
But after three or four notable Charges
by the Prince, and his Noble Captains,Eargate broken open. Eargate
was broken open, and the bars and bolts
wherewith it was used to be fast shut up against
the Prince, was broken into a thousand
pieces. Then did the Princes Trumpets
sound, the Captains shout, the Town shake,
and Diabolus retreat to his hold. Well,
when the Princes forces had broken open the
Gate, himself came up and did set his Throne
in it; also he set his standard thereby,The Princes Standard set up, and the Slings are plaid still at the Castle. upon
a mount that before by his men was cast up
to place the mighty slings thereon. The
mount was called mount Hear-well, there
therefore the Prince abode, to wit, hard by

the going in at the Gate. He commanded
also that the Golden slings should yet be played
upon the Town, especially against the Castle,
because for shelter thither was Diabolus
retreated. Now from Eargate the street was
streight even to the house of Mr. Recorder that
so was before Diabolus took the Town, and
hard by his house stood the Castle, which
Diabolus for a long time had made his irksome
den. The Captains therefore did quickly
clear that street by the use of their slings,
so that way was made up to the heart of the
Town. Then did the Prince command that
Captain Boanerges, Captain Conviction, and
Capt. Judgment, should forthwith march up
the Town to the old ** Conscience. Gentlemans Gate.
Then did the Captains in most warlike manner
enter into the Town of Mansoul,They go up to the Recorders house. and
marching in with flying Colours, they came
up to the Recorders house, (and that was almost
as strong as was the Castle.) Battering
Rams they took also with them to plant against
the Castle-gates. When they were
come to the house of Mr. Conscience, they
knocked and demanded entrance. Now the
old Gentleman not knowing as yet fully their
design, kept his Gates shut all the time of
this fight. Wherefore Boanerges demanded
entrance at his Gates, and no man making
answer, he gave it one stroke with the
head of a Ram,They demand entrance. and this made the old Gentleman
shake, and his house to tremble and

totter. Then came Mr. Recorder down to the
Gate, and as he could with quivering lips, he
asked who was there? Boanerges answered,
We are the Captains and Commanders of the
great Shaddai, and of the blessed Emanuel
his Son, and we demand possession of your
house for the use of our noble Prince. And
with that the Battering Ram gave the Gate
another shake: this made the old Gentleman
tremble the more,They go in. yet durst he not but
open the Gate: then the Kings forces marched
in, namely the three brave Captains mentioned
before. Now the Recorders house was
a place of much convenience for Emanuel,
not only because it was near to the Castle,
and strong, but also because it was large,
and fronted the Castle, the den where now
Diabolus was; for he was now afraid to come
out of his hold. As for Mr. Recorder, the
Captains carried it very reservedly to him,
as yet he knew nothing of the great designsThey do keep themselvs reserved from the Recorder.
of Emanuel; so that he did not know what
judgment to make, nor what would be the
end of such thundring beginnings. It was also
presently noised in the Town, how the Recorders
house was possessed, his rooms taken
up, and his Palace made the seat of the War;His house the seat of War.
and no sooner was it noised abroad but they
took the alarm as warmly, and gave it out
to others of his friends, (and you know as
a snow-ball loses nothing by rolling) so in little
time the whole Town was possessed, that

they must expect nothing from the Prince
but destruction; and the ground of the business
was this, the Recorder was afraid, the
Recorder trembled, and the Captains carried
it strangely to the Recorder; so many came
to see, but when they with their own eyes
did behold the Captains in the Palace, and
their battering Rams ever playing at the
Castle-gates to beat them down; they were
riveted in their fears, and it made them as
in amaze. And, as I said, the man of the
house would encrease all this,The office of Conscience when he is awakened. for whoever
came to him, or discoursed with him, nothing
would he talk of, tell them, or hear,
but that death and destruction now attended
Mansoul.
For (quoth the old Gentleman) you are all
of you sensible that we all have been Traytors to
that once despised, but now famously victorious
and glorious Prince Emanuel. For he now, as
you see, doth not only lye in close siege about us,
but hath forced his entrance in at our Gates;
moreover Diabolus flees before him, and he hath
as you behold, made of my house a garrison against
the Castle, where he is. I for my part have
transgressed greatly (and he that is clean 'tis well
for him.) But, I say, I have transgressed greatly
in keeping of silence when I should have spoken,
and in perverting of Justice when I should have
executed the same. True, I have suffered something
at the hand of Diabolus for taking part
with the Laws of King Shaddai; but that alas!

what will that do! Will that make compensation
for the Rebellions and Treasons that I have done,
and have suffered without gain-saying, to be committed
in the Town of Mansoul? O I tremble to
think what will be the end of this so dreadful and
so ireful a beginning!
Now while these brave Captains were thus
busie in the house of the old Recorder, Captain
Execution was as busie in other parts of
the Town, in securing the back-streets, and
the walls.The brave Exploits of the Captain Execution. He also hunted the Lord Wilbewill
sorely, he suffered him not to rest in any corner.
He pursued him so hard, that he drove
his men from him, and made him glad to
thrust his head into a hole. Also this mighty
Warrier did cut three of the Lord Wilbewils
Officers down to the ground; one was old
Mr. Prejudice,Old Prejudice slain. he that had his Crown crackt
in the mutiny; this man was made by Lord
Wilbewill Keeper of Eargate, and fell by the
hand of Captain Execution. There was also
one Mr. Backward to all but naught,Backward to all but naught slain. and he
also was one of Lord Wilbewils Officers, and
was the Captain of the two Guns that once
were mounted on the top of Eargate, he also
was cut down to the ground by the hands of
Captain Execution. Besides these two there
was another, a third, and his name was
Captain Treacherous, a vile man this was, but
one that Wilbewill did put a great deal of confidenceTreacherous slain.
in, but him also did this Captain
Execution cut down to the ground with the
rest.

He also made a very great slaughter among
my Lord Wilbewils souldiers, killing
many that were stout and sturdy, and wounding
of many that for Diabolus were nimble
and active. But all these were Diabolonians,
there was not a man, a native of Mansoul
hurt.
Other feats of War were also likewise performed
by other of the Captains, as at Eyegate,
where Captain Goodhope, and Captain
Charity had a charge, was great execution
done;Captain Goodhope doth slay Captain Blindfold. for the Captain Goodhope with his
own hands slew one Captain Blindfold, the
Keeper of that Gate, this Blindfold was Captain
of a thousand men, and they were they
that sought with Mauls; he also pursued his
men, slew many, and wounded more, and
made the rest hide their heads in corners.
There was also at that Gate Mr. Illpause,
of whom you have heard before, he was an
old man, and had a beard that reached down
to his girdle, the same was he that was Orator
to Diabolus, he did much mischief in the
Town of Mansoul, and fell by the hand of
Captain Goodhope.And old Illpause.
What shall I say, the Diabolonians in these
days lay dead in every corner, though too
many yet were alive in Mansoul.
Now the old Recorder,The old Townsmen meet and consult. and my Lord Understanding
with some others of the chief of
the Town, to wit such as knew they must
stand and fall with the famous Town of Mansoul,

came together upon a day, and after
consultation had, did jointly agree to draw
up a Petition, and to send it to Emanuel,
now while he sat in the Gate of Mansoul. So
they drew up their Petition to Emanuel,The Town does petition, and are answered with silence. the
Contents whereof were this, That they the old
inhabitants of the now deplorable Town of Mansoul,
confessed their sin, and were sorry that they
had offended his Princely Majesty, and prayed
that he would spare their lives.
Unto this Petition he gave no answer at
all, and that did trouble them yet so much
the more. Now all this while the Captains
that were in the Recorders house were playing
with the battering Rams at the Gates of theThe Castle-Gates broke open.
Castle to beat them down. So after some
time, labour and travel, the Gate of the Castle
that was called Impregnable, was beaten
open, and broken into several splinters;
and so a way made to go up to the hold in
which Diabolus had hid himself. Then was
tidings sent down to Eargate, for Emanuel
still abode there, to let him know that a way
was made in at the Gates of the Castle of
Mansoul. But Oh! how the Trumpets at the
tidings sounded throughout the Princes
Camp, for that now the War was so near
an end, and Mansoul it self of being set
free.
Then the Prince arose from the place
where he was,Emanuel marches into Mansoul. and took with him such of
his men of War as were fittest for that Expedition,

and marched up the street of Mansoul
to the old Recorders house.
Now the Prince himself was clad all in
Armour of Gold, and so he marched up the
Town with his Standard born before him;
but he kept his countenance much reserved
all the way as he went, so that the people
could not tell how to gather to themselves
love or hatred by his looks. Now as he
marched up the street, the Townsfolk came
out at every door to see, and could not but
be taken with his person, and the glory
thereof, but wondred at the reservedness of
his countenance; for as yet he spake more to
them by his actions and works, than he did
by words or smiles. But also poor Mansoul,
(as in such cases all are apt to do) they interpreted
the carriages of Emanuel to them, as
did Josephs Brethren his to them,How they interpret Emanuels carriages. even all the
quite contrary way: For thought they, if
Emanuel loved us, he would shew it to us by
word or carriage, but none of these he doth,
therefore Emanuel hates us. Now if Emanuel
hates us, then Mansoul shall be slain, then
Mansoul shall become a dunghill. They
knew that they had transgressed his Fathers
Law, and that against him they had been in
with Diabolus his enemy. They also knew
that the Prince Emanuel knew all this; for
they were convinced that he was as an Angel
of God, to know all things that are done in
the earth. And this made them think that

their condition was miserable, and that the
good Prince would make them desolate.
And thought they, what time so fit to do
this in as now, when he has the bridle of
Mansoul in his hand. And this I took special
notice of, that the inhabitants (notwithstanding
all this) could not; no, they could not,
when they see him march through the Town,
but cringe, bow, bend, and were ready to
lick the dust of his feet. They also wished a
thousand times over, that he would become
their Prince and Captain, and would become
their protection. They would also one to
another talk of the comeliness of his Person,
and how much for glory and valour he outstript
the great ones of the world. But poor
hearts, as to themselves their thoughts would
change, and go upon all manner of Extreams.
Yea through the working of them backward
and forward, Mansoul became as a ball tossed,
and as a rolling thing before the whirlwind.
Now when he was come to the Castle-Gates,
he commanded Diabolus to appear
and to surrender himself into his hands.He comes up to the Castle, and commands Diabolus to surrender himself. But
Oh how loth was the beast to appear! how he
stuck at it! how he shrunk! I how he cringed!
yet out he came to the Prince. Then Emanuel
commanded, and they took Diabolus and
bound him fast in chains, the better to reserve
him to the Judgment that he had appointed
for him. But Diabolus stood up to

intreat for himself that Emanuel would not
send him into the deep, but suffer him to depart
out of Mansoul in peace.
When Emanuel had taken him and bound
him in chains,He is taken and bound in chains. he led him into the Market-place,
and there before Mansoul, stript him of
his armour in which he boasted so much before.
This now was one of the acts of Triumph
of Emanuel over his enemy, and all the
while that the Giant was stripping, the Trumpets
of the Golden Prince did sound amain;
the Captains also shouted, and the souldiers
did sing for joy.
Then was Mansoul called upon to behold
the beginning of Emanuels Triumph over
him in whom they so much had trusted,Mansoul must behold it. and
of whom they so much had boasted in the
days when he flattered them.
Thus having made Diabolus naked in the
eyes of Mansoul, and before the Commanders
of the Prince; in the next place he
commands that Diabolus should be bound
with chains to his chariot wheels.  Then leaving
of some of his forces,He is bound to his Chariot-wheels. to wit, Captain
Boanerges, and Captain Conviction, as a guard
for the Castle-gates, that resistance might
be made on his behalf, (if any that heretofore
The Prince rides in Triumph over him, in the sight of Mansoul. followed Diabolus should make an attempt
to possess it) he did ride in triumph
over him quite through the Town of Mansoul,
and so out at, and before the Gate
called Eyegate, to the Plain where his Camp
did lye.

But you cannot think unless you had been
there (as I was) what a shout there was in
Emanuels Camp when they saw the Tyrant
bound by the hand of their noble Prince, and
tyed to his Chariot-wheels!
And they said, He hath led captivity captive,They sing.
he hath spoiled Principalities and Powers,
Diabolus is subjected to the power of
his sword, and made the object of all derision.
Those also that rode Reformades,The Reformades joy. and that
came down to see the Battel, they shouted
with that greatness of voice, and sung with
such melodious notes, that they caused them
that dwell in the highest Orbs to open their 
windows, put out their heads, and look
down to see the cause of that Glory.
The Townsmen also, so many of them as
saw this sight, were as it were,The men of Mansoul taken with Emanuel. while they
looked, betwixt the earth and the Heavens.
True, they could not tell what would be the
issue of things as to them, but all things were
done in such excellent methods; and I can
not tell how, but things in the management
of them seemed to cast a smile towards the
Town, so that their eyes, their heads, their
hearts, and their minds, and all that they
had were taken and held while they observed
Emanuels order.
So when the brave Prince had finished this
part of his Triumph over Diabolus his foe,
he turned him up in the midst of his contempt

and shame, having given him a charge
no more to be a possessor of Mansoul. Then
went he from Emanuel, and out of the midst
of his Camp to inherit the parched places in
a salt land,  seeking rest but finding none.
Now Captain Boanerges and Captain
Conviction were both of them men of very
great majesty, their faces were like the faces
of Lions, and their words like the roaring of
the Sea; and they still quartered in Mr. Consciences
house, of whom mention was made
before. When therefore the high and mighty
Prince had thus far finished his Triumph over
Diabolus, the Townsmen had more leisure
The carriage of Boanerges, and of Captain Conviction do crush the spirit of Mansoul.to view and to behold the actions of these
noble Captains. But the Captains carried it
with that terrour and dread in all that they
did (and you may be sure that they had private
instructions so to do) that they kept the
Town under continual heart-aking, and
caused (in their apprehension) the well-being
of Mansoul for the future, to hang in doubt
before them, so that (for some considerable
time) they neither knew what rest or ease, or
peace, or hope meant.
Nor did the Prince himself, as yet, abide
in the Town of Mansoul, but in his Royal
Pavilion in the Camp, and in the midst of
his Fathers forces. So at a time convenient, he
sent special Orders to Captain Boanerges to
summons Mansoul, the whole of the Townsmen,
into the Castle yard, and then and there

before their faces, to take my Lord Understanding,The Prince commands, & the Captains put the three chief of Mansoul in Ward.
Mr. Conscience, and that notable one
the Lord Wilbewill, and put them all three
in Ward, and that they should set a strong
Guard upon them there, until his pleasure
concerning them were further known. The
which orders when the Captains had put
them in execution, made no small addition to
the fears of the Town of Mansoul: for now
to their thinking, were their former fears of
the ruin of Mansoul confirmed. Now, what
death they should die, and how long they
should be in dying, was that which most
perplexed their heads and hearts: yea, they
were afraid that Emanuel would command
them all into the deep, the place that the
Prince Diabolus was afraid of; for they knew
that they had deserved it. Also to die by the
sword in the face of the Town, and in the
open way of disgrace, from the hand of so
good and so holy a Prince, that (too) troubled
them sore.Mansoul greatly distressed. The Town was also greatly
troubled for the men that were committed
to Ward, for that they were their stay and
their guide, and for that they believed that
if those men were cut off, their execution
would be but the beginning of the ruin of
the Town of Mansoul.They send a Petition to Emanuel by the hand of Mr. Wouldlive. Wherefore what do
they, but together with the men in prison,
draw up a Petition to the Prince, and sent it
to Emanuel by the hand of Mr. Wouldlive. So
he went and came to the Princes quarters,

and presented the Petition: the sum of which
was this.
Great and wonderful Potentate, Victor over
Diabolus, and Conqueror of the Town of Mansoul:
We the miserable inhabitants of that most
woful Corporation, do humbly beg that we may
find favour in thy sight, and remember not against
us former transgressions, nor yet the sins
of the chief of our Town, but spare us according
to the greatness of thy mercy, and let us not die,
but live in thy sight: so shall we be willing to be
thy servants, and if thou shalt think fit, to gather
our meat under thy Table. Amen.
So the Petitioner went as was said with
his Petition to the Prince,They are answered with silence. and the Prince
took it at his hand, but sent him away with
silence. This still afflicted the Town of
Mansoul, but yet considering that now they
must either Petition, or die; for now they
could not do any thing else; therefore they
consulted again, and sent another Petition,
and this Petition was much after the form
and method of the former.
But when the Petition was drawn up, by
whom should they send it, was the next question;
for they would not send this by him
by whom they sent the first, (for they thought
that the Prince had taken some offence at
the manner of his deportment before him),They Petition again.
so they attempted to make Captain Conviction
their messenger with it, but he said, That
he neither durst nor would petition Emanuel for

Traytors; nor be to the Prince an Advocate for
Rebels. Yet withal, said he, our Prince is
good,They cannot tell by whom to send it. and you may adventure to send it by
the hand of one of your Town; provided
he went with a rope about his head, and
pleaded nothing but mercy.
Well, they made through fear their delays
as long as they could, and longer than delays
were good, but fearing at last the dangerousness
of them, they thought, but with many a
fainting in their minds, to send their Petition
by Mr. Desires-awake; so they sent for
Mr. Desires-awake; now he dwelt in a very
mean cottage in Mansoul, and he came at his
neighbours request. So they told him what
they had done, and what they would do concerning
Petitioning, and that they did desire
of him that he would go therewith to the
Prince.
Then said Mr. Desires-awake,Mr Desires-awake goes with the Petition to the Prince. Why should
not I do the best I can to save so famous a
Town as Mansoul from deserved destruction?
They therefore delivered the Petition to
him, and told him how he must address himself
to the Prince, and wisht him ten thousand
good speeds. So he comes to the Princes
Pavilion, as the first, and asked to speak
with his Majesty: so word was carried to
Emanuel, and the Prince came out to the
man. When Mr. Desires-awake saw the
Prince, he fell flat with his face to the ground,
and cried out, O that Mansoul might live before

thee! and with that he presented the
Petition. The which when the Prince had
read,His Entertainment. he turned away for a while and wept,
but refraining himself he turned again to the
man (who all this while lay crying at his
feet as at the first) and said to him, Go thy
way to thy place, and I will consider of thy requests.
Now you may think that they of Mansoul
that had sent him, what with guilt, and what
with fear, lest their Petition should be rejected,
could not but look with many a long
look, and that too with strange workings
of heart, to see what would become of their
Petition:His return and answer to them that sent him. At last they saw their messenger
coming back; so when he was come, they
asked him how he fared, what Emanuel
said? and what was become of the Petition.
But he told them that he would be silent till
he came to the Prison to my Lord Mayor,
my Lord Wilbewill, and Mr. Recorder. So he
went forwards towards the Prison-house,
where the men of Mansoul lay bound. But
Oh! what a multitude flocked after to hear
what the messenger said. So when he was
come and had shewn himself at the Grate of
the Prison, my Lord Mayor himself lookt as
white as a clout, the Recorder also did quake:
but they asked and said, Come, good Sir, what
did the great Prince say to you? Then said Mr.
Desires-awake when I came to my Lords Pavilion,
I called, and he came forth; so I fell

prostrate at his feet, and delivered to him
my Petition, (for the greatness of his person,
and the glory of his countenance would not
suffer me to stand upon my legs.) Now as
he received the Petition, I cried, O that
Mansoul might live before thee! So when for a
while he had looked thereon, he turned him
about and said to his servant, Go thy way to
thy place again, and I will consider of thy requests.
The messenger added moreover, and
said, The Prince to whom you sent me, is such a
one for beauty and glory, that whoso sees him must
both love and fear him: I for my part can do no
less, but I know not what will be the end of these
things.Mansoul confounded at the answer. At this answer they were all at a
stand, both they in prison, and they that followed
the messenger thither to hear the
news, nor knew they what, or what manner
of interpretation to put upon what the
Prince had said. Now when the prison was
cleared of the throng, the prisoners among
themselves began to Comment upon Emanuels
words. My Lord Mayor said,The Prisoners judgment upon the Princes answer. That the answer
did not look with a rugged face; but Wilbewill
said, it betokened evil; and the Recorder,
that it was a messenger of death. Now they that
were left, and that stood behind, and so
could not so well hear what the Prisoners
said, some of them catcht hold of one piece
of a sentence, and some on a bit of another,
some took hold of what the messenger said,
and some of the prisoners judgment thereon,

Misgiving thoughts breed confusion in Mansoul.so none had the right understanding of
things; but you cannot imagin what work
these people made, and what a confusion
there was in Mansoul now.
For presently they that had heard what
was said, flew about the Town, one crying
one thing, and another the quite contrary,
and both were sure enough they told true,
for they did hear they said with their ears
what was said, and therefore could not be
deceived. One would say, We must all be
killed; another would say, We must all be
saved; and a third would say, that the Prince
would not be concerned with Mansoul; and a
fourth, that the prisoners must be suddenly put
to death. And as I said, every one stood to it,
that he told his tale the rightest; and that
all others but he were out. Wherefore Mansoul
had now molestation upon molestation,
nor could any man know on what to rest the
sole of his foot; for one would go by now,
and as he went, if he heard his neighbour tell
his tale, to be sure he would tell the quite
contrary, and both would stand in it that
he told the truth. Nay some of them had
got this story by the end, That the Prince did
intend to put Mansoul to the sword.Mansoul in perplexity. And now
it begun to be dark, wherefore poor Mansoul
was in sad perplexity all that night until
the morning.
But so far as I could gather by the best information
that I could get, all this hubbub

came through the words that the Recorder
said, when he told them,What will guilt do. That in his Judgment
the Princes answer was a messenger of
death. 'Twas this that fired the Town, and
that began the fright in Mansoul; for Mansoul
in former times did use to count that
Mr. Recorder was a Seer, and that his sentence
was equal to the best of Oracles; and
thus was Mansoul a terrour to it self.
And now did they begin to feel what was
the effects of stubborn rebellion, and unlawful
resistance against their Prince. I say they
now began to feel the effects thereof by guilt
and fear that now had swallowed them up;
and who more involved in the one but they
that were most in the other, to wit the chief
of the Town of Mansoul?
To be brief,They resolve to Petition again. when the fame of the fright
was out of the Town, and the prisoners had
a little recovered themselves, they take to
themselvs some heart, & think to Petition the
Prince for life again. So they did draw up a 3d
Petition, the Contents whereof was this.
Prince Emanuel the Great,Their Petition. Lord of all
Worlds, and master of Mercy, we thy poor wretched,
miserable, dying Town of Mansoul, do
confess unto thy great and glorious Majesty,
that we have sinned against thy Father and thee,
and are no more worthy to be called thy Mansoul,
but rather to be cast into the pit. If thou wilt slay
us, we have deserved it. If thou wilt condemn
us to the deep, we cannot but say thou art righteous.

We cannot complain whatever thou dost, or
however thou carriest it towards us. But Oh!
let mercy reign! and let it be extended to us! O
let mercy take hold upon us, and free us from
our transgressions, and we will sing of thy mercy,
and of thy judgment. Amen.
This Petition when drawn up was designed
to be sent to the Prince as the first,Prayer attended with difficulty. but
who should carry it, that was the question.
Some said, let him do it that went with the
first, but others thought not good to do that,
and that because he sped no better. Now
there was an old man in the Town, and his
name was Mr. Good-deed.Old Good-deed propounded as a fit person to carry the Petition, the old Recorder opposes it, and he is rejected. A man that bare
only the name, but had nothing of the nature
of the thing; now some were for sending of
him, but the Recorder was by no means for
that: For, said he, we now stand in need of,
and are pleading for mercy, wherefore to send
our Petition by a man of this name will seem to
cross the Petition it self; should we make Mr.
Good-deed our messenger, when our Petition
cries for mercy?
Besides, quoth the old Gentleman, should
the Prince now, as he receives the Petition, ask
him, and say, What is thy name? as no body
knows but he will; and he should say, Old Good-deed;
what, think you, would Emanuel say but
this, Ay, is old Good-deed yet alive in Mansoul,
then let old Good-deed save you from your
distresses. And if he says so, I am sure we are
lost, nor can a thousand of old Good-deeds save
Mansoul.

After the Recorder had given in his reasons
why old Good-deed should not go with this
Petition to Emanuel; the rest of the prisoners
and chief of Mansoul opposed it also, and so
old Good-deed was laid aside, and they
agreed to send Mr. Desires-awake again; so
they sent for him, and desired him that he
would a second time go with their Petition
to the Prince, and he readily told them he
would. But they bid him that in any wise he
should take heed that in no word or carriage
he gave offence to the Prince, for by doing
so, for ought we can tell, you may bring Mansoul
into utter destruction, said they.
Now Mr. Desires-awake,Mr. Desires-awake goes again and takes one Wet-eyes with him. when he saw that
he must go of this Errand, besought that
they would grant that Mr. Wet-eyes might go
with him. Now this Wet-eyes was a near
neighbour of Mr. Desires, a poor man, a man
of a broken spirit, yet one that could speak
well to a Petition. So they granted that he
should go with him. Wherefore they address
themselves to their business; Mr. Desires
put a rope upon his head, and Mr. Wet-eyes
went with hands wringing together.
Thus they went to the Princes Pavilion.
Now when they went to Petition this
third time, they were not without thoughts
that by often coming they might be a burden
to the Prince. Wherefore when they
were come to the door of his Pavilion, they
first made their apology for themselves, and

for their coming to trouble Emanuel so often,
and they said, That they came not hither
to day,Their Apology for their coming again. for that they delighted in being troublesome,
or for that they delighted to hear themselves
talk; but for that necessity caused them to come
to his Majesty; they could, they said, have no
rest day nor night, because of their transgressions
against Shaddai, and against Emanuel his
Son. They also thought that some misbehaviour
of Mr. Desires-awake the last time might give
distaste to his Highness; and so cause that he returned
from so merciful a Prince empty, and
without countenance. So when they had made
this apology, Mr. Desires-awake cast himself
prostrate upon the ground as at the first, at
the feet of the mighty Prince, saying, Oh!
that Mansoul might live before thee! and so he
delivered his Petition.The Prince talketh with them. The Prince then having
read the Petition, turned aside a while
as before, and coming again to the place
where the Petitioner lay on the ground, he
demanded what his name was, and of what
esteem in the account of Mansoul? for that
he above all the multitude in Mansoul should
be sent to him upon such an Errand. Then
said the man to the Prince, O let not my Lord
be angry; and why enquirest thou after the
name of such a dead dog as I am? Pass by I pray
thee, and take not notice of who I am, because
there is, as thou very well knowest, so great a
disproportion between me and thee. Why the
Townsmen chose to send me on this Errand to my

Lord, is best known to themselves,Mr. Desires free speech to his Prince. but it could
not be, for that they thought that I had favour
with my Lord. For my part I am out of charity
with my self, who then should be in love with me?
yet live I would, and so would I, that my Townsmen
should; and because both they and my self are
guilty of great transgressions, therefore they have
sent me, and I am come in their names to beg of
my Lord for mercy. Let it please thee therefore
to incline to mercy, but ask not what thy servants
are.
Then said the Prince, And what is he that
is become thy companion in this so weighty
a matter? So Mr. Desires told Emanuel, that
he was a poor neighbour of his, and one of
his most intimate Associates, and his name
said he, may it please your most excellent
Majesty, is Wet-eyes of the Town of Mansoul.
&rhand;I know that there are many of that name that
are naught, but I hope 'twill be no offence
to my Lord, that I have brought my poor
neighbour with me.
Then Mr. Wet-eyes fell on his face to the
ground, and made this Apology for his
coming with his neighbour to his Lord.
‘O my Lord, quoth he, what I am,Mr. Wet-eyes Apology for his coming with his neighbor. I
know not my self, nor whether my name
be feigned or true, especially when I begin
to think what some have said, namely that
this name was given me, because Mr. Repentance
was my Father. Good men have
bad children, and the sincere do often

times beget hypocrites. My mother also
called me by this name from my Cradle, but
whether because of the moistness of my
brain, or because of the softness of my
heart, I cannot tell. I see dirt in mine
own tears, and filthiness in the bottom of
my prayers. But I pray thee (and all this
while the Gentleman wept) that thou
wouldest not remember against us our transgressions,
nor take offence at the unqualifiedness
of thy servants, but mercifully pass
by the sin of Mansoul, and refrain from the
glorifying of thy grace no longer.’
So at his bidding they arose, and both
stood trembling before him, and he spake to
them to this purpose.
The Princes answer.‘The Town of Mansoul hath grievously
rebelled against my Father, in that they
have rejected him from being their King,
and did chuse to themselves for their Captain,
a lyer, a murderer, and a runnagateslave.
For this Diabolus, and your pretended
Prince, though once so highly accounted
of by you, made rebellion against my
Father and me, even in our palace and highest
Court there, thinking to become a Prince
and King. But being there timely discovered
and apprehended, and for his wickedness
bound in chains,The Original of Diabolus. and separated to the
pit with those that were his companions,
he offered himself to you, and you have
received him.

‘Now this is, and for a long time hath
been an high affront to my Father; wherefore
my Father sent to you a powerful army
to reduce you to your obedience. But you
know how those men, their Captains, and
their Counsels were esteemed of you, and
what they received at your hand. You rebelled
against them, you shut your Gates
upon them, you bid them battel, you fought
them, and fought for Diabolus against them.
So they sent to my Father for more power,
and I with my men are come to subdue you.
But as you treated the servants, so you
treated their Lord. You stood up in hostile
manner against me, you shut up your
Gates against me, you turned the deaf ear
to me, and resisted as long as you could;
but now I have made a conquest of you.
Did you cry me mercy so long as you had
hopes that you might prevail against me?
But now I have taken the Town, you cry;
but why did you not cry before, when the
white flag of my Mercy, the red flag of Justice,
and the black flag that threatened
Execution, were set up to cite you to it?
Now I have conquered your Diabolus, you
come to me for favour; but why did you
not help me against the mighty? Yet I will
consider your petition, and will answer it
so as will be for my glory.
‘Go bid Captain Boanerges, and Captain
Conviction, bring the prisoners out to me

into the Camp to morrow, and say you to
Captain Judgment, and Captain Execution;
Stay you in the Castle, and take good heed
to your selves that you keep all quiet in
Mansoul until you shall hear further from me:’
and with that he turned himself from them,
and went into his Royal pavilion again.
So the petitioners having received this answer
from the Prince, returned as at the first,
to go to their companions again. But they
had not gone far, but thoughts began to
work in their minds, that no mercy as yet
was intended by the prince to Mansoul: so
they went to the place where the prisoners
lay bound; but these workings of mind about
what would become of Mansoul, had
such strong power over them, that by that
they were come unto them that sent them,
they were scarce able to deliver their
message.
But they came at length to the Gates of
the Town (now the Townsmen with earnestness
were waiting for their return) where
many met them to know what answer was
made to the Petition. Then they cried out
to those that were sent, What news from the
Prince, and what hath Emanuel said? But
they said, that they must (as afore) go up to
the prison, and there deliver their message.
So away they went to the prison with a **Of Inquisitive thoughts. multitude
at their heels. Now when they were
come to the Grates of the prison, they told

the first part of Emanuels speech to the prisoners,
to wit,The messengers in telling their tale, fright the prisoners. how he reflected upon their
disloyalty to his Father and himself, and how
they had chose, and closed with Diabolus, had
fought for him, hearkened to him, and been
ruled by him, but had despised him and his
men. This made the prisoners look pale, but
the messengers proceeded, and said, He,
the Prince, said moreover, that yet he would
consider your Petition, and give such answer
thereto as would stand with his glory. And as
these words were spoken, Mr. Wet-eyes gave
a great sigh. At this they were all of them
struck into their dumps, and could not tell
what to say; fear also possest them in marvellous
manner, and death seem'd to sit upon
some of their Eyebrows.Old Inquisitive. Now there was
in the company a notable sharp-witted fellow,
a mean man of estate, and his name
was old Inquisitive, this man asked the Petitioners
if they had told out every whit of
what Emanuel said. And they answered, Verily
no. Then said Inquisitive, I thought so indeed.
Pray what was it more that he said
unto you? Then they paused awhile, but at
last they brought out all, saying, the Prince
did bid us, bid Captain Boanerges, and Captain
Conviction bring the prisoners down to
him to morrow, and that Captain Judgment,
and Captain Execution should take charge of
the Castle and Town till they should hear
further from him. They said also, That when

the Prince had commanded them thus to do, he
immediately turned his back upon them, and went
into his Royal Pavilion.
But, O how this return, and specially this
last clause of it, that the prisoners must go out
to the Prince into the Camp, brake all their loins
in pieces! Wherefore with one voice they set
up a cry that reached up to the Heavens.
This done, each of the three prepared himself
to die, (and the **Conscience. Recorder said unto
them, This was the thing that I feared), for
they concluded that to morrow by that the
Sun went down, they should be tumbled out
of the world. The whole Town also counted
of no other, but that in their time and order
they must all drink of the same cup. Wherefore
the Town of Mansoul spent that night in
mourning and sackcloth, and ashes. The prisoners
also when the time was come for
them to go down before the Prince, dressed
themselves in mourning attire, with ropes upon
their head. The whole Town of Mansoul
also, shewed themselves upon the wall,
all clad in mourning weeds, if perhaps the
Prince with the sight thereof might be moved
with compassion. But Oh how the **Vain thoughts. Busie
bodies that were in the Town of Mansoul,
did now concern themselves! they did run
here and there through the streets of the
Town by companies, crying out as they ran
in tumultuous wise, one after one manner,
and another the quite contrary, to the almost
utter distraction of Mansoul.

Well, the time is come that the prisoners
must go down to the Camp, and appear before
the Prince. And thus was the manner of
their going down: Captain Boanerges went
with a guard before them,The prisoners had to trial. and Captain Conviction
came behind, and the prisoners went
down bound in chains in the midst; so I say
(the prisoners went in the midst, and) the
Guard went with flying Colours behind and
before, but the prisoners went with drooping
spirits.
Or more particularly thus:
The prisoners went down all in Mourning,How they went.
they put ropes upon themselves; they went
on smiting of themselves on the breasts, but
durst not lift up their eyes to Heaven. Thus
they went out at the Gate of Mansoul, till
they came into the midst of the Princes army,
the sight and glory of which did greatly
heighten their affliction. Nor could they now
longer forbear, but cry out aloud, O unhappy
men! O wretched men of Mansoul! Their
Chains still mixing their dolorous notes, with
the cries of the prisoners, made the noise
more lamentable.
So when they were come to the door of
the Princes Pavilion,They fall down prostrate before him. they cast themselves
prostrate upon the place; then one went in
and told his Lord that the prisoners were
come down. The Prince then ascended a
Throne of State, and sent for the prisoners
in; who when they came, did tremble before

him, also they covered their faces with shame.
Now as they drew near to the place where
he sat, they threw themselves down before
him; then said the Prince to the Captain
Boanerges, Bid the prisoners stand upon their
feet: then they stood trembling before him,
and he said, Are you the men that heretofore
were the servants of Shaddai? And they said,
Yes, Lord, yes. Then said the Prince again,
They are upon their trial.Are you the men that did suffer your selves to
be corrupted, and defiled by that abominable
one Diabolus? And they said, We did more
than suffer it, Lord; for we chose it of our
own mind. The Prince asked further, saying,
Could you have been content that your slavery
should have continued under his tyranny as long
as you had lived? Then said the prisoners, Yes,
Lord, yes; for his ways were pleasing to our flesh,
and we were grown aliens to a better state.
And did you, said he, when I came up against
this Town of Mansoul, heartily wish that I might
not have the victory over you? Yes, Lord, yes,
said they. Then said the Prince, And what
punishment is it, think you, that you deserve at
my hand for these and other your high and
mighty sins? And they said, Both death and
the deep, Lord; for we have deserved no less.
He asked again, If they had ought to say for
themselves, why the sentence that they confessed
that they had deserved,They condemn themselves. should not be passed upon
them? And they said, We can say nothing,
Lord; thou art just, for we have sinned.

Then said the Prince, And for what are those
ropes on your heads? The prisoners answered,
These **Sins. ropes are to bind us withal to the
place of Execution,  if mercy be not pleasing
in thy sight. So he further asked, If all
the men in the Town of Mansoul were in this confession,
as they? And they answered, All the
**Powers of the Soul. natives, Lord; but for the **Corruptions and lusts. Diabolonians
that came into our Town when the Tyrant
got possession of us, we can say nothing for
them.
Then the Prince commanded that an **A victory proclaimed. Herald
should be called, and that he should in
the midst, and throughout the Camp of Emanuel
proclaim, and that with sound of
Trumpet, that the Prince, the Son of Shaddai,
had in his Fathers name, and for his Fathers
glory, gotten a perfect conquest and victory
over Mansoul, and that the prisoners should
follow him and say, Amen. So this was done as
he had commanded. And presently the **Joy for the victory. Musick
that was in the upper region sounded
melodiously. The Captains that were in the
Camp shouted, and the Souldiers did sing
Songs of Triumph to the Prince, the Colours
waved in the wind, and great joy was every
where,They are pardoned, and are commanded to proclaim it to morrow in Mansoul. only it was wanting as yet in the
hearts of the men of Mansoul.
Then the Prince called for the prisoners
to come and to stand again before him, and
they came and stood trembling. And he said
unto them, The sins, trespasses, iniquities, that

you with the whole Town of Mansoul, have from
time to time committed against my Father and me,
I have power and commandment from my Father
to forgive to the Town of Mansoul; and do forgive
you accordingly. And having so said, he
gave them written in Parchment, and sealed
with seven Seals, a large and general pardon,
commanding both my Lord Mayor, my Lord
Wilbewill, and Mr. Recorder, to proclaim,
and cause it to be proclaimed to morrow by
that the Sun is up, throughout the whole
Town of Mansoul.
Moreover the Prince stript the Prisoners of
their mourning weeds,Their rags are taken from them. and gave them beauty for
ashes, the oyl of joy for mourning, and the garment
of praise for the spirit of heaviness.
Then he gave to each of the three,  Jewels
of Gold,A strange alteration. and precious stones, and took away
their ropes, and put chains of Gold about
their necks, and Ear rings in their ears. Now
the prisoners when they did hear the gracious
words of Prince Emanuel, and had beheld
all that was done unto them, fainted almost
quite away; for the grace, the benefit,
the pardon, was sudden, glorious, and so
big, that they were not able without staggering
to stand up under it. Yea, my Lord
Wilbewill swounded out-right, but the Prince
stept to him, put his everlasting arms under
him, imbraced him, kissed him, and bid him
be of good cheer, for all should be performed
according to his word. He also did kiss and

imbrace, and smile upon the other two that
were Wilbewills companions, saying, take these
as further tokens of my love, favour and
compassions to you: and I charge you that
you Mr. Recorder tell in the Town of Mansoul
what you have heard and seen.
Then were their Fetters broken to piecesTheir guilt.
before their faces, and cast into the air, and
their steps were enlarged under them. Then
they fell down at the feet of the Prince, and
kissed his feet, and wetted them with tears;
also they cried out with a mighty strong
voice, saying, Blessed be the glory of the Lord
from this place. So they were bid rise up, and
go to the Town, and tell to Mansoul what the
Prince had done. He commanded also that
one with a Pipe and Tabor should go and play
before them all the way into the Town of
Mansoul.They are sent home with Pipe and Tabor. Then was fulfilled what they never
looked for, and they were made to possess
that which they never dreamt of. The
Prince also called for the noble Captain Credence,Captain Credence guards them home.
and commanded that he and some of
his Officers should march before the Noble
men of Mansoul with flying Colours into the
Town.When Faith and Pardon meet together, Judgment and Execution depart from the heart. He gave also unto Captain Credence
a charge that about that time that the Recorder
did read the general pardon in the
Town of Mansoul, that at that very time
he should with flying Colours march in at
Eyegate with his ten thousands at his feet,
and that he should so go until he came by the

high street of the Town, up to the Castle
gates, and that himself should take possession
thereof against his Lord came thither. He
commanded moreover that he should bid
Captain Judgment, and Captain Execution to
leave the strong-hold to him, and to withdraw
from Mansoul, and to return into the
Camp with speed unto the Prince.
And now was the Town of Mansoul also
delivered from the terrour of the first four
Captains and their men.
Well, I told you before how the prisoners
were entertained by the noble Prince Emanuel,
and how they behaved themselves before
him, and how he sent them away to
their home with Pipe and Tabor going before
them. And now you must think that those of
the Town that had all this while waited to
hear of their death, could not but be exercised
with sadness of mind, and with thoughts
that pricked like thorns. Nor could their
thoughts be kept to any one point; the
wind blew with them all this while at great
uncertainties, yea their hearts were like a balance
that had been disquieted with shaking
hand. But at last as they with many a long
look looked over the wall of Mansoul, they
thought that they saw some returning to the
Town; and thought again, who should they
be too, who should they be! at last they discerned
that they were the prisoners; but can
you imagin how their hearts were surprized

with wonder! specially when they perceived
also in what equipage, and with what honour
they were sent home! they went down to
the Camp in Black, but they came back to
the Town in White;A strange alteration. they went down to the
Camp in ropes, they came back in chains of
Gold; they went down to the Camp with
their feet in fetters, but came back with
their steps inlarged under them; they went
also to the Camp, looking for death, but they
came back from thence with assurance of
life; they went down to the Camp with
heavy hearts, but came back again with
Pipe and Tabor playing before them. So,
so soon as they were come to Eyegate, the
poor and tottering Town of Mansoul, adventured
to give a shout; and they gave such
a shout as made the Captains in the Princes
army leap at the sound thereof. Alas! for them
poor hearts, who could blame them, since
their dead friends were come to life again?
for 'twas to them as life from the dead,
to see the ancients of the Town of Mansoul
to shine in such splendour. They looked
for nothing but the Ax and the Block;
but behold! joy and gladness, comfort and
consolation, and such melodious notes attending
of them, that was sufficient to make
a sick-man well. So when they came up, 
they saluted each other with welcome, welcome,
and blessed be he that has spared
you. They added also, We see it is well

with you, but how must it go with the
Town of Mansoul, and will it go well with
the Town of Mansoul, said they? Then answered
them the Recorder,Conscience. and my Lord
Mayor,The Understanding. Oh! Tidings! glad tidings! good
tidings of good! and of great joy to poor
Mansoul! Then they gave another shout
that made the earth to ring again. After this
they enquired yet more particularly how
things went in the Camp, and what message
they had from Emanuel to the Town. So they
told them all passages that had happened to
them at the Camp, and every thing that the
Prince did to them. This made Mansoul
wonder at the wisdom and grace of the
Prince Emanuel; then they told them what
they had received at his hands for the whole
Town of Mansoul; and the Recorder delivered
it in these words,O the joy of pardon of sin. PARDON, PARDON,
PARDON for Mansoul; and this
shall Mansoul know to morrow. Then he
commanded, and they went and summoned
Mansoul to meet together in the Market-place
to morrow, there to hear their general
Pardon read.
But who can think what a turn, what a
change, what an alteration this hint of
things did make in the countenance of the
Town of Mansoul! no man of Mansoul could
sleep that night for joy; in every house there
was joy and musick, singing and making merry,
telling and hearing of Mansouls happiness,

was then all that Mansoul had to do: and this
was the burden of all their Song: Oh! more
of this at the rising of the Sun! more of this to
morrow! Who thought yesterday, would one say,
that this day would have been such a day to us?Town-talk of the Kings mercy.
And who though, that saw our prisoners go down
in irons, that they would have returned in chains
of gold! yea, they that judged themselves as they
went to be judged of their Judg, were by his mouth
acquitted, not for that they were innocent, but of
the Princes mercy, and sent home with Pipe and
Tabor.
But is this the common custom of Princes,
do they use to shew such kind of favours to
Traytors? No! this is only peculiar to
Shaddai, and unto Emanuel his Son.
Now morning drew on apace, wherefore
the Lord Mayor, the Lord Wilbewill, and
Mr. Recorder came down to the Market-place
at the time that the Prince had appointed,
where the Townsfolk were waiting for
them; and when they came, they came in
that attire, and in that glory that the Prince
had put them into the day before, and the
street was lightened with their glory: so the
Mayor, Recorder, and my Lord Wilbewill,
drew down to Mouthgate, which was at the
lower end of the Market-place, because that
of old time was the place where they used
to read publick matters. Thither therefore
they came in their Robes, and their Tabret
went before them. Now the eagerness of the

people, to know the full of the matter, was
great.
The manner of reading the pardon.Then the Recorder stood up upon his
feet, and first beckoning with his hand for
a silence, he read out with loud voice the
pardon. But when he came to these words,
The Lord,  the Lord God merciful and gracious,
pardoning iniquity, transgressions and sins; and
to them, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven, &c. they could not forbear but
leap for joy. For this you must know, that
there was conjoined herewith every mans
name in Mansoul; also the seals of the pardon
made a brave shew.
When the Recorder had made an end of
reading the pardon, the Townsmen ran up
upon the walls of the Town,Now they tread upon the flesh. and leaped
and skipped thereon for joy, and bowed
themselves seven times with their faces towards
Emanuels Pavilion, and shouted out aloud
for joy, and said, Let Emanuel live for
ever.Lively and warm thoughts. Then order was given to the young
men in Mansoul, that they should ring the
Bells for joy. (So the Bells did ring, and the
people sing, and the musick go in everyhouse)
in Mansoul.
The carriage of the Camp.When the Prince had sent home the three
prisoners of Mansoul with joy, and Pipe and
Tabor; he commanded his Captains with all
the Field-officers and Souldiers throughout
his army to be ready in that morning, that the
Recorder should read the pardon in Mansoul,

to do his further pleasure. So the morning as
I have shewed, being come, just as the Recorder
had made an end of reading the pardon,
Emanuel commanded that all the Trumpets
in the Camp should sound, that the Colours
should be displayed, half of them upon
mount Gracious, and half of them upon
mount Justice. He commanded also that all
the Captains should shew themselves in all
their Harness,Faith will not be silent when Mansoul is saved. and that the Souldiers should
shout for joy. Nor was Captain Credence,
though in the Castle, silent in such a day,
but he from the top of the hold shewed himself
with sound of Trumpet to Mansoul, and
to the Princes Camp.
Thus have I shewed you the manner, and
way that Emanuel took to recover the
Town of Mansoul from under the hand and
power of the Tyrant Diabolus.
Now when the Prince had compleated
these, the outward ceremonies of his joy, He
again commanded that his Captains and
Souldiers should shew unto Mansoul some
feats of War.The Prince displays his Graces before Mansoul. So they presently addressed
themselves to this work. But Oh! with
what agility, nimbleness, dexterity and bravery
did these military-men discover their
skill in feats of War to the now gazing
Town of Mansoul!
They marched, they counter marched, they
opened to the right and left, they divided, and
subdivided, they closed, they wheeled, made good

their front and reer with their right and left
wings,They are ravished at the sight of them. and twenty things more, with that aptne&esset;,
and then were all as they were again, that
they took, yea ravished the hearts that were in
Mansoul to behold it. But add to this, the
handling of their arms, the managing of their
weapons of war, were marvellous taking to Mansoul
and me.
When this action was over, the whole
Town of Mansoul came out as one man to the
Prince in the Camp to thank him, and praise
him for his abundant favour, and to beg
that it would please his Grace to come unto
Mansoul with his men,They beg that the Prince and his men will dwell with them for ever. and there to take up
their quarters for ever. And this they did in
most humble manner, bowing themselves seven
times to the ground before him. Then
said he, All peace be to you: so the Town
came nigh and touched with the hand the
top of his Golden Scepter, and they said,
Oh! that the Prince Emanuel with his Captains
and men of war would dwell in Mansoul for
ever; and that his battering Rams and Slings
might be lodged in her for the use and service
of the Prince, and for the help and strength of
Mansoul. For said they, we have room for
thee, we have room for thy men, we have
also room for thy weapons of war, and a
place to make a Magazine for thy Carriages.
Do it,Say and hold to it Mansoul. Emanuel, and thou shalt be King and
Captain in Mansoul for ever. Yea, govern
thou also according to all the desire of thy

soul, and make thou Governours and Princes
under thee of thy Captains and men of
War, and we will become thy servants, and
thy Laws shall be our direction.
They added moreover, and prayed his
Majesty to consider thereof, for said they, if
now after all this grace bestowed upon us thy
miserable Town of Mansoul, thou shouldest
withdraw, thou and thy Captains from us,
the Town of Mansoul will die. Yea, said
they, our blessed Emanuel, if thou shouldest
depart from us now, now thou hast done so
much good for us, and shewed so much mercy
unto us; What will follow but that our
joy will be as if it had not been, and our enemies
will a second time come upon us with
more rage than at the first? Wherefore we
beseech thee, O thou the desire of our eyes,
and the strength and life of our poor Town,
accept of this motion that now we have
made unto our Lord, and come and dwell in
the midst of us, and let us be thy people.Their Feats.
Besides, Lord, we do not know but that to
this day many Diabolonians may be yet lurking
in the Town of Mansoul, and they will
betray us when thou shalt leave us, into the
hand of Diabolus again; and who knows what
designs, plots, or contrivances have passed
betwixt them about these things already;
loth we are to fall again into his horrible
hands. Wherefore let it please thee to accept
of our Palace for thy place of residence,

and of the houses of the best men in our
Town for the reception of thy Souldiers, and
their furniture.
Then said the Prince, If I come to your
Town,The Princes question to Mansoul. will you suffer me further to prosecute
that which is in mine heart against mine enemies
and yours: yea, will you help me in such
undertakings?
They answered, We know not what we
shall do,Their Answer. we did not think once that we
should have been such Traytors to Shaddai,
as we have proved to be: What then shall
we say to our Lord? Let him put no trust
in his Saints, let the Prince dwell in our
Castle, and make of our Town a Garrison,
let him set his noble Captains, and his Warlike
Souldiers over us. Yea, let him conquer
us with his love, and overcome us
with his Grace, and then surely shall he be
but with us, and help us, as he was, and
did that morning that our pardon was read
unto us, we shall comply with this our
Lord, and with his ways, and fall in with
his word against the mighty.
One word more, and thy servants have
done, and in this will trouble our Lord no
more. We know not the depth of the wisdom
of thee our Prince. Who could have thought that
had been ruled by his reason, that so much sweet
as we do now enjoy, should have come out of
those bitter trials wherewith we were tried at
the first? But, Lord, let light go before, and

let love come after: yea, take us by the hand,
and lead us by thy counsels, and let this always
abide upon us, that all things shall be for the
best for thy servants, and come to our Mansoul,
and do as it pleaseth thee. Or, Lord, come to
our Mansoul, do what thou wilt, so thou keepest
us from sinning, and makest us serviceable to
thy Majesty.
Then said the Prince to the Town of Mansoul
again, Go return to your houses in peace,He consenteth to dwell in Mansoul, and promiseth to come in to morrow.
I will willingly in this comply with your desires.
I will remove my Royal Pavilion, I will draw
up my forces before Eyegate to morrow, and so
will march forwards into the Town of Mansoul.
I will possess my self of your Castle of Mansoul,
and will set my Souldiers over you; yea, I will
yet do things in Mansoul that cannot be parallel'd
in any Nation, Country or Kingdom under
Heaven.
Then did the men of Mansoul give a shout,
and returned unto their houses in peace;
they also told to their kindred and friends
the good that Emanuel had promised to
Mansoul. And to morrow, said they, he will
march into our Town, and take up his dwelling,
he and his men in Mansoul.
Then went out the inhabitants of the
Town of Mansoul with haste to the green
trees, and to the meadows to gather boughs
and flowers,Mansouls preparation for his reception. therewith to strew the streets
against their Prince, the son of Shaddai, should
come; they also made Garlands, and other

fine works to betoken how joyful they were,
and should be to receive their Emanuel into
Mansoul; yea, they strewed the street quite
from Eyegate to the Castle-gate, the place
where the Prince should be. They also prepared
for his coming what musick the Town
of Mansoul would afford, that they might
play before him to the Palace his habitation.
So at the time appointed he makes his approach
to Mansoul, and the Gates were set
open for him, there also the Ancients and
Elders of Mansoul met him to salute him with
a thousand welcomes. Then he arose and
entred Mansoul, he and all his servants. The
Elders of Mansoul did also go dancing before
him till he came to the Castle-gates. And
this was the manner of his going up thither.He enters the Town of Mansoul and how.
He was clad in his Golden Armour, he rode
in his Royal Chariot, the Trumpets sounded
about him, the Colours were displayed, his
ten thousands went up at his feet, and the Elders
of Mansoul danced before him. And now
were the walls of the famous Town of Mansoul
filled with the tramplings of the inhabitants
thereof, who went up thither to view
the approach of the blessed Prince, and his
Royal Army. Also the Casements, Windows,
Balconies and tops of the houses were all
now filled with persons of all sorts to behold
how their Town was to be filled with
good.

Now when he was come so far into the
Town as to the Recorders house, he commanded
that one should go to C. Credence, to know
whether the Castle of Mansoul was prepared
to entertain his Royal presence (for the
preparation of that was left to that Captain) 
and word was brought that it was. Then
was Captain Credence commanded also to
come forth with his power to meet the
Prince, the which was as he had commanded,
done, and he conducted him into the Castle. 
This done, the Prince that night did lodg in
the Castle with his mighty Captains and men
of War, to the joy of the Town of Mansoul.
Now the next care of the Townsfolk was
how the Captains and Souldiers of the Princes
army should be quartered among them, and
the care was not how they should shut their
hands of them,The Townsmen cover who shall have most of the Soldiers that belong to the Prince. but how they should fill their
houses with them; for every man in Mansoul
now had that esteem of Emanuel and his
men, that nothing grieved them more, than
because they were not enlarged enough, every
one of them to receive the whole army of
the Prince, yea they counted it their glory
to be waiting upon them, and would in those
days run at their bidding like Lacquies. At last
they came to this result:
1. That Captain Innocency should quarter
at Mr. Reasons.
2. That Captain Patience should quarter

at Mr. Minds. This Mr. Mind was formerly
the Lord Wilbewills Clerk in time of the late
rebellion.
3. It was ordered that Captain Charity
should quarter at Mr. Affections house.
How they were quartered in the Town of Mansoul.4. That Captain Good-hope should quarter
at my Lord Mayors. Now for the house of
the Recorder, himself desired, because his
house was next to the Castle, and because
from him it was ordered by the Prince, that
if need be, the alarm should be given to
Mansoul; It was, I say, desired by him that
Captain Boanerges, and Captain Conviction
should take up their quarters with him,
even they and all their men.
5. As for Captain Judgment, and Captain
Execution, my Lord Wilbewill took them, and
their men to him,  because he was to rule under
the Prince for the good of the Town of
Mansoul now, as he had before under the
Tyrant Diabolus for the hurt and damage
thereof.
6. And throughout the rest of the Town
were quartered Emanuels forces, but Captain
Credence with his men abode still in the Castle.
So the Prince, his Captains, and his Soldiers
were lodged in the Town of Mansoul.
Mansoul inflamed with their Prince Emanuel.Now the Ancients and Elders of the Town
of Mansoul thought that they never should
have enough of the Prince Emanuel; his person,
his actions, his words and behaviour,
were so pleasing, so taking, so desirable to

them. Wherefore they prayed him, that
though the Castle of Mansoul was his place
of residence (and they desired that he might
dwell there for ever) yet that he would often
visit the streets, houses, and people of Mansoul.
For, said they, Dread Soveraign, thy
presence, thy looks, thy smiles, thy words,
are the life, and strength, and sinews of the
Town of Mansoul.
Besides this, they craved that they might
have without difficulty or interruption, continual
access unto him,They have access unto him. (so for that very purpose
he commanded that the Gates should
stand open) that they might there see the
manner of his doings, the fortifications of
the place, and the Royal mansion-house of
the Prince.
When he spake, they all stopped their
mouths, and gave audience;They learn of him. and when he
walked, it was their delight to imitate him in
his goings.
Now upon a time Emanuel made a Feast
for the Town of Mansoul, and upon the
Feasting-day the Townsfolk were come to
the Castle to partake of his Banket. And
he feasted them with all manner of outlandish
food, food that grew not in the fields of
Mansoul, nor in all the whole Kingdom of
Universe. It was food that came from his
Fathers Court, and so there was dish after
dish set before them,Promise after promise. and they were commanded
freely to eat. But still when a fresh

dish was set before them, they would whisperingly
say to each other,  What is it? for
they wist not what to call it. They drank
also of the water that was made wine;Brave entertainment. and
were very merry with him. There was musick
also all the while at the Table, and man did
eat Angels food,  and had honey given him
out of the rock; so Mansoul did eat the food
that was peculiar to the Court, yea they had
now thereof to the full.
I must not forget to tell you, that as at
this Table there were Musicians; so they
were not those of the Country, nor yet of
the Town of Mansoul; but they were the
Masters of the Songs that were sung at the
Court of Shaddai.
Now after the feast was over, Emanuel
was for entertaining the Town of Mansoul
Riddles.with some curious riddles of secrets drawn
up by his Fathers Secretary, by the skill and
wisdom of Shaddai; the like to these there
is not in any Kingdom.The holy Scriptures. These Riddles were
made upon the King Shaddai himself, and
upon Emanuel his Son, and upon his wars
and doings with Mansoul.
Emanuel also expounded unto them some
of those Riddles himself, but Oh how they
were lightned! they saw what they never
saw, they could not have thought that such
rarities could have been couched in so few
and such ordinary words. I told you before
whom these Riddles did concern; and as they

were opened, the people did evidently see
'twas so. Yea, they did gather that the
things themselves were a kind of a Pourtraicture,
and that of Emanuel himself; for
when they read in the Scheme where the Riddles
were writ, and looked in the face of
the Prince, things looked so like the one to
the other, that Mansoul could not forbear but
say, This is the Lamb, this is the Sacrifice,
this is the Rock, this is the Red-Cow, this is
the Door, and this is the Way; with a great
many other things more.
And thus he dismissed the Town of Mansoul.
But can you imagin how the people of
the Corporation were taken with this Entertainment?
Oh they were transported
with joy,The end of that Banquet. they were drowned with wonderment,
while they saw and understood,
and considered what their Emanuel entertained
them withal, and what mysteries he
opened to them; and when they were at
home in their houses, and in their most retired
places they could not but sing of him,
and of his actions. Yea, so taken were the
Townsmen now with their Prince, that they
would sing of him in their sleep.
Now it was in the heart of the Prince Emanuel
to new model the Town of Mansoul,Mansoul must be new modelled. and
to put it into such a condition as might be
most pleasing to him, and that might best
stand with the profit and security of the now
flourishing Town of Mansoul. He provided

also against insurrections at home, and invasions
from abroad; such love had he for the
famous Town of Mansoul.
The instruments of war mounted.Wherefore he first of all commanded
that the great slings that were brought from
his Fathers Court when he came to the War
of Mansoul, should be mounted, some upon
the Battlements of the Castle, some upon the
Towers, for there were Towers in the Town
of Mansoul, Towers new built by Emanuel
since he came thither. There was also an instrument
invented by Emanuel, that was to
throw stones from the Castle of Mansoul,A nameless terrible instrument in Mansoul.
out at Mouth-gate; an instrument that could
not be resisted, nor that would miss of execution;
wherefore for the wonderful exploits
that it did when used, it went without a
name, and it was committed to the care of,
and to be managed by the brave Captain, the
Captain Credence, in case of war.
This done,Wilbewill promoted. Emanuel called the Lord Wilbewill
to him, and gave him in commandment
to take care of the Gates, the Wall and Towers
in Mansoul; Also the Prince gave him the
Militia into his hand, and a special charge to
withstand all insurrections and tumults that
might be made in Mansoul against the peace
of our Lord the King, and the peace and tranquillity
of the Town of Mansoul. He also
gave him in commission, that if he found any
of the Diabolonians lurking in any corner in
the famous Town of Mansoul, he should

forthwith apprehend them, and stay them,
or commit them to safe custody, that they
may be proceeded against according to
Law.
Then he called unto him the Lord Understanding,
who was the old Lord Mayor,My Lord Mayor put into place. he
that was put out of place when Diabolus
took the Town, and put him into his former
office again, and it became his place for his
life time. He bid him also that he should
build him a Palace near Eye-gate, and that
he should build it in fashion like a Tower for
defence. He bid him also that he should read
in the Revelation of Mysteries all the days of
his life, that he might know how to perform
his Office aright.
He also made Mr. Knowledg the Recorder,Mr. Knowledg made Recorder.
not of contempt to old Mr. Conscience, who
had been Recorder before; but for that it was
in his Princely mind to confer upon Mr. Conscience
another imploy; of which he told
the old Gentleman he should know more
hereafter.
Then he commanded that the Image of
Diabolus should be taken down from the
place where it was set up; and that they
should destroy it utterly,The image of the Prince and his Father set up again in Mansoul. beating of it into
powder, and casting it into the wind, with
out the Town-wall. And that the Image of
Shaddai his Father should be set up again,
with his own, upon the Castle gates.
And that it should be more fairly drawn than 

ever; for as much as both his Father and
himself were come to Mansoul in more grace
and mercy than heretofore. He would also
that his name should be fairly ingraven upon
the front of the Town, and that it should be
done in the best of Gold for the honour of
the Town of Mansoul.
After this was done, Emanuel gave out a
Commandment that those three great Diabolonians
should be apprehended, namely the
two late Lord Mayors, to wit, Mr. Incredulity,
Mr. Lustings, and Mr. Forget good the Recorder.
Besides these, there were some of them
that Diabolus made Burgesses and Aldermen
in Mansoul,Some Diabolonians commited to prison under the hand of Mr. True-man the Keeper. that were committed to Ward by
the hand of the now valiant, and now right
noble, the brave Lord Wilbewill.
And these were their names, Alderman
Atheism, Alderman Hard-heart, and Alderman
False-peace. The Burgesses were Mr. Notruth,
Mr. Pitile&esset;, Mr. Haughty, with the
like. These were committed to close custody;
and the Gaolers name was Mr. True-man;
this True man was one of those that Emanuel
brought with him from his Fathers Court,
when at the first he made a war upon Diabolus
in the Town of Mansoul.
After this the Prince gave a charge that
Diabolous's strongholds pull'd down.the three strong holds that at the command
of Diabolus the Diabolonians built in Mansoul,
should be demolished, and utterly pulled
down; of which Holds and their names,

with their Captains and Governours, you
read a little before. But this was long in doing,
because of the largeness of the places,
and because the stones, the timber, the iron,
and all rubbish was to be carried without the
Town.
When this was done,A Court to be called to try the Diabolonians. the Prince gave order
that the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
Mansoul, should call a Court of Judicature
for the Trial and Execution of the Diabolonians
in the Corporation now under the
charge of Mr. True-man the Gaoler.
Now when the time was come, and the
Court set,The Prisoners brought to the Bar. Commandment was sent to Mr.
True-man the Gaoler to bring the Prisoners
down to the Barr. Then were the prisoners
brought down, pinioned, and chained together
as the custom of the Town of Mansoul
was. So when they were presented before
the Lord Mayor, the Recorder, and the rest
of the Honourable Bench, First,The Jury impanelled, and witnesses sworn. the Jury
was impanelled, and then the Witnesses sworn.
The names of the Jury were these, Mr. Belief,
Mr. True-heart, Mr. Upright, Mr. Hate-bad,
Mr. Love-God, Mr. See-truth, Mr. Heavenly-mind,
Mr. Moderate, Mr. Thankeful,
Mr. Good-work, Mr. Zeal for God, and Mr.
Humble.
The names of the Witnesses were Mr. Know-all,
Mr. Tell true, Mr. Hate lies, with my
Lord Wilbewill and his man if need were.

So the prisoners were set to the Bar,Do-right the Clerk. then
said Mr. Do-right (for he was the Town-Clerk),
set Atheism to the Bar, Gaoler. So
he was set to the Bar.Atheism set to the Bar, his Indictment. Then said the Clerk,
Atheism, hold up thy hand: Thou art here indicted
by the name of Atheism, (an intruder upon
the Town of Mansoul) for that thou hast perniciously
and doultishly taught and maintained that
there is no God, and so no heed to be taken to Religion.
This thou hast done against the being, honour,
and glory of the King, and against the
peace and safety of the Town of Mansoul. What
saist thou, art thou guilty of this Indictment, or
not?
Atheism.His plea. Not guilty.
Cry. Call Mr. Know-all, Mr. Tell true,
and Mr. Hate-lies into the Court.
So they were called, and they appeared.
Clerk. Then said the Clerk, You the Witnesses
for the King, look upon the Prisoner at the
Bar, do you know him?
Know. Then said Mr. Know-all, Yes, my
Lord, we know him, his name is Atheism, he
has been a very pestilent fellow for many
years in the miserable Town of Mansoul.
Cler. You are sure you know him?
Know. Know him! Yes, my Lord: I have
heretofore too often been in his company,
to be at this time ignorant of him. He is a
Diabolonian, the son of a Diabolonian, I knew
his Grand-father, and his Father.

Cler. Well said: He standeth here indicted
by the name of Atheism, &c. and is charged
that he hath maintained and taught that there is
no God, and so no heed need be taken to any Religion.
What say you the Kings Witnesses, to this?
is he guilty or not?
Know. My Lord, I and he were once in Vilains-Lane
together, and he at that time did
briskly talk of divers opinions, and then
and there I heard him say, That for his part
he did believe that there was no God. But,
said he, I can profess one, and be as Religious
too, if the company I am in, and the
circumstances of other things, said he, shall
put me upon it.
Cler. You are sure you heard him say thus.
Know. Upon mine Oath I heard him say
thus.
Then said the Clerk, Mr. Tell-true, What
say you to the Kings Judges, touching the prisoner
at the Bar?
Tell. My Lord, I formerly was a great
companion of his, (for the which I now repent
me) and I have often heard him say, and
that with very great stomachfulness, that he
believed there was neither God, Angel, nor
Spirit.
Cler. Where did you hear him say so?
Tell. In Blackmouth-lane, and in Blasphemers
row, and in many other places besides.
Cler. Have you much knowledg of him?

Tell. I know him to be a Diabolonian, the
son of a Diabolonian, and an horrible man to
deny a Deity; his Fathers name was Never-be-good,
and he had more children than this
Atheism. I have no more to say.
Cler. Mr. Hate lyes look upon the prisoner at
the Bar, do you know him?
Hate. My Lord, this Atheism is one of the
vilest wretches that ever I came near, or had
to do with in my life. I have heard him say
that there is no God; I have heard him say
that there is no world to come, no sin, nor
punishment hereafter; and moreover, I have
heard him say that 'twas as good to go to a
Whore-house as to go to hear a Sermon.
Cler. Where did you hear him say these
things?
Hate. In Drunkards row, just at Raskal-lanes-end,
at a house in which Mr. Impiety
lived.
Cler. Set him by,Lustings set to the Bar. Gaoler, and set Mr. Lustings
to the Bar.
Mr. Lustings, thou art here indicted by the
name of Lustings, (an intruder upon the Town
of Mansoul) for that thou hast Devilishly and
Traiterously taught by practice and filthy words,
that it is lawful and profitable to man to give
way to his carnal desires,His Indictment. and that thou for thy
part hast not, nor never wilt deny thy self of any
sinful delight as long as thy name is Lustings.
How saist thou, art thou guilty of this Indictment
or not?

Lust. Then said Mr. Lustings, My Lord,His plea.
I am a man of high birth, and have been
used to pleasures and pastimes of greatness.
I have not been wont to be snub'd for my doings,
but have been left to follow my will as
if it were Law. And it seems strange to me
that I should this day be called into question
for that, that not only I, but almost all men
do either secretly or openly countenance,
love, and approve of.
Cler. Sir, we concern not our selves with your
greatne&esset; (though the higher the better you should
have been) but we are concerned, and so are you
now, about an Indictment preferred against you.
How say you, are you guilty of it, or not?
Lust. Not guilty.
Cler. Cryer, call upon the Witnesses to
stand forth, and give their Evidence.
Cry. Gentlemen, you the Witnesses for the
King, come in and give in your Evidence for
our Lord the King against the prisoner at the
Bar.
Cler. Come, Mr. Know-all, look upon the
prisoner at the Bar, do you know him?
Know. Yes, my Lord, I know him.
Clerk. What's his name?
Know. His name is Lustings, he was the
son of one Beastly, and his mother bare him
in Flesh-street; she was one Evil-concupiscence's
daughter. I knew all the generation of
them.

Cler. Well said, You have here heard his Indictment,
what say you to it, is he guilty of the
things charged against him, or not?
Know. My Lord, he has, as he saith, been
a great man indeed; and greater in wickedness
than by Pedigree, more than a thousand
fold.
Cler. But what do you know of his particular
actions, and especially with reference to his Indictment?
Know. I know him to be a swearer, a lyer, a
Sabbath-breaker; I know him to be a fornicator,
and an unclean person; I know him to
be guilty of abundance of evils. He has
been to my knowledg a very filthy man.
Cler. But where did he use to commit his
wickednesses, in some private corners, or more
open and shamelesly?
Know. All the Town over, my Lord.
Cler. Come, Mr. Tell-true, what have you
to say for our Lord the King against the prisoner
at the Bar?
Tell. My Lord, all that the first Witness
has said I know to be true, and a great deal
more besides.
Cler. Mr. Lustings, do you hear what these
Gentlemen say?
Lust. I was ever of opinion that the happiest
life that a man could live on earth,His second Plea. was
to keep himself back from nothing that he
desired in the world; nor have I been false
at any time to this opinion of mine, but

have lived in the love of my notions all
my days. Nor was I ever so churlish, having
found such sweetness in them my self, as to
keep the commendations of them from
others.
Court. Then said the Court, There hath
proceeded enough from his own mouth to lay him
open to condemnation, wherefore set him by,
Gaoler, and set Mr. Incredulity to the Bar.
Incredulity set to the Bar.Incredulity set to the Bar.
Cler. Mr. Incredulity, thou art here Indicted
by the name of Incredulity, (an intruder
upon the Town of Mansoul) for that thou hast
feloniously and wickedly, and that when thou wert
an Officer in the Town of Mansoul, made head
against the Captains of the great King Shaddai,
when they came and demanded possession of Mansoul;His Indictment.
yea thou didst bid defiance to the name,
forces and cause of the King, and didst also, as
did Diabolus thy Captain, stir up and encourage
the Town of Mansoul to make head against, and
resist the said force of the King. What saist thou
to this Indictment? art thou guilty of it, or
not?
Then said Incredulity, I know not Shaddai,His Plea.
I love my old Prince, I thought it my duty
to be true to my trust, and to do what I could
to possess the minds of the men of Mansoul
to do their utmost to resist strangers and foreigners,
and with might to fight against
them. Nor have I, nor shall I change mine
opinion for fear of trouble, though you at

present are possessed of place and power.
Court. Then said the Court, the man as
you see is incorrigible, he is for maintaining
his Villanies by stoutness of words, and his
rebellion with impudent confidence. And
therefore set him by Gaoler, and set Mr. Forget-good
to the Bar.
Forget-good set to the Bar.Forgetgood set to the Bar.
Cler. Mr. Forget-good, thou art here Indicted
by the name of Forget-good (an intruder
upon the Town of Mansoul) for that thou when
His Indictment.the whole affairs of the Town of Mansoul were in
thy hand, didst utterly forget to serve them in
what was good, and didst fall in with the Tyrant
Diabolus against Shaddai the King, against
his Captains, and all his host, to the dishonour of
Shaddai, the breach of his Law, and the endangering
of the destruction of the famous Town
of Mansoul. What saist thou to this Indictment?
are thou guilty, or not guilty?
Then said Forget-good, Gentlemen, and at
this time my Judges, as to the Indictment by
His Plea.which I stand of several crimes accused before
you, pray attribute my forgetfulness to
mine age, and not to my wilfulne&esset;; to the
crazine&esset; of my brain, and not to the carelesle&esset;
of my mind, and then I hope I may by
your charity be excused from great punishment,
though I be guilty.
Then said the Court, Forget-good, Forget-good,
Thy forgetfulne&esset; of good was not simply of
frailty, but of purpose, and for that thou didst

loth to keep vertuous things in thy mind. What
was bad thou couldest retain, but what was good
thou couldest not abide to think of, thy age therefore,
and thy pretended craziness, thou makest
use of to blind the Court withal, and as a cloak
to cover thy Knavery. But let us hear what the
Witnesses have to say for the King against the
prisoner at the Bar, is he guilty of this Indictment,
or not?
Hate. My Lord, I have heard this Forget-good
say, That he could never abide to think
of goodness, no not for a quarter of an
hour.
Cler. Where did you hear him say so?
Hate. In All-base-lane, at a house next
door to the Sign of the Conscience seared with
an hot iron.
Cler. Mr. Know-all, what can you say for
our Lord the King against the prisoner at
the Bar?
Know. My Lord, I know this man well,
he is a Diabolonian, the son of a Diabolonian,
his Fathers name was Love-naught, and for
him I have often heard him say that he counted
the very thoughts of goodness the most
burdensome thing in the world.
Clerk. Where have you heard him say these
words?
Know. In Flesh-lane right opposite to the
Church.
Then said the Clerk, Come, Mr. Tell-true,
give in your Evidence concerning the prisoner at

the Bar about that for which he stands here, as
you see, indicted before this honourable Court.
Tell. My Lord, I have heard him often
say, he had rather think of the vilest thing
than of what is contained in the Holy Scriptures.
Clerk. Where did you hear him say such
grievous words?
Tell. Where? in a great many places?
particularly in Nauseous-street, in the house of
one Shamele&esset;, and in Filth-lane, at the sign of
the Reprobate, next door to the Descent into
the pit.
Court. Gentlemen, you have heard the Indictment,
his Plea, and the testimony of the Witnesses.
Gaoler,Hard-heart set to the Bar. set Mr. Hard-heart to the Bar.
He is set to the Bar.
Clerk. Mr. Hard-heart, thou art here Indicted
by the name of Hard-heart, (an intruder
upon the Town of Mansoul) for that thou
didst most desperately and wickedly posse&esset; the
Town of Mansoul with impenitency and obduratene&esset;,
and didst keep them from remorse and
sorrow for their evils, all the time of their apostasie
from, and rebellion against the blessed King
Shaddai. What saist thou to this Indictment, art
thou guilty, or not guilty?
Hard. My Lord, I never knew what remorse
or sorrow meant in all my life: I am
impenetrable, I care for no man; nor can I
be pierced with mens griefs, their groans

will not enter into my heart; whomever I
mischief, whomever I wrong, to me it is musick,
when to others mourning.
Court. You see the man is a right Diabolonian,
and has convicted himself. Set him by,
Gaoler, and set Mr. False-peace to the Bar.
False-peace set to the Bar.False-peace set to the Bar.
Mr. False-peace, Thou art here Indicted by
the name of False peace, (an intruder upon the
Town of Mansoul) for that thou didst most
wickedly and satanically bring, hold, and keep
the Town of Mansoul, both in her apostasie, and
in her hellish rebellion, in a false, groundle&esset; and
dangerous peace, and damnable security, to the
dishonour of the King, the transgression of his
Law, and the great damage of the Town of
Mansoul. What saist thou, art thouguilty of this
Indictment, or not?
Then said Mr. False-peace, Gentlemen,
and you now appointed to be my Judges,His plea. I
acknowledg that my name is Mr. Peace, but
that my name is False-peace, I utterly deny.
If your Honours shall please to send for any
that do intimately know me, or for the
midwife that laid my mother of me, or for
the Gossips that was at my Christening,He denies his name. they
will any, or all of them prove that my name
is not False-peace, but Peace. Wherefore I
cannot plead to this Indictment, for as much
as my name is not inserted therein, and as is
my true name, so also are my conditions. I
was always a man that loved to live at quiet,

and what I loved my self, that I thought
others might love also. Wherefore when I
saw any of my neighbours to labour under a
disquieted mind, I endeavoured to help
them what I could, and instances of this
good temper of mine, many I could give:
As,
First, when at the beginning our Town of
Mansoul did decline the ways of Shaddai,
they,Pleads his Goodness. some of them afterwards began to
have disquieting reflections upon themselves
for what they had done; but I, as one troubled
to see them disquieted, presently sought
out means to get them quiet again.
2. When the ways of the old world, and
of Sodom, were in fashion; if any thing happened
to molest those that were for the customes
of the present times, I laboured to
make them quiet again, and to cause them
to act without molestation.
3. To come nearer home, when the wars
fell out between Shaddai and Diabolus, if
at any time I saw any of the Town of Mansoul
afraid of destruction, I often used by
some way, device, invention or other, to labour
to bring them to peace again.
Wherefore since I have been always a man
of so vertuous a temper, as some say a peace-maker
is, and if a peace-maker be so deserving
a man as some have been bold to attest
he is. Then let me, Gentlemen, be accounted
by you, who have a great name for justice

and equity in Mansoul, for a man that
deserveth not this inhumane way of treatment,
but liberty, and also a licence to seek
damage of those that have been my accusers.
Then said the Clerk, Cryer, make a Proclamation.
Cryer, O Yes, for as much as the prisoner at
the Bar hath denied his name to be that which is
mentioned in the Indictment, the Court requireth
that if there be any in this place that can
give information to the Court of the original and
right name of the prisoner, they would come forth
and give in their Evidence, for the prisoner
stands upon his own innocency.
Then came two into the Court and desired
that they might have leave to speak whatNew Witnesses come in against him.
they knew concerning the prisoner at the
Bar; the name of the one was Search-truth,
and the name of the other Vouch-truth: so the
Court demanded of these men, If they knew
the prisoner, and what they could say concerning
him, for he stands, said they, upon
his own Vindication?
Then said Mr. Search truth, My Lord, I.
Court. Hold, give him his Oath, then
they sware him. So he proceeded.
Search. My Lord, I know, and have known
this man from a child, and can attest that
his name is False peace. I knew his Father, his
name was Mr. Flatter, and his Mother before
she was married was called by the name of

Mrs. Sooth up; and these two when they
came together, lived not long without this
son, and when he was born, they called his
name False peace. I was his play-fellow, only
I was somewhat older than he; and when
his mother did use to call him home from his
play, she used to say, Falsepeace, Falsepeace,
come home quick, or I'le fetch you. Yea, I
knew him when he sucked; and though I was
then but little, yet I can remember that
when his mother did use to sit at the door
with him, or did play with him in her arms,
she would call him twenty times together,
My little Falsepeace, my pretty Falsepeace, and
O my sweet Rogue, Falsepeace; and again, O
my little bird, Falsepeace; and how do I love
my child! The Gossips also know it is thus,
though he has had the face to deny it in open
Court.
Then Mr. Vouch-truth was called upon to
speak what he knew of him. So they sware
him.
Then said Mr. Vouch-truth, My Lord, all
that the former Witness hath said is true;
his name is Falsepeace, the son of Mr Flatter,
and of Mrs. Soothup his mother. And I have
in former times seen him angry with those
that have called him any thing else but False-peace,
for he would say that all such did
mock and nick-name him, but this was in the
time when Mr. Falsepeace was a great man,
and when the Diabolonians were the brave
men in Mansoul.

Court. ‘Gentlemen, you have heard what
these two men have sworn against the prisoner
at the Bar: and now Mr. False-peace
to you, you have denied your name to be
False-peace, yet you see that these honest
men have sworn that this is your name. As
to your Plea, in that you are quite besides
the matter of your Indictment, you are
not by it charged for evil doing, because
you are a man of peace, or a peace-maker
among your neighbours; but for that you
did wickedly, and satanically bring, keep,
and hold the Town of Mansoul both under
its apostacy from, and in its rebellion against
its King, in a false, lying, and damnable
peace, contrary to the Law of Shaddai,
and to the hazard of the destruction of the
then miserable Town of Mansoul. All that
you have pleaded for your self is, that you
have denied your name, &c. but here you
see we have Witnesses to prove that you are
the man.
‘For the peace that you so much boast
of making among your neighbours,
know that peace that is not a companion
of truth and holiness, but that which is
without this foundation, is grounded upon
a lye, and is both deceitful and damnable;
as also the great Shaddai hath said: thy
Plea therefore has not delivered thee from
what by the Indictment thou art charged
with, but rather it doth fasten all upon thee.

‘But thou shalt have very fair play, let us
call the Witnesses that are to testifie, as to
matter of fact, and see what they have to
say for our Lord the King against the prisoner
at the Bar.’
Clerk. Mr. Know-all, what say you for our
Lord the King against the Prisoner at the Bar?
Know. My Lord, this man hath of a long
time made it, to my knowledg, his business
to keep the Town of Mansoul in a sinful quietness
in the midst of all her leudness, filthiness
and turmoils, and hath said, and that in
my hearing, Come, come, let us fly from all
trouble, on what ground soever it comes, and
let us be for a quiet and peaceable life,
though it wanteth a good foundation.
Clerk. Come, Mr. Hate-lies, what have you
to say?
Hate. My Lord, I have heard him say, that
peace, though in a way of unrighteousness is
better than trouble with truth.
Clerk. Where did you hear him say this?
Hate. I heard him say it in Folly-yard, at
the house of one Mr. Simple, next door to
the sign of the Self-deceiver. Yea, he hath
said this to my knowledg twenty times in
that place.
Clerk. ‘We may spare further Witness,No-truth set to the Bar.
this Evidence is plain and full. Set him by,
Gaoler, and set Mr. No-truth to the Bar. Mr.
No-truth,His Indictment. thou art here Indicted by the name
of No-truth, (an intruder upon the Town

of Mansoul) for that thou hast always to
the dishonour of Shaddai, and the endangering
of the utter ruin of the famous
Town of Mansoul, set thy self to deface,
and utterly to spoil all the remainders of
the law and image of Shaddai that have
been found in Mansoul after her deep apostasie
from her King to Diabolus the envious
Tyrant. What saist thou, art thou guilty
of this Indictment, or not?’
No. Not guilty, my Lord.
Then the Witnesses were called,His Plea. and Mr.
Knowall did first give in his Evidence against
him.
Know. My Lord, this man was at the pulling
down of the Image of Shaddai; yea, this
is he that did it with his own hands. I my self
stood by and saw him do it,Witnesses. and he did it at
the commandment of Diabolus. Yea, this
Mr. Notruth did more than this, he did also
set up the horned image of the beast Diabolus
in the same place. This also is he that at
the bidding of Diabolus did rent and tear, and
cause to be consumed all that he could of the
remainders of the Law of the King, even whatever
he could lay his hands on in Mansoul.
Clerk. Who saw him do this besides your self?
Hate. I did, my Lord, and so did many
more besides; for this was not done by
stealth, or in a corner, but in the open view
of all, yea he chose himself to do it publickly,
for he delighted in the doing of it.

Clerk. Mr. Notruth, how could you have
the face to plead not guilty, when you were
so manifestly the doer of all this wickedness?
&rhand;Notr. Sir, I thought I must say something,
and as my name is, so I speak: I have been
advantaged thereby before now, and did
not know but by speaking No truth, I might
have reaped the same benefit now.
Clerk. ‘Set him by, Gaoler, and set Mr.
Pittyle&esset; to the Bar:Pityle&esset; set to the Bar. Mr. Pityle&esset;, thou art
here indicted by the name of Pityle&esset;, (an
intruder upon the Town of Mansoul) for
that thou didst most trayterously and
wickedly shut up all bowels of compassion,
His Indictment. and wouldest not suffer poor Mansoul to
condole her own misery when she had
apostatized from her rightful King, but
didst evade, and at all times turn her
mind awry from those thoughts that had
in them a tendency to lead her to repentance.
What saist thou to this Indictment?
Guilty, or not guilty?’
Not guilty of Pitylesne&esset;:His Plea. all I did was to
chear-up, according to my name, for my
name is not Pityle&esset;, but Chear-up; and I
could not abide to see Mansoul incline to
Melancholy.
Clerk. How! do you deny your name,
and say it is not Pityle&esset; but Chear-up? Call
for the Witnesses: What say you the Witnesses
to this Plea?

Know. My Lord, his name is Pityle&esset;; so
he hath writ himself in all papers of concern
wherein he has had to do. But these
Diabolonians love to counterfeit their names:
Mr. Covetousne&esset; covers himself with the
name of good Husbandry, or the like; Mr.
Pride can when need is, call himself Mr.
Neat, Mr. Handsome, or the like, and so of
all the rest of them.
Clerk. Mr. Telltrue what say you?
Tel. His name is Pityle&esset;, my Lord; I have
known him from a child, and he hath done
all that wickedness whereof he stands charged
in the Indictment; but there is a company
of them that are not acquainted with
the danger of damning, therefore they call
all those melancholy that have serious
thoughts how that state should be shunned
by them.
Clerk. Set Mr. Haughty to the Bar, Gaoler.
Mr. Haughty,Haughty set to the Bar. Thou art here indicted by the
name of Haughty, (an intruder upon the Town
of Mansoul) for that thou didst most Trayterously
and Devillishly teach the Town of Mansoul
to carry it loftily and stoutly against the summons
that was given them by the Captains of the King
Shaddai.His Indictment. Thou didst also teach the Towne of
Mansoul to speak contemptuously, and vilifyingly
of their great King Shaddai; and didst moreover
encourage, both by words and examples,
Mansoul, to take up arms both against the King
and his Son Emanuel. How saist thou, art thou
guilty of this Indictment, or not?

Haugh. Gentlemen,His Plea. I have always been
a man of courage and valour, and have not
used when under the greatest clouds, to
sneak or hang down the head like a bulrush;
nor did it at all at any time please me to see
men veil their Bonnets to those that have
opposed them. Yea, though their adversaries
seemed to have ten times the advantage
of them.
I did not use to consider who was my foe,
nor what the cause was in which I was engaged.
'Twas enough to me if I carried it
bravely, fought like a man, and came off a
Victor.
Court. Mr. Haughty,The Court. you are not here Indicted
for that you have been a valiant man,
nor for your courage and stoutne&esset; in times of
distre&esset;, but for that you have made use of this
your pretended valour to draw the Town of
Mansoul into acts of rebellion both against the
great King and Emanuel his Son. This is the
crime and the thing wherewith thou art charged
in and by the Indictment. But he made no answer
to that.
Now when the Court had thus far proceeded
against the prisoners at the Bar, then
they put them over to the verdict of their
Jury, to whom they did apply themselves
after this manner:
Gentlemen of the Jury,The Court to the Jury. you have been here,
and have seen these men, you have heard their
Indictments, their Pleas, and what the Witnesses

have testified against them: Now what remains,The Juries charge.
is, that you do forthwith withdraw your selves to
some place, where without confusion you may consider
of what verdict in a way of truth and righteousne&esset;
you ought to bring in for the King
against them, and so bring it in accordingly.
Then the Jury, to wit, Mr. Belief,They withdraw themselvs. Mr.
Trueheart, Mr. Upright, Mr. Hatebad, Mr.
Lovegod, Mr. Seetruth, Mr. Heavenlimind,
Mr. Moderate, Mr. Thankful, Mr. Humble,
Mr. Goodwork, and Mr. Zealforgod, withdrew
themselves in order to their work:
Now when they were shut up by themselves,
they fell to discourse among themselves in
order to the drawing up of their Verdict.
And thus Mr. Belief, for he was the Foreman,
began: Gentlemen, quoth he,Their Conference among themselvs. for the
men, the prisoners at the Bar, for my part I
believe that they all deserve death. Very right,
said Mr. Trueheart, I am wholly of your opinion:
O what a mercy is it, said Mr. Hatebad,
that such Villains as these are apprehended!
Ai, Ai, said Mr. Lovegod, this is one
of the joyfullest days that ever I saw in my life.
Then said Mr. Seetruth, I know that if we judg
them to death, our verdict shall stand before
Shaddai himself. Nor do I at all question it,
said Mr. Heavenlimind; he said moreover,
When all such beasts as these are cast out of Mansoul,
what a goodly Town will it be then! Then
said Mr. Moderate, it is not my manner to
pass my judgment with rashness, but for these

their crimes are so notorious, and the Witness
so palpable, that that man must be wilfully
blind who saith the prisoners ought not to die.
Blessed be God, said Mr. Thankful, that the
Traytors are in safe custody. And I join with
you in this upon my bare knees, said Mr. Humble
I am glad also said Mr. Goodwork. Then said
the warm man, and true hearted Mr. Zealfor
God, Cut them off, they have been the plague,
and have sought the destruction of Mansoul.
Thus therefore being all agreed in
their Verdict, they come instantly into the
Court.
They are agreed of their Verdict, and bring them in guilty.Clerk. Gentlemen of the Jury answer all
to your Names: Mr. Belief, one: Mr. True-heart,
two: Mr. Upright, three: Mr. Hatebad,
four: Mr. Lovegod, five: Mr. Seetruth, six:
Mr. Heavenlymind, seven: Mr. Moderate,
eight: Mr. Thankful, nine: Mr. Humble, ten:
Mr. Goodwork, eleven: and Mr. Zealforgod,
twelve: Good men and true, stand together
in your Verdict: are you all agreed?
Jury. Yes, my Lord.
Clerk. Who shall speak for you?
Jury. Our Foreman.
Clerk. You the Gentlemen of the Jury being
impannelled for our Lord the King to serve here
in a matter of life and death, have heard the
trials of each of these men the prisoners at the
Bar: What say you, are they guilty of that, and
those crimes for which they stand here Indicted,
or are they not guilty?

Foreman. Guilty, my Lord.The Verdict.
Clerk. Look to your Prisoners, Gaoler.
This was done in the morning, and in the
afternoon they received the sentence of
death according to the Law.
The Gaoler therefore having received
such a charge, put them all in the inward
prison, to preserve them there till the day
of Execution, which was to be the next day
in the morning.
But now to see how it happened, one of
the prisoners, Incredulity by name, in the interim
betwixt the Sentence and time of Execution,Incredulity breaks prison.
brake prison, and made his escape,
and gets him away quite out of the Town of
Mansoul, and lay lurking in such places and
holes as he might, until he should again have
opportunity to do the Town of Mansoul a
mischief for their thus handling of him as
they did.
Now when Mr. Truman the Gaoler perceived
that he had lost his Prisoner, he was in a
heavy taking, because he that Prisoner was,
to speak on, the very worst of all the gang:
wherefore first he goes and acquaints my
Lord Mayor, Mr. Recorder, and my Lord
Wilbewill with the matter, and to get of them
an Order to make search for him throughout
the Town of Mansoul.No Incredulity found in Mansoul. So an Order he got
and search was made, but no such man could
now be found in all the Town of Mansoul.

All that could be gathered was, that he
had lurked a while about the out-side of the
Town, and that here and there one or other
had a glimpse of him as he did make his
escape out of Mansoul, one or two also did
affirm that they saw him without the Town,
going apace quite over the Plain. Now when
he was quite gone, it was affirmed by one
Mr. Didsee,He is gone to Diabolus. that he ranged all over dry places,
till he met with Diabolus his friend; and
where should they meet one another but just
upon Hellgate-hill.
But Oh! what a lamentable story did the
old Gentleman tell to Diabolus concerning
what sad alteration Emanuel had made in
Mansoul?
As first,He tells Diabolus what Emanuel now is doing in Mansoul. how Mansoul had, after some delays
received a general pardon at the hands
of Emanuel, and that they had invited him
into the Town, and that they had given him
the Castle for his possession. He said moreover,
that they had called his Souldiers into
the Town, coveted who should quarter the
most of them; they also entertained him
with the Timbrel, Song and Dance. But that,
said Incredulity, that is the sorest vexation to
me is, that he hath pulled down, O father,
thy image, and set up his own, pulled down
thy officers, and set up his own. Yea, and
Wilbewill, that Rebel, who, one would have
thought, should never have turned from us,
he is now in as great favour with Emanuel, as

ever he was with thee. But besides all this,
this Wilbewill has received a special Commission
from his Master to search for, to apprehend,
and to put to death all, and all manner
of Diabolonians that he shall find in Mansoul:
Yea, and this Wilbewill has taken and committed
to prison already eight of my Lords
most trusty friends in Mansoul. Nay further,
my Lord, with grief I speak it, they have
been all arraigned, condemned, and I doubt
before this executed in Mansoul. I told my
Lord of eight, and my self was the ninth,
who should assuredly have drunk of the same
cup, but that through craft, I, as thou seest,
have made mine escape from them.
When Diabolus had heard this lamentable
story he yelled,Diabolus yells at this news. and snuffed up the wind like
a Dragon, and made the sky to look dark
with his roaring: He also sware that he
would try to be revenged on Mansoul for this.
So they, both he and his old friend Incredulity
concluded to enter into great consultation, how
they might get the Town of Mansoul again.
Now before this time the day was come
in which the Prisoners in Mansoul were to
be Executed:  so they were brought to the
Cross, and that by Mansoul, in most solemn
manner: for the Prince said that this should
be done by the hand of the Town of Mansoul,
that I may see, said he, the forwardness
of my now redeemed Mansoul to keep my
word, and to do my Commandments;  and

that I may bless Mansoul in doing this deed.
Proof of sincerity pleases me well, let Mansoul
therefore first lay their hands upon these
Diabolonians to destroy them.
So the Town of Mansoul slew them according
to the word of their Prince: but when
the Prisoners were brought to the Cross to
die, you can hardly believe what troublesome
work Mansoul had of it to put the Diabolonians
to death, (for the men knowing that
they must die, and every of them having implacable
enmity in their heart to Mansoul)
what did they but took courage at the Cross,
and there resisted the men of the Town of
Mansoul?The assistance of more Grace. Wherefore the men of Mansoul
were forced to cry out for help to the Captains
and men of war. Now the great Shaddai
had a Secretary in the Town, and he was a
great lover of the men of Mansoul, and he
was at the place of Execution also; so
he hearing the men of Mansoul cry out
against the struglings and unruliness of the
Prisoners, rose up from his place, and came
and put his hands upon the hands of the men
of Mansoul.Execution done. So they crucified the Diabolonians
that had been a plague, a grief, and an
offence to the Town of Mansoul. 
Now when this good work was done,The Prince comes down to congratulate them. the
Prince came down to see, to visit, and to
speak comfortably to the men of Mansoul, and
to strengthen their hands in such work. And

he said to them, that by this act of theirs he
had proved them, and found them to be lovers
of his person, observers of his Laws,
and such as had also respect to his honour.
He said moreover, (to shew them that they
by this should not be losers, nor their Town
weakened by the loss of them) that he would
make them another Captain,He promises to make them a new Captain. and that of one
of themselves. And that this Captain should
be the ruler of a thousand, for the good and
benefit of the now flourishing Town of Mansoul.
So he called one to him whose name was
Waiting, and bid him go quickly up to the
Castle-gate, and enquire there for one Mr.
Experience that waiteth upon that noble Captain,Experience must be the new Captain.
the Captain Credence, and bid him come
hither to me. So the messenger that waited
upon the good Prince Emanuel went & said as
he was commanded. Now the young Gentleman
was waiting to see the Captain train and
muster his men in the Castle-yard. Then said
Mr. Waiting to him, Sir, the Prince would
that you should come down to his Highness
forthwith.The qualifications of their new Captain. So he brought him down to
Emanuel, and he came and made obeisance
before him. Now the men of the Town
knew Mr. Experience well, for he was born
and bred in Mansoul; they also knew him to
be a man of conduct, of valour, and a person
prudent in matters; he was also a comely
person, well spoken, and very successful in
his undertakings.

Mansoul takes it well.Wherefore the hearts of the Townsmen
were transported with joy, when they saw
that the Prince himself was so taken with
Mr. Experience, that he would needs make
him a Captain over a band of men.
So with one consent they bowed the knee
before Emanuel, and with a shout said, Let
Emanuel live for ever. Then said the Prince
to the young Gentleman, whose name was
Mr. Experience, I have thought good to confer
The thing told to Mr. Experience.upon thee a place of trust and honour in
this my Town of Mansoul, (then the young
man bowed his head and worshipped), It is,
said Emanuel, that thou shouldest be a Captain,
a Captain over a thousand men in my
beloved Town of Mansoul. Then said the
Captain, Let the King live. So the Prince
gave out orders forthwith to the Kings Secretary,
that he should draw up for Mr. Experience
a Commission to make him a Captain
over a thousand men,His Commission sent him. and let it be brought
to me, said he, that I may set to my seal. So
it was done as it was commanded. The
Commission was drawn up, brought to Emanuel,
and he set his seal thereto. Then by the
hand of Mr. Waiting he sent it away to the
Captain.
Now so soon as the Captain had received
his Commission, he soundeth his Trumpet
for Voluntiers, and young men come to him
apace; yea the greatest and chiefest men in

the Town sent their sons to be listed underHis Under-Officers.
his command. Thus Captain Experience came
under command to Emanuel, for the good
of the Town of Mansoul. He had for his
Lieutenant one Mr. Skilful, and for his Cornet
one Mr. Memory. His under Officers I
need not name. His Colours were the White
Colours for the Town of Mansoul; and his
Scutcheon was the dead Lion, and dead Bear. 
So the Prince returned to his Royal Palace
again.
Now when he was returned thither, the
Elders of the Town of Mansoul, to wit,The Elders of Mansoul congratulate him. the
Lord Mayor, the Recorder, and the Lord
Wilbewill went to congratulate him, and in
special way to thank him for his love, care,
and the tender compassion which he shewed
to his ever obliged Town of Mansoul. So after
a while, and some sweet Communion
between them, the Townsmen having solemnly
ended their Ceremony, returned to
their place again.
Emanuel also at this time appointed them
a day wherein he would renew their Charter,
yea wherein he would renew and enlargeHe renews their Charter.
it, mending several faults therein, that
Mansouls yoke might be yet more easie. And
this he did without any desire of theirs,  even
of his own frankness, and noble mind. So when
he had sent for and seen their old one, he
laid it by, and said, Now that which decayeth
and waxeth old is ready to vanish away. He

said moreover, the Town of Mansoul shall
have another, a better, a new one, more
steady and firm by far. An Epitome hereof
take as follows.
Emanuel Prince of Peace, and a great lover
of the Town of Mansoul,An Epitome of their new Charter. I do in the name of
my Father, and of mine own clemency, give,
grant, and bequeath to my beloved Town of
Mansoul,
First,  free, full, and everlasting forgivene&esset;
of all wrongs, injuries, and offences done by
them against my Father, me, their neighbour, or
themselves.
Secondly, I do give them the holy Law, and
my Testament, with all that therein is contained,
for their everlasting comfort and consolation.
Thirdly, I do also give them a portion of
the self same grace and goodne&esset; that dwells in
my Fathers heart and mine.
Fourthly, I do give, grant and bestow upon
them freely the world, and what is therein for
their good,  and they shall have that power over
them, as shall stand with the honour of my Father,
my glory, and their comfort, yea, I grant
them the benefits of life and death, and of things
present, and things to come. This priviledg, no
other City, Town or Corporation shall have but
my Mansoul only.
Fifthly, I do give and grant them leave, and
 free acce&esset; to me in my Palace at all seasons (to my
Palace above or below) there to make known their
wants to me, and I give them moreover a promise

that I will hear and redre&esset; all their
grievances.
Sixthly, I do give, grant to,No man to die for killing of sin. and invest the
Town of Mansoul with full power and authority
to seek out, take, inslave, and destroy all, and all
manner of Diabolonians that at any time from
whence soever shall be found stragling in, or about
the Town of Mansoul.
Seventhly,No lust has any grant by Christ, or any liberty to action the Town of Mansoul. I do further grant to my beloved
Town of Mansoul that they shall have authority
not to suffer any foreigner or stranger, or their
seed, to be free in, and of the blessed Town of
Mansoul, nor to share in the excellent priviledges
thereof. But that all the grants, priviledges, and
immunities that I bestow upon the famous Town of
Mansoul, shall be for those the old natives,  and
true inhabitants thereof, to them I say, and to
their right seed after them.
But all Diabolonians of what sort, birth,
Country, or Kingdom soever, shall be debarred a
share therein.
So when the Town of Mansoul had received
at the hand of Emanuel their gracious
Charter, (which in it self is infinitely more
large than by this lean Epitome is set before
you) they carried it to audience, that is to the
Market place,  and there Mr. Recorder read
it in the presence of all the people. This being
done, it was had back to the Castle gates,Their Charter set upon their Castle-gates.
and there fairly engraven upon the doors
thereof, and laid in Letters of Gold, to the
end that the Town of Mansoul, with all the

people thereof, might have it always in their
view, or might go where they might see
what a blessed freedom their Prince had bestowed
upon them, that their joy might be
increased in themselves, and their love renewed
to their great and good Emanuel.
But what joy!Joy renewed in Mansoul. what comfort! what consolation
think you, did now possess the hearts
of the men of Mansoul; the Bells ringed,
the Minstrils played, the people danced,
the Captains shouted, the Colours waved in
the wind, and the silver Trumpets sounded,
and the Diabolonians now were glad to hide
their heads, for they looked like them that
had been long dead.
When this was over, the Prince sent again
for the Elders of the Town of Mansoul, and
communed with them about a Ministry that
he intended to establish among them; such a
Ministry that might open unto them, and
that might instruct them in the things that
did concern their present and future state.
For said he,  You of your selves, without
you have Teachers and Guides, will not be
able to know, and if not to know, to be sure,
not to do the will of my father.
At this news when the Elders of Mansoul
brought it to the people,The common good thoughts. the whole Town
came running together, (for it pleased them
well, as whatever the Prince now did, pleased
the people) and all with one consent implored
his Majesty that he would forthwith

establish such a Ministry among them as
might teach them both law and judgment,
statute and commandment; that they might
be documented in all good and wholsome
things. So he told them that he would grant
them their requests; and would establish two
among them; one that was of his Fathers
Court, and one that was a native of Mansoul.
He that is from the Court, said he, is a
person of no less quality and dignity than is
my Father and I:  and he is the Lord chief
Secretary of my Fathers house, for he is, and
always has been the chief dictator of all my
Fathers Laws, a person altogether well skill'd
in all mysteries, and knowledg of mysteries
as is my Father, or as my self is. Indeed he
is one with us in nature, and also as to loving
of, and being faithful to, and in, the eternal
concerns of the Town of Mansoul.
And this is he, said the Prince, that must
be your chief Teacher: for 'tis he, and he
only that can teach you clearly in all high and
supernatural things. He and he only it is that
knows the ways and methods of my Father
at Court, nor can any like him shew how the
heart of my Father is at all times, in all things,
upon all occasions towards Mansoul, (for as
no man knows the things of a man but that
spirit of a man which is in him: so the things
of my Fatherr knows no man but this his 
high and mighty Secretary. Nor can any (as

he) tell Mansoul, how and what they shall do
to keep themselvs in the love of my Father.)
He also it is that can bring lost things to
your remembrance, and that can tell you
things to come. This Teacher therefore
must of necessity have the preheminence
(both in your affections and judgment) before
your other Teacher; his personal dignity,
the excellency of his teaching, also
the great dexterity that he hath to help you
to make and draw up Petitions to my Father
for your help, and to his pleasing, must lay
obligations upon you to love him, fear him,
and to take heed that you grieve him not.
 This person can put life and vigor into
all he says; yea, and can also put it into
your heart. This person can make Seers of
you, and can make you tell what shall be
hereafter. By this person you must frame all
your Petitions to my Father and me; and
without his advice and counsel first obtained,
let nothing enter into the Town or Castle of
Mansoul, for that may disgust and grieve
this noble person.
Take heed, I say, that you do not grieve
this Minister, for if you do, he may fight
against you; and should he once be moved
by you, to set himself against you, against
you in battel array, that will distress you
more than if twelve legions should from my
Fathers Court be sent to make war upon
you.

But (as I said) if you shall hearken unto
him, and shall love him; if you shall devote
your selves to his teaching, and shall seek to
have converse,  and to maintain Communion
with him, you shall find him ten times better
than is the whole world to any: yea, he will
shed abroad the love of my Father in your
hearts, and Mansoul will be the wisest, and
most blessed of all people.
Then did the Prince call unto him the Old
Gentleman,Conscience made a Minister. who afore had been the Recorder
of Mansoul, Mr. Conscience by name, and
told him, That for as much as he was well
skilled in the Law and Government of the
Town of Mansoul, and was also well spoken,
and could pertinently deliver to them his
Masters will in all terrene & domestick matters,
therefore he would also make him a
Minister for, in, and to the goodly Town of
Mansoul; in all the Laws, Statutes and Judgments
of the famous Town of Mansoul. And
thou must (said the Prince) confine thy selfHis limits.
to the teaching of Moral Vertues, to Civil
and Natural duties, but thou must not attempt
to presume to be a revealer of those
high and supernatural Mysteries that are
kept close in the bosome of Shaddai my Father:His Caution.
for those things know no man, nor can
any reveal them but my Fathers Secretary
only.
Thou art a native of the Town of
Mansoul, but the Lord Secretary is a native

with my Father, wherefore as thou hast
knowledg of the Laws and customs of the
Corporation, so he of the things and will
of my Father.
Wherefore, Oh! Mr. Conscience, although
I have made thee a Minister and a Preacher
to the Town of Mansoul, yet as to the things
which the Lord Secretary knoweth, and shall
teach to this people, there thou must be his
scholar, and a learner, even as the rest of
Mansoul are.
Thou must therefore in all high and supernatural
things, go to him for information
and knowledg; for though there be a spirit
in man,  this Persons inspiration must give
him understanding. Wherefore, Oh thou
Mr. Recorder, keep low and be humble, and
remember that the Diabolonians that kept not
their first charge, but left their own standing,
are now made prisoners in the pit; be
therefore content with thy station.
I have made thee my Fathers Vicegerent
on Earth, in such things of which I have made
mention before:His power in Mansoul. and thou, take thou power
to teach them to Mansoul, yea, and to impose
them with whips and chastisements, if
they shall not willingly hearken to do thy
Commandments.
And, Mr. Recorder, because thou art old,
and through many abuses made feeble;
His Liberty.therefore I give thee leave and licence to go
when thou wilt to my fountain, my conduit,

and there to drink freely of the blood of
my Grape,Body. for my conduit doth always run
Wine. Thus doing,  thou shalt drive from
thy heart and stomach all foul, gross, and
hurtful humours. It will also lighten thine
eyes, and will strengthen thy memory for
the reception and keeping of all that the
Kings most noble Secretary teacheth.
When the Prince had thus put Mr. Recorder
(that once so was) into the place and office
of a Minister to Mansoul; and the man
had thankfully accepted thereof: then did
Emanuel address himself in a particular
speech to the Townsmen themselves.
‘Behold,The Princes speech to Mansoul. (said the Prince to Mansoul) my
love and care towards you, I have added to
all that is past, this mercy, to appoint you
Preachers: the most noble Secretary to
teach you in all high and sublime Mysteries;
and this Gentleman (pointing to Mr. Conscience)
is to teach you in all things humane
and domestick, for therein lyeth his work.
He is not by what I have said, debarred of
telling to Mansoul any thing that he hath
heard, and received at the mouth of the
Lord high Secretary; only he shall not attempt
to presume to pretend to be a revealer
of those high Mysteries himself; for the
breaking of them up, and the discovery of
them to Mansoul lyeth only in the power,
authority and skill of the Lord high Secretary
himself. Talk of them he may, and so

may the rest of the Town of Mansoul;A licence to Mansoul. yea,
and may as occasion gives them opportunity,
press them upon each other for the
benefit of the whole. These things therefore
I would have you observe and do, for
it is for your life, and the lengthening of
your days.
‘And one thing more to my beloved Mr.
Recorder, and to all the Town of Mansoul,
you must not dwell in,A world to come promised to Mansoul. nor stay upon any
thing of that which he hath in Commission
to teach you, as to your trust and expectation
of the next world; (of the next world
(I say) for I purpose to give another to
Mansoul, when this with them is worn out)
but for that you must wholly and solely have
recourse to, and make stay upon his Doctrine,
that is your teacher after the first
order. Yea, Mr. Recorder himself must not
look for life from that which he himself revealeth,
his dependance for that must be
founded in the Doctrine of the other Preacher.
Let Mr. Recorder also take heed that
he receive not any Doctrine, or point of
Doctrine, that are not communicated to
him by his superiour teacher, nor yet within
the precincts of his own formal knowledg.’
He gives them caution about the Captains.Now after the Prince had thus setled
things in the famous Town of Mansoul, he
proceeded to give to the Elders of the Corporation
a necessary caution, to wit how

they should carry it to the high and noble
Captains that he had, from his Fathers Court,
sent or brought with him to the famous
Town of Mansoul.
‘These Captains, said he, do love the
Town of Mansoul, and they are pickt
men, pickt out of abundance,Graces pickt from common Vertues. as men that
best suit, and that will most faithfully serve
in the wars of Shaddai against the Diabolonians,
for the preservation of the Town of
Mansoul. I charge you therefore, said he, O ye
inhabitants of the now flourishing Town of
Mansoul, that you carry it not ruggedly, or
untowardly to my Captains, or their men;
since, as I said, they are pickt and choise
men, men chosen out of many for the good
of the Town of Mansoul. I say, I charge
you that you carry it not untowardly to
them; for though they have the hearts and
faces of Lions, when at any time they shall
be called forth to ingage and fight with the
Kings foes,Satan cannot weaken our Graces as we our selves may. and the enemies of the Town
of Mansoul; yet a little discountenance cast
upon them from the Town of Mansoul, will
deject and cast down their faces, will weaken
and take away their courage. Do not
therefore, Oh my beloved, carry it unkindly
to my valiant Captains, and couragious
men of war, but love them,Words. nourish
them, succour them, and lay them in your
bosoms, and they will not only fight for
you, but cause to fly from you all those the

Diabolonians that seek, and will if possible
be your utter destruction.
‘If therefore any of them should at any
time be sick or weak, and so not able to
perform that office of love, which with all
their hearts they are willing to do, (and
will do also when well and in health) slight
them not, nor despise them, but rather
strengthen them,  and incourage them though
weak and ready to die, for they are your
fence, and your guard, your wall, your gates,
your locks, and your bars. And although
when they are weak, they can
do but little, but rather need to be helped
by you, (than that you should then expect
great things from them) yet when well, you
know what exploits, what feats and warlike
Atchievements they are able to do, and
will perform for you.
‘Besides, if they be weak, the Town of
Mansoul cannot be strong; if they be strong,
then Mansoul cannot be weak: your safety
therefore doth lye in their health, and in
your countenancing of them. &rhand;Remember also
that if they be sick, they catch that disease of
the Town of Mansoul it self.
‘These things I have said unto you, because
I love your welfare, and your honour:
Observe therefore Oh my Mansoul, to be
punctual in all things that I have given in
charge unto you, and that not only as a
Town corporate, and so to your officers

and guard, and guides in chief, but to you
as you are a people whose well-being, as
single persons, depends on the observation
of the Orders and Commandments of their
Lord.
‘Next, Oh my Mansoul,A Caution about the Diabolonians that yet remain in Mansoul. I do warn you of
that of which notwithstanding that reformation
that at present is wrought among
you, you have need to be warn'd about:
wherefore hearken diligently unto me. I am
now sure, and you will know hereafter that
there are yet of the Diabolonians remaining
in the Town of Mansoul; Diabolonians
that are sturdy and implacable, and that
do already while I am with you, and that
will yet more when I am from you, study,
plot, contrive, invent, and jointly attempt
to bring you to desolation, and so to a
state far worse than that of the Egyptian
bondage; they are the avowed friends of
Diabolus, therefore look about you: they
used heretofore to lodg with their Prince
in the Castle,  when Incredulity was the
Lord Mayor of this Town, but since my
coming hither, they lye more in the outsides,
and walls,  and have made themselves
dens, and caves, and holes, and strong
holds therein. Wherefore, Oh Mansoul!
thy work as to this, will be so much the more
difficult and hard. That is, to take, mortifie,
and put them to death according to the
will of my Father. Nor can you utterly rid

your selves of them, unless you should pull
down the walls of your Town,Christ would not have us destroy our selves thereby to destroy our sins. the which
I am by no means willing you should. Do
you ask me, What shall we do then? Why,
be you diligent, and quit you like men, observe
their holds, find out their haunts, assault
them, and make no peace with them.
Where ever they haunt, lurk, or abide,
and what terms of peace soever they offer
you abhor, and all shall be well betwixt
you and me. And that you may the better
know them from those that are the natives
of Mansoul, I will give you this brief Schedule
of the names of the chief of them;
and they are these that follow: The Lord
Fornication,The names of some of the Diabolonians in Mansoul. the Lord Adultery, the Lord
Murder, the Lord Anger, the Lord Lasciviousne&esset;,
the Lord Deceit, the Lord Evil-eye,
Mr. Drunkenne&esset;, Mr. Reveling, Mr.
Idolatry, Mr. Witchcraft, Mr. Variance, Mr.
Emulation, Mr. Wrath, Mr. Strife, Mr. Sedition,
and Mr. Heresie. These are some of
the chief, Oh Mansoul! of those that will
seek to overthrow thee for ever: these I
say are the Sculkers in Mansoul, but look
thou well into the Law of thy King, and
there thou shalt find their Physiognomy, and
such other characteristical notes of them, by
which they certainly may be known.
‘These, O my Mansoul, (and I would
gladly that you should certainly know it) if
they be suffered to run and range about the

Town as they would, will quickly like Vipers
eat out your bowels, yea poyson your
Captains, cut the sinews of your souldiers,
break the bar and bolts of your Gates, and
turn your now most flourishing Mansoul into
a barren and desolate wilderness, and
ruinous heap. Wherefore that you may
take courage to your selves to apprehend
these Villains where ever you find them, I
give to you my Lord Mayor, my Lord Wilbewill,A Commission to destroy the Diabolonians in Mansoul.
and Mr. Recorder, with all the inhabitants
of the Town of Mansoul, full power and
commission to seek out, to take, and to cause to
be put to death by the Cro&esset;, all, and all manner
of Diabolonians, when and where ever you
shall find them to lurk within, or to range without
the walls of the Town of Mansoul.
‘I told you before, that I had placed a
standing Ministry among you, not that you
have but these with you,More Preachers if need be for Mansoul. for my four first
Captains who came against the Master and
Lord of the Diabolonians that was in Mansoul,
they can, and (if need be, and) if they
be required, will not only privately inform,
but publickly Preach to the Corporation
both good and wholsome Doctrine, and such
as shall lead you in the way. Yea, they will
set up a weekly, yea, if need be a daily
Lecture in thee, Oh Mansoul! and will instruct
thee in such profitable lessons, that if
heeded will do thee good at the end. &rhand;And
take good heed that you spare not the men that

you have a Commission to take and crucifie.
‘Now as I have set out before your eyes
the vagrants & runnagates by name, so I will
tell you that among your selves some of
them shall creep in to beguile you, even
such as would seem, and that in appearance
are,A Caution. very rife and hot for Religion. And they
if you watch not, will do you a mischief,
such an one as at present you cannot think
of.
‘These, as I said, will shew themselves to
you in another hue than those under description
before. Wherefore Mansoul watch
and be sober, and suffer not thy self to be betrayed.’
When the Prince had thus far new modelled
the Town of Mansoul, and had instructed
them in such matters as were profitable
for them to know: then he appointed
another day in which he intended when the
Townsfolk came together to bestow a further
badg of honour upon the Town of
Mansoul. A badg that should distinguish
them from all the people, kindreds and
tongues that dwell in the Kingdom of Universe.Another priviledg for Mansoul.
Now it was not long before the day
appointed was come, and the Prince and his
people met in the Kings Palace, where first
Emanuel made a short speech unto them, and
then did for them as he had said, and unto
them as he had promised.

‘My Mansoul, said he,His speech to Mansoul. that which I now
am about to do is to make you known to
the world to be mine, and to distinguish
you also in your own eyes, from all false
Traytors that may creep in among you.’
Then he commanded that those that waited
upon him should go and bring forth out of
his treasury those white and glistering robesWhite Robes.
that I, said he, have provided and laid up in
store for my Mansoul. So the white garments
were fetched out of his treasury,  and laid
forth to the eyes of the people. Moreover,
it was granted to them that they should take
them and put them on, according, said he, to
your sizse and stature. So the people were
put into white, into fine linnen, white and
clean.
Then said the Prince unto them, ‘This, O
Mansoul, is my livery, and the badg by
which mine are known from the servants of
others. Yea, it is that which I grant to all
that are mine, and without which no man
is permitted to see my face. Wear them
therefore for my sake who gave them unto
you; and also if you would be known by
the world to be mine.’
But now! can you think how Mansoul
shone? it was fair as the Sun, clear as the
Moon, and terrible as an Army with banners.
The Prince added further, and said, ‘No
Prince, Potentate, or mighty one of Universe,

giveth this livery but my self:That which distinguisheth Mansoul from other people. Behold
therefore, as I said before, you shall
be known by it to be mine.
‘And now, said he, I have given you my
livery, let me give you also in commandment
concerning them: and be sure that
you take good heed to my words.’
First,  Wear them daily, day by day, lest you
should at sometimes appear to others, as if you were
none of mine.
Secondly, Keep them always white, for if
they be soiled, 'tis dishonour to me.
Thirdly, Wherefore gird them up from the
ground, and let them not lag with dust and
dirt.
Fourthly, Take heed that you lose them not,
lest you walk naked,  and they see your shame.
Fifthly, But if you should sulley them, if you
should defile them (the which I am greatly unwilling
you should, and the Prince Diabolus will be
glad if you would) then speed you to do that which
is written in my Law, that yet you may stand,
and not fall before me,  and before my Throne.
Also this is the way to cause that I may not leave
you nor forsake you while here, but may dwell in
this Town of Mansoul for ever.
And now was Mansoul, and the inhabitants
of it as the signet upon Emanuels right
hand; where was there now a Town, a City,
a Corporation that could compare with
Mansoul! A Town redeemed from the hand
and from the power of Diabolus! A Town

that the King Shaddai loved,The glorious state of Mansoul. and that he sent
Emanuel to regain from the Prince of the Infernal
Cave: yea, a Town that Emanuel loved
to dwell in, and that he chose for his
Royal habitation; a Town that he fortified
for himself, and made strong by the force of
his Army. What shall I say, Mansoul has now
a most excellent Prince, Golden Captains and
men of war, weapons proved, and garments
as white as snow. Nor are these benefits
to be counted little but great; can the
Town of Mansoul esteem them so, and improve
them to that end and purpose for
which they are bestowed upon them?
When the Prince had thus compleated the
modelling of the Town, to shew that he
had great delight in the work of his hands,
and took pleasure in the good that he had
wrought for the famous and flourishing Mansoul,
he commanded, and they set his standard
upon the Battlements of the Castle.
And then,
First, He gave them frequent visits, not a
day now but the Elders of Mansoul must
come to him (or he to them) into his Palace. 
Now they must walk and talk together
of all the great things that he had done,
and yet further promised to do for the Town
of Mansoul. Thus would he often do with
the Lord Mayor,Understanding. The Will. my Lord Wilbewill, and the
honest subordinate Preacher Mr. Conscience,
and Mr. Recorder. But Oh! how graciously!

how lovingly! how courteously! and tenderly
did this blessed Prince now carry it towards
the Town of Mansoul! in all the
Streets, Gardens, Orchards, and other places
where he came, to be sure the Poor should
have his blessing and benediction:Hungry thoughts. yea, he
would kiss them, and if they were ill, he
would lay hands on them, and make them
well. The Captains also he would daily, yea
sometimes hourly incourage with his presence
and goodly words. For you must know
that a smile from him upon them would put
more vigor, more life and stoutness into
them, than would any thing else under
Heaven.
The Prince would now also feast them,
and with them continually: hardly a week
would pass but a Banquet must be had betwixt
him and them.  You may remember
that some Pages before we make mention of
one feast that they had together, but now to
feast them was a thing more common, every
day with Mansoul was a feast-day now. Nor
did he when they returned to their places,
send them empty away, either they must
have a Ring,A token of Marriage. a Gold-chain,A token of Honour. a Bracelet,A token of Beauty. a white
stone,A token of Pardon. or something; so dear was Mansoul
to him now; so lovely was Mansoul in his
eyes.
Secondly, When the Elders and Townsmen
did not come to him, he would send in
much plenty of provision unto them; meat

that came from Court, wine and bread that
were prepared for his Fathers Table: yea,
such delicates would he send unto them, and
therewith would so cover their Table, that
whoever saw it confessed that the like could
not be seen in any Kingdom.
Thirdly, If Mansoul did not frequently visit
him as he desired they should, he would walk
out to them, knock at their doors and desire
entrance, that amity might be maintained
betwixt them and him; if they did hear
and open to him, as commonly they would
if they were at home,The danger of wandring thoughts. then would he renew his
former love, and confirm it too with some
new tokens, and signs of continued
favour.
And was it not now amazing to behold, 
that in that very place where sometimes
Diabolus had his abode, and entertained his
Diabolonians to the almost utter destruction
of Mansoul, the Prince of Princes should sit
eating and drinking with them, while all
his mighty Captains, men of War, Trumpeters,
with the singing-men and singing-women
of his Father stood round about to
wait upon them! Now did Mansouls cup run
over, now did her Conduits run sweet wine,Mansouls Glory.
now did she eat the finest of the wheat, and
drink milk and hony out of the rock! Now
she said, how great is his goodness! for since I
sound favour in his eyes, how honourable
have I been!

The blessed Prince did also ordain a new
Officer in the Town, and a goodly person
he was,  his name was Mr. Gods peace;
this man was set over my Lord Wilbewill, my
Lord Mayor, Mr. Recorder, the Subordinate
Preacher, Mr. Mind, and over all the Natives
of the Town of Mansoul. Himself was not
a Native of it, but came with the Prince
Emanuel from the Court. He was a great acquaintance
of Captain Credence, and Captain
Goodhope;  some say they were kin, and I am
of that opinion too. This man, as I said, was
made Governour of the Town in general,
specially over the Castle, and Captain Credence
was to help him there. And I made
great observation of it, that so long as all
things went in Mansoul as this sweet natured
Gentleman would, the Town was in most
happy condition. Now there were no jars, no
chiding, no interferings, no unfaithful doings
in all the Town of Mansoul; every man
in Mansoul kept close to his own imployment.
The Gentry, the Officers, the Soldiers, and
all in place observed their order. And as for
the Women and Children of the Town,Holy Conceptions. Good Thoughts. they
followed their business joyfully, they would
work and sing, work and sing from morning
till night; so that quite through the Town
of Mansoul now, nothing was to be found
but harmony, quietness, joy and health. And
this lasted all that Summer.

But there was a man in the Town of Mansoul,
and his name was Mr. Carnal Security,The story of Mr. Carnal Security.
this man did after all this mercy bestowed on
this Corporation, bring the Town of Mansoul
into great and grievous slavery and bondage.
A brief account of him and of his doings
take as followeth.
When Diabolus at first took possession of
the Town of Mansoul, he brought thither
with himself, a great number of Diabolonians,
men of his own conditions. Now among
these there was one whose name was
Mr. Self-conceit,Mr. Self-conceit. and a notable brisk man he
was, as any that in those days did possess the
Town of Mansoul. Diabolus then perceiving
this man to be active and bold, sent him upon
many desperate designs, the which he managed
better, and more to the pleasing of
his Lord than most that came with him from
the dens could do. Wherefore finding of
him so fit for his purpose he preferred him,
and made him next to the great Lord Wilbewill,
of whom we have written so much before.
Now the Lord Wilbewill being in those
days very well pleased with him, and with
his atchievements, gave him his daughter,
the Lady Fear-nothing, to wife.Carnal Securities Original. Now of my
Lady Fear-nothing did this Mr. Self conceit beget
this Gentleman Mr. Carnal Security.
Wherefore there being then in Mansoul those
strange kind of mixtures, 'twas hard for
them in some cases to find out who were Natives,

who not; for Mr. Carnal Security
sprang from my Lord Wilbewill by mothers
side, though he had for his Father a Diabolonian
by nature.
Well, this Carnal Security took much after
his Father and mother, he was Self-conceited,
he feared nothing,His Qualities. he was also a very busie
man; nothing of news, nothing of doctrine,
nothing of alteration, or talk of alteration
could at any time be on foot in Mansoul, but
be sure Mr. Carnal Security would be at the
head or tayl of it: but to be sure he would
decline those that he deemed the weakest,
He is always for the strongest side.and stood always with them (in his way of
standing) that he supposed was the strongest
side.
Now when Shaddai the mighty, and Emanuel
his Son made war upon Mansoul to take
it, this Mr. Carnal Security was then in Town,
and was a great doer among the people, incouraging
them in their rebellion, putting of
them upon hardning of themselves in their
resisting of the Kings forces; but when he
saw that the Town of Mansoul was taken and
converted to the use of the glorious Prince
Emanuel; and when he also saw what was
become of Diabolus, and how he was unroosted,
and made to quit the Castle in the
greatest contempt and scorn, and that the
Town of Mansoul was well lined with Captains,
Engins of War, and men, and also provision,
what doth he but sliely wheel about

also; and as he had served Diabolus against
the good Prince, so he feigned that he would
serve the Prince against his foes.
And having got some little smattering of
Emanuels things by the end (being bold) he
ventures himself into the company of the
Townsmen, and attempts also to chat among
them. Now he knew that the power and
strength of the Town of Mansoul was great,How Mr. Carnal Security begins the misery of Mansoul. and
that it could not but be pleasing to the people if he
cried up their might and their glory. Wherefore
he beginneth his tale with the power
and strength of Mansoul, and affirmed that it
was impregnable. Now magnifying their Captains,
and their slings, and their rams; then
crying up their fortifications, and strong holds;
and lastly the assurances that they had from
their Prince, that Mansoul should be happy for
ever. But when he saw that some of the men
of the Town were tickled and taken with his
discourse, he makes it his business, and walking
from street to street, house to house, and
man to man, he at last brought Mansoul to
dance after his pipe, and to grow almost as
carnally secure as himself; so from talking
they went to feasting, and from feasting to
sporting; and so to some other matters (now
Emanuel was yet in the Town of Mansoul, and
he wisely observed their doings) My Lord
Mayor, my Lord Wilbewill, and Mr. Recorder,
were also all taken with the words of this
tatling Diabolonian Gentleman; forgetting

that their Prince had given them warning before
to take heed that they were not beguiled
with any Diabolonian sleight: He had further
told them that the security of the now
'Tis not Grace received, but Grace improved, that preserves the soul from temporal dangers.flourishing Town of Mansoul did not so much
lye in her present fortifications and force, as
in her so using of what she had, as might oblige
her Emanuel to abide within her Castle.
For the right Doctrine of Emanuel was, that
the Town of Mansoul should take heed that
they forgot not his Fathers love and his; also
that they should so demean themselves as to
continue to keep themselves therein. Now
this was not the way to do it, namely, to
fall in love with one of the Diabolonians, and
with such an one too as Mr. Carnal Security
was, and to be led up and down by the nose
by him: They should have heard their
Prince, fear'd their Prince, loved their Prince,
and have ston'd this naughty-pack to death,
and took care to have walked in the ways of
their Princes prescribing, for then should
their peace have been as a river, when their
righteousness had been like the waves of the
Sea.
Now when Emanuel perceived that
through the policy of Mr. Carnal Security,
the hearts of the men of Mansoul were chill'd
and abated in their practical love to him:
First, he bemoans them, and condoles
their state with the Secretary,Emanuel bemoans Mansoul. saying, Oh that
my people had hearkened unto me, and that Mansoul

had walked in my ways! I would have fed
them with the finest of the wheat, and with hony
out of the rock would I have sustained them.
This done, he said in his heart, I will return
to the Court and go to my place till Mansoul
shall consider and acknowledg their offence. And
he did so, and the cause and manner of his
going away from them was thus:
The cause was for that,
First, Mansoul declined him, as is manifest
in these Particulars.
1.The way of Mansouls backsliding. They left off their former way of visiting
of him, they came not to his Royal Palace as
afore.
2. They did not regard, nor yet take notice
that he came, or came not to visit them.
3. The love-feasts that had wont to be between
their Prince and them, though he made
them still, and called them to them, yet they neglected
to come at them, or to be delighted with them.
4. They waited not for his counsels, but began
to be head-strong and confident in themselves,
concluding that now they were strong and invincible,
and that Mansoul was secure, and beyond
all reach of the foe, and that her state must
needs be unalterable for ever.
Now, as was said, Emanuel perceiving
that by the craft of Mr. Carnal Security, the
Town of Mansoul was taken off from their
dependance upon him, and upon his Father
by him, and set upon what by them was bestowed

upon it; He first, as I said, bemoaned
their state, then he used means to make them
understand that the way that they went on
in was dangerous. For he sent my Lord high
Secretary to them, to forbid them such ways;
but twice when he came to them he found
them at dinner in Mr. Carnal Securities Parlour,
and perceiving also that they were
not willing to reason about matters concerning
their good,They grieve the Holy Ghost and Christ. he took grief and went his
way. The which when he had told to the
Prince Emanuel, he took offence, and was
grieved also, and so made provision to return
to his Fathers Court.
Now the methods of his withdrawing, as
I was saying before, were thus:
1.Christ withdraws not all at once. Even while he was yet with them in Mansoul
he kept himself close, and more retired than
formerly.
2. His speech was not now, if he came in their
company, so pleasant and familiar as formerly.
3. Nor did he as in times past, send to Mansoul
from his Table, those dainty bits which he
was wont to do.
4. Nor when they came to visit him, as now
and then they would, would he be so easily spoken
with as they found him to be in times past. They
might now knock once, yea twice, but he would
seem not at all to regard them;The working of their affections. whereas formerly
at the sound of their feet he would up and run,
and meet them half way, and take them too, and
lay them in his bosom.

But thus Emanuel carried it now, and by this
his carriage he sought to make them bethink
themselves and return to him. But alas they
did not consider, they did not know his
ways, they regarded not, they were not
touched with these,He is gone. nor with the true remembrance
of former favours. Wherefore
what does he but in private manner withdraw
himself, first from his Palace,  then to
the Gate of the Town, and so away from
Mansoul he goes, till they should acknowledg
their offence, and more earnestly seek his
face. Mr. Godspeace also laid down his Commission,
and would for the present act no
longer in the Town of Mansoul.
Thus they walked contrary to him, and
he again by way of retaliation, walked contrary
to them. But alas by this time they
were so hardened in their way, and had so
drunk in the Doctrine of Mr. Carnal Security,
that the departing of their Prince touched 
them not, nor was he remembred by them
when gone; and so of consequence his absence
not condoled by them.
Now there was a day wherein this old
Gentleman Mr. Carnal Security did againA trick put upon Mr. Godlyfear, he goes to the feast and sits there like a stranger.
make a feast for the Town of Mansoul, and
there was at that time in the Town one Mr.
Godlyfear, one now but little set by, though
formerly one of great request. This man old
Carnal Security had a mind, if possible, to
gull and debauch, and abuse as he did the

rest, and therefore he now bids him to the
feast with his neighbours: so the day being
come they prepare, and he goes and appears
with the rest of the guests; and being all set
at the Table, they did eat and drink, and
were merry even all but this one man. For
Mr. Godlyfear sat like a stranger, and did
neither eat, nor was merry. The which
when Mr. Carnal Security perceived, he presently
addrest himself in a speech thus to
him:
Carn. Mr. Godlyfear, are you not well?
you seem to be ill of body or mind, or both.
I have a cordial of Mr. Forgetgoods making,Talk betwixt Mr. Carnal Security, and Mr. Godlyfear.
the which, Sir, if you will take a dram of, I
hope, it may make you bonny and blith, and
so make you more fit for we feasting companions.
Godly. Unto whom the good old Gentleman
discreetly replied, Sir, I thank you for all things
courteous and civil, but for your cordial I have
no list thereto. But a word to the natives of
Mansoul: You the Elders and chief of Mansoul,
to me it is strange to see you so jocund and
merry, when the Town of Mansoul is in such woful
case.
Carn. Then said Mr. Carnal Security, You
want sleep, good Sir, I doubt. If you please
lye down and take a nap, and we mean while
will be merry.
Godly. Then said the good man as follows,
Sir, if you were not destitute of an honest heart,

you could not do as you have done, and do.
Carn. Then said Mr. Carnal Security, Why?
Godly. Nay pray interrupt me not. 'Tis true,
the Town of Mansoul was strong, and (with a
proviso) impregnable; but you, the Townsmen
have weakned it, and it now lyes obnoxious to its
foes; nor is it a time to flatter, or be silent, 'tis
you Mr. Carnal Security that have wilily
stripped Mansoul, and driven her glory from
her; you have pulled down her Towers, you have
broken down her Gates, you have spoiled her
locks and bars.
And now to explain my self, from that time
that my Lords of Mansoul and you, Sir, grew
so great, from that time the strength of Mansoul
has been offended, and now he is arisen and is
gone. If any shall question the truth of my words,
I will answer him by this, and such like questions.
Where is the Prince Emanuel? When did a
man or woman in Mansoul see him? When
did you hear from him, or taste any of his
dainty bits? You are now a feasting with this
Diabolonian monster, but he is not your Prince.
I say therefore, though enemies from without, had
you taken heed, could not have made a prey of
you, yet since you have sinned against your
Prince, your enemies within have been too hard
for you.
Carn. Then said Mr. Carnal Security, Fie,
fie, Mr. Godlyfear, fie; will you never shake
off your timorousne&esset;? are you afraid of being
sparrow-blasted? who hath hurt you? behold

I am on your side, only you are for doubting,
and I am for being confident. Besides, is this
a time to be sad in? A feast is made for
mirth, why then do you now, to your shame,
and our trouble, break out into such passionate
melancholy language when you should
eat and drink, and be merry?
Godly. Then said Mr. Godlyfear again, I
may well be sad, for Emanuel is gone from Mansoul.
I say again he is gone, and you, Sir, are
the man that has driven him away; yea, he is
gone without so much as acquainting the Nobles
of Mansoul with his going, and if that is not a
sign of his anger, I am not acquainted with the
methods of Godline&esset;.
And now my Lords and Gentlemen,His speech to the Elders of Mansoul. for my
speech is still to you, your gradual declining from
him did provoke him gradually to depart from
you, the which he did for some time, if perhaps
you would have been made sensible thereby, and
have been renewed by humbling of your selves;
but when he saw that none would regard, nor lay
these fearful beginnings of his anger and judgment
to heart, he went away from this place, and
this I saw with mine eye. Wherefore now while
you boast, your strength is gone, you are like the
man that had lost his locks that before did wave
about his shoulders. You may with this Lord of
your feast shake your selves, and conclude to do
as at other times; but since without him you can
do nothing, and he is departed from you, turn
your feast into a sigh, and your mirth into lamentation.

Then the Subordinate Preacher,Conscience startled. old Mr.
Conscience by name, he that of old was Recorder
of Mansoul, being startled at what
was said, began to second it thus.
Con. Indeed, my Brethren, quoth he, I
fear that Mr. Godlyfear tells us true: I, for
my part, have not seen my Prince a long season.
I cannot remember the day for my part.
Nor can I answer Mr. Godlyfears question. I
doubt, I am afraid that all is naught with
Mansoul.
Godly. Nay, I know that you shall not find
him in Mansoul, for he is departed and gone;
yea, and gone for the faults of the Elders, and
for that they rewarded his grace with unsufferable
unkindnesses.
Then did the Subordinate Preacher look asThey are all agast.
if he would fall down dead at the Table,
also all there present, except the man of the
house, began to look pale and wan. But having
a little recovered themselves, and
jointly agreeing to believe Mr. Godlyfear and
his sayings, they began to consult what was
best to be done (now Mr. Carnal Security
was gone into his with-drawing room, for he
liked not such dumpish doings) both to the
man of the house for drawing them into evil,
and also to recover Emanuels love.
And with that, that saying of their Prince
came very hot into their minds, which he had
bidden them do to such as were false Prophets
that should arise to delude the Town

of Mansoul.They consult and burn their Feast-master. So they took Mr. Carnal Security
(concluding that he must be he) and
burned his house upon him with fire, for he
also was a Diabolonian by nature.
So when this was past and over, they be-speed
 themselves to look for Emanuel their
Prince, and they sought him, but they found
him not; then were they more confirmed in
the truth of Mr. Godlyfears sayings, and began
also severely to reflect upon themselves
for their so vile and ungodly doings; for
they concluded now that it was through
them that their Prince had left them.
They apply themselves to the Holy Ghost, but he is grieved, &c.Then they agreed and went to my Lord
Secretary, (him whom before they refused
to hear, him whom they had grieved with
their doings) to know of him, for he was a
Seer, and could tell where Emanuel was, and
how they might direct a Petition to him. But
 the Lord Secretary would not admit them to
a conference about this matter, nor would
admit them to his Royal place of abode, nor
come out to them to shew them his face, or
intelligence.
And now was it a day gloomy and dark,
a day of clouds and of thick darkness with
Mansoul. Now they saw that they had been
foolish, and began to perceive what the
company and prattle of Mr. Carnal Security
had done, and what desperate damage his
swaggering words had brought poor Mansoul
into. But what further it was like to cost

them, that they were ignorant of. Now Mr.
Godlyfear began again to be in repute with
the men of the Town; yea, they were ready
to look upon him as a Prophet.
Well, when the Sabbath-day was come,A thundring Sermon.
they went to hear their Subordinate Preacher;
but Oh how he did thunder and lighten this
day! His Text was that in the Prophet Jonah,
They that observe lying vanities,  forsake
their own mercies. But there was then such
power and authority in that Sermon, and
such a dejection seen in the countenances of
the people that day, that the like hath seldom
been heard or seen. The people when
Sermon was done, were scarce able to go
to their homes, or to betake themselves to
their imploys the week after; they were so
Sermon smitten,  and also so Sermon-sick by
being smitten, that they knew not what to
do.
He did not only shew to Mansoul their sin,
but did tremble before them, under the sense
of his own, still crying out of himself,The Subordinate Preacher doth acknowledg his fault, and bewails his compliance with Mr. Carnal Security. as he
Preached to them, Unhappy man that I am!
that I should do so wicked a thing! That I! a
Preacher! whom the Prince did set up to
teach to Mansoul his Law, should my self live
sensless, and sottishly here, and be one of
the first found in transgression. This transgression
also fell within my precincts, I should
have cried out against the wickedness, but I
let Mansoul lye wallowing in it, until it had

driven Emanuel from its borders. With these
things he also charged all the Lords and Gentry
of Mansoul,  to the almost distracting of
them.
About this time also there was a great
sickness in the Town of Mansoul;A great sickness in Mansoul. and most
of the inhabitants were greatly afflicted. Yea
the Captains also, and men of war were
brought thereby to a languishing condition,
and that for a long time together; so that
in case of an invasion, nothing could to purpose
now have been done, either by the
Townsmen, or Field-officers. Oh how many
pale faces, weak hands, feeble knees, and
 staggering men were now seen to walk the
streets of Mansoul. Here were groans, there
pants, and yonder lay those that were ready
to faint.Sin doth cause to be weak, both body, and soul, and graces.
The garments too which Emanuel had given
them were but in a sorry case; some
were rent, some were torn, and all in a nasty
condition; some also did hang so loosely
upon them, that the next bush they came at
was ready to pluck them off.
After some time spent in this sad and desolate
condition the Subordinate Preacher
called for a day of fasting, and to humble
themselves for being so wicked against the
great Shaddai, and his Son. And he desired
that Captain Boanerges would Preach. So he
consented to do it, and the day was come,
and his Text was this, Cut it down, why cumbreth

it the ground?Boanerges doth Preach to Mansoul. And a very smart Sermon
he made upon the place. First, he shewed
what was the occasion of the words, to wit,
because the fig-tree was barren; then he shewed
what was contained in the sentence, to
wit, repentance, or utter desolation. He then
shewed also by whose authority this sentence
was pronounced, and that was by Shaddai
himself. And lastly, he shewed the reasons of
the point, and then concluded his Sermon. But
he was very pertinent in the application, insomuch
that he made poor Mansoul tremble.The men of Mansoul much affected.
For this Sermon as well as the former,
wrought much upon the hearts of the men
of Mansoul; yea it greatly helped to keep
awake those that were roused by the Preaching
that went before. So that now throughout
the whole Town there was little or nothing
to be heard or seen but sorrow and
mourning, and wo.
Now after Sermon they got together and
consulted what was best to be done.They consult what to do. But
said the Subordinate Preacher, I will do nothing
of mine own head, without advising
with my neighbour Mr. Godlyfear.
For if he had afore, and understood more
of the mind of our Prince than we, I do not
know but he also may have it now, even now
we are turning again to vertue. So they called
and sent for Mr. Godlyfear, and he forthwith
appeared; then they desired that he would
further shew his opinion about what they

had best to do. Then said the old Gentleman
as followeth, It is my opinion that this
Mr. Godlyfears advice.Town of Mansoul should in this day of her distre&esset;
draw up and send an humble Petition to
their offended Prince Emanuel, that he in his
favour and grace will turn again unto you, and
not keep anger for ever.
When the Townsmen had heard this
Speech, they did with one consent agree to
his advice; so they did presently draw up
their request, and the next was, But who
shall carry it? At last they did all agree to
send it by my Lord Mayor.They send the Lord Mayor to Court. So he accepted of
the service, and addressed himself to his
journey; and went and came to the Court
of Shaddai, whither Emanuel the Prince of
Mansoul was gone.  But the Gate was shut,
and a strict watch kept thereat, so that the
Petitioner was forced to stand without for a
great while together. Then he desired that
some would go into the Prince and tell him
who stood at the Gate, and what his business
was. So one went and told to Shaddai, and
to Emanuel his Son, that the Lord Mayor of
the Town of Mansoul stood without at the
Gate of the Kings Court, desiring to be admitted
into the presence of the Prince, the
Kings Son. He also told what was the Lord
Mayors Errand, both to the King and his Son
Emanuel. But the Prince would not come
down nor admit that the Gate should be
opened to him, but sent him an answer to

this effect: They have turned the back unto me, 
and not their face, but now in the time of their
trouble they say to me Arise and save us. But can
they not now go to Mr. Carnal Security to whom
they went when they turned from me, and make
him their leader, their Lord, and their protection
now in their trouble;A dreadful answer. why now in their trouble
do they visit me, since in their prosperity they
went astray?
This answer made my Lord Mayor look
black in the face; it troubled, it perplexed, 
it rent him sore. And now he began again to
see what it was to be familiar with Diabolonians,
such as Mr. Carnal Security was. When
he saw that at Court (as yet) there was little
help to be expected, either for himself, or
friends in Mansoul;The Lord Mayor returns, and how. he smote upon his breast
and returned weeping, and all the way bewailing
the lamentable state of Mansoul.
Well, when he was come within sight of
the Town, the Elders and chief of the people
of Mansoul went out at the Gate to meet
him, and to salute him, and to know how
he sped at Court.The state of Mansoul now. But he told them his tale
in so doleful a manner, that they all cried
out, and mourned, and wept. Wherefore
they threw ashes and dust upon their heads,
and put sackcloth upon their loins, and went
crying out through the Town of Mansoul;
the which when the rest of the Townsfolk
saw, they all mourned and wept.The whole Town cast down. This therefore
was a day of rebuke and trouble, and of

anguish to the Town of Mansoul, and also
of great distress.
After some time, when they had somewhat
refrained themselves, they came together
to consult again what by them was
yet to be done; and they asked advice, as
they did before,They consult again Mr. Godlyfears advice. of that reverend Mr. Godlyfear,
who told them that there was no way
better than to do as they had done, nor
would he that they should be discouraged at
all with that they had met with at Court;
yea, though several of their Petitions should
be answered with nought but silence or rebuke:
For, said he, it is the way of the wise
Shaddai to make men wait and to exercise patience,
and it should be the way of them in want,
to be willing to stay his leisure.
Then they took courage,See now what's the work of a backsliding Saint awakened. and sent again,
and again, and again, and again; for there
was not now one day, nor an hour that
went over Mansouls head, wherein a man
might not have met upon the road one or
other riding post, sounding the horn from
Mansoul to the Court of the King Shaddai;
Groaning desires.and all with Letters Petitionary in behalf of
(and for the Princes return, to) Mansoul.
The road, I say, was now full of messengers,
going and returning, and meeting one
another; some from the Court, and some
from Mansoul, and this was the work of the
miserable Town of Mansoul, all that long,
that sharp, that cold and tedious winter.

Now if you have not forgot,A Memento. you may yet
remember that I told you before, that after
Emanuel had taken Mansoul, yea, and after that
he had new modelled the Town, there remained
in several lurking places of the Corporation
many of the old Diabolonians, that
either came with the Tyrant when he invaded
and took the Town, or that had there
by reason of unlawful mixtures, their birth
and breeding, and bringing up. And their
holes, dens, and lurking places were in, under,
or about the wall of the Town. Some of
their names are the Lord Fornication, the
Lord Adultery, the Lord Murder, the Lord
Anger, the Lord Lasciviousness, the Lord Deceit,
the Lord Evileye, the Lord Blasphemy,
and that horrible Villain the old and dangerous
Lord Covetousne&esset;. These, as I told you,
with many more, had yet their abode in the
Town of Mansoul, and that after that Emanuel
had driven their Prince Diabolus out of
the Castle.
Against these the good Prince did grant a
Commission to the Lord Wilbewill and others,
yea to the whole Town of Mansoul, to seek,Mansoul heeded not her Princes Caution, nor put his Commission into execution.
take, secure, and destroy any, or all that they
could lay hands of, for that they were Diabolonians
by nature, enemies to the Prince,
and those that sought to ruin the blessed
Town of Mansoul. But the Town of Mansoul
did not pursue this warrant, but neglected
to look after, to apprehend, to secure, and to

destroy these Diabolonians. Wherefore what
do these Villains but by degrees take courage
to put forth their heads, and to shew themselves
to the inhabitants of the Town. Yea,
and as I was told, some of the men of Mansoul
grew too familiar with some of them, to
the sorrow of the Corporation, as you yet
will hear more of in time and place.
Well, when the Diabolonian Lords that
were left, perceived that Mansoul had through
sinning offended Emanuel their Prince,The Diabolonians Plot. and
that he had with drawn himself and was
gone, what do they but plot the ruin of the
Town of Mansoul. So upon a time they met
together at the hold of one Mr. Mischiefs,
who also was a Diabolonian, and there consulted
how they might deliver up Mansoul
into the hands of Diabolus again. Now some
advised one way, and some another, every
man according to his own liking. At last
my Lord Lasciviousne&esset; propounded, whether
it might not be best in the first place for some
of those that were Diabolonians in Mansoul
to adventure to offer themselves for servants
to some of the Natives of the Town, for
said he, if they so do, and Mansoul shall accept
of them, they may for us, and for Diabolus
our Lord, make the taking of the Town
of Manso. more easie than otherwise it will be.
But then stood up the Lord Murder, and said,
This may not be done at this time, for Mansoul
is now in a kind of a rage, because by

our friend Mr. Carnal Security she hath been
once insnared already and made to offend
against her Prince, and how shall she reconcile
her self unto her Lord again, but by the
heads of these men? Besides, we know that
they have in commission to take and slay us
where ever they shall find us, let us therefore
be wise as Foxes, when we are dead we can
do them no hurt, but while we live we may.
Thus when they had tossed the matter to
and fro, they jointly agreed that a Letter
should forthwith be sent away to Diabolus in
their name, by which the state of the Town
of Mansoul should be shewed him,They send to Hell for advice. and how
much it is under the frowns of their Prince;
we may also, said some, let him know our intentions,
and ask of him his advice in the
case.
So a Letter was presently framed, the Contents
of which was this.
To our great Lord, the Prince Diabolus,
dwelling below in the Infernal Cave.
O great Father, and mighty Prince Diabolus,
we, the true Diabolonians,The Copy of their Letter. yet
remaining in the rebellious Town of Mansoul,
having received our beings from thee, and our
nourishment at thy hands, cannot with content
and quiet endure to behold, as we do this day,
how thou art dispraised, disgraced, and reproached
among the inhabitants of this Town; nor is

thy long absence at all delightful to us, because
greatly to our detriment.
The reason of this our writing unto our Lord,
is for that we are not altogether without hope that
this Town may become thy habitation again;&rhand; for
it is greatly declined from its Prince Emanuel,
and he is up-risen, and is departed from them;
yea, and though they send, and send, and send,
and send after him to return to them, yet can
they not prevail, nor get good words from him.
There has been also of late, and is yet remaining
a very great sickne&esset; and faintings among
them, and that not only upon the poorer
sort of the Town, but upon the Lords, Captains,
and chief Gentry of the place &rhand;(we only who are
of the Diabolonians by nature remain well,
lively, and strong) so that through their great
transgression on the one hand, and their dangerous
sickne&esset; on the other, we judg they lye open
to thy hand and power. If therefore it shall
stand with thy horrible cunning, and with the
cunning of the rest of the Princes with thee, to
come and make an attempt to take Mansoul
again, send us word, and we shall to our utmost
power be ready to deliver it into thy hand. Or if
what we have said shall not by thy Fatherhood
be thought best, and most meet to be done, send us
thy mind in a few words, and we are all ready to
follow thy counsel to the hazarding of our lives,
and what else we have.
Given under our hands the day and date

above written, after a close consultation
at the house of Mr. Mischief, who yet
is alive, and hath his place in our desirable
Town of Mansoul.
When Mr. Profane (for he was the Carrier)Mr. Profane is Carrier, he brings the Letter to Hellgate-hill, and there presents it to Cerberus the Porter.
was come with his Letter to Hellgate hill, he
knocked at the Brazen gates for entrance.
Then did Cerberus the Porter, for he is the
keeper of that Gate, open to Mr. Profane,
to whom he delivered his Letter, which he
had brought from the Diabolonians in Mansoul.
So he carried it in and presented it to
Diabolus his Lord; and said, Tidings my Lord,
from Mansoul; from our trusty friends in
Mansoul.
Then came together from all places of the
den Beelzebub, Lucifer, Apollyon, with the
rest of the rabblement there, to hear what
news from Mansoul. So the Letter was broken
up and read, and Cerberus he stood by.
When the Letter was openly read, and the
Contents thereof spread into all the corners
of the den, command was given that without
let or stop,Dead-mans bell, and how it went. Dead-mans-bell should be rung
for joy. So the Bell was rung, and the Princes
rejoiced that Mansoul was like to come to
ruin. Now the Clapper of the Bell went, The
Town of Mansoul is coming to dwell with us,
make room for the Town of Mansoul. This Bell
therefore they did ring, because they did
hope that they should have Mansoul again.

Now when they had performed this their
horrible ceremony, they got together again
to consult what answer to send to their
friends in Mansoul, and some advised one
thing, and some another, but at length because
the business required haste, they left
the whole business to the Prince Diabolus,
judging him the most proper Lord of the
place. So he drew up a Letter as he thought
fit, in answer to what Mr. Profane had
brought, and sent it to the Diabolonians that
did dwell in Mansoul, by the same hand that
had brought theirs to him: And this was the
Contents thereof,

To our off-spring the high and mighty
Diabolonians, that yet dwell in the
Town of Mansoul, Diabolus the great
Prince of Mansoul, wisheth a prosperous
issue and conclusion of those many brave
enterprizes, conspiracies, and designs
that you of your love and respect to
our honour, have in your hearts to attempt
to do against Mansoul.
Beloved children and disciples, my Lord Fornication,
Adultery, and the rest, we
have here in our desolate den received to our
highest joy and content, your welcome Letter
by the hand of our trusty Mr. Profane, and
to shew how acceptable your tidings were, we
rang out our Bell for gladne&esset;; for we rejoiced
as much as we could, when we perceived that

yet we had friends in Mansoul, and such as
sought our honour and revenge in the ruin of
the Town of Mansoul. We also rejoiced to hear
that they are in a degenerated condition, and
that they have offended their Prince, and that
he is gone. Their sickne&esset; also pleaseth us, as
does also your health, might and strength. Glad
also would we be, right horribly beloved, could
we get this Town into our clutches again. Nor
will we be sparing of spending our wit, our
cunning, our craft, and hellish inventions to
bring to a wished conclusion this your brave beginning
in order thereto.
And take this for your comfort, (our birth,
and our off spring) that shall we again surprize
it and take it, we will attempt to put all your
foes to the sword, and will make you the great
Lords and Captains of the place. Nor need you
fear (if ever we get it again) that we after
that shall be cast out any more; for we will
come with more strength, and so lay far more
fast hold than at the first we did. Besides, it
is the Law of that Prince that now they 
own, that if we get them a second time they
shall be ours for ever.
Do you therefore our trusty Diabolonians,
yet more pry into, and endeavour to spie out
the weakne&esset; of the Town of Mansoul. We also
would that you your selves do attempt to weaken
them more and more. Send us word also by
what means you think we had best to attempt the
regaining thereof: to wit, whether by perswasion

to a vain and loose life; or, whether by tempting
them to doubt and despair; or, whether by
blowing up of the Town by the Gun-powder of
pride, and self conceit. Do you also, O ye brave
Diabolonians, and true sons of the Pit, be always
in a readine&esset; to make a most hideous assault
within, when we shall be ready to storm it
without. Now speed you in your project, and
we in our desires, the utmost power of our Gates,
which is the wish of your great Diabolus,
Mansouls enemy, and him that trembles when
he thinks of judgment to come, all the blessings
of the Pit be upon you, and so we close up our
Letter.
Given at the Pits mouth by the joint
consent of all the Princes of Darkne&esset;
to be sent (to the force and power
that we have yet remaining in Mansoul)
by the hand of Mr. Profane.
By me Diabolus.
This Letter, as was said, was sent to Mansoul,
to the Diabolonians that yet remained
there,Flesh. and that yet inhabited the wall, from
the dark Dungeon of Diabolus, by the hand
of Mr. Profane, by whom they also in Mansoul
sent theirs to the Pit.Profane comes home again. Now when this Mr.
Profane had made his return, and was come
to Mansoul again, he went and came as he

was wont to the house of Mr. Mischief, for
there was the Conclave, and the place where
the Contrivers were met. Now when they
saw that their messenger was returned safe
and sound, they were greatly gladded thereat.
Then he presented them with his Letter
which he had brought from Diabolus for
them; the which when they had read and
considered, did much augment their gladness.
They asked them after the welfare of their
friends, as how their Lord Diabolus, Lucifer,
and Beelzebub did, with the rest of those of
the Den. To which this Profane made answer,
Well, well, my Lords, they are well,
even as well as can be in their place. They
also, said he, did ring for joy at the reading
of your Letter, as you well perceived by
this when you read it.
Now, as was said, when they had read
their Letter, and perceived that it incouraged
them in their work, they sell to their
way of contriving again, to wit, how they
might compleat their Diabolonian design upon
Mansoul. &rhand;And the first thing that they agreed
upon was to keep all things from Mansoul as
close as they could. Let it not be known, let
not Mansoul be acquainted with what we design
against it. The next thing was, how, or
by what means they should try to bring to
pass the ruin and overthrow of Mansoul, and
one said after this manner, and another said
after that. Then stood up Mr. Deceit, and

said, My right Diabolonian friends, our Lords,
and the high ones of the deep Dungeon do
propound unto us these three ways.
1. Whether we had best to seek its ruin
by making of Mansoul loose and vain.
2. Or whether by driving them to doubt
and despair.
3. Or whether by endeavouring to blow
them up by the Gun-powder of pride and
self conceit.Take heed Mansoul.
Now I think if we shall tempt them to
pride, that may do something; and if we
tempt them to wantonness, that may help.
But in my mind, if we could drive them into
desperation, that would knock the nail
on the head; for then we should have them
in the first place question the truth of the
love of the heart of their Prince towards
them, and that will disgust him much. This
if it works well, will make them leave off
quickly their way of sending Petitions to
him; then farewell earnest sollicitations for
help and supply; for then this conclusion
lies naturally before them, As good do nothing
as do to no purpose. So to Mr. Deceit
they unanimously did consent.
Then the next question was,Take heed Mansoul. but how shall
we do to bring this our project to pass?
and 'twas answered by the same Gentleman,
That this might be the best way to do it, even
let, quoth he, so many of our friends as are
willing to venture themselves for the promoting

of their Princes cause, disguise themselves
with apparel, change their names; and
go into the market like far Country men, and
proffer to let themselves for servants to the
famous Town of Mansoul, and let them pretend
to do for their Masters as beneficially as
may be; for by so doing they may, if Mansoul
shall hire them, in little time so corrupt
and defile the Corporation, that her now
Prince shall be not only further offended
with them, but in conclusion shall spue them
out of his mouth. And when this is done,
our Prince Diabolus shall prey upon them
with ease: Yea,Take heed Mansoul. of themselves they shall fall
into the mouth of the eater.
This project was no sooner propounded,
but was as highly accepted, and forward
were all Diabolonians now to engage in so delicate
an interprize; but it was not thought
fit that all should do thus, wherefore they
pitched upon two or three, namely, the
Lord Covetousne&esset;, the Lord Lasciviousne&esset;, and
the Lord Anger. The Lord Covetousne&esset; called
himself by the name of Prudent thrifty;
the Lord Lasciviousne&esset; called himself by the
name of Harmle&esset;-mirth;Take heed Mansoul. and the Lord Anger
called himself by the name of Good-zeal.
So upon a Market-day they came into the
Market-place, three lusty fellows they were
to look on, and they were clothed in sheeps-russet,
which was also now in a manner as

white as were the white robes of the men of
Mansoul. Now the men could speak the language
of Mansoul well.Take heed Mansoul. So when they were
come into the Market-place, and had offered
to let themselves to the Townsmen, they
were presently taken up, for they asked but
little wages, and promised to do their Masters
great service.
Mr. Mind hired Prudent-thrifty, and Mr.
Godly-fear hired Good-zeal. True, this fellow
Harmle&esset;-mirth did hang a little in hand, and
could not so soon get him a Master as the
other did, because the Town of Mansoul
was now in Lent, but after a while because
Lent was almost out, the Lord Wilbewill hired
Harmle&esset;-mirth to be both his Waiting-man,Take heed Mansoul.
and his Lacquy, and thus they got them
Masters.
These Villains now being got thus far into
the houses of the men of Mansoul, quickly
began to do great mischief therein; for being
filthy arch and slie, they quickly corrupted
the families where they were; yea,
they tainted their Masters much, especially
this Prudent-thrifty, and him they call Harmle&esset;-mirth.
True, he that went under the vizor
of Good-zeal, was not so well liked of
his Master, for he quickly found that he was
but a counterfeit Rascal; the which when
the fellow perceived, with speed he made
his escape from the house, or I doubt not
but his Master had hanged him.
