


Containing as much of the Birth of the
Foundling as is necessary or proper
to acquaint the Reader with in the
Beginning of this History. 



The Introduction to the Work, or Bill of
Fare to the Feast. 
An author ought to consider himself,
not as a Gentleman who gives
a private or eleemosynary Treat,
but rather as one who keeps a public Ordinary,
at which all Persons are welcome 

for their Money. In the former Case, it is
well known, that the Entertainer provides
what Fare he pleases; and tho' this should
be very indifferent, and utterly disagreeable
to the Taste of his Company, they
must not find any Fault; nay, on the contrary,
Good-Breeding forces them outwardly
to approve and to commend whatever
is set before them. Now the contrary
of this happens to the Master of an Ordinary. 
Men who pay for what they eat, will
insist on gratifying their Palates, however
nice and even whimsical these may prove; 
and if every Thing is not agreeable to their
Taste, will challenge a Right to censure,
to abuse, and to d&wblank;n their Dinner without
Controul. 
To prevent therefore giving Offence to
their Customers by any such Disappointment,
it hath been usual, with the honest
and well-meaning Host, to provide a Bill
of Fare, which all Persons may peruse at
their first Entrance into the House; and,
having thence acquainted themselves with
the Entertainment which they may expect,
may either stay and regale with what
is provided for them, or may depart to
some other Ordinary better accommodated
to their Taste. 

As we do not disdain to borrow Wit or
Wisdom from any Man who is capable of
lending us either, we have condescended to
take a Hint from these honest Victuallers,
and shall prefix not only a general Bill of
Fare to our whole Entertainment, but shall
likewise give the Reader particular Bills to
every Course which is to be served up in
this and the ensuing Volumes. 
The Provision then which we have here
made is no other than Human Nature. Nor
do I fear that my sensible Reader, though
most luxurious in his Taste, will start,
cavil, or be offended, because I have named
but one Article. The Tortoise, as the
Alderman of Bristol, well learned in eating,
knows by much Experience, besides the
delicious Calibash and Calipee, contains
many different Kinds of Food; nor can the
learned Reader be ignorant, that in Human
Nature, tho' here collected under one general
Name, is such prodigious Variety,
that a Cook will have sooner gone through
all the several Species of animal and vegetable
Food in the World, than an Author
will be able to exhaust so extensive a Subject. 

An Objection may perhaps be apprehended
from the more delicate, that this
Dish is too common and vulgar; for what
else is the Subject of all the Romances,
Novels, Plays and Poems, with which the
Stalls abound. Many exquisite Viands
might be rejected by the Epicure, if it was
a sufficient Cause for his contemning of
of them as common and vulgar, that something
was to be found in the most paultry
Alleys under the same Name. In reality,
true Nature is as difficult to be met with
in Authors, as the Bayonne Ham or Bologna
Sausage is to be found in the Shops. 
But the whole, to continue the same Metaphor,
consists in the Cookery of the
Author; for, as Mr. Pope tells us, 
True Wit is Nature to Advantage drest,
What oft' was thought, but ne'er so well exprest.
The same Animal which hath the Honour
to have some Part of his Flesh eaten at the
Table of a Duke, may perhaps be degraded
in another Part, and some of his Limbs
gibbeted, as it were, in the vilest Stall in
Town. Where then lies the Difference
between the Food of the Nobleman and the 

Porter, if both are at Dinner on the same
Ox or Calf, but in the seasoning, the dressing,
the garnishing, and the setting forth. 
Hence the one provokes and incites the
most languid Appetite, and the other turns
and palls that which is the sharpest and
keenest. 
In like manner, the Excellence of the
mental Entertainment consists less in the
Subject, than in the Author's Skill in well
dressing it up. How pleased therefore will
the Reader be to find, that we have, in the
following Work, adhered closely to one of
the highest Principles of the best Cook
which the present Age, or perhaps that of
Heliogabalus, hath produced. This great
Man, as is well known to all polite Lovers
of eating, begins at first by setting plain
Things before his hungry Guests, rising afterwards
by Degrees, as their Stomachs may
be supposed to decrease, to the very Quintessence
of Sauce and Spices. In like manner,
we shall represent Human Nature at
first to the keen Appetite of our Reader, in
that more plain and simple Manner in
which it is found in the Country, and shall
hereafter hash and ragoo it with all the high
French and Italian Seasoning of Affectation
and Vice which Courts and Cities afford. 

By these Means, we doubt not but our
Reader may be rendered desirous to read on
for ever, as the great Person, just above-mentioned,
is supposed to have made some
Persons eat. 
Having premised thus much, we will
now detain those, who like our Bill of Fare,
no longer from their Diet, and shall proceed
directly to serve up the first Course of
our History, for their Entertainment. 



A short Description of 'Squire Allworthy,
and a fuller Account of Miss Bridget Allworthy
his Sister. 
In that Part of the western Division of
this Kingdom, which is commonly called
Somersetshire, there lately lived (and perhaps
lives still) a Gentleman whose Name
was Allworthy, and who might well be called
the Favourite of both Nature and Fortune; 
for both of these seem to have contended
which should bless and enrich him
most. In this Contention, Nature may
seem to some to have come off victorious,
as she bestowed on him many Gifts; while 

Fortune had only one Gift in her Power; but
in pouring forth this, she was so very profuse,
that others perhaps may think this
single Endowment to have been more than
equivalent to all the various Blessings which
he enjoyed from Nature. From the former
of these, he derived an agreeable Person, a
sound Constitution, a solid Understanding,
and a benevolent Heart; by the latter, he
was decreed to the Inheritance of one of the
largest Estates in the County. 
This Gentleman had, in his Youth, married
a very worthy and beautiful Woman,
of whom he had been extremely fond: By
her he had three Children, all of whom
died in their Infancy. He had likewise
had the Misfortune of burying this beloved
Wife herself, about five Years before the
Time in which this History chuses to set
out. This Loss, however great, he bore
like a Man of Sense and Constancy; tho'
it must be confest, he would often talk a
little whimsically on this Head: For he
sometimes said, he looked on himself as
still married, and considered his Wife as
only gone a little before him, a Journey
which he should most certainly, sooner or
later, take after her; and that he had not
the least Doubt of meeting her again, in a 

Place where he should never part with her
more. Sentiments for which his Sense was
arraigned by one Part of his Neighbours,
his Religion by a second, and his Sincerity
by a third. 
He now lived, for the most Part, retired
in the Country, with one Sister, for whom
he had a very tender Affection. This Lady
was now somewhat past the Age of 30, an
Æra, at which, in the Opinion of the malicious,
the Title of Old Maid may, with
no Impropriety, be assumed. She was of that
Species of Women, whom you rather commend
for good Qualities than Beauty, and
who are generally called by their own Sex,
very good Sort of Women—as good a Sort
of Woman, Madam, as you would wish to
know. Indeed she was so far from regretting
Want of Beauty, that she never mention'd
that Perfection (if it can be called one)
without Contempt; and would often thank
God she was not as handsome as Miss such
a one, whom perhaps Beauty had led into
Errors, which she might have otherwise
avoided. Miss Bridget Allworthy (for that
was the Name of this Lady) very rightly conceived
the Charms of Person in a Woman
to be no better than Snares for herself, as
well as for others, and yet so discreet was 

she in her Conduct, that her Prudence was
as much on the Guard, as if she had had
all the Snares to apprehend which were ever
laid for her whole Sex. Indeed, I have
observed (tho' it may seem unaccountable
to the Reader) that this Guard of Prudence,
like the Trained Bands, is always
readiest to go on Duty where there is the
least Danger. It often basely and cowardly
deserts those Paragons for whom the Men
are all wishing, sighing, dying, and spreading
every Net in their Power; and constantly
attends at the Heels of that higher
Order of Women, for whom the other Sex
have a more distant and awful Respect, and
whom, (from Despair, I suppose, of Success)
they never venture to attack. 
Reader, I think proper, before we proceed
any farther together, to acquaint thee,
that I intend to digress, through this whole
History, as often as I see Occasion: Of
which I am myself a better Judge than any
pitiful Critic whatever; and here I must
desire all those Critics to mind their own Business,
and not to intermeddle with Affairs,
or Works, which no ways concern them: 
For, till they produce the Authority by
which they are constituted Judges, I shall
plead to their Jurisdiction. 




An odd Accident which befel Mr. Allworthy,
at his Return home. The decent Behaviour
of Mrs. Deborah Wilkins, with some
proper Animadversions on Bastards. 
I have told my Reader, in the preceding
Chapter, that Mr. Allworthy inherited
a large Fortune; that he had a good Heart,
and no Family. Hence, doubtless, it will
be concluded by many, that he lived like
an honest Man, owed no one a Shilling,
took nothing but what was his own, kept a
good House, entertained his Neighbours
with a hearty Welcome at his Table, and
was charitable to the Poor, i. e. to those
who had rather beg than work, by giving
them the Offals from it; that he dy'd immensely
rich, and built an Hospital. 
And true it is, that he did many of these
Things; but, had he done nothing more, I
should have left him to have recorded his own
Merit on some fair Free-Stone over the
Door of that Hospital. Matters of a much
more extraordinary Kind are to be the Subject
of this History, or I should grossly
mispend my Time in writing so voluminous 

a Work; and you, my sagacious Friend,
might, with equal Profit and Pleasure, travel
through some Pages, which certain
droll Authors have been facetiously pleased
to call The History of England. 
Mr. Allworthy had been absent a full
Quarter of a Year in London, on some very
particular Business, tho' I know not what it
was; but judge of its Importance, by its
having detained him so long from home,
whence he had not been absent a Month at a
Time during the Space of many Years. 
He came to his House very late in the
Evening, and after a short Supper with his
Sister, retired much fatigued to his Chamber. 
Here, having spent some Minutes on
his Knees, a Custom which he never broke
through on any Account, he was preparing
to step into Bed, when, upon opening the
Cloaths, to his great Surprize, he beheld
an Infant, wrapt up in some coarse Linnen,
in a sweet and profound Sleep, between his
Sheets. He stood some Time lost in Astonishment
at this Sight; but, as Good-nature
was  always the Ascendant in his
Mind, he soon began to be touched with
Sentiments of Compassion for the little
Wretch before him. He then rang his Bell,
and ordered an elderly Woman Servant to 

rise immediately and come to him, and in
the mean Time was so eager in contemplating
the Beauty of Innocence, appearing
in those lively Colours with which Infancy
and Sleep always display it, that his
Thoughts were too much engaged to reflect
that he was in his Shirt, when the Matron
came in. She had indeed given her Master
sufficient Time to dress himself; for out of
Respect to him, and Regard to Decency,
she had spent many Minutes in adjusting
her Hair at the Looking-glass, notwithstanding
all the Hurry in which she had
been summoned by the Servant, and tho'
her Master, for ought she knew, lay expiring
in an Apoplexy, or in some other
Fit. 
It will not be wondered at, that a Creature,
who had so strict a Regard to Decency
in her own Person, should be shocked
at the least Deviation from it in another. 
She therefore no sooner opened the Door,
and saw her Master standing by the Bedside
in his Shirt, with a Candle in his Hand,
than she started back in a most terrible
Fright, and might perhaps have swooned
away, had he not now recollected his being
undrest, and put an End to her Terrors,
by desiring her to stay without the Door 

till he had thrown some Cloaths over his
Back, and was become incapable of shocking
the pure Eyes of Mrs. Deborah Wilkins,
who, tho' in the 52d Year of her Age,
vowed she had never beheld a Man without
his Coat. Sneerers and prophane Wits
may perhaps laugh at her first Fright, yet
my graver Reader, when he considers the
Time of Night, the Summons from her
Bed, and the Situation in which she found
her Master, will highly justify and applaud
her Conduct; unless the Prudence, which
must be supposed to attend Maidens at that
Period of Life at which Mrs. Deborah had
arrived, should a little lessen his Admiration. 
When Mrs. Deborah returned into the
Room, and was acquainted by her Master
with the finding the little Infant, her Consternation
was rather greater than his had
been; nor could she refrain from crying out
with great Horror of Accent as well as Look,
‘My good Sir! what's to be done?” Mr.
Allworthy answered, she must take care of
the Child that Evening, and in the Morning
he would give Orders to provide it a Nurse. 
‘Yes, Sir,’ says she, ‘and I hope your Worship
will send out your Warrant to take
up the Hussy its Mother (for she must be 

one of the Neighbourhood) and I should
be glad to see her committed to Bridewel,
and whipt at the Cart's Tail. Indeed
such wicked Sluts cannot be too severely
punished. I'll warrant 'tis not her first,
by her Impudence in laying it to your
Worship.’ ‘In laying it to me, Deborah,’ 
answered Allworthy,’ ‘I can't think she hath
any such Design. I suppose she hath only
taken this Method to provide for her
Child; and truly I am glad she hath not
done worse.’ ‘I don't know what is worse,’ 
cries Deborah, ‘than for such wicked Strumpets
to lay their Sins at honest Mens
Doors; and though your Worship knows
your own Innocence, yet the World is
censorious; and it hath been many an
honest Man's Hap to pass for the Father
of Children he never begot; and if your
Worship should provide for the Child, it
may make the People the apter to believe: 
Besides, why should your Worship
provide for what the Parish is obliged
to maintain? For my own Part, if it was
an honest Man's Child indeed; but for
my own part, it goes against me to touch
these misbegotten Wretches, whom I
don't look upon as my Fellow Creatures. 
Faugh, how it stinks! It doth not smell
like a Christian. If I might be so bold to 

give my Advice, I would have it put in a
Basket, and sent out and laid at the Church-Warden's
Door. It is a good Night,
only a little rainy and windy; and if it
was well wrapt up, and put in a warm
Basket, it is two to one but it lives 'till it
is found in the Morning. But if it should
not, we have discharged our Duty in
taking proper care of it; and it is, perhaps,
better for such Creatures to die in a
state of Innocence, than to grow up and
imitate their Mothers; for nothing better
can be expected of them.’ 
There were some Strokes in this Speech
which, perhaps, would have offended Mr.
Allworthy, had he strictly attended to it; but
he had now got one of his Fingers into the
Infant's Hand, which by its gentle Pressure,
seeming to implore his Assistance, had certainly
out-pleaded the Eloquence of Mrs. Deborah,
had it been ten times greater than it was. 
He now gave Mrs. Deborah positive Orders
to take the Child to her own Bed, and to
call up a Maid-servant to provide it Pap
and other things against it waked. He likewise
ordered that proper Clothes should be
procured for it early in the Morning, and
that it should be brought to himself as soon
as he was stirring. 

Such was the Discernment of Mrs. Wilkins,
and such the Respect she bore her
Master, under whom she enjoyed a most
excellent Place, that her Scruples gave way
to his peremptory Commands; and she
took the Child under her Arms, without
any apparent Disgust at the Illegality of
its Birth; and declaring it was a sweet little
Infant, walked off with it to her own
Chamber. 
Allworthy here betook himself to those
pleasing Slumbers, which a Heart that
hungers after Goodness, is apt to enjoy,
when thoroughly satisfied. As these are
possibly sweeter than what are occasioned
by any other hearty Meal, I should take
more Pains to display them to the Reader, if
I knew any Air to recommend him to for
the procuring such an Appetite. 




The Reader's Neck brought into Danger by a
Description, his Escape, and the great Condescension
of Miss Bridget Allworthy. 
The Gothick Stile of Building could
produce nothing nobler than Mr. Allworthy's
House. There was an Air of
Grandeur in it, that struck you with Awe,
and rival'd the Beauties of the best Grecian
Architecture; and it was as commodious
within, as venerable without. 
It stood on the South-east Side of a Hill,
but nearer the Bottom than the Top of it,
so as to be sheltered from the North-east by
a Grove of old Oaks, which rose above it
in a gradual Ascent of near half a Mile,
and yet high enough to enjoy a most charming
Prospect of the Valley beneath. 
In the midst of the Grove was a fine
Lawn sloping down towards the House,
near the Summit of which rose a plentiful
Spring, gushing out of a Rock covered with
Firs, and forming a constant Cascade of about
thirty Foot, not carried down a regular
Flight of Steps, but tumbling in a natural
Fall over the broken and mossy Stones,
till it came to the bottom of the Rock; 
then running off in a pebly Channel, that 

with many lesser Falls winded along, till
it fell into a Lake at the Foot of the Hill,
about a quarter of a Mile below the House
on the South Side, and which was seen from
every Room in the Front. Out of this
Lake, which filled the Center of a beautiful
Plain, embellished with Groupes of
Beeches and Elms, and fed with Sheep,
issued a River, that for several Miles was
seen to meander through an amazing Variety
of Meadows and Woods, till it emptied
itself into the Sea, with a large Arm of
which, and an Island beyond it, the Prospect
was closed. 
On the right of this Valley opened another
of less Extent, adorned with several
Villages, and terminated by one of the
Towers of an old ruined Abbey, grown
over with Ivy, and Part of the Front which
remained still entire. 
The left Hand Scene presented the
View of a fine Park, composed of very unequal
Ground, and agreeably varied with all
the Diversity that Hills, Lawns, Wood and
Water, laid out with admirable Taste, but
owing less to Art than to Nature, could give. 
Beyond this the Country gradually rose into
a Ridge of wild Mountains, the Tops of
which were above the Clouds. 
It was now the Middle of May, and the
Morning was remarkably serene, when Mr. 

Allworthy walked forth on the Terrace,
where the Dawn opened every Minute that
lovely Prospect we have before described to
his Eye. And now having sent forth Streams
of Light, which ascended the blue Firmament
before him as Harbingers preceding
his Pomp, in the full Blaze of his Majesty,
rose the Sun; than which one Object alone
in this lower Creation could be more glorious,
and that Mr. Allworthy himself presented; 
a human Being replete with Benevolence,
meditating in what manner he might
render himself most acceptable to his Creator,
by doing most good to his Creatures. 
Reader, take care, I have unadvisedly led
thee to the Top of as high a Hill as Mr.
Allworthy's, and how to get thee down
without breaking thy Neck, I do not well
know. However, let us e'en venture to
slide down together, for Miss Bridget rings
her Bell, and Mr. Allworthy is summoned
to Breakfast, where I must attend, and, if you
please, shall be glad of your Company. 
The usual Compliments having past between
Mr. Allworthy and Miss Bridget, and
the Tea being poured out, he summoned
Mrs. Wilkins, and told his Sister he had a
Present for her; for which she thanked him; 
imagining, I suppose, it had been a Gown
or some Ornament for her Person. Indeed,
he very often made her such Presents, and 

she in Complacence to him spent much time
in adorning herself. I say, in Complacence
to him, because she always exprest the greatest
Contempt for Dress, and for those Ladies
who made it their Study. 
But if such was her Expectation, how was
she disappointed, when Mrs. Wilkins, according
to the Order she had receiv'd from
her Master, produced the little Infant. Great
Surprises, as hath been observed, are apt
to be silent, and so was Miss Bridget, 'till
her Brother began and told her the whole
Story, which as the Reader knows already,
we shall not repeat. 
Miss Bridget had always exprest so great a
regard for what the Ladies are pleased to call
Virtue, and had herself mantained such a Severity
of Character, that it was expected,
especially by Wilkins, that she would have
vented much Bitterness on this Occasion, and
would have voted for sending the Child, as
a kind of noxious Animal, immediately out
of the House; but on the contrary, she
rather took the good-natur'd side of the
question, intimated some Compassion for the
helpless little Creature, and commended her
Brother's Charity in what he had done. 
Perhaps the Reader may account for
this Behaviour from her Condescension to
Mr. Allworthy, when we have informed him, 

that the good Man had ended his Narrative
with owning a Resolution to take care of
the Child, and to breed him up as his own; 
for, to acknowledge the Truth, she was
always ready to oblige her Brother, and
very seldom, if ever, contradicted his Sentiments; 
she would indeed sometimes
make a few Observations, as, that Men
were headstrong and must have their own
way, and would wish she had been blest
with an independent Fortune; but these were
always vented in a low Voice, and at the
most amounted only to what is called Muttering. 
However, what she withheld from the
Infant, she bestowed with the utmost Profuseness
on the poor unknown Mother, whom
she called an impudent Slut, a wanton Hussy,
an audacious Harlot, a wicked Jade, a vile
Strumpet, with every other Appellation with
which the Tongue of Virtue never fails to
lash those who bring a Disgrace on the Sex. 
A Consultation was now entered into, how
to proceed in order to discover the Mother. 
A Scrutiny was first made into the Characters
of the female Servants of the House,
who were all acquitted by Mrs. Wilkins,
and with apparent Merit; for she had collected 

them herself, and perhaps it would
be difficult to find such another Set of Scarecrows. 
The next Step was to examine among
the Inhabitants of the Parish; and this was
referred to Mrs. Wilkins, who was to enquire
with all imaginable Diligence, and to
make her Report in the Afternoon. 
Matters being thus settled, Mr. Allworthy
withdrew to his Study, as was his Custom,
and left the Child to his Sister, who,
at his Desire, had undertaken the Care
of it. 



Containing a few common Matters, with a
very uncommon Observation upon them. 
When her Master was departed, Mrs.
Deborah stood silent, expecting her
Cue from Miss Bridget; for as to what had
past before her Master, the prudent Housekeeper
by no means relied upon it, as she
had often known the Sentiments of the
Lady in her Brother's Absence to differ
greatly from those which she had expressed in 

his Presence. Miss Bridget did not, however,
suffer her to continue long in this
doubtful Situation; for having looked some
time earnestly at the Child, as it lay asleep
in the Lap of Mrs. Deborah, the good Lady
could not forbear giving it a hearty Kiss,
at the same time declaring herself wonderfully
pleased with its Beauty and Innocence. 
Mrs. Deborah no sooner observed
this, than she fell to squeezing and kissing
with as great Raptures as sometimes inspire
the sage Dame of forty and five towards a
youthful and vigorous Bridegroom, crying
out in a shrill Voice, ‘O the dear little Creature,
the dear, sweet, pretty Creature! well,
I vow, it is as fine a Boy as ever was
seen!’ 
These Exclamations continued 'till they
were interrupted by the Lady, who now
proceeded to execute the Commission given
her by her Brother, and gave Orders for
providing all Necessaries for the Child, appointing
a very good Room in the House
for his Nursery. Her Orders were indeed
so liberal, that had it been a Child
of her own, she could not have exceeded
them; but lest the virtuous. Reader
may condemn her for shewing too great
Regard to a base-born Infant, to which all 

Charity is condemned by Law as irreligious,
we think proper to observe, that she concluded
the whole with saying, ‘Snce it was
her Brother's Whim to adopt the little
Brat, she supposed little Master must be
treated with great Tenderness; for her
part, she could not help thinking it was
an Encouragement to Vice; but that she
knew too much of the Obstinacy of Mankind
to oppose any of their ridiculous Humours.’ 
With Reflections of this nature, she
usually, as hath been hinted, accompany'd
every Act of Compliance with her Brother's
Inclinations; and surely nothing could
more contribute to heighten the Merit of
this Compliance, than a Declaration that
she knew at the same time the Folly and
Unreasonableness of those Inclinations to
which she submitted. Tacit Obedience
implies no Force upon the Will, and consequently
may be easily, and without any
Pains preserved; but when a Wife, a Child,
a Relation, or a Friend, performs what we
desire, with Grumbling, and Reluctance,
with Expressions of Dislike and Dissatisfaction,
the manifest Difficulty which they
undergo, must greatly enhance the Obligation. 

As this is one of those deep Observations
which very few Readers can be supposed
capable of making themselves, I have
thought proper to lend them my Assistance; 
but this is a Favour rarely to be expected in
the Course of my Work. Indeed I shall
seldom or never so indulge him, unless in
such Instances as this, where nothing but
the Inspiration with which we Writers are
gifted, can possibly enable any one to make
the Discovery. 



Mrs. Deborah is introduced into the Parish,
with a Simile. A short Account of Jenny
Jones, with the Difficulties and Discouragements
which may attend young Women
in the Pursuit of Learning. 
Mrs. Deborah, having disposed of the
Child according to the Will of her
Master, now prepared to visit those Habitations
which were supposed to conceal its
Mother. 
Not otherwise than when a Kite, tremendous
Bird, is beheld by the feathered Generation
soaring aloft, and hovering over their 

Heads, the amorous Dove, and every innocent
little Bird spread wide the Alarm,
and fly trembling to their Hiding-places. 
He proudly beats the Air, conscious of his
Dignity, and meditates intended Mischief. 
So when the Approach of Mrs. Deborah
was proclaimed through the Street, all the
Inhabitants ran trembling into their Houses,
each Matron dreading lest the Visit should
fall to her Lot. She with stately Steps
proudly advances over the Field, aloft she
bears her tow'ring Head, filled with Conceit
of her own Pre-eminence, and Schemes
to effect her intended Discovery. 
The sagacious Reader will not, from this
Simile, imagine these poor People had any
Apprehension of the Design with which
Mrs. Wilkins was now coming towards
them; but as the great Beauty of the Simile
may possibly sleep these hundred Years,
till some future Commentator shall take this
Work in hand, I think proper to lend the
Reader a little Assistance in this Place. 
It is my Intention therefore to signify,
that as it is the Nature of a Kite to devour
little Birds, so is it the Nature of such Persons
as Mrs. Wilkins, to insult and tyrannize 

over little People. This being indeed
the Means which they use to recompense to
themselves their extreme Servility and Condescension
to their Superiors; for nothing
can be more reasonable, than that Slaves
and Flatterers should exact the same Taxes
on all below them, which they themselves
pay to all above them. 
Whenever Mrs. Deborah had had Occasion
to exert any extraordinary Condescension
to Mrs. Bridget, and by that means
had a little sowered her natural Disposition,
it was usual with her to walk forth among
these People, in order to refine her Temper,
by venting, and, as it were, purging off
all ill Humours; on which Account, she
was by no means a welcome Visitant; to
say the Truth, she was universally hated
and dreaded by them all. 
On her Arrival in this Place, she went
immediately to the Habitation of an elderly
Matron; to whom, as this Matron had the
good Fortune to resemble herself in the
Comeliness of her Person, as well as in her
Age, she had generally been more favourable
than to any of the rest. To this Woman
she imparted what had happened, and
the Design upon which she was come thither 

that Morning. These two began presently
to scrutinize the Characters of the
several young Girls, who lived in any of
those Houses, and at last fixed their strongest
Suspicion on one Jenny Jones, who they
both agreed was the likeliest Person to have
committed this Fact. 
This Jenny Jones was no very comely
Girl, either in her Face or Person; but
Nature had somewhat compensated the
Want of Beauty with what is generally
more esteemed by those Ladies, whose
Judgment is arrived at Years of perfect
Maturity; for she had given her a very
uncommon Share of Understanding. This
Gift Jenny had a good deal improved by
Erudition. She had lived several Years a
Servant with a Schoolmaster, who discovering
a great Quickness of Parts in the
Girl, and an extraordinary Desire of learning,
(for every leisure Hour she was always
found reading in the Books of the Scholars)
had the Good-nature, or Folly, which the
Reader pleases to call it, to instruct her so
far, that she obtained a very competent Skill
in the Latin Language, and was perhaps as
good a Scholar as most of the young Men
of Quality of the Age. This Advantage,
however, like most others of an extraordinary 

Kind, was attended with some small
Inconveniencies: For as it is not to be
wondered at, that a young Woman so well
accomplished should have little Relish for
the Society of those whom Fortune had
made her Equals, but whom Education
had rendered so much her Inferiors; so is
it Matter of no greater Astonishment, that
this Superiority in Jenny, together with
that Behaviour which is its certain
Consequence, should produce among the
others some little Envy and Ill will towards
her; and these had perhaps secretly burnt
in the Bosoms of her Neighbours, ever
since her Return from her Service. 
Their Envy did not however display itself
openly, till poor Jenny, to the Surprize
of every Body, and to the Vexation of all
the young Women in these Parts, had publickly
shone forth on a Sunday in a new
Silk Gown, with a laced Cap, and other
proper Appendages to these. 
The Flame, which had before lain in
Embrio, now burst forth. Jenny had, by
her Learning, encreased her own Pride,
which none of her Neighbours were kind
enough to feed with the Honour she seemed
to demand; and now, instead of Respect 

and Adoration, she gained nothing but Hatred
and Abuse, by her Finery. The
whole Parish declared she could not come
honestly by such Things; and Parents, instead
of wishing their Daughters the same,
felicitated themselves that their Children had
them not. 
Hence perhaps it was, that the good
Woman first mentioned the Name of this
poor Girl to Mrs. Wilkins; but there was
another Circumstance that confirmed the
latter in her Suspicion: For Jenny had lately
been often at Mr. Allworthy's House. She
had officiated as Nurse to Miss Bridget, in
a violent Fit of Illness, and had sat up
many Nights with that Lady; besides which,
she had been seen there the very Day before
Mr. Allworthy's Return, by Mrs. Wilkins
herself, tho' that sagacious Person had
not at first conceived any Suspicion of her
on that Account: For, as she herself said,
‘She had always esteemed Jenny as a very
sober Girl, (tho indeed she knew very
little of her) and had rather suspected some
of those wanton Trollops, who gave
themselves Airs because, forsooth, they
thought themselves handsome.’ 

Jenny was now summoned to appear in
Person before Mrs. Deborah, which she immediately
did. When Mrs. Deborah, putting
on the Gravity of a Judge, with somewhat
more than his Austerity, began an Oration
with the Words ‘You audacious Strumpet,’ 
in which she proceeded rather to
pass Sentence on the Prisoner, than to accuse
her. 
Tho' Mrs. Deborah was fully satisfied of
the Guilt of Jenny, from the Reasons above
shewn, it is possible Mr. Allworthy might
have required some stronger Evidence to
have convicted her; but she saved her Accusers
any such Trouble, by freely confessing
the whole Fact with which she was charged. 
This Confession, tho' delivered rather
in Terms of Contrition, as it appeared,
did not at all mollify Mrs. Deborah, who
now pronounced a second Judgment against
her, in more opprobrious Language than
before; nor had it any better Success with
the Bye-standers, who were now grown
very numerous. Many of them cried out,
‘They thought what Madam's Silk Gown
would end in;’ others spoke sarcastically
of her Learning. Not a single Female was 

present, but found some Means of expressing
her Abhorrence of poor Jenny; who
bore all very patiently, except the Malice of
one Woman, who reflected upon her Person,
and, tossing up her Nose, said, ‘The
Man must have a good Stomach, who
would give Silk Gowns for such Sort of
Trumpery.’ Jenny replied to this, with a
Bitterness which might have surprized a judicious
Person, who had observed the Tranquility
with which she bore all the Affronts
to her Chastity; but her Patience was perhaps
tired out: For this is a Virtue which
is very apt to be fatigued by Exercise. 
Mrs. Deborah, having succeeded beyond
her Hopes in her Enquiry, returned with
much Triumph, and at the appointed Hour
made a faithful Report to Mr. Allworthy,
who was much surprized at the Relation; 
for he had heard of the extraordinary Parts
and Improvements of this Girl, whom he
intended to have given in Marriage, together
with a small Living, to a neighbouring
Curate. His Concern therefore on this Occasion,
was at least equal to the Satisfaction
which appeared in Mrs. Deborah, and to many
Readers may seem much more reasonable. 
Mrs. Bridget blessed herself, and said,
‘For her Part, she should never hereafter 

entertain a good Opinion of any Woman:’ 
For Jenny had likewise had the Happiness
of being much in her good Graces. 
The prudent Housekeeper was again dispatched
to bring the unhappy Culprit before
Mr. Allworthy, in order, not, as it was
hoped by some and expected by all, to be
sent to the House of Correction; but to receive
wholesome Admonition and Reproof,
which those who relish that kind of instructive
Writing, may peruse in the next Chapter. 



Containing such grave Matter, that the Reader
cannot laugh once through the whole
Chapter, unless peradventure he should
laugh at the Author. 
When Jenny appeared, Mr. Allworthy
took her into his Study,
and spoke to her as follows: 
‘You know, Child, it is in my Power,
as a Magistrate, to punish you very rigorously
for what you have done; and you
will perhaps be the more apt to fear I 

should execute that Power, because you
have, in a manner, laid your Sins at my
Door.’ 
‘But perhaps this is one Reason which
hath determined me to act in a milder
Manner with you: For, as no private
Resentment should ever influence a Magistrate,
I will be so far from considering
your having deposited the Infant in my
House, as an Aggravation of your Offence,
that I will suppose, in your Favour,
this to have proceeded from a natural
Affection to your Child; since you
might have some Hopes to see it thus
better provided for, than was in the Power
of yourself, or its Wicked Father, to provide
for it. I should indeed have been
highly offended with you, had you exposed
the little Wretch in the Manner of
some inhuman Mothers, who seem no
less to have abandoned their Humanity,
than to have parted with their Chastity. 
It is the other Part of your Offence therefore
upon which I intend to admonish
you, I mean the Violation of your Chastity. 
A Crime, however lightly it may
be treated by debauched Persons, very
heinous in itself, and very dreadful in its
Consequences.’ 

‘The heinous Nature of this Offence
must be sufficiently apparent to every
Christian, inasmuch as it is committed in
Defiance of the Laws of our Religion,
and of the express Commands of him who
founded that Religion.’ 
‘And here its Consequences may well be
argued to be dreadful; for what can be
more so, than to incur the divine Displeasure,
by the Breach of the divine Commands; 
and that in an Instance, against which the
highest Vengeance is specifically denounced.’ 
‘But these Things, tho' too little, I am
afraid, regarded, are so plain, that Mankind,
however they may want to be reminded,
can never need Information on
this Head. A Hint therefore to awaken
your Sense of this Matter shall suffice; for
I would inspire you with Repentance,
and not drive you to Desperation.’ 
‘There are other Consequences, not indeed
so dreadful or replete with Horror as
this; and yet such, as if attentively considered,
must, one would think, deter all,
of your Sex at least, from the Commission
of this Crime.’ 

‘For by it you are rendered infamous,
and driven, like Lepers of old, out of
Society; at least from the Society of all
but wicked and reprobate Persons; for no
others will associate with you.’ 
‘If you have Fortunes, you are hereby
rendered incapable of enjoying them; if
you have none, you are disabled from acquiring
any, nay almost of procuring
your Sustenance; for no Persons of Character
will receive you into their Houses. 
Thus you are often driven by Necessity
itself into a State of Shame and Misery,
which unavoidably ends in the Destruction
of both Body and Soul.’ 
‘Can any Pleasure compensate these
Evils? Can any Temptation have Sophistry
and Delusion strong enough to
persuade you to so simple a Bargain? Or
can any carnal Appetite so overpower
your Reason, or so totally lay it asleep, as
to prevent your flying with Affright and
Terror from a Crime which carries such
Punishment always with it?’ 
‘How base and mean must that Woman
be, how void of that Dignity of 

Mind, and decent Pride, without which
we are not worthy the Name of human
Creatures, who can bear to level herself
with the lowest Animal, and to sacrifice
all that is great and noble in her, all her
Heavenly Part, to an Appetite which she
hath in common with the vilest Branch of
the Creation! For no Woman sure, will
plead the Passion of Love for an Excuse. 
This would be to own herself the meer
Tool and Bubble of the Man. Love,
however barbarously we may corrupt and
pervert its Meaning, as it is a laudable,
is a rational Passion, and can never be violent,
but when reciprocal; for though
the Scripture bids us love our Enemies,
it means not with that fervent Love,
which we naturally bear towards our
Friends; much less that we should sacrifice
to them our Lives, and what ought
to be dearer to us, our Innocence. 
Now in what Light, but in that of an Enemy,
can a reasonable Woman regard
the Man, who solicits her to entail on
herself, all the Misery I have above described,
and who would purchase to himself
a short, trivial, contemptible Pleasure,
so greatly at her Expence! For by the
Laws of Custom the whole Shame, with
all its dreadful Consequences, falls entirely
upon her. Can Love, which always 

seeks the Good of its Object, attempt to
betray a Woman into a Bargain, where
she is so greatly to be the Loser? If such
Corrupter, therefore, should have the
Impudence to pretend a real Affection
for her, ought not the Woman to regard
him, not only as an Enemy, but as the
worst of all Enemies; a false, designing,
treacherous, pretended Friend, who intends
not only to debauch her Body, but
her Understanding at the same Time?’ 
Here Jenny expressing great Concern, Allworthy
by paused a Moment, and then proceeded: 
‘I have talked thus to you, Child, not to
insult you for what is past, and irrevocable,
but to caution and strengthen you
for the future. Nor should I have taken
this Trouble, but from some Opinion of
your good Sense, notwithstanding the
dreadful Slip you have made; and from
some Hopes of your hearty Repentance,
which are founded on the Openness and
Sincerity of your Confession. If these
do not deceive me, I will take care to
convey you from this Scene of your
Shame, where you shall, by being unknown,
avoid the Punishment which, as
I have said, is allotted to your Crime in
this World; and I hope by Repentance,
you will avoid the much heavier Sentence 

denounced against it in the other. Be a
good Girl the rest of your Days, and
Want shall be no Motive to your going
astray: And believe me, there is more
Pleasure, even in this World, in an innocent
and virtuous Life, than in one debauched
and vicious.’ 
‘As to your Child, let no Thoughts concerning
it, molest you; I will provide for
it in a better manner than you can ever
hope. And now nothing remains, but
that you inform me who was the wicked
Man that reduced you; for my Anger
against him will be much greater than
you have experienced on this Occasion.’ 
Jenny now first lifted her Eyes from the
Ground, and with a modest Look, and decent
Voice, thus began: 
‘To know you, Sir, and not love your
Goodness, would be an Argument of total
want of Sense or Goodness in any one. 
In me it would amount to the highest
Ingratitude, not to feel, in the most sensible
manner, the great Degree of Goodness
you have been pleased to exert on
this Occasion. As to my Concern for
what is past, I know you will spare my
Blushes the Repetition. My future Conduct 

will much better declare my Sentiments,
than any Professions I can now
make. I beg leave to assure you, Sir, that I
take your Advice much kinder, than your
generous Offer with which you concluded
it. For as you are pleased to say, Sir, it is
an Instance of your Opinion of my Understanding’ 
—Here her Tears flowing
apace, she stopped a few Moments, and then
proceeded thus, ‘Indeed, Sir, your Kindness
overcomes me; but I will endeavour
to deserve this good Opinion; for if I
have the Understanding you are so kindly
pleased to allow me, such Advice cannot
be thrown away upon me. I thank
you, Sir, heartily, for your intended Kindness
to my poor helpless Child; he is innocent,
and I hope will live to be grateful
for all the Favours you shall shew
him. But now, Sir, I must on my Knees
intreat you, not to persist in asking me
to declare the Father of my Infant. I
promise you faithfully, you shall one Day
know; but I am under the most solemn
Ties and Engagements of Honour, as
well as the most religious Vows and
Protestations, to conceal his Name at this
Time. And I know you too well to
think you would desire I should sacrifice
either my Honour, or my Religion.’ 

Mr. Allworthy, whom the least Mention
of these sacred Words was sufficient to stagger,
hesitated a Moment before he replied,
and then told her she had done wrong to
enter into such Engagements to a Villain; 
but since she had, he could not insist on her
breaking them. He said, it was not from
a Motive of vain Curiosity he had enquired,
but in order to punish the Fellow; at least,
that he might not ignorantly confer Favours
on the Undeserving. 
As to these Points, Jenny satisfied him by the
most solemn Assurances, that the Man was
entirely out of his Reach, and was neither
subject to his Power, nor in any probability
of becoming an Object of his Goodness. 
The Ingenuity of this Behaviour, had
gained Jenny so much Credit with this worthy
Man, that he easily believed what she told
him: For as she had disdained to excuse
herself by a Lie, and had hazarded his farther
Displeasure in her present Situation, rather
than she would forfeit her Honour, or Integrity,
by betraying another, he had but little
Apprehension that she would be guilty
of Falshood towards himself. 
He therefore dismissed her with Assurances,
that he would very soon remove her 

out of the Reach of that Obloquy she had
incurred, concluding with some additional
Documents, in which he recommended Repentance,
saying, “Consider, Child, there
is one still to reconcile yourself to, whose
Favour is of much greater Importance to
you than mine.’ 



A Dialogue between Mesdames Bridget, and
Deborah; containing more Amusement, but
less Instruction than the former. 
When Mr. Allworthy had retired to his
Study with Jenny Jones, as hath been
seen, Mrs. Bridget, with the good Housekeeper,
had betaken themselves to a Post
next adjoining to the said Study; whence,
through the Conveyance of a Key-hole,
they sucked in at their Ears the instructive
Lecture delivered by Mr. Allworthy,
together with the Answers of Jenny, and indeed
every other Particular which passed in
the last Chapter. 
This Hole in her Brother's Study Door,
was indeed as well known to Mrs. Bridget,
and had been as frequently applied to by
her, as the famous Hole in the Wall was 

by Thisbe of old. This served to many
good Purposes. For by such Means Mrs.
Bridget became often acquainted with her
Brother's Inclinations, without giving him
the Trouble of repeating them to her. It
is true, some Inconveniencies attended this
Intercourse, and she had sometimes Reason
to cry out with Thisbe, in Shakespear, ‘O
wicked, wicked Wall!’ For as Mr. Allworthy
was a Justice of Peace, certain Things
occurred in Examinations concerning Bastards,
and such like, which are apt to give
great Offence to the chaste Ears of Virgins,
especially when they approach the Age of
forty, as was the Case of Mrs. Bridget. However,
she had, on such Occasions, the Advantage
of concealing her Blushes from the
Eyes of Men, and De non apparentibus,
et non existentibus eadem est ratio. In English:
‘When a Woman is not seen to
blush, she doth not blush at all.’ 
Both the good Women kept strict Silence
during the whole Scene between Mr. Allworthy
and the Girl; but as soon as it was ended,
and that Gentleman was out of hearing,
Mrs. Deborah could not help exclaiming against
the Clemency of her Master, and especially
against his suffering her to conceal the
Father of the Child, which she swore she
would have out of her before the Sun set. 

At these Words Mrs. Bridget discomposed
her Features with a Smile; (a Thing
very unusual to her.) Not that I would have
my Reader imagine, that this was one of
those wanton Smiles, which Homer would
have you conceive came from Venus, when
he calls her the laughter-loving Goddess; 
nor was it one of those Smiles, which Lady
Seraphina shoots from the Stage-Box, and
which Venus would quit her Immortality to be
able to equal. No, this was rather one of those
Smiles, which might be supposed to have
come from the dimpled Cheeks of the august
Tysiphone, or from one of the Misses her
Sisters. 
With such a Smile then, and with a
Voice, sweet as the Evening Breeze of Boreas
in the pleasant Month of November,
Mrs. Bridget gently reproved the Curiosity
of Mrs. Deborah, a Vice with which it seems
the latter was too much tainted, and which
the former inveighed against with great Bitterness,
adding, ‘that among all her Faults,
she thanked Heaven, her Enemies could
not accuse her of prying into the Affairs
of other People.’ 
She then proceeded to commend the Honour
and Spirit with which Jenny had acted. 

She said, she could not help agreeing with
her Brother, that there was some Merit in
the Sincerity of her Confession, and in her
Integrity to her Lover. That she had always
thought her a very good Girl, and
doubted not but she had been seduced by
some Rascal, who had been infinitely more
to blame than herself, and very probably
had prevailed with her by a Promise of
Marriage, or some other treacherous Proceeding. 
This Behaviour of Mrs. Bridget greatly
surprized Mrs. Deborah; for this well-bred
Woman seldom opened her Lips either to
her Master or his Sister, 'till she had first
sounded their Inclinations, with which her
Sentiments were always strictly consonant. 
Here, however, she thought she might have
launched forth with Safety; and the sagacious
Reader will not perhaps accuse her of
want of sufficient Forecast in so doing,
but will rather admire with what wonderful
Celerity she tacked about, when she
found herself steering a wrong Course. 
‘Nay, Madam,’ said this able Woman,
and truly great Politician, ‘I must own I
cannot help admiring the Girl's Spirit, as
well as your Ladyship. And, as your 

Ladyship says, if she was deceived by
some wicked Man, the poor Wretch is to
be pitied. And to be sure, as your Ladyship
says, the Girl hath always appeared
like a good, honest, plain Girl, and not
vain of her Face, forsooth, as some wanton
Husseys in the Neighbourhood are. 
‘You say true, Deborah, laid Mrs. Bridget,
if the Girl had been one of thole vain
Trollops, of which we have too many in
the Parish, I should have condemned my
Brother for his Lenity towards her. I saw
two Farmers Daughters at Church, the
other Day, with bare Necks. I protest they
shock'd me. If Wenches will hang out
Lures for Fellows, it is no matter what
they suffer. I detest such Creatures; and it
would be much better for them, that their
Faces had been seamed with the Small-Pox; 
but I must confess, I never saw any
of this wanton Behaviour in poor Jenny; 
some artful Villain, I am convinced, hath
betrayed, nay perhaps forc'd her; and I
pity the poor Wretch with all my Heart.’ 
Mrs. Deborah approved all these Sentiments,
and the Dialogue concluded with a
general and bitter Invective against Beauty,
and with many compassionate Considerations 

for all honest, plain Girls, who are
deluded by the wicked Arts of deceitful
Men. 



Containing Matters which will surprize the
Reader. 
Jenny returned home well pleased
with the Reception she had met with
from Mr. Allworthy, whose Indulgence to
her she industriously made public; partly
perhaps as a Sacrifice to her own Pride, and
partly from the more prudent Motive of reconciling
her Neighbours to her, and silencing
their Clamours. 
But though this latter View, if she indeed
had it, may appear reasonable enough, yet
the Event did not answer her Expectation; 
for when she was convened before the Justice,
and it was universally apprehended,
that the House of Correction would have
been her Fate; tho' some of the young
Women cry'd out, ‘it was good enough for
her,’ and diverted themselves with the
Thoughts of her beating Hemp in a Silk
Gown; yet there were many others who 

began to pity her Condition: But when it
was known in what manner Mr. Allworthy
had behaved, the Tide turned against her. 
One said, ‘I'll assure you, Madam hath had
good Luck.’ A second cry'd, ‘See what
it is to be a Favorite.’ A third, ‘Ay,
this comes of her Learning.’ Every Person
made some malicious Comment or other,
on the Occasion; and reflected on the Partiality
of the Justice. 
The Behaviour of these People, may appear
impolitic, and ungrateful to the Reader,
who considers the Power, and the Benevolence
of Mr. Allworthy: But as to his
Power, he never used it; and as to his Benevolence,
he exerted so much, that he
had thereby disobliged all his Neighbours: 
For it is a Secret well known to great Men,
that by conferring an Obligation, they do
not always procure a Friend, but are certain
of creating many Enemies. 
Jenny was, however, by the Care and
Goodness of Mr. Allworthy, soon removed
out of the Reach of Reproach; when Malice,
being no longer able to vent its Rage on
her, began to seek another Object of its
Bitterness, and this was no less than Mr.
Allworthy himself; for a Whisper soon went 

abroad, that he himself was the Father of
the foundling Child. 
This Supposition so well reconciled his
Conduct to the general Opinion, that it met
with universal Assent; and the Outcry
against his Lenity soon began to take another
Turn, and was changed into an Invective
against his Cruelty to the poor Girl. 
Very grave and good Women exclaimed
against Men who begot Children and then
disowned them. Nor were there wanting
some, who, after the Departure of Jenny,
insinuated, that she was spirited away with a
Design too black to be mentioned, and who
gave frequent Hints, that a legal Inquiry
ought to be made into the whole Matter,
and that some People should be forced to
produce the Girl. 
These Calumnies might have probably
produced ill Consequences (at the least might
have occasioned some Trouble,) to a Person of
a more doubtful and suspicious Character than
Mr. Allworthy was blessed with; but in his
Case they had no such Effect; and, being
heartily despised by him, they served only
to afford an innocent Amusement to the
good Gossips of the Neighbourhood. 

But as we cannot possibly divine what
Complexion our Reader may be of, and as
it will be some Time before he will hear any
more of Jenny, we think proper to give
him a very early Intimation, that Mr. Allworthy
was, and will hereafter appear to be,
absolutely innocent of any criminal Intention
whatever. He had indeed committed no
other than an Error in Politics, by tempering
Justice with Mercy, and by refusing to
the good-natured Disposition of the
Mob, *  with an Object for their Compassion
to work on in the Person of poor Jenny,
whom, in order to pity, they desired to have
seen sacrificed to Ruin and Infamy by a
shameful Correction in Bridewel. 
So far from complying with this their
Inclination, by which all Hopes of Reformation
would have been abolished, and
even the Gate shut against her, if her
own Inclinations should ever hereafter lead
her to chuse the Road of Virtue, Mr. Allworthy
rather chose to encourage the Girl to
return thither by the only possible Means; 

for too true I am afraid it is, that many
Women have become abandoned, and have
sunk to the last Degree of Vice by being
unable to retrieve the first Slip. This will
be, I am afraid, always the Case while
they remain among their former Acquaintance; 
it was therefore wisely done by Mr.
Allworthy, to remove Jenny to a Place
where she might enjoy the Pleasure of Reputation,
after having tasted the ill Consequences
of losing it. 
To this Place therefore, wherever it was,
we will wish her a good Journey, and for
the present take leave of her, and of the
little Foundling her Child, having Matters
of much higher Importance to communicate
to the Reader. 



The Hospitality of Allworthy; with a short
Sketch of the Characters of two Brothers, a
Doctor, and a Captain, who were entertained
by that Gentleman. 
Neither Mr. Allworthy's House,
nor his Heart, were shut against
any Part of Mankind, but they were both 

more particularly open to Men of Merit. 
To say the Truth, this was the only House
in the Kingdom where you was sure to
gain a Dinner by deserving it. 
Above all others, Men of Genius and
Learning shared the principal Place in his
Favour; and in these he had much Discernment: 
For though he had missed the Advantage
of a learned Education, yet being
blest with vast natural Abilities, he had so
well profited by a vigorous, though late
Application to Letters, and by much Conversation
with Men of Eminence in this
Way, that he was himself a very competent
Judge in moft Kinds of Literature. 
It is no Wonder that in an Age when
this Kind of Merit is so little in Fashion,
and so slenderly provided for, that  Persons
possessed of it should very eagerly flock to a
Place where they were sure of being received
with great Complaisance; indeed where they
might enjoy almost the same Advantages of
a liberal Fortune as if they were entitled
to it in their own Right; for Mr. Allworthy
was not one of those generous Persons,
who are ready most bountifully to bestow
Meat, Drink, and Lodging on Men of Wit
and Learning, for which they expect no other 

Return but Entertainment, Instruction, Flattery,
and Subserviency; in a Word, that
such Persons should be enrolled in the Number
of Domestics, without wearing their
Master's Cloaths, or receiving Wages. 
On the contrary, every Person in this
House was perfect Master of his own Time:
and as he might at his Pleasure satisfy all his
Appetites within the Restrictions only of
Law, Virtue and Religion; so he might,
if his Health required, or his Inclination
prompted him to Temperance, or even to
Abstinence, absent himself from any Meals,
or retire from them whenever he was so disposed,
without even a Solicitation to the
contrary: For indeed, such Solicitations
from Superiors always savour very strongly
of Commands. But all here were free
from such Impertinence, not only those,
whose Company is in all other Places esteemed
a Favour from their Equality of
Fortune, but even those whose indigent
Circumstances make such an eleemosynary
Abode convenient to them, and who are
therefore less welcome to a great Man's
Table because they stand in need of it. 
Among others of this Kind was Dr.
Blifil, a Gentleman who had the Misfortune 

of losing the Advantage of great Talents
by the Obstinacy of a Father, who
would breed him to a Profession he disliked. 
In Obedience to this Obstinacy the Doctor
had in his Youth been obliged to study
Physick, or rather to say he studied it; for
in reality Books of this Kind were almost
the only ones with which he was unacquainted; 
and unfortunately for him, the Doctor
was Master of almost every other Science but
that by which he was to get his Bread; the
Consequence of which was, that the Doctor
at the Age of Forty had no Bread to eat. 
Such a Person as this was certain to
find a Welcome at Mr. Allworthy's Table,
to whom Misfortunes were ever a Recommendation
when they were derived
from the Folly or Villany of others, and
not of the unfortunate Person himself. Besides
this negative Merit, the Doctor had
one positive Recommendation. This was
a great Appearance of Religion. Whether
his Religion was real, or consisted only
in Appearance, I shall not presume to say,
as I am not possessed of any Touch-stone,
which can distinguish the true from the false. 
If this Part of his Character pleased Mr.
Allworthy, it delighted Miss Bridget. She 

engaged him in many religious Controversies; 
on which Occasions she constantly expressed
great Satisfaction in the Doctor's
Knowledge, and not much less in the Compliments
which he frequently bestowed on her
own. To say the Truth, she had read much
English Divinity, and had puzzled more
than one of the neighbouring Curates. Indeed
her Conversation was so pure, her
Looks so sage, and her whole Deportment
so grave and solemn, that she seemed to deserve
the Name of Saint equally with her
Name-sake, or with any other Female in the
Roman Kalendar. 
As Sympathies of all Kinds are apt to beget
Love, so Experience teaches us that none have
a more direct Tendency this Way than those
of a religious Kind between Persons of different
Sexes. The Doctor found himself so
agreeable to Miss Bridget, that he now began
to lament an unfortunate Accident
which had happened to him about ten Years
before; namely, his Marriage with another
Woman, who was not only still alive, but
what was worse, known to be so by Mr.
Allworthy. This was a fatal Bar to that
Happiness which he otherwise saw sufficient
Probability of obtaining with this young Lady; 
for as to criminal Indulgencies, he 

certainly never thought of them. This was
owing either to his Religion, as is most probable,
or to the Purity of his Passion, which was
fixed on those Things, which Matrimony
only, and not criminal Correspondence,
could put him in Possession of, or could give
him any Title to. 
He had not long ruminated on these
Matters before it occurred to his Memory
that he had a Brother who was under no
such unhappy Incapacity. This Brother he
made no doubt would succeed; for he discerned,
as he thought, an Inclination to
Marriage in the Lady; and the Reader
perhaps, when he hears the Brother's Qualifications,
will not blame the Confidence
which he entertained of his Success. 
This Gentleman was about 35 Years
of Age. He was of a middle Size, and
what is called well built. He had a Scar
on his Forehead, which did not so much injure
his Beauty, as it denoted his Valour (for
he was a half-pay Officer.) He had good
Teeth, and something affable, when he
pleased, in his Smile; though naturally his
Countenance, as well as his Air and Voice,
had much Roughness in it, yet he could
at any Time deposite this, and appear all 

Gentleness and good Humour. He was
not ungenteel, nor entirely void of Wit,
and in his Youth had abounded in Spriteliness,
which, though he had lately put on a
more serious Character, he could, when he
pleased, resume. 
He had, as well as the Doctor, an Academic
Education; for his Father had, with
the same Paternal Authority we have mentioned
before, decreed him for holy Orders; 
but as the old Gentleman died before he
was ordained, he chose the Church Militant, 
and preferred the King's Commission to the
Bishop's. 
He had purchased the Post of Lieutenant
of Dragoons, and afterwards came to be
a Captain; but having quarrelled with his
Colonel, was by his Interest obliged to
sell; from which Time he had entirely rusticated
himself, had betaken himself to
studying the Scriptures, and was not a little
suspected of an Inclination to Methodism. 
It seemed therefore not unlikely that such
a Person should succeed with a Lady of so
Saint-like a Disposition, and whose Inclinations
were no otherwise engaged than to the
married State in general; but why the 

Doctor, who certainly had no great Friendship
for his Brother, should for his Sake
think of making so ill a Return to the Hospitality
of Allworthy, is a Matter not so
easy to be accounted for. 
Is it that some Natures delight in Evil, as
others are thought to delight in Virtue? Or
is there a Pleasure in being accessary to
a Theft when we cannot commit it ourselves? 
Or Lastly, (which Experience seems
to make probable) have we a Satisfaction
in aggrandizing our Families, even tho' we
have not the least Love or Respect for them? 
Whether any of these Motives operated
on the Doctor we will not determine; but
so the Fact was. He sent for his Brother,
and easily found Means to introduce him at
Allworthy's as a Person who intended only
a short Visit to himself. 
The Captain had not been in the House
a Week before the Doctor had Reason to
felicitate himself on his Discernment. The
Captain was indeed as great a Master of
the Art of Love as Ovid was formerly. He
had besides received proper Hints from his
Brother, which he failed not to improve to
the best Advantage. 




Containing many Rules, and some Examples,
concerning falling in love: Descriptions
of Beauty, and other more prudential Inducements
to Matrimony. 
It hath been observed by wise Men or
Women, I forget which, that all Persons
are doomed to be in Love once in their
Lives. No particular Season is, as I remember,
assigned for this; but the Age at
which Miss Bridget was arrived seems to me
as proper a Period as any to be fixed on for
this Purpose: It often indeed happens much
earlier; but when it doth not, I have observed,
it seldom or never fails about this
Time. Moreover, we may remark that at
this Season Love is of a more serious and
steady Nature than what sometimes shews
itself in the younger Parts of Life. The
Love of Girls is uncertain, capricious, and
so foolish that we cannot always discover
what the young Lady would be at; nay, it
may almost be doubted, whether she always
knows this herself. 

Now we are never at a Loss to discern this
in Women about Forty; for as such grave,
serious and experienced Ladies well know
their own Meaning, so it is always very easy
for a Man of the least Sagacity to discover
this  with the utmost Certainty. 
Miss Bridget is an Example of all these
Observations. She had not been many
Times in the Captain's Company before she
was seized with this Passion. Nor did she
go pining and moping about the House,
like a puny foolish Girl, ignorant of her
Distemper: She felt, she knew, and she enjoyed,
the pleasing Sensation, of which, as
she was certain it was not only innocent but
laudable, she was neither afraid nor ashamed. 
And to say the Truth, there is in all Points,
great Difference between the reasonable Passion
which Women at this Age conceive towards
Men, and the idle and childish Liking of
a Girl to a Boy, which is often fixed on the
Outside only, and on Things of little Value
and no Duration; as on Cherry Cheeks, small
Lily-white Hands, slow-black Eyes, flowing
Locks, downy Chins, dapper Shapes, nay
sometimes on Charms more worthless than 

these, and less the Party's own; such are
the outward Ornaments of the Person, and
for which Men are beholden to the Taylor,
the Laceman, the Perriwigmaker, the Hatter,
and the Milliner, and not to Nature. 
Such a Passion Girls may well be ashamed,
as they generally are, to own either to themselves
or to others. 
The Love of Miss Bridget was of another
Kind. The Captain owed nothing to any of
these Fop-makers in his Dress, nor was his Person
much more beholden to Nature. Both his
Dress and Person were such as, had they
appeared in an Assembly, or a Drawing-room,
would have been the Contempt and
Ridicule of all the fine Ladies there. The
former of these was indeed neat, but plain,
coarse, ill-fancied, and out of Fashion. 
As for the latter, we have expressly described
it above. So far was the Skin on
his Cheeks from being Cherry-coloured,
that you could not discern what the natural
Colour of his Cheeks was, they being totally
overgrown by a black Beard, which
ascended to his Eyes. His Shape and
Limbs were indeed exactly proportioned,
but so large, that they denoted the Strength
rather of a Ploughman than any other. His
Shoulders were broad, beyond all Size, and 

the Calves of his Legs larger than those of a
common Chairman. In short, his whole
Person wanted all that Elegance and Beauty,
which is the very reverse of clumsy Strength,
and which so agreeably sets off most of our
fine Gentlemen; being partly owing to the
high Blood of their Ancestors, viz. Blood
made of rich Sauces and generous Wines,
and partly to an early Town Education. 
Tho' Miss Bridget was a Woman of the
greatest Delicacy of Taste; yet such were
the Charms of the Captain's Conversation,
that she totally overlooked the Defects of
his Person. She imagined, and perhaps
very wisely, that she should enjoy more
agreeable Minutes with the Captain, than
with a much prettier Fellow; and forewent
the Consideration of pleasing her Eyes, in
order to procure herself much more solid
Satisfaction. 
The Captain no sooner perceived the Passion
of Miss Bridget, in which Discovery he was
very quick-sighted, than he faithfully returned
it. The Lady, no more than her Lover,
was remarkable for Beauty. I would attempt
to draw her Picture; but that is done
already by a more able Master, Mr. Hogarth
himself, to whom she sat many Years
ago, and hath been lately exhibited by that 

Gentleman in his Print of a Winter's
Morning, of which she was no improper Emblem,
and may be seen walking (for walk
she doth in the Print) to Covent-Garden
Church, with a starved Foot-boy behind
carrying her Prayer-book. 
The Captain likewise very wisely preferred
the more solid Enjoyments he expected
with this Lady, to the fleeting Charms of
Person. He was one of those wise Men,
who regard Beauty in the other Sex as a
very worthless and superficial Qualification; 
or, to speak more truly, who rather chuse
to possess every Convenience of Life with an
ugly Woman, than a handsome one without
any of those Conveniences. And having
a very good Appetite, and but little Nicety,
he fancied he should play his Part very well
at the matrimonial Banquet, without the
Sauce of Beauty. 
To deal plainly with the Reader, the
Captain, ever since his Arrival, at least from
the Moment his Brother had proposed the
Match to him, long before he had discovered
any flattering Symptoms in Miss Bridget,
had been greatly enamoured; that is to say,
of Mr. Allworthy's House and Gardens, and of
his Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments; 

of all which the Captain was so passionately
fond, that he would most probably have
contracted Marriage with them, had he been
obliged to have taken the Witch of Endor
into the Bargain. 
As Mr. Allworthy therefore had declared
to the Doctor, that he never intended to
take a second Wife, as his Sister was his
nearest Relation, and as the Doctor had
fished out that his Intentions were to make
any Child of hers his Heir, which indeed
the Law, without his Interposition, would
have done for him; the Doctor and his
Brother thought it an Act of Benevolence
to give Being to a human Creature, who
would be so plentifully provided with the
most essential Means of Happiness. The
whole Thoughts therefore of both the Brothers,
were how to engage the Affections of
this amiable Lady. 
But Fortune, who is a tender Parent,
and often doth more for her favourite Offspring
than either they deserve or wish, had
been so industrious for the Captain, that
whilst he was laying Schemes to execute his
Purpose, the Lady conceived the same Desires
with himself, and was on her Side contriving
how to give the Captain proper Encouragement, 

without appearing too forward; for
she was a strict Observer of all Rules of
Decorum. In this, however, she easily succeeded; 
for as the Captain was always on
the Look-out, no Glance, Gesture, or Word,
escaped him. 
The Satisfaction which the Captain received
from the kind Behaviour of Miss Bridget, was
not a little abated by his Apprehensions of
Mr. Allworthy; for, notwithstanding his
disinterested Professions, the Captain imagined
he would, when he came to act, follow
the Example of the rest of the World, and refuse
his Consent to a Match, so disadvantageous
in point of Interest, to his Sister. 
From what Oracle he received this Opinion,
I shall leave the Reader to determine; but,
however he came by it, it strangely perplexed
him how to regulate his Conduct so,
as at once to convey his Affection to the
Lady, and to conceal it from her Brother. 
He, at length, resolved to take all private
Opportunities of making his Addresses; but
in the Presence of Mr. Allworthy to be as
reserved, and as much upon his Guard as
was possible; and this Conduct was highly
approved by the Brother. 

He soon found Means to make his Addresses,
in express Terms, to his Mistress,
from whom he receiv'd an Answer in the
proper Form; viz. The Answer which was
first made some thousands of Years ago,
and which hath been handed down by Tradition
from Mother to Daughter ever since. 
If I was to translate this into Latin, I should
render it by these two Words, Nolo Episcopari; 
a Phrase likewise of immemorial Use
on another Occasion. 
The Captain, however he came by his
Knowledge, perfectly well understood the
Lady; and very soon after repeated his
Application with more Warmth and
Earnestness than before, and was again,
according to due Form, rejected; but as he
had encreased in the Eagerness of his Desires,
so the Lady, with the same Propriety,
decreased in the Violence of her Refusal. 
Not to tire the Reader, by leading him
through every Scene of this Courtship,
(which, tho' in the Opinion of a certain great
Author, it is the pleasantest Scene of Life
to the Actor, is perhaps as dull and tiresome
as any whatever to the Audience) the
Captain made his Advances in Form, the 

Citadel was defended in Form, and at
length, in proper Form, surrendered at Discretion. 
During this whole Time, which filled the
Space of near a Month, the Captain preserved
great Distance of Behaviour to his
Lady, in the Presence of the Brother, and
the more he succeeded with her in private,
the more reserved was he in public. And
as for the Lady, she had no sooner secured
her Lover, than she behaved to him before
Company with the highest Degree of Indifference; 
so that Mr. Allworthy must have
had the Insight of the Devil (or perhaps
some of his worse Qualities) to have entertained
the least Suspicion of what was going
forward. 



Containing what the Reader may perhaps expect
to find in it. 
In all Bargains, whether to fight, or to
marry, or concerning any other such Business,
little previous Ceremony is required, to
bring the Matter to an Issue, when both
Parties are really in earnest. This was the 

Case at present, and in less than a Month
the Captain and his Lady were Man and
Wife. 
The great Concern now was to break the
Matter to Mr. Allworthy; and this was undertaken
by the Doctor. 
One Day then as Allworthy was walking
in his Garden, the Doctor came to him,
and with great Gravity of Aspect, and all
the Concern which he could possibly affect
in his Countenance, said, ‘I am come, Sir,
to impart an Affair to you of the utmost
Consequence; but how shall I mention
to you, what  almost distracts me to think
of!’ He then launched forth into the most
bitter Invectives both against Men and
Women; accusing the former of having
no Attachment but to their Interest, and
the latter of being so addicted to vicious Inclinations,
that they could never be safely
trusted with one of the other Sex. ‘Could I,
said he, Sir, have suspected, that a Lady
of such Prudence, such Judgment, such
Learning, should indulge so indiscreet a
Passion; or could I have imagined that
my Brother—why do I call him so? He
is no longer a Brother of mine.—’ 

‘Indeed but he is, said Allworthy, and
a Brother of mine too.’ —‘Bless me, Sir,
said the Doctor, do you know the shocking
Affair?’ —‘Look'ee, Mr. Blifil,
answered the good Man, it hath been my
constant Maxim in Life, to make the best
of all Matters which happen. My Sister,
tho' many Years younger than me, is at
least old enough to be at the Age of Discretion. 
Had he imposed on a Child, I
should have been more averse to have
forgiven him; but a Woman upwards of
thirty must certainly be supposed to know
what will make her most happy. She
hath married a Gentleman, tho' perhaps
not quite her Equal in Fortune; and if he
hath any Perfections in her Eye, which
can make up that Deficiency, I see no
Reason why I should object to her Choice
of her own Happiness; which I, no more
than herself, imagine to consist only in
immense Wealth. I might, perhaps, from
the many Declarations I have made, of
complying with almost any Proposal, have
expected to have been consulted on this
Occasion; but these Matters are of a very
delicate Nature, and the Scruples of Modesty
perhaps are not to be overcome. 
As to your Brother, I have really no 

Anger against him at all. He hath no
Obligations to me, nor do I think he was
under any Necessity of asking my Consent,
since the Woman is, as I have said,
Sui Juris, and of a proper Age to be entirely
answerable only to herself for her
Conduct.’ 
The Doctor repeated his Accusations against
his Brother, accused Mr. Allworthy
of too great Lenity, and declared that he
should never more be brought either to see,
or to own him for his Relation. He then
launched forth into a Panegyric on Allworthy's
Goodness, into the highest Encomiums
on his Friendship; and concluded, by saying,
He should never forgive his Brother
for having put the Place which he bore in
that Friendship, to a Hazard. 
Allworthy thus answer'd: ‘Had I conceived
any Displeasure against your Brother,
I should never have carried that
Resentment to the Innocent: But, I assure
you, I have no such Displeasure. 
Your Brother appears to me to be a Man
of Sense and Honour. I do not disapprove
the Taste of my Sister; nor will I
doubt but that she is equally the Object
of his Inclinations. I have always thought 

Love the only Foundation of Happiness
in a married State; as it can only produce
that high and tender Friendship, which
should always be the Cement of this
Union; and, in my Opinion, all those
Marriages which are contracted from
other Motives, are greatly criminal; they
are a Profanation of a most holy Ceremony,
and generally end in Disquiet and
Misery: For surely we may call it a Profanation,
to convert this most sacred Institution
into a wicked Sacrifice to Lust,
or Avarice: And what better can be said
of those Matches to which Men are induced
merely by the Consideration of a
beautiful Person, or a great Fortune! 
‘To deny that Beauty is an agreeable
Object to the Eye, and even worthy some
Admiration, would be false and foolish. 
Beautiful is an Epithet often used in Scripture,
and always mentioned with Honour. 
It was my own Fortune to marry
a Woman, whom the World thought
handsome, and I can truly say, I liked her
the better on that Account. But, to
make this the sole Consideration of Marriage,
to lust after it so violently, as to
overlook all Imperfections for its Sake,
or to require it so absolutely as to reject 

and disdain Religion, Virtue, and Sense,
which are Qualities, in their Nature, of
much higher Perfection, because an Elegance
of Person only is wanting; this
is surely inconsistent either with a wise
Man, or a good Christian. And it is,
perhaps, being too charitable to conclude
that such Persons mean any thing more by
their Marriage, than to please their carnal
Appetites, for the Satisfaction of which
we are taught it was not ordained. 
‘In the next Place, with respect to Fortune. 
Worldly Prudence perhaps exacts
some Consideration on this Head; nor
will I absolutely and altogether condemn
it. As the World is constituted, the Demands
of a married State, and the Care of
Posterity, require some little Regard to what
we call Circumstances. Yet this Provision
is greatly encreased beyond what is
really necessary, by Folly and Vanity,
which create abundantly more Wants than
Nature. Equipage for the Wife, and
large Fortunes for the Children, are by
Custom enrolled in the List of Necessaries; 
and, to procure these, every thing
truly solid and sweet, and virtuous, and
religious, are neglected and overlooked.’ 

‘And this in many Degrees; the last and
greatest of which seems scarce distinguishable
from Madness. I mean, where Persons
of immense Fortunes contract themselves
to those who are, and must be,
disagreeable to them; to Fools and Knaves,
in order to encrease an Estate, already
larger even than the Demands of their
Pleasures. Surely such Persons, if they
will not be thought mad, must own, either
that they are incapable of tasting the
Sweets of the tenderest Friendship, or
that they sacrifice the greatest Happiness
of which they are capable, to the vain,
uncertain, and senseless Laws of vulgar
Opinion, which owe as well their Force,
as their Foundation, to Folly.’ 
Here Allworthy concluded his Sermon,
to which Blifil had listened with the profoundest
Attention, tho' it cost him some
Pains to prevent now and then a small Discomposure
of his Muscles. He now praised
every Period of what he had heard, with the
Warmth of a young Divine who hath the
Honour to dine with a Bishop the same
Day in which his Lordship hath mounted
the Pulpit. 




Which concludes the first Book, with an Instance
of Ingratitude, which we hope will
appear unnatural. 
The Reader, from what hath been
said, may imagine that the Reconciliation
(if indeed it could be so called) was
only Matter of Form; we shall therefore
pass it over, and hasten to what must surely
be thought Matter of Substance. 
The Doctor had acquainted his Brother
with what had past between Mr. Allworthy
and him; and added with a Smile. ‘I
promise you, I paid you off; nay, I absolutely
desired the good Gentleman not
to forgive you: For you know, after he
had made a Declaration in your Favour,
I might, with Safety, venture on such a
Request with a Person of his Temper; 
and I was willing, as well for your Sake
as for my own, to prevent the least Possibility
of a Suspicion.’ 
Captain Blifil took not the least Notice of
this, at that Time; but he afterwards made
a very notable use of it. 

One of the Maxims which the Devil, in
a late Visit upon Earth, left to his
Disciples, is, when once you are got up,
to kick the Stool from under you. In plain
English, when you have made your Fortune
by the good Offices of a Friend, you are
advised to discard him as soon as you can. 
Whether the Captain acted by this Maxim,
I will not positively determine; so far
we may confidently say, that his Actions
may be fairly derived from this diabolical
Principle; and indeed it is difficult to assign
any other Motive to them: For no sooner
was he possessed of Miss Bridget, and reconciled
to Allworthy, than he began to shew
a Coldness to his Brother, which encreased
daily; till at length it grew into Rudeness,
and became very visible to every one. 
The Doctor remonstrated to him privately
concerning this Behaviour, but could
obtain no other Satisfaction than the following
plain Declaration: ‘If you dislike any
thing in my Brother's House, Sir, you
know you are at Liberty to quit it.’ This
strange, cruel, and almost unaccountable
Ingratitude in the Captain, absolutely broke
the poor Doctor's Heart: For Ingratitude 

never so thoroughly pierces the human
Breast, as when it proceeds from those in
whose Behalf we have been guilty of Transgressions. 
Reflections on great and good
Actions, however they are received or returned
by those in whose Favour they are
performed, always administer some Comfort
to us; but what Consolation shall we receive
under so biting a Calamity as the ungrateful
Behaviour of our Friend, when our wounded
Conscience at the same Time flies in our
Face, and upbraids us with having spotted
it in the Service of one so worthless? 
Mr. Allworthy himself spoke to the Captain
in his Brother's Behalf, and desired to
know what Offence the Doctor had committed; 
when the hard-hearted Villain had the
Baseness to say, that he should never forgive
him for the Injury which he had endeavoured
to do him in his Favour; which,
he said, he had pumped out of him, and
was such a Cruelty, that it ought not to be
forgiven. 
Allworthy spoke in very high Terms upon
this Declaration, which, he said, became
not a human Creature. He expressed, indeed,
so much Resentment against an unforgiving
Temper, that the Captain at last 

pretended to be convinced by his Arguments,
and outwardly professed to be reconciled. 
As for the Bride, she was now in her
Honey-moon, and so passionately fond of
her new Husband, that he never appeared,
to her, to be in the wrong; and his Displeasure
against any Person, was a sufficient
Reason for her Dislike to the same. 
The Captain, at Mr. Allworthy's Instance,
was outwardly, as we have said, reconciled
to his Brother, yet the same Rancour
remained in his Heart; and he found
so many Opportunities of giving him private
Hints of this, that the House at last
grew insupportable to the poor Doctor; and
he chose rather to submit to any Inconveniencies
which he might encounter in the
World, than longer to bear these cruel and
ungrateful Insults, from a Brother for whom
he had done so much. 
He once intended to acquaint Allworthy
with the whole; but he could not bring
himself to submit to the Confession, by
which he must take to his Share so great a
Portion of Guilt. Besides, by how much
the worse Man he represented his Brother to 

be, so much the greater would his own Offence
appear to Allworthy, and so much the
greater, had he Reason to imagine, would
be his Resentment. 
He feigned, therefore, some Excuse of
Business for his Departure, and promised to
return soon again; and took leave of his
Brother with so well-dissembled Content,
that, as the Captain played his Part to the
same Perfection, Allworthy remained well
satisfied with the Truth of the Reconciliation. 
The Doctor went directly to London,
where he died soon after of a broken Heart; 
a Distemper which kills many more than is
generally imagined, and would have a fair
Title to a Place in the Bill of Mortality,
did it not differ in one Instance from all
other Diseases, viz. That no Physician can
cure it. 
Now, upon the most diligent Enquiry
into the former Lives of these two Brothers,
I find, besides the cursed and hellish Maxim
of Policy above-mentioned, another Reason
for the Captain's Conduct: The Captain,
besides what we have before said of him,
was a Man of great Pride and Fierceness, 

and had always treated his Brother, who
was of a different Complexion, and greatly
deficient in both these Qualities, with the
utmost Air of Superiority. The Doctor,
however, had much the larger Share of
Learning, and was by many reputed to
have the better Understanding. This the
Captain knew, and could not bear. For,
tho' Envy is at best a very malignant Passion,
yet is its Bitterness greatly heightened
by mixing with Contempt towards the same
Object; and very much afraid I am, that
whenever an Obligation is joined to these
two, Indignation, and not Gratitude, will
be the Product of all three. 

