


Great Examples of Greatness in
Wild, shewn as well by his Behaviour
to Bagshot, as in a Scheme
laid first to impose on Heartfree
by Means of the Count, and then
to cheat the Count of the Booty. 
Wild undertook, therefore, to extract
some Money from Bagshot,
who, notwithstanding the Depredations
made on him, had carried off a pretty
considerable Booty from their Engagement
at Dice the preceding Day. He found
Mr. Bagshot in Expectation of his Bail,
and, with a Countenance full of Concern,
which he could at any Time, with wonderful
Art, put on, told him, that all was
discovered; that the Count knew him, and
intended to prosecute him for the Robbery,
had not I exerted, said he, my utmost Interest,
and with great Difficulty prevailed on
him in Case you refund the Money—“Refund
the Money, cry'd Bagshot, that is in


your Power; for you know what an inconsiderable
Part of it fell to my Share. 
How! reply'd Wild, is this your Gratitude
to me for saving your Life? For
your own Conscience must convince you
of your Guilt, and with how much
Certainty the Gentleman can give Evidence
against you. Marry come up, quoth
Bagshot, I believe my Life alone will
not be in Danger. I know those who are
as guilty as myself. Do you tell me of
Conscience? —Yes, Sirrah! answered
our Hero, taking him by the Collar,
and since you dare threaten me, I will
shew you the Difference between committing
a Robbery, and conniving at it,
which is all I can charge myself with. I
own indeed I suspected when you shewed
me a Sum of Money, that you had
not come honestly by it. How, says
Bagshot, frightened out of one half of
his Wits, and amazed out of the other,
can you deny? —Yes, you Rascal,
answered Wild, I do deny every thing,
and do you find a Witness to prove it; 
and, to shew you how little Apprehension
I have of your Power to hurt me, 

I will have you apprehended this Moment.” 
—At which Words he offered
to break from him; but Bagshot laid hold
of his Skirts, and, with an altered Tone
and Manner, begged him not to be so impatient. 
“Refund then, Sirrah, cries
Wild, and perhaps I may take pity on
you. What must I refund, answered
Bagshot: Every Farthing in your Pocket,
replied Wild; then I may have some Compassion
on you, and not only save your
Life, but, out of an Excess of Generosity,
may return you something.” At
which Words Bagshot seeming to hesitate,
Wild pretended to make to the Door, and
rapt out an Oath of Vengeance with so violent
an Emphasis, that his Friend no
longer presumed to ballance, but suffered
Wild to search his Pockets, and draw forth
all he found, to the Amount of twenty one
Guineas and an half, which last Piece our
generous Hero returned him again; telling
him, he might now sleep secure, but advised
him for the future never to threaten his
Friends. 

Thus did our Hero execute the greatest
Exploits with the utmost Ease imaginable,
by Means of those transcendent Qualities
which Nature had indulged him with, viz.
a bold Heart, a thundering Voice, and a
steddy Countenance. 
Wild now returned to the Count, and
informed him that he had got ten Guineas
of Bagshot; for with great and commendable
Prudence, he sunk the other eleven in
his own Pocket; and told him with that
Money he would procure him Bail, which
he after prevailed on his Father and another
Gentleman of the same Occupation to
become for two Guineas each; so that
he made lawful Prize of six more; for
such were his great Abilities, and so vast
the Compass of his Understanding, that he
never made any Bargain without over-reaching
(or, in the vulgar Phrase, cheating)
the Person with whom he dealt. 
The Count being, by these Means, enlarged,
the first thing they did, in order to
procure Credit from Tradesmen, was the 

taking a handsome House ready furnished
in one of the new Streets, in which, as soon
as the Count was settled, they proceeded
to furnish him with Servants and Equipage,
and all the Insignia of a large Estate
proper to impose on poor Heartfree. 
These being all obtained, Wild made a second
Visit to his Friend, and, with much
Joy in his Countenance, acquainted him
that he had succeeded in his Endeavours,
and that the Gentleman had promised to
deal with him for the Jewels which he intended
to present his Bride, and which
were designed to be very splendid and costly; 
he therefore appointed him to go to
the Count the next Morning, and bring
with him a Set of the richest and most
beautiful Jewels he had, giving him at the
same Time some Hints of the Count's Ignorance
of that Commodity, and that he
might extort what Price of him he pleased; 
but Heartfree told him, not without some
Disdain, that he scorned to take any such
Advantage; and, after expressing much
Gratitude to his Friend for his Recommendation,
he promised to carry the Jewels at
the Hour, and to the Place appointed. 

I am sensible that the Reader, if he hath
but the least Notion of Greatness, must
have such a Contempt for the extreme Folly
of this Fellow, that he will be very
little concerned at any Misfortunes which
befal him in the sequel; for, to have no
Suspicion that an old School-fellow, with
whom he had, in his tenderest Years, contracted
a Friendship, and who, on the accidental
renewing their Acquaintance, had
professed the most passionate Regard for
him, should be very ready to impose on
him; in short, to conceive that a Friend
should, of his own Accord, without any
View to his own Interest, endeavour to do
him a Service; must argue such Weakness
of Mind, such Ignorance of the World, and
such an artless, simple, undesigning Heart,
as must render the Person possessed of it the
lowest Creature, and the properest Object
of Contempt imaginable, in the Eyes of
every Man of Understanding and Discernment. 
Wild remembered that his Friend Heartfree's
Faults were rather in his Heart than 

his Head; that tho' he was an abject mean
Fellow, and never capable of laying a
Design to injure any human Creature, yet
was he by no Means a Fool, nor liable to
any gross Imposition, unless where his
Heart betrayed him. He therefore instructed
the Count to take only one of his Jewels
at the first Interview, and to reject the rest
as not fine enough, and order him to provide
some richer. He said, this Management
would prevent Heartfree from expecting
ready Money for the Jewel he
brought with him, which the Count was
presently to dispose of, and by Means of
that Money, and his great Abilities at Cards
and Dice, to get together as large a Sum
as possible, which he was to pay down to
Heartfree at the Delivery of the Set of
Jewels, who would be thus void of all
manner of Suspicion, and would not fail
to give him Credit for the residue. 
By this Contrivance it will appear in
the sequel, that Wild did not only propose
to make the Imposition on Heartfree, who
was (hitherto) void of all Suspicion, but
to rob the Count himself of this Sum; this
double Method of cheating the very Tools 

who are their Instruments to cheat others,
is the superlative Degree of Greatness,
and is probably, as far as any Spirit crusted
over with Clay can carry it, falling very
little short of Dæmonism itself. 
This Method was immediately put in
Execution, and the Count, the first Day,
took only a single Brilliant, worth about
five hundred Pounds, and ordered a Necklace,
Ear-rings, and Solitaire of the Value
of four thousand Pounds, to be prepared by
that Day Seven-night. 
This Interval was employed by Wild
in prosecuting his Scheme of raising a
Gang, in which he met with such Success,
that within a few Days he had levied
seven bold and resolute Fellows, fit for any
Enterprize, how dangerous or GREAT, i. e.
villainous soever. 
We have before remarked, that the
truest Mark of Greatness is Insatiability. 
Wild had covenanted with the Count to
receive three-fourths of the Booty, and
had, at the same time, covenanted with 

himself to secure the other fourth Part likewise,
for which he had formed a very GREAT
and noble Design; but he now saw with
Concern, that Sum, which was to be received
in Hand by Heartfree, in Danger of
being absolutely lost. In order, therefore,
to possess himself of that likewise, he contrived,
that the Jewels should be brought
in the Afternoon, and that Heartfree
should be detained before the Count could
see him; that the Night should overtake
him in his Return, where two of his Gang
were ordered to attack and plunder him. 