


Wild pays a Visit to Miss Lætitia
Snap. A Description of that
lovely young Creature, and the
successless Issue of Mr. Wild's Addresses. 
The next Morning when he waked,
he began to think of paying a Visit
to Miss Tishy Snap; for tho' she was really
a Woman of Merit, and great Generosity,
yet Mr. Wild found a Present was
ever most welcome to her, as being a
Token of Respect in her Lover. He therefore
went directly to a Toy-Shop, and
there purchased a genteel Snuff-Box, with
which he waited upon his Mistress; whom
he found in the most beautiful Deshabille. 
Her lovely Hair hung wantonly over her
Forehead, being neither white with, nor yet
free from Powder; a neat double Clout
which seemed to have been worn a few
Times only, was pinned under her Chin; 
some Remains of that Art which Ladies 

improve Nature with, shone on her Cheeks. 
Her Body was loosely attired, without
Stays or Jumps; so that her Breasts
had uncontroulled Liberty to display their
beauteous Orbs, which they did as low
as her Girdle, a thin Covering of a rumpled
Muzlin Handkerchief almost hid
them from the Eyes, save in a few
Parts where a good-natured Hole gave Opportunity
to the naked Breast to appear,
and put us in Mind by its Whiteness of
the Fault in the Handkerchief, which
might have otherwise past unobserved. Her
Gown was a Sattin of a whitish Colour, with
about a dozen little Silver Spots upon it, so
artificially interwoven, that they looked as
if they had fallen there by Chance. This
flying open, discovered a fine white Petticoat
beautifully edged round the Bottom
with a narrow Piece of half Gold-Lace,
beneath this appeared another Petticoat
stiffened with Whalebone, vulgarly called
a Hoop, which was six Inches at least
below the other; and under this again appeared
a red Stuff. She likewise displayed
two pretty Feet covered with Silk, and adorned
with Lace, and tied the right with 

a handsome Piece of blue Ribband; the
left, as more unworthy, with a Piece of
red Stuff, which seemed to have been a
Strip of her Under-Petticoat. Such was the
lovely Creature whom Mr. Wild attended. 
She received him at first with some Coldness,
which Women of strict Virtue by a
commendable, tho' sometimes painful Restraint,
enjoin themselves to their Lovers. 
The Snuff-Box being produced, was at first
civilly, and indeed, gently refused: But on
a second Application accepted. The Tea-Table
was soon called for, at which a Discourse
passed between these young Lovers,
which could we set down with any Accuracy,
would be very edifying as well as entertaining
to our Reader; let it suffice then
that the Wit, together with the Beauty of
this young Creature, so inflamed the Passion
of Wild, which, tho' an honourable
Sort of a Passion, was at the same Time so
extremely violent, that it transported him to
Freedoms too offensive to the nice Chastity
of Lætitia, who was, to confess the Truth,
more indebted to her own Strength for the
Preservation of her Virtue, than to the awful
Respect or Backwardness of her Lover; 

for he was indeed so very urgent in his
Addresses, that had he not with many Oaths
promised her Marriage, we could scarce
have been justified in calling his Passion strictly
honourable; but he was so remarkably
attached to Decency, that he never offered
any Violence to a young Lady without the
most earnest Promises of that kind, being,
he said, a Ceremonial due to their Modesty,
and which was so easily performed,
that the Omission could arise from nothing
but the mere Wantonness of Brutality. The
lovely Lætitia, either out of Prudence, or
perhaps Religion, of which she was a liberal
Professor, was deaf to all his Promises, and
luckily invincible by his Force; for though
she had not learnt the vulgar Art of clenching
her Fist, Nature had not, however, left
her defenceless; for at the Ends of her Fingers
she wore Arms, which she used with
such admirable Dexterity, that the hot
Blood of Mr. Wild soon began to appear in
several little Spots on his Face, and his full-blown
Cheeks to resemble that Part which
Modesty forbids a Boy to turn up any where
but in publick School, after some Pedagogue,
strong of Arm, hath exercised his 

Talents thereon. Wild now retreated from
the Conflict, and the victorious Lætitia,
with becoming Triumph and noble Spirit,
cried out, “D&wblank;n you, if this be your
Way of shewing your Love, I'll warrant
I give you enough on't.” She then proceeded
to talk of her Virtue, which Wild
bid her carry to the Devil with her; and
thus our Lovers parted. 