
Contains a brief recital of Jemmy's journey and return, with some other particulars, which if not very interesting will be found necessary, however, to be inserted. 
The morning dew was yet upon the grass, when Jemmy, attended by one servant, set out for Bath in a post-chaise;—it happened a little unluckily for him that this was the very day that lady Speck's coach had broke down, and the company been obliged to put up at the first village till it was repaired; but for which accident he might have spared himself part of his journey, and met those upon the road whom he went to seek at a greater distance. 
Finding, on his arrival at Bath, that Jenny had left the place, he was no less disappointed and vexed than he had expressed himself to be in the letter he sent to her from thence;—he took a lodging in the same house the ladies had quitted, and put many questions to the mistress of 
it concerning the motive of their departing so suddenly; but all she could answer was, that she believed it was on miss Wingman's account, as the old lady's steward had been sent down, after which they had presently prepared for going. 
In order to divert his thoughts, he no sooner had put off his travelling dress than he went to the Long-room;—but as it often happens that seeking pleasure we encounter pain, so it was with Jemmy,—here he met with something which instead of dissipating the gloominess of his mind, served only to render it more heavy. 
There was a great deal of company, many of whom Jemmy had a slight acquaintance with, but none with whom he had any intimacy excepting one gentleman, who on the moment of his entering the room ran to embrace him,—“Dear Jack, cried Jemmy to him, you wonder, I believe, to see me here at this tail of the season.” —‘No faith, reply'd the other, I should have wonder'd if I had seen you here before: —I have always observed that married people, and people that are going to break off, are always careful to avoid each other;—they are like buckets in a well,—one up and the other down.’ 
“What do you mean, demanded Jemmy a little gravely?” —‘How dull of understanding you affect to be, said the other; miss Jessamy left Bath one day,—you come to it the next;—do you think the world don't see into this? —It was not, however, quite so politic, methinks; you should have staid a day longer at least; for sure you must meet, if not clash, upon the road.’ 
“If I had been so fortunate, reply'd Jemmy, you would not have found me at Bath; for I assure you it was only my impatience to see that lady that brought me hither.” —‘Then there is nothing in the story of your breaking with her, cried the gentleman, and going to be married to miss Chit.’ —“Just as much, return'd he, as that you are going to be made King of the Romans.” 
The other was about to make some answer; but all farther discourse between them on this head was prevented for the present, by several gentlemen, who seeing Jemmy at a distance, came that instant towards him to pay their compliments to him on his arrival. 
As Jemmy had never been the least sensible that any report was raised of his infidelity to Jenny, till he was told it by mr. Morgan, he was the more surprised to hear it at Bath, and from the mouth of a person who had left London before he thought such a thing had ever been talked of there. 
This making him extremely curious to know who had been his informers, he took an opportunity, when most of the company were engaged at play, to propose to him passing the remainder of the evening together at a tavern, to which the other readily agreed, and they immediately adjourn'd. 
They had no sooner seated themselves than Jemmy renewed the conversation which had been interrupted in the Long-room, and desired his friend, in the most earnest terms, to let him know by whom, and in what manner, he had been told so wild and so improbable a story as that of his breaking off with miss Jessamy, and making his addresses to miss Chit? 
‘Faith, my dear Jessamy, reply'd the other, I am afraid I shall be able to give you but little satisfaction in this 
point: —I think that the first time I ever heard any thing of it was at White's chocolate-house, the day before I left London;—but there being a good deal of company, I cannot for my soul recollect what gentleman began the discourse, though I know I was a good deal surprised at it, remembering that I had heard you express some uneasiness that your affairs in town would not permit you to accompany me to Bath, where, you then said, the best part of yourself, meaning miss Jessamy, was already gone. 
‘I must confess, continued he, that my journey, and one affair or other of my own, put this intelligence quite out of my head; till on my coming hither I found it the discourse of almost all the tea-tables where I have been;—some condemning,—others excusing your change; but every one agreeing in the certainty of the fact.’ 
Here Jemmy could not keep himself from expressing some astonishment, that a thing so utterly without the least foundation in truth should be able to obtain such credit, and more especially that it should already have reach'd to such a distance as Bath. 
‘For my part, resumed the gentleman, I see nothing strange in all this;—a story once raised, whether true or false, immediately spreads itself like wildfire, and runs through the ears and tongues of as many as have any acquaintance with the persons concern'd in it. —Do you not know what the poet tells us? 
On Eagles wings immortal scandals fly.
‘Besides, said he, Bath is the same thing as London;—people are so perpetually going backwards and forwards, that what is talked on in one place can never be long a secret in the other. —You may also find another reason for the propagation of this rumour;—you cannot suppose that either yourself or miss Jessamy are so little known, or so indifferent to the world, as that it should not be interested in whatever concerns you.’ 
This compliment was lost upon Jemmy in the humour he was at present;—they were going on, however, with some farther discourse on the same subject, when something else coming that instant into the gentleman's mind, he ask'd him suddenly 
if he had heard any thing of the hurly-burly that had happen'd in the house where miss Jessamy and the other ladies lodged;—to which Jemmy answer'd in the negative, and desired to know of what nature. 
The other then repeated to him what he had heard from the mouth of common fame;—that a woman, who it was said had been kept by Celandine, and ran mad on his quitting her, had attempted to stab miss Jessamy;—that mr. Lovegrove had sent him a challenge on that young lady's account, which he refused to accept; but that some brulée happening between them afterwards, they were both carried before a magistrate, where mr. Lovegrove, being proved the aggressor, was obliged to give bail; and the other, to avoid being pointed at for a coward, went directly out of the town. 
“Well, but the occasion, my dear friend, cried Jemmy hastily, how was Celandine answerable for the fury of his forsaken mistress? or if he could be so, how come Lovegrove, who all the world knows courts lady Speck, to be so warm in his resentment on the account of any other woman?” 
‘Indeed, reply'd the other, the whole affair seems to me, and to all whom I have heard speak of it, as much a mystery as it can be to yourself: —I can only tell you what happen'd;—but as to the why and the wherefore, it must be left to time, and the parties themselves to unfold.’ 
Jemmy's impatience to know every thing relating to an event in which he thought himself so deeply interested, made him persecute his friend with a thousand questions, which were altogether unavailing, as the other had it not in his power to inform him in any more than he had already done. 
Hoping, however, to get better intelligence at home, he took leave of his friend more early than otherwise he would have done, yet came to his lodging too late for what he had proposed;—the gentlewoman of the house was gone to bed, and he was compell'd to defer taking any measures for the satisfaction of his curiosity till the next day. 
In the morning the mistress of the house, on his requesting it, drank chocolate with him in his own apartment; but 
at first was very cautious in her replies to the interrogatories he put to her, till finding he was already informed of the quarrel between mr. Lovegrove and Celandine, and also on whose account it happen'd, she made no scruple of relating to him all she knew of the transaction of the garden, and the danger miss Jessamy had been in from the jealous rage of mrs. M&wblank;. 
Let any one, who is truly a lover, judge how much Jemmy must be shock'd on hearing the double danger to which his mistress had been exposed; and as he doubted not but his presence would have secur'd her from meeting either with the one or the other of these insults, he severely condemn'd himself for having suffer'd any thing to keep him from her. 
He met with several of his acquaintance here, who would fain have detain'd him among them during the remainder of the season; but all the persuasions in the world would not now have prevailed upon him to stay a moment longer than he could conveniently depart. 
By way of attonement for the vexation, and perhaps the slights Jenny might have sustain'd through the report of his 
infidelity, he resolved to shew that he came to Bath only for her sake, and that neither the place nor company had any charms for him now she was gone. 
Accordingly he set out for London, after giving one day's rest to his servant, who, as he had wrote to Jenny, was very much hurt by a fall he had received in the journey thither. 
