
Contains only such accidents as are too common to excite much wonder. 
I would not be understood, by the observations made on the generality of mankind in the close of the preceding chapter, that the vice of inconstancy ought to be imputed to the hero of this history; what in most others is the effect of a love of variety, was produced in him by the too great vivacity and sprightliness of his temper: he had sometimes very strong 
inclinations, but never a real affection for any but his dear Jenny; and tho' these may have led him into errors which render him not wholly blameless, yet the permanence of his devoirs to that sole object of his honourable passion, shews his character to have in it infinitely more of light than shade. 
Let no one therefore pass too severe a censure on his conduct in regard to this fair tempter, either as Celia of the woods or lady Hardy;—whatever was the first motive of his addresses to her, curiosity to know how this transformation came about might now, and doubtless had, some share in exciting him to renew his acquaintance with her. 
I shall not, however, as I have more than once assured my readers, make any attempts either to palliate or disguise the truth:—Jemmy was punctual to the hour that had been prefix'd by his mistress, yet found her in the Park before him;—she had placed herself on a bench behind the Mall, as being most free from company:—when he first discerned her, she seem'd talking to a young woman who stood waiting near her, but left her ladyship alone before he could come up to them. 
‘How little possible was it for me to expect this blessing,—said he approaching her.’ —‘Hold—hold,—cried she interrupting him,—we have no time at present for fine speeches, and you will be surprised to find yourself summon'd here only to be told you must be gone.’ —I should be indeed surprised,—rejoin'd he;—but how have I deserved to be so unhappy?’ 
‘No, no, reply'd she smiling, you are not unhappy, though I could easily tell you how you deserve to be so;—but this is no place either for a quarrel or a reconciliation:—you must know I could not come out alone for fear of giving suspicion to my old husband, so brought my woman with me; but as soon as I saw you, sent her home under the pretence of fetching my snuffbox, which I left behind me for that purpose;—she will be here again in two minutes, for we live but in the next street, and have a door into the Park;—therefore take this, continued she, and be careful to do as this directs.’ 
‘Let me first examine how I approve of the contents, said he with his accustom'd gaiety,’—‘You may, answer'd 
she; but then you will lose the only moment that I have to tell you, I am as much yours as ever, and that I have not known one joy in life since last we parted.’ —‘Angelic creature! cried he with a voice and eyes all transport, oh that I had the opportunity of throwing myself at your feet to thank, as it deserves, this goodness!—where,—when shall we meet again?’ 
‘The paper I gave you will inform you, reply'd she; but do not disappoint lady Hardy in the same manner as you did Celia of the woods.’ —‘Oh I can clear myself of that, cried he, it was a sad necessity that drove me from you, and I had no means of conveying a letter to you;—but I have sought you since.’ —‘And I have sought you too, rejoin'd she; but we must talk of this hereafter;—I see my woman coming,—leave me for Heaven's sake, and if you stay in the walks pass carelesly by, and seem not to regard me.’ —Jemmy had only time to tell her, that he would read the dear mandate, and obey whatever it enjoined. 
After speaking these words he retired with as much haste as he could to the other end of the walk, where he examined 
what had been given him by the lady, and found it contain'd only these few expressive lines: 
“Go at six this evening percisely to mrs. Comode, the habit-maker, in * * * street,—she is already apprized of your coming, but knows not your person;—so you have only to say,—you are come for the riband,—on which she will immediately conduct you to. 
“Yours, &c.” 

It had been observ'd through the course of this history, that Jemmy, in spite of his gay temper, had sometimes the power of thinking very seriously;—the billet he had in his hand, together with the looks and gestures of the lady, fill'd him with reflections which it cannot be supposed she either intended or wish'd to inspire. 
To find that the most timid bashfulness,—the most innocent simplicity of mind and manners thus improved, in the compass of so small a space of time, into all the assured airs of a woman who had pass'd her whole life in artifice and intrigue, seem'd to him a thing so strange, so out of nature, that he would never have believed it possible, had he not seen it 
verified in the character of his Celia, at present lady Hardy. 
This transformation did not render her more amiable in his eyes;—he was, however, punctual to the assignation, though it is pretty certain his curiosity of knowing those accidents which had occasion'd so extraordinary a revolution, both in her circumstances and behaviour, had as great a share in carrying him thither as any other motive. 
On his coming to mrs. Comode's he found the obliging gentlewoman ready to receive him; and, on his giving the appointed signal, led him with a smiling countenance into a back parlour behind the shop, where lady Hardy already waited his approach. 
He was doubtless about to salute her with some fine speech, but she no sooner saw him enter than, starting from her seat, she threw herself at once into his arms, before they were even open to receive her;—‘My dear, dear mr. Jessamy, cried she, with an undescribeable softness in her voice and eyes,—a few days past how little did I hope this happiness?’ 
Such love,—such tenderness, in one so young and beautiful, must have warm'd the heart of a dull Stoick, much more that of one endow'd by nature with the most amorous inclinations,—Jemmy must have been as insensible as he was really the reverse, had he not felt the force of such united charms;—he return'd all her transports,—her caresses, with interest;—they said the most passionate and endearing things to each other; but the energy of their expressions, as they were so often interrupted with kisses and embraces, would be lost in the repetition;—for as mr. Dryden justly says, 
Imperfect sentences, and broken sounds,
And nonsense is the eloquence of love.
After the first demonstrations of their mutual joy on this meeting was over,—‘I will not, said she, be so ungenerous to accuse you of a crime of which I know you clear;—I discover'd the melancholy occasion which call'd you in such haste to London;—but tell me, my dear Jessamy, continued she, did not your heart feel some anguish on finding yourself obliged to leave your Celia just as you had prevail'd upon her to swear she would be yours?’ 
He could not without being guilty of, as much ill manners as ingratitude, avoid pretending he had suffer'd greatly on that account; but whatever was wanting of sincerity in this assertion he attoned for in the relation he made her of the pains he had taken in searching for her on his return to Oxford. 
She laugh'd heartily at the detail he gave her of the conversation he had with the countryman concerning her uncle Adams and the affairs of his family;—‘And, now, said she, I will make you the confidant of every thing that has happen'd to me since I had the pleasure of seeing you.’ 
Jemmy then telling her it was a favour for which he had the utmost impatience, she immediately gave him the satisfaction he desired. 
