
Displays love in colours very different from those in which that passion generally appears, and seems calculated chiefly for the entertainment of the young and fair; but will scarcely be displeasing to such as are not so, with this proviso, that they have no share of envy in their composition. 
Not the sybils of antiquity, nor those enthusiasts who mounted the hallowed tripod, more mistook for the inspiration of their fictitious deity the frenzy of their own heated imaginations, or were more deceiv'd themselves, or 
capable of deceiving others, than those lovers are who dignify with the sacred name of a pure and virtuous affection that passion which is excited merely by beauty and the difference of sex. 
I have heard of some ladies of that romantic turn of mind as not to be convinced of their lovers sincerity without the most fatal proofs, and have took in good earnest what the humourous poet meant only in ridicule: 

He that will hang or beat out's brains,
The devil's in him if he feigns.
But though it is to be hoped that far the greater number are of a more reasonable way of thinking, yet I am afraid that even among some of these the hero of this history will be look'd upon as no more than a half lover at the best;—he could be perfectly easy and gay out of his Jenny's company;—nay,—and what is less to be forgiven, amuse the hours of absence from her in an amorous conversation with other women, when with her he has hitherto discovered none of those impatiencies,—those alternate hopes and fears,—those extravagancies which men so frequently put in practice, and which their mistresses are apt to take as the 
most certain indications of a true and ardent passion. 
Yet, in spite of all these deficiencies,—omissions,—commissions, and other sins against the god of love, I doubt not to bring him, by degrees, into the good graces of the most imperious, vain and tyrannic of my fair readers. 
It will appear that he loved the object of his honourable flame much more than he knew he did himself;—he had never been sensible of the least jealousy on her account, nor indeed, had taken much pains to prevent that passion from laying hold on her; yet no sooner had he reason to believe she was made acquainted with the story of his falshood, than he felt all the pangs which he supposed had seized her heart on receiving a shock so unexpected. 
What was wanting in the violence of that passion he had for her was abundantly made up with tenderness;—he trembled not for himself but her;—conscious of his innocence, he had no cause to dread the reproaches she might meet him with; but was ready to sink under the apprehensions of what she endured, till he was fully clear'd of this unjust accusation. 
It was now that he first began to feel that burning impatience to be with her which all lovers pretend to have, though few perhaps, very few, in reality experience;—it was not that he so much languish'd to feast his eyes upon her beauties, or his ears with her wit and engaging conversation, tho' both had charms for him preferable to those of any other woman in the world; but it was to ease her of all suspence in regard to his integrity; and convince her, by the most unquestionable testimony, that he was incapable of love for any but herself. 
Let the discreet, and judging part of womankind speak their opinion of a lover such as this, and I believe Jemmy himself might safely appeal to the verdict they would give. 
The freedom with which from their infancy they had been accustom'd to converse together abolish'd all manner of ceremony between them; but had more been required, Jemmy's eagerness to see her would not have permitted him to make use of any at this time:—he order'd the postilion to drive directly to the house where she was lodged, and without going home, or having any thoughts of changing 
his travelling dress, flew up stairs, nor even waited till a servant should apprise her of his arrival. 
This, however, being the day in which his letter had made her expect his coming, she had taken care to be at home and alone, judging it improper there should be any witnesses of a conversation which she knew not but might be of too much importance to be divulged. 
On seeing him enter the room, she rose hastily from her seat and received the embrace he gave her with the same sweetness and obliging air with which she had always treated him—“My dear,—dear Jenny, cried he, throwing himself a second time upon her bosom,—how many disappointments have I suffer'd before I could attain the blessing I now enjoy?” 
‘I should have shared with you in those disappointments, answered she smiling, if I had not been assured that whatever pleasures you missed the enjoyment of at Bath were very well attoned for by others that you met with in London.’ 
“Cruel sarcasm, rejoin'd he, looking earnestly on her face,—could I have expected it from a mouth so much used to softness? —If to have been detained from the presence of all my soul holds dear;—if to have been involved in affairs to which my nature is the most averse;—if to have been aspersed,—scandalized,—doubly wounded in my love and honour by a villainous report;—if these are pleasures, I have indeed met with enough to gratify the spleen of my worst enemies, but should methinks excite my Jenny's pity.” 
‘One cannot rightly pity, reply'd she more seriously, what one is not perfectly acquainted with;—you may perhaps have had some embarasments which you did not think proper to communicate to me, and I was loth to depend too much on what I heard from others.’ 
“The less you have depended, said he, the more generous you are, and the more fortunate I am;—I need not ask what it is you mean;—I know you have been told that I am inconstant, perfidious;—that, insensible to your merits and the happiness 
ordained for me by the best of fathers, I have basely transferred my vows and affections to another. 
“This story, continued he, perceiving she was silent, false and absurd as in itself it is, has not only gained strange credit here, but I find has also been carried down to Bath, and cannot have escaped your ears. —I hope you know your Jemmy better than to imagine there was even a possibility of there being the least truth in it; yet the uneasiness you may have felt through your regard for me, in finding it believed by others, has given me a mortification beyond what I am able to express.” 
‘Much pains has indeed been taken, reply'd Jenny, to persuade both myself and friends, that you no longer thought me worthy of your affection, and were weary of the engagement made for us by our parents; but I assure you that I never gave the least credit to any insinuations of this kind, tho' made in the most specious manner imaginable.’ 
She was going on,—but Jemmy could not forbear interrupting her, by catching her in his arms, and testifying 
by that action, as well as by the most rapturous expressions, the grateful sense he had of the justice she had done him. 
After having indulged him for some moments, ‘It was not, said she, that I was thus tenacious of your constancy through any vanity of my own merits, but through a perfect confidence in the sincerity of your heart;—I was far from thinking it impossible that you should cease to love me, but then I also thought it impossible that you would not at the same time cease all professions of it;—I always believed you incapable of deceit, and therefore could not give credit to your change of sentiments in respect to me, while you continued to assure me they were the same as ever.’ 
“Charming,—angelic Creature!” cried he, seizing her a second time, and pressing her with the extremest tenderness to his breast, “How beyond all description villainous, as well as stupid, must be the man who could wrong such excelling sweetness,—such unparallel'd goodness!” 
Jenny then told him, that whoever had propagated this report must certainly be 
greatly interested in having it believed, since such uncommon methods had been taken for that purpose,—‘as you will presently be convinced continued she, by what I have to shew you.’ 
In speaking these words she ran hastily to a little cabinet, and having taken thence the letter which had been sent to lady Speck at Bath, and that other which she had received herself since her coming to town from a pretended rival, put them both into his hands, and desired him to peruse them. 
Jemmy read then over with an equal mixture of rage and astonishment;—he now plainly saw, that to break the union between him and Jenny must have been a thing contrived by some person who was an enemy to both, and could not proceed merely from the vanity of miss Chit, in imagining him her lover;—much less could he think it possible that any woman was capable of raising such a report, for the sake of revenge, against a man for not loving her, who had never pretended to do so. 
He repeated to Jenny, without the least reserve, the motive of his being at first introduced to that young lady's acquaintance, 
and of the visits he continued to make at her house, till he was informed by mr. Morgan what the world said of it;—protested, as he might do with the greatest veracity, that he never had the least thought of making an amorous address to her on any score whatever. 
They were still upon this topick, and endeavouring, by various conjectures, to fathom the bottom of an affair which seemd so mysterious to both of them, when a servant came into the room to lay the cloth, Jenny having ordered supper should be served up that night in her own chamber. 
This changed the subject of their entertainment for the present; but the business of the table was no sooner over than more and greater matters came upon the carpet. 
