
Shews the character of Jemmy in a light which will be thought worthy approbation by some readers, and equally ridiculed by others. 
How much soever Jemmy was taken up on going to bed, with the thoughts of when and where he should meet his mistress, according to her desire, he did not forget next morning an appointment he had made to breakfast with a gentleman, 
in order to look over some curiosities that had been brought from Rome at the last jubilee. 
In his way thither, as he was passing by the door of a great Mercer, he was surprised with the sight of lady Hardy starting out upon him, and before he had time to speak, or indeed to think whether he ought to do so in that place or not, ‘Well, mr. Jessamy, cried she in a low voice, what answer may I expect to the letter I sent last night?’ —‘Such a one, madam, reply'd he, as I hope will give you no future cause to reproach me.’ 
‘I should be glad,’ said she, and was going on; but something, which will hereafter be discover'd, prevented her, and she ran back into the shop in the greatest hurry and confusion: Jemmy imagined that the sight of some person who knew her had given her this alarm; but as it was improper to follow her, and he did not chuse to saunter about the street in hope of speaking to her again, he went directly to the place where he was expected. 
He said no longer at this visit than mere civility required;—the task enjoin'd 
him by lady Hardy ran very much in his head, and he could not be easy till he had found some means or other of performing it. 
He was returning home so deeply buried in cogitation, that though he went through the park, which at that time was very full of company, he saw nor took notice of any body in it, till Belpine meeting him in this unusual musing accosted him with a slap on the shoulder, accompanied by these lines borrow'd from Farquair's Recruiting-Officer: 
Spleen, thou worst of fiends below,
Fly, I conjure thee, by this magic blow.
‘What in the name of wonder, pursued he, has wrought this transformation? —What fair cruel she has the power to engross you to herself, and make you absent amidst a throng of beauties.’ 
The sight of him, together with the salutation he had given him, put Jemmy in mind of something he had never thought on before: 
—‘Faith, Belpine, answer'd he laughing, your guess is partly right;—I was thinking of a lady, though no 
cruel one, and just wishing for such a friend as you.’ 
‘Then here I am apropos, cried the other;—What act of friendship am I to be employ'd in?’ —‘Come home with me, and I will tell you, reply'd Jemmy.’ —‘With all my heart, said Belpine, I will only speak to a couple of gentlemen I see yonder, and be after you in a moment.’ 
Jemmy was now astonish'd at his own stupidity; so anxious as he had been to find a proper place for the consummation of his amour with lady Hardy, yet he had never once thought of having recourse to Belpine for that purpose, who was a single man, had handsome lodgings, and look'd upon by him as sufficiently his friend to oblige him in a much greater matter than the use of his apartment for a few hours. 
He walked slowly on, and the other overtook him before he reach'd his own door;—as soon as they were come into the house and shut up together, Jemmy told him, that having a small affair of gallantry with a woman of condition, who would not venture to any house or public resort, the favour he requested of him 
was to lend him his lodgings to entertain her in. 
To this the other reply'd, that he was glad of the opportunity of contributing to his pleasures;—‘but, said he, we must be very cautious,—my landlady, you must know, is a formal piece of stuff, and piques herself mightily on the reputation and honesty of her house;—I will therefore sneak privately out before you come, that she may not know I am abroad, and when my man has shew'd you and your fair companion up stairs, he shall tell the old cant that you are relations of mine come to visit me.’ 
Belpine looked extremely thoughtful all the time he was speaking, which Jemmy interpreting as the effect of his great zeal and care that every thing should be conducted to his satisfaction, heartily embraced and thank'd him for. 
The other grew every moment more serious; but asked him on what day and at what hour he intended to bring his mistress. 
—‘That must depend upon herself, said Jemmy, and what opportunity chance and our good fortune may befriend 
us with;—but I shall take care to give you timely notice.’ 
‘I suppose, resumed Belpine, as this affair is to be a mighty secret, I must not be trusted with the name of this fine lady.’ —‘No, friend, reply'd Jemmy, you must excuse me there;—she is a person of fashion, and a married woman.’ —‘Aye, return'd Belpine, in a voice scarce articulate, through his inward agitations, and you might have added too,—a lewd,—a base, and a most ungrateful woman.’ 
‘What do you mean, sir? demanded Jemmy somewhat startled at his looks and manner of speaking.’ —‘Before I answer you, cried Belpine, tell me, I conjure you, by all our friendship,—tell me truly, whether you have yet enjoy'd her?’ —‘No, upon my honour, reply'd the other still more surprised;—but wherefore do you ask? —she is perhaps your mistress.’ 
‘Would to Heaven, said Belpine, that she were mine,—or yours,—or any man's mistress, so she were not my uncle's wife, and dignify'd with the name of lady Hardy.’ 
Never was any one in a greater consternation than Jemmy was on hearing this;—he had been told, indeed, somewhat concerning his having an uncle who had married a girl of mean extraction, but knew nothing of his name nor of the particulars of the story. —‘What, cried he hastily, is sir Thomas Hardy your uncle?’ 
‘Yes, reply'd the other sullenly, he is my mother's brother, and I was always look'd upon as his undoubted heir, but by his marriage with this curst Jezabel I am like to be defrauded of an estate of upwards of two thousand pounds a year.’ 
Jemmy having by this time a little recovered himself from his surprise, was very much affected with these last words; ‘—You shall not be a looser by an act of mine, said he; if lady Hardy were more handsome than she is, and I loved her more than I ever did, be assured I would henceforth for ever shun her presence, and forego the gratification of my desires, rather than be guilty of attempting any thing which might happen to prove an injury to my friend.’ 
‘This is generous, indeed, cried Belpine embracing him, and what I could have expected from no man but yourself:—you will pardon, dear sir, continued he, the warmth of some expressions I may have let fall;—but I cannot keep my temper in due bounds whenever I think on my uncle's dotage, and the misfortunes I may possibly be reduced to by it.’ 
After many repeated assurances on the one side, and retributions on the other, Jemmy bethought himself of asking him how it came into his head to guess that lady Hardy, of all womankind, was the mistress he had spoke of, and intended to have brought to his lodgings. 
‘It can be call'd, indeed, no more than a conjecture, reply'd Belpine, yet was it such a conjecture as amounted almost to a certainty; you know, pursued he, that you spoke to her this morning at the door of a shop in Chandos-street;—I was sitting in a parlour window just opposite to it, and had the opportunity of beholding with what hurry of looks and motion her impudent ladyship flew out to meet you; and how presently after conscious guilt 
and fear at sight of me, on turning her head that way, made her leave you, and retire with as much precipitation as she had come out. 
‘This, went he still on, was enough to give a strange suspicion of your intimacy, and I thought to have asked you by what means you came to be so well acquainted with one of our family; but you prevented me by making a request which confirmed me in what I had so much reason to believe before; and also that you were entirely ignorant of the near relationship between me and that vile woman.’ 
‘You do me justice, said Jemmy; nothing could be farther from my thoughts than that she was your aunt;—I knew her before she had any expectations of being so, and when she was much more innocent than I fear she is at present.’ 
He then, on the desire of the other, related the manner of his first acquaintance with Celia of the woods, and the many accidents which had interven'd and hinder'd the completion of what at that time he so ardently had desired, and she seem'd not very averse to grant. 
On his having finish'd this recital;—‘When I consider, said Belpine, what you are, and what she was at the time of her acquaintance with you in the wood, I could almost pity her for not being able, even after marriage, to banish an idea so agreeable, and which had made the first impression on her heart; but, my dear friend, it is not for your sake alone that she has transgressed the rules of virtue, and even of decency;—others have proved the too great warmth of her constitution; some unquestionable instances of this have came to my knowledge;—be assured I speak not this out of malice, nor in regard of my uncle's honour would mention it at all, if I did not think it might serve to fortify you in the resolution you have taken of never seeing her any more.’ 
A sort of a contemptuous smile spread itself all over Jemmy's face at this supposition;—he assured Belpine that there was no occasion for any proofs of that lady's levity to enable him to keep the promise he had made; and that as he never was possess'd of anything more than a transient inclination for her, he could threw it off without feeling the least pain. 
‘—Whatever anecdotes therefore, said he, you favour me with will only serve to gratify my curiosity.’ 
Belpine was, however, preparing to recollect the passages he had to relate; but their discourse had already taken up so much time, that before he could begin, a servant came into the room and told his master that dinner was upon table. 
‘Well then, said Jemmy to his guest, you must do penance with me,—a batchelor's table is always thinly served; but I indulg'd somewhat too plentifully last night, so mortify to day with a boil'd chicken and small beer.’ 
In speaking these words, he took Belpine by the hand and led him into another room, where it is not to be doubted but that they found more covers already placed than he had made mention of. 
