

Contains nothing very extraordinary,
yet such things as are highly proper
to be known. 
I think it is generally allowed, that
there are few emotions of the mind
more uneasy than suspence. Not the extreme
youth of miss Betsy, not all her
natural chearfulness, nor her perfect indifference
for the son of alderman Saving,
could enable her to throw off the vexation,
in which his late behaviour had
involved her. Had the motive been the
most mortifying of any that could be imagined
to her vanity, pride and resentment
would then have come to her assistance:
—she would have despised the author
of the insult, and, in time, have forgot the 
insult itself; but the uncertainty in what
manner she ought to think of the man,
and this last action of his, made both
dwell much longer on her mind, than
otherwise they would have done. As the
poet truly says, 

“When puzzling doubts the anxious bosom seize,
“To know the worst is some degree of ease.”

This is a maxim which will hold good,
even when the strongest and most violent
passions operate; but miss Betsy was possessed
of no more than a bare curiosity,
which as she had as yet no other sensation,
which demanded gratification, was sufficiently
painful to her. 
It was about ten, or twelve days, that
she continued to labour under this dilemma; 
but at the expiration of that time,
was partly relieved from it by the following
means. 
Mr. Goodman happening to meet alderman
Saving, with whom he had great
business, upon 'Change, desired he would
accompany him to an adjacent tavern. 
To which the other complied; but with
an air much more grave and reserved, 
than he was accustomed to put on, with
a person whom he had known for a great
number of years, and was concerned with
in some affairs of traffic; they went together
to the ship tavern. 
After having ended what they had to
say to each other upon business, “Mr.
Goodman,” said the alderman, “we
have long been friends, I always thought
you an honest, fair-dealing man, and
am, therefore, very much surprized you
should go about to put upon me in the
manner you have lately done.” “Put
upon you, sir,” cried the merchant, “I
know not what you mean, and am very
certain I never did any thing that
might call in question my integrity,
either to you or any one else.” “It
was great integrity indeed,” resumed
the alderman, with a sneer, “to endeavour
to draw my only son into a clandestine
marriage, with the girl you
have at your house.” Mr. Goodman
was astonished, as well he might, at this
accusation, and perceiving by some other
words that the alderman let fall, that he
was well acquainted with the love young
Saving had professed for miss Betsy, frankly
related to him all that he knew of the
courtship, and the method he had taken
to put a stop to it. “That was not 
enough, sir,” cried the alderman hastily,
you should have told me of it. —Do
you think young folks, like them,
would have regarded your forbidding? 
—No, no; I'll warrant you they would
have found some way or other to come
together before now, and the boy might
have been ruined, if I had not been informed
by other hands how things were
carried on, and put it out of the power
of any of you to impose upon me. 
The girl may spread her nets to catch
some other woodcock, if she can,— 
thanks to heaven, and my own prudence,
my son is far enough out of her
reach.” 
Mr. Goodman, though one of the best
natured men in the world, could not keep
himself from being a little ruffled at the
alderman's discourse, and told him, that
though he had been far from encouraging
mr. Saving's inclinations, and should always
think it the duty of a son to consult
his father in every thing he did, especially
in so material a point as that of
marriage; yet he saw no reason for treating
miss Betsy with contempt, as she was
of a good family, had a very pretty fortune
of her own, and suitable accomplishments. 
“You take a great deal of pains to set
her off,” said the alderman, “and since
you married a court-lady not worth a
groat, have got all the romantic idle
notions of the other end of the town,
as finely as if you had been bred there. 
A good family!—very pleasant i'faith. 
Will a good family go to market? — 
Will it buy a joint of mutton at the
butcher's? —Or a pretty gown at the
mercer's? Then, a pretty fortune you
say;—enough it may be to squander
away at cards and masquerades, for a
month or two. She has suitable accomplishments
too;—yes, indeed, they
are suitable ones, I believe:—I suppose
she can sing, dance, and jabber a
little French; but I'll be hanged if she
knows how to make a pye, or a pudding,
or to teach her maid to do it.” 
The reflection on lady Mellasin, in the
beginning of this speech, so much incensed
mr. Goodman, that he could scarce attend
to the latter part of it:—he forbore
interrupting him, however, but as soon
as he had done speaking, replied in terms
which shewed his resentment. In fine,
such hot words passed between them, as,
had they been younger men, might have
produced worse consequences;—but the 
spirit of both being equally evaporated in
mutual reproaches, they grew more calm,
and, at last, talked themselves into as
good harmony as ever. Mr. Goodman
said, he was sorry that he had been prevailed
upon, by the young man's entreaties,
to keep his courtship to miss Betsy a secret; 
and the alderman begged pardon in
his turn, for having said any thing disrespectful
of lady Mellasin. 
On this they shook hands, another half
pint of sherry was called for, and before
they parted, the alderman acquainted mr.
Goodman, that to prevent entirely all future
correspondence between his son and
miss Betsy, he had sent him to Holland
some days ago, without letting him know
any thing of his intentions, 'till every
thing was ready for his embarkation. “I
sent,” said he, “the night before he
was to go, his portmanteau, and what
other luggage I thought he would have
occasion for, to the inn where the Harwich
stage puts up, and making him
be called up very early in the morning,
told him, he must go a little way out
of town with me, upon extraordinary
business:—he seemed very unwilling,
said he had appointed that morning to
meet a gentleman, and begged I would
delay the journey to the next day, or 
even till the afternoon. What caused
this backwardness, I cannot imagine,
for I think it was impossible he could
know my designs on this score; but,
whatever was in his head, I took care
to disappoint it: —I listened to none of
his excuses, nor trusted him out of my
sight, but forced him to go with me to
the coach, in which I had secured a
couple of places. He was horridly
shocked when he found where he was
going, and would fain have perswaded
me to repeal his banishment, as he called
it: —I laughed in my sleeve, but
took no notice of the real motive I had
for sending him away, and told him,
there was an absolute necessity for his
departure;—that I had a business of
the greatest importance at Rotterdam,
in which I could trust nobody but himself
to negotiate, and that he would
find, in his trunk, letters and other
papers, which would instruct him how
to act. 
“In fine,” continued the alderman, “I
went with him aboard, staid with
him till they were ready to weigh
anchor, then returned, and stood on
the beach till the ship sailed quite
out of sight, so that if my gentleman
had a thought of writing to his mistress, 
he had not the least opportunity for it.” 
He added, that he did not altogether deceive
his son, having, indeed, some affairs
to transact at Rotterdam, though they
were not of the mighty consequence he
had pretended; but which he had, by a private
letter to his agent there, ordered
should be made appear as intricate and
perplexed as possible, that the young gentleman's
return might be delayed as long
as there was any plausible excuse for detaining
him, without his seeing through
the reason of it. 
Mr. Goodman praised the alderman's
discretion in the whole conduct of this
business, and to atone for having been
prevailed upon to keep young Saving's
secret from him, offered to make interest
with a friend he had at the post-office, to
stop any letter should be directed for miss
Betsy Thoughtless, by the way of Holland; 
“by which means,” said he, “all
communication between the young
people will soon be put an end to; he
will grow weary of writing when he receives
no answers, and she of thinking
of him as a lover, when she finds he
ceases to tell her he is so.” 
The alderman was ready to hug his old
friend for this proposal, which, it is certain, 
he made in the sincerity of his heart,
for they no sooner parted, than he went
to the office, and fulfilled his promise. 
When he came home, in order to hinder
miss Betsy from expecting to hear any
thing more of mr. Saving, be told her he
had been treated by the alderman pretty
roughly, on account of the encouragement
had been given in his house to the
amorous addresses had been made to her
by his son; “and,” added he, “the old
man is so incensed against him, for
having a thought of that kind in your
favour, that he has sent him beyond
sea,—I know not to what part;— 
but it seems he is never to come back,
till he has given full assurances the liking
he has for you is utterly worn off.” 
“He might have spared himself the
pains,” said miss Betsy, blushing with
disdain, “his son could have informed
him, how little I was inclinable to listen
to any thing he said on the score of
love; and I myself, if he had asked me
the question, would have given him the
strongest assurances that words could
form, that if ever I changed my condition,
which heaven knows I am far
from thinking on as yet, I should 
never be prevailed upon to do it, by
any merits his son was possessed of.” 
Mr. Goodman congratulated her on the
indifference she expressed, and told her,
he hoped she would always continue in
the same humour, till an offer which promised
more satisfaction in marriage should
happen to be made. 
Nothing more was said on this head
but miss Betsy, on ruminating on what
mr. Goodman had related, easily imagined,
that the day in which he had been
sent away, was the same on which he had
appointed to meet her, and therefore excused
his not coming as a thing unavoidable; 
yet as she knew not the precaution
his father had taken, was not so ready to
forgive him for not sending a line to prevent
her waiting so long for him at the
habit-shop. She could not, however,
when she reflected on the whole tenour of
his deportment to her, think it possible
he should all at once become guilty of
wilfully omitting, what even common
good manners and decency required. She
soon grew weary, however, of troubling
herself about the matter, and a very few
days served to make her lose even the memory
of it. 