


Has somewhat more business in it than
the former. 

Though miss Betsy was very conscious
of the merits of mr. Trueworth,
and equally convinced of the
friendship her brother Francis had for
him, and had therefore doubted not, but
when that young gentleman should arrive,
he would reason strongly with her,
on the little regard she had paid to his
recommendations, or the advantages of
the alliance he had proposed; yet she did
not expect the satisfaction of their first
meeting would have been imbittered, by
a resentment, such, as it seemed to her,
he had testified on the occasion. 
She easily perceived the two brothers
had consulted together, before they came
to her, in what manner they should behave
towards her; and this she looked
upon as a sort of proof, that they intended
to assume an authority over her, to which
they had no claim. —‘The love I have
for them,’ said she to herself, ‘will always
make me take a pleasure in obliging 

them, and doing every thing they
desire of me; but they are intirely mistaken,
if they imagine it in their power
to awe me into compliance with their
injunctions.’ 
‘And yet,’ cried she again, ‘what
other aim than my happiness and interest
can they propose to themselves,
in desiring to have me under their direction? 
—Poor Frank has given me
proofs, that I am very dear to him,
and, I believe, my brother Thoughtless
is not wanting in natural affection for
me; why then should I reject the council
of two friends, whose sincerity there
is not a possibility of suspecting? — 
They know their sex, and the dangers
to which ours are exposed, by the artifices
of base designing men: —I have
had some escapes, which I ought always
to remember, enough to keep me from
falling into the like ugly accidents again; 
—how near was I to everlasting ruin, by
slighting the warning given me by mr.
Trueworth!’ 
This reflection bringing into her mind
many passages of her behaviour towards
that gentleman, she could not forbear
justifying his conduct, and condemning
her own:—‘I have certainly used him 

ill,’ pursued she, with a sigh, ‘and if
he should return, and forgive what is
past, I think I ought, in gratitude, to
reward his love!’ 
She was in this contemplating mood
when her servant told her, that mrs.
Modely had been to wait upon her, but
on hearing her brothers were with her,
went away, saying, she would come again,
which she now was, and begged to speak
with her. 
Miss Betsy was in this moment just
beginning to feel some sort of pleasure in
the idea of mr. Trueworth's renewing his
addresses, and was a little peevish at the
interruption;—she ordered, however,
that the woman should come up,— 
‘Well, mrs. Modely,’ said she, as soon
as she saw her enter, ‘what stuff have
you brought me now?’ 
‘Ah, charming miss Betsy,’ replied she,
‘you fine ladies, and great fortunes,
think you may do any thing with the
men:—poor sir Frederick will break
his heart, or run mad, that's to be
sure, if you don't send him a favourable
answer to this letter.’ —In speaking
these words, she delivered a letter to miss
Betsy, which that young lady opened 

with a careless air, and it contained these
high-flown lines: 

‘This humbly to be presented to the
most beautiful of all beauties, the
super-excellent miss Betsy
Thoughtless.
‘Adorable creature,
I am grieved to the very soul, to
hear you have any subject for affliction; 
but am very certain, that in being
deprived of your divine presence, I
endure a more mortal stab than any loss
you have sustained can possibly inflict. 
—I am consumed with the fire of my
passion:—I have taken neither repose,
nor food, since first I saw you:—I
have lived only on the idea of your
charms:—O! nourish me with the
substance! —Hide me in your bosom
from the soul fiend despair, that is just
ready to lay hold on me. 
‘The passion I am possessed of for you
is not like that of other men;—I cannot
wait the tedious forms of courtship; 
—there is no medium between death
and the enjoyment of you;—the circle
of your arms, or a cold leaden shroud:
—the one or the other must very shortly
be my portion. —But I depend upon 

the heaven of your mercy, and hope
you will permit me to pour forth the
abundance of my soul before you,—to
bask in the sunshine of your smiles, and
to try, at least, if no spark of that
amorous flame, which burns me up,
has darted upon you, and kindled you
into soft desires. 
‘O! if any part of my impatient fires,
by secret sympathy, should happily have
reached your breast, never was there a
pair so transcendently blest as we should
be. —The thought is rapture!—extacy
too big for words!—too mighty
for description!—and I must therefore,
for a few hours, defer any further
endeavours to convince you, —till when
I remain, 
‘Absorbed in the delightful image,
Dear quintessence of joy,
Your most devoted,
Most obsequious,
And most adoring vassal,
F. Fineer.’ 

In spite of the serious humour miss
Betsy was in, she could not read this
without bursting into a violent fit of
laughter; but soon composing herself,
‘If I had not seen the author of this 

epistle,’ said she, to mrs. Modely, ‘I
should have thought it had been sent
me by some school-boy, and was the
first essay of describing a passion he had
heard talk of, and was ambitious of
being supposed capable of feeling;— 
but sure,’ continued she, ‘the man
must be either mad, or most impudently
vain, to write to me, as if he imagined
I was in love with him, and would
have him on his first putting the
question to me.’ 
‘Ah, my dear madam,’ said mrs.
Modely, ‘do you consider, that a young
gentleman of ten thousand a year in
possession, as much more in reversion,
and the expectation of a coronet, is apt
to think he may have any body?’ — 
‘If he does he may find himself mistaken,’ 
replied miss Betsy haughtily, and then in
the same breath softening her voice, ‘but
are you sure,’ cried she, ‘that he has
so much?’ —‘Sure, madam!’ said
mrs. Modely, ‘aye, as sure as that I am
alive;—I have heard it from twenty
people:—they say, he has a house in
the country as big as a town, and above
fifty servants in it;—but he is but
just come to London, and has not had
time to settle his equipage as yet, but
he has bespoke the finest coach, and 

the genteelest chariot you ever saw,— 
all in a new taste, and perfectly French; 
—they are quite finished, all but the
painting, and that only waits till he
knows whether he may quarter your
arms or not.’ 
‘Bless me!’ cried miss Betsy, ‘does he
think to gain me in the time of painting a
coach?’ —‘Nay, I don't know,’ answered
mrs. Modely; ‘but I think such
an offer is not to be trifled with;—he
is violently in love with you, that is
certain:—he does not desire a penny
of your fortune, and will settle upon
you, notwithstanding, his whole estate,
if you require it.’ 
Miss Betsy made no answer, but paused
for a considerable time, and seemed, as
it were, in a profound resverie:—at last
coming out of it,—‘He is for doing
things in such a hurry,’ said she;—‘I
have seen him no more than once, and
scarce know what sort of a person he
is,—how then can I tell, whether I
ever shall be able to bring myself to
like him or not?’ 
‘You may give him leave to wait on
you however,’ cried the other. —Here
miss Betsy was again silent for some moments; 

but mrs. Modely repeating her
request, and enforcing it with some arguments,
—‘Well then,’ replied she,
‘I shall not go to church this afternoon,
and will see him if he comes;—but
dear Modely,’ continued she, ‘don't
let him assume on the permission I give
him,—tell him, you had all the difficulty
in the world to prevail on me to
do it; for, in my mind, he already
hopes too much, and fears too little,
for a man so prodigiously in love.’ — 
Mrs. Modely on this assured her, she
might trust to her management, and took
her leave, very well pleased with the success
of her negociation. 
We often see the love of grandeur prevail
over persons of the ripest years, and
knowledge. —What guilty lengths have
not some men run to attain it, even
among those, who have been esteem'd the
wisest, and most honest of their time,
when once a title, a bit of ribband cross
their shoulder, or any other gew-gaw
trophy of the favour of a court has been
hung out, how has their virtue veered and
yielded to the temptation? —It is not,
therefore, to be wondered at, that a young
heart, unexperienced in the fallacy of
shew, should be dazzled with the tinsel
glitter:—the good sense of miss Betsy 

made her see, that this last triumph of her
charms, was a vain, silly and affected coxcomb; 
but then this coxcomb had a vast
estate, and the enchanting ideas of the
figure she should make, if in possession of
it, in some moments out-balanced the
contempt she had of the owner's person,
and understanding. 
The glare of pomp and equipage, the
pleasure of having it in her power of
taking the upper-hand of those of her own
rank, and of vying with those of a more
exalted one, it is certain had very potent
charms for her; but then there was a delicacy
in her nature, that would not suffer
the desire of attaining it to be altogether
predominant:—the thoughts of
being sacrificed to a man for whom it
was impossible for her to have either love,
or esteem;—to be obliged to yield that
through duty, which inclination shuddered
at, struct a sudden damp to all the rising
fires of pride and ambition in her soul,
and convinced her, that greatness would
be too dearly purchased at the expence of
peace. 
In fine, she consider'd on these things so
long, that she grew weary of considering
at all, so resolved to let the matter rest,— 
give herself no farther pain,—leave to 

chance the disposal of her fate, and treat
all her lovers as she hitherto had done,
only as subjects of mere amusement. 
She was now beginning to please herself
with the thoughts how mr. Munden,
whom she expected that evening, would
behave at sight of his new rival, and how
sir Frederick Fineer would bear the presence
of a man, whom she was resolved
to shew him had the same pretensions as
himself;—but tho' she happened to be
disappointed in her expectations in this,
she did not want other sufficient matter
for her diversion. 
Sir Frederick, to shew the impatience of
his passion, came very soon after dinner;— 
she received him with as grave an air as
she could possibly put on, but it was not
in her power, nor indeed would have been
in any one's else, to continue it for any
long time:—his conversation was much
of a piece with his letters, and his actions
even more extravagant. 
Never was such an Orlando Furioso in
love;—on his first approach, he had indeed
the boldness to take one of her
hands and put it to his mouth, but afterwards
whatever he said to her was on his
knees;—he threw himself prostrate on 

the carpet before her, grasp'd her feet, and
alternately kissed each shoe, with the same
vehemence, as he could have done her lips,
and as much devotion as the pilgrims at
Rome do the Pantosle of his Holiness. — 
Darts! —Flames! —Immortal joys! — 
Death! —Despair! —Heaven! —Hell!
ever-during woe, and all the epithets in the
whole vocabulary of Cupid's legend, begun
and ended every sentence of his discourse. 
—This way of entertaining her
was so extraordinary, and so new to her,
that she could not forbear sometimes returning
it with a smile, which, in spite of
her endeavours to preserve a serious deportment,
diffused a gaiety through all
her air. 
Those who had told sir Ferderick, that
the way to please this lady, was to sooth
her vanity, either knew not, or had forgot
to inform him, she had also an equal share
of good sense; so that mistaking the
change he had observed in her looks for
an indication of her being charmed with
his manner of behaviour, he acted and reacted
over all his sopperies, and felt as
much secret pride in repeating them, as a
celebrated singer on the stage does in
obeying the voice of an encore. 

It is probable, however, that he would
have continued in them long enough to
have tired miss Betsy so much, as to have
made her give him some demonstrative
mark, that the pleasantry he had seen her
in proceeded rather from derision than satisfaction,
if, divine service being ended,
some ladies, as they came from church,
had not called to visit her. —The sound
of company coming up stairs, obliged
him to break off in the middle of a rhapsody,
which he, doubtless, thought very
fine, and he took his leave somewhat
hastily, telling her, the passion with which
he was inflamed, was too fierce to be restrained
within those bounds which she
might expect before witnesses, and that
he would wait on her the next day, when
he hoped she would be more at liberty to
receive his vows. 
Eased of the constraint which decency,
and the respect which she thought due to
his quality, had laid her under while he
was there, her natural sprightliness burst
with double force. —Mr. Munden, who
came in soon after, felt the effects of it:
—he indeed enjoyed a benefit he little
dreamt of. —The absurd conversation of
a rival he as yet knew nothing of,
served to make all he said sound more 

agreeable than ever in the ears of his
mistress:—in this excess of good humour
she not only made a handsome apology
for the treatment he had received at
mrs. Modely's, a thing she had never before
vouchsafed to do to any of her lovers,
but also gave him an invitation to
'squire her to a country-dancing, in which
she had engaged to make one the ensuing
night. 
