

Relates how, in the compass of an hour, Jenny met with two surprising adventures of very different kinds; and the manner in which she behaved in them, with some other no less extraordinary particulars, which the reader will doubtless be puzzled to know the meaning of. 
After what had pass'd between Jenny and sir Robert, that gentleman thought it would be in vain to prosecute his suit; his friends also, to whom he imparted the conversation he had with her, were of the same opinion; and the report of Jemmy's inconstancy began now to lose much of the credit it had obtain'd among them. 
Sir Robert, whose esteem for Jenny was not at all diminish'd by her late behaviour towards him, tho' it had made him endeavour to overcome his passion for her, omitted nothing in his power to reconcile himself to her good graces; which he at length effectually did, by giving her the strongest and reiterated assurances that he would never more attempt to interrupt that affection, which he now seem'd to believe mutually existing between her and mr. Jessamy. 
The same easy freedom of conversation, which had reign'd among this amiable company since their first coming down to Bath, was now again restored; but it lasted not long, accidents on accidents, in which every one had a share, immediately fell out, and turn'd all into discord and confusion. 
Among the croud of guests who were every day at the tea-table of lady Speck, there was a gentleman named Celandine; he had but lately return'd from making the tour of Europe, and like Clodio in the play, pretended to be acquainted with all the intrigues of the several courts he had been in; he was gay, spiritous, had some wit, and abundance of assurance; which, with the affectation of great good humour, made him pass for a very agreeable companion, and particularly entitled him to the favour of the ladies; many of whom thought the loss of reputation no disgrace when forfeited on his account. 
He was certainly very much indebted to nature for a handsome person, and to education for all those modish accomplishments which with unthinking people are apt to cast a lustre even to the worst qualities of the mind; his example was at least a proof of this melancholy truth; for it would have puzzled even his best friends and greatest admirers, if ask'd the question, to have found any one virtue in him to compensate for a thousand vices; he was vain to an excess, ungrateful, insincere, incapable either of love or friendship; a contemner both of morality and religion; in fine, he was a libertine profess'd. 
His family was ancient and honourable, and from thence descended to him a very large estate, which, without doing one generous or benevolent action, he seem'd to take abundance of pains to get rid of by the most unheard of, and ridiculous extravagancies and vagaries. 
The reader will perhaps imagine, that a character such as this, deserved not so particular a description; nor should I have troubled him with it had there not been an absolute necessity of my doing so, for reasons which will presently appear. 
Jenny was at home alone one day; lady Speck and miss Wingman were gone into the walks, but some letters she had received from London, which required immediate answers, had hinder'd her from accompanying them; having finish'd what she had to do before they return'd, she went down into the garden, in order to refresh her spirits after the fatigue they had undergone, by her writing so much longer than she was accustom'd at one time. 
She took a short promenade in the great alley; but being in a contemplative mood, retired into the arbour at the farther end of it; where, as the reader may remember, the performers in lord Huntley's interlude had been conceal'd: there could not, indeed, be a more proper scene for indulging meditation, and she was just beginning to fall into a very agreeable resvery, when on a sudden Celandine appear'd at the entrance of the leafy bower, and accosted her with these lines, translated by himself, from a French poet: 
So look'd Pomona when Vertumnus came,
And with immortal raptures clasp'd the dame.
As great a favourite as this young gallant was with most of the women of his acquaintance, Jenny had never been able to endure the sight of him, on account of his pert confident behaviour; but his presence was now doubly unwelcome to her, as there was nobody but herself to entertain him, or to bear a part in the impertinent freedoms of his conversation, and she could not forbear giving him a look which might have dash'd the boldness of any other man, and made him quit the place. 
But Celandine, as has been before observ'd, and Jenny in this visit experienced to her cost, was none of those who were capable of being aw'd either by looks or words; 'full of his own merit, and puff'd up with frequent successes among the fair, he thought the whole sex at his devotion; that no woman could withstand his charms, and that the coldness Jenny had always treated him with was no more than an affectation of modesty in public, which on his making the first overtures of a passion for her would vanish in an instant, and she would drop into his arms as rain does from the firmament. 
‘How kind is fortune to me, said he, approaching her, in giving me this opportunity of speaking in private to my angel.’ ‘If you are indebted to fortune for no greater favours, replied Jenny, you have but small cause to thank her bounty: But pray, continued she, how came you to be out of the walks this fine day, when all the world are there? 
‘I might ask you the same question, answered he, and equally wonder why I find the enchanting miss Jessamy here, mopeing in a solitary shade, and neglecting to increase the number of her conquests, and add new triumphs to her eyes;—but I'll tell you, pursued he, catching hold of her hand,—it was fate,—propitious fate, ordain'd it so for both our happiness;—some kind good natured Demon put it into your head to stay at home, and in mine to seek you here.’ 
He concluded these words with throwing one of his arms about her neck, and began to kiss her with vehemence: hard is it to say, whether surprise or rage, at being treated in this manner, was most predominant in her soul;—she broke from him, and starting some paces back, ‘What means this rudeness? cried she,’—Give not so harsh a name, rejoin'd he, to the emotions of the most tender passion that ever was.’ —‘A passion for me, said she, in a voice full of disdain.’ Yes,—for you, replyed he, staring her in the face,—Did my eyes never tell you the secret of my heart?’ ‘No, really, said she,—I never examine into the mysterious dialect, nor desire to have it explain'd.’ 
With these words she was going hastily out of the arbour, but the nimble Celandine at one jump got between her and the entrance, and in spite of all the resistance she could make, forced her back to the bench where he had found her sitting. 
‘No more prudery, cry'd he,—this pretended coyness,—we are now alone, and the means of being so are not easy to be found in such a place as Bath;—do not then, by this unseasonable reserve, make me lose the golden glorious opportunity that Heaven has sent, of giving you the most substantial proofs how much my soul adores you,—how much I prize you above that Heaven itself. 
It is as impossible to paint the distraction Jenny was in, as it was for her to express it, or relieve herself from the impending danger to which she was reduced. They were at too great a distance from the house for her cries to alarm the family;—he held her fast down on the seat, with his hands on both her shoulders, she could only call him monster, villain;—while he, regardless of her reproaches, utter'd things which made her modest heart shudder at the sound of. 
To what horrid freedoms he might have proceeded is uncertain; a sudden rustling among the branches, which twined about the latticed arbour, made him relax the hold he had taken of his fair captive, and turn to see what had occasion'd this interruption. Jenny lost not the instant of her release, but rather flew than ran out of that detested place, when, just at the entrance, she was met by a woman, or to speak more properly, a fury, arm'd with a penknife, which she had doubtless plunged into the bosom of the defenceless fair, if Celandine, who was close behind, had not been very quick in wresting it from her hand. 
‘What fiend, thou cursed creature, cry'd Celandine, has prompted thy malice to attempt this execrable deed?’ ‘What fiend but thyself,—thou worse than devil,’ answer'd she, almost foaming at the mouth with passion. Jenny stay'd not to hear what further pass'd between them, but ran screaming down the alley; lady Speck and miss Wingman, accompany'd by mr. Lovegrove, enter'd the house at that very moment, and were the first who came to her assistance. 
Never were three people in greater consternation than they; Jenny, with arms extended and garments all disorder'd, crying out for help;—Celandine at some distance, with the utmost confusion in his looks and at his feet a woman, who seem'd either dead or in a swoon;—in vain they inquired the occasion of all this;—Jenny was incapable of speaking, by the fright which yet hung upon her spirits;—the intended murderess by the condition she was in, and Celandine by his guilt. 
Mr. Lovegrove, who had more presence of mind than any of the rest on this occasion, finding no answers were given to their interrogatories, stept forward to convince himself if the person who lay upon the earth were alive or dead; and this action of his 'twas that probably recover'd Celandine the use of his tongue; but the first and only token he gave of it, was to say, it was a mad woman, who had some how or other gained admittance; and to desire the servants might be order'd to carry her out of the house. 
Mr. Lovegrove having found the person he spoke of in this manner was only in a fainting fit, cry'd out, ‘Whatever she is, her figure, as well as the present condition she is in, seems to demand rather compassion than contempt.’ —On this lady Speck and her sister ran to assist the charitable endeavour he was making for her recovery: but Jenny still keept at a good distance; and Celandine, who, for all his impudence, was not provided with fit answers to the questions which were like to be put to him, took the opportunity of their being thus engaged to sneak off, without giving any notice of his going. 
By this time the woman of the house, with all the servants, were got into the garden, and among them the unhappy stranger was carried into a parlour and laid upon a couch, where proper remedies being apply'd, she came a little to herself. 
