
Treats of divers things, some of little, some of greater consequence; but none that will afford much matter of entertainment to those who read for no other end than merely to divert themselves. 
Every passion of the human mind gains double energy by our own endeavours to conceal it;—like fire, which being smother'd for a time bursts out at last with greater violence;—Jenny, who had behav'd with so much seeming resolution while Jemmy was with her, could not see him turn his back to leave her; she knew not for how long, and on so dreadful an occasion, without falling into the extremest agonies;—all her moderation, almost all her reason, forsook her at this juncture. 
—‘He is gone! cried she, he is gone!—perhaps for ever, and I am left to waste my youth in unavailing grief:—but what of that,—selfish that I am,—in comparison of him; how 
small a share of pity is my due? —His single loss is all I have to mourn, while he, dear unhappy wanderer, is driven at once from his native country,—from love,—from friendship,—fortune, without any other companion than the dire reflection of having embrued his hands in the blood of a fellow creature. —Belpine was wicked, continued she, but justice might have overtaken him without the guilt of him he had wrong'd. —Oh what is honour! —this impatience of indignities, as the poet calls it:’ 
This raging fit of virtue in the soul,
This painful burthen, which great minds must bear,
Obtain'd with danger, and possess'd with fear.
This was the manner in which the generous and truly amiable Jenny lamented the accident that had happen'd;—she wept not for the absence of her lover, but for the occasion that enforced it;—such was the delicacy of her soul, that his real infidelity would not have inflicted on her the thousandth part of those agonies she now endured on his having so fatally resented the aspersion; and so dear was he to her, that she would have wish'd 
to see him even unfaithful rather than unhappy. 
It might perhaps be too affecting, tho' all that could be said would be far short of the truth of what she suffer'd during this whole cruel night;—the morning, however, brought her some consolation;—she heard that Belpine was not dead, and to find that he had not been killed upon the spot, as Jemmy had imagined, affording her some hopes that his wounds might not be mortal, gave her as much satisfaction as a person in her circumstances was capable of feeling. 
The whole adventure being presently blaz'd abroad, all her friends, and more of her acquaintance than, at that time, she wish'd to see, come to visit her, and make their compliments of condolance;—among the number of the former were lady Speck, miss Wingman, mr. Lovegrove, and sir Robert Manley. 
After having express'd their concern for the accident, as it might give mr. Jessamy much trouble; especially if his antagonist should die, they told her that lord Huntley was to give them a concert that evening upon the river, and would fain have persuaded her to have accompanied them, in order, as they said and really meant, to divert 
those melancholy thoughts which could not but rise in her mind on what had happen'd. 
It is not to be imagined that she gave the least ear to so unseasonable an invitation; but they continuing to press her with a great deal of earnestness to accept it;—‘Oh,’ said she, bursting into tears, which hitherto she had restrain'd in their presence,—‘can you think me capable of making one in a party of pleasure, while the liberty, perhaps the life of him ordain'd to be my husband is in danger? —No,—till I know him safe, music would be discord to my ears, and every thing that gives joy to others add to my affliction.’ 
On hearing this, sir Robert Manley could not forbear breaking into a kind of rhapsody,—‘Happy mr. Jessamy, cried he, by his very misfortunes rendered yet more blest in the proofs of such exalted tenderness.’ 
Mr. Lovegrove said little less in praise of her constancy and generosity; and the ladies afterwards gave over urging her any farther on the subject they had done, but employ'd the whole time they staid 
with her in discourses more suitable to her present humour. 
But what was most of all obliging to her, was a promise the two gentlemen made of taking care to inform themselves, from day to day, of the true condition of Belpine's wounds, and letting her have an exact account, to the end she might transmit it to mr. Jessamy, and enable him the better to judge what course he had to take. 
Several others of her acquaintance, who hearing what had happen'd, came to visit her on that occasion, and those among them who were most apprehensive on Jemmy's account, forbore to speak their sentiments in her presence; but, on the contrary, all joined to comfort her with hopes which they were far from entertaining themselves;—so that she pass'd this night with somewhat more tranquility than she had done the preceding one. 
Between her broken slumbers, however, a thousand melancholy reflections return'd upon her mind;—her thoughts pursued the dear unhappy fugitive in his wanderings, they painted him to her troubled imaginations in the most forlorn 
and pitious moving figure, thus traveling by night, and exposed to dangers almost equal to those from which he fled;—nor when her eyes, doubly fatigued with tears and watching, were closed again in sleep, did the sad ideas intirely quit her head. 
The next day brought with it something which threw her into fresh agitations,—she was no sooner up than her maid presented her with a letter, which had been left for her by a footman sometime before she had quitted her bed, she having lain that morning longer than was her usual custom. 
She was a little surprised as not knowing the hand on the superscription; but, on her opening it, found it from miss Chit, and contain'd the following lines; 
To miss Jessamy.
Madam,
“I am extremely sorry to send you any intelligence that may add to the disquiet I am sensible you are already under; but there are some cases in which it is absolutely necessary that even the most painful truths should be reveal'd;—you will find this relating to mr. Jessamy, is so; and therefore 
do not condemn, as an over officiousness in me, what I now take the liberty to communicate. 
“One of the surgeons who attends Belpine has declared, that, according to the best of his judgment, his patient cannot live; on which a search-warrant is issued out against mr. Jessamy, it being already known that he has absconded from his house. 
“This, madam, my father heard last night at a coffee-house; and moreover, that the people of the tavern, as well as a gentleman who it seems was with Belpine when he was met by mr. Jessamy, have offer'd to depose that he took him aside, prevail'd with him to leave his company, and go with him into a private room, where he soon after left him for dead. 
“I cannot pretend to any understanding in such matters; but they say, that in the eye of the law these circumstances will make the affair appear very black on the side of mr. Jessamy, and that the fact will not be consider'd as a rencounter, or a fair duel, but as a downright premeditated murder. 

“As I cannot suppose that to whatever place mr. Jessamy is retired you are ignorant of it, I thought it highly proper to give you this intimation, to the end you may apprise him of the greatness of his danger, and warn him to keep extremely close;—indeed I should never have forgiven myself, if by neglecting to do so any worse accident, than what has already happen'd, should ensue;—but I will trouble you no farther, than to assure you that I am, 
“With all due respect,
Madam,
Your most obedient,
Humble servant,
S. Chit. 
“P. S. My poor father is troubled beyond measure at this event, and swears that, old as he is, if he had sooner been convinced of the baseness of Belpine, which till now he never was, he would have taken upon himself to punish it.” 


Jenny had but just finish'd the reading this epistle, when she was convinced of the truth of the intelligence it contain'd,—the officers of justice came in,—produced their warrant, and one of them very civilly intreated her leave to do what, by virtue of their commission, they were impowered to have done without it. 
She seem'd a little surprised notwithstanding, and said, with an air of some resentment, that it seemed very odd to her that they should come to search her lodgings for a gentleman;—to which another of them, more surly than he who had spoke first, replied,—that they had orders to search not only her lodgings, but all that house, and every other which mr. Jessamy had been known to frequent. 
She said no more, but suffer'd them to pass wherever they would, and they discharged their duty with so much diligence, as to leave no place unlook'd into, that was big enough to have concealed a much less person than him they sought for. 
Tho' Jenny had nothing to apprehend on this score, yet the light of these men, and the errand they came upon, 
was an extreme shock to her; but she presently received another yet greater, when the person with whom she boarded told her, without considering the consequence of what he said, that he was credibly informed that notice had been sent to all the ports to prevent mr. Jessamy from making his escape out of the kingdom. 
These words struck her with such a horror, that she was very near falling into fits; and it was not in the power of all that both he and his wife could say afterwards to pacify her grief, or to make her be persuaded that mr. Jessamy must needs be in Calais before any orders to stop him could arrive at Dover. 
They remonstrated to her, that if he travelled all night, as it was not to be doubted but he did, he would certainly reach the port by the next day at noon; and as there was always some one or other of the packets ready, might embark the same hour he came;—‘So that, my dear miss, cried he merrily, you may depend upon it your lover long before now has been regaling himself with good Burgundy, and some Quelque-chose or other, a-la-mode de France.’ 
She could not help allowing the reasonableness of his arguments;—but imagination, that creative faculty, which has the power to raise us to the utmost pinnacle of happiness, or sink us into the lowest depths of despair, form'd so many accidents which might retard her dear Jemmy's journey, and render him too late to avoid the pursuit made after him, that she could not think she ought to flatter herself with the hopes of his being safe till she was positively assured he was so. 
