

Gives an account of a farther, and
more laudable motive, to induce mr.
Trueworth to put off his intended
journey into the country. 
Though it is impossible for a man
of sense to have any real love for a
woman, whom he cannot esteem, yet mr.
Trueworth found enough in the agreeable
person and sprightly humour of miss
Flora, to dissipate those uneasy reflections,
which, in spite of him, had lurked in his
mind, on miss Betsy's account: —the
amour with this fond girl afforded him a
pleasing amusement for a time, and,
without filling his heart with a new passion,
cleared it of those remains of his
former one, which he had taken so much
pains to extirpate. 
Whenever he thought of miss Betsy,
as it was impossible a young lady, he once
had loved with so much tenderness, should
not sometimes come into his thoughts, it
was only with a friendly concern for her
imagined fall. —‘It is no wonder,’ would
he often say to himself, ‘that so young, 
and lovely a creature, under the tuition
of a woman of lady Mellasin's character,
and the constant companion of one of
miss Flora's disposition, endued with
charms to excite the warmest wishes,
and unprovided with sufficient arms for
her defence, should have yielded to the
temptations of an unwarrantable flame.’ 
—In fine, he pitied her, but no more. 
Thus entirely freed from all prepossession,
and his heart almost in the same
situation, as before he never knew what
it was to love, he was easily perswaded
by his friends to give over all thoughts of
going into the country, and stay to partake,
in a moderate way, those pleasures
of the town, which the many uneasy moments
he had sustained, during his courtship
with miss Betsy, had kept him hitherto
from having any relish for. 
But this state of indifference lasted not
long,—an object presented itself to him,
inspiring him with a passion, which had
so much of reason for its guide, as made
him think it rather his glory, than his
misfortune, to be a second time enslaved. 
Among all the friends and acquaintance
he had in town, there was none he
more valued and esteemed, than sir Bazil 

Loveit:—they had been for some time
inseparable companions; but accidents,
either on the one side or the other, having
hindered their meeting for several
days, mr. Trueworth went one morning
to visit him at his house:—he found
him at home, but the hall so incumbered
with trunks and boxes, that there was
scarce a passage to the parlour door. 
—‘Welcome, my dear friend,’ said sir Bazil,
who, having seen him from a window,
run down stairs to receive him; 
‘you find me in a strange disorder here,
but I have got a couple of women out
of the country, and that sex, I think,
like a general officer, can never move
without a waggon load of trumpery at
their tail.’ —‘What, married!’ cried
mr. Trueworth. —‘No faith,’ said the
other, ‘but the arrival of two sisters last
night from Staffordshire, gives me a
sort of specimen of the hurry I am to
expect when I become a husband.’ 
‘The hurry,’ said mr. Trueworth,
‘you seem to complain of, must needs
be a very agreeable one, and I heartily
congratulate you upon it. —A single
man, like you; makes but a very solitary
figure, in a great wild house;— 
these ladies will fill the vacuum, and
give a double life to your family.’ 
—‘Nay,’ resumed sir Bazil, ‘I shall not
have them long with me,—they hate
London, and never come but once in
two years, to buy cloaths, and see
fashions;—besides one of them is
married, and the other so fond of her
sister, that I believe she would not quit
her to be a dutchess. —Indeed it is not
much to be wondered at, our mother
dying when she was very young, Harriot,
for so she is called, was brought
up under her sister, who is eight years
older than herself, and they never have
been asunder two days in their lives.’ 
Mr. Trueworth then expatiated on the
amiableness of such an harmony between
persons of the same blood; to which sir
Bazil replied, that it was more than ordinarily
fortunate for his sisters; —‘for,’ 
said he, ‘the elder of them being married; 
just before my mother's death, my
father committed to her the care of the
younger, as she was reckoned a woman
of greater prudence than might be expected
from her years. —My brother
Wellair, for that is the name of the
gentleman she married, though a very
good husband in the main, is a great
sportsman, takes rather too much delight
in his hawks and hounds, and
gives his wife but little of his company 
in the day, so that if it were not for
Harriot she would pass her time uncomfortably
enough. —In fine, the
younger is improved by the lessons of
the elder, and the elder diverted by the
sprightliness and good humour of the
younger.’ 
Sir Bazil, who had an extreme regard
for his sisters, could not forbear entertaining
mr. Trueworth on this subject all
the time he was there, and at parting
told him, he would not ask him to stay
dinner that day, because he supposed they
would be very busy in unpacking their
things, and setting themselves in order,
but engaged him to come on the following. 
Mr. Trueworth thought no farther on
what had passed, than to remember his
promise, which he accordingly fulfilled. 
—Sir Bazil received him with open arms,
and conducted him into the dining-room,
where the two ladies were sitting:— 
they were both very handsome:—the
elder was extremely graceful, and, at first
glance, appeared to be the most striking
beauty of the two; but on a second, the
younger had the advantage:—she was
not altogether so tall as her sister, nor 
had a skin of that dazzling whiteness,
but her shape was exquisite,—her complexion
clear,—her eyes sparkling,— 
all her features perfectly regular, and accompanied
with a sweetness, which had
in it somewhat irresistably attractive. 
After the first compliments were over,
neither of them lost, by their manner of
conversation, any part of that admiration
which their eyes had gained. —Mrs.
Wellair talked pretty much, yet so agreeably,
that no body could be tired of
hearing her:—miss Harriot spoke much
less, but all she said discovered a delicacy
of sentiment, and a judgment far above
her years. —Sir Bazil had a large estate,
he lived up to the height of it, had a very
elegant taste, and in complaisance to his
sisters, as well as to his friend, who had
never dined with him before since he set
up housekeeping, had taken care that
day to omit nothing in his bill of fare,
that could excite, or gratify, the most
luxurious appetite; yet it was the wit,
spirit, and good humour of the company,
especially of miss Harriot, which,
to mr. Trueworth, made the most agreeable
part of the entertainment. 
When the desert was over, and the
healths of absent friends toasted in Tokay
and Frontiniac, they all adjourned
into the drawing-room, where coffee and
tea were soon after brought in;—mrs. 
Wellair having been advised by her physicians
to refrain the use of any of these
liquors, on account of some disorder she
had complained of, took this opportunity
of desiring leave to retire, in order
to acquaint her husband, it being postnight,
with her safe arrival in town. 
Agreeable as her conversation was,
mr. Trueworth found no miss of her, as
the lovely Harriot was left behind:— 
on the contrary, he was rather rejoiced,
in the hope she would now give her
tongue a greater latitude than she had
done in the presence of one, whom he
easily perceived, she looked upon as her
superior in understanding, as well as
years; and to provoke her to it, artfully
introduced some discourse on the
pleasures of the town, and said to sir
Bazil, it seemed to him a kind of miracle,
that so young and beautiful a lady,
as miss Harriot, could content herself
with the obscurity of a country life. — 
‘Few of her age, indeed,’ replied sir 
Bazil, ‘would choose to live in the
manner she does, but though I should,
perhaps, not be of the same way of
thinking, if I were a woman, and in her
place, yet I cannot but say, my reason
approves of her conduct in this point.’ 
‘London,’ said she, ‘is a very magnificent,
opulent city, and those who
have their lot cast to live in it, may,
doubtless, find sufficient to content
them; but as for those amusements,
which you gentlemen call the pleasures
of the town, and which so many people
take every winter such long journies
merely to enjoy, I can see nothing in
them, which a reasonable person may
not very well dispense with the want
of.’ 
‘What think you of the court, madam?’ 
cried mr. Trueworth. —‘As
of a place I would always choose to
avoid, replied she;—I heartily pity
the fatigue of those, who are obliged
to attend, and am tempted to laugh at
the stupidity of those, who undertake
it without necessity. —I am amazed to
think how any one of common sense
can be at so great an expence for rich
cloaths, to go to a place where she 
must suffer as great pain in shewing
them. —Bless me! to stand for two or
three hours together, mute as a fish,— 
upright as an arrow, and when the scene
is over, walk backward like a crab,
curtsying at every step, though their
legs are so tired, they are scarce able to
go through the ceremony.’ 
‘A masquerade then,’ resumed mr.
Trueworth, willing to try her farther,
‘what say you madam to a masquerade? 
I hope you will allow no freedom of
behaviour is wanting there.’ —‘I
should like a masquerade extremely,’ 
answered she, ‘if conducted in the same
manner I have been told they are in
Italy, and some other places, where
only persons of condition are admitted,
and none presumes to say that under a
vizard, which he either would, or ought
to be ashamed of, when it is pluck'd
off;—but the venal ones you have
here, are my utter detestation;—they
seem to me to licence, under a shew of
innocent diversion, not only folly, but
all kind of prophaneness, and indecency.’ 
‘It must be owned, madam,’ said mr.
Trueworth, ‘that your sentiments on 
both these subjects are extremely just,
but you can have no such objection
against a play, or opera.’ —‘No, sir,’ 
answered she, ‘I look upon a good play
as one of the most improving, as well
as agreeable entertainments, a thinking
mind can take:—and as for an opera,’ 
—‘Aye sister,’ cried sir Bazil, interrupting
her, ‘the opera,—take care what
you say of the opera;—my friend
here is a passionate lover of musick,
and if you utter one syllable against his
favourite science, you will certainly pass
in his opinion for a stoic,’—‘I should
deserve it,’ said she, ‘and be in reality
as insensible as that sect of philosophers
affect to be, if I were not capable of
being touched by the charms of harmony.’ 
‘Then, madam,’ said mr. Trueworth,
there are two of the pleasures of London,
which are so happy to receive
you approbation.’ —‘Not only my approbation,’ 
replied she, ‘but my applause. 
—I am, indeed, a very great
admirer of both, yet can find ways to
make myself easy, without being present
at either, and, at the distance of a
hundred miles, enjoy in theory all the 
satisfaction the representation could afford.’ 
‘This is somewhat extraordinary, indeed
madam,’ cried mr. Trueworth; 
‘be so good as to let us know by what
method.’ —‘It is this, sir,’ answered she; 
‘—as for the plays,—I have a very
good collection of the old ones by me,
and have all the new ones sent down to
me as they come out;—when I was
last in London, I was several times at
the theatre,—I observed how the actors
and actresses varied their voices and gestures,
according to the different characters
they appeared in on the stage;— 
and thus, whilst I am reading any play,
am enabled to judge pretty near how it
shews in representation. —I have, indeed,
somewhat more difficulty in bringing
the opera home to me, yet I am so
happy, as to be able to procure a shadow
of it at least;—we have two or
three gentlemen in the neighbourhood,
who play to great perfection on the
violin, and several ladies, who have
very pretty voices, and some skill in
music;—my sister touches the bassviol
finely, and I play a little on the
harpsichord;—we have all our parts
in score before us, which we execute 
to the best of our power:—it serves,
however, to divert ourselves, and those
friends who think it worth their while
to come to hear us.’ 
Mr. Trueworth cried out, in a kind
of rapture, as soon as she had done speaking,
—‘Who would not think himself
happy to be one of the audience at such
a performance?’ —He was going on,
but mrs. Wellair returned, on which he
directed the compliments he was about
to make miss Harriot, equally to the
other;—which she returned with a great
deal of politeness. —The conversation
afterwards turned on different subjects,
and was very entertaining;—some other
company coming in, mr. Trueworth
would have taken leave, but sir Bazil
would not permit him,—he stayed the
whole evening, and when he went home,
carried with him such an idea of the
lovely Harriot's perfections, that scarce
any consideration would have been powerful
enough to have made him quit the
town, while she continued in it. 