

Is the better for being short. 
Miss Flora retired to her chamber,
indeed, not to employ herself in the
manner she pretended, but to give a
loose to passions more inordinate and outrageous,
than it would naturally be believed
could have taken possession of so
young a heart. 
But it is now high time to let the
reader see into the secret springs, which
set her wicked wit in motion, and induced 
her to act in the manner she had
done. 
Through the whole course of the preceding
pages, many hints have been given,
that the inclinations of this young lady
were far from being unblameable, and it
will not seem strange, that a person of
the disposition she has all along testified,
should envy and malign those charms she
every day saw so much extolled, and preferred
above her own; but we do not
ordinarily find one, who all gay and free,
like her, and who various times, and
for various objects, had experienced those
emotions which we call love, should, all
at once, be inspired with a passion no
less serious, than it was violent, for a
person, who never made the least addresses
to her on that account. 
Yet so in effect it was:—mr. Trueworth
had been but a very few times in
her company, before she began to entertain
desires for her fair friend. —Whenever
she had an opportunity of speaking
to him alone, she made him many advances,
which he either did not, or would
not interpret in the sense she meant them. 
—This coldness, instead of abating, but
the more inflamed her wishes, and looking
on the passion he had for miss Betsy, 
as the only impediment to the gratification
of her inclinations, she curst his constancy,
and the beauties which excited it. 
—So true is that observation of mr.
Dryden, 

‘Love! various minds does variously inspire;
‘He stirs in gentle natures gentle fires,
‘Like that of incense on the altar laid;
‘But raging flames tempestuous souls invade.
‘A fire which ev'ry windy passion blows,
‘With pride it mounts, and with revenge it glows.’

Miss Flora was not of a temper, either
to bear the pangs of hopeless love, in silent
grief, or to give way too readily to
dispair. —In spite of the indifference she
found herself treated with by mr. Trueworth,
she was not without hope, that if
she could by any means occasion a disunion
between him and miss Betsy, he would
then be brought to cast his eyes on her,
and return her flame with some degree of
ardency. 
It was for this end she had taken so
much pains in endeavouring to perswade
miss Betsy, either to write, or suffer her 
to go, to mr. Staple, in order, as she
pretended, to undeceive that gentleman
in his opinion, that she was in love with
mr. Trueworth; but her intentions, in
reality, were to make him believe, that
he himself was the favoured person, and
had much the advantage over his rival
in the affections of his mistress. —This
she doubted not would make him quit
his resolution of going into the country,
and encourage him to renew his courtship
with the same fervency as ever. — 
The pride she knew miss Betsy took in a
multiplicity of lovers, and the equality
with which she had carried herself between
him and mr. Trueworth, and which
probably she would continue, seemed to
afford her a fair prospect of giving mr.
Trueworth so much cause of discontent, as
to make him break off with a woman,
who after what had passed made no distinction
between him and the person he
had twice vanquished in the field. —She
knew it would, at least, create a good
deal of perplexity among them, and delay,
if not totally prevent, the completion
of what she so much dreaded. 
But this scheme being rendered abortive,
by the seasonable discovery miss
Betsy had made of her perfidiousness, she
set her wits to work for some other new 
invention, and believing that miss Betsy's
pride would immediately take fire on the
least suspicion of any insult being offered,
either to her beauty or reputation, procured
an agent to write the above inserted
letter;—the effect of which has been already
shewn. 
This disappointment was the more
grievous to her, as she had so little expected
it:—she broke the sticks of her
fan, tore every thing that came in her
way,—flew about the room, like a princess
in a tragedy;—wanting the means
of venting the rage she was possessed of
in great things, she exercised it in small. 
—A fine petticoat of miss Betsy's happening
to hang on the back of a chair,
she threw a standish of ink upon it, as if
by accident; and it is no breach of charity
to believe, would have served the
owner in a much worse manner, if her
power had been equal to her will, and she
could have done it without danger to herself. 
To add to the fury and distraction of
her mind, continuing still in her chamber,
and happening to be pretty near the
window, she saw miss Betsy, miss Mabel,
and mr. Trueworth pass by in a landau,
that gentleman having, it seems, invited
these ladies on a party of pleasure: — 
“You shall not long enjoy this satisfaction,” 
cried she to herself, “if it be
in human wit to separate you;”—but
at this sight, the turbulent passions of her
soul becoming more outrageous, “O may
the machine that conveys you be
thrown from off its wheels!” pursued
she: “May the wine you drink be poisoned! 
—May the first morsel you attempt
to swallow, mistake its way, and
choak you in the passage!” 
Thus did she rave, not like one possessed
with seven, but seven thousand
fiends, and had perhaps remained in this
wild way till her brain had been absolutely
turned, if lady Mellasin, having
a great deal of company, had not positively
commanded her to come down,
after having sent several times in more
mild terms, to let her know what friends
were there. 
It was some days before the unhappy,
and more wicked, miss Flora, could recollect
her scattered senses, enough for
the contrivance of any further mischief; 
but those evil spirits, to which she had
yielded but too much the mastery of her
heart, and all its faculties, at length inspired
her with, and enabled her in the
execution of, a design of the most barbarous 
kind, and which, for a time, she
saw successful, even to her most sanguine
expectations. 
But while she was ruminating on projects,
which had neither virtue nor generosity
for their patrons, miss Betsy passed
her days in that chearfulness which is the
constant companion of uncorrupted innocence,
and a mind uninfluenced by any
tempestuous passions;—but as it is natural,
even to the sweetest tempers, to
take pleasure in the mortification of those
who have endeavoured to injure us without
cause given on our parts, she could
not forbear being highly diverted to see
the pains miss Flora took to conceal the
inward disturbance of her soul:—the
aukward excuses she made, for the damage
done her petticoat, gave her more
satisfaction, than she could have felt vexation
for the spoiling the best thing she
had in the world. 
Miss Mabel, to whom miss Betsy had
imparted the whole of this affair, was not
at all surprised at that part of the letter
which related to herself, as she had often
been informed, by several of her acquaintance,
of the character given of her by
that malicious girl; but neither of these 
young ladies could be able to imagine,
as they suspected not her passion for mr.
Trueworth, from what source this pretended
enmity to him was derived. 
It would certainly have greatly contributed
to the happiness of that gentleman,
to have known in what manner his mistress
had resented the injustice had been
done him; but miss Betsy forbore to let
him into the secret, as being already sufficiently
convinced of the sincerity of his
affection, and would not put him to the
trouble of giving her new proofs of it,
by shewing him the ridiculous accusation,
anonymously formed against him. 