

“Do not expect that I should pretend
to be sorry for Mr. Vincent,” said lady
Delacour. “Let him be as generous and
as penitent as he pleases, I am heartily
glad that he is on his way to Germany.
I dare say he will find in the upper or lower
circles of the empire, some heroine in
the Kotzebue taste, who will alternately
make him miserable, till he is happy; and
happy, till he is miserable. He is one of
those men, who require great emotions.— 
Fine lovers these make for stage effect!— 
but the worst husbands in the world!
“I hope, Belinda, you give me credit, for
having judged better of Mr. Vincent than
lady Anne Percival did?”

“For having judged worse of him, you
mean? Lady Anne always judges as well
as possible of every body.”
“I will allow you to play upon words
in a friend's defence, but do not be alarmed
for the reputation of lady Anne's judgment.
If it will be any satisfaction to you,
I can with thorough sincerity assure you,
that I never liked her so well in my life,
as since I have detected her in a mistake.
It saves her, in my imagination, from the
odium of being a perfect character.”
“And there was something so handsome
in her manner of writing to me, when she
found out her errour,” said Belinda—
“Very true, and my friend Mr. Percival
behaved handsomely. Where friendships
clash, it is not every man who has
clearness of head sufficient to know his
duty to his neighbour. Mr. Percival said
no more, than just the thing he ought, for
his ward. You have reason to be obliged
to him; and as we are returning thanks to
all persons concerned in our deliverance
from this imminent danger, Juba the

black, and Solomon the Jew, ought to
come in for their share; for without that
wrestling match of theirs, the truth might
never have been dragged to light, and Mr.
Vincent would have been this day your
lord and master. But the danger is over; 
you need not look so terrified—Do not be
like the man who dropped down dead with
terrour, when he was shown by day light
the broken bridge, which he had gallopped
over in the dark.”
Lady Delacour was in such high spirits,
that, without regard to connexion, she ran
on from one subject to another.
“You have proved to me, my dear,” 
said she, “that you are not a girl to
marry, because your wedding-gown was
sent home, or because the day was fixed,
or because things had gone so far. I
give you infinite credit for your civil
courage, as Dr. X&wblank;calls it: military
courage, as he said to me yesterday—military
courage, that seeks the bubble reputation
even in the cannon's mouth,
may be had for sixpence a day. But civil

courage, such as enabled the princess Parizade,
in the Arabian Tales, to go straight
up the hill to her object, though the magical
multitude of advising and abusive
voices continually called to her to turn
back, is one of the rarest qualities in man
or woman, and not to be had for love,
money, or admiration.”
“You place admiration not only above
money, but above love, in your climax,
I perceive,” said Belinda, smiling.
“I will give you leave to be as philosophically
sarcastic as you please, my dear,
if you will only smile, and if you will not
look, as pale as Seneca's Paulina, whose
story we heard—from whom?”
“From Mr. Hervey, I believe.”
“His name was ready upon your lips; 
I hope he was not far from your thoughts?”
“No one could be farther from my
thoughts,” said Belinda.
“Well, very likely—I believe it, because
you say it; and because it is impossible.”
“Rally me as much as you please, my

dear lady Delacour, I assure you, that I
speak the simple truth.”
“I cannot suspect you of affectation,
my dear. Therefore houestly tell me, if
Clarence Hervey were at your feet this
instant, would you spurn him from you?”
“Spurn him! no—I would neither
spurn him, nor motion him from me; but
without using any of the terms in the
heroine's dictionary—”
“You would refuse him?” interrupted
lady Delacour, with a look of indignation— 
“you would refuse him?”
“I did not say so, I believe.”
“You would accept him?”
“I did not say so, I am sure.”
“O, you would tell him that you were
not accustomed to him?”
“Not exactly in these words, perhaps.”
“Well, we shall not quarrel about
words,” said lady Delacour; “I only beg
you to remember yourxs own principles; 
and if ever you are put to the trial, be
consistent. The first thing in a philosopher
is to be consistent.”

“Fortunately, for the credit of my philosophy,
there is no immediate danger of
it's being put to the rest.”
“Unfortunately, you surely mean; unless
you are afraid that it might not stand the
test. But I was going, when I spoke of
consistency, to remind you, that all your
own and Mr. Percival's arguments about
first loves may now, with equal propriety,
be turned against you.”
“How against me?”
“They are evidently as applicable to
second as to first loves, I think.”
“Perhaps they are,” said Belinda; “but
I really and truly am not inclined to think
of love at present; particularly as there is
no necessity that I should.”
Belinda took up a book, and lady Delacour
for one half hour abstained from any
farther raillery. But longer than half an
hour she could not be silent on the subject
uppermost in her thoughts.
“If Clarence Hervey,” cried she, “were
not the most honourable of blockheads,
he might be the most happy of men. This

Virginia!—O, how I hate her!—I am sure
poor Clarence cannot love her.”
“Because you hate her—or because
you hate her without having ever seen
her?” said Belinda.
“O, I know what she must be,” replied
lady Delacour—“a soft, sighing, dying
damsel, who puts bullfinches in her bosom.
Smile, smile, my dear; you cannot help it:
in spite of all your generosity, I know you
must think as I do, and wish as I do, that
she were at the bottom of the Black-sea
this instant.” Lady Delacour stood for
some minutes musing, and then exclaimed,
“I will move Heaven and Earth to break
off this absurd match.”
“Good Heavens, my dear lady Delacour,
what do you mean?”
“Mean! my dear, I mean what I say,
which very few people do: no wonder I
should surprise you!”
“I conjure you,” cried Belinda, “if you
have the least regard for my honour and
happiness—”

“I have not the least, but the greatest; 
and depend upon it, my dear, I will do
nothing that shall injure that dignity of
mind, and delicacy of character, which I
admire and love, as much as Clarence
Hervey did, and does. Trust to me—not
lady Anne Percival herself can be more
delicate in her notions of propriety, than I
am for my friends, and since my reformation,
I hope I may add, for myself.—Fear
nothing.”—she finished these words,
she rang for her carriage. “I don't ask
you to go out with me, my dear Belinda; 
I give you leave to sit in this arm chair,
till I come back again, with your feet upon
the fender, a book in your hand, and this
little table beside you, like lady S.'s picture
of Comfort.”
Lady Delacour spent the rest of the
morning abroad, and when the returned
home, she gave no account of what she had
been doing, or of what or whom she had
seen. This was so unusual, that Belinda
could not avoid taking notice of it. Notwithstanding
her ladyship's eulogium upon

her own delicate sense of propriety, miss
Portman could not confide, with perfect
resignation, in her prudence.
“Your ladyship reproached me once,” 
said she, in a playful tone, “for my provoking
want of curiosity: you have completely
cured me of this defect, for never
was woman more curious than I am, at
this instant, to know the secret scheme
that you have in agitation.”
“Have patience a little longer, and the
mystery will be unravelled. In the mean
time, trust that every thing I do is for the
best. However, as you have behaved
pretty well, I will give you one leading
hint, when you have explained to me what
you meant by saying, that your heart is
not at present inclined to love? Pray
have you quarrelled with love for ever?”
“No; but I can exist without it.”
“Have you a heart?”
“I hope so.”
“And it can exist without love? I now
understand what was once said to me by

a foolish lordling:—‘Of what use is the
sun to the dial?” 
Company came in, and relieved Belinda
from any farther raillery. Lady Boucher
and Mrs. Margaret Delacour were, amongst
a large party, to dine at lady Delacour's.
At dinner, the dowager seized the first
suspicious moment of silence to announce
a piece of intelligence, which she flattered
herself would fix the eyes of all the world
upon her.
“So Mr. Clarence Hervey is married
at last!”
“Married!” cried lady Delacour—she had
sufficient presence of mind not to look
directly at Belinda; but she fixed the
dowager's eyes, by repeating—“married!
are you sure of it?”
“Positive—positive! He was privately
married yesterday at his aunt, lady Almeria's
apartments, at Windsor, to miss
Hartley. I told you it was to be, and now
it is over; and a very extraordinary match

Mr. Hervey has made of it, after all.
Think of his going, at last, and marrying a
girl, who has been his mistress for years!
No body will visit her, to be sure. Lady
Almeria is excessively distressed; she did
all she could to prevail on her brother, the
bishop, to marry his nephew, but he very
properly refused, giving it as a reason, that
the girl's character was too well known.”
“I thought my lord the bishop was at
Spa,” interposed a gentleman, whilst the
dowager drew breath.
“O dear, no, sir; you have been misinformed,” 
resumed she. “My lord the
bishop has been returned from Spa this
great while, and he has refused to see his
nephew, to my certain knowledge. After
all, I cannot but pity poor Clarence
for being driven into this match. Mr.
Hartley has a prodigious fine fortune,
to be sure, and he hurried things forward
at an amazing rate, to patch up
his daughter's reputation. He said, as I
am credibly informed, yesterday morning,
that if Clarence did not marry the girl before

night, he would carry her and her fortune
off the next day to the West Indies.
Now the fortune was certainly an object.”
“My dear lady Boucher,” interrupted lord
Delacour; “you must be misinformed in
that particular: fortune is no object to
Clarence Hervey; he is too generous a fellow
to marry for fortune. What do you
think—what do you say, lady Delacour?”
“I say, and think, and feel, as you do,
my lord,” said lady Delacour.
“You say, and think, and feel the same
as my lord. Very extraordinary, indeed!” 
said the dowager. “Then if it were not
for the sake of the fortune, pray why did
Mr. Hervey marry at all? Can any body
guess?”
“I should guess, because he was in
love,” said lord Delacour, “for I remember,
that was the reason I married myself.”
“My dear good lord—but when I tell you
the girl had been his mistress, till he was
tired of her—”

“My lady Boucher,” said Mrs. Margaret
Delacour, who had hitherto listened in
silence—“my lady Boucher, you have
been misinformed; miss Hartley never
was Clarence Hervey's mistress.”
“I'm mighty glad you think so, Mrs.
Delacour; but I assure you, nobody else
is so charitable. Those who live in the
world hear a great deal more than those
who live out of the world. I can promise
you nobody will visit the bride, and that
is the thing by which we are to judge.”
Then the dowager and the rest of the
company continued to descant upon the
folly of the match. Those who wished to
pay their court to lady Delacour were the
loudest in their astonishment, at his throwing
himself away in this manner. Her
ladyship smiled, and kept them in play by
her address, on purpose to withdraw all
eyes from miss Portman, whilst, from time
to time, she stole a glance at Belinda, to
observe how she was affected by what
passed: she was provoked by Belinda's
self-possession. At last, when it had been
settled that all the Herveys were odd, but

that this match of Clarence's was the oddest
of all the odd things, that any of the
family had done for many generations,
Mrs. Delacour calmly said:
“Are you sure, lady Boucher, that Mr.
Hervey is married?”
“Positive! as I said before, positive!
Madam, my woman had it from lady Newland's
Swiss, who had it from lady Singleton's
Frenchwoman, who had it from
Longueville, the hair-dresser, who had it
from lady Almeria's own woman, who was
present at the ceremony, and must know,
if any body does.”
“The report has come to us zigzag as
quick as lightning, yet it does not flash conviction
upon me,” said lady Delacour.
“Nor upon me,” said Mrs. Delacour,
“for this simple reason. I have seen miss
Hartley, within these two hours, and I had
it from her, that she is not married.”
“Not married!” cried the dowager, with
terrour.
“I rather think not; she is now with
her father, at my house, at dinner, I believe,
and Clarence Hervey is at lady Almeria's,

at Windsor: her ladyship is confined by
a fit of the gout, and sent for her nephew
yesterday. If people who live out of the
world hear less, they sometimes hear more
correctly than those who live in it.”
“Pray when does Mr. Hervey return
from Windsor?” said the incorrigible dowager.
“To morrow, madam,” said Mrs. Delacour.
“As your ladyship is going to several
parties this evening, I think it but charitable
to set you right in these particulars,
and I hope you will be so charitable, as to
contradict the report of miss Hartley's
having been Clarence's mistress.”
“Why, as to that, if the young lady is
not married, we must presume there are
good reasons for it,” said the dowager.
“Pray, on which side was the match
broken off?”
“On neither side,” answered Mrs. Delacour.
“The thing goes on then? and what
day is the marriage to take place?” said
lady Boucher.
“On Monday—or Tuesday—or Wednesday

—or Thursday—or Friday—or Saturday
—or Sunday, I believe,” replied
Mrs. Delacour, who had the prudent art
of giving answers effectually baffling to
the curiosity of gossips.
The dowager consoled herself in her
utmost need with a full plate of brandy
cherries, and spoke not a word more during
the second course. When the ladies
retired after the dessert, she again commenced
hostilities: she dared not come to
open war with Mrs. Delacour; but in a
by-battle, in a corner, she carried every
thing before her; and she triumphantly
whispered, “We shall see, ma'am, that it
will turn out, as I told you, that miss
Rachel, or Virginia, or whatever he
pleases to call her, has been what I said; 
and, as I said, nobody will visit her, not
a soul: fifty people I can count, who have
declared to me they've made-up Y their
minds; and my own's made up, I candidly
confess; and lady Delacour, I am sure by
her silence and looks, is of my way of
thinking, and has no opinion of the young

lady: as to miss Portman, she is, poor
thing! of course so wrapped up in her
own affairs, no wonder she says nothing.
That was a sad business of Mr. Vincent's; 
I am surprised to see her look even as well
as she does after it. Mr. Percival, I am
told,”—said the well informed dowager, lowering
her voice so much, that the lovers
of scandal were obliged to close their heads
round her—“Mr. Percival, I am informed,
refused his consent to his ward, (who is
not of age) on account of an anonymous
letter, and it is supposed Mr. Vincent desired
it for an excuse to get off handsomely.
Fighting that duel, about her, with sir
Philip Baddely, settled his love—so he
is gone to Germany, and she is left to wear
the willow, which, you see, becomes her,
as well as every thing else. Did she eat
any dinner, ma'am—you sat next her?”
“Yes—more than I did, I am sure”
“Very extraordinary! Then perhaps sir
Philip Baddely's on again—Lord bless me,
what a match would that be for her! Why,
Mrs. Stanbope might then, indeed, deserve

to be called the match-maker general. The
seventh of her nieces this—But look, there's
Mrs. Delacour, leading miss Portman off
into the trictrac cabinet, with a face full
of business—her hand in hers—Lord, I did
not know they were on that footing! I
wonder what's going forward—suppose old
Hartley was to propose for miss Portman— 
there would be a denouement!—and cut
his daughter off with a shilling! Nothing's
impossible, you know. Did he ever see
miss Portman? I must go, and find out,
positively.”
In the mean time, Mrs. Delacour, unconscious
of the curiosity she had excited,
was speaking to Belinda in the trictrac
cabinet.
“My dear miss Portman,” said she,
“you have a great deal of good nature, else
I should not venture to apply to you on
the present occasion. Will you oblige me,
and serve a friend of mine—a gentleman
who, as I once imagined, was an admirer of
yours?”
“I will do any thing in my power to

oblige any friend of yours, madam,” said
Belinda; “but of whom are you speaking?”
“Of Mr. Hervey, my dear young lady.”
“He was never an admirer of mine,” said
Belinda; ”but that does not make me the
less disposed to serve him, as a friend— 
tell me, how it can possibly be in my
power?”
“That you shall know immediately,” said
Mrs. Delacour, rummaging and rustling
for a considerable time amongst a heap
of letters, which she had pulled out of the
largest pockets that ever woman wore,
even in the last century.
“O, here it is,” continued she, opening
and looking into them. “May I trouble
you just to look over this letter? It is
from poor Mr. Hartley; he is, as you will
see, excessively fond of this daughter, whom
he has so fortunately discovered after his
long search: he is dreadfully nervous, and
has been terribly alarmed by these idle
gossiping stories. You find, by what lady
Boucher said at dinner, that they have
settled it amongst them, that Virginia is

not a fit person to he visited; that she
has been Clarence's mistress, instead of
his pupil. Mr. Hartley, you see by
this letter, is almost out of his senses with
the apprehension, that his daughter's reputation
is ruined. I sent my carriage
to Twickenham, the moment I received
this letter, for the poor girl, and her gouvernante.
They came to me this morning; 
but what can I do?—I am only one
old woman against a confederacy of veteran
gossips; but if I could gain you and lady
Delacour for my allies, I should fear no
adversaries. Virginia is to stay with me for
some days; and lady Delacour, I see, has
a great mind to come to see her; but she
does not like to come without you, and
she says, that she does not like to ask you
to accompany her. I don't understand
her delicacy about the matter; I have none,
believing, as I do, that there is no foundation
whatever for these malicious reports,
which, entre nous, originated, I fancy,
with Mrs. Marriott. Now, will you oblige
me? If you and lady Delacour will come,

and see Virginia to morrow, all the world
would follow your example the next day.
It's often cowardice that makes people ill
natured; have you the courage, my good
miss Portman, to be the first to do a benevolent
action? I do assure you,” continued
Mrs. Delacour with great earnestness—“I
do assure you, I would as soon put my
hand into that fire, this moment, as ask
you to do any thing that I thought improper
—But forgive me for pressing this
point; I am anxious to have your suffrage
in her favour: miss Belinda Portman's character
for prudence and propriety stands
so high, and is fixed so firmly, that she
may venture to let us cling to it; and I
am as firmly convinced of the poor girl's
innocence, as I am of yours, and when you
see her, you will be of my opinion.”
“And I assure you, Mrs. Delacour,” said
Belinda, “that you have wasted a great deal
of eloquence upon this occasion, for—”
“I am sorry for it,” interrupted Mrs. Dencour,
rising from her seat, with a look of
some displeasure; “I meant not to distress

or offend you, miss Portman, by my eloquence
—I am only concerned, that I should
have so far mistaken your character as to
expose myself to this refusal.”
“I have given no refusal,” said Belinda,
mildly, “you did not let me finish my sentence.”
“I beg pardon, that is a foolish old trick
of mine.”
“Mrs. Delacour, I was going to say, has
wasted a great deal of eloquence: for I am
entirely of her opinion, and I shall with
the greatest readiness comply with her
request.”
“You are a charming generous girl, and
I am a passionate old fool—thank you a thousand
times.”
“You are not at all obliged to me,” said
Belinda. “When I first heard this story,
I believed it, as lady Boucher now does
—but I have had reason to alter my opinion,
and perhaps the same means of
information would have changed hers; 
once convinced, it is impossible to relapse
into suspicion.”

“Impossible to you—the most truly virtuous
women are always the least suspicious
and uncharitable in their opinion
of their own sex. Lady Anne Percival
inspired me with this belief, and miss
Portman confirms it.—I admire your courage
in daring to come forward in the defence
of innocence. I am very rude, alas!
for praising you so much.”
“I have not a right to your admiration,” 
said Belinda, “for I must honestly
confess to you, that I should not have
this courage, if there were any danger
in the case; I do not think, that, in
doubtful cases, it is the business of a
young woman to hazard her own reputation,
by an attempt to preserve another's:
I do not imagine, at least, that I am
of sufficient consequence, in the world,
for this purpose; therefore I should never
attempt it. It is the duty of such women
as Mrs. Delacour, whose reputations are
beyond the power of scandal, to come
forward in the defence of injured innocence:
but this would not be courage in

Belinda Portman, it would be presumption
and temerity.”
“Well, if you will not let me admire your
courage, or your generosity, or your prudence,” 
said Mrs. Delacour, laughing, “you
must positively let me admire you altogether,
and love you too, for I cannot
help it. Farewell.”
After the company was gone, lady Delacour,
was much surprised, by the earnestness
with which Belinda pressed the request,
that they might the next morning pay a
visit to Virginia.
“My dear,” said lady Delacour, “to tell
you the truth, I am full of curiosity, and
excessively anxious to go. I hesitated,
merely on your account; I fancied that
you would not like the visit, and that
if I went without you, it might be taken
notice of.—But I am delighted to find
that you will come with me; I can only
say, that you have more generosity, than
I should have in the same situation.”
The next morning they went together
to Mrs. Delacour's. In their way thither,

Belinda, to divert her own thoughts, and
to rouse lady Delacour from the profound
and unnatural silence, into which she had
fallen, petitioned her to finish the history
of sir Philip Baddely, the dog, miss Annabella
Luttridge, and her billet-doux.
“For some of my high crimes and misdemeanours,
you vowed that you would not
tell me the remainder of the story, till
the whole week had elapsed; now will you
satisfy my curiosity? You recollect, that
you left off just where you said, that you
were come to the best part of the story.”
“Was I? did I?—Very true, we shall
have time enough to finish it by and by,
my dear,” said lady Delacour; “at present
my poor head is running upon something
else, and I have left off being an accomplished
actress, or I could talk of one
subject, and think of another, as well as
the best of you. Stop the carriage, my
dear, I am afraid they have forgot my
orders.”
“Did you carry what I desired this morning

to Mrs. Delacour's?” said her ladyship
to one of her footmen.
“I did, my lady.”
“And did you say from me, that it was
not to be opened, till I came?”
“Yes, my lady.”
“Where did you leave it?”
“In Mrs. Delacour's dressingroom, my
lady:—she desired me to take it up there,
and she locked the door, and said, no one
should go in, till you came.”
Very well—go on Belinda.—My dear,
I hope that I have worked up your curiosity
to the highest pitch.