

“I left off with the true skill of a good
storyteller, at the most interesting part— 
a duel—and yet, duels are so common
now, that they are really vulgar incidents.
“But we think that a duel concerning
ourselves must be more extraordinary
than any other.—We hear of men being
shot in duels about nothing every day,
so it is really a weakness in me to think
so much about poor Lawless's death, as
Harriot Freke said to me at the time.— 
She expected to see me show sorrow in
publick—but very fortunately for me, she
roused my pride—which was always

stronger than my reason; and I behaved
myself upon the occasion as became a
fine lady.—There were some things, however,
I could hardly stand.—You must
know that Lawless, fool and coxcomb as
he was, had some magnanimity, and
showed it—as some people do from whom
it is least expected—on his deathbed. The
last words he said, were—‘lady Delacour
is innocent—I charge you don't prosecute
lord Delacour.’—This he said to his mother
—who—to complete my misery—is
one of the most respectable women in
England, and was most desperately fond
of Lawless, who was an only son.—She
never has recovered his loss.—Do you
remember asking me who a tall elderly
lady in mourning was, that you saw getting
into her carriage one day, in South-Audley
street chapel, as we passed by in
our way to the park?—That was lady
Lawless—I believe I didn't answer you
at the time.—I meet her every now and
then—to me a spectre of dismay.—But
as Harriot Freke said, certainly such a

man as poor Lawless was a useless being
in society, however he may be regretted
by a doating mother.—We should see
things in a philosophical light if we can.— 
I should not have suffered half as much as
I did, if he had been a man of a stronger
understanding; but he was a poor, vain,
weak creature, that I actually drew on
and duped with my own coquetry, whilst
all the time I was endeavouring only to
plague lord Delacour.—I was punished
enough by the airs his lordship doubly
gave himself, upon the strength of his
valour and his judgment—they roused me
completely—and I blamed him with all
my might, and got an enormous party of
my friends, I mean my acquaintance,
to run him down full cry, for having
fought for me—It was absurd—It was
rash—It was want of proper confidence
in his wife; thus we said:—lord
Delacour had his partizans, it is true,
amongst whom the loudest was odious
Mrs. Luttridge. I embraced the first opportunity
I met with of retaliation.—You

must know that Mrs. Luttridge, beside
being a great faro-player, was a great
dabbler in politics; for she was almost as
fond of power as of money: she talked
loud and fluently, and had, somehow or
other, partly by intriguing, partly by relationship,
connected herself with some of
the leading men in parliament.—There
was to be a contested election in our
county; Mr. Luttridge had a good estate
there next to lord Delacour's, and being
of an ancient family, and keeping a good
table, the Luttridges were popular enough.
—At the first news of an election, out
comes a flaming advertisement from Mr.
Luttridge; away posted Mrs. Luttridge
to begin her canvas, and away posted
lady Delacour after her, to canvas for a
cousin of Harriot Freke's.—This was a
new scene for me; but I piqued myself
on the versatility of my talents, and I laid
myself out to please all the squires, and,
what was more difficult, all the squires'
ladies in &wblank;shire. I was ambitious to
have it said of me, ‘that I was the finest

figure that ever appeared upon canvass.’ 
—O ye&wblank;shireians, how hard did I
work to obtain your praise!—All that the
combined force of vanity and hatred could
inspire, I performed, and with success.
You have but little curiosity, I presume,
to know how many hogsheads of port
went down the throat of John Bull, or
how many hecatombs were offered up to
the genius of English liberty. My
hatred to Mrs. Luttridge was, of course,
called love of my country. Lady Delacour
was deified by all true patriots—and,
luckily, a handsome legacy left me for my
spirit, by an uncle who died six weeks
before the election, enabled us to sustain
the expense of my apotheosis.—The day
of election came—Harriot Freke and I
made our appearance on the hustings,
dressed in splendid party uniforms; and
before us, our knights and squires held
two enormous panniers full of ribands and
cockades; which we distributed with a
grace that won all hearts, if not all votes.
—Mrs. Luttridge thought the panniers

would carry the election; and forthwith
she sent off an express for a pair of panniers
twice as large as ours. I took out my
pencil, and drew a caricature of the ass
and her panniers; wrote an epigram at
the bottom of it; and the epigram and
the caricature were soon in the hands of
half&wblank;shire. The verses were as bad
as impromptus usually are, and the drawing
was not much better than the writing,
but the good will of the critics supplied
all my deficiencies; and never was
more praise bestowed upon the pen of
Burke, or the pencil of Reynolds, than
was lavished upon me by my honest
friends.—My dear Belinda, if you will
not quarrel with the quality, you may
have what quantity of praise you please.
—Mrs. Luttridge, as I hoped and expected,
was beyond measure enraged at
the sight of the caricature and epigram.
—She was, beside being a gamester and
a politician—what do you think?—an
excellent shot!—She wished, she said, to
be a man, that she might be qualified to

take proper notice of my conduct—The
same kind friends who showed her my
epigram, repeated to me her observation
upon it. Harriot Freke was at my elbow,
and offered to take any message I might
think proper to Mrs. Luttridge. I
scarcely thought her in earnest, till she
added, that the only way left, nowadays,
for a woman to distinguish herself, was by
spirit; as every thing else was grown
‘cheap and vulgar in the eyes of men.’— 
That she knew one of the cleverest young
men in England, and a man of fashion
into the bargain, who was just going to
publish a treatise ‘upon the Propriety
and Necessity of Female Duelling;’ and
that he had demonstrated beyond a possibility
of doubt, that civilized society could
not exist half a century longer without
this necessary improvement. I had prodigious
deference for the masculine superiority,
as I thought it, of Harriot's understanding.
She was a philosopher, and
a fine lady—I was only a fine lady—I had
never fired a pistol in my life; and I was

a little inclined to cowardice; but Harriot
offered to bet any wager upon the
steadiness of my hand, and assured me
that I should charm all beholders in male
attire—In short, as my second, if I would
furnish her with proper credentials, she
swore she would undertake to furnish me
with clothes, and pistols, and courage,
and every thing I wanted.—I sat down to
pen my challenge. When I was writing
it, my hand did not tremble much—not
more than my lord Delacour's always does.
The challenge was very prettily worded— 
I believe I can repeat it.
‘Lady Delacour presents her compliments
to Mrs. Luttridge—she is informed
that Mrs. L&wblank;wishes she were a man,
that she might be qualified to take proper
notice of lady D&wblank;'s conduct. Lady
Delacour begs leave to assure Mrs. Luttridge,
that though she has the misfortune
to be a woman, she is willing to
account for her conduct, in any manner
Mrs. L&wblank;may think proper—and at
any hour and place she may appoint.

Lady D&wblank;leaves the choice of the
weapons to Mrs. L&wblank;. Mrs. H. Freke,
who has the honour of presenting this
note, is lady Delacour's friend upon this
occasion.’
“I cannot repeat Mrs. Luttridge's answer; 
all I know is, it was not half as
neatly worded as my note; but the essential
part of it was, that she accepted
my challenge with pleasure, and should
do herself the honour of meeting me at six
o'clock the next morning—that miss
Honour O'Grady would be her friend upon
the occasion—and that pistols were
the weapons she preferred. The place of
appointment was behind an old barn,
about two miles from the town of &wblank;.
The hour was fixed to be early in the
morning, to prevent all probability of interruption.
In the evening, Harriot and
I rode to the ground. There were several
bullets sticking in the posts of the
barn:—this was the place where Mrs.
Luttridge had been accustomed to exercise
herself in firing at a mark. I own

my courage ‘oozed out’ a little at this
sight.—The duke de Rochefoucault, I
believe, said truly, that ‘many would
be cowards if they dared.’ There seemed
to me to be no physical, and less moral
necessity for my fighting this duel, but I
did not venture to reason on a point of
honour with my spirited second. I bravadoed
to Harriot most magnanimously,
but at night, when Marriott was undressing
me, I could not forbear giving her a
hint, which I thought might tend to preserve
the king's peace, and the peace of
the county. I went to the ground in the
morning, in good spirits and with a safe
conscience. Harriot was in admiration
of my ‘lion-port:’ to do her justice, she
conducted herself with great coolness upon
the occasion; but then it may be observed,
that it was I who was to stand
fire, and not she. I thought of poor
Lawless a billion of times at least, as we
were going to the ground; and I had my
presentiments, and my confused notions
of poetic justice—but poetic justice,

and all other sorts of justice, went clear
out of my head, when I saw my antagonist
and her friend actually pistol in
hand, waiting for us: they were both
in men's clothes.—I secretly called
upon the name of Marriott with fervency,
and I looked round with more
anxiety than ever Bluebeard's wife, or
‘Anne, sister Anne!’ looked to see if
any body was coming: nothing was to be
seen, but the grass blown by the wind
—No Marriott to throw herself toute
éplorée between the combatants—no
peace-officers to bind us over to our good
behaviour—no deliverance at hand— 
and Mrs. Luttridge, by all the laws of
honour, as challenged, was to have the
first shot.—O, those laws of honour!— 
I was upon the point of making an apology,
in spite of them all, when, to my
inexpressible joy, I was relieved from the
dreadful alternative of being shot through
the head, or of becoming a laughing-stock
for life, by an incident, less heroic,
I'll grant ye, than opportune.—But you

shall have the whole scene, as well as I
can recollect it—as well—for those who,
for the first time, go to a field of battle,
do not, as I am credibly informed, and
internally persuaded, always find the
clearness of their memories improved by
the novelty of their situation. Mrs. Luttridge,
when we came up, was leaning,
with a truly martial negligence, against
the wall of the barn, with her pistol, as I
told you, in her hand. She spoke not
a word, but her second, miss Honour
O'Grady, advanced towards us immediately,
and taking off her hat very manfully,
addressed herself to my second.— 
‘Mistriss Harriot Freke, I presume, if
I mistake not.’—Harriot bowed slightly,
and answered—‘Miss Honour O'Grady,
I presume, if I mistake not.’—‘The same,
at your service,’ replied miss Honour.—‘I
have a few words to suggest, that may
save a great deal of noise, and bloodshed,
and ill will.’—‘As to noise,’ said Harriot,
‘it is a thing in which I delight, therefore,
I beg that mayn't be spared on my

account; as to bloodshed, I beg that
may not be spared on lady Delacour's account,
for her honour, I am sure, is dearer
to her than her blood; and as to ill will,
I should be concerned to have that saved
on Mrs. Luttridge's account, as we all
know it is the thing in which she delights,
even more than I do in noise, or
lady Delacour in blood:—but pray proceed,
miss Honour O'Grady; you have a
few words to suggest.’—‘Yes, I would
willingly observe, as it is my duty to my
principal,’ said Honour, ‘that one, who is
compelled to fire a pistol with her left
hand, though ever so good a shot naturally,
is by no means on a footing with
one who has the advantage of her right
hand.’ Harriot rubbed my pistol with
the sleeve of her coat, and I, recovering
my wit with my hopes of being witty
with impunity, answered—‘Unquestionably!
—left-handed wisdom and left-handed
courage are neither of them the
very best of their kinds, but we must content
ourselves with them, if we can have

no other. ‘That if,’ cried Honour O'Grady,
‘is not, like most of the family of the
ifs, a peace-maker. My lady Delacour,
I was going to observe, that my principal
has met with an unfortunate accident in
the shape of a whitlow on the fore-finger
of her right hand, which incapacitates her
from drawing a trigger; but I am at your
service, ladies, either of you, that can't
put up with a disappointment with good
humour.’—I never, during the whole
course of my existence, was more disposed
to bear a disappointment with good
humour, to prove that I was incapable of
bearing malice; and, to oblige the seconds,
for form sake, I agreed that we
should take our ground, and fire our pistols
into the air—Mrs. Luttridge, with
her left-handed wisdom, fired first—and
I, with great magnanimity, followed her
example.—I must do my adversary's sescond,
miss Honour O'Grady, the justice
to observe, that in this whole affair she
conducted herself not only with the spirit,
but with the good nature and generosity

characteristic of her nation—We met enemies
and parted friends.
“Life is a tragicomedy!—Though the
critics will allow of no such thing in their
books, it is a true representation of what
passes in the world; and of all lives,
mine has been the most grotesque mixture,
or alternation I should say, of tragedy
and comedy.—All this is à-propos
to something I have not told you yet.
—This comic duel ended tragically for
me—‘How?’—you say—Why, 'tis clear
that I was not shot through the head; 
but it would have been better, a hundred
times better for me, if I had; I
should have been spared, in this life at
least, the torments of the damned—I was
not used to priming and loading—my
pistol was overcharged—when I fired, it
recoiled, and I received a blow on my
breast, the consequences of which you
have seen—or are to see.
“The pain was nothing at the moment
compared with what I have since experienced
—But I will not complain till I
cannot avoid it—I had not, at the time I

received the blow, much leisure for lamentation; 
for I had scarcely discharged my
pistol, when we heard a loud shout on
the other side of the barn, and a crowd
of town's people, country people, and
hay makers, came pouring down the lane
towards us with rakes and pitch forks in
their hands.—An English mob is really a
formidable thing.—Marriott had mismanaged
her business most strangely—she
had, indeed, spread a report of a duel—a
female duel—but the untutored sense of
propriety amongst these rusticks was so
shocked at the idea of a duel fought by
women in men's clothes, that I verily believe
they would have thrown us into the
river with all their hearts—Stupid block-heads!
I am convinced that they would
not have been half so much scandalised if
we had boxed in petticoats—The want of
these petticoats had nearly proved our destruction,
or at least our disgrace—a
peeress, after being ducked, could never
have held her head above water again
with any grace.—The mob had just closed

round us, crying ‘shame! shame! shame!
—duck 'em, duck 'em—gentle or simple
—duck 'em—duck 'em’—when their attention
was suddenly turned towards a
person, who was driving up the lane a
large herd of squeaking, grunting pigs.— 
The person was clad in splendid regimentals,
and he was armed with a long
pole, to the end of which hung a bladder,
and his pigs were frightened, and they ran
squeaking from one side of the road to the
other; and the pig-driver in regimentals, in
the midst of the noise, could not without
difficulty make his voice heard; but at
last he was understood to say, that a bet
of a hundred guineas depended upon his
being able to keep these pigs ahead of a
flock of turkies that were following them,
and he begged the mob to give him and
his pigs fair play.—At the news of this
wager, and at the sight of the gentleman
turned pig-driver, the mob were in raptures,
and, at the sound of his voice, Harriot
Freke immediately exclaimed—‘Clarence
Hervey!—By all that's lucky!’
“Clarence Hervey!” interrupted Belinda.

—“Clarence Hervey, my dear,” 
said lady Delacour, coolly—“he can do
every thing you know! even drive pigs
better than any body else”—but let me
go on.
“Harriot Freke shouted in a Stentorean
voice, which actually made your pigdriver
start: she explained to him in French
our distress, and the cause of it. Clarence
was, as I suppose you have discovered
long ago, ‘that cleverest young man in
England, who had written on the propriety
and necessity of female duelling.’— 
He answered Harriot in French—‘To
attempt your rescue by force would be
vain—but I will do better, I will make a
diversion in your favour.’—Immediately
our hero, addressing himself to the sturdy
fellow who held me in custody, exclaimed
—‘Huzza, my boys! Old England for ever!
Yonder comes a Frenchman with a flock
of turkies. My pigs will beat them for a
hundred guineas.—Old England for ever,
huzza!’
“As he spoke, the French officer, with

whom Clarence Hervey had laid the
wager, appeared at the turn of the lane— 
his turkies half flying, half hobbling up
the road before him.—The Frenchman
waved a red streamer over the heads of
his flock—Clarence shook a pole, from the
top of which hung a bladder full of beans.
The pigs grunted—the turkies gobbled,
and the mob shouted—eager for the fame
of old England, the crowd followed Clarence
with loud acclamations.—The
French officer was followed with groans
and hisses.—So great was the confusion,
and so great the zeal of the patriots, that
even the pleasure of ducking the female
duellists was forgotten in the general enthusiasm.
—All eyes and all hearts were intent
upon the race—and now the turkies
got foremost—and now the pigs.—But
when we came within sight of the horsepond,
I heard one man cry—‘don't forget
the ducking.’—How I trembled! but our
knight shouted to his followers—‘For the
love of old England, my brave boys, keep
between my pigs and the pond—if our pigs

see the water they'll run to it, and England's
undone.’
“The whole attention of the mob was
by this speech conducted away from us— 
‘On, on my boys into town, to the market-place; 
whoever gains the market
place first, wins the day.’—Our general
shook the rattling bladder in triumph, over
the heads of ‘the swinish multitude,’ as
we followed in perfect security in his train
into the town.
“Men, women, and children, crowded
to the windows and doors.—‘Retreat
into the first place you can,’ whispered
Clarence to us; we were close to him.— 
Harriot Freke pushed her way into a
milliner's shop—I could not get in after
her, for a frightened pig turned back suddenly,
and almost threw me down. Clarence
Hervey caught me, and favoured my retreat
into the shop. But poor Clarence
lost his bet by his gallantry. Whilst he
was manœuvering in my favour, the turkies
got several yards ahead of the pigs,

and reaching the market-place first, won
the race.
“The French officer found great difficulty
in getting safe out of the town; but
Clarence represented to the mob, that he
was a prisoner on his parole, and that it
would be unlike Englishmen, to insult a
prisoner.—So he got off without being
pelted, and they both returned in safety
to the house of general Y&wblank;, where
they were to dine, and where they entertained
a large party of officers with the
account of this adventure.
“Mrs. Freke and I rejoiced in our
escape, and we thought that the whole
business was now over—but in this we
were mistaken. The news of our duel,
which had spread in the town, raised such
an uproar as had never been heard, even
at the noisiest election.—Would you believe
it? The fate of the election turned
upon this duel.—The common people,
one and all, declared, that they would not
vote either for Mr. Luttridge or Mr.
Freke, because as how—But I need not

repeat all the platitudes that they said.— 
In short, neither ribands nor brandy could
bring them to reason. With true English
pig-headedness, they went every man of
them and polled for an independent candidate
of their own choosing, whose wife,
forsooth, was a proper behaved woman.
“The only thing I had to console me
for all this, was Clarence Hervey's opinion,
that I looked better in man's clothes,
than my friend Harriot Freke.—Clarence
was charmed with my spirit and grace,
but he had not leisure at that time to
attach himself seriously to me, or to any
thing.—He was then, I guess, about
nineteen or twenty; he was all vivacity,
presumption, and paradox; he was enthusiastic
in support of his opinions, but
he was at the same time the most candid
man in the world; for there was no set
of tenets which could be called exclusively
his; he adopted in liberal rotation
every possible absurdity, and to do him
justice, defended each in it's turn with the
most ingenious arguments that could be

devised, and with a flow of words which
charmed the ear if not the sense.—His
essay on female duelling was a most extraordinary
performance; it was handed
about in manuscript till it was worn out,
he talked of publishing it, and dedicating
it to me. However, this scheme, amongst
a million of others, he talked of, but never
put into execution.—Luckily for him,
many of his follies evaporated in words.— 
I saw but little either of him or his follies
at this time.—All I know about him is,
that after he had lost his bet of a hundred
guineas, as a pig-driver, by his knighterrantry
in rescuing the female duellists
from a mob, he wrote a very charming
copy of verses upon the occasion; and
that he was so much provoked by the
stupidity of some of his brother officers,
who could not understand the verses, that
he took a disgust to the army, and sold
his commission. He set out upon a tour to
the continent, and I returned with Harriot
Freke to London, and forgot the existence
of such a person as Clarence Hervey

for three or four years.—Unless people
can be of some use, or unless they are
actually present, let them be ever so
agreeable or meritorious, we are very apt
to forget them.—One grows strangely
selfish by living in the world.—'Tis a
perfect cure for romantic notions of gratitude,
and love, and so forth.—If I had
lived in the country, in an old manor
house, Clarence Hervey would have
doubtless reigned paramount in my imagination,
as the deliverer of my life, &c.
But in London one has no time for thinking
of deliverers. And yet what I did
with my time I cannot tell you—'Tis
gone, and no trace left—One day after
another went, I know not how.—Had I
wept for every day I lost, I'm sure I
should have cried my eyes out before this
time.—If I had enjoyed any amusement
in the midst of this dissipation, it would
all have been very well; but I declare to
you in confidence, I have been tired to
death.—Nothing can be more monotonous
than the life of a hacknied fine lady.

—I question whether a drayhorse, or a
horse in a mill, would willingly exchange
places with one—if they could know as
much of the matter as I do.—You are
surprised at hearing all this from me.—My
dear Belinda, how I envy you!—You are
not yet tired of every thing. The world
has still the gloss of novelty for you—But
don't expect that can last above a season.
—My first winter was certainly entertaining
enough.—One begins with being
charmed with the bustle and glare, and
what the French call spectacle; this is
over, I think, in six months.—I can but
just recollect having been amused at the
Theatres, and the Opera, and the Pantheon,
and Ranelagh, and all those places,
for their own sakes.—Soon, very soon we
go out to see people, not things.—Then
we grow tired of seeing people—then
we grow tired of being seen by people— 
and then we go out, merely because we
can't stay at home—A dismal story, and
a true one.—Excuse me for showing you
the simple truth; well dressed falsehood
is a personage much more presentable —

I am now come to an epoch in my history,
in which there is a dearth of extraordinary
events—What shall I do?—Shall I
invent—I would if I could—but I cannot
—Then I must confess to you, that during
these last four years I should have
died of ennui if I had not been kept alive
by my hatred of Mrs. Luttridge, and of
my husband—I don't know which I hate
most—O, yes I do—I certainly hate Mrs.
Luttridge the most—for a woman can
always hate a woman more than she can
hate a man, unless she has been in love
with him—which I never was with poor
lord Delacour.—Yes! I certainly hate
Mrs. Luttridge the most—I cannot count
the number of extravagant things I have
done on purpose to eclipse her.—We have
had rival routs, rival concerts, rival
galas, rival theatres—she has cost me
more than she's worth—But then I certainly
have mortified her once a month at
least.—My hatred to Mrs. Luttridge, my
dear, is the remote cause of my love for
you—for it was the cause of my intimacy

with your aunt Stanhope—Mrs. Stanhope
is really a clever woman, she knows
how to turn the hatred of all her friends
and acquaintance to her own advantage.
—To serve lovers, is a thankless office,
compared with that of serving haters— 
polite haters I mean.—It may be dangerous,
for aught I know, to interpose in the
quarrels of those who hate their neighbours,
not only with all their souls, but
with all their strength'—the barbarians
fight it out, kiss, and are friends.—The
quarrels which never come to blows are
safer for a go-between; but even these
are not to be compared to such as never
come to words—Your true silent hatred is
that which lasts for ever.—The moment it
was known that Mrs. Luttridge and I had
come to the resolution never to speak to
one another, your aunt Stanhope began to
minister to my hatred so, that she made
herself quite agreeable. She, one winter,
gave me notice that my adversary had
set her heart upon having a magnificent
entertainment, on a particular day. On

that day, I determined, of course, to have
a rival gala.—Mrs. Stanhope's maid had a
lover, a gardener, who lived at Chelsea; 
and the gardener had an aloe, which was
expected soon to blow. Now, a plant
that blows but once in a hundred years
is worth having. The gardener intended
to make a public exhibition of it; by
which he expected to gain about a hundred
guineas.—Your aunt Stanhope's
maid got it from him, for me, for fifty; 
and I had it whispered about, that an aloe
in full blow, would stand in the middle of
one of lady Delacour's supper tables.—The
difficulty was to make Mrs. Luttridge fix
upon the very day we wanted; for you
know we could not possibly put off the
blowing of our aloe.—Your aunt Stanhope
managed the thing admirably, by
means of a common friend, who was not
a suspected person with the Luttridges— 
in short, my dear, I gained my point— 
every body came from Mrs. Luttridge's to
me, or to my aloe—She had a prodigiously
fine supper, but scarcely a soul staid with

her; they all came to see, what could be
seen but once in a hundred years.—Now,
the aloe, you know, is of a cumbersome
height for a supper ornament.—My
saloon luckily has a dome, and under the
dome we placed it.—Round the huge
china vase in which it was planted, we
placed the most beautiful, or rather the
most expensive hot-house plants we could
procure.—After all, the aloe was an ugly
thing—but it answered my purpose—it
made Mrs. Luttridge, as I am credibly informed,
absolutely weep with vexation.— 
I was excessively obliged to your aunt
Stanhope, and I assured her, that if ever
it were in my power, she might depend
upon my gratitude.—Pray, when you
write, repeat the same thing to her, and
tell her, that since she has introduced Belinda
Portman to me, I am a hundred times
more obliged to her than ever I was before.
—But to proceed with my important
history.—I will not tire you, with fighting
over again all my battles, in my seven
years war with Mrs. Luttridge.—I believe

love is more to your taste than hatred; 
therefore I will go on as fast as possible, to
Clarence Hervey's return from his travels.
—He was much improved by them; or
at least I thought so, for he was heard to
declare, that after all he had seen in
France and Italy, lady Delacour appeared
to him the most charming woman of her
age, in Europe.—The words, of her age,
piqued me, and I spared no pains to make
him forget them—a stupid man cannot
readily be persuaded out of his senses— 
what he sees, he sees, and neither more
nor less—but 'tis the easiest thing in the
world to catch hold of a man of genius— 
you have nothing to do but to appeal from
his senses to his imagination; and then he
sees with the eyes of his imagination, and
hears with the ears of his imagination; 
and then no matter what the age, beauty,
or wit of the charmer may be—no matter
whether it be lady Delacour, or Belinda
Portman—I think I know Clarence Hervey's
character au fin fond, and I could
lead him where I pleased—but don't be

alarmed, my dear, you know I can't lead
him into matrimony.—You look at me, and
from me—and you don't well know which
way to look—You are surprised perhaps,
after all that passed, all that I felt, and all
that I still feel about poor Lawless, I
should not be cured of coquetry—So am I
surprised—but habit, fashion, the devil,
I believe, leads us on—and then, lord
Delacour is so obstinate and jealous—you
can't have forgotten the polite conversation
that passed one morning at breakfast
between his lordship and me, about Clarence
Hervey—but neither does his lordship
know, nor does Clarence Hervey suspect,
that my object with him is to conceal from
the world, what I cannot conceal from
myself, that I am a dying woman.—I am,
and I see you think me, a strange, weak; 
inconsistent creature—I was intended for
something better—but now it is too late
—a coquet I have lived, and a coquet I
shall die—I speak frankly to you—let me
have the glory of leading Clarence Hervey
about with me in public for a few

months longer, then I must quit the stage.
—As to love, you know with me, that is
out of the question; all I ask or wish for
is admiration.”
Lady Delacour paused, and leaned
back on the sofa—she appeared in great
pain.
“O!—I am, sometimes,” resumed
she, “as you see, in terrible pain.—For
two years after I gave myself that
blow with the pistol, I neglected the
warning twinges that I felt from time to
time—at last I was terrified.—Marriott
was the only person to whom I mentioned
my fears, and she was profoundly ignorant.
—She flattered me with false hopes,
till, alas! it was in vain to doubt of the
nature of my complaint.—Then she urged
me to consult a physician—that I would
not do—I could not—I never will consult
a physician—I would not for the universe
have my situation known.—You stare— 
you cannot enter into my feelings.—Why,
my dear, if I lose admiration, what have
I left?—Would you have me live upon

pity?—Consider, what a dreadful thing
it must be to me, who have no friends,
no family, to be confined to a sick room
—a sick bed—'tis what I must come to
at last—but not yet—not yet—I have fortitude
—I should despise myself if I had
no species of merit—besides, it is still
some occupation to me, to act my part in
public—and bustle, noise, nonsense, if
they do not amuse, or interest me, yet they
stifle reflection—may you never know
what it is to feel remorse!—The idea of
that poor wretch, Lawless, whom I actually
murdered, as much as if I had shot
him, haunts me whenever I am alone
—It is now between eight and nine years
since he died, and I have lived éver since
in a constant course of dissipation—but
it won't do—Conscience! conscience will
be heard.—Since my health has been
weakened, I believe I have acquired
more conscience—I really think that my
stupid lord, who has neither ideas nor sensations,
except when he is intoxicated,
is a hundred times happier than I am.—

But I will spare you, Belinda—I promised
that you should not have a scene, and I
will keep my word—It is, however, a
great relief to open my mind to one who
has some feeling—Harriot Freke has none
—I am convinced that she has no more
feeling than this table.—I have not yet
told you how she has used me.—You
know that it was she who led, or rather
dragged me into that scrape with Lawless
—For that I never reproached her.—You
know it was she who frightened me into
fighting that duel with Mrs. Luttridge— 
For this I never reproached her.—She has
cost me my peace of mind—my health— 
my life—She knows it, and she forsakes,
betrays, insults, and leaves me to die—I
cannot command my temper sufficiently
to be coherent when I speak of her—I
cannot express in words what I feel— 
How could that most treacherous of beings,
for ten years, make me believe that she
was my friend?—Whilst I thought she
really loved me, I pardoned her all her
faults—All—what a comprehensive word!

—All, all I forgave, and continually said
—but she has a good heart—A good heart!
—She has no heart! She has no feeling
for any living creature but herself—I
always thought that she cared for no one
but for me—but now I find she can throw
me off as easily as she would her glove— 
And this too I suppose she calls a frolic— 
or, in her own vulgar language, fun.— 
Can you believe it?—What do you think
she has done, my dear? She has gone
over at last to odious Mrs. Luttridge— 
actually she is gone down with the Luttridges
to—shire.—The independent
member has taken the Chiltern Hundreds,
vacates his seat, a new election comes on
directly—the Luttridges are to bring in
Freke—not Harriot's cousin, they have
cut him—but her husband, who is now to
commence senator—he is to come in for
the county, upon condition that Luttridge
shall have Freke's borough.—Lord Delacour,
without saying one syllable, has
gone and promised his interest to this
precious junto, and lady Delacour is left

a miserable cipher—My Lord's motives
I can clearly understand; he lost a thousand
guineas to Mrs. Luttridge this winter,
and this is a convenient way of paying
her—why Harriot should be so anxious
to serve a husband whom she hates—bitterly
hates—might surprise any body who
did not know les dessous des cartes as well
as I do.—You are but just come into the
world, Belinda—the world of wickedness
I mean, my dear, or you would have
heard what a piece of work there was, a
few years ago, about Harriot Freke, and
this cousin of hers.—Without betraying
her confidence, I may just tell you what is
known to every body, that she went so
far, that if it had not been for me, not a
soul would have visited her—she swam in
the sea of folly out of her depth—the tide
of fashion ebbed, and then was she left
sticking knee deep in the mud; a ridiculous,
scandalous figure; I had the courage
and foolish good nature to hazard myself
for her, and actually dragged her to
terra firma—how she has gone on since I

cannot tell you—precisely, because I am
in the secret—but the catastrophe is public
—to make her peace with her husband,
she gives up her friend.—Well! that I
could have pardoned, if she had not been
so base as to go over to Mrs. Luttridge.— 
Mrs. Luttridge offered (I've seen the letter
and Harriot's answer) to bring in
Freke, the husband, and to make both a
county and a family peace, on condition
that Harriot should give up all connexion
with lady Delacour.—Mrs. Luttridge
knew this would provoke me beyond measure,
and there is nothing she would not
do to gratify her mean, malevolent passion
—she has succeeded for once in her life— 
the blame of the duel, of course, is all
thrown upon me—and, would you believe
it, Harriot Freke, I am credibly informed,
throws all the blame of Lawless's business
on me—nay, hints that Lawless's death-bed
declaration of my innocence was
very generous.—O, the treachery, the
baseness of this woman!—and it was my
fate to hear all this last night, at the masquerade

—I waited, and waited, and looked
every where for Harriot—she was to be
the widow Brady, I knew—At last the
widow Brady made her appearance, and I
accosted her with all my usual familiarity
—The widow was dumb—I insisted upon
knowing the cause of this sudden loss of
speech—The widow took me into another
apartment, unmasked, and there I beheld
Mr. Freke, the husband.—I was astonished,
had no idea of the truth—‘Where is Harriot?’ 
I believe were the first words I said
—‘Gone to the country.’—‘To the country!’ 
—‘Yes; to&wblank;shire, with Mrs.
Luttridge.’—Mrs. Luttridge, odious Mrs.
Luttridge! I could scarcely believe my
senses—but Freke, who always hated
me, believing that I led his wife, instead
of her leading me into mischief, would
have enjoyed my astonishment and my
rage—so I concealed both, with all possible
presence of mind.—He went on
overwhelming me with explanations and
copies of letters; and declared it was at

Mrs. Freke's request he did and said all
this; and that he was to follow her early
the next morning to&wblank;shire.—I broke
from him, simply wishing him a good
journey, and as much family peace as his
patience merited.—He knows that I
know his wife's history, and though she
has no shame, he has some.—I had the
satisfaction to leave him blushing with
anger, and I supported the character of
the comic muse a full hour afterward,
to convince him, that all their combined
malice would fail to break my spirit—in
public—what I suffer in private, is known
only to my own heart.”
As she finished these words, lady Delacour
rose abruptly, and hummed a
new opera air. Then she retired to her
boudoir, saying, with an air of levity, to
Belinda, as she left the room—
“Good bye, my dear Belinda; I
leave you to ruminate sweet and bitter
thoughts—to think of the last speech
and confession of lady Delacour, or,

what will interest you much more, the
first speech and confession of—Clarence
Hervey.”