

Lord Oldborough expected, that the
prompt measure of despatching the dangerous
Godfrey to the West Indies
would restore things to their former train.
For a week after Godfrey Percy's departure
Miss Hauton seemed much affected
by it, and was from morning till
night languid, or in the sullens. Of all
which Lord Oldborough took not the
slightest notice. In the course of a
fortnight Miss Falconer, who became
inseparable from Miss Hauton, flattering,
pitying, and humoring her, contrived to
recover the young Lady from this fit of
despondency, and produced her again at
musical parties. She was passionately
fond of music; the Miss Falconers played
on the forte piano and sung, their
brother John accompanied exquisitely

on the flute, and the Marquis of Twickenham,
who was dull as “the fat weed
that grows on Lethe's brink,” stood by,
—admiring. His proposal was made in
form—and in form the young lady evaded
it—in form her uncle, Lord Oldborough,
told her, that the thing must be,
and proceeded directly to decide upon
the settlements with the Duke of Greenwich,
and set the lawyers to work. In
the mean time, the bride elect wept,
and deplored, and refused to eat, drink,
or speak, except to the Miss Falconers,
with whom she was closetted for hours,
and to whom the task of managing her
was consigned by common consent.— 
The Marquis, who, though he was, as
he said, much in love, was not very delicate
as to the possession of the lady's
affections, wondered that any one going
to be married to the Marquis of Twickenham
could be so shy, and so melancholy; 
but her confidantes assured
him, that “it was all uncommon refinement
and sensibility, which was their

sweetest Maria's only fault.”—Excellent
claret, and a moderately good opinion of
himself, persuaded the Marquis of the
truth of all the Miss Falconers pleased to
say, and her uncle graciously granted
the delays, which the young Lady prayed
for week after week—till, at last, striking
his hand upon the table, Lord Oldborough
said, “There must be an end
of this—the papers must be signed this
day se'nnight—Maria Hauton shall be
married this day fortnight.”—Maria
Hauton was sent for to her uncle's study,
heard her doom in sullen silence; but
she made no show of resistance, and
Lord Oldborough was satisfied. An
hour afterwards Commissioner Falconer
begged admission, and presented himself
with a face of consternation— 
Lord Oldborough, not easily surprised or
alarmed, waited, however, with some
anxiety, till he should speak.
“My Lord, I beg pardon for this
intrusion ... I know, at this time, you
are much occupied ... But it is absolutely

necessary I should communicate
... I feel it to be my duty immediately
... and I cannot hesitate ... though I
really do not know how to bring myself ...”
There was something in the apparent
embarrassment and distress of Mr. Falconer,
which Lord Oldborough's penetrating
eye instantly discerned to be affected.— 
His Lordship turned a chair
towards him, but said not a word.—The
Commissioner sat down like a man acting
despair, but looking for a moment
in Lord Oldborough's face, he saw what
his Lordship was thinking of, and immediately
his affected embarrassment became
real and great.—
“Well, Commissioner, what is the
difficulty?”
“My Lord, I have within this quarter
of an hour heard what will ruin me
for ever in your Lordship's opinion, unless
your Lordship does me the justice
to believe, that I never heard or suspected

it before—I have only to trust to your
magnanimity—and, I do.”
Lord Oldborough bowed slightly&wblank; 
“The fact, if you please, my dear
Sir?”
“The fact, my Lord, is, that Captain
Bellamy, whose eyes, I suppose,
have been quickened by jealousy, has
discovered what has escaped us all ...
what never would have occurred to me.
 ... what never could have entered into
my mind to suspect ... what I still
hope ...”
“The fact, Sir, let me beg”—
The urgency of Lord Oldborough's
look and voice admitted of no delay.
“Miss Hauton is in love with my
son John.”
“Indeed!”—
This—“ Indeed!”—was pronounced
in a tone which left the Commissioner
in doubt what it expressed, whether
pure surprise—indignation, or contempt
—most of the last, perhaps—he longed

to hear it repeated, but he had not that
satisfaction.—Lord Oldborough turned
abruptly—walked up and down the room
with such a firm tread as sounded ominously
to the Commissioner's ear.—
“So then, Sir, Miss Hauton, I think
you tell me, is in love with Cornet Falconer?”
“Captain Bellamy says so, my
Lord”—
“Sir, I care not what Captain Bellamy
says—nor do I well know who, or
what he is—much less, what he can
have to do with my family affairs— 
I ask, Sir, what reason you have to believe,
that my niece is in love, as it is
called, with your son? You certainly
would not make such a report to me
without good reason for believing it— 
What are your reasons?”
“Excuse me, my Lord, my reasons
are founded on information which I do
not think myself at liberty to repeat— 
But upon hearing the report from” ...

The Commissioner in the hurry and
confusion of his mind, and in his new
situation, totally lost his tact, and at
this moment was upon the point of again
saying ... from Captain Bellamy ... but
the flash of Lord Oldborough's eye warned
him of his danger—he dropped the
name.
“I immediately went to sound my
son John, and as far as I can judge, he
has not yet any suspicion of the—truth.”
Lord Oldborough's countenance cleared.
The Commissioner recovered his
presence of mind, for he thought he
saw his way before him—“I thought it
my duty to let your Lordship know the
first hint I had of such a nature ... for
how soon it might be surmised ... or
what steps might be taken, I must leave
it to your Lordship to judge—I can
only assure you, that as yet, to the best
of my belief, John has not any suspicion
... Fortunately he is very slow— 
and not very bright.”

Lord Oldborough stood with compressed
lips, seeming to listen, but deep
in thought.
“Mr. Commissioner Falconer, let us
understand one another well now—as we
have done hitherto.—If your son, Cornet
Falconer, were to marry Maria
Hauton, she would no longer be my
niece, he would have a portionless,
friendless, and, in my opinion, a very
silly wife.—He is, I think you say, not
very bright himself—He would probably
remain a cornet the rest of his days—All
idea of assistance being of course out of
the question in that case, from me, or
mine, to him, or his.”—
The awful pause which Lord Oldborough
made, and his determined look,
gave the Commissioner opportunity to
reflect much, in a few seconds.—
“On the contrary,” resumed his
Lordship, “if your son John, my dear
Sir, show the same desire to comply
with my wishes, and to serve my interests,

which I have found in the rest
of his family, he shall find me willing
and able to advance him as well as his
brother Cunningham.”
“Your Lordship's wishes will, I can
answer for it, be laws to him, as well as
to the rest of his family.”
“In one word then—Let Colonel
Falconer be married elsewhere, within a
fortnight, and I prophesy, that within a
year he shall be a field officer—within
two years a Lieutenant Colonel.”
Commissioner Falconer bowed twice
—low to the field officer—lower to the
Lieutenant-Colonel.—
“I have long had a match in my eye
for John,” said the father, “but a fortnight,
my gracious Lord ... that is so
very short a time ... Your Lordship
will consider there are delicacies in these
cases ... no young Lady ... it is impossible
... your Lordship must be sensible
that it is really impossible, with a
young Lady of any family”—

“I am aware that it is difficult, but
not impossible”—replied Lord Oldborough,
rising deliberately.
The Commissioner took his leave,
stammering somewhat of “nothing being
impossible for a friend”—courtier—he
should have said.
The Commissioner set to work in earnest
about the match he had in view for
John.—Not one, but several fair visions
flitted before the eye of his politic mind.
The Miss Chattertons, any one of whom
would, he knew, come readily within
the terms prescribed—but then, they had
neither fortune nor connexions. A relation
of Lady Jane Granville's—excellent
connexion, and reasonable fortune— 
but there all the decorum of regular approaches
and time would be necessary:
luckily a certain Miss Petcalf was just
returned from India, with a large fortune.
—The General, her father, was anxious
to introduce his daughter to the fashionable
world, and to marry her for connexion— 
fortune no object to him—delicacies

he would wave.—The Commissioner
saw—counted—and decided— 
(There was a brother Petcalf too, who
might do for Georgiana—but for that no
hurry)—John was asked by his father if
he would like to be a Major in a year,
and a Lieutenant-Colonel in two years?
“To be sure he would—was he a
fool?”
“Then he must be married in a fortnight.”
John did not see how this conclusion
followed immediately from the premises,
for John was not quite a fool—So he answered— 
Indeed!—an indeed! so
unlike Lord Oldborough's, that the Commissioner,
struck with the contrast, could
scarcely maintain the gravity the occasion
required, and he could only pronounce
the words,
“General Petcalf has a daughter.”— 
“Ay, Miss Petcalf—Ay, he is a
General, true—now I see it all–Well,
I'm their man—I have no objection—but
Miss Petcalf! ... Is not that the Indian

girl? ... Is not there a drop of
black blood? ... No, no, father,” 
cried John, drawing himself up—“I'll
be d&wblank;d ...”
“Hear me first, my own John,” 
cried his father, much and justly alarmed,
for this motion was the precursor of
an obstinate fit, which, if John took, perish
father, mother, the whole human
race, he could not be moved from the settled
purpose of his soul.
“Hear me, my beloved John,—for you
are a man of sense,” said his unblushing
father—“do you think I'd have a drop
of black blood for my daughter-in-law,
much less let my favorite son ... But
there's none—it is climate—all climate— 
as you may see by only looking at Mrs.
Governor Carneguy, how she figures every
where, and Miss Petcalf is nothing
near so dark as Mrs. Carneguy, surely.”
“Surely”—said John.
“And her father, the General, gives
her an Indian fortune to suit an Indian
complexion.”

“That's good, at any rate,” quoth
John.
“Yes, my dear Major—yes, my Lieutenant-Colonel,
to be sure that's good.— 
So to secure the good the Gods provide
us, go you this minute, dress and away
to your fair Indian ... I'll undertake
the business with the General.”—
“But a fortnight, my dear father,” 
said John, looking in the glass—“how
can that be?”
“Look again, and tell me how it can
not be?—Pray don't put that difficulty
into Miss Petcalf's head—into her heart
I am sure it would never come.”
John yielded his shoulder to the push
his father gave him towards the door, but
suddenly turning back,—
“Zounds, father, a fortnight,” he exclaimed,
“why there won't be time to
buy even boots!
“And what are even boots,” replied
his father, “to such a man as you?— 
Go, go, man, your legs are better than
all the boots in the world.”

Flattery can find her way to sooth the
dullest coldest ear alive.—John looked
in the glass again—dressed—and went
to flatter Miss Petcalf.—The proposal
was graciously accepted, for the Commissioner
stated, as he was permitted in
confidence, to the General, that his son
was under the special patronage of Lord
Oldborough, who would make him a
Lieutenant-Colonel in two years.—The
General, who looked only for connexion,
and genteel family, was satisfied. The
young lady started at the first mention of
an early day—but there was an absolute
necessity for pressing that point, since
the young officer was ordered to go abroad
in a fortnight, and could not bear to leave
England without completing his union
with Miss Petcalf.—These reasons ...
as no other were to be had, proved sufficient
with father and daughter.—
John was presented with a captain's
commission.—He, before the end of the
fortnight, looked again and again in the
glass to take leave of himself, hung up

his flute,—and—was married.—The bride
and bridegroom were presented to Lord
and Lady Oldborough, and went immediately
abroad.
Thus the forms of homage, and the
rights of vassalage are altered; the competition
for favor having succeeded to the
dependance for protection, the feudal lord
of ancient times could ill compete in
power with the influence of the modern
political patron.—
Pending the negociation of this marriage,
and during the whole of this eventful
fortnight, Cunningham Falconer had
been in the utmost anxiety that can be
conceived–not for a brother's interests,
but for his own: his own advancement
he judged would depend upon the result,
and he could not rest day or night, till
the marriage was happily completed,— 
though, at the same time, he secretly
cursed all the loves and marriages, which
had drawn Lord Oldborough's attention
away from that embassy, on which his
own heart was fixed.

Buckhurst, the while, though not admitted
behind the scenes, said he was
sufficiently amused by what he saw on the
stage, enjoyed the comedy of the whole,
and pretty well made out for himself the
double plot.—The confidante, Miss Falconer,
played her part to admiration, and
prevailed on Miss Hauton to appear on
the appointed day in the character of a
reasonable woman, and accordingly she
suffered herself to be led, in fashionable
style, to the hymeneal altar by the Marquis
of Twickenham. This dénouement
satisfied Lord Oldborough.
Captain Percy to his brother Alfred.
“DEAR ALFRED,
Don't flatter yourself that
I am yet gone to Jamaica: notwithstanding
the hurry of our embarkation, we
were six weeks detained at Portsmouth,
waiting for some order, which some secretary
had forgotten to expedite.—At last
we sailed, and then were driven back by
contrary winds, forced to put in at Plymouth,

from whence I now write after
sitting up and dancing all night. And
who do you think I found here waltzing
with the mayor's daughters, rusticating,
as he says, and lost to the world? Who
do you think?—Captain Bellamy, who
used to waltz with Miss Hauton, which
cured me luckily of all desire to have her
for my partner for life. Bellamy tells me
the strangest story of her having been,
since I left London, in love and out of
love with John Falconer—John Falconer
—the dunce—but surely this is a fable,
or a dream, or a blunder of Bellamy's— 
especially as in to day's paper I see the
marriage of the said John to Miss Petcalf,
and a paragraph in the same paper
announcing, that the young Marquis of
Twickenham is next week to lead to the
altar the beautiful and accomplished
niece of Lord Oldborough. All this has
been done so suddenly, that it makes me
rub my eyes, and feel like Mahomet,
who plunged his head into a tub of water,
and when he took it out again, heard

of four marriages that had happened
during his dip.—Pray send me word by
next post, what I am to believe and disbelieve,
that I may not go with wrong
news and a puzzled head to Jamaica.— 
My heart, thank Heaven, has nothing to
do with the business now.—But I shall
be glad, however, to know for certain,
whether Miss Hauton is to be pitied
or congratulated, upon becoming Marchioness
of Twickenham.
“Gascoigne and I are anxious to hear
how Charles Henry goes on, and how
he likes being with the merchants. I
take it for granted that he is with them.
But I have not heard from him, or from
any of you, because you took it for
granted, I suppose, that I was upon the
salt seas.—Pray be kind to Henry, and
see as much of him as you can, and send
me his address, for I cannot recollect the
merchant's name.
“Remember Gascoigne to him—Gascoigne
loves him as if he was his son,

and I should believe Henry was his son,
only that Gascoigne is not old enough.
“The first leisure moment, will you go
to De Berg's riding-house, and inquire
whether he has broke the horse he promised
me, White-Surrey?—I intended
it for Caroline, but forgot to say so in
the hurry of our departure.—Do you
settle with De Berg for me handsomely,
and send the horse down to Caroline,
with my love, hoping White-Surrey will
prove both gentle and spirited.
“In an old, old letter of yours, which
just now fell out of my letter-case, and
which, for want of something better to
do, I have reperused, I find a prophecy
to which, at the time I first read it, I
paid,—begging your pardon,—little attention; 
but now it strikes me with some
force. You prophesy, that Attorney
Sharpe, and our worthy relative, Sir Robert
Percy, whom you saw conjuring
together, will work us wo.—Do you
really think it possible, that, work as

they will, they can ever work themselves
into the Percy estate? and do you seriously
advise me to prepare for being
poor, and to practise being economical?
—I will think of it&wblank;
“How are you and Erasmus getting
on? Write me long letters and full accounts
of yourselves—Rosamond and Caroline
promise to furnish me with a
home-journal regularly.—
“I purpose—but will not promise—to
live upon my pay, and not to cost my
father (—God bless him! for the best of
fathers as he is, though I say it in a
parenthesis)—one shilling—provided always,
that I do not lose my baggage.
But Gascoigne warns me, that every
young officer loses his baggage by his
own carelessness, once, at least, in his
life—Gascoigne lost his three times, but
he had a good mother—a good aunt— 
and a good brother, who never let him
feel the loss, so he says, he wonders that
he did not lose it a fourth time.—I have
friends enough who would, I dare say,

spoil me in the same way; but, lest your
prophecies should be accomplished, and
that I should be the ruin of my good
friends, I will go and look after my own
baggage.
Your affectionate Brother,
G. Percy.”