

No—lord Colambre was not in his accustomed
place, reading in the breakfast
room: nor did he make his appearance
till both his father and mother had been
some time at breakfast.
“Good morning to you, my lord Colambre,” 
said his mother, in a reproachful
tone, the moment he entered; “I
am much obliged to you for your company
last night.”
“Good morning to you, Colambre,” 
said his father, in a more jocose tone of
reproach; “I am obliged to you for
your good company last night.”
“Good morning to you, lord Colambre,” 
said miss Nugent; and though
she endeavoured to throw all reproach
from her looks, and to let none be heard
in her voice, yet there was a slight tremulous

motion in that voice, which
struck our hero to the heart.
“I thank you, ma'am, for missing
me,” said he, addressing himself to his
mother; “I stayed away but half an
hour; I accompanied my father to St.
James's street, and when I returned, I
found that every one had retired to
rest.”
“O, was that the case?” said lady
Clonbrony; “I own I thought it very
unlike you to leave me in that sort of
way.”
“And, lest you should be jealous of
that half hour when he was accompanying
me,” said lord Clonbrony, “I
must remark, that though I had his
body with me, I had none of his mind; 
that he left at home with you ladies, or
with some fair one across the water, for
the deuse of two words did he bestow
upon me, with all his pretence of accompanying
me.”
“Lord Colambre seems to have a
fair chance of a pleasant breakfast,” said

miss Nugent, smiling; “reproaches on
all sides.”
“I have heard none on your side,
Grace,” said lord Clonbrony; “and
that's the reason, I suppose, he wisely
takes his seat beside you. But come,
we will not badger you any more, my
dear boy. We have given him as fine a
complexion amongst us, as if he had
been out hunting these three hours:
have not we, Grace?”
“When Colambre has been a season
or two more in Lon'on, he'll not be so
easily put out of countenance,” said
lady Clonbrony; “you don't see young
men of fashion here blushing about
nothing.”
“No, nor about any thing, my dear,” 
said lord Clonbrony; “but that's no
proof they do nothing they ought to
blush for.”
“What they do, there's no occasion for
ladies to inquire,” said lady Clonbrony; 
“but this I know, that it's a great disadvantage
to a young man of a certain rank

to blush; for no people, who live in a
certain set, ever do. And it is the most
opposite thing possible to a certain air,
which, I own, I think Colambre wants; 
and now that he has done travelling in
Ireland, which is no use in pint of giving
a gentleman a travelled air, or any thing
of that sort, I hope he will put himself
under my conduct for next winter's
campaign in town.”
Lord Clonbrony looked as if he did
not know how to look; and after drumming
on the table for some seconds,
said,
“Colambre, I told you how it would
be.—That's a fatal hard condition of
yours.”
“Not a hard condition, I hope, my
dear father,” said lord Colambre.
“Hard it must be, since it can't be
fulfilled, or won't be fulfilled, which
comes to the same thing,” replied lord
Clonbrony, sighing.
“I am persuaded, sir, that it will be
fulfilled,” said lord Colambre; “I am

persuaded, that, when my mother hears
the truth and the whole truth,—when
she finds that your happines and the
happiness of her whole family depend
upon her yielding her taste on one subject—”
“O, I see now what you are about,” 
cried lady Clonbrony, “you are coming
round with your persuasions and prefaces
to ask me to give up Lon'on, and
go back with you to Ireland, my lord.
You may save yourselves the trouble,
all of you; for no earthly persuasions
shall make me do it. I will never give
up my taste on that pint. My happiness
has a right to be as much considered
as your father's, Colambre, or any
body's. And, in one word, I won't do
it,” cried she, rising angrily from the
breakfast table.
“There! did not I tell you how it
would be?” cried lord Clonbrony.
“My mother has not heard me, yet,” 
said lord Colambre, laying his hand upon
his mother's arm, as she attempted to

pass; “hear me, madam, for your own
sake. You do not know what will
happen, this very day—this very hour,
perhaps, if you do not listen to me.”
“And what will happen!” said lady
Clonbrony, stopping short.
“Ay, indeed; she little knows,” said
lord Clonbrony, “what's hanging over
her head.”
“Hanging over my head!” said lady
Clonbrony, looking up; “nonsense!
—what?”
“An execution, madam!” said lord
Colambre.
“Gracious me! an execution!” said
lady Clonbrony, sitting down again; 
but I heard you talk of an execution
months ago, my lord, before my son
went to Ireland, and it blew over—I
heard no more of it.”
“It won't blow over now,” said lord
Clonbrony; “you'll hear more of it
now. Sir Terence O'Fay it was, you
may remember, that settled it then.”
“Well, and can't he settle it now?

Send for him, since he understands
these cases; and I will ask him to
dinner myself, for your sake, and be
very civil to him, my lord.”
“All your civility, either for my
sake, or your own, will not signify a
straw, my dear, in this case—any thing
that poor Terry could do, he'd do, and
welcome without it; but he can do
nothing.”
Nothing!—that's very extraordinary.
But I'm clear no one dare to bring a
real execution against us, in earnest; 
and you are only trying to frighten me
to your purpose, like a child; but it
shan't do.”
“Very well, my dear; you'll see— 
too late.”
A knock at the house door.
“Who is it?—What is it?” cried
lord Clonbrony, growing very pale.
Lord Colambre changed colour too,
and ran down stairs. “Don't let 'em,
let any body in, for your life, Colambre; 
under any pretence,” cried

lord Clonbrony, calling from the head
of the stairs—Then running to the
window,
“By all that's good, it's Mordicai
himself! and the people with him.”
“Lean your head on me, my dear
aunt,” said miss Nugent—Lady Clonbrony
leant back, trembling, and ready
to faint.
“But he's walking off now, the
rascal could not get in—safe for the
present!” cried lord Clonbrony, rubbing
his hands, and repeating, “Safe for the
present!”
“Safe for the present!” repeated
lord Colambre, coming again into the
room. “Safe for the present hour.”
“He could not get in, I suppose— 
O, I warned all the servants, well,” 
said lord Clonbrony, “and so did Terry.
Ay, there's the rascal, Mordicai, walking
off, at the end of the street; I
know his walk a mile off—Gad! I can
breathe again. I am glad he's gone— 
But he will come back and always lie

in wait, and some time or other, when
we're off our guard, (unawares) he'll
slide in.”
“Slide in! O, horrid!” cried lady
Clonbrony, sitting up, and wiping
away the water, which miss Nugent
had sprinkled on her face.
“Were you much alarmed?” said
lord Colambre, with a voice of tenderness,
looking at his mother first, but
his eyes fixing on miss Nugent.
“Shockingly!” said lady Clonbrony; 
“I never thought it would reelly come
to this?”
“It will really come to much more,
my dear,” said lord Clonbrony, “that
you may depend upon, unless you
prevent it.”
“Lord! What can I do!—I know
nothing of business. How should I,
lord Clonbrony? but I know there's Colambre
—I was always told that when
he was of age, every thing should be
settled; and why can't he settle it when
he's upon the spot?”

“And upon one condition, I will,” 
cried lord Colambre; “at what loss to
myself, my dear mother, I need not
mention.”
“Then I will mention it,” cried
lord Clonbrony, “at the loss it will be
of nearly half the estate, he would have
had, if we had not spent it”—
“Loss! O, I am excessively sorry,
my son's to be at such a loss—it
must not be.”
“It cannot be otherwise,” said lord
Clonbrony; “nor it can't be this way
either, my lady Clonbrony, unless you
comply with his condition, and consent
to return to Ireland.”
“I cannot, I will not;” replied lady
Clonbrony. “Is this your condition,
Colambre?—I take it exceedingly ill of
you. I think it very unkind, and
unhandsome, and ungenerous, and undutiful
of you, Colambre; you my
son!”—She poured forth a torrent of
reproaches; then came to intreaties
and tears. But our hero, prepared for

this, had steeled his mind, and he
stood resolved not to indulge his own
feelings, or to yield to caprice or
persuasion; but to do that which he
knew was best for the happiness of
hundreds of tenants, who depended
upon them; best, for both his father
and his mother's ultimate happiness
and respectability.
“It's all in vain,” cried lord Clonbrony,
I have no resource, but one, and
I must condescend now to go to him
this minute, for Mordcai will be back
and seize all—I must sign and leave
all to Garraghty.”
“Well, sign, sign, my lord, and settle
with Garraghty. Colambre, I've heard
all the complaints you brought over
against that man. My lord spent half the
night telling them to me: but all agents
are bad, I suppose; at any rate I can't
help it—sign, sign, my lord; he has
money—“Yes, do; go and settle with
him, my lord.”
Lord Colambre and miss Nugent,

at one and the same moment, stopped
lord Clonbrony as he was quitting
the room, and then approached lady
Clonbrony with supplicating looks; 
but she turned her head to the other
side, and, as if putting away their intreaties,
made a repelling motion with
both her hands, and exclaimed, “No
Grace Nugent!—no Colambre—no— 
no Colambre! I'll never hear of leaving
Lon'on.—There's no living out of
Lon'on—I can't, I won't live out of
Lon'on, I say.”
Her son saw that the Londonomania
was now stronger than ever upon her,
but resolved to make one desperate
appeal to her natural feelings, which,
though smothered, he could not believe
were wholly extinguished—he caugh
her repelling hands, and pressing them
with respectful tenderness to his lips,
“O, my dear mother, you once loved
your son,” said he, “loved him better
than any thing in this world—if one
spark of affection for him remains, hear

him now, and forgive him, if he pass
the bounds ... bounds he never passed
before, of filial duty. Mother, in
compliance with your wishes, my father
left Ireland—left his home, his
duties, his friends, his natural connections,
and for many years he has lived
in England, and you have spent many
seasons in London.”
“Yes, in the very best company—in
the very first circles,” said lady Clonbrony; 
“cold as the high-bred English
are said to be in general to strangers.”
“Yes!” replied lord Colambre, “the
very best company (if you mean the
most fashionable) have accepted of our
entertainments. We have forced our
way into their frozen circles; we have
been permitted to breathe in these elevated
regions of fashion; we have it to
say, that the duke of this, and my lady
that, are of our acquaintance.—We
may say more: we may boast that we
have vied with those whom we could
never equal. And at what expense

have we done all this? For a single
season, the last winter, (I will go no
further) at the expense of a great part
of your timber, the growth of a century
—swallowed in the entertainments
of one winter in London! Our hills to
be bare for another half century to
come! But let the trees go: I think
more of your tenants—of those left
under the tyranny of a bad agent, at
the expense of every comfort, every
hope they enjoyed!—tenants, who were
thriving and prosperous; who used to
smile upon you, and to bless you both!
In one cottage, I have seen—”
Here lord Clonbrony, unable to restrain
his emotion, hurried out of the
room.
“Then I am sure it is not my fault,” 
said lady Clonbrony; “for I brought
my lord a large fortune: and I am confident
I have not, after all, spent more
any season, in the best company, than
he has among a set of low people, in
his muddling, discreditable way.”

“And how has he been reduced to
this?” said lord Colambre, “Did he
not formerly live with gentlemen, his
equals, in his own country; his contemporaries.
Men of the first station and
character, whom I met in Dublin,
spoke of him in a manner that gratified
the heart of his son: he was respectable
and respected, at his own home; but
when he was forced away from that
home, deprived of his objects, his occupations
induced him to live in London,
or at watering-places, where he
could find no employments that were
suitable to him; sat down, late in life,
in the midst of strangers, to him cold
and reserved; himself too proud to
bend to those who disdained him as
an Irishman. Is he not more to be
pitied than blamed? for—yes, I, his
son, must say the word—the degradation
which has ensued. And do not the
feelings, which have this moment forced
him to leave the room, show that he is
capable ... O, mother!” cried lord

Colambre, throwing himself at lady
Clonbrony's feet; “restore my father
to himself!—Should such feelings be
wasted?—No; give them again to expand
in benevolent, in kind, useful actions.
Give him again to his tenantry,
his duties, his country, his home. Return
to that home yourself, dear mother
—leave all the nonsense of high
life—scorn the impertinence of these
dictators of fashion; by whom, in return
for all the pains we take to imitate,
to court them—in return for the
sacrifice of health, fortune, peace of
mind, they bestow sarcasm, contempt,
ridicule, and mimickry.”
“O, Colambre! Colambre! mimickry
—I'll never believe it.”
“Believe me, believe me, mother; 
for I speak of what I know. Scorn
them, quit them—return to an unsophisticated
people; to poor, but grateful
hearts, still warm with the remembrance
of your kindness—still blessing
you for favours, long since conferred—

ever praying to see you once more.— 
Believe me, for I speak of what I
know—your son has heard these prayers,
has felt these blessings. Here! at
my heart felt, and still feel them, when
I was not known to be your son, in
the cottage of the widow O'Neill.”
“O, did you see the widow O'Neill!
and does she remember me?” said lady
Clonbrony.
“Remember you! and you, miss
Nugent! I have slept in the bed—I
would tell you more, but I cannot.”
“Well! I never should have thought
they would have remembered me so
long!—poor people!” said lady Clonbrony.
“I thought all in Ireland must
have forgotten me; it is now so long
since I was at home.”
“You are not forgotten in Ireland by
any rank, I can answer for that. Return
home, my dearest mother—let me
see you once more among your natural
friends, beloved, respected, happy”—
“O, return! let us return home!”

cried miss Nugent, with a voice of
great emotion. “Return, let us return
home!—My beloved aunt, speak to us!
—say that you grant our request!”
She kneeled beside lord Colambre, as
she spoke.
“Is it possible to resist that voice!
that look?” thought lord Colambre.
“If any body knew,” said lady Clonbrony; 
“if any body could conceive,
how I detest the sight, the thoughts of
that old yellow damask furniture in the
drawing-room at Clonbrony castle.”
“Good Heavens!” cried lord Colambre,
starting up, and looking at his
mother in stupified astonishment; “Is
that what you are thinking of, ma'am?”
“The yellow damask furniture!” said
her niece, smiling. “O, if that's all,
that shall never offend your eyes again.
Aunt, my painted velvet chairs are
finished; and trust the furnishing that
room to me. The legacy lately left me
cannot be better applied—you shall see
how beautifully it will be furnished.”

“O, if I had money, I should like
to do it myself; but it would take an
immensity to new furnish Clonbrony
castle properly.”
“The furniture in this house,” said
miss Nugent, looking round—
“Would do a great deal towards it, I
declare,” cried lady Clonbrony; “that
never struck me before, Grace, I protest
—and what would not suit, one
might sell or exchange here—and it
would be a great amusement to me— 
and I should like to set the fashion
of something better in that country.
And I declare, now, I should like to
see those poor people, and that widow
O'Neill. I do assure you, I think I
was happier at home; only that one
gets, I don't know how, a notion one's nobody
out of Lon'on. But, after all,
there's many drawbacks in Lon'on—and
many people are very impertinent, I'll
allow—and, if there's a woman in the
world I hate, it is Mrs. Dareville—and
if I was leaving Lon'on, I should not

regret lady Langdale neither—and lady
St. James is as cold as a stone. Colambre
may well say frozen circles—these
sort of people are really very cold, and
have, I do believe, no hearts. I don't
verily think there is one of them would
regret me more ... Hey! let me see,
Dublin—the winter—Merrion-square
—new furnished—and the summer
Clonbrony castle.”
Lord Colambre and miss Nugent
waited in silence till her mind should
have worked itself clear. One great
obstacle had been removed; and now
that the yellow damask had been taken
out of her imagination they no longer
despaired.
Lord Clonbrony put his head into the
room.
“What hopes?—any? if not, let me
go.”
He saw the doubting expression of
lady Clonbrony's countenance—hope in
the face of his son and niece.
“My dear, dear lady Clonbrony

make us all happy by one word,” said
he, kissing her.
“You never kissed me so since we
left Ireland before,” said lady Clonbrony.
“Well, since it must be so,
let us go,” said she.
“Did I ever see such joy!” said lord
Clonbrony, clasping his hands: “I never
expected such joy in my life!—I
must go and tell poor Terry!” and off
he ran.
“And now, since we are to go,” said
lady Clonbrony, “pray let us go immediately,
before the thing gets wind; 
else I shall have Mrs. Dareville, and
lady Langdale, and lady St. James, and
all the world coming to condole with
me, just to satisfy their own curiosity:
and then, miss Pratt, who hears every
thing that every body says, and more
than they say, will come and tell me
how it is reported every where that we
are ruined. Oh! I never could bear to
stay and hear all this. I'll tell you
what I'll do—you are to be of age the

day after to morrow, Colambre,—very
well, there are some papers for me to
sign,—I must stay to put my name to
them, and that done, that minute I'll
leave you and lord Clonbrony to settle
all the rest; and I'll get into my carriage
with Grace, and go down to Buxton
again; where you can come for me
and take me up when you're all ready
to go to Ireland—and we shall be so far
on our way. Colambre, what do you
say to this?”
“That,—if you like it, madam,” said
he, giving one hasty glance at miss
Nugent and withdrawing his eyes, “it
is the best possible arrangement.”
“So,” thought Grace, “that is the
best possible arrangement which takes
us away.”
“If I like it!” said lady Clonbrony,
“to be sure I do, or I should not propose
it. What is Colambre thinking
of? I know, Grace, at all events, what
you and I must think of—of having the
furniture packed up, and settling what's

to go and what's to be exchanged, and
all that. Now, my dear, go and write
a note directly to Mr. Soho, and bid
him come himself immediately; and
we'll go and make out a catalogue this
instant of what furniture I will have
packed.”
So, with her head full of furniture,
lady Clonbrony retired. “I go to my
business, Colambre; and I leave you to
settle yours in peace.”
In peace!—Never was our hero's
mind less at peace than at this moment.
The more his heart felt that it was painful,
the more his reason told him it was
necessary, that he should part from
Grace Nugent. To his union with her
there was an obstacle, which his prudence
told him ought to be insurmountable; 
yet he felt, that during the few
days he had been with her, the few
hours he had been near her, he had with
his utmost power over himself scarcely
been master of his passion, or capable
of concealing it from it's object. It could

not have been done, but for her perfect
simplicity and innocence. But how
could this be supposed, on his part?
How could he venture to live with this
charming girl? How could he settle at
home? What resource?
His mind turned towards the army:
he thought that abroad, and in active
life, he should lose all the painful recollections,
and drive from his heart all
the resentments, which could now be
only a source of unavailing regret.— 
But his mother—his mother, who had
now yielded her own taste to his intreaties,
for the good of her family, she
expected him to return and live with
her in Ireland.—Though not actually
promised, or specified, he knew that
she took it for granted; that it was
upon this hope, this faith, she consented:
he knew, that she would be
shocked at the bare idea of his going
into the army. There was one chance— 
our hero tried, at this moment, to think
it the best possible chance,—that miss

Nugent might marry Mr. Salisbury,
and settle in England. On this idea
he relied, as the only means of extricating
him from difficulties.
It was necessary to turn his thoughts
immediately to business, to execute his
promises to his father. Two great objects
were now to be accomplished— 
the payment of his father's debts, and
the settlement of the Irish agent's
accounts; and in transacting this complicated
business he derived considerable
assistance from sir Terence O'Fay,
and from sir Arthur Berryl's solicitor,
Mr. Edwards. Whilst acting for sir
Arthur, on a former occasion, lord
Colambre had gained the entire confidence
of this solicitor, who was a man
of the first eminence. Mr. Edwards
took the papers and lord Clonbrony's
title deeds home with him, saying, that
he would give an answer the next
morning. He then waited upon lord
Colambre, and informed him, that he
had just received a letter from sir

Arthur Berryl, who, with the consent
and desire of his lady, requested, that
whatever money might be required by
lord Clonbrony should be immediately
supplied on their account, without
waiting till lord Colambre should be of
age, as the ready money might be of
some convenience to him in accelerating
the journey to Ireland, which sir
Arthur and lady Berryl knew was his
lordship's object. Sir Terence O'Fay
now supplied Mr. Edwards with accurate
information, as to the demands
that were made upon lord Clonbrony,
and of the respective characters of the
creditors. Mr. Edwards undertook to
settle with the fair claimants; sir
Terence with the rogues: so that by
the advancement of ready money from
the Berryls, and by the detection of
false and exaggerated charges, which
sir Terence made among the inferior
class, the debts were reduced nearly
to one half of their former amount.
Mordicai, who had been foiled in his

vile attempt to become sole creditor,
had, however, a demand of more than
seven thousand pounds upon lord
Clonbrony, which he had raised to
this enormous sum in six or seven
years, by means well known to himself.
He stood the foremost in the list: not
from the greatness of the sum; but
from the danger of his adding to it
the expenses of law. Sir Terence undertook
to pay the whole with five
thousand pounds. Lord Clonbrony
thought it impossible—the solicitor
thought it improvident, because he
knew that, upon a trial, a much greater
abatement would be allowed; but lord
Colambre was determined, from the
present embarrassments of his own
situation, to leave nothing undone
that could be accomplished immediately.
Sir Terence, pleased with his commission,
immediately went to Mordicai.
“Well, sir Terence,” said Mordicai,

“I hope you are come to pay me my
hundred guineas; for miss Broadhurst
si married!”
“Well, Mister Mordicai, what then?
The ides of March are come, but not
gone! Stay, if you plase, Mister Mordicai,
till Lady-day, when it becomes
due—in the mean time, I have a handful,
or, rather, an armful of bank notes
for you, from my lord Colambre.”
“Humph!” said Mordicai; “how's
that?—he'll not be of age these three
days.”
“Don't matter for that: he has sent
me to look over your account, and to
hope that you will make some small
abatement in the total.”
“Harkee, sir Terence!—you think
yourself very clever in things of this
sort, but you've mistaken your man:
I have an execution for the whole; 
and I'll be d&wblank;d if all your cunning shall
Make me take up with part!”
“Be asy, Mister Mordicai!—you
shan't make me break your bones, nor

make me drop one actionable word
against your high character; for I know
your clerk there, with that long goose
quill behind his ear, would be ready
evidence again me. But I beg to know,
in one word, whether you will take
five thousand down, and give lord
Clonbrony a discharge?”
“No, Mr. Terence! nor six thousand
nine hundred and ninety-nine
pounds. My demand is £7,130., odd
shillings: if you have that money, pay
it; if not, I know how to get it, and
along with it complete revenge for all
the insults I have received from that
greenhorn, his son.”
“Paddy Brady!” cried sir Terence,
“do you hear that? Remember that
word, revenge!—Mind, I call you to
witness!”
“What, sir! will you raise a rebellion
among my workmen?”
“No, Mr. Mordicai! no rebellion!
And I hope you won't cut the boy's

ears off, for listening to a little of the
brogue. ... So listen, my good lad.
... Now, Mr. Mordicai, I offer you
here, before little goose quill, 5000l.
ready penny—take it, or leave it: take
your money, and leave your revenge; 
or, take your revenge, and lose your
money.”
“Sir Terence, I value neither your
threats nor your cunning.—Good morning
to you!”
“Good morning to you, Mr. Mordicai
—but not kindly! Mr. Edwards,
the solicitor, has been at the office to
take off the execution: so now, you
may have law to your heart's content!
And it was only to plase the young
lord that the ould one consented to my
carrying this bundle to you.” (Showing
the bank notes.)
“Mr. Edwards employed!” cried
Mordicai.—“Why, how the Devil did
lord Clonbrony get into such hands as
his? The execution taken off! Well,
sir, go to law—I am ready for you:

Jack Latitat is a match for your sober
solicitor.”
“Good morning again to you, Mr.
Mordicai!—We're fairly out of your
clutches; and we have enough to do
with our money.”
“Well, sir Terence, I must allow
you have a very wheedling way! ...
Here, Mr. Thompson, make out a receipt
for lord Clonbrony: I never go
to law with an old customer, if I can
help it.”
This business settled, Mr. Soho was
next to be dealt with.
He came at lady Clonbrony's summons; 
and was taking directions, with
the utmost sang froid, for packing up
and sending off the very furniture for
which he was not paid.
Lord Colambre called him into his
father's study; and, producing his bill,
he began to point out various articles,
which were charged at prices that were
obviously extravagant.
“Why, really, my lord, they are

abundantly extravagant: if I charged
vulgar prices, I should be only a vulgar
tradesman. I, however, am not a
broker, nor a Jew. Of the article superintendance,
which is only £500.,
I cannot abate a doit: on the rest of
the bill, if you mean to offer ready, I
mean, without any negociation, to abate
thirty per cent.; and I hope that is a
fair and gentlemanly offer.”
“Mr. Soho, there is your money!”
“My lord Colambre! I would give
the contents of three such bills, to be
sure of such noblemanly conduct as
yours. Lady Clonbrony's furniture
shall be safely packed, without costing
her a farthing.”
With the help of Mr. Edwards, the
solicitor, every other claim was soon
settled; and lord Clonbrony, for the
first time since he left Ireland, found
himself out of debt, and out of
danger.
Old Nick's account could not be
settled in London. Lord Colambre had

detected numerous false charges, and
sundry impositions: the land, which
had been purposely let to run wild, so
far from yielding any rent, was made a
source of constant expense, as remaining
still unset: this was a large tract,
for which St. Dennis had at length
offered a small rent.
Upon a fair calculation of the profits
of the ground, and from other items in
the account, Nicholas Garraghty, esq.
appeared at last to be, not the creditor,
but the debtor to lord Clonbrony. He
was dismissed with disgrace; which
perhaps he might not have felt, if it had
not been accompanied by pecuniary
loss, and followed by the fear of losing
his other agencies, and by the dread
of immediate bankruptcy.
Mr. Burke was appointed agent in
his stead, to the Clonbrony as well
as the Colambre estate. His appointment
was announced to him by the
following letter:

To Mrs. Burke, at Colambre.
“Dear madam,
“The traveller, whom you so hospitably
received some months ago, was
lord Colambre—he now writes to
you in his proper person. He promised
you that he would, as far as it
might be in his power, do justice to
Mr. Burke's conduct and character,
by representing what he had done for
lord Clonbrony in the town of Colambre,
and in the whole management
of the tenantry and property
under his care.
“Happily for my father, my dear
madam, he is now as fully convinced
as you could wish him to be, of Mr.
Burke's merits; and he begs me to
express his sense of the obligations
he is under to him and to you. He
intreat that you will pardon the impropriety
of a letter, which, as I assured
you, the moment I saw it, he
never wrote or read. This will, he

says, cure him, for life, of putting his
signature to any paper, without reading
it.
“He hopes that you will forget that
such a letter was ever received, and
that you will use your influence with
Mr. Burke to induce him to continue
to our family his regard and valuable
services. Lord Clonbrony encloses a
power of attorney, enabling Mr. Burke
to act in future for him, if Mr. Burke
will do him that favour, in managing
the Clonbrony, as well as the Colambre
estate.
“Lord Clonbrony will be in Ireland
in the course of next month, and intends
to have the pleasure of soon
paying his respects in person to Mr.
Mr. Burke, at Colambre.
“I am,
Dear madam,
Your obliged guest,
And faithful servant,
“Colambre.
‘Grosvenor square, London.’

Lord Colambre was so continually
occupied with business, during the
two days previous to his coming of age,
every morning at his solicitor's chambers,
every evening in his father's
study, that miss Nugent never saw him
but at breakfast or dinner; and, though
she watched for it most anxiously,
never could find an opportunity of
speaking to him alone, or of asking an
explanation of the change and inconsistencies
of his manner. At last she
began to think, that, in the midst of so
much business of importance, by which
he seemed harrassed, she should do
wrong to torment him, by speaking of
any small disquietude that concerned
only herself. She determined to suppress
her doubts, to keep her feelings
to herself, and to endeavour, by constant
kindness, to regain that place in
his affections, which she imagined that
she had lost. “Every thing will go
right again,” thought she, “and we
shall all be happy when he returns with

us to Ireland—to that dear home, which
he loves as well as I do!”
The day lord Colambre was of age,
the first thing he did was to sign a bond
for five thousand pounds, miss Nugent's
fortune, which had been lent to his father,
who was her guardian.
“This, sir, I believe,” said he, giving
it to his father, as soon as signed— 
“This, I believe, is the first debt you
would wish to have secured.”
“Well thought of, my dear boy— 
God bless you—that has weighed more
upon my conscience and heart, than all
the rest, though I never said any thing
about it. I used, whenever I met Mr.
Salisbury, to wish myself fairly down
at the centre of the Earth: not that he
ever thought of fortune, I'm sure; for
he often told me, and I believed him,
he would rather have miss Nugent
without a penny, if he could get her,
than the first fortune in the empire.
But I'm glad she will not go to him
pennyless, for all that; and by my fault

especially. There, there's my name to
it—do witness it, Terry. But, Colambre,
you must give it to her—you must
take it to Grace.”
“Excuse me, sir; it is no gift of
mine—it is a debt of yours. I beg you
will take the bond to her yourself, my
dear father.”
“My dear son, you must not always
have your own way, and hide every
thing good you do; or give me the honour
of it—I won't be the jay in borrowed
feathers. I have borrowed
enough in my life, and I've done with
borrowing now, thanks to you, Colambre—so
come along with me, for I'll be
hanged, if ever I give this joint bond to
miss Nugent, without you along with
me. Leave lady Clonbrony here, to
sign these papers—Terry will witness
them properly, and you come along
with me.”
“And pray, my lord,” said her ladyship,
“order the carriage to the door; 
for, as soon as you have my signature,

I hope you'll let me off to Buxton.”
“O, certainly—the carriage is ordered
—every thing ready, my dear.”
“And pray tell Grace to be ready,” 
added lady Clonbrony.
“That's not necessary; for she is always
ready,” said lord Clonbrony.
“Come, Colambre,” added he, taking
his son under the arm, and carrying
him up to miss Nugent's dressing-room.
They knocked, and were admitted.
“Ready!” said lord Clonbrony; 
“Ay, always ready—so I said. Here's
Colambre, my darling,” continued he,
“has secured your fortune to you to
my heart's content; but he would not
condescend to come up to tell you so,
till I made him. Here's the bond, put
your hand to it, Colambre; you were
ready enough to do that when it cost you
something. And now, all I have to ask
of you is, to persuade her to marry out
of hand, that I may see her happy before
I die. Now my heart's at ease; I can

meet Mr. Salisbury with a safe conscience.
One kiss, my little Grace.— 
If any body can persuade you, I'm sure
it's that man that's now leaning against
the mantle-piece. It's Colambre will, or
your heart's not made like mine—so I
leave you.”
And out of the room walked he,
leaving his poor son in as awkward,
embarrassing, and painful a situation,
as could well be conceived. Half a
dozen indistinct ideas crossed his mind,
quick conflicting feelings made his
heart beat and stop. And how it
would have ended, if he had been left
to himself: whether he would have
stood or fallen, have spoken or have
continued silent, can never now be
known, for all was decided without the
action of his will. He was awakened
from his trance by these simple words
from miss Nugent.
“I'm much obliged to you, cousin
Colambre—more obliged to you, for
your kindness, in thinking of me first,

in the midst of all your other business,
than by your securing my fortune.— 
Friendship—and your friendship, is
worth more to me than fortune. May
I believe that is secured?”
“Believe it—O, Grace, can you
doubt it?”
“I will not—it would make me too
unhappy.—I will not.”
“You need not.”
“That is enough—I am satisfied— 
I ask no further explanation. You are
truth itself—one word from you is security
sufficient. We are friends for
life,” said she, taking his hand between
both of hers; “are not we?”
“We are—and therefore sit down,
cousin Grace, and let me claim the
privilege of friendship, and speak to
you of him who aspires to be more
than your friend for life, Mr.&wblank;.”
“Mr. Salisbury!” said miss Nugent; 
“I saw him yesterday. We had a
very long conversation; I believe he
understands my sentiments perfectly;

and that he no longer thinks of being
more to me than a friend for life.”
“You have refused him!”
“Yes—I have a high opinion of Mr.
Salisbury's understanding, a great esteem
for his character; I like his manners
and conversation, but I do not love
him, and therefore, you know, I could
not marry him.”
“But, my dear miss Nugent, with a
high opinion, a great esteem, and liking
his manners and conversation, in such
a well regulated mind as yours, can there
be a better foundation for love?”
“It is an excellent foundation,” said
she; “but I never went any farther
than the foundation; and indeed I never
wished to proceed any farther.”
Lord Colambre scarcely dared to
ask, why; but, after some pause, he
said,
“I don't wish to intrude upon your
confidence.”
“You cannot intrude upon my confidence; 
I am ready to give it to you

entirely, frankly; I hesitated only because
another person was concerned.
Do you remember, at my aunt's gala, a
lady who danced with Mr. Salisbury?”
“Not in the least.”
“A lady, with whom you and Mr.
Salisbury were talking, just before supper,
in the Turkish tent.”
“Not in the least.”
“As we went down to supper you
told me, you had had a delightful conversation
with her; that you thought
her a charming woman.”
“A charming woman! I have not
the slightest recollection of her.”
“And you told me, that she and
Mr. Salisbury had been praising me à 
l'envie l'une et l'autre.”
“O, I recollect her now, perfectly,” 
said lord Colambre: “but what of
her?”
“She is the woman, who, I hope,
will be Mrs. Salisbury. Ever since I
have been acquainted with them both,
I have seen that they were suited to

each other; and fancy, indeed I am almost
sure, that she could love him, tenderly
love him—and, I know, I could
not. But my own sentiments, you
may be sure, are all I ever told Mr.
Salisbury.”
“But of your own sentiments you
may not be sure;” said lord Colambre; 
“and I see no reason why you should
give him up from false generosity.”
“Generosity!” interrupted miss
Nugent; “you totally misunderstand
me; there is no generosity,
nothing for me to give up in the
case. I did not refuse Mr. Salisbury
from generosity, but because I did not
love him. Perhaps my seeing this at
first prevented me from thinking of him
as a lover; but, from whatever cause, I
certainly never felt love for Mr. Salisbury,
nor any of that pity which
said to lead to love: perhaps,” added
she, smiling, “because I was aware
that he would be so much better off after
I refused him—so much happier

with one suited to him in age, talents,
fortune, and love,—‘What bliss, did he
but know his bliss, were his!”
“Did he but know his bliss,” repeated
lord Colambre; “but is not he
the best judge of his own bliss?”
“And am not I the best judge of
mine?” said miss Nugent; “I go no
farther.”
“You are, and I have no right to go
farther.—Yet, this much permit me to
say, my dear Grace, that it would give
me sincere pleasure—that is, real
satisfaction, to see you happily—established.”
“Thank you, my dear lord Colambre; 
but you spoke that like a man of
seventy at least with the most solemn
gravity of demeanour.”
“I meant to be serious not solemn,” 
said lord Colambre, endeavouring to
change his tone.
“There now,” said she, in a playful
tone, “you have seriously accomplished
the task my good uncle set you; so I
will report well of you to him, and certify

that you did all that in you lay to
exhort me to marry; that you have
even assured me that it would give you
sincere pleasure—that is, real satisfaction,
to see me happily established,”.
“O Grace, if you knew how much
I fellt when I said that, you would spare
this raillery.”
“I will be serious,—I am most seriously
convinced of the sincerity of your
affection for me; I know my happiness
is your object in all you have said, and
I thank you from my heart for the interest
you take about me. But really and
truly I do not wish to marry. This is
not a mere common place speech; but
I have not yet seen any man I could
love—I like you, cousin Colambre, better
than Mr. Salisbury, I would rather
live with you than with him; you know
that is a certain proof that I am not
likely to be in love with him. I am
happy as I am, especially now we are
all going to dear Ireland, home, to live
together: you cannot conceive with
what pleasure I look forward to that.”

Lord Colambre was not vain; but
love quickly sees love, where it exists,
or foresees the probability, the possibility
of its existence. He saw that miss
Nugent might love him tenderly, passionately,
but that duty, habit, the prepossession
that it was impossible she
could marry her cousin Colambre,—a
prepossession instilled into her by his
mother, had absolutely prevented her
from ever yet thinking of him as a lover.
He saw the hazard for her, he felt the
danger for himself. Never had she
appeared to him so attractive as at this
moment, when he felt the hope that he
could obtain return of love.
“But St. Omar!—Why! why is she
a St. Omar!—illegitimate!—‘No St.
Omar sans reproche.’—My wife she can
not be—I will not engage her affections.”
Swift as thoughts in moments of
strong feeling pass in the mind without
being put into words, our hero thought

all this, and determined, cost what it
would, to act honourably.
“You spoke of my returning to Ireland,
my dear Grace—I have not yet
told you my plans.”
“Plans! are not you returning with
us?” said she, precipitately; “are not you
going to Ireland—home—with us?”
“No:—I am going to serve a campaign
or two abroad—I think every
young man, in these times—”
“Good Heavens! What does this
mean? What can you mean?” cried
she, fixing her eyes upon his, as if she
would read his very soul. “Why!
what reason?—O, tell me the truth— 
and at once.”
His change of colour—his hand that
trembled, and withdrew from hers— 
the expression of his eyes, as they met
hers, revealed the truth to her at once.
As it flashed across her mind, she started
back; her face grew crimson, and in
the same instant pale as death.

“Yes—you see, you feel the truth; 
now,” said lord Colambre—“You see,
you feel, that I love you—passionately.”
“O, let me not hear it!” said she,
I must not,—ought not—Never, till
this moment, did such a thought cross
my mind—I thought it impossible— 
O! make me think so still.”
“I will—it is impossible, that we
can ever be united.”
“I always thought so,” said she,
taking breath, with a deep sigh,— 
“Then why not live as we have
lived?”
“I cannot—I cannot answer for
myself—I will not run the risk, and,
therefore, I must quit you—Knowing,
as I do, that there is an invincible
obstacle to our union, of what nature,
I cannot explain; I beg you not to inquire.”
“You need not beg it—I shall not
inquire—I have no curiosity—none,”

said she, in a passive, dejected tone; 
“that is not what I am thinking of
in the least—I know there are invincible
obstacles, I wish it to be so— 
But if invincible,—you, who have so
much sense, honour, and virtue—”
“I hope, my dear cousin, that I have
honour and virtue. But there are temptations
to which no wise, no good man
will expose himself. Innocent creature,
you do not know the power of love.
I rejoice that you have always thought
it impossible—think so still—it will
save you from ... all I must endure— 
Think of me, but as your cousin, your
friend,—Give your heart to some
happier man.—As your friend, your
true friend, I conjure you, give your
heart to some more fortunate man.— 
Marry, if you can feel love—marry,
and be happy—Honour, virtue! Yes,
I have both, and I will not forfeit them.
Yes, I will merit your esteem, and my
own—By actions, not words, and I give

you the strongest proof, by tearing myself
from you, at this moment—Farewell!”
“The carriage at the door! Miss
Nugent, and my lady calling for you,” 
said her maid. “Here's your key,
ma'am, and here's your gloves, my
dear ma'am.”
“The carriage at the door, miss
Nugent,” said lady Clonbrony's woman,
coming eagerly with parcels in
her hand, as miss Nugent passed her
and ran down stairs; “and I dont
know where I laid my lady's numbrella,
for my life,—do you, Anne?”
“No, indeed—but I know here's
my own young lady's watch, that she
has left. Bless me, I never knew
her to forget any thing on a journey
before.”
“Then she is going to be married,
as sure as my name's le Maistre; and to
my lord Colambre, for he has been here
this hour to my certain Bible knowledge.

O, you'll see, she will be lady
Colambre.”
“I wish she may, with all my heart,” 
said Anne: “but I must run down,
they're waiting.”
“O! no,” said Mrs. le Maistre,
seizing Anne's arm, and holding her
fast; “stay, you may safely, for
they're all kissing and taking leave,
and all that, you know; and my lady
is talking on about Mr. Soho, and giving
a hundred directions about legs of
tables, and so forth, I warrant—she's
alway's an hour after she's ready, before
she get's in—and I'm looking
for the numbrella. So stay, and tell
me ... Mrs. Petito wrote over word
it was to be lady Isabel; and then a
contradiction came, it was turned into
the youngest of the Killpatricks; and
now here he's in miss Nugent's dressing
room, to the last moment—Now, in
my opinion, that am not censorious.
this does not look so pretty; but according

to my verdict, he is only making
a fool of miss Nugent, like the
rest; and his lordship seems too,
like what you might call a male cocket,
or a masculine jilt.”
“No more like a masculine jilt, than
yourself, Mrs. le Maistre,” cried Anne,
taking fire. “And my young lady is
not a lady to be made a fool of, I
promise you; nor is my lord likely to
make a fool of any woman.”
“Bless us all! that's no great
praise for any young nobleman, miss
Anne.”
“Mrs. le Maistre! Mrs. le Maistre!
are you above?” cried a footman, from
the bottom of the stairs;—“my lady's
calling for you.”
“Very well! Very well!” said sharp
Mrs. le Maistre—“Very well, and if
she is—Manners, sir!—Come up
for one, can't you, and don't stand
bawling at the bottom of the stairs, as
if one had no ears to be saved.—I'm
coming as fast as I can conveniently

can.” Mrs. le Maistre stood in the
door-way, so as to fill it up, and prevent
Anne from passing. “Miss Anne,
miss Anne! Mrs. le Maistre!” cried
another footman,—“My lady's in the
carriage, and miss Nugent.”
“Miss Nugent!—is she?” cried
Mrs. le Maistre, running down stairs,
followed by Anne. “Now, for the
world in pocket-pieces, wouldn't I
have missed seeing him hand miss Nugent
in; for by that I could have judged
definitively.”
“My lord, I beg pardon!—I'm afeard
I'm late,” said Mrs. le Maistre, as she
passed lord Colambre, who was standing
motionless in the hall.—“I beg a
thousand pardons; but I was hunting
high and low, for my lady's numbrella.”
Lord Colambre did not hear or
heed her: his eyes were fixed, and they
never moved.
Lord Clonbrony was at the open carriage-door,
kneeling on the step, and
receiving lady Clonbrony's “more last

words” for Mr. Soho. The two waiting
maids stood together on the steps.
“Look at our young lord! how he
stands!” whispered Mrs. le Maistre to
Anne: “the image of despair! And
she, the picture of death!—I don't
know what to think!”
“Nor I: but don't stare, if you can
help it!” said Anne. “Get in, get in,
Mrs. le Maistre,” added she, as lord
Clonbrony now rose from the step, and
made way for them.
“Ay, in with you—in with you, Mrs.
le Maistre,” said lord Clonbrony.— 
“Good bye to you, Anne, and take
care of your young mistress at Buxton:
let me see her blooming, when we meet
again: I don't half life her looks, and
I never thought Buxton agreed with
her.”
“Buxton never did any body harm,” 
said lady Clonbrony: “and as to
bloom, I'm sure, if Grace has not bloom
enough in her cheeks this moment to
please you, I don't know what you'd

have, my dear lord. ... Rouge?— 
Shut the door, John!—O, stay! ...
Colambre!—Where upon Earth's Colambre?” 
cried her ladyship, stretching
from the farthest side of the coach
to the window.—“Colambre!”
Colambre was forced to appear.
“Colambre, my dear! I forgot to
say, that if any thing detains you longer
than Wednesday sennight, I beg you
will not fail to write, or I shall be miserable!”
“I will write!—at all events, my
dearest mother, you shall hear from
me.”
“Then, I shall be quite happy.— 
Go on!”
The carriage drove on.
“I do believe Colambre's ill: I never
saw a man look so ill in my life—did
you, Grace, as he did the minute we
drove on? He should take advice.
I've a mind,” cried lady Clonbrony,
laying her hand on the cord to stop the
coachman; “I've a mind to turn

about, tell him so, and ask what is the
matter with him.”
“Better not!” said miss Nugent:
“he will write to you, and tell you—if
any thing is the matter with him.— 
Better go on, now, to Buxton!” continued
she, scarcely able to speak.— 
Lady Clonbrony, let go the cord.
“But what is the matter with you,
my dear Grace? for you are certainly
going to die, too!”
“I will tell you—as soon as I can; 
but don't ask me now, my dear
aunt!”
“Grace, Grace! pull the cord!” cried
lady Clonbrony; “Mr. Salisbury's
phaeton! ... Mr. Salisbury, I'm
happy to see you! We're on our way
to Buxton—as I told you.”
“So am I,” said Mr. Salisbury.
“I hope to be there before your ladyship:
will you honour me with any
commands?—of course, I will see that
every thing is ready for your reception.”

Her ladyship had not any commands.
Mr. Salisbury drove on rapidly.
Lady Clonbrony's ideas had now
taken the Salisbury channel—
“You didn't know, that Mr. Salisbury
was going to Buxton to meet you,
did you, Grace?” said lady Clonbrony.
“No, indeed; I did not!” said miss
Nugent: “and I am very sorry for
it.”
“Young ladies, as Mrs. Broadhurst
says, ‘never know, or at least never
tell, what they are sorry or glad for,’” 
replied lady Clonbrony. “At all
events, Grace, my love, it has brought
the fine bloom back to your cheeks; 
and I own I am satisfied.”