

Letter from Alfred.
This appears to have been written some months
after the vacation spent at the Hills.
“Oh! thoughtless mortals, ever blind to fate,
Too soon dejected, and too soon elate.”
“You remember, I am
sure, my dear father, how angry we were
some time ago with that man, whose
name I never would tell you, the man
whom Rosamond called Counsellor Nameless,
the lawyer, who snatched a good
point from me in arguing Mr. Hauton's
cause. This very circumstance has been
the means of introducing me to the notice
of three men, all eminent in their
profession, and each with the same inclination

to serve me, according to their respective
powers.—A solicitor,—a barrister,
and a judge.—Solicitor Babington,
(by the by, pray tell Rosamond in answer
to her question, whether there is an honest
attorney—that there are no such
things as attorneys now in England, they
are all turned into solicitors and agents,
just as every shop is become a warehouse,
and every service a situation,—Solicitor
Babington, the solicitor employed against
us in that suit, a man who knows, without
practising them, all the tricks of the
trade, and who is a thoroughly honest
man, saw the trick that was played by
Nameless, and took occasion afterwards
to recommend me to several of his own
clients. Upon the strength of this point
briefs appeared on my table, day after
day—two guineas, three guineas—five
guineas! comfortable sight!—But far
more comfortable, more gratifying the
kindness of Counsellor Friend—Friend
by name, and Friend by nature—A more
benevolent man never existed.—I am sure

the profession of the law has not contracted
his heart, and yet you never saw
or can conceive a man more intent upon
his business.—I believe he eats, drinks,
and sleeps upon law; he has the reputation,
in consequence, of being one of the
soundest of our lawyers—the best opinion
in England.—He seems to make the cause
of every client his own, and is as anxious
as if his private property depended on
the fate of each suit. He sets me a fine
example of labor, perseverance, professional
enthusiasm, and rectitude. He is
one of the very best friends a young lawyer
like me could have, he puts me in the
way I should go, and keeps me in it by
showing that it is not a matter of chance,
but of certainty, that this is the right road
to fortune, and to fame.
“Mr. Friend has sometimes a way of
paying a compliment, as if he was making
a reproach, and of doing a favor, as
a matter of course.—Just now, I met
him, and à propos to some observations
I happened to make on a cause, in which

he is engaged,—He said to me, as if he
was half angry, though I knew he was
thoroughly pleased,
“‘Quick parts! yes, so I see you
have—but take care!—In your profession
'tis often ‘Most haste, worst speed’— 
Not but what there are happy exceptions,
examples of lawyers, who have
combined judgment with wit, industry
with genius, and law with eloquence.
But these instances are rare, very rare; 
for the rarity of the case worth studying.
Therefore dine with me to morrow, and
I will introduce you to one of these exceptions.’
“The person in question, I opine, is
the Lord Chief Justice—and Friend could
not do me a greater favor than to introduce
me to one whom, as you know, I
have long admired in public, and with
whom, independently of any professional
advantage, I have ardently wished to be
acquainted.
“I have been told. ... I cannot tell
you what—for here's the bell-man.—I

don't wonder ‘the choleric man’ knocked
down the postman for blowing his horn
in his ear.
Abruptly yours,
Alfred Percy.”
Alfred had good reason to desire to be
acquainted with this Lord Chief Justice.
Some French writer says, “Qu'il faut
plier les grandes ailes de l'éloquence pour
entrer dans un salon.”—The Chief Justice
did so with peculiar ease. He possessed
perfect conversational tact, with
great powers of wit, humor, and all that
felicity of allusion, which an uncommonly
recollective memory, acting on stores
of various knowledge, can alone command.
He really conversed; he did not
merely tell stories, or make bon-mots, or
confine himself to the single combat of
close argument, or the flourish of declamation; 
but he alternately followed and
led, threw out and received ideas, knowing
how to listen full as well as how to
talk, remembering always Lord Chesterfield's

experienced maxim, “That it is
easier to hear, than to talk yourself into
the good opinion of your auditors.”—It
was not, however, from policy, but from
benevolence, that the Chief Justice made
so good a hearer. It has been said, and
with truth, that with him a good point
never passed unnoticed in a public court,
nor was a good thing ever lost upon him
in private company. Of the number of
his own good things fewer are in circulation
than might be expected. The best
conversation, that which rises from the
occasion, and which suits the moment,
suffers most from repetition. Fitted precisely
to the peculiar time and place, the
best things cannot bear transplanting.
The day Alfred Percy was introduced
to the Chief Justice, the conversation
began, from some slight remarks made by
one of the company, on the acting of
Mrs. Siddons. A lady who had just been
reading the Memoirs of the celebrated
French actress, Mademoiselle Clairon,
spoke of the astonishing pains, which she

took to study her parts, and to acquire
what the French call l' air noble, continually
endeavoring, on the most common
occasions, when she was off the stage, to
avoid all awkward motions, and in her
habitual manner to preserve an air of
grace and dignity.—This led the Chief
Justice to mention the care, which Lord
Chatham, Mr. Pitt, and other great orators,
have taken to form their habits of
speaking by unremitting attention to
their language in private, as well as
in public. He maintained, that no man
can speak with ease, and security, in public,
till custom has brought him to feel
it as a moral impossibility, that he could
be guilty of any petty vulgarism, or that
he could be convicted of any capital sin
against grammar.
Alfred felt anxious to hear the Chief
Justice farther on this subject, but the
conversation was dragged back to Mademoiselle
Clairon. The lady, by whom
she was first mentioned, declared she
thought that all Mademoiselle Clairon's

studying must have made her a very unnatural
actress.—The Chief Justice quoted
the answer, which La Clairon gave
when she was reproached with having too
much art.
“De l'art! et que voudroit-on donc
que j'eusse? Etois-je Andromaque?— 
Etois-je Phédre?”
Alfred observed, that those who complained
of an actress's having too much
art, should rather complain of her having
too little, of her not having art enough
to conceal her art.
The Chief Justice honored Alfred by
a nod and a smile.—
The lady, however, protested against
this doctrine, and concluded by confessing,
that she always did, “and always
should, prefer nature to art.”
From this commonplace confession,
the Chief Justice, by a playful cross-examination,
presently made it apparent,
that we do not always know what we
mean by art, and what by nature; that
the ideas are so mixed in civilized

society, and the words so inaccurately
used, both in common conversation,
and in the writings of philosophers,
that no metaphysical prism can separate,
or reduce them to their primary
meaning.—Next he touched upon the
distinction between art and artifice.— 
The conversation branched out into remarks
on grace and affectation, and thence
to the different theories of beauty, and
taste, with all which he played with a
master's hand.
A man accustomed to speak to numbers
perceives immediately when his auditors
seize his ideas, and knows instantly,
by the assent, and expression of the
eye, to whom they are new, or to whom
they are familiar. The Chief Justice
discovered, that Alfred Percy had superior
knowledge, literature, and talents, even
before he spoke, by his manner of listening.
—The conversation presently passed
from l'air noble to le style noble, and to
the French laws of criticism, which prohibit
the descending to allusions to arts

and manufactures. This subject he discussed
deeply, yet rapidly, observed how
taste is influenced by different governments
and manners—remarked how the
strong line of demarcation formerly kept
in France between the nobility and the
citizens had influenced taste in writing
and in eloquence, and how our more popular
government not only admitted allusions
to the occupations of the lower
classes—but required them. Our orators
at elections, and in parliament, must
speak so as to come home to the feelings
and vocabulary of constituents. Examples
from Burke, and others, the Chief
Justice said might be brought in support
of this opinion.
Alfred was so fortunate as to recollect
some apposite illustrations from Burke,
and from several of our great orators,
Wyndham, Erskine, Mackintosh, and
Romilly. As Alfred spoke, the Chief
Justice's eye brightened with approbation,
and it was observed, that he afterwards
addressed to him particularly his

conversation, and, more flattering still,
that he went deeper into the subject,
which he had been discussing. From one
of the passages which had been mentioned,
he took occasion to answer the argument
of the French critics, who justify
their taste, by asserting that it is the taste
of the ancients. Skilled in classical, as
in modern literature, he showed, that the
ancients had made allusions to arts and
manufactures, as far as their knowledge
went; but, as he observed, in modern
times new arts and sciences afford fresh
subjects of allusion unknown to the ancients,
consequently we ought not to restrict
our taste by exclusive reverence for
classical precedents.—On these points it
is requisite to reform the pandects of criticism.—
Another passage from Burke, to which
Alfred had alluded, the Chief Justice
thought too rich in ornament. “Ornaments,” 
he said, “if not kept subordinate,
however intrinsically beautiful, injure
the general effect,—therefore a judicious

orator will sacrifice all such as draw
the attention from his principal design.”
Alfred Percy, in support of this opinion,
cited the example of the Spanish
painter, who obliterated certain beautiful
silver vases, which he had introduced in
a picture of the Lord's Supper, because
he found that, at first view, every spectator's
eye was caught by these splendid
ornaments, and every one extolled their
exquisite finish, instead of attending to
the great subject of the piece.”—
The Chief Justice was so well pleased
with the conversation of our young barrister,
that, at parting, he gave Alfred
an invitation to his house. The conversation
had been very different from what
might have been expected. Metaphysics
—belles-lettres—poetry—plays—criticism
—what a range of ideas, far from
Coke and Seldon, was gone over this
evening in the course of a few hours. Alfred
had reason to be more and more convinced
of the truth of his father's favorite
doctrine, that the general cultivation of

the understanding, and the acquirement
of general knowledge, are essential to the
attainment of excellence in any profession,
useful to a young man particularly
in introducing him to the notice of valuable
friends and acquaintance.
An author well skilled in the worst
parts of human nature has asserted, that
“nothing is more tiresome than praises
in which we have no manner of share.”— 
Yet we, who have a better opinion of our
kind, trust that there are some, who can
sympathize in the enthusiasm of a young
and good mind, struck with splendid talents,
and with a superior character; 
therefore we venture to insert some of the
warm eulogiums, with which we find our
young lawyer's letters filled.
“MY DEAR FATHER,
I have only a few moments
to write, but cannot delay to answer
your question about the Chief Justice.— 
Disappointed—no danger of that—he far
surpasses my expectations. It has been

said, that he never opened a book, that
he never heard a common ballad, or saw
a workman at his trade, without learning
something, which he afterwards turned
to good account. This you may see in
his public speeches, but I am more completely
convinced of it, since I have heard
him converse. His illustrations are drawn
from the workshop, the manufactory, the
mine, the mechanic, the poet, from every
art and science, from every thing in
nature, animate or inanimate.
‘From gems, from flames, from orient rays of light;
The richest lustre makes his purple bright.’
“Perhaps I am writing his panegyric,
because he is my Lord Chief Justice, and
because I dined with him yesterday, and
am to dine with him again to morrow.—
Yours affectionately,
Alfred Percy.”
In a subsequent letter he shows, that his
admiration increased instead of diminishing,

upon a more intimate acquaintance
with it's object.
“High station,” says Alfred—“appears
to me much more desirable, since
I have known this great man. He makes
rank so gracious, and shows, that it is a
pleasurable, not a ‘painful preeminence,’ 
when it gives the power of raising others,
and of continually doing kind and generous
actions. Mr. Friend tells me, that,
before the Chief Justice was so high as he
is now, without a rival in his profession,
he was ever the most generous man to
his competitors. I am sure he is now the
most kind and condescending to his inferiors.
In company he is never intent
upon himself, seems never anxious about
his own dignity, or his own fame. He
is sufficiently sure of both to be quite at
ease.—He excites my ambition, and exalts
the nature and value of that ambition.
“He has raised my esteem for my
profession, by showing the noble use that
can be made of it, in defending right and

virtue.—He has done my mind good in
another way.—He has shown me, that
professional labor is not incompatible with
domestic pleasures.—I wish you could
see him as I do, in the midst of his family,
with his fine children playing about
him, with his wife, a charming cultivated
woman, who adores him, and who is his
best companion and friend. Before I
knew the Chief Justice, I had seen other
great lawyers and judges, some of them
crabbed old bachelors, others uneasily
yoked to vulgar help-mates—having married
early in life women whom they had
dragged up as they rose, but who were
always pulling them down,—had seen
some of these learned men sink into
mere epicures, and become dead to intellectual
enjoyment—others, with higher
minds, and originally fine talents, I had
seen in premature old age, with understandings
contracted and palsied by partial
or overstrained exertion, worn out
mind and body, and only late, very late
in life, just attaining wealth and honors,

when they were incapable of enjoying
them. This had struck me as a deplorable
and discouraging spectacle—a sad
termination of a life of labor.—But now
I see a man in the prime of life, in the
full vigor of all his intellectual faculties
and moral sensibility, with a high character,
fortune, and professional honors,
all obtained by his own merit and exertions,
with the prospect of health and
length of days, to enjoy and communicate
happiness. Exulting in the sight
of this resplendent luminary, and conscious,
that it will guide and cheer me
forwards, I ‘bless the useful light.”—
Our young lawyer was so honestly enthusiastic
in his admiration of this great
man, and was so full of the impression,
that had been made on his mind, that
he forgot in this letter to advert to the
advantage, which, in a professional point
of view, he might derive from the good
opinion formed of him by the Chief Justice.
In consequence of Solicitor Babington's
telling his clients the share

which Alfred had in winning Colonel
Hauton's cause, Alfred was employed
in a suit of considerable importance, in
which a great landed property was at
stake. It was one of those standing
suits, which last from year to year, and
which seem likely to linger on from generation
to generation. Instead of considering
his brief in this cause merely
as a means of obtaining a fee; instead of
contenting himself to make some motion
of course, which fell to his share, Alfred
set himself seriously to study the case,
and searched indefatigably for all the
precedents that could bear upon it. He
was fortunate enough, or rather he was
persevering enough, to find an old case
in point, which had escaped the attention
of the other lawyers. Mr. Friend
was one of the senior counsel in this
cause, and he took generous care, that
Alfred's merit should not now, as upon
a former occasion, be concealed. Mr.
Friend prevailed upon his brother barristers
to agree, in calling upon Alfred

to speak to his own case in point—And
the Chief Justice, who presided, said
“This case is new to me.—This had escaped
me, Mr. Percy; I must take another
day to reconsider the matter, before
I can pronounce judgment.”
This from the Chief Justice, with the
sense which Alfred's brother barristers
felt of his deserving such notice, was of
immediate and material advantage to our
young lawyer. Attorneys and Solicitors
turned their eyes upon him, briefs began
to flow in, and his diligence increased
with his business. As junior counsel,
he still had little opportunity in the common
course of things of distinguishing
himself, as it frequently fell to his share
only to say a few words; but he never
failed to make himself master of every
case, in which he was employed. And it
happened one day, when the senior
counsel was attending in another court,
the Judge called upon the next barrister,
“Mr. Trevors—Are you prepared?”

“My Lord. ... I can't say ... no,
my Lord.”—
“Mr. Percy, are you prepared?”
“Yes—my Lord.”
“So I thought—always prepared— 
Go on, Sir—Go on, Mr. Percy.”
He went on, and spoke so ably, and
with such comprehensive knowledge of
the case, and of the law, that he obtained
a decision in favor of his client, and
established his own reputation as a man
of business and of talents, who was always
prepared.—For the manner, in which
he was brought forward and distinguished
by the Chief Justice, he was truly grateful.
This was a species of patronage
honorable both to the giver and the receiver.
Here was no favor shown disproportionate
to deserts, but here was
just distinction paid to merit, and generous
discernment giving talents opportunity
of developing themselves. These
opportunities would only have been the
ruin of a man, who could not show himself
equal to the occasion; but this was

not the case with Alfred. His capacity,
like the fairy tent, seemed to enlarge so
as to contain all that it was necessary to
comprehend: and new powers appeared
in him in new situations.
Alfred had been introduced by his
brother Erasmus to some of those men
of literature, with whom he had become
acquainted at Lady Spilsbury's good dinners.
—Among these was a Mr. Dunbar,
a gentleman, who had resided for many
years in India, from whom Alfred, who
constantly sought for information from
all with whom he conversed, had learned
much of India affairs. Mr. Dunbar
had collected some curious tracts on
Mohammedan law, and glad to find an
intelligent auditor on his favorite subject,
a subject not generally interesting, he
willingly communicated all he knew to
Alfred, and lent him his manuscripts and
scarce tracts, which Alfred, in the many
leisure hours that a young lawyer can
command before he gets into practice,
had studied, and of which he had made

himself master. This was again according
to his father's favorite principle, that
all knowledge may be useful. It happened
a considerable time afterwards,
that the East India Company had a cause,.
 ... one of the greatest causes ever
brought before our courts of law, relative
to the demand of some native bankers in
Hindostan against the Company for upwards
of four millions of money. This
Mr. Dunbar, who had a considerable interest
in the cause, and who was intimate
with several of the directors, recommended
it to them to employ Mr. Alfred Percy,
who, as he knew, had had ample
means of information, and who had studied
a subject, of which few of his brother
barristers had any knowledge. The very
circumstance of his being employed in a
cause of such importance was of great
advantage to him; and the credit he
gained by accurate and uncommon knowledge
in the course of the suit at once
raised his reputation among the best
judges, and established him in the courts.

On another occasion, Alfred's moral
character was as serviceable as his literary
taste had been,—in recommending
him to his clients. Buckhurst Falconer
had introduced him to a certain Mr.
Clay, known by the name of French
Clay. In a conversation after dinner,
when the ladies had retired, Mr. Clay
had boasted of his successes with the
fair sex, and had expressed many sentiments,
that marked him for a profligate
coxcomb.
Alfred felt disgust and indignation for
this parade of vice. There was one officer
in company, who strongly sympathized
in his feelings; this led to further
acquaintance, and mutual esteem.—This
officer soon afterwards married Lady
Harriot—, a beautiful young woman,
with whom he lived happily for some time,
till unfortunately, while her husband was
abroad with his regiment, chance brought
the wife, at a watering place, into the
company of French Clay, and imprudence,
the love of flattery, coquetry,

and self-confidence, made her a victim
to his vanity.—Love he had none—nor
she either—but her disgrace was soon
discovered, or revealed; and her unhappy
and almost distracted husband immediately
commenced a suit against
Clay.—He chose Alfred Percy for his
counsel. In this cause, where strong
feelings of indignation were justly roused,
and where there was room for oratory,
Alfred spoke with such force and
pathos, that every honest heart was
touched.—The verdict of the Jury showed
the impression which he had made
upon them; his speech was universally
admired, and those who had till now
known him only as a man of business,
and a sound lawyer, were surprised to
find him suddenly display such powers
of eloquence. Counsellor Friend's plain
advice to him had always been,
“Never harangue about nothing—if
your client require it, he is a fool, and
never mind him; never speak till you've

something to say, and then say only
what you have to say.” 
“Words are like leaves, and where they most abound,
Much fruit of solid sense is seldom found.”
Friend now congratulated Alfred with
all his honest affectionate heart, and
said, with a frown that struggled hard
with a smile,
“Well! I believe I must allow you
to be an orator.—But, take care—don't
let the lawyer merge in the advocate.
Bear it always in mind, that a mere man
of words at the bar ... or indeed any
where else ... is a mere man of straw.”
The Chief Justice, who knew how to
say the kindest things in the most polite
manner, was heard to observe, that,
“Mr. Percy had done wisely, to begin
by showing that he had laid a solid
foundation of law, on which the ornaments
of oratory could be raised high,
and supported securely.”—

French Clay's affair with Lady Harriot
had been much talked of in the fashionable
world; from a love of scandal,
or a love of justice, from zeal in the
cause of morality, or from natural curiosity,
her trial had been a matter of
general interest to the ladies, young and
old. Of consequence Mr. Alfred Percy's
speech was prodigiously read, and, from
various motives, highly applauded. When
a man begins to rise all hands ... all
hands but the hands of his rivals, are
ready to push him up, and all tongues
exclaim,
“'Twas I helped;”—or,“'Twas what
I always foretold!”
The Lady Angelica Headingham now
bethought herself, that she had a little
poem, written by Mr. Alfred Percy,
which had been given to her long ago
by Miss Percy, and of which, at the
time she received it, her Ladyship had
thought so little, that, hardly deigning to
bestow the customary tribute of a compliment,
she had thrown it, scarcely perused,

into her writing box. It was now
worth while to rummage for it, and now,
when the author had a name, her Ladyship
discovered “that the poem was
charming! absolutely charming!—Such
an early indication of talents! such a
happy promise of genius!—Oh! she had
always foreseen, that Mr. Alfred Percy
would make an uncommon figure in the
world!”—
“Bless me! does your Ladyship know
him?”
“Oh! intimately!—That is, I never
saw him exactly—but all his family I've
known intimately—ages ago in the
country.”
“I should so like to meet him.—And
do pray give me a copy of the verses.— 
And me!—and me!”
To work went the pens of all the female
amateurs, in scribbling copies of
“The Lawyer's May-day.”—And away
went the fair patroness in search of the
author,—introduced herself with unabashed
grace, invited him for “Monday,

Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday— 
Engaged! how unfortunate.—Well, for
next week?—a fortnight hence, three
weeks, positively she must have him at
her conversazione—She must give him
—No, he must give her a day, he must
consent to lose a day.—So many of her
friends and real judges were dying to
see him.”
To save the lives of so many judges,
Alfred consented to lose an evening— 
the day was fixed—Alfred found her
conversazione very brilliant—was admired
—and admired others in his turn
as much as was expected.—It was an
agreeable variety of company and of
thought to him, and he promised to go
sometimes to her Ladyship's parties.— 
A promise which delighted her much,
particularly as he had not yet given a
copy of the verses to Lady Spilsbury.
Lady Spilsbury, to whom verses quickly
worked round, was quite angry, that her
friend Erasmus had not given her an
early copy, and now invitations the most

pressing came from Lady Spilsbury to
her excellent literary dinners. If Alfred
had been so disposed, he might, among
these fetchers and carriers of bays, have
been extolled to the skies; but he had
too much sense and prudence to lose the
substance for the shadow, to sink a solid
character into a drawing-room reputation.
Of this he had seen the folly in Buckhurst
Falconer's case, and now, if any
further warning on this subject had been
wanting, he would have taken it from
the example of poor Seebright, the poet,
whom he met the second time he went
to Lady Angelica Headingham's. Poor
Seebright, as the world already began to
call him, from being an object of admiration,
was beginning to sink into an object
of pity. Instead of making himself
independent by steady exertions in any
respectable profession, instead of making
his way in the republic of letters by
some solid work of merit, he frittered
away his time among fashionable amateurs,
feeding upon their flattery, and

living on in the vain hope of patronage.
Already the flight of his genius had been
restrained, the force of his wing impaired; 
instead of soaring superior, he kept hovering
near the Earth; his “kestrel courage
fell,” he appeared to be almost
tamed to the domestic state to which he
was reduced—yet now and then a rebel
sense of his former freedom, and of his
present degradation, would appear.—
“Ah! if I were but independent as
you are!—If I had but followed a profession
as you have done,” said he to
Alfred, when, apart from the crowd,
they had an opportunity of conversing
confidentially.
Alfred replied, “that it was not yet
too late, that it was never too late for a
man of spirit and talents to make himself
independent: he then suggested to
Mr. Seebright various ways of employing
his powers, and pointed out some
useful and creditable literary undertakings,
by which he might acquire reputation.
Seebright listened, his eye eagerly

catching at each new idea the first moment,
the next turning off to something
else, raising objections futile or fastidious,
seeing nothing impossible in any
dream of his imagination, where no effort
of exertion was requisite, but finding
every thing impracticable when he
came to sober reality, where he was
called upon to labor. In fact, he was
one of the sort of people, who do not
know what they want, or what they
would be, who complain and complain,
disappointed and discontented, at having
sunk below their powers and their hopes,
and are yet without capability of persevering
exertion to emerge from their obscurity.
Seebright was now become an
inefficient being, whom no one could assist
to any good purpose. Alfred, after
a long, mazy, fruitless conversation, was
convinced that the case was hopeless,
and, sincerely pitying him, gave it up as
irremediable.—Just as Alfred had come
to this conclusion, and had sunk into
silence, a relation of his, whom he had

not seen for a considerable time, entered
the room, and passed by without noticing
him. She was so much altered
in her appearance, that he could scarcely
believe he saw Lady Jane Granville.
She looked out of spirits, and care-worn
—he immediately observed, that less
attention was paid to her than she used
to command, she had obviously sunk
considerably in importance, and appeared
to feel this keenly. Upon inquiry,
Alfred learnt, that she had lost a
large portion of her fortune by a lawsuit,
which she had managed, that is to
say, mismanaged for herself; and she
was still at law for the remainder of her
estate, which, notwithstanding her right
was undoubted, it was generally supposed
that she would lose, for the same
reason that occasioned her former failure,
her pertinacity in following her own advice
only. Alfred knew, that there had
been some misunderstanding between
Lady Jane and his family, that she had
been offended by his sister Caroline's

having declined accepting her invitation
to town, and from Mr. and Mrs. Percy's
having differed with her in opinion as
to the value of the patronage of fashion.
Notwithstanding all this, he was convinced
that Lady Jane, whatever her
opinions might be, and whether mistaken
or not, had been actuated by sincere
regard for his family, for which he
and they were grateful; and now was
the time to show it, now when he was
coming into notice in the world, and she
declining in importance.—Therefore,
though she had passed him by without
recognising him, he went immediately,
and spoke to her in so respectful and
kind a manner—paid her the whole evening
such marked attention, that she was
quite pleased and touched. In reality
she had been vexed with herself, for having
persisted so long in her resentment,
she wished for a fair opportunity for a
reconciliation, and she rejoiced that Alfred
thus opened the way for it. She
invited him to come to see her the next

day, observing, as she put her card into
his hand, that she no longer lived in her
fine house in St. James's Place. Now
that his motives could not be mistaken,
he was assiduous in his visits, and when
he had sufficiently obtained her confidence,
he ventured to touch upon her
affairs. She, proud to convince him of
her abilities as a woman of business, explained
her whole case, and descanted
upon the blunders and folly of her solicitors
and counsellors, especially upon
the absurdity of the opinions which she
had not followed. Her cause depended
upon the replication she was to put in
to a plea in special pleading: she
thought she saw the way straight before
her, and exclaimed vehemently against
that love of the crooked path by which
her lawyers seemed possessed.
Without disputing the legal soundness
of her ladyship's opinion in her own peculiar
case, Alfred, beginning at a great
distance from her passions, quietly undertook,
by relating to her cases which

had fallen under his own knowledge, to
convince her, that plain common sense
and reason could never lead her to the
knowledge of the rules of special-pleading,
or to the proper wording of those
answers, on the letter of which the fate
of a cause frequently depends. He confessed
to her, that his own understanding
had been so shocked, at first, by the apparent
absurdity of the system, that he
had almost abandoned the study, and that
it had been only in consequence of
actual experience, that he had at last
discovered the utility of those rules. She
insisted upon being also convinced before
she could submit, but as it is not quite so
easy as ladies sometimes think it is, to
teach any art or science in two words,
or to convey, in a moment, to the ignorant,
the combined result of study and
experience, Alfred declined this task,
and could undertake only to show her
Ladyship, by asking her opinion on
various cases which had been decided in
the courts, that it was possible she might

be mistaken; and that, however, superior
her understanding, a court of law would
infallibly decide according to it's own
rules.
“But good Heavens! my dear Sir,” 
exclaimed Lady Jane, “when, after I have
paid the amount of my bond, and every
farthing that I owe a creditor, yet this
rogue says I have not, is not it a proper
answer, that I owe him nothing.”
“Pardon me, this would be considered
as an evasive plea by the court, or as a
negative pregnant.”
“Oh, if you come to your negative
pregnants,” cried Lady Jane, “it is
impossible to understand you—I give up
the point.”
To this conclusion it had been Alfred's
object to bring her Ladyship, and when
she was fully convinced of the insufficient
limits of the human ... he
never said the female, understanding, to
comprehend these things without the aid
of men learned in the law, he humbly
offered his assistance to guide her out of

that labyrinth, into which, unwittingly
and without any clew, she had ventured
further and further, till she was just in
the very jaws of nonsuit and ruin.— 
She put her affairs completely into his
hands, and promised, that she would no
further interfere, even with her advice; 
for it was upon this condition, that Alfred
engaged to undertake the management
of her cause. Nothing indeed is more
tormenting to men of business, than to
be pestered with the incessant advice— 
hopes and fears—cautions and explanations— 
cunning suggestions—superficial
knowledge, and profound ignorance, of
lady or gentlemen lawyers.—Alfred now
begged and obtained permission from the
court to amend the Lady Jane Granville's
last plea,—he thenceforward conducted
the business, and played the game
of special pleading with such strict and
acute attention to the rules, that there
were good hopes the remaining portion
of her Ladyship's fortune, which was
now at stake, might be saved. He endeavored

to keep up her spirits and her
patience, for of a speedy termination to
the business there was no chance. They
had to deal with adversaries, who knew
how, on their side, to protract the
pleadings, and to avoid what is called
coming to the point.
It was a great pleasure to Alfred, thus
to have it in his power to assist his
friends, and the hope of serving them
redoubled his diligence. About this
time he was engaged in a cause for his
brother's friend and Rosamond's admirer,
Mr. Gresham.—A picture-dealer had
cheated this gentleman, in the sale of a
picture of considerable value.—Mr. Gresham
had bargained for, and bought, an
original Guido, wrote his name on the
back of it, and directed that it should
be sent to him. The painting which
was taken to his house had his name
written on the back, but was not the
original Guido for which he had bargained,
it was a copy. The picture-dealer,
however, and two respectable

witnesses, were ready to swear positively,
that this was the identical picture on
which Mr. Gresham wrote his name— 
that they saw him write his name, and
heard him order that it should be sent to
him. Mr. Gresham himself acknowledged,
that the writing was so like his
own, that he could not venture to deny
that it was his, and yet he could swear
that this was not the picture for which
he had bargained, and on which he had
written his name. He suspected it to be
a forgery; and was certain, that, by some
means, one picture had been substituted
for another. Yet the defendant had witnesses
to prove, that the picture never
was out of Mr. Gresham's sight, from
the time he bargained for it, till the
moment when he wrote his name on the
back, in the presence of these same witnesses.
This chain of evidence they thought
was complete, and that it could not be
broken. Alfred Percy, however, discovered
the nature of the fraud, and regardless

of the boasts and taunts of the
opposite party, kept his mind carefully
secret, till the moment when he came
to cross-examine the witnesses; for, as
Mr. Friend had observed to him, many
a cause has been lost by the impatience
of Counsel, in showing, beforehand, how
it might certainly be won . By thus
revealing the intended mode of attack,
opportunity is given to prepare a defence,
by which it may be ultimately counteracted.
In the present case, the defendant,
however, came into court secure
of victory, and utterly unprepared to
meet the truth, which was brought out
full upon him when least expected. The
fact was, that he had put two pictures
into the same frame, the original in
front, the copy behind it—on the back
of the canvass of the copy, Mr. Gresham
had written his name, never suspecting
that it was not the original for which he
bargained, and which he thought he

actually held in his hand. The witnesses,
therefore, swore literally the truth, that
they saw him write upon that picture; 
and they believed the picture, on which
he wrote, was the identical picture that
was sent home to him. One of the witnesses
was an honest man, who really
believed what he swore, and knew nothing
of the fraud, to which the other,
a rogue in confederacy with the picture-dealer,
was privy. The cross-examination
of both was so ably managed, that
the honest man was soon made to perceive,
and the rogue forced to reveal the
truth.—Alfred had reason to be proud of
the credit he obtained for the ability
displayed in this cross-examination, but
he was infinitely more gratified by
having it in his power to gain a cause
for his friend, and to restore to Mr. Gresham
his favorite Guido.
A welcome sight!—a letter from Godfrey!
the first his family had received
from him since he left England. Two
of his letters, it appears, had been lost.

Alluding to one he had written immediately
on hearing of the change in his
father's fortune, he observes, that he has
kept his resolution of living within his
pay, and, after entering into some other
family details, he continues as follows.
“Now, my dear mother, prepare to
hear me recant what I have said against
Lord Oldborough.—I forgive his Lordship
all his sins, and I begin to believe,
that though he is a statesman, his heart
is not yet quite ossified. He has recalled
our regiment from this unhealthy place,
and he has promoted Gascoigne to be
our Lieutenant-Colonel.—I say that
Lord Oldborough has done all this, because
I am sure, from a hint in Alfred's
last letter, that his Lordship has been
the prime mover in the business.—But
not to keep you in suspense about the
facts.
“In my first letter to my father, I
told you, that from the moment our
late lethargic Lieutenant-Colonel came

to the island, he took to drinking rum,
pure rum, to waken himself—claret,
port, and madeira, had lost their power
over him.—Then came brandy, which
he fancied was an excellent preservative
against the yellow fever, and the fever
of the country.—So he died ‘boldly by
brandy.’—Poor fellow! he was boasting
to me, the last week of his existence,
when he was literally on his death-bed,
that his father taught him to drink
before he was six years old, by practising
him every day, after dinner, in
the sublime art of carrying a bumper
steadily to his lips. He moreover boasted
to me, that when a boy of thirteen,
at an academy, he often drank two
bottles of claret at a sitting; and that,
when he went into the army, getting
among a jolly set, he brought himself
never to feel the worse for any quantity
of wine.—I don't know what he meant
by the worse for it—at forty-five, when
I first saw him, he had neither head nor
hand left for himself or his country. His

hand shook so, that if he had been perishing
with thirst, he could not have
carried a glass to his lips, till after various
attempts in all manner of curves
and zigzags, spilling half of it by the
way.—It was really pitiable to see him
—when he was to sign his name I always
went out of the room, and left Gascoigne
to guide his hand.—More helpless
still his mind than his body.—If his own
or England's salvation had depended
upon it, he could not, when in the least
hurried, have uttered a distinct order,
have dictated an intelligible letter, or, in
time of need, have recollected the name
of any one of his officers, or even his
own name—quite imbecile and embruted.
—But peace to his ashes! or rather
to his dregs—and may there never be
such another British Colonel!
“Early habits of temperance have not
only saved my life, but made my life
worth saving. Neither Colonel Gascoigne
nor I have ever had a day's serious
illness since we came to the island

—but we are the only two that have
escaped. Partly from the Colonel's example,
and partly from their own inclination,
all the other officers have drunk
hard.—Lieutenant R&wblank;is now ill of
the fever.—Captain H&wblank;(I beg his
pardon) now Major H&wblank;will soon
follow the Colonel to the grave, unless
he takes my very disinterested advice
and drinks less.—I am laughed at by
D&wblank;and V&wblank;and others for this; 
they ask, why the deuse I can't let the
Major kill himself his own way, and as
fast as he pleases, when I should get on a
step by it, and that step such a great
one. They say none but a fool would
do as I do, and I think none but a brute
could do otherwise—I can't stand by
with any satisfaction, and see a fellow-creature
killing himself by inches, even
though I have the chance of stepping into his
shoes.—I am sure the shoes would pinch
me confoundedly. If it is my brother-officers'
lot to fall in battle, it's very
well—I run the same hazard, he dies,

as he ought to do, a brave fellow—but
to stand by, and see a man die as he
ought not to do, and die what is called
an honest fellow!—I can't do it.—H&wblank;,
at first, had a great mind to run me
through the body—but, poor man, he
is now very fond of me, and if any one
can keep him from destroying himself, I
flatter myself I shall.
“A thousand thanks to dear Caroline
for her letter, and to Rosamond for
her journal. They, who have never
been an inch from home, cannot conceive
how delightful it is, at such a distance,
to receive letters from our friends.
You remember, in Cook's voyage, his
joy, at meeting in some distant island
with the spoon marked London.
“I hope you received my letters, Nos.
1 and 2.—Not that there was any thing
particular in them. You know I never
do more than tell the bare facts.—Not
like Rosamond's journal—with which,
by the by, Gascoigne has fallen in love.
He sighs, and wishes that Heaven had

blessed him with such a sister—for sister,
read wife.—I hope this will encourage
Rosamond to write again immediately.
No.—Do not tell what I have just said
about Gascoigne, for,—who knows the
perverse ways of women!—perhaps it
might prevent her from writing to me
at all. You may tell her, in general,
that it is my opinion ladies always write
better, and do every thing better than
men—except fight,—which Heaven forbid
they should ever do in public or
private.
“I am glad that Caroline did not
marry Mr. Barclay, since she did not
like him. But by all accounts he is a
sensible, worthy man, and I give my
consent to his marriage with Lady Mary
Pembroke, though, from Caroline's
description, I became half in love with
her myself. N. B. I have not been in
love above six times since I left England,
and but once any thing to signify.
How does the Marchioness of Twickenham
go on?

“Affectionate duty to my father, and
love to all the happy people at home.
Dear Mother,
Your affectionate Son,
G. Percy.”