

As soon as it was possible, after his
return to Percy-Hall, Mr. Percy went
to pay his respects to Lord Oldborough.
He found this great statesman happy in
retirement, without any affectation of
happiness. There were proofs in every
thing about him, that his mind had
unbent itself agreeably; his powers had
expanded upon different objects, building,
planting, improving the soil and
the people.
He had many tastes, which had long
lain dormant, or rather which had been
held in subjugation by one tyrant passion.
That passion vanquished, the
former tastes resumed their activity.— 
The superior strength of his character
was shown in his never recurring to ambition.
It's vigour was displayed in the

means by which he supplied himself not
only with variety of occupation, but
with variety of motive.—Those who best
know the human mind must be aware of
the difficulty of supplying motive for
one accustomed to stimulus of so high a
kind as that, to which Lord Oldborough
had been habituated. For one who had
been at the head of the government of a
great nation, to make for himself objects
in the stillness and privacy of a
country life, required no common talent
and energy of soul.—The difficulty was
increased to Lord Oldborough, for to
him the vast resource of a taste for literature
was wanting.—
The biographer of Sir Robert Walpole
tells us, that, “though he had not forgotten
his classical attainments, he had
little taste for literary occupations. Sir
Robert once expressed his regret on this
subject to Mr. Fox, in the library at
Houghton.—“I wish,” he said, “I
took as much delight in reading as you
do, it would be the means of alleviating

many tedious hours in my present retirement.
But, to my misfortune, I derive
no pleasure from such pursuits.”
Lord Oldborough felt, but never condescended
to complain of that deficiency
of general literature, which was
caused in him partly by his not having
had time for the attainment, and partly
by his having formed too low an estimate
of the influence and power of literature
in the political world—But he
now took peculiar delight in recalling
classical literature, in which he had in
his youth excelled; as Mr. Percy sympathised
with him in this taste, there
was another point in which they coalesced—Mr.
Percy staid with his old
friend some days, for he was anxious to
give him this proof of attachment, and
felt interested in seeing his character develope
itself in a new direction, displaying
fresh life and strength, and unexpected
resource in circumstances, in
which statesmen of the most vigorous
minds, and of the highest spirit, have

been seen “to droop and drowse,” to
sink into indolence, sensuality, or the
horrors of hypochondriacism and superstition.—
Lord Oldborough, on his first retiring
to Clermont-Park, had informed Mr.
Percy, that he should wish to see him
as soon as he had arranged certain papers.
The arrival of Count Altenberg,
the marriage of Caroline, and Mr.
Percy's long imprisonment, which followed,
had prevented his recollecting
this message till his present visit. He
now reminded his Lordship of it, and
Lord Oldborough put into his hands a
sketch, which he had been drawing out,
of the principal transactions in which he
had been engaged during his political
career, with copies of his letters to the
first public characters of the day, in our
own and in foreign countries—Even by
those who had felt no regard for the
man, the letters of such a minister would
have been read with avidity; but Mr.
Percy perused them with a stronger interest

than any which could be created
by mere political or philosophical curiosity—He
read them with the pleasure
which a generous mind takes in admiring
that which is good and great,
with the delight which a true friend feels
in seeing proofs, that justify all the
esteem he had previously felt.—He saw
in these original documents, in this history
of Lord Oldborough's political life,
the most perfect consistency and integrity,
the most disinterested and enlightened
patriotism. When Mr. Percy
returned the manuscript to his Lordship,
he spoke of the satisfaction he must experience,
in looking back upon this record
of a life spent in the service of his
country, and observed, that he was not
surprised that, with such a solid source
of self-approbation, such indefeasible
claims to the gratitude of his countrymen,
and such well-earned fame, he
should be, as he appeared, so happy in
retirement.
“I am happy, and, I believe, principally

from the cause you have mentioned”—said
Lord Oldborough, who had a
mind too great for the affectation of humility—“So
far I am happy”—
“Yet”—added he, after a considerable
pause, “I have, I feel, a greater
capability of happiness, for which I have
been prevented from making any provision,
partly by the course of life, of
which I made choice, and partly by circumstances,
over which I had no control.”—
He paused again—And turning the
conversation, spoke of his sister, an elderly
lady, who had come to pass some
time with him—They had lived separate
almost all their lives; she in Scotland
with her husband, a Scottish nobleman,
who having died about the time when
Lord Oldborough had resigned his ministerial
situation, she had accepted his
Lordship's invitation to visit him in his
retirement. The early attachment he had
had for this sister seemed to revive in his
mind when they met, and, as if glad to

have some object for his affections, they
were poured out upon her—Mr. Percy
observed a tenderness in his manner and
voice when he spoke to her, a thousand
little attentions, which no one would
have expected from the apparently stern
Lord Oldborough, a man who had been
engrossed all his life by politics.
On the morning of the last day which
Mr. Percy meant to spend at Clermont-Park,
his Lordship, as they were sitting
together in his study, expressed more
than common regret at the necessity for
his friend's departure, but said,

“I have no right to detain you from
your family”— 

Then, after a pause, he added— 

“Mr. Percy, you first gave me the
idea, that a private life is the happiest.”
“My Lord, in most cases I believe it
is; but I never meant to assert, that a
public life spent in noble exertion, and
with the consciousness of superior talent
and utility, is not more desirable than
the life of any obscure individual can

possibly be, even though he possess the
pleasures of domestic ease and tranquility.—There
are men of eminent abilities,
capable of extraordinary exertions, inspired
by exalted patriotism ... I believe—notwithstanding
the weakness or
corruption of so many has weakened all
faith in public virtue—I believe in
the existence of such men—men, who
devote themselves to the service of their
country,—when the time for their relinquishing
the toils of public life arrives,
honor and self-approbation follow them
in retirement.
“It is true, I am happy,”—repeated
Lord Oldborough; “but to go on with
what I began to say to you yesterday.—I
feel that some addition might be made
to my happiness.—The sense of having,
to the best of my ability, done my
duty, is satisfactory.—I do not require
applause—I disdain adulation—I have
sustained my public life without sympathy—I
could seldom meet with it—Where
I could, I have enjoyed it—and

could now enjoy it—exquisitely—as you
do, Mr. Percy—surrounded by a happy
family.—Domestic life requires domestic
pleasures—objects for the affections.”
Mr. Percy felt the truth of this, and
could answer only by suggesting the
idea of Mr. Temple, who was firmly
and warmly attached to Lord Oldborough,
and for whom his Lordship had
a strong regard.
“Mr. Temple, and my daughter Rosamond,
whom your Lordship honored
with so kind an invitation, propose, I
know, paying their respects to you next
week.—Though I am her father, I may
venture to say, that Rosamond's sprightliness
is so mixed with solid information
and good sense, that her society will become
aggreeable to your Lordship.”
“I shall rejoice to see Mrs. Temple
here.—As the daughter of one friend,
and the wife of another, she has a double
claim to my regard. And, (to say nothing
of hereditary genius or dispositions—in
which you do not believe, and

I do), there can be no doubt, that the
society of a lady, educated as Mrs.
Temple has been, must suit my taste.
The danger is, that her society should
become necessary to me. For Mr.
Temple I already feel a degree of affection,
which I must repress, rather
than indulge.”
“Repress!—Why so, my Lord.—You
esteem him? you believe in the sincerity
of his attachment?”
“I do.”
“Then why with stoicism—pardon me,
my dear Lord—why repress affection?”
“Lest I should become dependent for
my daily happiness on one, whose happiness
is independent of mine—in some
degree incompatible with mine.—Even
if his society were given to me, his heart
must be at his home, and with his family.—You
see I am no proud stoic.—But
a man who dares to look at life ...
the decline of life, such as it is—as it
must be.—Different, Mr. Percy, in your
situation—and in mine.”

The conversation was here interrupted
by the arrival of a carriage— 
Lord Oldborough looked out of the
window as it passed—then smiled, and
observed how altered the times were,
since Clermont-Park used to be crowded
with visitors and carriages—now the arrival
of one is an event.
The servant announced a foreign
name—A Neapolitan Abbé, who had
come over in the train of a new ambassador,
he had just arrived in England,
and had letters from the Cardinal &wblank; 
his uncle, which he was desired to deliver
into Lord Oldborough's own hand. The
Abbé was, it appeared, personally a
stranger to him, but there had been
some ministerial intercourse between his
Lordship and the Cardinal. Lord Oldborough
received these political letters
with an air of composure and indifference,
which proved, that he ceased to
have an interest in the game.
“He supposed,” he said, “that the Abbé 
had been apprised, that he was no longer

one of his Majesty's ministers—that he
had resigned his official situation, had
retired, and that he took no part whatever
in public affairs.”
The Abbé replied, that he had been
apprised, that Lord Oldborough had retired
from his public office; but his uncle,
he added, with a significant smile, was
aware that Lord Oldborough's influence
was as great still as it had ever been, and
greater than that of any ostensible minister.
This Lord Oldborough disclaimed—coolly
observing, that his influence, whatever
it might be, could not be known
even to himself, as it was never exerted,—and
that as he had determined never more
to interfere in public business, he could
not be of the least political service to the
Cardinal. The Duke of Greenwich was
now the person, to whom on such subjects
all applications should be addressed.
The Abbé, however, repeated, that his
instructions from the Cardinal were positive
and peremptory, to deliver these

letters into no hands but those of Lord
Oldborough—That in consequence of
this strict injunction, he had come purposely
to present them. He was instructed
to request his Lordship would
put the letters into the hands of any secretary,
but would have the goodness to
examine them himself, and give his counsel
how to proceed, and to whom they
should, in case of his Lordship's declining
to interfere, be addressed.
“Mr. Percy!”—said Lord Oldborough,
recalling Mr. Percy, who had
risen to quit the room—“You will
not leave me—Whatever you may
wish to say, M. l'Abbé, may be said
before this gentleman—my friend.”
His Lordship then opened the packet,
examined the letters—read and redirected
some to the Duke of Greenwich—others
to the King.
The Abbé, all the time, descanting
vehemently on Neapolitan politics—regretting
Lord Oldborough's resignation—adverting
still to his Lordship's powerful

influence—and pressing some point
in negotiation, for which his uncle, the
Cardinal, was most anxious.
Among the letters, there was one
which Lord Oldborough did not open; 
he laid it on the table with the direction
downwards, leaned his elbow upon it,
and sat as if calmly listening to the
Abbé; but Mr. Percy, knowing his
countenance, saw signs of extraordinary
emotion, with difficulty repressed.
At length the gesticulating Abbé finished,
and waited his Lordship's instructions.
They were given in few words—The
letters redirected to the King and the
Duke of Greenwich were returned to
him. He thanked his Lordship with
many Italian superlatives—declined his
Lordship's invitation to stay till the next
day at Clermont-Park—said he was
pressed in point of time, that it was indispensably
necessary for him to be in
London, to deliver these papers as soon
as possible.—His eye glanced on the
unopened letter—

“Private, Sir”—said Lord Oldborough,
in a stern voice—without moving
his elbow from the paper—“Whatever
answer it may require, I shall have the
honor to transmit to you—for the Cardinal”—
The Abbé bowed low—left his address—and
took leave—Lord Oldborough,
after attending him to the door, and
seeing him depart, returned, took out
his watch, and said to Mr. Percy—
“Come to me, in my cabinet, in five
minutes.”
Seeing his sister on the walk approaching
his house, he added,

“Let none follow me.”
When the five minutes were over, Mr.
Percy went to Lord Oldborough's
cabinet—knocked—no answer—knocked
again—louder—all was silent—he
entered—and saw Lord Oldborough
seated, but in the attitude of
one just going to rise, he looked more
like a statue than a living person, there
was a stiffness in his muscles, and over

his face and hands a death-like color—His
eyes were fixed, and directed towards
the door—but they never moved when
Mr. Percy entered, nor did Lord Oldborough
stir at his approach—From
one hand, which hung over the arm
of his chair, his spectacles had dropped; 
his other hand grasped an open letter— 

“My dear Lord!” cried Mr. Percy.
He neither heard nor answered—Mr.
Percy opened the window and let
down the blind. Then attempting to
raise the hand which hung down, he
perceived it was fixed in all the rigidity
of catalepsy. In hopes of recalling his
senses or his power of motion, Mr.
Percy determined to try to draw the letter
from his grasp; the moment the
letter was touched, Lord Oldborough
started—his eyes darting fiercely upon
him.
“Who dares?—Who are you, Sir?” 
cried he.
“Your friend, Percy—my Lord.”

Lord Oldborough pointed to a chair—Mr.
Percy sat down—His Lordship
recovered gradually from the species of
trance into which he had fallen. The
cataleptic rigidity of his figure relaxed—the
color of life returned—the body regained
her functions—the soul resumed
at once her powers&wblank;Without seeming
sensible of any interruption or intermission
of feeling or thought, Lord
Oldborough went on speaking to Mr.
Percy.
“Upon you, Mr. Percy, I can depend
as upon myself. Injunctions of
secresy are unnecessary to a man of
honor—The letter, which I now hold
in my hand, is from that Italian lady of
transcendent beauty, in whose company
you once saw me when we first met at
Naples.—She was of high rank—high
endowments.—I loved her—how well—I
need not—cannot say—She gave me
reason to believe she was attached to me.—I
was induced—no matter how—to
suspect her fidelity—pass over these circumstances

—I cannot speak, or think
of them.—We parted, I never saw her
more.—She retired to a convent.—Nor
did I, till I received this letter, written
on her death-bed, know that she had
given me a son.—The proofs that I
wronged her are irresistible—Would that
they had been given to me when I
could have repaired my injustice!—But
her pride prevented their being sent till
the hour of her death.”
On the first reading of her letter, Lord
Oldborough had been so struck by the
idea of the injustice he had done the
mother, that he seemed scarcely to advert
to the idea of his having a son—Absorbed
in the past, he was at first insensible
both to the present and the future.
Early associations, long dormant, were
suddenly wakened; he was carried back
with irresistible force to the days of his
youth, and something of likeness in air
and voice to the Lord Oldborough he
had formerly known appeared to Mr.
Percy—As the tumult of passionate recollections

subsided, as this enthusiastic
reminiscence faded; and the memory of
the past gave way to the sense of the
present, Lord Oldborough resumed his
habitual look and manner—His thoughts
turnd upon his son, that unknown being
who belonged to him, who had claims
upon him, who might form a great addition
to the happiness or misery of his
life.—He took up the letter again,
looked for the passage that related to his
son, and read it anxiously to himself,
then to Mr. Percy—observing, “that
the directions were so vague, that it
would be difficult to act upon them.”
“The boy was sent when three years
old to England or Ireland, under the care
of an Irish Priest, who delivered him to
a merchant, recommended by the Hamburgh
banker, &c.”
“I shall have difficulty in tracing
this,—Great danger of being mistaken
or deceived,” said Lord Oldborough,—pausing—with
a look of anxiety,— 
“Would to God! that I had means of

knowing with certainty, where and above
all, what he is,—or—that I had never
heard of his existence!”—
“My Lord, are there any more particulars?” 
inquired Mr. Percy, eagerly.
Lord Oldborough continued to read,
“Four hundred Pounds of your English
money have been remitted to him annually,
by means of these Hamburgh
bankers.—To them we must apply in
the first instance,” said Lord Oldborough,
“and I will write this moment.”
“I think my Lord, I can save you
the trouble,” said Mr. Percy,—“I
know the man.” ...
Lord Oldborough put down his pen,
and looked at Mr. Percy with astonishment.
“Yes my Lord, however extraordinary
it may appear, I repeat it—I believe I
know your son, and if he be the man I
imagine him to be, I congratulate you,—you
have reason to rejoice.”
“The facts my dear Sir,” cried Lord

Oldborough,—“Do not raise my
hopes.” ...
Mr. Percy repeated all that he had
heard from Godfrey of Mr. Henry, related
every circumstance from the first
commencement of them—The impertinence
and insult to which the mystery
that hung over his birth had subjected
him in the regiment—the quarrels in the
regiment—the goodness of Major Gascoigne—the
gratitude of Henry—the
attachment between him and Godfrey,
his selling out of the regiment after
Godfrey's ineffectual journey to London,
his wishing to go into a mercantile house—the
letter which Godfrey then wrote,
begging his father to recommend Henry
to Mr. Gresham, disclosing to Mr. Percy,
with Henry's permission, all that he
knew of his birth.—
“I have that letter at home,”—said
Mr. Percy—“your Lordship shall see
it—I perfectly recollect the circumstances
of Henry's having been brought
up in Ireland by a Dublin merchant,

and having received constantly a remittance
in quarterly payments of four
hundred pounds a year, from a banker
in Cork.”
“Did he inquire why, or from whom,” 
said Lord Oldborough—“and does he
know his mother?”
“Certainly not, the answer to his first
inquiries prevented all farther questions—He
was told by the bankers, that they
had directions to stop payment of the
remittance, if any questions were asked.”
Lord Oldborough listened with profound
attention, as Mr. Percy went on
with the history of Mr. Henry, relating
all the circumstances of his honorable
conduct with respect to Miss Panton—his
disinterestedness, decision, and energy
of affection.—
Lord Oldborough's emotion increased,
he seemed to recognise some traits of his
own character.
“I hope this youth is my son,”—said
his Lordship, in a low suppressed voice,

“He deserves to be yours my Lord,”—said
Mr. Percy.
“To have a son might be the greatest
of evils—To have such a son, must be the
greatest of blessings,” said his Lordship,—he
was lost in thought for a moment,
then exclaimed,—“I must see the
letter—I must see the man.”—
“My Lord he is at my house.”—
Lord Oldborough started from his seat,
“Let me see him instantly.”—
“To morrow my Lord,” said Mr.
Percy, in a calm tone, for it was necessary
to calm his impetuosity.—“To
morrow—Mr. Henry could not be brought
here to night, without alarming him, or
without betraying to him the cause of
our anxiety.”
“To morrow let it be—you are right
my dear friend. Let me see him without
his suspecting, that I am any thing to
him, or he to me—you will let me have
the letter to night?”
“Certainly my Lord.”—

Mr. Percy sympathised with his impatience,
and gratified it with all the celerity
of a friend—The letter was sent
that night to Lord Oldborough. In
questioning his sons more particularly
concerning Henry, Mr. Percy learnt
from Erasmus a fresh and strong coroborating
circumstance. Dr. Percy
had been lately attending Mr. Gresham's
porter, O'Brien, the Irishman; who had
been so ill, that, imagining himself dying,
he had sent for a priest.—Henry was
standing by the poor fellow's bedside,
when the priest arrived, who was so
much struck by the sight of him, that
for some time his attention could scarcely
be fixed on the sick man. The priest,
after he had performed his official duties,
returned to Henry, begged pardon for having
looked at him with so much earnestness,
but said, that Mr. Henry strongly
reminded him of the features of an
Italian lady, who had committed a child
to his care many years ago. This led to

further explanation, and upon comparing
dates and circumstances, Henry was
convinced, that this was the very priest
who had carried him over to Ireland;—the
priest recognized him to be the
child, of whom he had taken charge—But
farther all was darkness.—The priest
knew nothing more—not even the name
of the lady, from whom he had received
the child.—He knew only, that he had
been handsomely rewarded by the Dublin
merchant, to whom he had delivered the
boy—and he had heard, that this merchant
had since become bankrupt, and
had fled to America.—This promise of a
discovery, and sudden stop to his hopes,
had only mortified poor Henry, and had
irritated that curiosity, which he had endeavored
to lull to repose.
Mr. Percy was careful both for Mr.
Henry's sake and for Lord Oldborough's,
not to excite hopes, which might not ultimately
be accomplished. He took
precautions to prevent him from suspecting
any thing extraordinary in the intended

introduction to Lord Oldborough.
There had been some dispute between
the present minister, and some London
merchant, about the terms of a loan,
which had been made by Lord Oldborough—Mr.
Gresham's house had some
concern in this transaction; and it was
now settled between Mr. Percy and Lord
Oldborough, that his Lordship should
write to desire to see Henry, who, as Mr.
Gresham's partner, could give every necessary
information—Henry accordingly
was summoned to Clermont-Park,
and accompanied Mr. Percy, with his
mind intent upon this business.
Mr. Henry, in common with all, who
were capable of estimating a great public
character, had conceived high admiration
for Lord Oldborough; he had seen
him only in public, and at a distance—and
it was not without awe, that he
now thought of being introduced to
him, and of hearing and speaking to
him in private.

Lord Oldborough, meanwhile, who
had been satisfied by the perusal of
the letter, and by Mr. Percy's information,
waited for his arrival with extreme
impatience—He was walking up
and down his room, and looking frequently
at his watch, which he believed
more than once to have stopped. At
length the door opened.
“Mr. Percy, and Mr. Henry, my
Lord.”
Lord Oldborough's eye darted upon
Henry.—Struck instantly with the
resemblance to the mother, Lord Oldborough
rushed forward, and clasping
him in his arms, exclaimed,
“My son!. ... He is my son!”
Tenderness, excessive tenderness, was
in his look, voice, soul, as if he wished
to repair in a moment the injustice of
years.
“Yes,” said Lord Oldborough,—“now—I
am happy,—now, I also Mr.
Percy may be proud of a son—I too

shall know the pleasures of domestic
life.—Now I am happy!”—repeated
he,— 
“And, pleas'd, resign'd
To tender passions all his mighty mind.”
March 26th, 1813.