



My dear Father and Mother,
I know you will be pleased to hear, that
we arrived safely in Town last Night. We
found a stately, well-furnished, and convenient
House; and I had my Closet, or Library,
and my Withdrawing-room, all in complete
Order, which Mr. B. gave me Possession of, in a
manner the most obliging that can be imagin'd. 
I am in a new World, as I may say, and see
such vast Piles of Building every-where, and such
a Concourse of People, and hear such a Rattling
of Coaches in the Day, that I hardly know what
to make of it, as yet. Then the nightly Watch, 

going their hourly Rounds, disturbed me last
Night. But I shall soon be used to that, and
sleep the sounder, perhaps, for the Security it
assures to us. 
Mr. B. is impatient to shew me what is curious
in and about this vast City; and to hear, as he
is pleased to say, my Observations upon what I
shall see; and he has carried me thro' several of
the fine Streets this Day, in his Chariot: But, at
present, I have too confused a Notion of Things,
to give any Account of them: Nor shall I trouble
you with Descriptions of that kind; for you being
within a Day's Journey of London, I hope for
the Pleasure of seeing you oftener than I could
expect before; and shall therefore leave these
Matters to your own Observations, and what you
will hear from others. 
I am impatient for the Arrival of my dear
Miss Darnford; whose Company and Conversation
will reconcile me, in a great measure, to
this new World. 
Our Family, at present, are Mr. Colbrand,
Mr. Jonathan, and Six Men-servants, including
the Coachman. The Four Maids are also with us. 
But my good Mrs. Jervis was indisposed,
so came not up with us; but we expect her, and
Mr. Longman, in a Day or two: For Mr. B.
has given her to my Wishes; and Arthur the
Gardener, and his Wife, with Benjamin, are to
keep House in the Country. And as Mr. Longman's
Business will require him to be up and down
frequently, Mrs. Jervis's Care will be the better
dispens'd with there; and I long to see the dear 

good Woman, and shall be more in my Element,
when I do. 
Then I have, besides, my penitent Polly
Barlow: But the poor Girl has never held up her
Head since that deplorable Instance of her Weakness,
which I mentioned to you, and to Miss
Darnford; yet am I as kind to her, as if nothing
had happened. I wish, however, some good
Husband would offer for her. 
Mr. Adams, out worthy Chaplain, is, at
present, with Mr. Williams. He purposes to
give us his Company here till Christmas, when,
probably, Matters will be so adjusted, as that
he may take Possession of his Living. Mean
time, that we may not let fall a good Custom,
when perhaps we shall have most Occasion for
it, I make Mr. Jonathan, who is reverend by
his Years, and silver Hairs, supply his Place,
appointing him the Prayers he is to read. 
God preserve you both in Health, and continue
to me, I beseech you, your Prayers and
Blessings, concludes me 
Your ever-dutiful Daughter,
P. B. 

