



My dear Father and Mother,
John being to go your Way, I am willing
to write, because he is so willing to carry
any thing for me. He says it does him good
at his Heart to see you both, and to hear you
talk. He says you are both so sensible, and so
honest, that he always learns something from
you to the Purpose. It is a thousand Pities, he
says, that such worthy Hearts should not have
better Luck in the World! and wonders, that
you, my Father, who are so well able to teach,
and write so good a Hand, succeeded no better
in the School you attempted to set up; but was
forc'd to go to such hard Labour. But this is
more Pride to me, that I am come of such
honest Parents, than if I had been born a
Lady. 
I hear nothing yet of going to Lady
Davers; and I am very easy at present here: 
For Mrs. Jervis uses me as if I were her own
Daughter, and is a very good Woman, and makes
my Master's Interest her own. She is always
giving me good Counsel, and I love her, next to
you two, I think, best of any body. She keeps so
good Rule and Order, she is mightily respected
by us all; and takes Delight to hear me read to
her; and all she loves to hear read, is good Books,
which we read whenever we are alone; so that
I think I am at home with you. She heard one 

of our Men, Harry, who is no better than he
should be, speak freely to me, I think he call'd
me his pretty Pamela, and took hold of me,
as if he would have kissed me; for which, you
may be sure, I was very angry; and she took
him to Task, and was as angry at him as could
be; and told me she was very well pleased to
see my Prudence and Modesty, and that I kept
all the Fellows at a Distance. And indeed I am
sure I am not proud, and carry it civilly to every
body; but yet, methinks, I cannot bear to be
look'd upon by these Men-servants; for they
seem as if they would look one thro'; and as I
generally breakfast, dine, and sup, with Mrs.
Jervis, (so good she is to me) I am very easy,
that I have so little to say to them. Not but
they are very civil to me in the main, for Mrs.
Jervis's sake, who they see loves me; and they
stand in Awe of her, knowing her to be a
Gentlewoman born, tho' she has had Misfortunes. 
I am going on again with a long Letter; for
I love Writing, and shall tire you. But when
I began, I only intended to say, that I am quite
fearless of any Danger now: And indeed cannot
but wonder at myself, (tho' your Caution
to me was your watchful Love) that I should be
so foolish as to be so uneasy as I have been: 
For I am sure my Master would not demean
himself so, as to think upon such a poor
Girl as I, for my Harm. For such a thing would
ruin his Credit as well as mine, you know: 

Who, to be sure, may expect one of the best
Ladies in the Land. So no more at present; 
but that I am 
Your ever-dutiful Daughter. 

