


I Write now with a little more Liking, tho' less
Opportunity, because Mr. Williams has got a large
Parcel of my Papers safe, in his Hands, to send
them to you, as he has Opportunity; so I am not
quite uselesly employ'd; and I am deliver'd, besides,
from the Fear of their being found, if I should be
search'd, or discover'd. I have been permitted to take
an Airing five or fix Miles, with Mrs. Jewkes: But,
tho' I know not the Reason, she watches me more
closely than ever; so that we have discontinued,
by Consent, for these three Days, the Sun-flower
Correspondence. 
The poor Cook-maid has had a bad Mischance; for
she has been hurt much by a Bull in the Pasture, by
the Side of the Garden, not far from the Back-door. 
Now this Pasture I am to cross, which is about half
a Mile, and then comes to a Common, and near that
a private Horse-road, where I hope to find an Opportunity
for escaping, as soon as Mr. Williams can
get me a Horse, and has made all ready for me:
For he has got me the Key, which he put under the
Mould, just by the Door, as he found an Opportunity to hint to me. 
He just now has signify'd, that the Gentleman is
dead, whose Living he has had Hope of, and he
came pretendedly to tell Mrs. Jewkes of it, and so
could speak this to her, before me. She wish'd him 

Joy; see what the World is! one Man's Death is
another Man's Joy: Thus we thrust out one another! 
—My hard Case makes me serious. He found
means to slide a Letter into my Hands, and is gone
away: He look'd at me with such Respect and
Solemnness at Parting, that Mrs. Jewkes said, Why,
Madam, I believe our young Parson is half in Love
with you—Ah! Mrs. Jewkes, said I, he knows
better. Said she, (I believe to sound me) Why I
can't see you can either of you do better; and I
have lately been so touch'd for you, seeing how
heavily you apprehend Dishonour from my Master,
that I think it is Pity you should not have Mr.
Williams. 
I knew this must be a Fetch of hers, because, instead
of being troubled for me, she had watched me
closer, and him too; and so I said, There is not the
Man living, that I desire to marry; if I can but keep
myself honest, it is all my Desire; and to be a Comfort
and Assistance to my poor Parents, if it should
be my happy Lot to be so, is the very Top of my
Ambition. Well, but, said she, I have been thinking
very seriously, that Mr. Williams would make you
a good Husband, and as he will owe all his Fortune
to my Master, he will be very glad, to be sure,
to be oblig'd to him for a Wife of his chusing:
Especially, said she, such a pretty one, and one so
ingenious and genteelly educated. 
This gave me a Doubt, whether she knew of
my Master's Intimation of that sort formerly; and
I asked her, if she had Reason to surmize, that that
was in View? No, she said; it was only her own
Thought; but it was very likely that my Master had
either that in View, or something better for me. 
But, if I approv'd of it, she would propose such a
thing to her Master directly; and gave a detestable
Hint, that I might take Resolutions upon it, of 

bringing such an Affair to Effect. I told her, I abhorr'd
her Insinuation; and as to Mr. Williams, I
thought him a civil good sort of Man; but as on
one side, he was above me; so on the other, of all
Things, I did not love a Parson. So finding she
could make nothing of me, she quitted the Subject. 
I will open his Letter by-and-by, and give you
the Contents of it; for she is up and down, so
much, that I am afraid of her catching me. 
Well, I see Providence has not abandon'd me. I
shall be under no Necessity to make Advances to
Mr. Williams, if I was, as I am sure I am not, dispos'd
to it. This is his Letter. 

‘I Know not how to express myself, lest I should
appear to you to have a selfish View in the
Service I would do you. But I really know but
one effectual and honourable Way to disengage
yourself, from the dangerous Situation you are in. 
It is that of Marriage with some Person that you
could make happy in your Approbation. As for
my own part, it would be, as Things stand, my
apparent Ruin; and, worse still, I should involve
you in Misery too. But yet, so great is my Veneration
for you, and so intire my Reliance in Providence,
on so just an Occasion, that I should think
myself but too happy, if I might be accepted. I
would, in this Case, forego all my Expectations,
and be your Conductor to some safe Distance. 
But why do I say, in this Case? That I will do,
whether you think fit to reward me so eminently or
not. And I will, the Moment I hear of the
'Squire's setting out, (and I think now I have settled
a very good Method of Intelligence of all his
Motions) get the Horse ready, and myself to 

conduct you. I refer myself wholly to your
Goodness and Direction, and am, with the highest
Respect, 
‘Your most faithful humble Servant. 
‘Don't think this a sudden Resolution. I always
admir'd your hear-say Character; and the
Moment I saw you, wish'd to serve so much
Excellence.’ 

What shall I say, my dear Father and Mother, to
this unexpected Declaration? I want now more
than ever your Blessing and Direction. But after all,
I have no Mind to marry. I had rather live with
you. But yet, I would marry a Man who begs from
Door to Door, and has no Home nor Being, rather
than indanger my Honesty. Yet, I cannot, methinks,
hear of being a Wife. —After a thousand
different Thoughts, I wrote as follows. 

Reverend Sir,
I am much confused at the Contents of your
last. You are much too generous, and I can't
bear you should risque all your future Prospects
for so unworthy a Creature. I cannot think of
your Offer without equal Concern and Gratitude; 
for nothing but to avoid my utter Ruin can make
me think of a Change of Condition; and so, Sir,
you ought not to accept of such an involuntary
Compliance, as mine would be, were I, upon the
last Necessity, to yield to your very generous Proposal. 
I will rely wholly upon your Goodness to
me, in assisting my Escape; but shall not, on
your account principally, think of the Honour
you propose for me, at present; and never, but 

at the Pleasure of my Parents, who, poor as they
are, in such a weighty Point, are as much intitled
to my Obedience and Duty, as if they were ever
so rich. I beg you therefore, Sir, not to think of
any thing from me, but everlasting Gratitude,
which will always bind me to be 
‘Your most obliged Servant.’ 

