



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

I am preparing to leave this kingdom. Mowbray
and Tourville promise to give me their company in
a month or two. 
I'll give thee my route. 
I shall first to Paris; and, for amusement and diversion
sake, try to renew some of my old friendships: 
Thence to some of the German courts: Thence, perhaps,
to Vienna: Thence descend thro' Bavaria and
the Tyrol to Venice, where I shall keep the carnival: 
Thence to Florence and Turin: Thence again over
mount Cenis to France: And, when I return again to
Paris, shall expect to see my friend Belford, who by
that time, I doubt not, will be all crusted and bearded
over with penitence, self-denial, and mortification; a
very anchoret, only an itinerant one, journeying over
in hope to cover a multitude of his own sins, by proselyting
his old companion. 
But let me tell thee, Jack, if stock rises on, as it has
done since I wrote my last Letter, I am afraid thou
wilt find a difficult task in succeeding, should such be
thy purpose. 
Nor, I verily think, can thy own penitence and reformation
hold. Strong habits are not so easily rooted
out. Old Satan has had too much benefit from thy
faithful services, for a series of years, to let thee so easily
get out of his clutches. He knows what will do with
thee. A fine strapping Bona Roba, in the Chartrestaste,
but well-limb'd, clear-complexion'd, and Turkish-ey'd; 

Thou the first man with her, or made to believe
so, which is the same thing; how will thy frosty face
shine upon such an object! How will thy tristful visage
be illumined by it! A composition will be made between
thee and the grand tempter: Thou wilt promise to do
him suit and service till old age and inability come. 
And then will he, in all probability, be sure of thee for
ever. For, wert thou to outlive thy present reigning
appetites, he will trump up some other darling sin, or
make a now secondary one darling, in order to keep
thee firmly attached to his infernal interests. Thou wilt
continue resolving to amend, but never amending, till
grown old before thou art aware (a dozen years after
thou art old with every-body else) thy for-time-built tenement
having lasted its allotted period, he claps down
upon thy grizzled head the universal trap-door: And
then all will be over with thee in his own way. 
Thou wilt think these hints uncharacteristic from me. 
But yet I cannot help warning thee of the danger thou
art actually in; which is the greater, as thou seemest
not to know it. A few words more, therefore, on this
subject. 
Thou hast made good resolutions. If thou keepest
them not, thou wilt never be able to keep any. But,
nevertheless, the devil and thy time of life are against
thee: And Six to One thou failest. Were it only that
thou hast resolved, Six to One thou failest. And if thou
dost, thou wilt become the scoff of men, and the triumph
of devils. —Then how will I laugh at thee! For
this warning is not from principle. Perhaps I wish it
were: But I never lyed to man, and hardly ever said
truth to woman. The first is what all free livers cannot
say: The second, what every one can. 
I am mad again, by Jupiter! —But, thank my stars,
not gloomily so! —Farewel, farewel, farewel, for the
third or fourth time, concludes 
Thy Lovelace. 

I believe Charlotte and you are in private league together. 
Letters, I find, have passed between her,
and you, and Lord M. I have been kept strangely
in the dark of late; but will soon break upon
you all, as the Sun upon a midnight thief. 
Remember, that you never sent me the copy of my
Beloved's Will. 