



My dear Lady G.
The Remarks which, your Cousin Fielding tells
you, I have made on the Subject of young
Gentlemens Travelling, and which you request me
to communicate to you, are Part of a little Book
upon Education, which I wrote for Mr. B.'s Correction
and Amendment, on occasion of his putting
Mr. Locke's Treatise on that Subject into my Hands,
and requiring my Observations upon it. 
I cannot flatter myself, that they will answer your
Expectation; for I am sensible they must be unworthy
even of the Opportunities I have had in the
Excursions, in which I have been indulg'd by the
best of Gentlemen. 
But your Requests are so many Laws to me; and
I will give you a short Abstract of what I read to
Miss Fielding, who has so greatly over-rated it to
you. 
That Gentleman's Book contains many excellent
Rules on the Subject of Education: But this of
Travel I will only refer you to at present. You will
there see his Objections against the Age at which
young Gentlemen are sent abroad, from Sixteen to
Twenry-one, the Time in all their Lives, he says,
in which young Men are the least suited to these
Improvements, and in which they have the least
Fence and Guard against their Passions. 

The Age he proposes is from Seven to Fourteen,
because of the Advantage they will then have to
master Foreign Languages, and to form the Tongue
to their true Accents, as well as that then they will be
easier directed by their Tutors or Governors. Or
else he proposes that more sedate Time of Life, when
the Gentleman is able to travel without a Tutor, and
to make his own Observations; and when he is
thoroughly acquainted with the Laws and Fashions, the
natural and moral Advantages and Defects of his own
Country; by which means, as Mr. Locke wisely
observes, the Traveller will have something to exchange
with those abroad, from whose Conversation
he hopes to reap any Knowlege. This Gentleman
supports his Opinion by excellent Reasons, to which
I refer you. 
What I have written in my little Book, which I
have not yet quite finish'd, on this Head, relates
principally to Home Travelling, which Mr. B. was
always resolv'd his Sons should undertake, before
they enter'd upon a Foreign Tour. I have there
observ'd, That England abounds with Curiosities,
both of Art and Nature, worth the Notice of a
diligent Inquirer, and equal with some of those we
admire in Foreign Parts; and that if the Youth be
not sent abroad at Mr. Locke's earliest Time, from
Seven to Fourteen, (which I can hardly think will be
worth while, merely for the sake of attaining a Perfection
in the Languages) he may with good Advantage
begin, at Fourteen or Fifteen, the Tour of Great
Britain, now-and-then by Excursions in the Summer
Months, between his other Studies, and as a Diversion
to him. 
This I should wish might be enter'd upon in his
Papa's Company, as well as his Tutor's, if it could
conveniently be done; who thus initiating both the
Governed and the Governor in the Methods he 

would have observ'd by both, will obtain no small
Satisfaction and Amusement to himself. 
For the Father would by this means be an Eyewitness
of the Behaviour of the one and the other,
and have a Specimen, how fit the young Man was
to be trusted, or the Tutor to be depended upon,
when they went abroad, and were out of his Sight; 
as they would of what was expected from them by
the Father. And hence a thousand Benefits, as I
humbly conceive, would arise to the young Gentleman
from the Observations and Reflections he would
receive from his Father, as Occasion offer'd, with
regard to Expence, Company, Conversation, Hours,
and such-like. 
If the Father could not himself accompany his
Son, he might appoint the Stages the young Gentleman
should take, and injoin both Tutor and Son
to give, at every Stage, an Account of whatever
they observed curious and remarkable, not omitting
the minutest Occurrences, travelling Expences, &c. 
By this means, and the Probability, that he might
hear of them, and their Proceedings, from his Friends,
Acquaintance, and Relations, who might fall in with
them, or at whose Seats they might sometimes be
entertained, they would know the Inspection they
were under, and have a greater Regard to their
Conduct. 
By seeing thus the different Customs, Manners,
and Oeconomy of different Persons and Families,
(for in so mix'd a Nation as ours is, there is as great
a Variety of that sort to be met with, as in most)
and from their different Treatment at their several
Stages, a great deal of the World may be learn'd by
the young Gentleman. He would be prepar'd to
go abroad with more Delight to himself, as well as
more Experience, and greater Reputation to his
Family and Country. In such Excursions as these, 

the Tutor would see the Temper and Inclination of
the young Gentleman, and might give proper Notices
to the Father, if any thing was amiss, that it might
be set right, while the Youth was yet in his Reach,
and more under his Inspection, than he would be
in a foreign Country: And the Observations the
young Gentleman would make at his Return, as
well as in his Letters, would shew how fit he was
to be trusted, and how likely to improve, when at
a greater Distance. 
After England and Wales, as well the inland
Parts, as the Sea-coasts, let them, if they behave
according to Expectation, take a Journey into Scotland
and Ireland, and visit the principal Islands, as
Guernsey, Jersey, &c. the young Gentleman continuing
to write down his Observations all the way,
and keeping a Journal of Occurrences: And let him
imploy the little Time he will be on board of Ship
in these small Trips from Island to Island, or Coastwise,
in observing upon the noble Art of Navigation,
of the Theory of which, it will not be amiss,
that he has some Notion, as well as of the curious
Structure of a Ship, its Tackle, and Furniture: 
A Knowlege very far from being insignificant to a
Gentleman who is an Islander, and has a Stake in
the greatest maritime Kingdom in the World; and
hence he will be taught to love and value that most
useful and brave Set of Men, the British Sailors,
who are the natural Defence and Glory of the
Realm. 
Hereby he will confirm his Theory of the Geography
of the British Dominions in Europe: He
will be appris'd of the Situation, Conveniencies,
Interests and Constitution of his own Country; and
will be able to lay a Ground-work for the future
Government of his Thoughts and Actions, if the
Interest he bears in his native Country should call 

him to the publick Service in either House of Parliament. 
With this Foundation, how excellently would he
be qualify'd to go abroad? and how properly then
would he add to the Knowlege he had attain'd of
his own Country, that of the different Customs,
Manners, and Forms of Government of others? 
How would he be able to form Comparisons, and to
make all his Inquiries appear pertinent and manly? 
All the Occasions of that ignorant Wonder, which
renders a Novice the Jest of all about him, would
be taken away. He would be able to ask Questions,
and to judge without Leading-strings. Nor would
he think he has seen a Country, and answer'd the
Ends of his Father's Expence, and his own Improvement,
by running thro' a Kingdom, and knowing
nothing of it, but the Inns and Stages, at which he
stopp'd to eat and drink. For, on the contrary, he would
make the best Acquaintance, and contract worthy
Friendships with such as would court and reverence
him as one of the rising Genius's of his Country. 
Whereas most of the young Gentlemen, who
are sent abroad raw and unprepar'd, as if to wonder
at every thing they see, and to be laugh'd at by all
that see them, do but expose themselves, and their
Country. And if at their Return, by Interest of
Friends, by Alliances or Marriages, they shall happen
to be promoted to Places of Honour or Profit,
their unmerited Preferment will only serve to make
those Foreigners, who were Eye-witnesses of their
Weakness and Follies, when among them, conclude
greatly in Disfavour of the whole Nation, or, at
least, of the Prince, and his Administration, who
could find no fitter Subjects to distinguish. 
This, my dear Friend, is a brief Extract from
my Observations on the Head of qualifying young
Gentlemen to travel with Honour and Improvement. 

I doubt you'll be apt to think me not a
little out of my Element; but since you would have
it, I claim the Allowances of a Friend; to which
my ready Compliance with your Commands the
rather intitles me. 
I am very sorry Mr. and Mrs. Murray are so
unhappy in each other. Were he a generous Man,
the heavy Loss the poor Lady has sustained, as well
as her Sister, my beloved Friend, in so excellent a
Mother, and so kind a Father, would make him bear
with her Infirmities a little. 
But, really, I have seen on Twenty Occasions,
that, notwithstanding all the fine Things Gentlemen
say to Ladies before Marriage, if the latter do not
improve upon their Husbands Hands, their imputed
Graces, when single, will not protect them from
Indifference, and, probably, from worse: While
the Gentleman, perhaps, thinks he only, of the
Two, is intitled to go backward in Acts of Kindness
and Complaisance. A strange and a shocking
Difference, which too many Ladies experience, who,
from fond Lovers, prostrate at their Feet, find
surly Husbands, trampling upon their Necks! 
You, my dear Friend, were happy in your Days
of Courtship, and are no less so in your State of
Wedlock. And may you continue to be so to a
good old Age, prays 
Your affectionate and faithful Friend,
P. B. 

