

It is thought proper to prefix to this Edition the following ample
Table of CONTENTS, which may serve to revive the
Memory of the principal Matters in the Minds of those who have
read them, and to give an easy and clear View of what they
contain, to those who have not, nor perhaps have Leisure to peruse
them; at least, so carefully as may be necessary to answer the
End of their Publication: And which, at the same time, will
serve as a copious INDEX to direct the Reader where to
find the most material Passages, as well as give an Idea of the
entertaining and instructive Variety to be found in the Work. 

VOL. I.
Letter
I. To her Parents. Recounting her Lady's Death. —Her
Master's Kindness to her. She is all grateful Confusion
upon it, and thinks him the best of Gentlemen. 
Page I
II. From her Parents. Are much concern'd for her Lady's
Death: But that their chief Trouble is, lest she should have
too grateful a Sense of her Master's Favour; so as to be
brought to any thing dishonest or wicked. Their Cautions
and Instructions to her. 
p. 5
III. To her Father. Is concern'd lest he should doubt her Virtue. 
Assures him of her Resolution to prefer it to Life itself. Apprehends
no Danger at present from her Master's Favour. 
8
IV. To her Mother. Lady Davers praises her Beauty, and
gives her Advice to keep the Men at a Distance. Intends to
take her to wait upon her own Person; to which her Master
consents. Pamela's Joy hereupon, and Security in his honourable
Views. 
9
V. To her Parents. Mrs. Jervis's the Housekeeper's worthy
Conduct in the Family, and Friendship to her. She is quite
fearless of Danger; and why. 
11
VI. To the same. Further Instances of her Master's Goodness
to her. Her joyful Gratitude upon it. He praises her Person 

to Mrs. Jervis, to whom he expresses his Hope, that she keeps
the Men at a Distance. 
13
VII. To her Father. Reciting other Particulars of her Master's
Bounty to her. Her Confusion at a free Expression of his. 
Is uneasy at it; but hopes she has nothing to apprehend. 
14
VIII. From her Father. Inforcing his former Cautions and
Instructions on the above Occasions. Is easier, since he
knows she has Mrs. Jervis to advise with. 
16
IX. To her Parents. Her Master refuses to let her go to Lady
Davers. His pretended Reason for it. Lady Davers seemingly
apprehensive for her. But still she hopes the best, and
will give them Notice of all that happens. 
18
X. To her Mother. Acquaints her, that now her Master's Designs
against her are apparent. That she had written down the
Particulars of all; but that somebody had stollen her Letter. 
Will write at the first Opportunity another, revealing all:
But is watched and blamed by her Master, for spending so
much Time in writing. 
19
XI. To her Mother. Cannot find her Letter; so recites her
Master's free Behaviour to her in the Summer-house. Her
virtuous Resentment. Refuses his Offers of Money. He injoins
her to Secrecy, pretending he only designed to try her. 
21
XII. To her Mother. Continuation of her Story. Her Irresolution
what to do. Desires Mrs. Jervis to permit her to lie
with her: And tells her all that had passed. Mrs. Jervis's
good Advice. Her Master's angry Behaviour to her. She
wishes she had never been taken from her low Condition. 
24
XIII. From her Parents. Their Concern and Apprehensions
for her. They think it best for her to return to them; but
are the easier, as she lies with Mrs. Jervis. 
29
XIV. To her Father. Relating a Conversation between her
Master and Mrs. Jervis about her. He will have it, that she
is an artful and designing Girl. Orders Mrs. Jervis to caution
her how she writes out of the House the Affairs of his Family. 
30
XV. To her Mother. Her Master upbraids her with revealing
to Mrs. Jervis what he had order'd her to keep secret: And
tries to intimidate her. Her moving Expostulation. He offers
Freedoms to her. Her passionate Exclamations. He tauntingly
ridicules her Resistance. She escapes from him into another
Room, and falls into a Fit. Mrs. Jervis interposes in her
Behalf. He appoints the next Day for her and Mrs. Jervis
to attend him in his late Mother's Closet. 
33
XVI. To her Parents. His Sternness at her Approach with
Mrs. Jervis. His imperious Manner intimidates his Housekeeper. 
Pamela's Courage hereupon. He accuses her of 

Pertness; attributes her Fit to Hypocrisy; and tells her she
shall return to her former Poverty and Distress. Her moving
Behaviour on this Occasion. 
40
XVII. From her Parents. They tell her, how welcome her
Return will be to them, as she will come innocent and honest. 
They will meet her Part of the Way, and receive her with
more Pleasure than they had at her Birth. 
47
XVIII. To her Parents. Mrs. Jervis gives her Opinion, that
he will never attempt her again; and that she may stay, if she
will ask it as a Favour. Her Reasons for desiring to go. 
48
XIX. To the same. Mrs. Jervis again advises her to ask to stay. 
Her Reasons to the contrary. —How the Love of her Fellow
Servants affects her. Mr. Longman the Steward's Kindness
to her. 
52
XX. To the same. Provides a neat, home-spun Suit of Cloaths,
that when she returns to her Parents, she may not appear
above her Condition. 
58
XXI. To the same. Mrs. Jervis tells her, of how much Consequence
she is to her Master, and his Expressions in her
Favour. Is uneasy at Mrs. Jervis's wishing her to stay. —Has
near finish'd the Work she has in hand; and is solicitous how
she shall get to her Father's. 
62
XXII. To the same. A rough Expression of her Master to her,
overheard by the Butler. The Servants concerned, that she
is to go away. Farther Instance of her Master's Roughness
to her. —Mr. Jonathan the Butler's Kindness, and Concern
at what he had heard her Master say to her. Instance of
Mr. Longman's Favour for her. 
65
XXIII. To the same. Description and Characters of several
neighbouring Ladies, who railly her Master on her Account. 
Their Behaviour to her, and Observations on her Person. — 
Has finish'd her Task, and hopes to set out in a few Days. 
70
XXIV. To the same. Puts on her home-spun Dress. What
passes on that Occasion between Mrs. Jervis, her Master, and
herself. He charges her with a Design to attract him in Disguise; 
yet tells her she may stay, if she will humble herself. 
She resolves to go. He storms. She expostulates. Her smart
Retort upon him for his past Attempts. —A Note from
Mr. Jonathan, warning her of her Danger. 
80
XXV. To the same. Her Master hides himself in their Closet,
and overhears a Discourse against himself between Mrs. Jervis
and her, as they are going to Rest. Being alarmed at the
Rustling of his Gown, she, almost undress'd, goes towards the
Closet; and he rushing out, she flies to the Bed to Mrs. Jervis,
and falls into Fits. 
90
XXVI. To the same. Mrs. Jervis, resenting her Master's 

Conduct in her Apartment, gives him Warning. He agrees
that they shall go away both together; and tells them, That
he shall probably embrace a Proposal of Marriage that has
been made him, and think no more of Pamela. Her Joy on
hearing this. Hopes now, that all the Danger is over; but
will not be too secure. 
98
XXVII. To the same. She is to stay a Week longer for Mrs. Jervis's
going with her. —Her Master asks her Opinion in relation to a
new Birth-day Suit of Cloaths. Her serious Behaviour, and
Answers to his Questions, ridiculed by him. —He tells
Mrs. Jervis, he had an Eye upon Pamela in his Mother's Lifetime. 
Her Surprize at his Wickedness, and at that of several
Gentlemen in the Neighbourhood. 
103
XXVIII. To the same. Mrs. Jervis is permitted to stay. Mr.
Longman intercedes for Pamela, and desires her to humble
herself. Her Master's cruel Insults upon her. She resolves,
however, not to expose him, tho' in her own Defence, before
his Steward: Therefore heaps Blessings and Prayers upon him
and his Family, on her Knees; but declares, that she is unworthy
to stay, and will not stay, if she might. Mr. Longman,
mov'd at her Behaviour, melts into Tears. Her Master a
little touched; yet, resuming his Hardheartedness, bids her begone
from his Presence. Her affecting Behaviour hereupon. 
109
XXIX. To the same. She has finish'd every thing, and hopes to
be soon with them. Mrs. Jervis's kind Offer of Money to her; 
which she refuses, knowing her to be in low Circumstances
herself. —Laments, that, as Things have fallen out, she has been
brought up wrong by her Lady: But hopes to make her Mind
bend to her Condition. —She divides her Cloaths into three
Bundles: One containing those given her by her Lady; the
second, those her Master gave her; and the third, what she
deems more properly her own; and desires Mrs. Jervis to
inspect them before she goes away. Her Master, out of Curiosity,
conceals himself (with Mrs. Jervis's Knowlege) in the
Closet of the Room into which the Bundles are brought. 
Her moving Conduct and Reasonings. She discovers, to her
great Surprize, that her Master had heard all: Upbraids
Mrs. Jervis upon it, and repeats her Wishes to be safe with
her Parents. 
117
XXX. To the same. Her Master, contrary to what she feared,
when she next sees him, treats her kindly. Bespeaks her Confidence
in him. Avows his Love to her. Intimates, that he
will make all her Family happy. Protests he has no View to
her Dishonour in it. Particularizes those Parts of her Conduct
and Behaviour which had mov'd him in her Favour: And
tells her, that if she will stay but a Fortnight longer, she shall 

find her Account in it. Her Distress and Difficulties upon
these favourable Appearances. He gives her a short Time to
consider of his Proposal, and retires. The different Agitations
of her Mind on this Occasion; yet at last resolves to insist upon
going away. 
128
XXXI. To the same. She declares her Determination to go. 
He offers her a Sum of Money for her Father. She refuses
it till she knows what he is to do for it, and what is to become
of herself. He then intimates, that he will find her a Husband,
who shall make her a Gentlewoman. She dissembles her Resentment
of his base Designs, till she gets from him; and then,
by Writing, signifies to him her Resolution to go to her Parents. 
He threatens her by Mrs. Jervis; but says she may go when
she will. Gives Leave for his Travelling Chariot and Lincolnshire
Coachman to carry her, and sends her Five Guineas. — 
Her Verses on her Departure. 
135
The Editor's Account of what happen'd after she set out: Of
her being carried to her Master's Seat in Lincolnshire, instead
of to her Father's. —Of John's treacherous Baseness, in delivering
all her Letters to his Master, before he carried them to
her Parents. —The Copy of a Letter from the 'Squire to her
Father, containing his pretended Reasons for not permitting
her to go to them. —Her Parents Grief. —Her Father, traveling
all Night, arrives in the Morning at the 'Squire's. What
passed between Mrs. Jervis, the 'Squire, and the old Man,
on that Occasion. —Copy of Pamela's Letter to Mrs. Jervis,
which, as it afterwards appears, she was induced to write by
a prescribed Form, lest her Parents Grief should be fatal to
them. 
144
XXXII. From Pamela to her Parents. Bewails her wretched
Condition, and the vile Trick put upon her. Writes the Particulars
of it, tho' she knows not how to convey it to them. — 
Her Stratagems on the Road to escape, when she found herself
betray'd, all frustrated by her Master's Precautions. —She is
met by Mrs. Jewkes, and conducted to the Lincolnshire Seat. 
That Woman's vile Behaviour and Wickedness. Her Reproaches
of the Coachman. Tampers, but to no Purpose,
with Mrs. Jewkes. 
156
Her JOURNAL,
Begun for her Amusement, and in hopes to find some Opportunity
to send it to them. —Describes the Servants there. —All her
Hopes centre in moving Mr. Williams to assist her Escape. 
178
Sunday. Mrs. Jewkes's Insolence to Mr. Williams; and still greater
to her, ordering her Shoes to be taken from her. Describes
the Person of the bad Woman. —John arrives with a Letter 

from her Master to her, requiring her to copy a prescribed
Form of a Letter to her Parents, to make them easy. She
complies for their sakes; and writes a moving one to her
Master. 
182
Monday. John's excessive Concern on reflecting upon his own
Baseness, makes Mrs. Jewkes suspect he loves Pamela, and narrowly
watch him: However, he privately drops a Letter,
which Pamela takes up, in which he confesses his Villainy to
her. Her Surprize upon it. —All the Cloaths her Lady and
Master had given her, brought down to her, but locked up
from her by Mrs. Jewkes. 
192
Tuesday, Wednesday. Her Contrivance to correspond with
Mr. Williams, and to keep from Mrs. Jewkes the Knowlege
of her little Stores of Pens, Ink, and Paper. The Contents of
her first Letter to him, reciting her Dangers, and begging him
to assist her to escape. Suggests several Methods, and hopes
much from his Key of the Back-door. 
197
Thursday. Further Instances of Mrs. Jewkes's Insolence to her. 
Pamela resents her profligate Talk, and is struck by her. Forced
to put up with this insolent Treatment, lest the Correspondence
with Mr. Williams should be frustrated. —A Letter from
that Gentleman, ‘declaring his Readiness to assist her. Gives
her an Account of the Gentry in the Neighbourhood. That
he will try, if she pleases, to move Lady Darnford to protect
her. Praises her Beauty and Virtue.’ Her Answer; ‘desiring
a Key may be made by his, to the Back-door. Hopes
by his Means to be enabled to send a Packet to her Parents. 
Has a Stock of five or six Guineas, and desires to put half
in his Hands to defray Incidents.’ —She exults to her Father
and Mother in the Success of her Plot. —Is permitted to angle; 
and hooks a Carp, which, moved by a Reflection upon her
own Case, she throws in again. 
203
Friday, Saturday. Mrs. Jewkes tricks her out of her little
Stock of Money. —She receives a Letter from her Master,
signifying, ‘That if she will invite him to come, her generous
Confidence in him shall not be thrown away upon him; 
and he will put Mrs. Jewkes into her Power; and permit
Mrs. Jervis to attend her, &c.’ —A Second Letter from
Mr. Williams, acquainting her, ‘That he has been repulsed by
every one to whom he has apply'd in her Favour. That
he shall soon procure the Key she desires, and a Man and
Horse to carry her to one of the distant Villages: So begs
her not to be discomforted.’ —Her Answer. ‘Fears her
Master's coming may be sudden; that therefore no Time is
to be lost. —Acquaints him with Mrs. Jewkes's Trick to
get her Money. —Her moving Letter to her Master, in Answer 

to his; in which she absolutely denies her Consent to
his coming down.’ 
215
Sunday. Is concern'd she has not the Key. Turns the cxxxviith
Psalm to her own Case. 
230
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday. Is pleased, that Mr. Williams
has got a large Parcel of her Papers, to send away to
her Parents. He has procur'd the Key for her; and now only
waits for the Horse. —Mrs. Jewkes suspects by his Looks, that
he is in Love with Pamela, and pretends to wish it to be a
Match between them. —His third Letter, intimating, ‘That
she has but One way honourably to avoid the Danger she is
in; and that is, by marrying. Modestly tenders himself.’ 
Her Observations upon it to her Parents. —In her Answer to
Mr. Williams intimates, ‘Her Gratitude for his generous Offer; 
but that nothing but to avoid her utter Ruin, can make her
think of a Change of Condition; and that therefore he must
expect nothing from her but everlasting Gratitude.’ 
233
Thursday, Friday, Saturday. Lays a Trap to come at
Mrs. Jewkes's Instructions; but fails in it. Mr. Williams promises
to assist her to his Power, though she has not so readily
come into his Proposal, as he wished. 
238
Sunday. That she has a strange Turn to acquaint her Parents
with, in the Contents of two Letters from her Master; one to
Mr. Williams, the other to Mrs. Jewkes. In the former, he
acquaints Mr. Williams, ‘That by the Death of the late Incumbent,
he has an Opportunity to make him doubly happy
in a lovely Wife, and a fine Living. That he will account
for his odd Conduct in this Affair to him, when he sees him. 
That he only desires he will let him know, that Pamela approves
of him, and he of her.’ Mrs. Jewkes communicates
her Letter, which confirms the Contents of the other. She
upbraids Pamela with her past Mistrusts of the Designs of so
good a Master. But she, still suspecting a Stratagem, cautions
Mr. Williams upon his honest Joy, and open-hearted Declaration; 
of which Mrs. Jewkes takes Advantage: But yet is so
civil to them both, that she hopes now for a happy Deliverance,
and to be soon with her Parents. 
239
The Journal continued.
Further Instances of Mrs. Jewkes's Civility to her, who presses
her to encourage Mr. Williams's Address; and, upon her Refusal,
supposes she has some Pre-engagement. Mr. Williams
goes home to write a Letter on his own Account to her Parents. 
She begs they will not encourage his Address. 
245
Monday Morning. Mr. Williams is attack'd by supposed Robbers,
on his Return to the Village. His woeful Letter to
Mrs. Jewkes, giving an Account of the Disaster. Mrs. Jewkes 

ridicules the Misfortune. Pamela's Mistrusts increase Refuses
to accompany Mrs. Jewkes to make him a Visit. In her Absence,
has great Temptations to make her Escape: But is
frighted at her own apprehensive Fancies, and unable to resolve. 
247
Monday Afternoon. Mrs. Jewkes returns from visiting Mr. Williams. 
Raillies Pamela, and makes a Jest of his Fright. Declares
she had got out of him all that was plotting between him
and her. Advises her to send a Letter of Thanks to her Master,
for his Favour to her, in relation to Mr. Williams: On her
Refusal; declares her to be quite unfathomable. Pamela apprehends
Mischief hatching. 
254
Tuesday, Wednesday. Mrs. Jewkes's Change of Temper to
Mr. Williams. He is surprised at it. Pamela writes to him,
blaming his Openness. Desires to know what he had said to
Mrs. Jewkes; and proposes to resume the Project of escapeing. 
258
Thursday. His Answer. ‘Thinks Mr. B. neither can nor dare
deceive him in so black a Manner. That John Arnold acquaints
him, that his Master is preparing for his London
Journey; after which he will come into Lincolnshire. That
John refers to a Letter he had sent before, but which is
not come to hand; yet hopes there is no Treachery. Owns
he was too free in Talk with Mrs. Jewkes: But said not a
Word of the Back-door, Key, &c.’ —Her Reply, expressing
her great Uneasiness and Doubts; and impatiently wishes for
the Horse. 
259
Friday. Mr. Williams's Answer. ‘He thinks her too apprehensive. 
Doubts not, that Things must be better than she
apprehends.’ —Sends her a Letter from her Father: Signifying
‘his and her Mother's grateful Hopes, that their Prayers for her
are at last heard; and their Pleasure to find her Virtue in View
of its Reward. Thinks she cannot do better than to marry
Mr. Williams: But refers this to her own Prudence.’ Her
dutiful Joy upon the Receipt of this Letter. 
262
Saturday, Sunday. Mrs. Jewkes quarrels with Mr. Williams. 
Pamela is more and more convinced there is Mischief
brewing. 
266
Monday, Tuesday. All now out! —Two Letters brought from
Mr. B. one to Pamela, the other to Mrs. Jewkes; but being
folded and sealed alike, that to her, was directed to Mrs. Jewkes,
and Mrs. Jewkes's to her. Is quite confounded at the Mistake; 
but more at the Contents; in which he declares to Mrs. Jewkes
‘the utmost Resentment against her, on Mr. Williams's Account. 
Sends down a Swiss, who is to assist in preventing her Escape:
That John Arnold has proved a Villain, and shall meet with 

his Reward. That he has order'd his Attorney to arrest
Mr. Williams in an Action of Debt, and will utterly ruin
him. That he hates her perfectly now, and on his Return
from London will decide her Fate.’ Her Affliction and Despair
make even Mrs. Jewkes pity her; who gives her the Letter
written for her, which is full of violent Upbraidings and
Threatnings. —Her Reflections upon her hard Fortune: Begs
Mrs. Jewkes to let Mr. Williams know her Master's Resentment,
that he may fly the Country. Mrs. Jewkes glories in
her wicked Fidelity, and threatens to be more circumspect
over her than ever. —Her Apprehensions of Colbrand the
Swiss, whose odd Person and Dress she describes. 
267
Wednesday. Mr. Williams actually arrested. She forms a
new Stratagem for her Escape, resolving to get out of the
Window into the Garden, when Mrs. Jewkes is asleep; and to
throw some of her Cloaths into the great Pond, to make it
believ'd she had drowned herself, in order to gain more Time
for escaping by the Back-door; and trust the rest to Providence. 
—Overhears Mrs. Jewkes owning to Monsieur Colbrand
in her Cups, that the Robbery of Mr. Williams was owing to
a Contrivance of her own, to come at his Letters. 
278
Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday. That every thing
has been worse and worse; and all her Contrivances ruin'd. 
She recounts the Particulars of her fruitless Attempt. Her
Sufferings and Bruises. Being quite desperate, is tempted to
drown herself. Her Soliloquy by the Pond Side. Has the
Grace to escape the Temptation, and limps away to the Wood-house,
and, half-dead with her Bruises and Distresses, creeps
behind a Pile of Fire-wood. —Mrs. Jewkes's Fright on missing
her: She raises the House; and at last, finding some of her
Cloaths in the Pond, they conclude she had drowned herself. 
Their dismal Lamentations; fearing their Master's Resentment. 
Nan, at last, finds her in the Wood-house, unable to
stir. Mrs. Jewkes's Cruelty to her. 
282
Sunday Afternoon. That Health is hardly to be coveted in
her Circumstances. Dreads the coming of her Master. Yet
having heard, that he had been near drowning in the Pursuit
of his Game, she could not help rejoicing in his Safety. 
Wonders what is the Matter she cannot hate him for his ill
Usage of her. —Hears, that John Arnold is turn'd away; 
and that Mr. Longman, Mr. Jonathan, and Mrs. Jervis are in
Danger, for offering to intercede for her, knowing now where
she is. 
297
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday. Mrs. Jewkes more and
more insolent to her. Talks filthily to her, and ridicules her
Notions of Virtue. 
299

Thursday. Apprehends from some particular Dispositions, that
her Master will soon come. Her moving Reflection on his
pretended Love to her, and his Promise not to see her, without
her own Consent. Believes he perfectly hates her; else,
that he would not leave her thus to the Mercy of this bad
Woman. 
300
Friday. Mrs. Jewkes apprehends she designs another Escape. 
Her Violence to her upon it. She locks her up without Shoes
in the Day, and makes her lie between herself and the Maid
at Night. She is weary of her Life. —That she has just given
her her Shoes, and laid her Commands upon her to dress herself
in one of the Suits she had lock'd up from her, against three
or four o'Clock, telling her, she would have a Visit from
Lady Darnford's two Daughters. That she will not obey her; 
resolving not to be made a Shew of. 
Ibid.
Five o'Clock is come, and no young Ladies. —She thinks she
hears their Coach. Resolves not to go down to them. Steps
to the Window; and, to her utmost Surprize and Terror,
there beholds her Master just arrived. 
303
Seven o'Clock is come, and she has not yet seen him. Doubts
not that something is resolving against her. Is full of trembling
Confusion and Grief. 
Ibid.
Saturday Morning. Relates, that at half an Hour after Seven
the preceding Night, her Master came up to her. His stern
Behaviour, and violent Reproaches. Withdraws threatening,
and leaves her ready to die with Grief and Apprehension. 
Mrs. Jewkes's impertinent Soothings, and detestable Hint, that
she may make up all by the Morning. —Her Master orders her
down to attend him at Supper. His harsh Treatment of her,
as she waits upon him. Mrs. Jewkes's officious Stories against
her. On her Knees she begs he'll hear her tell of that Woman's
Usage of her. He cruelly interrupts her, and justifies
Mrs. Jewkes. And after many Reproaches and Threatenings
on his Side, and vile Instigations on Mrs. Jewkes's, he bids the
latter take her up Stairs, and he'll send her a few Lines to
consider of; her Answer to which shall fix her Doom. 
Ibid.
Saturday Noon. Sends Proposals to her in Writing, to live
with him as his Mistress, offering her very high Terms for
herself and Friends; and assuring her, that if she refuses them,
he will put his Designs in Execution, and she shall have no
Benefit from them. —Her noble and resolute Answer; absolutely
refusing all his Offers with Disdain. He storms against
her to Mrs. Jewkes upon it, who most impudently instigates
him to execute all his Purposes. 
312
Saturday Night. He sends Mrs. Jewkes for her. She is going
down; but finding Mrs. Jewkes lead to his Chamber, she
turns back, notwithstanding his Menaces. Mrs. Jewkes ridicules 

her Fears, and upbraids her with the Appeal she would
have made to her Master against her. 
324
Sunday. Her Master, being from home, sends a Letter to
Mrs. Jewkes, signifying, ‘that he is going to Stamford on
Mr. Williams's Account, and shall not be back till the next
Evening, if then. That she must not trust Pamela without
another's lying with her, as well as herself.’ She sees this Letter,
thro' Mrs. Jewkes's pretended Carelessness, and rejoices at this
further Reprieve. 
328,330
Tuesday Night. She gives the Particulars of the worst Attempt
he had yet made, and of Mrs. Jewkes's wicked Assistance, and
her narrow Escape, by falling into Fits. On her Recovery he
gives her Hopes, that he will never offer to compel her again. 
Desires, for her own Sake, that she will not attempt to get away
for a Fortnight to come, and that she will forgive Mrs. Jewkes. 
Is pleased with her Answer. Seems to be all Kindness. Talks
of Love without Reserve; which, with other Liberties which
he calls innocent, makes her very uneasy. 
333
Wednesday Morning. Sends for her to walk with him in the
Garden. Likes not him, nor his Ways. And why. He resents
an Expression which his free Usage provoked from her. 
She expostulates with him on his Proceedings. 
349
Wednesday Night. His great Kindness and Favour to her before
Mrs. Jewkes. Mrs. Jewkes's respectful Behaviour to her
upon it, and Apprehensions of her resenting her past Baseness. 
His Goodness to her, and Admiration of her Prudence, fill her
with Hopes of his honourable Designs. But, on a sudden, he
damps all again, and leaves her in a State of Uncertainty. 
354
Thursday Morning. Mr. B. being to go to Stamford, acquaints
her, that either Mrs. Jervis or Mr. Longman, whom, with Jonathan,
he has discharged, will attempt to convey a Letter to her
in his Absence: That he will take it kindly, if she will confine
herself pretty much to her Chamber till he returns. She
promises not to stir any-where without Mrs. Jewkes. 
368
Friday Night. A Gipsey, under Pretence of telling Mrs. Jewkes
and her their Fortunes, finds means to drop a Letter for her,
the Contents of which alarm her with the Intimation of a Stratagem
of a sham Marriage designed. Her passionate Reflections
upon him and his Designs on this Occasion. 
372
Saturday Noon. Her Master returns. Mrs. Jewkes, coming
upon her by Surprize, seizes a Parcel of her Papers, and carries
them to him. Her Apprehensions on this Account. 
377
Saturday, Six o'Clock. Intreats him to return her Papers unread. 
He refuses. Her sharp Expressions hereupon make
him angry with her. She endeavours to pacify him. —Having
read the Papers, he sends for her, and insnaringly discovers, 

that she has Papers of a later Date than these, and insists upon
seeing them. She refuses; but he frightens her into a Compliance. 
381
Sunday Morning. On reading her last Papers, which contain
her Temptations at the Pond, he is greatly moved. His kind
Behaviour to her; yet, apprehending that this Kindness is but
consistent with the sham Marriage she dreads, she still insists
upon going to her Parents. He falls into a violent Rage hereupon,
will not suffer her to speak, and bids her begone from
his Presence. 
397
Sunday, Three o'Clock. Her Reflections upon the Haughtiness
of People in a high Condition—Is surprised by a Message from
Mrs. Jewkes, that she must instantly leave the House. Prepares
to go, but cannot help being grieved. —The travelling
Chariot is drawn out. Colbrand is getting on Horseback. Wonders
where all this will end. 
405


CONTENTS of Vol. II.
The Journal Continued.
Monday. Mrs. Jewkes insults her on her Departure. Her
wicked Hints to her Master in her hearing. He
rebukes her for them. Pamela blesses him on her Knees for it. — 
Wonders she could be so loth to leave the House. —The Chariot
drives away with her. She can hardly think but she is in a Dream
all the time. —A Copy of her Master's Letter to her, deliver'd
at a certain Distance, ‘full of Tenderness and Respect, declaring
his honourable Intentions to her, had she not unseasonably,
in the midst of his Kindness to her, preferred going
to her Parents.’ She laments that she gave Credit to the Gipsey-story. 
Accuses her Heart of Treachery to her. 
p. I
Monday Morning, Eleven. More surprising Things still, as
she says. Thomas the Groom overtakes her with a second Letter
from her Master, declaring, ‘That he finds he cannot live
without her. That if she will return, it will lay him under
the highest Obligation.’ Her Reasonings with herself, whether
to go back, or to proceed. At last, resolves to oblige
him. 
12
Tuesday Morning. Her Master's Pleasure and Gratitude on
her Return. Orders that she be left intirely at her own Liberty
to go and come as she pleases, and the Chariot to be at her
Service. Acquaints her, that he had set Mr. Williams at Liberty,
and taken his Bond. He gives her a Letter to peruse from 

Lady Davers, who severely and loftily expostulates with him on
her Account, declaring. ‘That if he should marry her, she
will renounce all Relation to him; but begs that he will give
her a Sum of Money, and marry her to some Fellow of her
own Degree.’ Pamela's serious Reflections upon the Pride
of People of Birth and Condition. 
21
Wednesday Morning. Her Master takes an Airing with her in
the Chariot. His great Kindness. Gives his Reasons for dismissing
Mr. Longman, Mrs. Jervis, and Jonathan, and for his Resentment
against his Sister. —Intimates the Slights she will receive
from Persons of Figure, if he marries her, and asks, how
she will imploy her Time, when she has not the genteel Amusements,
to which she will be intitled as his Wife. Is highly delighted
with her remarkable and instructive Answer. Clears
up, to her Satisfaction, the Gipsey's Information. Acquaints
her with the neighbouring Ladies intending to make him a
Visit, on purpose to see and admire her. —Mrs. Jewkes's Humility,
and Apprehension of her Resentment. He intercedes
for her. —She resolves, throughout her future Life, to rely on
Providence, who has brought such real Good to her out of such
evil Appearances. 
29
Thursday. Declares his Intentions of privately marrying her. — 
His Servant, who had been sent by her, at his Request, for the
Papers which were in her Father's Hands, returns without them,
and reports her Parents Grief, who apprehended she had been
subdued to his own Terms. He directs her to write to make
them easy. —An accidental Conversation between her Master
and Mr. Williams, which gives her Hopes of their Reconciliation. 
58
Friday. She gives the Particulars of what passed in the Visit of
the neighbouring Gentry. Their high Encomiums upon her
Person and Behaviour. Miss Polly Darnford particularly fond
of her. 
71
Friday Afternoon. Her Father's unexpected Arrival, while all
the Guests are together. Is kindly received by her Master,
and all his Fears for his Daughter's Virtue dissipated. —The Company
greatly affected at the first Interview between her Father
and her. Writes to her Mother all the moving Particulars of
it. —Her Master's Kindness, and Declarations of his honourable
Intentions, give inexpressible Joy to her Father. 
81
Saturday. Her Master, seeing by the Papers brought by her
Father, how hardly she had been treated by Mrs. Jewkes, offers
to remove her from her Presence. Is pleased with her forgiving
Temper. —Takes an Airing with her Father and her,
and designedly falls in with Mr. Williams. His Kindness to that 

Gentleman. Gives him up his Bond, and requests him to officiate
next Day in his newly fitted up Chapel. 
99
Sunday. Mr. Williams accordingly officiates. Her Father performs
the Clerk's Part with Applause. Mr. B.'s pleasant Remarks
on her Paraphrase on the cxxxviith Psalm. Mr. Andrews
joyfully takes Leave, to carry the good Tidings of all
these Things to his Wife. 
122
Monday. Mr. B. brings her a Licence, and presses for the
Day. Her Desire that it may be on a Thursday, and Reasons
for it. He raillies her agreeably on that Head. The Thursday
following fixed upon. He proposes, in a generous manner,
that Mr. Williams shall marry them. 
141
Tuesday. Her serious Reflections on the near Prospect of her
important Change of Condition. Is diffident of her own
Worthiness. Prays for Humility, that her new Condition may
not be a Snare to her. How she intends to behave herself to
the Servants. 
149
Wednesday. Her alternate Fears and Exultation, as the Day
draws nigh. His generous and polite Tenderness to her. Her
modest, humble, and thankful Returns. Readily, at his Proposal,
consents to let Mrs. Jewkes attend her at her Nuptials. 
153
Thursday Morning. His generous and encouraging Tenderness
to her. Her grateful Acknowlegements. 
165
Thursday Afternoon. The happy Celebration of her Nuptials. 
Her joyful Exultations to her Parents upon it. Mr. B.'s Generosity
to Mr. Peters, and Mr. Williams. —Are broken in upon
by three rakish Gentlemen of his Acquaintance, which obliges
her to dine without him. —Mrs. Jewkes's dutiful and submissive
Behaviour to her. —The different Aspect every thing
bears to her, now her Prison is become her Palace. 
171
Friday Evening. His polite Demeanour to her, and Generosity
to her Parents. Gives her a large Sum to distribute among
the Servants on Occasion of her Nuptials. He kindly complies
with her Intercession for Mr. Longman, Mrs. Jervis, Jonathan,
and John Arnold. 
189
Saturday Morning. Copy of Mr. B.'s Letter to Mr. Longman,
and of hers to Mrs. Jervis, in the kindest manner desiring them
to take Possession, with Jonathan, of their former Offices. — 
Rejoices in her Happiness, and prays that her Will to do Good
may be inlarged with her Opportunities. 
202

Saturday Evening. Mr. B.'s kind Intentions towards her Parents. 
His generous annual Allowance to her for her private
Charities. 
208
Sunday. Has now nothing to wish for, but a Reconciliation
between Lady Davers and her Brother. His Rules to her, in 

relation to Dress, and to different Parts of Family Management; 
and to her own Deportment, on particular Occasions. — 
The neighbouring Gentry, on their Visit to Mr. B. railly her
upon her stollen Marriage. —Mr. B. sent for Post-haste to
visit a dying Friend. Her serious Reflections on the Occasion. 
—Observes, in the reformed Behaviour of Mrs. Jewkes,
the Force which the good Examples of Principals have on
Inferiors. 
213
Monday. On Receipt of a Letter from Mr. B. she prepares
to go to meet him at Sir Simon Darnford's; but, to her great
Confusion, is prevented by the Arrival of Lady Davers, with
Lord Jackey, her Nephew. The Particulars of the harsh
Treatment she met with on that Occasion: Which at last
obliges her to leap from the Parlour Window, and to fly to
the Chariot, which carries her to Sir Simon's. —What passed
on that Occasion between Mr. B. and her, and between them
and the rest of the neighbouring Gentry, and some Guests of
Sir Simon's, who greatly admire her. 
233
Tuesday. Lady Davers's outrageous Behaviour to her Brother. 
He argues with her on the Difference between a Gentleman's
and a Lady's marrying beneath themselves. She at
last provokes him to a violent Resentment, in which Pamela,
interposing, incurs his Displeasure. At last a happy Reconciliation
takes Place. —She gives the Particulars of a Conversation
between Mr. B. and herself, when alone together, in
which he tells her what he expects from her future Conduct; 
which she afterwards reduces into forty-eight Articles, and
remarks upon. —She is a little tinctured with Jealousy upon
a Charge made by Lady Davers, in her Passion, of an Intrigue
between him and Miss Sally Godfrey. 
297
Wednesday. She relates briefly to Lady Davers her past Trials
and Distresses, who is greatly delighted with her Story; and
desires to see all her Papers, that she may admire her more,
and doubts not they will justify the Step her Brother has taken. 
She promises, with Mr. B.'s Consent, to oblige her Ladyship
as soon as her Parents return them. —Wonders, to herself, if
Miss Godfrey be dead or living. 
359
Wednesday Night. The neighbouring Gentry take Leave of
Mr. and Mrs. B. on their setting out for Bedfordshire. — 
Mrs. Jewkes, with Tears, begs her to forgive her past Wickedness
to her. —Miss Darnford and she agree upon a Correspondence
by Letters. Her Value and Esteem for that young
Lady. 
363
Saturday. Lady Davers sets out for her own Seat; and Mr.
and Mrs. B. for Bedfordshire. —Her Emotions of Joy and
Gratitude on her Arrival as Mistress of the House she was lately 

turned out of. Mr. B.'s polite Tenderness to her. Her kind
Reception of Mrs. Jervis, and affable Behaviour to the
Servants. —Mr. B. puts in Force his generous Intention of
assigning her a large annual Sum for her private Charities; 
and directs her to make the like bountiful Presents to the
Servants of this House, that she did to those of the other. 
369
Sunday Night. Has the Pleasure to think, she is not puffed up
with this great Change of Condition. Repeats her Supplications
for a grateful and humble Heart. 
389
Monday. Desires her Father will send her back all her Papers
for Lady Davers. Declares, that their own Creditors shall
be paid all their Debts, Interest as well as Principal. —Requests
from them a List of such honest and industrious Poor,
as they know to be true Objects of Charity. 
391
Wednesday Evening. Mr. B. brings home to Dinner with
him Four of the neighbouring Gentry. What passed on that
Occasion. —She tells her Parents, how much Mr. B. is pleased
with their undertaking to manage the Kentish Estate, as he had
directed her to propose to them. 
395
Thursday. Mr. B. carries her to Breakfast ten Miles off, to a
neat Dairy-house. He acquaints her with the Method which
the Governess of a neighbouring Boarding-school takes, to
reward the Diligence of the Misses, by a Ride in a Chaise and
Pair to breakfast at this House. Four of them arrive while
he is speaking; one of which proves to be the Child he had
by Miss Sally Godfrey. Her generous and affecting Conduct
on this Occasion. —As they return, he gives the moving Particulars
of that Amour, and of the Lady's remarkable Penitence
and Prudence; which she greatly admires, and generously
extols. 
401
Monday Morning. She gives an Account of their publick Appearance
the Day before, at Church; and of what passed in
the Morning and Afternoon on that Occasion. 
420

Tuesday. An affecting Instance of Mr. B.'s Goodness to her,
in settling his Affairs in such Manner, that, in case of his Death
without Children by her, neither she nor her Parents should
lie at the Mercy of his Heirs. His Request to her, that she
will not, in such Case, marry one certain Gentleman; and
Reasons for it. Her inexpressible Concern on the tender Subject. 
He kindly tries to divert her, by repeating a Copy of
Verses of his own Composing. Her serious Reflections upon
the Vanity of human Life in its best Enjoyments. 
428
Friday. The most considerable of the neighbouring Gentry
visit them, to congratulate their Nuptials, and all join to admire
her. —She resolves to have no other Pride but in
making deserving Objects happy. —Relates, that Lady Davers 

has sent for her Papers, and promises, that her Lord and she
will soon be her Guests. —Wants another Dairy-house Visit. 
Hopes, as Miss Goodwin grows older, she shall have her committed
to her Care. —Has just received the blessed News,
as in a Rapture she calls it, that they are on the Point of setting
out to be with her. Prays for a happy Meeting. Impatiently
longs for it. 
435

CONTENTS of Vol. III.
The good old Couple, arriving at the Bedfordshire Mansion, were received
by Mr. B. with great Demonstrations of Esteem and Respect
and by their beloved Daughter with Transports of dutiful Joy: And
having resided there, till every thing was in Order for their Reception
at the Kentish Farm, they set out to take Possession of it,
accompanied by the happy Pair, who staid with them a Fortnight: And
then returning to Bedfordshire, Mrs. B. writes to acquaint them with
their safe Arrival, and to the following Effect. 

Letter I. Wishes them long Life and Health in their
sweet Farm, and pretty Dwelling. —That Mr. B.
intends to fit up some of the Apartments for his own Convenience,
designing to retire thither now-and-then. Gives his
Directions on that Head. Exults gratefully in her Happiness,
and in his generous Tenderness. 
Page I
II. From her Father. Their grateful Joy in their present happy
Situation: How much it is heighten'd, when they reflect, that
all is the Reward of their Child's Virtue. That, nevertheless,
he cannot bear to enjoy all these Benefits, without paying for
the Stock and Farm what any other Person would pay. His
Conversation with Mr. Longman on this Head; and grateful
Resolutions upon it. —Acquaints her, That some of his Relations
are desirous to come and live with him, as Servants:
Desires her Advice upon it. —Hopes to be favour'd now-and-then
with a Letter from her, like some of her former. 
6
III. To her Father and Mother. Her Opinion of the only
Way both she and they have to make a suitable Return to
Mr. B. for his Goodness to them. That she must write to
them, and cannot help it, if she would, and it is an Augmentation
of her Felicity, to be able to add to their Comfort. 

13
IV. To the same. That Mr. B. has thought of a Method to
make them easy, in the Desire they have to be useful to his
Affairs, and at the same Time respected by their Neighbours. 
—Gives her Opinion at large of the Offer of some of their 

Relations, to serve them in the Farm; in which she shews,
in what Instances Relationship should, and should not, be
regarded. 
20
V. From her Father. 
Expressing his grateful Acceptance of
the Office her Spouse has conferred upon him: That he is
intirely convinced by the Reasons she gives him, about taking
any of their Relations. —Acquaints her how much all their
Kentish Neighbours admire and bless her and her Consort. 
30
VI. From Lady Davers to Mrs. B. That she and her Friends
have been exceedingly diverted with perusing her Papers; and
desires to have the Sequel of them. That Lady Betty praises
her Story as the best she had ever heard; yet thinks she had
a good Heart to go back again to him, when he had driven
her from him on so slight an Occasion. But that, when they
had read the rest of her Accounts, they would give her all
their Judgments upon her Conduct. 
35
VII. From Mrs. B. in Answer. Wishes to be favour'd with
Remarks on her Conduct. Is prepared to receive Blame, and
to benefit by it. —Excuses herself from sending the rest of
her Papers: But gives briefly the Contents of them; and, among
the rest, the Story of Sally Godfrey, as related to her by Mr. B. 
—Hopes, that some of the Scenes, particularly those of her two
grand Trials of all, in the Papers her Ladyship had read, were not
seen by the Gentlemen; and begs to know if they were. 
38
VIII. From Lady Davers in Reply. How much they are all
disappointed on her declining to send the rest of her Papers. 
Insists, however, upon her corresponding with her for the
future, in the same free Manner she used to do with her Parents; 
and mentions the Subjects she would have her write
upon. Having more to say, will soon write again, without
waiting for an Answer to this. 
44
IX. From the same Lady. Is glad, that her Brother has let her
into the Affair of Miss Godfrey. Desires an Account of the
Manner in which he did it, and of her Thoughts upon it. 
Gives a brief Account of the Lady and her Family. —Touches
upon her Brother's intriguing Spirit. —That Lady Betty and
she will go over her Papers, and if they can find any thing
censurable, will freely let her know it. —Gives her Opinion
how she ought to imploy her Time, in order to do Credit to
her Elevation, and what their Family hopes from her Brother's
Marriage with her. —Will soon write again, having still more
to say. 
47
X. From the same Lady. That the Gentlemen have seen every
Part of her Papers: Gives her Reasons, why those Scenes she
is so scrupulous about, were necessary to be written by her,
and ought to be read by those who saw the rest of her Narrations. 

–––That they all blame her for bearing the wicked Jewkes
in her Sight; and think, that she ought not by any means to
have put her on a foot with Mrs. Jervis, in the Present made
her on her Nuptials. 
52
XI. From Mrs. B. in Answer to Lady Davers's Three Letters. 
That, in Obedience to her Ladyship's Commands, she enters
upon the Particulars of the happy Fortnight, which Mr. B.
and she passed with her Parents, on settling them in the
Kentish Farm. Desires to know from this Specimen, before she
proceeds, whether her Manner of Writing will be acceptable. 
58
XII. From Lady Davers, in Reply. Leaves it to her to write
in what Manner she pleases. Praises the Copies (which she
had sent her) of the Three Letters, that passed between her
and her Parents; and finds hitherto, that all her Conduct is
unexampled Prudence. Desires to see the Letter she wrote
to her Father, about their Relations offering to come to live
with them. —Admires her greatly; but tells her, to what it
is she principally owes her Improvements. 
64
XIII. From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. Attributes all the Advantages
her Ladyship imputes to her, to her late excellent
Lady; of whose Favours she gives a moving Relation. — 
Incloses the Letter her Ladyship requires of her, and also her
Father's Reply to it; and, being incapable of dark Reserves,
is pleased with the Hope, that her Conduct will be under her
Ladyship's watchful Eye. Gives farther Particulars relating to
the happy Fortnight they passed in Kent. 
69
XIV. From Mrs. B. to the same. Proceeds to answer her Ladyship's
second Article, relating to Miss Godfrey's Affair. Seeks
generously to extenuate the Lady's Fault, and shews what a
dismal Mortifier Love is, making a Lady think meanly of
herself, and highly of the favoured Objects. Begs her Ladyship's
future Interest, that Miss Goodwin may be given up to
her Care. 
76
XV. From Mrs. B. to the same. She particularly states the Case,
and defends her forgiving Conduct to Mrs. Jewkes. Declares,
that she has no Notion of the slight Distinction, too commonly
made, between Forget and Forgive. 
79
XVI. From Mrs. B. to the same. In order to justify her Conduct
by its good Effects on Mrs. Jewkes, she sends her Ladyship
a Copy of a Letter from Miss Darnford, in which that
young Lady, after mentioning her Papa's flinging a Book at
her Head in a peevish Fit, acquaints her with Mr. Peters's
Account of the great Change which her Example has wrought
upon Mrs. Jewkes. —Mrs. B. with this Letter, sends also the
Copy of a moving one from Mrs. Jewkes to herself, to the same
Effect: Then proceeds to answer what is objected to her, for 

putting the two Housekeepers on a foot, in the Present she
made to each on her Nuptials. 
93
XVII. From Mrs. B. to the same. Gives her Ladyship a moving
Instance of her Bounty and Affection for Mrs. Jervis; and
at the same time of her prudent Regard to Mr. B.'s Interest. 
105
XVIII. From the same. The generous and noble Manner in
which Mr. B. confirmed and extended her Bounty to Mrs.
Jervis. 
113
XIX. From Lady Davers, in Answer to Mrs. B.'s last Six Letters. 
Her Ladyship pleasantly construes her good Conduct and
Prudence as a Reproach to herself. Summarily expresses her
Approbation of all she has written. —Desires a Copy of her
Answer to Miss Darnford's Letter; and to the penitent one of
Mrs. Jewkes. —Exclaims against some of her Brother's libertine
Notions formerly; and extols her for reclaiming him by
her good Example and Conduct. 
118
XX. From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. Sends her the Copy of her
Answer to Miss Darnford, in which she gives ‘Mr. B.'s Reasons,
why every Member of Parliament should attend the Business
of it. —Presses Miss to winter with them in London. —Rallies
Sir Simon for flinging a Book at Miss's Head, and for what
he calls his innocent Double Entendres; and expresses how
much she is delighted with the Account Miss gives her of Mrs.
Jewkes's Penitence.’ —Then gives her Ladyship the Copy of
her Answer to Mrs. Jewkes's Letter, ‘Rejoicing in her Conversion; 
encouraging her to Perseverance; arming her
against Despondency, and warning her against returning to
her former evil Ways.’ —Gives her Ladyship an affecting Instance
of contented Poverty and Resignation. —Her serious
Reflections upon the Unsatisfiedness which attends even the
highest Enjoyments. —Is delighted with her Ladyship's Approbation
of her Conduct to Miss Goodwin. Generously endeavours
again to extenuate her Mamma's Fall, and to exalt her Merit
for her remarkable Penitence. 
127
XXI. From Miss Darnford to Mrs. B. That Sir Simon affects
to be in a great Pet at her lecturing him as she had done, and
threatens to demand Satisfaction of Mr. B. for it. —That she
fears Mr. B.'s former Character will prevent Sir Simon from
permitting her to winter with them. That since she is denied
a personal Conversation with her, desires in all their Names an
epistolary one; and particularly to know how Lady Davers's
first Visit to her passes. —That since she wrote the above, it
comes out, that her Papa's Refusal of her wintering with her,
is owing to a Proposal made him of an Humble Servant for
one of his Daughters. —That Mr. Peters desires her to mention
his hearty Sorrow for having formerly deny'd her the Protection 

of his House; and hopes, that neither Religion nor his
Cloth may suffer in her Opinion on that Account. —Felicitates
her on the Efficacy of her Example, as well upon Enemies
as Friends. 
147
XXII. From Sir Simon Darnford to Mr. B. Humorously
complaining of the Freedoms Mrs. B. has taken with him to
his Daughter. Insists upon Satisfaction from him. 
153
XXIII. From Mr. B. in Answer to Sir Simon. In which, under
the Notion of espousing his Cause against his own Lady, he puts
her into Fear, and at the same time severely rallies Sir Simon
on the Liberties of Speech, and the indecent Double Entendre,
in which he so much delights. That, however, it shall be in
his own Power to punish or absolve the Delinquent as he
pleases, if he will bring his Daughter with him to his House,
and permit her to winter with them; which he, finally, requests
of him as a Favour. 
159
XXIV. From Sir Simon Darnford, in Reply. Humorously
resenting the Treatment he meets with in Mr. B.'s Letter. 
170
XXV. From Mrs. B. to her Parents. That she daily expects
Lord and Lady Davers. The Rules she intends to observe
on this Occasion, in order to avoid the Censure of Pride on
the one hand, or of Meanness on the other. —That she has
begun a Correspondence with Miss Darnford, and intends to
procure from Miss the Return of the Letters she shall write
to her, for their Perusal. —Acquaints them with Mr. B.'s
generous Goodness on Mr. Longman's telling them the Good
they do in Kent to their poor Neighbours. —Expresses her
Apprehensions of what may possibly fall out to disturb her
Happiness, when they go to London. 
174
XXVI. From her Father, in Answer. He thinks it not improper
to mention of what Nature, and how easy, as to
Expence, those Kindnesses are which they confer upon their
poor Neighbours; and accordingly gives a moving Account
of them. —He advises her not to be over-thoughtful of what
may happen at London; and tells her why she ought not. 
180
XXVII. From Mrs. B. to Miss Darnford. Is desirous to
know how Miss approves of the Gentleman who is recommended
to her. Her Opinion of the Value Riches ought, and
ought not, to have, in a Marriage Treaty. —She complains
pleasantly of Sir Simon's Endeavour to set Mr. B. and her at
Variance. —Endeavours to extenuate Mr. B.'s former Faults,
and has no Fear for his Morals, but from his Notions in favour
of Polygamy, and from their future London Residence. —Her
generous Allowances for Mr. Peters's Frailty; and kind Opinion
of his Merit and Piety. Has the highest Honour and Reverence
for his Function, and will never let the Faults of a 

Few give her a disadvantageous Opinion of the Order. — 
Hopes, that Miss will favour her with an Account of her
new Affair, and with such of their Conversations as may give
her a Notion of a polite Courtship; of which (humourously
describing her own) she says, she can have no Notion. 
185
XXVIII. From Miss Darnford to Mrs. B. Approves of her
Apology for Mr. B. as she says it is the Part of a good Wife
to make the best of her Husband's bad Qualities. Gives a
Description and Character of Mr. Murray. —Likes him not; 
and hopes, as he has not Delicacy enough to love with any
great Distinction, that he may be brought to address her Sister,
instead of her. 
196
XXIX. From Mrs. B. to Miss Darnford. That Lord and Lady
Davers, the Countess of C. (Mother of Lady Betty) and Mr. H.
(Lord Jackey) are arrived. Particulars of their first Salutations. 
Lady Davers presses her Brother to accept of the Title of a
Baronet. A Conversation on that Subject. 
200
XXX. From Mrs. B. to the same. Gives the Particulars of a
Breakfast Conversation, which turns upon Lady Davers's excepting
to her Lord's frequently calling Pamela Sister. —Her
Ladyship calls upon Mr. B. to account for his Attempt upon
Pamela in Presence of Mrs. Jervis. Mr. B. entertains them
with a History of the Commencement of his Love for her; 
in which he sets forth, ‘The Violence of that Passion, and what
mean things it puts its Votaries upon: Pamela's surprising Docility,
Merit, and Beauty; his Mother's Fondness of her, and
Intentions in her Favour. Enters upon his own Character
and Intrigues, which afford instructive Lessons to the Sex,
how to avoid the Stratagems of Rakes and Libertines. Disavows
any Intention to offer Violence to her Honour, when
he concealed himself in the Closet; and accounts for his Conduct
on that Occasion. Declares, that he has now a sincere
Contempt of his former wicked Courses, which had made
him a Curse to Society, instead of a Blessing.’ —Mrs. B.'s Reflections
to Miss Darnford upon this affecting Story. Her
grateful Blessings on the Memory of her good Lady. 
215
XXXI. From Miss Darnford to Mrs. B. That Mr. Murray, as
she wish'd, has dropp'd his Suit to her, and makes his Addresses
to her Sister. Miss's pleasant Observations upon that Occasion.
Hopes to get Leave in a while to attend Mrs. B. in Town. 
261
XXXII. From Mrs. B. to Miss Darnford. Proceeds with her
Journal, giving an Account of their entertaining Fourteen of
the principal Gentry in the Neighbourhood, besides their noble
Guests. Briefly draws their Characters. The Particulars of
the Conversation that passed on that Occasion, in which the 

Profligate of the one Sex are exposed and censured, and the
Innocent of the other cautioned and instructed. 
264
Saturday. Lady Davers and she take an Airing together. Her
Ladyship's tender Behaviour to her. Admires her Family Management,
which she briefly describes. She acquaints her Ladyship
with the Boldness of some unknown Admirer, who had
put under her Cushion at Church some Verses of Mr. Cowley's. 
The exemplary Delicacy of her Sentiments on this Occasion. 
Critically remarks upon the Lines, and justly censures the lewd
Writings of Men of Genius, whose Works may do Mischief
to the End of Time. —Lady Davers, after admiring the Purity
of her Notions, accounts for her own passionate Behaviour to
her formerly at the Hall, and intimates some further Mischief
she had designed her, had she not escaped out of the Window
as she did. —On their Return, the Countess and Lady Davers
enter more particularly into the Description of all they admire
in Mrs. B.'s Family Management. 
277

Saturday Evening. Mrs. B. is in some Pain, because of their
Family Rules for the next Day. But will rather be censured
for doing what she thinks her Duty, than for the want of it, and
so will continue her usual Methods, as if her noble Guests were
not present. Observes, however, that those who aim at very
great Strictnesses in a beginning Reformation, rather discourage,
than allure, the Persons they would reclaim. —Her Consolations
to a desponding sick Gentlewoman. 
300
Sunday. Acquaints Miss with the Methods she takes in her Family
on this Day. The good Effects it has upon all the Servants. 
The Domesticks of her noble Guests desire to join in
it. —She relates the Particulars of what passed at Church, and
Lady Davers's Goodness to her in publick. —The Ladies, on
the Report of their Women, accompany her in her Evening
Duties. Are greatly affected on the Occasion. –––––Lady Davers's
Observation to the Credit of chearful Piety, and Reflection
on the Gloominess of some Pretenders to Religion. 
303
Monday. She congratulates Miss Darnford on her dismissing
Mr. Murray. Acquaints Miss with Mr. B.'s facetious Remarks
on her Letter. The odd Character of Sir Jacob Swynford,
Mr. B.'s Uncle by the Half-blood, who is expected to visit
them; and who is greatly incensed at his Nephew's marrying
her. 
322
Tuesday. Mr. Williams comes to pay his Respects to his Patron,
and (for Motives worthy of his Character) to ask his
Leave to quit his Living for one of less Value. She gives the
Particulars of a Conversation on this Occasion, relating to the
Clergy's Treatment of one another, and on the Subject of Pluralities
and Dispensations. 
326

XXXIII. Wednesday. Sir Jacob Swynford arrives. His unpolite
Behaviour to Lady Davers, at his first alighting. A Description
of his Person, Dress, and Behaviour. He inquires
after his Nephew, who, as well as Mrs. B. happens to be abroad; 
and rails at his Marriage. The Countess, on Mrs. B.'s Return,
begs of her to pass for her youngest Daughter, Lady Jenny;
and she is introduced to Sir Jacob as such; who, in that
Character, is highly taken with her Beauty and Behaviour, and
rallies his Nephew, at his coming in, for not marrying such a
fine Lady as that. 
367
Thursday. The Countess, at Breakfast, discovers to Sir Jacob,
that his favourite Lady Jenny, is Mrs. B. His Rage and Surprize
upon it. Mrs. B.'s condescending and moving Behaviour
to him, quite confounds him with Shame, and reconciles him
to her. —The Substance of a Conversation begun by Sir Jacob,
of the bad Precedent Mr. B. has set to young Gentlemen to
marry their Mothers Waiting-maids. Lady Davers seconds Sir
Jacob. Mr. B. calls upon his Spouse to defend him. Her pertinent
Observation on this Head: Which, yet, not answering fully
the Objection, Mr. B. undertakes his own Defence, and clears
up the Point to their Satisfaction. —Mrs. B. applies in a moving
manner to Sir Simon Darnford for his Permission to Miss to visit
her. 
383
XXXIV. From Miss Darnford to Mrs. B. She gives the Particulars
of a Quarrel betwixt herself and her Sister, whom she
reprehends for her fond Behaviour to Mr. Murray. Sir Simon's
humorous Interposition. 
405
XXXV. From the same. Her Notions of the Conduct a Lady
ought to observe when courted. —Particularizes the Pleasure
which the Subjects of her Letters give them. She longs to be
with her, out of the way of her ill-natured Sister, and resolves
once more to move her Papa on this Head. 
411
XXXVI. From the same. She is all Joy and Rapture, having
obtained Leave to attend her when at London. Sir Simon's
humorous Condition, on permitting her to go. 
417
XXXVII. From Mrs. B. to Miss Darnford. Friday. She
gives briefly the Particulars of her charitable Visits and Bounty
to her poor Neighbours. Lady Davers, and the Countess of C.
(who accompany her on this Occasion) highly delighted with
her prudent Method. Her Motives and Reasons for her Proceedings
in this Way. —Observes with how little Expence and
Trouble a great deal of Good may be done, by a prudent Management,
and proper Choice of the Objects. Her Rule
where, and where not, to bestow her Favours. 
421
Saturday. Her Discovery of an amorous Intrigue between
Mr. H. and her Polly Barlow. Her prudent, instructive, and 

resolute Conduct hereupon, as well with regard to the Gentleman,
as to the Girl. His ungenerous and ridiculous Behaviour. 
434
Saturday Evening. She gives an Account of the free Behaviour
and Conversation of Four rakish Gentlemen Visitors. 
Her Reflections upon what passed, and upon the profligate
Lives of Gentlemen of their Character, which render them,
as she observes, of very little Consequence to the Publick, or
to the Families from which they spring. 
454
XXXVIII. From Mrs. B. to Miss Darnford. Sunday, Monday. 
Rejoices in the News, that she shall be favoured with
her Company. Tells her how much Mr. B. admires her letters. 
—Her Reflections upon her Polly's Weakness. —Sir
Jacob takes his Leave, highly delighted with her. —Mr. B.
promises her another Dairy-house Breakfast. 
462
Tuesday. Recapitulates briefly, how the Ladies and Gentlemen
usually imploy themselves, in order to give Miss an Idea of
what passes among them. 
466
Wednesday, Thursday. Intimates a Debate which she has
with Mr. B. about the extraordinary Prerogative of a Husband,
which, in a particular Instance, he insists upon. 
467
Friday. Their noble Guests take Leave of them, with
Blessings and good Wishes. The Copy of a Letter delivered
to her by Mr. H. excusing himself, at her Polly's Expence,
for his Intrigue with her, and to thank her for not exposing
him to his Aunt. Mrs. B.'s Reflections upon it. —Her
Apprehensiveness, on occasion of the Circumstance she is in; and
instructive Reflections on that Head. —Her favourable Observations
to Mr. B. upon Lord Davers's amiable Character: He
occasionally asserts the Necessity of a Husband's controuling his
Wife in some Instances, for the Sake of the Reputation and
Tranquillity of both. 
469
XXXIX. From Mrs. B. to Miss Darnford. Hears that Mrs.
Jewkes is in a bad State of Health. Begs she will vouchsafe to
visit her, and in her Name injoin her to spare for nothing that
may contribute to her Recovery, or Peace of Mind. —Looks forward
to the approaching Occasion with great Apprehension. 
484
XL. From Miss Darnford to Mrs. B. Miss, for Reasons she
gives, desires to know, whether Mr. B. is as respectful to her
when they are by themselves, as when they have Visitors? Whether,
in Compliment to her Will, he gives up at any time his
own? Whether he breaks not into her Retirements unceremoniously,
making no Difference between the Field or his Stud,
and her Chamber or Closet? And whether he has at any time
borne with any Infirmity of hers? 
This Letter, and the following, viz. 
488

XLI. From Mrs. B. in Answer, Give instructive and entertaining
Instances of the polite and tender, yet manly and generous
Behaviour, of a good Husband, in Mr. B.'s Conduct to his
Lady; and of the prudent and affectionate Returns of a good
Wife, in her obliging Behaviour to him; which not only answer
fully all Miss's Queries, but afford such Rules as may be worthy
the Observation of every married Pair; especially of those who
would aim at such a conjugal Delicacy, as may keep up a mutual
Respect and Value for each other. 
493
XLII. From Mrs. B. to Miss Darnford. Giving her the Particulars
of her second Dairy-house Visit. How much Mr. B.
as well as herself, was affected by a casual Expression of the
Child: Which produces a very solemn Conversation between
them on their Return. 
507


CONTENTS of Vol. IV. 
Letter
I. From Mrs. B. to her Father and Mother. Gives an Account
of their Arrival at their London Residence. Is impatient
for the Company of Miss Darnford, which, she hopes,
will reconcile her to this new World. 
page 1
II. From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. A few cursory Observations
on her Arrival at London. Gives the Character of two Gentlemen
of the Law, Mr. Turner and Mr. Fanshaw, who pay their
Compliments to Mr. B. on his Arrival in Town. 
3
III. To her Father and Mother. Requesting their Advice in a Dispute
she has with Mr. B. on the Subject of a Mother's Duty to
nurse her own Child, which she insists upon. Her Plea on this
Occasion; and his Answer, in which he asserts the Prerogative
of Parents and Husbands over their Daughters and Wives; and
then gives Reasons, peculiar to himself, why he cannot comply
with her Desire in this Particular. Her Difficulties on this
Occasion. 
10
IV. From her Parents, in Answer. They are concerned, that
Mr. B. insists so strenuously upon a Point so tender to her: But
advise her to submit to his Will, in order to avoid worse Consequences. 
Give brief Hints what sort of Nurse they would
have her chuse. 
25
V. From Mrs. B. The Particulars of a tender Quarrel between
Mr. B. and her, on Occasion of the above Dispute. —His
nice Distinction between Tears of Penitence and Tears of Sullenness. 
28
VI. From Lady Davers to Mrs. B. Sends her a Present of Child-bed
Linen. Tells her, that she must not put them off with a 

Girl; but must first present them with half a Dozen fine Boys; 
whose Names she pleasantly gives. —From her Brother's Tenderness
to her, infers how much it is in the Power of a good
Wife to make a good Husband. —Upbraids her, in a polite and
tender manner, for not subscribing her Letter with the Word
Sister. Hints at several Regulations which she and the Countess
have made in their Families, in Imitation of her Example,
since their Return. 
36
VII. From Mrs. B. in Answer. Is overwhelmed with her Ladyship's
Goodness to her. —Acquaints her with the Arrival of
Miss Darnford. —Accuses herself of Aukwardness and Bashfulness,
and wishes to be just what Miss Darnford is. Her Rule
to make the best of Defects she cannot conquer. —Humourously
describes the foppish and fluttering Conversation and Behaviour
of the two young Lawyers. 
40
VIII. From Lady Davers to Mrs. B. That she must decide an
odd Dispute that has happened among them, in relation to her
own Character; and acquaint them with some of those secret
Foibles that leave Room for her to be still more perfect; and
which yet they cannot discover. —She briefly extols the conjugal
Purity and Decorum, as well in Word as Behaviour, which
is observed between her Brother and her. 
49

IX. From Mrs. B. in Answer. Is surprised at the Task her Ladyship
has set her; but, in Obedience to her Commands, accuses
herself of divers Imperfections. 
51
X. From Miss Darnford to her Father and Mother. Describes
the Happiness of Mr. and Mrs. B. and his polite Tenderness,
and her consummate Prudence. —Gives Account of the Nature
of her London Charities, and of the Performance of her Sunday
Duties there. Observes that all is done with graceful Ease, and
true Dignity, and without the least Intermixture of Enthusiasm
or Ostentation. 
56
XI. From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. Her Opinion of the Stage. 
Thinks the Poets, in the Plays she has seen and read, give unnatural
Descriptions of Love. Her Observations on the Tragedy
of the Distress'd Mother. Censures severely the Epilogue,
that is generally called for, when this Play is acted. 
66
XII. To the same. Her Observations on the Comedy of the
Tender Husband, or Accomplish'd Fools. Thinks it ought to be
called, The Accomplish'd Knaves. 
88
XIII. To the same. Her Opinion of the Italian Opera; with
Mr. B.'s Remarks upon that Subject. 
99
XIV. To the same. Is carried to a Masquerade; which she describes,
and gives some Particulars of the Conversations that
passed there. Is very apprehensive, on seeing Mr. B. everywhere
followed by a fine Lady in a Nun's Habit. Utterly 

dislikes this kind of Entertainment. All the little Doubts and
Jealousies (which are supposed natural to her Temper) excited
on this Occasion. Her Opinion of true Wit; and what are its
indispensable Requisites in publick Entertainments. 
104
XV. To the same. That her Mind being ingross'd wholly by
Thoughts of a more serious Nature, on account of her approaching
Lying-in, she begs to be dispensed, for the present,
from the lighter Subjects of the Theatre. Her Apprehensiveness
on the Occasion. 
112
XVI. From Lady Davers to her Brother. In a generous
and tender Manner requests him to assure his Pamela, that
he will legally secure to her Parents the Possession of the Good
he has conferred upon them, if she dies. —Prays for a Son
and Heir; but, however that shall be, that God will spare his
Pamela; for that he can never have such another Wife. 
115
XVII. From Mrs. B. to Mr. B. (Not to be delivered to him, but in
case of her Death.) In a grateful and moving Manner thanking
him for all the Benefits he had heaped on her and hers. Begging
Pardon for all her Imperfections. Recommending to him some
of her unfinish'd Charities; and all his Servants; and then taking
a solemn Farewel of him. 
116
XVIII. From Miss Darnford to Lady Darnford. Congratulates
them on her Sister's Nuptials. —Gives a brief Character
of good old Mrs. Andrews. —Mr. B.'s considerate Contrivance
to have a Midwife in the House, unknown to his Lady. — 
Miss concludes, with acquainting her Mamma, that Mrs. B.
is happily deliver'd of a fine Boy. 
126
XIX. From Miss Darnford to the same. Gives a signal Instance
of the joyful Gratitude of Mr. B.'s Tenants, on the
Birth of a Son and Heir to the Estate. That the Earl and
Countess of C. and Lord and Lady Davers, are arrived to
stand Sponsors at the Christening. —Requests to stay with
Mrs. B. the Remainder of the Winter. 
133
XX. From Miss Darnford to the same. That having received
their Commands to come down, she will directly obey them. 
Instructingly particularizes Mr. B.'s polite Conduct to his
Lady, and her obliging Returns. —That she sees but one
thing, that can possibly happen to disturb their Felicity. Then
recites the Behaviour of the Nun at the Masquerade, who, as
she has been told by Mr. Turner, unmasked to Mr. B. and is
the Countess Dowager of—and that a Letter or two have
passed between the Lady and Mr. B. That, as Mrs. B. with
all her Perfections, has a little Spice of Jealousy, Miss trembles,
she says, for the Consequences to both their Happiness,
should she be once alarmed. 
138

XXI. From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. That they are just
returned from accompanying Miss Darnford, in her Way home,
as far as Bedford, where she was met by her Papa and Mamma. 
—Her maternal Tenderness for her Billy. —Gives the moving
Particulars of her Father's thankful Joy, on his first seeing the
Child. —That Mr. B. has put into her Hands Mr. Locke's
Treatise upon Education, requiring her Thoughts of it in
Writing. His Reason for it. —She repeats a Conversation
between herself and Mr. B. in which, under the Notion of
asking Leave to take into her Care some neighbouring Child,
in order the better to qualify her for instructing her Billy,
when older; she surprises him into an Approbation of her
Scheme, which is to obtain, that Miss Goodwin may be the
Child. He is at first angry to be so surprised; but, on Consideration, censures his own Hastiness. 
143
XXII. From Lady Davers to Mrs. B. Drops some Hints,
that she has heard she is uneasy of late; and desires to know
how she does. —Praises her Brother's moderate Conduct in
Parliament. Wishes him to act out of the House, and in it,
with equal Honour. 
153
XXIII. From Mrs. B. in Answer. That she has been in a little
Disorder. But is unwilling to believe all that is said. That
this, however, is a wicked Town. Wishes to quit it; but
chuses not to go without Mr. B. 
154
XXIV. From Lady Davers, in Reply. Understands, that Things
go not well. Offers to make a Pretence of Indisposition, to
come to Town, if she thinks it will be of Service. 
155
XXV. From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. Is very thankful for
her Goodness to her. Hopes all will be well. Desires to
know what her Ladyship has heard; but that it becomes not
her, till she cannot help it, to make Appeals. —Apprehends,
that her Ladyship's Presence will not avail. 
ibid.
XXVI. From Lady Davers to Mrs. B. That what she has
heard, is no Secret to any body; but that she shall not be
first told of it by her. Desires to know what she has heard,
and how she came to hear it. 
156
XXVII. From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. Exclaims bitterly
against Masquerades, to which she attributes her present Unhappiness. —Acquaints
her Ladyship with her Informant and
Information. —Receives a Letter, directed for Mr. B. in his
Absence, from the Dowager Lady: Gives it him. His captious
Behaviour upon it. —Her alternate Hopes and Fears, Resolutions
and Doubtings. 
157
XXVIII. From Lady Davers to Mrs. B. Is greatly moved by
her affecting Periods. —Is vexed to hear, that the vile Lady,
as she calls the Countess, has argued for Polygamy before her 

Uncle. —Leaves her to her own Workings: But that if she
finds Matters to proceed to Extremity, the Storm she formerly
raised at the Hall, was nothing to the Hurricane she will excite
on this Occasion. 
169
XXIX. From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. Mr. B.'s Kindness to
her; but slighting Expression of her Billy. —A fresh Occasion
of Distress, in Mr. B.'s acquainting her, that that very Afternoon
the Countess and the Viscountess her Sister are to come
to drink Tea with her, and to see her Billy. Her Behaviour
upon this affecting News, and his to her upon that. —Her
Comfort, and her Distress, on Occasion of this trying Visit. — 
Is forced to break off on his coming in to receive his Guests. 
171
XXX. From Mrs. B. to the same. Gives the Particulars of the
Two Ladies Visit, of her own Deportment, and the Conversation
that passed on the Occasion. —That not being able to
refrain from a Flood of Tears at their Departure, on something
unexpectedly spoken in Italian by the Countess and
Mr. B. in her Favour, and explained to her by him, he goes
out in a Passion. Her new Distress upon this Occasion, as he
will hereby guess at the Reason of her Grief. He returns at
Night, and locks himself into his Closet. 
174
XXXI. From Mrs. B. to the same. She writes by Polly to beg
Leave to attend him in his Closet, in order to account to him
for her Conduct. He answers by Writing also, declining to
see her, and promising to give her Cause a fair Hearing at
some other Time. She ventures down. Her solemn Speech
and Deportment makes him apprehensive for her Intellects.
His tender Behaviour to her. Desires her to waive the Subject
for a few Days, being to set out on a Journey at Four in
the Morning; and intends to return on Saturday Night. 
185
XXXII. From Mrs. B. to the same. Gives the Copy of a
Letter written to her, signed Thomasine Fuller, acquainting her,
‘That Mr. B. is gone with the Countess that very Morning
to Tunbridge; and that they have agreed to live together as
Man and Wife.’ —Is now endeavouring, by the Help of
Religion, to bring her Mind to support the heavy Evil. Her
Reasonings and Reflections, and the new Scheme she is
forming to make herself as easy as possible. Hopes they will
not be so cruel as to take her Billy from her. That she will
give them no Provocation by Law-suits or otherwise, so to
do. 
190
Friday is concluding, and she hopes she is calmer than she
was; and that, after a while, she may not, at the worst, be
an unhappy Person. 
194
Saturday Night. After impatiently expecting his Return,
she receives a Note from him, at Eleven, that he shall not 

be with her till Monday, when he hopes to dine with her. 
195
Monday, Eleven. Impatiently longs for his Return. —He
comes, and she resolves to have her Trial over, if possible,
before Night be passed. His tender Reception of her. From
her Behaviour he is still more apprehensive for her Intellects. 
Her whimsical Bar, and Apparatus for her Trial, as
she calls it, increase his Concern for her Head, and prepare
his Mind for the good Impression which the Solemnity
of her Behaviour and Expressions, and her noble Conduct
and Sentiments afterwards, make upon him: For, having by
the Generosity of her Affection to him, by her prudently
avoiding all Upbraidings and Reproaches, and by her Regard
for his future Happiness, greatly moved him, he confesses his
Error, and promises, that he will restore to her Virtue an
Husband all her own. —Her ecstatic Joy on this Occasion. — 
Begs of her Ladyship to return her all her Letters on that
Subject, in order to oblige Mr. B. who requests to see them,
and promises to make a good Use of them, with the Countess. 
ibid.
XXXIII. From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. That she has obtained
Leave to get every thing ready to set out for Kent. — 
Mr. B. admires and applauds her Conduct in the late Affair. 
Promises to account to her for every Step he has taken, or
shall take, in it; which he can do, he says, because the Lady's
Honour is untainted. —He takes a tender Leave of her for a
few Days. Her Reflection upon the Benefits that may be
made of Afflictions. 
220
XXXIV. From Lady Davers to Mrs. B. Sends the Letters
she writes for. Rejoices with her upon the Turn this afflicting
Affair has taken. —Observes how watchful over their
Conduct young Widows ought to be. Gives some Particulars
of the Countess's Story. —Takes Notice, that her Bar, and
other Parts of her Conduct, shew that her Intellect was in
Danger, had this Affair proceeded; which redoubles her Joy,
that it is likely to end so happily. 
223
XXXV. From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. Relates her Journey
to Kent. Her Joy to see her Husband, her Child, and her
Parents, on one happy Spot together. —That Mr. B. is set out
with her Papers to Tunbridge. That he first gave her the
Particulars of his Affair with the Countess, beginning at the
Masquerade. —She recites those Particulars, which contain
Cautions to the Fair Sex, against the Wiles and Stratagems of
the other; to both, to check the first Appearances of Evil. — 
Mr. B.'s Comparison, Feature by Feature, of the Countess
with his Pamela. 
225

XXXVI. From Mrs. B. to the same. Continuation of the Subject; 
in which Mr. B. clears up the Countess's Character, imputing
to himself the bad Consequences that might have followed
from their Intimacy. —His Scheme to end this Affair
with the Countess to the Satisfaction of all Parties. —Platonick
Love censured. 
248
XXXVII. From Mrs. B. to the same. Her Billy is taken dangerously
ill of the Small-pox. Her sorrowful Reflections upon
the Troubles to which the happiest State is naturally subjected. 
—Her Precautions on the Likelihood, that she may have the
Distemper herself. Mr. B.'s kind Assurances of the Continuance
of his Affection, should she be taken with it, and
suffer by it. Her pious Reflections and Resignation. —At
last, after a cruel Suspense of several Days, the Pustules come
kindly out upon the Child; but being taken ill herself, is
forced to lay down her Pen. 
254
XXXVIII. From Mr. B. to Lady Davers. Informing her, that
Mrs. B. has the Small-pox; but is in a fair way of doing
well; and that Billy is recovered. —That her Face is likely
to receive no Disadvantage by it: That if it had, his Value for
her would not have been lessen'd; for that, notwithstanding
her Ladyship's Readiness to censure him on a certain Affair,
he never loved any Lady as he loves his Pamela. 
261
XXXIX. From Lady Davers in Answer. Congratulates him
on the Child's Recovery, and the good way her Sister is in. 
Is the more rejoiced, as her Face is not likely to suffer; for a
Reason which she gives. Her smart Observation upon the Censoriousness
he attributes to her. Warns him not to slight a
Correction, which, she says, shews, that Providence chuses to try
to reclaim him by Mercies, rather than by Judgments. 
263
XL. From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. Acquaints her with hers
and her Billy's Recovery, and Mr. B.'s kind Intentions to
travel with her. —Gives the Copy of a polite Letter from the
Countess Dowager, congratulating her Recovery; and her
Answer: Also the agreeable Particulars of the Reception he
met with from that Lady, when he attended her with a Resolution
to break off the Intimacy between them. Thinks,
that, by the Help of proper Reflections on this Affair, she has
received a Cure for her own jealous Temper. 
264
XLI. From Mrs. B. to Miss Darnford. Enumerates her present
Felicities. Tells her, That they are about to turn
Travellers. —Her Concern for Mrs. Jewkes's Illness. Begs
Miss to vouchsafe a Visit to her in her Name, and to comfort
her. The strong Sense she has of the Duty of visiting and
comforting the Sick. —Sends Miss the Copy of a Letter from
Lady Davers, proposing a Match between her and Mr. H. 

—Acquaints her, that Mr. Williams is about to marry a Lady
of Merit, Niece to his noble Patron; and that Mr. Adams
has asked her Consent to address Polly Barlow. Her Puzzles
on this Occasion, because of Polly's former Conduct. — 
Humorously describes the bashful Behaviour of the young
Scholar, in a Conference she has with him on this Topick. —She
briefly lays down to Polly the Duty of a Clergyman's Wife. 
270
XLII. From Miss Darnford to Mrs. B. That she will comply
with all she requests, in relation to Mrs. Jewkes, who cannot,
as she thinks, recover. —Her Answer to the Proposal about
Mr. H. characterizing, with a just Severity, Self-admirers,
Coxcombs, or Pretty Fellows. —Then acquaints her with another
Proposal of Marriage made to her, which has her
Parents Consent, and meets not with her own Disapprobation. 
—She informs her, with Concern, that her Sister and Mr.
Murray live very unhappily together. Intimates to her the
Death of Mrs. Jewkes. 
281
XLIII. From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. Acquaints her, that
a Match is likely to be brought to Effect between Miss Darnford
and Sir W. G. as a Reason why her Proposal of Mr. H.
cannot take place. —Informs her of Mrs. Jewkes's Death, and
makes a Compliment to her Ladyship of naming her Woman's
Sister to succeed her. —That she shall be favour'd, as on the
Morrow, with the Care of Miss Goodwin. 
289
XLIV. From Lady Davers to Mrs. B. Is glad Miss Darnford
is likely to be so happy as with Sir W. G. —Takes exceeding
kindly her Compliment of the Housekeeper. —Is glad, because
it pleases her so much, that she is to have Miss Goodwin. 
290
XLV. From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. She sends her Ladyship
a Copy of a moving Letter she has received from Miss
Goodwin's Mamma. —Lays down the Method she intends to
take to bring Miss off from some Foibles incident to high-spirited
Children. 
292
XLVI. From Mrs. B. to the same Lady. Has Three Marriages
to acquaint her with; Miss Darnford's, Mr. Williams's, and
Mr. Adams's. —Gives the Character of Miss Judy Swynford,
Sister to Sir Jacob, a Maiden Lady of near Sixty, remarkable
for her Affectation of Youth and Gaiety. 
306
XLVII. From Mrs. B. to the same. That once more she
thankfully dedicates to her Ladyship the First-fruits of her
Penmanship, on her Upsitting. —Is glad to hear, that Lady
Betty is likely to be happy with one of the worthiest Persons
in the Peerage. —Has had the Honour of a Visit from the
Countess Dowager, to take Leave of her on her going abroad:
And gives the Particulars of their Conversation. —That Mr. B.
requires her to write to him her Opinion of Mr. Locke's 

Treatise of Education, as if he were absent. And that she
has obtained his Consent to transmit what she writes to her
Ladyship, if she is desirous to see it. 
311
XLVIII. From Mrs. B. to Mr. B. In pursuance of his Commands,
begins her Observations on Mr. Locke's Treatise. 
Gives her Opinion of his Regimen for Childrens Health. 
324
XLIX. To the same. She considers Mr. Locke's Rules against
leading on Children to do their Duty by Rewards; and his
Advice to teach them to cross their Appetites, and to deny
their Inclination. Thinks the Doctrine too philosophical for
Children. Is of Opinion, that they should not be pressed to
overcome natural Aversions. Her Reasons for it. 
330
L. To the same. Mentions gratefully the Excursions Mr. B.
has taken with her to the Sea Ports, and the more noted
inland Towns of the maritime Counties. Then proceeds to
consider the Preference Mr. Locke gives to a Home Education; 
and the Difficulties he enumerates, first, to find a well-qualified
Tutor for that Purpose. Secondly, From the Examples
they meet with from the meaner Servants. Thirdly, From the
Examples of the Parents themselves, if they be not very circumspect
and discreet. From all which she refers to Mr. B.'s
Consideration, If a Middle-way may not be proposed in a
School Education? Of which she gives her Thoughts. 
337
LI. To the same. That notwithstanding all she has said in her
last, she prefers the Home Education in a Family circumstanced
as theirs is; and gives her Notions of the Qualifications
of a Tutor. 
348
LII. To the same. She considers Mr. Locke's next Inconvenience
in a Home Education, as to the Company of the meaner
Servants Lays down what shall be the Rule of her own Conduct
to her Billy, in relation to Servants and Inferiors. —She
inlarges then on the Hint she has given of the Example necessary
to be set by Parents themselves. Expatiates on the Benefit
of Emulation among Youth. Proposes a Method to excite
this in the Home Education, which may be attended with
Benefit both to the Youth and Family. 
355
LIII. To the same. Approves of Mr. Locke's Advice to shame
a Child out of his Faults, rather than to beat him; and agrees
with him as to the Faults that deserve Correction; but differs
as to the Time when, and as to the Person by whom this Correction
is to be given. Applauds and improves upon a Hint
of Mr. Locke, that when a Child has incurred its Parent's
Displeasure, it should be in Disgrace with every one, till it
had owned its Faults. Describes the Delights which those
Mamma's have, who can make the first Education of their Children
the Subjects of their Entertainment and Diversion. 
370

LIV. To the same. Disagrees with Mr. Locke, in relation to
Childrens making their own Playthings, and some other
Points. Is greatly averse to his Method of teaching Children
the Letters by Dice. —Is charm'd with his Observations, that
a Mother may teach her Children the first Rudiments of
Latin, French, Geography, and Arithmetic. 
379
LV. To the same. She enters more particularly into those Parts
of Education which relate to her own Sex; and shews the
Benefits that would accrue to Men, as well as Women, from
a more inlarged Education to the latter. —Asserts an Equality
of Genius in the Sexes. —Censures the Writings of some great
Wits, who treat the Sex contemptuously; and shews the pernicious Tendency to Virtue and Morals of such a Conduct. 
391
LVI. From Mrs. B. to her Father and Mother.  Occasionally
mentions the frequent Journeys she has taken with
Mr. B. over most Parts of England. Then reviews briefly
her past Conduct, and the View she always had in it, to Mr. B.'s
Reformation: How all her Hopes of this sort were at an End
on the Masquerade Affair; but that Providence out of that
evil Appearance had brought about the Good she had so long
been supplicating for. —She then gives the affecting Particulars
of a Conversation between them; in which he voluntarily
disclaims and condemns all his past Frailties, and resolves upon
a through Reformation: That, to her inexpressible Delight,
he has ever since behaved answerably to his good Resolutions. 
—She then lays down the Rules with regard to Divine Worship,
which she intends to observe in Popish Countries. — 
Tells them, that her Davers and Pamela will be sent down to
them, while Miss Goodwin and her Billy are to accompany
her abroad. 
402
LVII. From Mrs. B. to Lady G. (Miss Darnford that was)
Repeating briefly the Contents of several of her Letters to
her, when abroad, which appear not in these Volumes; particularly
the Marriage of the Countess Dowager, with Lord C. 
—Informs her of their Arrival at Dover, and happy Meeting
with her Parents. —The Improvement of her children and
Miss Goodwin. —The Difficulties they had abroad with Mr. H.;
who now, while she writes, by the Death of his Father, is
become a Peer. —Gives some useful Hints on the Subject of
Travelling in Foreign Parts. —Most pathetically bewails the
Death of her beloved Mrs. Jervis, and of Jonathan, which
happen'd while she was abroad. Takes Notice of the Deaths
of Sir Simon Darnford, his Lady, and Mrs. Jones; which likewise
happened during her Absence from England. 
413

LVIII. From Mrs. B. to Lady G. Acquaints her with the Marriage
of the new Lord H. with a Woman of ill Fame. Gives
briefly the History of that Affair, and the Copy of a Letter
which he sent to Lord Davers on that Subject. Her Reflections
upon his rash Conduct. —Apprises her of the Birth
of her Jemmy. 
424
LIX. From Mrs. B. to the same. Transcribes, at her Request,
from her little Book of Education, some Observations relating
to young Gentlemens Travelling; in which she considers Mr.
Locke's Sentiments, and gives a Scheme of her own, on that
Subject. —Expresses her Concern, that Mr. and Mrs. Murray
live unhappily: And animadverts upon the different Behaviour
of Gentlemen in Courtship, and after Marriage. 
429
LX. From Mrs. B. to the same. At her Desire, for the sake of
Two headstrong young Ladies, gives the Particulars of an
instructive Conversation which formerly passed between herself,
several of the Neighbouring Ladies, and the Dean, with
Miss Stapylton, Miss Cope, Miss Sutton,
and Miss L. Four young Ladies, of different Tempers and
Inclinations: Who (admiring her Story, but not knowing
the Design of their Friends in this Visit) were brought to
receive Benefit from her Conversation: Which therefore
(being appris'd of the Intention) she adapts to their respective
Characters and Tastes: And which is attended with happy
Effects to each young Lady. 
435
LXI. To the same. Sends her a Specimen of her Nursery-Tales,
calculated for the Instruction of her attentive Little-ones. 
In which she comprises, in a very brief and intelligent
Manner, the principal Duties of Children from Infancy
to Manhood, and the Rewards which attend the Good, as
well as the Punishments that follow the Bad. —After which,
at Miss Goodwin's Request for a Woman's Story, she gives
her the Histories and Characters of Four young Ladies, whom
she calls Coquetilla, Prudiana, Profusiana, and
Prudentia; interspersed with such Cautions and Instructions,
as deserve the Attention of every young Lady. — 
Miss, greatly affected with the Story, hopes to imitate the Character
of Prudentia, which she ascribes to Mrs. B. 
473

CONCLUSION. Containing a brief Narrative of Facts
which happened after the Period of Time comprehended in
the preceding Letters; relating to 

Mr. and Mrs. B.
Lord H.
Miss Goodwin,
Lady G. and
Lord and Lady Davers,
Mr. Longman,

