



My dear Lady G.
You desire me to send you a little Specimen of
my Nursery Tales and Stories, with which, as
Miss Fenwick told you, on her Return to Lincolnshire,
I entertain my Miss Goodwin, and my little
Boys. But you make me too high a Compliment,
when you tell me, it is for your own Instruction and
Example. Yet you know, my dear Lady G. be your
Motives what they will, I must obey you, altho',
were others to see it, I might expose myself to the
Smiles and Contempt of Judges less prejudic'd in
my Favour. So I will begin without any further
Apology; and, as near as I can, give you those
very Stories with which Miss Fenwick was so
pleased, and of which she has made so favourable a
Report. 
Let me acquaint you then, that my Method is,
To give Characters of Persons I have known in one
Part or other of my Life, in feigned Names, whose
Conduct may serve for Imitation or Warning to
my dear attentive Miss; and sometimes I give Instances
of good Boys and naughty Boys, for the
sake of my Billy, and my Davers; and they are
continually coming about me, Dear Madam, a 

pretty Story now, cries Miss: And, Dear Mamma,
tell me of good Boys, and of naughty Boys, cries
Billy. 
Miss is a surprising Child, for her Age, and is
very familiar with many of the best Characters in
the Spectators; and having a Smattering of Latin,
and more than a Smattering of Italian, and being
a perfect Mistress of French, is seldom at a Loss for
the Derivation of such Words, as are not of English
Original. And so I shall give you a Story in feigned
Names, with which she is so delighted, that she has
written it down. But I will first trespass on your
Patience with one of my childish Tales. 
Every Day once or twice, if I am not hinder'd,
I cause Miss Goodwin, who plays and sings very
prettily, to give a Tune or two to me, and my Billy
and Davers, who, as well as my Pamela, love
and learn to touch the Keys, young as the latter is; 
and she will have a sweet Finger, I can see that; 
and a charming Ear; and her Voice is Musick itself! 
—O the fond, fond Mother! I know you
will say, on reading this. 
Then, Madam, we all proceed hand-in-hand together
to the Nursery, to my Charley and Jemmy:
And in this happy Retirement, so much my Delight
in the Absence of my best Beloved, imagine
you see me seated, surrounded with the Joy and the
Hope of my future Prospects, as well as my present
Comforts. 
Miss Goodwin imagine you see, on my Righthand,
sitting on a Velvet Stool, because she is eldest,
and a Miss: Billy on my Left, in a little Cane Elbow-Chair,
because he is eldest, and a good Boy:
My Davers, and my sparkling-ey'd Pamela, with 



my Charley between them, on little silken Cushions
at my Feet, hand-in-hand, their pleased Eyes looking
up to my more delighted ones, and my sweetnatur'd
promising Jemmy in my Lap; the Nurses
and the Cradle just behind us, and the Nursery
Maids delightedly pursuing some useful Needlework,
for the dear Charmers of my Heart—All
as hush and as still, as Silence itself, as the pretty
Creatures generally are, when their little watchful
Eyes see my Lips beginning to open: For they take
great notice already, of my Rule of Two Ears to
* One Tongue, insomuch that if Billy or Davers
are either of them for breaking the Mum, as they
call it, they are immediately hush, at any time, if I
put my Finger to my Lip, or if Miss points hers to
her Ears, even to the breaking of a Word in two,
as it were: And yet all my Boys are as lively as so
many Birds; while my Pamela is chearful, easy,
soft, gentle, always smiling, but modest and harmless
as a Dove, 
I began with the Story of Two little Boys, and
Two little Girls, the Children of a fine Gentleman
and a fine Lady, who lov'd them dearly: That they
were all so good, and loved one another so well,
that every body who saw them, admir'd them, and
talk'd of them far and near: That they would part
with any thing to one another: Loved the Poor:
Spoke kindly to the Servants: Did every thing they
were bid to do; were not proud; and knew no
Strife, but who should learn their Books best, and
be the prettiest Scholar: That the Servants loved
them, and would do any thing they desired; that
they were not proud of fine Cloaths; let not 

their Heads run upon their Playthings, when they
should mind their Books; said Grace before they
eat; their Prayers before they went to-bed, and as
soon as they rose; were always clean and neat; 
would not tell a Fib for the World, and were above
doing any thing that requir'd one: That God blessed
them more and more, and blessed their Papa and
Mamma, and their Uncles and Aunts, and Cousins,
for their sakes. And there was a happy Family, my
dear Loves! —No one idle; all prettily imploy'd; 
the Masters at their Books; the Misses at their
Books too, or their Needles; except at their Playhours,
when they were never rude, nor noisy, nor
mischievous, nor quarrelsome: And no such Word
was ever heard from their Mouths, as, Why mayn't
I have this or that, as well as Billy or Bobby? — 
Or, Why should Sally have this or that, any more
than I? —But it was, As my Mamma pleases; 
My Mamma knows best; and a Bow and a Smile,
and no Surliness, or scouling Brow to be seen, if
they were deny'd any thing: For, well did they
know, that their Papa and Mamma loved them so
dearly, that they would refuse them nothing that
was for their Good; and they were sure, when they
were refused, they asked for something that would
have done them hurt, had it been granted. Never
were such good Boys and Girls as these! And they
grew up, and the Masters became fine Scholars,
and fine Gentlemen, and every body honour'd
them; and the Misses became fine Ladies, and fine
Housewives; and this Gentleman, when they grew
to be Women, sought to marry one of the Misses,
and that Gentleman the other; and happy was he
that could be admitted into their Companies! So 

that they had nothing to do, but to pick and chuse
out of the best Gentlemen in the County: While
the greatest Ladies for Birth, and the most remarkable
for Virtue, (which, my Dears, is better than
either Birth or Fortune) thought themselves honour'd
by the Addresses of the Two Brothers. And
they marry'd, and made good Papas and Mammas,
and were so many Blessings to the Age in which
they lived. 
There, my dear Loves, were happy Sons and
Daughters! For good Masters seldom fail to make
good Gentlemen; and good Misses, good Ladies; 
and God blesses them with as good Children as
they were to their Parents; and so the Blessing
goes round! —Who would not but be good? 
Well, but, Mamma, we will all be good:
Won't we, Master Davers, cries my Billy? Yes,
Brother Billy. Then they kiss one another, and if
they have Playthings, or any thing they like, exchange
with each other, to shew the Effect my
Lessons have upon them. 
But what will become of the naughty Boys? 
Tell us, Mamma, about the naughty Boys! 
Why, there was a poor, poor Widow Woman,
who had Three naughty Sons, and One naughty
Daughter; and they would do nothing that their
Mamma bid them do; were always quarrelling,
scratching, and fighting; would not say their Prayers; 
would not learn their Book; so that the little
Boys used to laugh at them, and point at them, as
they went along, for Blockheads; and nobody
loved them, or took notice of them, except to beat
and thump them about, for their naughty Ways,
and their Undutifulness to their poor Mother, who 

worked hard to maintain them. As they grew
up, they grew worse and worse, and more and
more stupid and ignorant, so that they impoverished
their poor Mother, and at last broke her Heart,
poor, poor Widow Woman! —And her Neighbours
join'd together to bury the poor Widow Woman!
for these sad ungracious Children made away
with what little she had left, while she was ill, before
her Heart was quite broken: And this helped
to break it the sooner; for had she lived, she saw
she must have wanted Bread, and had no Comfort
from such wicked Children. 
Poor, poor Widow Woman! said my Billy,
with Tears; and my little Dove shed Tears too,
and Davers was moved, and Miss wiped her fine
Eyes. 
But what became of the naughty Boys, and the
naughty Girl, Mamma! —Became of them! Why
one Son was forced to go to Sea, and there he was
drowned: Another turned Thief, (for he would
not work) and he came to an untimely End: The
third was idle, and ignorant, and nobody, who
knew how he had used his poor Mother, would
imploy him; and so he was forced to go into a far
Country, and beg his Bread. And the naughty
Girl, having never loved Work, pined away in
Sloth and Filthiness, and at last broke her Arm,
and died of a Fever, lamenting too late, that she had
been so wicked a Daughter to so good a Mother! ––– 
And so there was a sad End of all the Four ungracious
Children, who never would mind what their
poor Mother said to them: And God punished their
Naughtiness, as you see! —While the good Children
I mentioned before, were the Glory of their 

Family, and the Delight of every body that knew
them. 
Who would not be good! was the Inference:
And the Repetition from Billy, with his Hands
clapt together, Poor, poor Widow Woman! — 
gave me much Pleasure. 
So my childish Story ended, with a Kiss of each
pretty Dear, and their Thanks for my Story: And
then came on Miss's Request for a Woman's Story,
as she called it. I dismiss'd my Babies to their Play
in the Apartment allotted for that Purpose; and
taking Miss's Hand, she standing before me, all Attention,
began in a more womanly Strain to her;
for she is very fond of being thought a Woman; 
and indeed is a prudent, sensible Dear, comprehends
any thing instantly, and makes very pretty Reflections
upon what she hears or reads, as you will observe
in what follows: 
There is nothing, my dear Miss Goodwin, that
young Ladies should be so watchful over, as their
Reputation: 'Tis a tender Flower, that the least
Frost will nip, the least cold Wind will blast; and
when once blasted, it will never flourish again, but
wither to the very Root. But this I have told you
so often, that I am sure I need not repeat what I
have said. So to my Story. 
There were Four pretty Ladies lived in One
genteel Neighbourhood, the Daughters of Four several
Families; but all Companions, and Visitors; 
and yet all of very different Inclinations. Coquetilla
we will call one, Prudiana another,
Profusiana the third, and Prudentia the
fourth; their several Names denoting their respective
Qualities. 

Coquetilla was the only Daughter of a
worthy Baronet, by a Lady very gay, but rather indiscreet
than unvirtuous, who took not the requisite
Care of her Daughter's Education, but let her be
over-run-with the Love of Fashions, Dress, and
Equipage; and when in London, Balls, Operas,
Plays, the Park, the Ring, the Withdrawing-Room,
took up her whole Attention. She admir'd nobody
but herself, flutter'd about, laughing at, and despising
a Croud of Men-Followers, whom she attracted
by gay, thoughtless Freedoms of Behaviour, too
nearly treading on the Skirts of Immodesty: Yet
made she not One worthy Conquest; exciting, on
the contrary, in all sober Minds, that Contempt to
herself, which she so profusely would be thought to
pour down upon the rest of the World. After she
had several Years flutter'd about the dangerous
Light, like some silly Fly, she at last sindged the
Wings of her Reputation; for, being despised by
every worthy Heart, she became too easy and cheap
a Prey to a Man, the most unworthy of all her Followers,
who had Resolution and Confidence enough
to break thro' those few cobweb Reserves, in which
she had incircled her precarious Virtue; and which
were no longer of Force to preserve her Honour,
when she met with a Man more bold and more enterprising
than herself, and who was as designing
as she was thoughtless. And what then became of
Coquetilla? —Why, she was forced to pass over
Sea, to Ireland, where nobody knew her, and to
bury herself in a dull Obscurity; to go by another
Name; and at last, unable to support a Life so unsuitable
to the natural Gaiety of her Temper, she
pined herself into a Consumption, and dy'd unpity'd 

and unlamented, among Strangers, having
not one Friend but whom she bought with her
Money. 
Poor Lady Coquetilla! said Miss; what a sad
thing it is, to have a wrong Education! And how
happy am I, who have so good a Lady to supply the
Place of a dear distant Mamma! —But be pleased,
Madam, to proceed to the next. 
Prudiana, my Dear, was the Daughter of a
Gentleman who was a Widower, and had, while
the young Lady was an Infant, bury'd her Mamma. 
He was a good sort of Man; but had but One Lesson
to teach to Prudiana, and that was, To avoid all
manner of Conversation with the Men; but never
gave her the right Turn of Mind, nor instill'd into it
that Sense of her religious Duties, which would have
been her best Guard in all Temptations. For, provided
she kept out of the Sight and Conversation of
the Gentlemen, and avoided the Company of those
Ladies, who more freely conversed with the other
Sex, it was all her Papa desired of her. This gave
her a haughty, sullen, and reserved Turn; made
her stiff, formal, and affected. She had Sense enough
to discover early the Faults of Coquetilla, and, in
Dislike of them, fell, the more easily into that contrary
Extreme, which her recluse Education, and
her Papa's Cautions, naturally led her. So that
Pride, Reserve, Affectation, and Censoriousness,
made up the Essentials of her Character, and she
became more unamiable even than Coquetilla; and
as the other was too accessible, Prudiana was quite
unapproachable by Gentlemen, and unfit for any
Conversation, but that of her Servants being also deserted
by those of her own Sex, by whom she might 

have improv'd, on account of her censorious Disposition. 
And what was the Consequence? Why
this: Every worthy Person of both Sexes despising
her, and she being used to see nobody but Servants,
at last throws herself upon one of that Class: In an
evil Hour, she finds something that is taking to
her low Taste in the Person of her Papa's Valet, a
Wretch so infinitely beneath her, (but a gay Coxcomb
of a Servant) that every body attributed to
her the Scandal of making the first Advances; for,
otherwise, it was presumed, he durst not have
looked up to his Master's Daughter. So here ended
all her Pride! All her Reserves came to this! Her
Censoriousness of others, redoubled People's Contempts
upon herself, and made nobody pity her. 
She was, finally, turned out of Doors, without a
Peny of Fortune: The Fellow was forced to set
up a Barber's Shop in a Country Town; for all he
knew, was to shave, and dress a Peruque; and her
Papa would never look upon her more: So that
Prudiana became the Outcast of her Family, and
the Scorn of all that knew her; and was forced to
mingle in Conversation and Company, with the
Wretches of her Husband's Degree! 
Poor, miserable Prudiana! said Miss. —What
a sad, sad Fall was hers! —And all owing to the
Want of a proper Education too! —And to the
Loss of such a Mamma, as I have an Aunt; and so
wise a Papa, as I have an Uncle! —How could
her Papa, I wonder, restrain her Person as he did,
like a poor Nun, and make her unacquainted with
the enerous Restraints of the Mind? 

I am sure, my dear good Aunt, it will be owing
to you, that I shall never be a Coquetilla, nor a
Prudiana neither. Your Table is always Surrounded
with the best of Company, with worthy
Gentlemen, as well as Ladies; and you instruct
me to judge of both, and of every new Guest, in
such a manner, as makes me esteem them all, and
censure nobody; but yet to see Faults in some to
avoid, and Graces in others to imitate; but in nobody
but Yourself and my Uncle, any thing so like
Perfection, as shall attract one's Admiration to one's
own Ruin. 
You are young yet, my Love, and must always
doubt your own Strength; and pray to God, more
and more, as your Years advance, to give you more
and more Prudence, and Watchfulness over your
conduct. 
But yet, my Dear, you must think justly of
yourself too; for let the young Gentlemen be ever
so learned, and discreet, your Education intitles you
to think as well of yourself, as of them: For, don't
you see, the Ladies who are so kind to visit us, that
have not been abroad, as you have been, when they
were young, yet make as good Figures in Conversation,
say as good things, as any of the Gentlemen? 
For, my Dear, all that the Gentlemen know more
than the Ladies, except here and there such a one
as your dear Uncle, with all their learned Education,
is only, that they have been disciplin'd perhaps,
into an Observation of a few Accuracies in
Speech, which, if they know no more, rather
distinguish the Pedant, than the Gentleman: Such
as the avoiding of a false Concord, as they call it,
and which you know how to do, as well as the 

best; not to put a was for a were, an are for an is,
and to be able to speak in Mood and Tense, and
such-like valuable Parts of Education: So that, my
Dear, you can have no Reason to look upon that
Sex in so high a Light, as to depreciate your own:
And yet you must not be proud nor conceited
neither; but make this one Rule your Guide: 
In your Maiden State, think yourself above the
Gentlemen, and they'll think you so too, and address
you with Reverence and Respect, if they see
there be neither Pride nor Arrogance in your Behaviour,
but a Consciousness of Merit, a true Dignity,
such as becomes Virgin Modesty, and untainted
Purity of Mind and Manners, like that of
an Angel among Men; for so young Ladies should
look upon themselves to be, and will then be
treated as such by the other Sex. 
In your marry'd State, which is a kind of State
of Humiliation for a Lady, you must think yourself
subordinate to your Husband; for so it has
pleased God to make the Wife. You must have
no Will of your own, in petty Things: And if
you marry a Gentleman of Sense and Honour, such
a one as your Uncle, he will look upon you as his
Equal; and will exalt you the more, for your
abasing yourself. —In short, my Dear, he will act
by you, just as your dear Uncle does by me: And
then, what a happy Creature will you be! 
So I shall, Madam! To be sure I shall! —But I
know I shall be happy whenever I marry, because
I have such wise Directors, and such an Example
before me: And if it please God, I will never think
of any Man, (in pursuance of your constant Advice
to young Ladies at the Tea table) who is not a Man 

of Sense, and a virtuous Gentleman. But now,
dear Madam, for your next Character. There are
Two more yet to come, that's my Pleasure! I wish
there were Ten! 
Why the next was Profusiana, you remember,
my dear Love. Profusiana took another Course to
her Ruin. She fell into some of Coquetilla's Foibles,
but pursued them for another End, and in
another Manner. Struck with the Grandeur and
Magnificence of what weak People call the Upper
Life, she gives herself up to the Circus, to Balls, to
Operas, to Masquerades, and Assemblées; affects
to shine at the Head of all Company, at Tunbridge,
at Bath, and every Place of publick Resort; plays
high, is always receiving and paying Visits, giving
Balls, and making Treats and Entertainments; and
is so much above the Conduct which mostly recommends
a young Lady to the Esteem of the Deserving
of the other Sex, that no Gentleman, who prefers
solid Happiness, can think of addressing her, tho'
she is a fine Person, and has many outward Graces
of Behaviour. She becomes the favourite Toast of
the Places she frequents, is proud of that Distinction; 
gives the Fashion, and delights in the Pride,
that she can make Apes in Imitation, whenever she
pleases: But yet, endeavouring to avoid being
thought proud, makes herself cheap, and is the
Subject of the Attempts of every Coxcomb of Eminence; 
and with much ado, preserves her Virtue,
tho' not her Character. 
What, all this while, is poor Profusiana doing? 
She would be glad, perhaps, of a suitable Proposal,
and would, it may be, give up some of her Gaieties
and Extravagancies; for Profusiana has Wit, and 

is not totally destitute of Prudence, when she suffers
herself to think. But her Conduct procures her not
One solid Friendship; and she has not in a Twelve-month,
among a Thousand Professions of Service,
One Devoir that she can attend to, or a Friend that
she can depend upon. All the Women she sees, if
she excels them, hate her; the gay Part of the Men,
with whom she accompanies most, are all in a Plot
against her Honour. Even the Gentlemen, whose
Conduct in the general is govern'd by Principles of
Virtue, come down to these publick Places to partake
of the innocent Freedoms allowed there, and
oftentimes give themselves Airs of Gallantry, and
never have it in their Thoughts to commence a
Treaty of Marriage, with an Acquaintance begun
upon that gay Spot. What solid Friendships and
Satisfactions then is Profusiana excluded from? 
Her Name indeed is written in every publick
Window, and prostituted, as I may call it, at the
Pleasure of every profligate, or Sot, who wears a
Diamond to ingrave it: And that, it may be, with
most vile and barbarous Imputations, and Freedoms
of Words, added by Rakes, who very probably never
exchanged a Syllable with her. The wounded
Trees are perhaps also taught to wear the Initials of
her Name, linked, not unlikely, and widening as
they grow, with those of a Scoundrel. But all this
while, she makes not the least Impression upon One
noble Heart: And at last, perhaps, having run on
to the End of an uninterrupted Race of Follies, she
is cheated into the Arms of some vile Fortune-hunter; 
who quickly lavishes away the Remains
of that Estate which her Extravagance had left; 
and then, after the worst Usage, abandoning her 

with Contempt, she sinks into an Obscurity, that
cuts short the Thread of her Life, and leaves no
Remembrance, but on the brittle Glass, and more
saithful Bark, that ever she had a Being. 
Alas, alas! what a Butterfly of a Day, said
Miss, (an Expression she remember'd of Lady Towers's)
was poor Profusiana! —What a sad thing
to be so dazled by worldly Grandeur, and to have
so many Admirers, and not One real Friend! 
Very true, my Dear; and how carefully ought
a Person of a gay and lively Temper to watch over
it! And what a Rock may publick Places be to a
Lady's Reputation, if she be not doubly vigilant in
her Conduct, when she is exposed to the Censures
and Observations of malignant Crouds of People; 
many of the worst of whom spare the least, those
who are most unlike themselves! 
But then, Madam, said Miss, would Profusiana
venture to play at publick Places? Will Ladies
game, Madam? I have heard you say, That Lords,
and Sharpers but just out of Liveries, in Gaming,
are upon a Foot in every thing, save that one
has nothing to lose, and the other much, besides
his Reputation: And will Ladies so disgrace their
Characters, and their Sex, as to pursue this pernicious
Diversion in publick? 
Yes, my Dear, they will, too often, the more's
the Pity! And don't you remember, when we were
at Bath, in what a Hurry I once passed by some
Knots of genteel People, and you asked, What those
were doing? I told you, whisperingly, They were
Gaming; and loth I was, that my Miss Goodwin
should stop to see some Sights, to which, till she
arrived at Years of Discretion, it was not proper to 

familiarize her Eye; in some sort acting like the
antient Romans, who would not assign Punishments
to certain atrocious Crimes, because they
had such a high Idea of human Nature, as to suppose
it incapable of committing them: So I was not
for having you, while a little Girl, see those things,
which I knew would give no Credit to our Sex, and
which I thought, when you grew older, should be
new and shocking to you: But now you are so
much a Woman in Discretion, I may tell you any
thing. 
She kiss'd my Hand, and made me a fine Courtesy
—and told me, That now she long'd to hear
of Prudentia's Conduct. Her Name, Madam, said
she, promises better things, than those of her Three
Companions; and so it had need: For how sad is
it to think, that out of Four Ladies of Distinction,
Three of them should be naughty, and, of course,
unhappy—These Two Words, of course, my
Dear, said I, were very prettily put in: Let me kiss
you for them: Since every one that is naughty,
first or last, must be certainly unhappy. 
Far otherwise than what I have related, was it
with the amiable Prudentia. Like the industrious
Bee, she makes up her Honey-hoard from every
Flower, bitter as well as sweet; for every Character
is of Use to her, by which she can improve
her own. She had the Happiness of an Aunt, who
loved her, as I do you; and of an Uncle, who
doted on her, as yours does: For, alas! poor Prudentia
lost her Papa and Mamma almost in her Infancy,
in One Week: But was so happy in her
Uncle and Aunt's Care, as not to miss them in her
Education, and but just to remember their Persons. 

By Reading, by Observation, and by Attention, she
daily added new Advantages to those which her
Education gave her. She saw, and pitied, the fluttering
Freedoms, and dangerous Flights, of Coquetilla. 
The sullen Pride, the Affectation,
and stiff Reserves, which Prudiana assum'd, she
penetrated, and made it her Study to avoid. And
the gay, hazardous Conduct, extravagant Temper,
and Love of tinsell'd Grandeur, which were the
Blemishes of Profusiana's Character, she dreaded
and shunn'd. She fortifies herself with the excellent
Examples of the past and present Ages, and
knows how to avoid the Faults of the Faulty, and
to imitate the Graces of the most Perfect. She
takes into her Scheme of that future Happiness,
which she hopes to make her own, what are the
true Excellencies of her Sex, and endeavours to appropriate
to herself the domestick Virtues, which
shall one Day make her the Crown of some worthy
Gentleman's earthly Happiness; and which, of
course, as you prettily said, my Dear, will secure
and heighten her own. 
That noble Frankness of Disposition, that sweet
and unaffected Openness and Simplicity, which
shine in all her Actions and Behaviour, commend
her to the Esteem and Reverence of all Mankind; 
as her Humility, and Affability, and a Temper uncensorious,
and ever making the best of what is said
of the absent Person, of either Sex, do to the Love
of every Lady. Her Name indeed is not prostituted
on Windows, nor carved on the Barks of Trees in
publick Places; but it smells sweet to every Nostril,
dwells on every Tongue, and is ingraved on every
Heart. She meets with no Address but from Men 

of Honour and Probity! The fluttering Coxcomb,
the inveigling Parasite, the insidious Deceiver, the
mercenary Fortune-hunter, spread no Snares for a
Heart guarded by Discretion and Prudence, as hers
is. They see, that all her amiable Virtues are the
happy Result of an uniform Judgment, and the Effects
of her own Wisdom, sounded in an Education
to which she does the highest Credit. And at last,
after several worthy Offers, enough to perplex any
Lady's Choice, she blesses some one happy Gentleman,
more distinguish'd than the rest, for Learning,
good Sense, and true Politeness, which is but
another Word for Virtue and Honour; and shines,
to her last Hour, in all the Duties of domestick
Life, as an excellent Wife, Mother, Mistress, Friend,
and Christian; and so confirms all the Expectations,
of which her Maiden Life had given such strong,
and such edifying Presages. 
Then folding my dear Miss in my Arms, and
kissing her, Tears of Pleasure standing in her pretty
Eyes, Who would not, said I, shun the Examples
of the Coquetilla's, the Prudiana's, and
the Profusiana's of this World, and chuse to
imitate the Character of PRUDENTIA!—the
Happy, and the Happy making Prudentia! 
O Madam! Madam! said the dear Creature,
smothering me with her rapturous Kisses, Prudentia
is YOU! —Is YOU indeed! —It can
be nobody else! —O teach me, good GOD! to
follow Your Example, and I shall be a Second
Prudentia—Indeed I shall! 
God send you may, my beloved Miss! And may
He bless you more, if possible, than Pradentia was
blessed! 

And so, my dear Lady G. you have some of my
Nursery Tales; with which, relying on your kind
Allowance and Friendship, I conclude myself, 
Your affectionate and faithful,
P. B. 

