


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 


Paris, Aug. 31. Sept. 11.
I Set out from Parma early on Tuesday morning, as
I intended. The Count of Belvedere was so obliging,
as to accompany me to Pavia, where we parted
with mutual civilities. 
I paid my respects to Lady Sforza at Milan, as I
had promised. She received me with great politeness. 
Our conversation chiefly turned on the differences between
the other branches of her family, on one part; 
and herself, and Lady Laurana, on the other. She
owned, that when she sent to desire a visit from me,
she had supposed, that the alliance between them and
me was a thing concluded upon; and that she intended,
by my mediation, to reconcile herself to the family,
if they would meet her half-way. 
She was so indiscreet, as to lay general blame on
her noble niece, as a person given up to a zeal that
wanted government: She threw out hints, injurious
to the sincerity of the three brothers, as well as to that
of the father and mother, with regard to me: All
which I discountenanced. 
I have hardly ever conversed with a woman so artful
as Lady Sforza. I wonder not, that she had the
address to fire the Count of Belvedere with impatience,
and to set him on seeking to provoke me to
an act of rashness, which, after what had happened between
me and the young Count Altieri, some years
ago, at Verona, might have been fatal to one, if not
to both; and, by that means, rid Italy, if not the
world, of me, and, at the same time, revenged herself
on the Count, for rejecting her daughter, who,
as I have told you before, has a passion for him, in a 

manner that she called too contemptuous to be passed
over. 
She told me, that she doubted not now, that I had
been circumvented, by (what even she, an Italian,
called) Italian finesse, but her niece would be prevailed
upon to marry the Count; and bid me mind
her words. Ah, my poor Laurana! added she—But
I will renounce her, if she can be so mean, as to retain
Love for a man who despises her. 
A convent, she said, after such a malady as Clementina
had been afflicted with, would be the fittest
place for her. She ascribed to hers and Laurana's
treatment of her (with great vehemence, on my disallowing
her assertion) the foundation of her cure. 
She wished that, were Clementina to marry, it
might have been me, preferably to any other man; 
since the Love she bore me, was most likely to complete
her recovery; which was not to be expected,
were she to marry a man to whom she was indifferent
—But, added she, they must take their own way. 
Lady Laurana was on a visit at the Borromean palace:
Her mother sent for her, unknown to me. I
could very well have excused the compliment. I was
civil, however: I could be no more than civil: And,
after a stay of two hours, pursued my route. 
Nothing remarkable happened in my journey. I
wrote to Jeronymo, and his beloved Sister, from Lyons. 
At the post-house there, I found a servant of Lady
Olivia, with a Letter. He was ordered to overtake,
and give it into my own hands, were he to travel with
it to Paris, or even to England. Lady Olivia will be
obeyed. The man missed me, by my going to visit
Lady Sforza at Milan. I inclose the Letter; as also
a copy of mine, to which it is an answer. When
you read them, you will be of opinion, that they ought
not to pass your own hands. Perhaps you will choose
to read them in this place. 

