



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Saturday, May 20. 
I did not know, my dear, that you deferred giving
an answer to Mr. Lovelace's proposals, till you
had my opinion of them. A particular hand occasionally
going to town, will leave this at Wilson's,
that no delay may be made on that account. 
I never had any doubt of the man's justice and
generosity in matters of Settlement; and all his relations
are as noble in their spirits, as in their descent: 
But now, it may not be amiss for you to wait, to see
what returns my Lord makes to his Letter of invitation. 
The scheme I think of is this. 
There is a person whom I believe you have seen
with me; her name Townsend, who is a great
dealer in Indian Silks, Brussels and French Laces,
Cambricks, Linen, and other valuable goods; which
she has a way of coming at, duty-free; and has a
great vend for them (and for other curiosities which
she imports) in the private families of the gentry
round us. 
She has her days of being in town, and then is at
a chamber she rents at an Inn in Southwark, where
she keeps patterns of all her Silks, and much of her
portable goods, for the conveniency of her London
customers. But her place of residence, and where she
has her principal warehouse, is at Deptford, for the
opportunity of getting her goods on shore. 
She was first brought to me by my Mother, to
whom she was recommended on the supposal of my 

speedy marriage; ‘that I might have an opportunity
to be as fine as a princess,’ was my Mother's expression,
‘at a moderate expence.’ 
Now, my dear, I must own, that I do not love to
encourage these contraband traders. What is it, but
bidding defiance to the Laws of our Country, when
we do; and hurting fair traders; and at the same
time robbing our Prince of his legal due, to the diminution
of those duties which possibly must be made
good by new levies upon the public? 
But however Mrs. Townsend and I, tho' I have
not yet had dealings with her, are upon a very good
foot of understanding. She is a sensible woman; she
has been abroad, and often goes abroad in the way of
her business; and gives very entertaining accounts of
all she has seen. And having applied to me, to
recommend her to you (as it is her view to be known
to young Ladies who are likely to change their condition)
I am sure I can engage her to give you protection
at her house at Deptford; which she says is a
populous village; and one of the last, I should think,
in which you would be sought for. She is not much
there, you will believe, by the course of her dealings; 
but, no doubt, must have somebody on the spot, in
whom she can confide: And there perhaps you might
be safe, till your Cousin comes. And I should not
think it amiss, that you write to him out of hand. I
cannot suggest to you what you should write. That
must be left to your own discretion. For you will
be afraid, no doubt, of the consequence of a variance
between the two men. 
&dotup;But notwithstanding all this, and were I sure of
getting you safely out of his hands, I will nevertheless
forgive you, were you to make all up with
him, and marry to-morrow. Yet I will proceed
with my projected scheme in relation to Mrs.
Townsend;&dotup; tho' I hope there will be no occasion
to prosecute it, since your prospects seem to be 

changed, and since you have had twenty-four not unhappy
hours together. How my indignation rises for
this poor consolation in the courtship [Courtship must
call it?] of such a woman! &dotup;Let me tell you,
my dear, that were you once your own absolute
and independent mistress, I should be tempted, notwithstanding
all I have written, to wish you the
wife of any man in the world rather than the wife
either of Lovelace, or of Solmes.&dotup; 
Mrs. Townsend, as I have recollected, has two
Brothers, each a master of a vessel; and who knows,
as she and they have concerns together, but that, in
case of need, you may have a whole Ship's Crew at
your devotion? If Lovelace give you cause to leave
him, take no thought for the people at Harlowe-Place. 
Let them take care of one another. It is a care they
are used to. The Law will help to secure them. The
wretch is no assassin, no night-murderer. He is an
open, because a fearless enemy; and should he attempt
any-thing that would make him obnoxious to the Laws
of Society, you might have a fair riddance of him
either by flight or the gallows; no matter which. 
Had you not been so minute in your account of the
circumstances that attended the opportunity you had
of overhearing the dialogue between Mr. Lovelace
and two of the women, I should have thought the
conference contrived on purpose for your ear. 
I shewed Mr. Lovelace's proposals to Mr. Hickman,
who had chambers once at Lincoln's-Inn, being
designed for the Law, had his elder brother lived. 
He looked so wise, so proud, and so important, upon
the occasion; and wanted to take so much consideration
about them—Would take them home if I
pleased—and weigh them well—and so forth—and
the like—and all that—that I had no patience with
him, and snatched them back with anger. 
O dear!—to be so angry, an't please me, for his
zeal— 

Yes, zeal without knowledge, I said—like most
other zeals—If there were no objections that struck
him at once, there were none. 
So hasty, dearest Madam!— 
And so slow, un-dearest Sir, I could have said— 
But, Surely, said I, with a look which implied,
Would you rebel, Sir! 
He begged my pardon—Saw no objection, indeed! 
—But might he be allowed once more— 
No matter—No matter—I would have shewn
them to my Mother, I said, who, tho' of no Inn of
Court, knew more of these things than half the
lounging Lubbers of them; and that at first sight— 
only that she would have been angry at the confession
of our continued correspondence. 
But, my dear, let the Articles be drawn up, and
engrossed; and solemnize upon them; and there's no
more to be said. 
Let me add, that the Sailor-fellow has been tampering
with my Kitty, and offered a bribe, to find
where to direct to you. Next time he comes, I will
have him laid hold of; and if I can get nothing out
of him, will have him drawn through one of our
deepest fish-ponds. His attempt to corrupt a servant
of mine will justify my orders. 
I send this Letter away directly. But will follow
it by another; which shall have for its subject only
my Mother, Myself, and your Uncle Antony. And
as your prospects are more promising than they have
been, I will endeavour to make you smile upon the
occasion. For you will be pleased to know, that my
Mother has had a formal tender from that grey goose,
which may make her skill in Settlements useful to
herself, were she to encourage it. 
May your prospects be still more and more happy,
prays 
Your own Anna Howe. 