


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Miss Caroline arose: Four creeping steps, her
handkerchief at her eyes, brought her within
her father's reach. He snatched her hand, quicken'd
her pace, and brought her close to his knees. Poor
sister Caroline! thought I: O the ty—And I had
like, at the time, to have added the syllable rant to
myself. —He pulled the other hand from her eye. The
handkerchief dropt: He might see that it was wet and 

heavy with her tears. Fain would she have turn'd her
blubber'd eye from him. He held both her hands, and
burst out into a laugh— 
And what cries the girl for? Why, Caroline, you
shall have a husband, I tell you. I will hasten with you
to the London market. Will you be offer'd at Ranelagh
market first? the concert or breakfasting? —Or shall I
shew you at the opera, or at the play? Ha, ha, hah! 
—Hold up your head, my amorous girl! You shall
stick some of your mother's jewels in your hair, and in
your bosom, to draw the eyes of fellows. You must
strike at once, while your face is new; or you will be
mingled with the herd of women, who prostitute their
faces at every polite place. Sweet impatient soul! — 
Look at me, Caroline. Then he laughed again. 
Car. Indeed, Sir, if you were not my father— 
Well said, Caroline! thought I; and trod on her
toe. 
Sir Tho. Hey-day! But what then? 
Car. I would say you are very cruel. 
Sir Tho. And is that all you would say, poor soft
thing! in such circumstances, to any other man? 
Well, but, all this time, you don't tell me (still holding
her hands) whether any other man will not do as
well as your Scots-man? 
Car. I am not kindly used. Indeed, Sir, you
don't use me kindly. I hope I am not an amorous creature,
as you call me. I am not in haste to be married. 
I am willing to wait your time, your pleasure:
But, as I presume, that there can be no objection to
Lord L. I wish not to be carried to any London
market. 
Sir Tho. (gravely). If I am disposed to railly you, Caroline; 
if I am willing to pass off, in a pleasant manner,
a forwardness that I did not expect in my daughter; and
for which, in my heart, I have despised the daughters of
other men, tho' I have not told the wenches so; I will 

not be answered pertly. I will not have you forget
yourself. 
Car. (courtesying). Good Sir, permit me to withdraw. 
I will recollect myself, and be sorry— 
Sir Tho. And is it necessary for you to withdraw,
to recollect your duty? —But you shall answer my
question—How stand you and Lord L.? Are you resolved
to have him, and none other? —Will you wait
for him, will he wait for you, till death has numbered
me with my ancestors? 
Car. O Sir! And she look'd down after her dropt
handkerchief. She wanted it; and would have withdrawn
one of her hands to reach it; and when she
could not, the big tears running down her cheeks [Yet
she look'd pretty] down she dropt on her knees—Forgive
me, Sir—I dread your displeasure—But must say,
that I am not an amorous girl: And, to convince you
that I amnot, I will never marry any man living, if it
be not Lord L. 
I all this time was in agitations for my poor sister. I
tired three chairs; and now look'd at her; now from
her; then at my fingers ends, wishing them claws,
and the man an husband, instead of a father. Indeed,
Miss Byron, I could not but make Caroline's treatment
my own; and, in fancy, not so very remote, as
you imagin'd, Lady L. Once I said to myself, If
some Lord L. tenders himself to me, and I like him,
I will not stand all this. The first moon-light night,
if he urge me heartily, and I am sure the parson is
ready, I will be under another protection, despicably
as I have always thought of runaway daughters! — 
Should I have done right, Miss Byron? 
The example, Miss Grandison! replied I—Such a
mamma as you were blessed with! The world that
would have sat in judgment upon the flight of the
daughter, would not have known the cruel treatment
of the father. I believe, my dear, you are glad you 

had not the trial: And you see how Lady L. is rewarded
for her patient duty. 
That's my good Harriet! said Lady L. I love you
for your answer. But, Sister, you leave me in too
much distress. You must release me from my knees,
and send me up to my chamber, as fast as you can. 
A little patience, Lady L. —But what say my minutes? 
—Miss Byron seems all attention. This is a
new subject to her. She never had any-body to controul
her. 
I think I could have borne any-thing from a father
or mother, said I, had it pleased God to continue to
me so dear a blessing. 
Fine talking, Harriet! said Miss Grandison. But
let me say, that a witty father is not a desirable character— 
By the way, ours was as cruel (Shall I say it,
Lady L.? You are upon your knees, you know) to
two very worthy sisters of his own: One of them ran
away from him to a relation in Yorkshire, where she
lives still, and as worthy an old maid she is as any in
the county: The other died before she could get her
fortune paid, or she would have been married to a man
she loved, and who loved her: But she left every
shilling of her fortune to her maiden sister, and nothing
to my father. 
It is well my brother is not in hearing, said Lady
L. He would not have borne the hundredth part of
what we have said. But sufferers will complain. Remember,
however, Charlotte, that I am still upon my
knees. 
See, my Lucy! Rakish men make not either good
husbands, or good fathers; nor yet good brothers. — 
But, no wonder! The narrow-hearted creatures centre
all their delight in themselves. —Finely do women
choose, who, taken in by their specious airs, vows,
protestations, become the abject properties of such
wretches! Yet, a reformed rake, they say, makes the
best husband—Against general experience this is said— 

But by whom? By the vulgar and the inconsiderate
only, surely! 
Miss Grandison proceeded. 
Sir. Tho. You will never marry any other man living! 
—And this is declared, in order to convince me
that you are not amorous! —Quibbling nonsense! — 
Had you not been amorous, you had not put yourself
into a situation, that should give you courage to say
this to me. Bold fool! Begone! 
She arose. 
Yet you shall not go, holding both her hands. And
dare you thus declare yourself? —What option, I again
ask you, is left me? —And yet Lord L. and you, as
you pretended just now, were determined only on a
conditional courtship, as I should, or should not, approve
of it! Confound your sex! This ever was, and ever
will be, the case. The blind god sets you out, where
you mean the best, on a pacing beast; you amble,
prance, parade, till your giddy heads turn round; and
then you gallop over hedge and ditch; leap fences; 
and duty, decency, and discretion, are trodden under
foot! 
Poor Miss Caroline! said I, Lucy, to them both— 
I expected this cruel retort. 
I foresaw it, replied Lady L. And this kept me off
so long from declaring my preference of Lord L. to all
the men in the world; as, in justice to his merit, my
heart several times bid me do without scruple. 
Begone from my presence, said Sir Thomas, proceeded
Miss Grandison—Yet he still held her hands— 
That little witch! I have been watching her eyes, and
every working muscle of her saucy face [meaning poor
me, said Miss Grandison]: She takes part with you
in all your distresses—You are sorely distressed, are
you not? —Am I not a tyrant with you both? —You
want to be gone, both of you: Then shall I be the
subject of your free discourses. All the resentment,
that now you endeavour to confine, will then burst 

out: I shall be intitled to no more of your duty than
is consistent with your narrow interest: Lord L. will
be consulted in preference to me, and have the whole
confidence of my daughters against me. I am now,
from this hour, to be looked upon as your enemy, and
not your father. But I will renounce you both; and
permit your brother, the joy of my life, and the hope
of my better days, to come over: And he shall renounce
you, as I do, or I will renounce him: And, in
that case, I shall be a father without a child; yet three
living by the best of women. How would she— 
I broke out here, said Miss Grandison, with an emotion
that I could not suppress. O my dear mamma! 
How much do we miss you! —Were you to have become
angel when we were infants, should we have
missed you as we do now? —O my dear mamma! 
This, this, is the time that girls most want a mother!— 
I was about to fly for it. I trembled at the sternness
of my father's looks, on this apostrophe to my
mother. He arose. Caroline, don't stir, said he; I
have something more to say to you. Come hither,
Charlotte! and held out both his hands—You have
burst out at last. I saw your assurance swelling to
your throat.— 
I threw myself at his feet, and besought him to forgive
me. 
But taking both my hands in one of his, as I held
them up folded—Curse me if I do! said he. I was
willing you should be present, in hopes to make you
take warning by your sister's folly and inconsistency. 
Lord L. has been a thief in my house. He has stolen
my elder daughter's affections from me: Yet has
drawn her in, as pretending that he desired not her
favour, but as I approved of his addresses. I do not
approve of them. I hope I may be allowed to be my
own judge in this case. She however declares, she
will have nobody else. And have I brought up my 

children till the years that they should be of use and
comfort to me; and continued a widower myself for
their sakes [So my father was pleased to say, said Miss
Grandison]; and all for a man I approve not? —And
do you, Charlotte, call your blessed mother from her
peaceful tomb, to relieve you and your sister against a
tyrant-father? —What comfort have I in prospect before
me, from such daughters? —But leave me. Leave
my house. Seek your fortunes where you will. Take
your cloaths: Take all that belongs to you: But
nothing that was your mother's. I will give you each
a draught on my banker for 500l. When that is
gone, according to what I shall hear of your behaviour,
you shall, or shall not, have more. 
Dear Sir! said Caroline, flinging herself on her
knees by me, forgive my sister! —Dear, good Sir!
whatever becomes of me, forgive your Charlotte! 
Sir Tho. You are fearless of your destiny, Caroline. 
You will throw yourself into the arms of Lord L. 
I doubt not. —I will send for your brother. But you
shall both leave this house. I will shut it up the moment
you are gone. It shall never again be open'd
while I live. When my ashes are mingled with those
of your mother, then may you keep open house in it,
and trample under foot the ashes of both. 
I sobbed out, Dear Sir, forgive me! I meant not
to reflect upon my father, when I wish'd for my mother. 
I wish'd for her for your sake, Sir, as well as
for ours. She would have mediated—She would
have soften'd— 
Sir Tho. My hard heart—I know what you mean,
Charlotte! 
And flung from us a few paces, walking about in
wrath, leaving us kneeling at his vacant chair. 
He then, ringing the bell, the door in his hand,
ordered in the housekeeper. She enter'd. A very
good woman she was. She trembled for her kneeling
ladies. 

Sir Th. Beckford, do you assist these girls in getting
up every-thing that belongs to them. Give me an inventory
of what they take. Their father's authority
is grievous to them. They want to shake it off. 
They find themselves women-grown. They want
husbands— 
Indeed, indeed, Beckford, we don't, said Caroline; 
interrupted by my father— 
Do you give me the lye, bold-face?— 
Pray your honour—Good your honour—intreated
honest Beckford: Never were modester young ladies. 
They are noted all over the county for their modesty
and goodness— 
Woman, woman, argue not with me. Modesty
never forgets duty. Caroline loves not her father. 
Lord L. has stolen away her affections from
me. Charlotte is of her party: And so are you, I
find. But take my commands in silence—A week
longer they stay not in this house— 
Beckford, throwing herself on her knees, repeated— 
Good your honour— 
We both arose, and threw ourselves at his feet— 
Forgive us! I beseech you, forgive us! —For my
mamma's sake, forgive us!—said Caroline— 
For my mamma's sake, for my brother's sake,
dear Sir, forgive your daughters! cried I, in as rueful
an accent. 
And we each of us took hold of his open'd coat,
both in tears; and Beckford keeping us company. 
Unmoved he went on—I intend you a pleasure,
girls. I know you want to be freed from my authority. 
You are women-grown. The man who has
daughters knows not discomfort with them, till busy
fellows bid them look out of their father's house for
that happiness, which they hardly ever find but
in it. 
We are yours, my papa, said I—We are nobody's
else—Do not, do not, expose your children to the 

censures of the world. Hitherto our reputations are
unsullied— 
Dear Sir, cried Caroline, throw us not upon the
world, the wide world! Dear Sir, continue us in
your protection. We want not to be in any other. 
You shall try the experiment, girls—I am not
fit to be your counsellor. Lord L. has distanced me
with the one: The other calls upon her departed mother
to appear, to shield her from the cruelty of an
unnatural father. And Lord L. has the insolence to
tell me to my face, that I am too young a father to
take upon me the management of women-grown
daughters. And so I find it. Blubber not, Beckford; 
assist your young ladies for their departure. A
week is the longest time they have to stay in this
house. I want to shut it up: Never more to enter its
gates. 
We continued our pleadings. 
O Sir, said Caroline, turn not your children out of
doors. We are daughters. We never more wanted
a father's protection than now. 
What have we done, Sir, cried I, to deserve being
turned out of your doors? —For every offensive word
we beg your pardon. You shall always have dutiful
children of us. Permit me to write to my brother— 
So, so! You mend the matter. You want to
interest your brother in your favour—You want to
appeal to him, do you? and to make a son sit in judgment
upon his father! —Prate not, girls! Intreat
not! —Get ready to be gone. I will shut up this
house— 
Where-ever you are, Sir, intreated I, there let
us be—Renounce not your children, your penitent
children. 
He proceeded. I suppose Lord L. will as soon find
out your person, Caroline, as he has your inclinations; 
so contrary to my liking. As to you, Charlotte,
you may go down to your old aunt Prue in 

Yorkshire: [He calls their aunt Eleanor so from the
word Prude—Yet we have seen, Lucy, it was owing
to him that this lady did not marry]: She will be able
to instruct you, that patience is a virtue; and that
you ought not to be in haste to take a first offer, for
fear you should not have a second. 
Poor sister Caroline! He look'd disdainfully at her. 
You are my father, Sir, said she. All is welcome
from you: But you shall have no cause to reproach
me. I will not be in haste. And here on my knees,
I promise, that I will never be Lord L's, without your
consent. I only beg of you, Sir, not to propose to
me any other man. 
My father, partly relented [partly, Harriet]: I
take you at your word: And I insist that you shall
not correspond with him, nor see him—You answer
not to that. But you know my will. And once
more, answer or not, I require your obedience,
Beckford, you may go. Rise, Caroline. 
And am I forgiven, Sir? said I—Dear Sir, forgive
your Charlotte—[Yet, Miss Byron, what was my
crime?] 
Make the best use of the example before you,
Charlotte: Not to imitate Caroline, in engaging your
affections unknown to me. —Remember that. She
has her plagues in giving me plague. It is fit she
should. Where you cannot in duty follow the example,
take the warning. 
Beckford was withdrawn. He graciously saluted
each girl: And thus triumphantly made them express
sorrow for—Do you know for what, Harriet? 
I wish, thought I to myself, Lucy, that these
boisterous spirits, either fathers or husbands, were not
generally most observed. 
But was Miss Grandison's spirit so easily subdued?
thought I. 
You smile, Harriet. What do you smile at? 

Will you forgive me, if I tell you? 
I don't know. 
I depend on your good-nature. I smiled to think,
Lady L. how finely Miss Grandison has got up since
that time. 
Miss Gr. O the sly girl! —Remember you not,
that I was before your debtor? 
A good hit, I protest! said Lady L. Yet Charlotte
was always a pert girl out of her father's presence. 
But I will add a word or two to my sister's narrative. 
My father kept us with him till he read Lord L's
letter, which he open'd not till then, and plainly, as I
saw, to find some new fault with him and me on the
occasion. But I came off better than I apprehended
I should at the time; for I had not seen it. Here is a
copy of it. 
Lady L. allowed me, Lucy, to take it up with me,
when we parted for the night. 

Permit me, Sir, by pen and ink, rather than
in person, as I think it will be most acceptable to
you, to thank you, as I most cordially do, for
the kind and generous treatment I have received at
your hands, during a whole month's residence at
Grandison-hall, whither I came with intent to stay
but three days. 
I am afraid I suffer'd myself to be surprised into an
undue warmth of expression, when I last went from
your presence. I ask your pardon, if so. You have
a right in your own child. God forbid that I shou'd
ever attempt to invade it! But what a happy man
should I be, if my love for Miss Grandison, and that
right, cou'd be made to coincide! I may have appeared
to have acted wrong in your apprehension, in
applying myself first to Miss Grandison: I beg, Sir,
your pardon for that also. 
But perhaps I have a still greater fault to atone for. 
I need not indeed acquaint you with it; but had rather 

intitle myself by my ingenuousness to your forgiveness,
than wish to conceal any-thing from you in any article
of this high importance, whether you grant it me or
not. I own then, that when I last departed from
your angry presence, I directly went to Miss Grandison,
and on my knees implored her hand. I presumed
that an alliance with me was not a disgraceful one; 
and assured her, that my estate should work itself
clear without any expectation from you; as it will, I
hope, in a few years, by good management, to which
I was sure she would contribute. But she refused me,
and resolved to await the good pleasure of her father; 
yet giving me, I must honestly add, condescending
hopes of her favour, could your consent be obtained. 
Thus is the important affair circumstanced. 
I never will marry any other woman, while there
is the least shadow of hope, that she can be mine. 
The conversation of the best of young men, your
son, for two months, in Italy, and one before that in
some of the German courts, has made me ambitious
of following such an example in every duty of life:
And if I might obtain, by your favour, so dear a
wife, and so worthy a brother, as well as so amiable
a sister as Miss Charlotte, the happiest man in the
world would then be, 
Sir,
Your obliged and faithful servant,
L. 

Yet my father, said Lady L. called it an artful letter; 
and observed, that Lord L. was very sure of me,
or he had not offer'd to make a proposal to me, that
deserved not to be excused. You were aiming at
prudence, girl, in your refusal, I see that, said my father. 
You had no reason to doubt but Lord L. would
hereafter like you the better for declining marriage in
that clandestine manner, because the refusal would 

give him an opportunity to make things more convenient
to himself. One half of a woman's virtue is
pride, continued he [I hope not, truly, said Lady L.]; 
the other half, policy. If they were sure the man would
not think the worse of them for it, they would not
wait a second question. Had you had an independent
fortune, Caroline, what wou'd you have done? —But
go; you are a weak, and yet a cunning girl. Cunning
is the wisdom of women. Womens weakness
is man's strength. I am sorry that my daughters are
not compounded of less brittle materials. I wonder
that any man who knows the sex, marries. 
Thus spoke the rakish, the keeping father, Lucy,
endeavouring to justify his private vices by general reflexions
on the sex. And thus are wickedness and
libertinism called a knowlege of the world, a knowlege
of human nature. Swift, for often painting a
dunghil, and for his abominable Yahoe story, was
complimented with this knowlege: But I hope, that
the character of human nature, the character of
creatures made in the image of the Deity, is not to
be taken from the overflowings of such dirty imaginations. 
What company, my dear, must these men be supposed
to have generally kept? How are we authorised
to wish (only that good is often produced out of evil,
as is instanced in two such daughters, and such a son)
that a man of this cast had never had the honour to
call a Lady Grandison by his name! And yet Sir
Thomas's vices called forth, if they did not establish,
her virtues. What shall we say? 

 Whatever is, is in its causes just;
—But purblind man
Sees but a part o' th' chain, the nearest link;
His eyes not carrying to that equal beam,
That poises all above.

Dryd.

I thought, my Lucy, that the conversation I have
attempted to give, wou'd not, tho' long, appear tedious
to you; being upon a new subject, the behaviour
of a free-liver of a father to his grown-up
daughters, when they came to have expectations upon
him, which he was not disposed to answer; and
the rather, as it might serve to strengthen us, who
have had in our family none but good men (tho' we
have neighbours of a different character, who have
wanted to be acquainted with us) in our resolution to
reject the suits of libertine men by a stronger motive
even than for our own sakes: And I therefore was glad
of the opportunity of procuring it for you, and for our
Nancy, now her recover'd health will allow her to
look abroad more than she had of late been used to
do. I am sure, my grandmamma, and my aunt Selby,
will be pleased with it; because it will be a good
supplement to the lessons they have constantly inculcated
upon us, against that narrow-hearted race of
men, who live only for the gratification of their own
lawless appetites, and consider all the rest of the world
as made for themselves, the worst and most noxious
reptiles in it. 

