


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Thursday, April 13. 
We played at cards last night till supper-time. 
When that was over, every one sought to engage
Sir Charles in discourse. I will give you some
particulars of our conversation, as I did of one before. 
Lord W. began it with a complaint of the insolence
and profligateness of servants. What he said, was
only answered by Sir Charles, with the word Example,
example, my good Lord, repeated. 
You, Sir Charles, replied my Lord, may indeed 

insist upon the force of example; for I cannot but observe,
that all those of yours, whom I have seen, are
intitled to regard. They have the looks of men at
ease, and of men grateful for that ease: They know
their duty, and need not a reminding look. A servant
of yours, Sir Charles, looks as if he would one day
make a figure as a master. How do you manage it? 
Perhaps I have been peculiarly fortunate in worthy
servants. There is nothing in my management deserving
the attention of this company. 
I am going to begin the world anew, nephew. Hitherto,
servants have been a continual plague to me. 
I must know how you treat them. 
I treat them, my Lord, as necessary parts of my
family. I have no secrets, the keeping or disclosing
of which might give them self-importance. I endeavour
to set them no bad example. I am never angry
with them but for wilful faults: If those are not habitual,
I shame them into amendment, by gentle expostulation,
and forgiveness. If they are not capable
of a generous shame, and the faults grow habitual, I
part with them; but with such kindness, as makes
their fellow-servants blame them, and take warning. 
I am fond of seeking occasions to praise them: And
even when they mistake, if it be with a good intention,
they have my approbation of the intention, and
my endeavours to set them right as to the act. Sobriety
is an indispensable qualification for my service; 
and for the rest, if we receive them not quite good, we
make them better than they were before. Generally
speaking, a master may make a servant what he
pleases. Servants judge by example, rather than precept,
and almost always by their seelings. One thing
more permit me to add, I always insist upon my servants
being kind and compassionate to one another. 
A compassionate heart cannot habitually be an unjust
one. And thus do I make their good-nature contribute
to my security as well as quiet. 

My Lord was greatly pleased with what his nephew
said. 
Upon some occasion, Lady G. reflected upon a
Lady for prudery; and was going on, when Sir Charles,
interrupting her, said, Take care, Lady G. —You,
Ladies, take care; for I am afraid, that Modesty,
under this name, will become ignominious, and be
banished the hearts, at least the behaviour and conversation,
of all those whose fortunes or inclinations carry
them often to places of public resort. 
Talk of places of public resort! said Lord L.; It is
vexatious to observe at such, how men of real merit
are neglected by the fine Ladies of the age, while
every distinction is shewn to fops and foplings. 
But, who, my Lord, said Sir Charles, are those
women? Are they not generally of a class with those
men? Flippant women love empty men, because they
cannot reproach them with a superiority of understanding,
but keep their folly in countenance. They
are afraid of a wise man: But I would by no means
have such a one turn fool to please them: For they
will despise the wise man's folly more than the silly
man's, and with reason; because being uncharacteristic,
it must sit more aukwardly upon him than the
others can do. 
Yet wisdom itself, and the truest wisdom, goodness,
said Mrs. Reeves, is sometimes thought to sit ungracefully,
when it is uncharacteristic, not to the man, but
to the times. She then named a person who was
branded as an hypocrite, for performing all his duties
publicly. 
He will be worse spoken of, if he declines doing
so, said Dr. Bartlett. His enemies will add the charge
of cowardice; and not acquit him of the other. 
Lady Gertrude being withdrawn, it was mentioned
as a wonder, that so agreeable a woman, as
she must have been in her youth, and still was for her
years, should remain single. Lord G. said, that she 

had had many offers: And once, before she was
twenty, had like to have stolen a wedding: But her
fears, he said, since that, had kept her single. 
The longer, said Sir Charles, a woman remains
unmarried, the more apprehensive she will be of entering
into the state. At seventeen or eighteen a girl
will plunge into it, sometimes without either fear or
wit; at twenty she will begin to think; at twenty-four
will weigh and discriminate; at twenty-eight will
be afraid of venturing; at thirty will turn about, and
look down the hill she has ascended; and, as occasions
offer, and instances are given, will sometimes repent,
sometimes rejoice, that she has gained that summit
sola. 
Indeed, said Mrs. Reeves, I believe in England
many a poor girl goes up the hill with a companion
she would little care for, if the state of a single woman
were not here so peculiarly unprovided and helpless:
For girls of slender fortunes, if they have been
genteelly brought up, how can they, when family-connexions
are dissolved, support themselves? A man
can rise in a profession, and if he acquires wealth in
a trade, can get above it, and be respected. A woman
is looked upon as demeaning herself, if she gains
a maintenance by her needle, or by domestic attendance
on a superior; and without them where has she
a retreat? 
You speak, good Mrs. Reeves, said Sir Charles, as
if you would join with Dr. Bartlett and me in wishing
the establishment of a scheme we have often talked
over, tho' the name of it would make many a Lady
start. We want to see established in every county,
Protestant Nunneries; in which single women of small
or no fortunes might live with all manner of freedom,
under such regulations as it would be a disgrace
for a modest or good woman not to comply with,
were she absolutely on her own hands; and to be allowed
to quit it whenever they pleased. 

Well, brother, said Lady G. and why could you
not have got all this settled a fortnight ago (you that
can carry every point) and have made poor me a Lady
Abbess? 
You are still better provided for, my sister: But let
the Doctor and me proceed with our scheme. The
governesses or matrons of the society I would have
to be women of family, of unblameable characters
from infancy, and noted equally for their prudence,
good-nature, and gentleness of manners. The attendants,
for the slighter services, should be the hopeful
female children of the honest industrious poor. 
Do you not, Ladies, imagine, said Dr. Bartlett, that
such a society as this, all women of unblemished reputation,
employing themselves as each (consulting
her own genius) at her admission, shall undertake to
employ herself, and supported genteelly, some at more,
some at less expence to the foundation, according
to their circumstances; might become a national good; 
and particularly a seminary for good wives, and the
institution a stand for virtue, in an age given up to
luxury, extravagance, and amusements little less than
riotous? 
How could it be supported? said Lord W. 
Many of the persons, of which each community
would consist, would be, I imagine, replied Sir Charles,
no expence to it at all; as numbers of young women,
joining their small fortunes, might be able, in such a
society, to maintain themselves genteelly on their own
income; tho' each, singly in the world, would be distressed. 
Besides, liberty might be given for wives,
in the absence of their husbands, in this maritime
country; and for widows, who, on the deaths of theirs,
might wish to retire from the noise and hurry of the
world, for three, six, or twelve months, more or less; 
to reside in this well-regulated society. And such persons,
we may suppose, would be glad, according to
their respective abilities, to be benefactresses to it. 

No doubt but it would have besides the countenance of
the well-disposed of both sexes; since every family in
Britain, in their connexions and relations, near or distant,
might be benefited by so reputable and useful
an institution: To say nothing of the works of the Ladies
in it, the profits of which perhaps will be thought
proper to be carried towards the support of a foundation
that so genteelly supports them. Yet I would
have a number of hours in each day, for the encouragement
of industry, that should be called their own; 
and what was produced in them, to be solely appropriated
to their own use. 
A truly worthy divine, at the appointment of the
Bishop of the diocese, to direct and animate the devotion
of such a society, and to guard it from that superstition
and enthusiasm which soars to wild heights in
almost all Nunneries, would confirm it a biessing to
the kingdom. 
I have another scheme, my Lord, proceeded Sir
Charles—An Hospital for Female Penitents; for such
unhappy women, as having been once drawn in, and
betrayed by the perfidy of men, find themselves, by
the cruelty of the world, and principally by that of
their own Sex, unable to recover the path of virtue,
when perhaps (convinced of the wickedness of the
men in whose honour they confided) they would willingly
make their first departure from it the last. 
These, continued he, are the poor creatures who
are eminently intitled to our pity, tho' they seldom
meet with it. Good-nature, and Credulity the child
of good-nature, are generally, as I have the charity to
believe, rather than viciousness, the foundation of their
crime. Those men who pretend they would not be
the first destroyers of a woman's innocence, look upon
these as fair prize. But, what a wretch is he, who
seeing a poor creature exposed on the summit of a
dangerous precipice, and unable, without an assisting
hand, to find her way down, would rather push 

her into the gulph below, than convey her down in
safety? 
Speaking of the force put upon a daughter's inclinations,
in wedlock: Tyranny and ingratitude, said Sir
Charles, from a man beloved, will be more supportable
to a woman of strong passions, than even kindness
from a man she loves not: Shall not parents then, who
hope to see their children happy, avoid compelling
them to give their hands to a man who has no share
in their hearts? 
But would you allow young Ladies to be their own
choosers, Sir Charles? said Mr. Reeves. 
Daughters, replied he, who are earnest to choose for
themselves, should be doubly careful that prudence justifies
their choice. Every widow who marries imprudently
(and very many there are who do) furnishes a
strong argument in favour of a parent's authority over
a maiden daughter. A designing man looks out for a
woman who has an independent fortune, and has no
questions to ask. He seems assured of finding indiscretion
and rashness in such a one, to befriend him. 
But ought not she to think herself affronted, and resolve
to disappoint him? 
But how, said Lady G. shall a young creature be
able to judge—. 
By his application to her, rather than to her natural
friends and relations; by his endeavouring to alienate
her affections from them; by wishing her to favour
private and clandestine meetings (conscious that his
pretensions will not stand discussion) by the inequality
of his fortune to hers: And has not our excellent Miss
Byron, in the Letters to her Lucy (bowing to me)
which she has had the goodness to allow us to read,
helped us to a criterion! ‘Men in their addresses to
young women, she very happily observes, forget not
to set forward the advantages by which they are distinguished,
whether hereditary or acquired; while
Love, Love, is all the cry of him who has no other
to boast of.’ 

And by that means, said Lady Gertrude, setting
the silly creature at variance with all her friends,
he makes her fight his battles for him; and become
herself the cat's paw to help him to the ready-roasted
chesnuts. 
But, dear brother, said Lady G. do you think Love
is such a stay'd deliberate passion, as to allow a young
creature to take time to ponder and weigh all the merits
of the cause? 
Love at first sight, answered Sir Charles, must indicate
a mind prepared for impression, and a sudden
gust of passion, and that of the least noble kind; since
there could be no opportunity of knowing the merit of
the object. What woman would have herself supposed
capable of such a tindery fit? In a man, it is an
indelicate paroxysm: But in a woman, who expects
protection and instruction from a man, much more so. 
Love, at first, may be only fancy. Such a young Love
may be easily given up, and ought, to a parent's judgment. 
Nor is the conquest so difficult as some young
creatures think it. One thing, my good Emily, let
me say to you, as a rule of some consequence in the
world you are just entering into—Young persons, on
arduous occasions, especially in Love-cases, should not
presume to advise young persons; because they seldom
can divest themselves of passion, partiality, or prejudice; 
that is, indeed, of youth; and forbear to mix their
own concerns and byasses with the question referred to
them. It should not be put from young friend to young
friend, What would you do in such a case? but, What
ought to be done? 
How the dear girl blush'd, and how pleased she
looked, to be particularly addressed by her guardian! 
Lady Gertrude spoke of a certain father, who for
interested views obliged his daughter to marry at fifteen,
when she was not only indifferent to the man, but had
formed no right notions of the state. 
And are they not unhappy? ask'd Sir Charles. 

They are, reply'd she. 
I knew such an instance, returned he. The Lady
was handsome, and had her full share of vanity. She
believed every man who said civil things to her, was
in love with her; and had she been single, that he
would have made his addresses to her. She supposed,
that she might have had this great man, or that, had
she not been precipitated: And this brought her to
slight the man who had, as she concluded, deprived
her of better offers. They were unhappy to the end
of their lives. Had the Lady lived single long enough
to find out the difference between compliment and
sincerity, and that the man who flattered her vanity,
meant no more than to take advantage of her folly,
she would have thought herself not unhappy with the
very man with whom she was so dissatisfied. 
Lady L. speaking afterwards of a certain nobleman,
who is continually railing against matrimony, and who
makes a very indifferent husband to an obliging wife; 
I have known more men than one, said Sir Charles,
inveigh against matrimony, when the invective would
have proceeded with a much better grace from their
wives lips than from theirs. But let us enquire, would
this complainer have been, or deserved to be, happier
in any state, than he now is? 
A state of suffering, said Lady L. had probably
humbled the spirit of the poor wives into perfect meekness
and patience. 
You observe rightly, replied Sir Charles: And
surely a most kind disposition of Providence it is, that
adversity, so painful in itself, should conduce so peculiarly
to the improvement of the human mind. It
teaches modesty, humility, and compassion. 
You speak feelingly brother, said Lady L. with a
sigh. Do you think, Lucy, nobody sighed but she? 
I do, said he. I speak with a sense of gratitude:
I am naturally of an imperious spirit: But I have
reaped advantages, from the early stroke of a mother's 

death. Being for years, against my wishes,
obliged to submit to a kind of exile from my native
country, which I considered as a heavy evil, tho' I
thought it my duty to acquiesce, I was determined,
as much as my capacity would allow, to make my
advantage of the compulsion, by qualifying myself to
do credit, rather than discredit, to my father, my
friends, and my country. And, let me add, that if I
have in any tolerable manner succeeded, I owe much
to the example and precepts of my dear Dr. Bartlett. 
The doctor blushed and bowed, and was going to
disclaim the merit which his patron had ascribed to
him; but Sir Charles confirmed it in still stronger
terms: You, my dear Dr. Bartlett, said he, as I have
told Miss Byron, was a second conscience to me in
my earlier youth: Your precepts, your excellent life,
your pure manners, your sweetness of temper, could
not but open and enlarge my mind. The soil, I hope
I may say, was not barren; but you, my dear paternal
friend, was the cultivator: I shall ever acknowlege
it—And he bowed to the good man; who was covered
with modest confusion, and could not look up. 
And think you, Lucy, that this acknowlegement
lessened the excellent man with any one present? No! 
It raised him in every eye: And I was the more
pleased with it, as it helped me to account for that deep
observation, which otherwise one should have been at
a loss to account for, in so young a man. And yet I
am convinced, that there is hardly a greater difference
in intellect between angel and man, than there is between
man and man. 

