



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Sat. Evening. 
I had a charming Airing. No return of my malady. 
My heart perfectly easy, how could my
stomach be otherwise? 
But when I came home, I found that my sweet
soul had been alarmed by a new incident—The enquiry
after us both, in a very suspicious manner, and
that by description of our persons, and not by names,
by a servant in a blue livery turn'd up and trimm'd
with yellow. 

Dorcas was called to him, as the upper servant; 
and she refusing to answer any of the fellow's questions,
unless he told his business, and from whom
he came, the fellow (as short as she) said, That if
she would not answer him, perhaps she might answer
somebody else; and went away out of humour. 
Dorcas hurried up to her Lady, and alarmed her
not only with the fact, but with her own conjectures; 
adding, that he was an ill-looking fellow, and she
was sure could come for no good. 
The livery and the features of the servant were
particularly enquired after, and as particularly described
—Lord bless her! no end of her alarms, she
thought! And then bid her apprehensions anticipate
every evil that could happen. 
She wished Mr. Lovelace would come in. 
Mr. Lovelace came in soon after; all lively, grateful,
full of hopes, of duty, of love, to thank his
Charmer, and to congratulate with her upon the cure
she had performed. And then she told the Story, with
all its circumstances; and Dorcas, to point her Lady's
fears, told us, that the servant was a sun-burnt fellow,
and looked as if he had been at Sea. 
He was then, no doubt, Captain Singleton's servant,
and the next news she should hear was, that
the house was surrounded by a whole Ship's crew; 
the vessel lying no farther off, as she understood, than
Rotherhith. 
Impossible, I said. Such an attempt would not be
ushered in by such a manner of enquiry. And why
may it not rather be a servant of your Cousin Morden,
with notice of his arrival, and of his design to
attend you? 
This surmize delighted her. Her apprehensions
went off, and she was at leisure to congratulate me
upon my sudden recovery; which she did in the most
obliging manner. 
But we had not sat long together, when Dorcas 

again came fluttering up to tell us, that the footman,
the very footman, was again at the door, and enquired,
whether Mr. Lovelace and his Lady, by name,
had not lodgings in this house? He asked, he told
Dorcas, for no harm: But his disavowing of harm,
was a demonstration with my apprehensive Fair-one,
that harm was intended. And as the fellow had not
been answered by Dorcas, I proposed to go down
to the Street-parlour, and hear what he had to
say. 
I see your causeless terror, my dearest life, said I,
and your impatience—Will you be pleased to walk
down—And without being observed (for he shall come
no farther than the Parlour-door) you may hear all
that passes? 
She consented. We went down. Dorcas bid the
man come forward. Well, friend, what is your
business with Mr. or Mrs. Lovelace? 
Bowing, scraping, I am sure you are the gentleman,
Sir. Why, Sir, my business is only to know
if your Honour be here, and to be spoken with; or
if you shall be here for any time? 
Whom came you from? 
From a gentleman who ordered me to say, if I
was made to tell, but not else, it was from a friend
of Mr. John Harlowe, Mrs. Lovelace's eldest
Uncle. 
The dear creature was ready to sink upon this. 
It was but of late that she had provided herself with
Salts. She pulled them out. 
Do you know any-thing of Colonel Morden,
friend? said I. 
No; I never heard of his name. 
Of Captain Singleton? 
No, Sir. But the gentleman, my master, is a
Captain too. 
What is his name? 
I don't know if I should tell. 

There can be no harm in telling the gentleman's
name, if you come upon a good account. 
That I do; for my master told me so; and there
is not an honester gentleman on the face of God's
yearth. —His name is Captain Tomlinson, Sir. 
I don't know such a one. 
I believe not, Sir. He was pleased to say, He
don't know your Honour, Sir; but I heard him say,
as how he should not be an unwelcome visitor to you
for all that. 
Do you know such a man as Captain Tomlinson,
my dearest life [Aside] your Uncle's friend? 
No; but my Uncle may have acquaintance, no
doubt, that I don't know. —But I hope [trembling]
this is not a trick. 
Well, friend, if your master has any-thing to say
to Mr. Lovelace, you may tell him, that Mr. Lovelace
is here; and will see him whenever he pleases. 
The dear creature looked as if afraid that my engagement
was too prompt for my own safety; and
away went the fellow—I wondering, that she might
not wonder, that this Captain Tomlinson, whoever
he were, came not himself, or sent not a Letter the
second time, when he had reason to suppose that I
might be here. 
Mean time, for fear that this should be a contrivance
of James Harlowe, who, I said, loved plotting,
though he had not a head turned for it, I gave
some precautionary directions to the servants, and
the women, whom, for the greater parade, I assembled
before us: And my Beloved was resolved
not to stir abroad till she saw the issue of this odd
affair. 
And here must I close, though in so great a
puzzle. 
Only let me add, that poor Belton wants thee; 
for I dare not stir for my life. 
Mowbray and Tourville skulk about like vagabonds, 

without heads, without hands, without souls; 
having neither You nor Me to conduct them. They
tell me, they shall rust beyond the power of oil or
action to brighten them up, or give them motion. 
How goes it with thy Uncle? 