


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 


Bologna, July 8-19.
My heart is unusually sad. How imperfect is that
happiness which we cannot enjoy without giving
pain to another! The Count of Belvedere has
been made acquainted with the hopeful turn in the
mind of Clementina; and that, in all probability, she
will be given as a reward to the man to whose friendly
cares for her, and her brother, the whole family attribute
the happy alteration; and late last night he gave
me notice of his arrival in this city, and of his intention
to pay me an early visit this morning. 
I have just now had a message from Clementina by
Camilla, with a request, that I will suspend my intended
visit till the afternoon. 
I asked Camilla, If she knew the reason of this; 
and of her being so early dispatched with it? She said,
It was her young Lady's own order, without consulting
any-body. The Marchioness, said she, yesterday
in the afternoon, told her, that every-thing was now
absolutely determined upon between them and me; 
and she would be mistress of her own wishes; and
that I should be allowed to attend her in the morning
at breakfast, to know what those were. Her young
Lady, on this happy communication (so Camilla
called it) threw herself at her mother's feet, and in a
very graceful manner acknowleged her father's and
her indulgence to her; and from that hour her temper
took a turn different from what it had been before. 
For, ever since, said Camilla, she has been silent, solemn,
and reserved; yet busy at her pen, transcribing 

fair from her pocket-book what she had written in it. 
To-morrow, Camilla! —To-morrow! said she, breaking
once her solemn silence, her complexion varying,
will be a day indeed! O that it were come! and yet
I dread it. How shall I, face to face, converse with
this exalted man! What shall I do to appear as great
as He? His goodness fires me with emulation! —O
that to-morrow were come, and gone! 
This was over night. I believe, proceeded Camilla,
that the dear Lady is drawing up some conditions
of her own for you to sign: But, Sir, I dare say,
by the hint she has thrown out, they will be generous
ones, and what will have more of fancy than hardship
in them. 
I had much ado to prevail upon her, continued her
faithful woman, to go to rest at midnight: Yet at
four in the morning she arose, and went to her pen
and ink; and about six commanded me to call Laura
to attend her, while I went to you with the message
I have brought. I expostulated with her, and begged
she would delay it till the Marchioness arose; but she
began to be impatient: I have reason in my request,
Camilla, said she. I must not be contradicted, or expostulated
with: My head will not bear opposition, at
this time. Is it a slight thing for such a poor creature
as I have been, and am, to be put out of her course? 
Am I not to have a meeting with the Chevalier Grandison,
on the most important act of my life? My
mamma tells me, that I am to be now mistress of my
own will; Don't you, Camilla, seek to controul me. 
I shall not be prepared enough for the subject he will
possibly talk to me upon, till the afternoon: And if I
know he is in the house with an expectation of seeing
me, I shall want the presence of mind I am struggling
to obtain. 
So, Sir, concluded Camilla, I have performed my
duty. The dear Lady, I see, will be in too much
confusion, if the important subject be not begun with 

precaution: But who shall instruct you in such delicate
points as these? One thing, however, permit me,
Sir, to observe: I have often known young Ladies
go on courageously with a Lover, while the end in
view has been distant, or there have been difficulties
to encounter with; but when these difficulties are
overcome, and they have ascended the hill they toiled
up, they have turned round, and looked about them,
with fear as strong as their hopes. 
What the conditions may be— 
But the Count of Belvedere is come. 
Ten o'clock.
The Count accosted me, in return for the kindest
reception I could give him, with an air of coldness and
displeasure. I was surprised at a behaviour so different
from his usual politeness, and the kindness he had ever
shewn me. I took notice to him of it. He asked
me, If I would tell him faithfully what my present
situation was with Lady Clementina? 
I will, my Lord, if I tell you any-thing of it:
But the temper of mind you seem to be in, may not,
perhaps, for your own sake, any more than mine,
make it prudent for me to comply with your expectations. 
You need not give me any other answer, replied he. 
You seem to be sure of the Lady: But she must not,
she shall not, be yours, while I am living. 
It is not for me, my Lord, who have met with
many amazing turns and incidents which I have not
either invited or provoked, to be surprised at any thing:
But if your Lordship has any expectations,
any demands, to make on this subject, it must be from
the family of the Marchese della Porretta, and not
from me. 
Do you think, Sir, that I feel not the sting of this
reference? And yet all the family, but one, are in my
interest in their hearts; every consideration is on my
side; not one, but the plausibility of your generosity, 

and the speciousness of your person and manners, on
yours. 
A man, my Lord, should not be reproached for
qualities, upon which, whether he has them or not,
he values not himself. But, let me ask you, Were
my pretensions out of the question, has your Lordship
any hope of an interest in the affections of Lady Clementina? 
While she is unmarried, I may hope. Had you
not come over to us, I make no doubt but I might, in
time, have called her mine. You cannot but know,
that her absence of mind was no obstacle with me. 
I am wholly satisfied in my own conduct, replied I:
That, my Lord, is a great point with me: I am not
accountable for it to any man on earth. Yet, if you
have any doubts about it, propose them. I have a
high opinion of the Count of Belvedere, and wish to
have him think well of me. 
Tell me, Chevalier, what your present situation is
with Lady Clementina? What is concluded upon between
the family and you? And whether Clementina
herself has declared for you? 
She has not yet declared herself to me. I repeat,
that I have a value for the Count of Belvedere, and
will therefore acquaint him with more than he has
reason to expect from the humour which seems to
have governed him in this visit. —I am to attend her
this afternoon, by appointment: Her family and I
understand one another. I have been willing to consider
the natural impulses of a spirit so pure, tho'
disturbed, as the finger of Providence. I have hitherto
been absolutely passive: In honour I cannot
now be so. This afternoon, my Lord— 
‘This afternoon,’ trembling; What! this afternoon!— 
Will my destiny, as to Lady Clementina, be determined. 
I am distracted. If her friends are determined in
your favour, it is from necessity, rather than choice: 

But if the Lady is left to her own determination, I
am a lost man. 
You have given a reason, my Lord, for your acquiescence,
should Lady Clementina determine in my
favour—But it cannot be a happy circumstance for
me, if, as you hint, I am to enter into the family of
Porretta as an unwelcome relation to any of them; 
and still less, if my good fortune shall make a man,
justly valued by all who know him, unhappy. 
And are you, this afternoon, Chevalier, to see Clementina
for the purpose you intimate? This very
afternoon? —And are you then to change your passive
conduct towards her? And will you court, will you
urge her to consent to be yours? Religion, Country— 
Let me tell you, Sir—I must take resolutions. With
infinite regret I tell you, that I must. You will not
refuse to meet me. The consent is not yet given:
You shall not rob Italy of such a prize. Favour me,
Sir, this moment, without the city-gates. 
Unhappy man! How much I pity you! You know
my principles. It is hard, acting as I have done, to
be thus invited. Acquaint yourself with my whole
conduct in this affair, from the Bishop, from Father
Marescotti, from the General himself, so much always
your friend, and once so little mine. What has influenced
them (so much as you seem to think against
their inclinations) cannot want its influence upon a
mind so noble as that of the Count of Belvedere. 
But whatever be your resolutions upon the enquiries I
wish you to make, I tell you before-hand, that I never
will meet you but as my friend. 
He turned from me with emotion: He walked about
the room as a man irresolute; and at last, with a wildness
in his air, approached me. —I will go this instant,
said he, to the family: I will see Father Marescotti,
and the Bishop; and I will let them know my despair. 
And if I cannot have hope given me—O Chevalier!
once more I say, that Lady Clementina shall not be
yours, while I live. 

He looked round him, as if he would not have anybody
hear what he was going to say, but me, tho' no
one was near; and whispering, It is better, said he,
to die by your hand, than—He stopt; and in disorder
hurried from me; and was out of sight when I got
down to the door. 
The Count, when he came up to me, left his valet
below; who told Saunders, that Lady Sforza had
made his Lord a visit at Parma; and by something she
related to him, had stimulated him to make this to me. 
He added, that he was very apprehensive of the humour
he came in, and which he had held ever since
he saw Lady Sforza. 
How, my dear Dr. Bartlett, do the rash escape as
they do; when I, who endeavour to avoid embarrassments,
and am not ready either to give or take
offence, am hardly able to extricate myself from one
difficulty, but I find myself involved in another? 
What cannot a woman do, when she resolves to make
mischief among friends? Lady Sforza is a high-spirited
and contriving woman. It is not for her interest
that Clementina should marry at all: But yet,
as the Count of Belvedere is a cool, a dispassionate
man, and knows the views of that Lady, I cannot
but wonder what those arts must be, by which she has
been able to excite, in so calm a breast, a flame so
vehement. 
I am now hastening to the palace of Porretta; my
heart not a little affected with the apprehensions given
me by Camilla's account of her young Lady's solemn,
yet active turn, on the expected visit. For does it not
indicate an imagination too much raised for the occasion
(important as that is); and that her disorder is far
from subsiding? 

