


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 


Bologna, May 11–22. 
The Bishop set out yesterday for Urbino, in order
to inform himself of his sister's state of health,
and perhaps to qualify the General to meet me with
temper and politeness. Were I sure the good prelate
thought this necessary, my pride would be excited. 
The Count of Belvedere arrived here yesterday. 
He made it his first business to see me. He acquainted
me, but in confidence, that proposals of marriage
with Lady Laurana had actually been made him: To
which he had returned answer, that his heart, however
hopelesly, was engaged; and that he never could
think of any other woman than Lady Clementina. 
He made no scruple, he said, of returning so short
an answer, because he had been apprised of the cruelty
with which one of the noblest young women in
Italy had been treated, by the proposers; and with
their motives for it. 
You see, Chevalier, said he, that I am open and
unreserved to you. You will oblige me, if you will
let me know what it is you propose to your-self in the
present situation? —But, first, I should be glad to hear
from your own mouth, what passed between you and
Clementina, and the family, before you quitted Italy
the last time. I have had their account. 
I gave him a very faithful relation of it. He was
pleased with it. Exactly as it has been represented to
me! said he. Were Clementina and you of one religion,
there could have been no hope for any other
man. I adore her for her piety, and for her attachment
to hers; and am not so narrow-minded a man,
but I can admire you for yours. As her malady is accidental,
I never would think of any other woman, 

could I flatter myself that she would not, if restored,
be unhappy with me. —But now tell me; I am earnest
to know; Are you come over to us (I know you are
invited) with an expectation to call her yours, in case
of her recovery? 
I answered him as I had done the Marchioness. 
He seemed as much pleased with me as I am with
him. He is gone back to Parma. 
Friday, May 12–23. 
The Bishop is returned. Lady Clementina has
been very ill: A fever. How has she been hurried
about! He tells me, that the General and his Lady,
and also the Conte della Porretta, acknowlege themselves
and their whole family obliged to me for the
trouble I have been at to serve their Jeronymo. 
The fever having left Lady Clementina, she will
set out in a day or two. The Count and Signor
Sebastiano, as well as the General and his Lady,
will attend her. I am impatient to see her. Yet
how greatly will the fight of her afflict me! The Bishop
says, she is the picture of silent woe: Yet, tho'
greatly emaciated, looks herself, were his words. 
They told her, that Jeronymo was better than he had
been. Your dear Jeronymo, said the General to her. 
The sweet echo repeated—Jeronymo—and was again
silent. 
They afterwards proposed to name me to her. 
They did. She looked quick about her, as if for
Somebody. Laura, her maid, was occasionally called
upon. She started, and threw her arms about Camilla,
as terrified; looking wildly. Camilla doubts
not, but by the name Laura, she apprehended the savage
Laurana to be at hand. 
How must she have suffered from her barbarity! — 
Sweet Innocent! She, who even in her resveries
thought not but of good to the Soul of the man whom
she honoured with her regard—She, who bore offence 

without resentment; and by meekness only sought to
calm the violence for which she had not given the least
cause! 
But when Camilla and she had retired, she spoke to
her. The Bishop gave me the following dialogue between
them, as he had it from Camilla: 
Did they not name to me the Chevalier Grandison? 
said she. 
They did, madam. 
See! see! said she, before I name him again, if
my cruel cousin hearken not at the door. 
Your cruel cousin, madam, is at many miles distance. 
She may hear what I say, for all that. 
My dear Lady Clementina, she cannot hear. She
shall never more come near you. 
So you say. 
Did I ever deceive you, madam? 
I can't remember: My memory is gone; quite
gone, Camilla. 
She then looked earnestly at Camilla, and screamed. 
What ails you, my dearest young Lady? 
Recovering herself—Ah, my own Camilla! It is
you. I thought, by the cast of your eye, you were
become Laurana. —Do not, do not give me such another
look! 
Camilla was not sensible of any particularity in her
looks. 
Here you have me again upon a journey, Camilla:
But how do I know that I am not to be carried
to my cruel cousin? 
You are really going to your father's palace at Bologna,
madam. 
Is my mother there? 
She is. 
Who else? 
The Chevalier, madam. 
What Chevalier? 

Grandison. 
Impossible! Is he not in proud England? 
He is come over, madam. 
What for? 
With a skilful English surgeon, in hopes to cure
Signor Jeronymo— 
Poor Jeronymo! 
And to pay his compliments to you, madam. 
Flatterer! How many hundred times have I been
told so? 
Should you wish to see him, madam? 
See whom? 
The Chevalier Grandison. 
Once I should; and sighed. 
And not now, madam? 
No: I have lost all I had to say to him. Yet I
wish I were allowed to go to that England. We poor
women are not suffered to go any-whither; while
men— 
There she stopt; and Camilla could not make her
say any more. 
The Bishop was fond of repeating these particulars; 
as she had not, for some time, talked so much, and so
sensibly. 
Friday Evening. 
I pass more than half my time with Signor Jeronymo; 
but (that I may not fatigue his spirits) at different
hours of the day. The Italian surgeons and
Mr. Lowther happily agree in all their measures:
They applaud him when his back is turned; and he
speaks well of them in their absence. This mutual
return of good offices, which they hear of, unites
them. The patient declares, that he had not for
months been so easy as now. Every-body attributes
a great deal to his heart's being revived by my frequent
visits. To-morrow it is proposed to make an
opening below the most difficu't wound. Mr. Lowther
says, he will not flatter us, till be sees the sucess
of this operation. 

The Marquis and his Lady are inexpressibly obliging
to me. I had yesterday a visit from both, on
an indisposition that confined me to my chamber; 
occasioned, I believe, by a hurry of spirits; by fatigue; 
by my apprehensions for Jeronymo; my concern
for Clementina; and by my too great anxiety
for the dear friends I had so lately left in England. 
You know, Dr. Bartlett, that I have a heart too
susceptible for my own peace, tho' I endeavour to
conceal from others those painful sensibilities, which
they cannot relieve. The poor Olivia was ever to be
my disturbance. Miss Byron must be happy in the
rectitude of her own heart. I am ready to think,
that she will not be able to resist the warm instances
of the Countess of D. in favour of her son, who is
certainly one of the best young men among the nobility. 
She will be the happiest woman in the world,
as she is one of the most deserving, if she be as happy
as I wish her. 
Emily takes up a large portion of my thoughts. 
Our Beauchamp I know must be happy: So must
my Lord W.; my Sisters; and their Lords. —Why
then shall I not think myself so? God restore Jeronymo,
and his Sister, and I must, I will; for you,
my dear Dr. Bartlett, are so: And then I will subscribe
myself a partaker of the happiness of all my
friends; and particularly 
Your ever-affectionate
Grandison. 

