



My dear Father and Mother,
All my Fellow-servants have now some
Notion, that I am to go away; but can't
imagine for what. Mrs. Jervis tells them,
that my Father and Mother, growing in Years,
cannot live without me; and so I go home to
them, to help to comfort their old Age; but
they seem not to believe it. 
What they found it out by, was, the Butler
heard him say to me, as I pass'd by him,
in the Entry leading to the Hall, Who's that? 
Pamela, Sir, said I. Pamela! said he, how
long are you to stay here? —Only, please your 

Honour, said I, till I have done the Waistcoat; 
and it is almost finish'd. —You might, says he,
(very roughly indeed) have finish'd that long
enough ago, I should have thought. Indeed,
and please your Honour, said I, I have work'd
early and late upon it; there is a great deal of
Work in it. —Work in it! said he: You
mind your Pen more than your Needle; I don't
want such idle Sluts to stay in my House. 
He seem'd startled, when he saw the Butler,
as he enter'd the Hall, where Mr. Jonathan
stood. What do you here? said he. —The Butler
was as much confounded as I; for, never
having been tax'd so roughly, I could not help
crying sadly; and got out of both their ways
to Mrs. Jervis, and told my Complaint. This
Love, said she, is the D&wblank;l! in how many
strange Shapes does it make People shew themselves? 
And in some the farthest from their
Hearts. 
So one, and then another, has been since
whispering, Pray, Mrs. Jervis, are we to lose
Mrs. Pamela? as they always call me—What
has she done? And then she tells them as
above, about going home to you. 
She said afterwards to me, Well, Pamela,
you have made our Master, from the sweetest-temper'd
Gentleman in the World, one of the
most peevish. But you have it in your Power
to make him as sweet-temper'd as ever; tho'
I hope you'll never do it on his Terms. 
This was very good in Mrs. Jervis; but it
intimated, that she thought as ill of his Designs 

as I; and as she knew his Mind more than I,
it convinced me, that I ought to get away as fast
as I could. 
My Master came in, just now, to speak to
Mrs. Jervis about Houshold Matters, having
some Company to dine with him To-morrow; 
and I stood up, and having been crying, at his
Roughness in the Entry, I turn'd away my Face. 
You may well, said he, turn away your
cursed Face; I wish I had never seen it! — 
Mrs. Jervis, how long is she to be about this
Waistcoat? 
Sir, said I, if your Honour had pleased, I
would have taken it with me; and tho' it would
be now finish'd in a few Hours, I will do so still,
and remove this hated poor Pamela out of your
House and Sight for ever. 
Mrs. Jervis, said he, (not speaking to me)
I believe this little Slut has the Power of Witchcraft,
if ever there was a Witch; for she inchants
all that come near her. She makes
even you, who should know better what the
World is, think her an Angel of Light. 
I offer'd to go away; for I believ'd he
wanted me to ask to stay in my Place, for all
this his great Wrath; and he said, Stay here!
stay here, when I bid you! and snatch'd my
Hand. I trembled, and said, I will! I will!
for he hurt my Fingers, he grasped me so
hard. 
He seem'd to have a mind to say something
to me; but broke off abruptly, and said, Be-gone! 

And away I tripp'd, as fast as I could; 
and he and Mrs. Jervis had a deal of Talk, as
she told me; and among the rest, he expressed
himself vex'd to have spoken in Mr. Jonathan's
Hearing. 
Now you must know, that Mr. Jonathan,
our Butler, is a very grave good s.....ort of old
Man, with his Hair as white as Silver! and an
honest worthy Man he is. I was hurrying out
with a Flea in my Ear, as the Saying is; and,
going down Stairs into the Parlour, met him. 
He took hold of my Hand, (in a gentler manner
tho' than my Master) with both his; and he
said, Ah! sweet, sweet Mrs. Pamela! what is it
I heard but just now! —I am sorry at my
Heart; but I am sure I will sooner believe any
body in Fault than you. Thank you, Mr. Jonathan,
said I; but as you value your Place, don't
be seen speaking to such an one as me. I cry'd
too; and slipt away as fast as I could from him,
for his own sake, lest he should be seen to pity
me. 
And now I will give you an Instance how
much I am in Mr. Longman's Esteem also. 
I had lost my Pen some-how; and my Paper
being written out, I stepp'd to Mr. Longman's
our Steward's Office, to beg him to give
me a Pen or two, and a Sheet or two of
Paper. He said, Ay, that I will, my sweet
Maiden! And gave me Three Pens, some Wafers,
a Stick of Wax, and Twelve Sheets of
Paper; and coming from his Desk, where he
was writing, he said, Let me have a Word or 

two with you, my sweet little Mistress (for so
these Two good old Gentlemen often call me; 
for I believe they love me dearly): I hear bad
News; that we are going to lose you: I hope
it is not true? Yes, it is, Sir, said I; but I was
in Hopes it would not be known till I went
away. 
What a D&wblank;l, said he, ails our Master of
late! I never saw such an Alteration in any
Man in my Life! He is pleas'd with nobody,
as I see; and by what Mr. Jonathan tells me
just now, he was quite out of the way with you. 
What could you have done to him, tro'? Only
Mrs. Jervis is a very good Woman, or I should
have fear'd she had been your Enemy. 
No, said I, nothing like it. Mrs. Jervis is
a just good Woman, and, next to my Father
and Mother, the best Friend I have in the
World. —Well then, said he, it must be
worse. Shall I guess? You are too Pretty,
my sweet Mistress, and, may-be, too virtuous. 
Ah! have I not hit it? No, good Mr. Longman,
said I, don't think any thing amiss of my
Master; he is cross and angry with me,
that's true; but I have given Occasion for
it, may-be; and because I chuse to go to
my Father and Mother, rather than stay here,
may-hap, he thinks me ungrateful. But,
you know, Sir, said I, that a Father and Mother's
Comfort is the dearest thing to a good
Child that can be. Sweet Excellence! said he,
this becomes you; but I know the World and
Mankind too well; tho' I must hear, and see, 

and say nothing! And so a Blessing attend my
little Sweeting, where-ever you go! And away
went I, with a Court'sy and Thanks. 
Now this pleases one, my dear Father and
Mother, to be so belov'd—How much better,
by good Fame and Integrity, is it, to get every
one's good Word but one, than by pleasing that
one, to make every one else one's Enemy, and
be an execrable Creature besides! I am, &c. 

