



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Harlowe-Place, Jan. 13. 
How you oppress me, my dearest friend, with
your politeness! I cannot doubt your sincerity; 
but you should take care, that you give me not reason
from your kind partiality to call in question your judgment. 
You do not distinguish that I take many admirable
hints from you, and have the art to pass them
upon you for my own: For in all you do, in all you
say, nay, in your very looks (so animated!) you give
lessons to one who loves you and observes you as I
love and observe you, without knowing that you do— 
So, pray, my dear, be more sparing of your praise for
the future, lest after this confession we should suspect
that you secretly intend to praise yourself, while you
would be thought only to commend another. 
Our Family has indeed been strangely discomposed. 
—Discomposed!—It has been in tumults, ever since
the unhappy transaction; and I have borne all the
blame; yet should have had too much concern from
myself, had I been more justly spared by every one
else. 
For, whether it be owing to a faulty impatience,
having been too indulgently treated to be enured to
blame, or to the regret I have to hear those censured
on my account whom it is my duty to vindicate; I
have sometimes wished, that it had pleased God to
have taken me in my last fever, when I had everybody's
love and good opinion; but oftener that I had
never been distinguished by my Grandfather as I was: 
Since that distinction has estranged from me my Brother's
and Sister's affections; at least, has raised a jealousy
with regard to the apprehended favour of my
two Uncles, that now-and-then overshadows their
Love. 

My Brother being happily recovered of his fever,
and his wound in a hopeful way, altho' he has not yet
ventured abroad, I will be as particular as you desire
in the little history you demand of me. But Heaven
forbid that any-thing should ever happen which may
require it to be produced for the purpose you mention! 
I will begin, as you command, with Mr. Lovelace's
address to my Sister; and be as brief as possible. I will
recite facts only; and leave you to judge of the truth
of the report raised that the younger Sister has robbed
the elder. 
It was in pursuance of a conference between Lord
M. and my Uncle Antony, that Mr. Lovelace [my
Father and Mother not forbidding] paid his respects
to my Sister Arabella. My Brother was then in Scotland,
busying himself in viewing the condition of the
considerable Estate which was left him there by his
generous Godmother, together with one as considerable
in Yorkshire. I was also absent at my Dairy-house,
as it is called (a) , busied in the accounts relating
to the Estate which my Grandfather had the
goodness to devise to me; and which once a year are
left to my inspection, altho' I have given the whole
into my Father's power. 
My Sister made me a visit there the day after Mr.
Lovelace had been introduced; and seemed highly
pleased with the gentleman. His birth, his fortune
in possession, a clear 2000l. a year, as Lord M. had
assured my Uncle; presumptive heir to that Nobleman's
large Estate: His great expectations from Lady
Sarah Sadleir and Lady Betty Lawrance; who with
his Uncle interested themselves very warmly (he being
the last of his line) to see him married. 

‘So handsome a man! —O her beloved Clary!’ 
(for then she was ready to love me dearly, from the
overflowings of her good humour on his account!) 
‘He was but too handsome a man for her! —Were
she but as amiable as Somebody, there would be a
probability of holding his affections! —For he was
wild, she heard; very wild, very gay; loved intrigue
—But he was young; a man of sense: Would
see his error, could she but have patience with his
faults, if his faults were not cured by Marriage.’ 
Thus she ran on; and then wanted me ‘to see
the charming man,’ as she called him. —Again
concerned, ‘that she was not handsome enough
for him;’ With, ‘A sad thing, that the man should
have the advantage of the woman in that particular!’ 
—But then, stepping to the glass, she complimented
herself, ‘That she was very well: That there were
many women deemed passable who were inferior to
herself: That she was always thought comely; and
Comeliness, let her tell me, having not so much to
lose as Beauty had, would hold, when that would
evaporate or fly off: —Nay, for that matter’ [and
again she turned to the glass] ‘her features were not
irregular; her eyes not at all amiss.’ And I remember
they were more than usually brilliant at that time. — 
‘Nothing, in short, to be found fault with, tho'
nothing very engaging she doubted—Was there,
Clary?’ 
Excuse me, my dear, I never was thus particular
before; no, not to you. Nor would I now have written
thus freely of a Sister, but that she makes a merit
to my Brother of disowning that she ever liked him; 
as I shall mention hereafter: And then you will always
have me give you minute descriptions, nor suffer me
to pass by the air and manner in which things are spoken
that are to be taken notice of; rightly observing,
that air and manner often express more than the accompanying
words. 

I congratulated her upon her prospects. She received
my compliments with a great deal of self-complacency. 
She liked the gentleman still more at his next visit; 
and yet he made no particular address to her, altho'
an opportunity was given him for it. This was wondered
at, as my Uncle had introduced him into our
family declaredly as a visiter to my Sister. But as we
are ever ready to make excuses when in good humour
with ourselves for the perhaps not unwilful slights of
those whose approbation we wish to engage; so my
Sister found out a reason much to Mr. Lovelace's
advantage for his not improving the opportunity that
was given him. —It was bashfulness, truly, in him. 
[Bashfulness in Mr. Lovelace, my dear!] —Indeed,
gay and lively as he is, he has not the Look of an
impudent man. But I fansy, it is many, many years
ago since he was bashful. 
Thus, however, could my Sister make it out— 
‘Upon her word, she believed Mr. Lovelace deserved
not the bad character he had as to women. —He
was really, to her thinking, a modest man. He
would have spoken out, she believed; but once or
twice as he seemed to intend to do so, he was under
so agreeable a confusion! Such a profound respect
he seemed to shew her! A perfect reverence, she
thought: She loved dearly that a man in courtship
should shew a reverence to his mistress.’ —So
indeed we all do, I believe: And with reason; 
since, if I may judge from what I have seen in many
families, there is little enough of it shewn afterwards. 
—And she told my Aunt Hervey, that she would be
a little less upon the reserve next time he came: ‘She
was not one of those Flirts, not she, who would
give pain to a person that deserved to be well-treated; 
and the more pain for the greatness of
his value for her.’ —I wish she had not Somebody
whom I love in her eye. 

In his third visit, Bella governed herself by this kind
and considerate principle: So that, according to her
own account of the matter, the man might have spoken
out. —But he was still bashful: He was not able to
overcome this unseasonable reverence. So this visit
went off as the former. 
But now she began to be dissatisfied with him. She
compared his general character with This his particular
behaviour to her; and having never been courted
before, owned herself puzzled how to deal with so
odd a Lover. ‘What did the man mean, she wondered? 
Had not her Uncle brought him declaredly
as a Suiter to her? —It could not be bashfulness
(now she thought of it) since he might have opened
his mind to her Uncle, if he wanted courage to speak
directly to her. —Not that she cared much for the
man neither: But it was right, surely, that a woman
should be put out of doubt early as to a man's intentions
in such a case as This, from his own mouth. 
—But, truly, she had begun to think, that he was
more solicitous to cultivate her Mamma's good opinion,
than hers! —Every-body, she owned, admired
her Mother's conversation; but he was mistaken if
he thought respect to her Mother only would do
with her. And then, for his own sake, surely he
should put it into her power to be complaisant to
him, if he gave her reason to approve of him. 
This distant behaviour, she must take upon her to
say, was the more extraordinary, as he continued
his visits, and declared himself extremely desirous
to cultivate a friendship with the whole Family; 
and as he could have no doubt about her sense, if
she might take upon her to join her own with the
general opinion; he having taken great notice of,
and admired many of her good things as they fell
from her lips. Reserves were painful, she must
needs say, to open and free spirits, like hers: And
yet she must tell my Aunt’ (to whom all this was 

directed) ‘that she should never forget what she
owed to her Sex, and to herself, were Mr. Lovelace
as unexceptionable in his morals as in his figure,
and were he to urge his suit ever so warmly.’ 
I was not of her council. I was still absent. And
it was agreed upon between my Aunt Hervey and her,
that she was to be quite solemn and shy in his next
visit, if there were not a peculiarity in his address
to her. 
But my Sister it seems had not considered the matter
well. This was not the way, as it proved, to be
taken, for matters of mere omission, with a man of
Mr. Lovelace's penetration. Nor with any man; 
since if Love has not taken root deep enough to cause
it to shoot out into declaration, if an opportunity be
fairly given for it, there is little room to expect, that
the blighting winds of anger or resentment will bring
it forward. Then my poor Sister is not naturally
good-humoured. This is too well-known a truth
for me to endeavour to conceal it, especially from
you. She must therefore, I doubt, have appeared to
great disadvantage when she aimed to be worse-temper'd
than ordinary. 
How they managed it in their next conversation I
know not. One would be tempted to think by the
issue, that Mr. Lovelace was ungenerous enough to
seek the occasion given (a) , and to improve it. Yet
he thought fit to put the question too: —But, she says,
it was not till, by some means or other (she knew
not how) he had wrought her up to such a pitch of
displeasure with him, that it was impossible for her to
recover herself at the instant. Nevertheless he reurged
his question, as expecting a definitive answer,
without waiting for the return of her temper, or endeavouring
to mollify her; so that she was under a
necessity of persisting in her denial: Yet gave him 

reason to think she did not dislike his address, only the
manner of it; his court being rather made to her
Mother than to herself, as if he were sure of her consent
at any time. 
A good encouraging denial, I must own: —As was
the rest of her plea; to wit, ‘A disinclination to
change her State. —Exceedingly happy as she was: 
She never could be happier!’ And such-like consenting
negatives, as I may call them, and yet not intend
a reflection upon my Sister: For what can any
young creature in the like circumstances say, when she
is not sure but a too ready consent may subject her to
the slights of a Sex that generally values a blessing
either more or less as it is obtained with difficulty or
ease? Miss Biddulph's answer to a copy of verses
from a gentleman, reproaching our Sex as acting in
disguise, is not a bad one, altho' you perhaps may
think it too acknowleging for the female character. 

Ungen'rous Sex!—To scorn us, if we're kind;
 And yet upbraid us, if we seem severe!
Do You, t'encourage us to tell our mind,
 Yourselves put off disguise, and be sincere.
You talk of Coquetry!—Your own false hearts
Compel our Sex to act dissembling parts.
Here I am obliged to lay down my pen. I will
soon resume it. 