



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Monday, Sept. 4. 
The Lady would not read the Letter she had from
Mrs. Norton, till she had received the Communion,
for fear it should contain any-thing that might
disturb that happy calm, which she had been endeavouring
to obtain for it. And when that solemn office was
over, she was so composed, she said, that she thought
she could receive any news, however affecting, with
tranquillity. 
Nevertheless, in reading it, she was forced to leave off
several times thro' weakness and a dimness in her sight,
of which she complained; if I may say complained; for
so easy and soft were her complaints, that they could
hardly be called such. 
She was very much affected at divers parts of this
Letter. She wept several times, and sighed often. Mrs.
Lovick told me, that these were the gentle exclamations
she broke out into, as she read: —Her unkind, her cruel
Brother! —How unsisterly! —Poor dear woman! seeming
to speak of Mrs. Norton. Her kind Cousin! —O
these flaming spirits! —And then reflecting upon herself
more than once —What a deep error is mine! —What
evils have I been the occasion of!— 
When I was admitted to her presence, I have received,
said she, a long and not very pleasing Letter from my
dear Mrs. Norton. It will soon be in your hands. I am
advised against appointing you to the office you have so
kindly accepted of: But you must resent nothing of these 

things. My choice will have an odd appearance to them: 
But it is now too late to alter it, if I would. 
I would fain write an answer to it, continued she: 
But I have no distinct sight, Mr. Belford, no steadiness
of fingers. —This mistiness, however, will perhaps be
gone by-and-by. —Then turning to Mrs. Lovick, I
don't think I am dying yet—not actually dying, Mrs.
Lovick—For I have no bodily pain—No numbnesses; 
no signs of immediate death, I think—And my breath,
which used of late to be so short, is now tolerable—My
head clear, my intellects free—I think I cannot be dying
yet—I shall have agonies, I doubt—Life will not give
up so blessedly easy, I fear—Yet how merciful is the
Almighty, to give his poor creature such a sweet serenity! 
—'Tis what I have prayed for! —What encouragement,
Mrs. Lovick, so near one's dissolution, to have
it to hope, that one's prayers are answered! 
Mrs. Smith, as well as Mrs. Lovick, was with her. 
They were both in tears; nor had I, any more than
they, power to say a word in answer: Yet she spoke
all this, as well as what follows, with a surprising composure
of mind and countenance. 
But, Mr. Belford, said she, assuming a still sprightlier
air and accent, let me talk a little to you, while I
am thus able to say what I have to say. 
Mrs. Lovick, don't leave us [for the women were
rising to go]—Pray sit down; and do you, Mrs. Smith,
sit down too. —Dame Shelbourne, take this key, and
open that upper drawer. I will move to it. 
She did, with trembling knees. Here, Mr. Belford,
is my Will. It is witnessed by three persons of Mr.
Smith's acquaintance. 
I dare to hope, that my Cousin Morden will give
you assistance, if you request it of him. My Cousin
Morden continues his affection for me: But as I have
not seen him, I leave all the trouble upon you, Mr. Belford. 
This Deed may want forms; and it does, no doubt: 
But the less, as I have my Grandfather's Will almost by 

heart, and have often enough heard that canvassed. I
will lay it by itself in this corner; putting it at the farther
end of the drawer. 
She then took up a parcel of Letters, inclosed in one
cover, sealed with three seals of black wax: This, said
she, I sealed up last night. The cover, Sir, will let you
know what is to be done with what it incloses. This is
the superscription [holding it close to her eyes, and rubbing
them]; As soon as I am certainly dead, this to be
broke open by Mr. Belford. —Here, Sir, I put it [placing
it by the Will]. —These folded papers are Letters and
Copies of Letters, disposed according to their dates. 
Miss Howe will do with those as you and she shall think
fit. If I receive any more, or more come when I cannot
receive them, they may be put into this drawer
[pulling out and pushing in the Looking-glass drawer]
to be given to Mr. Belford, be they from whom they
will. You'll be so kind as to observe That, Mrs. Lovick,
and dame Shelbourne. 
Here, Sir, proceeded she, I put the keys of my apparel
[putting them into the drawers with her papers]. 
All is in order, and the Inventory upon them, and an
account of what I have disposed of: So that nobody
need to ask Mrs. Smith any questions. 
There will be no immediate need to open or inspect
the trunks which contain my wearing apparel. Mrs.
Norton will open them, or order somebody to do it for
her, in your presence, Mrs. Lovick; for so I have directed
in my Will. They may be sealed up now: I shall
never more have occasion to open them. 
She then, tho' I expostulated with her to the contrary,
caused me to seal them up with my seal. 
After this, she locked the drawer where were her papers; 
first taking out her book of Meditations, as she
called it; saying, She should, perhaps, have use for
that; and then desired me to take the key of that
drawer; for she should have no further occasion for that
neither. 

All this in so composed and chearful a manner, that
we were equally surprised and affected with it. 
You can witness for me, Mrs. Smith, and so can
you, Mrs. Lovick, proceeded she, if any one ask after
my life and conversation, since you have known me,
that I have been very orderly; have kept good hours; 
and never have lain out of your house, but when I was in
prison; and then, you know, I could not help it. 
O Lovelace! that thou hadst heard her, or seen her,
unknown to herself, on this occasion! —Not one of us
could speak a word. 
I shall leave the world in perfect charity, proceeded
she. And turning towards the women, Don't be so
much concerned for me, my good friends. This is all
but needful preparation; and I shall be very happy. 
Then again rubbing her eyes, which she said were
misty, and looking more intently round upon each, particularly
on me—God bless you all, said she! how
kindly are you concerned for me! —Who says, I am
friendless? Who says, I am abandoned, and among
strangers? —Good Mr. Belford, don't be so generously
humane! —Indeed [putting her handkerchief to her
charming eyes] you will make me less happy, than I am
sure you wish me to be. 
While we were thus solemnly engaged, a servant
came with a Letter from her Cousin Morden: —Then,
said she, he is not come himself! 
She broke it open; but every line, she said, appeared
two to her: So that, being unable to read it herself, she
desired I would read it to her. I did so; and wished it
were more consolatory to her: But she was all patient
attention; tears, however, often trickling down her
cheeks. By the date, it was written yesterday; and this
is the substance of it. 
He tells her, ‘That the Thursday before he had procured
a general meeting of her principal relations, at
her Father's; tho' not without difficulty, her haughty
Brother opposing it, and, when met, rendering all his 

endeavours to reconcile them to her ineffectual. He
censures him, as the most ungovernable young man
he ever knew: Some great sickness, he says, some
heavy misfortune, is wanted to bring him to a knowlege
of himself, and of what is due from him to others; 
and he wishes, that he were not her Brother, and his
Cousin. Nor does he spare her Father and Uncles for
being so implicitly led by him.’ 
He tells her, ‘That he parted with them all in high
displeasure, and thought never more to darken any of
their doors: That he declared as much to her two
Uncles, who came to him on Saturday, to try to accommodate
with him; and who found him preparing
to go to London to attend her; and that, notwithstanding
their pressing entreaties, he determined so to
do, and not to go with them to Harlowe-Place, or
to either of their own houses; and accordingly dismissed
them with such an answer. 
‘But that her noble Letter, as he calls it, of Aug.
31. (a)  being brought him about an hour after their
departure, he thought it might affect them as much
as it did him; and give them the exalted opinion of
her virtue which was so well deserved; he therefore
turned his horse's head back to her Uncle Antony's,
instead of forward towards London. 
‘That accordingly arriving there, and finding her
two Uncles together, he re'd to them the affecting
Letter; which left none of the three a dry eye: That
the absent, as is usual in such cases, bearing all the
load, they accused her Brother and Sister; and besought
him to put off his journey to town, till he
could carry with him the Blessings which she had formerly
in vain solicited for; and (as they hoped) the
happy tidings of a general Reconciliation. 
‘That not doubting but his visit would be the more
welcome to her, if these good ends could be obtained,
he the more readily complied with their desires. But
not being willing to subject himself to the possibility 

of receiving fresh insults from her Brother, he had
given her Uncles a copy of her Letter, for the family
to assemble upon; and desired to know, as soon as
possible, the result of their deliberations. 
‘He tells her, that he shall bring her up the accounts
relating to the produce of her Grandfather's Estate,
and adjust them with her; having actually in his hands
the arrears due to her from it. 
‘He highly applauds the noble manner in which she
resents your usage of her. It is impossible, he owns,
that you can either deserve her, or to be forgiven. 
But as you do justice to her virtue, and offer to make
her all the reparation now in your power; and as she
is so very earnest with him not to resent that usage; 
and declares, that you could not have been the author
of her calamities but through a strange concurrence of
unhappy causes; and as he is not at a loss to know
how to place to a proper account that strange concurrence; 
he desires her not to be apprehensive of any
vindictive measures from him. 
Nevertheless (as may be expected) ‘he inveighs against
you; as he finds, that she gave you no advantage
over her. But he forbears to enter further into this
subject, he says, till he has the honour to see her; 
and the rather, as she seems so much determined against
you. However, he cannot but say, that he thinks
you a gallant man, and a man of sense; and that you
have the reputation of being thought a generous man
in every instance but where the Sex is concerned. 
In such, he owns, that you have taken inexcuseable liberties. 
And he is sorry to say, that there are very
few young men of fortune but who allow themselves
in the same. Both Sexes, he observes, too much love
to have each other in their power: Yet he hardly
ever knew man or woman who was very fond of
power, make a right use of it. 
‘If she be so absolutely determined against marrying
you, as she declares she is, he hopes, he says, to prevail 

upon her to take (as soon as her health will permit)
a little Tour abroad with him, as what will probably
establish it; since traveling is certainly the best
physic for all those disorders which owe their rise to
grief or disappointment. An absence of two or three
years will endear her to every one, on her return,
and every one to her. 
‘He expresses his impatience to see her. He will
set out, he says, the moment he knows the result of
her family's determination; which he doubts not will
be favourable. Nor will he wait long for that.’ 
When I had re'd the Letter thro' to the languishing
Lady, And so, my friends, said she, have I heard of
a patient who actually died, while five or six principal
physicians were in a consultation, and not agreed upon
what name to give to his distemper. The patient was
an Emperor: The Emperor Joseph, I think. 
I asked, If I should write to her Cousin, as he knew
not how ill she was, to hasten up? 
By no means, she said; since, if he were not already
set out, she was persuaded that she should be so low by
the time he could receive my Letter, and come, that his
presence would but discompose and hurry her, and afflict
him. 
I hope, however, she is not so very near her end. 
And without saying any more to her, when I retired, I
wrote to Colonel Morden, that if he expects to see his
beloved Cousin alive, he must lose no time in setting
out. I sent this Letter by his own servant. 
Dr. H. sent away his Letter to her Father by a particular
hand this morning. 
Mrs. Walton the Milaner has also just now acquainted
Mrs. Smith, that her husband had a Letter brought by a
special messenger from parson Brand, within this half-hour,
inclosing the copy of one he had written to Mr.
John Harlowe, recanting his officious one. 

And as all these, and the Copy of the Lady's Letter
to Col. Morden, will be with them pretty much at a
time, the devil's in the family if they are not struck with
a remorse that shall burst open the double-barred doors
of their hearts. 
Will. engages to reach you with this (late as it will
be) before you go to rest. He begs that I will testify for
him the hour and the minute I shall give it him. It is
just half an hour after Ten. 
I pretend to be (now by use) the swiftest short-hand
writer in England, next to yourself. But were matter
to arise every hour to write upon, and I had nothing else
to do, I cannot write so fast as you expect. And let it
be remembred, that your servants cannot bring Letters
or Messages before they are written or sent. 
J. Belford. 