



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday, April 14. 
I will now give you the particulars of a conversation
that has just passed between Mr. Lovelace
and me; which I must call agreeable. 
It began with his telling me, that he had just received
intelligence, that my friends were on a sudden
come to a resolution, to lay aside all thoughts of pursuing
me, or of getting me back: And that therefore he
attended me to know my pleasure; and what I would
do, or have him do? 
I told him, that I would have him leave me directly; 
and that, when it was known to every-body
that I was absolutely independent of him, it would
pass, that I had left my Father's house because of my 

Brother's ill usage of me: Which was a plea that I
might make with justice, and to the excuse of my Father,
as well as of myself. 
He mildly replied, that if he could be certain, that
my relations would adhere to this their new resolution,
he could have no objection, since such was my pleasure: 
But, as he was well assured, that they had taken
it only from apprehensions, that a more active one
might involve my Brother (who had breathed nothing
but revenge) in some fatal misfortune, there was too
much reason to believe, that they would resume their
former purpose the moment they should think they
safely might. 
This, Madam, said he, is a risque I cannot run. 
You would think it strange if I could. And yet, as
soon as I knew they had so given out, I thought it proper
to apprise you of it, and to take your commands
upon it. 
Let me hear, said I, willing to try if he had any
particular view, what you think most adviseable? 
'Tis very easy to say That, if I durst—If I might not
offend you—If it were not to break conditions that shall
be inviolable with me. 
Say then, Sir, what you would say. I can approve
or disapprove, as I think fit. 
Had not the man a fine opportunity here to speak
out? —He had. And thus he used it. 
To wave, Madam, what I would say till I have
more courage to speak out [More courage—Mr. Lovelace
more courage, my dear!] —I will only propose what
I think will be most agreeable to you—Suppose, if you
chuse not to go to Lady Betty's, that you take a turn
cross the country to Windsor? 
Why to Windsor? 
Because it is a pleasant place: Because it lies in the
way either to Berkshire, to Oxford, or to London: 
Berkshire, where Lord M. is at present: Oxford, in
the neighbourhood of which lives Lady Betty: London, 

whither you may retire at your pleasure: Or, if you
will have it so, whither I may go, you staying at
Windsor; and yet be within an easy distance of you,
if any-thing should happen, or if your friends should
change their new-taken resolution. 
This proposal, however, displeased me not. But I
said, My only objection was, the distance of Windsor
from Miss Howe, of whom I should be glad to be always
within two or three hours reach by a messenger,
if possible. 
If I had thoughts of any other place than Windsor,
or nearer to Miss Howe, he wanted but my commands,
and would seek for proper accommodations: But, fix
as I pleased, farther or nearer, he had servants, and
they had nothing else to do but to obey me. 
A grateful thing then he named to me—To send
for my Hannah, as soon as I should be fix'd (a) ; unless
I would chuse one of the young gentlewomen here
to attend me; both of whom, as I had acknowleged,
were very obliging; and he knew I had generosity
enough to make it worth their while. 
This of Hannah, he might see, I took very well. 
I said, I had thoughts of sending for her, as soon as I
got to more convenient lodgings. As to these young
gentlewomen, it were pity to break in upon that usefulness
which the whole family were of to each other; 
each having her proper part, and performing it with an
agreeable alacrity: Insomuch that I liked them all so
well, that I could even pass my days among them
were he to leave me; by which means the lodgings
would be more convenient to me than now they were. 
He need not repeat his objections to this place, he
said: But as to going to Windsor, or where-ever else
I thought fit, or as to his personal attendance, or leaving
me, he would assure me (he very agreeably said)
that I could propose nothing in which I thought my 

reputation, and even my punctilio, concerned, that he
would not chearfully come into. And since I was so
much taken up with my pen, he would instantly order
his horse to be got ready, and would set out. 
Not to be off my caution, Have you any acquaintance
at Windsor? said I. —Know you of any convenient
lodgings there? 
Except the Forest, replied he, where I have often
hunted, I know the least of Windsor, of any place so
noted, and so pleasant. Indeed, I have not a single
acquaintance there. 
Upon the whole, I told him, that I thought his
proposal of Windsor not amiss; and that I would remove
thither, if I could get a lodging only for myself,
and an upper chamber for Hannah; for that my stock
of money was but small, as was easy to be conceived; 
and I should be very loth to be obliged to any-body. 
I added, that the sooner I removed the better; for
that then he could have no objection to go to London,
or Berkshire, as he pleased: And I should let everybody
know my independence. 
He again proposed himself, in very polite terms, for
my banker. But I, as civilly, declined his offer. 
This conversation was to be, all of it, in the main,
agreeable. He asked, whether I would chuse to lodge
in the town of Windsor, or out of it? 
As near the Castle, I said, as possible, for the convenience
of going constantly to the public worship: 
An opportunity I had been long deprived of. 
He should be very glad, he told me, if he could
procure me accommodations in any one of the Canons
houses; which he imagined would be more agreeable
to me than any other, on many accounts. And as he
could depend upon my promise, Never to have any
other man but himself, on the condition to which he
had so chearfully subscribed, he should be easy; since
it was now his part, in earnest, to set about recommending
himself to my favour, by the only way he 

knew it could be done. Adding, with a very serious
air—I am but a young man, Madam; but I have run
a long course: Let not your purity of mind incline you
to despise me for the acknowlegement. It is high time
to be weary of it, and to reform; since, like Solomon,
I can say, There is nothing new under the Sun: But
that it is my belief, that a life of virtue can afford such
pleasures, on reflection, as will be for ever blooming,
for ever new! 
I was agreeably surprised. I looked at him, I believe,
as if I doubted my ears and my eyes. His aspect
however became his words. 
I expressed my satisfaction in terms so agreeable to
him, that he said, he found a delight in this early
dawning of a better day to him, and in my approbation,
which he had never received from the success of
the most favoured of his pursuits. 
Surely, my dear, the man must be in earnest. He
could not have said this; he could not have thought it,
had he not. What followed made me still readier to
believe him. 
In the midst of my wild vagaries, said he, I have
ever preserved a reverence for Religion, and for Religious
men. I always called another cause, when any
of my libertine companions, in pursuance of Lord
Shaftesbury's test (which is a part of the Rake's Creed,
and what I may call The whetstone of infidelity) endeavoured
to turn the sacred subject into ridicule. On
this very account I have been called by good men of
the Clergy, who nevertheless would have it, that I
was a practical Rake, The decent Rake: And indeed I
had too much pride in my shame, to disown the name
of Rake. 
This, Madam, I am the readier to confess, as it may
give you hope, that the generous task of my Reformation,
which I flatter myself you will have the goodness
to undertake, will not be so difficult a one as you may
have imagined; for it has afforded me some pleasure 

in my retired hours, when a temporary remorse has
struck me for any-thing I have done amiss, that I
should one day take delight in another course of life: 
For, unless we can, I dare say, no durable good is to
be expected from the endeavour. Your example, Madam,
must do all, must confirm all (a) . 
The divine Grace, or Favour, Mr. Lovelace, must
do All, and confirm All. You know not how much
you please me, that I can talk to you in this dialect. 
And I then thought of his generosity to his pretty
Rustic; and of his kindness to his Tenants. 
Yet, Madam, be pleased to remember one thing: 
Reformation cannot be a sudden work. I have infinite
vivacity: It is That which runs away with me. 
Judge, dearest Madam, by what I am going to confess,
that I have a prodigious way to journey on, before
a good person will think me tolerable; since, tho' I
have read in some of our Perfectionists enough to make a
better man than myself either run into madness or despair
about the Grace you mention; yet I cannot enter
into the meaning of the word, nor into the modus of
its operation. Let me not then be checked, when I
mention your example for my visible reliance; and instead
of using such words, till I can better understand
them, suppose all the rest included in the profession of
that reliance. 
I told him, that, altho' I was somewhat concerned
at his expression, and surprised at so much darkness, as
(for want of another word) I would call it, in a man
of his talents and learning; yet I was pleased with his
Ingenuousness. I wished him to encourage this way of
thinking. I told him, that his observation, that no
durable good was to be expected from any new course
where there was not a delight taken in it, was just: 
But that the delight would follow by use. 
And twenty things of this sort I even preached to 

him; taking care, however, not to be tedious, nor to
let my expanded heart give him a contracted or impatient
brow. And, indeed, he took visible pleasure in
what I said, and even hung upon the subject, when I,
to try him, once or twice, seemed ready to drop it: 
And proceeded to give me a most agreeable instance,
that he could at times think both deeply and seriously. 
—Thus it was. 
He was once, he said, dangerously wounded in a
duel, in the left arm, baring it, to shew me the Scar: 
That this (notwithstanding a great effusion of blood,
it being upon an artery) was followed by a violent fever,
which at last fix'd upon his spirits; and that so
obstinately, that neither did he desire life, nor his friends
expect it: That, for a month together, his heart, as
he thought, was so totally changed, that he despised
his former courses, and particularly that rashness, which
had brought him to the state he was in, and his antagonist
(who, however, was the aggressor) into a much
worse: That in this space he had thoughts which at
times still give him pleasure to reflect upon: And altho'
these promising prospects changed, as he recovered
health and spirits, yet he parted with them with so
much reluctance, that he could not help shewing it in
a copy of verses, truly blank ones, he said; some of
which he repeated, and (advantaged by the grace which
he gives to every-thing he repeats) I thought them
very tolerable ones; the sentiments, however, much
graver than I expected from him. 
He has promised me a copy of the lines; and then I
shall judge better of their merit; and so shall you. 
The tendency of them was, “That, since, sickness
only gave him a proper train of thinking, and that
his restored health brought with it a return of his
evil habits, he was ready to renounce the gifts of
Nature for those of Contemplation.” 
He farther declared, that altho' these good motions
went off (as he had owned) on his recovery, yet he 

had better hopes now, from the influence of my example,
and from the reward before him, if he persevered: 
And that he was the more hopeful that he should,
as his present resolution was made in a full tide of health
and spirits; and when he had nothing to wish for but
perseverance, to entitle himself to my favour. 
I will not throw cold water, Mr. Lovelace, said I,
on a rising flame: But look to it! For I shall endeavour
to keep you up to this spirit. I shall measure
your value of me by this test: And I would have you
bear those charming lines of Mr. Rowe for ever in
your mind; you, who have, by your own confession,
so much to repent of; and as the Scar, indeed, you
shewed me, will, in one instance, remind you to your
dying day. 
The lines, my dear, are from that Poet's Ulysses: 
You have heard me often admire them; and I repeated
them to him: 

Habitual evils change not on a sudden;
But many days must pass, and many sorrows;
Conscious remorse and anguish must be felt,
To curb desire, to break the stubborn will,
And work a second nature in the soul,
Ere Virtue can resume the place she lost:
'Tis else Dissimulation—
He had often read these lines, he said; but never
tasted them before. —By his Soul (the unmortified creature
swore) and as he hoped to be saved, he was now in
earnest in his good resolutions. He had said, before I
repeated these lines from Rowe, that habitual evils
could not be changed on a sudden: But he hoped, he
should not be thought a dissembler, if he were not enabled
to hold his good purposes; since ingratitude and
dissimulation were vices that of all others he abhorred. 
May you ever abhor them! said I. They are the
most odious of all vices. 
I hope, my dear Miss Howe, I shall not have occasion, 

in my future Letters, to contradict these promising
appearances. Should I have nothing on his side
to combat with, I shall be very far from being happy,
from the sense of my fault, and the indignation of all
my relations. —So shall not fail of condign punishment
for it, from my inward remorse on account of my
forfeited character. But the least ray of hope could
not dart in upon me, without my being willing to lay
hold of the very first opportunity to communicate it
to you, who take so generous a share in all my concerns. 
Nevertheless, you may depend upon it, my dear,
that these agreeable assurances, and hopes of his begun
Reformation, shall not make me forget my caution. 
Not that I think, at worst, any more than you, that
he dare to harbour a thought injurious to my honour: 
But he is very various, and there is an apparent, and
even an acknowleged unfixedness in his temper, which
at times, gives me uneasiness. I am resolved therefore to
keep him at distance from my person and my thoughts,
as much as I can: For whether all men are or are not
encroachers, I am sure Mr. Lovelace is one. 
Hence it is, that I have always cast about, and will
continue to cast about, what ends he may have in view
from this proposal, or from that report. In a word,
tho' hopeful of the best, I will always be fearful of the
worst, in every-thing that admits of doubt. For it
is better, in such a situation as mine, to apprehend
without cause, than to subject myself to surprize for
want of forethought. 
Mr. Lovelace is gone to Windsor, having left two
servants to attend me. He purposes to be back tomorrow. 
I have written to my Aunt Hervey, to supplicate
her interest in my behalf, for my cloaths, books, and
money; signifying to her, ‘That, if I may be restored
to the favour of my family, and allowed a
Negative only, as to any man who may be proposed 

to me, and be used like a Daughter, a Niece, and a
Sister, I will stand by my offer to live single, and
submit, as I ought, to a Negative from my Father.’ 
Intimating nevertheless, ‘That it were perhaps better,
after the usage I have received from my Brother and
Sister, that I may be allowed to be distant from
them, as well for their sakes as for my own’ (meaning,
as I suppose it will be taken, at my Dairy-house)
—offering, ‘to take my Father's directions, as to the
manner I shall live in, the servants I shall have, and
in every-thing that shall shew the dutiful subordination
to which I am willing to conform.’ 
My Aunt will know by my Letter to my Sister how
to direct to me, if she be permitted to favour me with
a line. 
I am equally earnest with her in this Letter, as I
was with my Sister in That I wrote to her, to obtain
for me a speedy Reconciliation, that I may not be further
precipitated; intimating, ‘That, by a timely lenity,
all may pass for a misunderstanding only, which,
otherwise, will be thought equally disgraceful to them,
and to me; appealing to her for the necessity I was
under to do what I did.’— 
&dotup;Had I owned, that I was over-reached, and forced
away against my intention, might they not, as a
proof of the truth of my assertion, have insisted upon
my immediate return to them? And if I did not return,
would they not have reason to suppose, that I
had now altered my mind (if such were my mind) or
had not the power to return? —Then were I to have
gone back, must it not have been upon their own
terms? No conditioning with a Father! is a maxim
with my Father, and with my Uncles. If I would
have gone, Mr. Lovelace would have opposed it. So
I must have been under his controul, or have run
away from him, as it is supposed I did to him from
Harlowe-Place. In what a giddy light would this
have made me appear! —Had he constrained me, 

could I have appealed to my friends for their protection,
without risquing the very consequences, to prevent
which (setting up myself presumptuously, as a
middle person between flaming spirits) I have run into
such terrible inconveniences? 
&dotup;But, after all, must it not give me great anguish
of mind, to be forced to sanctify, as I may say, by
my seeming after-approbation, a measure I was so
artfully tricked into, and which I was so much resolved
not to take? 
&dotup;How one evil brings on another, is sorrowfully
witnessed to, by 
&dotup;Your ever-obliged and affectionate
&dotup;Clarissa Harlowe.&dotup; 