


Lady G. To Miss Byron. 


Friday Morning, Nov. 10.
Expect a Letter of hurry, in answer to one, two,
three, four, five, six, I don't know how many,
of yours; some filled with tenderness, some with love,
some with nicety, sense, and nonsense. I shall reckon
with you soon for one of them, in which you take intolerable
liberties with me. O Harriet! tremble at
my resentment. You are downright scurrilous, my
dear. 
I imputed extravagance to Emily, in my last. The
girl's a good girl. I was too hasty. I will shew you
two Letters of hers, and one of my brother, which
clears up the imputation. I love her more and more. 
Poor girl! Love peeps out in twenty places of hers:
In his, he is the best of men: But that you knew
before. 
And so the honest man kissed you; kissed your lip! 

O Lud! O Lud! how could you bear him afterwards
in your sight? —Forgiving creature! —And so you
were friends with him before you had time to shew
your anger. —Nothing like doing impudent things in
a hurry. —Sometimes respectful, sometimes free:
Why this is the way of all the fellows, Harriet! — 
And so they go on till the respectfulness is drawn off,
and nothing but the lees are left; and after two or
three months are over, the once squeamish palate will
be glad of them. 
I like your uncle better than I like either your aunt
or you—He likes me. 
What a miserable dog (Take the word for shortness,
I am in haste) is Sir Hargrave! 
Your plea against Clementina being compelled, or
over-persuaded (the same thing) I much like. You are
a good girl. 
Betwixt her excellencies and yours, how must my
brother's soul be divided! —I wonder he thinks of
either of you. Ass and two bundles of hay, Harriet. 
But my brother is a nobler animal: He won't starve. 
But I think, in my conscience, he should have you
both. There might be a law made, that the case
should not be brought into precedent till two such women
should be found, and such a man; and all three
in the like situation. 
Bagenhall! a miserable devil! Excellent warning-pieces! 
Wicked Harriet! You infected me with your horrible
inferences from Greville's temper, threatenings,
and-so-forth. The conclusion of this Letter left me a
wretch! —If these megrims are the effect of Love,
thank Heaven, I never knew what it was. —Sufficient
to the day, and-so-forth. 
Devilish girl! to torment me with your dreams! If
you ever tell me of any more of them, except they are
of a different sort, woe be to you! 
I like your parting scene, and all that. Your 

realities, thank Heaven, are more delightful than your
resveries. I hope you'll always find them so. 
And so you were full of apprehensions on the favour
your aunt did me in employing me about your nuptial
equipments. Long ago ‘you gave affectation to the
winds.’ Good! But the winds would not accept of
your present. They puffed it you back again, and
your servants never told you it was brought home. I
repeat, my dear, that my brother is much more clever,
in these scenes of Love and Courtship, than his mistress. 
You are a pretty cow, my love: You give
good store of milk, but you have a very careless heel. 
Yet when you bethink you, you are very good; but
not always the same Harriet. Your nurse in your infancy,
see-sawed you—Margery-down—and you can't
put the pretty play out of your practice, tho' it is out
of your memory. I can look back, and sometimes
by your frowardness, sometimes by your crowing,
know how it was with you eighteen years ago. 
My brother's Letter to you, after he has mentioned
his visits to the two sick Baronets, is that of a man who
shews you genteelly, and politely, that he is sensible he
has a pretty trifler to deal with. I wish you would
square your conduct, by what you must imagine a man
of his sense would think of you. I should be too
proud a minx, in your case, to owe obligation to my
man for bearing with me—Spare me, spare me, Harriet! 
I have hit myself a terrible box o' the ear. But
we can find faults in others, which we will not allow
to be such in ourselves—But here is the difference between
your conduct now, and what mine was. I knew
I was wrong, and resolved one day to amend. You
think yourself right, and, while you so think, will
hardly ever mend, till your man ties you down to good
behaviour. 
Jeronymo's Letter! O the next-to divine Clementina! 
Indeed, Harriet, I think she out-soars you. I
adore her. But will she be prevailed upon to marry?— 

She will! —If she does—Then—But, dear Soul! — 
Pressed as she is—Having refused, instead of being refused,
the beloved of her heart, she will still be greater
than any of her Sex, if she does; the man proposed,
so unexceptionable; so tenderly loving her, in the
height of her calamity, as well as in her prosperity! — 
Gratitude to him, as well as Duty to her parents; 
parents so indulgent as they have always been to her; 
will incline her to marry. May she be happy! I am
pleased with your solicitude for her happiness. 
I like your answer to my brother: A good and well-deserved
resignation. Let's see how you keep to it. 
You do keep to it—as I expected—Ah, Harriet!
you are quite a girl, sometimes; tho', at others, more
than woman! ‘Will he not ask leave to come down?’ 
Fine resignation! —‘Will he not write, first?’ —Yes,
yes, he will do every-thing he ought to do. Look to
your own behaviour, child; don't fear but his will be
all as it should be. As to your finery, how now,
Harriet! Are you to direct every-thing; yet pretend to
ask advice? Be cóntented that every-thing is done for
you of this sort, and learn to be humble. Sure we that
have passed the Rubicon, are not to be directed by you,
who never came in sight of the river. But you, maidens,
are poor, proud, pragmatical mortals. You profess
ignorance; but in heart imagine you are at the
tip-top of your wisdom. 
But here you come with your horrid fears again. 
Would to the Lord the Day were over; and you and
my brother were—Upon my life—you are a—But I
won't call you names. 
Lucy thinks you should go to Shirley-manor when
my brother comes down. Egregious folly! I did not
think Lucy could have been so silly. 
Concerning our cousin Reeves's wanting to be present
at your nuptials—your invitation to me—and
what you say of Emily—more anon. 
Well, and so my brother has sent you the expected 

Letter. Does it please you, Harriet? The duce is in
you, if it don't. 
But you are not pleased with it, it seems. He is too
hasty for you. Where's the boasted-of resignation,
Harriet? True Female resignation! 
Tell Lucy, I am obliged to her, for her transcriptions. 
I shall be very proud of her correspondence. 
‘Your aunt thinks he is full hasty.’ —Your aunt's a
simpleton, as well as you. My service to her. 
But is the D&wblank;l in the girl again? What would
have become of Lady L. and me, had you not sent
both Letters together that relate to Greville's supposed
malignance? I tremble, nevertheless, at the thought
of what might have been. But I will not forgive
Lucy for advising you to send to us your horribly-painted
terrors. What could possess her to advise you
to do so, and you, to follow her advice? I forgive not
either of you. In revenge I will remind you, that
you are one of the good women to whom he owes all
the embarrasments of his past life. 
But a caution, Harriet! —Never, never, let foolish
dreams claim a moment of your attention—Imminent
as seemed the danger, your superstition made it
more dreadful to you than otherwise it would have
been. You have a mind superior to such foibles: Act
up to its native dignity, and let not the follies of your
nurses, in your infantile state, be carried into your maturer
age, to depreciate your womanly reason. Do you
think I don't dream, as well as you? 
Well might ye all rejoice in his safety. ‘Hang
about his neck, for joy!’ So you ought, if you
thought it would do him honour. Hush, hush, proud
girl! don't scold me! I think, were a king your man,
he would have been honoured by the charming freedom. 
‘Cast himself at your feet!’ And you ought
to have cast yourself at his. ‘There can be no reserve
to him after this,’ you say. Nor ought there,
had it not been for this. Did you not signify to him, 

by Letter, that you would resign to his generosity? 
Let me whisper you, Harriet—Sure you proud maiden
minxes think—But I did once—I wonder in my heart,
oftentimes—But men and women are cheats to one
another. But we may, in a great measure, thank the
poetical tribe for the fascination. I hate them all. 
Are they not inflamers of the worst passions? With
regard to the Epics, would Alexander, madman as he
was, have been so much a madman, had it not been
for Homer? Of what violences, murders, depredations,
have not the Epic poets been the occasion, by
propagating false honour, false glory, and false religion? 
Those of the amorous class ought in all ages
(could their future genius's for tinkling sound and measure
have been known) to have been strangled in their
cradles. Abusers of talents given them for better purposes
(for all this time, I put Sacred poesy out of the
question); and avowedly claiming a right to be licentious,
and to overleap the bounds of decency, truth,
and nature. 
What a rant! How came these fellows into my
rambling head? O, I remember—My whisper to you
led me into all this stuff. 
Well, and you at last recollect the trouble you have
given my brother about you. Good girl! Had I remembered
that, I would have spared you my reflexions
upon the poets and poetasters of all ages, the truly-inspired
ones excepted: And yet I think the others
should have been banished our commonwealth, as well
as Plato's. 
Well, but, to shorten my nonsense, now you have
shortened yours—The Day is at last fixed—Joy, joy,
joy, to you, my lovely Harriet, and to my Brother! 
And it must be a public affair! —Why—that's right,
since it would be impossible to make it a private one. 
My honest man is mad for joy. He fell down on his
knees, to beg of me to accept of your invitation, and
of his company. I made a merit of obliging him, 

tho' I would have been as humble to him, rather than
not be with you; and yet, by one saucy line, I imagine
you had rather be without me. 
Your cousin Reeves's are ready to set out. 
God bless you, invite aunt Nell: She thinks herself
neglected. A nephew whom she so dearly loves! 
Very hard! she says. —And she never was but at one
wedding, and has forgot how it was; and may never
be at another—Pink and yellow, all is ready provided,
go down or not—O but, if you choose not her company,
I will tell you how to come off—Give her your
word and honour that she shall be a person of prime
account at your first Christening. Yet she would be
glad to be present on both occasions. 
But ah, the poor Emily! —She has also been on her
knees to me, to take her down with me—What shall
I do? —Dear Soul! she embarrasses me! I have put
her upon writing to her Guardian, for his leave: I believe
she has written. If she knew her own case, I
think she would not desire it. 
Poor Lady L! —She is robbed, she says, of one of
the greatest pleasures of her life. Ah, Charlotte!
said she to me, wringing my hand, these husbands
owe us a great deal. This is an humbling circumstance. 
Were not my Lord and yours the best of
husbands— 
The best of husbands! Wretches! said I. You
may forgive yours, Caroline—You are a good creature; 
but not I mine. And something else I said,
that made her laugh in the midst of her lacrymals. 
But she begs and prays of me, not to go down to you,
unless all should be over with her. I can do her no
good; and only increase my own apprehensions, if I
am with her. A blessed way two poor souls of sisters
of us are in. Sorry fellows! 
And yet, Harriet, with such prospects as these before
them, some girls leap windows, swim rivers,
climb walls—Duce take their folly: Their choice is 

their punishment. Who can pity such rash souls as
those? Thanks be praised, you, Harriet, are going
on to keep in countenance the two anxious sisters, 

 Who, having shot the gulph, delight to see
Succeeding souls plunge in with like uncertainty;

Says a good man, on a still more serious occasion. 
* *
Good news! joyful news! —I shall, I shall, go down
to you. Nothing to hinder me! Lord L. proud as a
peacock, is this moment come for me: I am hurrying
away with him. A fine boy! —Sister safe! —Harriet,
Lucy, Nancy, for your own future encouragement! 
Huzzah, girls! —I am gone. 

