



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Hamstead, Friday Night, June 9. 
Now, Belford, for the Narrative of narratives. 
I will continue it, as I have opportunity; and
that so dextrously, that if I break off twenty times,
thou shalt not discern where I piece my thread. 
Although grievously afflicted with the gout, I alighted
out of my chariot (leaning very hard on my cane
with one hand, and on my new servant's shoulder with
the other) the same instant almost that he had knocked 

at the door, that I might be sure of admission into the
house. 
I took care to button my great coat about me, and
to cover with it even the pommel of my sword; it being
a little too gay for my years. I knew not what
occasion I might have for my sword. I stooped forward; 
blinked with my eyes to conceal their lustre
[No vanity in saying that, Jack!]; my chin wrapt up
for the tooth-ach; my slouched, laced hat, and so
much of my wig as was visible, giving me, all together,
the appearance of an antiquated beau. 
My wife, I resolved beforehand, should have a
complication of disorders. 
The maid came to the door. I asked for her mistress. 
She shewed me into one of the parlours; and I sat
down, with a gouty Oh!— 
Enter Goody Moore.
Your servant, Madam—But you must excuse me; 
I cannot well stand. —I find by the bill at the door,
that you have lodgings to lett [Mumbling my words as
if, like my man Will, I had lost some of my foreteeth]: 
Be pleased to inform me what they are; for I
like your situation—And I will tell you my family— 
I have a wife, a good old woman—Older than myself,
by the way, a pretty deal. She is in a bad state of
health, and is advised into the Hamstead air. She will
have two maid-servants and a footman. The coach or
chariot (I shall not have them up both together) we
can put up any-where, and the coachman will be with
his horses. 
When, Sir, shall you want to come in? 
I will take them from this very day; and, if convenient,
will bring my wife in the afternoon. 
Perhaps, Sir, you would board, as well as lodge? 
That as you please. It will save me the trouble of
bringing my cook, if we do. And I suppose you
have servants who know how to dress a couple of 

dishes. My wife must eat plain food, and I don't love
kick-shaws. 
We have a single Lady, who will be gone in two or
three days. She has one of the best apartments: That
will then be at liberty. 
You have one or two good ones mean time, I presume,
Madam, just to receive my wife; for we have
lost time—These damn'd physicians—Excuse me,
Madam, I am not used to curse; but it is owing to the
love I have for my wife—They have kept her in hand,
till they are ashamed to take more fees, and now advise
her to the air. I wish we had sent her hither at first. 
But we must now make the best of it. 
Excuse me, Madam [for she looked hard at me]
that I am muffled up thus in this warm weather. I am
but too sensible, that I have left my chamber sooner
than I ought, and perhaps shall have a return of my
gout for it. I came out thus muffled up, with a dreadful
pain in my jaws; an ague in them, I believe. But
my poor dear will not be satisfied with any-body's
care but mine. And, as told you, we have lost time. 
You shall see what accommodations I have, if you
please, Sir. But I doubt you are too lame to walk upstairs. 
I can make shift to hobble up now I have rested a
little. I'll just look upon the apartment my wife is to
have. Any-thing may do for the servants: And as you
seem to be a good sort of gentlewoman, I shan't stand
for a price, and will pay well besides for the trouble I
shall give. 
She led the way; and I, helping myself by the banisters,
made shift to get up with less fatigue than I
expected from ancles so weak. But oh! Jack, What
was Sixtus the Vth's artful depression of his natural
powers to mine, when, as the half-dead Montalto, he
gaped for the pretendedly unsought Pontificate, and
the moment he was chosen leapt upon the prancing
beast, which it was thought by the amazed conclave 

he was not able to mount without help of chairs and
men? Never were there a more joyous heart and
lighter heels than mine, joined together; yet both denied
their functions; the one fluttering in secret, ready
to burst its bars for relief ful expression, the others
obliged to an hobbling motion; when, unrestrained,
they would, in their master's imagination, have
mounted him to the lunar world without the help of
a ladder. 
There were three rooms on a floor; two of them
handsome; and the third, she said, still handsomer; 
but the Lady was in it. 
I saw, I saw she was! for as I hobbled up, crying
out upon my weak ancles, in the hoarse mumbling
voice I had assumed, I beheld a little piece of her as
she just cast an eye (with the door a jar, as they call
it) to observe who was coming up; and, seeing such
an old clumsy fellow, great-coated in weather so warm,
slouched, and muffled up, she withdrew, shutting the
door without any emotion. But it was not so with
me; for thou canst not imagine how my heart danced
to my mouth, at the very glimpse of her; so that I
was afraid the thump, thump, thumping villain, which
had so lately thumped as much to no purpose, would
have choaked me. 
I liked the lodgings well; and the more as she said
the third room was still handsomer. I must sit down,
Madam [and chose the darkest part of the room]: 
Won't you take a seat yourself? —No price shall part
us—But I will leave the terms to you and my wife, if
you please: And also whether for board or not. Only
please to take This for earnest, putting a guinea into
her hand. —And one thing I will say; My poor wife
loves money; but is not an ill-natured woman. She
was a great fortune to me: But, as the real Estate
goes away at her death, I would fain preserve her for
that reason, as well as for the Love I bear her as an
honest man. But if she make too close a bargain with 

you, tell me; and unknown to her, I will make it
up. This is my constant way: She loves to have her
pen'worths; and I would not have her vexed or made
uneasy on any account. 
She said, I was a very considerate gentleman; and,
upon the condition I had mentioned, she was content
to leave the terms to my Lady. 
But, Madam, cannot a-body just peep into the
other apartment, that I may be more particular to my
wife in the furniture of it? 
The Lady desires to be private, Sir—But—And
was going to ask her leave. 
I caught hold of her hand—However, stay, stay,
Madam: It mayn't be proper, if the Lady loves to
be private. Don't let me intrude upon the Lady— 
No intrusion, Sir, I dare say: The Lady is good-humoured. 
She will be so kind as to step down into
the parlour, I dare say. As she stays so little a while,
I am sure she will not wish to stand in my way. 
No, Madam, that's true, if she be good-humoured,
as you say—Has she been with you long, Madam? 
She came but yesterday, Sir— 
I believe I just now saw the glimpse of her. She
seems to be an elderly Lady. 
No, Sir; you're mistaken. She's a young Lady; 
and one of the handsomest I ever saw. 
Cot so, I beg her pardon! Not but that I should
have liked her the better, were she to stay longer, if
she had been elderly. I have a strange taste, Madam,
you'll say; but I really, for my wife's sake, love every
elderly woman. Indeed I ever thought Age was to
be reverenced, which made me (taking the fortune into
the scale too, that I own) make my addresses to my
present dear. 
Very good of you, Sir, to respect Age: We all
hope to live to be old. 
Right, Madam. —But you say the Lady is beautiful. 
Now you must know, that tho' I chuse to converse 

with the elderly, yet I love to see a beautiful young
woman, just as I love to see fine flowers in a garden. 
There's no casting an eye upon her, is there? without
her notice? For in this dress, and thus muffled
up about my jaws, I should not care to be seen any
more than she, let her love privacy as much as she
will. 
I will go ask if I may shew a gentleman the apartment,
Sir; and, as you are a married gentleman, and
not over-young, she'll perhaps make the less scruple. 
Then, like me, she loves elderly folks best perhaps. 
But it may be she has suffered by young ones? 
I fansy she has, Sir, or is afraid she shall. She desired
to be very private; and if by description enquired
after, to be denied. 
Thou art true woman, goody Moore, thought I! 
Good lack! —Good lack! —What may be her Story
then, I pray? 
She is pretty reserved in her Story; but, to tell you
my thoughts, I believe Love is in the case: She is always
in tears, and does not much care for company. 
Nay, Madam, it becomes not me to dive into Ladies
Secrets; I want not to pry into other peoples affairs. 
But, pray, how does she employ herself? — 
Yet she came but yesterday; so you can't tell. 
Writing continually, Sir. 
These women, Jack, when you ask them questions
by way of information, don't care to be ignorant of
any-thing. 
Nay, excuse me, Madam, I am very far from being
an inquisitive man. But if her case be difficult,
and not merely Love, as she is a friend of yours, I
would give her my advice. 
Then you are a Lawyer, Sir— 
Why, indeed, Madam, I was some time at the 

Bar; but I have long left practice; yet am much consulted
by my friends in difficult points. In a pauper
case I frequently give money; but never take any from
the richest. 
You are a very good gentleman, then, Sir. 
Ay, Madam, we cannot live always here; and we
ought to do what good we can—But I hate to appear
officious. If the Lady stay any time, and think fit,
upon better acquaintance, to let me into her case, it
may be a happy day for her, if I find it a just one; 
for, you must know, that when I was at the Bar, I
never was such a sad fellow as to undertake, for the
sake of a paltry fee, to make white black, and black
white; for what would that have been, but to endeavour
to establish iniquity by quirks, while I robbed
the innocent? 
You are an excellent gentleman, Sir: I wish [and
then she sighed] I had had the happiness to know there
was such a Lawyer in the world; and to have been
acquainted with him. 
Come, come, Mrs. Moore, I think your name is,
it may not be too late—When you and I are better acquainted,
I may help you perhaps. —But mention nothing
of this to the Lady; for, as I said, I hate to appear
officious. 
This prohibition I knew, if goody Moore answered
the specimen she had given of her womanhood, would
make her take the first opportunity to tell, were it to
be necessary to my purpose that she should. 
I appeared, upon the whole, so indifferent about
seeing the Room, or the Lady, that the good woman
was the more eager I should see both. And the rather,
as I, to stimulate her, declared, that there was more
required in my eye to merit the character of a handsome
woman, than most people thought necessary; 
and that I had never seen six truly lovely women in
my life. 

To be brief, she went in; and after a little while
came out again. The Lady, Sir, is retired to her
closet. So you may go in and look at the room. 
Then how my heart began again to play its pug's
tricks! 
I hobbled in, and stumped about, and liked it very
much; and was sure my wife would. I begged excuse
for sitting down, and asked, Who was the Minister of
the place? If he were a good preacher? Who
preached at the Chapel? And if he were a good preacher,
and good liver too, Madam—I must enquire after
That: For I love, I must needs say, that the Clergy
should practise what they preach. 
Very right, Sir; but that is not so often the case,
as were to be wished. 
More's the pity, Madam. But I have a great veneration
for the Clergy in general. It is more a satire
upon Human nature, than upon the Cloth, if we suppose
those who have the best opportunities to be good,
less perfect than other people. For my part, I don't
love professional any more than national reflections. — 
But I keep the Lady in her closet. My gout makes
me rude. 
Then up from my seat stumped I—What do you
call these window-curtains, Madam? 
Stuff-damask, Sir. 
It looks mighty well, truly. I like it better than
silk. It is warmer to be sure, and much fitter for
lodgings in the country; especially for people in years. 
The bed is in a pretty taste. 
It is neat and clean, Sir: That's all we pretend to. 
Ay, mighty well—Very well—A silk camblet, I
think—Very well, truly! —I am sure my wife will
like it. But we would not turn the Lady out of her
lodging for the world. The other two apartments
will do for us at the present. 
Then stumping towards the closet, over the door of 

which hung a picture—What picture is that—Oh! I
see: A St. Cæcilia! 
A common print, Sir!— 
Pretty well, pretty well! It is after an Italian master. 
—I would not for the world turn the Lady out of
her apartment. We can make shift with the other two,
repeated I, louder still: But yet mumblingly hoarse:
for I had as great regard to uniformity in accent, as
to my words. 
O Belford! to be so near my angel, think what a
painful constraint I was under! 
I was resolved to fetch her out, if possible: And
pretending to be going—You can't agree as to any
time, Mrs. Moore, when we can have this third room,
can you? —Not that [whispered I, loud enough to
be heard in the next room; Not that] I would incommode
the Lady: But I would tell my Wife when
abouts—And women, you know, Mrs. Moore, love
to have every-thing before them of this nature. 
Mrs. Moore, said my Charmer [And never did her
voice found so harmonious to me: Oh how my heart
bounded again! It even talked to me, in a manner; 
for I thought I heard, as well as felt, its unruly flutters; 
and every vein about me seemed a pulse: Mrs.
Moore] you may acquaint the gentleman, that I shall
stay here only for two or three days at most, till I receive
an Answer to a Letter I have written into the
country; and rather than be your hindrance, I will
take up with any apartment a pair of stairs higher. 
Not for the world! —Not for the world, young
Lady, cried I! —My wife, well as I love her, should
lie in a garret, rather than put such a considerate Lady
as you seem to be, to the least inconveniency. 
She opened not the door yet; and I said, But since
you have have so much goodness, Madam, if I could
but just look into the closet as I stand, I could tell my
wife whether it is large enough to hold a cabinet she
much values, and will have with her where-ever she
goes. 

Then my Charmer opened the door, and blazed
upon me, as it were, in a flood of light, like what
one might imagine would strike a man, who, born
blind, had by some propitious power been blessed with
his sight, all at once, in a meridian Sun. 
Upon my Soul, I never was so strangely affected
before. I had much ado to forbear discovering myself
that instant: But, hesitatingly, and in great disorder,
I said, looking into the closet, and around it, There
is room, I see, for my wife's Cabinet; and it has
many jewels in it of high price; but, upon my Soul
[for I could not forbear swearing, like a puppy: — 
Habit is a cursed thing, Jack—] Nothing so valuable
as the Lady I see, can be brought into it. 
She started, and looked at me with terror. The
truth of the compliment, as far as I know, had taken
dissimulation from my accent. 
I saw it was impossible to conceal myself longer
from her, any more than (from the violent impulses of
my passion) to forbear manifesting myself. I unbuttoned
therefore my cape, I pulled off my slapt slouched hat; 
I threw open my great coat, and, like the devil in
Milton [an odd comparison tho'!] 

I started up in my own form divine,
Touch'd by the beam of her celestial eye,
More potent than Ithuriel's spear!—
Now, Belford, for a similitude—Now for a likeness
to illustrate the surprising scene, and the effect it had
upon my charmer, and the gentlewoman! —But nothing
was like it, or equal to it. The plain fact can
only describe it, and set it off—Thus then take it. 
She no sooner saw who it was, than she gave three
violent screams; and, before I could catch her in my
arms (as I was about to do the moment I discovered
myself) down she sunk at my feet, in a fit; which
made me curse my indiscretion for so suddenly, and
with so much emotion, revealing myself. 

The gentlewoman, seeing so strange an alteration
in my person, and features, and voice, and dress,
cried out, Murder, help! Murder, help! by turns,
for half a dozen times running. This alarmed the
house, and up ran two servant-maids, and my servant
after them. I cried out for water and hartshorn, and
every one flew a different way, one of the maids as
fast down as she came up; while the gentlewoman ran
out of one room into another, and by turns up and
down the apartment we were in, without meaning or
end, wringing her foolish hands, and not knowing
what she did. 
Up then came running a gentleman and his sister,
fetched, and brought in by the maid, who had run
down; and having let in a cursed crabbed old wretch,
hobbling with his gout, and mumbling wit h hi
hoarse broken-toothed voice, who was metamorphosed
all at once into a lively gay young fellow, with a clear
accent, and all his teeth, she would have it, that
I was neither more nor less than the devil, and could
not keep her eye from my soot; expecting, no doubt,
every minute to see it discover itself to be cloven. 
For my part, I was so intent upon restoring my
angel, that I regarded nobody else. And at last, she
slowly recovering motion, with bitter sighs and sobs
(only the whites of her eyes however appearing for
some moments) I called upon her in the tenderest accent,
as I kneeled by her, my arm supporting her
head; My Angel! My Charmer! My Clarissa! look
upon me, my dearest Life! —I am not angry with
you! —I will forgive you, my best Beloved!— 
The gentleman and his sister knew not what to make
of all this: And the less, when my Fair-one, recovering
her sight, snatched another look at me; and then
again groaned, and fainted away. 
I threw up the closet-sash for air, and then left her
to the care of the young gentlewoman, the same notable
Miss Rawlins, whom I had heard of at the Flask; 

and to that of Mrs. Moore; who by this time had
recovered herself; and then retiring to one corner of
the room, I made my servant pull off my gouty
stockens, brush my hat, and loop it up into the usual
smart cock. 
I then stept to the closet to Mr. Rawlins, whom,
in the general confusion, I had not much minded before. 
—Sir, said I, you have an uncommon scene before
you. The Lady is my Wife, and no gentleman's
presence is necessary here but my own. 
I beg pardon, Sir; If the Lady be your Wife, I
have no business here. But, Sir, by her concern at
seeing you— 
Pray, Sir, none of your if's, and but's, I beseech
you: Nor your concern about the Lady's concern. 
You are a very unqualified judge in this cause; and I
beg of you, Sir, to oblige me with your absence. The
Women only are proper to be present on this occasion,
added I; and I think myself obliged to them for their
care and kind assistance. 
'Tis well he made not another word: For I found
my choler begin to rise. I could not bear, that the
finest neck, and arms, and foot, in the world, should
be exposed to the eyes of any man living but mine. 
I withdrew once more from the closet, finding her
beginning to recover, lest the sight of me too soon,
should throw her back again. 
The first words she said, looking round her with
great emotion, were, O hide me, hide me! Is he
gone! —O hide me! —Is he gone! 
Sir, said Miss Rawlins, coming to me with an air
both peremptory and assured, This is some surprising
case. The Lady cannot bear the sight of you. What
you have done is best known to yourself. But another
such fit will probably be her last. It would be but
kind therefore for you to retire. 
It behoved me to have so notable a person of my
party; and the rather as I had disobliged her impertinent
Brother. 

The dear creature, said I, may well be concerned to
see me. If you, Madam, had a Husband who loved
you as I love her, you would not, I am confident, fly
from him, and expose yourself to hazards, as she does
whenever she has not all her way—And yet with a
mind not capable of intentional evil—But Mother-spoilt! 
This is her fault, and All her fault: And the
more inexcuseable it is, as I am the man of her choice,
and have reason to think she loves me above all the
men in the world. 
Here, Jack, was a Story to support to the Lady; 
face to face too [a] ! 

You speak like a gentleman; you look like a gentleman,
said Miss Rawlins—But, Sir, this is a strange
case; the Lady seems to dread the sight of you. 
No wonder, Madam; taking her a little on one
side nearer to Mrs. Moore. I have three times already
forgiven the dear creature. —But this jealousy! — 
There is a spice of that in it—and of phrensy too
[whispered I, that it might have the face of a secret,
and of consequence the more engage their attention]
—But our Story is too long— 
I then made a motion to go to my Beloved. But
they desired that I would walk into the next room; 
and they would endeavour to prevail upon her to lie
down. 
I begged that they would not suffer her to talk; for
that she was accustomed to Fits, and when in this
way, would talk of any-thing that came uppermost: 
And the more she was suffered to run on, the worse
she was; and if not kept quiet, would fall into raveings; 
which might possibly hold her a week. 
They promised to keep her quiet; and I withdrew
into the next room; ordering every one down but
Mrs. Moore and Miss Rawlins. 
She was full of exclamations. Unhappy creature!
miserable! ruined! and undone! she called herself; 
wrung her hands, and begged they would assist her to
escape from the terrible evils she should otherwise be
made to suffer. 
They preached patience and quietness to her; and
would have had her to lie down: But she refused; 
sinking, however, into an easy chair; for she trembled
so, she could not stand. 
By this time, I hoped, that she was enough recovered
to bear a presence, that it behoved me to make her
bear; and fearing she would throw out something in
her exclamations, that would still more disconcert me,
I went into the room again. 
O there he is! said she, and threw her apron over 

her face—I cannot see him! —I cannot look upon
him! —Begone, begone! touch me not!— 
For I took her struggling hand, beseeching her to
be pacified; and assuring her, that I would make all
up with her upon her own terms and wishes. 
Base man! said the violent Lady, I have no wishes,
but never to behold you more! Why must I be thus
pursued and haunted? Have you not made me miserable
enough already? —Despoiled of all succour and
help, and of every friend, I am contented to be poor,
low, and miserable, so I may be free from your persecutions. 
Miss Rawlins stared at me [A confident slut this
Miss Rawlins, thought I]: So did Mrs. Moore. I
told you so! whisperingly said I, turning to the women; 
shaking my head with a face of great concern
and pity; and then to my Charmer, My dear creature,
how you rave! You will not easily recover from
the effects of this violence. Have patience, my Love. 
Be pacified; and we will coolly talk this matter over: 
For you expose yourself, as well as me: These Ladies
will certainly think, you have fallen among robbers; 
and that I am the chief of them. 
So you are! so you are! stamping, her face still
covered [She thought of Wednesday night, no doubt]; 
and, sighing as if her heart were breaking, she put her
hand to her forehead—I shall be quite distracted! 
I will not, my dearest Love, uncover your face. 
You shall not look upon me, since I am so odious to
you. But this is a violence I never thought you capable
of. 
And I would have pressed her hand, as I held it,
with my lips; but she drew it from me with indignation. 
Unhand me, Sir, said she. I will not be touched
by you. Leave me to my fate. What right, what
title, have you to persecute me thus? 
What right, what title, my dear! —But this is not 

a time—I have a Letter from Captain Tomlinson— 
Here it is—offering it to her— 
I will receive nothing from your hands—Tell me
not of Captain Tomlinson—Tell me not of any-body
—You have no right to invade me thus—Once more
leave me to my fate—Have you not made me miserable
enough? 
I touched a delicate string, on purpose to set her in
such a passion before the women, as might confirm the
intimation I had given of a phrensical disorder. 
What a turn is here! —Lately so happy! —Nothing
wanting but a Reconciliation between you and your
friends! —That Reconciliation in such a happy train— 
Shall so slight, so accidental an occasion be suffered to
overturn all our happiness? 
She started up with a trembling impatience, her
apron falling from her indignant face—Now, said she,
that thou darest to call the occasion slight and accidental,
and that I am happily out of thy vile hands,
and out of a house I have reason to believe as vile,
traitor and wretch that thou art, I will venture to cast
an eye upon thee—And O that it were in my power,
in mercy to my Sex, to look thee first into shame and
remorse, and then into death! 
This violent Tragedy-speech, and the high manner
in which she uttered it, had its desired effect. I looked
upon the women, and upon her, by turns, with a pitying
eye; and they shook their wise heads, and besought
me to retire, and her to lie down to compose
herself. 
This hurricane, like other hurricanes, was presently
allayed by a shower. She threw herself once more
into her armed chair, and begged pardon of the women
for her passionate excess; but not of me: Yet I was
in hopes, that when compliments were stirring, I
should have come in for a share. 
Indeed, Ladies, said I [with assurance enough,
thou'lt say] this violence is not natural to my Beloved's
temper—Misapprehension— 

Misapprehension, wretch! —And want I excuses
from thee! 
By what a scorn was every lovely feature agitated! 
Then turning her face from me, I have not patience,
O thou guileful betrayer, to look upon thee! — 
Begone! Begone! With a face so unblushing, how
darest thou my presence? 
I thought then, that the character of a Husband
obliged me to be angry. 
You may one day, Madam, repent this treatment: 
—By my Soul you may. You know I have not deserved
it of you—You know I have not. 
Do I know you have not? —Wretch! Do I
know— 
You do, Madam—And never did man of my figure
and consideration [I thought it was proper to throw
that in] meet with such treatment— 
She lifted up her hands: Indignation kept her
silent. 
But all is of a piece with the charge you bring against
me of despoiling you of all succour and help, of making
you poor and low, and with other unprecedented language. 
I will only say, before these two gentlewomen,
that since it must be so, and since your former esteem
for me is turned into so riveted an aversion, I will soon,
very soon, make you entirely easy. I will be gone: 
—I will leave you to your own fate, as you call it; 
and may That be happy! —Only, that I may not appear
to be a spoiler, a robber indeed, let me know
whither I shall send your apparel, and every-thing
that belongs to you, and I will send it. 
Send it to this place; and assure me, that you will
never molest me more; never more come near me; 
and that is all I ask of you. 
I will do so, Madam, said I, with a dejected air. 
But did I ever think I should be so indifferent to you? 
—However, you must permit me to insist on your
reading this Letter; and on your seeing Captain Tomlinson, 

and hearing what he has to say from your
Uncle. He will be here by-and-by. 
Don't trifle with me, said she, in an imperious
tone—Do as you offer. I will not receive any Letter
from your hands. If I see Captain Tomlinson,
it shall be on his own account; not on yours. You
tell me you will send me my apparel: If you would
have me believe any-thing you say, let This be the
Test of your Sincerity—Leave me now, and send my
things. 
The women stared. They did nothing but stare; 
and appeared to be more and more at a loss what to
make of the matter between us. 
I pretended to be going from her in a pet: But
when I had got to the door, I turned back; and, as
if I had recollected myself, One word more, my
dearest creature! —Charming even in your anger! — 
O my fond soul! said I, turning half-round, and pulling
out my handkerchief. 
I believe, Jack, my eyes did glisten a little. I have
no doubt but they did. The women pitied me. Honest
souls! They shewed, that they had each of them
a handkerchief as well as I. So, hast thou not observed
(to give a familiar illustration) every man in
a company of a dozen, or more, obligingly pull out
his watch, when some one has asked, What's o'clock? 
—&dotup;As each man of a like number, if one talks of
his Beard, will fall to stroking his chin with his four
fingers and thumb.&dotup; 
One word only, Madam, repeated I (as soon as my
voice had recovered its tone): I have represented to
Captain Tomlinson in the most favourable light the
cause of our present misunderstanding. You know
what your Uncle insists upon; and with which you
have acquiesced. The Letter in my hand [and again
I offered it to her] will acquaint you with what you
have to apprehend from your Brother's active malice. 
She was going to speak in a high accent, putting 

the Letter from her, with an open palm—Nay, hear
me out, Madam—The Captain, you know, has reported
our marriage to two different persons. It is
come to your Brother's ears. My own relations have
also heard of it. Letters were brought me from town
this morning, from Lady Betty Lawrance and Miss
Montague. Here they are [I pulled them out of my
pocket, and offered them to her, with That of the
Captain; but she held back her still open palm, that
she might not receive them]. Reflect, Madam, I beseech
you reflect, upon the fatal consequences with
which this your high resentment may be attended. 
Ever since I knew you, said she, I have been in
a wilderness of doubt and error. I bless God that I
am out of your hands. I will transact for myself
what relates to myself. I dismiss all your solicitude
for me. Am I not my own mistress! —Have you any
title— 
The women stared [The devil stare ye, thought
I! Can ye do nothing but stare?] It was high time
to stop her here. 
I raised my voice to drown hers—You used, my
dearest creature, to have a tender and apprehensive
heart—You never had so much reason for such a one
as now. 
Let me judge for myself, upon what I shall see,
not upon what I shall hear—Do you think I shall
ever— 
I dreaded her going on—I must be heard, Madam,
raising my voice still higher. You must let me read
one paragraph or two of This Letter to you, if you
will not read it yourself— 
Begone from me, Man! —Begone from me with thy
Letters! What pretence hast thou for tormenting me
thus—What right—What title— 
Dearest creature, what questions you ask! Questions
that you can as well answer yourself— 
I can, I will—And thus I answer them— 

Still louder raised I my voice. She was overborne. 
Sweet Soul! It would be hard, thought I [and yet I
was very angry with her] if such a spirit as thine cannot
be brought to yield to such a one as mine! 
I lowered my voice on her silence. All gentle, all
entreative, my accent: My head bowed; one hand
held out; the other on my honest heart: —For Heaven's
sake, my dearest creature, resolve to see Captain
Tomlinson with temper. He would have come along
with me: But I was willing to try to soften your mind
first on this fatal misapprehension; and This for the
sake of your own wishes: For what is it otherwise to
me whether your friends are or are not reconciled to
us? Do I want any favour from them? —For your own
mind's sake therefore, frustrate not Captain Tomlinson's
negotiation. That worthy Gentleman will be
here in the afternoon—Lady Betty will be in town
with my Cousin Montague, in a day or two. They
will be your visitors. I beseech you do not carry this
misunderstanding so far, as that Lord M. and Lady
Betty, and Lady Sarah, may know it. [How considerable
this made me look to the women!] Lady Betty will
not let you rest till you consent to accompany her to
her own Seat—And to that Lady may you safely entrust
your cause. 
Again, upon my pausing a moment, she was going
to break out. I liked not the turn of her countenance,
nor the tone of her voice—“And thinkest
thou, base wretch—” were the words she did utter. 
I again raised my voice and drowned hers—Base
wretch, Madam! —You know that I have not deserved
the violent names you have called me. Words so
opprobrious! from a mind so gentle! —But this treatment
is from you, Madam! —From you, whom I love
more than my own Soul—By that Soul, I swear that
I do—[The women looked upon each other. They
seemed pleased with my Ardor. Women, whether
Wives, Maids, or Widows, love Ardors. Even Miss 

Howe, thou knowest, speaks up for Ardors (a) ]— 
Nevertheless, I must say, that you have carried matters
too far for the occasion. I see you hate me— 
She was just going to speak—If we are to separate
for ever, in a strong and solemn voice, proceeded I,
this Island shall not long be troubled with me. Mean
time, only be pleased to give these Letters a perusal,
and consider what is to be said to your Uncle's friend,
and what he is to say to your Uncle. —Any-thing will
I come into (renounce me if you will) that shall make
for your peace, and for the Reconciliation your heart
was so lately set upon. But I humbly conceive, that
it is necessary, that you should come into better temper
with me, were it but to give a favourable appearance
to what has passed, and weight to any future
application to your friends, in whatever way you shall
think proper to make it. 
I then put the Letters into her lap, and retired into
the next apartment with a low bow, and a very solemn
air. 
I was soon followed by the two women. Mrs. Moore
withdrew to give the fair Perverse time to read them: 
Miss Rawlins for the same reason; and because she was
sent for home. 
The widow besought her speedy return. I joined
in the same request; and she was ready enough to promise
to oblige us. 
I excused myself to Mrs. Moore for the disguise I
had appeared in at first, and for the Story I had invented. 
I told her, that I held myself obliged to
satisfy her for the whole floor we were upon; and for
an upper room for my servant; and that for a month
certain. 
She made many scruples, and begged she might
not be urged on this head, till she had consulted Miss
Rawlins. 

I consented; but told her, that she had taken my
Earnest; and I hoped there was no room for dispute. 
Just then Miss Rawlins returned, with an air of
eager curiosity; and having been told, what had passed
between Mrs. Moore and me, she gave herself airs of
office immediately: Which I humoured, plainly perceiving,
that if I had her with me, I had the other. 
She wished, if there were time for it, and if it were
not quite impertinent in her to desire it, that I would
give Mrs. Moore and her a brief History of an affair,
which, as she said, bore the face of Novelty, Mystery,
and Surprize: For sometimes it looked to her as if
we were married; at other times, that point appeared
doubtful; and yet the Lady did not absolutely deny
it; but, upon the whole, thought herself highly injured. 
I said, That ours was a very particular case: That
were I to acquaint them with it, some part of it would
hardly appear credible. But however, as they seemed
to be persons of discretion, I would give them a brief
account of the whole; and this in so plain and sincere
a manner, that it should clear up to their satisfaction
every-thing that had passed, or might hereafter pass
between us. 
They sat down by me, and threw every feature of
their faces into attention. I was resolved to go as near
the truth as possible, lest any-thing should drop from
my Spouse to impeach my veracity; and yet keep in
view what passed at the Flask. 
It is necessary, altho' thou knowest my whole Story,
and a good deal of my views, that thou shouldst be
apprised of the substance of what I told them. 
‘I gave them, in as concise a manner as I was able,
the history of our families, fortunes, alliances, antipathies; 
her Brother's, and mine, particularly. I
averred the truth of our private Marriage.’ The
Captain's Letter, which I will inclose, will give thee
my reasons for that. And besides, the women might 

have proposed a Parson to me by way of compromise. 
‘I told them the condition my Spouse had made me
swear to; and to which she held me, in order, I
said, to induce me the sooner to be reconciled to
her Relations.’ 
‘I owned, that this restraint made me sometimes
ready to fly out.’ And Mrs. Moore was so good
as to declare, that she did not much wonder at it. 
Thou art a very good sort of a woman, Mrs.
Moore, thought I. 
As Miss Howe has actually detected our mother; 
and might possibly find some way still to acquaint her
friend with her discoveries; I thought it proper to
prepossess them in favour of Mrs. Sinclair and her two
Nieces. 
I said, ‘They were Gentlewomen born; that they
had not bad hearts; that indeed my Spouse did not
love them; they having once jointly taken the liberty
to blame her for her over-niceness with regard
to me. People, I said, even good people, who knew
themselves to be guilty of a fault they had no inclination
to mend, were too often least patient, when
told of it; as they could less bear than others, to be
thought indifferently of.’ 
Too often the case, they owned. 
‘Mrs. Sinclair's house was a very handsome house,
and fit to receive the first quality [True enough,
Jack!]. Mrs. Sinclair was a woman very easy in
her circumstances: A Widow-gentlewoman—as
you, Mrs. Moore, are. Lets Lodgings—as you,
Mrs. Moore, do. Once had better prospects—as
you, Mrs. Moore, may have had: The Relict of
Colonel Sinclair: You, Mrs. Moore, might know
Colonel Sinclair—He had lodgings at Hamstead.’ 
She had heard of the name. 
‘O, he was related to the best families in Scotland: 
And his Widow is not to be reflected upon,
because she lets Lodgings, you know, Mrs. Moore; 
—You know, Miss Rawlins.’ 

Very true, and, Very true: And they must needs
say, it did not look quite so pretty in such a Lady as
my Spouse, to be so censorious. 
A foundation here, thought I, to procure these womens
help to get back the Fugitive, or their conniveance
at least at my doing so; as well as for anticipating
any future information from Miss Howe. 
I gave them a character of that Virago: And intimated,
‘that for a head to contrive mischief, and a
heart to execute it, she had hardly her equal in her
Sex.’ 
To this Miss Howe it was, Mrs. Moore said, she
supposed, that my Spouse was so desirous to dispatch a
man and horse, by day-dawn, with a Letter she wrote
before she went to-bed last night; proposing to stay no
longer than till she had received an Answer to it. 
The very same, said I. I knew she would have immediate
recourse to her. I should have been but too
happy, could I have prevented such a Letter from
passing, or so to have managed, as to have it given
into Mrs. Howe's hands, instead of her Daughter's. 
Women who had lived some time in the world knew
better, than to encourage such skittish pranks in young
wives. 
Let me just stop to tell thee, while it is in my
head, that I have since given Will. his cue to find out
where the man lives who is gone with the fair Fugitive's
Letter; and, if possible, to see him on his return,
before he sees her. 
I told the women, ‘I despaired that it would ever
be better with us while Miss Howe had so strange
an ascendency over my Spouse, and remained herself
unmarried; and until the Reconciliation with
her friends could be effected; or a still happier
event—as I should think it, who am the last male
of my family; and which my foolish vow, and her
rigour, had hitherto’— 
Here I stopt, and looked modest, turning my diamond 

ring round my finger: While goody Moore
looked mighty significant, calling it a very particular
case; and the Maiden fanned away, and primm'd
and purs'd, to shew, that what I said needed no farther
explanation. 
‘I told them the occasion of our present difference: 
I avowed the reality of the Fire: But owned, that I
would have made no scruple of breaking the unnatural
oath she had bound me in (having an Husband's
right on my side) when she was so accidentally
frighted into my arms: And I blamed myself
excessively, that I did not; since she thought fit to
carry her resentment so high, and had the injustice
to suppose the Fire to be a contrivance of mine.’ 
Nay, for that matter, Mrs. Moore said—as we were
married, and Madam was so odd—Every Gentleman
would not—And there stopt Mrs. Moore. 
‘To suppose I should have recourse to such a poor
contrivance, said I, when I saw the dear creature
every hour—’ Was not this a bold put, Jack? 
A most extraordinary case, truly! cried the Maiden; 
fanning, yet coming in with her Well-buts; and her
sifting Pray Sir's! and her restraining Enough Sir's!— 
flying from the question to the question; her seat now-and-then
uneasy, for fear my want of delicacy should
hurt her abundant modesty; and yet it was difficult to
satisfy her super-abundant curiosity. 
‘My Beloved's jealousy [and jealousy of itself, to
female minds, accounts for a thousand unaccountablenesses]
and the imputation of her half-phrensy
brought upon her by her Father's wicked curse, and
by the previous persecutions she had undergone from
all her family, were what I dwelt upon, in order to
provide against what might happen.’ 
In short, ‘I owned against myself most of the
offences which I did not doubt but she would charge
me with in their hearing: And as every cause has
a black and a white side, I gave the worst parts of 

our Story the gentlest turn. And when I had done,
acquainted them with some of the contents of that
Letter of Captain Tomlinson, which I had left
with the Lady. I concluded with cautioning them
to be guarded against the enquiries of James Harlowe,
and of Captain Singleton, or of any Sailor-looking
men.’ 
This thou wilt see from the Letter itself was necessary
to be done. Here therefore thou mayest read it. 
And a charming Letter to my purpose wilt thou find
it to be, if thou givest the least attention to its contents. 

To Robert Lovelace, Esq;
Wedn. June 7. 
Dear Sir,
Altho' I am obliged to be in town to-morrow, or
next day at farthest, yet I would not dispense
with writing to you, by one of my servants (whom I
send up before me upon a particular occasion) in order
to advertise you, that it is probable you will hear from
some of your own relations on your [supposed * ] nuptials. 
One of the persons (Mr. Lilburne by name) to whom
I hinted my belief of your Marriage, happens to be
acquainted with Mr. Spurrier, Lady Betty Lawrance's
Steward; and (not being under any restriction) mentioned
it to Mr. Spurrier, and he to Lady Betty, as a
thing certain: And this (tho' I have not the honour
to be personally known to her Ladyship) brought on an
enquiry from her Ladyship to me by her gentleman; 
who coming to me in company with Mr. Lilburne, I
had no way but to confirm the report. And I understand,
that Lady Betty takes it amiss, that she was
not acquainted with so desireable a piece of news
from yourself. 

Her Ladyship, it seems, has business that calls her
to town [and you will possibly chuse to put her right. 
If you do, it will, I presume, be in confidence; that
nothing may perspire from your own family to contradict
what I have given out.] 
[I have ever been of opinion, That truth ought to
be strictly adhered to on all occasions: And am concerned
that I have (tho' with so good a view) departed
from my old maxim. But my dear friend Mr.
John Harlowe would have it so. Yet I never knew
a departure of this kind a single departure. But, to
make the best of it now, allow me, Sir, once more
to beg the Lady, as soon as possible, to authenticate
the report given out.] When both you and the Lady
join in the acknowlegement of your marriage, it will
be impertinent in any one to be inquisitive as to the
day or week: [And, if as privately celebrated as you
intend (while the gentlewomen with whom you lodge
are properly instructed, as you say they are, and who
actually believe you were married long ago) who shall
be able to give a contradiction to my report?] 
And yet it is very probable, that minute enquiries
will be made; and this is what renders precaution necessary. 
For Mr. James Harlowe will not believe
that you are married; and is sure, he says, that
you both lived together when Mr. Hickman's application
was made to Mr. John Harlowe: And if you
lived together any time unmarried, he infers from
your character, Mr. Lovelace, that it is not probable,
that you would ever marry. And he leaves it to his
two Uncles to decide, if you even should be married,
whether there be not room to believe, that his Sister
was first dishonoured; and if so, to judge of the title
she will have to their favour, or to the forgiveness of
any of her family. I believe, Sir, this part of my
Letter had best be kept from the Lady. 
Young Mr. Harlowe is resolved to find this out, and
to come at his Sister's speech likewise; and for that 

purpose sets out to-morrow, as I am well informed,
with a large attendance armed; and Mr. Solmes is to
be of the party. And what makes him the more earnest
to find it out, is this: Mr. John Harlowe has
told the whole family, that he will alter and new-settle
his will. Mr. Antony Harlowe is resolved to
do the same by his; for, it seems, he has now given
over all thoughts of changing his condition; having
lately been disappointed in a view he had of that sort
with Mrs. Howe. These two Brothers generally act
in concert; and Mr. James Harlowe dreads (and let
me tell you, that he has reason for it, on my Mr.
Harlowe's account) that his younger Sister will be,
at last, more benefited than he wishes for, by the
alteration intended. He has already been endeavouring
to sound his Uncle Harlowe on this subject; and
wanted to know whether any new application had been
made to him on his Sister's part. Mr. Harlowe
avoided a direct answer, and expressed his wishes for a
general Reconciliation, and his hopes that his Niece
were married. This offended the furious young man,
and he reminded his Uncle of Engagements they had
all entered into at his Sister's going away, not to be
reconciled but by general consent. 
Mr. John Harlowe complains to me often, of the
uncontroulableness of his Nephew; and says, that
now, that the young man has not any-body of whose
superior sense he stands in awe, he observes not decency
in his behaviour to any of them. And this
makes my Mr. Harlowe still more desirous than ever
of bringing his younger Niece into favour again. I
will not say all I might of this young man's extraordinary
rapaciousness: —But one would think, that
these grasping men expect to live for ever! 
‘I took the liberty but within these two hours, to
propose to set on foot (and offered my cover to) a
correspondence between my friend, and his daughter-niece,
as he still sometimes fondly calls her. She 

was mistress of so much prudence, I said, that I was
sure she could better direct every-thing to its desireable
end, than any-body else could. But he said,
he did not think himself entirely at liberty to take
such a step at present; and that it was best that he
should have it in his power to say, occasionally,
that he had not any correspondence with her, or
Letter from her. 
‘You will see, Sir, from all this, the necessity of
keeping our treaty an absolute Secret; and if the
Lady has mentioned it to her worthy friend Miss
Howe, I hope it is in confidence.’ 
[And now, Sir, a few lines in answer to yours of
Monday last.] 
[Mr. Harlowe was very well pleased with your readiness
to come into his proposal. But as to what you
both desire, that he will be present at the ceremony,
he said, that his Nephew watched all his steps so narrowly,
that he thought it was not practicable (if he
were inclinable) to oblige you: But that he consented
with all his heart, that I should be the person
whom he had stipulated should be privately present
at the ceremony on his part.] 
[However, I think, I have an expedient for this, if
your Lady continues to be very desirous of her Uncle's
presence (except he should be more determined than
his answer to me seemed to import); of which I shall
acquaint you, and perhaps of what he says to it, when
I have the pleasure to see you in town. But, indeed, I
think you have no time to lose. Mr. Harlowe is impatient
to hear, that you are actually one; and I hope
I may carry him down word, when I leave you next,
that I saw the Ceremony performed.] 
[If any obstacle arises from the Lady (from You it
cannot) I shall be tempted to think a little hardly of
her punctilio.] 
Mr. Harlowe hopes, Sir, that you will rather take
pains to avoid, than to meet, this violent young man. 

He has the better opinion of you, let me tell you,
Sir, from the account I gave him of your moderation
and politeness; neither of which are qualities with his
Nephew. But we have all of us something to amend. 
You cannot imagine how dearly my friend still
loves this excellent Niece of his—I will give you an
instance of it, which affected me a good deal—‘If
once more, said he (the last time but one we were
together) I can but see this sweet child gracing the
upper-end of my table, as mistress of my house, in
my allotted month; all the rest of the family present
but as her guests; for so I formerly would have it; 
and had her Mother's consent for it—’ There he
stopt; for he was forced to turn his reverend face
from me. Tears ran down his cheeks. Fain would
he have hid them: But he could not—‘Yet—yet,
said he—how—how—’ [Poor gentleman, he perfectly
sobbed]—how shall I be able to bear the first
meeting!’ 
I bless God I am no hard-hearted man, Mr. Lovelace: 
My eyes shewed to my worthy friend, that
he had no reason to be ashamed of his humanity before
me. 
I will put an end to this long epistle. Be pleased
to make my compliments acceptable to the most excellent
of women; as well as believe me to be, 
Dear Sir,
Your faithful Friend, and humble Servant,
Antony Tomlinson. 
During the conversation between me and the women,
I had planted myself at the farther end of the
apartment we were in, over-against the door, which
was open; and opposite to the Lady's chamber-door,
which was shut. I spoke so low, that it was impossible
for her, at that distance, to hear what we said; 
and in this situation I could see if her door opened. 
I told the women, that what I had mentioned to 

my Spouse of Lady Betty's coming to town with her
Niece Montague, and of their intention to visit my
Beloved, whom they had never seen, nor she them,
was real; and that I expected news of their arrival
every hour. I then shewed them copies of the other
two Letters, which I had left with her; the one from
Lady Betty, the other from my Cousin Montague. — 
And here thou mayest read them if thou wilt. 
Eternally reproaching, eternally upbraiding me, are
my impertinent relations. But they are fond of occasions
to find fault with me. Their Love, their Love,
Jack, and their dependence on my known good humour,
are their inducements. 

To Robert Lovelace, Esq;
Wedn. Morn. June 7. 
Dear Nephew,
I understand, that at length all our wishes are answered
in your happy Marriage. But I think, we
might as well have heard of it directly from you, as
from the round-about way by which we have been made
acquainted with it. Methinks, Sir, the power and the
will we have to oblige you, should not expose us the
more to your slights and negligence. My Brother
had set his heart upon giving to you the Wife we
have all so long wished you to have. But if you were
actually married at the time you made him that request
(supposing, perhaps, that his gout would not let him
attend you) it is but like you * . —If your Lady had her
reasons to wish it to be private while the differences
between her family and self continue, you might nevertheless
have communicated it to us with that restriction; 
and we should have forborn the public manifestations
of our joy, upon an event we have so long
desired. 
The distant way we have come to know it, is by
my Steward; who is acquainted with a friend of 

Captain Tomlinson, to whom that gentleman revealed
it: And he, it seems, had it from yourself and Lady,
with such circumstances as leave it not to be doubted. 
I am, indeed, very much disobliged with you: So
is Lady Sarah. But I shall have a very speedy opportunity
to tell you so in person; being obliged to go to
town on my old Chancery-affair. My Cousin Leeson,
who is, it seems, removed to Albemarle-street, has
notice of it. I shall be at her house, where I bespeak
your attendance on Sunday night. I have written to
my Cousin Charlotte for either her, or her Sister, to
meet me at Reading, and accompany me to town. I
shall stay but a few days; my business being matter
of form only. On my return I shall pop upon Lord
M. at M. Hall, to see in what way his last Fit has
left him. 
Mean time, having told you my mind on your negligence,
I cannot help congratulating you both upon
the occasion—Your fair Lady particularly, upon her
entrance into a family, which is prepared to admire
and love her. 
My principal intention of writing to you (dispensing
with the necessary punctilio) is, that you may acquaint
my dear new Niece, that I will not be denied the honour
of her company down with me into Oxfordshire. I
understand, that your proposed house and equipages
cannot be soon ready. She shall be with me till they
are. I insist upon it. This shall make all up. My
house shall be her own. My servants and equipages
hers. 
Lady Sarah, who has not been out of her own house
for months, will oblige me with her company for a
week, in honour of a Niece so dearly beloved, as I
am sure she will be of us all. 
Being but in lodgings in town, neither You nor
your Lady can require much preparation. 
Some time on Monday I hope to attend the dear
young Lady, to make her my compliments; and to 

receive her apology for your negligence: Which, and
her going down with me, as I said before, shall be full
satisfaction. Mean time, God bless her for her courage
[Tell her I say so]: And bless you both in each
other; and that will be happiness to us all—particularly,
to 
Your truly affectionate Aunt,
Eliz. Lawrance. 

To Robert Lovelace, Esq;
Dear Cousin,
At last, as we understand, there is some hope of
you. Now does my good Lord run over his
bead-roll of proverbs; of Black Oxen, Wild Oats,
Long Lanes, and so forth. 
Now, Cousin, say I, is your time come; and you will
be no longer, I hope, an infidel either to the power or
excellence of the Sex you have pretended hitherto so
much to undervalue; nor a ridiculer or scoffer at an
Institution which all Sober people reverence, and all
Rakes, sooner or later, are brought to reverence, or
to wish they had. 
I want to see how you become your silken fetters: 
Whether the charming yoke sits light upon your shoulders. 
If, with such a sweet Yoke-fellow it does not,
my Lord, and my Sister, as well as I, think, that
you will deserve a closer tie about your neck. 
His Lordship is very much displeased, that you have
not written him word of the Day, the Hour, the Manner,
and every-thing. But I ask him, How he can
already expect any mark of deference or politeness from
you? He must stay, I tell him, till that sign of Reformation,
among others, appear from the influence
and example of your Lady: But that, if ever you will
be good for any-thing, it will be quickly seen. And,
O Cousin, what a vast, vast, journey have you to
take from the dreary Land of Libertinism, thro' the 

bright Province of Reformation, into the serene Kingdom
of Happiness! —You had need to lose no time. 
You have many a weary step to tread, before you can
overtake those travellers, who set out for it from a
less remote quarter. But you have a charming Pole-star
to guide you; that's your advantage. I wish you
joy of it: And as I have never yet expected any highly
complaisant thing from you, I make no scruple to begin
first; but it is purely, I must tell you, in respect to
my new Cousin; whose accession into our family we
most heartily congratulate and rejoice in. 
I have a Letter from Lady Betty. She commands
either my attendance or my Sister's at Reading, to
proceed with her to town, to Cousin Leeson's. She
puts Lord M. in hopes, that she shall certainly bring
down with her our lovely new Relation; for she says,
she will not be denied. His Lordship is the willinger
to let me be the person, as I am in a manner wild to
see her; my Sister having two years ago had that honour
at Sir Robert Biddulph's. So get ready to accompany
us in our return; except your Lady has objections
strong enough to satisfy us all. Lady Sarah
longs to see her; and says, This accession to the family
will supply to it the loss of her beloved Daughter. 
I shall soon, I hope, pay my compliments to the
dear Lady in person: So have nothing to add, but
that I am 
Your old mad Playfellow and Cousin,
Charlotte Montague. 
The women having read the copies of these two
Letters, I thought that I might then threaten and
swagger—‘But very little heart have I, said I, to encourage
such a visit from Lady Betty and Miss Montague
to my Spouse. For after all, I am tired out
with her strange ways. She is not what she was,
and (as I told her in your hearing, Ladies) I will
leave this plaguy island, tho' the place of my birth, 

and tho' the stake I have in it is very considerable; 
and go and reside in France or Italy, and never think
of myself as a married man, nor live like one.’ 
O dear! said one. 
That would be a sad thing! said the other. 
Nay, Madam [turning to Mrs. Moore]—Indeed,
Madam [to Miss Rawlins]—I am quite desperate. I
can no longer bear such usage. I have had the good
fortune to be favoured by the smiles of very fine Ladies,
tho' I say it [and I looked modest] both abroad
and at home—[Thou knowest this to be true, Jack]. 
With regard to my Spouse here, I had but one hope
left (for as to the Reconciliation with her friends, I
scorn them all too much to value that, but for her
sake]; and that was, that if it pleased God to bless us
with children, she might entirely recover her usual
Serenity; and we might then be happy. But the Reconciliation
her heart was so much set upon, is now,
as I hinted before, entirely hopeless—Made so, by
this rash step of hers, and by the rasher temper she is
in; since (as you will believe) her Brother and Sister,
when they come to know it, will make a fine handle
of it against us both;—affecting, as they do at present,
to disbelieve our Marriage—and the dear creature
herself too ready to countenance such a disbelief
—as nothing more than the Ceremony—as nothing more
—hem!—as nothing more than the Ceremony— 
Here, as thou wilt perceive, I was bashful; for Miss
Rawlins, by her preparatory primness, put me in mind,
that it was proper to be so— 
I turned half round; then facing the Fan-player,
and the Matron—You yourselves, Ladies, knew not
what to believe till Now, that I have told you our Story: 
And I do assure you, that I shall not give myself
the same trouble to convince people I hate: People
from whom I neither expect nor desire any favour; 
and who are determined not to be convinced. And what,
pray, must be the issue, when her Uncle's friend comes, 

altho' he seems to be a truly worthy man? It is not natural
for him to say, ‘To what purpose, Mr. Lovelace,
should I endeavour to bring about a Reonciliation
between Mrs. Lovelace and her friends, by
means of her elder Uncle, when a good understanding
is wanting between yourselves?’ —A fair inference,
Mrs. Moore! —A fair inference, Miss Rawlins! 
—And here is the unhappiness—Till she is reconciled
to them, this cursed oath, in her notion, is
binding. 
The women seemed moved; for I spoke with great
earnestness, tho' low—And besides, they love to have
their Sex, and its favours, appear of importance to us. 
They shook their deep heads at each other, and looked
sorrowful: And this moved my tender heart too. 
'Tis an unheard-of case, Ladies—Had she not preferred
me to all mankind—There I stopped—And
that, resumed I, feeling for my handkerchief, is what
staggered Captain Tomlinson, when he heard of her
flight; who, the last time he saw us together, saw the
most affectionate couple on earth! —The most affectionate
couple on earth!—in the accent-grievous,
repeated I. 
Out then I pulled my handkerchief, and putting it
to my eyes, arose, and walked to the window—It
makes me weaker than a woman! —Did I not love
her, as never man loved his wife [I have no doubt
but I do, Jack]— 
There again I stopt; and resuming—Charming
creature, as you see she is, I wish I had never beheld
her face! —Excuse me, Ladies; traversing the room. 
And having rubbed my eyes till I supposed them red,
I turned to the women; and, pulling out my Letter-case,
I will shew you one Letter—Here it is—Read
it, Miss Rawlins, if you please—It will confirm to
you, how much all my family are prepared to admire
her. I am freely treated in it;—so I am in the two
others: But after what I have told you, nothing need
be a secret to you two. 

She took it, with an air of eager curiosity, and
looked at the seal, ostentatiously coroneted; and at
the superscription, reading out, To Robert Lovelace,
Esq;—Ay Madam—Ay, Miss—that's my name
[giving myself an air, tho' I had told it to them before]
I am not ashamed of it. My Wife's maiden name— 
Unmarried name, I should rather say—fool that I
am!—and I rubbed my cheek for vexation [Fool
enough in conscience, Jack!] was Harlowe—Clarissa
Harlowe—You heard me call her My Clarissa.— 
I did—but thought it to be a feigned or Love name,
said Miss Rawlins. 
I wonder what is Miss Rawlins's Love-name, Jack. 
Most of the fair Romancers have in their early womanhood
chosen Love-names. No parson ever gave
more real names, than I have given fictitious ones. 
And to very good purpose: Many a sweet dear has
answered me a Letter for the sake of owning a name
which her godmother never gave her. 
No—It was her real name, I said. 
I bid her read out the whole Letter. If the spelling
be not exact, Miss Rawlins, said I, you will excuse
it; the writer is a Lord. But, perhaps, I may not
shew it to my Spouse; for if those I have left with
her have no effect upon her, neither will this: And I
shall not care to expose my Lord M. to her scorn. 
Indeed I begin to be quite careless of consequences. 
Miss Rawlins, who could not but be pleased with
this mark of my confidence, looked as if she pitied
me. 
And here thou mayest read the Letter, No III. 

To Robert Lovelace, Esq;
M. Hall, Wedn. June 7. 
Cousin Lovelace,
I think you might have found time to let us know
of your nuptials being actually solempnized. I might
have expected this piece of civility from you. But perhaps 

the Ceremony was performed at the very time
that you asked me to be your Lady's Father—But I
shall be angry if I proceed in my guesses—And little
said is soon amended. 
But I can tell you, that Lady Betty Lawrance,
whatever Lady Sarah does, will not so soon forgive
you, as I have done. Women resent slights longer than
men. You that know so much of the Sex (I speak it
not however to your praise) might have known That. 
But never was you before acquainted with a Lady of
such an amiable character. I hope there will be but
one Soul between you. I have before now said, that
I will disinherit you, and settle all I can upon her, if
you prove not a good Husband to her. 
May this Marriage be crowned with a great many
fine Boys (I desire no Girls) to build up again a family
so antient! The first Boy shall take my surname by
Act of Parliament. That is in my Will. 
Lady Betty and Niece Charlotte will be in town
about business before you know where you are. They
long to pay their compliments to your fair Bride. I
suppose you will hardly be at the Lawn when they get
to town; because Greme informs me, you have sent
no orders there for your Lady's accommodation. 
Pritchard has all things in readiness for signing. I
will take no advantage of your Slights. Indeed I am
too much used to them—More praise to my patience,
than to your complaisance, however. 
One reason for Lady Betty's going up, as I may
tell you under the rose, is, to buy some suitable Presents
for Lady Sarah and all of us to make on this
agreeable occasion. 
We would have blazed it away, could we have had
timely notice, and thought it would have been agreeable
to all round. The like occasions don't happen every
day. 
My most affectionate compliments and congratulations 

to my new Niece, conclude me, for the present,
in violent pains, that with all your heroicalness would
make you mad, 
Your truly affectionate Uncle,
M. 
This Letter clench'd the nail. Not but that, Miss
Rawlins said, she saw I had been a wild gentleman; 
and, truly, she thought so, the moment she beheld me. 
They began to intercede for my Spouse (so nicely
had I turned the tables); and that I would not go abroad,
and disappoint a Reconciliation so much wished for on
one side, and such desirable prospects on the other in
my own family. 
Who knows, thought I to myself, but more may
come of this plot, than I had even promised myself? 
What a happy man shall I be, if these women can be
brought to join to carry my Marriage into consummation! 
Ladies, you are exceeding good to us both. I should
have some hopes, if my unhappily-nice Spouse could
be brought to dispense with the unnatural oath she has
laid me under. You see what my case is. Do you
think I may not insist upon her absolving me from this
abominable oath? Will you be so good, as to give
your advice, that one apartment may serve for a Man
and his Wife at the hour of retirement? —Modestly
put, Belford! —And let me here observe, that few
Rakes would find a language so decent, as to engage
modest women to talk with him in, upon such subjects. 
They both simpered, and looked upon one another. 
These subjects always make women simper, at least. 
No need but of the most delicate hints to them. A man
who is gross in a woman's company, ought to be
knocked down with a club: For, like so many musical
instruments, touch but a single wire, and the
dear Souls are sensible all over. 

To be sure, Miss Rawlins learnedly said, playing
with her Fan, a Casuist would give it, that the matrimonial
vow ought to supersede any other obligation. 
Mrs. Moore, for her part, was of opinion, that,
if the Lady owned herself to be a Wife, she ought to
behave like one. 
Whatever be my luck, thought I, with this all-eyed
Fair-one, any other woman in the world, from
fifteen to five-and-twenty, would be mine upon my
own terms before the morning. 
And now, that I may be at hand to take all advantages,
I will endeavour, said I to myself, to make
sure of good quarters. 
I am your Lodger, Mrs. Moore, in virtue of the
Earnest I have given you for these apartments, and for
any one you can spare above for my servants: Indeed
for all you have to spare—for who knows what my
Spouse's Brother may attempt? I will pay you your
own demand; and that for a month or two certain
(Board included) as I shall or shall not be your hindrance. 
Take that as a pledge; or in part of payment
—Offering her a thirty pound Bank Note. 
She declined taking it; desiring she might consult
the Lady first; adding, that she doubted not my Honour; 
and that she would not lett her apartments to
any other person, whom she knew not something of,
while I and the Lady were here. 
The Lady! The Lady! from both the womens
mouths continually (which still implied a doubt in
their hearts): And not Your Spouse, and Your Lady,
Sir. 
I never met with such women, thought I: —So
thoroughly convinced but this moment, yet already
doubting—I am afraid I have a couple of Sceptics to
deal with. 
I knew no reason, I said, for my Wife to object to
my lodging in the same house with her here, any more
than in town, at Mrs. Sinclair's. But were she to make 

such objection, I would not quit possession; since it
was not unlikely, that the same freakish disorder which
brought her to Hamstead, might carry her absolutely
out of my knowlege. 
They both seemed embarrassed; and looked upon
one another; yet with such an air, as if they thought
there was reason in what I said. And I declared myself
her Boarder, as well as Lodger; and, dinner-time
approaching, was not denied to be the former. 