


Sir Charles Grandison, To Miss Byron. 


Friday, Nov. 3.
Receive, dearest, loveliest, of women, the thanks
of a most grateful heart, for your invaluable favour
of Wednesday last. Does my Harriet (Already, 

methinks, I have sunk the name of Byron into that of
Grandison), do Mrs. Shirley, Mrs. Selby, think, that
I have treated one of the most delicate of Female
minds indelicately, in the wish (not the prescription) I
have presumed to signify to the beloved of my heart; 
that within three days after my permitted return to
Northamptonshire, I may be allowed to receive, at
the Altar, the greatest blessing of my life? I would
not be thought ungenerous. I signified my wishes; 
but I told you, in the same Letter, that your chearful
compliance was to me the great desirable. In everything,
from the date of the condescending Letter before
me, to the last of my life, shall your wishes determine
mine. I will have your whole heart in the
grant of every request I make to you, or you shall
have the chearful acquiescence of mine with your will. 
Permit me to say, that the family-punctilio was not
out of my thoughts, when I expressed my own ardent
wishes to you. Does not the world about you expect,
on the return of the happy man, a speedy solemnization? 
I imagined, that whether he be permitted to
make the place of his abode Selby-house or Shirley-manor,
you would not that the happy day should be
long deferred, which should give him rank as one of
the dear family. 
Our Equipages, my dearest life, are all in great forwardness. 
In tenderness to you, I have forborne to
consult you upon some parts of them, as my regard
for your judgment would otherwise have obliged me
to do. The Settlements are all ready. Our good Mr.
Deane is ready to attend you with them. Allow me,
then, to do myself the honour of presenting myself
before you at Selby-house, on Tuesday next. I will
leave it to you to distinguish the happiest day of my
life, whether within the succeeding three, four, five,
or even six, of my return. 
If I have not your commands to the contrary,
Tuesday morning then, if not Monday night, shall 

present to you the most ardent and sincere of men,
pouring out on your hand his grateful vows for the invaluable
favour of Wednesday's date, which I consider
in the sacred light of a plighted Love; and, as such,
have given it a place next my heart. 
My most respectful compliments to all whom we
both so justly hold dear, conclude me, dearest madam, 
Your most grateful, obliged,
and ever-affectionate,
Charles Grandison. 

