


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Sir Charles enter'd. She was near the door. His
sisters were at the other end of the room. 
He bowed to her—Mrs. Oldham, I presume, said
he—Pray, Madam, be seated. I sent to you, that
you might see the seals—Pray, madam, sit down. 
He took her hand, and led her to a chair not far
distant from them; and sat down in one between
them and her. 
His sisters owned, they were startled at his complaisance
to her. Dear ladies! they forgot, at that
moment, that mercy and justice are sister-graces, and
cannot be separated in a virtuous bosom. 
Pray, madam, compose yourself; looking upon
her with eyes of anguish and pity mingled, as the
ladies said, they afterwards recollected with more approbation
than at the time. What, my Lucy, must
be the reflexions of this humane man, respecting his
father, and her, at that moment! 
He turn'd to his sisters, as if to give Mrs. Oldham
time to recover herself. A flood of tears relieved her. 
She tried to suppress her audible sobs, and, most considerately,
he would not hear them. Her emotions
attracting the eyes of the ladies, he took them off,
by asking them something about a picture that hung
on the other side of the room. 

He then drew his chair nearer to her, and again
taking her trembling hand—I am not a stranger to
your melancholy story, Mrs. Oldham—Be not discomposed— 
He stopt to give her a few moments time to recover
herself—Resuming; See in me a friend, ready to
thank you for all your past good offices, and to forget
all mistaken ones. 
She could not bear this. She threw herself at his
feet. He raised her to her chair. 
Poor Mr. Oldham, said he, was unhappily careless! 
Yet I have been told he loved you, and that you merited
his love—Your misfortunes threw you into the knowlege
of our family. You have been a faithful manager
of the affairs of this house—By written evidences
I can justify you; evidences that no one here will,
I am sure, dispute. 
It was plain, that his father had written in her
praise, as an oeconomist; the only light in which
this pious son was then willing to consider her. 
Indeed, I have—And I would still have been— 
No more of that, madam. Mr. Grandison, who
is a good-natured man, but a little hasty, has told me
that he treated you with unkindness. He owns you
were patient under it. Patience never yet was a solitary
virtue. He thought you wrong for insisting to
put your seal: But he was mistaken. You did right,
as to the thing; and I dare say, a woman of your
prudence, did not wrong in the manner. No one
can judge of another, that cannot be that very other
in imagination, when he takes the judgment-seat. 
O my brother! O my brother!—said both ladies
at one time—half in admiration, tho' half-concern'd,
at a goodness so eclipsing. 
Bear with me, my sisters. We have all something
to be forgiven for. 
They, knew not how far they were concern'd, in
his opinion, in the admonition, from what their 

father had written of them. They owned, that they
were mortified: Yet knew not how to be angry with
a brother, who, tho' more than an equal sufferer with
them, could preserve his charity. 
He then made a motion, dinner-time, as he said,
not being near, for chocolate; and referred to Mrs.
Oldham to direct it, as knowing best where everything
was. She referred to the deliver'd-up keys. 
Caroline called in her servant, and gave them to her. 
Sir Charles desired Mrs. Oldham to be so good as to
direct the maid. 
The ladies easily saw, that he intended by this, to
relieve the poor woman by some little employment; 
and to take the opportunity of her absence, to endeavour
to reconcile them to his intentions, as well as
manner of behaving to her. 
The moment she was gone out of the room, he
thus addressed himself to the ladies: 
My dear sisters, let me beg of you to think favourably
of me on this occasion. I would not disoblige
you for the world. I consider not the case of
this poor woman, on the foot of her own merits, with
regard to us. Our father's memory, is concern'd. 
Was he accountable to us, was she, for what each did? — 
Neither of them was. She is intitled to justice, for its
own sake: To generosity, for ours: To kindness, for
my father's. Mr. Grandison accused her of living in
too much state, as he called it. Can that be said to
be her fault? With regard to us, was it any-body's? 
My father's magnificent spirit is well known. He was
often at this house. Where-ever he was, he lived in
the same taste. He praises to me Mrs. Oldham's
oeconomy in several of his letters. He had a right
to do what he would with his own fortune. It was
not ours till now. Whatever he has left us, he might
have still lessen'd it. That oeconomy is all that concerns
us in interest; and that is in her favour. If
any act of kindness to my sisters was wanting from 

the parent, they will rejoice, that they deserved what
they hoped to meet with from him: And where the
parent had an option, they will be glad, that they
acquiesced under it. He could have given Mrs. Oldham
a title to a name that would have commanded
our respect, if not our reverence. My sisters have
enlarged minds: They are daughters of the most
charitable, the most forgiving, of women. Mr.
Grandison (it could not be you) has carried too severe
an hand towards her. Yet he meant service to us all. 
I was willing, before I commended this poor woman
to your mercy (since it was necessary to see her) to
judge of her behaviour. Is she not humbled enough? 
From my soul I pity her. She loved my father; and
I have no doubt but mourns for him in secret; yet
dares not own, dares not plead, her love. I am
willing to consider her only as one who has executed
a principal office in this house: It becomes us so
to behave to her, as that the world should think we
consider her in that light only. As to the living proofs
(unhappy innocents!) I am concern'd, that what are
the delight of other parents, are the disgrace of this. 
But let us not, by resentments, publish faults that
could not be hers only. —Need I say more? —It would
pain me to be obliged to it. With pain have I
said thus much—The circumstances of the case are
such, that I cannot give it its full force. I ask it of
you as a favour, not as a right (I should hate myself,
were I capable of exerting to the utmost any power
that may be devolved upon me) that you will be so
good as to leave the conduct of this affair to me. 
You will greatly oblige me, if you can give me your
chearful acquiescence. 
They answer'd by tears. They could not speak. 
By this time Mrs. Oldham returned; and, in an
humble manner, offer'd chocolate to each young lady. 
They bent their necks, not their bodies, with cold civility,
as they owned; each extending her stately 

hand, as if she knew not whether she should put it
out or not. 
Methinks I see them. How could such gracious
girls be so ungracious, after what Sir Charles had
said? 
Their brother, they saw, seemed displeased. He
took the salver from Mrs. Oldham. Pray, madam,
sit down, said he, offering her a dish, which she declined,
and held the toasted bread to his sisters; who
then were ready enough to take each some—And
when they had drank their chocolate; Now, Mrs.
Oldham, said he, I will attend you—Sisters, you will
give me your company. 
They arose to follow him. The poor woman
courtesied, I warrant, and stood by while they passed:
And methinks I see the dear girls bridle, and walk as
stately, and as upright, as duchesses may be supposed
to do in a coronation-procession. 
Miss Grandison acknowleged, that she grudged her
brother's extraordinary complaisance to Mrs. Oldham; 
and said to her sister, as arm in arm they went out,
Politeness is a charming thing, Caroline! 
I don't quite understand it, replied the other. 
They did not intend their brother should hear what
they said: But he did; and turned back to them
(Mrs. Oldham being at a distance, and, on his speaking
low, dropping still further behind them): Don't
you, my sisters, do too little, and I will not do too
much. She is a gentlewoman. She is unhappy from
within. Thank God, you are not. And she is not
now, nor ever was, your servant. 
They reddened, and look'd upon each other in
some confusion. 
He pressed each of their hands, as in love. Don't
let me give you concern, said he; only permit me to
remind you, while it is yet in time, that you have
an opportunity given you to shew yourselves Grandisons. 

When they came to the chamber in which Sir Thomas
died, and which was his usual apartment, Mrs.
Oldham turned pale, and begged to be excused attending
them in it. She wept. You will find everything
there, Sir, said she, to be as it ought. I am
ready to answer all questions. Permit me to wait in
the adjoining drawing-room. 
Sir Charles allowed her request. 
Poor woman! said he: How unhappily circumstanced
is she, that she dares not, in this company,
shew the tenderness, which is the glory, not only of
the female, but of the human nature! 
In one of the cabinets in that chamber they found
a beautiful little casket, and a paper wafer'd upon the
back of it; with these words written in Sir Thomas's
hand, My wife's jewels, &c. 
The key was tied to one of the silver handles. 
Had you not my mother's jewels divided between
you? ask'd he. 
My father once shew'd us this casket at Grandison-hall,
answer'd Caroline. We thought it was still there. 
My dear sisters, let me ask you: Did my father
forbear presenting these to you, from any declared
misapprehension of your want of duty to him? 
No, replied Miss Caroline. But he told us, they
should be ours when we married. You have heard,
I dare say, that he was not fond of seeing us dressed. 
It must have been misapprehension only, had it been
so. You could not be undutiful to a father. 
He would not permit it to be open'd before him:
But, presenting it to them, Receive your right, my
sisters. It is heavy. I hope there is more than jewels
in it. I know that my mother used to deposit in it
her little hoard. I am sure there can be no dispute
between such affectionate sisters, on the partition of
the contents of this casket. 
While their brother was taking minutes of papers,
&c. the ladies retired to open the casket. 

They found three purses in it; in one of which
was an India bond of 500l. inclosed in a paper, thus
inscribed by Lady Grandison—From my maiden money. 
120 Carolus's were also in this purse in two papers
the one inscribed, From my aunt Molly; the other,
From my aunt Kitty. 
In the second purse were 115 Jacobus's, in a paper,
thus inscribed by the same Lady, Presents made at
different times by my honoured mamma, Lady W.
three bank notes and an India bond, to the amount
of 300l. 
The third purse was thus labelled, as Lady L.
shewed me by a copy she had of it in her memorandum
book. 
“For my beloved son: In acknowlegement of his
duty to his father and me from infancy to this
hour Jan.1.17—Of his love to his sisters—Of
the generosity of his temper; never once
having taken advantage of the indulgence
shewn him by parents so fond of him, that, as
the only son of an antient family, he might
have done what he pleased with them—Of
his love of truth: And of his modesty,
courage, benevolence, steadiness of mind,
docility, and other great and amiable qualities,
by which he gives a moral assurance of
making A GOOD MAN.—GOD grant
it. Amen!” 
The ladies immediately carried this purse, thus labelled,
to their brother. He took it; read the label,
turning his face from his sisters, as he read;— 
Excellent woman! said he, when he had read
it, Being dead, she speaks. May her pious prayer be
answer'd! looking up. Then opening the purse, he
found five coronation-medals of different princes in it,
and several others of value; a gold snuff-box, in
which, wrapt in cotton, were three diamond rings; 

one signified to be his grandfather's; the two others,
an uncle's and brother's of Lady Grandison: But
what was more valuable to him than all the rest, the
ladies said, was a miniature picture of his mother, set
in gold; an admirable likeness, they told me; and
they would get their brother to let me see it. 
Neglecting all the rest, he eagerly took it out of
the shagreen case; gazed at it in silence; kissed it; 
a tear falling from his eye. He then put it to his
heart: Withdrew for a few moments; and return'd
with a chearful aspect. 
The ladies told him what was in the other two
purses. They said they made no scruple of accepting
the jewels; but the bonds, the notes and the
money, they offer'd to him. 
He ask'd, If there were no particular direction upon
either? They answer'd, No. 
He took them; and emptying them upon the
table, mingled the contents of both together: There
may be a difference in the value of each: Thus
mingled, you, my sisters, will equally divide them
between you. This picture (putting his hand on
his bosom, where it yet was,) is of infinite more value
than all the three purses contained besides. 
You will excuse these particularities, my dear
friends. But if you do not, I can't help it. We
are all apt, I believe, to pursue the subjects that most
delight us. Don't grudge me my pleasure: Perhaps
I shall pay for it. I admire this man more than I can
express. 
Saturday Night—And no Sir Charles Grandison.
With all my heart! 

