


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Monday Morning, Feb. 27. 
What a dreadful day was yesterday to me; and
what a still worse night had I, if possible, than
the former! My prayers, I doubt, cannot be heard,
since they have not that affiance with them that they
used to be attended with. How happy was I before I
came to London! I cannot write: I cannot do anything. 
Mr. Reeves is just informed, that Sir Charles,
and Lord L. and the two sisters, arrived in town late
last night. O my Lucy, to return such an answer, I
doubt, as Sir Charles thinks a gentleman ought to send. 
Good heaven! how will this day end? 
Eight o'Clock. 
I Have received this moment the following billet. 

My dear Harriet,
Prepare yourself for a new admirer: My sister
L. and I, are resolved to breakfast with you, unless
you forbid us by the bearer. If we find you to 

have made an attempt to alter your usual morning appearance,
we shall suspect you of a desire to triumph
over us in the consciousness of your superior graces. It
is a sudden resolution. You should have had otherwise
notice last night; and yet it was late before we came
to town. —Have you been good? Are you quite recovered? 
But in half an hour I hope to ask you an
hundred thousand questions. 
Compliments to our cousins. 
Ch. Gr. 

Here is a sweet sprightly billet. Miss Grandison
cannot know, the Countess cannot know, any-thing
of the dreadful affair, that has given to my countenance,
and I am sure will continue on it, an appearance,
that, did I not always dress when I arose for
the morning, would make me regardless of that Miss
Grandison hints at. 
What joy, at another time, would the honour of
this visit have given us! But even now, we have a
melancholy pleasure in it: Just such a one, as the sorrowing
friends of the desperate sick, experience, on
the coming-in of a long-expected physician, altho'
they are in a manner hopeless of his success. But a
coach stops— 
I an to the dining-room window. O my dear! 
It is a coach; but only the two ladies! Good God! — 
Sir Charles at this moment, at this moment, my
boding heart tells me— 
Twelve o'Clock. 
My heart is a little lighter: Yet not unapprehensive
—Take my narrative in course, as I shall endeavour
to give you the particulars of every-thing that
passed in the last more than agreeable three hours. 
I had just got down into the great parlour, before
the ladies entered. Mr. Reeves waited on them at
their coach. He handed in the Countess. Miss Grandison
in a charming humour entered with them. 

There, Lady L. first know our cousin Reeves, said
she— 
The Countess, after saluting Mrs. Reeves, turned to
me—There, Lady L. said Miss Grandison, That's the
girl! That's our Harriet! —Her ladyship saluted me— 
But how now! said Miss Grandison looking earnestly
in my face. How now, Harriet! —Excuse me, Lady
L. (taking my hand) I must reckon with this girl; 
leading me to the window—How now, Harriet! — 
Those eyes! —Mr. Reeves, cousin, Mrs. Reeves! 
What's to do here!— 
Lively and ever-amiable Miss Grandison, thought
I, how will, by-and-by, all this sweet sun-shine in
your countenance be shut in! 
Come, come, I will know, proceeded she, making
me sit down, and taking my hand as she sat by
me, her fan in the other hand; I will know the whole
of this matter. —That's my dear, for I try'd to smile
—An April eye—Would to heaven the month was
come which my Harriet's eye anticipates. 
I sighed. Well, but why that heavy sigh, said
she? —Our grandmother Shirley— 
I hope, madam, is very well. 
Our aunt Selby? Our uncle Selby? Our Lucy? 
All well I hope. 
What a duce ails the girl then? Take care I don't
have cause to beat you? —Have any of your fellows
hanged themselves? —And are you concern'd they did
not sooner find the rope? —But come, we will know
all by-and-by. 
Charlotte, said the Countess, approaching me (I
stood up) you oppress our new sister: I wish, my dear,
you would borrow a few of our younger sister's
blushes. Let me take you out of this lively girl's
hands; I have much ado to keep her down, tho' I
am her elder sister. Nobody but my brother can manage
her. 
Miss Grandison, madam, is all goodness. 

We have been all disturbed, said Mrs. Reeves [I
was glad to be help'd out] in the fear that Sir Hargrave
Pollexfen— 
O madam! He dare not; he will not;—He'll be
glad to be quiet, if you'll let him, said the Countess. 
It was plain they knew nothing of the challenge. 
You have not heard any-thing particular, asked Miss
Grandison, of Sir Hargrave? 
I hope your brother, madam, has not, answered I. 
Not a word, I dare say. 
You must believe, ladies, said I, that I must be
greatly affected, were any-thing likely to happen to
my deliverer; as all must have been laid at my door. 
Such a family harmony to be interrupted— 
Come, said Miss Grandison, this is very good of
you: This is like a sister: But I hope my brother will
be here by-and-by. 
And Lord L. added the obliging Countess, wants to
see you, my dear. Come, my love, if Charlotte is
naught, we will make a party against her; and she
shall be but my second-best sister. I hope my Lord
and Sir Charles will come together, if they can but
shake off wicked Everard, as we call a kinsman, whom
Sir Charles has no mind to introduce to you, without
your leave. 
But we'll not stay breakfast for them, said Miss
Grandison: They were not certain; and desired we
would not. —Come, come, get us some breakfast; 
Lady L. has been up before her hour; and I have
told you, Harriet, that I am an early riser. I don't
choose to eat my gloves. —But I must do something to
divert my hunger: And stepping to the harpsichord,
she touch'd the keys in such a manner, as shew'd she
could make them speak what language she pleased. 
I attended to her charming finger: So did every one. 
But breakfast coming in—No but I won't, said she,
anticipating our requests; and continuing the air by
her voice, ran to the table: Hang ceremony, said she, 

sitting down first; let slower souls compliment: And
taking some muffin, I'll have breakfasted before these
Pray madams, and Pray my dears, are seated. 
Mad girl! Lady L. called her. These, Mrs. Reeves,
are always her airs with us: But I thought she would
have been restrained by the example of her sister
Harriet. We have utterly spoiled the girl by our fond
indulgence. But, Charlotte, is a good heart to be
every-where pleaded for a whimsical head? 
Who sees not the elder sister in that speech, reply'd
Miss Grandison? But I am the most generous
creature breathing; yet nobody finds it out. For why
do I assume these silly airs, but to make you, Lady L.
shine at my expence? 
Still, Lucy, the contents of that Bagenhall's letter
hung heavy at my heart. But, as I could not be sure
but Sir Charles had his reasons for concealing the matter
from his sisters, I knew not how to enter directly
into the subject: But, thought I, cannot I fish something
out for the quiet of my own heart; and leave
to Sir Charles's discretion, the manner of his revealing
the matter to his sisters, or otherwise? 
Did your ladyship, said I to Lady L. arrive on Saturday
[I knew not how to begin] at the hospitable
house at Colnebrooke, my asylum? 
I did: And shall have a greater value for that house
than ever I had before, for its having afforded a shelter
to so valued a lady. 
You have been told, ladies, I suppose, of that
Wilson's letter to Sir Charles? 
We have: And rejoice to find, that so deep a plot
was so happily frustrated. 
His postscript gives me concern. 
What were the contents of it? 
That Sir Hargrave breathed nothing but revenge. 
Sir Charles told us nothing of that: But it is not
unlikely that a man so greatly disappointed should rave
and threaten. I am told that he is still, either by shame
or illness, confined to his chamber. 

At that moment, a chariot stopt at the door: And
instantly, It is Lord L. and Sir Charles with him, said
Miss Grandison. 
I dared not to trust myself with my joy. I hurried
out at one of the doors, as if I had forgot something,
as they entered at the other. I rush'd into the back
parlour—Thank God! Thank God! said I. My gratitude
was too strong for my heart: I thought I should
have fainted. 
Do you wonder, Lucy, at my being so much affected,
when I had been in such a dreadful suspense, and
had formed such terrible ideas of the danger of one
of the best of men, all owing to his serving and saving
me? 
Surprizes from joy, I fansy, and where gratitude is
the principal spring, are sooner recovered than surprizes
which raise the more stormy passions. Mrs.
Reeves came in to me: My dear! Your withdrawing
will be noticed. I was just coming in, said I: And
so I was. I enter'd. 
Sir Charles bowed low to me: So did my Lord. 
Permit me, madam, said Sir Charles, to present Lord
L. to you: He is our brother—Our late-found sister
Harriet, my Lord. 
Yes, but, Sir Charles, said Miss Grandison, Miss
Byron, and Mr. and Mrs. Reeves, have been tormenting
themselves about a postscript to that footman's
letter. You told us not of that postscript. 
Who minds postscripts, Charlotte? Except indeed
to a lady's letter. One word with you, good Miss
Byron; taking my hand, and leading me to the window. 
How the fool colour'd! I could feel my face glow. 
O Lucy! What a consciousness of inferiority fills
even a mind not ungenerous, when it labours under
the sense of obligations it cannot return! 
My sister Charlotte, madam, was impatient to present
to you her beloved sister. Lady L. was as impatient to 

attend you. My Lord L. was equally desirous to
claim the honour of your acquaintance. They insisted
upon my introducing my Lord. I thought it was too
precipitant a visit, and might hurt your delicacy, and
make Charlotte and me appear, as if we had been
ostentatiously boasting of the opportunities that had
been thrown into our hands, to do a very common service. 
I think I see that you are hurt. Forgive me,
madam, I will follow my own judgment another time. 
Only be assured of this, that your merits, and not
the service, have drawn this visit upon you. 
I could not be displeased at this polite address, as it
helped me to an excuse for behaving so like a fool,
as he might think, since he knew not the cause. 
You are very obliging, Sir. My Lord and Lady L.
do me great honour. Miss Grandison cannot do anything
but what is agreeable to me. In such company,
I am but a common person: But my gratitude will
never let me look upon your seasonable protection as
a common service. I am only anxious for the consequences
to yourself. I should have no pretence to
the gratitude I speak of, if I did not own, that the
reported threatnings, and what Wilson writes by
way of postscript, have given me disturbance, lest
your safety should, on my account, be brought into
hazard. 
Miss Byron speaks like herself: But whatever were
to be the consequences, can you think, madam, that
a man of any spirit could have acted otherwise than I
did? Would I not have been glad, that any man
would have done just the same thing, in favour of my
sister Charlotte? Could I behave with greater moderation? 
I am pleased with myself on looking back; 
and that I am not always: There shall no consequences
follow, that I am not forced upon in my own necessary
defence. 
We spoke loud enough to be heard: And Miss
Grandison, joining us, said, But pray, brother, tell us, 

if there be grounds to apprehend any thing from what
the footman writes? 
You cannot imagine but Sir Hargrave would bluster
and threaten: To lose such a prize, so near as he
thought himself to carrying his point, must affect a
man of his cast: But are ladies to be troubled with
words? Men of true courage do not threaten. 
Shall I beg one word with you, Sir Charles? said
my cousin Reeves. 
They withdrew to the back parlour; and there Mr.
Reeves, who had the letter of that Bagenhall, shewed
it to him. 
He read it—A very extraordinary letter! said he; 
and gave it back to him—But pray, what says Miss
Byron to it? —Is she willing to take this step in consideration
of my safety? 
You may believe, Sir Charles, she is greatly distress'd. 
As a tender-hearted woman, and as one who thinks
already much too highly of what was done, she may
be distress'd: But does she hesitate a moment upon the
part she ought to take? Does she not despise the writer
and the writing? —I thought Miss Byron— 
He stopt, it seems, and spoke and look'd warm; 
the first time, said Mr. Reeves, that I thought Sir
Charles, on occasion, passionate. 
I wish, Lucy, that he had not stopt. I wish he
had said what he thought Miss Byron. I own to you,
that it would go to my heart, if I knew that Sir
Charles Grandison thought me a mean creature. 
You must think, Sir Charles, that Miss Byron— 
Pray, Mr. Reeves, forgive me for interrupting you,
What steps have been taken upon this letter? 
None, Sir. 
It has not been honoured with notice, not with the
least notice? 
It has not. 
And could it be supposed by these mean men (All 

men are mean, Mr. Reeves, who can be premeditatedly
guilty of a baseness) that I would be brought to ask pardon
for my part in this affair? No man, Mr. Reeves,
would be more ready than myself to ask pardon, even
of my inferior, had I done a wrong thing: But never
should a prince make me stoop to disavow a right one. 
But, Sir Charles, let me ask you, Has Sir Hargrave
challenged you? Did this Bagenhall bring you a letter? 
Sir Hargrave has: Bagenhall did: But what of that,
Mr. Reeves? I promised an answer on Monday. I
would not so much as think of setting pen to paper
on such an account, to interrupt for a moment the
happiness I had hoped to receive in the meeting of a
Sister and her Lord so dear to me! An answer I have
accordingly sent him this day. 
You have sent him an answer, Sir! —I am in great
apprehensions— 
You have no reason, Mr. Reeves, I do assure you. 
But let not my Sisters nor Lord L. know of this matter. 
Why should I, who cannot have a moment's
uneasiness upon it, for my own sake, have the needless
fears and apprehensions of persons to whom I wish
to give nothing but pleasure, to contend with? An
imaginary distress, to those who think it more than
imaginary, is a real one: And I cannot bear to see
my friends unhappy. 
Have you accepted, Sir—Have you— 
I have been too much engaged, Mr. Reeves, in
such causes as this: I never drew my sword but in my
own defence, and when no other means could defend
me. I never could bear a design'd insult. I am naturally
passionate. You know not the pains it has cost
me, to keep my passion under: But I have suffered
too much in my after-regret, when I have been hurried
away by it, not to endeavour to restrain its first
sallies. 
I hope, Sir, you will not meet— 

I will not meet any man, Mr. Reeves, as a duellist. 
I am not so much a coward, as to be afraid of being
branded for one. I hope my spirit is in general too
well known for any one to insult me on such an imputation. 
Forgive the seeming vanity, Mr. Reeves:
But I live not to the world: I live to myself; to the
monitor within me. 
Mr. Reeves-applauded him with his hands and eyes; 
but could not in words. The heart spoke these last
words, said my good cousin. How did his face seem
to shine in my eyes! 
There are many bad customs, Mr. Reeves, that I
grieve for: But for none so much as this of premeditated
duelling. Where is the magnanimity of the
man that cannot get above the vulgar breath? How
many fatherless, brotherless, sonless families have
mourned all their lives the unhappy resort to this dreadful
practice! A man who defies his fellow-creature
into the field, in a private quarrel, must first defy his
God; and what are his hopes, but to be a murderer? 
—To do an irreparable injury to the innocent family
and dependents of the murdered? —But since you
have been let into the matter so far, by the unaccountable
letter you let me see, I will shew you Sir Hargrave's
to me. This is it, pulling it out of his pocketbook. 

You did well, Sir Charles Grandison, to leave
your name. My scoundrels were too far off
their master to inform themselves by the common
symbols, who the person was that insulted an innocent
man (as to him innocent, however) on the highway. 
You expected to hear from me, it is evident; and
you should have heard before now, had I been able
from the effects of the unmanly surprize you took advantage
of, to leave my chamber. I demand from
you the satisfaction due to a gentleman. The time
your own; provided it exceed not next Wednesday; 

which will give you opportunity, I suppose, to settle
your affairs; but the sooner the better. The place,
if you have no objection, Kensington Gravel-pits. I
will bring pistols for your choice; or you may for
mine, which you will. The rest may be left to my
worthy friend Mr. Bagenhall, who is so kind as to
carry you this, on my part; and to some one whom
you shall pitch upon, on yours. Till when, I am 
Your humble Servant,
Hargrave Pollexfen. 
Saturday. 

I have a copy of my answer somewhere—Here it
is. You will wonder, perhaps, Mr. Reeves, on such
a subject as this, to find it a long one. Had Sir Hargrave
known me better than he does, six lines might
have been sufficient. 

Sir,
Mr. Bagenhall gave me yours on Saturday last,
just as I was stepping into my chariot to go out
of town. Neither the general contents, nor the time
mentioned in it, made it necessary for me to alter my
measures. My sister was already in the chariot. I
had not done well to make a woman uneasy. I have
many friends; and I have great pleasure in promoting
theirs. I promised an answer on Monday. 
My answer is this—I have ever refused (and the occasion
has happened too often) to draw my sword upon
a set and formal challenge. Yet I have reason to
think, from the skill I pretend to have in the weapons,
that in declining to do so, I consult my conscience rather
than my safety. 
Have you any friends, Sir Hargrave? Do they love
you? Do you love them? Are you desirous of life for
their sakes? for your own? —Have you enemies to
whom your untimely end would give pleasure? —Let
these considerations weigh with you: They do, and
always did, with me. I am cool: You cannot be so. 
The cool person, on such an occasion as this, should 

put the warm one on thinking: This however as you
please. 
But one more question let me ask you—If you
think I have injured you, is it prudent to give me a
chance, were it but a chance, to do you a still greater
injury? 
You were engaged in an unlawful enterprize. If
you would not have done by me in the same situation,
what I did by you, you are not, let me tell you, Sir
Hargrave, the man of honour, that a man of honour
should be sollicitous to put upon a foot with himself. 
I took not an unmanly advantage of you, Sir Hargrave:
You drew upon me: I drew not in return. 
You had a disadvantage in not quitting your chariot; 
after the lunge you made at me, you may be thankful
that I made not use of it. 
I should not have been sorry, had I been able to give
the lady the protection she claimed, with less hurt to
yourself: For I could have no malice in what I did:
Altho' I had, and have still, a just abhorrence of the
violence you were guilty of to an helpless woman; 
and who I have found since merited better treatment
from you; and indeed merits the best from all the
world; and whose life was endanger'd by the violence. 
I write a long letter, because I propose only to write. 
Pardon me for repeating, that the men who have acted
as you and I have acted, as well with regard to the
lady, as to each other, cannot, were their principles
such as would permit them to meet, meet upon a
foot. 
Let any man insult me upon my refusal, and put
me upon my defence, and he shall find that numbers
to my single arm shall not intimidate me. Yet, even
in that case, I would much rather choose to clear myself
of them as a man of honour should wish to do,
than either to kill or maim any man. My life is not
my own: Much less is another man's mine. Him
who thinks differently from me, I can despise as heartily 

as he can despise me. And if such a one imagines,
that he has a title to my life, let him take it: But it
must be in my own way, not in his. 
In a word, If any man has aught against me, and
will not be concluded by the laws of his country, my
goings out, and comings in, are always known; and
I am any hour of the day to be found or met with,
where-ever I have a natural call. My sword is a
sword of defence, not of offence. A pistol I only
carry on the road, to terrify robbers: And I have
found a less dangerous weapon sometimes sufficient to
repel a sudden insult. And now, if Sir Hargrave Pollexfen
be wise, he will think himself obliged for this
not unfriendly expostulation, or whatever he pleases
to call it, to 
His most humble Servant,
Charles Grandison. 
Monday. 

Mr. Reeves besought Sir Charles to let him shew
me these letters. I hope I have not trespassed much
in transcribing them for you, my friends. But as I
had not leave, I beg that they pass not out of the venerable
circle. 
I know I need not say how much I am pleased with
the contents of the latter: I doubt not but you all will
be equally so: Yet, as Sir Charles himself expects
not that Sir Hargrave will rest the matter here; and
indeed says he cannot, consistently with the vulgar
notions of honour; do you think I can be easy, as
all this is to be placed to my account? 
But it is evident, that Sir Charles is. He is govern'd
by another set of principles, than those of
false honour; and shews, what his sister says to be true,
that he regards first his duty, and then what is called
honour. How does the knowlege of these his excellencies
raise him in my mind! Indeed, Lucy, I seem sometimes
to feel, as if my gratitude had raised a throne
for him in my heart; but yet as for a near friend, as 

a beloved brother only. My reverence for him is
too great—Assure yourself, my dear, that this reverence
will always keep me right. 
Sir Charles and Mr. Reeves returning into company,
the conversation took a general turn. But, oppressed
with obligations as I am, I could not be lively. 
My heart, as Miss Grandison says, is, I believe, a
proud one. And when I thought of what might still
happen (who knows, but from assassination, in resentment
of some very spirited strokes in Sir Charles's
letter, as well as from the disgrace the wretch must
carry in his face to the grave?) I could not but look
upon this fine man, who seemed to possess his own
soul in peace, sometimes with concern, and even
with tender grief, on supposing, that now, lively and
happy as he seemed to be, and the joy of all his friends,
he might possibly, and perhaps in a few hours—How
can I put down my horrid thoughts! 
At other times, indeed, I cast an eye of some pleasure
on him (when he look'd another way) on thinking
him the only man on earth, to whom, in such
distress, I could have wished to owe the obligations I
am under to him. His modest merit, thought I, will
not make one uneasy: He thinks the protection
afforded but a common protection. He is accustomed
to do great and generous things. I might have been
obliged to a man whose fortune might have made it
conven ent for him to hope such advantages from the
risque he run for me, as prudence would have made
objections to comply with, not a little embarrassing to
my gratitude. 
But here, my heart is left free. And O, thought I,
now-and-then, as I looked upon him, Sir Charles
Grandison is a man with whom I would not wish to
be in love. I, to have so many rivals! He, to be so
much admired! Women not to stay till they are asked,
as Miss Grandison once said; his heart must be proof
against those tender sensations, which grow into ardour, 

and glow, in the bosom of a man pursuing a first and
only love. 
I warrant, my Lucy, if the truth were known, altho'
Sir Charles has at Canterbury, or at one place or other,
his half-score ladies, who would break their hearts if
he were to marry, yet he knows not any one of them
whom he loves better than another. And all but
right! All but justice, if they will not stay till they
are asked! 
Miss Grandison invited Mr. and Mrs. Reeves, and
me, to dinner, on Wednesday, and for the rest of the
day and evening. It was a welcome invitation. 
The Countess expressed herself pleased with me. Poor
and spiritless as was the figure which I made in this
whole visit, her prepossession in my favour from Miss
Grandison must have been very great and generous. 
And will you not, before now, have expected, that
I should have brought you acquainted with the persons
of Lord and Lady L. as I am accustomed to give
you descriptions of every one to whom I am introduced? 
To be sure we have, say you. 
Well, but my mind has not always been in tune to
gratify you. And, upon my word, I am so much humbled
with one thing, and another, that I have lost
all that pertness, I think, which used to give such
a liveliness to my heart, and alertness to my pen, as
made the writing task pleasant to me, because I knew
that you all condescended to like the flippant airs of
your Harriet. 
Lady L. is a year older than Sir Charles: But has
that true female softness and delicacy in her features,
which make her perfectly lovely; and she looks to be
two or three years younger than she is. She is tall and
slender; and enjoys the blessing of health and spirits
in an high degree. There is something of more dignity
and sprightliness in the air and features of Miss
Grandison, than in those of Lady L.: But there is in 

those of the latter, so much sweetness and complacency,
that you are not so much afraid of her as you are of
her sister. The one you are sure to love at first sight. 
The other you will be ready to ask her leave to let you
love her, and to be ready to promise that you will,
if she will spare you: And yet, whether she will or
not, you cannot help it. 
Lady L. is such a wife, I imagine, as a good woman
should wish to be thought. The behaviour of
my Lord to her, and of her to my Lord, is free, yet
respectful; affectionate, but not apishly fond. One
sees their love for each other in their eyes. All love-matches
are not happy: This was a match of love; 
and does honour to it. Every-body speaks of Lady L.
with equal affection and respect, as a discreet and prudent
woman. Miss Grandison, by her livelier manner,
is not so well understood in those lights as she ought
to be; and, satisfied with the worthiness of her own
heart, is above giving herself concern about what the
world thinks of it. 
Lord L. is not handsome; but he is very agreeable. 
He has the look of an honest good man; and of a
man of understanding. And he is what he looks to
be. He is genteel, and has the air of a true British
nobleman; one of those, I imagine, that would have
been respected by his appearance and manners, in the
purest times, an hundred or two years (or how long?)
ago. 
I am to have the family-history of this Lord and
Lady, on both sides, and of their loves, their difficulties,
and of the obligations they talk of being
under to their brother, to whom both my Lord and
Lady behave with love that carries the heart in every
word, in every look. 
What, my dear, shall we say to this brother? Does
he lay every-body that knows him under obligation? 
And is there no way to be even with him in any one
thing? I long to have some intimate conversation with 

Miss Grandison, by which I shall perhaps find out the
art he has of making every-body proud of acknowleging
an inferiority to him. 
I almost wish I could, while I stay in town, devote
half my time to this amiable family; without
breaking in upon them, so much as to be thought impertinent. 
The other half ought to be with my kind
cousin Reeves's. I never shall make them amends for
the trouble I have given them. 
How I long for Wednesday, to see all the family of
the Grandison's-They are all to be there—On several
accounts I long for that day: Yet this Sir Hargrave— 
I have written, my dear, as usual, very unreservedly. 
I know that I lie more open than ever to my uncle's
observations. But if he will not allow for weakness
of heart, of head, and for having been frighted out of
my wits, and cruelly used; and for further apprehensions; 
and for the sense I have of obligations that never
can be returned; why then I must lie wholly at his
mercy—But if he should find me to be ever so silly a
creature, I hope he will not make his particular conclusions
general in disfavour of the sex. 
Adieu, my dear Lucy! —And in you, adieu all the
dear and revered friends, benefactors, lovers, of 
Your Harriet Byron! 

