


Dr. Bartlett, To Lady G. 


Monday, Sept. 11.
In obedience to your Ladyship's commands, I write,
but it must be briefly, an account of our motions. 
Sir Charles would not go out of town, till he had
made a visit to Mr. and Mrs. Reeves, and enquired after
Miss Byron's health, of which he received an account
less alarming, than we, from our love and our
fears, had given him. 
We arrived at Windsor on Wednesday evening. 
My Lord and Lady W. expected him not till the next
day. 
I cannot find words to express the joy with which
they received him. My Lord acknowleged, before us
all, that he owed it to God, and to him, that he was
the happiest man in the world. My Lady called herself, 

with tears of joy, a happy woman: And Sir
Charles told me, that when he was led by her to her
closet, to talk about the affairs of her family, she
exceedingly abashed him, by expressing her gratitude
to him for his goodness to them all, on her knees; 
while he was almost ready, on his, he said, to acknowlege
the aunt, that had done so much honour to his
recommendation, and made his uncle so happy. 
Sir Charles, in order to have leave to depart next
morning, as soon as he had breakfasted, promised to
pass several days with them, when he could think himself
a settled Englishman. 
You, madam, and Lady L. equally love and admire
Lady W.: I will not, therefore, enlarge to you
on her excellencies. Every-body loves her. Her
servants, as they attend, look at their Lady, with the
same delight, mingled with reverence, as those of
my patron look upon him. 
Poor Mr. Grandison could not help taking notice
to me, with tears, on the joint acknowlegements of
my Lord and Lady made to my patron, that goodness
and beneficence brought with them their own rewards. 
Saw you not, my good Dr. Bartlett, said he, how
my cousin's eyes glistened with modest joy, as my
Lord and Lady ran over with their gratitude? I thought
of him, as an angel among men—What a wretch have
I been! How can I sit at table with him! Yet how
he overwhelms me with his goodness! 
My patron having heard, that Sir Hargrave Pollexfen
was at his house on the forest, he rode to make him
a visit, tho' some few miles out of his way. I attended
him. 
Sir Hargrave is one of the most miserable of men. 
He is not yet fully recovered of the bruises and rough
treatment he met with near Paris: But he is so miserably
sunk in his spirits, that my patron could not but
be concerned for him. He received him with grateful
acknowlegements, and was thankful for his visit. 

But he told him, that he was so miserable in himself,
that he could hardly thank him for saving a life so
wretched. 
Mr. Merceda, it seems, died about a fortnight
ago. 
That poor man was thought to be pretty well recovered; 
and rode out several times: But was taken
on his return from one of his rides, with a vomiting
of blood; the consequence, as imagined, of some inward
bruises; and died miserably. His death, and
the manner of it, have greatly affected Sir Hargrave. — 
And poor Bagenhall, Sir Charles, said he, is as miserable
a dog as I am! 
Sir Hargrave, understanding, as he said, that I was a
parson, begged me to give him one prayer— 
He was so importunate, and for Sir Charles to join
in it, that we both kneeled with him. 
Sir Hargrave wept. He called himself a hardened
dog. 
Strange man! —But I think I was still more affected
(Sir Hargrave shocked me!) by your noble
brother's humanity, than by Sir Hargrave's wretchedness; 
tears of compassion for the poor man, stealing
down his manly cheek—God comfort you,
Sir Hargrave, said he, wringing his hand—Dr. Bartlett
is a good man. You shall have the prayers of
us both. 
He left him. He could stay no longer; followed
by the unhappy man's blessings, interrupted by violent
sobbings. 
We were both so moved, that we broke not
silence, as we rode, till we joined our company at
my Lord's. 
I recounted what passed at this interview to Mr.
Grandison. Your Ladyship will not want me to be
very particular in relating what were his applications 

to, and reflexions on, himself, when I tell you that
he could not have been more concerned, had he been
present on the occasion. 
Mr. Beauchamp was with us when I gave this relation
to Mr. Grandison. He was affected at it, and
with Mr. Grandison's sensibility: But how happy for
himself was it, that his concern had in it no mixture
of self-reproach! It was a generous and humane concern,
like that of his dear friend. 
Sir Charles's next visit was to the good Earl of G. 
And here we left my Lord G.; the best-natured, and
one of the most virtuous and prudent young noblemen
in the kingdom. Your Ladyship will not accuse me
of flattery, when you read this; but you will, perhaps,
of another view—Yet, as long as I know that you
love to have justice done to my Lord; and in your
heart are sensible of the truth of what I say, and I am
sure rejoice in it; I give chearful way to the justice; 
and the rather, as you look upon my Lord as so much
yourself, that if you receive his praises with some little
reluctance, it is with such a modest reluctance as you
would receive your own; glad, at the same time, that
you were so justly complimented. 
My Lord will acquaint your Ladyship with all that
passed at the good Earl's; and how much overjoyed he
and Lady Gertrude were at the favour they thought
your brother did them in dining with them. His Lordship
will tell you also, how much they wish for you; 
for they propose to winter there, and not in Hertfordshire,
as once they thought to do. 
Here Sir Charles enquired after their neighbour,
Mr. Bagenhall. 
He is become a very melancholy man. His wife is
as obliging as he will let her be; but he hates her; 
and the less wonder, for he hates himself. 

Poor woman! she could not expect a better fate. 
To yield up her chastity; to be forced upon him
afterwards, by way of doing her poor justice; what
affiance can he have in her virtue, were she to meet
with a trial? 
But that is not all; for though nobody questions her
fidelity, yet what weight with him can her arguments
have, were she to endeavour to enforce upon his mind
those doctrines, which, were they to have proceeded
from a pure heart, might, now-and-then, have let in
a ray of light on his benighted soul? A gloomy mind
must occasionally receive great consolation from the
interposal and soothing of a companionable Love, when
we know it comes from an untainted heart! 
Poor Mr. Grandison found in this case also great
room for self-application and regret, without my being
so officious as to remind him of the similitude; tho'
the woman who is endeavoured to be imposed on him
for a wife, is a more guilty creature than ever Mrs.
Bagenhall was. 
And here, madam, allow me to observe, that there
is such a Sameness in the lives, the actions, the pursuits
of libertines, and such a likeness in the accidents,
punishments, and occasions for remorse, which attend
them, that I wonder they will not be warned by the
beacons that are lighted up by every brother libertine
whom they know; and that they will so generally be
driven on the same rock, overspread and surrounded as
it is, in their very sight, by a thousand wrecks! —Did
such know your brother, and learn from his example
and history, what a variety there is in goodness, as
he passes on from object to object, exercising, not
officiously, but as opportunity offers, his noble talents
to the benefit of his fellow-creatures, surely they would,
like honest Mr. Sylvester, the attorney, endeavour
to give themselves solid joy, by following what 

that gentleman justly called so self-rewarding an example. 
Forgive me, madam, if sometimes I am ready to
preach: It is my province. Who but your brother
can make every province his, and accommodate himself
to every subject? 
We reached Sir Harry Beauchamp's that night; 
and there took up our lodgings. 
Sir Harry seems to be in a swift decay; and he is
very sensible of it. He rejoiced to see your brother. 
I was afraid, Sir Charles Grandison, said he, that our
next meeting would have been in another world. May
it be in the same world, and I shall be happy! 
This was a wish, a thought, not to be discouraged
in a dying man. Sir Charles was affected with it. 
You know, madam, that your brother has a heart
the most tender, and, at the same time, the most intrepid,
of human hearts. I have learned much from
him. He preaches by action. Till I knew him, young
man as he then was, and still is, my preaching was
by words; I was contented, that my actions disgraced
not my words. 
Lady Beauchamp, as my patron afterwards told me,
confessed, in tears, that she should owe to him all the
tranquillity of mind that she can hope for, if she survive
Sir Harry. O Sir, said she, till I knew you, I was
a narrow selfish creature. I was jealous of a father's
Love to a worthy son; whose worthiness I knew not,
as a son, and as a friend: That was the happiest day
of our Beauchamp's life, which introduced him to an
intimacy with you. 
Here, on Friday morning, we left Mr. Beauchamp,
sorrowing for his father's illness, and endeavouring,
by every tender act of duty, to comfort his mother-in-law
on a deprivation, with which, I am afraid, she
will soon be tried. 

My Beauchamp loves you, Sir Charles, said Sir
Harry, at parting in the morning after breakfast; and
so he ought. Where-ever you are, he wants to be; 
but spare him to his mother and me for a few days:
He is her comforter, and mine. Fain, verv fain, would
I have longer rejoiced, if God had seen fit, in the
Love of both. But I resign to the Divine Will. Pray
for me: You also, Dr. Bartlett, pray for me. My
son tells me what a good man you are—And may we
meet in heaven! I am afraid, Sir Charles, that I never
shall see you again in this world—But why should I
oppress your noble heart? God be your Guide
and Protector! Take care of your precious health. 
You have a great deal to do, before you finish your
glorious course, and come to this last period of human
vanity. 
My patron was both grieved and rejoiced—Rejoiced
to see Sir Harry in a frame of mind so different from
that to which he had been a witness in Sir Hargrave
Pollexfen; and grieved to find him past all hopes of
recovery. 
Sir Charles pursued his journey, cross the country,
to Lady Mansfield's. We found no convenient place
for dining, and arrived at Mansfield-house about five
on Friday afternoon. 
My Lady Mansfield, her daughter and sons, were
overjoyed to see my patron. Mr. Grandison told me,
that he never, from infancy till this time, shed so many
tears as he has shed on this short tour, sometimes from
joy, sometimes from grief. I don't know, madam,
whether one should wish him re-established in his fortune,
if it could be done; since calamity, rightly supported,
is a blessing. 
Here I left my patron, and proceeded on Saturday
morning with Mr. Grandison to the Hall. If Sir Charles
finds matters ripened for a treaty between the Mansfields 

and their adversaries, as he has been put in hopes,
he will go near to stay at Mansfield-house, and only
visit us at the Hall incognito, to avoid neighbourly congratulations,
till he can bring things to bear. 
Mr. Grandison just now told me, that Sir Charles,
before he left town, gave him a 400l. bank note, to
enable him to pay off his debts to tradesmen; of which,
at his desire, he had given him in a list; amounting
to 360l. 
He owes, he says, 100l. more to the widow of a
wine-merchant; but being resolved to pay it the moment
money comes into his hands, he would not acquaint
Sir Charles with it. 
I have the honour to be
Your Ladyship's
Most faithful and obedient Servant,
Ambrose Bartlett. 

