



Dear Father and Mother,
John says you wept when you read my
last Letter, that he carry'd. I am sorry you
let him see that; for they all mistrust already
how Matters are; and as it is no Credit, that I 

have been attempted, tho' it is, that I have resisted;
yet I am sorry they have Cause to think
so evil of my Master from any of us. 
Mrs. Jervis has made up her Accounts
with Mr. Longman, and will stay in her Place. 
I am glad of it, for her own sake, and for my
Master's; for she has a good Master of him; 
so indeed all have, but poor me!—and he
has a good House-keeper in her. 
Mr. Longman, it seems, took upon him to
talk to my Master, how faithful and careful of
his Interests she was, and how exact in her
Accounts; and he told him, there was no
Comparison between her Accounts and Mrs.
Jewkes's, at the Lincolnshire Estate. He said
so many fine Things, it seems, of Mrs. Jervis,
that my Master sent for her in Mr. Longman's
Presence, and said, Pamela might come along
with her: I suppose to mortify me, that I must
go, while she was to stay: But as, when I go
away, I am not to go with her, nor was she to
go with me; so I did not matter it much: only
it would have been creditable to such a poor
Girl, that the House-keeper would bear me
Company, if I went. 
Said he to her, Well, Mrs. Jervis, Mr.
Longman says you have made up your Accounts
with him, with your usual Fidelity and Exactness. 
I had a good Mind to make you an
Offer of continuing with me, if you can be a
little sorry for your hasty Words, which indeed
were not so respectful as I have deserv'd at your
Hands. She seem'd at a sad Loss what to say, 

because Mr. Longman was there; and she could
not speak of the Occasion of those Words,
which was me. 
Indeed, said Mr. Longman, I must needs
say before your Face, that since I have known
my Master's Family, I have never found such
good Management in it, nor so much Love
and Harmony neither. I wish the Lincolnshire
Estate was as well serv'd! —No more of that,
said my Master; but Mrs. Jervis may stay, if
she will; and here, Mrs. Jervis, pray accept
of this, which, at the Close of every Year's
Accounts, I will present you with, besides
your Salary, as long as I find your Care so
useful and agreeable. And he gave her Five
Guineas. —She made a low Court'sy, and
thanking him, look'd to me, as if she would
have spoken for me. 
He took her Meaning, I believe; for he said,
—Indeed I love to encourage Merit and Obligingness,
Mr. Longman; but I can never be
equally kind to those who don't deserve it at
my Hands, as to those who do; and then he
look'd full at me. Mr. Longman, continued he,
I said that Girl might come in with Mrs. Jervis,
because they love to be always together: For
Mrs. Jervis is very good to her, and loves her
as well as if she was her Daughter. But else— 
Mr. Longman, interrupting him, said, Good
to Mrs. Pamela! Ay, Sir, and so she is, to
be sure! But every body must be good to
her; for— 

He was going on. But my Master said,
No more, no more, Mr. Longman! I see old
Men are taken with pretty young Girls, as well
as other Folks; and fair Looks hide many a
Fault, where a Person has the Art to behave
obligingly. Why, and please your Honour,
said Mr. Longman, every body—and was
going on, I believe to say something more in
my Praise; but he intertupted him, and said,
Not a Word more of this Pamela. I can't let
her stay, I'll assure you; not only for her own
Freedom of Speech, but her Letter-writing of
all the Secrets of my Family. Ay! said the good
old Man; I'm sorry for that too! But, Sir! — 
No more, I say, said my Master; for my Reputation
is so well known, (mighty fine,
thought I!) that I care not what any body writes
or says of me: But to tell you the Truth, (not
that it need go further) I think of changing my
Condition soon; and, you know, young Ladies
of Birth and Fortune will chuse their own
Servants, and that's my chief Reason why
Pamela can't stay. As for the rest, said he,
the Girl is a good sort of Body, take her all
together; tho' I must needs say, a little pert,
since my Mother's Death, in her Answers, and
gives me Two Words for One; which I can't
bear; nor is there Reason I should, you know,
Mr. Longman. No, to be sure, Sir, said he; 
but 'tis strange methinks, she should be so mild
and meek to every one of us in the House,
and forget herself so where she should shew
most Respect! Very true, Mr. Longman, said 

he; but so it is, I'll assure you; and it was from
her Pertness, that Mrs. Jervis and I had the
Words: And I should mind it the less, but
that the Girl (there she stands, I say it to her
Face) has Wit and Sense above her Years, and
knows better. 
I was in great Pain to say something, but yet
I knew not what, before Mr. Longman; and
Mrs. Jervis look'd at me, and walk'd to the Window
to hide her Concern for me. At last, I said,
It is for you, Sir, to say what you please; and
for me only to say, God bless your Honour! 
Poor Mr. Longman falter'd in his Speech,
and was ready to cry. Said my insulting Master
to me, Why pr'ythee, Pamela, now, shew thyself
as thou art, before Mr. Longman. Can'st
not give him a Specimen of that Pertness which
thou hast exercis'd upon me sometimes? 
Did he not, my dear Father and Mother,
deserve all the Truth to be told? Yet I overcame
myself so far, as to say, Well, your Honour
may play upon a poor Girl, that you know
can answer you, but dare not. 
Why, pr'ythee now, Insinuator, reply'd he,
say the worst you can before Mr. Longman,
and Mrs. Jervis. I challenge the utmost of thy
Impertinence; and as you are going away, and
have the Love of every body, I would be a
little justify'd to my Family, that you have no
Reason to complain of Hardships from me, as
I have of pert saucy Answers from you, besides
exposing me by your Letters. 

Surely, Sir, said I, I am of no Consequence
equal to this, in your Honour's Family,
that such a great Gentleman as you, should
need to justify yourself about me. I am glad
Mrs. Jervis stays with your Honour; and I
know I have not deserv'd to stay; and more
than that, I don't desire to stay. 
Ads-bobbers! said Mr. Longman, and
ran to me; don't say so, don't say so, dear
Mrs. Pamela! We all love you dearly; and
pray down of your Knees, and ask his Honour's
Pardon, and we will all become Pleaders in a
Body, and I, and Mrs. Jervis too, at the Head
of it, to beg his Honour's Pardon, and to continue
you, at least till his Honour marries. — 
No, Mr. Longman, said I, I cannot ask; nor
would I stay, if I might. All I desire, is, to return
to my poor Father and Mother; and tho' I
love you all, I won't stay. —O well-a-day,
well-a-day, said the good old Man, I did not
expect this! —When I had got Matters thus
far, and had made all up for Mrs. Jervis, I was
in Hopes to have got a double Holiday of Joy
for all the Family, in your Pardon too. Well,
said my Master, this is a little Specimen of what
I told you, Mr. Longman. You see there's a
Spirit you did not expect. 
Mrs. Jervis told me after, that she could
stay no longer, to hear me so hardly used; and
must have spoken, had she stay'd, what would
never have been forgiven her; so she went out. 
I look'd after her, to go too; but my Master
said, Come, Pamela, give another Specimen, 

I desire you, to Mr. Longman: I am sure you
must, if you will but speak. Well, Sir, said I,
since it seems your Greatness wants to be justified
by my Lowness, and I have no Desire you should
suffer in the Sight of your Family, I will say, on
my bended Knees, (and so I kneel'd down) that
I have been a very faulty, and a very ungrateful
Creature to the best of Masters: I have been very
perverse and saucy; and have deserv'd nothing at
your Hands, but to be turn'd out of your Family
with Shame and Disgrace. I, therefore, have
nothing to say for myself, but that I am not worthy
to stay, and so cannot wish to stay, and will
not stay: And so God Almighty bless you, and
you, Mr. Longman, and good Mrs. Jervis, and
every living Soul of the Family! and I will pray
for you as long as I live. —And so I rose up,
and was forc'd to lean upon my Master's Elbow-chair,
or I should have sunk down. 
The poor old Man wept more than I, and
said, Ads-bobbers, was ever the like heard! 
'Tis too much, too much! I can't bear it. As
I hope to live, I am quite melted. Dear Sir,
forgive her: The poor Thing prays for you; 
she prays for us all! She owns her Fault; yet
won't be forgiven! I profess I know not what
to make of it. 
My Master himself, harden'd Wretch as he
was, seem'd a little mov'd, and took his Handkerchief
out of his Pocket, and walk'd to the
Window: What Sort of a Day is it? said he. ––– 
And then getting a little more Hard-heartedness,
he added, Well, you may be gone from my Presence, 

thou strange Medley of Inconsistence!
but you shan't stay after your Time in the House. 
Nay, pray, Sir, pray, Sir, said the good
old Man, relent a little. Ads-heartlikins! you
young Gentlemen are made of Iron and Steel,
I think: I'm sure, said he, my Heart's turn'd
into Butter, and is running away at my Eyes. 
I never felt the like before. —Said my Master,
with an imperious Tone, Get out of my Presence,
Hussy! I can't bear you in my Sight. 
Sir, said I, I'm going as fast as I can. 
But indeed, my dear Father and Mother,
my Head was so giddy, and my Limbs trembled
so, that I was forc'd to go holding by the
Wainscot all the way with both my Hands, and
thought I should not have got to the Door:
But when I did, as I hop'd this would be my
last Interview with this terrible hard-hearted
Master, I turn'd about, and made a low Court'sy,
and said, God bless you, Sir! God bless
you, Mr. Longman! And I went into the
Lobby leading to the great Hall, and dropp'd
into the first Chair; for I could get no further
a good while. 
I leave all these Things to your Reflection,
my dear Parents; but I can write no
more. My poor Heart's almost broken! Indeed
it is. –––O when shall I get away! –––Send me, good
God, in Safety, once more to my poor Father's
peaceful Cot!—and there the worst that can
happen will be Joy in Perfection to what I
now bear! —O pity 
Your distressed Daughter. 

