


Letter
I. II.Lovelace, To Belford. The Lady gives a promisory
note to Dorcas, to induce her to further her escape.—A
fair trial of skill now he says. A conversation between the
vile Dorcas and her Lady: In which she engages her Lady's pity.
The bonds of wickedness stronger than the ties of virtue. Observations
on that subject.
III. IV. V.From the same. A new contrivance to take advantage of
the Lady's intended escape.—A Letter from Tomlinson. Intent of
it.—He goes out to give opportunity for the Lady to attempt an
escape. His design frustrated.
VI.From the same. An interesting conversation between the Lady
and him. No concession in his favour. By his Soul, he swears,
this dear girl gives the lye to all their Rakish maxims. He has laid
all the Sex under obligation to him: And why.
VII.From the same. Lord M. in extreme danger. The family desire
his presence. He intercepts a severe Letter from Miss Howe to her
friend. Copy of it.
VIII.From the same. The Lady, suspecting Dorcas, tries to prevail
upon him to give her her liberty. She disclaims vengeance, and affectingly
tells him all her future views. Denied, she once more attempts
an escape. Prevented; and terrified with apprehensions of
instant dishonour, she is obliged to make some concession.
IX.From the same. Accuses her of explaining away her concession.
Made desperate, he seeks occasion to quarrel with her. She exerts a
spirit which overawes him. He is ridiculed by the infamous copartnership.
Calls to Belford to help a gay heart to a little of his dismal,
on the expected death of Lord M.
X.From the same. Another message from M. Hall, to engage him to
go down next morning. No concession yet from the Lady.
XI. XII.From the same. The womens instigations. His further
schemes against the Lady. What, he asks, is the injury, which a
church-rite will at any time repair?
XIII.From the same. Himself, the Mother, her Nymphs, all assembled
with intent to execute his detestable purposes. Her glorious
behaviour on the occasion. He execrates, detests, despises himself; 
and admires her more than ever. Obliged to set out early that morning

for M. Hall, he will press her with Letters to meet him next
Thursday, her Uncle's birthday, at the Altar.
XIV. XV. XVI.Lovelace, To Clarissa. From M. Hall. Urging
her accordingly (the Licence in her hands) by the most engaging
pleas and arguments.
XVII.Lovelace, To Belford. Begs he will wait on the Lady, and
induce her to write but four words to him, signifying the church and
the day. Is now resolved on Wedlock. Curses his plots and contrivances; 
which all end, he says, in one grand plot upon himself.
XVIII.Belford, To Lovelace. In Answer. Refuses to undertake for
him, unless he can be sure of his honour. Why he doubts it.
XIX.Lovelace. In Reply. Curses him for his scrupulousness. Is in
earnest to marry. After one more Letter of entreaty to her, if she
keep sullen silence, she must take the consequence.
XX.Lovelace, To Clarissa. Once more earnestly entreats her to
meet him at the Altar. Not to be forbidden coming, he will take
for leave to come.
XXI.Lovelace, To Patrick McDonald. Ordering him to visit the Lady,
and instructing him what to say, and how to behave to her.
XXII.To the same, as Captain Tomlinson. Calculated to be shewn to
the Lady, as in confidence.
XXIII.McDonald, To Lovelace. Goes to attend the Lady according
to direction. Finds the house in an uproar; and the Lady escaped.
XXIV.Mowbray, To Lovelace. With the same news.
XXV.Belford, To Lovelace. Ample particulars of the Lady's escape.
Makes serious reflections on the distress she must be in; and on his
(Lovelace's) ungrateful usage of her. What he takes to be the Sum
of Religion.
XXVI.Lovelace, To Belford. Runs into affected levity and ridicule.
Yet at last owns all his gaiety but counterfeit. Regrets his baseness
to the Lady. Inveighs against the women for their instigations.
Will still marry her, if she can be found out. One misfortune
seldom comes alone; Lord M. is recovering. He had bespoken
mourning for him.
XXVII.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Writes with incoherence, to enquire
after her health. Lets her know whither to direct to her.
But forgets, in her rambling, her private address. By which means
her Letter falls into the hands of Miss Howe's Mother.
XXVIII.Mistress Howe, To Clarissa. Reproaches her for making
all her friends unhappy. Forbids her to write any more to her
Daughter.
XXIX.Clarissa's meek Reply.
XXX.Clarissa, To Hannah Burton.

XXXI.Hannah Burton. In Answer.
XXXII.Clarissa, To Mrs. Norton. Excuses her long silence. Asks her
a question, with a view to detect Lovelace. Hints at his ungrateful
villainy. Self-recriminations.
XXXIII.Mrs. Norton, To Clarissa. Answers her question. Inveighs
against Lovelace. Hopes she has escaped with her honour. Consoles
her by a brief relation of her own case, and from motives truly pious.
XXXIV.Clarissa, To Lady Betty Lawrance. Requests an answer to
three questions, with a view further to detect Lovelace.
XXXV.Lady Betty, To Clarissa. Answers her questions. In the
kindest manner offers to mediate between her Nephew and her.
XXXVI. XXXVII.Clarissa, To Mrs. Hodges, her Uncle Harlowe's
housekeeper; with a view of still further detecting Lovelace.— 
Mrs. Hodge's Answer.
XXXVIII.Clarissa, To Lady Betty Lawrance. Acquaints her with
her Nephew's baseness. Charitably wishes his reformation; but
utterly, and from principle, rejects him.
XXXIX.Clarissa, To Mrs. Norton. Is comforted by her kind soothings.
Wishes she had been her child. Will not allow her to come up
to her. Why? Some account of the people she is with; and of a
worthy woman, Mrs. Lovick, who lodges in the house. Briefly
hints to her the vile usage she has received from Lovelace.
XL.Mrs. Norton, To Clarissa. Inveighs against Lovelace. Wishes
Miss Howe might be induced to refrain from freedoms that do hurt,
and can do no good. Further piously consoles her.
XLI.Clarissa, To Mrs. Norton. A new trouble. An angry Letter
from Miss Howe. The occasion. Her heart is broken. Shall
be uneasy, till she can get her Father's Curse revoked. Casts about
to whom she can apply for this purpose. At last resolves to write to
her Sister, to beg her mediation.
XLII.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Her angry and reproachful Letter
above-mentioned; demands from her the clearing up of her conduct.
XLIII.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Gently remonstrates upon her severity.
To this hour knows not all the methods taken to deceive
and ruin her. But will briefly, yet circumstantially, enter into the
darker part of her sad story, tho' her heart sinks under the thoughts
of a recollection so painful.
XLIV. XLV. XLVI. XLVII.She gives the promised particulars
of her story. Begs that the blackest parts of it may be kept secret.
And why. Desires one friendly tear, and no more, may be dropt
from her gentle eye, on the happy day that shall shut up all her
sorrows.
XLVIII. XLIX.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Execrates the abandoned
profligate. She must, she tells her, look to a world beyond this for her
reward. Unravels some of Lovelace's plots; and detects his forgeries.

Is apprehensive for her own, as well as Clarissa's safety. Advises her
to pursue a legal vengeance. Laudable custom in the Isle of Man.
Offers personally to attend her in a Court of Justice.
L.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Cannot consent to a prosecution. Discovers
who it was that personated her at Hamstead. She is quite sick
of life, and of an earth in which innocent and benevolent spirits are
sure to be considered as aliens.
LI.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Beseeches her to take comfort, and not
despair. Is dreadfully apprehensive of her own safety from Mr. Lovelace. An instruction to Mothers.
LII.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Averse as she is to appear in a Court
of Justice against Lovelace, she will consent to prosecute him, rather
than Miss Howe shall live in terror. Hopes she shall not despair; 
but doubts not, from so many concurrent circumstances, that the Blow
is given.
LII, LIV.Lovelace, To Belford. Has no subject worth writing
upon, now he has lost his Clarissa. Half in jest, half in earnest
[as usual with him when vexed or disappointed] he deplores the loss
of her.—Humorous account of Lord M. of himself, and of his two
Cousins Montague. His Clarissa has made him eyeless and senseless
to every other Beauty.
LV. LVI. LVII. LVIII.From the same. Lady Sarah Sadleir and
Lady Betty Lawrance arrive, and engage Lord M. and his two Cousins
Montague against him, on account of his treatment of the Lady.
His Tryal, as he calls it.—After many altercations, they obtain his
consent, that his two Cousins should endeavour to engage Miss Howe
to prevail upon Clarissa to accept of him, on his unfeigned repentance.
It is some pleasure to him, he however rakishly reflects, to observe
how placable the Ladies of his family would have been, had they met
with a Lovelace.—Marriage, says he, with these women, is an
atonement for the worst we can do to them: A true Dramatic recompence.
—He makes several other whimsical, but characteristic observations,
some of which may serve as cautions and warnings to the
Sex.
LIX.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Has had a visit from the two
Miss Montague's. Their errand. Advises her to marry Lovelace.
Reasons for her advice.
LX.From the same. Chides her with friendly impatience for not answering
her Letter. Re-urges her to marry Lovelace, and instantly
to put herself under Lady Betty's protection.
LXI.Miss Howe, To Miss Montague. In the phrensy of her soul,
writes to her to demand news of her beloved friend, spirited away,
as she apprehends, by the base arts of the blackest of men.
LXII.Lovelace, To Belford. The suffering Innocent arrested and
confined, by the execrable woman, in a sham action. He curses
himself, and all his plots and contrivances. Conjures him to fly to
her, and clear him of this low, this dirty villainy; to set her free

without conditions; and assure her, that he will never molest her
more. Horribly execrates the diabolical women, who thought to
make themselves a merit with him by this abominable insult.
LXIII. LXIV.Miss Montague, To Miss Howe. With the particulars
of all that has happened to the Lady.—Mr. Lovelace the most miserable
of men. Reflection on Libertines. She, her Sister, Lady
Betty, Lady Sarah, Lord M. and Lovelace himself, all sign Letters
to Miss Howe, asserting his innocence of this horrid insult, and
imploring her continued interest in his and their favour with Clarissa.
LXV.Belford, To Lovelace. Particulars of the vile arrest. Insolent
visits of the wicked women to her. Her unexampled meekness and
patience. Her fortitude. He admires it, and prefers it to the false
courage of men of their class.
LXVI.From the same. Goes to the Officer's house. A description
of the horrid prison-room, and of the suffering Lady on her
knees in one corner of it. Her great and moving behaviour. Breaks
off, and sends away his Letter, on purpose to harass him by suspense.
LXVII.Lovelace, To Belford. Curses him for his tormenting abruption.
Clarissa never suffered half what he suffers. That Sex
made to bear pain. Conjures him to hasten to him the rest of his
soul-harrowing intelligence.
LXVIII.Belford, To Lovelace. His further proceedings. The Lady
returns to her lodgings at Smith's. Distinction between Revenge
and Resentment in her character. Sends her, from the vile women,
all her apparel, as Lovelace had desired.
LXIX.From the same. Rejoices to find he can feel. Will endeavour
from time to time to add to his remorse. Insists upon his promise
not to molest the Lady.
LXX.From the same. Describes her lodgings, and gives a character
of the people, and of the good Widow Lovick. She is so ill, that
they provide her an honest Nurse, and send for Mr. Goddard, a
worthy Apothecary. Substance of a Letter to Miss Howe, dictated
by the Lady.
LXXI.From the same. Admitted to the Lady's presence. What
passed on the occasion. Really believes, that she still loves him.
Has a reverence, and even a holy love for her. Astonished that
Lovelace could hold his purposes against such an angel of a woman,
Condemns himself for not timely exerting himself to save her.
LXXII.From the same. Dr. H. called in. Not having a single
guinea to give him, she accepts of three from Mrs. Lovick on a
diamond ring. Her dutiful reasons for admitting the Doctor's visit.
His engaging and gentlemanly behaviour. She resolves to part with
some of her richest apparel. Her reasons.
LXXIII.Lovelace, To Belford. Raves at him. For what. Raillies
him with his usual gaiety on several passages in his Letters. Reasons
why Clarissa's heart cannot be broken by what she has suffered.

Passionate girls easily subdued. Sedate ones hardly ever pardon. He
has some retrograde motions: Yet is in earnest to marry Clarissa.
Gravely concludes, that a person intending to marry should never be
a Rake. His gay resolutions. Renews, however, his promises not
to molest her. A charming encouragement for a man of intrigue,
when a woman is known not to love her Husband. Advantage
which men have over women, when disappointed in Love. He
knows she will permit him to make her amends, after she has
plagued him heartily.
LXXIV.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Is shocked at receiving a Letter
from her written by another hand. Tenderly consoles her, and inveighs
against Lovelace. Re-urges her however to marry him.
Her Mother absolutely of her opinion. Praises Mr. Hickman's
Sister, who with her Lord had paid her a visit.
LXXV.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Her condition greatly mended. In
what particulars. Her mind begins to strengthen; and she finds
herself at times superior to her calamities. In what light she wishes
her to think of her. Desires her to love her still, but with a
weaning Love. She is not now what she was when they were inseparable
Lovers. Their views must now be different.
LXXVI.Belford, To Lovelace. A consuming malady, and a consuming
mistress, as in Belton's case, dreadful things to struggle with.
Further reflections on the life of Keeping. The poor man afraid to
enter into his own house. Belford undertakes his cause. Instinct in
brutes equivalent to natural affection in men. Story of the antient
Sarmatians, and their slaves. Reflects on the lives of Rakes, and
Free-livers; and how ready they are in sickness to run away from one
another. Picture of a Rake on a sick bed. Will marry, and desert
them all.
LXXVII.From the same. The Lady parts with some of her Laces.
Instances of the worthiness of Dr. H. and Mr. Goddard. He severely
reflects upon Lovelace.
LXXVIII.Lovelace, To Belford. Has an interview with Mr. Hickman.
On what occasion. He endeavours to disconcert him, by assurance
and ridicule; but finds him to behave with spirit.
LXXIX.From the same. Raillies him on his intentional Reformation.
Ascribes the Lady's ill health entirely to the Arrest (in
which, he says, he had no hand) and to her Relations cruelty.
Makes light of her selling her cloaths and laces. Touches upon
Belton's case. Distinguishes between companionship and friendship.
How he purposes to rid Belton of his Thomasine and her cubs.
LXXX.Belford, To Lovelace. The Lady has written to her Sister, to
obtain a revocation of her Father's Malediction. Defends her Parents.
He pleads with the utmost earnestness to her for his friend.
Her noble answer, and great deportment.
LXXXI.From the same. Can hardly forbear prostration to her.
Tenders himself as her Banker. Conversation on this subject. Admires
her magnanimity. No wonder that a Virtue so solidly based

could baffle all his arts. Other instances of her greatness of mind.
Mr. Smith and his Wife invite him, and beg of her to dine with
them, it being their wedding-day. Her affecting behaviour on the
occasion. She briefly, and with her usual noble simplicity, relates to
them the particulars of her life and misfortunes.
LXXXII.Lovelace, To Belford. Ridicules him on his address to the
Lady as her Banker, and on his aspirations and prostrations. Wants
to come at Letters she has written. Puts him upon engaging
Mrs. Lovick to bring this about. Weight that proselytes have with
the good people who convert them. Reasons for it. He has hopes
still of the Lady's favour. And why. Never adored her so much as
now. Is about to go to a Ball at Colonel Ambrose's. Who to be there.
Censures affectation and finery in the dress of men; and particularly,
with a view to exalt himself, ridicules Belford on this subject.
LXXXIII. LXXXIV. LXXXV. LXXXVI. LXXXVII.Sharp
Letters that pass between Miss Howe and Arabella Harlowe.
LXXXVIII.Mrs. Harlowe, To Mrs. Howe. Sent with Copies of the
five foregoing Letters.
LXXXIX.Mrs. Howe, To Mrs. Harlowe. In Answer.
XC.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Desires an Answer to her former
Letters for her to communicate to Miss Montague. Further enforces
her own and her Mother's opinion, that she should marry
Lovelace. Is obliged by her Mother to go to a Ball at Colonel Ambrose's.
Fervent professions of her friendly Love.
XCI.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Her noble Reasons for refusing
Lovelace. Desires her to communicate extracts from this Letter to
the Ladies of his family.
XCII.From the same. Begs, for her sake, that she will forbear
treating her Relations with freedom and asperity. Endeavours, in her
usual dutiful manner, to defend their conduct towards her. Presses
her to make Mr. Hickman happy.
XCIII.Mrs. Norton, To Clarissa. Excuses her long silence. Her
family, who were intending to favour her, incensed against her by
means of Miss Howe's warm Letters to her Sister.
XCIV.Clarissa, To Mrs. Norton. Is concerned that Miss Howe should
write about her to her friends. Gives her a narrative of all that has
befallen her since her last. Her truly Christian frame of mind.
Makes reflections worthy of herself, upon her present situation, and
upon her hopes, with regard to a happy Futurity.
XCV.Copy of Clarissa's humble Letter to her Sister, imploring the
revocation of her Father's heavy Malediction.
XCVI.Belford, To Lovelace. Defends the Lady from the perverseness
he (Lovelace) imputes to her on parting with some of her apparel.
Poor Belton's miserable state both of body and mind. Observations on
the friendships of Libertines. Admires the noble simplicity, and natural
ease and dignity of style, of the sacred books. Expatiates upon

the pragmatical folly of man. Those who know least, the greatest
scoffers.
XCVII.From the same. The Lady parts with one of her best suits
of cloaths. Reflections upon such Purchasers as take advantage of
the necessities of their fellow-creatures. Self an odious devil. A
visible alteration in the Lady for the worse. She gives him all Mr.
Lovelace's Letters. He (Belford) takes this opportunity to plead for
him. Mr. Hickman comes to visit her.
XCVIII.From the same. Breakfasts next morning with the Lady
and Mr. Hickman. His advantageous opinion of that Gentleman.
Censures the conceited pride and narrow-mindedness of Rakes and
Libertines. Tender and affecting parting between Mr. Hickman and
the Lady. Observations in praise of intellectual friendship.
XCIX.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Has no notion of coldness in
friendship. Is not a Daughter of those whom she so freely treats.
Delays giving the desired negative to the solicitation of the Ladies of
Lovelace's family. And why. Has been exceedingly fluttered by
the appearance of Lovelace at the Ball given by Colonel Ambrose.
What passed on that occasion. Her Mother, and all the Ladies of
their select acquaintance, of opinion that she should accept of him.
C.Clarissa. In Answer. Chides her for suspending the decisive
Negative. Were she sure she should live many years, she would not
have Mr. Lovelace. Censures of the world to be but of second regard
with any-body. Method as to devotion and exercise she was in,
when so cruelly arrested.
CI.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Designed to be communicated to Mr.
Lovelace's relations.