



From Miss Darnford, to Mr. B. 


My dear Mrs. B.
Every Post you more and more oblige us to
admire and love you: And let me tell you, I
will gladly receive your Letters upon your own
Terms*  Only when your worthy Parents have perused
them, see that I have every Line of them again. 

Your Account of the Arrival of your noble Guests,
and their Behaviour to you, and yours to them; your
Conversation, and wise Determination, on the offer'd
Title of Baronet; the just Applauses conferred on
you by all, particularly the good Countess; your
Breakfast Conversation, and the Narrative of your
saucy abominable Master, tho' amiable Husband; all
delight us beyond Expression. 
Do, go on, dear excellent Lady, with your charming
Journals, and let us know all that passes. 
As to the State of Matters with us, I have desired
my Papa to allow me to decline Mr. Murray's Addresses. 
The good Man lov'd me most violently,
nay, he could not live without me; Life was no
Life, unless I favour'd him: But yet, after a few more
of these Flights, he is trying to sit down satisfy'd
without my Papa's foolish perverse Girl, as Sir Simon
calls me, and to transpose his Affections to a
worthier Object, my Sister Nancy; and it would
make you smile to see how, a little while before he
directly apply'd to her, she screw'd up her Mouth
to my Mamma, and, Truly, she'd have none of Polly's
Leavings; no, not she! —But no sooner did he
declare himself in Form, than the gaudy Wretch, as
he was before with her, became a well-dress'd Gentleman; 
—the chattering Magpye, (for he talks and
laughs much) quite conversible,–––and has something
agreeable to say on every Subject. Once, He would
make a good Master of the Buck-hounds; but now,
Really, the more one is in his Company, the more
polite one finds him. 
Then, on his Part,—Indeed, he happened to see
Miss Polly first; and, Truly, he could have thought
himself very happy in so agreeable a young Lady: Yet there was always something of Majesty! (what a
stately Name is that for Ill-Nature!) in Miss Nanny;
something so aweful, that while Miss Polly ingaged 

the Affections at first Sight, Miss Nanny struck a
Man with Reverence; insomuch that the one night
be loved as a Woman, but the other revered as something
more: A Goddess, no doubt! 
I do but think, that when he comes to be listed up
to her Celestial Sphere, as her Fellow Constellation,
what a Figure will Nancy and her Ursa Major
make together, and how will they glitter and shine
to the Wonder of all Beholders! 
Then she must make a brighter Appearance by far,
and a more pleasing one too; for why? She has 3000
Satellites, or little Stars, in her Train more than poor
Polly can pretend to. Won't there be fine Twinkling
and Sparkling, think you, when the Greater and
Lesser Bear-stars are joined together? 
But excuse me, dear Mrs. B. this saucy Girl has
vex'd me just now, by her ill-natur'd Tricks; and
I am even with her, having thus vented my Spite,
tho' she knows nothing of the Matter. 
So, fansy, my dear Friend, you see Polly Darnford
abandon'd by her own Fault; her Papa angry
at her; her Mamma pitying her, and calling her silly
Girl; Mr. Murray, who is a rough Lover, growling
over his Mistress, as a Dog over a Bone he fears to
lose; Miss Nancy, putting on her prudish Pleasantry,
and snarling out a kind Word, and breaking thro'
her sullen Gloom, for a Smile now and-then in Return; 
and I laughing at both in my Sleeve, and thinking,
that in a while I shall get Leave to attend you
in Town, and that will be better than twenty humble
Servants of Mr. Murray's Cast: Or, if I can't, that
I shall have the Pleasure of your Correspondence
here, and injoy, unenvied, the Favour of my dear
Papa and Mamma, which this ill temper'd Girl is
always begrudging me. 
Forgive all this Nonsense. I was willing to write
something, tho' worse than nothing, to shew how 

desirous I would be to oblige you, had I Capacity or
Subject as you have. But nobody can love you better,
or admire you more; of this you may be assured,
(however unequal in all other respects) than 
Your Polly Darnford. 

I send you up some of your Papers for the good
Couple in Kent. Pray my Respects to them; 
and beg they'll let me have 'em again as soon as
they can, by your Conveyance. 
Our Stamford Friends desire their kindest Respects: They mention you with Delight in
every Letter. 
