



My dearest Lady,
I am once more, blessed be God for all his
Mercies to me! enabled to dedicate to you
the first Fruits of my Penmanship, on my Upsitting, 

to thank you, and my noble Lord, for all your
kind Solicitudes for my Welfare. Billy every Day
improves, Miss is all I wish her to be, and my second
dear Boy continues to be as lovely and as fine a
Baby as your Ladyship was pleased to think him; 
and their Papa, the best of Gentlemen, and of
Husbands! 
I am glad to hear Lady Betty is likely to be so
happy. Mr. B. says, her noble Admirer is as worthy
a Gentleman as the Peerage boasts; and I beg
of your Ladyship to congratulate the dear Lady,
and her noble Parents, in my Name, if I should be
at a Distance, when the Nuptials are celebrated. 
I have had the Honour of a Visit from my Lady,
the Countess Dowager, on Occasion of her leaving
the Kingdom for one Year, for which Space she
designs to reside in Italy; principally at Naples or
Florence. 
Mr. B. was abroad when her Ladyship came,
having taken a Turn to Gloucester the Day before,
and I expected him not till the next Day. Her
Ladyship sent her Gentleman, the preceding Evening,
to let me know, that Business had brought her
as far as Wooburn; and if it would not be unacceptable,
she would pay her Respects to me, at Breakfast,
the next Morning, being speedily to leave
Eugland. I return'd, that I should be very proud of
that Honour. And about Ten her Ladyship came. 
She was exceedingly fond of my two Boys, the
little Man, and the pretty Baby, as she called them; 
and I had very different Emotions from the Expression
of her Love to them, and her Visit to me, from
what I had once before. She was sorry, she said,
Mr. B. was abroad; tho' her Business was principally
with me. For, Mrs. B. said she, I come to
tell you all that pass'd between Mr. B. and myself,
that you may not think worse of either of us than 

we deserve; and I could not leave England, till I
had done myself the Pleasure of waiting on you for
this Purpose. 
I said, I was very sorry, I had ever been uneasy,
when I had two Persons of so much Honour––– 
Nay, said she, interrupting me, you have no need
to apologize: Things look'd bad enough, as they
were represented to you, to justify greater Uneasiness
than you express'd. 
She ask'd me, Who that pretty genteel Miss was? 
–––I said, a Relation of Lord Davers, who was
intrusted lately to my Care. Then, Miss, said her
Ladyship, and kissed her, you are very happy. 
Believing the Countess was desirous of being alone
with me, I said, My dear Miss Goodwin, won't you
go to your little Nursery, my Love? For so she
calls my last Blessing–––You'd be sorry the Baby
should cry for you–––For Miss was so taken with
the charming Lady, that she was loth to leave us
–––But on my saying this, withdrew. 
When we were alone, the Countess began her
Story with a sweet Confusion, that added to her
Loveliness. She said, She would be brief, because
she should exact all my Attention, and not suffer me
to interrupt her till she had done. 
She began with acknowleging, “That she thought,
when she saw Mr. B. first at the Masquerade, that
he was the finest Gentleman she had ever seen; 
that the allow'd Freedoms of the Place had made
her take Liberties in following him, and engaging
him where-ever he went. She blamed him very
freely for passing for a single Gentleman; for,
that she said, as she had so splendid a Fortune of her
own, was all she was solicitous about; having
never, as she confess'd, seen a Gentleman she could
like so well; her former Marriage having been in 

some sort forced upon her, at an Age, when she
knew not how to distinguish; and that she was
very loth to believe him marry'd, even when she
had no Reason to doubt it. Yet, this, I must say,
Madam, said her Ladyship, I never heard a Gentleman,
when he owned he was married, express himself
of a Lady, with more affectionate Regard and
Fondness, than he, when he spoke of you to me; 
which made me long to see you: For I had a
great Opinion of those personal Advantages, which
every one flatter'd me with: And I was very unwilling
to yield the Palm of Beauty to you. 
“I believe you will censure me, Mrs. B. said
she, for permitting his Visits, after I knew how
happy he was in such a Lady&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;these were her
Words. To be sure, that was a thoughtless and a
faulty Conduct in me–––But the World's saucy
Censures, and my Friends indiscreet Interposals,
incensed me; and, knowing the Uprightness of
my own Heart, I was resolved to disregard both,
when I found they could not think worse of me
than they did. 
“I am naturally, said she, of a haughty Spirit,
impatient of Contradiction, always gave myself
Freedoms, for which, satisfy'd with my own
Innocence and Honour, I thought myself above
being accountable to any body–––And then Mr. B.
has such noble Sentiments, a Courage and Fearlessness,
which I saw on more Occasions than one,
that all Ladies, who know the Weakness of their
own Sex, and how much they want the Protection
of the Brave, are taken with. Then his personal
Address was so peculiarly distinguishing, that having
an Opinion of his Honour, I was imbarass'd
greatly how to deny myself his Conversation; altho',
you'll pardon me, Mrs. B. I began to be afraid, 

that my Honour might suffer in the World's Opinion
for the Indulgence. 
“Then, said she, when I had resolv'd, as several
times was the Case, to see him no more, some
unforeseen Accident threw him in my way again,
at one publick Entertainment or other; for I love
Balls, and Concerts, and publick Diversions, perhaps,
better than I ought; and I had all my Resolves
to begin again. 
“Yet this, said she, I can truly say, whatever his
Views were, I never heard from his Lips the
least indecent Expression, nor saw in his Behaviour
to me, aught that might make me very apprehensive; 
saving, that I began to fear, that by his
insinuating Address, and noble Manner, I should be
too much in his Power, and too little in my own, if
I went on so little doubting, and so little alarm'd,
if ever he should pull off the Mask, and avow
dishonourable Designs. 
“I had often lamented, said her Ladyship, that
our Sex were prohibited, by the Designs of the
other upon their Honour, and by the World's
Censures, from conversing with the same Ease
and Freedom with Gentlemen, as with one another. 
And when once I asked myself, To what this Conversation
might tend at last? And where the Pleasure
each seem'd to take in the other's might
possibly end? I resolv'd to break it off; and told
him my Resolution next time I saw him. But
he stopp'd my Mouth with a romantick Notion,
as I since think it, (tho' a sorry Plea will have
Weight in favour of a Proposal one has no Aversion
to) of Platonick Love; and we had an
Intercourse by Letters, to the Number of Six or
Eight, I believe, on that and other Subjects. 
“All this time, I was the less apprehensive, continued
her Ladyship, because he always spoke so 

tenderly, and even with Delight, whenever he
mention'd his Lady; and I could not find, that
you were at all alarm'd at our Acquaintance; for
I never scrupled to send my Letters, by my
own Livery, to your House, sealed with my own
Seal. 
“At last, indeed, he began to tell me, that from
the sweetest and the evenest Temper in the World,
you seem'd to be leaning towards Melancholy, were
always in Tears, or shew'd you had been weeping,
when he came home; and that you did not make
his Return to you so agreeable as he used to
find it. 
“I asked, If it was not owing to some Alteration
in his own Temper? If you might not be uneasy
at our Acquaintance? And at his frequent Absence
from you, and the like? He answer'd, No!––– 
that you were above Disguises, were of a noble and
frank Nature, and would have taken some Opportunity
to hint it to him, if you had. 
“This, however, gave me but little Satisfaction,
and I began to think seriously of the Matter, and
was more and more convinced, that my Honour
requir'd it of me, to break off this Intimacy. 
“And altho' I permitted Mr. B. to go with me
to Tunbridge, when I went to take a House there,
yet I was uneasy, as he saw. And, indeed, so was
he, tho' he tarry'd a Day or two longer than he
designed, on account of a little Excursion, my
Sister and her Lord, and he and I, made into
Sussex, to see an Estate that I had Thoughts of
purchasing; for he was so good as to look into
my Affairs for me, and has put them upon an
admirable Establishment. 
“His Uneasiness, he told me, was upon your
Account, and he sent you a Letter to excuse
himself for not waiting on you on Saturday, and 

to tell you, he would dine with you on Monday. 
And I remember, when I said, Mr. B. you seem
to be chagrin'd at something; you are more
thoughtful than usual; his Answer was–––Madam,
you are right. Mrs. B. and I have had a little
Misunderstanding. She is so solemn and so melancholy
of late, that I fear it will be too easy a
Matter to put her out of her right Mind: And
I love her so well, that then I should hardly keep
my own. 
“Is there no Reason, think you, said I, continu'd
the Countess, to imagine, that your Acquaintance
and mine gives her Uneasiness? You know,
Mr. B. how that Villain T. (a Gentleman, said
she, whose insolent Address I rejected with the
Contempt it deserv'd) has slander'd us. How
know you, but he has found a way to your Wife's
Ear, as he has done to my Uncle's, and to all my
Friends? And if so, it is best for us both to discontinue
a Friendship, that may be attended with
disagreeable Consequences! 
“He said, he should find it out on his Return
to you. And will you, said I, ingenuously,
acquaint me with the Issue of your Inquiries?
for, added I, I never beheld a Countenance in so
young a Lady, that seem'd to mean more than
Mrs. B.'s, when I saw you in Town; and notwithstanding
her Prudence, I could see a Reserve and
Thoughtfulness in it, that, if it was not natural to
it, must indicate too much. 
“He return'd to you, Madam: He wrote to me,
in a very moving Letter, the Issue of your Conference,
and referred to some Papers of yours,
that he would shew me, as soon as he could procure
them, they being out of your own Hands,
and let me know that T. was the Accuser, as I
had suspected. 

“In brief, Madam, when you went down into
Kent, he came to me, and read some Part of
your Account to Lady Davers, of your Informant
and Information; your Apprehensions; your
Prudence; your Affection for him; the Reason
of your Melancholy; and, according to the
Appearance Things bore, Reason enough you
had, especially from the Letter of Thomasine
Fuller, which was one of T.'s vile Forgeries: For
tho' we had often, for Argument's sake, talked of
Polygamy, (he arguing for it, I against it) yet
had not Mr. B. dared, I will say, nor was he
inclined, I verily believe, to propose any such
thing to me: No, Madam, I was not so much
abandon'd of a Sense of Honour, as to give Reason
for any one, but my impertinent and foolish
Uncle, to impute such a Folly to me; and he had
so behaved to me, that I cared not what he
thought. 
“Then, what he read to me, here and there, as
he pleased, gave me Reason to admire you for
your generous Opinion of one you had so much
seeming Cause to be afraid of: He told me his Apprehensions,
from your uncommon Manner, that
your Mind was in some Degree affected, and your
strange Proposal of parting with an Husband every
one knows you so dearly love: And we agreed to
forbear seeing each other, and all manner of Correspondence,
except the latter, for one Month,
by Letter, till some of my Affairs were settled,
which had been in great Disorder, and were in
his kind Management then; and I had not one
Relation, whom I car'd to trouble with them,
because of their Treatment of me on Mr. B.'s
account. And this, I told him, should not be
neither, but thro' your Hands, and with your
Consent. 

“And thus, Madam, said her Ladyship, have I
told you the naked Truth of the whole Affair. 
“I have seen Mr. B. but once since, and that
at an Horse-race, in the open Field. 
“I respect him greatly; you must allow me to
say that. Except in the Article of permitting me
to believe, for some Time, that he was a single
Gentleman, which is a Fault he cannot be excused
for, and which made me heartily quarrel with
him, when I first knew it, he has always behaved
towards me with so much Generosity and Honour,
that I could have wish'd I had been of his Sex,
since he has a Lady so much more deserving than
myself; and never would there have been then, had
he had the same Esteem for me, a more perfect
Friendship. 
“I am now going, continu'd her Ladyship, to
embark for France, and shall pass a Year in Italy;
and then I shall, I hope, return, as solid, as grave,
as circumspect, tho' not so wise, as Mrs. B.” 
In this manner the Countess concluded her Narrative; 
and I told her, That I was greatly obliged
to her Ladyship for the Honour she did me in this
Visit, and the kind and considerate Occasion of it:
But that Mr. B. had made me intirely happy in
every Particular, and had done her Ladyship the
Justice she so well deserv'd, having taken upon himself
the Blame of passing as a single Gentleman, at
his first Acquaintance with her Ladyship. 
I added, That I could hope her Ladyship might
be prevented, by some happy Gentleman, from
leaving a Kingdom to which she was so great an
Ornament, as well by her Birth, her Quality, and
Fortune, as by her Perfections of Person and Mind. 
She said, She had not been the happiest of her
Sex in her former Marriage; altho' nobody, her Youth 

consider'd, thought her a bad Wife; and her Lord's
Goodness to her, at his Death, had demonstrated
his own favourable Opinion of her by Deeds, as he
had done by Words, upon all Occasions: But that she
was yet young; a little too gay and unsettled; and
had her Head turn'd towards France and Italy, for
one Tour, of a Year at least, having pass'd some
Time in those Countries, which she thought of with
Pleasure, tho' then but a Girl of Twelve or Thirteen:
That for this Reason, and having been on a
late Occasion still more unsettled, (looking down
with Blushes, which often overspread her lovely
Face, as she talked) she had refused some Offers, not
despisable: That, indeed, Lord C&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;threatened to
follow her to Italy, in hopes of meeting better
Success there; but if he did, tho' she would make
no Resolutions, she believ'd she should be too much
offended with him, to give him Reason to boast of
his Journey. 
She wish'd to see Mr. B. and to take Leave of
him, but not out of my Company, she was pleased
to say. Your Ladyship's Consideration for me, reply'd
I, lays me under high Obligation; but, indeed, Madam,
there is no Occasion for it, from any Diffidences I
have in yours or Mr. B.'s Honour. And if your
Ladyship will give me the Pleasure of knowing
when it will be most acceptable, I will beg of
Mr. B. to oblige me with his Company to return
this Favour, the first Visit I make abroad. 
You are very kind, my dear Mrs. B. said she: But
I think to go to Tunbridge for a Fortnight, when I
have disposed of every thing for my Imbarkation, and
so set out from thence. And if you should then be both
in Kent, I should be glad to take you at your Word. 
To be sure, I said, Mr. B. at least, would attend
her Ladyship there, if any thing should happen to
deprive me of that Honour; and if it would be 

agreeable to her Ladyship, I made no doubt he
would, with as high a Pleasure, as I should receive
in his doing so, attend her Ladyship on board, and
see her safe on the other Side. 
You are a generous Lady! said the Countess––– 
I take great Concern to myself, for having been the
Means of giving you a Moment's Uneasiness formerly: 
But I must now endeavour to be circumspect,
in order to retrieve my Character, which has been
so basely traduc'd by that presumptuous Fellow
Turner, that was her Word, who hoped, I suppose,
thereby to bring me down to his Level. 
Her Ladyship would not be prevailed upon to
stay Dinner, and saying, She should be at Wooburn all
the next Day, took a very kind and tender Leave of
me, wishing me all manner of Happiness, as I did her. 
Mr. B. came home in the Evening, and next
Morning rode to Wooburn, to pay his Respects to
the Countess, and came back in the Evening. 
Thus happily, and to the Satisfaction of all Three,
as I hope, ended this perplexing Affair. 
Mr. B. asks me, Madam, How I relish Mr. Locke's
Treatise of Education? which he put into my Hands
some time since, as I told your Ladyship. I answer'd,
Very well; and I thought it an excellent Piece, in
the main. 
I'll tell you, said he, what you shall do. You
have not shew'd me any thing you have written for a
good while. I would be glad, you would fill up
your Leisure-time, as you cannot be without Pen
and Ink, with your Observations on that Treatise,
that I may know what you can object to it; for
you say, In the main, which shews, that you do not
intirely approve of every Part of it. 
But will not that be presumptuous, Sir? 
I admire Mr. Locke, reply'd he; and I admire
my Pamela. I have no Doubt of his Excellencies; 

but I want to know the Sentiments of a young
Mother, as well as of a learned Gentleman, upon
the Subject of Education; because I have heard
several Ladies censure some Part of his Regimen,
when I am convinc'd, that the Fault lies in their
own over-great Fondness for their Children. 
As to myself, Sir, said I, who, in the early Part
of my Life, have not been brought up too tenderly,
you will hardly meet with any Objection to the Part
which I imagine you have heard most objected to
by Ladies who have been more indulgently treated
in their first Stage. But there are a few other Things
that want clearing up to my Understanding; but
which, however, may be the Fault of that. 
Then, my Dear, suppose me at a Distance from
you, cannot you give me your Remarks in the same
manner as if you were writing to Lady Davers, or
Miss Darnford, that was? 
Yes, Sir, depending on your kind Favour to me,
I believe I could. 
Do then, return'd he; and the less Restraint you
write with, the more I shall be pleased with it. But
I confine you not to Time or Place. We will
make our Excursions as I once proposed to you; 
and do you write me a Letter now-and-then upon the
Subject; for the Places and Remarkables you will
see, will be new only to yourself; nor will either
of those Ladies expect from you an Itinerary, or a
particular Description of Countries, which they will
find better described by Authors, who have made it
their Business to treat upon those Subjects. By this
Means, you will be usefully imploy'd in your own
way, which may turn to good Account to us both,
and to the dear Children, which it may please God
to bestow upon us. 
You don't expect, Sir, any thing regular or digested
from me? 

I don't, my Dear. Let your Fancy and your
Judgment be both imploy'd; and I require no
Method; for I know, in your easy, natural way,
that would be a Confinement, that would cramp
your Genius, and give what you write a stiff,
formal Air, that I might expect in a Pedagogue,
but not in my Pamela. 
Well, but, Sir, said I, altho' I may write nothing
to the Purpose, yet if Lady Davers is desirous to
give it a Reading, will you allow me to transmit,
what I shall write, to her Hands, when you have
perus'd it yourself? For your good Sister is so indulgent
to my Scribble, that she will expect to be always
hearing from me; and this way I shall oblige her
Ladyship, while I obey her dear Brother. 
With all my Heart, he was pleased to say. 
So, my Lady, I shall now-and-then pay my Respects
to you in the writing way, tho' I must address
myself, it seems, to my dearest Mr. B.; and I hope
I shall be received on these my own Terms, since they
are your Brother's Terms also; and, at the same
time, such as will convince you, how much I wish
to approve myself, to the best of my poor Ability, 
Your Ladyship's most obliged Sister,
and humble Servant,
P. B. 

