



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wednesday Morning, Nine o'Clock. 
I am just return'd from my morning walk, and
already have received a letter from Mr. Lovelace
in answer to mine deposited last night. He must have
had pen, ink, and paper, with him; for it was written
in the coppice; with this circumstance; On one
knee, kneeling with the other. Not from reverence
to the written-to, however, as you'll find. 
Well are we instructed early to keep this sex at a
distance. An undesigning open heart, where it is
loth to disoblige, is easily drawn in, I see, to
oblige more than ever it designed. It is too apt to
govern itself by what a bold spirit is encouraged to
expect of it. It is very difficult for a good natured
young person to give a negative where it disesteems
not. 
One's heart may harden and contract, as one gains
experience, and when we have smarted perhaps for
our easy folly: And so it ought, or it would be upon
very unequal terms with the world. 
Excuse these grave reflections. This man has vex'd
me heartily. I see his gentleness was art; fierceness,
and a temper like what I have been too much used to
at home, are nature in him. In the mind I am in,
nothing shall ever make me forgive him, since there
can be no good reason for his impatience on an expectation
given with reserve, and absolutely revocable. 

—I so much to suffer thro' him; yet, to be
treated as if I were obliged to bear insults from him!— 
But here you will be pleased to read his letter; 
which I shall inclose. 

To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
Good God!
What is now to become of me! —How shall I
support this disappointment! —No new cause! 
—On one knee, kneeling with the other, I write! — 
My feet benumbed with midnight wanderings thro'
the heaviest dews, that ever fell: My wig and my
linen dripping with the hoar-frost dissolving on them! 
—Day but just breaking—Sun not risen to exhale— 
May it never rise again! —Unless it bring healing and
comfort to a benighted soul! —In proportion to the
joy you had inspired (ever lovely promiser!), in such
proportion is my anguish! 
And are things drawing towards a crisis between your
friends and you? —Is not this a reason for me to expect,
the rather to expect, the promised interview? 
Can I write all that is in my mind, say you? — 
Impossible! —Not the hundredth part of what is in
my mind, and in my apprehension, can I write! 
O the wavering, the changeable sex! —But can
Miss Clarissa Harlowe— 
Forgive me, Madam! —I know not what I write! 
—Yet, I must, I do, insist upon your promise—Or
that you will condescend to find better excuses for the
failure—Or convince me, that stronger reasons are
imposed upon you, than those you offer. —A promise
once given; upon deliberation given!—the promise-ed
only can dispense with;—or some very apparent necessity
imposed upon the promise-er, which leaves no
power to perform it. 
The first promise you ever made me! Life and 

Death, perhaps, depending upon it—My heart desponding
from the barbarous methods resolved to be
taken with you, in malice to me! 
You would sooner choose death than Solmes (How my
soul spurns the competition!) O my beloved creature,
what are these but words! —Whose words? —Sweet
and ever-adorable—What? —Promise-breaker—must
I call you? —How shall I believe the asseveration
(your supposed Duty in the question! Persecution so
flaming! Hatred to me so strongly avow'd!) after
this instance of your so lightly dispensing with your
promise! 
If, my dearest life! you would prevent my distraction,
or, at least distracted consequences, renew
the promised hope! —My fate is indeed upon its
crisis. 
Forgive me; dearest creature, forgive me! —I
know I have written in too much anguish of mind! 
—Writing this, in the same moment that the just-dawning
light has imparted to me the heavy disappointment! 
I dare not re-peruse what I have written. —I must
deposite it—It may serve to shew you my distracted
apprehensions, that This disappointment is but a prelude
to the greatest of All. —Nor, having here, any
other paper, am I able to write again, if I would, on
this gloomy spot. Gloomy is my soul; and all nature
round me partakes of my gloom! —I trust it,
therefore, to your goodness! If its fervor excites your
displeasure, rather than your pity, you wrong my
passion; and I shall be ready to apprehend, that I am
intended to be the sacrifice of more miscreants than
one! —Have patience with me, dearest creature! —I
mean Solmes, and your Brother only—But, if, exerting
your usual generosity, you will excuse and re-appoint,
may That God, whom you profess to serve,
and who is the God of Truth and of Promises, protect 

and bless you, for both; and for restoring to Himself,
and to Hope, 
Your ever-adoring, yet
almost desponding
Lovelace! 
Ivy-Cavern in the Coppice—day but just breaking. 

This is the Answer I shall return. 

Wednesday Morning. 
I am amazed, Sir, at the freedom of your reproaches. 
Pressed and teazed, against convenience
and inclination to give you a private meeting, am
I to be thus challeng'd and upbraided, and my Sex
reflected upon, because I thought it prudent to change
my mind? —A liberty I had reserved to myself, when
I made the appointment, as you call it. I wanted not
instances of your impatient spirit to other people:
yet may it be happy for me, that I have this new
one; which shews, that you can as little spare me,
when I pursue the dictates of my own reason, as you
do others, for acting up to theirs. Two motives you
must be governed by in this excess. The one my
easiness; the other your own presumption. Since you
think you have found out the first, and have shewn
so much of the last upon it, I am too much alarmed,
not to wish and desire, that your letter of this day
may conclude all the trouble you have had from, or
for, 
Your humble Servant,
Cl. Harlowe. 

I believe, my dear, I may promise myself your
approbation, whenever I write or speak with spirit, be
it to whom it will. Indeed, I find but too much reason
to exert it, since I have to deal with people, who
measure their conduct to me, not by what is fit or
decent, right or wrong, but by what they think my 

temper will bear. I have, till very lately, been praised
for mine; but it has always been by those who never
gave me opportunity to return the compliment to
themselves: Some people have acted, as if they
thought forbearance on one side absolutely necessary
for them and me, to be upon good terms together; 
and in this case have ever taken care rather to owe
that obligation than to lay it. You have hinted to
me, that resentment is not natural to my temper, and
that therefore it must soon subside. It may be so,
with respect to my relations: But not to Mr. Lovelace,
I assure you. 
Wednesday Noon, March 29. 
We cannot always answer for what we can do: 
But to convince you, that I can keep my above resolution,
with regard to This Lovelace, angry as my
letter is, and three hours as it is since it was written; 
I assure you, that I repent it not, nor will soften it,
altho' I find it is not taken away. And yet I hardly
ever before did any-thing in anger, that I did not repent
in half an hour; and question myself in less than
that time, whether I was right or wrong. 
In this respite till Tuesday, I have a little time to
look about me, as I may say, and consider of what I
have to do, and can do. And Mr. Lovelace's insolence
will make me go very home with myself. Not
that I think I can conquer my aversion to Mr. Solmes. 
I am sure I cannot. But, if I absolutely break with
Mr. Lovelace, and give my friends convincing proofs
of it, who knows but they will restore me to their
favour, and let their views in relation to the other
man go off by degrees? —Or, at least, that I may
be safe till my cousin Morden arrives: To whom, I
think, I will write; and the rather, as Mr. Lovelace
has assured me, that my friends have written to him
to make good their side of the question. 
But, with all my courage, I am exceedingly apprehensive 

about Tuesday next, and about what may
result from my stedfastness; for stedfast I am sure I
shall be. They are resolved, I am told, to try every
means to induce me to comply with what they are
determin'd upon. I am resolved to do the like, to
avoid what they would force me to do. A dreadful
contention between parents and child! —Each hoping
to leave the other without excuse, whatever the
consequence may be. 
What can I do? Advise me, my dear! Something
is strangely wrong somewhere! to make parents, the
most indulgent till now, seem cruel in a child's eye; 
and a daughter, till within these few weeks, thought
unexceptionably dutiful, appear, in their judgment,
a rebel! —O my ambitious and violent brother! — 
What may he have to answer for to both!— 
Be pleased to remember, my dear, that your last
favour was dated on Saturday. This is Wednesday: 
And none of mine have been taken away since. 
Don't let me want your advice. My situation is extremely
difficult. —But I am sure you love me still: 
And not the less on that account. Adieu, my beloved
friend. 
Cl. Harlowe. 
