



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Thursday Night, March 30. 
The fruits of my enquiry after your abominable
wretch's behaviour and baseness at the paltry
Alehouse, which he calls an Inn, prepare to hear. 
Wrens and Sparrows are not too ignoble a quarry 

for this villainous Gos-hawk! —His assiduities; his
watchings; his nightly risques; the inclement weather
he journeys in; must not be all placed to your
account. He has opportunities of making every-thing
light to him of that sort. A sweet pretty girl, I am
told—Innocent till he went thither—Now! (Ah!
poor girl!) who knows what? 
But just turned of Seventeen! —His friend and brother
Rake (a man of humour and intrigue) as I am
told, to share the social bottle with. And sometimes
another disguised Rake or two. No sorrow comes
near their hearts. Be not disturbed, my dear, at his
hoarsenesses! His pretty Betsey, his Rosebud, as the
vile wretch calls her, can hear all he says. 
He is very fond of her. They say she is innocent
even yet—Her Father, her Grandmother, believe her
to be so. He is to fortune her out to a young lover! 
—Ah! the poor young lover! —Ah! the poor simple
girl! 
Mr. Hickman tells me, that he heard in town,
that he used to be often at Plays, and at the Opera,
with women; and every time with a different one— 
Ah! my sweet friend! —But I hope he is nothing to
you, if all this were truth—But this intelligence, in
relation to this poor girl, will do his business, if you
had been ever so good friends before. 
A vile wretch! Cannot such purity in pursuit, in
view, restrain him? But I leave him to you! —There
can be no hope of him. More of a fool, than of such
a man. Yet I wish I may be able to snatch the poor
young creature out of his villainous paws. I have laid
a scheme to do so; if indeed she be hitherto innocent
and heart free. 
He appears to the people as a military man, in disguise,
secreting himself on account of a duel fought in
town; the adversary's life in suspense. They believe
he is a great man. His friend passes for an inferior
officer; upon a foot of freedom with him. He, accompanied 

by a third man, who is a sort of subordinate
companion to the second. The wretch himself
with but one servant. 
O my dear! How pleasantly can these devils, as I
must call them, pass their time, while our gentle bosoms
heave with pity for their supposed sufferings for us! 
* *
I have sent for this Girl and her Father; and am
just now informed, that I shall see them. I will sift
them throughly. I shall soon find out such a simple
thing as This, if he has not corrupted her already— 
And if he has, I shall soon find that out too,—If more
Art than Nature appears either in her or her Father,
I shall give them both up—But depend upon it, the
girl's undone. 
He is said to be fond of her. He places her at the
upper end of his table. He sets her a-prattling. He
keeps his friend at a distance from her. She prates
away. He admires for nature all she says. Once
was heard to call her Charming little creature! An
hundred has he called so no doubt. He puts her upon
singing. He praises her wild note. —O my dear, the
girl's undone!—must be undone! —The man, you
know, is Lovelace. 
Let 'em bring Wyerley to you, if they will have
you married—Any-body but Solmes and Lovelace be
yours! —So advises 
Your
Anna Howe. 
My dearest friend, consider this Alehouse as his garison: 
Him as an enemy: His Brother-rakes as
his assistants and abetters. Would not your Brother,
would not your Uncles, tremble, if they
knew how near them he is, as they pass to and
fro? —I am told, he is resolved you shall not be
carried to your Uncle Antony's. —What can you
do, with or without such an enterprizing— 
Fill up the blank I leave. —I cannot find a word
bad enough. 