


Miss Byron, To Lady G. 


Thursday, Nov. 9.
My aunt is so much afraid that every-thing will
not be ready, that she puts me upon writing to
you, to hasten what remains—I am more than half a
fool—But that I always was. My spirits sink at the
thoughts of so public a Day. The mind, my grandmamma
says, can but be full; and it would have been
filled by the circumstance, had not the publicness of
the Day given me something more of grievance. 
I am afraid, sometimes, that I shall not support my
spirits; that I shall be ill—Then I think something will
happen—Can it be, that I shall be the wife of Sir
Charles Grandison? I can hardly believe it. —Sir
Charles is tenderly concerned for me. It would be
impossible, he says, that the Day could be private, unless
I were to go to London; and the very proposing
of that would put my uncle out of all patience, who
prides himself in the thought of having his Harriet
married from his own house: Nor could I expect my 

grandmamma's presence. He does all he can to assure
my heart, and divert me: A thousand agreeable lively
things he says: So tender, so considerate, in his joy!— 
surely I shall be too happy. But will you come? 
Can you? And if you do, will you be good? Will
you make my case your own? 
My uncle, at times, is prodigiously headstrong. 
Every hour he does or says something wrong; yet we
dare not chide him. Thursday next will be one of
the greatest days of his life, he says; and it shall be all
his own. He either sings, hums, or whistles, in
every motion. He resolves, he says, to get his best
dancing legs in readiness. He started up from table
after dinner this day, and caught hold of Lucy's hand,
and whisked her round the room. Dear toad, he called
her; a common address of his to Lucy (I say, because
she has a jewel in her head); and flourishing about with
her in a very humorous manner, put her quite out, on
purpose to laugh at her; for she would have been in,
if he would have let her, for the humour-sake. He
was a fine dancer in his youth. 
Miss Orme breakfasted with us this morning. She,
no doubt, threw herself in our way on purpose to hear
the news of the appointed Day confirmed. My uncle
officiously told her, it would be one day next week. 
She named the very day, and turned pale, on his owning
she was not mistaken. She hoped, she said, her
brother would bear the shock, as he had been long destitute
of hope. But, said she, he promised me, before
he went abroad, to carry me to London on a visit
to some relations there. I will remind him; and hope
to prevail on him to set out next Monday or Tuesday. 
God bless you! my dear Miss Byron, said she, at
parting; may your bustle be happily over! I shall pity
you. You will pay for being so universally admired. 
But your penance will be but for two days; the very
Day, and that of your appearance; and in both your
man will bear you out: His merit, his person, his 

address. Happy Miss Byron! —The universal approbation
is yours. But I must have you contrive some
how, that my brother may see him before he is yours:
His heart will be the easier afterwards. 
—Sent for down by my grandmamma. —Dear Lucy,
make up the Letter for me. I know you will be glad
of the opportunity. 
Continued by Lucy.] ‘Will Lady G. admit me, in
this abrupt manner, into her Imperial presence! I
know she will, on this joyful occasion, accept of any
intelligence. The poor Harriet! My uncle Selby
would invite all the country, if they came in his
way. Four of my cousin's old playfellows have already
been to claim his promise. He wished, he
said, he had room for all the world; it should be
welcome. 
‘He will have the Great Barn, as it is called,
cleared out; a tight large building, which is to be
illuminated at night with a profusion of lights; and
there are all his tenants, and those of Shirley-manor,
to be treated, with their wives, and such of their sons
and daughters as are more than Twelve years old. 
The treat is to be a cold one. Hawkins, his steward,
who is well respected by them all, is to have
the direction of it. My uncle's October is not to be
spared. It will cost two days, at least, to roast,
boil, and bake, for them. The carpenters are already
sent for. Half a dozen bonfires are to be
lighted up, round the Great Barn; and the stacks of
wood are not to be spared, to turn winter into summer,
as my uncle expresses himself. 
‘Neither the poor nor the populace are to be admitted,
that the confusion, almost unavoidable from
a promiscuous multitude, may be avoided. But notice
will be given, that two houses in the neighbouring
village, held by tenants of the family, and one
near Shirley-manor, will be opened at Twelve on
Thursday, and be kept open for the rest of the day, 

till Ten at night, for the sake of all who choose to
go thither. The Churchwardens are preparing a
list of the poor people; who, on Friday morning,
were to receive Five shillings apiece, which Sir Charles
has desired to make Ten; on condition that they shall
not be troublesome on the day. 
‘Poor Sir Hargrave, to whom all this joyful bustle
is primarily owing! —I tell Harriet, that she has not,
with all her punctilio, been half punctilious enough. 
She should have had him, after all, on the motive of
Prince Prettiman in the Rehearsal. 
‘Dear madam, can your Ladyship allow of this
idle rattle? But I have not time to make up for it
by a ceremonious conclusion; tho' I am, with the
truest respect, Lady G's 
Most obedient humble Servant,
Lucy Selby.’ 

