



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday, Three o'Clock. 
You incense, alarm, and terrify me, at the same
time—Hasten, my dearest friend, hasten to me,
what further intelligence you can gather about this
vilest of men. 
But never talk of innocence, of simplicity, and this
unhappy girl, together! Must she not know, that
such a man as That, dignified in his very aspect; and
no disguise able to conceal his being of condition; 
must mean too much, when he places her at the
upper end of his table, and calls her by such tender
names? Would a girl, modest as simple, above Seventeen,
be set a singing at the pleasure of such a man as
That? A stranger, and professedly in disguise! —Would
her Father and Grandmother, if honest people, and
careful of their simple girl, permit such freedoms? 
Keep his friend at distance from her! —To be sure
his designs are villainous, if they have not been already
effected. 
Warn, my dear, if not too late, the unthinking
Father, of his child's danger. There cannot be a
Father in the world, who would sell his child's virtue. 
No Mother! —The poor thing!— 
I long to hear the result of your intelligence. You
shall see the simple creature, you tell me. —Let me
know what sort of a girl she is. —A sweet pretty girl!
you say. A sweet pretty girl, my dear! —They are
sweet pretty words from your pen. But are they
yours or his of her? —If she be so simple, if she have
Ease and Nature in her manner, in her speech, and
warbles prettily her wild notes, why, such a girl as
That must engage such a profligate wretch (as now
indeed I doubt this man is) accustomed, perhaps, to
town-women, and their confident ways—Must deeply 

and for a long season engage him: Since perhaps when
her Innocence is departed, she will endeavour by Art
to supply the loss of the natural charms which now engage
him. 
Fine hopes of such a wretch's Reformation! I
would not, my dear, for the world have any-thing to
say—But I need not make resolutions. I have not
opened, nor will I open, his Letter. —A sycophant
creature! —With his hoarsenesses—got perhaps by a
midnight revel, singing to his wild-note singer, and
only encreased in the coppice! 
To be already on a foot! —In his esteem, I mean: 
For myself, I despise him. I hate myself almost for
writing so much about him, and of such a simpleton
as This sweet pretty girl as you call her: But no one
can be either sweet or pretty, that is not modest, that
is not virtuous. 
And now, my dear, I will tell you, how I came
to put you upon this enquiry. 
This vile Joseph Leman had given a hint to Betty,
and she to me, as if Lovelace would be found out to
be a very bad man, at a place where he had been
lately seen in disguise. But he would see further, he
said, before he told her more; and she promised secrecy,
in hope to get at further intelligence. I thought
it could be no harm, to get you to inform yourself,
and me, of what could be gathered (a) . And now I 

see, his enemies are but too well warranted in their
reports of him: And, if the ruin of this poor young
creature be his aim, and if he had not known her but
for his visits to Harlowe-Place, I shall have reason to
be doubly concerned for her; and doubly incensed
against so vile a man. 
I think I hate him worse than I do Solmes himself. 
But I will not add one other word about him; after
I have told you, that I wish to know, as soon as
possible, what further occurs from your enquiry. I
have a Letter from him; but shall not open it till I
do: And then, if it come out as I dare say it will, I
will directly put the Letter unopened into the place I
took it from, and never trouble myself more about
him. Adieu, my dearest friend. 
Cl. Harlowe. 