



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Monday afternoon. 
Pity me, Jack, for pity's sake; since, if thou
dost not, nobody else will: And yet never was
there a man of my genius and lively temper that
wanted it more. We are apt to attribute to the Devil
every-thing that happens to us, which we would not
have happen: But here, being (as perhaps thou'lt
say) the Devil myself, my plagues arise from an Angel. 
I suppose all mankind is to be plagued by its
Contrary. 

She began with me like a true woman [She in the
fault, I to be blamed] the moment I entered the
dining-room: —Not the least apology, not the least
excuse, for the uproar she had made, and the trouble
she had given me. 
I come, said she, into thy detested presence, because
I cannot help it. But why am I to be imprisoned
here? —Altho' to no purpose, I cannot help— 
Dearest Madam, interrupted I, give not way to
so much violence. You must know, that your detention
is entirely owing to the desire I have to make
you all the amends that is in my power to make you. 
And This, as well for your sake as my own. —Surely,
there is still one way left to repair the wrongs you
have suffered— 
Canst thou blot out the past week? Several weeks
past, I should say; ever since I have been with thee? 
Canst thou call back time? —If thou canst— 
Surely, Madam, again interrupting her, If I may
be permitted to call you legally mine, I might have
but anticip— 
Wretch, that thou art! Say not another word upon
this subject. When thou vowedst, when thou promisedst
at Hamstead, I had begun to think that I
must be thine. If I had consented, at the request of
those I thought thy relations, this would have been
a principal inducement, That I could then have
brought thee, what was most wanted, an unsullied
honour in dowry, to a wretch destitute of all honour; 
and could have met the gratulations of a family to
which thy life has been one continued disgrace, with
a consciousness of deserving their gratulations. But
thinkest thou, that I will give a Harlot-niece to thy honourable
Uncle, and to thy real Aunts; and a Cousin
to thy Cousins from a Brothel? For such, in my opinion,
is this detested house! —Then, lifting up her
clasped hands, ‘Great and good God of Heaven,
said she, give me patience to support myself under
the weight of those afflictions, which Thou, for 

wise and good ends, tho' at present impenetrable by
me, hast permitted!’ 
Then, turning towards me, who knew neither
what to say to her, nor for myself, I renounce thee
for ever, Lovelace! —Abhorred of my Soul! for ever
I renounce thee! —Seek thy fortunes wheresoever
thou wilt! —Only now, that thou hast already ruined
me— 
Ruined you, Madam—The world need not—I
knew not what to say. 
Ruined me in my own eyes; and that is the same to
me, as if all the world knew it—Hinder me not from
going whither my mysterious destiny shall lead me. 
Why hesitate you, Sir? What right have you to
stop me, as you lately did; and to bring me up by
force, my hands and arms bruised with your violence? 
What right have you to detain me here? 
I am cut to the heart, Madam, with invectives so
violent. I am but too sensible of the wrong I have
done you, or I could not bear your reproaches. The
man who perpetrates a villainy, and resolves to go
on with it, shews not the compunction I shew. Yet,
if you think yourself in my power, I would caution
you, Madam, not to make me desperate. For you
shall be mine, or my life shall be the forfeit! Nor is
life worth having without you!— 
Be thine! —I be thine!—said the passionate Beauty. 
O how lovely in her violence!— 
Yes, Madam, Be mine! —I repeat, You shall be
mine! —My very crime is your glory. My Love,
my Admiration of you is encreased by what has passed: 
And so it ought. I am willing, Madam, to court
your returning favour: But let me tell you, were
the house beset by a thousand armed men, resolved
to take you from me, they should not effect their
purpose, while I had life. 
I never, never will be yours, said she, clasping
her hands together, and lifting up her eyes! —I never
will be yours! 

We may yet see many happy years, Madam. All
your friends may be reconciled to you. The treaty
for that purpose is in greater forwardness than you
imagine. You know better than to think the worse
of yourself for suffering what you could not help. Enjoin
but the terms I can make my peace with you
upon, and I will instantly comply. 
Never, never, repeated she, will I be yours! 
Only forgive me, my dearest life, this one time! — 
A virtue so invincible! what further view can I have
against you? —Have I attempted any further outrage? 
—If you will be mine, your injuries will be injuries
done to myself. You have too well guessed at the
unnatural Arts that have been used. —But can a
greater testimony be given of your Virtue? —And
now I have only to hope, that altho' I cannot make
you complete amends, yet you will permit me to
make you all the amends that can possibly be made. 
Hear me out, I beseech you, Madam; for she was
going to speak with an aspect unpacifiedly angry: 
The God, whom you serve, requires but repentance
and amendment. Imitate Him, my dearest Love,
and bless me with the means of reforming a course of
life, that begins to be hateful to me. That was once
your favourite point. Resume it, dearest creature: 
In charity to a Soul as well as Body, which once, as
I flattered myself, was more than indifferent to you,
resume it. And let to-morrow's Sun witness to our
espousals. 
I cannot judge thee, said she; but the God to
whom thou so boldly referrest, can; and assure thyself
He will. But, if compunction has really taken
hold of thee; if indeed thou art touched for thy ungrateful
baseness, and meanest any-thing by pleading
the Holy Example thou recommendest to my imitation; 
in this thy pretended repentant moment, let
me sift thee thoroughly; and by thy answer I shall
judge of the sincerity of thy pretended declarations. 

Tell me then, Is there any reality in the treaty
thou hast pretended to be on foot between my Uncle
and Captain Tomlinson, and Thyself? —Say, and
hesitate not, is there any truth in that Story? —But,
remember, if there be not, and thou avowest that
there is, what further condemnation attends thy averrment,
if it be as solemn as I require it to be! 
This was a cursed thrust. What could I say? — 
Surely, this merciless Lady is resolved to damn me,
thought I; and yet accuses me of a design against her
Soul! —But was I not obliged to proceed as I had
begun? 
In short, I solemnly averred, that there was! — 
How one crime, as the good folks say, brings on
another! 
I added, That the Captain had been in town, and
would have waited on her, had she not been indisposed: 
That he went down much afflicted, as well
on her account, as on that of her Uncle; tho' I had
not acquainted him either with the nature of her disorder,
or the ever-to-be-regretted occasion of it; 
having told him, that it was a violent fever: That
he had twice since, by her Uncle's desire, sent up to
enquire after her health: And that I had already dispatched
a man and horse with a Letter, to acquaint
him (and her Uncle thro' him) with her recovery; 
making it my earnest request, that he would renew
his application to her Uncle for the favour of his presence
at the private celebration of our Nuptials; and
that I expected an answer, if not this night, as tomorrow. 
Let me ask thee next, said she (Thou knowest the
opinion I have of the women thou broughtest to me
at Hamstead; and who have seduced me hither to my
ruin; Let me ask thee) If, really and truly, they
were Lady Betty Lawrance and thy Cousin Montague? 
—What sayest thou—Hesitate not—What sayest
thou to this question? 

Astonishing, my dear, that you should suspect
them! —But, knowing your strange opinion of them,
what can I say to be believed? 
And is this the answer thou returnest me? Dost
thou thus evade my question? But let me know, for
I am trying thy sincerity now, and shall judge of thy
new professions by thy answer to this question; Let
me know, I repeat, whether those women be really
Lady Betty Lawrance and thy Cousin Montague? 
Let me, my dearest Love, be enabled to-morrow
to call you lawfully mine, and we will set out the
next day, if you please, to Berkshire, to my Lord
M's, where they both are at this time; and you shall
convince yourself by your own eyes, and by your
own ears; which you will believe sooner than all I
can say or swear. 
Now, Belford, I had really some apprehension of
treachery from thee; which made me so miserably
evade; for else, I could as safely have sworn to the
truth of this, as to that of the former: But she pressing
me still for a categorical answer, I ventured
plumb; and swore to it [Lovers Oaths, Jack!] that
they were really and truly Lady Betty Lawrance and
my Cousin Montague. 
She lifted up her hands and eyes—What can I
think! —What can I think!— 
You think me a devil, Madam; a very devil! or
you could not, after you have put these questions to
me, seem to doubt the truth of answers so solemnly
sworn to. 
And if I do think thee so, have I not cause? Is
there another man in the world (I hope, for the sake
of human nature, there is not) who could act by any
poor friendless creature as thou hast acted by me, whom
thou hast made friendless—And who, before I knew
thee, had for a friend every one who knew me? 
I told you, Madam, before, that Lady Betty and
my Cousin were actually here, in order to take leave 

of you, before they set out for Berkshire: But the
effects of my ungrateful crime (such, with shame and
remorse, I own it to be) were the reason you could
not see them. Nor could I be fond, that they should
see you: Since they never would have forgiven me,
had they known what had passed—And what reason
had I to expect your silence on the subject, had you
been recovered? 
It signifies nothing now, that the cause of their appearance
has been answered in my ruin, who or what
they are: But, if thou hast averred thus solemnly to
two falshoods, what a wretch do I see before me! 
I thought she had now reason to be satisfied; and
I begged her to allow me to talk to her of to-morrow,
as of the happiest day of my life. We have the Licence,
Madam—And you must excuse me, that I
cannot let you go hence, till I have tried every way
I can try, to obtain your forgiveness. 
And am I then [with a kind of frantic wildness] to
be detained a prisoner in this horrid house? Am I,
Sir? —Take care! Take care! holding up her hand,
menacing, how you make me desperate! If I fall,
tho' by my own hand, inquisition will be made for
my blood: And be not out in thy plot, Lovelace, if
it should be so—Make sure work, I charge thee: Dig
a hole deep enough to cram in and conceal this unhappy
body: For, depend upon it, that some of
those, who will not stir to protect me living, will
move Heaven and Earth to avenge me dead! 
A horrid dear creature! —By my Soul, she made
me shudder! She had need indeed to talk of her unhappiness
in falling into the hands of the only man in
the world, who could have used her, as I have used
her—She is the only woman in the world, who could
have shocked and disturbed me, as she has done. — 
So we are upon a foot in that respect. And I think
I have the worst of it by much: Since very little has
been my joy; very much my trouble: And her punishment, 

as she calls it, is over: But when mine
will, or what it may be, who can tell? 
Here, only recapitulating (think, then, how I
must be affected at the time) I was forced to leave
off, and sing a song to myself. I aimed at a lively
air; but I croaked rather than sung. And fell into
the old dismal Thirtieth of January strain. I hemmed
up for a sprightlier note; but it would not do: 
And at last I ended, like a malefactor, in a dead-psalm
melody. 
High-ho!—I gape like an unfledged kite in its
nest, wanting to swallow a chicken, bobbed at its
mouth by its marauding dam!— 
What a devil ails me! —I can neither think nor
write!— 
Lie down, pen, for a moment!— 