



From Lady Davers, in Answer to the preceding. 


My dear Brother,
I do most heartily congratulate you on the Recovery
of Master Billy, and the good Way my
Sister is in. I am the more rejoic'd, as her sweet
Face is not likely to suffer by the Malady; for, be
the Beauties of the Mind what they will, those of
Person are no small Recommendation, with some
Folks, I am sure; and I began to be afraid, that
when it was hardly possible for both conjoined to
keep a roving Mind constant, that one only would
not be sufficient. 
This News gives me the more Pleasure, because
I am well inform'd, that a certain gay Lady was
pleased to give herself Airs upon hearing of my
Sister's Illness; as, That she could not be sorry for
it; for now she should look upon herself as the
prettiest Woman in England. She meant only, I
suppose, as to outward Prettiness, Brother! 
You give me the Name of a ready Censurer. I
own, I think myself to be not a little interested in all 

that regards my Brother, and his Honour. But
when some People are not readier to censure, than
others to trespass, I know not whether they can
with Justice be styled censorious. 
But however that be, the Rod seems to have been
held up, as a Warning–––and that the Blow, in the
irreparable Deprivation, is not given, is a Mercy,
that I hope will be deserved; tho' you never can
those very signal ones you receive at the Divine
Hands, beyond any Gentleman I know. For even
(if I shall not be deemed censorious again) your very
Vices have been turned to your Felicity, as if God
would try the Nobleness of the Heart he has given
you, by overcoming you (in Answer to my Sister's
constant Prayers, as well as mine) by Mercies rather
than by Judgments. 
I might give Instances of the Truth of this Observation,
in almost all the Actions and Attempts of
your past Life: And take care, (if you are displeased,
I will speak it) take care, thou bold
Wretch, that if this Method be ingratefully slighted,
the uplifted Arm fall not down-with double Weight
on thy devoted Head! 
I must always love and honour my Brother; but
cannot help speaking my Mind: Which, after all,
is the natural Result of that very Love and Honour,
and which obliges me to style myself, 
Your truly affectionate Sister,
B. Davers. 

