


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 
In Continuation. 


My Lord, tho' he had acquitted himself on the
occasion, in such a manner as darted into my
mind a little ray of my beloved mother's spirit, could
not forbear giving way to his habitual littleness, when
he was assured Giffard was out of the house. He called
Halden to him, who entered with joy in his countenance,
arising, as it came out, from the same occasion, 

and ordered him to make all his domestics happy
for (what he meanly called) his deliverance: Asking,
If there were any-body in the house who loved her? 
Not a single soul, said Halden; and I am sure, that I
may venture to congratulate your Lordship, in the
names of all your servants: For she was proud, imperious,
and indeed a tyranness to all beneath her. 
I then, for the first time, pitied the woman; and
should have pitied her still more (true as this might,
in some measure, be) had she not gone away so amply
rewarded: For in this little family I looked forward
to the family of the State; the Sovereign and his ministers. 
How often has a minister, who has made a
tyrannical use of his power (and even some who have
not) experienced, on his dismission, the like treatment,
from those who, had they had his power, would perhaps
have made as bad an use of it; who, in its plenitude,
were fawning, creeping slaves, as these servants
might be to this mistress of their Lord! We
read but of one grateful Cromwell, in all the superb
train of Wolsey, when he had fallen into disgrace; 
and yet he had in it hundreds, some not ignobly born,
and all of them less meanly descended than their magnificent
master. 
Halden addressed himself to me, as having been the
means of making his Lord, and his whole houshold,
happy. Let the joy be moderate, Halden, said I:
The poor woman might, possibly, have numbered
among her well-wishers (she could not have disobliged
every-body) some of those, who now will be most
forward to load her with obloquy. You must not
make her too considerable: It is best for my Lord, as
well as for those who loved her not, to forget there
ever was such a woman; except to avoid her faults,
and to imitate her in what was commendable. She
boasts of her honesty and management: My Lord
charges her not with infidelity, of any kind. 
Halden bowed, and withdrew. 

My Lord swore, by his soul, that I had not my
good name for nothing. Blessed, said he, be the name
of the Grandisons! This last plaudit gratified my
pride (I need not tell my Dr. Bartlett, that I have
pride); the more gratified it, as Lord W.'s animosity
to my father made him out of love with his name. 
I did not think, when my Lord began his story to
me, that I should so soon have brought about a separation
of guilt from guilt: But their mutual disgusts
had prepared the way; resentment and pride, mingled
with avarice on one side, and self-interestedness,
founded (reasonably) on a stipulation made, and not
complied with, on the other; were all that hindered it
from taking place as from themselves. A mediator
had nothing then to do, but to advise an act of justice,
and so to gild it by a precedent of disinterestedness in
himself, as should inspire an emulation in a proud spirit,
that, if not then, must, when passion had subsided,
have arisen, to make all end as it ought. 
When I found my Lord's joy a little moderated, I
drew my chair near him. Well, my Lord, and now
as to your hints of marriage— 
Blessed God! —Why, nephew, you overturn me
with your generosity. Are you not my next of kin? 
And can you give your consent, were I to ask it,
that I should marry? 
I give you not only my consent, as you condescendingly
phrase it, but my advice, to marry. 
Good God! I could not, in the like case, do thus. 
But, nephew, I am not a young man. 
The more need of a prudent, a discreet, a tender
assistant. Your Lordship hinted, that you liked not
men-servants about your person, in your illness. You
are often indisposed with the gout: Servants will not
always be servants when they find themselves of use. 
Infirmity requires indulgence: In the very nature of
the word and thing, indulgence cannot exist with servility; 
between man and wife it may: The same interest 

unites them. Mutual confidence! who can
enough value the joy, the tranquillity at least, that
results from mutual confidence? A man gives his own
consequence to the woman he marries; and he sees
himself respected in the respect paid her: She extends
his dignity, and confirms it. There is such a tenderness,
such an helpfulness, such a sympathy in suffering,
in a good woman, that I am always for excusing
men in years, who marry prudently; while I censure,
for the same reason, women in years. Male nurses
are unnatural creatures! [There is not such a character
that can be respectable] Womens sphere is
the house, and their shining-place the sick chamber,
in which they can exert all their amiable, and, shall
I say, lenient qualities? Marry, my Lord, by all
means. You are hardly Fifty; but were you Seventy,
and so often indisposed; so wealthy; no children
to repine at a mother-in-law, and to render your
life or hers uncomfortable by their little jealousies; I
would advise you to marry. The man or woman deserves
not to be benefited in the disposition of your
affairs, that would wish you to continue in the hands
of mean people, and to rob you of the joys of confidence,
and the comfort of tender help, from an equal,
or from one who deserves to be made your equal, in
degree. Only, my Lord, marry so, as not to defeat
your own end: Marry not a gay creature, who will
be fluttering about in public, while you are groaning
in your chamber, and wishing for her presence. 
Blessings on your heart, my nephew! Best of men! 
I can hold no longer. There was no bearing, before,
your generosity: What can I say now? —But you
must be in earnest. 
Have you, my Lord, asked I, any Lady in your
eye? 
No, said he; indeed I have not. 
I was the better pleased with him, that he had not; 
because I was afraid, that, like our VIIIth Henry, he 

had some other woman in view, which might have
made him more uneasy than he would otherwise have
been with Giffard: For tho' it was better that he
should marry, than live in scandal; and a woman of
untainted character, rather than one who had let the
world see that she could take a price for her honour; 
yet I thought him better justified in his complaints of
that woman's misbehaviour, than in the other case he
would have been: And that it was an happiness to
both (if a right use were made of the event) that they
had been unable to live on, as they had set out. 
He told me, that he should think himself the happiest
of men, if I could find out, and recommend to
him, a woman, that I thought worthy of his addresses; 
and even would court her for him. 
Your Lordship ought not to expect fortune. 
I do not. 
She should be a gentlewoman by birth and education; 
a woman of a serious turn: Such an one is
not likely in affluence to run into those scenes of life,
from which, perhaps, only want of fortune has restrained
the gayer creature. I would not have your
Lordship fix an age, tho' I think you should not
marry a girl. Some women, at Thirty, are more discreet
than others at Forty: And if your Lordship
should be blessed with a child or two to inherit your
great estate, that happy event would domesticate the
Lady, and make your latter years more happy than
your former. 
My Lord held up his hands and eyes, and tears
seemed to make themselves furrows on his cheeks. 
He made me look at him, by what he said on this
occasion, and with anger, till he explained himself. 
By my soul, said he, and clapped his two lifted-up
hands together, I hate your father: I never heartily
loved him; but now I hate him more than ever I did
in my life. 
My Lord!— 

Don't be surprised. I hate him for keeping so long
abroad a son, who would have converted us both. 
Lessons of morality, given in so noble a manner by
regular practice, rather than by preaching theory
(those were his words) not only where there is no interest
proposed to be served, but against interest, must
have subdued us both; and that by our own consents. 
O my sister! and he clasped his hands, and lifted up
his eyes, as if he had the dear object of his brotherly
address before him; how have you blessed me, in your
son!— 
This apostrophe to my mother affected me. What
a mixture is there in the character of Lord W.! 
What a good man might he have made, had he been
later his own master! —His father died before he was
of age. 
He declared, that I had described the very wife he
wished to have. Find out such an one for me, my
dear kinsman, said he; and I give you carte blanche:
But let her not be younger than Fifty. Make the
settlements for me: I am very rich: I will sign them
blindfold. If the Lady be such an one as you say I
ought to love, I will love her: Only let her say, she
can be grateful for my Love, and for the provision
you shall direct me to make for her; and my first interview
with her shall be at the altar. 
I think, my friend, I have in my eye such a woman
as my Lord ought to do very handsome things for, if
she condescend to have him. I will not tell you, not
even you, whom I mean, till I know she will encourage
such a proposal; and, for her own fortune's
sake, I think she should: But I had her not in my
thoughts when I proposed to my Lord the character
of the woman he should wish for. 
Adieu, my dear friend. 

