



Mr. Lovelace. In Continuation. 

The Ladies, instead of taking up the subject where
we had laid it down, must needs touch upon
passages in my fair Accuser's Letter, which I was in
hopes they would have let rest, as we were in a tolerable
way. But, truly, they must hear all they could
hear, of our Story, and what I had to say to those
passages, that they might be better enabled to mediate
between us, if I were really and indeed inclined to do
her the hoped-for justice. 

These passages were, 1st, “That after I had compulsatorily
tricked her into the act of going off with
me, I carried her to one of the worst houses in
London.” 
2. “That I had made a wicked attempt upon
her; in resentment of which, she fled to Hamstead,
privately.” 
3dly, Came the Forgery, and personating charges
again; and we were upon the point of renewing our
quarrel, before we could get to the next charge: 
Which was still worse. 
For that (4thly) was, “That having betrayed her
back to the vile house, I first robbed her of her
Senses, and then of her Honour; detaining her afterwards
a prisoner there.” 
Were I to tell thee the glosses I put upon these
heavy charges, what would it be, but to repeat many
of the extenuating arguments I have used in my Letters
to thee? —Suffice it, therefore, to say, that I insisted
much, by way of palliation, on the Lady's extreme
niceness: On her diffidence in my honour: On
Miss Howe's contriving spirit; plots on their parts
begetting plots on mine: On the high passions of the
Sex. I asserted, that my whole view, in gently restraining
her, was to oblige her to forgive me, and to
marry me; and this, for the honour of both families. 
I boasted of my own good qualities; some of which
none that know me, deny; and to which few Libertines
can lay claim. 
They then fell into warm admirations and praises of
the Lady; all of them preparatory, as I knew, to the
grand question: And thus it was introduced by Lady
Sarah. 
We have said as much as I think we can say, upon
these Letters of the poor Lady. To dwell upon the
mischiefs that may ensue from the abuse of a person of
her rank, if all the reparation be not made that now
can be made, would perhaps be to little purpose. But 

you seem, Sir, still to have a just opinion of her, as
well as affection for her. Her virtue is not in the least
questionable. She could not resent as she does, had
she any-thing to reproach herself with. She is, by
every-body's account, a fine woman; has a good
Estate in her own right; is of no contemptible family; 
tho' I think, with regard to her, they have acted
as imprudently as unworthily. For the excellency of
her mind, for good oeconomy, the common speech
of her, as the worthy Dr. Lewen once told me, is,
That her prudence would 'enrich a poor man, and her
piety reclaim a licentious one. I, who have not been
abroad twice this twelvemonth, came hither purposely,
so did Lady Betty, to see if justice may not be done
her; and also whether we, and my Lord M. (your
nearest relations, Sir) have, or have not, any influence
over you. And, for my own part, as your determination
shall be in this article, such shall be mine,
with regard to the disposition of all that is within my
power. 
Lady Betty. And mine. 
And mine, said my Lord: And valiantly he swore
to it. 
Lovel. Far be it from me to think slightly of favours
you may any of you be glad I would deserve! But as
far be it from me to enter into conditions against my
own liking, with sordid views! —As to future mischiefs,
let them come. I have not done with the
Harlowes yet. They were the aggressors; and I
should be glad they would let me hear from them, in
the way they should hear from me, in the like case. 
Perhaps, I should not be sorry to be found, rather than
be obliged to seek, on this occasion. 
Miss Charlotte [reddening]. Spoke like a man of
violence, rather than a man of reason! I hope you'll
allow that, Cousin. 
Lady Sarah. Well, but since what is done, is done,
and cannot be undone, let us think of the next best. 

Have you any objection against marrying Miss Harlowe,
if she will have you? 
Lovel. There can possibly be but one: That she is
to every-body, no doubt, as well as to Lady Betty,
pursuing that maxim peculiar to herself (and let me
tell you, so it ought to be); That what she cannot conceal
from herself, she will publish to all the world. 
Miss Patty. The Lady, to be sure, writes this in
the bitterness of her grief, and in despair— 
Lovel. And so when her grief is allayed; when her
despairing sit is over—And this from you, Cousin
Patty! —Sweet girl! And would you, my dear, in
the like case [whispering her] have yielded to entreaty
—Would you have meant no more by the like
exclamations? 
I had a rap with her fan, and a blush; and from
Lord M. a reflection, That I turned into jest everything
they said. 
I asked, If they thought the Harlowes deserved any
consideration from me? and whether that family
would not exult over me, were I to marry their
daughter, as if I dared not to do otherwise? 
Lady Sarah. Once I was angry with that family, as
we all were. But now I pity them; and think, that
you have but too well justified the worst treatment
they gave you. 
Lord M. Their family is of standing. All gentlemen
of it, and rich, and reputable. Let me tell
you, that many of our coronets would be glad they
could derive their descents from no worse a stem than
theirs. 
Lovel. The Harlowes are a narrow-souled and implacable
family. I hate them: And tho' I revere the
Lady, scorn all relation to them. 
Lady Betty. I wish no worse could be said of him,
who is such a scorner of common failings in others. 
Lord M. How would my Sister Lovelace have reproached
herself for all her indulgent folly to this favourite 

Boy of hers, had she lived till now, and been
present on this occasion! 
Lady Sarah. Well but, begging your Lordship's
pardon, let us see if any-thing can be done for this
poor Lady. 
Miss Ch. If Mr. Lovelace has nothing to object
against the Lady's character (and I presume to think
he is not ashamed to do her justice, tho' it may make
against himself) I cannot see but honour and generosity
will compel from him all that we expect. If there
be any levities, any weaknesses, to be charged upon
the Lady, I should not open my lips in her favour; 
tho' in private I would pity her, and deplore her hard
hap. And yet, even then, there might not want arguments,
from honour and gratitude, in so particular
a case, to engage you, Sir, to make good the vows
it is plain you have broken. 
Lady Betty. My Niece Charlotte has called upon
you so justly, and has put the question to you so properly,
that I cannot but wish you would speak to it
directly, and without evasion. 
All in a breath then bespoke my seriousness, and
my justice: And in this manner I delivered myself,
assuming an air sincerely solemn. 
“I am very sensible, that the performance of the
task you have put me upon, will leave me without
excuse: But I will not have recourse either to evasion
or palliation. 
“As my Cousin Charlotte has severely observed,
I am not ashamed to do justice to Miss Harlowe's
merit. 
“I own to you all, and, what is more, with high
regret (if not with shame, Cousin Charlotte) that I
have a great deal to answer for in my usage of this
Lady. The Sex has not a nobler mind, nor a
lovelier person of it. And, for virtue, I could not
have believed (Excuse me, Ladies) that there ever
was a woman who gave, or could have given, such 

illustrious, such uniform proofs of it: For, in her
whole conduct, she has shewn herself to be equally
above Temptation and Art; and, I had almost said,
Human frailty. 
“The step she so freely blames herself for taking,
was truly what she calls compulsatory: For tho'
she was provoked to think of going off with me,
she intended it not, nor was provided to do so: 
Neither would she ever have had the thought of it,
had her relations left her free, upon her offered
composition to renounce the man she did not hate,
in order to avoid the man she did. 
“It piqued my pride, I own, that I could so little
depend upon the force of those impressions which I
had the vanity to hope I had made in a heart so
delicate; and in my worst devices against her, I
encouraged myself, that I abused no confidence; for
none had she in my honour. 
“The evils she has suffered, it would have been
more than a miracle had she avoided. Her watchfulness
rendered more plots abortive, than those
which contributed to her fall; and they were
many and various. And all her greater trials and
hardships were owing to her noble resistance, and
just resentment. 
“I know, proceeded I, how much I condemn
myself in the justice I am doing to this excellent
creature. But yet I will do her justice, and cannot
help it if I would. And I hope this shews, that
I am not so totally abandoned, as I have been
thought to be. 
“Indeed, with me, she has done more honour to
the Sex in her fall, if it be to be called a fall (In
truth it ought not) than ever any other could do
in her standing. 
“When, at length, I had given her watchful virtue
cause of suspicion, I was then indeed obliged to
make use of Power and Art to prevent her escaping 

from me. She then formed contrivances to elude
mine; but all hers were such as strict truth and
punctilious honour would justify. She could not
stoop to deceit and falshood, no, not to save herself. 
More than once justly did she tell me, fired
by conscious worthiness, that her Soul was my
Soul's superior! —Forgive me, Ladies, for saying,
that till I knew her, I questioned a Soul in a Sex,
created, as I was willing to suppose, only for temporary
purposes. —It is not to be imagined into
what absurdities men of free principles run, in
order to justify to themselves their free practices; 
and to make a Religion to their minds: And yet,
in this respect, I have not been so faulty as some
others. 
“No wonder that such a noble creature as this
looked upon every studied artifice, as a degree of
baseness not to be forgiven: No wonder that she
could so easily become averse to the man (tho'
once she beheld him with an eye not wholly indifferent)
whom she thought capable of premeditated
guilt. —Nor, give me leave, on the other hand, to
say, is it to be wondered at, that the man who
found it so difficult to be forgiven for the slighter
offences, and who had not the grace to recede or
repent (made desperate) should be hurried on to the
commission of the greater. 
“In short, Ladies, in a word, my Lord, Miss
Clarissa Harlowe is an Angel; if ever there was or
could be one in human nature: And is, and ever
was, as pure as an Angel in her will: And this justice
I must do her, altho' the question, I see by every
glistening eye, is ready to be asked, What, then,
Lovelace, are you?—” 
Lord M. A devil! —A damn'd devil! I must answer. 
And may the curse of God follow you in all
you undertake, if you do not make her the best amends
now in your power to make her! 

Lovel. From you, my Lord, I could expect no
other: But from the Ladies I hope for less violence
from the ingenuousness of my confession. 
The Ladies, elder and younger, had their handkerchiefs
to their eyes, at the just testimony which I bore
to the merits of this exalted creature; and which I
would make no scruple to bear at the Bar of a Court
of Justice, were I to be called to it. 
Lady Betty. Well, Sir, this is a noble character. 
If you think as you speak, surely you cannot refuse
to do the Lady all the justice now in your power to do
her. 
They all joined in this demand. 
I pleaded, that I was sure she would not have me: 
That, when she had taken a resolution, she was not
to be moved: Unpersuadableness was an Harlowe
sin: That, and her name, I told them, were all she
had of theirs. 
All were of opinion, that she might, in her present
desolate circumstances, be brought to forgive me. 
Lady Sarah said, that Lady Betty and she would endeavour
to find out the Noble Sufferer, as they justly
called her; and would take her into their protection,
and be guarantees of the justice that I would do her; 
as well after Marriage, as before. 
It was some pleasure to me, to observe the placability
of these Ladies of my own family, had they,
any or either of them, met with a Lovelace. 
But 'twould be hard upon us honest fellows, Jack, if
all women were Clarissa's. 
Here I am obliged to break off. 