


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Tuesday, March 14. 
Sir Charles is come at last! He came time enough
to breakfast, and with him the good Dr. Bartlett. 
My philosophy, I doubt, is gone again, quite gone; 
for one while at least. I must take sanctuary, and
that very soon, at Selby-house. 
Every word that passes now, seems to me worth
repeating. There is no describing how the presence
of this man animates every one in company. But
take only part of what passed. 

We were in hopes, Sir Charles, said Lord L. that
we should have had the pleasure of seeing you before
now. 
My heart was with you, my Lord: And (taking my
hand; for he sat next me, and bowing) the more ardently,
I must own, for the pleasure I should have shared
with you all, in the company of this your lovely guest. 
[What business had he to take my hand? But indeed,
the character of brother might warrant the
freedom.] 
I was engaged most part of last week in a very
melancholy attendance, as Mr. Grandison could have
informed you. 
But not a word of the matter, said Mr. Grandison,
did I tell the Ladies; looking at his two cousins. I
amused them, as they love to do all mankind, when
they have power. 
The Ladies, I hope, cousin, will punish you for
this reflexion. 
I came not to town till Saturday, proceeded Sir
Charles; and found a billet from Sir Hargrave Pollexsen,
inviting himself, Mr. Merceda, Mr. Bagenhall,
and Mr. Jordan, to pass the Sunday evening
with me at St. James's-square. The company was
not suitable to the day, nor the day to the purposed
meeting. I made my excuses, and desired them to
favour me at breakfast on Monday morning. They
came. And when we were all in good humour with
one another, I proposed, and was seconded by Mr.
Jordan, that we would make a visit—You will hardly
guess to whom, Miss Byron—It was to the widow
Awberry at Paddington. 
I started, and even trembled. What I suffered
there, was all in my mind. 
He proceeded then to tell me, that he had, tho'
not without some difficulty on Sir Hargrave's part, engaged
him to draw upon his banker for the 100l. he
had promised Wilson; on Mr. Merceda on his banker 

for 50l. and he himself generously added 50l. more; 
and, giving, as he said, the air of a frolick to the
performance of a promise, they all of them went to
Paddington. There, satisfying themselves of the
girl's love for Wilson, and of the widow's opinion of
Wilson's good intentions by the girl; they let them
know, that the sum of 200l. was deposited in Sir
Charles's hands to be paid on the day of marriage, as
a portion for the young woman; and bid them demand
it as soon as they thought fit. Neither Wilson
nor the widow's son was there. The widow and her
daughters were overjoy'd at this unexpected good
news. 
They afterwards shew'd Sir Charles, it seems, every
scene of my distress; and told him, and the gentlemen,
all but Sir Hargrave (who had not patience to
hear it, and went into another room) my whole sad
story. Sir Charles was pleased to say, That he was
so much affected with it, that he had some little difficulty,
on joining Sir Hargrave, to be as civil to him
as he was before he heard the relation. 
To one condition, it seems, the gentlemen insisted
Sir Charles should consent, as an inducement for
them to comply with his proposal. It was, that Sir
Charles should dine with Sir Hargrave and the company
at his house on the forest, some one day in the
next week, of which they would give him notice. 
They all insisted upon it; and Sir Charles said, he
came the more readily into the proposal, as they declared,
it would be the last time they should see him
for at least a twelvemonth to come; they being determined
to prosecute their intended tour. 
Wilson and young Awberry waited on Sir Charles
the same evening. The marriage is to be celebrated
in a few days. Wilson says, that his widow-sister in
Smithfield will, he is sure, admit him into a partnership
with her, now that he shall have something to
carry into the stock; for she loves his wife-elect; and 

the saving both of body and soul, will be owing, he
declared (with transport that left him speechless) to
Sir Charles Grandison. 
Every-body was delighted with the relation he gave. 
Dear Sir Charles, said Mr. Grandison, let me be allowed
to believe the Roman Catholic doctrine of Supererogation; 
and let me express my hope, that I
your kinsman may be the better for your good works. 
If all you do, is but necessary, the Lord have mercy
upon me! 
Miss Grandison said, if I had written to my
friends the account of what I suffered from the vile attempt
of Sir Hargrave, as she doubted not but I had,
Lady L. as well as herself, would take it for a particular
mark of my confidence, if they might be allowed
to peruse it. 
When I am favoured, reply'd I, with the return of
my Letters, I will very chearfully communicate to you,
my dear Ladies, my relation of this shocking affair. 
They all expressed a pleasure in my frankness. Sir
Charles said, he admired me beyond expression, for
that noble criterion of Innocence and Goodness. 
There, Lucy! 
I think there is nothing in that part, but what they
may see. 

