



From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. 


My dear Lady Davers,
I have a valuable Present made me by the same
excellent Lady: And therefore hope you will 

not take it amiss, that, with abundance of Thanks,
I return yours by Mrs. Worden; whose Sister I much
approve of, and thank your Ladyship for your kind
recommendation of so worthy a Gentlewoman. 
We begin with so much good Liking to one another,
that I doubt not we shall be very happy together. 
A moving Letter, much more valuable to me,
than the handsome Present, was put into my Hands,
at the same time with that; of which the following
is a Copy: 

From Mrs. Wrightson (formerly Miss Sally Godfrey) to Mrs. B.
Happy, deservedly happy, dear Lady,
‘Permit these Lines to kiss your Hands, from
one, who, tho' she is a Stranger to your Person,
is not so to your Character: That has reach'd
us here, in this remote Part of the World, where
you have as many Admirers as have heard of you. 
But I, more particularly, am bound to be so, by
an Obligation, which I can never discharge, but
by my daily Prayers for you, and the Blessings I
continually implore upon You and Yours. 
‘I can write my whole Mind to you, tho' I
cannot, from the most deplorable Infelicity, receive
from you the wish'd-for Favour of a few
Lines in Return, written with the same Unreservedness:
So unhappy am I, from the Effects of
an Inconsideration and Weakness on one hand,
and Temptations on the other, which You, at a
tenderer Age, most nobly, for your own Honour,
and that of your Sex, have escaped: Whilst I— 

But let my Tears in these Blots speak the rest––––as
my Heart bleeds, and has constantly bled ever since,
at the grievous Rememblance—But believe me,
however, dear Madam, that 'tis Shame and Sorrow,
and not Pride and Impenitence, that make
me loth to speak out, to so much Purity of Life
and Manners, my own odious Weakness. 
‘Nevertheless, I ought, and I will accuse
myself by Name. Imagine then, illustrious Lady,
truly illustrious, for Virtues, which are infinitely
superior to all the Advantages of Birth and Fortune! 
—Imagine, I say, that in this Letter,
you see before you the once guilty, and therefore,
I doubt, always guilty, but ever penitent, Sarah
Godfrey; the unhappy, tho' fond and tender
Mother of the poor Infant, to whom your generous
Goodness, as I am inform'd, has extended itself,
in such manner, as to make you desirous of
taking her under your worthy Protection: God
for ever bless you for it! prays an indulgent Mother,
who admires, at an awful Distance, that
Virtue in you, which she could not practise herself. 
‘And will you, my dearest Lady, will you take
under your own immediate Protection, the poor
unguilty Infant? Will you love her, for the sake
of her suffering Mamma, whom you know not; 
for the sake of the Gentleman, now so dear to
you, and so worthy of you, as I hear, with Pleasure,
he is? And will you, by the best Example
in the World, give me a moral Assurance, that
she will never sink into the Fault, the Weakness,
the Crime (I ought not to scruple to call it so)
of her poor, inconsiderate—But You are her 

Mamma now: I will not think of a guilty one
therefore. And what a Joy is it to me, in the
midst of my heavy Reflections on my past Misconduct,
that my beloved Sally can boast a virtuous
and innocent Mamma, who has withstood
the Snares and Temptations, that have been so
fatal—elsewhere! —and whose Example, and
Instructions, next to God's Grace, will be the
strongest Fences, that can be wish'd for, to her
Honour! —Once more I say, and on my Knees
I write it! God for ever bless you here, and
augment your Joys hereafter, for your generous
Goodness to my poor, and, till now, motherless
Infant. 
‘I hope the dear Child, by her Duty and Obligingness,
will do all in her little Power to make
you Amends, and never give you Cause to repent
of this your unexampled Kindness to her and to
me. She cannot, I hope, (except her Mother's
Crime has had an Influence upon her, too much
like that of an original Stain) be of a sordid, or
an ingrateful Nature. And, O my poor Sally! if
you are, and if ever you fail in your Duty to your
new Mamma, to whose Care and Authority I
transfer my whole Right in you, remember that
you have no more a Mamma in me, nor can you
be intitled to my Blessing, or to the Fruits of my
Prayers for you; which I make now, on that only
Condition, your implicit Obedience to all your
new Mamma's Commands and Directions. 
‘You may have the Curiosity, Madam, to wish
to know how I live: For no doubt you have
heard all my sad, sad Story! —Know then, that
I am as happy, as a poor Creature can be, who 

who has once so deplorably, so inexcusably fallen. 
I have a worthy Gentleman for my Husband, who
marry'd me as a Widow, whose only Child by
my former, was the Care of her Papa's Friends,
particularly of good Lady Davers, and her Brother. 
—Poor, unhappy I! to be under such a sad
Necessity, to disguise the Truth! —Mr. Wrightson
(whose Name I am unworthily honour'd by)
has several times earnestly intreated me to send for
the poor Child, and to let her be join'd as his— 
killing Thought, that it cannot be! —with Two
Children I have by him! —Judge, my good
Lady, how that very Generosity, which, had I
been guiltless, would have added to my Joys,
must wound me deeper, than even ungenerous
or unkind Usage from him could do! And how
heavy that Crime must lie upon me, which turns
my very Pleasures to Misery, and fixes all the
Joy I can know, in Repentance for my past
Misdeeds! —How happy are You, Madam, on
the contrary! You, who have nothing of this
sort to pall, nothing to mingle with your Felicities!
who, bless'd in an Honour untainted, and a
Conscience that cannot reproach you, are enabled
to enjoy every well-deserv'd Comfort, as it
offers itself; and can improve it too, by Reflection
on your past Conduct! While mine— 
alas! —like a Winter-Frost, nips in the Bud every
rising Satisfaction! 
‘My Spouse is rich, as well as generous, and
very tender of me—Happy, if I could think
myself as deserving, as he thinks me! —My
principal Comfort, as I hinted, is in my Penitence
for my past Faults; and that I have a merciful 

God for my Judge, who knows that Penitence
to be sincere! 
‘You may guess, Madam, from what I have
said, in what Light I must appear here; and if
you would favour me with a Line or two, in Answer
to the Letter you have now in your Hand, it
will be one of the greatest Pleasures I can receive:
A Pleasure next to that which I have receiv'd, in
knowing, that the Gentleman you love best, has
had the Grace to repent of all his Evils; has early
seen his Errors; and has thereby, I hope, freed
Two Persons from being, one Day, mutual Accusers
of each other: For now I please myself to
think, that the Crimes of both may be wash'd
away in the Blood of that Saviour God, whom
both have so grievously offended! 
‘May that good God, who has not suffer'd me
to be abandon'd intirely to my own Shame, as I
deserved, continue to shower down upon You
those Blessings, which a Virtue like yours may
expect from his Mercy! May you long be happy
in the Possession of all you wish! And late, very
late, (for the Good of Thousands, I wish this!)
may you receive the Reward of your Piety, your
Generosity, and your filial, your social, and conjugal'
Virtues! are the Prayers of 
Your most unworthy Admirer,
and obliged humble Servant,
Sarah Wrightson. 
‘Mr. Wrightson begs your Acceptance of a
small Present, Part of which can have no
Value, but what its excelling Qualities, for 

what it is, will give it at so great a Distance
as that dear England, which I once
left with so much Shame and Regret; but
with a laudable Purpose, however, because
I would not incur still greater Shame, and,
of Consequence, give Cause for still greater
Regret!’ 

To this Letter, my dear Lady Davers, I have
written the following Answer, which Mr. B. will
take care to have convey'd to the good Lady. 

Dearest Madam,
‘I Embrace with great Pleasure the Opportunity
you have so kindly given me, of writing to a
Lady, whose Person tho' I have not the Honour
to know, yet whose Character and noble Qualities
I truly revere. 
‘I am infinitely obliged to you, Madam, for
the precious Trust you have reposed in me, and
the Right you make over to me, of your maternal
Interest in a Child, on whom I set my Heart,
the Moment I saw her. 
‘Lady Davers, whose Love and Tenderness
for Miss, as well for her Mamma's sake, as your
late worthy Spouse's, had, from her kind Opinion
of me, consented to grant me this Favour; 
and I was, by Mr. B.'s Leave, in actual Possession
of my pretty Ward, about a Week before your
kind Letter came to my Hands. 
‘As I had been long very solicitous for this Favour,
judge how welcome your kind Concurrence
was to me; and the rather, as, had I known
that a Letter from you was on the Way to me, I 

should have apprehended, that you would have insisted
upon depriving the surviving Friends of her
dear Papa, of the Pleasure they take in the sweet
Miss. Indeed, Madam, I believe we should one
and all have join'd to disobey you, had that been
the Case; and it is a great Satisfaction to us, that
we are not under so hard a Necessity, as to dispute
with a tender Mamma the Possession of her own
Child. 
‘Assure yourself, dearest, worthiest, kindest
Madam, of a Care and Tenderness in me to your
dear Miss, truly maternal, and answerable, as
much as is in my Power, to the Trust you repose
in me. The little Boy, that God has given me,
shall not be more dear to me, than my sweet
Miss shall be; and my Care, by God's Grace,
shall extend to her future as well as to her present
Prospects, that she may be worthy of that Piety,
and truly religious Excellence, which I admire in
your Character. 
‘We all rejoice, dear Madam, in the Account
you give of your present Happiness. It was impossible,
that God Almighty should desert a Lady
so exemplarily deserving; and He certainly conducted
you in your Resolutions to abandon every
thing that you loved in England, after the Loss of
your dear Spouse, because it seems to have been the
Intention of His Providence, that you should reward
the Merit of Mr. Wrightson, and meet with
your own Reward in so doing. 
‘Miss is very fond of my little Billy: She is
a charming Child; is easy and genteel in her
Shape; and very pretty; she dances finely, has a
sweet Air, and is improving every Day in Musick; 

works with her Needle, and reads, admirably,
for her Years; and takes a Delight in both, which
gives me no small Pleasure. But she is not very
forward in her Penmanship, as you will see by
what follows: The Inditing too is her own; but
in that, and the Writing, Miss took a good deal
of Time, on a separate Paper.’ 


Dearest, dear Mamma,
Your Sally is full of Joy, to have any Commands
from her honoured Mamma. I promise
to follow all your Directions. Indeed, and
upon my Word, I will. You please me mightily
in giving me so dear a new Mamma here. Now
I know, indeed, I have a Mamma, and I will
love and obey her, as if she was you your own
Self. Indeed I will. You must always bless me,
because I will be always good. I hope you will
believe me, because I am above telling Fibs. I
am, my honoured Mamma, on the other Side of
the Water, and ever will be, as if you was here, 
Your dutiful Daughter,
Sally Goodwin.” 
‘Miss (permit me, dear Madam, to subjoin)
is a very good-temper'd Child, easy to be persuaded,
and, I hope, loves me dearly; and I will
endeavour to make her love me better and better; 
for, on that Love will depend the Regard
which, I hope, she will pay to all I shall say and
do for her Good. 
‘Repeating my Acknowlegements for the
kind Trust you repose in me, and with Thanks 

for the valuable Present you have sent me, we all
here join in Respects to worthy Mr. Wrightson,
and in wishing you, Madam, a Continuance and
Increase of worldly Felicity; and I, particularly,
beg Leave to assure you, that I am, and ever will
be, with the highest Respect and Gratitude, tho'
personally unknown, dearest Madam, 
The affectionate Admirer of your Piety,
and your obliged humble Servant,
P. B.’ 

Your Ladyship will see how I was circumscrib'd
and limited; otherwise I would have told the good
Lady (what I have mention'd more than once)
how I admire and honour her for her Penitence,
and for that noble Resolution, which enabled her
to do what Thousands could not have the Heart to
do, abandon her Country, her Relations, Friends,
Baby, and all that was dear to her, as well as the
Seducer, whom she too well lov'd, and hazard the
Sea, the Danger of Pirates, and possibly of other
wicked Attempters of the mischievous Sex, in a
World she knew nothing of, among Strangers; 
and all to avoid repeating a Sin she had been unhappily
drawn into; and for which the dear good Lady
still abhors herself. 
Must not such a Lady as this, dear Madam,
have as much Merit, as many even of those, who,
having not had her Temptations, have not fallen? 
This, at least, one may aver, that next to not committing
an Error, is certainly the Resolution to retrieve
it all that one may, to repent of it, and studiously
to avoid the Repetition of it But who, besides 

this excellent Mrs. Wrightson, having so fallen,
and being still so ardently solicited and pursued
(and flatter'd, perhaps, by fond Hopes, that her
Spoiler would, one Day, do her all the Justice he
could—For who can do complete Justice to a
Lady he has robb'd of her Honour?)—could
resolve as she resolved, and act as she acted? 
Miss is a sweet pretty Dear; but, permit me to
say, has a little of her Papa's Spirit; hasty, yet generous
and acknowleging, when she is convinc'd
of her Fault; a little haughtier and prouder than
I wish her to be; but in every thing else deserves
the Character I give of her to her Mamma. 
She is very fond of fine Cloaths, is a little too
lively to the Servants—Told me once, when I
took Notice, that Softness and Mildness of Speech
became a young Lady, That they were but Servants; 
and she could say no more, than Pray, and
I desire, and I wish you'd be so kind—to her
Uncle, or to me. 
I told her, Our Servants were not common
Servants, and deserved any civil Distinctions; and
that so long as they were ready to oblige her in
every thing, by a kind Word, it would be very wrong
to give them imperative ones, which could serve
for no other End, but to convince every one of the
Haughtiness of one's own Temper; and looked, as
if one would question their Compliance with one's
own Will, unless we would exact it with a high
Hand; which might cast a Slur upon the Command
we gave, as if we thought it was hardly so reasonable,
as otherwise to obtain their Observation of it. 
Besides, my Dear, said I, you don't consider,
that if you speak as haughtily and commandingly to 

them on common, as on extraordinary Occasions,
you weaken your own Authority, if ever you should
be permitted to have any, and they'll regard you no
more in the one Case, than in the other. 
She takes great Notice of what I say, and when
her little proud Heart is subdu'd by Reasonings she
cannot answer, she will sit as if she were studying
what to say, that she may come off as flyingly as
she can: And, as the Case requires, I let her go off
easily, or I push the little Dear to her last Refuge,
and make her quit her Post, and yield up her Spirit, a
Captive to Reason and Discretion, Two excellent
Commanders, with whom, I tell her, I must bring
her to be intimately acquainted. 
Yet, after all, till I can be sure, that I can inspire
her with the Love of Virtue, for its own Sake, I
will rather try to conduct her Spirit to proper Ends,
than endeavour totally to subdue it; being sensible
that our Passions are given us for excellent Ends,
and that they may, by a proper Direction, be made
subservient to the noblest Purposes. 
I tell her sometimes, there may be a decent
Pride in Humility, and that it is very possible for a
young Lady to behave with so much true Dignity,
as shall command Respect by the Turn of her Eye,
sooner than by Asperity of Speech; that she may
depend upon it, that the Person who is always finding
Faults, frequently causes them; and that it is
no Glory to be better born than Servants, if she is
not better behav'd too. 
Besides, I tell her, Humility is a Grace that
shines in a high Condition, but cannot equally in
a low one; because that is already too much humbled,
perhaps: And that, tho' there is a Censure 

lies against being poor and proud, yet I would rather
forgive Pride in a poor Body, than in a rich; for
in the Rich it is Insult and Arrogance, proceeding
from their high Condition; but in the Poor, it may
be a Defensative against Dishonesty, and may shew
a natural Bravery of Mind, that, (if properly directed,
and manifested on right Occasions) the Frowns of
Fortune cannot depress. 
She says, She hears every Day Things from me,
which her Governess never taught her. 
That may very well be, I tell her, because her
Governess has many young Ladies to take care of; 
I but one; and that I want to make her wise and
prudent betimes, that she may be an Example to
other Misses; and that Governesses and Mamma's
shall say to their Misses, When will you be like
Miss Goodwin? Do you ever hear Miss Goodwin
say a naughty Word? Would Miss Goodwin, think
you, have done so or so? 
She threw her Arms about my Neck on one
such Occasion as this: Oh, said she, What a charming
Mamma have I got! I will be in every thing as
like you, Madam, as ever I can! —And then You
will love me, and so will my Uncle, and so will
Every-body else. 
Mr. B. whom, now-and-then, she says, she
loves as well as if he were her own Papa, sees,
with Pleasure, how we go on; and loves us both, if
possible, better and better. But she tells me, I must
not have any Daughter but her, and is very jealous
on the Occasion about which your Ladyship so kindly
reproaches me. 
There is a Pride, you know, Madam, in
some of our Sex, that serves to useful Purposes, and 

is a good Defence against improper Matches, and
mean Actions; and this is not wholly to be subdu'd,
for that Reason; for, tho' it is not Virtue,
yet, if it can be Virtue's Substitute, in high, rash,
and inconsiderate Minds, it may turn to good Account. 
So I will not quite discourage my dear
Pupil neither, till I see what Discretion, and riper
Years, may add to her distinguishing Faculty. For,
as some have no Notion of Pride, separate from
Imperiousness and Arrogance; so others know no
Difference between Humility and Meanness. 
There is a golden Mean in every thing; and
if it please God to spare us both, I will endeavour
to point her Passions, and such even of those Foibles,
which seem too deeply rooted to be soon eradicated,
to useful Purposes; chusing to imitate Physicians,
who in certain Chronical Illnesses, as I have
read in Lord Bacon, rather proceed by Palliatives,
than by harsh Extirpatives, which, thro' the Resistance
given to 'em by the Constitution, may create
such Ferments in it, as may destroy that Health it
was their Intention to establish. 
But, whither am I running? —Your Ladyship,
I hope, will excuse this parading Freedom of my
Pen: For tho' these Notions are well enough with
regard to Miss Goodwin, they must be very impertinent
to a Lady, who can so much better instruct
Miss's Tut'ress, than that vain Tut'ress can her Pupil. 
And therefore, with my humblest Respect to my
good Lord Davers, and your noble Neighbours,
and to Mr. H. I hasten to conclude myself 
Your Ladyship's obliged Sister,
and obedient Servant,
P. B. 

Your Billy, Madam, is a charming Dear! —I
long to have you see him. He sends you a
Kiss upon this Paper. You'll see it stain'd,
just here. The Charmer has cut Two Teeth,
and is about more: So you'll excuse the dear,
pretty, slabbering Boy. Miss Goodwin is ready
to eat him with Love: And Mr. B. is fonder
and fonder of us all: And then your Ladyship,
and my good Lord Davers, love us too. 
O my dear Lady, what a blessed Creature
am I! 
Miss begs I'll send her Duty to her Noble Uncle
and Aunt; that's her just Distinction always,
when she speaks of you both, which is not
seldom. She ask'd me, pretty Dear! just
now, If I think there is such a happy Girl in
the World, as she is? I tell her, God always
blesses good Misses, and makes them happier
and happier. 

