



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wedn. Night, March 22. 
On the report made by my Aunt and Sister of my
obstinacy, my assembled relations have taken an
unanimous resolution (as Betty tells me it is) against
me. This resolution you will find signified to me in
the inclosed Letter from my Brother, just now brought
me. Be pleased to return it, when perused. I may
have occasion for it, in the altercations between my
Relations and me. 

Miss Clary,
I am commanded to let you know, that my Father
and Uncles having heard your Aunt Hervey's account
of all that has passed between her and you: 
Having heard from your Sister what sort of treatment
she has had from you: Having recollected all that has
passed between your Mother and you: Having weighed
all your pleas and proposals: Having taken into consideration
their engagements with Mr. Solmes; that
gentleman's patience, and great affection for you; 
and the little opportunity you have given yourself to
be acquainted either with his merit, or his proposals: 
Having considered two points more; to wit, the
wounded authority of a Father; and Mr. Solmes's
continual entreaties (little as you have deserved regard 

from him) that you may be freed from a confinement
to which he is desirous to attribute your perverseness
to him [Averseness I should have said, but let it go]
he being unable to account otherwise for so strong a
one, supposing you told truth to your Mother, when
you asserted that your heart was free; and which Mr.
Solmes is willing to believe, tho' nobody else does
—For all these reasons, it is resolved, that you shall
go to your Uncle Antony's: And you must accordingly
prepare yourself so to do. You will have but
short notice of the day, for obvious reasons. 
I will honestly tell you the motive for your going: 
It is a double one; first, That they may be sure, that
you shall not correspond with any-body they do not
like (for they find from Mrs. Howe, that, by some
means or other, you do correspond with her daughter; 
and, thro' her, perhaps with somebody else): And
next, That you may receive the visits of Mr. Solmes; 
which you have thought fit to refuse to do here; by
which means you have deprived yourself of the opportunity
of knowing whom and what you have
hitherto refused. 
If after one fortnight's conversation with Mr.
Solmes, and after you have heard what your friends
shall further urge in his behalf, unhardened by clandestine
correspondencies, you shall convince them,
that Virgil's Amor omnibus idem (for the application of
which I refer you to the Georgic as translated by
Dryden) is verified in you, as well as in the rest of the
animal creation; and that you cannot, or will not,
forego your prepossession in favour of the moral, the
virtuous, the pious Lovelace [I would please you if I
could!] it will then be considered, whether to humour
you, or to renounce you for ever. 
It is hoped, that as you must go, you will go chearfully. 
Your Uncle Antony will make every-thing at
his house agreeable to you. But indeed he won't
promise, that he will not, at proper times, draw up
the Bridge. 

Your visitors, besides Mr. Solmes, will be myself,
if you permit me that honour, Miss Clary; your
Sister; and, as you behave to Mr. Solmes, your
Aunt Hervey, and your Uncle Harlowe; and yet the
two latter will hardly come neither, if they think it
will be to hear your whining vocatives. —Betty Barnes
will be your attendant: And, I must needs tell you,
Miss, that we none of us think the worse of the
faithful maid, for your dislike of her: Altho' Betty,
who would be glad to oblige you, laments it as a
misfortune. 
Your Answer is required, whether you chearfully
consent to go? And your indulgent Mother bids me
remind you from her, That a fortnight's visits from
Mr. Solmes, are all that is meant at present. 
I am, as you shall be pleased to deserve, 
Yours, &c.
James Harlowe jun. 
So here is the master-stroke of my Brother's policy! 
Called upon to consent to go to my Uncle Antony's,
avowedly to receive Mr. Solmes's visits! —A Chapel!
—A Moated-house!—Deprived of the opportunity of
corresponding with you!—or of any possibility of
escape, should violence be used to compel me to be
that odious man's (a) ! 
Late as it was when I received this insolent Letter,
I wrote an Answer to it directly, that it might be
ready for the writer's time of rising. I inclose the
rough draught of it. You will see by it how much
his vile hint from the Georgic, and his rude one of
my whining vocatives, have set me up. Besides, as
the command to get ready to go to my Uncle's is in
the name of my Father and Uncles, it is but to shew
a piece of the Art they accuse me of, to resent the 

vile hint I have so much reason to resent, in order to
palliate my refusal of preparing to go to my Uncle's; 
which refusal would otherwise be interpreted an act
of rebellion by my Brother and Sister: For it seems
plain to me, that they will work but half their ends, if
they do not deprive me of my Father's and Uncles favour,
even altho' it were possible for me to comply with their
own terms. 

You might have told me, Brother, in three lines,
what the determination of my friends was; only,
that then you would not have had room to display your
pedantry by so detestable an allusion or reference to
the Georgic. Give me leave to tell you, Sir, That
if Humanity were a branch of your Studies at the University,
it has not found a genius in you for mastering
it. Nor is either my Sex or myself, tho' a Sister, I
see, intitled to the least decency from a Brother, who
has studied, as it seems, rather to cultivate the malevolence
of his natural temper, than any tendency
which one would have hoped his parentage, if not his
education, might have given him to a tolerable politeness. 
I doubt not, that you will take amiss my freedom: 
But as you have deserved it from me, I shall be less
and less concerned on that score, as I see you are more
and more intent to shew your wit at the expence of
justice and compassion. 
The time is indeed come that I can no longer
bear those contempts and reflections which a Brother
least of all men is intitled to give. And let me beg
of you one favour, officious Sir: —It is this, That
you will not give yourself any concern about a Husband
for me, till I shall have the forwardness to propose
a Wife to you. Pardon me, Sir; but I cannot
help thinking, that could I have the Art to get my
Father of my side, I should have as much right to prescribe
for you, as you have for me. 

As to the communication you make me, I must
take upon me to say, That altho' I will receive, as
becomes me, any of my Father's commands; yet,
as this signification is made by a Brother, who has
shewn of late so much of an unbrotherly animosity
to me (for no reason in the world that I know of,
but that he believes he has, in me, one Sister too many
for his interest) I think myself intitled to conclude,
that such a Letter as you have sent me, is all your
own—And of course to declare, that, while I so
think it, I will not, willingly, nor even without violence,
go to any place, avowedly to receive Mr.
Solmes's visits. 
I think myself so much intitled to resent your infamous
hint, and this as well for the sake of my Sex,
as for my own, that I ought to declare, as I do, that
I will not receive any more of your Letters, unless
commanded to do so by an authority I never will
dispute; except in a case where I think my future as
well as present happiness concerned—And were such
a case to happen, I am sure my Father's harshness
will be less owing to himself than to you; and to the
specious absurdities of your ambitious and selfish
schemes. —Very true, Sir! 
One word more, provoked as I am, I will add: 
That had I been thought as really obstinate and perverse
as of late I am said to be, I should not have
been so disgracefully treated as I have been—Lay
your hand upon your heart, Brother, and say, By
whose instigations—And examine what I have done
to deserve to be made thus unhappy, and to be obliged
to style myself 
Your injured Sister,
Cl. Harlowe. 
When, my dear, you have read my Answer to my
Brother's Letter, tell me, what you think of me? — 
I shall go!— 