



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;
In Continuation. 

But is it not a confounded thing, that I cannot
fasten an obligation upon this proud Beauty? I
have two motives, in endeavouring to prevail upon
her to accept of Money and Raiment from me: One,
the real pleasure I should have in the accommodating
of the haughty maid; and to think there was something
near her, and upon her, that I could call mine: 
The other, in order to abate her severity, and humble
her a little. 
Nothing more effectually brings down a proud spirit, 

than a sense of lying under pecuniary obligations. 
This has always made me solicitous to avoid laying
myself under any such: Yet sometimes formerly have
I been put to it, and cursed the tardy revolution of the
quarterly periods. And yet I ever made shift to avoid
anticipations: I never would eat the calf in the cow's
belly, as Lord M's phrase is: For what is that, but to
hold our Lands upon Tenant-courtesy, the vilest of all
Tenures? To be denied a fox-chace, for fear of breaking
down a fence, upon my own grounds? To be
clamoured-at for repairs studied for, rather than really
wanted? To be prated to by a bumkin with his hat
on, and his arms folded, as if he defied your expectations
of that sort; his foot firmly fix'd, as if upon his
own ground; and you forced to take his arch leers,
and stupid gybes; he intimating by the whole of his
conduct, that he had had it in his power to oblige you,
and, if you behave civilly, may oblige you again? —I,
who think I have a right to break every man's head I
pass by, if I like not his looks, to bear this! —No more
could I do it, than I could borrow of an insolent Uncle,
or inquisitive Aunt, who would thence think themselves
entitled to have an account of all my life and actions
laid before them for their review and censure. 
My Charmer, I see, has a pride like my own: But
she has no distinction in her pride: Nor knows the
pretty fool, that there is nothing nobler, nothing more
delightful, than for Lovers to be conferring and receiving
obligations from each other. In this very Farmyard,
to give thee a familiar instance, I have more
than once seen this remark illustrated. A strutting
rascal of a cock have I beheld chuck, chuck, chuck,
chuck-ing his mistress to him, when he has found
a single barley-corn, taking it up with his bill, and
letting it drop five or six times, still repeating his chucking
invitation: And when two or three of his feathered
ladies strive who shall be the first for't [O Jack! a
Cock is a Grand Signor of a Bird!] he directs the bill 

of the foremost to it; and, when she has got the dirty
pearl, he struts over her with an erected crest, and with
an exulting chuck—a chuck-aw-aw-w, circling round
her, with dropt wings, sweeping the dust in humble
courtship: While the obliged She, half-shy, half-willing,
by her cowring tail, prepared wings, yet
seemingly affrighted eyes, and contracted neck, lets
one see, that she knows the barley-corn was not all he
called her for. 
When he comes to that part of his narrative, where he
mentions the proposing of the Lady's maid Hannah,
or one of the young Sorlings's, to attend her, thus
he writes: 
Now, Belford, canst thou imagine what I meant by
proposing Hannah, or one of the girls here, for her attendant? 
I'll give thee a month to guess. 
Thou wilt not pretend to guess, thou say'st. 
Well, then, I'll tell thee. 
Believing she would certainly propose to have that
favourite wench about her, as soon as she was a little
settled, I had caused the girl to be enquired after, with
an intent to make interest, some how or other, that a
month's warning should be insisted on by her master or
mistress, or by some other means, which I had not
determined upon, to prevent her coming to her. But
fortune fights for me. The wench is luckily ill; a
violent rheumatic disorder, which has obliged her to
leave her place, confines her to her chamber. Poor
Hannah! How I pity the girl! These things are very
hard upon industrious servants! —I intend to make the
poor wench a small present on the occasion—I know
it will oblige my Charmer. 
And so, Jack, pretending not to know any-thing of
the matter, I pressed her to send for Hannah. She
knew I had always a regard for this servant, because of
her honest love to her Lady: But now I have a greater
regard for her than ever. Calamity, tho' a poor servant's 

calamity, will rather encrease than diminish
good-will, with a truly generous master or mistress. 
As to one of the young Sorlings's attendance, there
was nothing at all in proposing that; for if either of
them had been chosen by her, and permitted by the
Mother [Two chances in that!] it would have been
only till I had fix'd upon another. And if afterwards
they had been loth to part, I could easily have given
my Beloved a jealousy, which would have done the
business; or to the girl, who would have quitted her
Country dairy, such a relish for a London one, as would
have made it very convenient for her to fall in love
with Will; or perhaps I could have done still better
for her with Lord M's Chaplain, who is very desirous
of standing well with his Lord's presumptive heir. 
A blessing on thy honest heart, Lovelace! thou'lt
say; for thou art for providing for every-body. 
He gives an account of the serious part of their conversation,
with no great variation from the Lady's
account of it: And when he comes to that part of
it, where he bids her remember, that Reformation
cannot be a sudden thing, he asks his friend; 
Is not this fair play? Is it not dealing ingenuously? 
Then the observation, I will be bold to say, is founded
in truth and nature. But there was a little touch of
policy in it besides; that the Lady, if I should fly out
again, should not think me too gross an hypocrite: 
For, as I plainly told her, I was afraid, that my fits
of Reformation were but Fits and Sallies; but I hoped
her Example would fix them into Habits. But it is so
discouraging a thing, to have my monitress so very
good! —I protest I know not how to look up at her! 
Now, as I am thinking, if I could pull her down a
little nearer to my own level; that is to say, could
prevail upon her to do something that would argue imperfection,
something to repent of; we should jog on
much more equally, and be better able to comprehend 

one another: And so the comfort would be mutual,
and the remorse not all on one side. 
He acknowleges, that he was greatly affected and
pleased with the Lady's serious arguments at the
time: But even then was apprehensive that his
temper would not hold. Thus he writes; 
This Lady says serious things in so agreeable a manner
(and then her voice is all harmony when she touches
a subject she is pleased with) that I could have listened
to her for half a day together. But yet I am afraid,
if she falls, as they call it, she will lose a good deal of
that pathos, of that noble self-confidence, which gives
a good person, as I now see, a visible superiority over
one not so good. 
But, after all, Belford, I would fain know why
people call such free-livers as you and me hypocrites. — 
That's a word I hate; and should take it very ill to
be called by it. For myself, I have as good motions,
and perhaps have them as frequently, as any-body: 
All the business is, they don't hold; or, to speak more
in character, I don't take the care some do, to conceal
my lapses. 