


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Wednesday Night, April 5. 
Miss Grandison, as I told you, took with her my
Letter of yesterday. As soon as my cousin
Reeves's and I entered Sir Charles's house, the two
sisters conducted us into the drawing-room adjoining
to the dining-parlour, and congratulated me on the
high compliment their brother had made me, tho' in
preference to themselves, and his communicativeness
and tender behaviour to me. Lord L. joined us, and
he, having read the Letter, congratulated me also— 
On what, Lucy? —Why on the possibility, that if the
unhappy Clementina should die; or if she should be 

buried for life in a nunnery; or if she should be otherwise
disposed of; why then, that your Harriet may have
room given her to hope for a civil husband in Sir
Charles Grandison, and half a heart: Is not this the
sum of these humbling congratulations? 
Sir Charles, when we came, was in his Study with
Mr. Lowther, the surgeon whom he had engaged
to go abroad with him: But he just came out to
welcome us; and then returned. —He had also with
him two physicians eminent for their knowlege in
disorders of the head, to whom he had before communicated
the case of the unhappy Clementina; and
who brought to him in writing their opinions of the
manner in which she ought to be treated, according
to the various symptoms of her disorder. 
When he joined us, he told us this; and said very
high things at the same time in praise of the English
surgeons; and particularly of this gentleman: And
added, that as nervous disorders were more frequent
in England, than in any country in the world, he was
willing to hope, that the English physicians were more
skilful than those of any other country in the management
of persons afflicted with such maladies:
And as he was now invited over, he was determined
to furnish himself with all the means he could think
of, that were likely to be useful in restoring and healing
friends so dear to him. 
Miss Grandison told him, that we were all in some
apprehensions, on his going to ltaly, of that fierce and
wrong-headed man the General. Miss Byron, said
she, has told us, that Mrs. Beaumont advises not your
going over. 
The young Marquis della Porretta, said he, is hasty; 
but he is a gallant man, and loves his sister. His
grief on the unhappy situation they are in demands
allowance. It is natural in a heavy calamity to look
out of ourselves for the occasion. I have not any apprehensions
from him, or from any-body else. The 

call upon me is a proper one. The issue must be left
where it ought to be left. If my visit will give comfort
to any one of the family, I shall be rewarded: If to
more than one, happy—And, whatever be the event,
shall be easier in myself, than I could be, were I not
to comply with the request of the Bishop, were be
only to have made it. 
Lord L. asked Sir Charles, whether he had fixed the
day of his setting out? 
I have, said he, within this half hour. Mr. Lowther
has told me, that he shall be ready by the beginning of
next week; and on Saturday seven-night, I hope to be
at Dover, on my way. 
We looked upon one another. Miss Grandison told
me afterwards, that my colour went and came several
times, and that she was afraid for me. My heart was
indeed a little affected. I believe I must not think of
taking leave of him when he sets out. Ah Lucy! 
Nine days hence! —Yet, in less than nine days after
that, I shall be embraced by the tenderest relations that
ever creature had to boast of. 
Sir Charles taking his sister aside, I want, said he,
to say a few words to you, Charlotte. They were
about half an hour together; and then returning, I
am encouraged to think, said he, that Charlotte will
give her hand to Lord G. She is a woman of honour,
and her heart must therefore go with it. —I have a request
to make to her, before all you our common
friends—The Earl of G. Lady Gertrude, Lord G. all
join in one suit: It is, that I may be allowed to give
my sister to Lord G. before I leave England. 
I have told you, brother, that it is impossible, if
you go away in nine or ten days time. 
Sir Charles particularly requested my influence. I
could have no doubt, I said, but Miss Grandison would
oblige her brother. 
She vehemently opposed so early a day. 
In a most affectionate manner, yet with an air of 

seriousness, he urged his request. He said, that it was
very proper for him to make some dispositions of his
affairs before he went abroad. He should leave England
with much more pleasure, if he saw his Charlotte
the wife of a man so worthy as Lord G.: Lord G.
said he, adores you: You intend to be his: Resolve
to oblige your brother, who, tho' he cannot be happy
himself, wishes to see you so. 
O Sir Charles! —You ruin me by your solemnity,
and by your goodness. 
The subject is not a light one. I am greatly in
earnest, Charlotte. I have many affairs on my hands. 
My heart is in this company; yet my engagements
will permit me but few opportunities to enjoy it between
this and Tuesday next. If you deny me now,
I must acquiesce: If you have more than punctilio to
plead, say you have; and I will not urge you farther. 
And so this is the last time of asking, Sir? A little
archly— 
Not the last time of my Lord G.'s—But of mine— 
But I will not allow you now to answer me lightly. — 
If you can name a day before Tuesday, you will
greatly oblige me. I will leave you to consider of it. 
And he withdrew. 
Every-one then urged her to oblige her brother. 
Lady L. very particularly. She told her, that he was
intitled to her compliance; and that he had spoken to
her on this subject in a still more earnest manner. She
should hardly be able to excuse her, she said, if the
serious hint he had given about settling his affairs before
he went abroad, had not weight with her. You
know, Charlotte, continued she, that he can have no
motive but your good; and you have told me, that
you intend to have Lord G. and that you esteem his
father, his aunt, and every-one of his family, whom
you have seen; and they are all highly pleased with
you. Settlements are ready drawn: That my brother
told you last night. Nothing is wanting but your day. 

I wish he was in half the hurry to be married himself. 
So he would be, I dare say, if marriage were as
much in his power, as it is in yours. 
What a duce, to be married to a man in a week's
time, with whom I have quarrell'd every day for a
fortnight past—Pride and petulance must go down by
degrees, sister. A month, at least, is necessary, to
bring my features to such a placidness with him, as to
allow him to smile in my face. 
Your brother has hinted, Charlotte, said I, that he
loves you for your vivacity; and should still more, if
you consulted time and occasion. 
He has withdrawn, sister, said Lord L. with a resolution,
if you deny him, to urge you no farther. 
I hate his peremptoriness. 
Has he not told you, Charlotte, said I, and that in
a manner so serious, as to affect every-body, that there
is a kind of necessity for it? 
I don't love this Clementina, Harriet: All this is
owing to her. 
Just then a rapping at the door signified visitors; 
and Emily ran in—Lord G. the Earl, and Lady Gertrude,
believe me! 
Miss Grandison changed colour. A contrivance of
my brother's! —Ah! Lord! Now shall I be beset! — 
I will be sullen, that I may not be saucy. 
Sullen you can't be, Charlotte, said Lady L.: But
saucy you can. Remember, however, my brother's
earnestness, and spare Lord G. before his father and
aunt, or you will give me, and every-body, pain. 
How can I? Our last quarrel is not made up: But
advise him not to be either impertinent or secure. 
Immediately enter'd Sir Charles, introducing the
Earl and Lady Gertrude. After the first compliments,
Pray, Sir Charles, said Miss Grandison, drawing him
aside, towards me, and whispering, tell me truly:
Did you not know of this visit? 

I invited them, Charlotte, whispered he. I meant
not however to surprise you. If you comply, you will
give me great pleasure: If you do not, I will not be
dis-pleased with my sister. 
What can I do? Either be less good to me, Sir, or
less hurrying. 
You have sacrificed enough to female punctilio,
Charlotte. Lord G. has been a zealous courtier. 
You have no doubt of the ardor of his passion, nor
of your own power. Leave the day to me. Let it
be Tuesday next. 
Good heaven! I can't bear you, after such a— 
And she gasped, as if for breath; and he turning from
her to me, she went to Lady Gertrude, who, rising,
took her hand, and withdrew with her into the next
room. 
They staid out till they were told dinner was served:
And when they returned, I thought I never saw Miss
Grandison look so lovely. A charming flush had
overspread her cheeks: A sweet consciousness in her
eyes gave a female grace to her whole aspect, and
softened, as I may say, the natural majesty of her fine
features. 
Lord G. looked delighted, as if his heart were filled
with happy presages. The Earl seemed no less pleased. 
Miss Grandison was unusually thoughtful all dinnertime:
She gave me great joy to see her so, in the
hope, that when the lover becomes the husband, the
over-lively mistress will be sunk in the obliging wife. — 
And yet, now-and-then, as the joy in my Lord's
heart overflowed at his lips, I could observe that
archness rising to her eye, that makes one both love
and fear her. 
After dinner, the Earl of G. and Lady Gertrude,
desired a conference with Sir Charles and Lady L.
They were not long absent, when Sir Charles came
in, and carried out Miss Grandison to them. Lord G.'s
complexion varied often. 

Sir Charles left them together, and joined us. We
were standing; and he singled me out. —I hope, madam,
said he, that Charlotte may be prevailed upon
for Tuesday next: But I will not urge it farther. 
I thought that he was framing himself to say something
particular to me, when Lady L. came in, and
desired him and me to step to her sister, who had retired,
from the Earl and Lady Gertrude, by consent. 
Ah, my Harriet! said she, pity me, my dear! — 
Debasement is the child of pride! —Then turning to
Sir Charles, I acknowlege myself overcome, said she,
by your earnestness, as you are so soon to leave us; 
and by the importunities of the Earl of G. Lady Gertrude,
and my Sister—Unprepared in mind, in cloaths,
I am resolved to oblige the best of brothers. Do you,
Sir, dispose of me as you think sit. 
My sister consents, Sir, said Lady L. for next Tuesday. 
Chearfully, I hope. If Charlotte balances whether,
if she took more time, she should have Lord G.
at all, let her take it. Lord L. in my absence, will
be to her all that I wish to be, when she shall determine. 
I balance not, Sir: But I thought to have had a
month's time, at least, to look about me, and having
treated Lord G. too flippantly, to give him by degrees
some fairer prospects of happiness with me, than hitherto
he has had. 
Sir Charles embraced her. She was all his Sister,
he said. Let the alteration now begin. Lord G.
would rejoice in it, and consider all that had passed, as
trials only of his love for her. The obliging wife would
banish from his remembrance the petulant mistress. 
And now, allow me, my dear sister, to present you
to the Earl and Lady Gertrude. 
He led her in to them. Lady L. took my hand,
and led me in also. —Charlotte, my Lord, yields to
yours and Lady Gertrude's importunities. Next Tuesday 

will give the two families a near and tender relation
to each other. 
The Earl saluted her in a very affectionate manner:
So did Lady Gertrude; who afterwards run out for
her nephew; and, leading him in, presented him to
Miss Grandison. 
She had just time to whisper me, as he approach'd
her; Ah, Harriet! now comes the worst part of the
shew. —He kneeled on one knee, kissed her hand; 
but was too much overjoyed to speak; for Lady Gertrude
had told him, as she led him in, that Tuesday
was to be his happy day. 
It is impossible, Lucy, but Sir Charles Grandison
must carry every point he sets his heart upon. When
he shall appear before the family of Porretta in Italy,
who will be able to withstand him? —Is not his consequence
doubled, more than doubled, since he was with
them? The man whose absence they requested, they
now invite to come among them. They have tried
every experiment to restore their Clementina: He has
a noble estate now in possession. The same of his
goodness is gone out to distant countries. O my
dear! All opposition must fly before him. And if it
be the will of heaven to restore Clementina, all her
friends must concur in giving her to him upon the
terms he has proposed; and from which, having himself
proposed them, Sir Charles Grandison cannot recede. 
His heart, it is evident, is at Bologna. Well, and
so it ought to be. And yet I could not forbear being
sensibly touch'd by the following words, which I overheard
him say to Lord L. in answer to something my
Lord said to him: 
‘I am impatient to be abroad. Had I not waited
for Mr. Lowther, the last Letters I received from
Italy should have been answered in person.’ 
But as honour, compassion, love, friendship (still
nobler than love!) have demands upon him, let him 

obey the call. He has set me high in his esteem. Let
me be worthy of his friendship. Pangs I shall occasionally
feel; but who that values one person above
the rest of the world, does not? 
Sir Charles, as we sat at tea, mentioned his cousin
Grandison to Lord L.: It is strange, my Lord, said
he, that we hear nothing of our cousin Everard, since
he was seen at White's. But whenever he emerges,
Charlotte, if I am absent, receive him without reproaches:
Yet I should be glad that he could have rejoiced
with us. Must I leave England, and not see
him? 
It has been, it seems, the way of this unhappy
man, to shut himself up with some woman in private
lodgings, for fear his cousin should find him out; and
in two or three months, when he has been tired of his
wicked companion, emerge, as Sir Charles called it,
to notice, and then seek for his cousin's favour and
company, and live for as many more months in a
state of contrition. And Sir Charles, in his great charity,
believes, that till some new temptation arises,
he is in earnest in his penitence; and hopes, that in
time he will see his errors. 
Oh, Lucy! What a poor creeping, mean wretch
is a libertine, when one looks down upon him, and
up to such a glorious creature as Sir Charles Grandison! 
Sir Charles was led to talk of his engagement for
to-morrow, on the triple marriage in the Danby family. 
We all gave him joy of the happy success that
had rewarded his beneficent spirit, with regard to that
family. He gave us the characters of the three couples
greatly to their advantage, and praised the families
on both sides, which were to be so closely united
on the morrow; not forgetting to mention kindly honest
Mr. Sylvester the attorney. 
He told us, that he should set out on Friday early
for Windsor, in order to attend Lord W. in his first 

visit to Mansfield-house. You, Lady L. will have the
trouble given you, said he, of procuring to be newset
the jewels of the late Lady W. for a present to
the future bride. My Lord shewed them to me (among
a great number of other valuable trinkets of his late
wife's) in my last return from the Hall. They are
rich, and will do credit to his quality. You, my
Lord L. you, my sisters, will be charmed with your
new aunt, and her whole family. I have joy on the
happiness in prospect that will gild the latter days
of my mother's brother; and at the same time be a
means of freeing from oppression an ancient and worthy
family. 
Our eyes all round offered, as I may say, to keep
in countenance each others sensibility; for they all
glistened. There now, thought I, sits this princely
man, rejoicing every one who sees him, and hears him
speak: But where will he be nine days hence? And
whose this-day-twelvemonth? 
He talked with particular pleasure of the expected
arrival of his Beauchamp. He pleased himself, that
he should leave behind him a man who would delight
every-body, and supply to his friends his absence. — 
What a character did he give, and Dr. Bartlett confirm,
of that amiable friend of his! 
How did the Earl, and Lady Gertrude, dwell upon
all he said! They prided themselves on the relation
they were likely so soon to stand in to so valuable a
man. 
In your last Letter, you tell me, Lucy, that Mr.
Greville has the confidence to throw out menaces
against this excellent man—Sorry wretch! —How
my heart rises against him! —He—But no more of
such an earth-born creature. 

