


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Friday Evening. 
We have had a great debate about the place in
which the nuptial ceremony is to be performed. 
Charlotte, the perverse Charlotte, insisted upon not
going to church. Lord G. dared not to give his
opinion; tho' his father and Lady Gertrude, as well
as every other person, were against her. 
Lord L. said, that if fine ladies thought so slightly
of the office, as that it might be performed anywhere,
it would be no wonder, if fine gentlemen
thought still more slightly of the obligation it laid
them under. 
Being appealed to, I said, that I thought of marriage
as one of the most solemn acts of a woman's
life. 
And if of a woman's, of a man's, surely, interrupted
Lady L. If your whimsey, Charlotte, added
she, arises from modesty, you reflect upon your sister; 
and, what is worse, upon your mother. 
Charlotte put up her pretty lip, and was unconvinced. 
Lady Gertrude laid an heavy hand upon the affectation; 
yet admires her niece elect. She distinguished
between chamber-vows and church-vows. She mentioned
the word decency. She spoke plainer, on Charlotte's
unfeeling perverseness. If a bride meant a
compliment by it to the bridegroom [O dear! O dear!
said Mrs. Eleanor Grandison, and looked as if she
thought she blushed] that was another thing; but then
let her declare as much; and that she was in an hurry
to oblige him. 
Charlotte attempted to kill her by a look—She
gave a worse to Lord G. —And why, whispered she 

to him, as he sat next her, must thou shew all thy
teeth, man? —As Lady Gertrude meant to shame her,
I thought I could as soon forgive that Lady, as her
who was the occasion of the freedom of speech. 
But still she was perverse: She would not be married
at all, she said, if she were not comply'd with. 
I whispered her, as I sat on the other side of her,
I wish, Charlotte, the knot were ty'd: Till then,
you will not do even right things, but in a wrong
manner. 
Dr. Bartlett was not present: He was making a
kind visit to my cousin Reeves's. When he came in,
the debate was referred to him. He entered into it
with her, with so much modesty, good sense, propriety,
and steadiness, that at last the perverse creature
gave way: But hardly would neither, had he not
assured her, that her brother would be entirely against
her; and that he himself must be excused performing
the sacred office, but in a sacred place. She has set
her heart on the doctor's marrying her. 
The Earl of G. and Lady Gertrude, as also Lord
and Lady L. went away, not dissatisfied with Charlotte's
compliance: She is the most ungraciously graceful
young woman I ever knew in her compliances: But
Lord G. was to pay for all: She and I had got together
in the Study: In bolted Lord G. perhaps with
too little ceremony. She coloured—Hey-day, Sir! 
Who expected you? His countenance immediately
fell. He withdrew precipitately. Fie, Charlotte! said
I, recollect yourself—and rising, stept to the door,
My Lord—calling after him. 
He came back; but in a little ferment—I hoped,
I hoped, madam, as you were not in your own apartment,
that I might, that I might have been— 
Where-ever Ladies are by themselves, it is a Lady's
apartment, my Lord, said she, with an haughtiness
that sat better on her features, than they would upon
almost any other woman's. 

He looked, as if he knew not whether he should
stay or go. Sit down, my Lord, said I; we are not
particularly engaged. He came nearer, his hat under
his arm, bowing to her, who sat as stately as a princess
on her throne: But yet looked disobliged. You
give yourself pretty airs, my Lord—don't you? 
Pretty airs, madam! —Pretty airs! —By my Soul,
I think, madam—And with such a glow in your face,
madam—Taking his laced hat from under his arm,
and with an earnest motion swinging it backwards
and forwards, as unknowing what he did— 
What, Sir, am I to be buffeted, Sir?— 
He put his hat under his arm again—Buffeted,
madam! —Would to heaven— 
What has heaven to do with your odd ways, Lord G.? 
I beg pardon for intruding, madam—But I thought— 
That you had a privilege, Sir—But marriage itself,
Sir, shall not give you a privilege to break into
my retirements. You thought, Sir—You could not
think—So much the worse if you did— 
If I have really offended—I will be more circumspect
for the future—I beg pardon, madam—Miss Byron
I hope will forgive me too. 
He was going, in great discomposure, and with an
air of angry humility. 
Charlotte, whispered I—Don't be silly— 
Come, come, now you have broke in upon us,
you may stay—But another time when you know
me to be retired with a friend so dear to me, let it
enter into your head, that no third person, unsent for,
can be welcome. 
Poor man! —How he loves her! —His countenance
chang'd at once to the humble placid: He looked as
if he had rather be in fault than she. 
Oh! how little did she make him look! 
But he has often, as well as in this instance, let her
see her power over him. I am afraid she will use it. 
I now see it is and will be his misfortune that she can 

vex him without being vexed herself: And what may
he expect, who can be treated with feigned displeasure,
which, while it seems to be in earnest to him, will be
a jest to his wife? 
I was very angry with her, when we were alone; 
and told her, that she would be an enemy, I was
afraid, of her own happiness. But she only laughed at
me: Happiness, my dear! said she: That only is
happiness which we think so. If I can be as happy
in my way, as you can be in yours, shall I not pursue
it? Your happiness, child, is in the still life. I love
not a dead calm: Now a tempest, now a refreshing
breeze, I shall know how to enjoy the difference— 
My brother will not be here to turn jest into earnest; 
as might perhaps be the effect of his mediation—But,
high-ho, Harriet! that the first week were over, and
I had got into my throne!— 
She ended with an Italian air, contrasted with another
High-ho; and left me for a few moments. 
Poor Lord G.! said I looking after her. 
She returned soon. Poor Lord G.! repeated she:
Those were the piteous words you threw after me— 
But if I should provoke him, do you think he would
not give me a cuff, or so? —You know he can't return
joke for joke; and he must revenge himself some
way—If that should be the case, Poor Charlotte, I
hope you would say— 
Not if you deserved it. 
Deserve a cuff, Harriet! —Well, but I am afraid I
shall. 
Remember next Tuesday, Charlotte! —You must
vow obedience—Will you break your vow? —This is
not a jesting matter. 
True, Harriet. And that it is not, was perhaps
one of the reasons that made me disinclined to go to
so solemn a place as the church with Lord G.—Don't
you think it one with those who insist upon being
married in their own chamber? 

I believe great people, said I, think they must not
do right things in the common way: That seems to
me to be one of their fantastic reasons: But the vow
is the vow, Charlotte: God is every-where. 
Now you are so serious, Harriet, it is time to have
done with the subject. 
* *
I have no sleep in my eyes; and must go on. 
What keeps me more wakeful is, my real concern for
this naughty Miss Grandison, and my pity for Lord G.; 
for the instance I have given you of her petulance is nothing
to what I have seen: But I thought, so near the
day, she would have changed her behaviour to him. 
Surely, the situation her brother is in, without any
fault of his own, might convince her, that she need
not go out of her path to pick up subjects for unhappiness. 
Such a kittenish disposition in her, I called it; for
it is not so much the love of power that predominates
in her mind, as the love of playfulness: And when the
fit is upon her, she regards not whether it is a China
cup, or a cork, that she pats and tosses about: But her
sport will certainly be the death of Lord G's happiness. 
Pity that Sir Charles, who only has power over her,
is obliged to go abroad so soon! But she has principles:
Lady Grandison's daughter, Sir Charles Grandison's
sister, must have principles. The solemnity of the
occasion; the office; the church; the altar;—must
strike her: The vow—Will she not regard the vow
she makes in circumstances so awful? Could but my
Lord G. assume dignity, and mingle raillery with it,
and be able to laugh with her, and sometimes at her,
she would not make him her sport: She would find
somebody else: A butt she must have to shoot at: But
I am afraid he will be too sensible of her smartness:
And she will have her jest, let who will suffer by it. 
Some of the contents of your last are very agreeable
to me, Lucy. I will begin in earnest to think 

of leaving London. Don't let me look silly in your
eyes, my dear, when I come. It was not so very presumptuous
in me, was it, to hope? —When all his relations—When
he himself—Yet what room for hope
did he, could he, give me? He was honest; and I
cheated myself: But then all you, my dearest friends,
encouraged the cheat: Nay, pointed my wishes, and
my hopes, by yours, before I had dared (shall I say,
or condescended?) to own them to myself. 
You may let that Greville know, if you please,
that there is no room for his If's, nor, of consequence,
any for his menaces. You may own, that I shall
soon be in Northamptonshire. This may prevent
his and Fenwick's threatened journey to town. 
But, Lucy, tho' my heart has been ever dutifully,
as I may say, open to the venerable domestic circle; 
tho' it would not have been an honest heart, could it,
circumstanced as I was, have concealed itself from
Lady D.; and must have been an impenetrable one
indeed, if it could have been disguised to the two
sisters here—yet, I beseech you, my dear, almost
on my knees I beseech you, let not the audacious,
the insulting Greville, have ground given him to suspect
a weakness in your Harriet, which indelicate
minds know not how to judge of delicately. For
sex-sake, for example-sake, Lucy, let it not be known
to any but the partial, friendly few, that our grandmamma
Shirley's child, and aunt Selby's niece, has
been a volunteer in her affections. How many still
more forward girls would plead Mrs. Shirley's approbation
of the hasty affection, without considering the
circumstances, and the object! So the next girl that
run away to a dancing-master, or an ensign, would
reckon herself one of Harriet's school. 
Poor Mr. Orme! I am sorry he is not well. It
is cruel in you, Lucy, at this time, to say (so undoubtingly)
that his illness is owing to his love of me. 

You knew that such a suggestion would pain me. 
Heaven restore Mr. Orme! 
But I am vex'd, as it cannot be to purpose, that
Sir Charles Grandison and I have been named together,
and talked of, in your neighbourhood! —He will
be gone abroad. I shall return to Northamptonshire:
And shall look so silly! So like a refused girl! 
‘Every-body gives me to him, you say’—So much
the worse. I wonder what business this Every-body
has to trouble itself about me. 
One consolation, however, I shall have in my return; 
and that is, in my Nancy's recover'd health; 
which was so precarious when I set out for London. 
But I shall have nothing to entertain you with
when I am with you: Sir Charles Grandison, Lord
and Lady L. Lady G. (as now in three or four days
she will be) my dear Miss Jervois, Dr. Bartlett, will
be all my subject. And have I not exhausted that by
pen and ink? O no! The doctor promises to correspond
with me; and he makes no doubt but Sir
Charles will correspond with him, as usual. 
What can the unusually tender friendship be called
which he professed for me, and, as I may say, claimed
in return from me? I know that he has no notion of the
Love called Platonic. Nor have I: I think it, in general,
a dangerous allowance; and, with regard to our
sex, a very unequal one; since while the man has
nothing to fear, the woman has every-thing, from
the privileges that may be claimed, in an acknowleged
confidence, especially in presence. Miss Grandison thus
interprets what he said, and strengthens her opinion
by some of Dr. Bartlett's late intimations, that he
really loves me; but not being at liberty to avow his
love, he knew not what to say; and so went as near
to a declaration as was possible to do in his circumstances. 
But might I not expect, from such a profession of
friendship in Sir Charles, an offer of correspondence 

in absence? And if he made the offer, ought I to decline
it? Would it not indicate too much on my side,
were I to do so? —And does it not on his, if he make
not the offer? He corresponds with Mrs. Beaumont:
Nobody thinks that any-thing can be meant by that
correspondence on either side; because Mrs. Beaumont
must be at least forty; Sir Charles but six or
seven and twenty: But if he makes not the request
to Harriet, who is but little more than twenty; what,
after such professions of a friendship so tender, will be
inferred from his forbearance? 
But I shall puzzle myself, and you too, Lucy, if I
go on with this sort of reasoning; because I shall not
know how to put all I mean into words. Have I not
already puzzled you? I think my expression is weak
and perplexed—But this offered and accepted friendship
between two persons not indelicate, must be perplexing; 
since he is the only young man in the world,
from whom a woman has no dishonour to fear—Ah,
Lucy! —It would be vanity in me, would it not? to
suppose that he had more to fear from Harriet, than
she has from him? —As the virtue of either, I hope,
is not questionable: But the event of his Italian visit
will explain and reconcile every-thing. 
I will encourage a drowsy fit that seems to be
stealing upon me. If I have not written with the
perspicuity I always aim at, allow, Lucy, for the
time of night; for spirits not high; and for the subject,
that having its delicacies, as well as uncertainties,
I am not able to write clearly upon it. 

