



From Miss Darnford to Mrs. B. 


My dearest Mrs. B.
We are greatly obliged to you for every
particular Article in your entertaining
Journal, which you have brought sooner
than we wish'd to a Conclusion. We
cannot express how much we admire
you for your judicious Charities, so easy
to be practised, yet so uncommon in the Manner; 
and for your inimitable Conduct in the Affair of your
frail Polly, and the silly Mr. H. 
Your Account of the Visit of the Four Rakes, and
of your Parting with your noble Guests; your
Verses, and Mr. H.'s Letter, (an Original indeed!)
have all greatly entertain'd us, as your Prerogative
Hints have amus'd us: But we defer our Opinions
of those Hints, till we have the Case more
fully explain'd. 

But, my dear Friend, are you not in Danger of
falling into a too thoughtful and gloomy way? By the
latter Part of your Letter, we are afraid you are; 
and my Mamma, and Mrs. Jones, and Mrs. Peters,
injoin me to write, to caution you on that Head. 
But there is the less need of it, because your Prudence
will always suggest to you Reasons, as it does
in that very Letter, that must out-balance your Fears. 
Think little, and hope much, is a good Lesson in your
Case, and to a Lady of your Temper; and I hope
Lady Davers will not in vain have given you that
Caution. After all, I dare say, your Thoughtfulness
is but symptomatical, and will go off, in proper
Time. 
Mean time, permit me to chuse you a Subject, that
will certainly divert you. You must know, that I
have been a diligent Observer of the Conduct of
People in the marry'd Life to each other, and have
often pronounced, that there cannot be any tolerable
Happiness in it, unless the one or the other
makes such Sacrifices of their Inclinations and Humours,
as renders it a State very little desirable to
free and generous Minds. Of this I see an Instance
in our own Family; for tho' my Papa and Mamma
live very happily, it is all owing to one Side, I need
not say which. And this, I am sure, must be the
Case between Mr. B. and you: For you must, even
thro' Fire, if requir'd, sacrifice to Moloch. I know
your Prudence will oblige you to make the best of
it; and, like a contented good Wife, you will say,
You have your own Will in every thing: A good
Reason why, Because you make your own Will his. 
This, long ago, we all decreed, any Lady must do,
be her Quality ever so great, who would be happy
with Mr. B.—Yet my Sister once hoped (entre
nous) to be the Person. Fine Work would there
have been between two such Spirits, you may believe!— 

But to wave this: Let me ask you, Mrs. B. Is
your Monarch's Conduct to you as respectful, I
don't mean fond, when you are alone together, as
when in Company? —Forgive me, Madam— 
But you have hinted two or three times, in your
Letters, that he always is most complaisant to you
in Company; and you observe, that wisely does he
act in this, Because he thereby does Credit with every
body to his own Choice. I make no doubt, that
the many charming Scenes which your Genius and
fine Behaviour furnish out to him, must, as often as
they happen, inspire him with Joy, and even Rapture; 
and must make him love you more for your
Mind than for your Person: —But these rapturous
Scenes last very little longer than the present Moment. 
What I want to know, is, Whether in the
steadier Parts of Life, when you are both nearer the
Level of us common Folks, he gives up any thing
of his own Will in Compliment to yours? Whether
he acts the Part of a respectful, polite Gentleman,
in his Behaviour to you; and breaks not into your
Retirements, in the Dress, and with the brutal Roughness,
of a Fox-hunter? —Making no Difference,
perhaps, between the Field or his Stud, I will not
say Kennel, and your Chamber or Closet? —Policy,
for his own Credit sake, as I mention'd, accounts to
me well, for his Complaisance to you in Publick. 
But his regular and uniform Behaviour to you in
your Retirements, when the Conversation between
you turns upon usual and common Subjects, and
you have not obliged him to rise to Admiration of
you, by such Scenes as those of your two Parsons,
Sir Jacob Swynford, and the like; are what would
most engage my Curiosity, if you please to give me
an Instance or two of it. 
Now, my dearest Mrs. B. if you can give me a
Case partly or nearly thus circumstanced, you will
highly oblige me: 

First, Where he has borne with some Infirmity of
your own; and I know of none where you can be
guilty of any, except you get into a vapourish Habit,
by giving way to a Temper too thoughtful and
apprehensive: 
Next, That, in Complaisance to your Will, he recedes
from his own, in any one Instance: 
Next, Whether he breaks not into your Retirements
unceremoniously, and without Apology or
Concern; as I hinted above. 
You know, my dear Mrs. B. all I mean, by what
I have said; and if you have any pretty Conversation
in Memory, where this my bold Curiosity may be
answer'd, pray oblige me with it; and we shall be
able to judge by it, not only of the inborn Generosity
which all that know Mr. B. have been willing to
attribute to him, but of the Likelihood of the Continuance
of both your Felicities, upon Terms suitable
to the Characters of a fine Lady and fine Gentleman; 
and, of consequence, worthy of the Imitation
of the most delicate of our own Sex. 
This is the Task your Polly Darnford presumes to
set to her beloved Mrs. B. And why? For your
own Diversion, in the first Place. For my Edification,
in the next. And that when I have the Pleasure I
hope for, of attending you in London, I may see
what there is in the Conduct of you both, to admire,
or to remonstrate against, in the Third. For,
where there is so little wanting to Perfection between
you, I shall be very free with you both, in my Censures,
if he imposes, thro' Prerogative, or you permit,
thro' an undue Compliance, what I shall imagine
ought not to be in either Case. I know, you
will excuse me for what I have said; and well you
may, since I am sure, I shall have nothing to do,
when I am with you, but to admire, and to imitate
you; and to wish, if ever I marry, I may have just 

such an Husband (tho' not quite so haughty perhaps)
as Mr. B. But pray, let not the lordly Man see
this Letter, nor your Answer, nor the Copy of it,
till you may conclude I have the latter, if then; 
that you may not be under any undue Influences. 
Your obliging Longings, my beloved dear Lady,
for my Company, I hope, will be soon, very soon,
answer'd. My Papa was so pleased with your sweet
Earnestness on this Occasion, that he join'd with my
Mamma, and both with equal Chearfulness, said,
You should not be many Days in London before me. 
Murray and his Mistress go on swimmingly, and have
not yet had one Quarrel. The only Person, he, of
either Sex, that ever knew Nancy so intimately, and
so long, without one! 
This is all I have to say, at present, when I have
assured you, my dear Mrs. B. how much I am 
Your obliged and affectionate
Polly Darnford. 

I must add, however, that I expect, from you,
almost as many Letters as there are Post-Days,
between this and the Time I see you; for I
will not part with my Correspondent for any
body; no, not for Lady Davers. 
But I must insist upon your giving me the Conversation
with the young Ladies related to Mrs.
Towers and Mrs. Arthur. 
I will observe every thing you say in relation to
Mrs. Jewkes; who is much as she was, but
not better. 
