


Sir Charles Grandison.  In Continuation. 


Mr. Lowther and his collegues, having been consulted,
gave it as their opinion, that Jeronymo
might be removed by litter to the nearest sea-port,
and there embark for England; but that it is most
eligible to stay till the next spring, by which time they
hope the two old wounds may be safely cicatrized, and
the new one only kept open. 
But they all engaged, that then not only Jeronymo,
and the two young Lords, but some others of the family,
will be my guests in England; and, in the mean
time, that the Bishop and Father Marescotti will in
turn correspond with me, and acquaint me with all
that passes here. 
Clementina drank chocolate with us. She had been
made acquainted with their determination, and approved
of the promises of a visit to be made me next
year, by some of the principals of the family. What
a hard circumstance is it, whispered she, as she sat
next me, that the person who would be most willing
to go, and, I flatter myself, would not be the least
welcome, must not be of the company! I should have
been glad to have made one visit to the country where
the Chevalier Grandison was born. 

And what a perverseness, thought I, is there in custom; 
that would not permit this kind explicitness in
Lady Clementina, were she not determined to consider
the brother, in the man before her, rather than a still
nearer relation! By how many ways, my dear Dr.
Bartlett, may delicate minds express a denial! Negatives
need not to be frowningly given, nor affirmatives
blushingly pronounced. 
Jeronymo and I being left alone, he challenged me
on the visible concern which he, and every one, as he
said, saw in my countenance, on the turn his sister had
taken: Had it not been in my heart, he was sure it
would not have been there. 
Can you wonder at it, my dear friend? said I: When
I came over, greatly as I thought of your sister, I did
not think she had been so great, as she has shewn herself. 
I admired her ever; but I now more than admire
her. Taught to hope, as I was, and so unexpectedly
disappointed, as I have been, I must have been more
than man, were I not very much affected. 
No doubt but you must; and I am cordially concerned
for your concern. But, my dear Grandison, it
is only God that she prefers to you. She suffers more
than you can do. She has no other way, she assures
me, to comfort herself, but by indulging her hopes,
that she shall not live long—Dear creature! She flatters
herself, that her reason is restored, in answer to
her fervent supplications, which, she says, she put up
to Heaven, in all her lucid intervals, that for the sake
of her parents and brothers, it might be restored, and
that then she might be taken to the arms of mercy. 
But if your heart be deeply affected, my Grandison— 
It is, Jeronymo. I am not an insensible man. But
should now our dear Clementina be prevailed upon to
descend from the height to which she has soared, however
my wishes might be gratified by the condescension; 
yet, while she believed her conscience would be
wounded by it, I could not but think it would be some 

diminution to her glory. And how, as she has hinted
in one of her letters to me, would it be possible, were
I to see my beloved wife unhappy with her scruples, to
forbear endeavouring to quiet her mind by removing
them? And could this be effected, without giving her
an opinion of the religion I profess, in opposition to
hers? And would not that subject me to a breach of
articles? O my dear Jeronymo! Matters must stand
just as they do, except she could think more favourably
of my religion, and less favourably of her own. 
He began to talk of their obligations to me. I declared,
that they could no other way give me pain. 
Do not, said I, let this subject ever be again mentioned,
by you, or any of the family. Every one,
my dear Jeronymo, is not called upon by the occasion,
as I have had the happiness to be. Would my
friend envy me this happiness? 
I wish, Dr. Bartlett, with all my heart, that I
could think of any thing that I could accept of, to
make such grateful spirits easy. It pains me, to be
placed by them in such a superior light, as must give
them pain. What, my dear Dr. Bartlett, can I do,
consistent with my notions of friendship, to make their
hearts easy? 
He was afraid, he said, that I should now soon think
of leaving them. 
I told him, that having no doubt of Lady Clementina's
perseverance in her resolution, and of her leave
to return to my native country, I should be glad, for
my own sake, as well as the Lady's, to be allowed to
depart in a few days. Mr. Lowther, as it would
make Jeronymo, as he had declared, more easy, would
stay behind me. But dismiss him, my friend, said I,
as soon as you can. He had obtained abroad a happy
competency, and was returned to England, when I
first knew him, with intent to enjoy it. He is as rich
as he wants to be; and can gratify only the natural
benevolence of his heart, by attending my dear friend. 

I hope to get him to accept of apartments with me, in
my London house; and to fix his retirement, if not
with me in my paternal seat, in its neighbourhood
at least. He has merit that is not confined to his profession:
But for what he has done for my Jeronymo,
he will always hold a prime place in my heart. 
It is true, Dr. Bartlett; and I please myself, that
he will be found as worthy of your friendly love, and
my Beauchamp's, as of mine. If I can at last be indulged
in my long, long hoped-for wish, of settling
in my native country, with some tolerable tranquillity
of mind, I shall endeavour to draw around me such a
collection of worthies, as shall make my neighbourhood
one of the happiest spots in Britain. 
The Marchioness came up to us. Clementina, said
she, is apprehensive that you soon will leave us. Her
father and brothers are walking with her in the garden:
They will, I dare say, be glad of your company. 
I left Jeronymo and his mother together; and
joined the Marquis, the General, the Bishop, and
Clementina. The General's Lady and Father Marescotti
were in another alley, in earnest conversation. 
The Marquis made me a high compliment; and,
after a few turns, the Prelate led off his father and
brother, and left Clementina and me alone together. 
Were you not cruel, Chevalier, said she, in your
last Letter to me, not only to deny me your weight in
the request my heart was, and is still, set upon; but
to strengthen their arguments against me? Great use
have some of my friends made of what you wrote. 
O Sir, you have won the heart of Giacomo; but you
have contributed to oppress that of his sister. Indeed,
indeed, I cannot be easy, if I am denied the veil. 
Dear Lady Clementina, remember, that the full
establishment of your health depends, under God, upon
the quiet of your own mind. Give not way, I beseech
you, to uneasy apprehensions. What daughter
may rely upon the indulgence of a father and mother, 

what sister upon the affection of brothers, if you may
not upon yours? You have seen how much their
happiness depends upon your health. Would you
doubt the efficacy of that piety, while you are in the
world, of which you have already (Shall I say to my
cost?) given an instance so glorious to yourself, that
the sufferer by it cannot help applauding you for it? 
O Chevalier! Say not at your cost, if you wish me
to be easy. 
With the utmost difficulty have I restrained, and do
I restrain, myself on these occasions. I must, however,
add, on this, a few words: You have obliged
me, madam, to give one of the greatest instances of
self-denial, that ever was given by man: Let me beseech
you, dearest Lady Clementina, for your own
sake, for the sake of your duty, as well to the departed,
as to the living (and, may I add, for my sake?)
that you would decline this now favourite wish of your
heart. 
She paused; and at last said, Well, Sir, I see I
must not expect any favour from you, on this subject. 
Let us turn into that shaded alley. And now, Sir, as
to the other part of my request to you, in my last Letter
—It was not a request made on undeliberate motives. 
What is that, madam? 
How shall I say it? —Yet I will—If, Chevalier, you
would banish from my heart—Again she stopt. I
thought not, at that moment, of what she meant. 
If you would make me easy— 
Madam— 
You must marry! —Then, Sir, shall I not doubt
of my adhering to my resolution. But, say not a
word till I have told you, that the Lady must be an
English woman. She must not be an Italian. Olivia
would not scruple to change her religion for you. But
Olivia must not be yours. You could not be happy,
I persuade myself, with Olivia. Do you think you
could? 

I bowed, in confirmation of her opinion. 
I thought you could not. Let not Clementina be
disgraced in your choice of a wife. I have a proud
heart. Let it not be said, that the man, of whom
Clementina della Porretta thought with distinction,
undervalued himself in marriage. 
This, Dr. Bartlett, was a request of the same generous
import, that she mentioned in her resverie, before
I left Italy. How consistently delicate! She had
tears in her eyes, as she spoke. I was too much affected
with her generosity, to interrupt her. 
If you marry, Sir, I shall, perhaps, be allowed to
be one in the party, that will make you a visit in England:
My sister-in-law has, within this hour, wished
to be one. She will endeavour to prevail upon her
Lord (He can deny her nothing) to accompany her. 
You will be able to induce Mrs. Beaumont once more
to visit her native country. You and your Lady, and
perhaps your Sisters and their Lords, will return with
us. Thus shall we be as one family. If I am not
to be obliged in another wish, I must in this: And
this must be in your power. And will you not make
me easy? 
Admirable Clementina! Who can be so great as
you? Such tenderness as I read in your eyes, such
magnanimity, never before met in woman! You can
do every-thing that is noble—But that very greatness
of soul attaches me to you; and makes it, at least while
I am an admiring witness of your excellence— 
Hush, Chevalier! Not a word more on this subject. 
It affects me more than I wish it did. I am
afraid I am chargeable with affectation—But you must,
however, marry. I shall not be easy, while you are
unmarried—When I know it is not possible to be— 
But no more of this subject now—How long is it, that
we are to have you among us? 
If I have no hopes, madam— 
Dear Chevalier, speak not in this strain—She turned
her face from me. 

The sooner, the better—But your pleasure, madam— 
I thank you, Sir—But did I not tell you, that I
have pride, Chevalier? —Ah, Sir, you have long ago
found it out! Pride will do greater things for women,
than Reason can—Let us walk to that seat, and I will
tell you more of my pride. 
She sat down; and making me sit by her—I will
talk to these myrtles, fancifully said she, turning her
head from me. “Shall the Chevalier Grandison be
acquainted with the weakness of thy heart, Clementina? 
—Shall he, in compassion to thy weakness,
leave his native country, and come over to thee? — 
Shall the success that has attended his generous effort,
shew his power to the confirmation of thy
weakness? —Shalt thou, enabled by the divine goodness
to take a resolution becoming thy character,
be doubtful whether thou canst adhere to it; and
give him room to think thee doubtful? —Shall he,
in consequence of this doubtfulness, make officious
absences, to try thy strength of mind? —And shalt
thou fail in the trial his compassionate generosity puts
thee to?” —No, Clementina! 
Then turning to me, with a downcast eye—I thank
you, Sir, for all the instances of generous compassion
you have shewn me. My unhappy disorder had intitled
me, in some measure, to it. It was the hand of
God. Perhaps a punishment for my pride; and I submit
to it. Nor am I ashamed to acknowlege the kindness
of your compassion to me. I will retain a grateful
sense of it, to the last hour of my life. I wish to
be remembred by you with tenderness to the last hour
of yours. I may not live long: I will therefore yield
to your request, so earnestly made, and to the wishes
of my dearest friends, in suspending, at least, my own. 
I will hope to see you (in the happy state I have hinted
at) in England, and afterwards in Italy. I will
suppose you of my family. I will suppose myself of 

yours. On these suppositions, in these hopes, I can
part with you; as, if I live, it will be a temporary
parting only; an absence of a few months. And have
I not behaved well for the whole last month, and several
days over, tho' I reckoned to myself the time as
it passed, more than once every day, as so much
elapsed, and nearer to the time of your return? —I
own it (blushing)—And now, Sir, I return to you
the option you offered me. Be the day, the solemn
day, at your nomination—Your Sister Clementina will
surrender you up to her Sisters and yours—O Sir! lifting
up her eyes to me, and beholding an emotion
in me which I tried to conceal, but could not, how
good, how compassionate, how affectionate, you are! 
—But name to me now your day! This seat, when
you are far, far distant from me, shall be a seat consecrated
to the remembrance of your tenderness. I
will visit it every day; nor shall the summer's sun, nor
the winter's frost, keep me from it. 
It will be best, taking her hand, admirable Lady!
it will be best for us both, for me I am sure it will,
that the solemn day be early. Next Monday morning
let me set out—Sunday evening—The day, on my
part, shall be a day passed in imploring health, happiness,
and every blessing, on my dearest Clementina,
on our Jeronymo, and their whole family; and for a
happy meeting to us all in England—Sunday evening,
if you please, I will—I could not speak out the
sentence. 
She burst into tears; reclined her face on my shoulder
—her bosom heaved—and she sobbed out—Oh,
Chevalier! —Must, must—But be it—Be it so! —And
God Almighty strengthen the minds of both! 
The Marchioness, who was coming towards us,
saw at distance the emotion of her beloved daughter,
and fearing she was fainting, hastened to her, and
clasping her arms about her—My child, my Clementina,
said she—Why these streaming eyes? Look upon
me, Love. 

Ah, madam! The day, the day is set! —Next
Monday! —The Chevalier will leave Bologna! 
God forbid—Chevalier, you will not so soon leave
us? My dear, we will prevail upon the Chevalier— 
I arose, and walked into a cross alley from them. 
I was greatly affected! —O Dr. Bartlett! These good
women! —Why have I a heart so susceptible; yet
such demands upon it for fortitude? 
The General, the Bishop, and Father Marescotti,
came to me. I briefly recounted to them the substance
of the conversation that had passed between Lady Clementina
and me. The Marquis joined his Lady and
daughter; and Clementina, in her tender way, gave
her father and mother an account of the same. 
The Marquis and his Lady, leaving her to her Camilla,
joined us: O Chevalier! said the Marquis, how
can we think of parting with you? —And so soon? — 
You will not so suddenly leave us? 
Not if Lady Clementina commands the contrary. 
If she do not, the sooner, the better it will be for me. 
I cannot bear her generous excellence. She is the
most exalted of women. —See! the dear Lady before
us, leaning on her Camilla, as if she wanted support! 
My sister and you, Chevalier, said the General, will
no doubt correspond. We shall none of us deny her
that liberty. As she has already expressed to you her
wishes that you would marry; may we not hope, that
you will try your influence over her, upon the same
subject, in your future Letters? The marriage of
either will answer the end she proposes to herself, by
urging yours. 
Good Heaven! thought I—Do they believe me absolutely
divested of human passions? —I have been at
continual war, as you know, Dr. Bartlett, with the
most ungovernable of mine; but without wishing to
overcome the tender susceptibilities, which, properly
directed, are the glory of the human nature. 

This is too much to be asked, said the young Marchioness. 
How can this be expected? 
You know not, madam, said the Bishop, supporting
his brother's wishes, what the Chevalier Grandison
can do, to make a whole family happy, tho' against
himself. 
Lady Clementina, said the equally unfeeling, tho'
good, Father Marescotti, thinks she is under the divine
direction, in the resolution she has taken. This world,
and all its glories, are but of second consideration with
her. Were it to cost her her life, I am confident, she
would not alter it. As therefore the Chevalier can
have no hopes— 
I cannot ask this, said the Marquis. You see how
hard a task (referring to me)—O that the great obstacle
could be removed! My dear Grandison, taking my
hand, cannot, cannot—But I dare not ask—If it
could, my own sons would not be more dear to me,
than you. 
My Lord, you honour me. You engage my utmost
gratitude. It is with difficulty that I am able to
adhere to my engagement, not to press her to be
mine, when I have the honour to be with her. I
have wished her to resign her will to that of her father
and mother, as you have seen, knowing the consequence. 
I am persuaded, that if either were to marry,
the other would be more easy in mind; and I had
much rather follow her example, than set her one— 
You will see what my return to my native country
will do for us both. But she must not be precipitated. 
If she is, her wishes to take the veil may
be resumed. Punctilio will join with her piety; and,
if not complied with, she may then again be unhappy. 
They agreed to follow my advice; to have patience; 
and leave the issue to time. 
I left them, and went to Jeronymo. I communicated
to him what had passed, and the early day I 

had named for setting out on my return to England. 
This I did, with as much tenderness as possible. Yet
his concern was so great upon it, that it added much
to mine; and I was forced, with some precipitation,
to quit his chamber, and the house; and to retire to
my lodgings, in order to compose myself. 
And thus, my dear Dr. Bartlett, is the day of my
setting out fixed. I hope I shall not be induced to
alter it. Mrs. Beaumont, I know, will excuse me
going back to Florence. Olivia must. I hope she
will. I shall write to both. 
I shall take my route thro' Modena, Parma, Placentia. 
Lady Sforza has desired an interview with
me. I hope she will meet me at Pavia, or Turin. 
If not, I will attend her at Milan. I promised to pay
her a visit before I quitted Italy: But as her request to
see me was made while it was thought there might
have been a relation between us, I suppose the interview
now can mean nothing but civility. I hope, if
I see her, her cruel daughter will not be present. 

