



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Eight o'clock, Sat. Morn. June 10. 
I am come back from Mrs. Moore's, whither I
went in order to attend my Charmer's commands. 
But no admittance—A very bad night. 
Doubtless she must be as much concerned, that she
has carried her resentments so very far, as I have reason
to be, that I made such a poor use of the opportunity
I had on Wednesday night. 
But now, Jack, for a brief review of my present
situation; and a slight hint or two of my precautions. 
I have seen the women this morning, and find them
half-right, half-doubting. 

Miss Rawlins's Brother tells her, that she lives at
Mrs. Moore's. 
Mrs. Moore can do nothing without Miss Rawlins. 
People who keep lodgings at public places expect to
get by every one who comes into their purlieus. Tho'
not permitted to lodge there myself, I have engaged all
the rooms she has to spare, to the very garrets; and
that, as I have told thee before, for a month certain,
and at her own price, board included; my Spouse's
and all: But she must not at present know it. So I
hope I have Mrs. Moore fast by the interest. 
This, devil-like, is suiting temptations to inclinations. 
I have always observed, and, I believe, I have hinted
as much formerly (a) , that all dealers, tho' but for
pins, may be taken in by customers for pins, sooner
than by a direct bribe of ten times the value; especially
if pretenders to conscience: For the offer of a
bribe would not only give room for suspicion; but
would startle and alarm their scrupulousness; while a
high price paid for what you buy, is but submitting
to be cheated in the method the person makes a profession
to get by. Have I not said, that human nature
is a rogue (b) ? —And do not I know that it is? 
To give a higher instance, How many proud Senators
in the year 1720. were induced, by presents or
subscriptions of South-Sea-Stock, to contribute to a
scheme big with national ruin; who yet would have
spurned the man who should have presumed to offer
them even twice the sum certain, that they had a
chance to gain by the Stock? —But to return to my
review, and to my precautions. 
Miss Rawlins fluctuates as she hears the Lady's
Story, or as she hears mine. Somewhat of an Infidel,
I doubt, is this Miss Rawlins. I have not yet considered 

her foible. The next time I see her, I will
take particular notice of all the moles and freckles in
her mind; and then infer and apply. 
The widow Bevis, as I have told thee, is all my
own. 
My man Will. lies in the house. My other new
fellow attends upon me; and cannot therefore be quite
stupid. 
Already is Will. over head and ears in love with one
of Mrs. Moore's maids. He was struck with her the
moment he set his eyes upon her. A raw country
wench too. But all women, from the Countess to
the Cook-maid, are put into high good humour with
themselves when a man is taken with them at first
sight. Be they ever so plain [No woman can be ugly,
Jack!] they'll find twenty good reasons, besides the
great one (for Sake's sake) by the help of the glass
without (and perhaps in spite of it) and conceit within,
to justify the honest fellow's caption. 
“The Rogue has saved 150 l. in my Service”— 
More by 50 than I bid him save. No doubt he thinks
he might have done so; tho' I believe not worth a
groat. “The best of Masters I—Passionate, indeed; 
but soon appeased.” 
The wench is extremely kind to him already. The
other maid is also very civil to him. He has a husband
for her in his eye. She cannot but say, that Mr.
Andrew, my other servant [The girl is for fixing the
person] is a very well-spoken civil young man. 
“We common folks have our joys, and please
your Honour, says honest Joseph Leman, like as
our betters have (a) .” And true says honest Joseph. 
—Did I prefer ease to difficulty, I should envy these
low-born sinners some of their joys. 
But if Will. had not made amorous pretensions to
the wenches, we all know, that Servants, united in 

one common compare-note cause, are intimate the moment
they see one another—Great genealogists too; 
they know immediately the whole kin and kin's kin
of each other, tho' dispersed over the three kingdoms,
as well as the genealogies and kin's kin of those whom
they serve. 
But my precautions end not here. 
O Jack, with such an invention, what occasion
had I to carry my Beloved to Mrs. Sinclair's? 
My Spouse may have further occasion for the messengers
whom she dispatched, one to Miss Howe, the
other to Wilson's. With one of these Will. is already
well acquainted, as thou hast heard—To mingle Liquor
is to mingle Souls with these fellows—With the
other messenger he will soon be acquainted, if he be
not already. 
The Captain's servant has his uses and instructions
assigned him. I have hinted at some of them already
(b) . He also serves a most humane and considerate
master. I love to make every-body respected to my
power. 
The post, general and peny, will be strictly watched
likewise. 
Miss Howe's Collins is remembred to be described. 
Miss Howe's and Hickman's Liveries also. 
James Harlowe and Singleton are warned against. I
am to be acquainted with any enquiry that shall happen
to be made after my Spouse, whether by her married
or maiden name, before she shall be told of it—And
this that I may have it in my power to prevent mischief. 
I have ordered Mowbray and Tourville (and Belton,
if his health permit) to take their quarters at
Hamstead for a week, with their fellows to attend
them. I spare thee for the present, because of thy
private concerns. But hold thyself in chearful readiness
however, as a mark of thy allegiance. 

As to my Spouse herself, has she not reason to be
pleased with me for having permitted her to receive
Miss Howe's Letter from Wilson's? A plain case,
either that I am no deep plotter, or that I have no
further views than to make my peace with her for an
offence so slight and so accidental. 
Miss Howe says, tho' prefaced with an Alas! that
her charming friend loves me: She must therefore
yearn after this Reconciliation—Prospects so fair—If
she used me with less rigour, and more politeness; if
she shewed me any compassion; seemed inclinable to
spare me, and to make the most favourable constructions; 
I cannot but say, that it would be impossible
not to shew her some. But to be insulted and defied
by a rebel in one's power, what prince can bear that? 
But I return to the scene of action. I must keep
the women steady. I had no opportunity to talk to
my worthy Mrs. Bevis in private. 
Tomlinson, a dog, not come yet! 