



My beloved Lady G.
You will excuse my long Silence, when you are
reminded of the Occasions to which it has been
owing; for some of them you know; and when
you are told the others. 
In the first Place, I was oblig'd to pay a dutiful
and concerning Visit to Kent, where my good Father
was taken ill of a Fever, and my Mother of an
Ague: And think, Madam, how this must affect
me, from their Time of Life!––– O Death! Death!
thou mayst knock at the Doors of Tenements so
frail, but so beloved: We cannot help ourselves: 
But we will not let thee in, if we can possibly avoid
it; for the Lives of such dear Parents are a Part of 

my own Life: And, if God see fit, I cannot spare
them! Indeed I cannot! 
Mr. B. kindly accompany'd me, apprehending,
that his beloved Presence would be necessary, if
that Recovery of them both, in which I thankfully
rejoice, had not taken Effect; especially, as a Circumstance
I am, I think, always in, added more
Weight to his Apprehensions. 
I had hardly return'd from Kent to Bedfordshire,
and look'd round, when I was oblig'd to set out to
attend Lady Davers, who sent me word, that
she should die, that was her strong Term, if she
saw me not, to comfort and recover, by my Counsel
and Presence, so she was pleas'd to express herself,
her sick Lord, who was just got out of an intermittent
Fever, which left him without any Spirits,
and was occasion'd by fretting at the Conduct of her
stupid Nephew, those also were her Words. 
For you must have heard, (Every-body hears when
Man of Quality does a foolish Thing!) and it has
been in all the News-papers, That –––‘On Wednesday
last the Right Honourable John (Jackey, they
should have said) Lord H. Nephew to the Right
Honourable William Lord Davers, was marry'd
to the Honourable Mrs. P. Relict of J. P. of
Twickenham, Esq; a Lady of celebrated Beauty,
and ample Fortune.’ 
Now, my dear Friend, you must know, that this
celebrated Lady is, 'tis true, of the &sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank; Family,
whence her Title of Honourable; but is indeed so
celebrated, that every fluttering Coxcomb in Town
can give some Account of her, even before she was
in Keeping of the Duke of &sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;, who had cast
her off to the Town he had robb'd of her. 
In short, my Dear, she is quite a common Woman; 
has no Fortune at all, as one may say, only a small
Jointure incumber'd, and is much in Debt.–––– She 

is a Shrew into the Bargain, and the poor Wretch
is a Father already; for he has had a Girl of Three
Years old (her Husband has been dead Seven) brought
him home, which he knew nothing of, nor ever
inquir'd, If his Widow had a Child?— And he is
now imploy'd in paying the Mother's Debts, and
trying to make the best of his Bargain. 
This is the Fruit of a London Journey, so long
desir'd by him, and his Fluttering about there with
his new Title. 
He was drawn in by a Brother of his Lady, and
a Friend of that Brother's, two Town Sharpers,
Gamesters, and Bullies.— Poor Sir Joseph Wittol! 
That was his Case, and his Character, it seems, in
London. 
Shall I present you with a Curiosity? 'Tis a Copy
of his Letter to his Uncle, who had, as you may well
think, lost all Patience with him, on occasion of this
abominable Folly. 

My Lord Davers,
For if you will not call me Nephew, I have
no Reason to call you Uncle; Surely you forget
who it was you held up your Cane to: I
have as little Reason to value your Displeasure, as
you have me; for I am, God be thanked! a Lord,
and a Peer of the Realm, as well as you: And as
to your not owning me, nor your Brother B. not
looking upon me, I care not a Farthing; and,
bad as you think I have done, I have marry'd a
Woman of Family—Take that among you! 
‘As to your personal Abuses of her, take care
what you say. You know the Statute will defend
us as well as you!— And, besides, she has a Brother,
that won't let her good Name be call'd in
Question—Mind that! 

‘Some Things I wish had been otherwise—Perhaps
I do—What then?— Must you, my Lord,
make more Mischief, and add to my Plagues, if I
have any?— Is this your Uncleship? 
‘But I sha'n't want your Advice. I have as good
an Estate as you have, and am as much a Lord as
yourself. Why the Devil then, am I to be treated
as I am? Why the Plague—But I won't swear
neither!— I desire not to see you, any more than
you do me, I can tell you that. And if we ever
meet under one Roof with my Liking, it must be
at the House of Peers, where I shall be upon a
Par with you in every thing, that's my Comfort. 
‘As to my Lady Davers, I desire not to see her
Ladyship; for she was always plaguy nimble with
her Fingers; but, let my false Step be what it will,
I have, in other respects, marry'd a Lady, who is
as well descended as herself, and no Disparagement
neither; so have not that to answer for to her
Pride; and who has as good a Spirit too, if they
were to come Face to Face, or I am mistaken: 
Nor will she take Affronts from any one. So,
my Lord, leave me to make the best of my
Matters, as I will you of yours. So no more,
but that I am 
‘Your Servant,
H. 
‘P. S. I mean no Affront to Mrs. B. She is
the best of ye all–––by G&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;.’ 

I will not take up your Time with further Observations
upon this poor Creature's bad Conduct: His
Reflection must proceed from Feeling; and will,
that's the worst of it, come too late, come when or
how it will. I will only say, I am sorry for it on his
own Account, but more for that of Lord and Lady 

Davers, who take the Matter very heavily, and wish
he had marry'd the lowest-born Creature in England,
(so she had been honest and virtuous) rather than
done as he has done. 
But, I suppose, the poor Gentleman was resolv'd
to shun, at all Adventures, Mr. B.'s Faule, and keep
up to the Pride of Descent and Family!—and so
marry'd the only Creature, as I hope, (since it cannot
be help'd) that is so great a Disgrace to both! 
For I presume to flatter myself, for the sake of my
Sex, that, among the poor Wretches, who are sunk
so low as the Town-Women are, there are very
few of Birth or Education; but such, principally, as
have had their Necessities or their Ignorance taken
Advantage of by base Men; since Birth and Education
must needs set the most unhappy of the Sex above so
sordid and so abandon'd a Guilt, as the hourly Wickedness
of such a Course of Life subjects them to. 
But let me pursue my Purpose of excusing my
long Silence. I had hardly return'd from Lord and
Lady Davers's, and recover'd my Family Management,
and resum'd my Nursery Duties, when my
Fourth dear Boy, my Jemmy–––(for, I think, I am
going on to make out the Number Lady Davers allotted*   me) press'd upon me in such a manner, as not
to be refus'd, for one Month or Six Weeks close
Attention. And then a Journey to Lord Davers's, and
that noble Pair accompanying us to Kent; and daily
and hourly Pleasures crouding upon us, narrow and
confin'd as our Room there was, (tho' we went with
as few Attendants as possible) took up more of my
Time. So that I hope you will forgive me, on all these
Accounts, because, as soon as I return'd, I set about
writing this, as an Excuse for myself, in the first
place; to promise you the Subject you insist upon, 

in the next; and to tell you, that I am incapable
of Forgetfulness or Negligence to such a Friend as
Lady G. For I must always be, dear Madam, 
Your faithful and affectionate humble Servant,
P. B. 

