


Strap communicates to me a conquest he had
made on a chandler's widow—finds himself
miserably mistaken—I go to the opera
—admire Melinda—am cautioned by
Banter—go to the assembly at Hampstead
—dance with that young lady— 
receive an insolent message from Bragwell,
whose mettle is soon cooled—am in favour
with my mistress, whom I visit next
day; and am bubbled out of eighteen
guineas at cards—Strap triumphs at
my success, but is astonished at my expence
—Banter comes to my lodging, is very
sarcastic at my expence, and borrows five
guineas from me, as a proof of his friendship. 
In the morning before I got up, Strap came into
my chamber, and finding me awake, hemmed
several times, scratched his head, cast his
eyes upon the ground, and with a very foolish
kind of a simper on his face, let me know he had
something to communicate. —“By your countenance
(said I) I expect to hear good tidings.”— 
“Indifferent (replied he, tittering) that is,
thereafter as it shall be. —You must know, I
have some thoughts of altering my condition.” 
—“What! (cried I, astonished) a
matrimonial scheme? O rare Strap! thou hast 

got the heels of me at last.” —“N'—no
less, I'll assure you (said he, bursting into a
laugh of self-approbation) a tallow-chandler's
widow, that lives hard by, has taken a liking
to me. —A fine jolly dame, as plump as a
partridge. —She has a well furnished house, a
brisk trade, and a good deal of the ready. — 
I may have her for the asking. —She told a
friend of mine, a brother footman, that she
would take me out of a stinking clout. —But
I refused to give my final answer, till I knew
your opinion of the matter.” —I congratulated
Monsieur d'Estrapes upon his conquest, and
approved of the scheme, provided he could be
assured of these circumstances of her fortune; but
advised him to do nothing rashly, and give me
an opportunity of seeing the lady before matters
should be brought to a conclusion. —He assured me
he would do nothing without my consent and approbation,
and that very morning, while I was
at breakfast, introduced his innamorata to my
acquaintance. —She was a short thick woman,
about the age of thirty-six, and had a particular
prominence of belly, which I perceived at first
sight, not without some suspicion of foul play. — 
I desired her, however, to sit, and treated her
with a dish of tea; the discourse turning on the
good qualities of Strap, whom I represented as a
prodigy of sobriety, industry and virtue. —When
she took her leave, he followed her to the door,
and returned licking his lips, and asking if I did
not think she was a luscious creature. —I made no
mystery of my apprehension, but declared my
sentiments of her without reserve; at which he
was not surprized, telling me, he had observed
the same symptom, but was informed by his 

friend that she was only livergrown, and would
in a few months be as small in the Waist as ever. 
—“Yes, (said I) a few weeks, I believe, will
do the business. —In short, Strap, it is my opinion,
that you are egregiously imposed upon; 
and that this friend is no other than a rascal
who wants to palm his trull upon you for
a wife, that he may at once deliver himself
from the importunities of the mother, and
the expence of her bantling; for which reason
I would not have you trust implicitly to
the report he makes of her wealth, which is
inconsistent with his behaviour; nor run your
head precipitately into a noose, that you may afterwards
wished exchanged for the hangman's.” 
He seemed very much started at my insinuation,
and promised to look twice before he leaped; 
saying, with some heat, “Odd, if I find his intention
is to betray me, we shall see which of us
is the better man.” —My prediction was verified
in less than a fortnight; her great belly producing
an infant, to the unspeakable amazement
of Strap, who was, before this happened, inclinable
to believe I had refined a little too much in my
penetration. His false friend disappeared, and in
a few days after, an execution was issued against
her goods and household-furniture, which were
seized by the creditors. 
Mean while I met my friend Banter at the
ordinary, and in the evening went to the opera
with him and Mr. Chatter, who pointed out
Melinda in one of the boxes, and offered to introduce
me to her, observing at the same time,
that she was a reigning toast worth ten thousand
pounds. —This piece of information made my
heart bound with joy, and I discovered great 

eagerness to accept the proposal; upon which
he assured me I should dance with her at the next
assembly, if he had any influence in that quarter; 
so saying, he went round, spoke to her some
minutes, and, as I imagined, pointed at me, then
returning, told me, to my inexpressible pleasure,
that I might depend upon what he had promised,
for she was now engaged as my partner. —Banter,
in a whisper, gave me to understand that she
was an incorrigible coquette, who would grant
the same favour to any young fellow in England,
of a tolerable appearance, meerly to engage him
among the herd of her admirers, that she might
have the pleasure of seeing them increase daily; 
—that she was of a cold insensible disposition,
dead to every passion but vanity, and so blind to
merit, that he would lay any wager, the wealthiest
fool should carry her at last. I attributed a good
deal of this intelligence to the satirical turn of
my friend, or resentment, for having himself suffered
a rebuff from the lady in question; and at
any rate, trusted so much to my own accomplishments,
as to believe no woman could resist the
ardour of my addresses. 
Full of this confidence, I repaired to Hampstead,
in company with Billy Chatter, my Lord
Hobble, and doctor Wagtail. —Here I saw a
very brilliant assembly, before whom I had the
honour to walk a minuet with Melinda,
who charmed me with her frank manner of receiving
me, and easiness of behaviour. —Before
the country dances began, I received a message
by a person I did not know, from Bragwell,
who was present, importing that no body who
knew him, presumed to dance with Melinda,
while he was there in person; and that I would 

do well to relinquish her without noise, because
he had a mind to lead up a country dance with
her. This extraordinary intimation, which was
delivered in the lady's hearing, did not at all
discompose me, who by this time was pretty well
acquainted with the character of my rival. I
therefore, without the least symptom of concern,
bid the gentleman tell Mr. Bragwell, that while
I was so happy as to obtain the lady's consent,
I should not be sollicitous about his; and desired
the bearer himself to bring me no such impertinent
messages for the future. Melinda affected
a sort of confusion, and pretended to wonder
that Mr. Bragwell should give himself such liberties
with regard to her, who had no manner of
connexion with the fellow. I laid hold of this
opportunity to display my valour, and offered to
call him to account for his insolence, which she absolutely
refused, under pretence of consulting my
safety; though I could perceive by the sparkling
of her eyes, that she would not have thought herself
affronted in being the subject of a duel. I
was by no means pleased with this discovery of
her thoughts, which not only argued the most
unjustifiable vanity, but likewise the most barbarous
indifference; however, I was allured by her
fortune, and resolved to gratify her pride, in
making her the occasion of a publick quarrel between
me and Bragwell, who, I was pretty certain,
would never drive matters to a dangerous
extremity. 
While we danced together, I observed this
formidable rival at one end of the room, encircled
with a cluster of beaus, to whom he
talked with great vehemence, casting many big
looks at me, from time to time: I guessed the 

subject of his discourse, and as soon as I had
handed my partner to her seat, strutted up to the
place where he stood, and cocking my hat in his
face, demanded aloud, if he had any thing to
say to me. He answered with a sullen tone,
“Nothing, at present, Sir,” and turned about
upon his heel. —“Well, (said I) you know
where I am to be found at any time.” —His
companions stared at one another, and I returned
to the lady, whose features brightened at my approach,
and immediately a whisper run thro' the
whole room; after which, so many eyes were turned
upon me, that I was ready to sink with confusion. 
—When the ball broke up, I led her to her
coach, and, like a true French gallant, would
have got up behind it, in order to protect her
from violence on the road; but she absolutely
refused my offer, and expressed her concern
that there was not an empty seat for me within
it. 
Next day in the afternoon I waited on her at
her lodgings, by permission, in company with
Chatter, and was very civilly received by her
mother, with whom she lived;—there were a
good many fashionable people present, chiefly
young fellows, and immediately after tea a couple
of card tables were set, at one of which I had
the honour to play with Melinda, who in less
than three hours made shift to plunder me of
eight guineas. —I was well enough content to
lose a little money with a good grace, that I might
have an opportunity to say-soft things in the
mean time, which are still most welcome, when
attended with good luck; but I was by no means
satisfied with her fair play, a circumstance that
shocked me not a little, and greatly impaired my 

opinion of her disinterestedness and delicacy. — 
However, I was resolved to profit by this behaviour,
and treat her in my turn with less ceremony; 
accordingly, I laid close siege to her,
and finding her not at all disgusted with the gross
incense I offered, that very night made a declaration
of love in plain terms. —She received my
addresses with great gaity, and pretended to laugh
them off, but at the same time treated me with
such particular complacency, that I was persuaded
I had made a conquest of her heart, and concluded
myself the happiest man alive. —Elevated
with these flattering ideas, I sat down again to
cards, after supper, and with great chearfulness
suffered myself to be cheated of ten guineas
more. 
It was late before I took my leave, after being
favoured with a general invitation; and when I
got into bed, the adventures of the day hindered
me from sleeping. —Sometimes I pleased myself
with the hopes of possessing a fine woman with
ten thousand pounds; then I would ruminate on
the character I had heard of her from Banter,
and compare it with the circumstances of her
conduct towards me, which seemed to bear too
great a resemblance to the picture he had drawn. 
—This introduced a melancholy reflection on the
expence I had undergone, and the smallness of
my funds to support it, which, by the bye, were
none of my own. —In short, I found myself involved
in doubts and perplexities, that kept me
awake the greatest part of the night. 
In the morning, Strap, with whom I had not
conversed these two days, presented himself with
the utensils for shaving me; upon which, I asked
his opinion of the lady whom he had seen me 

conduct to her coach at Hampstead. —“Odd!
she's a delicious creature (cried he) and, as I
am informed, a great fortune. —I am sorry
you did not insist on going home with her. 
—I dare say, she would not have refused your
company; for she seems to be a good-humoured
soul.” —“There's a time for all
things (said I.) You must know, Strap, I
was in company with her till one o'clock this
morning.” —I had no sooner pronounced these
words, than he began to caper about the room,
and snap his fingers, crying in a transport,
“The day's our own!—the day's our own!” 
I gave him to understand that his triumph was a
little premature, and that I had more difficulties
to surmount than he was aware of; then I recounted
to him the intelligence I had received from
Banter. —At which he changed colour, shook his
head, and observed there was no faith in woman. 
—I told him, I was resolved to make a bold push
notwithstanding, although I foresaw it would lead
me into a great expence; and bid him guess the
sum I had lost last night at cards. —He scratched
his chin, and professed his abhorrence of cards,
the very name of which being mentioned made
him sweat with vexation, as it recalled the money-dropper
to his remembrance; “But however
(said he) you have to do with other guess
people now. —Why, I suppose, if you had a
bad run last night, you would scarce come off
for less than ten or twelve shillings.” —I was
mortified at this piece of simplicity, which I
imagined, at that time, was all affected by way
of reprimand for my folly; and asked with some
heat, if he thought I had spent the evening in a
cellar with chairmen and bunters; giving him to 

know, at the same time time, that my expence
amounted to eighteen guineas. —I would require
the pencil of Hogarth to express the astonishment
and concern of Strap, on hearing this piece of
news; the bason in which he was preparing the
lather for my chin, dropped out of his hands,
and he remained some time immoveable in that ludicrous
attitude, with his mouth open, and his eye; 
thrust forward considerably beyond their station; 
but remembering my disposition, which was
touchy and impatient of controul, he smothered
his chagrin, and attempted to recollect himself. — 
With this view he endeavoured to laugh, but in
spite of his teeth, broke out into a whimper,
took up his washball and pewter-pot, scrubbed my
beard with the one, and discharged the other
upon my face. —I took no notice of his confusion,
but after he had fully recovered himself,
put him in mind of his right, and assured him
of my readiness to surrender his effects whenever
he should think proper to demand them. — 
He was nettled at my insinuation, which he
thought proceeded from my distrust of his friendship; 
and begged I would never talk to him in
that strain again, unless I had a mind to break
his heart. 
This good creature's unalterable friendship
for me affected me with the most grateful sentiments,
and acted as a spur to my resolution of
acquiring a fortune, that I might have it in my
power to manifest my generosity in my turn. —For
this purpose, I determined to bring matters to
a speedy conclusion with Melinda; well knowing
that a few such nights as the last, would effectually
incapacitate me from prosecuting that,
or any other advantageous amour. 

While my meditation was busied in planning
out my future conduct, Mr. Banter favoured me
with a visit; and after breakfast, asked how I
had passed the preceeding evening—I answered,
I was very agreeably entertained at a private
house. —“Yes, (said he, with a sarcastic smile)
you deserved something extraordinary for the
price you paid.” —I was surprised at his remark,
and pretended ignorance of his meaning. 
—“Come, come, Random (continued he)
you need not make a mystery of it to me,
the whole town has it. —I wish that foolish affair
between you and Bragwell at Hampstead
had been less publick—It has set all the busy
bodies at work to find out your real character
and situation; and you cannot imagine what
conjectures have already circulated at your
expence: One suspects you to be Jesuit in disguise; 
another believes you are an agent from
the Pretender; a third believes you to be an
upstart gamester, because no body knows any
thing of your family or fortune; a fourth is
of opinion, that you are an Irish fortune-hunter.” 
—This last hypothesis touched me so
near, that, to conceal my confusion, I was fain
to interrupt his detail, and damn the world for
an envious meddling community, that would
not suffer a gentleman to live without molestation. 
He took no notice of this apostrophe, but
went on, “For my own part, I neither know
nor desire to know, who, or what you are; 
this I am certain of, that few people make
a mystery of their origin and situation, who
can boast of any thing advantageous in either;— 
and my own opinion of the matter is,
that you have raised yourself by your industry, 

from nothing to the appearance you now maintain,
and which you endeavour to support by some
matrimonial scheme.” —Here he fixed his eyes
stedfastly upon me, and perceiving my face covered
with blushes, told me, now he was confirmed in
his opinion;—“Look ye, Random, (said he)
I have divined your plan, and am confident
it will never succeed—You are too honest and
too ignorant of the town, to practice the necessary
cheats of your profession, and detect
the conspiracies that will be formed against you
—Besides, you are downright bashful—what
the devil! set up for a fortune-hunter, before
you have conquered the sense of shame! — 
Perhaps you are entitled by your merit, and
I believe you are, to a richer and better wife
than Melinda; but take my word for it, she
is not to be won at that rate;—or, if you
are so lucky as to carry her, between you
and me, you may say, as Teague did, By
my soul I have gained a lass! She would take
care to spend her own fortune in a twinkling,
and soon make you sick of her extravagance.” 
I was alarmed by his discourse, while I resented
the freedom of it, and expressed my disgust, by
telling him, he was mistaken in my intentions,
and desiring he would give me leave to regulate
my conduct according to the dictates of my own
reason. —He made an apology for the liberty he
had taken, and ascribed it to the warmth of his
friendship for me; as an uncommon instance of
which, he borrowed five guineas, assuring me,
there were very few people in the world whom
he would so far favour with his confidence. — 
I gave him the money, and professed myself so
well convinced of his sincerity, that he had no 

occasion to put it to such extraordinary proofs for
the future. —“I thought (said he) to have asked
five pieces more, but hearing you was bubbled
of eighteen last night, I presumed you might
be out of cash, and resolved to model my demand
accordingly.” I could not help admiring
the cavalier behaviour of this spark, of
whom I desired to know his reason for saying I
was bubbled. —Whereupon he gave me to understand,
that before he came to my lodgings, he
had beat up Tom Tossle, who having been present,
informed him of the particulars, rehearsed
all the fine things I said to Melinda, with which
he proposed to entertain the town; and among
other circumstances, assured him, my mistress
cheated with so little art, that no body but a
meer novice could have been imposed upon. 
The thoughts of becoming a subject of raillery
for coxcombs, and losing my money to boot,
stung me to the quick; but I made a virtue of
my indignation, and swore that no man should
with impunity, either asperse the character of Melinda,
or turn my behaviour into ridicule. He
replied in a dry manner, that I would find it a
Herculean task to chastise every body who should
laugh at my expence; and as for the character
of Melinda, he did not see how it could suffer
by what was laid to her charge; for that cheating
at cards, so far from being reckoned a blemish
among people of fashion, was looked upon as an
honourable indication of superior genius and address. 
—“But let us wave this subject (said he)
and go to the coffee-house, in order to make
a party for dinner.” 