


Hot Well, April 20. 
I UNDERSTAND your hint. There are
mysteries in physick, as well as in religion; which
we of the prophane have no right to investigate—A
man must not presume to use his reason, unless he
has studied the categories, and can chop logic by
mode and figure—Between friends, I think, every
man of tolerable parts ought, at my time of day,
to be both physician and lawyer, as far as his own
constitution and property are concerned. For my
own part, I have had an hospital these fourteen
years within myself, and studied my own case with
the most painful attention; consequently may be
supposed to know something of the matter, altho'
I have not taken regular courses of phisiology, et
cetera, et cetera. —In short, I have for some time
been of opinion, (no offence, dear doctor) that
the sum of all your medical discoveries amounts to
this, that the more you study the less you know. — 
I have read all that has been written on the Hot
Wells, and what I can collect from the whole, is
that the water contains nothing but a little salt, and
calcarious earth, mixed in such inconsiderable proportion,
as can have very little, if any, effect on
the animal oeconomy. This being the case, I
think, the man deserves to be fitted with a cap and
bells, who, for such a paltry advantage as this spring
affords, sacrifices his precious time, which might
be employed in taking more effectual remedies,
and exposes himself to the dirt, the stench, the
chilling blasts, and perpetual rains, that render
this place to me intolerable. If these waters, from
a small degree of astringency, are of some service 

in the diabetes, diarrhea, and night sweats, when
the secretions are to much encreased, must not
they do harm in the same pro portion, where the
humours are obstructed, as in the asthma, scurvy
gout, and dropsy? —Now we talk of the dropsy,
here is a strange, fantastical oddity, one of your
brethren, who harangues every day in the pump-room,
as if he was hired to give lectures on all
subjects whatsoever—I know not what make of
him—Sometimes he makes shrewd remarks; at
other times, he talks like the greatest simpleton in
nature—He has read a great deal; but without
method or judgment, and digested nothing. He
believes every thing he has read; especially if it has
any thing of the marvellous in it; and his conversation
is a surprising hotch potch of erudition and
extravagance. —He told me t'other day, with great
confidence, that my case was dropsical; or, as he
called it, leucophlegmatic: A sure sign, that his
want of experience is equal to his presumption; 
for, you know, there is nothing analogous to the
dropsy in my disorder—I wish those impertinent
fellows, with their ricketty understandings, would
keep their advice for those that ask it—Dropsy, indeed! 
Sure I have not lived to the age of fifty-five,
and had such experience of my own disorder,
and consulted you and other eminent physicians,
so often, and so long, to be undeceived by such a
—But, without all doubt, the man is mad; and,
therefore, what he says is of no consequence. I
had, yesterday, a visit from Higgins; who came
hither under the terror of your threats, and brought
me as a present a brace of hares; which he owned
he took in my own ground; and I could not persuade
the fellow that he did wrong, or that I would
ever prosecute him for poaching—I must desire
you will wink hard at the practises of this rascallion; 
otherwise I shall be plagued with his presents; 
which cost me more than they are worth 

—If I could wonder at any thing Fitzowen
does, I should be surprised at his assurance, in desiring
you to solicit my vote for him, at the next
election for the county: for him, who opposed
me on the like occasion, with the most illiberal competition
—You may tell him civilly, that I beg to be
excused. Direct your next for me at Bath, whither
I propose to remove to-morrow; not only on
my own account, but for the sake of my niece,
Liddy, who is like to relapse. The poor creature
fell into a fit yesterday, while I was cheapening a
pair of spectacles, with a Jew-pedler. —I am afraid
there is something still lurking in that little heart of
her's; which I hope a change of objects will remove. 
Let me know what you think of this half-witted
Doctor's impertinent, ridiculous, and absurd
notion of my disorder—So far from being
dropsical, I am as lank in the belly as a grey-hound; 
and, by measuring my ancle with a pack-thread, I
find the swelling subsides every day—From such
doctors, good Lord deliver us! —I have not yet
taken any lodgings in Bath; because there we can
be accommodated at a minute's warning, and I shall
choose for myself—I need not say your directions
for drinking and bathing will be agreeable
to, 
Dear Lewis,
yours ever,
Matt. Bramble. 
P. S. I forgot to tell you, that
my right ancle pits, a
symptom, as I take it, of
its being oedematous, not
leucophlegmatic. 