


Peregrine meets with Mrs. Hornbreck, and is consoled
for his loss. His valet de chambre is embroiled
with her duenna, whom, however, he
finds means to appease. 
Every thing having thus resumed its natural
channel, they dined together in great
tranquillity; and in the afternoon, Peregrine, on
pretence of staying at home to write letters, while
his companions were at the coffee-house, ordered a
coach to be called, and with his valet de chambre,
who was the only person acquainted with the present
state of his thoughts, set out for the Promenade,
to which all the ladies of fashion resort in 

the evening, during the summer-season, in hopes
of seeing his fugitive among the rest. 
Having made a circuit round the walk, and
narrowly observed every female in the place, he
perceived at some distance the livery of Hornbeck
upon a lacquey that stood at the back of a coach:
upon which, he ordered his man to reconnoitre
the said carriage, while he pulled up his glasses,
that he might not be discovered, before he should
have received some intelligence, by which he
might conduct himself on this unexpected occasion,
that already began to interfere with the purpose
of his coming thither, though it could not
dispute his attention with the idea of his charming
Unknown. 
His Mercury having made his observations, reported,
that there was no body in the coach but
Mrs. Hornbeck and an elderly woman, who had
all the air of a duenna, and that the servant was
not the same footman who had attended them in
France. Encouraged by this information, our
hero ordered himself to be driven close up to that
side of their convenience on which his old mistress
sat, and accosted her with the usual salutation. 
This lady no sooner beheld her gallant, than her
cheeks reddened with a double glow; and she
exclaimed, “Dear brother, I'm overjoy'd to see
you! Pray come into our coach.” He took the
hint immediately, and complying with her request,
embraced this new sister with great affection. 
Perceiving that her attendant was very much
surprised and alarmed at this unexpected meeting,
she, in order to banish her suspicion, and
at the same time give her lover his cue, told him
that his brother (meaning her husband) was gone 

to the Spa for a few weeks, by the advice of physicians,
on account of his ill state of health; and
that, from his last letter, she had the pleasure to
tell him, he was in a fair way of doing well. 
The young gentleman expressed his satisfaction at
this piece of news, observing with an air of fraternal
concern, that if his brother had not made
too free with his constitution, his friends in England
would have had no occasion to repine at his
absence and want of health, by which he was
banished from his own country and connexions. 
He then asked with an affectation of surprize,
why she had not accompanied her spouse? and
was given to understand, that his tenderness of
affection would not suffer him to expose her to
the fatigues of the journey, which lay among
rocks that were almost inaccessible. 
The duenna's doubts being eased by this preamble
of conversation, he changed the subject to
the pleasures of the place; and among other such
questions, inquired if she had as yet visited Versailles? 
This is a public house situated upon the
canal, at the distance of about two miles from
town, and accommodated with tolerable gardens
for the entertainment of company. When she
replied in the negative, he proposed to accompany
her thither immediately; but the governante,
who had hitherto sat silent, objected to
this proposal, telling them, in broken English, that
as the lady was under her care, she could not answer
to Mr. Hornbeck for allowing her to visit
such a suspicious place. “As for that matter,
Madam, (said the confident gallant) give yourself
no trouble, the consequences shall be at my
peril; and I will undertake to insure you against
my brother's resentment.” So saying, he directed 

the coachman to the place, and ordered his own
to follow, under the auspices of his valet de
chambre, while the old gentlewoman, over-ruled
by his assurance, quietly submitted to his authority. 
Being arrived at the place, he handed the ladies
from the coach, and then, for the first time,
observed that the duenna was lame, a circumstance
of which he did not scruple to take the advantage; 
for they had scarce alighted, and drank
a glass of wine, when he advised his sister to enjoy
a walk in the garden: and although the attendant
made shift to keep them almost always in
view, they enjoyed a detached conversation, in
which Peregrine learnt, that the true cause of
her being left behind at Brussels, whilst her husband
proceeded to Spa, was his dread of the
company and familiarities of that place, to which
his jealousy durst not expose her; and that she
had lived three weeks in a convent at Lisle, from
which she was delivered by his own free motion,
because indeed he could no longer exist without
her company; and lastly, our lover understood,
that her governante was a mere dragon, who had
been recommended to him by a Spanish merchant,
whose wife she attended to her dying day: but
she very much questioned whether or not her fidelity
was proof enough against money and strong
waters. Peregrine assured her the experiment
should be tried before parting; and they agreed
to pass the night at Versailles, provided his endeavours
should succeed. 
Having exercised themselves in this manner,
until his duenna's spirits were pretty much exhausted,
that she might be the better disposed to
recruit them with a glass of liqueur, they returned 

to their apartment, and the cordial was recommended
and received in a bumper: but as it did
not produce such a visible alteration as the sanguine
hopes of Pickle had made him expect, and
the old gentlewoman observed that it began to be
late, and that the gates would be shut in a little
time, he filled up a parting glass, and pledged her
in equal quantity. Her blood was too much
chilled to be warmed even by this extraordinary
dose, which made immediate innovation in the
brain of our youth, who in the gaiety of his imagination
overwhelmed this She-Argus with such
profusion of gallantry, that she was more intoxicated
with his expressions than with the spirits
she had drank; and when in the course of toying
he dropt a purse into her bosom, she seemed
to forget how the night wore, and with the approbation
of her charge, assented to his proposal
of having something for supper. 
This was a great point which our adventurer
had gained, and yet he plainly perceived that the
governante mistook his meaning, by giving herself
credit for all the passion he had professed. As
this error could be rectified by no other means
than those of plying her with the bottle, until
her distinguishing faculties should be overpowered,
he promoted a quick circulation, and she
did him justice, without any manifest signs of
inebriation, so long, that his own eyes began to
reel in the sockets; and he found, that before his
scheme could be accomplished, he should be effectually
unfitted for all the purposes of love. 
He therefore had recourse to his valet de chambre,
who understood the hint as soon as it was given,
and readily undertook to perform the part, of
which his master had play'd the prelude. This 

affair being settled to his satisfaction, and the
night at odds with morning, he took an opportunity
of imparting to the ear of this aged
Dulcinea a kind whisper, importing a promise
of visiting her, when his sister should be retired
to her own chamber, and an earnest desire of
leaving her door unlocked. 
This agreeable intimation being communicated,
he conveyed a caution of the same nature to
Mrs. Hornbeck, as he led her to her apartment; 
and darkness and silence no sooner prevailed in
the house, than he and his trusty squire set out
on their different voyages; and every thing would
have succeeded according to their wish, had not
the valet de chambre suffered himself to fall asleep
at the side of his inamorata, and in the agitation
of a violent dream, exclaimed in a voice so unlike
to that of her supposed adorer, that she distinguished
the difference at once; and waking
him with a pinch and a loud shriek, threatened
to prosecute him for a rape, and reviled him with
all the epithets her rage and disappointment could
suggest. 
The Frenchman finding himself detected, behaved
with great temper and address: he begg'd
she would compose herself, on account of her
own reputation, which was extremely dear to
him; protested, that he had a most inviolable
esteem for her person; and that if he had not already
given convincing proofs of his passion, he
was disposed to do every thing in his power for her
satisfaction. These representations, mingled with
some little practical expressions of tenderness, had
weight with the duenna, who, upon recollection,
comprehended the whole affair, and thought it
would be her interest to bring matters to an accommodation. 

She therefore admitted the apologies
of her bedfellow, provided he would promise
to atone by marriage for the injury she had
sustained; and in this particular he set her heart
at ease by repeated vows, which he uttered with
surprising volubility, though without any intention
to perform the least tittle of their contents. 
Peregrine, who had been alarmed by her exclamation,
and run to the door with a view of
interposing, according to the emergency of the
case, over-hearing the affair thus compromised,
returned to his mistress, who was highly entertained
with an account of what had passed, foreseeing,
that for the future she should be under no difficulty
or restriction from the severity of her guard. 