


He becomes melancholy and despondent; is favoured
with a condescending letter from his uncle, reconciles
himself to his governor, and sets out
with Emilia and her friend for Mrs. Gauntlet's
house. 
Peregrine, fortified as he was with pride and
indignation, did not fail to feel the smarting
suggestions of his present situation: after
having lived so long in an affluent and imperious
manner, he could ill brook the thoughts of submitting 

to the mortifying exigencies of life; 
all the gaudy schemes of pomp and pleasure,
which his luxuriant imagination had formed, began
to dissolve; a train of melancholy ideas took
possession of his thoughts, and the prospect of
losing Emilia was not the least part of his affliction. 
Though he endeavoured to suppress the
chagrin that preyed upon his heart, he could not
conceal the disturbance of his mind from the
penetration of that amiable young lady, who
sympathized with him in her heart, though she
could not give her tongue the liberty of asking
the cause of his disorder; for, notwithstanding
all the ardour of his addresses, he never could
obtain from her the declaration of a mutual
flame; because, tho' he had hitherto treated her
with the utmost reverence of respect, he had never
once mentioned the final aim of his passion; 
and however honourable she supposed it to be,
she had discernment enough to foresee, that vanity
or interest co-operating with the levity of
youth, might one day deprive her of her lover,
and she was too proud to give him any handle of
exulting at her expence; so that, although he was
received by her with the most distinguished civility,
and even an intimacy of friendship, all his sollicitations
could never extort from her an acknowledgment
of love; on the contrary, being of a
gay disposition, she sometimes coquetted with
other admirers, that his attention thus whetted
might never abate, and that he might see she
had other resources, in case he should flagg in
his affection. 
This being the prudential plan on which she
acted, it cannot be supposed that she would condescend
to inquire into the state of his thoughts, 

when she saw him thus affected; but she, nevertheless,
imposed that task on her cousin and
confidante, who, as they walked together in the
park, observed that he seemed to be out of humour. 
When this is the case, such a question
generally increases the disease; at least it had
that effect upon Peregrine, who replied somewhat
peevishly, “I assure you, Madam, you never
was more mistaken in your observations.” “I
think so too (said Emilia) for I never saw Mr.
Pickle in higher spirits.” This ironical encomium
compleated his confusion; he affected to
smile, but it was a smile of anguish, and in his
heart cursed the vivacity of both. He could not
for his soul recollect himself, so as to utter one
connected sentence; and the suspicion that they
observed every circumstance of his behaviour,
threw such a damp on his spirits, that he was
quite overwhelmed with shame and resentment,
when Sophy casting her eyes towards the gate,
said, “Yonder is your servant, Mr. Pickle, with
another man who seems to have a wooden leg.” 
Peregrine started at this intelligence, and immediately
underwent sundry changes of complexion,
knowing that his fate, in a great measure, depended
upon the information he would receive
from his friend. 
Hatchway advancing to the company, after a
brace of sea-bows to the ladies, took the youth
aside, and put the commodore's letter into his
hand, which threw him into such an agitation,
that he could scarce pronounce, “Ladies, will
you give me leave?” And when, in consequence
of their permission, he attempted to open
the billet, he fumbled with such manifest disorder,
that his mistress, who watched his motions, began 

to think there was something very interesting
in the message; and so much was she affected
with his concern, that she was fain to turn her
head another way, and wipe the tears from her
lovely eyes. 
Mean while, Peregrine no sooner read the first
sentence, than his countenance, which before was
overcast with a deep gloom, began to be lighted
up, and every feature unbending by degrees, he
recovered his serenity; and having perused the
letter, his eyes sparkling with joy and gratitude,
he hugged the lieutenant in his arms, and presented
him to the ladies as one of his best friends. 
Jack met with a most gracious reception, and
shook Emilia by the hand, telling her, with the
familiar appellation of old acquaintance, that he
did not care how soon he was master of such another
clean-going frigate as herself. 
The whole company partook of this favourable
change that evidently appeared in our lover's
recollection, and enlivened his conversation with
such an uncommon flow of sprightliness and good
humour, as even made an impression on the iron
countenance of Pipes himself, who actually
smiled with satisfaction as he walked behind
them. 
The evening being pretty far advanced, they
directed their course homeward; and while the
valet attended Hatchway to the inn, Peregrine
escorted the ladies to their lodgings, where he
owned the justness of Sophy's remark, in saying
he was out of humour, and told them he had
been extremely chagrined at a difference which
happened between him and his uncle, to whom
(by the letter which they had seen him receive)
he now found himself happily reconciled. 

Having received their congratulations, and declined
staying to sup with them, on account of
the longing desire he had to converse with his
friend Jack, he took his leave, and repaired to
the inn, where Hatchway informed him of every
thing that had happened in the garison upon his
representations; and far from being disgusted, he
was perfectly well pleased with the prospect of
going abroad, which flattered his vanity and ambition,
gratified his thirst after knowledge, and
indulged that turn for observation, for which he
had been remarkable from his most tender years:
neither did he believe a short absence would tend
to the prejudice of his love, but, on the contrary,
inhance the value of his heart, because he should
return better accomplished, and consequently a
more welcome offering to his mistress. Elevated
with these sentiments, his heart dilated with joy,
and the sluices of his natural benevolence being
opened by this happy turn of his affairs, he sent
his compliments to Mr. Jolter, to whom he had
not spoken during a whole week, and desired
he would favour Mr. Hatchway and him with his
company at supper. 
The governor was not weak enough to decline
this invitation, in consequence of which he forthwith
appeared, and was cordially welcomed by
the relenting pupil, who expressed his sorrow for
the misunderstanding which had prevailed between
them, and assured him, that for the future
he would avoid giving him any just cause of
complaint. Jolter, who did not want affections,
was melted by this acknowledgment, which he
could not have expected, and earnestly protested,
that his chief study had always been, and ever 

should be, to promote Mr. Pickle's interest and
happiness. 
The best part of the night being spent in the
circulation of a chearful glass, the company broke
up; and next morning Peregrine went out, with
a view of making his mistress acquainted with
his uncle's intention of sending him out of the
kingdom for his improvement, and of saying every
thing which he thought necessary for the interest
of his love. He found her at breakfast with
her cousin; and as he was very full of the subject
of his visit, had scarce fixed himself in his seat,
when he brought it upon the carpet, by asking
with a smile, if the ladies had any commands for
Paris? Emilia at this question began to stare,
and her confidante desired to know who was
going thither? He no sooner gave them to understand,
that he himself intended in a short
time to visit that capital, than his mistress, with
great precipitation, wished him a good journey,
and affected to talk with indifference about the
pleasures he would enjoy in France: but when
he seriously assured Sophy, who asked if he was
in earnest, that his uncle actually insisted upon
his making a short tour, than the tears gushed in
poor Emilia's eyes, and she was at great pains to
conceal her concern, by observing that the tea
was so scalding hot, as to make her eyes water. 
This pretext was too thin to impose upon her
lover, or even deceive the observation of her
friend Sophy, who after breakfast took an opportunity
of quitting the room. 
Thus left by themselves, Peregrine imparted
to her what he had learnt of the commodore's
intention, without, however, mentioning a syllable
of his being offended at their correspondence; 

and accompanied his information with
such fervent vows of eternal constancy, and solemn
promises of a speedy return, that Emily's
heart, which had been invaded by a suspicion,
that this scheme of travelling was the effect of
her lover's inconstancy, began to be more at
ease; and she could not help signifying her approbation
of his design. 
This affair being amicably compromised, he
asked how soon she proposed to set out for her
mother's house; and understanding that her departure
was fixed for next day but one, and
that her cousin Sophy intended to accompany
her in her father's chariot, he repeated his intention
of attending her, and in the mean time
dismissed his governor and the lieutenant to the
garison, with his compliments to his aunt and
the commodore, and a faithful promise of his
being with them in six days at farthest. 
These previous measures being taken, he, attended
by Pipes, set out with the ladies; and
they had also a convoy for twelve miles from
Sophy's father, who, at parting, recommended
them piously to the care of Peregrine, with
whom, by this time, he was perfectly well acquainted. 