


DEAR PHILLIPS,
AS I have nothing more at heart than to convince
you I am incapable of forgetting, or neglecting
the friendship I made at college, I now begin
that correspondence by letters, which you and I
agreed, at parting, to cultivate. I begin it sooner
than I intended, that you may have it in your power
to refute any idle reports which may be circulated
to my prejudice at Oxford, touching a foolish
quarrel, in which I have been involved on account
of my sister, who had been some time settled here
in a boarding-school. —When I came hither with
my uncle and aunt (who are our guardians) to fetch
her away, I found her a fine, tall girl, of seventeen,
with an agreeable person; but remarkably simple,
and quite ignorant of the world. This disposition,
and want of experience, had exposed her to the
addresses of a person—I know not what to call him
who had seen her at a play; and, with a confidence
and dexterity peculiar to himself, found means to be
recommended to her acquaintance. It was by the
greatest accident I intercepted one of his letters; as
it was my duty to stifle this correspondence in its
birth, I made it my business to find him out, and
tell him very freely my sentiments of the matter. 
The spark did not like the stile I used, and behaved
with abundance of mettle. Though his rank in life 

which, by the bye, I am ashamed to declare) did
not entitle him to much deference; yet as his behaviour
was remarkably spirited, I admitted him
to the privilege of a gentleman, and something
might have happened, had not we been prevented. 
—In short, the business took air, I know not how,
and made abundance of noise—recourse was had to
justice—I was obliged to give my word and
honour, &c. and to-morrow morning we set out
for Bristol Wells, where I expect to hear from you
by the return of the post. —I have got into a family
of originals, whom I may one day attempt to
describe for your amusement. My aunt, Mrs.
Tabitha Bramble, is a maiden of forty-five, exceedingly
starched, vain, and ridiculous. —My
uncle is an odd kind of humorist, always on the
fret, and so unpleasant in his manner, that, rather
than be obliged to keep him company, I'd resign
all claim to the inheritance of his estate. —Indeed
his being tortured by the gout may have soured his
temper, and, perhaps, I may like him better on
further acquaintance: certain it is, all his servants
and neighbours in the country, are fond of him,
even to a degree of enthusiasm, the reason of which
I cannot as yet comprehend. Remember me to
Griffy Price, Gwyn, Mansel, Basset, and all the
rest of my old Cambrian companions. —Salute
the bed-maker in my name—give my service to the
cook, and pray take care of poor Ponto, for the
sake of his old master, who is, and ever will be, 
Dear Phillips,
Your affectionate friend,
and humble servant,
Jer. Melford. 
Gloucester, April 2. 