


Peregrine artfully foments a quarrel between Pallet
and the physician, who fight a duel on the
ramparts. 
The painter betook himself to the house of
the Flemish Raphael, and the rest of the
company went back to their lodgings; where the
young gentleman, taking the advantage of being
alone with the physician, recapitulated all the affronts
he had sustained from the painter's petulance,
aggravating every circumstance of the disgrace,
and advising him, in the capacity of a
friend, to take care of his honour, which could
not fail to suffer in the opinion of the world, if
he allowed himself to be insulted with impunity,
by one so much his inferior in every degree of
consideration. 
The physician assured him, that Pallet had hitherto
escaped chastisement, by being deemed an
object unworthy his resentment, and in consideration
of the wretch's family, for which his compassion
was interested; but, that repeated injuries
would inflame the most benevolent disposition:
and although he could find no precedent
of duelling among the Greeks and Romans, whom
he considered as the patterns of demeanour, Pallet
should no longer avail himself of his veneration
for the ancients, but be punished for the very
next offence he should commit. 
Having thus spirited up the doctor to a resolution
from which he could not decently swerve, our
adventurer acted the incendiary with the other party
also; giving him to understand, that the physician 

treated his character with such contempt,
and behaved to him with such insolence, as no
gentleman ought to bear: that for his own part,
he was every day put out of countenance by their
mutual animosity, which appeared in nothing but
vulgar expressions, more becoming shoe-boys and
oyster-women than men of honour and education; 
and therefore he should be obliged, contrary
to his inclination, to break off all correspondence
with them both, if they would not fall
upon some method to retrieve the dignity of their
characters. 
These representations would have had little effect
upon the timidity of the painter, who was likewise
too much of a Grecian to approve of single
combat, in any other way than that of boxing,
an exercise in which he was well skill'd, had not
they been accompanied with an insinuation, that
his antagonist was no Hector, and that he might
humble him into any concession, without running
the least personal risk. Animated by this assurance,
our second Rubens set the trumpet of defiance to
his mouth, swore that he valued not his life a
rush, when his honour was concerned, and intreated
Mr. Pickle to be the bearer of a challenge,
which he would instantly commit to
writing. 
The mischievous fomentor highly applauded
this manifestation of courage, by which he was
at liberty to cultivate his friendship and society; 
but declined the office of carrying the billet, that
his tenderness of Pallet's reputation might not be
misinterpreted into an officious desire of promoting
quarrels. At the same time he recommended
Tom Pipes, not only as a very proper messenger
on this occasion, but also as a trusty second in
the field. The magnanimous painter took his 

advice, and retiring to his chamber, penn'd a
challenge in these terms. 

“SIR,
When I am heartily provoked, I fear
not the devil himself; much less—I
will not call you a pedantic coxcomb, nor an
unmannerly fellow, because these are the hippythets
of the wulgar: but, remember, such as you
are, I neyther love you nor fear you; but, on
the contrary, expect satisfaction for your audacious
behaviour to me, on divers occasions; and
will, this evening, in the twilight, meet you on
the ramparts with sword and pistol, where the
Lord have mercy on the soul of one of us; for
your body shall find no favour with your incensed
defier, till death, 
Layman Pallet. 
This resolute defiance, after having been submitted
to the perusal, and honoured with the approbation
of our youth, was committed to the
charge of Pipes, who, according to his orders,
delivered it in the afternoon; and brought for
answer, that the physician would attend him at
the appointed time and place. The challenger was
evidently discomposed at the unexpected news of
this acceptance, and ran about the house in great
disorder, in quest of Peregrine, to beg his further
advice and assistance; but, understanding that the
youth was engaged in private with his adversary,
he began to suspect some collusion, and cursed
himself for his folly and precipitation. He even
entertained some thoughts of retracting his invitation,
and submitting to the triumph of his antagonist: 

but, before he would stoop to this opprobrious
condescension, he resolved to try another
expedient, which might be the means of
saving both his character and person. In this
hope he visited Mr. Jolter, and very gravely desired
he would be so good as to undertake the office
of his second, in a duel which he was to
fight that evening with the physician. 
The governor, instead of answering his expectation,
in expressing fear and concern, and
breaking forth into exclamations of, “Good
God! gentlemen, what d'ye mean? You shall
not murther one another, while it is in my power
to prevent your purpose. I will go directly to
the governor of the place, who shall interpose his
authority.” I say, instead of these and other
friendly menaces of prevention, Jolter heard the
proposal with the most phlegmatic tranquillity,
and excused himself from accepting the honour
he intended for him, on account of his character
and situation, which would not permit him to be
concerned in any such rencounters. Indeed this
mortifying reception was owing to a previous hint
from Peregrine, who dreading some sort of interruption
from his governor, had made him acquainted
with his design, and assured him, that
the affair should not be brought to any dangerous
issue. 
Thus disappointed, the dejected challenger was
overwhelmed with perplexity and dismay; and in
the terrors of death or mutilitation, resolved to
deprecate the wrath of his enemy, and conform
to any submission he should propose; when he was
accidentally encountered by our adventurer, who
with demonstrations of infinite satisfaction, told
him in confidence, that his billet had thrown the 

doctor into an agony of consternation; and that
his acceptance of his challenge was a meer effort
of despair, calculated to confound the ferocity
of the sender, and dispose him to listen to terms
of accommodation: that he had imparted the
letter to him with fear and trembling, on pretence
of engaging him as a second, but in reality,
with a view of obtaining his good offices in promoting
a reconciliation; “but, perceiving the
situation of his mind, (added our hero) I thought
it would be more for your honour to baffle his
expectation; and therefore I readily undertook
the task of attending him to the field, in full assurance,
that he will there humble himself before
you, even to prostration. In this security, you
may go and prepare your arms, and bespeak the
assistance of Pipes, who will squire you in the
field, while I keep myself up, that our correspondence
may not be suspected by the physician.” 
Pallet's spirits, that were sunk to dejection, rose
at this encouragement to all the insolence of triumph; 
he again declared his contempt of danger,
and his pistols being loaded and accommodated
with new flints, by his trusty armour-bearer, he
waited, without flinching, for the hour of battle. 
On the first approach of twilight, somebody
knocked at his door, and Pipes having opened it
at his desire, he heard the voice of his antagonist
pronounce, “Tell Mr. Pallet, that I am going
to the place of appointment.” The painter was
not a little surprized at this anticipation, which
so ill agreed with the information he had received
from Pickle; and his concern beginning to recur,
he fortified himself with a large bumper of
brandy, which, however, did not overcome the
anxiety of his thoughts. Nevertheless, he set 

out on the expedition with his second, betwixt
whom and himself the following dialogue passed,
in their way to the ramparts. “Mr. Pipes, (said
the painter, with disordered accent) methinks the
doctor was in a pestilent hurry with that message
of his.” “Ey, ey, (answered Tom) I do suppose
he longs to be foul of you.” “What!
(replied the other) d'ye think he thirsts after my
blood?” “To be sure a does,” (said Pipes,
thrusting a large quid of tobacco in his cheek,
with great deliberation.) “If that be the case,
(cried Pallet, beginning to shake) he is no better
than a Cannibal, and no Christian ought to fight
him on equal footing.” Tom observing his
emotion, eyed him with a frown of indignation,
saying, “You an't afraid, are you?” “God
forbid! (replied the challenger, stammering with
fear.) What should I be afraid of? The worst
he can do, is to take my life, and then he'll be
answerable both to God and man for the murder: 
Don't you think he will?” “I think no such
matter, (answered the second) if so be as how he
puts a brace of bullets through your bows, and kills
you fairly, it is no more murder than if I was to
bring down a noddy from the main-top-sail-yard.” 
By this time, Pallet's teeth chattered with such
violence, that he could scarce pronounce this
reply, “Mr. Thomas, you seem to make very
light of a man's life; but I trust in the Almighty,
I shall not be so easily brought down. Sure many
a man has fought a duel, without losing his life. 
Do you imagine that I run such a hazard of falling
by the hand of my adversary?” You may,
or you may not, (said the unconcerned Pipes) just
as it happens. What then? Death is a debt that
every man owes, according to the song; and if 

you set foot to foot, I think one of you must go
to pot.” “Foot to foot! (exclaimed the terrified
painter) that's downright butchery; and I'll
be damn'd before I fight any man on earth in
such a barbarous way. What! d'ye take me to
be a savage beast?” This declaration he made
while they ascended the ramparts; and his attendant
perceiving the physician and his second at the
distance of an hundred paces before them, gave
him notice of their appearance, and advised him
to make ready, and behave like a man. Pallet
in vain endeavoured to conceal his pannic, which
discovered itself in an universal trepidation of body,
and the lamentable tone in which he answered
this exhortation of Pipes; saying, “I do
behave like a man; but you would have me act
the part of a brute. Are they coming this way?” 
When Tom told him that they had faced about,
and admonished him to advance, the nerves of
his arm refused their office, he could not hold out
his pistol, and instead of going forward, retreated
with an insensibility of motion; till Pipes, placing
himself in the rear, set his own back to that of
his principal, and swore he should not budge an
inch farther in that direction. 
While the valet thus tutored the painter, his
master enjoyed the terrors of the physician, which
were more ridiculous than those of Pallet, because
he was more intent upon disguising them. 
His declaration to Pickle in the morning, would
not suffer him to start any objections when he received
the challenge; and finding that the young
gentleman made no offer of mediating the affair,
but rather congratulated him on the occasion,
when he communicated the painter's billet, all
his efforts consisted in oblique hints, and general 

reflections upon the absurdity of duelling, which
was first introduced among civilized nations, by
the barbarous Huns and Longobards. He likewise
pretended to ridicule the use of fire-arms,
which confounded all the distinctions of skill and
address, and deprived a combatant of the opportunity
of signalizing his personal prowess. 
Pickle assented to the justness of his observations; 
but at the same time represented the necessity
of complying with the customs of the
world, (ridiculous as they were) on which a
man's honour and reputation depend. So that,
seeing no hopes of profiting by that artifice, the
republican's agitation became more and more remarkable; 
and he proposed in plain terms, that
they should contend in armour, like the combatants
of ancient days; for it was but reasonable,
that they should practise the manner of fighting,
since they adopted the disposition of those iron
times. 
Nothing could have afforded more diversion to
our hero, than the sight of two such duellists
cased in iron; and he wished that he had promoted
the quarrel in Brussels, where he could
have hired the armour of Charles the fifth, and
the valiant duke of Parma, for their accommodation:
but, as there was no possibility of furnishing
them cap-a-pee at Antwerp, he persuaded
him to conform to the modern use of the sword,
and meet the painter on his own terms; and suspecting
that his fear would supply him with other
excuses for declining the combat, he comforted
him with some distant insinuations to the prejudice
of his adversary's courage, which would in
all probability, evaporate, before any mischief could
happen. 

Notwithstanding this encouragement, he could
not suppress the reluctance with which he went
to the field, and cast many a wishful look over
his left shoulder, to see whether or not his adversary
was at his heels; and when, by the advice
of his second, he took possession of the
ground, and turned about with his face to the
enemy, it was not so dark, but that Peregrine
could perceive the unusual paleness of his countenance,
and the sweat standing in large drops
upon his forehead; nay, there was a manifest
disorder in his speech, when he regretted his want
of the Pila and Parma, with which he would have
made a rattling noise, to astonish his foe, in
springing forward, and singing the hymn to battle,
in the manner of the ancients. 
In the mean time, observing the hesitation of
his antagonist, who, far from advancing, seemed
to recoil, and even struggle with his second, he
guessed the situation of the painter's thoughts; 
and collecting all the manhood that he possessed,
seized the opportunity of profiting by his enemy's
consternation; and striking his sword and pistol
together, advanced in a sort of trot, raising a
loud howl, in which he repeated, in lieu of the
Spartan song, part of a strophe from one of Pindar's
Pythia, beginning with &GREsa;&grk; &grq;&gre;&grwc;&grn; &grg;&graa;&grr; &grm;&gra;&grc;&gra;&grn;&gra;&grig;
&grp;&grag;&grs;&gra;&gri; &grb;&grr;&gro;&grt;&grea;&gra;&gri;&grst; &gras;&grr;&gre;&grt;&gra;&gric;&grst;,
&c. This imitation of the
Greeks had all the desired effect upon the painter,
who seeing the physician running towards him,
like a fury, with a pistol in his right hand, which
was extended, and hearing the dreadful yell he
uttered, and the outlandish words he pronounced,
was seized with an universal palsy of his limbs,
and would have dropp'd down upon the ground,
had not Pipes supported and encouraged him to 

stand upon his defence. The doctor, contrary
to his expectation, finding that he had not flinched
from the spot, though he had now performed
one half of his career, put in practice his last
effort, by firing his pistol, the noise of which
no sooner reached the ears of the affrighted painter,
than he recommended his soul to God, and roared
for mercy with great vociferation. 
The republican, overjoyed at this exclamation,
commanded him to yield, and surrender
his arms, on pain of immediate death; upon
which he threw away his pistols and sword, in
spite of all the admonitions and even threats of his
second, who left him to his fate, and went up to
his master, stopping his nose with signs of loathing
and abhorrence. 
The victor having won the Spolia Opima,
granted him his life, on condition, that he would
on his knees supplicate his pardon, acknowledge
himself inferior to his conqueror in every virtue
and qualification, and promise for the future to
merit his favour by submission and respect. These
insolent terms were readily embraced by the unfortunate
challenger, who fairly owned, that he
was not at all calculated for the purposes of war,
and that henceforth he would contend with no
weapon but his pencil. He begg'd with great
humility, that Mr. Pickle would not think the
worse of his morals for this defect of courage,
which was a natural infirmity inherited from his
father, and suspend his opinion of his talents,
until he should have an opportunity of contemplating
the charms of his Cleopatra, which would
be finished in less than three months. 
Our hero observed with an affected air of displeasure,
that no man could be justly condemned 

for being subject to the impressions of fear; and
therefore his cowardice might easily be forgiven:
but, there was something so presumptuous, dishonest
and disingenuous, in arrogating a quality
to which he knew he had not the smallest pretension,
that he could not forget his misbehaviour
all at once, though he would condescend to communicate
with him as formerly, in hopes of seeing
a reformation in his conduct. Pallet protested,
that there was no dissimulation in the
case; for he was ignorant of his own weakness,
until his resolution was put to the trial: he faithfully
promised to demean himself, during the remaining
part of the tour, with that conscious
modesty and penitence which became a person in
his condition; and, for the present, implored the
assistance of Mr. Pipes, in disembarassing him
from the disagreeable consequence of his fear. 