


The travellers depart for Antwerp, at which place
the painter gives a loose to his enthusiasm. 
Our adventurer thus deprived of an agreeable
correspondence, and baffled in all his
efforts to retrieve the other object of his passion,
yielded at length to the remonstrances of his governor
and fellow-travellers, who, out of pure
complaisance to him, had exceeded their intended
stay by six days at least: and a couple of post-chaises,
with three riding-horses, being hired,
they departed from Brussels in the morning, dined
at Mechlin, and arrived about eight in the evening
at the venerable city of Antwerp. During
this day's journey, Pallet was elevated to an uncommon
flow of spirits, with the prospect of seeing
the birth place of Rubens, for whom he professed
an enthusiastic admiration. He swore, that
the pleasure he felt was equal to that of a Mussulman,
on the last day of his pilgrimage to Mecca; 
and that he already considered himself a native of
Antwerp, being so intimately acqainted with
their so justly boasted citizen, from whom, at certain 

junctures, he could not help believing himself
derived, because his own pencil adopted the
manner of that great man with surprising facility,
and his face wanted nothing but a pair of
whiskers and a beard to exhibit the express image
of the Fleming's countenance. He told them,
he was so proud of this resemblance, that in order
to render it more striking, he had at one time of his
life resolved to keep his face sacred from the razor; 
and in that purpose had persevered, notwithstanding
the continual reprehensions of Mrs. Pallet,
who being then with child, said, his aspect was
so hideous, that she dreaded a miscarriage every
hour, until she threatened, in plain terms, to
dispute the sanity of his intellects, and apply to
the chancellor for a committee. 
The doctor on this occasion observed, that a
man who is not proof against the solicitations of
a woman, can never expect to make a great figure
in life; that painters and poets ought to cultivate
no wives but the muses; or if they are, by
the accidents of fortune, incumbered with families,
they should carefully guard against that pernicious
weakness, falsely honoured with the appellation
of natural affection, and pay no manner
of regard to the impertinent customs of the world. 
“Granting that you had been for a short time
deemed a lunatic, (said he) you might have acquitted
yourself honourably of that imputation,
by some performance that would have raised your
character above all censure. Sophocles himself,
that celebrated tragic poet, who for the sweetness
of his versification, was stiled &grm;&grea;&grl;&gri;&grt;&grt;&gra;, or the bee,
in his old age suffered the same accusation from
his own children, who seeing him neglect his
family affairs, and devote himself intirely to poetry, 

carried him before the magistrate, as a man
whose intellects were so much impaired by the
infirmities of age, that he was no longer fit to
manage his domestic concerns; upon which the
reverend bard produced his tragedy of &grO;&gri;&grd;&gri;&grp;&gro;&gru;&grst; &gre;&grp;&gri; &grk;&gro;&grl;&grw;&grn;&grw;,
as a work he had just finished; which
being perused, instead of being declared unsound
of understanding, he was dismissed with admiration
and applause. I wish your beard and whiskers
had been sanctioned by the like authority; though
I am afraid you would have been in the predicament
of those disciples of a certain philosopher,
who drank decoctions of cummin-seeds, that their
faces might adopt the paleness of their master's
complexion, hoping, that in being as wan, they
would be as learned as their teacher.” The
painter, stung with this sarcasm, replied, “or
like those Virtuosi, who by repeating Greek, eating
sillikickaby, and pretending to see visions,
think they equal the ancients in taste and genius.” 
The physician retorted, Pallet rejoined, and the
altercation continued, until they entered the gates
of Antwerp, when the admirer of Rubens broke
forth into a rapturous exclamation, which put an
end to the dispute, and attracted the notice of
the inhabitants, many of whom, by shrugging up
their shoulders, and pointing to their foreheads,
gave shrewd indications, that they believed him a
poor gentleman disordered in his brain. 
They had no sooner alighted at the inn, than
this pseudo-enthusiast proposed to visit the great
church, in which he had been informed some of
his master's pieces were to be seen; and was remarkably
chagrined, when he understood that he
could not be admitted till next day. He rose next
morning by day-break, and disturbed his fellow-travellers 

travellers in such a noisy and clamorous manner,
that Peregrine determined to punish him with
some new infliction, and while he put on his
cloaths, actually formed the plan of promoting
a duel between him and the doctor; in the management
of which he promised himself store of
entertainment, from the behaviour of both. 
Being provided with one of those domestics
who are always in waiting to offer their services
to strangers on their first arrival, they were conducted
to the house of a gentleman who had an
excellent collection of pictures; and though the
greatest part of them were painted by his favourite
artist, Pallet condemned them all by the
lump, because Pickle had told him beforehand,
that there was not one performance of Rubens
among the number. 
The next place they visited, was what is
called the academy of painting, furnished with a
number of paultry pieces, in which our painter
recognized the stile of Peter Paul, with many
expressions of admiration, on, the same sort of
previous intelligence. 
From this repository they went to the great
church, and being led to the tomb of Rubens,
the whimsical painter fell upon his knees, and
worshipped, with such appearance of devotion,
that the attendant, scandalized at his superstition,
pulled him up, observing with great warmth,
that the person buried in that place was no saint,
but as great a sinner as himself; and that if he
was spiritually disposed, there was a chapel of the
Blessed Virgin, at the distance of three yards on
the right hand, to which he might retire. He
thought it was incumbent upon him to manifest
some extraordinary inspiration, while he resided 

on the spot where Rubens was born; and therefore,
his whole behaviour was an affectation of
rapture, expressed in distracted exclamations, convulsive
starts, and uncouth gesticulations. In the
midst of this frantic behaviour, he saw an old
Capuchin, with a white beard, mount the pulpit,
and hold forth to the congregation with such
violence of emphasis and gesture, as captivated his
fancy; and bawling aloud, “Zounds! what an
excellent Paul preaching at Athens!” he pulled
a pencil and small memorandum-book from his
pocket, and began to take a sketch of the orator,
with great eagerness and agitation, saying, “Egad!
friend Raphael, we shall see whether you or I
have got the best knack at trumping up an Apostle.” 
This appearance of disrespect gave offence
to the audience, which began to murmur against
this heretic libertine; when one of the priests
belonging to the choir, in order to prevent any
ill consequence from their displeasure, came and
told him in the French language, that such liberties
were not permitted in their religion, and advised
him to lay aside his implements, lest the
people should take umbrage at his design, and be
provoked to punish him as a profane scoffer at
their worship. 
The painter seeing himself addressed by a friar,
who, while he spoke, bowed with great complaisance,
imagined that he was a begging brother
come to supplicate his charity; and his attention
being quite ingrossed by the design he was
making, he patted the priest's shaven crown with
his hand, saying, Oter tems, oter tems; and then
resumed his pencil with great earnestness. The
ecclesiastic perceiving that the stranger did not
comprehend his meaning, pulled him by the sleeve, 

and explained himself in the Latin tongue: upon
which, Pallet, provoked at his intrusion, cursed
him aloud for an impudent beggarly son of a
whore; and taking out a schelling, flung it upon
the pavement, with manifest signs of indignation. 
Some of the common people, enraged to see
their religion contemned, and their priests insulted
at the very altar, rose from their seats, and
surrounding the astonished painter, one of the
number snatched his book from his hand, and
tore it into a thousand pieces. Frightened as he
was, he could not help crying, “Fire and faggots!
all my favourite ideas are gone to wreck!” 
and was in danger of being very roughly handled
by the croud, had not Peregrine stepped in, and
assured them, that he was a poor unhappy gentleman,
who laboured under a transport of the
brain. Those who understood the French language
communicated this information to the rest; 
so that he escaped without any other chastisement,
than that of being obliged to retire. And
as they could not see the famous descent from the
cross till after the service was finished, they were
conducted by their domestique to the house of a
painter, where they found a beggar standing for
his picture, and the artist actually employed in
representing a huge louse that crawled upon his
shoulder. Pallet was wonderfully pleased with
this circumstance, which he said was altogether
a new thought, and an excellent hint, of which
he would make his advantage: and in the course
of his survey of this Fleming's performances,
perceiving a piece in which two flies were engaged
upon the carcase of a dog half devoured,
he ran to his brother brush, and swore he was 

worthy of being a fellow-citizen of the immortal
Rubens. He then lamented, with many expressions
of grief and resentment, that he had lost
his common-place-book, in which he had preserved
a thousand conceptions of the same sort,
formed by the accidental objects of his senses and
imagination; and took an opportunity of telling
his fellow-travellers, that in execution he had
equalled, if not excelled, the two ancient painters
who vied with each other in the representation of
a curtain and a bunch of grapes; for he had exhibited
the image of a certain object so like to nature,
that the bare sight of it set a whole hog-sty
in an uproar. 
When he had examined and applauded all the
productions of this minute artist, they returned
to the great church, and were entertained with
the view of that celebrated master-piece of Rubens,
in which he has introduced the portraits of
himself and his whole family. The doors that
conceal this capital performance were no sooner
unfolded, than our enthusiast, debarred the use
of speech, by a previous covenant with his friend
Pickle, lifted up his hands and eyes, and putting
himself in the attitude of Hamlet, when his father's
ghost appears, adored in silent extasy and
awe. He even made a merit of necessity; and
when they had withdrawn from the place, protested
that his whole faculties were swallowed up
in love and admiration. He now professed himself
more than ever enamoured of the Flemish
school, raved in extravagant encomiums, and
proposed, that the whole company should pay
homage to the memory of the divine Rubens, by
repairing forthwith to the house in which he 

lived, and prostrating themselves on the floor of
his painting room. 
As there was nothing remarkable in the tenement,
which had been rebuilt more than once
since the death of that great man, Peregrine excused
himself from complying with the proposal,
on pretence of being fatigued with the circuit
they had already performed. Jolter declined it
for the same reason; and the question being put
to the doctor, he refused his company with an air
of disdain. Pallet, piqued at his contemptuous
manner, asked if he would not go and see the
habitation of Pindoor, provided he was in the city
where that poet lived? And when the physician
observed, that there was an infinite difference between
the men; “That I'll allow, (replied the
painter) for the devil a poet ever lived in Greece
or Troy, that was worthy to clean the pencils of
our beloved Rubens.” The physician could not
with any degree of temper and forbearance hear
this outrageous blasphemy, for which, he said,
Pallet's eyes ought to be picked out by owls:
and the dispute rose, as usual, to such scurrilities
of language and indecency of behaviour, that
passengers began to take notice of their animosity; 
and Peregrine was obliged to interpose, for
his own credit. 