


Captain Weazel challenges Strap, who declines
the combat—an affair between the captain
and me—the usurer is fain to give miss
Jenny five guineas for a release—we
are in danger of losing a meal—the behaviour
of Weazel, Jenny, and Joey on
that occasion—an account of captain Weazel
and his lady—the captain's courage tried— 
Isaac's mirth at the captain's expence. 
Next morning, I agreed to give the master
of the waggon ten shillings for my
passage to London, provided Strap should be allowed
to take my place when I should be disposed
to walk. —At the same time I desired him
to appease the incensed captain, who by this time
had got into the kitchen, with a drawn sword in
his hand, and threatned with many oaths, to
sacrifice the villain, who attempted to violate his
bed; but it was to no purpose for the master to
explain the mistake, and assure him of the poor
lad's innocence, who stood trembling behind me all
the while: the more submission that appeared in
Strap, the more implacable seemed the resentment
of Weazel, who swore he must either fight
him, or he would instantly put him to death. — 
I was extremely provoked at this insolence, and told
him, it could not be supposed that a poor barber
lad would engage a man of the sword at his own 

weapon; but I was persuaded he would wrestle
or box with him. —To which proposal Strap immediately
gave assent, by saying, he would box
with him for a guinea. —Weazel replied with a
look of disdain, it was beneath any gentleman
of his character to fight like a porter, or even
to put himself on a footing, in any respect, with
such a fellow as Strap. —“Ods bodikins! (cries
Joey) sure coptain, yaw wauld not coommit
moorder! Here's a poor lad that is willing to
make attoonement for his offence; and an
that woant't satisfie yaw, offers to fight yaw
fairly. —An yaw woan't box, I dare say, he
will coodgel with yaw. —Woan't yaw, my
lad?” —Strap, after some hesitation, answered,
“Ye—yes, I'll cudgel with him.” —But this
expedient being also rejected by the captain, I
began to smell his character, and tipping Strap
the wink, told the company, that I had always
heard it said, the person who receives a challenge
should have the choice of the weapons; this
therefore being the rule in point of honour, I
would venture to promise on the head of my
companion, that he would even fight captain
Weazel at sharps; but it should be with such
sharps as Strap was best acquainted with, namely
razors. —At my mentioning razors, I could perceive
the captain's colour to change, while Strap
pulling me by the sleeve, whispered with great
eagerness;—“No, no, no; for the love of
God, don't make any such bargain.” —At
length, Weazel recovered himself, turned towards
me, and with a ferocious countenance,
asked, “Who the devil are you?—will you
fight me?” With these words, putting himself
in a posture, I was grievously alarmed at 

seeing the point of a sword within half a foot of
my breast; and springing to one side, snatched
up a spit that stood in the chimney corner, with
which I kept my formidable adversary at bay,
who made a great many half longes, skipping
backward every time, till at last I got him
pinned up in a corner, to the no small diversion
of the company. While he was in this situation; 
his wife entered, and seeing her husband in
these dangerous circumstances, uttered a dreadful
scream, and swooned: Upon this, Weazel demanded
a cessation, which was immediately
granted; and after his lady had recovered, was
contented with the submission of Strap, who falling
on his knees before him, protested the innocence
of his intention, and asked pardon for the
mistake he had committed. This affair being
ended without bloodshed, we went to breakfast,
but missed two of our company, to wit, miss
Jenny and the usurer. As for the first, Mrs.
Weazel informed us, that she had kept her awake
all night with her groans; and that when she got
up this morning, miss Jenny was so much indisposed,
that she could not proceed on her journey. 
—At this moment, a message came from her to
the master of the waggon, who immediately went
into her chamber, followed by us all. —She told
him in a lamentable tone, that she was afraid of
a miscarriage owing to the fright she received last
night, from the brutality of Isaac; and as the event
was uncertain, desired the usurer might be
detained to answer for the consequence. —Accordingly
this ancient Tarquin was found in the waggon,
whither he had retired to avoid the shame
of last night's disgrace; and brought by force
into her presence. —He no sooner appeared, than 

she began to weep and sigh most piteously, and
told us, if she died, she would leave her blood
upon the head of that ravisher. —Poor Isaac,
turning up his eyes and hands to heaven, prayed
that God would deliver him from the machinations
of that Jezabel; and assured us with tears
in his eyes, that his being found in bed with her,
was the result of her own invitation. —The waggoner
understanding the case, advised Isaac to
make it up, by giving her a sum of money, to
which he replied with great vehemence, “A
sum of money!—a halter for the cockatrice!” 
—“O! 'tis very well, (said miss Jenny) I see
it is in vain to attempt that flinty heart of his,
by fair means. —Joey, be so good as to go to
the Justice, and tell him there is a sick person
here, who wants to see him on an affair of
consequence.” —At the name of justice, Isaac
trembling like an aspen-leaf, and bidding Joey
stay, asked with a faultering voice, “what she
would have?” She told him, that as he had
not perpetrated his wicked purpose, she would be
satisfied with a small matter. —And though the
damage she might sustain in her health, might be
irreparable, she would give him a release for an
hundred guineas. —“An hundred guineas! (cried
he in an extasy) an hundred furies! —Where
should a poor old wretch like me, have an hundred
guineas? if I had so much money, d'ye think
I would be found travelling in a waggon, at this
season of the year?” —“Come, come, (replied
Jenny) None of your miserly artifice here. — 
You think I don't know Isaac Rapine the money-broker
in the Minories. —Ah! you old
rogue! many a pawn have you had from me
and my acquaintance which was never redeemed.” 

—Isaac finding it was in vain to disguise
himself, offered twenty shillings for a discharge,
which she absolutely refused under fifty
pounds: At last, however, she was brought down
to five, which he paid with great reluctancy, rather
than be prosecuted for a rape. —After which
this sick person made shift to get into the waggon,
and we set forwards in great tranquillity,
Strap being accommodated with Joey's horse, the
driver himself chusing to walk. —This morning
and forenoon we were entertained with an account
of the valour of captain Weazel, who told
us of his having once knocked down a soldier
that made game of him; of tweaking a drawer
by the nose, who found fault with his picking
his teeth with a fork; and of his sending a challenge
to a cheese-monger, who had the presumption
to be his rival,—for the truth of
which he appealed to his wife. —She confirmed
whatever he said, and observed such a
thing happened that day, “I received a loveletter
from 'squire Gobble;—and don't
you remember, my dear, I was prodigiously
sick that very night with eating ortolans,
when my lord Diddle took notice of my complexion's
being altered, and my lady was so
alarmed, that she had well nigh fainted.” — 
“Yes, my dear, (replied the captain) you know,
my lord said to me, with a sneer,”—“Billy,
Mrs. Weazel is certainly breeding.” —“And I
answered cavalierly, My lord, I wish I could
return the compliment. —Upon which the
whole company broke out into an immoderate
fit of laughter; and my lord, who loves a
repartée dearly, came round and buffed me.” 
—We travelled in this manner five days, 

without interruption or meeting any thing worth
notice: Miss Jenny (who soon recovered her
spirits) entertaining us every day with diverting
songs, of which she could sing a great number; 
and rallying her old gallant, who notwithstanding
could never be reconciled to her. —On the
sixth day, while we were about to sit down to
dinner, the inn-keeper came and told us, that
three gentlemen just arrived, had ordered the
victuals to be carried to their apartment, altho'
he had informed them that they were bespoke by
the passengers in the waggon. To which they
had replied, “The passengers in the waggon
might be damn'd—their betters must be served
before them,—they supposed it would be no
hardship on such travellers to dine upon bread
and cheese for one day.” —This was a terrible
disappointment to us all; and we laid our heads
together how to remedy it; when miss Jenny
propose that captain Weazel, being by profession
a soldier, ought in this case to protect and prevent
us from being insulted. —But the captain excused
himself, saying, he would not for the
world be known to have travelled in a waggon; 
swearing at the same time, that could he appear
with honour, they should eat his sword sooner
than his provision. —Upon this declaration, miss
Jenny snatching his sword, drew it, and run immediately
to the kitchin, where she threatned to
put the cook to death, if he did not send the victuals
into our chamber immediately. —The noise
she made, brought the three strangers down, one
of whom no sooner perceived her, than he cried
out, “Ha! Jenny Ramper! what the devil
brought thee hither?” —“My dear Jack
Rattle! (replied she, running into his arms) 

is it you? —Then Weazel may go to hell for
a dinner—I shall dine with you.” —They
consented to this, with a great deal of joy; and
we were on the point of being reduced to a very
uncomfortable meal, when Joey understanding the
whole affair, entered the kitchin with a pitchfork
in his hand, swore he would be the death of
any man who should pretend to seize the victuals
prepared for the waggon. —This menace
had like to have produced fatal consequences; 
the three strangers drawing their swords, and being
joined by their servants, and we ranging ourselves
on the side of Joey; when the landlord
interposing, offered to part with his own dinner
to keep the peace, which was accepted by the
strangers; and we sat down at table without any
further molestation. —In the afternoon, I chose
to walk along with Joey, and Strap took my
place. —Having entered into conversation with
this driver, I soon found him to be a merry, facetious,
good-natured fellow, and withal very arch: 
He informed me, that miss Jenny was a common
girl upon the town, who falling into company
with a recruiting officer, he carried her down in
the stage-coach from London to Newcastle, where
he had been arrested for debt, and was now in prison; 
upon which she was fain to return to her former
way of life, in the manner we found her. —He
told me likewise, that one of the gentlemen's
servants, whom we left at the inn, having accidentally
seen Weazel, immediately knew him,
and acquainted Joey with some particulars of his
character, as follows: That he had served my
lord Frizzle in quality of valet de chambre many
years; while he lived separate from his lady: 
But upon their reconciliation, she expresly insisted 

upon Weazel's being turned off, as well
as the woman he kept: whereupon his lordship,
to get rid of them both with a good grace,
proposed that he should marry his mistress, and he
would procure a commission for him in the army; 
this expedient was agreed to, and Weazel is now,
by his lordship's interest, ensign in&wblank;'s regiment. 
I found he and I had the same sentiments with
regard to Weazel's courage, which we resolved
to put to the trial, by alarming the passengers
with the cry of, “an highwayman!” as soon as
we should discover an horseman appear. This we
put in practice towards the dusk, when we descried
a man on horseback approaching us. Joey
had no sooner intimated to the people in the
waggon, that he was afraid we should be all
robbed, than a general consternation arose: Strap
jumped out of the waggon and hid himself behind
a hedge. The usurer put forth ejaculations,
and made a rustling among the straw, which
made us conjecture he had hid something under
it. Mrs. Weazel wringing her hands, uttered
lamentable cries; and the captain, to our great
amazement, began to snore; but this artifice did
not succeed; for miss Jenny, shaking him by the
shoulder, bawl'd out, “'Sdeath! captain, is this
a time to snore, when we are going to be
robbed? —Get up for shame, and behave like
a soldier and a man of honour.” —Weazel
pretended to be in a great passion for being disturbed,
and swore he would have his nap out if
all the highwaymen in England surrounded him. 
—“D&wblank;n my blood! what are you afraid of
(continued he;”) at the same time trembling
with such agitation, that the whole carriage
shook. —This singular piece of behaviour incensed 

miss Ramper so much, that she cried out,
“D&wblank;n your pitiful soul, you are as arrant a
poltroon as ever was drummed out of a regiment. 
—Stop the waggon, Joey—let me get
out, and by G&sblank;d, if I have rhetorick enough,
the thief shall not only take your purse, but
your skin also.” —So saying, she leapt out
with great agility. —By this time the horseman
came up with us, and happened to be a gentleman's
servant well known to Joey, who communicated
our scheme, and desired him to carry it
on a little further, by going up to the waggon,
and questioning those within it. —The stranger
consenting for the sake of diversion, approached
it, and in a terrible tone, demanded, “Who
have you got here?” —Isaac replied with a
lamentable voice, “Here is a poor miserable sinner,
who has got a small family to maintain,
and nothing in the world wherewithal, but
these fifteen shillings, which if you rob me of,
we must all starve together.” —“Who's that
sobbing in the other corner?” (said the supposed
highwayman.) “A poor unfortunate woman,
(answered Mrs. Weazel) upon whom I
beg you for Christ's sake, to have compassion.” 
—“Are you maid or wife?” (said he)
—“Wife to my sorrow,” (cried she.) —“Who,
or where is your husband?” (continued he.) 
—“My husband, (replied Mrs. Weazel) is an
officer in the army, and was left sick at the
last inn where we dined.” —“You must be
mistaken, madam, (said he) for I myself saw
him get into the waggon this afternoon;— 
But pray what smell is that? Sure your lapdog
has befoul'd himself;—let me catch hold
of the nasty cur, I'll teach him better manners.” 

—Here he laid hold of one of Weazel's
legs, and pulled him from under his wife's petticoats
where he had concealed himself. —The
poor trembling captain being detected in this inglorious
situation, rubbed his eyes, and affecting
to wake out of sleep, cried, “What's the matter? 
—What's the matter?” “The matter
is not much, (answered the horseman) I only
called in, to enquire after your health, and
so adieu, most noble captain.” —Having said
this, he clapped spurs to his horse, and was out
of sight in a moment. —It was some time before
Weazel could recollect himself, but at length,
re-assuming the big look, he said, “Damn the
fellow! why did he ride away, before I had
time to ask how his lord and lady do? —Don't
you remember Tom, my dear?” addressing
himself to his wife. —“Yes, (replied she) I think
I do remember something of the fellow,—but
you know I seldom converse with people of
his station.” —“Hoy day! (cried Joey) do yaw
knaw the young mon, coptain?” —“Know
him, (said Weazel) many a time has he filled
a glass of Burgundy for me, at my lord Trippit's
table.” —“And what may his neame be,
coptain,” (said Joey.) “His name!—his
name (replied Weazel) is Tom Rinser. — 
—“Waunds! (cried Joey) a has changed his
true neame then! for I'se lay any wager he
was christened John Trotter.” —This observation
raised the laugh against the captain, who
seemed very much disconcerted; when Isaac
broke silence, and said, “It was no matter who
or what he was, since he had not proved the
robber we suspected. —And that we ought to
bless God for our narrow escape.” —“Bless 

God, (said Weazel) bless the devil! for
what? had he been a highwayman, I should
have eat his blood, body and guts, before he
had robbed me, or any one in this Diligence.” 
—“Ha, ha, ha! (cried miss Jenny) I believe
you will eat all you kill indeed, captain.” — 
The usurer was so pleased at the event of this adventure,
that he could not refrain from being severe,
and took notice that captain Weazel seemed
to be a good Christian, for he had armed himself
with patience and resignation, instead of carnal
weapons; and worked out his salvation with fear
and trembling. —This piece of satire occasioned
a great deal of mirth at Weazel's expence, who
muttered a great many oaths, and threatned to
cut Isaac's throat;—which the usurer taking
hold of, said, “Gentlemen and ladies, I take
you all to witness, that my life is in danger
from this bloody-minded officer. —I'll have
him bound over to the peace.” This second
sneer, procured another laugh against him, and
he remained crest-fallen during the remaining part
of our journey. 