


CHAP. XXXVII. We depart for Europe
—a misunderstanding arises between the captain
and surgeon, through the scandalous aspersions
of Crampley—the captain dies—Crampley
tyrannizes over the surgeon, who falls a
victim to his cruelty—I am also ill used—the
ship strikes—the behaviour of Crampley and the
seamen on that occasion—I get on shore, challenge
the captain to single combat—am treacherously
knocked down, wounded and robbed. p. 1
CHAP. XXXVIII. I get up, and crawl into
a barn, where I am in danger of perishing
thro' the fear of the country people—their inhumanity
—I am succoured by a reputed witch
—her story—her advice—she recommends me
as a valet to a single lady, whose character she
explains. p. 7
CHAP. XXXIX. My reception by that lady
—I become enamoured of Narcissa—recount
the particulars of my last misfortune—acquire
the good opinion of my mistress—an account
of the young 'Squire—I am made acquainted
with more particulars of Narcissa's situation— 

conceive a mortal hatred against Sir Timothy
—I examine my lady's library and performances
—her extravagant behaviour. p. 18
CHAP. XL. She is surprized at my learning
—communicates her performances to me
—I impart some of mine to her—am mortified
at her faint praise—Narcissa approves of
my production—I gain an involuntary conquest
over the cook-wench and dairy-maid—their
mutual resentment and insinuations—the jealousy
of their lovers. p. 27
CHAP. XLI. Narcissa being in danger from
the brutality of Sir Timothy, is rescued by me,
who revenge myself on my rival—I declare
my passion, and retreat to the sea-side—I am
surrounded by smugglers, and carried to Bulloign
—I find my uncle lieutenant Bowling, in
great distress, and relieve him—our conversation. p. 35
CHAP. XLII. He takes his passage in a Cutter
for Deal—we are accosted by a Priest, who
proves to be a Scottishman—his professions of
friendship—he is affronted by the lieutenant,
who afterwards appeases him by submission
—my uncle embarks—I am introduced by
the priest to a capuchin, in whose company I
set out for Paris—the character of my fellow-traveller
—an adventure on the road—I am
shocked at his behaviour. p. 47
CHAP. XLIII. We lodge at a house near
Amiens, where I am robbed by the capuchin,
who escapes while I am asleep—I go to
Noyons in search of him, but without success
—I make my condition known to several
people, but find no relief—I grow desperate— 
join a company of soldiers—inlist in the regiment
of Picardy—we are ordered into Germany 

—I find the fatigues of the march almost
intolerable—quarrel with my comerade in a
dispute upon politicks—he challenges me into
the field, wounds and disarms me. p. 56
CHAP. XLIV. The Gascon does not
use his victory with all the moderation
that might have been expected—In order to
be revenged I learn the science of Defence
—we join Marechal Duc de Noailles—are engaged
with the allies at Dettingen, and put
to flight—the behaviour of the French soldiers
on that occasion—I industriously seek another
combat with the old Gascon, and vanquish
him in my turn—our regiment is put into
winter-quarters at Rheims, where I find my
friend Strap—our recognition—he supplies me
with money, and procures my discharge—we
take a trip to Paris; from whence we set out
for London by the way of Flanders, where we
safely arrive. p. 65
CHAP. XLV. I enquire about my uncle,
and understand he is gone to sea—take lodgings
at Charing-cross—go to the Play, where
I meet with an adventure—I go to an ordinary; 
the guests described—become acquainted
with Medlar and doctor Wagtail. p. 80
CHAP. XLVI. Wagtail introduces me to a
set of fine gentlemen, with whom I spend the
evening at a tavern—our conversation—the
characters of my new companions—the
doctor is roasted—the issue of our debauch. p. 99
CHAP. XLVII. Strap communicates to me a
conquest he had made on a chandler's widow
—finds himself miserably mistaken—I go to
the opera—admire Melinda—am cautioned by
Banter—go to the assembly at Hampstead— 
dance with that young lady—receive an insolent
message from Bragwell, whose mettle is 

soon is cooled—am in favour with my mistress,
whom I visit next day; and am bubbled out of
eighteen guineas at cards—Strap triumphs at
my success, but is astonished at my expence
—Banter comes to my lodging, is very sarcastic
at my expence, and borrows five guineas
from me, as a proof his friendship. p. 114
CHAP. XLVIII. We repair to the coffee-house,
where we overhear a curious dispute
between Wagtail and Medlar, which is referred
to our decision—the doctor gives us an account
of his experiment—Medlar is roasted by
Banter at the ordinary—the old gentleman's
advice to me. p. 126
CHAP. XLIX. I receive a challenge—the consequences
of it—the quarrel being made up, I
am put in arrest, by the care and affection of
Strap—but immediately released upon explaining
my affair—the behaviour of Mr. Oregan and
his two friends—I visit Melinda, whom I
divert with an account of the duel—I propose
marriage—she refers the matter to her mother,
of whom I make a solemn demand of her
daughter—the old lady's behaviour—I am discarded,
resent their disdain. p. 132
CHAP. L. I long to be revenged on Melinda
—apply to Banter for his assistance—he contrives
a scheme for that purpose, which is put in
execution with great success—I make an attempt
on the heart of Miss Gripewell, but am disappointed
—I grow melancholy at my disappointment,
and have recourse to the bottle— 
receive a billet doux—am ravished with the
contents—find myself involved in an intrigue,
which I imagined would make my fortune— 
am confounded at my mistake, which banishes
all thoughts of matrimony. p. 143

CHAP. LI. I cultivate an acquaintance with
two noblemen—am introduced to Earl Strutwell
—his kind promise and invitation—the
behaviour of his porter and lacquey—he
receives me with an appearance of uncommon
affection—undertakes to speak in my behalf
to the minister—informs me of his success, and
wishes me joy—introduces a conversation about
Petronius Arbiter—falls in love with my watch,
which I press upon him—I make a present of
a diamond ring to Lord Stradle—impart my
good fortune to Strap, and Banter, who disabuses
me, to my utter mortification. p. 157
CHAP. LII. I attempt to recover my watch and
jewel, but to no purpose—resolve to revenge
myself on Strutwell by my importunity—am reduced
to my last guinea—obliged to inform Strap
of my necessity, who is almost distracted with
the news—but nevertheless obliged to pawn my
best sword for present subsistence—that small
supply being near exhausted, I am almost stupified
with my misfortunes—go to the gaming
table, by the advice of Banter, and come off
with unexpected success—Strap's extacy—Mrs.
Gawkey waits upon me, professes remorse for her
perfidy, and implores my assistance—I do myself
a piece of justice by her means, and afterwards
reconcile her to her father. p. 169
CHAP. LIII. I purchase new cloaths—reprimand
Strutwell and Straddle—Banter proposes
another matrimonial scheme—I accept of his
terms–––set out for Bath in a stage-coach, with
the young lady and her mother–––the behaviour
of an officer and lawyer, our fellow travellers,
described–––a smart dialogue between my mistress
and the captain. p. 181

CHAP. LIV. Day breaking, I have the pleasure
of viewing the person of miss Snapper, whom
I had not seen before–––the soldier is witty upon
me–––is offended, talks much of his valour–––is
reprimanded by a grave gentlewoman–––we are
alarmed with the cry of highwaymen–––I get
out of the coach, and stand on my defence––– 
they ride off without having attacked us–––I
pursue them–––one of them is thrown from his
horse and taken–––I return to the coach–––am
complimented by Miss Snapper–––the captain's
behaviour on this occasion–––the prude reproaches
me in a soliloquy–––I upbraid her in
the same manner–––the behaviour of Mrs. Snapper
at breakfast, disobliges me–––the lawyer is
witty upon the officer, who threatens him. p. 190
CHAP. LV. I resolve to ingratiate myself with
the mother, and am favoured by accident––– 
the precise lady finds her husband, and quits the
coach–––the captain is disappointed of his dinner
–––we arrive at Bath–––I accompany Miss Snapper
to the Long-Room, where she is attacked
by beau N&wblank;h, and turns the laugh against him
–––I make love to her and receive a check––– 
I squire her to an assembly, where I am blest
with a sight of my dear Narcissa, which discomposes
me so much, that Miss Snapper, observing
my disorder, is at pains to discover the
cause–––is picqued at the occasion, and in our
way home, pays me a sarcastic compliment––– 
I am met by Miss Williams, who is maid and
confidante of Narcissa–––she acquaints me with
her lady's regard for me while under the disguise
of a servant, and describes the transports of Narcissa
on seeing me at the assembly in the character
of a gentleman–––I am surprized with an
account of her aunt's marriage, and make an 

appointment to meet Miss Williams next day. p. 200
CHAP. LVI. I become acquainted with Narcissa's
brother, who invites me to his house— 
where I am introduced to that adorable creature
—after dinner, the Squire retires to take
his nap—Freeman guessing the situation of my
thoughts, withdraws likewise on pretence of
business—I declare my passion for Narcissa— 
am well received—charmed with her conversation
—the Squire detains us to supper—I elude
his design by a stratagem, and get home sober. p. 213
CHAP. LVII. Miss Williams informs me of
Narcissa's approbation of my flame—I appease
the Squire—write to my mistress, am blessed
with an answer—beg leave of her brother to
dance with her at a ball; obtain his consent
and her's—enjoy a private conversation with her
—am perplexed with reflections—have the honour
of appearing her partner at the ball—we
are complimented by a certain nobleman—he
discovers some symptoms of passion for Narcissa
—I am stung with jealousy—Narcissa alarmed,
retires—I observe Melinda in the company— 
the Squire is captivated by her beauty. p. 226
CHAP. LVIII. Tortured with jealousy, I go
home and abuse Strap—receive a message
from Narcissa, in consequence of which, I
hasten to her apartment, where her endearing
assurances banish all my doubts and apprehensions
—in my retreat I discover somebody in the
dark, whom, suspecting to be a spy, I resolve
to kill: but to my great surprize, am convinced
of his being no other than Strap—Melinda
slanders me—I become acquainted with Lord
Quiverwit, who endeavours to sound me with 

regard to Narcissa—the Squire is introduced to
his lordship, and grows cold towards me— 
I learn from my confidante, that this nobleman
professes honourable love to my mistress, who
continues faithful to me, notwithstanding the
scandalous report she has heard to my prejudice
—I am mortified with an assurance that her
whole fortune depends upon the pleasure of her
brother—Mr. Freeman condoles me on the
decline of my character, which I vindicate so
much to his satisfaction, that he undertakes to
combat fame in my behalf. p. 238
CHAP. LIX. I receive an extraordinary message
at the door of the Long Room, which
I however enter, and affront the Squire, who
threatens to take the law of me—I rebuke Melinda
for her malice—she weeps with vexation
—Lord Quiverwit is severe upon me—I retort
his sarcasm—am received with the utmost tenderness
by Narcissa, who desires to hear the
story of my life—we vow eternal constancy
to one another—I retire—am waked by a messenger,
who brings a challenge from Quiverwit,
whom I meet, engage, and vanquish. p. 246
CHAP. LX. I am visited by Freeman, with
whom I appear in publick, and am caressed
—I am sent for by Lord Quiverwit, whose
presence I quit in a passion—Narcissa is carried
off by her brother—I intend to pursue him,
and am dissuaded by my friend—I engage in
play, and lose all my money—set out for London
—try my fortune at the gaming-table,
without success—receive a letter from Narcissa
—bilk my taylor. p. 255
CHAP. LXI. I am arrested—carried to the
Marshalsea—find my old acquaintance beau 

Jackson in that jail—he informs me of his adventures
—Strap arrives, and with difficulty
is comforted—Jackson introduces me to
a poet—I admire his conversation and capacity
—am deeply affected with my misfortune— 
Strap hires himself as a journeyman-barber, p. 265
CHAP. LXII. I read Melopoyn's tragedy,
and conceive a vast opinion of his genius—he
recounts his adventures. p. 274
CHAP. LXIII. The continuation and conclusion
of Mr. Melopoyn's story. p. 286
CHAP. LXIV. I am seized with a deep melancholy,
and become a sloven—I am relieved
by my uncle—he prevails upon me to engage
with his owners, as surgeon of the ship
which he commands—he makes me a considerable
present—entertains Strap as his steward
—I take my leave of my friends, and go on
board—the ship arrives at the Downs. p. 303
CHAP. LXV. I set out for Sussex—consult
Mrs. Sagely—atchieve an interview with Narcissa
—return to the ship—we get clear of the
channel—I learn our destination—we are
chaced by a large ship—the company are dismayed,
and encouraged by the captain's speech
—our pursuer happens to be an English man of
war—we arrive on the coast of Guinea, purchase
400 negroes, sail for Paraguay, get safe
into the river of Plate, and sell our Cargo to
great advantage. p. 313
CHAP. LXVI. I am invited to the Villa of
a Spanish Don, where we meet with an
English gentleman, and make a very interesting
discovery—we leave Buenos Ayres, and arrive
at Jamaica. p. 325

CHAP. LXVII. I visit my old friend Thomson
—we set sail for Europe, meet with an odd
adventure—arrive in England—I ride across
the country from Portsmouth to Sussex—converse
with Mrs. Sagely, who informs me of
Narcissa's being in London—in consequence of
this intelligence, I proceed to Canterbury— 
meet with my old friend Morgan—arrive at
London—visit Narcissa—introduce my father
to her—he is charmed with her good sense and
beauty—we come to a determination of demanding
her brother's consent to our marriage. p. 337
CHAP. LXVIII. My father makes a present
to Narcissa—the letter is dispatched to her brother
—I appear among my acquaintance— 
Banter's behaviour—the Squire refuses his consent
—my uncle comes to town—approves of
my choice—I am married—we meet the
Squire and his lady at the play—our acquaintance
is courted. p. 351
CHAP. LXIX. My father intends to revisit
the place of his nativity—we propose to accompany
him—my uncle renews his will in my
favour, determines to go to sea again—we set
out for Edinburgh—purchase our paternal estate
—proceed to it—halt at the town where I
was educated—take up my bond to Crab—the
behaviour of Potion and his wife, and of my
female cousins—our reception at the estate— 
Strap marries Miss Williams, and is settled by
my father to his own satisfaction—I am more
and more happy. p. 360