


We repair to the coffee-house, where we overhear
a curious dispute between Wagtail
and Medlar, which is referred to our decision
—the doctor gives us an account
of his experiment—Medlar is roasted by
Banter, at the ordinary—the old gentleman's
advice to me. 
Being as willing to drop the theme, as
he to propose it, I accompanied him thither,
where we found Mr. Medlar and doctor Wagtail,
disputing upon the word Custard, which the physician
affirmed should be spelled with a G, because
it was derived from the Latin verb gustare,
“to taste.” —But Medlar pleaded custom in behalf
of C, observing, that by the doctor's rule,
we ought to change pudding into budding, because
it is derived from the French word boudin; 
and in that case, why not retain the original orthography
and pronounciation of all the foreign
words we have adopted; by which means our
language would become a dissonant jargon without
standard or propriety. The controversy was
referred to us; and Banter, notwithstanding his
real opinion to the contrary, decided it in favour
of Wagtail: Upon which, the peevish annuitant
arose, and uttering the monosyllable, pish! with
great emphasis, removed to another table. 

We then enquired of the doctor, what progress
he had made in the experiment of distilling tinderwater; 
and he told us, he had been at all the
glass-houses about town, but could find no body
who would undertake to blow a retort large
enough to hold the third part of the quantity
prescribed; but he intended to try the process on
as much as would produce five drops, which
would be sufficient to prove the specific, and
then he would make it a parliamentary affair;— 
that he had already purchased a considerable
weight of rags, in the reducing of which to tinder,
he had met with a misfortune which had
obliged him to change his lodgings: For he had
gathered them in a heap on the floor, and set
fire to them with a candle, on the supposition
that the boards would sustain no damage, because
it is the nature of flame to ascend; but by some
very extraordinary accident, the wood was invaded,
and began to blaze with great violence,
which disordered him so much, that he had not
presence of mind enough to call for assistance,
and the whole house must have been consumed
with him in the midst of it, had not the smoke
that rolled out of the windows in clouds alarmed
the neighbourhood, and brought people to his
succour. —That he had lost a pair of black velvet
breeches and a tye-wig in the hurry, besides
the expence of the rags, which were rendered
useless by the water used to quench the flame, and
the damage of the floor, which he was compelled
to repair. —That his landlord believing him distracted,
had insisted on his quitting his apartment
at a minute's warning, which put him to
incredible inconvenience; but now he was settled
in a very comfortable house, and had the 

use of a large paved yard for preparing his tinder: 
So that he hoped in a very short time to
reap the fruits of his labour. 
After having congratulated the doctor on his
prospect, and read the papers, we repaired to an
auction of pictures, where we entertained ourselves
an hour or two; from thence we adjourned
to the Mall, and after two or three turns, went
back to dinner, Banter assuring us, that he intended
to roast Medlar, at the ordinary; and indeed,
we were no sooner set than this Cynic began
to execute his purpose by telling the old gentleman,
he looked extremely well, considering the
little sleep he had enjoyed last night. To this
compliment Medlar made no reply, but by a
stare, accompanied with a significant grin;—and
Banter went on thus: “I don't know whether
most to admire the charity of your mind,
or the vigour of your body. —Upon my soul,
Mr. Medlar, you do generous things with the
best taste of any man I know! You extend
your compassion to real objects, and exact only
such returns as they are capable of making. 
—You must know, gentlemen, (said he,
turning to the company) I had been up most
part of the night with a friend who is bad of a
fever, and on my return home this morning,
I chanced to pass by a gin-shop still open,
whence issued a confused sound of mirth
and jollity: Upon which I popped in my
head, and perceived Mr. Medlar dancing
bare-headed in the midst of ten or twenty
ragged Bunters, who rejoiced at his expence. 
But indeed, Mr. Medlar, you ought not to
sacrifice your constitution to your benevolence. 
—Consider you grow old apace; and therefore 

have a reverend care of your health,
which must certainly be very much impaired
by these nocturnal expeditions.” —The testy
senior could no longer contain himself, but cried
hastily, “'Tis well known that your tongue is
no slander.” —“I think (said the other) you
might spare that observation, as you are very
sensible that my tongue has done you signal
service on many occasions. —You may remember,
that when you made your addresses to
the sat widow, who kept a publick-house at
Islington, there was a report spread very
much to the prejudice of your manhood; 
which coming to the ears of your mistress,
you was discarded immediately; and I brought
matters to a reconciliation, by assuring her you
had three bastards at nurse in the country: 
How you ruined your own affair afterwards, it
is neither my business nor inclination to relate.” 
—This anecdote, which had no other foundation
than in Banter's own invention, afforded a good
deal of mirth to every body present, and provoked
Mr. Medlar beyond all sufferance; so that
he started up in a mighty passion, and forgetting
that his mouth was full, bespattered those who
sit next to him, while he discharged his indignation
in a volly of oaths, and call'd Banter insignificant
puppy, impertinent jackanapes, and an
hundred such appellations; telling the company,
he had invented these false malicious aspersions,
because he would not lend him money to squander
away upon rooks and whores. —“A
very likely story, (said Banter) that I should
attempt to borrow money of a man who is
obliged to practice a thousand shifts to make
his weekly allowance hold out to Saturday's 

night. Sometimes he sleeps four and twenty
hours at a stretch, by which means he saves
three meals besides coffee-house expence. — 
Sometimes he is fain to put up with bread and
cheese and small beer for dinner; and sometimes
he regales on two pennyworth of ox-cheek
in a cellar.” —“You are a lying miscreant
(cried Medlar, in an exstacy of rage) I can always
command money enough to pay your
taylor's bill, which I'm sure is no trifle; and I
have a good mind to give you a convincing proof
of my circumstances, by prosecuting you for defamation,
sirrah.” —By this time the violence
of his wrath had deprived him of his appetite,
and he sat silent, unable to swallow one mouthful,
while his tormentor enjoyed his mortification,
and encreased his chagrin, by advising him to lay
in plentifully for his next day's fast. 
Dinner being ended, we came down stairs to
the coffee-room, and Banter went away to keep
an appointment, saying, he supposed he should
see Wagtail and me in the evening at the Bedford
coffee-house. —He was no sooner gone, than
the old gentleman took me aside, and said, he
was sorry to see me so intimate with that fellow
who was one of the most graceless rakes about
town, and had already wasted a good estate and
constitution upon harlots;—that he had been the
ruin of many a young man, by introducing them
into debauched company, and setting a lewd example
of all manner of wickedness; and that,
unless I was on my guard, he would strip me
in a short time, both of my money and reputation. 
I thanked him for his information, and
promised to conduct myself accordingly, wishing
however, his caution had been a few hours 

more early, by which means I might have saved
five guineas. Notwithstanding this intelligence,
I was inclinable to impute some part of the
charge to Medlar's revenge for the liberties taken
with him at dinner; and therefore, as soon as I
could disengage myself, applied to Wagtail for
his opinion of the character in question; resolved
to compare their accounts, allowing for the prejudice
of each, and form my judgment upon
both, without adhering strictly to either. —The
doctor assured me that he was a very pretty gentleman,
of family and fortune; a scholar, a wit,
a critick, and perfectly well acquainted with the
town; that his honour and courage were unquestionable,
though some extravagancies he had
been guilty of, and his talent for satire, had procured
him enemies, and made some people shy
of his acquaintance. —From these different
sketches, I concluded that Banter was a young
fellow of some parts, who had spent his fortune,
but retained his appetites, and fallen out with the
world because he could not enjoy it to his wish. 
I went to the Bedford coffee-house in the evening,
where I met-my friends, from thence proceeded
to the play, and afterwards carried them
home to my lodgings, where we supped with
great harmony and satisfaction. 