



The Author conducted by a Houyhnhnm to his
House. The House described. The Author's Reception. 
The Food of the Houyhnhnms. The
Author in Distress for want of Meat, is at last
relieved. His Manner of feeding in that
Country. 

Having travelled about three Miles,
we came to a long Kind of Building,
made of Timber, stuck in the
Ground, and wattled a-cross; the
Roof was low, and covered with
Straw. I now began to be a little
comforted; and took out some Toys, which Travellers
usually carry for Presents to the Savage Indians
of America and other Parts, in hopes the People of
the House would be thereby encouraged to receive
me kindly. The Horse made me a Sign to go in
first; it was a large Room with a smooth Clay
Floor, and a Rack and Manger extending the whole
Length on one Side. There were three Nags, and
two Mares, not eating, but some of them sitting
down upon their Hams, which I very much wondered 

at; but wondered more to see the rest employed
in domestick Business: The last seemed but
ordinary Cattle; however this confirmed my first
Opinion, that a People who could so far civilize
brute Animals, must needs excel in Wisdom all the
Nations of the World. The Grey came in just
after, and thereby prevented any ill Treatment,
which the others might have given me. He neighed
to them several times in a Style of Authority, and
received Answers. 
Beyond this Room there were three others,
reaching the Length of the House, to which you
passed through three Doors, opposite to each other,
in the Manner of a Vista: We went through the
second Room towards the third; here the Grey
walked in first, beckoning me to attend. I waited
in the second Room, and got ready my Presents, for
the Master and Mistress of the House: They were
two Knives, three Bracelets of false Pearl, a small
Looking Glass and a Bead Necklace. The Horse
neighed three or four Times, and I waited to hear
some answers in a human Voice, but I heard no
other Returns than in the same Dialect, only one
or two a little shriller than his. I began to think
that this House must belong to some Person of
great Note among them, because there appeared so
much Ceremony before I could gain Admittance. 
But, that a Man of Quality should be served all by
Horses, was beyond my Comprehension. I feared
my Brain was disturbed by my Sufferings and Misfortunes:
I roused my self, and looked about me in
the Room where I was left alone; this was furnished
as the first, only after a more elegant Manner. I
rubbed mine Eyes often, but the same Objects still 

occurred. I pinched my Arms and Sides, to awake
my self, hoping I might be in a Dream. I then absolutely
concluded, that all these Appearances could
be nothing else but Necromancy and Magick. But
I had no Time to pursue these Reflections; for the
Grey Horse came to the Door, and made me a Sign
to follow him into the third Room; where I saw a
very comely Mare, together with a Colt and Fole,
sitting on their Haunches, upon Mats of Straw, not
unartfully made, and perfectly neat and clean. 
The Mare soon after my Entrance, rose from
her Mat, and coming up close, after having nicely
observed my Hands and Face, gave me a most contemptuous
Look; then turning to the Horse, I
heard the Word Yahoo often repeated betwixt them; 
the meaning of which Word I could not then comprehend,
although it were the first I had learned to
pronounce; but I was soon better informed, to my
everlasting Mortification: For the Horse beckoning
to me with his Head, and repeating the Word
Hhuun, Hhuun, as he did upon the Road, which
I understood was to attend him, led me out into a
kind of Court, where was another Building at some
Distance from the House. Here we entered, and I
saw three of those detestable Creatures, which I first
met after my landing, feeding upon Roots, and the
Flesh of some Animals, which I afterwards found
to be that of Asses and Dogs, and now and then a
Cow dead by Accident or Disease. They were all
tied by the Neck with strong Wyths, fastened to a
Beam; they held their Food between the Claws of
their fore Feet, and tore it with their Teeth. 
The Master Horse ordered a Sorrel Nag, one
of his Servants, to untie the largest of these Animals, 

and take him into a Yard. The Beast and I
were brought close together; and our Countenances
diligently compared, both by Master and Servant,
who thereupon repeated several Times the Word
Yahoo. My Horror and Astonishment are not to
be described, when I observed, in this abominable
Animal, a perfect human Figure; the Face of it indeed
was flat and broad, the Nose depressed, the
Lips large, and the Mouth wide: But these Differences
are common to all savage Nations, where
the Lineaments of the Countenance are distorted by
the Natives suffering their Infants to lie grovelling
on the Earth, or by carrying them on their Backs,
nuzzling with their Face against the Mother's Shoulders. 
The Fore-feet of the Yahoo differed from
my Hands in nothing else, but the Length of the
Nails, the Coarseness and Brownness of the Palms,
and the Hairiness on the Backs. There was the
same Resemblance between our Feet, with the
same Differences, which I knew very well, although
the Horse did not, because of my Shoes
and Stockings; the same in every Part of our Bodies,
except as to Hairiness and Colour, which I
have already described. 
The great Difficulty that seemed to stick with
the two Horses, was, to see the rest of my Body
so very different from that of a Yahoo, for which I
was obliged to my Cloaths, whereof they had no
Conception: The Sorrel Nag offered me a Root,
which he held (after their Manner, as we shall
describe in its proper Place) between his Hoof and
Pastern; I took it in my Hand, and having smelt
it, returned it to him again as civilly as I could. 
He brought out of the Yahoo's Kennel a Piece of 

Ass's Flesh, but it smelt so offensively that I turned
from it with loathing; he then threw it to the Yahoo,
by whom it was greedily devoured. He afterwards
shewed me a Wisp of Hay, and a Fettlock
full of Oats; but I shook my Head, to signify, that
neither of these were Food for me. And indeed,
I now apprehended, that I must absolutely starve,
if I did not get to some of my own Species: For
as to those filthy Yahoos, although there were few
greater Lovers of Mankind, at that time, than myself; 
yet I confess I never saw any sensitive Being
so detestable on all Accounts; and the more I came
near them, the more hateful they grew, while I
stayed in that Country. This the Master Horse
observed by my Behaviour, and therefore sent the
Yahoo back to his Kennel. He then put his Fore-hoof
to his Mouth, at which I was much surprized,
although he did it with Ease, and with a Motion
that appear'd perfectly natural; and made other
Signs to know what I would eat; but I could not
return him such an Answer as he was able to apprehend; 
and if he had understood me, I did not see
how it was possible to contrive any way for finding
myself Nourishment. While we were thus engaged,
I observed a Cow passing by; whereupon I
pointed to her, and expressed a Desire to let me go
and milk her. This had its Effect; for he led me
back into the House, and ordered a Mare-servant
to open a Room, where a good Store of Milk lay
in Earthen and Wooden Vessels, after a very orderly
and cleanly Manner. She gave me a large Bowl
full, of which I drank very heartily, and found
myself well refreshed. 

About Noon I saw coming towards the House
a Kind of Vehicle, drawn like a Sledge by four
Yahoos. There was in it an old Steed, who seemed
to be of Quality; he alighted with his Hind-feet
forward, having by Accident got a Hurt in his Left
Fore-foot. He came to dine with our Horse, who
received him with great Civility. They dined in
the best Room, and had Oats boiled in Milk for
the second Course, which the old Horse eat warm,
but the rest cold. Their Mangers were placed circular
in the Middle of the Room, and divided into
several Partitions, round which they sat on their
Haunches upon Bosses of Straw. In the Middle
was a large Rack with Angles answering to every
Partition of the Manger. So that each Horse and
Mare eat their own Hay, and their own Mash of
Oats and Milk, with much Decency and Regularity. 
The Behaviour of the young Colt and Fole
appeared very modest; and that of the Master and
Mistress extremely chearful and complaisant to
their Guest. The Grey ordered me to stand by
him; and much Discourse passed between him and
his Friend concerning me, as I found by the Stranger's
often looking on me, and the frequent Repetition
of the Word Yahoo. 
I happened to wear my Gloves; which the
Master Grey observing, seemed perplexed; discovering
Signs of Wonder what I had done to my
Fore-feet; he put his Hoof three or four times to
them, as if he would signify, that I should reduce
them to their former Shape, which I presently did,
pulling off both my Gloves, and putting them into
my Pocket. This occasioned farther Talk, and I
saw the Company was pleased with my Behaviour, 

whereof I soon found the good Effects. I was
ordered to speak the few Words I understood; and
while they were at Dinner, the Master taught me
the Names for Oats, Milk, Fire, Water, and
some others; which I could readily pronounce after
him; having from my Youth a great Facility in
learning Languages. 
When Dinner was done, the Master Horse
took me aside, and by Signs and Words made me
understand the Concern he was in, that I had nothing
to eat. Oats in their Tongue are called
Hlunnh. This Word I pronounced two or three
times; for although I had refused them at first, yet
upon second Thoughts, I considered that I could
contrive to make of them a Kind of Bread, which
might be sufficient with Milk to keep me alive,
till I could make my Escape to some other Country,
and to Creatures of my own Species. The Horse
immediately ordered a white Mare-servant of his
Family to bring me a good Quantity of Oats in a
Sort of wooden Tray. These I heated before the
Fire as well as I could, and rubbed them till the
Husks came off, which I made a shift to winnow
from the Grain; I ground and beat them between
two Stones, then took Water, and made them into
a Paste or Cake, which I toasted at the Fire, and
eat warm with Milk. It was at first a very insipid
Diet, although common enough in many Parts of
Europe, but grew tolerable by Time; and having
been often reduced to hard Fare in my Life, this
was not the first Experiment I had made how easily
Nature is satisfied. And I cannot but observe,
that I never had one Hour's Sickness, while I staid
in this Island. It is true, I sometimes made a shift 

to catch a Rabbet, or Bird, by Springes made of Yahoos
Hairs; and I often gathered wholesome Herbs,
which I boiled, or eat as Salades with my Bread; 
and now and then, for a Rarity, I made a little
Butter, and drank the Whey. I was at first at a
great Loss for Salt; but Custom soon reconciled the
Want of it; and I am confident that the frequent
Use of Salt among us is an Effect of Luxury, and
was first introduced only as a Provocative to Drink; 
except where it is necessary for preserving of Flesh
in long Voyages, or in Places remote from great
Markets. For we observe no Animal to be fond
of it but Man: And as to myself, when I left this
Country, it was a great while before I could endure
the Taste of it in any thing that I eat. 
This is enough to say upon the Subject of my
Dyet, wherewith other Travellers fill their Books,
as if the Readers were personally concerned, whether
we fare well or ill. However, it was necessary
to mention this Matter, lest the World should
think it impossible that I could find Sustenance
for three Years in such a Country, and among such
Inhabitants. 
When it grew towards Evening, the Master
Horse ordered a Place for me to lodge in; it was
but Six Yards from the House, and separated from
the Stable of the Yahoos. Here I got some Straw,
and covering myself with my own Cloaths, slept
very sound. But I was in a short time better accommodated,
as the Reader shall know hereafter,
when I come to treat more particularly about my
Way of living. 
