



A Continuation of the State of England, under Queen Anne. The Character of a first Minister in the Courts of Europe. 

My Master was yet wholly at a Loss
to understand what Motives could
incite this Race of Lawyers to perplex,
disquiet, and weary themselves
by engaging in a Confederacy of
Injustice, merely for the Sake of
injuring their Fellow-Animals; neither could he
comprehend what I meant in saying they did it for
Hire. Whereupon I was at much Pains to describe
to him the Use of Money, the Materials it was
made of, and the Value of the Metals: That when
a Yahoo had got a great Store of this precious Substance,
he was able to purchase whatever he had a
mind to; the finest Cloathing, the noblest Houses,
great Tracts of Land, the most costly Meats and
Drinks; and have his Choice of the most beautiful
Females. Therefore since Money alone, was 

able to perform all these Feats, our Yahoos thought,
they could never have enough of it to spend or to
save, as they found themselves inclined from their
natural Bent either to Profusion or Avarice. That,
the rich Man enjoyed the Fruit of the poor Man's
Labour, and the latter were a Thousand to One in
Proportion to the former. That the Bulk of our
People was forced to live miserably, by labouring
every Day for small Wages to make a few live plentifully. 
I enlarged myself much on these and many
other Particulars to the same Purpose: But his
Honour was still to seek: For he went upon a
Supposition that all Animals had a Title to their
Share in the Productions of the Earth; and especially
those who presided over the rest. Therefore he
desired I would let him know, what these costly
Meats were, and how any of us happened to want
them. Whereupon I enumerated as many Sorts as
came into my Head, with the various Methods of
dressing them, which could not be done without
sending Vessels by Sea to every Part of the World,
as well for Liquors to drink, as for Sauces, and innumerable
other Conveniencies. I assured him,
that this whole Globe of Earth must be at least
three Times gone round, before one of our better
Female Yahoos could get her Breakfast, or a Cup to
put it in. He said, That must needs be a miserable
Country which cannot furnish Food for its own Inhabitants. 
But what he chiefly wondered at, was
how such vast Tracts of Ground as I described,
should be wholly without Fresh water, and the
People put to the Necessity of sending over the
Sea for Drink. I replied, that England (the dear 

Place of my Nativy) was computed to produce
three Times the Quantity of Food, more than its
Inhabitants are able to consume, as well as Liquors
extracted from Grain, or pressed out of the Fruit of
certain Trees, which made excellent Drink; and
the same Proportion in every other Convenience
of Life. But, in order to feed the Luxury and Intemperance
of the Males, and the Vanity of the
Females, we sent away the greatest Part of our necessary
Things to other Countries, from whence in
Return we brought the Materials of Diseases, Folly,
and Vice, to spend among ourselves. Hence it
follows of Necessity, that vast Numbers of our People
are compelled to seek their Livelihood by Begging,
Robbing, Stealing, Cheating, Pimping, Forswearing,
Flattering, Suborning, Forging, Gaming,
Lying, Fawning, Hectoring, Voting, Scribling,
Stargazing, Poysoning, Whoring, Canting, Libelling,
Free-thinking, and the like Occupations:
Every one of which Terms, I was at much Pains
to make him understand. 
That, Wine was not imported among us from
foreign Countries, to supply the Want of Water or
other Drinks, but because it was a Sort of Liquid
which made us merry, by putting us out of our
Senses; diverted all melancholy Thoughts, begat
wild extravagant Imaginations in the Brain, raised
our Hopes, and banished our Fears; suspended every
Office of Reason for a Time, and deprived us of
the Use of our Limbs, untill we fell into a profound
Sleep; although it must be confessed, that
we always awaked sick and dispirited; and that
the Use of this Liquor filled us with Diseases,
which made our Lives uncomfortable and short. 

But beside all this, the Bulk of our People supported
themselves by furnishing the Necessities or
Conveniencies of Life to the Rich, and to each
other. For Instance, when I am at home and
dressed as I ought to be, I carry on my Body the
Workmanship of an Hundred Tradesmen; the
Building and Furniture of my House employ as
many more; and five Times the Number to adorn
my Wife. 
I was going on to tell him of another Sort of
People, who get their Livelihood by attending the
Sick; having upon some Occasions informed his
Honour that many of my Crew had died of Diseases. 
But here it was with the utmost Difficulty,
that I brought him to apprehend what I meant. 
He could easily conceive, that a Houyhnhnm grew
weak and heavy a few Days before his Death; or
by some Accident might hurt a Limb. But that
Nature, who worketh all things to Perfection, should
suffer any Pains to breed in our Bodies, he thought
impossible; and desired to know the Reason of
so unaccountable an Evil. I told him, we fed on a
Thousand Things which operated contrary to each
other; that we eat when we were not hungry, and
drank without the Provocation of Thirst: That
we sat whole Nights drinking strong Liquors without
eating a Bit; which disposed us to Sloth, enflamed
our Bodies, and precipitated or prevented
Digestion. That, prostitute Female Yahoos acquired
a certain Malady, which bred Rottenness in
the Bones of those, who fell into their Embraces:
That this and many other Diseases, were propagated
from Father to Son; so that great Numbers
come into the World with complicated Maladies 

upon them: That, it would be endless to give him
a Catalogue of all Diseases incident to human Bodies; 
for they could not be fewer than five or six
Hundred, spread over every Limb, and Joynt: In
short, every Part, external and intestine, having
Diseases appropriated to each. To remedy which,
there was a Sort of People bred up among us, in the
Profession or Pretence of curing the Sick. And
because I had some Skill in the Faculty, I would
in Gratitude to his Honour, let him know the whole
Mystery and Method by which they proceed. 
Their Fundamental is, that all Diseases arise
from Repletion; from whence they conclude, that
a great Evacuation of the Body is necessary, either
through the natural Passage, or upwards at the
Mouth. Their next Business is, from Herbs, Minerals,
Gums, Oyls, Shells, Salts, Juices, Sea-weed,
Excrements, Barks of Trees, Serpents, Toads, Frogs,
Spiders, dead Mens Flesh and Bones, Beasts and
Fishes, to form a Composition for Smell and Taste
the most abominable, nauseous and detestable, that
they can possibly contrive, which the Stomach immediately
rejects with Loathing: And this they call
a Vomit. Or else from the same Store-house, with
some other poysonous Additions, they command us
to take in at the Orifice above or below, (just as the
Physician then happens to be disposed) a Medicine
equally annoying and disgustful to the Bowels; 
which relaxing the Belly, drives down all before it:
And this they call a Purge, or a Clyster. For Nature
(as the Physicians alledge) having intended the
superior anterior Orifice only for the Intromission
of Solids and Liquids, and the inferior Posterior for
Ejection; these Artists ingeniously considering that 

in all Diseases Nature is forced out of her Seat; 
therefore to replace her in it, the Body must be
treated in a Manner directly contrary, by interchanging
the Use of each Orifice; forcing Solids
and Liquids in at the Anus, and making Evacuations
at the Mouth. 
But, besides real Diseases, we are subject to
many that are only imaginary, for which the Physicians
have invented imaginary Cures; these have
their several Names, and so have the Drugs that are
proper for them; and with these our Female Yahoos
are always infested. 
One great Excellency in this Tribe is their Skill
at Prognosticks, wherein they seldom fail; their
Predictions in real Diseases, when they rise to any
Degree of Malignity, generally portending Death,
which is always in their Power, when Recovery is
not: And therefore, upon any unexpected Signs of
Amendment, after they have pronounced their
Sentence, rather than be accused as false Prophets,
they know how to approve their Sagacity to the
World by a seasonable Dose. 
They are likewise of special Use to Husbands
and Wives, who are grown weary of their Mates; 
to eldest Sons, to great Ministers of State, and often
to Princes. 
I had formerly upon Occasion discoursed with
my Master upon the Nature of Government in general,
and particularly of our own excellent Constitution,
deservedly the Wonder and Envy of the
whole World. But having here accidentally mentioned
a Minister of State; he commanded me some
Time after to inform him, what Species of Yahoo I
particularly meant by that Appellation. 

I told him, that a First or Chief Minister of
State, whom I intended to describe, was a Creature
wholly exempt from Joy and Grief, Love and Hatred,
Pity and Anger; at least makes use of no other
Passions but a violent Desire of Wealth, Power,
and Titles: That he applies his Words to all Uses,
except to the Indication of his Mind; That he
never tells a Truth, but with an Intent that you
should take it for a Lye; nor a Lye, but with a Design
that you should take it for a Truth; That those
he speaks worst of behind their Backs, are in the
surest way to Preferment; and whenever he begins
to praise you to others or to your self, you are from
that Day forlorn. The worst Mark you can receive
is a Promise, especially when it is confirmed with
an Oath; after which every wise Man retires, and
and gives over all Hopes. 
There are three Methods by which a Man may
rise to be Chief Minister: The first is, by knowing
how with Prudence to dispose of a Wife, a
Daughter, or a Sister: The second, by betraying
or undermining his Predecessor: And the third is,
by a furious Zeal in publick Assemblies against the
Corruptions of the Court. But a wise Prince would
rather chuse to employ those who practise the last
of these Methods; because such Zealots prove always
the most obsequious and subservient to the
Will and Passions of their Master. That, these Ministers
having all Employments at their Disposal, preserve
themselves in Power by bribing the Majority
of a Senate or great Council; and at last by an Expedient
called an Act of Indemnity (whereof I described
the Nature to him) they secure themselves 

from After-reckonings, and retire from the Publick,
laden with the Spoils of the Nation. 
The Palace of a Chief Minister, is a Seminary
to breed up others in his own Trade: The
Pages, Lacquies, and Porter, by imitating their Master,
become Ministers of State in their several Districts,
and learn to excel in the three principal Ingredients,
of Insolence, Lying, and Bribery. Accordingly,
they have a Subaltern Court paid to them by
Persons of the best Rank; and sometimes by the
Force of Dexterity and Impudence, arrive through
several Gradations to be Successors to their Lord. 
He is usually governed by a decayed Wench, or
favourite Footman, who are the Tunnels through
which all Graces are conveyed, and may properly
be called, in the last Resort, the Governors of the
Kingdom. 
One Day, my Master, having heard me mention
the Nobility of my Country, was pleased to
make me a Compliment which I could not pretend
to deserve: That, he was sure, I must have been
born of some Noble Family, because I far exceeded
in Shape, Colour, and Cleanliness, all the Yahoos
of his Nation, although I seemed to fail in Strength,
and Agility, which must be imputed to my different
Way of Living from those other Brutes; and
besides, I was not only endowed with the Faculty
of Speech, but likewise with some Rudiments of
Reason, to a Degree, that with all his Acquaintance
I passed for a Prodigy. 
He made me observe, that among the
Houyhnhnms, the White, the Sorrel, and the Iron-grey,
were not so exactly shaped as the Bay, the 

Dapple grey, and the Black; nor born with equal
Talents of Mind, or a Capacity to improve them; 
and therefore continued always in the Condition of
Servants, without ever aspiring to match out of
their own Race, which in that Country would be
reckoned monstrous and unnatural. 
I made his Honour my most humble Acknowledgements
for the good Opinion he was pleased to
conceive of me; but assured him at the same Time,
that my Birth was of the lower Sort, having been
born of plain, honest Parents, who were just able
to give me a tolerable Education: That, Nobility
among us was altogether a different Thing from the
Idea he had of it; That, our young Noblemen are
bred from their Childhood in Idleness and Luxury; 
that, as soon as Years will permit, they consume their
Vigour, and contract odious Diseases among lewd
Females; and when their Fortunes are almost ruined,
they marry some Woman of mean Birth, disagreeable
Person, and unsound Constitution, merely for
the sake of Money, whom they hate and despise. 
That, the Productions of such Marriages are generally
scrophulous, rickety or deformed Children; 
by which Means the Family seldom continues above
three Generations, unless the Wife take Care to
provide a healthy Father among her Neighbours,
or Domesticks, in order to improve and continue the
Breed. That, a weak diseased Body, a meager
Countenance, and sallow Complexion, are the true
Marks of noble Blood; and a healthy robust Appearance
is so disgraceful in a Man of Quality, that
the World concludes his real Father to have been a
Groom or a Coachman. The Imperfections of his 

Mind run parallel with those of his Body; being a
Composition of Spleen, Dulness, Ignorance, Caprice,
Sensuality and Pride. 
Without the Consent of this illustrious Body,
no Law can be enacted, repealed, or altered: And
these Nobles have likewise the Decision of all our
Possessions without Appeal. 
