

Having left Clarinthia and the other
weary Travellers to repose themselves
by the Bounty of Marcellus, I beg the Reader
to accompany me through a pleasant
Grove to Publius Scipio's House, where we
find this venerable Lord transported with
Joy at the unexpected Return of his beautiful
Daughter, after having been so long
given over for lost. Clelia's Happiness also
was inexpressible, to have again the Company
of her dear Cousin, who had been
the Associate of her tender Years. 
The two Ladies rising early, walk'd into
the Grove, to offer their Morning Oblations
to the Goddess Aurora, who had there
an Altar, (as before-mention'd) after which
they seated themselves in a pleasant Shade,
which the Day before had been the happy
Place of their Meeting; and at Clelia's
Request, Scipiana relates the following History. 
The History of Scipiana.
You are not Ignorant, Cousin, (said
Scipiana) that the Death of my Mother,
the Loss of my little Brother Scipio,
and the Banishment of the noble Catullus, 
so afflicted my Father, that he abandon'd
Rome, and retir'd to this his Country-Seat,
where I remain'd with him, leading a Life
somewhat particular for my Sex and Quality,
for I made the Study of Philosophy,
the Greek and Oriental Tongues, my Business
and Diversion. How far this is suitable
to our Sex I dare not pretend to determine,
the Men having taken Learning
for their Province, we must not touch upon
its Borders without being suppos'd Usurpers. 
However, since it did not displease
my Father, I regret not those Moments I
bestow'd in its Service, but think 'em still
my own, and not slipp'd with the rest of
my Life's Actions into the Abyss of Time
past, (which returns no more) but are always
present, or at least the Product of
those Moments, to wit, the good Morals I
learn'd, are always at my Command. 
'Tis probable, if Fortune had provided me
a more publick Station, I had employ'd
my Time otherwise; but in this Retirement
with my Father, I cou'd not find a
more agreeable Entertainment. 
When my Brother return'd in Triumph
from his Asian Conquest, you know then,
according to the Roman Custom, I was there
to meet the Triumpher amongst the other
Roman Ladies. Your Brother, the Noble
Fabius, in Pursuance of our Parents Desires,
offer'd me his Love, with a Gallantry 
suitable to his Youth and Quality, which I
receiv'd according to his Merit, and my
Duty; knowing it to be the Will of those
who had Power to dispose of us and our
Fortunes. Thus we thought we had built
our Amours on the safest and surest Foundation,
Duty, and Conveniency; but alas!
those fair Edifices are not able to resist the
Storms and Hurricanes which are raised by
cross Fortune, but fall with the first Shock,
as will appear by the sequel of my Story. 
Clodius, who, you know, makes Love to
all the World, did not spare me, I suppose
out of Curiosity, as knowing me to be a
Country Lady, he thought to find an Entertainment
particular and different from
others. What was his Motive it matters
not, I always let him know his Addresses
were unwelcome, and his loose Humour
disagreeable; nor did I scruple to own my
Kindnese to Fabius, since our Marriage was
so speedily to be celebrated. To which
Clodius answer'd, that Fabius should never
live with me, nor Clodius without me; and
this he endeavour'd to make good, in attempting
to assassinate Fabius in the Street
the Night before our Departure from Rome. 
You may remember that we were to have
gone together to this, my Father's House,
where the Nuptials were to have been celebrated,
but this Accident befalling Fabius,
prevented both him and you; wherefore 
my Brother and I took our Journey privately,
he sending his Equipage before,
whilst we came with no other Attendance
than his Gentleman Fidelius and my Woman
Milena, besides those necessary for the
Conduct of the Chariot. Our Journey the
first Day was very agreeable, except the
Regret we had for your Absence, and your
Brother's Illness, which detain'd you both. 
The next Day towards Evening, going by
a pleasant Wood, whose verdant Trees and
flowery Banks deserv'd our Regard, and
might have given us Entertainment, but
that a little Weariness had laid a kind of
drowsy Silence upon me, whereupon Asiaticus
merrily told me, if Fabius was here I
shou'd be better Company; have Patience,
Sister (continued he) his Wound will not
detain him long. To which I reply'd, that
the Love and Honour I had for my Cousin
Fabius oblig'd me to wish his speedy Recovery,
but not for my own Sake, in Regard
of our Marriage, which was to succeed; 
for I assure you (continu'd I) my Inclinations
to a marry'd Life are very little. No,
reply'd my Brother, your Books have
spoil'd you making you prefer the Conversation
of the Dead to that of the Living. 
But what think you, will you consent that
we make these your dead Companions augment
the Fireworks which will be prepar'd
for the celebrating your Nuptials? Take it 
not ill, dear Sister (continu'd he) that I
affront your Fancy touching a learned Woman,
I think it as misbecoming in your
Sex, as Effeminacy in ours; and a learned
Lady is as ridiculous as a spinning Hercules. 
Whilst we were in this Discourse by the
aforesaid Wood, we heard the Cries of a
Woman in Distress. Asiaticus being touch'd
with Pity and Generosity, forced himself
into the Forest to assist this distress'd Person,
leaving Fidelius to wait on me. We
continu'd our Journey with all convenient
Speed, in order to send Fidelius after his
Master, and in a little Time we arriv'd at
a magnificent House, where liv'd an ancient
Lady, Mother to Lucullus, and with
her Jemella, her Grand child. The good
Lady and Jemella were walking in the outward
Court, and very kindly invited me
to stay that Night; which Favour I accepted
without Ceremony, in Consideration
of sending Fidelius after his Master. 
Here I was entertain'd by these good
Ladies with all proper Civility and Respect. 
I slept but little, by Means of the Inquietude
I had in my Thoughts for my Brother. 
So rising early next Morning, Jemella, to
divert me, led me into the Garden, which
is indeed most surprizingly beautiful. You
know the Garden of Lucullus at Rome is
very fine, but far short of this his Country-Seat, 
which is most richly adorn'd with
Statues, Water-works, and all Sorts of rare
Trees and Plants, rang'd in exact Order,
making curious Walks, Arbors, and Recesses,
most pleasant and beautiful. After a
few Turns, we seated our selves and there
I took the Liberty to ask Jemella how Affairs
were between her and Marcellus, which
I thought was no uncivil Curiosity, their
Espousals being no Ways a Secret. Jemella
made no Difficulty to relate to me the
whole Affair; and because those Transactions
may concern you (my dear Cousin) I
will tell you what I can remember. 
The History of Marcellus and
Jemella, related by Scipiana.
In my tender Years (said Jemella) my
Father and the noble Marcellus being
tied in a strict Bond of Friendship, thought
to strengthen and perpetuate the same, by
uniting us, their only Children, in the
Bonds of Marriage; which they accomplish'd,
or rather began, (for ended it must
never be) when we were about seven or
eight Years of Age, for then we were marry'd
as Minors. In this State we liv'd at
Rome, 'till Time and Acquaintance with the
World made us begin to have a secret Regret
for being unlike the rest of our Companions,
who were single, and at Liberty 
to direct their Affections according to the
Bent of their Inclinations, of which most
desirable Privilege we found our selves depriv'd,
by our Parents too prudently forestalling
our Choice. This Regret was follow'd
by a Kind of Aversion for each other's
Company, and that Person that could most
wittily Pique or shock the other, was the
happy Conqueror. This, I suppose, our
Parents perceiv'd, which made 'em provide
for our Separation; for Marcellus was sent
to Athens to study among the rest of the
Roman Nobility; and I was sent hither to
this Country Solitude, with Design (I suppose)
to prevent my Thoughts from fixing
elsewhere in the Absence of Marcellus. 
When we were come to those Years in
which our Laws oblige us to give our final
Consent or Denial, my Lord Marcellus sent
for his Son, but he begg'd Leave to stay
yet another Year, which my Lord his Father
endeavour'd to palliate to me, by
telling me it was out of a true Honour
profound Respect, which he had for my
and Merit, made him deny his own
Happiness, thereby to render himself more
worthy my Acceptance. Whatever was
the Cause was to me indifferent, the Delay
was very agreeable; for beside the
Coldness between us, I had no Mind to
engage myself so soon in a marry'd State,
always counting this Time of Virginity 
more distinctly my own, as if snatch'd from
the round Ring of Eternity; tho' I must
confess I could wish to employ these Moments
otherwise than in this Solitude. But
thus it must be, I having no Mother, am
oblig'd to be under the Jurisdiction of my
Grandmother, who is a Lady of great Virtue
and Wisdom, but thoroughly fix'd to
this Country Abode, which is my Aversion. 
Before the Year was ended, which Marcellus
requir'd for the improving his Studies,
the Preparations were making for the Asian
Expedition, in which Scipio (your Noble
Brother) was constituted General. Marcellus,
who had always entertain'd a particular
Esteem for Scipio, and had now, it seems,
a greater Devotion to the God Mars than
Cupid, begg'd his Father to defer his Marriage,
and give him Leave to accompany
his beloved Friend Scipio, and with him to
gather at least one Branch of those Lawrels
which Fortune seem'd to have planted
for the Head of this her young Favourite. 
This pleas'd me so very much, that my
Father could scarce be persuaded but that
I had some secret Intrigue, which made
him recommend to my Grandmother an
exact Vigilance over me, even to a tiresom
Constraint, nor could I obtain Permission
to go to Rome, to see the Glorious Triumph
of Scipio, to congratulate the Triumpher, 
with the other Roman Ladies; which
so displeas'd me, that I made a hearty Resolution
never to be marry'd to Marcellus. 
In this state, Madam, (said she) are my Affairs
at present; I daily expect to be sent
for by my Father, to give my determinating
Voice before the Senate, which I resolve
shall be absolutely Negative; tho', at the
same Time, I count my self bound in Honour
to make some religious Pretence; for
to oppose the Choice of my Parents, without
some very laudable Reason, is to affront
their Judgments, and prefer my own; and,
at the same Time, all the World will believe
me to have some bye Intrigue, unless
I make Devotion the Veil of this my Disobedience; 
tho' I protest I am so far from
having any real Call or Inclination to a
religious Life, that I hate all Manner of
Constraint. How then shall I endure those
Hardships which attend the holy Recluses? 
This my ill founded Vocation makes me
suspect that of others, and tempts me almost
to conclude that the Vestals, and Diana's
numerous Train, have many of them
no better Motives than my self, to wit,
some worldly Inclination or Aversion, and
not the pure Love of the Gods, as they piously
pretend. But let what will happen,
I am resolv'd to hazard any Thing rather
than marry Marcellus, who has shew'd so
much Indifferency for me, that he has 
neither come, sent, nor taken any manner
of notice of me since his Return. I must
confess, reply'd I (said Scipiana) that no
Goodness can pardon such Negligence, and
'tis certain his Crimes deserve the capital
Punishment of an absolute Refusal; nevertheless,
I do not see that you are oblig'd
for that Reason to sequester your self from
all the Happiness of human Life; for in so
doing, you punish your innocent virtuous
self instead of him the Criminal. No, Madam,
(continued I) let me beg you to alter
that Resolution, and when you have given
your Refusal legally before the Senate, desire
to return hither to your Grandmother. 
And though the Place be remote, and by
its Distance from Rome something solitary,
yet, believe me, it will not be so long; 
for if you go not to Rome, your Beauty and
Merit will bring Rome hither; for Nature
makes not her Work in vain. She made
your Beauty to be admir'd and belov'd,
and when the World knows you are quite
detach d from Marcellus, every Heart will
hope for some small Place in your Favour. 
The Youths will come to adore your Beauty,
the Beauties to enjoy the Sweetness of
your Conversation, and the grave ones to
honour your Virtue, and altogether make
an agreeable Concourse of pleasant Company. 
We were in this Kind of Discourse,
when Fidelius came to us, and with a sad 
Countenance told us, that he had found
the Place of a very unlucky Rencounter,
and then bursting into Tears, said, he had
there found his Noble Master slain, whose
Body he intended to have brought away; 
but whilst he run about to catch his Horse,
(which was got from him) the Body was
gone. At this Relation I fainted quite away. 
Fidelius ran to the House to get some
little Cordial for me; in the mean Time,
Jemella, and Milena, my Woman, by rubbing,
and other Endeavours, brought me to
my self; when, all on the sudden, there
rush'd in at the Back Gate of the Garden
Clodius and his Servants, who, in spite of all
our Cries and Resistance, took us away; 
for Clodius being conscious of what he had
done to Fabius, had left Rome for fear of
being apprehended, and was now making
his Way to Sardinia, where he had a stately
Castle, and great Lordships. Being
alighted at this Place, to view a curious
Piece of carved Work over the Gate, he
heard our Voices, and finding the Gate
open, by what Accident or Negligence I
know not, he rush'd in and took us away as
before mention'd. We soon arriv'd on the
Sea-Coast, where he had a Vessel ready, in
which he imbark'd us, and for an Augmentation
of our Misfortune, he put us in
different Cabins, where, according to his
wild amorous Humour, he made Love to 
us both alternatively; and here he own'd
to me, that he had made that Attempt
on Fabius, purely for my sake, to deliver
me from the Necessity of casting away
my Wit, Youth, and Beauty, on a sober,
moral Plebeian Idol, as he was pleas'd
to term the noble and vertuous Fabius: And that out of no Motive (added he)
but an Itch of being counted the vertuous,
discreet, and dutiful Scipiana, a Pattern
to the Youth, and the Envy of
the Matrons, a Curb to the present licentious
Age, and an Example to the future. 
Thus you vertuous Pretenders please your
Vanity, and pride your selves in giving
Laws to the World; and this it is engages
you to accept of Fabius for an Husband; for
very well I know, that your Inclinations
are not towards him; therefore I hope you
will not refuse your Deliverer, who has generously
taken you out of this Prison of
Formality, in which you must have been
confin'd for your whole Life. Accept then
graciously this Service from your noble
Knight Errant Clodius. 
This kind of Raillery, as it was displeasing
to me in it self, so doubly offensive,
by reason of my sorrowful Circumstances; 
which, when he perceiv'd, he chang'd the
Manner of his Discourse, and with all Submission
and Respect endeavour'd to excuse
himself, and assert his Passion, which I 
mean not to repeat; for you know Clodius
is Possessor of an Affluence of Wit, and can
turn his Discourse as he pleases; which if
he would use to vertuous Ends, he might
deservedly have a Place in the Catalogue of
Worthies; but he always follows the wild
Mazes mark'd out by Fancy or Humour,
without any Regard to Reason or Judgment,
so that he renders himself a very odd
Original, which I hope will never be copy'd
by any of our noble Romans. 
Having thus persecuted me with his
Courtship, to which he found nothing but
disobliging Returns, he left me, and went
to Jemella, on the same Errand, as I suppose. 
When I was alone, Grief supply'd
the Place of Indignation, and the Thoughts
of my Brother's Death supplanted all other
Reflections, and every Reflection on that
sorrowful Subject pierc'd my Heart with
a new Wound of Grief; for whether I consider'd
his Glories, his Vertues, or his fraternal
Love to me, or any of his excellent
Endowments, all was Excess of Sorrow,
because I found my self depriv'd of all; 
great were his Merits, but greater was my
Love; the Excess of both transported me
so, that I wish'd my self dead, senseless, or
a Prey to some Sea-Monster. I condemn'd
those Philosophers as Teachers of false
Principles, who assert, that the Desire of
a Being is inseparable to our Nature; for 
the Misfortune of being cast into the Hands
of Clodius, as well as the Death of my Brother,
render'd Life to me an insupportable
Burden, that I thought nothing so agreeable
to my Wish as Death or Annihilation; 
but Experience, which often contradicts
and overthrows Speculation, soon
convinc'd me of the Extravagancy of these
Fancies; for all on a sudden there broke
out a Fire in the Ship, (by what Accident I
know not) which being past all Hopes
of extinguishing, we betook ourselves
to what Shifts we could to prolong our
Lives, if but for a few miserable Moments. 
And to shew the Instability of our Natures,
I, who but just before was so much in Love
with Death, now courted Life as earnestly
as any Pretender to her greatest Favours,
and was very glad to be fasten'd on a Piece
of the Hulk, and so committed to the other
Element, in Hopes it wou'd be more
merciful than that of Fire. 
As Scipiana was going on with her Discourse,
she was interrupted by a Youth approaching
them, who ask'd, if the House of
my Lord Publius Scipio was near, forasmuch
as he had Letters and Business of Consequence
to deliver to that noble Lord; 
wherefore the two Ladies, rising from their
Seat, commanded the Youth to follow
them, in order to conduct him to my Lord
Publius Scipio, where we will leave them for 
a Time, and return to the Strangers we
left at Marcellus's House, at the other Side
the Grove. 