







Such were the facts circumstantially communicated by
Sarah. They afforded to Constantia a theme of ardent meditation.
The similitude between her own destiny and that
of this unhappy exile, could not fail to be observed. Immersed
in poverty, friendless, burthened with the maintenance
and nurture of her father, their circumstances were
nearly parallel. The catastrophe of her tale, was the subject
of endless but unsatisfactory conjecture.
She had disappeared between the flight of Baxter and the
dawn of day. What path had she taken? Was she now
alive? Was she still an inhabitant of this city? Perhaps
there was a coincidence of taste as well as fortunes between
them. The only friend that Constantia ever enjoyed, congenial
with her in principles, sex and age, was at a distance
that forbade communication. She imagined that Ursula Monrose
would prove worthy of her love, and felt unspeakable
regret at the improbability of their ever meeting.
Meanwhile the dominion of cold began to be felt, and the
contagious fever entirely disappeared. The return of health
was hailed with rapture, by all ranks of people. The streets
were once more busy and frequented. The sensation of
present security seemed to shut out from all hearts the memory
of recent disasters. Public entertainments were thronged
with auditors. A new theatre had lately been constructed,
and a company of English Comedians had arrived during
the prevalence of the malady. They now began their
exhibitions, and their audiences were overflowing.
Such is the motly and ambiguous condition of human
society, such is the complexity of all effects from what
cause soever they spring, that none can tell whether this
destructive pestilence was, on the whole, productive of most
pain or most pleasure. Those who had been sick and had
recovered, found, in this circumstance, a source of exultation.
Others made haste, by new marriages, to supply the
place of wives, husbands and children, whom the scarcely
extinguished pestilence had swept away.
Constantia, however, was permitted to take no share in
the general festivity. Such was the color of her fate, that




the yellow fever, by affording her a respite from toil, supplying
leisure for the acquisition of a useful branch of knowledge,
and leading her to the discovery of a cheaper, more
simple, and more wholesome method of subsistence, had
been friendly, instead of adverse, to her happiness. Its
disappearance, instead of relieving her from suffering, was
the signal for the approach of new cares.
Of her ancient customers, some were dead, and others
were slow in resuming their ancient habitations, and their
ordinary habits. Meanwhile two wants were now created
and were urgent. The season demanded a supply of fuel,
and her rent had accumulated beyond her power to discharge.
M'Crea no sooner returned from the country, than
he applied to her for payment. Some proprietors, guided
by humanity, had remitted their dues, but M'Crea was not
one of these. According to his own representation, no man
was poorer than himself, and the punctual payment of all
that was owing to him, was no more than sufficient to afford
him a scanty subsistence.
He was aware of the indigence of the Dudleys, and was
therefore extremely importunate for payment, and could
scarcely be prevailed upon to allow them the interval of a
day, for the discovery of expedients. This day was passed
by Constantia in fruitless anxieties. The ensuing evening
had been fixed for a repetition of his visit. The hour
arrived, but her invention was exhausted in vain. M'Crea
was punctual to the minute. Constantia was allowed no
option. She merely declared that the money demanded
she had not to give, nor could she foresee any period at
which her inability would be less than it then was.
These declarations were heard by her visitant, with marks
of unspeakable vexation. He did not fail to expatiate on
the equity of his demands, the moderation and forbearance
he had hitherto shewn, notwithstanding the extreme urgency
of his own wants, and the inflexible rigor with which he had
been treated by his creditors. This rhetoric was merely
the prelude to an intimation that he must avail himself of
any lawful means, by which he might gain possession of his
own.
This insinuation was fully comprehended by Constantia,
but it was heard without any new emotions. Her





knowledge of her landlord's character taught her to expect but
one consequence. He paused to observe what effect would
be produced by this indirect menace. She answered, without
any change of tone, that the loss of habitation and
furniture, however inconvenient at this season, must be
patiently endured. If it were to be prevented only by the
payment of money, its prevention was impossible.
M'Crea renewed his regrets, that there should be no other
alternative. The law sanctioned his claims, and justice to
his family, which was already large, and likely to increase,
required that they should not be relinquished, yet such was
the mildness of his temper and his aversion to proceed to
this extremity, that he was willing to dispense with immediate
payment on two conditions. First, that they should leave
his house within a week, and secondly, that they should
put into his hands some trinket or moveable, equal in value
to the sum demanded, which should be kept by him as a
pledge.
This last hint suggested an expedient for obviating the
present distress. The lute with which Mr. Dudley was
accustomed to solace his solitude, was, if possible, more
essential to his happiness than shelter or food. To his
daughter it possessed little direct power to please. It was
inestimable merely for her father's sake. Its intrinsic value
was at least equal to the sum due, but to part with it was to
bereave him of a good, which nothing else could supply.
Besides, not being a popular and saleable instrument, it
would probably be contemptuously rejected by the ignorance
and avarice of M'Crea.
There was another article in her possession, of some value
in traffic, and of a kind which M'Crea was far more likely
to accept. It was the miniature portrait of her friend,
executed by a German artist, and set in gold. This image
was a precious though imperfect substitute for sympathy and
intercourse with the original. Habit had made this picture
a source of a species of idolatry. Its power over her
sensations was similar to that possessed by a beautiful
Madonna over the heart of a juvenile enthusiast. It was the
mother of the only devotion which her education had taught
her to consider as beneficial or true.






She perceived the necessity of parting with it on this
occasion, with the utmost clearness, but this necessity was
thought upon with indescribable repugnance. It seemed as if
she had not thoroughly conceived the extent of her calamity
till now. It seemed as if she could have endured the
loss of eyes with less reluctance than the loss of this inestimable
relic. Bitter were the tears which she shed over
it as she took it from her bosom, and consigned it to those
rapacious hands, that were stretched out to receive it. She
derived some little consolation from the promises of this man,
that he would keep it safely till she was able to redeem it.
The other condition, that of immediate removal from the
house, seemed at first sight impracticable. Some reflection,
however, shewed her, that the change might not only be
possible but useful. Among other expedients for diminishing
expense, that of limiting her furniture and dwelling to the
cheapest standard, had often occurred. She now remembered,
that the house occupied by Monrose, was tenantless;
that its antiquity, its remote and unpleasant situation, and its
small dimensions, might induce M'Crea, to whom it belonged,
to let it at a much lower price than that which he now exacted.
M'Crea would have been better pleased if her
choice had fallen on a different house, but he had powerful
though sordid reasons for desiring the possession of this
tenement. He assented therefore to her proposal, provided
her removal took place without delay.
In the present state of her funds this removal was impossible.
Mere shelter, would not suffice during this inclement
season. Without fuel, neither cold could be excluded, nor
hunger relieved. There was nothing, convertible into money,
but her lute. No sacrifice was more painful, but an irresistible
necessity demanded it.
Her interview with M'Crea took place while her father
was absent from the room. On his return she related what
had happened, and urged the necessity of parting with his
favorite instrument. He listened to her tale with a sigh.
Yes, said he, do what thou wilt, my child. It is unlikely
that any one will purchase it. It is certain that no one will
give for it what I gave; but thou may'st try.
It has been to me a faithful friend. I know not how I
should have lived without it. Its notes have cheered me




with the sweet remembrances of old times. It was, in some
degree, a substitute for the eyes which I have lost, but now
let it go, and perform for me perhaps the dearest of its
services. It may help us to sustain the severities of this
season.
There was no room for delay. She immediately set out
in search of a purchaser. Such a one was most likely to
be found in the keeper of a musical repository, who had
lately arrived from Europe. She entertained but slight
hopes that an instrument, scarcely known among her neighbors,
would be bought at any price, however inconsiderable.
She found the keeper of the shop engaged in conversation
with a lady, whose person and face instantly arrested
the attention of Constantia. A less sagacious observer
would have eyed the stranger with indifference. But Constantia
was ever busy in interpreting the language of features
and looks. Her sphere of observation had been narrow,
but her habits of examining, comparing and deducing, had
thoroughly exhausted that sphere. These habits were
eminently strong, with relation to this class of objects. She
delighted to investigate the human countenance, and treasured
up numberless conclusions as to the coincidence between
mental and external qualities.
She had often been forcibly struck by forms that were
accidentally seen, and which abounded with this species of
mute expression. They conveyed at a single glance, what
could not be imparted by volumes. The features and shape
sunk, as it were, into perfect harmony with sentiments and
passions. Every atom of the frame was pregnant with
significance. In some, nothing was remarkable but this
power of the outward figure to exhibit the internal sentiments.
In others, the intelligence thus unveiled, was remarkable
for its heterogeneous or energetic qualities; for its
tendency to fill her heart with veneration or abhorrence, or
to involve her in endless perplexities.
The accuracy and vividness with which pictures of this
kind presented themselves to her imagination, resembled the
operations of a sixth sense. It cannot be doubted, however,
that much was owing to the enthusiastic tenor of her own
conceptions, and that her conviction of the truth of the




picture, principally flowed from the distinctness and strength
of its hues.
The figure which she now examined, was small but of
exquisite proportions. Her complexion testified the influence
of a torrid sun, but the darkness veiled, without obscuring,
the glowing tints of her cheek. The shade was remarkably
deep, but a deeper still was required to become incompatible
with beauty. Her features were irregular, but defects of
symmetry were amply supplied by eyes that anticipated
speech, and positions which conveyed that to which language
was inadequate.
It was not the chief tendency of her appearance to seduce
or to melt. Her's were the polished cheek and the mutability
of muscle, which belong to woman, but the genius
conspicuous in her aspect, was heroic and contemplative.
The female was absorbed, so to speak, in the rational creature,
and the emotions most apt to be excited in the gazer,
partook less of love than of reverence.
Such is the portrait of this stranger, delineated by Constantia.
I copy it with greater willingness, because if we
substitute a nobler stature, and a complexion less uniform
and delicate, it is suited, with the utmost accuracy, to herself.
She was probably unconscious of this resemblance,
but this circumstance may be supposed to influence her in
discovering such attractive properties in a form thus vaguely
seen. These impressions, permanent and cogent as they
were, were gained at a single glance. The purpose which
led her thither was too momentous to be long excluded.
Why, said the master of the shop, this is lucky. Here
is a lady who has just been inquiring for an instrument of
this kind. Perhaps the one you have will suit her. If you
will bring it to me, I will examine it, and if it is complete,
will make a bargain with you.—He then turned to the lady
who had first entered, and a short dialogue in French ensued
between them. The man repeated his assurances to Constantia,
who, promising to hasten back with the instrument,
took her leave. The lute, in its structure and ornaments,
has rarely been surpassed. When scrutinized by this artist,
it proved to be complete, and the price demanded for it was
readily given.
By this means the Dudleys were enabled to change their




habitation, and to supply themselves with fuel. To obviate
future exigencies, Constantia betook herself, once more, to
the needle. They persisted in the use of their simple fare,
and endeavored to contract their wants and methodize their
occupations, by a standard as rigid as possible. She had
not relinquished her design of adopting a new and more
liberal profession, but though, when indistinctly and generally
considered, it seemed easily effected, yet the first steps
which it would be proper to take, did not clearly or readily
suggest themselves. For the present she was contented to
pursue the beaten tract, but was prepared to benefit by any
occasion that time might furnish, suitable to the execution of
her plan.
