


Mr. Wild with unprecedented Generosity
visits his Friend Heartfree,
and the ungrateful Reception he
met with. 
It hath been said then, that Mr. Wild
not being able on the strictest Examination
to find in a certain Spot of human
Nature called his own Heart, the least
Grain of that pitiful low Quality called
Honesty, had resolved, perhaps a little too
generally, that there was no such thing. He
therefore imputed the Resolution with which
Mr. Heartfree had so positively refused to
concern himself in Murther, either to a
Fear of bloodying his Hands, or the Apprehension
of a Ghost, or lest he should
make an additional Example in that excellent
Book called, God's Revenge against
Murther; and doubted not but he would
(at least in his present Necessity) agree without
Scruple to a simple Robbery, especially
where any considerable Booty should be proposed, 

and the Safety of the Attack plausibly
made appear; which, if he could prevail
on him to undertake, he would immediately
afterwards get him impeached, convicted,
and hanged. He no sooner therefore had
discharged his Duties to Hymen, and heard
that Heartfree had procured himself the
Liberties of the Fleet, than he resolved to
visit him, and propose a Robbery with all
the Allurements of Profit, Ease and Safety. 
This Proposal was no sooner made, than
it was answered by Heartfree in the following
Manner. 
“I might have hoped the Answer which
I gave to your former Advice would have
prevented me from the Danger of receiving
a second Affront of this Kind. 
An Affront I call it, and surely if it be so
to call a Man a Villain, it can be no less
to shew him you suppose him one. Indeed
it may be wondered how any Man
can arrive at the Boldness, I may say
Impudence, of first making such an Overture
to another; surely it is seldom
done, unless to those who have previously
betrayed some Symptoms of their 

own Baseness. If I have therefore shewn
you any such, these Insults are more pardonable; 
but I assure you, if such appear,
they discharge all their Malignance
outwardly, and reflect not even a Shadow
within; for to me, Baseness seems
inconsistent with this Rule, Of doing
no other Person an Injury from
any Motive or on any Consideration
whatever. This, Sir, is the
Rule by which I am determined to walk,
nor can that Man justify disbelieving me,
who will not own, he walks not by it
himself. But whether it be allowed to me
or no, or whether I feel the good Effects
of its being practised by others, I am resolved
to maintain it: For surely no
Man can reap a Benefit from my pursuing
it equal to the Comfort I myself enjoy: 
For what a ravishing Thought!
how replete with Extasy must the Consideration
be, that the Goodness of God
is engaged to reward me! How indifferent
must such a Persuasion make a Man
to all the Occurrences of this Life! What
Trifles must be represent to himself both
the Enjoyments and the Afflictions of 

this World! How easily must he acquiesce
under missing the former, and
how patiently will he submit to the latter,
who is convinced that his failing of
a transitory imperfect Reward here, is a
most certain Argument of his obtaining
one permanent and complete hereafter! 
Dost thou think then, thou little, paltry,
mean Animal, (with such Language did
he treat our truly great Man) that I
will forego such comfortable Expectations
for any pitiful Reward which thou canst
suggest or promise to me; for that sordid
Lucre for which all Pains and Labour are
undertaken by the Industrious, and all Barbarities
and Iniquities committed by the
vile; or a worthless Acquisition which such
as thou art can possess, can give or can rob
me of?” The former Part of this Speech
occasioned much yawning in our Hero,
but the latter roused his Anger; and he
was collecting his Rage to answer, when
Friendly and the Constable, who had been
summoned by Heartfree, on Wild's first
Appearance, entred the Room, and seized
the great Man just as his Wrath was
bursting from his Lips. 

The Dialogue which now ensued, is
not worth relating, Wild was soon acquainted
with the Reason of this rough Treatment,
and presently conveyed before a Magistrate. 
Notwithstanding the Doubts raised
by Mr. Wild's Lawyer on his Examination,
he insisting that the Proceeding was improper; 
for that a Writ de Homine Replegiando
should issue, and on the Return of that
a Capias in Withernam, the Justice inclined
to commitment, so that Wild was driven to
other Methods for his Defence. He therefore
acquainted the Justice, that there was
a young Man likewise with him in the
Boat, and begged that he might be sent
for, which Request was accordingly granted,
and the faithful Achates (Mr. Fireblood)
was soon produced to bear Testimony
for his Friend, which he did with so
much becoming Zeal, and went through
his Examination with such Coherence, (tho'
he was forced to collect his Evidence
from the Hints given him by Wild in the
Presence of the Justice and the Accusers,)
that, as here was direct Evidence against 

mere Presumption, our Hero was most honourably
acquitted, and poor Heartfree
was charged by the Justice, the Audience,
and all others, who afterwards heard the
Story, with the blackest Ingratitude, in attempting
to take away the Life of a Man,
to whom he had such eminent Obligations. 
Lest so vast an Effort of Friendship as
this of Fireblood's should too violently surprize
the Reader in this degenerate Age; it
may be proper to inform him, that besides
the Ties of Engagement in the same Employ,
another nearer and stronger Alliance
subsisted between our Hero and this Youth,
which latter was just departed from the
Arms of the lovely Lætitia, when he received
her Husband's Message: An Instance
which may also serve to justify those
strict Intercourses of Love and Acquaintance,
which so commonly subsist in modern
History between the Husband and
Gallant, displaying the vast Force of Friendship,
contracted by this more honourable
than legal Alliance, which is thought to be at
present one of the strongest Bonds of Amity 

between great Men, and the most reputable
as well as easy Way to Preferment. 
Four Months had now passed since
Heartfree's first Confinement, and his Affairs
had begun to wear a more benign Aspect; 
but they were a good deal injured
by this Attempt on Wild (so dangerous is
any Attack on a great Man) several of
his Neighbours, and particularly one or
two of his own Trade, industriously endeavouring,
from their bitter Animosity against
such Kind of Iniquity, to spread and exaggerate
his Ingratitude as much as possible; 
not in the least scrupling, in the violent
Ardour of their Indignation, to add some
small Circumstances of their own Knowledge
of the many Obligations conferred on
Heartfree by Wild. To all these Scandals
he quietly submitted, comforting himself in
the Consciousness of his own Innocence,
and confiding in Time, the sure
Friend of Justice, to acquit him. 