


Containing three Days. 



Containing a Portion of introductory Writing. 
When a Comic Writer hath
made his principal Characters as
happy as he can; or when a
Tragic Writer hath brought them to the
highest Pitch of human Misery, they both 

conclude their Business to be done, and
that their Work is come to a Period. 
Had we been of the Tragic Complexion,
the Reader must allow we were now very
nearly arrived at this Period, since it would
be difficult for the Devil, or any of his
Representatives on Earth, to have contrived
much greater Torments for poor
Jones, than those in which we left him in
the last Chapter; and as for Sophia, a
good-natured Woman would hardly wish
more Uneasiness to a Rival, than what she
must at present be supposed to feel. What
then remains to complete the Tragedy but
a Murder or two, and a few moral Sentences. 
But to bring our Favourites out of their
present Anguish and Distress, and to land
them at last on the Shore of Happiness,
seems a much harder Task; a Task indeed
so hard that we do not undertake to execute
it. In Regard to Sophia it is more
than probable, that we shall somewhere or
other provide a good Husband for her in
the End, either Blifil, or my Lord, or Somebody
else; but as to poor Jones, such are
the Calamities in which he is at present involved,
owing to his Imprudence, by which 

if a Man doth not become a Felon to the
World, he is at least a Felo de se; so destitute
is he now of Friends, and so persecuted
by Enemies, that we almost despair
of bringing him to any good; and if our
Reader delights in seeing Executions, I
think he ought not to lose any Time in
taking a first Row at Tyburn. 
This I faithfully promise, that notwithstanding
any Affection which we may be
supposed to have for this Rogue, whom
we have unfortunately made our Heroe,
we will lend him none of that supernatural
Assistance with which we are entrusted, upon
Condition that we use it only on very
important Occasions. If he doth not therefore
find some natural Means of fairly extricating
himself from all his Distresses, we
will do no Violence to the Truth and Dignity
of History for his Sake; for we had
rather relate that he was hanged at Tyburn
(which may very probably be the
Case) than forfeit our Integrity, or shock
the Faith of our Reader. 
In this the Antients had a great Advanvantage
over the Moderns. Their Mythology,
which was at that Time more firmly
believed by the Vulgar than any Religion 

is at present, gave them always an Opportunity
of delivering a favourite Heroe. 
Their Deities were always ready at the
Writer's Elbow, to execute any of his Purposes; 
and the more extraordinary the Intervention
was, the greater was the Surprize
and Delight of the credulous Reader. Those
Writers could with greater Ease have conveyed
a Friend from one Country to another,
nay from one World to another, and
have brought him back again, than a poor
circumscribed Modern can deliver him from
a Goal. 
The Arabians and Persians had an equal
Advantage in Writing their Tales from
the Genii and Fairies, which they believe
in as an Article of their Faith, upon the
Authority of the Koran itself. But we have
none of these Helps. To natural Means
alone are we confined; let us try therefore
what by these Means may be done for poor
Jones; though to confess the Truth, something
whispers me in the Ear, that he doth
not yet know the worst of his Fortune; 
and that a more shocking Piece of News
than any he hath yet heard remains for him
in the unopened Leaves of Fate. 




The generous and grateful Behaviour of Mrs. Miller. 
Mr. Allworthy and Mrs. Miller were
just sat down to Breakfast, when
Blifil, who had gone out very early that
Morning, returned to make one of the
Company. 
He had not been long seated before he
began as follows, ‘Good Lord! my dear
Uncle, what do you think hath happened? 
I vow I am afraid of telling it you, for fear
of shocking you with the Remembrance
of ever having shewn any Kindness to
such a Villain.’ ‘What is the Matter,
Child, said the Uncle, I fear I have shewn
Kindness in my Life to the Unworthy
more than once. But Charity doth not
adopt the Vices of its Objects.’ ‘O, Sir,
returned Blifil, it is not without the secret
Direction of Providence that you
mention the Word Adoption. Your adopted
Son, Sir, that Jones, that Wretch
whom you nourished in your Bosom, hath
proved one of the greatest Villains upon 

Earth.’ ‘By all that's sacred 'tis false,
cries Mrs. Miller. Mr. Jones is no Villain. 
He is one of the worthiest Creatures
breathing; and if any other Person
had called him Villain, I would have
thrown all this boiling Water in his Face.’ 
Mr. Allworthy looked very much amazed
at this Behaviour. But she did not give
him Leave to speak, before turning to him,
she cry'd, ‘I hope you will not be angry
with me; I would not offend you, Sir,
for the World; but indeed I could not
bear to hear him called so.’ ‘I must
own, Madam, said Allworthy very gravely,
I am a little surprized to hear you so
warmly defend a Fellow you do not know.’ 
O I do know him, Mr. Allworthy, said
she, indeed I do; I should be the most
ungrateful of all Wretches if I denied it. 
O he hath preserved me and my little Family; 
we have all Reason to bless him
while we live. —And I pray Heaven to
bless him, and turn the Hearts of his malicious
Enemies. I know, I find, I see he
hath such.’ ‘You surprize me, Madam,
still more, said Allworthy, sure you must
mean some other. It is impossible you
should have any such Obligations to the
Man my Nephew mentions.’ ‘Too surely,
answered she, I have Obligations to him of 

greatest and tenderest Kind. He hath
been the Preserver of me and mine. — 
Believe me, Sir, he hath been abused,
grosly abused to you, I know he hath, or
you, whom I know to be all Goodness
and Honour, would not, after the many
kind and tender Things I have heard you
say of this poor helpless Child, have so
disdainfully called him Fellow. Indeed,
my best of Friends, he deserves a kinder
Appellation from you, had you heard the
good, the kind, the grateful Things
which I have heard him utter of you; he
never mentions your Name but with a
Sort of Adoration. In this very Room
I have seen him on his Knees, imploring
all the Blessings of Heaven upon your
Head. I do not love that Child there
better than he loves you.’ 
‘I see, Sir, now, said Blifil, with one of
those grinning Sneers with which the
Devil marks his best Beloved, Mrs. Miller
really doth know him. I suppose you
will find she is not the only one of your
Acquaintance to whom he hath exposed
you. As for my Character, I perceive
by some Hints she hath thrown
out, he hath been very free with it, but I
forgive him.’ ‘And the Lord forgive 

you, Sir, says Mrs. Miller, we have all
Sins enough to stand in Need of his Forgiveness.’ 
‘Upon my Word, Mrs. Miller, said
Allworthy, I do not take this Behaviour
of yours to my Nephew, kindly; and I
do assure you as any Reflections which
you cast upon him must come only from
that wickedest of Men, they would only
serve, if that were possible, to heighten
my Resentment against him: For
I must tell you, Mrs. Miller, the
young Man who now stands before you,
hath ever been the warmest Advocate for
the ungrateful Wretch whose Cause you
espouse. This, I think, when you hear it
from my own Mouth, will make you wonder
at so much Baseness and ingratitude.’ 
‘You are deceived, Sir, answered Mrs.
Miller, if they were the last Words which
were to issue from my Lips, I would say you
are deceived; and I once more repeat it,
the Lord forgive those who have deceived
you. I do not pretend to say the
young Man is without Faults; but they
are the Faults of Wildness and of Youth; 
Faults which he may, nay which I am
certain he will relinquish, and if he should 

not, they are vastly over-ballanced by one
of the most humane tender honest Hearts
that ever Man was blessed with.’ 
‘Indeed, Mrs. Miller, said Allworthy,
had this been related of you, I should not
have believed it.’ ‘Indeed, Sir, answered
she, you will believe every Thing I have
said, I am sure you will; and when you
have heard the Story which I shall tell
you, (for I will tell you all) you will be
so far from being offended, that you will
own (I know your Justice so well) that I
must have been the most despicable and
most ungrateful of Wretches, if I had
acted any other Part than I have.’ 
‘Well, Madam, said Allworthy, I shall
be very glad to hear any good Excuse for
a Behaviour which I must confess, I think
wants an Excuse. And now, Madam,
will you be pleased to let my Nephew
proceed in his Story without Interruption. 
He would not have introduced a Matter
of slight Consequence with such a Preface. 
Perhaps even this Story will cure
you of your Mistake.’ 
Mrs. Miller gave Tokens of Submission,
and then Mr. Blifil began thus. ‘I am 

sure, Sir, if you don't think proper to
resent the ill Usage of Mrs. Miller, I
shall easily forgive what affects me only. 
I think your Goodness hath not deserved
this Indignity at her Hands.’ ‘Well,
Child, said Allworthy, but what is this
new Instance? What hath he done of
late?’ ‘What? cries Blifil, notwithstanding
all Mrs. Miller hath said, I am very
sorry to relate, and what you should never
have heard from me, had it not been
a Matter impossible to conceal from the
whole World. In short he hath killed a
Man; I will not say murdered,—for
perhaps it may not be so construed in
Law, and I hope the best for his Sake. 
Allworthy looked shocked, and blessed
himself; and then turning to Mrs. Miller,
he cried, ‘Well, Madam, what say you
now?’ 
‘Why, I say, Sir, answered she, that I
never was more concerned at any Thing in
my Life; but, if the Fact be true, I am
convinced the Man, who ever he is, was in
Fault. Heaven knows there are many
Villains in this Town, who make it their
Business to provoke young Gentlemen. 
Nothing but the greatest Provocation 

could have tempted him; for of all the
Gentlemen I ever had in my House, I
never saw one so gentle, or so sweet-tempered. 
He was beloved by every one in
the House, and every one who came near
it. 
While she was thus running on, a violent
Knocking at the Door interrupted the
Conversation, and prevented her from proceeding
further, or from receiving any Answer; 
for as she concluded this was a Visiter
to Mr. Allworthy, she hastily retired, taking
with her her little Girl, whose Eyes
were all over blubbered at the melancholy
News she heard of Jones, who used to call
her his little Wife, and not only gave her
many Playthings, but spent whole Hours in
playing with her himself. 
Some Readers may perhaps be pleased
with these minute Circumstances, in relating
of which we follow the Example of
Plutarch, one of the best of our Brother
Historians; and others to whom they may
appear trivial, will, we hope, at least pardon
them, as we are never prolix on such
Occasions. 




The Arrival of Mr. Western, with some
Matters concerning the Paternal Authority. 
Mrs. Miller had not long left the
Room, when Mr. Western entered; 
but not before a small wrangling Bout had
pass'd between him and his Chairmen; for
the Fellows who had taken up their Burden
at the Hercules Pillars, had conceived no
Hopes of having any future good Customer
in the Squire; and they were moreover
farther encouraged by his Generosity,
(for he had given them of his own Accord
Sixpence more than their Fare) they therefore
very boldly demanded another Shilling,
which so provoked the Squire, that he not
only bestowed many hearty Curses on them
at the Door, but retained his Anger after
he came into the Room; swearing, that all
the Londoners were like the Court, and
thought of nothing but plundering Country
Gentlemen. ‘D&wblank;n me, says he, if I
won't walk in the Rain rather than get
into one of their Handbarrows again. 

They have jolted me more in a Mile than
Brown Bess would in a long Fox Chace.’ 
When his Wrath on this Occasion was
a little appeased, he resumed the same passionate
Tone on another. ‘There, says
he, there is fine Business forwards now. 
The Hounds have changed at last, and
when we imagined we had a Fox to deal
with, Od-rat-it, it turns out to be a Badger
at last.’ 
‘Pray, my good Neighbour, said Allworthy,
drop your Metaphors, and speak a
little plainer.’ ‘Why then, says the Squire,
to tell you plainly, we have been all this
Time afraid of a Son of a Whore of a
Bastard of Somebody's, I don't know
who's not I—And now here is a confounded
Son of a Whore of a Lord, who
may be a Bastard too for ought I know
or care, for he shall never have a Daughter
of mine by my Consent. They have
beggared the Nation, but they shall never
beggar me. My Land shall never
be sent over to Hannover.’ 
‘You surprize me much, my good
Friend, said Allworthy.’ ‘Why, zounds! 
I am surprized myself, answered the 

Squire, I went to zee Sister Western last
Night, according to her own Appointment,
and there I was a had into a whole
Room-full of Women. —There was my
Lady Cousin Bellaston, and my Lady Betty,
and my Lady Catharine, and my Lady
I don't know who; d&wblank;n me if ever
you catch me among such a Kennel of
Hoop-petticoat B&wblank;s. D&wblank;n me, I'd
rather be run by my own Dogs, as one
Acton was, that the Story Book says was
turned into a Hare; and his own Dogs
kill'd un, and eat un. Od-rabbet-it, no
Mortal was ever run in such a Manner; 
if I dodged one Way, one had me, if I
offered to clap back, another snap'd me. 
O! certainly one of the greatest Matches in
England, says one Cousin (here he attempted
to mimic them) A very advantageous
Offer indeed, cries another Cousin. (for you
must know they be all my Cousins, thof I
never zeed half oum before. “Surely, says
that fat a&wblank;se B&wblank;, my Lady Bellaston,
Cousin, you must be out of your Wits to
think of refusing such an Offer.” 
‘Now I begin to understand, says Allworthy,
some Person hath made Proposals
to Miss Western, which the Ladies of 

the Family approve, but is not to your
liking.’ 
‘My Liking! said Western, how the Devil
should it? I tell you it is a Lord, and
those are always Volks whom you know I
always resolved to have nothing to do with. 
Did unt I refuse a matter of vorty Years
Purchase now for a Bit of Land, which
one oum had a Mind to put into a
Park, only because I would have no
Dealings with Lords, and dost think I
would marry my Daughter zu? Besides,
ben't I engaged to you, and did I ever
go off any Bargain when I had promised?’ 
‘As to that Point, Neighbour, said Allworthy,
I entirely release you from any
Engagement. No Contract can be binding
between Parties who have not a full
Power to make it at the Time, nor ever
afterwards acquire the Power of fulfilling
it.’ 
‘Slud! then, answered Western, I tell
you I have Power, and I will fulfil it. 
Come along with me directly to Doctors
Commons, I will get a Licence; and I
will go to Sister and take away the Wench 

by Force, and she shall ha un, or I will
lock her up and keep her upon Bread and
Water as long as she lives.’ 
‘Mr. Western, said Allworthy, shall I
beg you will hear my full Sentiments on
this Matter?’ ‘Hear thee! ay to be sure,
I will, answered he.’ ‘Why then, Sir,
cries Allworthy, I can truly say, without
a Compliment either to you or the young
Lady, that when this Match was proposed,
I embraced it very readily and heartily,
from my Regard to you both. An
Alliance between two Families so nearly
Neighbours, and between whom there
had always existed so mutual an Intercourse
and good Harmony, I thought a
most desirable Event; and with Regard
to the young Lady, not only the concurrent
Opinion of all who knew her, but
my own Observation assured me that she
would be an inestimable Treasure to a
good Husband. I shall say nothing of her
personal Qualifications, which certainly
are admirable; her Good-nature, her
charitable Disposition, her Modesty are
too well known to need any Panegyric:
but she hath one Quality which existed in
a high Degree in that best of Women,
who is now one of the first of Angels, 

which as it is not of a glaring Kind, more
commonly escapes Observation; so little
indeed is it remarked, that I want a Word
to express it. I must use Negatives on
this Occasion. I never heard any thing
of Pertness, or what is called Repartee
out of her Mouth; no Pretence to Wit,
much less to that Kind of Wisdom, which
is the Result only of great Learning and
Experience; the Affectation of which,
in a young Woman, is as absurd as any
of the Affectations of an Ape. No dictatorial
Sentiments, no judicial Opinions,
no profound Criticisms. Whenever I
have seen her in the Company of Men,
she hath been all Attention, with the Modesty
of a Learner, not the Forwardness
of a Teacher. You'll pardon me for it,
but I once, to try her only, desired her
Opinion on a Point which was controverted
between Mr. Thwackum and Mr. Square,
To which she answered with much Sweetness,
“You will pardon me, good Mr.
Allworthy, I am sure you cannot in Earnest
think me capable of deciding any
Point in which two such Gentlemen disagree.” 
‘Thwackum and Square, who both
alike thought themselves sure of a favourable
Decision, seconded my Request. She
answered with the same good Humour, 

I must absolutely be excused; for I will
affront neither so much, as to give my
Judgment on his Side.” ‘Indeed, she
always shewed the highest Deference to
the Understandings of Men; a Quality,
absolutely essential to the making a good
Wife. I shall only add, that as she is most
apparently void of all Affectation, this
Deference must be certainly real.’ 
Here Blifil sighed bitterly; upon which
Western, whose Eyes were full of Tears at
the Praise of Sophia, blubbered out, ‘Don't
be Chicken-hearted, for that ha her, d&wblank;n
me, shat ha her, if she was twenty Times
as good.’ 
‘Remember your Promise, Sir, cried
Allworthy, I was not to be interrupted.’ 
‘Well, shat unt, answered the Squire, I
won't speak another Word.’ 
‘Now, my good Friend,’ continued
Allworthy, ‘I have dwelt so long
on the Merit of this young Lady, partly
as I really am in Love with her
Character, and partly that Fortune (for
the Match in that Light is really advantageous
on my Nephew's Side) might
not be imagined to be my principal View 

in having so eagerly embraced the Proposal. 
Indeed I heartily wished to receive so
great a Jewel into my Family; but tho'
I may wish for many good Things, I
would not therefore steal them, or be
guilty of any Violence or Injustice to
possess myself of them. Now to force a
Woman into a Marriage contrary to her
Consent or Approbation, is an Act of
such Injustice and Oppression, that I wish
the Laws of our Country could restrain
it; but a good Conscience is never lawless
in the worst regulated State, and will
provide those Laws for itself, which the
Neglect of Legislators hath forgotten to
supply. This is surely a Case of that
Kind; for is it not cruel, nay impious, to
force a Woman into that State against her
Will; for her Behaviour in which she is
to be accountable to the highest and most
dreadful Court of Judicature, and to answer
at the Peril of her Soul. To discharge
the Matrimonial Duties in an adequate
Manner is no easy Task, and
shall we lay this Burthen upon a Woman
while we at the same Time deprive her
of all that Assistance which may enable
her to undergo it? Shall we tear her very
Heart from her, while we enjoin her Duties
to which a whole Heart is scarce equal. 

I must speak very plainly here, I
think Parents who act in this Manner are
Accessaries to all the Guilt which their
Children afterwards incur, and of Course
must, before a just Judge, expect to partake
of their Punishment; but if they
could avoid this, good Heaven! is there
a Soul who can bear the Thought of having
contributed to the Damnation of his
Child? 
‘For these Reasons, my best Neighbour,
as I see the Inclinations of this young Lady
are most unhappily averse to my Nephew,
I must decline any further Thoughts
of the Honour you intended him, tho' I
assure you I shall always retain the most
grateful Sense of it.’ 
‘Well, Sir, said Western, (the Froth
bursting forth from his Lips the Moment
they were uncorked) you cannot say but
I have heard you out, and now I expect
you'll hear me; and if I don't answer
every Word o't, why then I'll consent
to gee the Matter up. First then
I desire you to answer me one Question,
Did not I beget her? Did not
I beget her? answer me that. They say
indeed it is a wise Father that knows
his own Child; but I am sure I have the 

best Title to her, for I bred her up. But
I believe you will allow me to be her
Father, and if I be, am I not to govern
my own Child? I ask you that, am I not
to govern my own Child? And if I am
to govern her in other Matters, surely I
am to govern her in this which concerns
her most. And what am I desiring all
this while? Am I desiring her to do any
Thing for me? To give me any thing? 
—Zu much on t'other Side, that I
am only desiring her to take away half
my Estate now, and t'other half when I
die. Well, and what is it all vor? Why
is unt it to make her happy? It's enough
to make one mad to hear Volks talk; if
I was going to marry myself, then she
would ha Reason to cry and to blubber; 
but, on the contrary, han't I offered to
bind down my Land in zuch a Manner,
that I could not marry if I woud, seeing
as narro' Woman upon Earth would ha
me. What the Devil in Hell can I do
more? I contribute to her Damnation! 
—Zounds! I'd zee all the World d&wblank;d
bevore her little Vinger should be hurt. 
Indeed, Mr. Allworthy, you must excuse
me, but I am surprized to hear you talk in
zuch a Manner, and I must say, take it 

how you will, that I thought you had
more Sense.’ 
Allworthy resented this Reflection only
with a Smile; nor could he, if he would
have endeavoured it, have conveyed into
that Smile any Mixture of Malice or Contempt. 
His Smiles at Folly were indeed
such as we may suppose the Angels bestow
on the Absurdities of Mankind. 
Blifil now desired to be permitted to speak
a few Words. ‘As to using any Violence
on the young Lady, I am sure I shall
never consent to it. My Conscience
will not permit me to use Violence on any
one, much less on a Lady for whom,
however cruel she is to me, I shall always
preserve the purest and sincerest Affection; 
but yet I have read, that Women
are seldom Proof against Perseverance. 
Why may I not hope then by such
Perseverance at last to gain those Inclinations,
in which for the future I shall,
perhaps, have no Rival; for as for this
Lord, Mr. Western is so kind to prefer
me to him; and sure, Sir, you will not
deny but that a Parent hath at least a negative
Voice in these Matters; nay I
have heard this very young Lady herself 

say so more than once, and declare, that
she thought Children inexcuseable who
married in direct Opposition to the Will
of their Parents. Besides, though the
other Ladies of the Family seem to favour
the Pretensions of my Lord, I do
not find the Lady herself is inclined to
give him any Countenance; alas, I am
too well assured she is not; I am too
sensible that wickedest of Men remains
uppermost in her Heart.’ 
‘Ay, ay, so he does, cries Western.’ 
‘But surely, says Blifil, when she hears
of this Murder which he hath committed,
if the Law should spare his Life.’— 
‘What's that, cries Western, Murder,
hath he committed a Murder, and is there
any Hopes of seeing him hanged? — 
Tol de rol, tol lol de rol.’ Here he fell
singing and capering about the Room. 
‘Child, says Allworthy, this unhappy
Passion of yours distresses me beyond
Measure. I heartily pity you, and would
do every fair Thing to promote your Success.’ 

‘I desire no more,’ cries Blifil. ‘I am
convinced my dear Uncle hath a better
Opinion of me than to think that I myself
wou'd accept of more.’ 
‘Lookee,’ says Allworthy, ‘you have
my Leave to write, to visit, if she will
permit it,—but I insist on no Thoughts
of Violence. I will have no Confinement,
nothing of that Kind attempted.’ 
‘Well, well,’ cries the Squire, ‘nothing
of that Kind shall be attempted; we will
try a little longer what fair Means will
effect; and if this Fellow be but hanged
out of the Way—Tol lol de rol. I
never heard better News in my Life; I
warrant every Thing goes to my Mind. — 
Do, prithee, dear Allworthy, come and
dine with me at the Hercules Pillars: I
have bespoke a Shoulder of Mutton roasted,
and a Spare-rib of Pork, and a Fowl
and Egg-Sauce. There will be Nobody
but ourselves, unless we have a Mind to
have the Landlord; for I have sent Parson
Supple down to Basingstoke after my
Tobacco Box, which I left at an Inn
there, and I would not lose it for the
World; for its an old Acquaintance of 

above Twenty Years standing. I can
tell you Landlord is a vast comical Bitch,
you will like un hugely.’ 
Mr. Allworthy at last agreed to this Invitation,
and soon after the Squire went off,
singing and capering at the Hopes of seeing
the speedy tragical End of poor Jones. 
When he was gone, Mr. Allworthy resumed
the aforesaid Subject with much Gravity. 
He told his Nephew, ‘he wished
with all his Heart he would endeavour to
conquer a Passion, in which I cannot,’ 
says he, ‘flatter you with any Hopes of
succeeding. It is certainly a vulgar Error,
that Aversion in a Woman may be
conquered by Perseverance. Indifference
may, perhaps, sometimes yield to it; 
but the usual Triumphs gained by Perseverance
in a Lover, are over Caprice,
Prudence, Affectation, and often an exorbitant
Degree of Levity, which excites
Women not over-warm in their Constitutions,
to indulge their Vanity by prolonging
the Time of Courtship, even
when they are well-enough pleased with
the Object, and resolve (if they ever resolve
at all) to make him a very pitiful
Amends in the End. But a fixed Dislike, 

as I am afraid this is, will rather gather
Strength, than be conquered by
Time. Besides, my dear, I have another
Apprehension which you must excuse. 
I am afraid this Passion which
you have for this fine young Creature,
hath her beautiful Person too much for
its Object, and is unworthy of the Name
of that Love, which is the only Foundation
of matrimonial Felicity. To
admire, to like, and to long for the
Possession of a beautiful Woman, without
any Regard to her Sentiments towards
us, is, I am afraid, too natural: 
But Love, I believe, is the Child of Love
only; at least, I am pretty confident,
that to love the Creature who we are
assured hates us, is not in Human Nature. 
Examine your Heart, therefore,
thoroughly, my good Boy, and if, upon
Examination, you have but the least Suspicion
of this Kind, I am sure your own Virtue
and Religion will impel you to drive
so vicious a Passion from your Heart, and
your good Sense will soon enable you to
do it without Pain.’ 
The Reader may pretty well guess Blifil's
Answer; but if he should be at a Loss, we
are not, at present, at Leisure to satisfy 

him, as our History now hastens on to
Matters of higher Importance, and we can
no longer bear to be absent from Sophia. 



An extraordinary Scene between Sophia and
her Aunt. 
The lowing Heifer, and the bleating
Ewe in Herds and Flocks, may
ramble safe and unregarded through the
Pastures. These are, indeed, hereafter
doomed to be the Prey of Man; yet many
Years are they suffered to enjoy their Liberty
undisturbed. But if a plump Doe be
discovered to have escaped from the Forest,
and to repose herself in some Field or
Grove, the whole Parish is presently alarmed,
every Man is ready to set his Dogs
after her; and if she is preserved from the
rest by the good Squire, it is only that he
may secure her for his own eating. 
I have often considered a very fine young
Woman of Fortune and Fashion, when
first found strayed from the Pale of her
Nursery, to be in pretty much the same
Situation with this Doe. The Town is 

immediately in an Uproar, she is hunted from
Park to Play, from Court to Assembly,
from Assembly to her own Chamber, and
rarely escapes a single Season from the Jaws
of some Devourer or other: For if her Friends
protect her from some, it is only to deliver
her over to one of their own chusing, often
more disagreeable to her than any of
the rest: While whole Herds or Flocks of
other Women securely, and scarce regarded,
traverse the Park, the Play, the Opera,
and the Assembly; and though, for the
most Part at least, they are at last devoured,
yet for a long Time do they wanton
in Liberty, without Disturbance or Controul. 
Of all these Paragons, none ever tasted
more of this Persecution than poor Sophia. 
Her ill Stars were not contented with all
that she had suffered on Account of Blifil,
they now raised her another Pursuer, who
seemed likely to torment her no less than
the other had done. For though her Aunt
was less violent, she was no less assiduous
in teazing her, than her Father had been
before. 
The Servants were no sooner departed
after Dinner, than Mrs. Western, who had 

opened the Matter to Sophia, informed her,
‘That she expected his Lordship that very
Afternoon, and intended to take the first
Opportunity of leaving her alone with
him.’ ‘If you do, Madam,’ answered
Sophia, with some Spirit, ‘I shall take the
first Opportunity of leaving him by himself.’ 
‘How! Madam!’ cries the Aunt; 
‘is this the Return you make me for my
Kindness, in relieving you from your
Confinement at your Father's?’ ‘You
know, Madam,’ said Sophia, ‘the Cause
of that Confinement was a Refusal to
comply with my Father, in accepting a
Man I detested; and will my dear Aunt,
who hath relieved me from that Distress,
involve me in another equally bad?’ 
‘And do you think then, Madam,’ answered
Mrs. Western, ‘that there is no Difference
between my Lord Fellamar and
Mr. Blifil?’ ‘Very little, in my Opinion,’ 
cries Sophia; ‘and if I must be
condemned to one, I would certainly
have the Merit of sacrificing myself to
my Father's Pleasure.’ ‘Then my Pleasure
I find,’ said the Aunt, ‘hath very
little Weight with you; but that Consideration
shall not move me. I act from
nobler Motives. The View of aggrandizing
my Family, of ennobling yourself 

is what I proceed upon. Have you
no Sense of Ambition? Are there no
Charms in the Thoughts of having a Coronet
on your Coach?’ ‘None, upon
my Honour,’ said Sophia. A Pincushion
upon my Coach would please me just as
well.’ ‘Never mention Honour,’ cries
the Aunt. ‘It becomes not the Mouth of
such a Wretch. I am sorry, Neice, you
force me to use these Words; but I cannot
bear your groveling Temper; you
have none of the Blood of the Westerns
in you. But however mean and base
your own Ideas are, you shall bring no
Imputation on mine. I will never suffer
the World to say of me, that I encouraged
you in refusing one of the best
Matches in England; a Match which, besides
its Advantage in Fortune, would
do Honour to almost any Family, and
hath indeed, in Title, the Advantage of
ours.’ ‘Surely,’ says Sophia, ‘I am born
deficient, and have not the Senses with
which other People are blessed: There
must be certainly some Sense which
can relish the Delights of Sound and
Show, which I have not: For surely
Mankind would not labour so much,
nor sacrifice so much for the obtaining; 
nor would they be so elate and 

proud with possessing what appeared to
them, as it doth to me, the most insignificant
of all Trifles.’ 
‘No, no, Miss;’ cries the Aunt; ‘you
are born with as many Senses as other
People; but I assure you, you are not
born with a sufficient Understanding to
make a Fool of me, or to expose my
Conduct to the World. So I declare this
to you upon my Word, and you know,
I believe, how fixed my Resolutions are,
unless you agree to see his Lordship this
Afternoon, I will, with my own Hands,
deliver you Tomorrow Morning to my
Brother, and will never henceforth interfere
with you, nor see your Face again.’ 
Sophia stood a few Moments silent after this
Speech, which was uttered in a most angry
and peremptory Tone; and then bursting
into Tears, she cry'd, ‘Do with me,
Madam, whatever you please; I am the
most miserable, undone Wretch upon
Earth; if my dear Aunt forsakes me,
where shall I look for a Protector?’ 
— 
‘My dear Niece,’ cries she, ‘you will
have a very good Protector in his Lordship; 
a Protector, whom nothing but a
Hankering after that vile Fellow Jones
can make you decline.’ ‘Indeed, Madam,’ 

said Sophia, ‘you wrong me. How
can you imagine, after what you have
shewn me, if I had ever any such
Thoughts, that I should not banish them
for ever. If it will satisfy you, I will receive
the Sacrament upon it, never to see his
Face again.’ —But Child, dear Child,’ 
said the Aunt, ‘be reasonable: Can you
invent a single Objection?’ —‘I have
already, I think, told you a sufficient Objection,’ 
answered Sophia. —‘What?’ 
cries the Aunt; ‘I remember none.’ ‘Sure,
Madam,’ said Sophia, ‘I told you he
had used me in the rudest and vilest
Manner.’ ‘Indeed, Child,’ answered
she, ‘I never heard you, or did not understand
you: —But what do you mean by
this rude and vile Manner?’ ‘Indeed,
Madam,’ says Sophia, ‘I am almost ashamed
to tell you. He caught me in
his Arms, pulled me down upon the
Settee, and thrust his Hand into my Bosom,
and kissed it with such Violence,
that I have the Mark upon my left Breast
at this Moment.’ —‘Indeed!’ said Mrs.
Western. ‘Yes indeed, Madam,’ answered
Sophia; ‘my Father luckily came in
at that Instant, or Heaven knows what
Rudeness he intended to have proceeded
to.’ ‘I am astonished and confounded,’ 
cries the Aunt. ‘No Woman of the 

Name of Western hath been ever treated
so, since we were a Family. I would
have torn the Eyes of a Prince out, if
he had attempted such Freedoms with
me. It is impossible: Sure, Sophia, you
must invent this to raise my Indignation
against him.’ ‘I hope, Madam,’ said
Sophia, ‘you have too good an Opinion
of me, to imagine me capable of telling
an Untruth. Upon my Soul it is true.’ 
I should have stabbed him to the Heart
had I been present,’ returned the Aunt. 
Yet surely he could have no dishonourable
Design: It is impossible; he durst not: 
Besides, his Proposals shew he had not; 
for they are not only honourable but generous. 
I don't know; the Age allows
too great Freedoms. A distant Salute is
all I would have allowed before the Ceremony. 
I have had Lovers formerly, not
so long ago neither; several Lovers, tho'
I never would consent to Marriage, and
I never encouraged the least Freedom. It
is foolish Custom, and what I never would
agree to. No Man kissed more of me than
my Cheek. It is as much as one can bring
onesself to give Lips up to a Husband; 
and, indeed, could I ever have been persuaded
to marry, I believe I should not
have soon been brought to endure so
much.’ ‘You will pardon me, dear 

Madam,’ said Sophia, if I make one Observation: 
You own you have had many
Lovers, and the World knows it, even
if you should deny it. You refused them
all, and I am convinced one Coronet at
least among them.’ ‘You say true, dear
Sophy,’ answered she; ‘I had once the
Offer of a Title. Why then,’ said Sophia,
‘will you not suffer me to refuse
this once?’ ‘It is true, Child,’ said she,
I have refused the Offer of a Title; but
it was not so good an Offer; that is, not
so very, very good an Offer.’ —‘Yes,
Madam,’ said Sophia; ‘but you have
had very great Proposals from Men of
vast Fortunes. It was not the first, nor
the second, nor the third advantageous
Match that offered itself.’ ‘I own it was
not,’ said she. ‘Well, Madam,’ continued
Sophia, ‘and why may not I expect
to have a second perhaps better than this? 
You are now but a young Woman, and
I am convinced would not promise to
yield to the first Lover of Fortune, nay,
or of Title too. I am a very young
Woman, and sure I need not despair.’ 
Well, my dear, dear Sophy,’ cries the
the Aunt, ‘what would you have me say?’ 
Why I only beg that I may not be left alone,
at least this Evening: Grant me 

that, and I will submit, if you think,
after what is past, I ought to see
him in your Company.’ ‘Well, I will
grant it,’ cries the Aunt. ‘Sophy, you
know I love you, and can deny you nothing. 
You know the Easiness of my
Nature; I have not always been so easy. 
I have been formerly thought cruel; by
the Men I mean. I was called the cruel
Parthenissa. I have broke many a Window
that has had Verses to the cruel Parthenissa
in it. Sophy, I was never so handsome
as you, and yet I had something of
you formerly. I am a little altered. Kingdoms
and States, as Tully Cicero says in
his Epistles, undergo Alterations, and
so must the human Form.’ Thus run
she on for near half an Hour upon herself,
and her Conquests and her Cruelty, ‘till the
Arrival of my Lord, who, after a most tedious
Visit, during which Mrs. Western
never once offered to leave the Room, retired,
not much more satisfied with the
Aunt than with the Neice. For Sophia had
brought her Aunt into so excellent a Temper,
that she consented to almost every
Thing her Neice said; and agreed, that a
little distant Behaviour might not be improper
to so forward a Lover. 

Thus Sophia by a little well directed Flattery,
for which surely none will blame her,
obtained a little Ease for herself, and, at
least, put off the evil Day. And now we
have seen our Heroine in a better Situation
than she hath been for a long Time before,
we will look a little after Mr. Jones,
whom we left in the most deplorable Situation
that can well be imagined. 



Mrs. Miller and Mr. Nightingale visit Jones
in the Prison. 
When Mr. Allworthy and his Nephew
went to meet Mr. Western,
Mrs. Miller set forwards to her Son-in-Law's
Lodgings, in order to acquaint him
with the Accident which had befallen his
Friend Jones; but he had known it long
before from Partridge, (for Jones, when he
left Mrs. Miller, had been furnished with a
Room in the same House with Mr. Nightingale.) 
The good Woman found her
Daughter under great Affliction on Account
of Mr. Jones, whom having comforted
as well as she could, she set forwards to 

the Gatehouse, where she heard he was,
and where Mr. Nightingale was arrived
before her. 
The Firmness and Constancy of a true
Friend is a Circumstance so extremely delightful
to Persons in any Kind of Distress,
that the Distress itself, if it be only temporary
and admits of Relief, is more than
compensated by bringing this Comfort with
it. Nor are Instances of this Kind so rare,
as some superficial and inaccurate Observers
have reported. To say the Truth, Want
of Compassion is not to be numbered among
our general Faults. The black Ingredient
which fouls our Disposition is
Envy. Hence our Eye is seldom, I am
afraid, turned upward to those who are manifestly
greater, better, wiser, or happier
than ourselves, without some Degree of Malignity; 
while we commonly look downwards
on the Mean and Miserable, with sufficient
Benevolence and Pity. In Fact, I
have remarked, that most of the Defects
which have discovered themselves in the
Friendships within my Observation have arisen
from Envy only; a hellish Vice; and
yet one from which I have known very few
absolutely exempt. But enough of a Subject
which, if pursued, would lead me too far. 

Whether it was that Fortune was apprehensive
lest Jones should sink under the
Weight of his Adversity, and that she
might thus lose any future Opportunity of
tormenting him; or whether she really abated
somewhat of her Severity towards
him, she seemed a little to relax her
Persecution, by sending him the Company
of two such faithful Friends, and
what is perhaps more rare, a faithful Servant. 
For Partridge, tho' he had many
Imperfections, wanted not Fidelity; and
tho' Fear would not suffer him to be hanged
for his Master, yet the World, I believe,
could not have bribed him to desert his
Cause. 
While Jones was expressing great Satisfaction
in the Presence of his Friends, Partridge
brought an Account that Mr. Fitzpatrick
was still alive, tho' the Surgeon declared
that he had very little Hopes. Upon
which Jones fetching a deep Sigh, Nightingale
said to him; ‘My dear Tom, why
should you afflict yourself so upon an Accident,
which, whatever be the Consequence,
can be attended with no Danger
to you, and in which your Conscience
cannot accuse you of having been in the 

least to blame. If the Fellow should
die, what have you done more than
taken away the Life of a Ruffian in your
own Defence? So will the Coroner's
Inquest certainly find it; and then
you will be easily admitted to Bail: And
though you must undergo the Form of
a Trial, yet it is a Trial which many
Men would stand for you for a Shilling.’ 
‘Come, come, Mr. Jones,’ says Mrs.
Miller, ‘cheer yourself up. I knew you
could not be the Aggressor, and so I told
Mr. Allworthy, and so he shall acknowledge
too before I have done with him.’ 
Jones gravely answered, ‘That whatever
might be his Fate, he should always lament
the having shed the Blood of one
of his Fellow-Creatures, as one of the
highest Misfortunes which could have befallen
him. But I have another Misfortune
of the tenderest Kind—O! Mrs.
Miller, I have lost what I held most dear
upon Earth.’ ‘That must be a Mistress,’ 
said Mrs. Miller. ‘But come, come; I
know more than you imagine;’ (for indeed
Partridge had blabbed all) ‘and I have
heard more than you know. Matters
go better, I promise you, than you think; 

and I would not give Blifil Sixpence for
all the Chance which he hath of the
Lady.’ 
‘Indeed, my dear Friend, indeed,’ 
answered Jones, ‘you are an entire Stranger
to the Cause of my Grief. If you
was acquainted with the Story, you wou'd
allow my Case admitted of no Comfort. 
I apprehend no Danger from Blifil. I
have undone myself.’ ‘Don't despair,’ 
replied Mrs. Miller; ‘you know not what
a Woman can do, and if any Thing
be in my Power, I promise you I will do
it to serve you. It is my Duty. My
Son, my dear Mr. Nightingale, who is so
kind to tell me he hath Obligations to you
on the same Account, knows it is my
Duty. Shall I go to the Lady myself? 
I will say any Thing to her you would
have me say.’ 
‘Thou best of Women,’ cries Jones,
taking her by the Hand, ‘talk not of Obligations
to me;—but as you have been
so kind to mention it, there is a Favour
which, perhaps, may be in your Power. 
I see you are acquainted with the Lady
(how you came by your Information I
know not) who sits indeed very near my 

Heart. If you could contrive to deliver
this, (giving her a Paper from his Pocket)
I shall for ever acknowledge your Goodness.’ 
‘Give it me,’ said Mrs. Miller. ‘If I
see it not in her own Possession before I
sleep, may my next Sleep be my last. 
Comfort yourself, my good young Man; 
be wise enough to take Warning from
past Follies, and I warrant all shall be
well, and I shall yet see you happy with
the most charming young Lady in the
World; for so I hear from every one
she is.’ 
‘Believe me, Madam,’ said he, ‘I do
not speak the common Cant of one in my
unhappy Situation. Before this dreadful
Accident happened, I had resolved to
quit a Life of which I was become sensible
of the Wickedness as well as Folly. I
do assure you, notwithstanding the Disturbances
I have unfortunately occasioned in
your House, for which I heartily ask
your Pardon, I am not an abandoned
Profligate. Though I have been hurried
into Vices, I do not approve a vicious
Character; nor will I ever, from this
Moment, deserve it.’ 

Mrs. Miller expressed great Satisfaction in
these Declarations, in the Sincerity of which
she averred she had an entire Faith; and
now, the Remainder of the Conversation
past in the joint Attempts of that good
Woman and Mr. Nightingale, to cheer the
dejected Spirits of Mr. Jones, in which they
so far succeeded, as to leave him much
better comforted and satisfied than they
found him; to which happy Alteration nothing
so much contributed as the kind Undertaking
of Mrs. Miller, to deliver his
Letter to Sophia, which he despaired of
finding any Means to accomplish: For
when Black George produced the last from
Sophia, he informed Partridge, that she had
strictly charged him, on pain of having it
communicated to her Father, not to bring
her any Answer. He was moreover not a
little pleased, to find he had so warm an
Advocate to Mr. Allworthy himself in this
good Woman, who was in Reality one of
the worthiest Creatures in the World. 
After about an Hour's Visit from the
Lady, (for Nightingale had been with him
much longer,) they both took their leave
promising to return to him soon; during
which Mrs. Miller said, she hoped to bring
him some good News from his Mistress, 

and Mr. Nightingale promised to enquire
into the State of Mr. Fitzpatrick's Wound,
and likewise to find out some of the Persons
who were present at the Rencounter. 
The former of these went directly in
quest of Sophia, whither we likewise shall
now attend her. 



In which Mrs. Miller pays a Visit to Sophia. 
Access to the young Lady was by
no means difficult; for as she lived
now on a perfect friendly Footing with her
Aunt, she was at full Liberty to receive
what Visitants she pleased. 
Sophia was dressing, when she was acquainted
that there was a Gentlewoman below
to wait on her. As she was neither afraid,
nor ashamed, to see any of her own Sex,
Mrs. Miller was immediately admitted. 
Curt'sies, and the usual Ceremonials between
Women who are Strangers to each
other being past, Sophia said, ‘I have not the
Pleasure to know you, Madam.’ ‘No Madam,’ 
answered Mrs. Miller, ‘and I must
beg Pardon for intruding upon you. But
when you know what has induced me to 

give you this Trouble, I hope’—‘Pray,
what is your Business, Madam?’ said Sophia,
with a little Emotion. ‘Madam, we
are not alone,’ replied Mrs. Miller, in a low
Voice. ‘Go out, Betty,’ said Sophia. 
When Betty was departed, Mrs. Miller
said, ‘I was desired, Madam, by a very
unhappy young Gentleman to deliver you
this Letter.’ Sophia changed Colour
when she saw the Direction, well knowing
the Hand, and after some Hesitation, said
—‘I could not conceive, Madam, from
your Appearance, that your Business had
been of such a Nature. —Whomever you
brought this Letter from I shall not open
it. I should be sorry to entertain an unjust
Suspicion of any one; but you are
an utter Stranger to me.’ 
‘If you will have Patience, Madam,’ 
answered Mrs. Miller, ‘I will acquaint you
who I am, and how I came by that Letter.’ 
‘I have no Curiosity, Madam, to
know any thing,’ cries Sophia, ‘but I
must insist on your delivering that Letter
back to the Person who gave it you.’ 
Mrs. Miller then fell upon her Knees,
and in the most passionate Terms, implored
her Compassion; to which Sophia answered: 

Sure, Madam, it is surprizing you should
be so very strongly interested in the Behalf
of this Person. I would not think,
Madam,’—‘No, Madam, says
Mrs. Miller, you shall not think any
thing but the Truth. I will tell you all,
and you will not wonder that I am interested. 
He is the best natured Creature
that ever was born.’ —She then began
and related the Story of Mr. Henderson— 
After this she cried, ‘This, Madam, this
is his Goodness; but I have much more
tender Obligations to him. He hath
preserved my Child.’ —Here after shedding
some Tears, she related every thing
concerning that Fact, suppressing only those
Circumstances which would have most reflected
on her Daughter, and concluded
with saying, ‘Now, Madam, you shall
judge whether I can ever do enough for so
kind, so good, so generous a young Man,
and sure he is the best and worthiest of
all Human Beings.’ 
The Alterations in the Countenance of
Sophia, had hitherto been chiefly to her
Disadvantage, and had inclined her Complexion
to too great Paleness; but she new
waxed redder if possible, than Vermilion,
and cry'd, ‘I know not what to say, certainly 

what arises from Gratitude cannot
be blamed. —But what Service can
my reading his Letter do your Friend,
since I am resolved never—’Mrs.
Miller fell again to her Entreaties, and
begged to be forgiven, but she could not,
she said, carry it back. ‘Well, Madam,’ 
says Sophia, ‘I cannot help it, if you will
force it upon me. —Certainly you may
leave it whether I will or no.’ What
Sophia meant, or whether she meant any
thing, I will not presume to determine; 
but Mrs. Miller actually understood this
as a Hint, and presently laying the Letter
down on the Table took her Leave, having
first begged Permission to wait again on
Sophia, which Request had neither Assent
nor Denial. 
The Letter lay upon the Table no longer
than till Mrs. Miller was out of Sight; for
then Sophia opened and read it. 
This Letter did very little Service to his
Cause; for it consisted of little more than
Confessions of his own Unworthiness, and
bitter Lamentations of Despair, together
with the most solemn Protestations of his
unalterable Fidelity to Sophia, of which he
said, he hoped to convince her if he had 

ever more the Honour of being admitted
to her Presence; and that he could account
for the Letter to Lady Bellaston, in such a
Manner, that though it would not intitle
him to her Forgiveness, he hoped at least
to obtain it from her Mercy. And concluded
with vowing that nothing was ever
less in his Thoughts than to marry Lady
Bellaston. 
Though Sophia read the Letter twice
over with great Attention, his Meaning still
remained a Riddle to her, nor could her
Invention suggest to her any Means to excuse
Jones. She certainly remained very
angry with him, though indeed Lady Bellaston
took up so much of her Resentment
that her gentle Mind had but little left to
bestow on any other Person. 
That Lady was most unluckily to dine this
very Day with her Aunt Western, and in
the Afternoon, they were all three by Appointment
to go together to the Opera, and
thence to Lady Thomas Hatchet's Drum. Sophia
would have gladly been excused from
all, but she would not disoblige her Aunt; 
and as to the Arts of counterfeiting Illness,
she was so entirely a Stranger to them,
that it never once entered into her Head. 

When she was drest, therefore, down she
went, resolved to encounter all the Horrours
of the Day, and a most disagreeable one it
proved; for Lady Bellaston took every Opportunity
very civilly and slily to insult
her; to all which her Dejection of Spirits
disabled her from making any Return; and
indeed, to confess the Truth, she was at
the very best but an indifferent Mistress of
Repartee. 
Another Misfortune which befel poor
Sophia, was the Company of Lord Fellamar,
whom she met at the Opera, and who attended
her to the Drum. And though
both Places were too publick to admit of
any Particularities, and she was farther relieved
by the Musick at the one Place, and
by the Cards at the other, she could not
however enjoy herself in his Company:
for there is something of Delicacy in Women,
which will not suffer them to be even
easy in the Presence of a Man whom they
know to have Pretensions to them, which
they are disinclined to favour. 
Having in this Chapter twice mentioned
a Drum, a Word which our Posterity, it is
hoped, will not understand in the Sense it
is here applied, we shall, notwithstanding 

our present Haste, stop a Moment to describe
the Entertainment here meant, and
the rather as we can in a Moment describe it. 
A Drum then is an Assembly of well
dressed Persons of both Sexes, most of whom
play at Cards, and the rest do nothing at
all; while the Mistress of the House performs
the Part of the Landlady at an Inn,
and like the Landlady of an Inn prides herself
in the Number of her Guests, though
she doth not always, like her, get any Thing
by it. 
No wonder then as so much Spirits must
be required to support any Vivacity in these
Scenes of Dulness, that we hear Persons of
Fashion eternally complaining of the Want
of them; a Complaint confined entirely to
upper Life. How insupportable must we
imagine this Round of Impertinence to
have been to Sophia, at this time; how
difficult must she have found it to force
the Appearance of Gaiety into her Looks,
when her Mind dictated nothing but the tenderest
Sorrow, and when every Thought
was charged with tormenting Ideas. 
Night, however at last, restored her to
her Pillow, where we will leave her to 

soothe her Melancholy at least, though incapable
we are afraid of Rest, and shall pursue
our History, which something whispers
us is now arrived at the Eve of some great
Event. 



A pathetic Scene between Mr. Allworthy
and Mrs. Miller. 
Mrs. Miller had a long Discourse with
Mr. Allworthy at his Return from
Dinner, in which she acquainted him with
Jones's having unfortunately lost all which
he was pleased to bestow on him at their
Separation; and with the Distresses to which
that Loss had subjected him; of all which she
had received a full Account from the faithful
Retailer Partridge. She then explained the
Obligations she had to Jones; not that she was
entirely explicite with regard to her Daughter; 
for though she had the utmost Confidence
in Mr. Allworthy, and though there
could be no Hopes of keeping an Affair secret,
which was unhappily known to more
than half a Dozen; yet she could not prevail
with herself to mention those Circumstances
which reflected most on the Chastity 

of poor Nancy; but smothered that Part
of her Evidence as cautiously as if she had
been before a Judge, and the Girl was now
on her Trial for the Murder of a Bastard. 
Allworthy said, there were few Characters
so absolutely vicious as not to have the least
Mixture of Good in them. ‘However,’ 
says he, ‘I cannot deny but that you had
some Obligations to the Fellow, bad as
he is, and I shall therefore excuse what hath
past already, but must insist you never mention
his Name to me more; for I promise
you, it was upon the fullest and plainest
Evidence that I resolved to take the Measures
I have taken.’ ‘Well, Sir,’ says she,
I make not the least doubt, but Time
will shew all Matters in their true and natural
Colours, and that you will be convinced
this poor young Man deserves better
of you than some other Folks that
shall be nameless.’ 
‘Madam,’ cries Allworthy, a little ruffled,
‘I will not hear any Reflections on
my Nephew, and if you ever say a Word
more of that Kind, I will depart from
your House that Instant. He is the
worthiest and best of Men; and I once
more repeat it to you, he hath carried his 

Friendship to this Man to a bleamable
Length, by too long concealing Facts
of the blackest Die. The Ingratitude
of the Wretch to this good young Man
is what I most resent; for, Madam, I
have the greatest Reason to imagine he
had laid a Plot to supplant my Nephew
in my Favour, and to have disinherited
him.’ 
‘I am sure, Sir,’ answered Mrs. Miller,
a little frightened (for though Mr. Allworthy
had the utmost Sweetness and Benevolence
in his Smiles, he had great Terrour
in his Frowns) ‘I shall never speak
against any Gentleman you are pleased to
think well of. I am sure, Sir, such Behaviour
would very little become me, especially
when the Gentleman is your nearest
Relation; but, Sir, you must not be angry
with me, you must not indeed, for my
good Wishes to this poor Wretch. Sure,
I may call him so now, though once you
would have been angry with me, if I had
spoke of him with the least Disrespect. 
How often have I heard you call him your
Son? How often have you prattled to me
of him with all the Fondness of a Parent? 
Nay, Sir, I cannot forget the many tender
Expressions, the many good Things 

you have told me of his Beauty, and his
Parts, and his Virtues; of his Good-nature
and Generosity. —I am sure, Sir,
I cannot forget them: For I find them
all true. I have experienced them in my
own Cause. They have preserved my
Family. You must pardon my Tears,
Sir, indeed you must, when I consider the
cruel Reverse of Fortune which this poor
Youth, to whom I am so much obliged,
hath suffered; when I consider the Loss
of your Favour, which I know he valued
more than his Life, I must, I must lament
him. If you had a Dagger in your Hand,
ready to plunge into my Heart, I must
lament the Misery of one whom you have
loved, and I shall ever love. 
Allworthy was pretty much moved with
this Speech, but it seemed not to be with
Anger: For after a short Silence, taking
Mrs. Miller by the Hand, he said very
affectionately to her; ‘Come, Madam, let
us consider a little about your Daughter. 
I cannot blame you, for rejoicing in a
Match which promises to be advantageous
to her; but you know this Advantage,
in a great Measure, depends on the Father's
Reconciliation. I know Mr.
Nightingale very well, and have formerly 

had Concerns with him; I will make him a
Visit, and endeavour to serve you in this
Matter. I believe he is a worldly Man; 
but as this is an only Son, and the Thing
is now irretrievable, perhaps he may in
Time be brought to Reason. I promise
you I will do all I can for you.’ 
Many were the Acknowledgments which
the poor Woman made to Allworthy, for
this kind and generous Offer, nor could
she refrain from taking this Occasion again
to express her Gratitude towards Jones, to
whom, said she, I owe the Opportunity of
giving you, Sir, this present Trouble. Allworthy
gently stopped her; but he was too
good a Man to be really offended with the
Effects of so noble a Principle as now actuated
Mrs. Miller; and indeed had not this
new Affair inflamed his former Anger against
Jones, it is possible he might have
been a little softened towards him by the
Report of an Action which Malice itself
could not have derived from an evil Motive. 
Mr. Allworthy and Mrs. Miller had been
above an Hour together, when their Conversation
was put an End to by the Arrival of
Blifil, and another Person, which other Person 

was no less than Mr. Dowling, the Attorney,
who was now become a great Favourite
with Mr. Blifil, and whom Mr. Allworthy,
at the Desire of his Nephew, had
made his Steward, and had likewise recommended
him to Mr. Western, from whom the
Attorney received a Promise of being promoted
to the same Office upon the first Vacancy; 
and in the mean Time was employed
in transacting some Affairs which the
Squire then had in London, in Relation to
a Mortgage. 
This was the principal Affair which then
brought Mr. Dowling to Town, therefore
he took the same Opportunity to charge
himself with some Money for Mr. Allworthy,
and to make a Report to him of
some other Business; in all which as it was
of much too dull a Nature to find any Place
in this History, we will leave the Uncle,
Nephew, and their Lawyer concerned, and
resort to other Matters. 




Containing various Matters. 
Before we return to Mr. Jones,
we will take one more View of Sophia. 
Though that young Lady had brought
her Aunt into great good Humour by those
soothing Methods, which we have before
related, she had not brought her in the
least to abate of her Zeal for the Match
with Lord Fellamar; this Zeal was now inflamed
by Lady Bellaston, who had told her
the preceding Evening, that she was well
satisfied from the Conduct of Sophia, and
from her Carriage to his Lordship, that all
Delays would be dangerous, and that the
only Way to succeed, was to press the Match
forward with such Rapidity, that the young
Lady should have no Time to reflect,
and be obliged to consent, while she scarce
knew what she did. In which Manner,
she said, one half of the Marriages among
People of Condition were brought about. 
A Fact very probably true, and to which I
suppose is owing the mutual Tenderness which 

afterwards exists among so many happy
Couples. 
A Hint of the same Kind was given by
the same Lady to Lord Fellamar; and both
these so readily embraced the Advice
that the very next Day was, at his Lordship's
Request, appointed by Mrs. Western
for a private Interview between the young
Parties. This was communicated to Sophia
by her Aunt, and insisted upon in
such high Terms, that, after having urged
every Thing she possibly could invent
against it, without the least Effect, she
at last agreed to give the highest Instance
of Complaisance which any young Lady
can give, and consented to see his Lordship. 
As Conversations of this Kind afford no
great Entertainment, we shall be excused
from reciting the whole that past at this Interview; 
in which, after his Lordship had
made many Declarations of the most pure
and ardent Passion, to the silent, blushing
Sophia; she at last collected all the Spirits
she could raise, and with a trembling low
Voice, said, ‘My Lord, you must be
yourself conscious whether your former
Behaviour to me hath been consistent with 

the Professions you now make.’ ‘Is there,
answered he, no Way by which I
can attone for Madness? What I did,
I am afraid must have too plainly convinced
you, that the Violence of Love
had deprived me of my Senses.’ ‘Indeed,
my Lord, said she, it is in your
Power to give me a Proof of an Affection
which I much rather wish to encourage,
and to which I should think myself more
beholden.’ ‘Name it, Madam, said my
Lord, very warmly.’ —My Lord, says
she, looking down upon her Fan, I know
you must be sensible how uneasy this pretended
Passion of yours hath made me.’ 
—Can you be so cruel to call it pretended?
says he.’ ‘Yes, my Lord, answered
Sophia, all Professions of Love to
those whom we persecute, are most insulting
Pretences. This Pursuit of yours is to
me a most cruel Persecution; nay, it is taking
a most ungenerous Advantage of my
unhappy Situation.’ ‘Most lovely, most adorable
Charmer, do not accuse me, cries
he, of taking an ungenerous Advantage,
while I have no Thoughts but what are
directed to your Honour and Interest, and
while I have no View, no Hope, no Ambition
but to throw myself, Honour, Fortune,
every Thing at your Feet. My 

Lord, says she, it is that Fortune and
those Honours which give you the Advantage
of which I complain. These
are the Charms which have seduced my
Relations, but to me they are Things indifferent. 
If your Lordship will merit
my Gratitude, there is but one Way.’ — 
Pardon me, divine Creature, said he,
there can be none. All I can do for you
is so much your due, and will give me so
much Pleasure, that there is no room for
your Gratitude.’ —‘Indeed, my Lord, answered
she, you may obtain my Gratitude,
my good Opinion, every kind Thought and
Wish which it is in my Power to bestow,
nay you may obtain them with Ease; 
for sure to a generous Mind it must be
easy to grant my Request. Let me beseech
you then, to cease a Pursuit, in
which you can never have any Success. 
For your own Sake as well as mine, I
entreat this Favour; for sure you are too
noble to have any Pleasure in tormenting
an unhappy Creature. What can your
Lordship propose but Uneasiness to yourself,
by a Perseverance, which, upon my Honour,
upon my Soul, cannot, shall not
prevail with me, whatever Distresses you
may drive me to.’ Here my Lord fetched a
deep Sigh, and then said,—‘Is it then, Madam, 

that I am so unhappy to be the Object
of your Dislike and Scorn; or will you
pardon me if I suspect there is some other?’ 
—Here he hesitated, and Sophia
answered with some Spirit, ‘My Lord,
I shall not be accountable to you for the
Reasons of my Conduct. I am obliged
to your Lordship for the generous Offer
you have made; I own it is beyond either
my Deserts or Expectations; yet I
hope, my Lord, you will not insist on
my Reasons, when I declare I cannot accept
it.’ Lord Fellamar returned much
to this, which we do not perfectly understand,
and perhaps it could not all be strictly
reconciled either to Sense or Grammar; 
but he concluded his ranting Speech with
saying, ‘That if she has pre-engaged herself
to any Gentleman, however unhappy
it would make him, he should think himself
bound in Honour to desist.’ Perhaps
my Lord laid too much Emphasis
on the Word Gentleman; for we cannot
else well account for the Indignation with
which he inspired Sophia, who, in her Answer,
seemed greatly to resent some Affront
he had given her. 
While she was speaking, with her Voice
more raised than usual, Mrs. Western 

came into the Room, the Fire glaring in
her Cheeks, and the Flames bursting from
her Eyes. ‘I am ashamed, says she, my
Lord, of the Reception which you have
met with. I assure your Lordship we are
all sensible of the Honour done us; 
and I must tell you, Miss Western, the
Family expect a different Behaviour from
you.’ Here my Lord interfered on Behalf
of the young Lady, but to no Purpose; 
the Aunt proceeded till Sophia pulled
out her Handkerchief, threw herself
into a Chair, and burst into a violent Fit
of Tears. 
The Remainder of the Conversation between
Mrs. Western and his Lordship, till
the latter withdrew, consisted of bitter Lamentations
on his Side, and on hers of the
strongest Assurances that her Niece should
and would consent to all he wished. ‘Indeed,
my Lord, says she, the Girl hath
had a foolish Education, neither adapted
to her Fortune nor her Family. Her
Father, I am sorry to say it, is to blame
for every Thing. The Girl hath silly
Country Notions of Bashfulness. Nothing
else, my Lord, upon my Honour; I am
convinced she hath a good Understanding 

at the Bottom, and will be brought to
Reason.’ 
This last Speech was made in the Absence
of Sophia, for she had sometime before
left the Room with more Appearance
of Passion than she had ever shewn on any
Occasion; and now his Lordship, after many
Expressions of Thanks to Mrs. Western,
many ardent Professions of Passion
which nothing could conquer, and many
Assurances of Perseverance which Mrs.
Western highly encouraged, took his Leave
for this Time. 
Before we relate what now passed between
Mrs. Western and Sophia, it may be
proper to mention an unfortunate Accident
which had happened, and which had occasioned
the Return of Mrs. Western with so
much Fury as we have seen. 
The Reader then must know, that the
Maid who at present attended on Sophia, was
recommended by Lady Bellaston, with whom
she had lived for some Time in the Capacity
of a Comb-brush; she was a very sensible Girl,
and had received the strictest Instructions
to watch her young Lady very carefully. 
These Instructions, we are sorry to say, 

were communicated to her by Mrs. Honour,
into whose Favour Lady Bellaston had
now so ingratiated herself, that the violent
Affection which the good Waiting-Woman
had formerly borne to Sophia, was entirely
obliterated by that great Attachment which
she had to her new Mistress. 
Now when Mrs. Miller was departed,
Betty (for that was the Name of the Girl)
returning to her young Lady, found her
very attentively engaged in reading a long
Letter, and the visible Emotions which she
betrayed on that Occasion, might have well
accounted for some Suspicions which the
Girl entertained; but indeed they had yet
a stronger Foundation, for she had overheard
the whole Scene which passed between
Sophia and Mrs. Miller. 
Mrs. Western was acquainted with all
this Matter by Betty, who, after receiving
many Commendations, and some Rewards
for her Fidelity, was ordered, that if the Woman
who brought the Letter, came again,
she should introduce her to Mrs. Western
herself. 
Unluckily Mrs. Miller returned at the
very time when Sophia was engaged with 

his Lordship. Betty, according to Order,
sent her directly to the Aunt; who being
Mistress of so many Circumstances relating
to what had past the Day before, easily imposed
upon the poor Woman to believe that
Sophia had communicated the whole Affair; 
and so pumped every thing out of her which
she knew, relating to the Letter, and relating
to Jones. 
This poor Creature might indeed be called
Simplicity itself. She was one of that
Order of Mortals, who are apt to believe
every thing which is said to them; to
whom Nature hath neither indulged the offensive
nor defensive Weapons of Deceit,
and who are consequently liable to be imposed
upon by any one, who will only be
at the Expence of a little Falshood for that
Purpose. Mrs. Western having drained
Mrs. Miller of all she knew, which indeed
was but little, but which was sufficient to
make the Aunt suspect a great deal, dismissed
her, with Assurances that Sophia
would not see her, that she would send no
Answer to the Letter, nor ever receive another; 
nor did she suffer her to depart, without
a handsome Lecture on the Merits of
an Office, to which she could afford no
better Name than that of Procuress.— 

This discovery had greatly discomposed
her Temper, when coming into the Apartment
next to that in which the Lovers were,
she overheard Sophia very warmly protesting
against his Lordship's Addresses. At
which the Rage already kindled, burst forth,
and she rushed in upon her Niece in a
furious Manner, as we have already described
together with what past at that time
till his Lordship's Departure. 
No sooner was Lord Fellamar gone, than
Mrs. Western returned to Sophia, whom she
upbraided in the most bitter Terms, for
the ill Use she had made of the Confidence
reposed in her; and for her Treachery in
conversing with a Man, with whom she had
offered but the Day before to bind herself
in the most solemn Oath, never more to
have any Conversation. Sophia protested
she had maintained no such Conversation. 
‘How! Miss Western,’ said the Aunt,
will you deny your receiving a Letter
from him yesterday?’ ‘A Letter, Madam,’ 
answered Sophia, somewhat surprized. 
‘It is not very well bred, Miss,
replies the Aunt, ‘to repeat my Words. 
I say a Letter, and I insist upon your
shewing it me immediately.’ ‘I scorn a
Lie, Madam,’ said Sophia, ‘I did receive 

a Letter, but it was without my
Desire, and indeed I may say against my
Consent.’ ‘Indeed, indeed, Miss,’ cries
the Aunt, ‘you ought to be ashamed
of owning you had received it at all; 
but where is the Letter? for I will see it.’ 
To this peremptory Demand Sophia
paused some Time before she returned an
Answer; and at last only excused herself
by declaring she had not the Letter in her
Pocket, which was indeed true; upon which
her Aunt losing all manner of Patience, asked
her Niece this short Question, whether
she would resolve to marry Lord Fellamar or
no? to which she received the strongest Negative. 
Mrs. Western then replied with an
Oath, or something very like one, that she
would early the next Morning deliver her
back into her Father's Hands. 
Sophia then began to reason with her Aunt
in the following manner; ‘Why, Madam,
must I of Necessity be forced to
marry at all? consider how cruel you would
have thought it in your own Case, and how
much kinder your Parents were in leaving
you to your Liberty. What have I done
to forfeit this Liberty? I will never marry 

contrary to my Father's Consent, nor
without asking yours. —And when I ask
the Consent of either improperly it will
be then time enough to force some other
Marriage upon me.’ ‘Can I bear to hear
this,’ cries Mrs. Western, ‘from a Girl,
who hath now a Letter from a Murderer
in her Pocket?’ ‘I have no such Letter,
I promise you,’ answered Sophia; ‘and
if he be a Murderer, he will soon be in
no Condition to give you any further
Disturbance.’ ‘How, Miss Western,’ 
said the Aunt, ‘have you the Assurance
to speak of him in this Manner, to own
your Affection for such a Villain to my
Face!’ ‘Sure, Madam,’ said Sophia,
you put a very strange Construction on
my Words.’ ‘Indeed, Miss Western,’ 
cries the Lady, ‘I shall not bear this
Usage; you have learnt of your Father
this manner of treating me; he hath
taught you to give me the Lie. He hath
totally ruined you by his false System of
Education; and please Heaven he shall
have the Comfort of its Fruits: For
once more I declare to you, that to-morrow
Morning I will carry you back. I
will withdraw all my Forces from the 

Field, and remain henceforth, like the
wise King of Prussia, in a State of perfect
Neutrality. You are both too wise to be
regulated by my Measures; so prepare
yourself, for to-morrow Morning you
shall evacuate this House. 
Sophia remonstrated all she could; but
her Aunt was deaf to all she said. In this
Resolution therefore we must at present leave
her, as there seems to be no Hopes of
bringing her to change it. 




What happened to Mr. Jones in the Prison. 
Mr. Jones past above twenty-four
melancholy Hours by himself, unless
when relieved by the Company of Partridge, before Mr. Nightingale returned; not
that this worthy young Man had deserted
or forgot his Friend; for indeed, he had
been much the greatest part of the time
employed in his Service. 
He had heard upon Enquiry that the
only Persons who had seen the Beginning
of the unfortunate Rencounter, were a Crew
belonging to a Man of War, which then
lay at Deptford. To Deptford therefore he
went, in search of this Crew, where he was
informed that the Men he sought after were
all gone ashore. He then traced them from
Place to Place, till at last he found two of
them drinking together, with a third Person,
at a Hedge-Tavern, near Aldersgate. 
Nightingale desired to speak with Jones
by himself (for Partridge was in the Room
when he came in.) As soon as they were 

alone, Nightingale taking Jones by the Hand,
cried, ‘Come, my brave Friend, be not too
much dejected at what I am going to
tell you, I am sorry I am the Messenger
of bad News; but I think it my Duty
to tell you.’ ‘I guess already what that
News is,’ cries Jones. ‘The poor Gentleman
then is dead.’ —‘I hope not,’ 
answered Nightingale. ‘He was alive this
Morning; though I will not flatter you; 
I fear from the Accounts I could get, that
his Wound is mortal. But if the Affair
be exactly as you told it, your own Remorse
would be all you would have reason
to apprehend, let what would happen; 
but forgive me, my dear Tom, if I entreat
you to make the worst of your Story to
your Friends. If you disguise any thing
to us, you will only be an Enemy to
yourself.’ 
‘What Reason, my dear Jack, have I
ever given you,’ said Jones, ‘to stab me
with so cruel a Suspicion?’ ‘Have
Patience,’ cries Nightingale, ‘and I will
tell you all. After the most diligent Enquiry,
I could make, I at last met with
two of the Fellows who were present at
this unhappy Accident, and I am sorry
to say, they do not relate the Story so 

much in your Favour, as you yourself
have told it.’ ‘Why, what do they
say?’ cries Jones. ‘Indeed, what I am
sorry to repeat, as I am afraid of the
Consequence of it to you. They say that
they were at too great a Distance to overhear
any Words that passed between you; 
but they both agree that the first Blow
was given by you.’ ‘Then upon my
Soul,’ answered Jones, ‘they injure me. 
He not only struck me first, but struck me
without the least Provocation. What
should induce those Villains to accuse me
falsely?’ Nay, that I cannot guess,’ said
Nightingale, ‘and if you yourself, and I
who am so heartily your Friend, cannot
conceive a Reason why they should belie
you, what Reason will an indifferent
Court of Justice be able to assign why
they should not believe them? I repeated
the Question to them several times, and
so did another Gentleman who was present,
who, I believe, is a sea-faring Man,
and who really acted a very friendly part
by you; for he begged them often to consider,
that there was the Life of a Man
in the Case; and asked them over and
over if they were certain; to which they
both answered, that they were, and
would abide by their Evidence upon Oath. 

For Heaven's Sake, my dear Friend, recollect
yourself; for if this should appear
to be the Fact, it will be your Business to
think in time of making the best of your
Interest. I would not shock you; but
you know, I believe, the Severity of the
Law, whatever verbal Provocations may
have been given you.’ ‘Alas! my
Friend,’ cries Jones, ‘what Interest hath
such a Wretch as I? Besides, do you
think I would even wish to live with the
Reputation of a Murderer? If I had any
Friends, (as alas! I have none) could I
have the Confidence to solicit them to
speak in the Behalf of a Man condemned
for the blackest Crime in Human Nature? 
Believe me I have no such Hope; 
but I have some Reliance on a Throne
still greatly superior; which will, I am
certain, afford me all the Protection I
merit.’ He then concluded with many
solemn and vehement Protestations of the
Truth of what he had at first asserted. 
The Faith of Nightingale was now again
staggered, and began to incline to credit
his Friend, when Mrs. Miller appeared,
and made a sorrowful Report of the Success
of her Embassy; which when Jones
had heard, he cried out most heroically, 

Well, my Friend, I am now indifferent
as to what shall happen, at least with
Regard to my Life; and if it be the
Will of Heaven that I shall make an
Atonement with that for the Blood I
have spilt, I hope the Divine Goodness
will one Day suffer my Honour to be
cleared, and that the Words of a dying
Man, at least, will be believed, so far as
to justify his Character.’ 
A very mournful Scene now past between
the Prisoner and his Friends, at which, as
few Readers would have been pleased to be
present, so few, I believe, will desire to hear
it particularly related. We will, therefore,
pass on to the Entrance of the Turnkey,
who acquainted Jones, that there was a
Lady without who desired to speak with
him, when he was at Leisure. 
Jones declared his Surprize at this Message. 
He said, ‘he knew no Lady in the
World whom he could possibly expect to
see there. However, as he saw no Reason
to decline seeing any Person, Mrs.
Miller and Mr. Nightingale presently took
their Leave, and he gave Orders to have
the Lady admitted. 

If Jones was surprized at the News of a
Visit from a Lady, how greatly was he astonished
when he discovered this Lady to
be no other than Mrs. Waters. In this
Astonishment then we shall leave him awhile,
in order to cure the Surprize of
the Reader, who will likewise, probably,
not a little wonder at the Arrival of this
Lady. 
Who this Mrs. Waters was, the Reader
pretty well knows; what she was he must
be perfectly satisfied. He will therefore be
pleased to remember, that this Lady departed
from Upton in the same Coach with
Mr. Fitzpatrick and the other Irish Gentleman,
and in their Company travelled to
the Bath. 
Now there was a certain Office in the
Gift of Mr. Fitzpatrick at that Time vacant,
namely, that of a Wife; for the
Lady who had lately filled that Office had
resigned, or at least deserted her Duty. 
Mr. Fitzpatrick therefore having thoroughly
examined Mrs. Waters on the Road,
found her extremely fit for the Place, which,
on their Arrival at Bath, he presently conferred
upon her, and she, without any Scruple, 

accepted. As Husband and Wife this
Gentleman and Lady continued together
all the Time they stayed at Bath, and as
Husband and Wife they arrived together
in Town. 
Whether Mr. Fitzpatrick was so wise a
Man as not to part with one good Thing
till he had secured another, which he had
at present only a Prospect of regaining; 
or whether Mrs. Waters had so well discharged
her Office, that he intended still to
retain her as Principal, and to make his
Wife (as is often the Case) only her Deputy,
I will not say; but certain it is he
never mentioned his Wife to her, never
communicated to her the Letter given him
by Mrs. Western, nor ever once hinted his
Purpose of re-possessing his Wife; much
less did he ever mention the Name of Jones. 
For though he intended to fight with him
wherever he met him, he did not imitate
those prudent Persons who think a Wife, a
Mother, a Sister, or sometimes a whole
Family, the safest Seconds on these Occasions. 
The first Account therefore which
she had of all this, was delivered to her
from his Lips, after he was brought home
from the Tavern where his Wound had
been drest. 

As Mr. Fitzpatrick however had not the
clearest Way of telling a Story at any Time,
and was now, perhaps, a little more confused
than usual, it was some Time before she
discovered, that the Gentleman who had
given him this Wound was the very same
Person from whom her Heart had received
a Wound, which, though not of a mortal
Kind, was yet so deep that it had left a
considerable Scar behind it. But no sooner
was she acquainted that Mr. Jones himself
was the Man who had been committed to
the Gatehouse for this supposed Murder,
than she took the first Opportunity of committing
Mr. Fitzpatrick to the Care of his
Nurse, and hastened away to visit the Conqueror. 
She now entered the Room with an Air
of Gayety, which received an immediate
Check from the melancholy Aspect of poor
Jones, who started and blessed himself when
he saw her. Upon which she said, ‘Nay,
I do not wonder at your Surprize; I believe
you did not expect to see me; for
few Gentlemen are troubled here with
Visits from any Lady, unless a Wife. 
You see the Power you have over me,
Mr. Jones. Indeed I little thought when 

we parted at Upton, that our next Meeting
would have been in such a Place.’ 
Indeed, Madam,’ says Jones, ‘I must
look upon this Visit as kind; few will
follow the Miserable, especially to such
dismal Habitations.’ ‘I protest, Mr.
Jones, says she, ‘I can hardly persuade
myself you are the same agreeable Fellow
I saw at Upton. Why, your Face is more
miserable than any Dungeon in the Universe. 
What can be the Matter with
you?’ I thought, Madam,’ said Jones,
as you knew of my being here, you knew
the unhappy Reason.’ ‘Pugh,’ says she,
you have pinked a Man in a Duel, that's
all.’ Jones exprest some Indignation at
this Levity, and spoke with the utmost Contrition
for what had happened. To which
she answered, ‘Well then, Sir, if you
take it so much to Heart, I will relieve
you; the Gentleman is not dead; and,
I am pretty confident, is in no Danger
of dying. The Surgeon indeed who
first dressed him was a young Fellow, and
seemed desirous of representing his Case
to be as bad as possible, that he might
have the more Honour from curing him; 
but the King's Surgeon hath seen him
since, and says, unless from a Fever, of
which there are at present no Symptoms, 

he apprehends not the least Danger of
Life.’ Jones shewed great Satisfaction in
his Countenance at this Report; upon which
she affirmed the Truth of it, adding, ‘By
the most extraordinary Accident in the
World I lodge at the same House, and
have seen the Gentleman; and I promise
you he doth you Justice, and says,
Whatever be the Consequence that he
was entirely the Aggressor, and that you
was not in the least to blame.’ 
Jones expressed the utmost Satisfaction at
the Account which Mrs. Waters brought
him. He then informed her of many
Things which she well knew before, as who
Mr. Fitzpatrick was, the Occasion of his
Resentment, &c. He likewise told her several
Facts of which she was ignorant, as
the Adventure of the Muff, and other
Particulars, concealing only the Name of
Sophia. He then lamented the Follies and
Vices of which he had been guilty; every
one of which, he said, had been attended
with such ill Consequences, that he should
be unpardonable if he did not take Warning,
and quit those vicious Courses for the
future. He lastly concluded with assuring
her of his Resolution to sin no more, lest
a worse Thing should happen to him. 

Mrs. Waters with great Pleasantry ridiculed
all this, as the Effects of low Spirits
and Confinement. She repeated some Witticisms
about the Devil when he was sick,
and told him, ‘She doubted not but shortly
to see him at Liberty, and as lively a Fellow
as ever; and then,’ says she, ‘I don't
question but your Conscience will be safely
delivered of all these Qualms that it is
now so sick in breeding.’ 
Many more Things of this Kind she uttered,
some of which it would do her no
great Honour, in the Opinion of some Readers,
to remember; nor are we quite certain
but that the Answers made by Jones would
be treated with Ridicule by others. We
shall therefore suppress the rest of this Conversation,
and only observe, that it ended
at last with perfect Innocence, and much
more to the Satisfaction of Jones than of
the Lady: For the former was greatly
transported with the News she had brought
him; but the latter was not altogether so
pleased with the penitential Behaviour of a
Man whom she had at her first Interview 

conceived a very different Opinion of from
what she now entertained of him. 
Thus the Melancholy occasioned by the
Report of Mr. Nightingale was pretty well
effaced; but the Dejection into which Mrs.
Miller had thrown him still continued. 
The Account she gave, so well tallied with
the Words of Sophia herself in her Letter,
that he made not the least Doubt but that
she had disclosed his Letter to her Aunt,
and had taken a fixed Resolution to abandon
him. The Torments this Thought
gave him were to be equalled only by a
Piece of News which Fortune yet had in
Store for him, and which we shall communicate
in the second Chapter of the ensuing
Book. 