


The GREAT and wonderful Behaviour
of our Hero in the Boat. 
It is probable, that a Desire of ingratiating
himself with his charming Captive,
or rather Conqueror, had no little
Share in promoting this extraordinary Act
of illegal Justice; for he had conceived
the same Sort of Passion, or Hunger, which
Wild himself had felt, and was as much
resolved, by some Means or other, to satisfy
it. We will leave him, however, at
present, in the Pursuit of his Wishes, and 

attend our Hero in his Boat; since it
is in Circumstances of Distress, that true
Greatness appears most wonderful. For,
that a Prince in the midst of his Courtiers,
all ready to compliment him with his favourite
Character, or Title; or that a
Conqueror, at the Head of an hundred
thousand Men, all prepared to execute his
Will, how ambitious, wanton, or cruel
soever, should, in the Giddiness of his Pride,
elevate himself many Degrees above those
his Tools, seems not difficult to be imagined,
or indeed accounted for. But that a
Man in Chains, in Prisons, nay, in the
vilest Dungeon, should with persevering
Pride and obstinate Dignity, discover that
vast Superiority in his own Nature over
the rest of Mankind, who, to a vulgar Eye,
seem much happier than himself; nay,
that he should discover Heaven and Providence
(whose peculiar Care, it seems, he is) at
that very Time at work for him; this is among
the Arcana of Greatness, to be
perfectly understood only by an Adept in
that Science. 

What could be imagined more miserable
than the Situation of our Hero at this
Season, floating in a little Boat on the open
Seas, without Oar, without Sail, and
at the Mercy of the first Wave to overwhelm
him; which was indeed a much
more eligible Fate than that alternative,
which threatened him with almost unavoidable
Certainty, viz. Starving with
Hunger, the sure Consequence of a Continuance
of the Calm. 
Our Hero finding himself in this Condition,
began to ejaculate a Round of Blasphemies,
which the Reader, without being
over pious, might be offended at seeing repeated. 
He then accused the whole Female
Sex, and the Passion of Love (as he called
it) particularly that which he bore to Mrs.
Heartfree, as the unhappy Occasion of his
present Sufferings. At length, finding himself
descending too much into the Language
of Meanness and Complaint, he
stopp'd short, and soon after broke forth as
follows. “D&wblank;n it, a Man can die but
once, what signifies it! Every Man 

must die, and when it is over it is over. 
I never was afraid of any thing yet, nor
I won't begin now; no, d&wblank;n me,
won't I. What signifies Fear? I shall
die whether I am afraid or no: Who's
afraid then, d&wblank;n me?” At which
Words he looked extremely fierce, but recollecting
that no one was present to see
him, he abated the Terror of his Countenance,
and pausing a little, repeated the
Word, D&wblank;n! “Suppose I should
be d&wblank;ned at last, when I never
thought a Syllable of the Matter. I have
often laughed and made a Jest about it,
and yet it may be so, for any Thing
which I know to the contrary. If there
should be another World it will go hard
with me, that is certain. I shall never
escape for what I have done to Heartfree. 
The Devil must have me for that undoubtedly. 
The Devil! Pshaw! I am
not such a Fool to be frightned at him
neither. No, no; when a Man's dead,
there is an End of him. I wish I was
certainly satisfied of it tho'; for there are
some Men of Learning of a different Opinion. 
It is but a bad Chance methinks 

I stand. If there be no other World,
why I shall be in no worse Condition
than a Block or a Stone: But if there
should,—D&wblank;n me, I will think
no longer about it. —Let a Pack of cowardly
Rascals be afraid of Death, I dare
look him in the Face. But shall I stay
and be starved! —No, I will eat up the
Biscuits the French Son of a Whore bestowed
on me, and then leap into the
Sea for Drink, since the unconscionable
Dog hath not allowed me a single
Dram.” Having thus said, he proceeded
immediately to put his Purpose in Execution,
and as his Resolution never failed
him, he had no sooner dispatched the small
Quantity of Provision, which his Enemy
had with no vast Liberality presented him,
than he cast himself headlong into the Sea. 