


The Adventures we met with in the
City of Diseases. 
We had not been long arrived in our
Inn, where it seems we were to
spend the Remainder of the Day, before
our Host acquainted us, that it was customary
for all Spirits, in their Passage through that
City, to pay their Respects to that Lady Disease,
to whose Assistance they had owed their
Deliverance from the lower World. We
answered, we should not fail in any Complacence,
which was usual to others; upon
which our Host replied, he would immediately
send Porters to conduct us. He had
not long quitted the Room, before we were
attended by some of those grave Persons,
whom I have before described in large Tie-Wigs,
with amber-readed Canes. These Gentlemen
are the Ticket-Porters in this City,
and their Canes are the Insignia, or Tickets
denoting their Office. We informed them of
the several Ladies, to whom we were obliged,
and were preparing to follow them, when
on a sudden they all stared at one another, 

and left us in a Hurry, with a Frown on
every Countenance. We were surprized at
this Behaviour, and presently summoned the
Host, who was no sooner acquainted with
it, than he burst into a hearty Laugh, and
told us the Reason was, because we did not
see the Gentlemen the moment they came in,
according to the Custom of the Place. We
answered with some Confusion, we had
brought nothing with us from the other
World, which we had been all our Lives informed
was not lawful to do. ‘No, no,
Master, replied the Host, I am apprized of
that, and indeed it was my Fault. I should
have first sent you to my Lord *  Scrape; 
who would have supplied you with what you
want.’ ‘My Lord Scrape supply us! said I,
with Astonishment: Sure you must know
we cannot give him Security; and I am
convinced he never lent a Shilling without
it in his Life.’ ‘No, Sir, answered the Host,
and for that Reason he is obliged to do it
here, where he is sentenced to keep a Bank,
and to distribute Money gratis to all Passengers. 
This Bank originally consisted of 

just that Sum, which he had miserably
hoarded up in the other World, and he is
to perceive it decrease visibly one Shilling a
day, 'till it is totally exhausted; after which,
he is to return to the other World, and perform
the Part of a Miser for seventy Years; 
then being purified in the Body of a Hog,
he is to enter the human Species again, and
take a second Trial.’ ‘Sir, said I, you tell me
Wonders: But, if his Bank be to decrease
only a Shilling a day, how can he furnish all
Passengers?’ ‘The rest, answered the Host, is
supplied again; but in a manner, which I
cannot easily explain to you.’ ‘I apprehend,
said I, this Distribution of his Money is inflicted
on him as a Punishment; but I do not
see how it can answer that end, when he
knows it is to be restored him again. Would
it not serve the Purpose as well, if he parted
only with the single Shilling, which it seems is
all he is really to lose?’ ‘Sir, cries the Host,
when you observe the Agonies with which
he parts with every Guinea, you will be
of another opinion. No Prisoner condemned
to Death ever begged so heartily for
Transportation, as he, when he received his
Sentence, did to go to Hell, provided he 

might carry his Money with him. But you
will know more of these Things, when
you arrive at the upper World; and now, if
you please, I will attend you to my Lord's,
who is obliged to supply you with whatever
you desire.’ 
We found his Lordship sitting at the upper
End of a Table, on which was an immense
Sum of Money, disposed in several
Heaps, every one of which would have purchased
the Honour of some Patriots, and the
Chastity of some Prudes. The moment he saw
us, he turned pale, and sighed, as well apprehending
our Business. Mine Host accosted
him with a familiar Air, which at first surprized
me, who so well remembred the
Respect I had formerly seen paid this Lord,
by Men infinitely superiour in Quality to
the Person who now saluted him in the following
manner: ‘Here you, Lord, and be
dam&wblank;d to your little sneaking Soul, tell
out your Money, and supply your Betters
with what they want. Be quick, Sirrah, or
I'll fetch the Beadle to you. Don't fancy
yourself in the lower World again, with
your Privilege at your A&wblank;.’ He then 

shook a Cane at his Lordship, who immediately
began to tell out his Money with the
same miserable Air and Face, which the Miser
on our Stage wears, while he delivers his
Bank-bills. This affected some of us so
much, that we had certainly returned with
no more than what would have been sufficient
to see the Porters, had not our Host,
perceiving our Compassion, begged us not to
spare a Fellow, who in the midst of immense
Wealth had always refused the least
Contribution to Charity. Our Hearts were
hardened with this Reflection, and we all
filled our Pockets with his Money. I remarked
a poetical Spirit in particular, who
swore he would have a hearty Gripe at him: 
‘For, says he, the Rascal not only refused to
subscribe to my Works; but sent back my
Letter unanswered, tho' I'm a better
Gentleman than himself.’ 
We now returned from this miserable Object,
greatly admiring the Propriety, as well as
Justice of his Punishment, which consisted,
as our Host informed us, merely in the delivering
forth his Money; and he observed
we could not wonder at the Pain this gave 

him, since it was as reasonable that the bare
parting with Money should make him miserable,
as that the bare having Money without
using it should have made him happy. 
Other Tie-wig Porters, (for those we had
summoned before refused to visit us again)
now attended us; and we having feed them
the instant they entered the Room, according
to the Instructions of our Host, they
bowed and smiled, and offered to introduce
us to whatever Disease we pleased. 
We sat out several Ways, as we were all to
pay our Respects to different Ladies. I directed
my Porter to shew me to the Fever on
the Spirits, being the Disease which had delivered
me from the Flesh. My Guide and
I traversed many Streets, and knocked at several
Doors, but to no purpose. At one we
were told, lived the Consumption; at another,
the Maladie Alamode, a French Lady; at the
third, the Dropsy; at the fourth, the Rheumatism; 
at the fifth, Intemperance; at the sixth,
Misfortune. I was tired, and had exhausted
my Patience, and almost my Purse; for I gave
my Porter a new Fee at every Blunder he
made: when my Guide, with a solemn Countenance, 

told me, he could do no more; and
marched off without any farther Ceremony. 
He was no sooner gone, than I met another
Gentleman with a Ticket, i. e. an amber-headed
Cane in his Hand. I first fee'd
him, and then acquainted him with the Name
of the Disease. He cast himself for two or
three Minutes into a thoughtful Posture, then
pulled a piece of Paper out of his Pocket,
on which he writ something in one of the
oriental Languages, I believe; for I could not
read a Syllable: he bad me carry it to such
a particular Shop, and telling me it would
do my Business, he took his Leave. 
Secure, as I now thought myself of
my Direction, I went to the Shop, which very
much resembled an Apothecary's. The Person
who officiated, having read the Paper,
took down about twenty different Jars, and
pouring something out of every one of them,
made a mixture, which he delivered to me
in a Bottle, having first tied a Paper round a
the Neck of it, on which were written three
or four Words, the last containing eleven
Syllables. I mentioned the Name of the Disease 

I wanted to find out; but received no
other answer, than that he had done as he was
ordered, and the Drugs were excellent. 
I Began now to be enraged, and quitting
the Shop with some anger in my Countenance,
I intended to find out my Inn: but meeting
in the way a Porter, whose Countenance
had in it something more pleasing than ordinary,
I resolved to try once more, and clapt
a Fee into his Hand. As soon as I mentioned
the Disease to him, he laughed heartily,
and told me I had been imposed on: for in
reality, no such Disease was to be found in
that City. He then enquired into the Particulars
of my Case, and was no sooner acquainted
with them, than he informed me
that the Maladie Alamode was the Lady, to
whom I was obliged. I thanked him, and
immediately went to pay my Respects to her. 
The House, or rather Palace, of this
Lady, was one of the most beautiful and
magnificent in the City. The Avenue to it
was planted with Sycamore Trees, with Beds
of Flowers on each side; it was extremely
pleasant, but short. I was conducted through 

a magnificent Hall, adorned with several Statues
and Bustoes, most of them maimed,
whence I concluded them all to be true Antiques; 
but was informed they were the Figures
of several modern Heroes, who had
died Martyrs to her Ladyship's Cause. I
next mounted through a large painted Stair-Case,
where several Persons were depictured
in Caracatura; and upon enquiry, was told
they were the Portraits of those who had distinguished
themselves against the Lady in the
lower World. I suppose, I should have known
the Faces of many Physicians and Surgeons, had
they not been so violently distorted by the
Painter. Indeed, he had exerted so much
Malice in his Work, that I believe he had
himself received some particular Favours from
the Lady of this Mansion: It is difficult to
conceive a Groupe of stranger Figures. I
then entered a long Room hung round with
the Pictures of Women of such exact Shapes
and Features, that I should have thought
my self in a Gallery of Beauties, had not a
certain sallow Paleness in their Complexions
given me a more distasteful Idea. Through
this, I proceeded to a second Apartment, adorned,
if I may so call it, with the Figures 

of old Ladies. Upon my seeming to admire
at this Furniture, the Servant told me with
a Smile, that these had been very good
Friends of his Lady, and had done her eminent
service in the lower World. I immediately
recollected the Faces of one or two
of my Acquaintance, who had formerly kept
Bagnio's: but was very much surprized to
see the Resemblance of a Lady of great Distinction
in such Company. The Servant, upon
my mentioning this, made no other Answer
than that his Lady had Pictures of all degrees. 
I Was now introduced into the Presence
of the Lady herself. She was a thin, or
rather meagre Person, very wan in the
Countenance, had no Nose, and many Pimples
in her Face. She offered to rise at my
entrance, but could not stand. After many
Compliments, much Congratulation on her
side, and the most fervent Expressions of Gratitude
on mine, she asked me many Questions
concerning the Situation of her Affairs in the
lower World; most of which I answered to
her intire Satisfaction. At last with a kind
of forced Smile, she said, I suppose the Pill 

and Drop go on swimmingly. I told her,
they were reported to have done great Cures. 
She replied, she could apprehend no danger
from any Person, who was not of regular
Practice; for however simple Mankind are,
said she, or however afraid they are of
Death, they prefer dying in a regular manner
to being cured by a Nostrum. She then
exprest great pleasure at the Account I gave
her of the Beau-Monde. She said, she
had, herself, removed the Hundreds of
Drury to the Hundreds of Charing-Cross,
and was very much delighted to find they
had spread into St. James's; That she imputed
this chiefly to several of her dear and
worthy Friends, who had lately published
their excellent Works, endeavouring to extirpate
all Notions of Religion and Virtue; 
and particularly to the deserving Author of
the Batchelor's Estimate, to whom, said she,
if I had not reason to think he was a Surgeon,
and had therefore written from mercenary
Views, I could never sufficiently own my
Obligations. She spoke likewise greatly in
approbation of the Method so generally used
by Parents, of marrying Children very young,
and without the least affection between the 

Parties; and concluded by saying, that if
these Fashions continued to spread, she doubted
not, but she should shortly be the only
Disease who would ever receive a Visit from
any Person of considerable Rank. 
While we were discoursing, her three
Daughters entered the Room. They were all
called by hard Names, the eldest was named
*  Lepra, the second Chœras, and the third
Scorbutia. They were all genteel, but ugly. 
I could not help observing the little respect
they paid their Parent; which the old Lady
remarking in my Countenance, as soon as
they quitted the Room, which soon happened,
acquainted me with her Unhappiness in
her Offspring, every one of which had the
confidence to deny themselves to be her
Children, though she said she had been a
very indulgent Mother, and had plentifully
provided for them all. As Family Complaints
generally as much tire the Hearer, as
they relieve him who makes them, when
I found her launching farther into this Subject,
I resolved to put an end to my Visit; 

and taking my leave, with many Thanks for
the Favour she had done me, I returned
to the Inn, where I found my Fellow-Travellers
just mounting into their Vehicle. I
shook hands with my Host, and accompanied
them into the Coach, which immediately
after proceeded on its Journey. 