


Julian performs the Part of a
Statesman. 
‘It was now my fortune to be born of a
German Princess; but a Man-Widwife
pulling my Head off, in delivering my Mother,
put a speedy end to my princely Life. 
‘Spirits, who end their Lives before
they are at the Age of five Years, are immediately
ordered into other Bodies; and it
was now my fortune to perform several Infancies,
before I could again entitle myself to
an Examination of Minos. 
‘At length I was destined once more to
play a considerable Part on the Stage. I
was born in England, in the Reign of Etheldred
II. My Father's Name was Ulnoth. 
He was Earl or Thane of Sussex: I was afterwards 

known by the Name of Earl Goodwin,
and began to make a considerable Figure
in the World, in the time of Harold
Harefoot, whom I procured to be made
King of Wessex, or the West Saxons, in prejudice
of Hardicanute, whose Mother Emma
endeavoured afterwards to set another of
her Sons on the Throne: but I circumvented
her, and communicating her Design to the
King, at the same time acquainted him with
a Project, which I had formed for the Murder
of these two young Princes. Emma had
sent for these her Sons from Normandy, with
the King's Leave, whom she had deceived
by her religious Behaviour, and pretended
Neglect of all worldly Affairs; but I prevailed
with Harold to invite these Princes to
his Court, and put them to death. The
prudent Mother sent only Alfred, retaining
Edward to herself, as she suspected my ill
Designs, and thought I should not venture to
execute them on one of her Sons, while
she secured the other: but she was deceived,
for I had no sooner Alfred in my possession,
than I caused him to be conducted to Ely,
where I ordered his Eyes to be put out, 

and afterwards to be confined in a Monastery. 
‘This was one of those cruel Expedients,
which great Men satisfy themselves well in
executing, by concluding them to be necessary
to the Service of their Prince, who
is the Support of their Ambition. 
‘Edward, the other Son of Emma, escaped
again to Normandy; whence, after the
Death of Harold and Hardicanute, he made
no scruple of applying to my Protection and
Favour, tho' he had before prosecuted me
with all the Vengeance he was able, for the
Murder of his Brother: but in all great
Affairs, private Relation must yield to public
Interest. Having therefore concluded very
advantagious Terms for myself with him, I
made no scruple of patronizing his Cause,
and soon placed him on the Throne. Nor
did I conceive the least Apprehension from
his Resentment, as I knew my Power was
too great for him to encounter. 
‘Among other stipulated Conditions, one
was to marry my Daughter Editha. This 

Edward consented to, with great Reluctance,
and I had afterwards no reason to be pleased
with it: for it raised her, who had been my
favourite Child, to such an Opinion of Greatness,
that instead of paying me the usual
Respect, she frequently threw in my teeth,
(as often at least as I gave her any Admonition)
that she was now a Queen, and that
the Character and Title of Father merged
in that of Subject. This Behaviour, however,
did not cure me of my Affection towards
her, nor lessen the Uneasiness, which
I afterwards bore on Edward's dismissing her
from his Bed. 
‘One thing, which principally induced
me to labour the Promotion of Edward,
was the Simplicity or Weakness of that
Prince, under whom I promised myself absolute
Dominion, under another Name. 
Nor did this Opinion deceive me: for during
his whole Reign, my Administration was in
the highest degree despotic, I had every
thing of Royalty, but the outward Ensigns: 
No Man ever applying for a Place, or any
kind of Preferment, but to me only. A Circumstance,
which as it greatly enriched my 

Coffers, so it no less pampered my Ambition,
and satisfied my Vanity with a numerous
Attendance; and I had the pleasure of seeing
those, who only bowed to the King,
prostrating themselves before me. 
‘Edward the Confessor, or St. Edward, as
some have called him in derision, I suppose,
being a very silly Fellow, had all the
Faults incident, and almost inseparable, to
Fools. He married my Daughter Editha,
from his fear of disobliging me; and afterwards,
out of hatred to me, refused
even to consummate his Marriage, tho' she
was one of the most beautiful Women of
her Age. He was likewise guilty of the
basest Ingratitude to his Mother, (a Vice to
which Fools are chiefly, if not only liable)
and in return for her Endeavours to procure
him a Throne in his Youth, confined her in a
loathsome Prison, in her old Age. This, it
is true, he did by my Advice: but as to her
walking over nine Plowshares red-hot, and
giving nine Manors, when she had not one
in her possession, there is not a syllable of
Veracity in it. 

‘The first great Perplexity I fell into,
was on the account of my Son Swane, who
had deflowered the Abbess of Leon, since
called Leominster in Herefordshire. After
this Fact, he retired into Denmark, whence
he sent to me, to obtain his Pardon. The
King at first refused it; being moved thereto,
as I afterwards found, by some Churchmen,
particularly by one of his Chaplains, whom
I had prevented from obtaining a Bishoprick. 
Upon this, my Son Swane invaded the Coasts
with several Ships, and committed many
outragious Cruelties; which, indeed, did his
business, as they served me to apply to the
Fear of this King, which I had long since
discovered to be his predominant Passion. 
And at last, he who had refused Pardon to
his first Offence, submitted to give it him,
after he had committed many other more
monstrous Crimes; by which his Pardon lost
all Grace to the Offended, and received double
Censure from all others. 
‘The King was greatly inclined to the
Normans, had created a Norman Archbishop
of Canterbury, and had heaped extraordinary 

Favours on him. I had no other
Objection to this Man, than that he rose
without my Assistance; a Cause of Dislike,
which in the Reign of great and powerful
Favourites, hath often proved fatal to the Persons
who have given it, as the Persons thus
raised, inspire us constantly with Jealousies
and Apprehensions. For when we promote
any one ourselves, we take effectual Care to
preserve such an Ascendant over him, that
we can at any time reduce him to his former
Degree, should he dare to act in opposition
to our Wills: for which reason we never
suffer any to come near the Prince, but
such as we are assured it is impossible
should be capable of engaging or improving
his Affection; no Prime-Minister, as I apprehend,
esteeming himself to be safe, while
any other shares the Ear of his Prince, of
whom we are as jealous as the fondest Husband
can be of his Wife. Whoever, therefore,
can approach him by any other Channel
than that of ourselves, is in our opinion
a declared Enemy, and one, whom the first
Principles of Policy oblige us to demolish
with the utmost expedition. For the Affection 

of Kings, is as precarious as that of Women,
and the only Way to secure either to
ourselves, is to keep all others from them. 
‘But the Arch-Bishop did not let Matters
rest on Suspicion. He soon gave open
Proofs of his Interest with the Confessor, in
procuring an Office of some Importance for
one Rollo, a Roman of mean Extraction and
very despicable Parts. When I represented
to the King the Indecency of conferring such
an Honour on such a Fellow, he answered
me, that he was the Arch-Bishop's Relation. 
Then, Sir, replied I, he is related to
your Enemy. Nothing more past at that time:
but I soon perceived by the Arch-Bishop's
Behaviour, that the King had acquainted
him with our private Discourse, a sufficient
Assurance of his Confidence in him
and Neglect of me. 
‘The Favour of Princes, when once lost,
is recoverable only by the gaining a Situation
which may make you terrible to them. As
I had no doubt of having lost all Credit
with this King, which indeed had been
originally founded and constantly supported 

by his Fear, so I took the Method of Terror
to regain it. 
‘The Earl of Boulogne coming over to visit
the King, gave me an Opportunity of breaking
out into open Opposition: for as the Earl
was on his return to France, one of his Servants,
who was sent before to procure Lodgings
at Dover, and insisted on having them
in the House of a private Man in spite of the
Owner's teeth, was, in a Fray which
ensued, killed on the spot; and the Earl himself
arriving there soon after, very narrowly
escaped with his Life. The Earl, enraged
at this Affront, returned to the King at
Gloucester, with loud Complaints and Demands
of Satisfaction. Edward consented
to his Demands, and ordered me to chastise
the Rioters, who were under my Government
as Earl of Kent: but instead of obeying
these Orders, I answered with some
warmth, That the English were not used
to punish People unheard; nor ought their
Rights and Privileges to be violated: that
the Accused should be first summoned; if
guilty, should make Satisfaction both with
Body and Estate; but if innocent, should be 

discharged. Adding, with great ferocity,
that as Earl of Kent it was my Duty to
protect those under my Government against
the Insults of Foreigners. 
‘This Accident was extremely lucky, as
it gave my Quarrel with the King a popular
Colour; and so ingratiated me with the
People, that when I set up my Standard,
which I soon after did, they readily and
chearfully listed under my Banners, and
embraced my Cause, which I persuaded
them was their own: for that it was to
protect them against Foreigners that I had
drawn my Sword. The word Foreigners
with an Englishman hath a kind of magical
Effect, they having the utmost Hatred and
Aversion to them, arising from the Crueltie
they suffered from the Danes and some other
foreign Nations. No wonder therefore they
espoused my Cause, in a Quarrel which had
such a Beginning. 
‘But what may be somewhat more remarkable
is, that when I afterwards returned
to England from Banishment, and was at
the Head of an Army of the Flemish, who 

were preparing to plunder the City of London,
I still persisted that I was come to defend
the English from the Danger of Foreigners,
and gained their Credit. Indeed,
there is no Lye so gross, but it may be imposed
on the People by those whom they
esteem their Patrons and Defenders. 
‘The King saved his City by being reconciled
to me, and taking again my Daughter
whom he had put away from him; 
and thus having frightened the King into
what Concessions I thought proper, I dismiss'd
my Army and Fleet, with which I intended,
could I not have succeeded otherwise,
to have sacked the City of London,
and ravaged the whole Country. 
‘I Was no sooner re-established in the
King's Favour, or, what was as well for
me, the Appearance of it, than I fell violently
on the Arch-Bishop. He had of
himself retired to his Monastery in Normandy; 
but that did not content me, I had
him formally banished, the See declared
vacant, and then filled up by another. 

‘I Enjoyed my Grandeur a very short
time, after my Restoration to it: for the
King hating and fearing me to a very great
degree, and finding no means of openly
destroying me, at last effected his Purpose
by Poison, and then spread abroad a ridiculous
Story of my wishing the next Morsel
might choak me, if I had had any
hand in the Death of Alfred; and accordingly
that the next Morsel, by a divine
Judgment, stuck in my Throat, and performed
that Office. 
‘This of a Statesman was one of my
worst Stages in the other World. It is a
Post subjected daily to the greatest Danger
and Inquietude, and attended with little
Pleasure, and less Ease. In a word, it is a
Pill, which, was it not gilded over by
Ambition, would appear nauseous and detestable
in the eye of every one; and perhaps
that is one reason why Minos so greatly
compassionates the Case of those who
swallow it: for that just Judge told me, he
always acquitted a Prime-Minister, who
could produce one single good Action in 

his whole Life, let him have committed
ever so many Crimes. Indeed, I understood
him a little too largely, and was stepping
towards the Gate: but he pulled me
by the Sleeve, and telling me, no Prime-Minister
ever entered there, bid me go back again; 
saying, he thought I had sufficient
Reason to rejoice in escaping the Bottomless
Pit, which half my Crimes committed
in any other Capacity would have entitled
me to.’ 