


The Life of Alderman Julian. 
‘I Now revisited England, and was born
at London. My Father was one of the
Magistrates of that City. He had eleven
Children, of whom I was the eldest. He
had great Success in Trade, and grew extremely
rich, but the largeness of his Family
rendered it impossible for him to leave
me a Fortune sufficient to live well on, independent
of Business. I was accordingly
brought up to be a Fishmonger: in which
Capacity, I myself afterwards acquired very
considerable Wealth. 

‘The same Disposition of Mind, which
in Princes is called Ambition, is in Subjects
named Faction. To this Temper I was
greatly addicted from my Youth. I was,
while a Boy, a great Partizan of Prince John's
against his Brother Richard, during the
latter's Absence in the Holy War, and in his
Captivity. I was no more than one and
twenty, when I first began to make Political
Speeches in Public, and to endeavour to
foment Disquietude and Discontent in the
City. As I was pretty well qualified for
this Office, by a great Fluency of Words,
an harmonious Accent, a graceful Delivery,
and above all, an invincible Assurance, I
had soon acquired some Reputation among
the younger Citizens, and some of the weaker
and more inconsiderate of a riper Age. This
co-operating with my own natural Vanity,
made me extravagantly proud and supercilious. 
I soon began to esteem myself a
Man of some Consequence, and to overlook
Persons every way my Superiours. 
‘The famous Robin Hood, and his Companion
Little John, at this time made a considerable 

Figure in Yorkshire. I took upon
me to write a Letter to the former, in the
Name of the City, inviting him to come
to London, where I assured him of very
good Reception, signifying to him my own
great Weight and Consequence, and how
much I had disposed the Citizens in his favour. 
Whether he received this Letter or
no, I am not certain: but he never gave
me any Answer to it. 
‘A Little afterwards, one William Fitz-Osborn,
or, as he was nicknamed, William
Long-Beard, began to make a Figure in the
City. He was a bold and an impudent
Fellow, and had raised himself to great Popularity
with the Rabble, by pretending to
espouse their Cause against the Rich. I
took this Man's part, and made a public
Oration in his favour, setting him forth as
a Patriot, and one who had embarked in the
Cause of Liberty: for which Service he did
not receive me with the Acknowledgments
I expected. However, as I thought I should
easily gain the Ascendant over this Fellow, I
continued still firm on his side, till the Archbishop
of Canterbury, with an armed Force, 

put an end to his Progress: for he was
seized in Bow Church, where he had taken
Refuge, and with nine of his Accomplices
hanged in Chains. 
‘I Escaped narrowly myself: for I was
seized in the same Church with the rest, and
as I had been very considerably engaged in
the Enterprize, the Archbishop was inclined
to make me an Example: but my Father's
Merit, who had advanced a considerable
Sum to Queen Eleanor, towards the King's
Ransom, preserved me. 
‘The Consternation my Danger had occasioned,
kept me some time quiet, and I applied
myself very assiduously to my Trade. 
I invented all manner of Methods to enhance
the Price of Fish, and made use of
my utmost Endeavours to engross as much
of the Business as possible in my own hands. 
By these means I acquired a Substance,
which raised me to some little Consequence
in the City: but far from elevating me to
that Degree, which I had formerly flattered
myself with possessing, at a time when I was
totally insignificant: for in a trading Society, 

Money must at least lay the Foundation of
all Power and Interest. 
‘But as it hath been remarked, that the
same Ambition which sent Alexander into
Asia, brings the Wrestler on the Green; 
and as this same Ambition is as incapable as
Quicksilver of lying still: so I, who was possessed,
perhaps, of a Share equal to what
hath fired the Blood of any of the Heroes
of Antiquity, was no less restless, and
discontented with Ease and Quiet. My first
Endeavours were to make myself head of
my Company, which Richard I. had just
established, and soon afterwards I procured
myself to be chosen Alderman. 
‘Opposition is the only State, which
can give a Subject an Opportunity of exerting
the Disposition I was possessed of. Accordingly
King John was no sooner seated
on his Throne, than I began to oppose his
Measures, whether right or wrong. It is
true, that Monarch had Faults enow. He
was so abandoned to Lust and Luxury, that
he addicted himself to the most extravagant
Excesses in both, while he indolently suffered 

the King of France to rob him of almost
all his foreign Dominions: my Opposition
therefore was justifiable enough, and
if my Motive from within had been as good
as the Occasion from without, I should have
had little to excuse: but in truth, I sought
nothing but my own Preferment, by making
myself formidable to the King, and then
selling to him the Interest of that Party, by
whose means I had becom e so. Indeed, had
the public Good been my Care, however, zealously
I might have opposed the Beginning
of his Reign, I should have not scrupled to
lend him my utmost Assistance in the Struggle
between him and Pope Innocent the
Third, in which he was so manifestly in
the right; nor have suffered the Insolence of
that Pope, and the Power of the King of
France, to have compelled him in the Issue
basely to resign his Crown into the hands of
the former, and receive it again as a Vassal; 
by means of which Acknowledgement the
Pope afterwards claimed this Kingdom as a
tributary Fief to be held of the Papal Chair. 
A Claim which occasioned great Uneasiness
to many subsequent Princes, and brought
numberless Calamities on the Nation. 

‘As the King had among other Concessions
stipulated to pay an immediate Sum
of Money to Pandulph, which he had great
difficulty to raise, it was absolutely necessary
for him to apply to the City, where my Interest
and Popularity were so high, that he
had no Hopes without my Assistance. As I
knew this, I took care to sell myself and
Country as high as possible. The Terms I
demanded, therefore, were a Place, a Pension,
and a Knighthood. All those were
immediately consented to. I was forthwith
knighted, and promised the other two. 
‘I Now mounted the Hustings, and without
any regard to Decency or Modesty, made
as emphatical a Speech in favour of the
King, as before I had done against him. 
In this Speech I justified all those Measures
which I had before condemned, and pleaded
as earnestly with my Fellow-Citizens, to
open their Purses, as I had formerly done to
prevail with them to keep them shut. But
alas my Rhetoric had not the Effect I proposed. 
The Consequence of my Arguments
was only Contempt to myself. The 

People at first stared on one another, and afterwards
began unanimously to express their
Dislike. An impudent Fellow among them
reflecting on my Trade, cryed out, Stinking
Fish; which was immediately reiterated
through the whole Croud. I was then
forced to slink away home, but I was not
able to accomplish my Retreat without being
attended by the Mob, who huzza'd me
along the Street with the repeated Cries of
Stinking Fish. 
‘I Now proceeded to Court, to inform
his Majesty of my faithful Service, and how
much I had suffered in his Cause. I found
by my first Reception, he had already heard
of my Success. Instead of thanking me for
my Speech, he said, the City should repent
of their Obstinacy; for that he would shew
them who he was: and so saying, he immediately
turned that Part to me, to which the
Toe of Man hath so wonderful an Affection,
that it is very difficult, whenever it presents
itself conveniently, to keep our Toes from
the most violent and ardent Salutation of it. 

‘I Was a little nettled at this Behaviour,
and with some Earnestness claimed the
King's fulfilling his Promise: but he retired
without answering me. I then applied
to some of the Courtiers, who had
lately professed great Friendship to me, had
eat at my House, and invited me to theirs:
but not one would return me any Answer,
all running away from me, as if I had been
seized with some contagious Distemper. I
now found by Experience, that as none can
be so civil, so none can be ruder than
a Courtier. 
‘A Few Moments after the King's retiring,
I was left alone in the Room, to consider
what I should do, or whither I should turn
myself. My Reception in the City promised
itself to be equal at least with what I
found at Court. However, there was my
Home, and thither it was necessary I should
retreat for the present. 
‘But, indeed, bad as I apprehended my
Treatment in the City would be, it exceeded
my Expectation. I rode home on an
ambling Pad through Crouds, who expressed 

every kind of Disregard and Contempt; 
pelting me not only with the most abusive
Language, but with Dirt. However, with
much difficulty I arrived at last at my own
House, with my Bones whole, but covered
over with Filth. 
‘When I was got within my Doors,
and had shut them against the Mob, who had
pretty well vented their Spleen, and seemed
now contented to retire; my Wife, whom
I found crying over her Children, and from
whom I hoped some Comfort in my Afflictions,
fell upon me in the most outragious
manner. She asked me, why I would
venture on such a Step, without consulting
her; she said, her Advice might have
been civilly asked, if I was resolved not to
have been guided by it. That whatever
opinion I might have conceived of her Understanding,
the rest of the World thought
better of it. That I had never failed, when
I had asked her Counsel, nor ever succeeded
without it; with much more of the same
kind, too tedious to mention; concluding,
that it was a monstrous Behaviour to desert
my Party, and come over to the Court. 

An Abuse, which I took worse than all
the rest, as she had been constantly for several
Years assiduous in railing at the Opposition,
in siding with the Court-Party,
and begging me to come over to it. And
especially after my mentioning the Offer of
Knighthood to her, since which time she
had continually interrupted my Repose,
with dinning in my Ears the Folly of refusing
Honours, and of adhering to a Party,
and to Principles, by which I was certain
of procuring no Advantage to myself and
my Family. 
‘I Had now entirely lost my Trade, so
that I had not the least Temptation to stay
longer in a City, where I was certain of
receiving daily Affronts and Rebukes. I
therefore made up my Affairs with the utmost
Expedition, and scraping together all
I could, retired into the Country; where I
spent the Remainder of my Days, in universal
Contempt, being shunned by every body,
perpetually abused by my Wife, and not
much respected by my Children. 
‘Minos told me, tho' I had been a very
vile Fellow, he thought my Sufferings made 

some Atonement, and so bid me take the
other Trial.’ 