
Will, in some measure, contribute to reconcile Jemmy to those who may have been offended with him. 
How much soever Jemmy might be envy'd by the young amorous sparks of the town for the adventure he was now engag'd in, yet certain it is he felt less satisfaction in it than might have been expected either from his own years and warmth of constitution, or from the beauty and love of his mistress. 
Celia of the woods, it is true, had at first sight inspired him with very strong desires; but then it was a transient flame,—a sudden flash of inclination, which ceased on being absent from the object; the idea of her charms had been long since forgot; and if it return'd, on finding her again in the person of lady Hardy, 
it was but a faint resemblance of what he felt before, and could be called little more than the ghost of his first passion. 
The reason of this is pretty evident,—there is a charm in innocence more attracting to a nice and delicate heart than any other perfection whatsoever;—the harmless simplicity of the rural maid was not only now all lost in the fine lady, but exchanged for a certain boldness of looks and behaviour, and a spirit for intrigue, no way engaging to the penerating Jemmy. 
Besides, it must be remember'd, that when he first saw Celia he was two years younger, and consequently had less solidity, and perhaps a less sensibility of the merits of Jenny than he has since acquired, by being a more constant witness of them; to this may also be added, that an amour with lady Hardy was not a thing of his own seeking, but rather in a manner forced upon him;—a circumstance which in most men would have destroyed great part of the relish for it. 
From all that has been said, it may very justly be concluded that Jemmy considered the affair he was entering into only as a mere matter of amusement for his 
senses, without allowing it any share in the affections of his mind; and it is a point which might bear some dispute,—whether had the business which so long detain'd him in London been completed, he would have staid one day longer in respect to lady Hardy, or have rather chose to have gone directly down to Bath. 
An accident altogether unexpected, however, prevented him from being put to the trial, and left him not at liberty to do either the one or the other, by snatching him away at once from the pursuit both of his honourable and dishonourable flame. 
The business he had so much complain'd of was adjusted while lady Hardy was at Windsor, and he now had it in his power either to wait her return to London or to go down to Bath;—he was perhaps debating within himself which of these two he should do when he received a billet from mrs. Comode, with a small piece of paper inclosed in it;—that from mrs. Comode contain'd these lines: 
To James Jessamy, Esq;
Honour'd sir,
“ I just now have received the inclosed from the lady you know of;—it was brought by her footman, unseal'd as you see and address'd to me, to prevent all suspicion:—her ladyship has a world of wit; but you will easily comprehend the meaning, and not fail to favour with your company, at the appointed hour, those who so much desire it,—I am 
“With the profoundest respect,
Honour'd sir,
Your most devoted,
And most faithful servant
B. Comode.” 
“P.S. You may depend, sir, that every thing shall be order'd so as you may be here in all the privacy you can wish.’ 

In the other piece of paper he found these words: 
To mrs. Comode.
Dear mrs. Comode,
“I came last night from Windsor, and am in prodigious want of a new robe de chambre, for I am quite weary and sick of those I have by me;—therefore pray get me some patterns of silks, such as you think I shall like;—I will be with you to-morrow at five o'clock precisely to make my choice. —I am 
“Dear Comode,
Yours,
Hardy.” 
“P.S. Be sure you do not fail to get the silks ready against I come.” 

Whatever uncertainty his mind was in before this turn'd the balance, and he sent his compliments by the bearer to mrs. Comode, with an assurance that he would wait on her as she desir'd; but he had scarce dispatch'd this message when a footman belonging to one mr. Ellwood came to let him know his master intreated his company immediately at his house, on business of the utmost importance. 
This mr. Ellwood was one of those gentlemen who had been appointed by Jemmy's father for the trustees and guardians of his minority;—he was a man of great fortune,—great abilities, and yet greater integrity;—our young hero had a thousand obligations to him, particularly in relation to that perplexing affair he had lately been involved in, and which he could not so easily have accomplish'd without his kind assistance. 
The eldest son of this worthy person had been a fellow collegian with Jemmy,—they had lived together in the most perfect harmony while at the University; nor had the friendship between them slackened since their quitting it:—they had not now seen each other for a considerable time, the old gentleman, who lived for the most part at his seat in Bedfordshire, having sent for his son in order to make his addresses to a young lady of that country, an heiress to a large estate. 
The attachment Jemmy had to this family made him presently comply with the summons that had been sent him;—mr. Ellwood hearing he was come, met him at the top of the stairs, and with a 
countenance which express'd the inward satisfaction of his mind,—‘Dear mr. Jessamy, cried he, I have news to tell you, which I am certain you will participate in the joy of;—my boy has gain'd his point,—the lady has consented, and we must go and see them tack'd together.’ 
Jemmy had heard much talk of this courtship, and that it went on very successfully, but did not think it had been so near a conclusion;—he express'd, however, the interest he took in so felicitous an event in terms the most obliging and sincere. 
‘I doubt not, said mr. Ellwood, but the goodness of your heart makes you pleased with every thing that gives pleasure to your friends; but this is not all we require of you,—Harry must needs have you a witness of his marriage;—he presses me to engage you to accompany me to Ham-Hall;—and here is a letter for you which he sent inclosed in mine;—I have not been so curious or so ill-manner'd as to open it; but I suppose it is on the account I mention:—pray see whether I am mistaken.’ 
Jemmy having taken the letter out of his hand, instantly broke the seal, and read aloud as follows: 
To James Jessamy, Esq;
Dear Friend,
“I have now done with hopes,—fears, and suspence;—the angel I have so long sollicited has at last consented to be mine; and I am shortly to enjoy a happiness which can have no alloy but the want of your presence. 
“I would fain flatter myself, that the earnest desire I have to see you on this blest occasion will be sufficient to bring you to Ham-Hall; but lest I should be too vain in this point, have intreated my father, whose influence is questionless more powerful, to omit nothing which may engage you to accompany him; and in this expectation remain, 
“With the greatest sincerity,
Dear Jessamy,
Your most affectionate friend,
And very humble servant,
H. Ellwood.” 

This invitation very much disconcerted Jemmy;—the regard he had for those that made it render'd him very unwilling to deny, and the double obligation he had laid himself under, first of meeting lady Hardy at mrs. Comode's, and secondly of going down to Bath, made him not well know how to comply. 
Mr. Ellwood, on perceiving he paus'd and seem'd in some dilemma, told him he would have no denial, and remonstrated to him that he could have no engagements in town with any persons who were more truly his friends than those who now desir'd his company in Bedfordshire. 
Jemmy was a little ashamed at the reluctance he had shewn to this journey, and could find no better excuse for it than that which was indeed the chief motive,—his having promised Jenny to follow her to Bath, and the expectation he knew she was in every day of seeing him arrive. 
‘If that be all, cried the old gentleman, the difficulty is easily removed,—you have only to write to her, and relate the occasion that keeps you from 
her somewhat longer than you intended, and I will answer, for her she has good-nature enough to pardon you.’ 
Jemmy, being still desirous of finding some excuse to avoid this invitation, repeated the discourse he had with mr. Morgan, and the report which was spread about town in relation to his supposed infidelity to Jenny, urging the necessity of his being with her before she should hear any thing of it. 
Mr. Ellwood laugh'd at the apprehensions he discover'd on this account,—reply'd, that it was not likely that such an idle story should be told her, especially while she remain'd at so great a distance from the place where it was invented;—‘but in case, continued he, any malicious person should convey the scandal to her, as the thing is utterly without foundation, it may be easily disproved when you come together, and she would allow it a weakness in herself to have given credit to it.’ 
This, with some other arguments, assisted by Jemmy's own unwillingness to disoblige him, soon decided the matter; and as mr. Ellwood said he purposed to set out very early the next morning, 
Jenny's lover took his leave to make what preparations were necessary for his departure, as well as to give an account to both his mistresses of what had happened. 
