

Will gratify the readers impatience with the conclusion of mrs. M&wblank;'s history; and also with what effects the recital of it produced in the minds of those who heard it. 
The unfortunate mrs. M&wblank;having dried up her tears, and made the best apology she could to the ladies for this interruption, resumed her discourse in these words: 
‘I took up my lodgings on my arrival here, said she, at the inn where I alighted, and sent immediately in search of Celandine;—he came the next day, but his looks, before he spoke, made me know how little he was pleased with seeing me, “I thought madam, said he, I said enough to prevent you from coming hither; and am surprized you should act in a manner so contrary to my inclination.” 
‘I told him, that I found it impossible to live so long a time without him; and a great deal of such fond idle stuff, which he as little regarded as indeed it deserved;—he insisted on my return to London the next morning; which after some tears, I at last promised to do, on condition that he would dine with me that day. It was with some difficulty I prevail'd upon him to give me his company, even for the few hours I requested it;—nor would I have taken so much pains to obtain so small a favour, if I had not flatter'd myself with being able to win him yet further to my purpose.’ 
‘But my hopes deceived me,—in vain I try'd all the arts that love inspir'd me with,—he was inflexible to all my intreaties,—unmoved by my indearments, and treated all I said to him on the score of my staying here with so much contempt, that the pride and spirit which my passion for him had but too much quell'd, began to rouse themselves in me;—I told him that he had no right to prescribe the place of my residence; that Bath was equally as free for me as for himself; and that I would not leave it. On this he started up, and with a countenance full of spite,—“'Tis very well, said he, you then may stay; but I fancy you will find it extremely difficult to support yourself either here or any where else without my assistance, which you may be assured I shall never afford to one who acts in opposition to my will.’ 
‘The consideration of my wretched circumstances made me tremble at this menace, and again reduced me to submission; I implored his pardon for the rashness of my passion, and promised I would hereafter do in every thing as he would have me; this pacified him; and sitting down again, “I would have you, said he, behave like a reasonable woman, and one who knows the world; our amour has been of a long continuance, and you cannot expect a man like me should always confine himself to one object: to deal sincerely with you, I am here on the invitation of a woman of condition, whom I have the good fortune to be well with; if you offer to interfere with my pleasures I have done with you for ever; therefore, it depends entirely on yourself to keep me your friend or not. 
‘It is amazing, even to myself, to think how I had the power to conceal the agonies which rent my heart at this impudent declaration; yet it is certain that I did so: I avow'd to do every thing he required of me, and to regulate my conduct henceforward so as never to offend him; he seem'd pleas'd with my assurance, put five guineas into my hand to defray the unnecessary expence, as he called it, of my coming hither, gave me a kiss, wish'd me a good journey to London, and then left me to indulge the transports of a rage the more violent for having been suppress'd. 
‘I did not, however, waste much time in giving way to emotions which would neither avail my love or my revenge; to think of doing what I had promised to him was far from me; I resolved to see the face that had supplanted me in his affections; how afterwards I would behave I did not then consider: this was the first great point on which my soul was fix'd; and to accomplish it went that evening and hired a lodging in the most private part of the town: the people of the house, on my signifying to them that I wanted an adroit boy, or young fellow, to run on errands and wait on me while I stay'd at Bath, were so kind to help me to one exactly fit for my purpose; he had been a waiter in a coffee-house last season when Celandine was here, and knew him perfectly well. 
‘The chief business I employed him in was to stand centry near the house where Celandine lodg'd, to watch him wherever he went, to find out the names and characters of the persons he visited, and to bring me an exact account. 
‘By the diligence of this emissary I discover'd that he visited here every day; that he constantly attended three ladies from hence to the walks—the long room—the play, and all public places; that one of these ladies he seem'd most particularly attached to; and that she was call'd lady Speck. 
Mr. Lovegrove turn'd his eyes on lady Speck, at these words, with some surprise; she was in a good deal of confusion and cried out, ‘Your spy was mistaken in his intelligence in this point, his attachment was equal to us all, and I dare say was equally regarded.’ 
‘Pardon me, madam, resumed the unfortunate historian; I knew not then, nor am yet certain to which of you the name of lady Speck belongs; you will not wonder, that in those moments of my jealous rage, I wish'd destruction on the charms that had undone me; but this unlucky day above all I was least able to command my passion; the boy brought me word that he had seen Celandine in the walks with two of you, whom presently he quitted and hurried to this house; on which I concluded the third lady who stay'd at home, and to whom he was in so much haste to retire, was the person who I should henceforth look on as my rival; and at that instant fired with emotions, to which reason can set no bounds, I muffled myself up as you see, ran through the streets like one broke loose from Bedlam; on my coming here I found the door open, a servant-maid was doing something in the hall, and on my enquiring for Celandine she told me he had come in a little before, and she believed was then in the arbour at the lower end of the garden, for she had seen him pass that way; I flew directly to the place she mention'd; but the fury I was in had so blinded me that I did not readily perceive the entrance; I heard the voice of my perfidious lover, and thrust my head through the lattice, and my whole body had certainly broke through that slender partition, if those who occasion'd my despair had not that moment rush'd out of the place: at this sight distraction took possession of my brain; all hell and its worst furies were in my heart; I drew my penknife, resolved to sheath it in the villian's breast; but I know not how it was, continued she, addressing herself to Jenny, you, madam, were nearest to me, and the blow I meant for him, in my mistaken rage was aim'd at you: what follow'd I am wholly ignorant of; for my disappointed rage recoiling upon myself, together with the rude blow the villain gave me in wresting the penknife from my hand, stopp'd all the springs of life, till your charitable endeavours put them again in motion, and called me back to sense, to shame, to misery, and the racks of thought.’ 
Thus did mrs. M&wblank;conclude her tedious narrative; but did not give over speaking till she afresh intreated pardon of the company for the disturbance she had occasion'd in the family, and of Jenny in particular, who had suffer'd most through the extravagance she had been guilty of; to which that young lady, with a great deal of sweetness, tho' not without some blushes at the remembrance of Celandine's behaviour, reply'd in these terms: ‘I can easily forgive the fright you put me into, said she, as I know not but it was your seasonable interruption which chiefly preserved me from a worse mischief than that which I was threaten'd with by your mistaken jealousy.’ 
‘I did not know, my dear, said miss Wingman with a gay air, that the inclinations of Celandine were devoted to you; or that he left us so abruptly in the walks on purpose to have the pleasure of entertaining you alone.’ Jenny was about to make some answer, but was prevented by mr. Lovegrove, who hastily taking up the word, cried out, 'Tis difficult, madam, to know the realinclinations of a man such a Celandine; for I take him to be one of those so elegantly described by mr. Rowe in his play call'd the Fair Penitent: 
A singing, dancing, worthless tribe they are,
Who talk of beauties that they never saw,
And boast of favours that they ne'er enjoy'd.
In repeating these lines he fix'd his eyes on lady Speck, who seeming more than ordinarily pensive, and making no answer, he went on; ‘The poet, resum'd he, throughout that whole performance, shews himself very much a friend to the ladies, especially when gives them this advice: 
Were you, ye fair, but cautious whom you trust,
Would you but think how seldom fools are just,
So many of your sex would not in vain,
Of faithless men and broken vows complain.
Of all the various wretches love has made,
How few have been by men of sense betray'd;
Convinc'd by reason, they your power confess,
Pleas'd to be happy as you're pleas'd to bless,
And conscious of your worth can never love you less.Here ensued a silence, which perhaps had continued yet longer if it had not been broke by miss Wingman, that young lady having her thoughts more at liberty than any of the rest of the company, and who indeed loved talking so well, that it was a pain to her to forbear it for any considerable time. Turning towards mrs. M&wblank;, ‘I am surprised, madam, said she, that your unfaithful lover having the confidence to avow his guilt, by telling you that he came down to Bath on the invitation of a woman of fashion, that you had not the curiosity to ask him the name and quality of the person for whose sake you were undone; since he had so little discretion as to let you into one part of the secret, he would certainly have made you acquainted with the whole, if you had desired it.’ 
‘It must be confess'd, rejoined Jenny, that such an enquiry would have been highly natural in mis. M&wblank;; and, if answer'd to her satisfaction, might have saved her the trouble of employing an emissary to watch the motions of Celandine; but for my part, I have little cause to wish it had been so; since it was to her mistaken jealousy I was indebted for the seasonable relief I received from the insolent impertinencies of that vain and unworthy cox-comb.’ 
‘It is also possible, madam, cried mr. Lovegrove, in an extraordinary emotion; such an eclaircisement might have been attended with worse consequences than you think on. Who can tell, added he with still more vehemence, but that he might have mention'd the name of some lady who wants not an admirer zealous enough to have vindicated her reputation at the expence of his own life or that of the traducer?’ 
‘I know not, replied mrs. M&wblank;sighing, what consequences may have been prevented, or what might have ensued by the discovery of my rival; but this I am certain of, that I was so shock'd at his ingratitude, so astonish'd at his assurance, and so terrified with his menaces, that I had then neither presence of mind nor courage to put the question to him.’ 
Lady Speck, who had not spoke one syllable for a considerable time, now affected a prodigious gaity du coeur, ‘The demand you mean, said she, I believe would have been to very little purpose; I dare answer Celandine would have been strangely puzzled to have informed you in any particulars of the fond lady for whose sake he came to Bath; men of his romantic disposition worship images of their own formation; boast of visionary favours, and take as much pleasure in the shadow as others do in the substance. 
‘True, madam, cried mr. Lovegrove gravely; but if they should happen to assign real names to their ideal mistresses, what but the blood of such a villain could attone for his presumption? 
No reply was made to this; and mrs. M&wblank;thinking it would best become her to take leave of the company, which she did in the most respectful manner, every body assured her they pity'd her misfortunes, and that they sincerely wish'd something might happen to extricate her from the labyrinth in which she was at present involv'd. 
After she was gone, there soon remain'd none but miss Wingman and Jenny to maintain a conversation; mr. Lovegrove, a good deal disconcerted at some passages he had heard related by mrs. M&wblank;, pretending business call'd him, went away; and lady Speck, who was extremely out of humour, and had been at some pain to conceal it, took this opportunity of retiring to her closet, in order to compose the troubles of her mind. 
