
If it cannot be said to deserve any encomium, it must at least be allowed to stand in no need of an apology. 
This person who Jemmy had been told was so importunate to see him was no other than mrs. Comode;—lady Hardy, after having been obliged to leave him so abruptly in the morning, went directly to this woman, and commission'd her to find him either at his own house or where-ever else he could be heard of, in order to excuse her behaviour by relating the accident which had occasion'd it; and also to know of him if he had yet thought of a convenient place for their meeting. 
This necessary woman deliver'd her message with the utmost punctuality; and added, that she was extremely sorry for not having at present an apartment to accommodate them with;—‘But, your honour may depend, said she, that nothing in my power shall be wanting to oblige both you and the good lady.’ 
Jemmy received all this with great coolness, and only told her that lady Hardy should have a full declaration of his sentiments in a letter that same evening,—‘Which, said he, I will direct under a cover to you, as usual, and perhaps will be the last trouble I shall give you.’ 
She seem'd pretty much astonish'd on hearing him speak in this manner, and was going to make some reply; but he told her he had a friend within whom he could not leave alone any longer, so begg'd her pardon, and rung the bell for a servant to open the door. 
He paused for some moments before he return'd to Belpine, considering whether he should inform him of the visit he had just received; but as he was so nearly interested in the honour of sir Thomas Hardy, he thought it best not to say any thing to him of an affair which was of no consequence in itself, and would only serve to add to the chagrin he was already in. 
The other no sooner saw him re-enter the room, and that he was prepared to give attention to what he had to say, 
than he resumed his discourse in words to this effect: 
“There is now little remaining to inform you of, said he, mrs. Jamison only told me, that for three or four days after La Noye was dismiss'd, her infamous ladyship kept her chamber; whether by the order of sir Thomas, or that she was really indisposed, she could not be certain; but during that time her artifices so far prevail'd upon him, that he not only discharged all those servants who he thought had any suspicion of her crime, but also forbad them from ever coming within his doors again on any pretence whatsoever. 
“I then ask'd her if she thought my uncle was really convinced of the infidelity of his wife;”—‘As much as I am myself, reply'd she, though he will not seem to be so, because the excessive fondness he has for her will not suffer him to part from her. 
‘I rather think, said I, that he stands in awe of the just ridicule of the world, for having married, at his years, a girl whose conduct obliged him to get rid of in so short a time. 
‘It may be owing partly to the one, and partly to the other of these motives, answer'd she; but however that may be, I can assure you that he will suffer no body to come near him that he imagines has the least suspicion of her virtue. 
‘This is sufficiently evident in the case of La Noye, added she; but I can give you another instance since the banishment of her Frenchman, she has been catch'd in pretty close conference with a young gentleman, who has been for some time a guest at a neighbouring seat; though sir Thomas has been told that a fine diamond ring, which her ladyship pretended to have lost, has been seen on the finger of that spark, he only affected to laugh at the intelligence, and has since broke off all acquaintance with the person from whom he received it,’ 
“This is the sum of that account given me by mrs. Jamison, said Belpine to Jemmy, and I must be in fact as stupid as my uncle affects to be, if I doubted the truth of it: —Judge then, my dear friend, continued he, of the unhappiness of my situation;—I am 
every moment in danger of being deprived of my inheritance by the incontinency of this vile woman, and if I make any attempt to detect her infamy am equally in danger of losing it by my uncle's displeasure.” 
Jemmy could not help agreeing with him, that there was, indeed, somewhat extremely precarious in his case; but told him he ought to console himself with this reflection, that as lady Hardy had never yet been pregnant, she might in all probability not be so while sir Thomas Hardy lived. 
After this the conversation between them turn'd on various subjects, till Belpine having an engagement that evening took his leave; but before they parted Jemmy told him that his business in London being now entirely finish'd, he intended to set out the next morning for Bath, where he knew Jenny by this time expected him. 
Belpine was not altogether so much chagrin'd at this intelligence as he would have been some days before; for though he would have been glad to have kept him from Jenny, yet he was pleased at his removing himself out of the way of 
lady Hardy:—men who are themselves deceitful, are always slow in giving credit to the sincerity of others;—he had not enough depended on the promise Jemmy had made of breaking off all intercourse with his aunt, till he found him resolved to go from the place she was in, and to which it was not likely he should return till she had left it, as he had heard sir Thomas say he intended to stay but a few days longer. 
But not even this demonstration of his friend's honour towards him had the power of touching his ungrateful heart with any remorse for what he had done, or of obliging him to desist from the prosecution of his wicked attempt to break the union between him and Jenny; as the reader must have observed by the letter he sent to her under the character of a supposed rival, and the invidious hints he threw out in the visit he made her on her arrival in town. 
As for Jemmy, he was not much surprised at the account given him of lady Hardy's conduct;—by the little he had seen of her behaviour since his renewing an acquaintance with her in the character she now bore, he was perfectly convinced that she had a great genius as well as inclination 
for intrigues, and had also often imagined that an amour, such as she was about to enter into with him, was not a thing in which she was altogether unpracticed. 
He was not therefore sorry that his friendship for Belpine obliged him to discontinue an amorous correspondence with her; and as it was an affair at present not of his own seeking, and he had given into not through the force of passion but merely for the sake of amusement, cannot be supposed to give him any pangs in quitting. 
He thought it a great pity, however, that a woman endowed by nature with beauty, wit, and every thing requisite to adorn the station to which she was raised, should know so little how to improve or to deserve the good fortune that had befallen her; and, in this serious humour, remembering the promise he had given to her emissary of making a full declaration of his sentiments by way of letter, sat down immediately and wrote to her in the following manner: 


To lady Hardy.
Madam,
“I know not how you will relish this epistle, but am very certain you ought to look upon it as the greatest proof both of love and friendship that can be given by man;—be not therefore startled when I tell you that I must see you no more;—it is for your sake, and yours alone, that I have taken this resolution, and tear myself away from all the joys which beauty, such as yours, has the power of bestowing. 
“I have well consider'd the consequences which must infallibly attend your entering into an amorous engagement with me, and find that all the love I could offer in return would be too poor a recompence for those innumerable difficulties and dangers to which you would be perpetually exposed by it. 
“Exert then the whole force of your reason to curb the incroachments of lawless passion in your own heart, and to disdain the shew of it in another;—set a true value on yourself, and believe that no man living can deserve 
that merely for the gratification of his desires you should sacrifice your honour,—virtue,—reputation,—peace of mind, and, in fine, all that is valuable in your sex. 
“This advice may appear very odd in a man of my years; but the less you expected it from me the more impression it ought to make on you; you are not only a wife, but also bound by a double obligation to be just;—remember the station for which you were design'd by nature, and be not in sensible of that to which you are raised by fortune;—look round on the magnificence of every thing about you;—think to whom you owe it, and let gratitude supply the place of love for a husband who so dearly prizes you. 
“I allow that old age has something in it extremely disagreeable to youth;—yet, methinks, the many advantages you enjoy might compensate for that one deficiency; and also remind you, that as sir Thomas, by the course of nature, cannot long be with you, it is only by observing a proper conduct while he lives that you can, after his decease, have any right to expect the 
honourable addresses of a person capable of making you more happy. 
“Before I take my leave I have one thing more to add, tho' it be a secret which my sex would hardly forgive me for revealing;—we men are apt to think a woman is never singly kind;—that the favours she grants to one, she is equally liberal of to others; and, in this opinion, are seldom very thankful for the blessings we enjoy;—if you take this truth upon the assurance I give you of it, pride will enable you to forbear making the experiment. —Farewel, believe that, tho' I cease henceforth all correspondence with you, I am, 
“With the best wishes,
Madam,
Your ladyship's
Most humble and
Obliged servant,
J. Jessamy. 
POSTSCRIPT.
“Madam,
“To attempt sending to me again, either by letter or message, will be giving yourself an unprofitable trouble; for, besides the resolution I have made of avoiding a communication which I can neither answer to myself nor the regard I have for you, I shall infallibly leave this town to-morrow morning. 

This he sealed up and put under a cover directed to Mrs. Comode, in which he wrote these lines: 

“Madam,
“Pray deliver the inclosed with your accustomed care, and you will oblige 
“Your humble servant,
J. Jessamy. 

It must be owned that the advice contained in the above was very good; but whether Jemmy would have acted in this manner if his passion for the lady had been more strong or his friendship for Belpine less sincere, is a moot-point, and must be left to the decision of the judicious reader. 
