


CHAP. I.
Discovers something which may serve to prove, that though love is the original source from which jealousy is derived, yet the latter of these passions is the most difficult of the two to be concealed, and also less under the government of reason. 
p. 1
CHAP. II.
Contains a farther confirmation of the position advanced in the preceding chapter, and also some other particulars exciting the curiosity of the reader. 
11
CHAP. III
Completes the character of a modern fine gentleman, or a pretty fellow for the ladies. 
25
CHAP. IV.
Relates some passages subsequent to the preceding adventure. 
34
CHAP. V
Contains, among other things, an account of a very extraordinary, and no less severe trial of female fortitude and moderation. 
46

CHAP. VI.
Treats of many things as unexpected by the persons concern'd in them, as they can be by the reader himself. 
57
CHAP. VII.
Contains a brief recital of the resolutions taken on the foregoing advice. 
72
CHAP. VIII.
Serves only to render the cause more intricate, and involve the parties concern'd in it in fresh perplexities. 
81
CHAP. IX.
Has in it some things of no small importance, tho' at present they may appear too insignificant to be inserted. 
90
CHAP. X.
Is a digression of no consequence to the history, and may therefore either be read or omitted at discretion. 
100
CHAP. XI.
Is a continuation of the same digression, which however insignificant it may appear at present, the reader will hereafter perhaps be glad to turn back to the pages it contains. 
109
CHAP. XII.
Concludes the distressful narrative. 
117
CHAP. XIII.
May properly enough come under the denomination of an appendix to the three last preceding chapters, as containing some things which ought to have been inserted in them. 
131

CHAP. XIV.
Contains much matter for edification, but very little for entertainment. 
143
CHAP. XV.
Cannot fail of giving a very agreeable sensation to every honest and good-natur'd reader. 
151
CHAP. XVI.
Treats of more things than one. 
165
CHAP. XVII.
Affords fresh matter to employ the speculation of every curious reader. 
174
CHAP. XVIII.
Is dull enough to please those who take an ill-natur'd delight in finding something to condemn; yet is not without occurrences which will keep awake the attention of such who read with a desire of being agreeably amused. 
185
CHAP. XIX.
Returns to what has doubtless been long ago expected, and opens a new scene of various and entertaining occurrences. 
196
CHAP. XX.
Is very short, but pithy. 
207
CHAP. XXI.
Discovers Celia of the woods on her first acquaintance with Jemmy, and also some other particulars of equal importance. 
213

CHAP. XXII.
In which, among other things, it will be found highly proper that some passages formerly inserted should be re-capitulated, in order to form the better understanding of those which are now upon the tapis. 
226
CHAP. XXIII.
Contains only such accidents as are too common to excite much wonder. 
233
CHAP. XXIV.
The history of Celia in the woods prosecuted in that of lady Hardy, related by herself to Jemmy. 
241
CHAP. XXV.
Contains the sequel of lady Hardy's story, with other matters of some consequence. 
250
CHAP. XXVI.
Will, in some measure, contribute to reconcile Jemmy to those who may have been offended with him. 
261
CHAP. XXVII.
Contains, among other particulars, a more full explanation of Jemmy's innocence in somethings which had very much the appearance of being criminal. 
253
CHAP. XXVIII.
Treats of such things as the author is pretty well convinced, from a long series of observations on the human mind, will afford more pleasure than offence, even among some of those who most affect a contrary sensation. 
292

