
Affords less matter either of instruction or entertainment than many of the former; though perhaps more of both than can be found in some other late bistories of the same nature with this. 
How preferable are the enjoyments of the mind to those of the body! Persons of a truly delicate way of thinking find a much greater pleasure in their own contemplations, on a delightful subject, than those of less refined ideas are capable of tasting in the utmost gratification of the senses. 
Our amiable Jenny felt a more perfect satisfaction in the proof she had received of her lover's affection, and in that she had just shewn of her own for him, than she had ever known when with him, and no cross accident had interven'd to oblige either of them to exert, and display their mutual tenderness. 
She was in a most delightful situation of mind on this occasion, when mr. Morgan made her another morning visit, on a business which he doubted not but would greatly add to her contentment,—it was this: 
The sincere good-will he had towards Jemmy had made him indefatigable in his endeavours to find out the true state of Belpine's condition;—he had gone and sent several times to the house where he lodged, without being able to get any satisfactory account, sometimes being told one thing, and sometimes another;—they even refused to let him know who were the surgeons that attended him;—this however he got intelligence of from the people of the tavern where the accident had happened;—the first to whom he applied seemed a little uneasy at the questions he put to him,—made very short and evasive answers, the plainest of which was,—‘That if the gentleman lived, it would be a miracle.’ 
Mr. Morgan, not contenting himself with this, went directly to the other, who was the same that had been sent by Jemmy, and whom he found of a much more communicative disposition, tho' less able 
to give him the information he desired;—he said, that on examining the wound, he had thought it a very bad one, but when he went the next morning to visit mr. Belpine, he was told by somebody about him that there was no need of his attendance, and that he was not permitted to stay in the room even while the first dressings were taken off, tho' he had earnestly requested it. —Mr. Morgan than asked him, if he apprehended the wound to be mortal, by what he had seen of it at first. —‘I then thought it so, reply'd the surgeon, for had it been as I imagined he must have died in twelve hours;—but as he has lived till now, I think I may safely pronounce him out of danger, except a fever takes him.’ 
He then went on, and gave so many reasons, from the structure of the human body, to prove that if Belpine's wound had been mortal, he must have died long before the time which had elapsed since his receiving it, that the hearty old gentleman was quite convinced, and run immediately to make Jenny partaker of the joyful news. 
She was, indeed, extremely pleased; but said, she could not conceive what motive should induce Belpine or his friends 
to give out that he was still in danger if he was not really so. —‘Spite, cry'd mr. Morgan, nothing but spite,—as my friend Lee somewhere has it: 

Spite, by the Gods, proud spite, and burning envy.
‘I see into his design continued he, as well as if I were of his cabinet council;—the venemous revengeful rascal thinks, as long as he can make people believe his life is despaired of, mr. Jessamy will be obliged to keep out of the way; but he may be out in his politics,—the surgeon assures me that he will depose upon oath that the wound is not mortal; and if so, mr. Jessamy may come over as soon as he pleases,—bail will be taken for him.’ 
‘Ah, sir, let him not trust to that, cried Jenny hastily, and I beseech you do not advise him to it when you write.’ —‘I advise him, madam, answered he, not I, indeed,—I shall only tell him what I think,—he may do as he pleases.’ 
‘You may be certain, sir, resumed she, that I should greatly rejoice in mr. Jessamy's return, if he could come 
without any hazard either of his life or liberty;—but you must pardon me if I am not altogether so sanguine in this matter as you seem to be: —I am apt to hope and believe with you, that Belpine is not in so dangerous a way as is pretended;—but then, methinks, we ought not to build too much upon the asseveration of this surgeon, whose judgment we cannot be sure is infallible.’ 
Mr. Morgan was about to say something in answer to this but was prevented, Jenny's servant open'd the door instantly, and told her that lady Speck was just coming up stairs, on which he took his leave for that time. 
After the usual salutations at a first meeting were over, and they had seated themselves,—‘If the heart is to be judged by the countenance, said lady Speck, looking earnestly on her fair friend, I may hope, my dear, that yours is somewhat less depress'd than it has been of late.’ 
On her speaking in this manner, Jenny made no scruple to repeat to her all she had been told by mr. Morgan in regard to Belpine's condition, and also the reasons which both of them had assigned for his 
causing it to be reported so much worse than in effect it was. 
‘Belpine must certainly be one of the most mischievous fellows in the universe, said lady Speck, and since you have now got a more perfect intelligence of his situation, I may venture to let you know that nothing can be more terrible than the account given of it by his servant, both to sir Robert and mr. Lovegrove, who I assure you did not fail to make the enquiries they promised when they were here last;—and it has been only because they were unwilling either to deceive you, or to be the bearers of an unwelcome truth, that they have deny'd themselves the pleasure of waiting on you for some days.’ 
Jenny express'd herself in the most grateful terms for the generous concern those gentlemen had seem'd to take in her affairs; and then began to turn the conversation on some other topick; but there was something in the behaviour of Belpine which appeared so peculiar as well as base, in the opinion of lady Speck, that she could talk of little else all the time she said, which indeed was not very long, her ladyship being in her deshabille, and in haste to go home to dress for dinner. 
She was no sooner gone, than Jenny's servant acquainted her that a lady, who call'd herself Sophia, had been to wait on her. —‘Sophia, cried she hastily,—why then did you not shew her up?’ —‘You had company, madam, answer'd he, and she said she rather chose to wait on you when you were quite alone, and that she would come again in the afternoon to see if you were so.’ 
If the reader has forgot this young lady he may have recourse to the second chapter of the first volume, where he will find her character at large; and now need only to be told that Jenny, who had not heard of her being in town, was extremely glad that she should have a person near her in whom she placed more confidence than in most others of her acquaintance. 
The pleasure of this friend's return did not however make her forget that it was post-day, and that she had an obligation to discharge which could not be dispensed with by any other; and therefore, to prevent any interruption which delay might occasion, sat down immediately and wrote the following lines: 


To James Jessamy, Esq;
My dear Jemmy,
“I Received the trust you reposed in me of which I shall be a very faithful steward; but I have just heard something which makes me hope you might have spared yourself that trouble;—your worthy friend mr. Morgan will write to you the particulars, and perhaps subjoin some advice, which tho' I am certain he means well, cannot consent you should comply with;—so much as I prize your presence I should tremble to behold you here while there remains even the most distant menace either to your life or liberty. 
“A little time, of course, must put an end to our suspense,—till then therefore, I conjure you, content yourself with the assurance I have given you, and now again repeat, that if you cannot come to me, I will go to you, and endeavour, by every thing in my power, to soften the asperity of all other losses. 
“I fear, indeed, you pass your days in a manner uncomfortable enough,—without friends,—without acquaintance, 
—without any companion but your own melancholy thoughts,—nothing to please, or even to amuse your mind: —I am ignorant of the place you are in,—I only know it is on the sea-coast;—there, methinks, I see you often wandering, casting a wishing eye towards what you left behind, and almost cursing fortune for the deprivation. —Tell me, my Jemmy, does my fancy paint your situation such as it is? —I shall rejoice to find myself deceived, and to hear that Calais is not wanting in matters of agreeable entertainment;—believe you can give no account so welcome to me as that of your being perfectly easy;—endeavour, at least, to make yourself so, I beseech you, till the circumstances of things permit you to be happy, and to make happy all your friends, particularly her who is, 
“With an unfeign'd affection,
Dear Jemmy,
Yours eternally,
J. Jessamy. 
“P. S. I cannot close this without once more conjuring you, not for your own sake but mine, not to think of returning till we shall be well assured that Belpine has left his chamber.” 

She soon found how much she had been in the right to lay hold of the first opportunity to prepare the above, otherwise she might have been prevented from doing it at all that day; for Sophia, who had a great deal to say to her, came very early in the afternoon. 
