


Presents the reader with some prognostics
on events in futuro. 

The reader will easily suppose, that
in the present disposition of miss
Betsy's heart, mr. Munden met with but
an indifferent reception from her;—she
avoided his company as much as possible,
and when obliged to receive a visit from
him, could not bring herself to treat him
with any thing more than a cold civility. 
—He complained of her cruelty,—told
her, he had expected better things from
her, after her brothers had approved his
flame;—he pressed her, in the most pathetic
terms he was master of, to let him
know when the happy day would arrive,
which should put an end to the long series
of his hopes and fears. 
It is certain, that if this gentleman had
loved with that warmth and sincerity
which some men have done, he must
have been very unhappy during his courtship
to miss Betsy;—but he was altogether
insensible of the delicacies of the
passion he professed,—he felt not the 

pains he affected to languish under,—he
could support the frowns, or even the
slights of his mistress, without any other
anxiety than what his pride inflicted. 
It was, therefore, rather owing to this
last propensity in his nature, than any
emotions of a real tenderness for miss
Betsy, which had made him perserve in
his addresses to her. —All his acquaintance
knew he had courted her a long
time;—some of them had been witness
of her treatment of him, and he was unwilling
it should be said of him, that he
had made an offer of his heart in vain. 
He had, at first, indeed, a liking of
her person;—he had considered her
beauty, wit, and the many accomplishments
she was possessed of, were such as
would render his choice applauded by the
world. —The hopes of gaining her in a
short time, by the encouragement she had
given his addresses, had made him pursue
her with vigour; but the delays,— 
the scruples, the capriciousness of her humour,
—the pretences she of late had
made to avoid giving, him a definitive
answer, had, at length, palled all the inclination
he once had for her, and even
desire was deadened in him, on so many
disappointments. 

It is, therefore, a very ill-judged thing
in the ladies, to keep too long in play the
man they ever design to marry; and with
all due deference to that great wit and
poet, sir John Suckling, there are very
few examples, which verify his maxim,
that 

‘'Tis expectation makes the blessing dear.’

According to my opinion, which is
founded on observation, another author,
who wrote much about the same time
with sir John, has given us a more true
idea of what a tedious courtship may produce,
especially on the side of the man:
—in a matrimonial dialogue, he makes
the husband excuse the coldness complained
of by his wife, in these terms; 

‘Unequal lengths, alas! our passions run,
‘My love was quite worn out, e'er your's begun.’

This being the case with mr. Munden,
it rendered miss Betsy little less indifferent
to him, in reality, than he had ever been
to her:—to which another motive, perhaps,
might also be added, viz. that of
his indulging himself with amusements
with other fair ones, of a more kind complexion; 
for continency, as will hereafter 

appear, was not among the number of
that gentleman's virtues. 
But enough of mr. Munden for the
present. —It is now highly proper to give
the reader some account what mr. Trueworth
was doing, while miss Betsy was
entertaining sentiments for him, which he
had long since ceased the ambition of inspiring
her with. 
Difficult was it for him to get over the
mingled astonishment and vexation, which
the detection of the wickedness of miss
Flora had involved him in. —The remembrance
of those guilty moments, in
which he had indulged a tender intercourse
with a woman of her abandoned principles,
filled him with the most bitter remorse,
and rendered him almost hateful
to himself. 
To recollect, that he had been the instrument
of her base designs on miss Betsy,
and how cruelly he had wronged that
lady, by a too rash belief, was, of itself,
sufficient to inflame his rage; but when
he reflected on this last act of baseness,
which, if not providentially discovered,
might have made his dear Harriot entertain
suspicions of him, fatal to her peace,
if not totally destructive of their mutual
happiness, the shock of such a misfortune, 

though happily frustrated, was more than
he could bear with any tolerable degree
of patience. 
Rage, disdain, and revenge, for the
vile contriver of so black an attempt,
were the first emotions that took possession
of his mind; but the violence of those
passions evaporating by degrees, he began
to think more coolly, and to reason with
himself, on the source, from which that
depravity of morals and manners, women
are sometimes guilty of, proceeded. 
‘Chastity,’ said he, ‘is but one branch
of virtue, but a material one, and serves
as a guard to all the others, and, if that
is once overcome, endangers the giving
entrance to a thousand vices. —A woman,
entirely free from those inordinate
desires, which are indeed but the disgrace
of love, can scarce be capable of
envy, malice, or revenge to any excess.’ 
‘That sex,’ cried he again, ‘are endued
by nature with many perfections,
which our's cannot boast of,—it is
their own faults when they sink beneath
us in value;—but the best things,
when once corrupted, become the worst. 
—How dear, therefore, ought a woman
to prize her innocence!—as
Shakespear says, 


‘—They all are white,—a sheet
‘Of spotless paper, when they first are born;
‘But they are to be scrawl'd upon, and blotted
‘By every goose-quill.—

He was in the midst of these contemplations,
when a letter from miss Flora
was brought to him;—she still flattered
herself with being able to work on his
good-nature by submissions, and a seeming
contrition for what she had done, and had
accordingly wrote in the most moving
terms she was mistress of;—but he
knowing, by the hand-writing on the superscription,
from whom it came, would
not even open it, and his indignation rekindling
afresh, he took a piece of paper,
in which he wrote only this line, 

‘I read no letters from incendiaries.’

This served as a cover to the letter,
which he sent back directly by the messenger
that brought it. 
If the mind of mr. Trueworth had
been less taken up than it was at present,
this ugly accident would, doubtless,
have dwelt much longer upon it;—but
affairs of a more important, and more
pleasing nature, demanded his whole attention. 

The day prefixed for the celebration of
his marriage with miss Harriot, and also
of that of sir Bazil and miss Mabel, had
been delayed on account of mrs. Blanch-field's
death. —None of these generous
persons could think of indulging the joys
they so much languished for, 'till all due
rites were paid to the memory of that
amiable lady. 
Mr. Trueworth and miss Harriot went
into deep mourning;—sir Bazil and mrs.
Wellair also put on black;—miss Mabel
did the same in compliment to them; for
she had not the least acquaintance with the
deceased. 
Nor was this all:—mr. Trueworth, to
testify his gratitude and respect, ordered
a very curious monument of white marble
to be erected over her remains, the model
of which he drew himself, after one
he had seen in Italy, and was much admired
by all judges of architecture and
sculpture. 
If, by a secret and unfathomable intuition,
the souls of the departed are permitted
any knowledge of what is done
below, that of mrs. Blanchfield's must feel
an extreme satisfaction, in such proofs of
the esteem of him she had so tenderly and 

so fatally loved, as well as those of her
fair friend and rival. 
That generous young lady would fain
have prolonged their mourning for a whole
month, and consequently have put off her
marriage till that time; but this, if mr.
Trueworth would have been prevailed
upon to have submitted to, sir Bazil and
mrs. Wellair would not agree to;—he
thought he had already sacrificed enough
of the time of his promis'd happiness,
and mrs. Wellair was impatient to go
home, though equally loth to leave her
sister, 'till she had disposed of herself. 
They were arguing on this topick one
evening:—mr. Trueworth opposed miss
Harriot, as much as he durst do without
danger of offending her; but sir Bazil
plainly told her, that if she continued obstinate,
miss Mabel and he would finish
their affair without her. —Mrs. Wellair
urged the necessity there was for her return,
and mr. Trueworth, encouraged by
what these two had said, added, that he
was certain mrs. Blanchfield did not mean,
by what she had done, to obstruct his
happiness a moment:—to which miss
Harriot, with a most obliging smile, replied,
‘Well,’ cried she, ‘obedience will
very shortly be my duty, and I will 

give you a sample of it before-hand:
—here is my hand,’ continued she,
giving it to him, ‘make it your own as
soon as you please.’ 
It is not to be doubted but mr. Trueworth
kissed the hand she gave him, with
the utmost warmth and tenderness; but
before he could make any reply to so
kind a declaration, sir Bazil cried out,— 
‘Well said, Harriot,—love has already
wrought wonders in your heart;—you
will grant to a lover what you refuse to
us.’ —‘Not to a lover, sir,’ answered she; 
but to a person who is about to be my
husband. —I think it is as ill-judged a
reserve in a woman to disown her affection
for the man she has consented to
marry, as it would be imprudence to
confess it before she has consented.’ 
After some farther conversation on this
head, in the course of which mr. Trueworth
had the opportunity of being more
confirmed than ever, that the disposition
of his mistress was, in every respect, such
as he wished to find it;—all that was
yet wanting for the completion of the
nuptials was settled. 
The second day after this was fixed for
the celebration of the ceremony, after
which it was determined, that the two 

bridegrooms with their brides,—the father
of miss Mabel, mrs. Wellair, and two
other friends, should all set out together
for sir Bazil's seat in Staffordshire, and
that mrs. Wellair should write to her husband
to meet them there, that the whole
family might be together on so joyful an
occasion. 
