
Serves only to render the cause more intricate, and involve the parties concern'd in it in fresh perplexities. 

Lady Speck had given orders that when lord Huntley came he should be admitted, but no farther than the parlour. 
It would have been pleasant enough for any one to have observed the meeting 
of these two;—he approach'd her with a profound reverence, but with a reserve which had something in it very near akin to resentment;—she return'd his salutation with an air all distant and austere; and they stood looking upon one another for the space of near half a minute without speaking. 
Lady Speck was the first that broke silence;—‘I did not expect, my lord, said she, that your lordship would have given yourself the trouble of making any visits here, after what I wrote to you last night.’ 
‘It is not indeed, madam, a thing very common with me, answer'd he gravely, to go to any place where I have been once forbid;—but I am pierc'd in too tender a part to stand upon punctilios;—both my love and honour are wounded,—gash'd,—mangled in a most cruel and infamous degree; and it is only from your ladyship's justice and humanity that I can hope a cure.’ 
‘Can you deny, my lord, that you are married, cried she.’ —‘By Heaven!—not married,—nor contracted,—return'd he eagerly:—nor, till I saw your charming sister, defy the whole world 
to prove I ever made the least proposal of that nature to any woman breathing.’ 
These words, and the manner in which they were deliver'd, began a little to stagger that belief of his infidelity which she till now had thought herself confirm'd in: —‘If any part of what your lordship avers be true, said she, sir Thomas Welby must certainly have been imposed on by some very extraordinary methods.’ 
‘Sir Thomas Welby, madam, retorted lord Huntley in great amazement; is it then possible that he should be my accuser?’ —‘There required a no less substantial evidence, said she, to authorize a supposition of your lordship's being guilty of a crime like this: —But you may see what he says, added she, presenting him with sir Thomas's letter.’ 
He read it hastily to himself, and as soon as he had done so,—‘I perceive indeed, madam, said he, that some uncommon arts have been put in practice against me,—for what reason I am not able to conceive;—sir Thomas's veracity is well known to me, and I think he has been inclined to favour my pretensions;—I doubt not therefore but 
he will readily afford me his assistance in diving to the bottom of this mysterious villany;—I am sure I shall lose no time, nor spare no pains to bring the dark incendiary to light;—but, pursued he, I will trouble your ladyship no farther, nor even ask to see the object of my soul's desire till my innocence is fully clear'd, and I have proved myself less unworthy of adoring her.’ 
He concluded these words with a low bow, and went directly out of the room, without waiting to hear what answer she might have made to them. 
It was, perhaps, much for her ease that he did so; for she was now in a consternation at his behaviour little inferior to what she felt on the first information of his crime;—his words,—his looks,—his resolution, made a deep impression on her;—she had seen grief and resentment in his countenance, but nothing that betoken'd a consciousness of guilt;—she knew not what to think,—or how to form a right judgment of him, but ran immediately to Jenny and miss Wingman to impart to them all that had pass'd, and hear their sentiments upon it. 
The latter of these young ladies was afraid of giving her opinion, probably lest it should be thought too favourable; but Jenny presently cried, that she could almost lay her life upon his innocence: ‘—I dare believe, said she, that I have hit upon the real ground-work of this story;—the woman who would pass for his wife is certainly no other than some cast-off mistress of his, who either in revenge for his deserting her, or to give herself an air, assumes the name of lady Huntley.’ 
‘No, no miss Jessamy, interrupted lady Speck, it is impossible that sir Thomas would assert, in such positive terms, a thing of this nature on so slender a foundation,—I know him better,—and there must be something more in it than we can at present see into.’ 
While the ladies were in this dilemma lord Huntley, who the moment he had left lady Speck went in search of his two friends, sir Robert Manley and mr. Lovegrove, was now complaining to them of the aspersion cast upon him, and declaring his resolution of going to London with all possible expedition, in order to 
detect the primary author of that calumny cast upon him. 
These gentlemen, who had known his lordship for a considerable time, and had never heard any thing like his having consummated a marriage, were very much surprised that so odd a story should be raised, and highly applauded his intention of justifying himself as soon as he was able. 
Both of them offer'd to be partakers of his journey;—he told them he was greatly indebted to their friendship on this score; but that he hoped he should soon return to Bath with the proofs of his innocence, and that it would be altogether needless for them to undergo the fatigues of accompanying him. 
Sir Robert Manley, however, insisted on going with him;—‘As for Lovegrove, said he, I think he stands better with lady Speck for some days past than he had ever done before, and it would be pity to take him from her at a time when she seems to be in such favourable dispositions towards him;—but as for me, I have no mistress, at least none that will receive my vows, and consequently can have 
no pleasure equal to that of proving my sincerity to my friend;—therefore, my dear lord, added he, if you do not suffer me to go with you in your coach, you shall not hinder me from following you on horseback.’ 
Lord Huntley was at last prevailed upon to take sir Robert with him on this expedition; but though he hoped to return triumphant from it in four or five days at farthest, he would by no means hear of mr. Lovegrove's leaving Bath for never so small a space of time, while lady Speck continued there. 
They all dined together, after which sir Robert and mr. Lovegrove left lord Huntley, the one to give directions to his man for every thing to be got ready for his departure the next morning by break of day, and the other to pay his devoirs to his mistress. 
Jenny, who would not be persuaded to keep her chamber any longer, though not quite recover'd enough to go abroad, was now come down into the dining room, and miss Wingman being resolv'd not to appear again in any public place while she remain'd at Bath, for fear of meeting lord Huntley; lady Speck also, 
in complaisance to them both, would not go out of the house;—so that mr. Lovegrove, on his coming there, found them all at home. 
The first compliments were no sooner over than the conversation began on lord Huntley's affair;—mr. Lovegrove left nothing unsaid that he thought might contribute to make them entertain a more favourable opinion of his friend;—he remonstrated to them the improbability of his being guilty in the manner he was represented; and lady Speck and miss Wingman, in their turns, remonstrated the improbability that such a story could be raised without some sort of foundation; but Jenny, as she had always done, sided with mr. Lovegrove, and took the part of the accused. 
They were engaged in this dispute when sir Robert Manley came in,—that gentleman, though expecting to be back in a short time, was too polite to think of going without taking his leave of the ladies; hearing what subject they were upon, he seconded mr. Lovegrove's arguments, and so warmly defended the cause of his absent friend, that lady Speck was obliged to cry out,—‘Well—well, let us have no more discourse upon 
this head;—it is time alone that can decide the point between us;—for my part, added she, I sincerely wish his lordship my be found as innocent as you would persuade us to believe he is.’ 
‘This is extremely generous in your ladyship, reply'd sir Robert; but madam, continued he, addressing himself to miss Wingman, how happy should I make my friend if I were permitted to carry to him the assurance that you also join'd with your sister in the same kind wish?’ 
‘Lord Huntley may be certain, answer'd she blushing, that I should be very sorry a crime like what is laid to his charge should be proved on any in the world, much more on a person whom I cannot deny but I once thought highly deserving of my esteem.’ 
There pass'd nothing more of any moment while they were together, which was not very long, for the gentlemen were impatient to return to lord Huntley, who they knew was alone and stood in need of all the consolation they could give him;—they staid the whole evening with him, and rejoin'd him very early in the morning, at which time he 
set out with sir Robert on his journey to London. 
