

Full of sudden zeal for his own improvement,
Ormond sat down at the
foot of a tree, determined to make a list
of all his faults, and of all his good resolutions
for the future.—He took out
his pencil, and began on the back of a
letter the following resolutions, in a sad
scrawling hand and incorrect style:— 
Harry Ormond's good resolutions.
Resolved 1st.—That I will never drink
more than (blank number of) glasses.
Resolved 2dly.—That I will cure myself
of being passionate.
Resolved 3dly.—That I will never
keep low company.
Resolved.—That I am too fond of

flattery—women's especially I like most.— 
To cure myself of that.
Here he was interrupted by the sight
of a little gossoon, with a short stick
tucked under his arm, who came
pattering on barefoot in a kind of
pace indescribable to those who have
never seen it—it was something as
like walking or running as chaunting
is to saying or singing.
“The answer I am from the Black
Islands, Master Harry, and would have
been back wid you afore nightfall yesterday,
only he—king Corny—was at the
fair of Frisky—could not write till this
morning any way—but has his service
to ye, Master Harry, will be in it for ye
by half after two with a bed and blanket
for Moriarty, he bid me say on account
he forgot to put it in the note.—In the
Sally Cove the boat will be there abow
in the big lough, forenent the spot where
the fir dale was cut last seraph by them
rogues.”

The despatch from the king of the
Black Islands was then produced from
the messenger's bosom, and it ran as
follows:
“Dear Harry.—What the mischief has
come over cousin Ulick to be banishing
you from Castle Hermitage?—But
since he conformed he was never the same
man, especially since his last mis-marriage.— 
But no use moralising—he was
always too much of a courtier for me.— 
Come you to me, my dear boy, who is
no courtier, and you'll be received and
embraced with open arms—was I Briareus
the same way.—Bring Moriarty
Carroll (if that's his name), the boy you
shot, which has given you so much concern— 
for which I like you the better— 
and honour that boy, who, living or
dying, forbad to prosecute—Don't be
surprised to see the roof the way it is:— 
since Tuesday I wedged it up bodily
without stirring a stick:—you'll see it
from the boat, standing three foot high

above the walls, waiting while I'm
building up to it—to get attics—which I
shall for next to nothing—by my own
contrivance.—Mean time, good dry lodging,
as usual, for all friends at the palace.
He shall be well tended for you by
Sheelah Dunshauglin, the mother of
Betty, worth a hundred of her! and
we'll soon set him up again with the
help of such a nurse, as well as ever, I'll
engage—for I'm a bit of a doctor, you
know, as well as every thing else.—But
don't let any other doctor, surgeon, or
apothecary, be coming after him for
your life—for none ever gets a permit
to land, to my knowledge, on the Black
Islands—to which I attribute, under
Providence, to say nothing of my own
skill in practice, the wonderful preservation
of my people in health—that, and
woodsorrel, and another secret or two
not to be committed to paper in a hurry— 
all which I would not have written
to you, but am in the gout since four this

morning, held by the foot fast—else I'd
not be writing, but would have gone
every inch of the way for you myself in
stile, in lieu of sending, which is all I
can now do, my six-oared boat, streamers
flying, and piper playing like mad—for
I would not have you be coming like a
banished man, but in all glory to Cornelius
O'Shane, commonly called king
Corny—but no king for you, only your
hearty old friend.”
“Heaven bless Cornelius O'Shane!” 
said Harry Ormond to himself, as he
finished this letter, “king or no king, the
most warm-hearted man on earth, let the
other be who he will.”
Then pressing the letter to his heart,
he put it up carefully, and rising in
haste, he dropped the list of his faults.— 
That train of associations was completely
broken, and for the present completely
forgotten; nor was it likely to be soon
renewed at the Black Islands, especially
in the palace, where he was now going

to take up his residence. Moriarty was
laid on—what he never laid before—a
feather-bed, and was transported, with
Ormond, in the six-oared boat, streamers
flying, and piper playing, across the lake
to the islands. Moriarty's head ached
terribly, but he nevertheless enjoyed the
playing of the pipes in his ear, because
of the air of triumph it gave Master
Harry, to go away in this grandeur, in
the face of the country. King Corny
ordered the discharge of twelve guns on
his landing, which popped one after another
gloriously,—the hospitable echoes,
as Moriarty called them, repeating the
sound. A horse, decked with ribbands,
waited on the shore, with king Corny's
compliments for prince Harry, as the
boy, who held the stirrup for Ormond to
mount, said he was instructed to call
him, and to proclaim him—“Prince
Harry” throughout the island, which he
did by sound of horn, the whole way
they proceeded to the palace—very much

to the annoyance of the horse, but all
for the greater glory of the prince, who
managed his steed to the admiration of
the shouting ragged multitude, and of
his majesty, who sat in state in his
gouty chair at the palace door. He
had had himself rolled out to welcome
the coming guest.
“By all that's princely,” cried he,
“then, that young Harry Ormond was
intended for a prince, he sits a horse
so like myself; and that horse requires
a master hand to manage him.”
Ormond alighted—
The gracious, cordial, fatherly welcome,
with which he was received, delighted
his heart.
“Welcome, prince, my adopted son,
welcome to Corny castle—palace, I
would have said, only for the constituted
authorities of the post-office, that might
take exceptions, and not be sending me
my letters right. As I am neither
bishop nor arch—I have in their blind

eyes or conceptions no right—Lord help
them!—to a temporal palace. Be that
as it may, come you in with me, here
into the big room—and see! there's the
bed in the corner for your first object,
my boy—your wounded chap—And I'll
visit his wound, and fix it and him the
first thing for ye, the minute he comes
up.”
His majesty pointed to a bed in the
corner of a large apartment, whose
beautiful painted ceiling and cornice,
and fine chimney-piece with caryatides
of white marble, ill accorded with the
heaps of oats and corn—the thrashing
cloth and flail which lay on the floor—
“It is intended for a drawing-room,
understand,” said king Corny, “but
till it is finished, I use it for a granary
or a barn, when it would not be a
barrack-room or hospital, which last is
most useful at present.”
To this hospital Moriarty was carefully
conveyed. Here, notwithstanding

his gout, which affected only his feet,
king Corny dressed Moriarty's wound
with exquisite tenderness and skill; for
he had actually acquired knowledge
and address in many arts, with which
none could have suspected him to have
been in the least acquainted.
Dinner was soon announced, which
was served up with such a strange mixture
of profusion and carelessness, as
showed that the attendants, who were
numerous and ill caparisoned, were not
much used to gala-days. The crowd,
who had accompanied Moriarty into the
house, was admitted into the dining- 
room, where they stood round the king,
prince, and father Jos, the priest, as the
courtiers, during the king's supper at
Versailles, surrounded the king of
France. But these poor people were
treated with more hospitality than were
the courtiers of the French king; for
as soon as the dishes were removed,
their contents were generously distributed

among the attendant multitude.
The people blest king and prince,
“wishing them health and happiness
long to reign over them;”—and bowing
suitably to his majesty the king, and
to his reverence the priest, without
standing upon the order of their going,
departed.
“And now, father Jos,” said the king
to the priest, “say grace, and draw
close, and let me see you do justice to
my claret, or the whiskey-punch if you
prefer; and you, prince Harry, we will
set to it regally as long as you please.”
“Till tea-time,”—thought young
Harry. “Till supper-time,”—thought
father Jos. “Till bed-time,”—thought
king Corny.
At tea-time young Harry, in pursuance
of his resolution the first, rose, but
he was seized instantly, and held down
to his chair. The royal command was
laid upon him “to sit still and be a good
fellow.”—Moreover the door was locked

—so that there was no escape or retreat.
The next morning when he wakened
with an aching head, he recollected with
disgust the figure of father Jos, and all
the noisy mirth of the preceding night.
Not without some self-contempt, he
asked himself what had become of his
resolution?—
“The wounded boy was axing for
you, Master Harry,” said the girl, who
came in to open the shutters.
“How is he?” cried Harry, starting
up.
“He is but soberly;  he got the
night but middling; he concaits he
could not sleep because he did not get
a sight of your honour afore he'd settle— 
I tell him 'tis the change of beds,
which always hinders a body to sleep
the first night.”
The sense of having totally forgotten
the poor fellow—the contrast between

this forgetfulness and the anxiety and
contrition of the two preceding nights,
actually surprised Ormond; he could
hardly believe that he was one and the
same person. Then came excuses to
himself—“Gratitude—common civility— 
the peremptoriness of king Corny— 
his passionate temper, when opposed on
this tender point—the locked door— 
and two to one—In short, there was an
impossibility in the circumstances of
doing otherwise than what he had done.
But then the same impossibility—the
same circumstances—might recur the
next night, and the next, and so on:
the peremptory temper of king Corny
was not likely to alter, and the moral
obligation of gratitude would continue
the same;” so that at nineteen, Ormond
was to become, from complaisance, what
his soul and body abhorred—an habitual
drunkard?—And what would become of
Lady Annaly's interest in his fate or his
improvement?”
The two questions were not of equal

importance, but our hero was at this
time far from having any just proportion
in his reasoning. It was well he reasoned
at all.—The argument as to the
obligation of gratitude, and the view he
had taken of the never-ending nature
of the evil, that must be the consequence
of beginning with weak complaisance,— 
above all, the feeling that he had so lost
his reason as to forget Moriarty, and to
have been again incapable of commanding
his passions, if any thing had occurred
to cross his temper, determined
Ormond to make a firm resistance on
the next occasion that should occur. It
occurred the very next night.—After a
dinner given to his chief tenants and
the genteel people of the islands, a dinner
in honour and in introduction of his
adopted son, king Corny gave a toast
“to the prince presumptive,” as he
now stiled him—a bumper toast. Soon
afterwards he detected day-light in
Harry's glass, and cursing it properly,

he insisted on flowing bowls and full
glasses. “What! are you prince presumptuous?” 
cried he, with a half
angry and astonished look, “Would you
resist and contradict your father and
king at his own table after dinner!— 
Down with the glass!”— 
Further and steady resistance changed
the jesting tone and half angry look of
king Corny into sullen silence, and a
black portentous brow of serious displeasure; 
after a decent time of sitting, the
bottle passing him without further importunity,
Ormond rose—it was a hard
struggle—for in the face of his benefactor,
he saw reproach and rage bursting from
every feature. Still he moved on towards
the door—he heard the words
“sneaking off sober!—let him sneak!”
Ormond had his hand on the lock of
the door—it was a bad lock, and opened
with difficulty.
“There's gratitude for you! No heart
after all!—I mistook him.”

Ormond turned back, and firmly standing,
and firmly speaking, he said, coolly— 
“You did not mistake me formerly,
Sir,—but you mistake me now!—Sneaking!— 
Is there any man here sober or
drunk,” continued he, impetuously approaching
the table, and looking round
full in every face—“is there any man
here dares to say so but yourself.—You,
you my benefactor, my friend; you have
said it—think it you did not—you could
not, but say it you may.—You may say
what you will to Harry Ormond, bound to
you as he is—bound hand and foot and
heart!—Trample on him as you will—you
may—No heart—Oblige me, gentlemen,
some of you,” cried he, his anger rising
and his eyes kindling as he spoke. “Some
of you, gentlemen, if any of you think so,
oblige me by saying so.—No gratitude,
Sir!”—turning from them, and addressing
himself to the old man, who held an
untasted glass of claret as he listened.
“No gratitude! Have not I?—Try me,

try me to the death—you have tried me
to the quick of the heart, and I have
borne it.”
He could bear it no longer, he threw
himself into the vacant chair—flung out
his arms on the table, and laying his face
down upon them, wept aloud. Cornelius
O'Shane pushed the wine away. “I've
wronged the boy, grievously—” said he,
and forgetting the gout, he rose from his
chair, hobbled to him, and leaning over
him—“Harry, 'tis I—Look up my own
boy, and say you forgive me, or I'll never
forgive myself. That's well,” continued
he, as Harry looked up and gave him
his hand—“That's well!—you've taken
the twinge out of my heart, worse than
the gout—not a drop of gall or malice in
your nature, nor ever was, more than in
the child unborn. But see, I'll tell you
what you'll do now, Harry, to settle all
things—and lest the fit should take me ever
to be mad with you on this score again.
You don't chuse to drink more than's becoming?

—Well, you're right, and I'm
wrong. 'Twould be a burning shame of
me to make of you what I have made of
myself—I was born afore the present reformation
in manners, in that respect.— 
We must do only as well as we can. But
I will ensure you against the future—and
before we take another glass—There's
the priest—and you Tom Ferrally there,
step you for my swearing book. Harry
Ormond, you shall take an oath against
drinking more glasses than you please
evermore, and then you're safe from me.
But stay, you are a heretic. Phoo!
What am I saying—'Twas seeing the
priest put that word heretic in my head— 
you're not a catholic, I mean. But
an oath's an oath, taken before priest or
parson—an oath, taken how you will, will
operate. But stay, to make all easy, 'tis
I'll take it.”
“Against drinking, you! King Corny!” 
said Father Jos,” stopping his hand,
“and in case of the gout in your stomach?”

“Against drinking! do you think I'd
perjure myself? No! But against pressing
him to it—I'll take my oath I'll never
ask him to drink another glass more than
he likes.”
The oath was taken, and king Corny
concluded the ceremony by observing,
that “after all there was no character he
despised more than that of a sot. But
every gentleman knew that there was a
wide and material difference betwixt a
gentleman who was fond of his bottle,
and that unfortunate being, an habitual
drunkard. For his own part, it was his
established rule never to go to bed without
a proper quantity of liquor under his
belt; but he defied the universe to say he
was ever known to be drunk.”
This startling assertion could not bring
his majesty's veracity into question; for
according to his definition, and to the
received opinion at his court, “No man
could be called drunk, so long as he could
lie upon the ground without holding it.”

At a court where such ingenious casuistry
prevailed, it was happy for our hero,
that an unqualifying oath now protected
his resolution.