

We regret that we cannot gratify some
of our courteous readers with a detailed
account of the marriage of Caroline and
Count Altenberg, with a description of
the wedding-dresses, or a list of the company,
who, after the ceremony, partook
of an elegant collation at her Ladyship's
house in Cavendish Square. We lament
that we cannot even furnish a paragraph
in honor of Count Altenberg's
equipage.
After all their other friends had made
their congratulations, had taken leave of
Caroline, and had departed, Mrs. Hungerford
and Mrs. Mortimer still lingered.
“I know, my love,” said Mrs. Hungerford,
“I ought to resign you, in these
last moments, to your parents, your brothers,
your own Rosamond.—Yet I have

some excuse for my selfishness—they
will see you again, it is to be hoped,
often.—But I!—That is not in the
course of nature ... the blessing I
scarcely could have expected to live to
enjoy has been granted to me.—And
now that I have seen you united to one
worthy of you, one who knows your
value, I am content—I am grateful.— 
Farewell again and again, my beloved
Caroline, may every. ...”
Tears spoke the rest—turning from
Caroline, she leaned on Count Altenberg's
arm; as he conducted her to her
carriage, she could only say,
“You are a happy man, Count Altenberg.
Forgive me, if I am not able to
congratulate you as I ought ... Daughter
Mortimer! you know my heart ...
Speak for me ... if you can.”
Count Altenberg was more touched
by this strong affection for Caroline, than
he could have been by any congratulatory
compliments to himself.—After
the departure of Mrs. Hungerford and

Mrs. Mortimer came the separation so
much dreaded by all the family, for
which all stood prepared. Despising
and detesting the display of sensibility,
they had fortified themselves for this moment
with all their resolution, and each
struggled to repress their own feelings.
Count Altenberg had delayed till the
last moment. It was now necessary, that
they should set out.—Caroline, flushed
crimson to the very temples one instant,
and pale the next, commanded with the
utmost effort her emotion. Rosamond,
unable to repress hers, clung to her sister,
weeping—Caroline's lips quivered
with a vain attempt to speak—she could
only embrace Rosamond repeatedly, and
then her mother—in silence.—She
stood motionless, for she had not power
to withdraw her cold hand from her mother.—Her
father pressed her to his bosom—blessed
her—and then drawing her
arm within his, led her to her husband.
As they passed through the hall, the
faithful housekeeper, and the old steward,

who had come from the country to
the marriage, pressed forward, in hopes
of a last look. Caroline stopped, and
took leave of each.—She was able, though
with difficulty, to speak, and she thanked
them for all the services and kindness
she had received from them from childhood
to this hour.—Then her father led
her on to the carriage.
Oh! if it was not for such a husband
as Count Altenberg, I never, never could
bear this separation, thought Caroline,
as she took leave of her father.
Her foot was now on the step of the
carriage, into which Count Altenberg
was handing her; when, turning to look
once more at her father, two men rudely
crossed between them, and an instant
afterwards, she saw one of these lay his
hand on her father's shoulder, and heard
him say the words,
“Arrest!—Writ!—Prisoner!”
Caroline sprang from the step of the
carriage, Count Altenberg opened a way

for her between the sheriff's officers into
the house.
“Do not be alarmed, my dear Caroline.—There
is no cause,” said her father,
in a calm voice.—“This is a great
mistake, or great injustice.—In either
case, I shall obtain redress.”
The writ was shown.—It was taken
out at the suit of Sir Robert Percy, and
for an enormous sum—the amount of
the rents received by Mr. Percy during
the whole time he had been in possession
of the estate. When that estate
was given up to Sir Robert Percy, he
had agreed to abandon all claim to these
arrears, in consideration of improvements,
buildings, furniture, and plate,
which had been delivered to him without
reserve, to an amount then thought
equivalent to his demands. But he had
lately written, to state, that what he had
unwarily been induced to accept as full
payment was by no means equal to
his right, that the agreement was made

under mistaken information, that it was
not legally executed, and that he had
directed his solicitor, Mr. Sharpe, to proceed
at law for the recovery of the whole
of his just debt.
Mr. Percy had not conceived it possible,
that even Mr. Sharpe would, without
allowing time scarcely for an answer
to this demand, take out a writ against
him, and have it executed at such a
cruel moment.
Count Altenberg, when he understood
the nature of this arrest, and as soon as
he heard Alfred name the necessity of
obtaining security for his father, to prevent
this imprisonment, instantly came
forward,
“As your son, Mr. Percy,” said he,
“I have a right to speak—a right to
hope that my assistance will be accepted.
—I have an English property—will that
be sufficient security?”
Mr. Percy thanked the Count—and
Caroline, by her look, thanked him most
tenderly; but her father firmly said,

that he would not involve any of his
friends in his difficulties.—The nearer
and dearer they were, the more pain it
would give him—he had several excellent
friends, who would, he was sure, be
willing to risk much for him, but he
would not suffer them to hazard so enormous
a sum. It was, he said, an evil, but
no insupportable evil, to pass some months
in prison—he trusted the event would
prove, that he had been unjustly detained.
Then turning to Caroline, he said,
“You know the worst now, my dear
daughter; from your strength of mind
I expect, in all circumstances, resolution.—The
honor of Count Altenberg
obliges him to be with his Prince at an
appointed time.—Detain him not— 
farewell, my dear daughter.”—
Caroline, with the anguish of divided
duty and affection, looked from her father
to her husband.
“Heaven forbid! that I should separate
you at this moment from your father,
Caroline,” said the Count.—“Stay

with him—Heaven forbid! that I should
exert the right which the name of husband
gives me, to sever the ties of nature!—Stay
with your father, dearest
Caroline!—My honor safe, my promise
fulfilled, I will instantly return, and
may we meet in happiness!”
The Count, with a sort of desperate
haste, as if he feared his resolution should
fail, embraced his wife.—Thus parted
the lovers, who, but a few short hours
before thought themselves secure of passing
their lives together.—So uncertain
is all human felicity!
Caroline, as thought she had not been
a bride, prepared to accompany her father
to prison.
The sheriff's officer, who, in spite of
the obduracy of his trade, was touched— 
observed, that ... Gentlemen in similar
circumstances are usually allowed four
and twenty hours at least, to look for
bail—that he was willing to permit every
indulgence in his power—and though
his prisoner must be kept in safe custody,

yet that there were houses where he
could be accommodated for a day or
two, till his friends could see what might
be done to settle the matter.—There was
no necessity for his going directly to
prison.
Lady Jane Granville hearing from the
officer, that attorney Sharpe was now in
town, proposed that Alfred should go to
him immediately, and see what accommodation
could be made; but all Mr.
Percy's family knew too well the malignant
and revengeful nature of this man,
to expect that any good could result
from this measure; as a lawyer, Alfred
pronounced that it would be a dangerous
step, as it might be construed into an
offer to compromise, and a consciousness
of the validity of the claim made by
their opponent.
Mr. Percy decidedly disapproved of
making any concession, or any application
to the vile attorney, and determined,
as he had declared, not to permit any of
his friends to hazard themselves for him,

he thanked the sheriff's officer for his proffered
indulgence, but thought it best to
go to the prison at first, in which at last
he must be confined.
It was settled, that Rosamond and Erasmus
should remain with Lady Jane Granville,
who had been so dreadfully shocked
and terrified by what had happened, that
she most wanted their care.
Mr. Percy, his wife, and daughter
Caroline, then quitted her Ladyship's
hospitable and elegant mansion, and were
conducted to a very different abode in
the King's-Bench. The keeper of this
prison, accustomed to see varieties of
persons of all ranks, and obliged to form
a quick judgment of those who are committed
to his custody, was an excellent
physiognomist. He was favorably prepossessed
by the countenance and demeanor
of his prisoner, and by the appearance
of the ladies, by whom he was
accompanied.—
From the moment they entered, he

treated them with the utmost respect
and courtesy, which his habits could
command. He gave them the choice
... sad choice ... of the unoccupied
apartments.—Mr. and Mrs. Percy fixed
upon a tolerably clean, but very small
room, which they preferred, because it
had a closet large enough to contain a bed
for Caroline. As soon as they were in
possession of these rooms, Caroline began
to arrange the little furniture they
contained, in such a manner, as to make
her father and mother as comfortable as
circumstances would admit.—They uttered
no complaints.—The gaoler was not
used to see people so mild and resigned.
His own interest, and the calculation of
how much money they were likely to
spend with him, were, no doubt, his first
considerations, but as far as to dispose
him to civility, the manners of his prisoners,
at once dignified and gentle, and
the cheerfulness of Mr. Percy's temper,
certainly operated in their favor.

At night, when the doors were locked,
Mr. Percy, looking round him, said with
a smile,
“Abstract the idea of being deprived
of liberty; except the notion of bolts and
bars, turnkeys and gaolers, what is there
more terrible in being here, than sleeping
in any small lodging in any other part
of London?”—
“Except the disgrace,” said Mrs. Percy,
sighing.
“Had I brought myself to this situation
by any vice, or any folly, I should
feel it bitterly,” answered Mr. Percy, “I
should sink, perhaps, under the sense of
shame.—But at present, my Love, conscious
as I am, that no extravagance, no
imprudence of ours has been the cause of
our imprisonment, I feel it not as the
slightest degradation.”—
This assurance relieved Mrs. Percy's
mind from her greatest anxiety.—And
this night they slept peaceably, while he,
who had thrown them into prison, lay in
the best of beds, and best of rooms,

master of Percy-Hall, and of all that
wealth could give, yet was unable to
close his eyes.—He lay brooding on past
and future plans of avarice and malice.
Since his marriage with Miss Falconer,
Sir Robert Percy's establishment had become
so expensive, as to fret his temper
continually; and his tenants had had
more and more reason to complain of
their landlord, who, when any of his
farms were out of lease, raised his rents
exorbitantly, to make himself amends, as
he said, for the extravagance of his wife.
—The tenants, who had ever disliked
him, as being the successor and enemy
of their own good and beloved landlord,
now could not, and attempted not to
conceal their aversion. It appeared in a
variety of ways,—Sir Robert could hardly
stir out of his demesne, without being
made sensible of it, even by the very
children at the cottage doors. This renewed
and increased the virulence of his
dislike to our branch of the Percys, who,
as he knew, were always compared to

him and his, who were all idolized, and
who seemed indeed to be ever present to
the provoking memories of these tenants.
—Sir Robert Percy was disappointed
hitherto in the hope for which he married,
the hope of an heir, who should prevent
the estate from returning to those, from
whom it had been wrested by his arts.— 
Envy at seeing the rising and prosperous
state of those Percys, who, in spite of
their loss of fortune, had made their way
up again through all obstacles, combined
to increase his antipathy to his relations.
—He found a willing assistant in Sharpe,
the attorney; and they both enjoyed, as
much as malevolence can enjoy any
thing, the idea of the arrest.—After it
was executed, and that Mr. Percy was
lodged in prison, they were, however, a
little mortified by finding, that their utmost
malice had failed to intimidate their
victim, or to extort from him any species
of submission, or concession; but, on the
contrary, that Mr. Percy had desired his

son Alfred immediately to take all the
legal steps necessary to obtain redress,
and to bring the matter to issue as
speedily as possible.
To return to our prisoners, whom we
left tranquilly asleep. In the morning,
when first they wakened, it was with the
feeling that something extraordinary, and
painful, had happened; but what had
passed the preceding day seemed only
as a frightful dream, till the conviction
of it's reality was impressed upon their
minds by the external objects, which first
struck their senses:—the meanness of the
room, the grated windows, the strange
noises they heard in the passages, and
from the yard below.—
Caroline, now recollecting every circumstance,
rose with a heavy heart, but
appeared before her parents with a cheerful
countenance.—Whilst she made
breakfast, (Oh how unlike the breakfast
of the preceding morning!—) she began
to calculate when she could hear from

Count Altenberg.—Count Altenberg,
whom she scarcely yet ventured to call
her husband.—
The gaoler civilly came to offer them
newspapers. Caroline opening one, to
read it to her father, involuntarily looked
first for the foreign news, but her eye was
caught by a splendid account of her own
marriage, and of Count Altenberg's setting
out for the Continent. This prevented
her from reading loud for some moments.
The next attempt she made was
scarcely more successful. All the paragraphs
from Germany were calculated to
inspire her with the most serious apprehensions.
Count Altenberg had flattered himself
by the last despatches from his Court,
that the strong measures taken by the
Prince would have prevented danger; but
the French party had formed new intrigues,—they
gained ground.—Every
symptom threatened revolution—and, if
the newspaper accounts were true, civil
war, and foreign invasion, were inevitable.—

But these might be exaggerated
statements—Caroline endeavored to think
so, and to find comfort in the contradictory
accounts in other papers of opposite
parties.—While she, her father, and mother,
were employed in this manner, one
of the turnkeys came in, to say, that an
old man, Mr. Percy's steward, wished to
see him.
The old man was shown in, but when
he saw his master, he was quite overcome,
and being unable to speak, he stepped
behind the turnkey, making his way
back into the passage, where he staid
some minutes before he could summon
sufficient resolution to return.
When he reappeared, his master went
towards the door to meet him, and spoke
to him kindly; but this nearly overset
him again, and his face worked
with strong emotion before he could
utter.
“I'm only come, Sir, to see ... you,
before I would go down to the country,
on account of not knowing if you, or my

mistress ... had any orders ... for
me,—or any at home.”
The word home, which he usually
pronounced with full English cordiality
of emphasis, he could scarcely articulate
... nor could venture to attempt naming
his wife, to whom he could only
allude, under the general description of
any at home.—
Mr. Percy gave him directions, to
which he seemed to listen with motionless
attention and respect—occasionally
answering,
“So best, Sir”—“It shall be done
for certain”—“I understand, Sir.”
But at last he put his hand to his forehead,
and said—
“I am afeard, Sir, to forget all ...
my head's not so clear as it ought-for
this morning ... if you'd be pleased,
if it would not be too troublesome to
write me the orders down here in my
book, in pen and ink ... I might be
better able to morrow, or when I do
get ...”

Home again stopped him—so he unstrapped
his pocket-book, and began to
write what his master dictated.—Mr.
Percy took the pen from John's hand,
which trembled so that he could not get
on.
“You had better let me write, my
good John.”
“It is badly blotted, indeed, and a
shame”—said the old man—“but I am
all I don't know how to day, and no
better able, nor sensibler like, than a
child—I axe your pardon for being so
troublesome—I thank you kindly, Sir.”
While his master was writing, John
stole a look, which he had never ventured
yet, at his mistress and Caroline
—and bowed to each—but as to speaking,
that was out of the question—for
some time—at last he recollected a note
Rosamond had given him for his mistress,
and laying it down, he said,—“Might
I make bold to axe, Madam, is it true
what the gentleman who let me in was
telling on me, that this here place is not

in the nature of our county jails, but
that master will have liberty to walk
about as he pleases, and only the gates
and doors locked at night, like as for
any gentleman's own house and place at
home—If so be that's true, it would be
some comfort.”
Mr. Percy stopped writing, to assure
him that the information was correct; 
and he tried still further to raise his
spirits, by telling him that some gentlemen,
who had been confined in the
King's Bench, had been heard to declare
they never were happier in their
lives.
“Why, with a good conscience, to
be sure, there's no saying how happy a
man may be any where—And that's a
great point, Ma'am, for my master,
that's certain”—said the steward, brightening
up a little—“But”—his face
clouding again, as he looked at the grated
windows—
“A prison's a prison, turn it which
way one will—and I never thought for

to live to see the day when my master
would be in such a place—A gentleman
like he, as I have known, boy and man,
these forty years, and never knew him
to wrong no man, woman, nor child, no
how; but quite and clear the contrary,
doing good to all, which all can testify
—What sort of a heart must he have,
that could go for to lay a finger upon
him, and at such a time too—but he is
a bad man, if ever there was one ...”
“Don't talk of him, don't think of
him,” said Mr. Percy.
“So best, Sir,” said John—“And,
Sir, if in case there's any thing else you
think of for me to do, I suppose you
can write by post—And I may go
now?”—
But still he delayed—Moving slowly
towards the door, he said—
“I wish your honor your health, then,
and that, please God, you may be soon
down with us again, Sir—My mistress the
same—And Miss Caroline”—
The thought that she was no longer

Miss Caroline, again stopped him, and
his feelings at last forcing their way
fluently into words, he exclaimed,
“What will my poor woman say,
when I get home!—She, who is looking
to hear of nothing but o' the wedding
and joy—Little guessing, no more
than myself, how our Miss Caroline's
wedding-day was to end—Lack-a-day,
the bride, too, that I myself see, but
yesterday this time, the beautifullest
bride that ever was seed, and all the
power of ladies and gentlemen wishing
of her joy—And here she is, locked
up in a prison—the bridegroom gone!
—And she might have gone with him,
too, in her own carriage, to a palace
they say, only that, like an angel as she is
and ever was, she would stay to comfort
us!”
“Then should not we be comforted,
my good John,” said Mr. Percy, smiling—“If
I had not been thrown into
jail by these wicked men, just at the
very moment I was parting from my

daughter, her mother and I should not
now have her sitting between us. Come,
my good old friend, follow the example of
your master—Turn to the bright side of
things—bear up under misfortune, and
you will feel it lighten surprisingly.”
“Ah, master, so you can do, for
yourself—but I can never do the like
for you—It makes me a deal worse, so
it does, to see you looking so patient
withal, and hear you speaking so cheerful—I
can't stand it no longer—so had
best take myself away.”
John made his bow to all. His master
called to one of the turnkeys to show him
the way out.
“Lack-a-day! when will he do that
for you, dear master, could you give any
sort of a guess?”
“Law permitting”—said Mr. Percy,
“I hope to be with you at the Hills in
a few months.”
“Months!” repeated the old man,
stopping short—“Then afore that,
I shall be dead—But if so it is to be—Why,

so be it—God's will be
done.”
This visit from their steward, though
it could not serve immediately to raise
the spirits of our prisoner, had something
in it consolatory as well as touching.
Alfred was the next person who arrived,
and his countenance showed, that
he brought no good tidings. He had
been considering his father's case, and
had consulted his friends. As lawyers
they had an unfavorable opinion.
Alfred said, that the agreement, which
had been entered into between his father
and Sir Robert Percy, by which Sir
Robert had engaged to relinquish the
mesne rents, in consideration of the improvements
made by Mr. Percy, however
just and however binding it would
be between men of honor, was no way
good in law.—With professional knowledge,
and in technical language, Alfred
explained to his father, that “no release
of the mesne rents, for the six preceding

years, having been executed, an action
of trespass for these would lie; and to
this action, which Sir Robert had commenced
by the writ under which Mr.
Percy was arrested, no valid defence, it
was feared, could be made.—Because
the judgment and proceedings in the
former suit on ejectment, by which Sir
Robert obtained possession of the Percy
estate, were conclusive evidence to bind
Mr. Percy in the present action of
trespass.”
Alfred added “that both he and Mr.
Friend had been examining the record of
the judgment, and the return of the writ
of habere, in hopes of discovering some
irregularity, upon which they could
ground a defence, but that no error could
be detected.”
This explanation, unintelligible as it
will be to many of our readers, and,
as such, incapable of communicating
either pain or pleasure, was, alas, too
clear to poor Mr. Percy: he perceived,
that he had little chance of redress

from law; that the decision, when the
cause should come to a hearing, would
be against him; and that instead of
being liberated, as he had hoped, in a
few months, he had no likelihood of ever
obtaining his liberty, except by selling
The Hills, all the remaining property he
had in the world. Whether to do this,
or to spend the rest of his days in the
King's Bench, was the alternative of
evil, which would probably be left for his
future consideration.
In the mean time, Mr. Percy, naturally
of a cheerful temper, and habitually
of that philosophy which forbears to anticipate
future evil, turned the whole
force of his mind towards making the
present as easy and tolerable as possible
to himself and his fellow-sufferers.
He began to form a settled plan for
the occupation of the days he was inevitably
doomed to pass in prison, the
time that must elapse before the point
now in contest could be brought to any

decision favorable or unfavorable.—As
soon as they could leave Lady Jane
Granville, Rosamond and Erasmus came
to join the family-council. Mrs. Percy
then arranged with them at what hours
he should wish his friends to call upon
him, and at what hours he should like to
see his family—what time he would give
to exercise, and what to literary occupation.
—Literature! inestimable resource
to the prisoner!
Rosamond was excessively anxious to
be permitted to stay with her father, or at
least to be allowed in her turn every other
week to take the place of Caroline or of
her mother, whose health would be most
likely to suffer by continued confinement.
As none of this family wanted to
vie with each other in generosity, or in
demonstrations of affection, all readily
consented to do that which was most
reasonable, and most likely to be for the
general good. It was therefore settled,
that every second week either Mrs.

Percy, or one of her daughters, should
spend at Alfred's house.—Lady Jane
Granville and Mrs. Hungerford had written
to beg Mrs. Percy and her daughters
would come to their houses, whenever
they could leave Mr. Percy—but
from this they excused themselves, as
they wished to live in as retired a manner
as possible. To the propriety of this
resolution they knew their kind friends
must accede.
Their plan once settled, they adhered
to it invariably. Their hours and days
passed so regularly, that they began to
feel as if the ordering of them in a certain
manner was the necessary course of
life. Some time passed without bringing
any change in their circumstances.
Letters arrived from Count Altenberg,
which did not tend to put Caroline more
at ease. Public affairs indeed were not
so desperate as the newspapers had represented
them to be—But domestic sorrow
awaited him. Very soon after his return,

his father was seized with an illness of so
dangerous a nature, that his son could
not possibly leave him.—Post after
post brought accounts of the progress of
the malady, which at last terminated
fatally. The death of his father, the funeral,
and much business, which respect
to his memory required to be performed,
detained Count Altenberg. Till at length,
when all was arranged, and Caroline had
reason to hope, that his next letter would
announce his setting out, public affairs
again demanded delay. The French declared
war—their troops were in motion,
and it was necessary to prepare for the
defence of the country against invasion.
Their General boasted, that he would be
within the gates of their city, and within
the walls of their palace, before the ensuing
month should be at an end. In
these circumstances, when his prince and
his country required his services, it was
impossible that Count Altenberg should
desert his post. The letters he wrote to

Caroline breathed the most ardent affection,
expressing in different ways this
strong sentiment,
‘I could not love thee, dear, so much,
Lov'd I not honor more.’
Caroline prepared for the anxiety that
must be more or less the lot of the wife
of a man in Count Altenberg's public
situation, bore it with fortitude, and
however it preyed upon her mind, she
never uttered any expression of impatience
or complaint. Her husband's reputation
and her own duty were her first
objects; and whatever she suffered in the
performance of one, or in the hope of his
attaining the other, appeared to her of
inferior, and comparatively small importance.
—It was not merely in the generous
emotion or transitory heroism of
the moment, that she offered, when she
saw her father arrested, to stay with him
and share his imprisonment; she was
aware of what she offered, her resolution
and affection were sufficient to sustain

her through the protracted sacrifice.
Nor did she appear to think it a sacrifice
—Never for an instant did she remit
those daily, hourly, fond and grateful attentions,
which convinced her father, that
she did not repent the determination
she had made.
Poor Rosamond all this time was suffering
also, both for her father and for
her lover. Mr. Temple was still unable
to obtain the performance of the promise
which had been made him, of remuneration,
and of competent provision.
He had gone through, in compliance
with the advice of his friends, the mortification
of reiterating vain memorials
and applications to the Duke of Greenwich—Lord
Skrimpshire—Lord Skreene,
and Mr. Secretary Cope.—The only
thing, which Mr. Temple refused to do,
was to implicate Lord Oldborough, or
to disturb him on the subject.—He had
spent some weeks with his old master in
his retirement, without once adverting
to his own difficulties, still hoping, that

on his return to town a promise would
be fulfilled, which Lord Skreene had given
him, that “the affair should in his absence
be settled to his satisfaction.”— 
But on his return to town, his Lordship
found means of evasion and delay, and
threw the blame on others; the course
of memorials and representations was to
be recommenced.—Mr. Temple's pride
revolted, his love was in despair—and
frequently, in the bitterness of disappointment,
he reiterated to his friend Alfred,
his exclamations of regret and self-reproach,
for having quitted from pique
and impatience of spirit a profession,
where his own perseverance and exertions
would infallibly have rendered him
by this time independent.—Rosamond
saw with sympathy and anguish the
effect, which these feelings of self-reproach,
and hope delayed, produced on
Mr. Temple's spirits and health.—His
sensibility, naturally quick, and rendered
more acute by disappointment, seemed
now continually to draw from all characters

and events, and even from every
book he opened, a moral against himself,
some new illustration or example, which
convinced him more and more of the
folly of being a dependant on the great.
He was just in this repentant mood, when
one morning, at Mrs. Alfred Percy's,
Rosamond heard him sigh deeply several
times, as he was reading with great attention.
She could not forbear asking what it
was that touched him so much.—He put
the book into her hands, pointing to the
following passage—“The whole of this
letter ,” 
said he, “is applicable to me,
and excellent, but this really seems as
if it had been written for me, or by
me.”
She read—
“I was a young man, and did not
think that men were to die, or to be
turned out &wblank; What was to be
done now?—No money, my former patron

in disgrace! friends that were in
favor not able to serve me, or not willing; 
that is, cold, timid, careful of themselves,
and indifferent to a man whose disappointments
made him less agreeable
&wblank;&wblank;&wblank; I languished on
for three long melancholy years, sometimes
a little elated; a smile, a kind
hint, a downright promise, dealt out to
me from those in whom I had placed
some silly hopes, now and then brought
a little refreshment, but that never lasted
long, and to say nothing of the agony of
being reduced to talk of one's own misfortunes
and one's wants, and that basest
and lowest of all conditions, the slavery
of borrowing, to support an idle useless
being—my time, for those three years,
was unhappy beyond description. What
would I have given then for a profession!
&wblank;&wblank;&wblank; any useful profession
is infinitely better than a thousand
patrons.”
To this Rosamond entirely acceded,
and admired the strong good sense of the

whole letter, but she observed to Mr.
Temple, that it was very unjust, not
only to himself, but what was of much
more consequence to her, to say that
all this applied exactly to his case.— 
“Did Mr. Temple,” she asked him,
“did he mean to insult her, by asserting
that she could esteem, or have been near
consenting to marry a man, who was an
idle useless being. No, it was impossible,
that any one who had been a mere dependent
on great men, and a follower of
courts, could ever have recommended
himself to her father and her whole family,
could ever have been the chosen
friend of her brother Alfred.”
Rosamond then, with playfulness of
manner, but serious kindness, pleaded
Mr. Temple's cause against himself.
“It was true,” she acknowledged,
“that this friend of her brother's had
made one mistake in early life, but who
is there that can say, that he has not in
youth or age committed a single error.— 
Mr. Temple had done one silly thing to be

sure, in quarrelling with his profession; 
but he had suffered, and had made amends
for this afterwards, by persevering application
to literature. There he had obtained
the success he deserved.—Gentlemen
might sigh and shake their heads,
but could any gentleman deny this?
Could it be denied, that Mr. Temple had
distinguished himself in literature?— 
Could any person deny, that a political
pamphlet of his recommended him to
the notice of Lord Oldborough, one of
the ablest statemen in England, who
made him his secretary, and whose esteem
and confidence he afterwards acquired by
his merit, and continued in place and out, to
enjoy?—Will any gentleman deny this?” 
—Rosamond added, that “in defence
of her brother's friend she could not help
observing, that a man who had obtained
the esteem of some of the first persons
of their day, who had filled an employment
of trust, that of secretary to a minister,
with fidelity and credit, who

had published three celebrated political
pamphlets, and two volumes of moral
and philosophical disquisitions, which,
as she heard the bookseller say, were
become stock books, could not deserve to
be called an idle useless being. To be
born and die would not make all his
history.—No:—such a man would at
least be secure of honorable mention in
the Biographia Britannica, as a writer
moral—political—metaphysical.”
When Rosamond had, by this defence
of Mr. Temple, raised his spirits, and
when she had touched his heart by the
kindness of her raillery, she seized the
moment to urge him to continue his
exertions, and not to sink into the idleness
of despondency.—She was aware,
she said, that while he was in suspense
about this promised place, it was difficult
to follow steadily any employment; but
she also knew, that, if he could interest
himself in an occupation in which he
could continually advance by his industry,

it would afford the best relief to his
mind, and would raise him in his own
opinion, and in hers.
This last argument especially was so
forcible, that from that hour Mr. Temple
regularly devoted a portion of every
day to a new work, which he had commenced,
but which in the uncertain
situation of his affairs, and the anxious
state of his heart, he had not had courage
to pursue, till Rosamond supplied
him with sufficient motive.
Considering Mr. Temple now almost
as one of the Percy family, their biographer
has thought it not impertinent
to continue his history with theirs.
About this time, as if fortune was determined
to persist in showing herself
averse to those, who had never thoroughly
believed in her power; another calamity,
which no prudence could prevent,
befel them.—Soon after they had received
letters from Colonel Gascoigne, giving
the most satisfactory account of Godfrey—saying
that he had obtained the

highest character among his brother
officers, and that he was returning home; 
just about the time when his father expected
to see him came intelligence,
that the transport, in which Major
Percy's division of the regiment was
embarked, had been separated from
her convoy by a gale of wind in the
night, and it was apprehended, that
she had been taken by the enemy.— 
Godfrey's family hoped for a moment,
that this might be a false alarm, but
after enduring the misery of reading
contradictory paragraphs and contests of
the newspaper writers with each other
for several successive days, it was at last
too clearly established and confirmed by
official intelligence, that the transport
was taken by a Dutch ship.—Colonel
Gascoigne with his division of the regiment
arrived safely, and no doubt remained
of the misfortune, which had
happened to Godfrey.
For some weeks they never heard
more of his fate.—This suspense was

dreadful. The Percys have often since
declared, that of all they suffered at this
period of their lives suspense was the
evil, which they found the most difficult
to endure.—And each individual of the
family was held in anxious uncertainty,
for a considerable length of time, on
many points the most nearly interesting
to their hearts.—
Mr. Percy's son was a prisoner, he
knew not in what circumstances.—His
son-in-law, Count Altenberg, in the perilous
situation of prime minister, in a state
threatened with revolution, and certain of
immediate invasion.—Caroline's color
fading, and her health beginning to
suffer from anxiety.—Rosamond too,
with Mr. Temple, fluctuating between
hope and fear.—Mr. Percy's own liberty
for the depending on the event of
a trial, on a point of law, over which
neither his character nor his abilities
could have any influence, and of which
the decision could not be hastened by

any possible exertion he or his family
could make.
Suspense may be easily endured by
persons of an indolent character, who
never expect to rule their destiny by
their own genius; but to those, who
feel themselves possessed of energy and
abilities to surmount obstacles, and to
brave dangers, it is torture to be compelled
to remain passive, to feel that
prudence, virtue, genius, avail them not,
that while rapid ideas pass in their imagination,
time moves with an unalterable
pace, and compels them to wait, along
with the herd of vulgar mortals, for the
knowledge of futurity.