

The evening appointed for Mrs. Falconer's
ball at length arrived; and all
the neighboring gentry assembled at Falconer-Court.
They were received by
Mrs. Falconer in a splendid salon, new
furnished for this occasion, which displayed,
in it's decorations, the utmost
perfection of modern taste and magnificence.—
Mrs. Falconer was fitted, both by art
and nature, to adorn a ball-room, and
conduct a ball. With that ease of manner,
which a perfect knowledge of the

world and long practice alone can give; 
she floated round the circle, conscious
that she was in her element. Her eye,
with one glance, seemed to pervade the
whole assembly; her ear divided itself
amongst a multitude of voices; and her
attention diffused itself over all with
equal grace. Yet that attention, universal
as it seemed, was nicely discriminative.
Mistress of the art of pleasing,
and perfectly acquainted with all the
shades of politeness, she knew how to
dispose them so as to conceal their boundaries,
and even their gradation, from
all but the most skilful observers. They
might, indeed, have formed, from Mrs.
Falconer's reception of each of her
guests, an exact estimate of their rank,
fashion, and consequence in the world; 
for by these standards she regulated
her opinion, and measured her regard.
Every one present knew this to be her
theory, and observed it to be her practice
towards others; but each flattered
themselves by turns, that they discovered

in her manner a personal exception
in their own favor. In the turn of her
countenance, the tone of her voice, her
smile, or her anxiety, in her distant respect,
or her affectionate familiarity,
some distinction was discerned peculiar
to each individual.
The Miss Falconers, stationary at one
end of the room, seemed to have adopted
manners diametrically opposite to those
of their mother: attraction being the
principle of the mother; repulsion of the
daughters. Encircled amongst a party
of young female friends, Miss Falconers,
with high-bred airs, confined to their
own coterie their exclusive attention.
They left to their mother the responsibility
and all the labor of doing the honors
of her own house, whilst they enjoyed
the glory of being remarked and
wondered at by half the company; a circumstance
which, far from embarrassing,
seemed obviously to increase their gayety.
The ball could not begin till the band of
a regiment, quartered in the neighborhood,

arrived. Whilst they were waiting
for the music, the Miss Falconers
and their party stationed themselves
directly opposite to the entrance of the
salon, so as to have a full view of the
antichamber, through which the company
were to pass—No one passed uncensured
by this confederacy. The first
coup d'œil decided the fate of all who
appeared, and each of the fair judges
vied with the others in the severity of
the sentence pronounced on the unfortunate
persons, who thus came before
their merciless tribunal.
“But I am astonished the Percys do
not make their appearance,” cried Miss
Georgiana Falconer.
“Has Sir Robert Percy any one with
him?” asked one of the young ladies.
“I am not speaking of Sir Robert
Percy,” replied Miss Georgiana, “but
of the other branch, the fallen branch
of the Percys—Our relations too—but
we know nothing of them—Only Mamma
was obliged to ask them for to night

—And, Bell, only conceive how horridly
provoking, because they come we
shan't have Sir Robert Percy:—Just
sent to excuse himself.”
“Abominable! Now, really!—And
for people quite out of the world, that
nobody ever heard of, except lord Oldborough,
who, ages ago, had some political
connexion, I think they say, with
the father”—said Miss Arabella.
“No, they met abroad, or something
of that sort,” replied Miss Georgiana.
“Was that it?—Very likely—I know
nothing about them—I only wish they
had staid at home, where they are so
fond of staying I hear—You know,
Georgiana, Buckhurst told us, that when
they had something to live upon they
never lived like other people, but always
were buried alive in the country; and
Lady Jane Granville, with her own
lips, told me, that, even since they lost
their fortune, she had asked one of these
girls to town with her, and to Tunbridge

... Now only conceive how kind! and
what an advantage that would have been
... And can you believe it, Mr. Percy
was so unaccountable, and they all so
odd, that they refused:—Lady Jane, of
course, will never ask them again—But
now, must not they be the silliest creatures
in the universe?”—
“Silly! Oh dear, no: there you are
wrong, Bell; for you know they are all
so wise, and so learned, so blue, such a
deep blue, and all that sort of thing,
that, for my part, I shall never dare to
open my lips before them”—
“Fortunately,” said one of the young
ladies, “you have not much to fear from
their learning at a ball; and as dancers
I don't apprehend you have much to
dread from any of them, even from the
beauty.”
“Why, scarcely”—said Miss Georgiana— “ 
I own I shall be curious to see
how they will get on— ‘comment ces savantes
se tireront d'affaire’—I wonder they

are not here. Keep your eye on the
door, dear Lady Frances—I would not
miss their entrée for millions.”
In vain eyes and glasses were fixed
in expectation of the arrival of these devoted
objects of ridicule—Another, and
another, and another came, but not the
Percys—
The band was now ready, and began
to play—Count Altenberg entered the
room. Quick as grace can venture to
move, Mrs. Falconer glided to receive
him. Miss Georgiana Falconer, at the
same moment, composed her features
into their most becoming position, and
gave herself a fine air of the head. The
Count bowed to her—She fanned herself,
and her eye involuntarily glanced, first
at a brilliant star he wore, and then, at
her mother, whilst, with no small degree
of anxiety, she prepared to play off, on
this decisive evening, all her artillery to
complete her conquest—To complete
her victory, for she flattered herself, that
only the finishing blow was wanting.

In this belief her female companions
contributed to confirm her, though probably
they were all the time laughing at
her vanity.
Mrs. Falconer requested Count Altenberg
to open the ball with Lady
Frances Arlington. After having obeyed
her orders, he next led out Miss
Georgiana Falconer, evidently to her
satisfaction; the more so, as she was
conscious of being, at that moment, the
envy of at least half the company—
Count Altenberg, quite unconscious
of being himself the object of any attention,
seemed to think only of showing
his partner to advantage; if he danced
well, it appeared to be only because he
habitually moved with ease and dignity,
and that whatever he did he looked like
a gentleman. His fair partner danced
admirably, and now surpassed herself.
It was repeated to Mrs. Falconer, that
Colonel Bremen, the Count's friend, had
told some one that the Count had declared
he had never seen any thing equal

to Miss Georgiana Falconer, except at
the Opera at Paris.—At this triumphant
moment Miss Georgiana could have seen,
with security and complacency, the arrival
of Miss Caroline Percy. The more
prudent mother, however, was well satisfied
with her absence. Every thing
conspired to Mrs. Falconer's satisfaction.
The ball was far advanced, and no Percys
appeared—Miss Falconer wondered,
and deplored, and at length it came near
the hour when supper was ordered—The
Commissioner inquired, whether Mrs.
Falconer was certain, that she had named
the right day on the card.
“Oh! certain—But it is now so
late, I am clear they will not be here to
night”—
“Very extraordinary! to keep Lord
Oldborough's carriage and servants”—said
the Commissioner— “they went in
time, I am sure, for I saw them set
out.”
“All I know is, that we have done
every thing that is proper,” said Mrs.

Falconer, “and Lord Oldborough cannot
blame us—As to the Count he seems
quite content.”
Mrs. Falconer's accent seemed to imply
something more than content; but
this was not a proper time or place
to contest the point. The husband
passed on, saying to himself— “Absured!”—The
wife went on, saying— “Obstinate!”
Count Altenberg had led his partner
to a seat, and as soon as he quitted her,
the young ladies of her party all flattered
her, in congratulatory whispers—One
observed, that “there was certainly
something very particular in Count Altenberg's
manner, when he first spoke to
Miss Georgiana Falconer”—Another remarked,
that “he always spoke to Miss
Georgiana Falconer with emotion and
embarrassment”—A third declared, that
“her eye was fixed upon the Count, and
she saw him several times change color”—All
in short, agreed, that the Count's
heart was Miss Georgiana Falconer's

devoted prize. She the while, with well-affected
incredulity and secret complacency,
half repressed and half encouraged
these remarks by frequent exclamations of
“La! how can you think so!—Why
will you say such things!—Dear! how
can you be so tormenting—So silly now
to have such fancies!—But did he really
change colour?—In love with her!—She
wondered how such an idea could
ever come into their heads—She should,
for her part, never have dreamed of such
a thing—Indeed, she was positive they
were mistaken—Count Altenberg in love
with her!—O no, there could be nothing
in it.”—
Whilst she spoke, her eyes followed
the Count, who, quite unconscious of
his danger, undisturbed by any idea of
Miss Georgiana Falconer and love, two
ideas, which probably never had entered
his mind together, was carelessly walking
down the room, his thoughts apparently
occupied with the passing scene

—He had so much the habit of observing
men and manners, without appearing
to observe them, that under an air of
gayety, he carried his understanding, as
it were, incognito. His observation
glanced on all the company as he passed.
Miss Georgiana Falconer lost sight
of him as he reached the end of the
salon; he disappeared in the antichamber.
Soon afterwards a report reached her,
that the Percy family were arrived; that
Count Altenberg had been particularly
struck by the sight of one of the Miss
Percys, and had been overheard to
whisper to his friend Colonel Bremen,
“Very like the picture!—but still more
mind in the countenance!”—
At hearing this Miss Georgiana Falconer
grew first red and then turned
pale; Mrs. Falconer, though scarcely
less confounded, never changed a muscle
of her face, but leaving every body to
choose their various comments upon the
Count's words, and simply saying:

“Are the Percys come at last?”—She
won her easy way through the crowd,
whispering to young Petcalf as she
passed:
“Now is your time, Petcalf, my good
creature, Georgiana is disengaged”—
Before Mrs. Falconer got to the antichamber,
another report met her, “that
the Percys had been overturned, and
had been terribly hurt.”—
“Overturned!—terribly hurt!—Good
Heavens!”—cried Mrs. Falconer as she
entered the antichamber—But the next
person told her, they were not in the
least hurt—Still pressing forward, she
exclaimed:
“Mrs. Percy! Where is Mrs. Percy?
My dear Madam! what has happened?
Come the wrong road, did you?
... broken bridge—And were you really
overturned?”—
“No, no, only obliged to get out
and walk a little way”—
“Oh! I am sorry ... But I am

so glad to see you all safe! ... When
it grew late I grew so uneasy! ...”
Then turning towards Caroline—
“Miss Caroline Percy, I am sure,
though I had never, till now, the pleasure
of seeing her.”
An introduction of Caroline by Mrs.
Percy, in due form, took place—Mrs.
Falconer next recognised Mr. Percy,
declared he did not look a day older than
when she had seen him fifteen years
before—Then recurring to the ladies—
“But, my dear Mrs. Percy, are you
sure that your shoes are not wet through?—Oh!
my dear Madam, Miss Percy's
are terribly wet! and Miss Caroline's!—Positively
the young ladies must go to
my dressing room, the shoes must be dried”—Mrs.
Falconer said, that “perhaps
her daughters could accommodate
the Miss Percys with others.”
It was in vain that Rosamond protested
her shoes were not wet, and that
her sister's were perfectly dry; a few

specks on their white justified Mrs. Falconer's
apprehensions.
“Where is my Arabella? ... If there
was any body I could venture to trouble ...”
Count Altenberg instantly offered his
services.
“Impossible to trouble you, Count!
But since you are so very good, perhaps
you could find one of my daughters for
me—Miss Falconer,—if you are so kind,
Sir ... Georgiana I am afraid is dancing.”—
Miss Falconer was found, and despatched
with Miss Percys, in spite of
all they could say to the contrary, to
Mrs. Falconer's dressing-room. Rosamond
was permitted, without much difficulty,
to do as she pleased, but Mrs.
Falconer's infinite fears, lest Caroline
should catch her death of cold, could
not be appeased, till she had submitted
to change her shoes.
“Caroline!” said Rosamond, in a low
voice, “Caroline! do not put on those

shoes—they are too large—you will never
be able to dance in them.”—
“I know that—but I am content.—It
is better to yield, than to debate the
point any longer,” said Caroline.
When they returned to the ball-room,
Count Altenberg was in earnest conversation
with Mr. Percy, but Mrs. Falconer
observed, that the Count saw Miss
Caroline Percy the moment she reappeared.
“Now is not it extraordinary!” 
thought she, “when Georgiana dances
so well! is infinitely more fashionable!
and so charmingly dressed!—What can
strike him so much in this girl's appearance?”
It was not her appearance that struck
him.—He was too well accustomed to
see beauty and fashion in public places,
to be caught at first sight by a handsome
face, or by a young lady's exhibition of
her personal graces at a ball.—But a favorable
impression had been made on
his mind by what he had previously

heard of Miss Caroline Percy's conduct
and character; her appearance confirmed
this impression precisely, because she
had not the practised air of a professed
beauty, because she did not seem in the
least to be thinking of herself, or to expect
admiration.—This was really uncommon,
and, therefore, it fixed the attention
of a man like Count Altenberg.—He
asked Caroline to dance; she declined
dancing.—Mr. Temple engaged
Rosamond, and the moment he led her
away, the Count availed himself of her
place, and a conversation commenced,
which soon made Mrs. Falconer regret,
that Caroline had declined dancing.
Though the Count was a stranger to the
Percy family, yet there were many subjects
of common interest, of which he knew how
to avail himself. He began by speaking
of Mr. Alfred Percy, of the pleasure he
had had in becoming acquainted with
him. Of the circumstance which led to
this acquaintance.—Then he passed to
Lord Oldborough—to M. de Tourville—to

the shipwreck.—He paused at Percy-Hall,
for he felt for those to whom he
was speaking. They understood him,
but they did not avoid the subject; he
then indulged himself in the pleasure of
repeating some of the expressions of attachment
to their old landlord, and of
honest affection and gratitude, which he
had heard from the peasants in the village.
Mrs. Falconer moved away the moment
she foresaw this part of the conversation,
but she was only so far removed
as to prevent the necessity of her
taking any part in it, or of appearing to
hear what it might be “awkward for her
to hear,” considering her intimacy with
Sir Robert Percy. She began talking to
an old lady about her late illness, of
which she longed to hear from her own
lips all the particulars; and whilst the
old lady told her case, Mrs. Falconer,
with eyes fixed upon her, and making,
at proper intervals, all the appropriate
changes of countenance requisite to express

tender sympathy, alarm, horror,
astonishment, and joyful congratulation,
contrived, at the same time, through the
whole progress of fever, and the administration
of half the medicines in the
London Pharmacopœia, to hear every
thing that was said by Count Altenberg,
and not to lose a word that was uttered
by Caroline. Mrs. Falconer was particularly
anxious to know what would be
said about the picture in the gallery at
Percy-Hall, with which the Count had
been so much charmed.—When he got
into the gallery, Mrs. Falconer listened
with breathless eagerness, yet still smiling
on the old lady's never-ending history of
her convalescence, and of a shawl undoubtedly
Turkish, with the true, inestimable,
inimitable, little border.
Not a word was said of the picture—but
a pause—implied more to alarm
Mrs. Falconer, than could have been
expressed by the most flattering compliment.
Mrs. Falconer wondered why supper

was so late. She sent, to order that it
might be served as soon as possible. But
her man, or her gentleman-cook, was not
a person to be hurried. Three successive
messengers were sent in vain. He
knew his importance, and preserved his
dignity.—The caramel was not ready,
and nothing could make him dispense
with it's proper appearance.
How much depended on this caramel!—How
much, of which the cook
never dreamed!—How much Mrs. Falconer
suffered during this half hour, and
suffered with a smiling countenance!— 
How much, with a scowling brow, Miss
Georgiana Falconer made poor Petcalf
endure!
Every thing conspired to discomfit
Mrs. Falconer.—She saw the manner in
which all the principal gentry in the
country, one after another, expressed satisfaction
at meeting the Percy family.
She saw the regard and respect with
which they were addressed, notwithstanding
their loss of fortune and station.

It was quite astonishing to Mrs. Falconer.—Every
body in the rooms, except
her own set of town friends, seemed
so strangely interested about this family.— “How
provoking that I was obliged
to ask them here!—And Count Altenberg
sees and hears all this!”
Yes—all this confirmed, by the testimony
of their equals in rank, the favorable
ideas he had first received of the
Percys from their inferiors and dependants.—Every
person who spoke to, or of
Caroline—and he heard many speak of
her who had known her from childhood—spoke
with affection in their countenance
and manner.
At length, supper was announced, and
Mrs. Falconer requested Count Altenberg
would take Lady Frances Arlington
into the supper-room. Miss Georgiana
Falconer was anxious to sit as near as
possible to her dear Lady Frances, and
this was happily accomplished.
The Count was more than usually
agreeable, but whether this arose from

his desire to please the ladies who sat
beside him, or those who sat opposite to
him, those to whom he was in politeness
bound to address his conversation, or
those whose attention he might hope it
would attract, were questions of difficult
solution.
As they were returning into the ball-room,
Rosamond watched her opportunity,
made her way along a passage
which led to Mrs. Falconer's dressing-room,
seized her sister's shoes, returned
with the prize before Caroline reached
the antichamber, and, unseen by all,
made her put them on— “Now promise
me not to refuse to dance, if you
are asked again.”—
Count Altenberg engaged Miss Georgiana
Falconer the first two dances—When
these were finished, he asked
Caroline to dance, and Mrs. Falconer,
who dreaded the renewal of conversation
between them and who knew nothing of
Rosamond's counter-manœuvre about the
shoes, was surprised and rejoiced, when

she saw Caroline comply, and suffer herself
to be led out by Count Altenberg—But
Miss Georgiana, who had observed
that Rosamond danced well, had fears—The
mother's hopes were disappointed,
the daughter's fears were justified.—Caroline
showed all the capability of dancing
without being a dancer, and it certainly
did not escape the Count's observation,
that she possessed what is most
desirable in female accomplishments, the
power to excel, without the wish to display—Immediately
after she had finished
these dances, the favor of her hand was
solicited by a certain Colonel Spandrill.
Colonel Spandrill, celebrated for his
fashionable address, and personal accomplishments,
had been the hoped for partner
of many rival ladies, and his choice
excited no small degree of emotion. However
it was settled, that he only danced
with Miss Percy, because Mrs. Falconer
had made it her particular request. One
of these ladies declared, she had over-heard
that request; Colonel Spandrill

then was safe from all blame, but the full
fire of their resentment was directed
against poor Caroline. Every feature of
her face was criticised, and even the
minutiæ of her dress. They all allowed
that she was handsome, but each found
some different fault with her style of
beauty. It was curious to observe, how
this secondary class of young ladies, who
had without discomfiture or emotion seen
Caroline the object of Count Altenberg's
attention, were struck with indignation,
the moment they suspected her of pleasing
Colonel Spandrill. Envy seldom
takes two steps at once: it is always
excited by the fear of losing the proximate
object of ambition; it never exists
without some mixture of hope as well as
of fear. These ladies having no hope of
captivating Count Altenberg, Caroline
did not then appear to be their rival, but
now that they dreaded her competition
with a man whom they had hopes of
winning, they pulled her to pieces without
mercy. Yet there was something in

Caroline's unaffected unassuming manner,
which might have disarmed the rage
of malice; and this indeed was observed
by the few who were unprejudiced and
dispassionate spectators.
The Miss Falconers and their cotillon
set were resting themselves, whilst this
country dance was going on. Miss
Georgiana was all the time endeavoring
to engage Count Altenberg in conversation.—By
all the modern arts of coquetry,
so insipid to a man of the
world, so contemptible to a man of sense,
she tried to recall the attention of the
Count. Politeness obliged him to seem
to listen, and he endeavored to keep up
that kind of conversation, which is suited
to a ball-room; but he relapsed continually
into reverie, till at last provoked
by his absence of mind, Miss Georgiana,
unable to conceal her vexation, unjustly
threw the blame upon her health. She
complained of the “head-ach, of heat,
of cold, of country dances! such barbarous
things!—how could any one bear

any thing but cotillons ... then the
musick!—the band was horrid—They
played vastly too fast, shocking! there
was no such thing as keeping time. ...
Did not Count Altenberg think so?”
Count Altenberg was at that moment
beating time with his foot, in exact
cadence to Miss Caroline Percy's dancing—Miss
Falconer saw this, but not
till she had uttered her question, not till
it had been observed by all her companions,—Lady
Frances Arlington
half smiled, and half a smile instantly
appeared along a whole line of young
ladies.—Miss Georgiana suddenly became
sensible, that she was exposed to
the ridicule or sarcastic pity of those,
who but an hour before had flattered
her in the grossest manner—She had expected
to produce a great effect at this
ball, she saw another preferred. Her
spirits sunk, and even the powers of
affectation failed. The struggle between
the fine lady and the woman ceased.
Passion always conquers art at a coup de

main. When any strong emotion of the
soul is excited, the natural character,
temper, and manners, seldom fail to
break through all that is factitious—Those
who had seen Miss Georgiana
Falconer only through the veil of affectation
were absolutely astonished, at the
change that appeared when it was thrown
aside. By the Count the metamorphosis
was unnoticed, for he was intent on another
object; but by many of the spectators
it was beheld with open surprise,
or secret contempt.—She exhibited at
this moment the picture of a disappointed
coquet—The spasm of jealousy
had seized her heart, and unable to conceal
or endure the pain in this convulsion
of mind, she forgot all grace and
decorum. Her mother from afar saw
the danger at this crisis, and came to
her relief.—The danger in Mrs. Falconer's
opinion was, that the young lady's
want of temper should be seen by Count
Altenberg; she therefore carried him off
to a distant part of the room, to show

him as she said, “a bassoon player,
who was the exact image of Hogarth's
enraged musician.”
In the mean time Colonel Spandrill
and Caroline had finished their dance; 
and the Colonel, who made it a principle
to engross the attention of the prettiest
woman in the room, was now, after his
manner, paying his adorations to his fair
partner. Promising himself, that he
should be able to recede, or advance, as
he thought proper; he used a certain
happy ambiguity of phrase, which according
to the manner in which it is understood,
or rather according to the tone
and look with which it is accompanied,
says every thing—or, nothing.—With
prudent caution, he began with darts,
flames, wounds, and anguish; words
which every military man holds himself
privileged to use towards every fine woman
he meets.—Darts, flames, wounds
and anguish, were of no avail. The
Colonel went on, as far as bright eyes—bewitching
smiles—and heavenly grace

—Still without effect—With astonishment
he perceived, that the girl, who
looked as if she had never heard that she
was handsome, received the full fire of
his flattery with the composure of a
veteran inured to public admiration.
Mrs. Falconer was almost as much
surprised and disappointed by this, as
the Colonel could be. She had purposely
introduced the gallant Colonel
Spandrill to the Miss Percys, in the hope
that Caroline's head, like that of many
other young ladies, might be affected by
flattery; and that she might not then
retain all that dignity of manner, which,
as Mrs. Falconer had sense enough to
see, was her distinguishing charm in the
eyes of Count Altenberg.—Frustrated,
and dreading every instant, that with
all her address, she should not be able
to manage her Georgiana's temper, Mrs.
Falconer became excessively impatient
for the departure of the Percy family.
“Mr. Falconer!” cried she, “Commissioner!
Mrs. Percy ordered her carriage

a considerable time ago. They
have a great way to return, and a dreadful
road—I am uneasy about them—Do
pray, be so good to see what detains her
carriage.”—
The Commissioner went out of the
room, and a few minutes afterwards returned,
and taking Mrs. Falconer aside
said—
“I have something to tell you, my
dear, that will surprise you—Indeed I
can scarcely believe it. Long as I have
known Lord Oldborough, I never knew
him do, or think of doing such a thing—And
he ill ... at least ill enough with
the gout, for an excuse. ... An excuse
he thought sufficient for the whole county.
... And there are people of so much
more consequence—I protest I cannot
understand it.”—
“Understand what, Commissioner?—Will
you tell me what has happened,
and you may be as much surprised as
you please afterwards—Lord Oldborough
has the gout,” added she, in an

accent which expressed “Well!—all the
world knows that”—
“Lord Oldborough's own confidential
man Rodney you know.” ...
“Well, well, Rodney! I do know?
What of him?”
“He is here—I have seen him this
instant—from his Lord, with a message
to Mr. Percy, to let him know, that there
are apartments prepared for him, and
all his family at Clermont-Park; and that
he insists upon their not returning this
night to their Hills, lest the ladies should
be tired.”
“Lord Oldborough!” repeated Mrs.
Falconer, “Lord Oldborough!—the ladies!—Clermont-Park!
where none but
persons of the first distinction are invited!”
“Ay, now you are surprised!”—cried
the Commissioner.
“Surprised! beyond all power of
expression” said Mrs. Falconer—
“Beyond all power of discrimination,” 
she should have said.—

“Count Altenberg too, going to
hand them to their carriage—going to
Clermont-Park with them!—I wish to
Heaven,” said Mrs. Falconer to herself— “I
had never given this unfortunate
ball!”—
Mrs. Falconer was mistaken in this
idea.—It was not the circumstance of
meeting Caroline at a ball, that made
this impression on Count Altenberg.—Wherever
he had seen her, if he had
had opportunity of conversing, and of
observing the dignity and simplicity
of her manner, the same effect would
have been produced—But in fact, Mrs.
Falconer's fears, and her daughter's
jealousy, had much magnified the truth.—Count
Altenberg had not, as they
fancied, fallen desperately in love at
first sight with Caroline—He had only
been pleased, and interested sufficiently
to make him desirous to see more of
her.—Caroline, though so much the
object of jealousy, had not the slightest
idea, that she had made a conquest.

—She simply thought the Count's
conversation agreeable, and she was glad
that she should see him again at breakfast
the next morning.—