

The arrival of the post was at this
time an anxious moment to Mrs. Hungerford,
as she had so many near relations
and friends in the army and
navy. This day brought letters, with
news that lighted up her countenance
with dignified joy, one from Captain
Hungerford, her second son, ten minutes
after an action at sea with the
French.
“Dear mother—English victorious— 
of course—for particulars see Gazette.
—In the cockleshell I have—could
do nothing worth mentioning—but am
promised a ship soon—and hope for opportunity
to show myself worthy to be
your Son.
F. Hungerford.”

“I hope I am grateful to Providence
for such children!”—cried Mrs. Hungerford.
Mrs. Mortimer darted upon Captain
Hungerford's name in the Gazette,—
“And I cannot refrain from mentioning
to your Lordships the gallant manner,
in which I was seconded by Captain
Hungerford.”
“Happy mother! that I am!—And
more happiness still!—A letter also from
my Colonel!—Thanks of commanding
officer. ...gallant conduct abroad. ...
leave of absence for three weeks. ...and
will be here to morrow!”—
This news spread through the Castle
in a few minutes, and the whole house
was in motion and in joy.
“What is the matter,” said Rosamond,
“who had been out of the room
when the Colonel's letter was read,—As
I came down stairs, I met I can't tell
how many servants running different
ways, with faces of delight. I do believe
Colonel Hungerford is come?”

“Not come, but coming.” said Mrs.
Hungerford; “and I am proud that you,
my friends, should see what a sensation
the first sound of his return makes in his
own home.—There it is, after all, that
you may best judge what a man really
is.”
Every thing conspired to give Caroline
a favorable idea of Colonel Hungerford.
—He arrived—and his own appearance
and manners, far from contradicting,
fully justified all that his friends had
said. His appearance was that of a soldier
and a gentleman, with a fine person,
and striking countenance, with the
air of command, yet without presumption; 
not without a consciousness of his
own merit, but apparently with only a
consciousness sufficient to give value and
grace to his deference for others. To
those he respected or loved his manner
was particularly engaging; and the appropriate
attentions he paid to each of
his friends proved, that their peculiar
tastes, their characteristic merits, and

their past kindnesses were ever full in
his remembrance. To his mother his
grateful affection, and the tender reverence
he showed, were quite touching; 
and the high opinion he had of her character,
and the strong influence she held
over his mind, he seemed proud to avow
in words and actions.—To his sister
Mortimer, in a different, but not less
pleasing manner, his affection appeared
in a thousand little instances, which the
most polite courtiers, with the most officious
desire to please, could not without
the happy inspiration of truth have invented.
There were innumerable slight
strokes in his conversation with his sister,
which marked the pleasure he felt in the
recollection of their early friendship, allusions
to trivial passages in the history
of their childhood, which none of the
important scenes, in which he had since
been engaged, had effaced from his mind
—and at other times a playful carelessness.
...that showed the lightness, the
expanding freedom of heart, which can

be felt only in the perfect confidence and
intimacy of domestic affection.—In his
manner towards his cousins, the Lady
Pembrokes, who, since he had last seen
them, had grown up from children into
fine young women, there were nice differences; 
with all the privileged familiarity
of relationship he met the sprightly
frankness of Lady Mary, and by a degree
of delicate tender respect put the
retiring sensitive timidity of Lady Elizabeth
at ease. None of these shades of
manner were lost upon Caroline's discriminating
observation. For some time
after his arrival, the whole attention of
every individual, at Hungerford-Castle,
was occupied by Colonel Hungerford.
All were alternately talking of him, or
listening to him. The eagerness, which
every body felt to hear from him accounts
of public and private affairs, and
the multitude and variety of questions
by which he was assailed, drew him out
continually; so that he talked a great
deal, yet evidently more to gratify others

than himself. He was always unwilling
to engross the conversation, and sometimes
anxious to hear from his mother
and sister, of domestic occurrences; but
he postponed his own gratification, and
never failed to satisfy general curiosity,
even by the repetition of narratives and
anecdotes, till he was exhausted.—Conscious
that he did not wish to make
himself the hero of his tale, he threw
himself upon the mercy of his friends,
or their justice; and without any of the
provoking reserve of affected, or cowardly
humility, he talked naturally of the
events in which he had taken a share,
and of what concerned himself as well as
others. With polite kindness, which
gratified them peculiarly, he seemed to
take the Percy family, as his mother's
friends, directly upon trust as his own; 
and as if they were part of his family,
he spoke before them, freely, of all his
confidential opinions of men and things.
He did them justice in considering them
as safe auditors, and they enjoyed, and

fully appreciated the value of his various
conversation. In his anecdotes of persons,
there was always something decidedly
characteristic of the individual,
or illustrative of some general principle.
In his narratives there were strong marks
of the Froissart accuracy of detail, which
interests by giving the impression of
reality, and the proof of having been an
eye witness of the scene; and sometimes
scorning detail, he displayed the power
of keeping an infinite number of particulars
in subordination, and of seizing
those large features, which give a rapid
and masterly view of the whole. For
his profession he felt that enthusiasm,
which commands sympathy. Whilst he
spoke of the British army, those who
heard him seemed to see every thing as
he did in a military point of view.—Yet
his love of military glory had not hardened
his heart so as to render him insensible
of the evils and sufferings which— 
alas!—it necessarily produces. The natural
expression of great feeling and humanity

burst from him; but he turned
hastily and firmly from the contemplation
of evils, which he could not prevent, and
would not uselessly deplore. In conversing
one day privately with Mr. Percy
he showed, that bitter and deep philosophic
reflexions on the horrors and folly
of war had passed through his mind,
but that he had systematically and resolutely
shut them out.
“We are now,” said he, “less likely
than ever to see the time, when all the
Princes of Europe will sign the good
Abbé St. Pierre's project for a perpetual
peace; and in the mean time, while
kingdoms can maintain their independence,
their existence, only by superiority
in war, it is not for the defenders of their
country, to fix their thoughts upon ‘the
price of victory.”’—
After explaining the plan of a battle,
or the intrigues of a court, Colonel
Hungerford would turn with delight to
plans of cottages, which his sister Mortimer
was drawing for him; and from a

map of the seat of war he would go to
a map of his own estate, eagerly asking
his mother, where she would recommend
that houses should be built, and consulting
her about the characters and merits
of those tenants, with whom his absence
on the Continent had prevented him
from becoming acquainted. These and
a thousand other little traits showed,
that his military habits had not destroyed
his domestic tastes.
Caroline had taken an interest in the
military profession, ever since her eldest
brother had gone into the army. Colonel
Hungerford was seven or eight years
older than Godfrey Percy, and had a more
formed, steady, and exalted character,
with more knowledge, and a far more
cultivated understanding; but many expressions,
and some points of character,
were similar. Caroline observed this, and
wished and hoped, that, when her brother
should have had as many opportunities
of improvement, as Colonel Hungerford's
experience had given him, he might

be just such a man.—This idea increased
the interest she took in observing and
listening to Colonel Hungerford.—After
he had been some time at home, and
that every day more and more of his amiable
character had been developed, Rosamond
said to herself,
“This is certainly the man for Caroline,
and I suspect she begins to think
so.—If she does not, I never will forgive
her.”
One day, when the sisters were by
themselves, Rosamond tried to sound
Caroline on this subject. She began, as
she thought, at a safe distance from her
main object.
“How very much esteemed and beloved
Colonel Hungerford is in his own
family!”
“Very much and very deservedly,” 
answered Caroline.—She spoke without
any hesitation or embarrassment.
Rosamond, rather dissatisfied even with
the fulness of the assent to her first proposition
—added, “And not only by

his own family, but by all who know
him.”—
Caroline was silent.—
“It is surprising,” continued Rosamond,
“that a man, who has led a soldier's
wandering life, should have acquired
so much literature, such accurate knowledge,
and should have retained such
simple and domestic tastes.”
Full assent again from Caroline both
of look and voice—but still not the exact
look and voice Rosamond desired.
“Do you know, Caroline,” continued
she, “I think, that in several things
Colonel Hungerford is very like my brother
Godfrey.”
“Yes, and in some points, I think
Colonel Hungerford is superior to Godfrey,” 
said Caroline.
“Well, I really think so too,” cried
Rosamond, “and I am sure Godfrey
would think and say so himself.—How
he would admire Colonel Hungerford,
and how desirous, how ambitious he
would be, to make such a man his friend

... his ... in short, I know if Godfrey
was here this minute, he would think
just as I do about Colonel Hungerford.
 ... and about ... all other things—”
“All other things!” —repeated Caroline,
smiling—“that includes a great
deal.”
“Yes, it does, that is certain,” said
Rosamond significantly—“And,” continued
she, “I know another person of
excellent judgment too, who, if I mistake
not, is of my way of thinking, of
wishing at least, in some things, that is a
comfort.—How Mrs. Hungerford does
adore her son! ... And I think she
loves you almost as much.”—Caroline
expressed strong gratitude for Mrs. Hungerford's
kindness to her, and the warmest
return of affection.
“Then in one word,” continued Rosamond,
“for out it must come, sooner
or later. ... I think she not only loves
you, as if you were her daughter, but
that ... now confess, Caroline, did not
the idea ever occur to you?—And don't

you see that Mrs. Hungerford wishes it
 ... Oh! that blush is answer enough.
I'll say no more. ... I do not mean to
torment or distress ... good by, I am
satisfied.”
“Stay, my dear Rosamond, or you
will run away with a mistake.—Stay one
moment, and I will tell you exactly all
I think and feel.”
“I will stay as long as you please,” 
said Rosamond—“and I thank you for
this confidence.”
“You have a right to it,”—said Caroline
—“I see, my dear sister, and feel
all your kindness towards me, and all
Mrs. Hungerford's—I see what you both
wish.”
“There's my own sister Caroline,
above all artifice and affectation.”
“But,” said Caroline.
“But—Oh! Caroline, don't go back
—don't ‘palter with us, in a double
sense.'—Abide by your own words, and
your own character, and don't condescend
to any pitiful buts.”

“You do not yet know the nature of
my but.”—
“Nor do I wish to know it, nor will
I hear it,” cried Rosamond, stopping
her ears, “because I know whatever it
is, it will lower you in my opinion.— 
You have fairly acknowledged, that Colonel
Hungerford possesses every virtue,
public and private, that can make him
worthy of you ... not a single fault, on
which to ground one possible, imaginable,
rational but. Temper, manners,
talents, character, fortune, family, fame,
every thing the heart of woman can desire.”
“Every thing against which the heart
of woman should guard itself,” said Caroline.—
“Guard!—why guard?—what is it
you suspect?—What crime can you invent
to lay to his charge?”
“I suspect him of nothing.—It is no
crime ... except, perhaps, in your
eyes,” dear Rosamond ...” said Caroline,
smiling—“no crime not to love
me.”

“Oh! is that all? now I understand
and forgive you,” said Rosamond, “if
it is only that you fear.”
“I do not recollect that I said I feared
it,” said Caroline.
“Well, well!—I beg pardon for using
that unguarded word—Of course your
pride must neither hope nor fear upon
the occasion; you must quite forget
yourself to stone.—As you please, or
rather as you think proper; but you will
allow me to hope and fear for you.— 
Since I have not, thank Heaven! made
proud and vain professions of stoicism— 
have not vowed to throw away the rose,
lest I should be pricked by the thorn.”
“Laugh, but hear me,” said Caroline
—“I make no professions of stoicism; 
it is because I am conscious that I am
no stoic, that I have endeavoured to
guard well my heart. ... I have seen
and admired all Colonel Hungerford's
good and amiable qualities. I have seen
and been grateful for all that you and
Mrs. Hungerford hoped and wished for

my happiness, have not been insensible
to any of the delightful, any of the romantic
circumstances of the vision, but
I saw it was only a vision—and one that
might lead me into waking, lasting misery.”
“Misery! ... lasting—How!” said
Rosamond.
“Neither your wishes, nor Mrs. Hungerford's,
you know, can, or ought to decide,
or even to influence the event, that
is to be determined by Colonel Hungerford's
own judgment and feelings, and by
mine.—In the mean time, I cannot forget,
that the delicacy, honor, pride,
prudence of our sex, forbid a woman to
think of any man, as a lover, till he gives
her reason to believe, that he feels love
for her.”
“Certainly,” said Rosamond—“but
I take it for granted that Colonel Hungerford
does love you.”
“But why should we take it for granted?” 
said Caroline. “He has not shown
me any preference.”

“Why! ... I don't know, I am not
skilled in these matters,” said Rosamond,
“. ... I am not sure ... but I think
 ... and yet I should be sorry to mislead
you ... At any rate there is no harm in
hoping. ...”
“If there be no harm, theré might be
much danger,” said Caroline, “better
not to think of the subject at all, since
we can do no good by thinking of it, and
may do harm.”—
“Better, no doubt,” said Rosamond— 
“Right, no doubt, and fine as any maxim
of philosophy I ever heard—in theory
—but the practice is the difficulty— 
I won't say the impossibility—But Seriously
and honestly, Caroline, would you
have me believe that you have never ...
never thought of Colonel Hungerford.”
“As a lover—never.”—
“Upon your word?”
“Upon my word I never allowed myself
to think of him as a lover.”
“That is, you never regularly sat
down, and said to yourself, ‘now I am

thinking,’ or ‘now I will suffer myself to
think of Colonel Hungerford,’—but sans
y penser, there might be some little ...
Hey?—And now I force you to think on
this forbidden, this horrid subject ...
confess that you have some little partiality
for him.”—
“No; I assure you that I do not feel
any partiality,” said Caroline, “and you
may, you must believe me.”
“If I must, I must,” said Rosamond.
After a pause of surprise, disappointment,
and reflection, Rosamond resumed,
“So I am to understand it to be your
opinion, that a woman of sense, delicacy,
proper pride, honor and prudence,
must, can, and ought to shut her eyes,
ears, understanding, and heart, against
all the merit, and all the powers of pleasing
a man may possess, till said man
shall and do make a matrimonial proposal
for her in due form—Hey! Caroline?”
“I never thought any such thing,” 
answered Caroline, “and I expressed

myself very ill if I said any such thing.
A woman need not shut her eyes, ears,
or understanding to a man's merit—only
her heart.”—
“Then the irresistible charm, the supreme
merit, the only merit that can or
ought to touch her heart in any man, is
the simple or glorious circumstance of his
loving her?”
“I never heard that it was a man's supreme
merit to love,” said Caroline, “but
we are not at present inquiring, what is
a man's, but what is a woman's characteristic
excellence.—And I have heard it
said to be a woman's supreme merit, and
grace, and dignity, that her love should
not unsought be won.”
“That is true,” said Rosamond— 
“perfectly true—in general—But surely
you will allow, that there may be cases in
which it would be difficult to adhere to
the letter as well as to the spirit of this
excellent rule.—Have you never felt?— 
Can't you imagine this?”
“I can well imagine it,” said Caroline,

“fortunately I have never felt it.—If I
had not early perceived, that Colonel Hungerford
was not thinking of me, I might
have deceived myself with false hopes.— 
Believe me, I was never insensible to his
merit.”—
“But where is the merit or the glory,
if there was no struggle, no difficulty?” 
said Rosamond, in a melancholy tone.
“Glory there is none,” said Caroline,
“nor do I claim any merit; but is not it
something to prevent struggle and difficulty?
Is it nothing to preserve my own
happiness?”
“Something to be sure,” said Rosamond.
“But on the other hand, you
know there is the old proverb, ‘Nothing
hazard, nothing have.’”
“That is a masculine, not a feminine
proverb,” said Caroline, “else, acting
upon that principle, we should come presently
to a bold stroke for a husband.”
Rosamond blushed, retracted her proverb,
and utterly disclaimed the idea of
a bold stroke.

“All I meant to say was, that there is
no rule without an exception, as all your
philosophers, even the most rigid, allow:
And if an exception be ever permitted,
surely in such a case as this it might, in
favor of such a man as Colonel Hungerford.”
“Dangerous exceptions!” said Caroline.
“Every body is too apt to make an
exception in such cases in their own favor.
—That, you know, is the common
error of the weak.—Oh! my dear sister,
instead of weakening, strengthen my
mind—Instead of trying to raise my enthusiasm,
or reproaching me for want of
sensibility, tell me that you approve of
my exerting all my power over myself to
do that which I think right. Consider
what evil I should bring upon myself, if
I became attached to a man, who is not
attached to me. If you saw me sinking,
an object of pity and contempt, the victim,
the slave of an unhappy passion.”
“Oh! my dear, dear Caroline, that
could never be—God forbid! Oh! God

forbid!”—cried Rosamond, with a look of
terror—but recovering herself, she added,
—“This is a vain fear. With your
strength of mind, you could never be reduced
to such a condition.”
“Who can answer for their strength of
mind in the second trial, if it fail in the
first?” said Caroline. “If a woman once
lets her affections go out of her power,
how can she afterwards answer for her
own happiness?”
“All very right and very true,” said
Rosamond—“But for a young person,
Caroline, I could spare some of this premature
reason. If there be some folly,
at least there is some generosity, some
sensibility often joined with a romantic
temper.—Take care lest you ‘mistake reverse
of wrong for right,’ and in your
great zeal to avoid romance, run into selfishness.”—
“Selfishness!”
“Why—yes—after all, what are these
cold calculations about loving or not loving
such a character as Colonel Hungerford;

what is all this wonderfully longsighted
care of your own individual happiness,
but selfishness—moral, very moral
selfishness, I grant.”
Caroline colored—paused—and when
she answered, she spoke in a lower and
graver tone and manner than usual.
“If it be selfish to pursue, by the best
means in my power, and by means which
cannot hurt any human being, my own
happiness, must I deserve to be called
selfish.—Unless a woman be quite unconnected
with others in society, without
a family, and without friends,—which,
I thank God, is not my situation,—it is
impossible to hazard or to destroy our
own happiness by any kind of imprudence,
without destroying the happiness of
others.—Therefore imprudence, call it romance,
or what you please, is often want
of generosity—want of thought for the
happiness of our friends, as well as for
our own.”—
“Well, come off!” said Rosamond,
laughing, “you have proved, with admirable

logic, that prudence is the height
of generosity.—But, my dear Caroline,
do not speak so very seriously, and do
not look with such ‘sweet austere composure.’ 
—I don't in earnest accuse you of
selfishness.—I was wrong to use that ugly
word.—But I was vexed with you for
being more prudent than even good old
Mrs. Hungerford.”
At these words tears filled Caroline's
eyes. “Dear! kind! Mrs. Hungerford,” 
she exclaimed, “in the warmth of her
heart, in the fullness of her kindness for
me, once in her life Mrs. Hungerford
said perhaps an imprudent word, expressed
a wish, of which her better judgment
may have repented.”—
“No, no!”—cried Rosamond, “her
better, her best judgment must have confirmed
her opinion of you.—She never
will repent of that wish.—Why! should
you think she has repented of it, Caroline?”
“Because she must by this time see,
that there is no probability of that wish

being accomplished.—She must, therefore,
desire that it should be forgotten.— 
And I trust I have acted, and shall always
act, as if it were forgotten by me— 
except as to it's kindness, that I shall remember
while I have life and feeling.— 
But if I had built a romance upon that
slight word, consider how much that excellent
friend would blame herself, when
she found that she had misled me,
that she had been the cause of anguish
to my heart—that she had lowered, in
the opinion of all, even in her own opinion,
the girl she had once so exalted by
her approbation and friendship.—And
Oh! consider, Rosamond, what a return
should I make for that friendship, if I
were to be the occasion of any misunderstanding,
any disagreement, between
her and her darling son. If I were to
become the rival of her beloved niece!”
“Rival!—Niece!—How!—Which!” 
cried Rosamond, “Which,” repeated she
eagerly,—“I cannot think of any thing
else, till you say which.”

“Suppose Lady Elizabeth.”—
“The thought never occurred to me— 
Is it possible?—My dear Caroline, you
have opened my eyes ... you have
brought a host of terrors upon me!”—
“Terrors!—why terrors?” said Caroline,
smiling, “it might have been terrible
indeed to me, that Colonel Hungerford
should love another, if I had become
attached to him; but I have avoided
that misery,—and now, if my friend
should be the object of his preference, I
can rejoice and sympathize in her happiness.”—
“But are you sure? Then you have
acted wisely, rightly, Caroline; and I
have as usual been very, very imprudent.
Forgive what I said about selfishness,— 
I was unjust—You selfish! you who
thought of all your friends, I thought
only of you. But tell me, did you think
of Lady Elizabeth from the first.—Did
you see how it would be from the very
first?”—
“No; I never thought it till yesterday,

and I am not sure of it to day.”—
“Then you acted merely from general
principle, from prudence?”—
“Yes,” answered Caroline.
“There again you vex me,” cried Rosamond
—“Could you not as well at once
have told me, it was all generosity?—So
you never thought of it till yesterday!
And you are not sure of it to day?—Then
I dare say you are mistaken, and wrong,
with all your superfluous prudence. I
will observe with my own eyes, and trust
only my own judgment.”—
With this laudable resolution Rosamond
departed.
The next morning she had an opportunity
of observing, and deciding by her
own judgment.—Lady Elizabeth Pembroke
and Caroline had both been copying
a picture of Sir Philip Sidney when a
boy.—They had finished their copies.
Mrs. Hungerford showed them to her
son. Lady Elizabeth's was rather the
superior painting. Colonel Hungerford

instantly distinguished it, and, in strong
terms, expressed his admiration; but, by
some mistake, he fancied that both copies
were done by Caroline; she explained
to him that that which he preferred
was Lady Elizabeth's.
“Yours!”—exclaimed Colonel Hungerford,
turning to Lady Elizabeth with
a look and tone of delighted surprise— 
Lady Elizabeth colored—Lady Mary
smiled—he forbore adding one word
either of praise or observation.—Caroline
gently relieved Mrs. Hungerford's hand
from her copy of the picture which she
still held.
Rosamond, breathless, looked and looked,
and waited for something more decisive.
“My mother wished for a copy of this
picture,” said Lady Elizabeth, in a tremulous
voice, and without raising her
eyes,—for we have none but a vile daub
of him at Pembroke.”
“Perhaps my aunt Pembroke would

be so good to accept of the original?” 
said Colonel Hungerford, “and my mother
would beg of Lady Elizabeth to give
her copy to ... our gallery.”
“Do, my dear Elizabeth,” said Mrs.
Hungerford.
Lady Elizabeth shook her head, yet
smiled.
“Do, my dear, you cannot refuse your
cousin.”
“Cousin! there's hope still,” thought
Rosamond.
“If it were but worthy of his acceptance,” 
said Lady Elizabeth.—Colonel
Hungerford, lost in the enjoyment of her
self-timidity and retiring grace, quite forgot
to say how much he thought the picture
worthy of his acceptance.
His mother spoke for him.
“Since Hungerford asks you for it, my
dear, you may be certain, that he thinks
highly of it, for my son never flatters.”
“Who? I!—flatter!”—cried Colonel
Hungerford,—“flatter!” added he, in a
low voice, with a tenderness of accent,

and look, which could scarcely be misunderstood.
Nor was it misunderstood
by Lady Elizabeth, as her quick varying
color showed.—It was well that, at this
moment, no eye turned upon Rosamond,
for all her thoughts and feeling could have
been read in her face.
“Come,” cried Lady Mary, “Let us
have the picture in it's place directly,— 
Come all of you to the gallery, fix where
it shall be hung.” Colonel Hungerford
seized upon it, and offering his arm to
Lady Elizabeth, followed Lady Mary to
the gallery.—Mrs. Hungerford rose deliberately
—Caroline offered her arm.—
“Yes, my dear child, let me lean upon
you.”—
They walked slowly after the young
party—Rosamond followed.—
“I am afraid,”—said Mrs. Hungerford,
as she leaned more upon Caroline.
“I am afraid I shall tire you, my dear.”
“Oh! no, no!” said Caroline, “not
in the least.”
“I am growing so infirm, that I require

a stronger arm, a kinder I can never have.”—
The door of the antichamber, which
opened into the gallery, closed after the
young people.
“I am not one of those exigeante mothers,
who expect always to have possession
of a son's arm,” resumed Mrs. Hungerford,
“The time, I knew, would
come, when I must give up my Colonel.”
“And with pleasure, I am sure, you
now give him up, secure of his happiness,” 
—said Caroline.
Mrs. Hungerford stopped short, and
looked full on Caroline, upon whom she
had previously avoided to turn her eyes.
—From what anxiety did Caroline's
serene, open countenance, and sweet ingenuous
smile, at this instant, relieve her
friend. Old as she was, Mrs. Hungerford
had quick and strong feelings. For
a moment she could not speak.—She held
out her arms to Caroline, and folded her
to her heart.

“Excellent creature!” said she,— 
“Child of my affections—that you must
ever be!”—
“Oh, Mrs. Hungerford! my dear Madam,” 
cried Rosamond, “You have no
idea how unjust and imprudent I have
been about Caroline.”
“My love,” said Mrs. Hungerford,
smiling, and wiping tears from her eyes,
“I fancy I can form a competent idea of
your imprudence from my own.—We
must all learn discretion from this dear
girl—You, early—I, late in life.”—
“Dear Rosamond, do not reproach
yourself; for your excessive kindness to
me,”—said Caroline, “In candor and
generous feeling, who is equal to you?”
“Kissing one another, I protest,”— 
cried Lady Mary Pembroke, opening the
door from the gallery, whilst we were
wondering you did not come after us.— 
Aunt Hungerford, you know how we
looked for the bow and arrows, and the
peaked shoes, with the knee-chains of the

time of Edward the Fourth. Well, they
are all behind the great armory press,
which Gustavus has been moving to make
room for Elizabeth's picture of Sir Philip
Sidney. Do come and look at them— 
but stay, first I have a favor to beg of
you, Caroline. I know Gustavus will ask
my sister to ride with him this morning,
and the flies torment her horse so, and
she is such a coward, that she will not be
able to listen to a word that is said to
her ... Could you lend her your pretty
gentle White Surrey?”
“With pleasure,” said Caroline, “and
my net.”
“I will go and bring it to your Ladyship,” 
said Rosamond.
“My Ladyship is in no hurry,” cried
Lady Mary—“Don't run away ...
don't go ... it is not wanted yet.”—
But Rosamond, glad to escape, ran
away, saying—“There is some of the
fringe off—I must sew it on.”—
Rosamond, as she sewed on the fringe,

sighed,—and worked,—and wished it was
for Caroline, and said to herself.
“So it is all over—and all in vain!”
And she felt vexed ... as a child when
the table is suddenly shaken, and it's card
house is thrown down; disconsolate as a
philosopher, convinced, against his will,
that his favorite castle in the air is but
a baseless fabric.
The horses for the happy riding party
came to the door. Rosamond ran down
stairs with the net; Caroline had it put on
her horse, and Lady Elizabeth Pembroke
thanked her with such a look of kindness,
of secure faith in her friend's sympathy,
that even Rosamond forgave her for
being happy.—But Rosamond could not
wish to stay to witness her happiness just
at this time; and she was not sorry, when
her father announced the next day, that
business required his immediate return
home.—Lamentations, loud and sincere,
were heard from every individual in the
castle, especially from Mrs. Hungerford,

and from her daughter. They were, however,
too well bred to persist in their
solicitations to have the visit prolonged.
They said they were grateful for the
time which had been given to them, and
appeared kindly satisfied with their friends'
promise to repeat their visit, whenever
they could with convenience.
Caroline, tenderly and gratefully attached
to Mrs. Hungerford, found it very
difficult and painful to part from her; 
the more painful because she feared to
express all the affection, admiration, and
gratitude she felt for this excellent friend,
lest, if she yielded to the natural sensibility
of her heart, her emotion might be
misinterpreted.—Mrs. Hungerford understood
her thoroughly. When she took
leave of Caroline, she kissed her at first
in silence, and then, by a few strong
words, and more by her manner than by
her words, expressed her high esteem and
affection for her young friend.

Regretted by young and old, at peace
in her own mind,
“That sweet peace, which goodness bosoms ever,”
Caroline returned home, satisfied with
the present, and not anxious for the future.