

Towards the evening of the second
day's journey, the driver of lord Colambre's
hackney chaise stopped, and
jumping off the wooden bar, on which
he had been seated, exclaimed,
“We're come to the bad step now.
The bad road's beginning upon us,
please your honour.”
“Bad road! that is very uncommon
in this country.—I never saw such
fine roads, as you have in Ireland.”
“That's true; and God bless your
honour, that's sensible of that same,
for it's not what all the foreign quality
I drive have the manners to notice.— 
God bless your honour; I heard you're
a Welshman, but whether or no, I am
sure you are a gentleman, any way,
Welsh or other.”

Notwithstanding the shabby great
coat, the shrewd postillion perceived,
by our hero's language, that he was a
gentleman. After much dragging at the
horses' heads, and pushing and lifting,
the carriage was got over, what the
postillion said was the worst part of the
bad step; but as the road “was not yet
to say good,” he continued walking
beside the carriage.
“It's only bad just hereabouts, and
that by accident,” said he, “on account
of there being no jantleman resident in
it, nor near; but only a bit of an
under-agent, a great little rogue, who gets
his own turn out of the roads, and of
every thing else in life. I, Larry Brady,
that am telling your honour, have a
good right to know, for myself, and my
father, and my brother. Pat Brady,
the wheelwright, had once a farm under
him; but was ruined horse and foot,
all along with him, and cast out, and
my brother forced to fly the country,
and is now working in some coach-maker's

yard, in London; banished he
is!—and here am I, forced to be what I
am—and now that I'm reduced to drive
a hack, the agent's a curse to me still,
with these bad roads, killing my horses
and wheels—and a shame to the country,
which I think more of—Bad luck
to him!”
“I know your brother; he lives with
Mr. Mordicai, in Long-acre, in London.”
“O, God bless you for that!”
They came at this time within view
of a range of about four and twenty
men and boys, sitting astride on four
and twenty heaps of broken stones, on
each side of the road; they were all
armed with hammers, with which they
began to pound with great diligence
and noise, as soon as they saw the
carriage. The chaise passed betwen
these batteries, the stones flying on all
sides.
“How are you, Jem?—How are
you, Phil?” said Larry. “But hold
your hand, can't ye, while I stop and

get the stones out of the horses feet.
So you're making up the rent, are you,
for St. Dennis?”
“Whoosh!” said one of the pounders,
coming close to the postillion, and
pointing his thumb back towards the
chaise. “Who have you in it?”
“Oh, you need not scruple, he's a
very honest man;—he's only a man
from North-Wales, one Mr. Evans, an
innocent jantleman, that's sent over to
travel up and down the country, to
find is there any copper mines in it.”
“How do you know, Larry?”
“Because I know very well, from
one that was tould, and I seen him tax
the man of the King's head, with a
copper half-crown, at first sight, which
was only lead to look at, you'd think,
to them that was not skilful in copper.
So lend me a knife, till I cut a linchpin
out of the hedge, for this one won't
go far.”
Whilst Larry was making the linchpin,
all scruple being removed, his

question about St. Dennis and the rent
was answered.
“Ay, it's the rint, sure enough,
we're pounding out for him, for he
sent the driver round last-night-was-eight
days, to warn us old Nick would
be down a'monday, to take a sweep
among us; and there's only six clear
days, saturday night, before the assizes,
sure, so we must see and get it finished
any way, to clear the presentment
again the swearing day, for he and
Paddy Hart is the overseers themselves,
and Paddy is to swear to it.”
“St. Dennis, is it? Then you've one
great comfort and security—that he
won't be particular about the swearing; 
for since ever he had his head on his
shoulders, on oath never stuck in St.
Dennis's throat, more than in his own
brother, old Nick's.”
“His head upon his shoulders!” 
repeated lord Colambre: “Pray, did
you ever hear that Saint Dennis's head
was off his shoulders?”

“It never was, plase your honour,
to my knowledge.”
“Did you never, among your saints,
hear of St. Dennis carrying his head in
his hand?” said Colambre.
“The rael saint!” said the postillion,
suddenly changing his tone, and looking
shocked.—“O, don't be talking that
way of the saints, plase your honour.”
“Then of what St. Dennis were you
talking just now?—Whom do you mean
by St. Dennis, and whom do you call
old Nick?”
“Old Nick,” answered the postillion,
coming close to the side of the carriage,
and whispering—“Old Nick, plase
your honour, is our nickname for one
Nicholas Garraghty Esq., of College
Green, Dublin, and St. Dennis is his
brother Dennis, who is old Nick's brother
in all things, and would fain be
a saint, only he is a sinner. He lives
just by here, in the country, under-agent
to lord Clonbrony, as old Nick
is upper-agent—it's only a joke among

the people, that are not fond of them
at all.—Lord Clonbrony himself, is a
very good jantleman, if he was not an
absentee, resident in London, leaving
us and every thing to the likes of them.”
Lord Colambre listened with all
possible composure and attention; but
the postillion having now made his
linchpin of wood, and fixed himself,
he mounted his bar, and drove on,
saying to Lord Colambre, as he looked
at the road-makers,
“Poor cratures! They couldn't
keep their cattle out of pound,—or
themselves out of jail, but by making
this road.”
“Is road-making, then a very profitable
business?—Have road-makers
higher wages than other men in this
part of the country?”
“It is,—and it is not—They have,
and they have not—plase your honour.”
“I don't understand you!”
“No, beca-ase you're an Englishman—

that is, a Welshman—I beg
your honour's pardon. But I'll tell you
how that is, and I'll go slow over these
broken stones—for I can't go fast.— 
It is where there's no jantleman over
these under-agents, as here, they do as
they plase, and when they have set
the land, they get rasonable from the
head landlords, to poor cratures at a
rack-rent, that they can't live and pay
the rent, they say—” 
“Who says?”
“Them under-agents, that have no
conscience at all. Not all—but some,
like Dennis, says, says he, ‘I'll get
you a road to make up the rent:’ that
is, plase your honour, the agent gets
them a presentment for so many perches
of road from the grand jury, at twice the
price that would make the road. And
tenants are, by this means, as they take
the road by contract, at the price given
by the county, able to pay all they get
by the job, over and above potatoes and
salt, back again to the agent, for the

arrear on the land. Do I make your
honour sensible ?”
“You make me much more sensible
than I ever was before,” said lord Colambre:
“but is not this cheating the
county?”
“Well, and suppose,” replied Larry,
“is not it all for my good, and yours
too, plase your honour?” said Larry,
looking very shrewdly.
“My good!” said lord Colambre,
startled. “What have I to do with it?”
“Haven't you to do with the roads
as well as me, when you're travelling
upon them, plase your honour? And
sure, they'd never be got made at all,
if they wer'nt made this ways; and it's
the best way in the wide world, and
the finest roads we have. And when
the rael jantlemen's resident in the
country, there's no jobbing can be,
because they're then the leading men
on the grand jury; and these journey-men
jantlemen are then kept in order,
and all's right.”

Lord Colambre was much surprised
at Larry's knowledge of the manner in
which county business is managed, as
well as by his shrewd good sense: he
did not know, that this is not uncommon
in his rank of life in Ireland.
Whilst Larry was speaking, lord Colambre
was looking from side to side
at the desolation of the prospect.
“So this is lord Clonbrony's estate,
is it?”
“Ay, all you see, and as far, and
farther than you can see. My lord
Clonbrony wrote, and ordered plantations
here, time back; and enough
was paid to labourers for ditching and
planting.—And, what next?—Why,
what did the under-agent do, but let
the goats in through gaps, left o' purpose,
to bark the trees, and then the
trees was all banished. And next, the
cattle was let in trespassing, and winked
at, till the land was all poached: and
then the land was waste, and cried

down: and Saint Dennis wrote up to
Dublin to old Nick, and he over to the
landlord, how none would take it, or
bid any thing at all for it: so then it
fell to him a cheap bargain.—O, the
tricks of them! who knows 'em, if I
don't?”
Presently, lord Colambre's attention
was roused again, by seeing a man running,
as if for his life, across a bog,
near the road-side: he leaped over
the ditch, and was upon the road in an
instant. He seemed startled at first,
at the sight of the carriage; but, looking
at the postillion, Larry nodded, and
he smiled and said,
“All's safe!”
“Pray, my good friend, may I ask,
what that is you have on your shoulder?” 
said lord Colambre.
“Plase your honour, it is only a
private still, which I've just caught out
yonder in the bog; and I'm carrying it
in with all speed to the gauger, to

make a discovery, that the jantleman
may benefit by the reward: I expect
he'll make me a compliment.”
“Get up behind, and I'll give you a
lift,” said the postillion.
“Thank you kindly—but better my
legs!” said the man; and, turning
down a lane, off he ran again, as fast as
possible.
“Expect he'll make me a compliment!” 
repeated lord Colambre, “to
make a discovery.”
“Ay, plase your honour; for the
law is,” said Larry, “that, if an unlawful
still, that is, a still without license
for whiskey, is found, half the
benefit of the fine, that's put upon the
parish, goes to him that made the discovery:
that's what that man is after; 
for he's an informer.”
“I should not have thought, from
what I see of you,” said lord Colambre,
smiling, “that you, Larry, would have
offered an informer a lift.”
“Oh, plase your honour!” said

Larry, smiling archly, “would not I
give the laws a lift, when in my power?”
Scarcely had he uttered these words,
and scarcely was the informer out of
sight, when, across the same bog, and
over the ditch, came another man, a
half kind of gentleman, with a red silk
handkerchief about his neck, and a
silver-handled whip in his hand.
“Did you see any man pass the
road, friend?” said he, to the postillion.
“O! who would I see? or why
would I tell?” replied Larry, in a
sulky tone.
“Come, come, be smart!” said the
man with the silver whip, offering to
put half a crown into the postillion's
hand;—“point me which way he
took.”
“I'll have none o'your silver! don't
touch me with it!” said Larry.—“But
if you'll take my advice, you'll strike
across back, and follow the fields, out
to Killogenesawee.”

The exciseman set out again immediately,
in an opposite direction to that
which the man who carried the still had
taken. Lord Colambre now perceived,
that the pretended informer had been
running off to conceal a still of his
own.
“The gauger, plase your honour,” 
said Larry, looking back at lord Colambre; 
“the gauger is a still-hunting!”
“And you put him on a wrong
scent!” said lord Colambre.
“Sure, I told him no lie: I only
said, ‘If you'll take my advice.’ And
why was he such a fool as to take my
advice, when I wouldn't take his
fee?”
“So this is the way, Larry, you give
a lift to the laws!”
“If the laws would give a lift to me,
plase your honour, may be I'd do as
much by them. But it's only these
revenue laws I mean; for I never, to
my knowledge, broke another commandment:

but it's what no honest,
poor man among his neighbours would
scruple to take—a glass of potsheen.
“A glass of what, in the name of
Heaven?” said lord Colambre.
“Potsheen, plase your honour;—becaase
it's the little whiskey that's made
in the private still or pot; and sheen,
becaase it's a fond word for whatsoever
we'd like, and for what we have little
of and would make much of: after
taking the glass of it, no man could go
and inform to ruin the craturs; for they
all shelter on that estate under favour
of them that go shares, and make rent
of 'em—But I'd never inform again 'em.
And after all, if the truth was known,
and my lord Clonbrony should be informed
against, and presented, for it's
his neglect is the bottom of the nuisance.”— 
“I find all the blame is thrown upon
this poor lord Clonbrony,”—said lord
Colambre.
“Becaase he is absent,” said Larry.

—“It would not be so was he prisint.
—But your honour was talking to me
about the laws.—Your honour's a
stranger in this country, and astray
about them things.—Sure, why would
I mind the laws about whiskey, more
than the quality, or the judge on the
bench?”
“What do you mean?”
Why! was not I prisint in the court-house
myself, when the jidge was on
the bench judging a still, and across
the court came in one with a sly jug of
potsheen for the jidge himself, who prefarred
it when the right thing to claret; 
and when I seen that, by the laws! a
man might talk himself dumb to me
after again' potsheen, or in favour of
the revenue, or revenue-officers. And
there they may go on, with their
gaugers, and their surveyors, and their
supervisors, and their watching-officers,
and their coursing-officers, setting 'em
one after another, or one over the head
of another, or what way they will—we

can baffle and laugh at 'em. Did'n't
I know, next door to our inn, last
year, ten watching-officers set upon one
distiller, and he was too cunning for
them; and it will always be so, while
ever the people think it no sin.—No,
till then, not all their dockets and permits
signify a rush, or a turf.—And the
gauging rod even! who fears it? They
may spare that rod, for it will never
mend the child.”
How much longer Larry's dissertation
on the distillery laws would have
continued, had not his ideas been interrupted,
we cannot guess; but he
saw he was coming to a town, and he
gathered up the reins and plied the
whip, ambitious to make a figure in
the eyes of it's inhabitants.
This town consisted of one row of
miserable huts, sunk beneath the side
of the road, the mud walls crooked in
every direction; some of them opening
in wide cracks, or zigzag fissures, from
top to bottom, as if there had just been

an earthquake—all the roofs sunk in
various places—thatch off, or overgrown
with grass—no chimnies, the
smoke making its way through a
hole in the roof, or rising in clouds
from the top of the open door—dung-hills
before the doors, and green standing
puddles—squalid children, with
scarcely rags to cover them, gazing at
the carriage.
“Nugent's town,” said the postillion,
“once a snug place, when my lady
Clonbrony was at home to white-wash
it, and the like.
As they drove by, some men and
women put their heads through the
smoke out of the cabins; pale women,
with long, black, or yellow locks—men
with countenances and figures bereft of
hope and energy.
“Wretched! wretched people!” said
lord Colambre.
“Then it's not their fault neither,” 
said Larry; “for my own uncle's one
of them, and as thriving and hard a

working man as could be in all Ireland,
he was, afore he was tramped under
foot, and his heart broke. I was at his
funeral, this time last year; and for it,
may the agent's own heart, if he has
any, burn—.”
Lord Colambre interrupted this denunciation
by touching Larry's shoulder,
and asking some question, which as
Larry did not distinctly comprehend, he
pulled up the reins, and the various
noises of the vehicle stopped suddenly.
“I did not hear well, plase your honour.”
“What are those people?” pointing
to a man and woman, curious figures,
who had come out of a cabin, the door
of which the woman, who came out last,
locked, and carefully hiding the key in
the thatch, turned her back upon the
man, and they walked away in different
directions: the woman bending under a
huge bundle on her back, covered by a
yellow petticoat turned over her shoulders; 
from the top of this bundle the

head of an infant appeared; a little boy,
almost naked, followed her with a kettle,
and two girls, one of whom could
but just walk, held her hand and clung
to her ragged petticoat, forming altogether
a complete groupe of beggars. The
woman stopped, and looked back after
the man.
The man was a Spanish looking figure,
with gray hair, a wallet hung at the
end of a stick over one shoulder, a reaping-hook
in the other hand; he walked
off stoutly, without ever casting a look
behind him.
“A kind harvest to you, John Dolan,” 
cried the postillion, “and success
to ye, Winny, with the quality.
There's a luck-penny for the child to
begin with,” added he, throwing the
child a penny. “Your honour, they're
only poor craturs going up the country
to beg, while the man goes over to reap
the harvest in England. Nor this would
not be, neither, if the lord was in it to
give 'em employ. That man now was a

good and a willing slave in his day: I mind
him working with myself in the shrubberies
at Clonbrony castle, when I was a
boy,—but I'll not be detaining your honour,
now the road's better.”
The postillion drove on at a good rate
for some time, till he came to a piece of
the road freshly covered with broken
stones, where he was obliged again to go
slowly.
They overtook a string of cars, on
which were piled up high, beds, tables,
chairs, trunks, boxes, band-boxes.
“How are you Finnucan? you've fine
loading there—from Dublin, are you?”
“From Bray.”
“And what news?”
“Great news and bad, for old Nick,
or some belonging to him, thanks be to
Heaven, for myself hates him.”
“What's happened him?”
“His sister's husband that's failed; 
the great grocer that was, the man that
had the wife that ow'd  the fine house

near Bray, that they got that time the
parliament flitted, and that I seen in her
carriage flaming—well it's all out,
they're all done up.”
“Tut! is that all? then they'll
thrive, and set up again grander than
ever, I'll engage: have not they old
Nick for an attorney at their back? a
good warrant.”
“Oh trust him for that, he won't go
security nor pay a farthing for his shister,
nor wouldn't was she his father; I
heard him telling her so, which I could
not have done in his place at that time,
and she crying as if her heart would
break, and I standing by in the parlour.”
“The neger ! And did he speak that
way and you by?”
“Ay did he, and said, ‘Mrs. Raffarty,’ 
says he, ‘It's all your own fault; 
you're an extravagant fool, and ever
was, and I wash my hands of you:’ that
was the word he spoke; and she answered
and said, ‘And mayn't I send

the beds and blankets, said she, and
what I can, by the cars, out of the way
of the creditors, to Clonbrony castle; 
and won't you let me hide there from
the shame, till the bustle's over?’ ‘You
may do that,’ says he, ‘for what I care; 
but remember, says he, ‘that I've the
first claim to them goods;” and that's
all he would grant. So they are coming
down all o'Monday,—them are her band-boxes
and all, to settle it,—and faith it
was a pity of her! to hear her sobbing,
and to see her own brother speak and
look so hard! and she a lady.”
“Sure she's not a lady born, no more
than himself,” said Larry, “but that's
no excuse for him. His heart's as hard
as that stone,” said Larry; “and my
own people knew that long ago, and
now his own know it: and what right
have we to complain, since he's as bad
to his own flesh and blood as to us.”
With this consolation, and with a
“God speed you,” given to the carman,
Larry was driving off, but the carman

called to him, and pointed to a
house, at the corner of which, on a high
pole, was swinging an iron sign of three
horseshoes, set in a crooked frame, and
at the window hung an empty bottle, proclaiming
whiskey within.
“Well, I don't care if I do,” said Larry; 
“for I've no other comfort left me
in life now. I beg your honour's pardon,
sir, for a minute,” added he, throwing
the reins into the carriage to lord
Colambre, as he leaped down. All remonstrance
and power of lungs to reclaim
him vain! He darted into the
whiskey-house with the carman—reappeared
before lord Colambre could accomplish
getting out, remounted his seat,
and, taking the reins, “I thank your honour,” 
said he, “and I'll bring you into
Clonbrony before it's pitch-dark yet; 
though it's night fall, and that's four
good miles, but ‘a spur in the head is
worth two in the heel.”
Larry, to demonstrate the truth of
his favourite axiom, drove off at such

a furious rate over great stones left in
the middle of the road by carmen, who
had been driving in the gudgeons of
their axletrees to hinder them from
lacing , that lord Colambre thought
life and limb in imminent danger; and
feeling that at all events the jolting and
bumping was past endurance, he had recourse
to Larry's shoulder and shook
and pulled, and called to him to go
slower, but in vain; at last the wheel
struck full against a heap of stones at a
turn of the road, the wooden linch-pin
came off, and the chaise was overset:
lord Colambre was a little bruised, but
glad to escape without fractured bones.
“I beg your honour's pardon,” said
Larry, completely sobered; “I'm as glad
as the best pair of boots ever I see, to see
your honour nothing the worse for it.
It was the linch-pin, and them barrows
of loose stones, that ought to be fined
any way, if there was any justice in the
country.”

“The pole is broke, how are we to
get on,” said lord Colambre.
“Murder! murder!—and no smith
nearer than Clonbrony; nor rope even.
It's a folly to talk, we can't get to
Clonbrony, nor stir a step backward or
forward the night.”
“What then, do you mean to leave
me all night in the middle of the road?” 
cried lord Colambre, quite exasperated.
“Is it me! please your honour. I
would not use any jantleman so ill, barring
I could do no other,” replied the
postillion, coolly; then, leaping across
the ditch, or as he called it the gripe of
the ditch, he scrambled up, and while
he was scrambling said, “If your honour
will lend me your hand till I pull
you up the back of the ditch, the horses
will stand while we go. I'll find you as
pretty a lodging for the night, with a
widow of a brother of my shister's husband
that was, as ever you slept in
your life; for old Nick or St. Dennis
has not found 'em out yet; and your

honour will be, no compare, snugger
than the inn at Clonbrony, which has
no roof, the devil a stick. But where
will I get your honour's hand; for it's
coming on so dark, I can't see rightly.
There, you're up now safe. Yonder candle's
the house.”
“Go and ask whether they can give
us a night's lodging.”
“Is it ask? When I see the light!— 
Sure they'd be proud to give the traveller
all the beds in the house, let alone one.
Take care of the potato furrows, that's
all, and follow me straight. I'll go on
to meet the dog, who knows me and
might be strange to your honour.”
“Kindly welcome,” were the first
words lord Colambre heard when he approached
the cottage; and “kindly
welcome” was in the sound of the voice
and in the countenance of the old woman
who came out, shading her rush-candle
from the wind, and holding it so
as to light the path. When he entered
the cottage, he saw a cheerful fire and a

neat pretty young woman making it
blaze: she curtsied, put her spinning
wheel out of the way, set a stool by
the fire for the stranger; and repeating
in a very low tone of voice, “Kindly
welcome, sir,” retired.
“Put down some eggs, dear, there's
plenty in the bowl,” said the old woman,
calling to her; “I'll do the bacon.
Was not we lucky to be up?— 
The boy's gone to bed, but waken him,” 
said she, turning to the postillion; “and
he'll help you with the chay, and put
your horses in the bier for the night.”
No: Larry choose to go on to Clonbrony
with the horses, that he might
get the chaise mended betimes for his
honour. The table was set; clean
trenchers, hot potatoes, milk, eggs, bacon,
and “kindly welcome to all.”
“Set the salt, dear; and the butter,
love; where's your head, Grace, dear?”
“Grace!” repeated lord Colambre,
looking up; and to apologise for his involuntary

exclamation he added, “Is
Grace a common name in Ireland?”
“I can't say, plase your honour, but
it was give her by lady Clonbrony, from
a niece of her own that was her foster-sister,
God bless her: and a very kind
lady she was to us and to all when she
was living in it; but those times are
gone past,” said the old woman, with
a sigh. The young woman sighed too; 
and sitting down by the fire, began to
count the notches in a little bit of
stick, which she held in her hand; and
after she had counted them, sighed
again.
“But don't be sighing, Grace, now,” 
said the old woman; “sighs is bad sauce
for the traveller's supper; and we won't
be troubling him with more,” added she,
turning to lord Colambre, with a smile,
“Is your egg done to your liking?”
“Perfectly, thank you.”
“Then I wish it was a chicken for
your sake, which it should have been,

and roast too, had we time. I wish I
could see you eat another egg.”
“No more, thank you, my good
lady; I never ate a better supper, nor
received a more hospitable welcome.”
“O, the welcome is all we have to
offer.”
“May I ask what that is?” said lord
Colambre, looking at the notched stick,
which the young woman held in her
hand, and on which her eyes were still
fixed.
“It's a tally, plase your honour.— 
O, you're a foreigner—It's the way
the labourers do keep the account of the
day's work with the overseer, the bailiff; 
a notch for every day, the bailiff
makes on his stick, and the labourer the
like on his stick to tally; and when we
come to make up the account, it's by
the notches we go. And there's been
a mistake, and is a dispute here between
our boy and the overseer; and
she was counting the boy's tally, that's

in bed, tired, for in troth he's overworked.”
“Would you want any thing more
from me, mother,” said the girl, rising
and turning her head away.
“No, child; get away, for your
heart's full.”
She went instantly.
“Is the boy her brother?” said lord
Colambre.
“No: he's her bachelor,” said the
old woman, lowering her voice.
“Her bachelor?”
“That is, her sweetheart: for she is
not my daughter, though you heard her
call me mother. The boy's my son; but
I am afeard they must give it up; for
they're too poor, and the times is
hard, and the agent's harder than the
times. There's two of them, the under
and the upper; and they grind the substance
of one between them, and then
blow one away like chaff: but we'll not
be talking of that to spoil your honour's

night's rest. The room's ready, and
here's the rush-light.”
She showed him into a very small,
but neat room. “What a comfortable
looking bed,” said lord Colambre.
“Ah, these red check curtains,” said
she, letting them down; “these have
lasted well; they were give me by a
good friend now far away, over the seas,
my lady Clonbrony; and made by the
prettiest hands ever you see, her niece's,
miss Grace Nugent's, and she a little
child that time; sweet love! all gone!”
The old woman wiped a tear from her
eye, and lord Colambre did what he
could to appear indifferent. She set
down the candle and left the room; lord
Colambre went to bed, but he lay awake,
“revolving sweet and bitter thoughts.”