



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

My plaindealing with him, on seeing him again,
and the free dislike I expressed to his ways, his
manners, and his contrivances, as well as to his
speeches, have obliged him to recollect himself a little. 
He will have it, that the menaces which he threw out
just now against my brother and Mr. Solmes, are only
the effect of an unmeaning pleasantry. He has too
great a stake in his country, he says, to be guilty of
such enterprizes, as should lay him under a necessity
of quitting it for ever. Twenty things, particularly,
he says, he has suffer'd Joseph Leman to tell of him,
that were not and could not be true, in order to make
himself formidable in some peoples eyes, and this
purely with a view to prevent mischief. He is unhappy,
as far as he knows, in a quick invention, in
hitting readily upon expedients; and many things are
reported of him which he never said, and many which
he never did, and others which he has only talked of
(as just now) and which he has forgot as soon as the
words have passed his lips. 
This may be so, in part, my dear. No one man
so young could be so wicked as he has been reported
to be. But such a man at the head of such wretches
as he is said to have at his beck, all men of fortune and
fearlesness, and capable of such enterprizes as I have
unhappily sound him capable of, what is not to be apprehended
from him! 
His carelessness about his character is one of his
excuses: A very bad one. What hope can a woman
have of a man, who values not his reputation? — 
These gay wretches may, in mix'd conversation,
divert for an hour, or so: —But the man of probity,
the man of virtue, is the man that is to be the partner
for life. What woman, who could help it, would 

submit it to the courtesy of a wretch, who avows a
disregard to all moral sanctions, whether he will perform
his part of the matrimonial obligation, and treat
her with tolerable politeness? 
With these notions, and with these reflections, to
be thrown upon such a man myself—Would to Heaven
—But what avail wishes now? —To whom can I fly,
if I would fly from him? 