



Dear Father and Mother,
I shall write on, as long as I stay, tho' I
should have nothing but Sillinesses to write; 
for I know you divert yourselves on Nights 

with what I write, because it is mine. John
tells me how much you long for my coming; 
but he says, he told you, he hop'd something
would happen to hinder it. 
I am glad you did not tell him the Occasion
of my coming away; for were my Fellow-servants
to guess, it were better so, than to have it
from you or me: Besides, I really am concern'd,
that my Master should cast away a
Thought upon such a poor Creature as me; for
besides the Disgrace, it has quite turn'd his
Temper; and I begin to believe what Mrs.
Jervis told me, that he likes me, and can't
help it; and yet strives to conquer it, and so
finds no way but to be cross to me. 
Don't think me presumptuous and conceited; 
for it is more my Concern than my
Pride, to see such a Gentleman so demean
himself, and lessen the Regard he used to have
in the Eyes of his Servants, on my Account. –––But I am to tell you of my new Dress To-day. 
And so, when I had din'd, up-stairs I went,
and lock'd myself into my little Room. There
I trick'd myself up as well as I could in my
new Garb, and put on my round-ear'd ordinary
Cap; but with a green Knot, however,
and my home-spun Gown and Petticoat, and
plain-leather Shoes; but yet they are what they
call Spanish Leather, and my ordinary Hose,
ordinary I mean to what I have been lately
used to; tho' I shall think good Yarn may do
very well for every Day, when I come home. 
A plain Muslin Tucker I put on, and my black 

Silk Necklace, instead of the French Necklace
my Lady gave me; and put the Ear-rings out
of my Ears; and when I was quite 'quipp'd, I
took my Straw Hat in my Hand, with its two
blue Strings, and look'd about me in the
Glass, as proud as any thing. —To say Truth,
I never lik'd myself so well in my Life. 
O the Pleasure of descending with Ease,
Innocence, and Resignation! —Indeed there is
nothing like it! An humble Mind, I plainly
see, cannot meet with any very shocking Disappointment,
let Fortune's Wheel turn round
as it will. 
So I went down to look for Mrs. Jervis, to
see how she lik'd me. 
I met, as I was upon the Stairs, our Rachel,
who is the House-maid; and she made me
a low Court'sy, and I found did not know me. 
So I smil'd, and went to the House-keeper's
Parlour: And there sat good Mrs. Jervis at
Work, making a Shift: And, would you believe
it? she did not know me at first; but rose
up, and pull'd off her Spectacles; and said,
Do you want me, forsooth? I could not help
laughing, and said, Hey-day! Mrs. Jervis,
what! don't you know me? —She stood all in
Amaze, and look'd at me from Top to Toe; 
Why, you surprise me, said she; what! Pamela!
thus metamorphos'd! How came this about? 
As it happen'd, in stepp'd my Master; and
my Back being to him, he thought it was a
Stranger speaking to Mrs. Jervis, and withdrew
again; and did not hear her ask, If his 

Honour had any Commands with her? —She
turn'd me about and about, and I shew'd her all
my Dress, to my Under-petticoat; and she
said, sitting down, Why, I am all in Amaze:
I must sit down. What can all this mean? I
told her, I had no Cloaths suitable to my Condition,
when I return'd to my Father's; and so
it was better to begin here, as I was soon to go
away, that all my Fellow-servants might see I
knew how to suit myself to the State I was
returning to. 
Well, said she, I never knew the like of
thee. But this sad Preparation for going away,
(for now I see you are quite in Earnest) is what
I know not how to get over. O my dear
Pamela, how can I part with you! 
My Master rung in the Back-parlour, and so
I withdrew, and Mrs. Jervis went to attend
him. It seems, he said to her, I was coming in
to let you know that I shall go to Lincolnshire,
and, may-be, to my Sister Davers's, and be
absent some Weeks. But, pray, what pretty
neat Damsel was that with you? She says, she
smil'd, and ask'd, If his Honour did not know
who it was? No, said he, I never saw her
before. Farmer Nichols, or Farmer Brady,
have neither of them such a tight prim Lass
for a Daughter; have they? —Tho' I did not
see her Face neither, said he. If your Honour
won't be angry, said she, I will introduce her
into your Presence; for, I think, says she, she
out-does our Pamela. 

Now I did not thank her for this, as I told
her afterwards; for it brought a great deal of
Trouble upon me, as well as Crossness, as you
shall hear. That can't be, he was pleased to
say. But if you can find an Excuse for it, let
her come in. 
At that she stepp'd to me, and told me, I
must go in with her to my Master; but, said
she, for Goodness sake, let him find you out; 
for he don't know you. O fie, Mrs. Jervis,
said I, how could you serve me so? Besides, it
looks too free both in me, and to him. I tell
you, said she, you shall come in; and pray don't
reveal yourself till he finds you out. 
So I went in, foolish as I was; tho' I must
have been seen by him another time, if I had
not then. And she would make me take my
Straw Hat in my Hand. 
I dropp'd a low Court'sy, but said never a
Word. I dare say, he knew me as soon as he
saw my Face; but was as cunning as Lucifer. 
He came up to meet me, and took me by the
Hand, and said, Whose pretty Maiden are you? 
—I dare say you are Pamela's Sister, you are
so like her: So neat, so clean, so pretty! Why,
Child, you far surpass your Sister Pamela! 
I was all Confusion, and would have
spoken; but he took me about the Neck; 
Why, said he, you are very pretty, Child:
I would not be so free with your Sister, you
may believe; but I must kiss you. 
O Sir, said I, I am Pamela, indeed I am:
Indeed I am Pamela, her own self! 

He kissed me, for all I could do; and said,
Impossible! you are a lovelier Girl by half
than Pamela; and sure I may be innocently
free with you, tho' I would not do her so much
Favour. 
This was a sad Bite upon me indeed, and
what I could not expect; and Mrs. Jervis look'd
like a Fool, as much as I, for her Officiousness. 
—At last I got away, and ran out of the Parlour,
most sadly vex'd, as you may well think. 
He talk'd a good deal to Mrs. Jervis, and
at last order'd me to come in to him: Come
in, said he, you little Villain! for so he call'd
me; Good-sirs! what a Name was there! Who
is it you put your Tricks upon; I was resolv'd
never to honour your Unworthiness, said he,
with so much Notice again; and so you must
disguise yourself, to attract me, and yet pretend,
like an Hypocrite as you are— 
I was out of Patience, then; Hold, good
Sir, said I; don't impute Disguise and Hypocrisy
to me, above all things; for I hate them both,
mean as I am, I have put on no Disguise. — 
What a-plague, said he, for that was his Word,
do you mean then by this Dress? —Why, and
please your Honour, said I, I mean one of the
honestest things in the world. I have been in
Disguise indeed ever since my good Lady your
Mother took me from my poor Parents. I came
to her Ladyship so poor and mean, that these
Cloaths I have on, are a princely Suit, to those
I had then. And her Goodness heap'd upon
me rich Cloaths, and other Bounties: And as I 

am now returning to my poor Parents again so
soon, I cannot wear those good things without
being whooted at; and so have bought what
will be more suitable to my Degree, and be a
good Holiday-suit too when I get home. 
He then took me in his Arms, and presently
push'd me from him. Mrs. Jervis, said he,
take the little Witch from me; I can neither
bear, nor forbear her! (Strange Words these!) 
–––But stay; you shan't go! —Yet begone! —No, come back again. 
I thought he was mad, for my Share; 
for he knew not what he would have. I was
going, however; but he stepp'd after me, and
took hold of my Arm, and brought me in
again: I am sure he made my Arm black and
blue; for the Marks are upon it still. Sir, Sir,
said I, pray have Mercy; I will, I will come
in. 
He sat down, and look'd at me, and, as I
thought afterwards, as sillily as such a poor
Girl as I. At last, he said, Well, Mrs. Jervis,
as I was telling you, you may permit her to
stay a little longer, till I see if my Sister Davers
will have her; if, mean time, she humble herself,
and ask this as a Favour, and is sorry for
her Pertness, and the Liberty she has taken with
my Character, out of the House, and in the
House. Your Honour indeed told me so, said
Mrs. Jervis; but I never found her inclinable
to think herself in a Fault. Pride and Perverseness,
said he, with a Vengeance! Yet this is
your Doating-piece!––– Well, for once I'll 

submit myself, to tell you, Hussy, said he to
me, you may stay a Fortnight longer, till I see
my Sister Davers: Do you hear what I say to
you, Statue! Can you neither speak, nor be
thankful?––– Your Honour frights me so, said
I, that I can hardly speak: But I will venture
to say, that I have only to beg, as a Favour,
that I may go to my Father and Mother. — 
Why, Fool, said he, won't you like to go to
wait on my Sister Davers? Sir, said I, I was
once fond of that Honour; but you were
pleased to say, I might be in Danger from her
Ladyship's Nephew, or he from me. —D&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;d
Impertinence! said he; do you hear, Mrs. Jervis,
do you hear, how she retorts upon me? 
Was ever such matchless Assurance!— 
I then fell a weeping; for Mrs. Jervis
said, Fie, Pamela, fie! —And I said, My
Lot is very hard indeed! I am sure I would hurt
nobody; and I have been, it seems, guilty of
Indiscretions, which have cost me my Place,
and my Master's Favour, and so have been
turn'd away. And when the Time is come,
that I should return to my poor Parents, I am
not suffer'd to go quietly. Good your Honour,
what have I done; that I must be used worse
than if I had robb'd you! –––Robb'd me! said
he; why so you have, Hussy; you have robb'd
me. Who! I, Sir! said I; have I robb'd you? 
Why then you are a Justice of Peace, and may
send me to Gaol, if you please, and bring me
to a Tryal for my Life! —If you can prove, that
I have robb'd you, I am sure I ought to die. 

Now I was quite ignorant of his Meaning; 
tho' I did not like it, when it was afterwards
explain'd, neither; and, well, thought I,
what will this come to at last, if poor Pamela
is esteem'd a Thief! Then I thought, in an Instant,
how I should shew my Face to my honest
poor Parents, if I was only suspected. 
But, Sir, said I, let me just ask you one
Question, and pray let me not be call'd
Names for it; for I don't mean disrespectfully:
Why, if I have done amiss, am I not left to
be discharg'd by your House-keeper, as the other
Maids have been? And if Jane, or Rachel, or
Hannah, were to offend, would your Honour
stoop to take Notice of them? And why should
you so demean yourself to take Notice of me? 
Pray, Sir, if I have not been worse than others,
why should I suffer more than others? and why
should I not be turn'd away, and there's an
End of it? For indeed I am not of Consequence
enough for my Master to concern himself, and
be angry, about such a Creature as me. 
Do you hear, Mrs. Jervis, cry'd he again,
how pertly I am interrogated by this saucy Slut? 
Why, Sauce-box, says he, did not my good
Mother desire me to take care of you? And have
you not been always distinguish'd by me, above
a common Servant? And does your Ingratitude
upbraid me for this? 
I said something mutteringly, and he vow'd
he would hear it. I begg'd Excuse; but he
insisted upon it. Why then, reply'd I, if your
Honour must know, I said, That my good Lady 

did not desire your Care to extend to the Summer-house
and her Dressing-room. 
Well, this was a little saucy, you'll say! –––And he flew into such a Passion, that I was
forc'd to run for it; and Mrs. Jervis said, It
was happy I got out of his Way. 
Why what makes him provoke one so,
then? —I'm almost sorry for it; but I would
be glad to get away at any rate: For I begin to
be more fearful now. 
Just now Mr. Jonathan sent me these
Lines—(Bless me! what shall I do?) 
“Dear Mrs. Pamela, Take care of yourself; 
for Rachel heard my Master say to Mrs. Jervis,
who, she believes, was pleading for
you, Say no more, Mrs. Jervis; for by G&wblank; 
I will have her. Burn this instantly.” 
O pray for your poor Daughter! I am
call'd to go to-bed by Mrs. Jervis; for it is past
Eleven; and I am sure she shall hear of it; for
all this is owing to her, tho' she did not mean
any Harm. But I have been, and am, in a
strange Fluster; and I suppose too, she'll say, I
have been full-pert. 
O my dear Father and Mother, Power and
Riches never want Advocates: But, poor Gentlewoman!
she cannot live without him: And
he has been very good to her. 
So Good-night. May-be I shall send this in
the Morning? but may-be not; so won't conclude:
tho' I can't say too often, that I am (tho'
with great Apprehensions) 
Your most dutiful Daughter. 

