



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Friday, March 3. 
I have both your Letters at once. It is very
unhappy, my dear, since your friends will have
you marry, that a person of your merit should be addressed 

by a succession of worthless creatures, who
have nothing but their presumption for their excuse. 
That these presumers appear not in this very unworthy
light to some of your friends, is, because their
defects are not so striking to them as to others. —And
why? Shall I venture to tell you? —Because they are
nearer their own standard. —Modesty, after all, perhaps
has a concern in it; for how should they think,
that a Niece or a Sister of theirs [I will not go higher,
for fear of incurring your displeasure] should be an
angel? 
But where indeed is the man to be found (who has
the least share of due diffidence) that dares to look up
to Miss Clarissa Harlowe with hope, or with any-thing
but wishes? Thus the bold and forward, not being
sensible of their defects, aspire; while the modesty of
the really worthy fills them with too much reverence
to permit them to explain themselves. Hence your
Symmes's, your Byron's, your Mullins's, your Wyerley's
(the best of the herd) and your Solmes's, in
turn, invade you—Wretches that, looking upon the
rest of your family, need not despair of succeeding
in an alliance with it—But, to you, what an inexcuseable
presumption! 
Yet I am afraid all opposition will be in vain. You
must, you will, I doubt, be sacrificed to this odious
man. I know your family. There will be no resisting
such baits as he has thrown out. O, my dear,
my beloved friend! and are such charming qualities,
is such exalted merit, to be sunk in such a Marriage! 
—You must not, your Uncle tells my Mother, dispute
their authority. Authority! what a full
word is that in the mouth of a narrow-minded person,
who happened to be born thirty years before
one! —Of your Uncles I speak; for as to the Parental
authority, That ought to be sacred. —But should
not Parents have reason for what they do? 
Wonder not, however, at your Bell's un-sisterly 

behaviour in this affair: I have a particular to add to
the inducements your insolent Brother is governed by,
which will account for all her driving. You have
already owned, that her outward eye was from the
first struck with the figure and address of the man
whom she pretends to despise, and who, 'tis certain,
thoroughly despises her: But you have not told me,
that still she loves him of all men. Bell has a meanness
in her very pride; that meanness rises with her
pride, and goes hand in hand with it; and no one is
so proud as Bell. She has owned her Love, her uneasy
days, and sleepless nights, and her revenge grafted
upon her Love, to her favourite Betty Barnes. —To
lay herself in the power of a servant's tongue! Poor
creature! —But LIKE little souls will find one another
out, and mingle, as well as LIKE great ones. 
This however she told the wench in strict confidence: 
And thus, by way of the female round-about, as Lovelace
had the sauciness on such another occasion, in
ridicule of our Sex, to call it, Betty (pleased to be
thought worthy of a secret, and to have an opportunity
of inveighing against Lovelace's perfidy, as she
would have it to be) told it to one of her confidants: 
That confidant, with like injunctions of secrecy, to
Miss Lloyd's Harriot—Harriot to Miss Lloyd—Miss
Lloyd to me—I to you—with leave to make what
you please of it. 
And now you will not wonder to find in Miss Bell
an implacable Rival, rather than an affectionate Sister; 
and will be able to account for the words Witchcraft,
Syren, and such-like, thrown out against you; and
for her driving on for a fixed day for sacrificing you
to Solmes: In short, for her rudeness and violence of
every kind. 
What a sweet revenge will she take, as well upon
Lovelace as upon you, if she can procure her rival
Sister to be married to the man that Sister hates; and
so prevent her having the man whom she herself loves 

(whether she have hope of him or not) and whom she
suspects her Sister loves! 
Poisons and poniards have often been set to work
by minds inflamed by disappointed Love, and actuated
by Revenge—Will you wonder then, that the ties of
relationship in such a case have no force, and that a
Sister forgets to be a Sister? 
Now I know This to be her secret motive (the
more grating to her, as her Pride is concerned to
make her disavow it) and can consider it as joined
with her former Envy, and as strengthened by a Brother,
who has such an ascendant over the whole family; 
and whose Interest (slave to it as he always
was) engaged him to ruin you with every one: Both
possessed of the ears of all your family, and having
it as much in their power as in their will, to misrepresent
all you say, all you do; such subjects also as
the Rencounter, and Lovelace's want of morals, to
expatiate upon: Your whole family likewise avowedly
attached to the odious man by means of the captivating
proposals he has made them;—When I consider
all these things, I am full of apprehensions
for you. —O my dear, how will you be able to maintain
your ground? —I am sure, (alas! I am too sure)
that they will subdue such a fine spirit as yours, unused
to opposition; and (Tell it not in Gath) you
must be Mrs. Solmes! 
Mean time, it is now easy, as you will observe, to
guess from what quarter the report I mentioned to
you in one of my former, came, That the younger
Sister has robbed the elder of her Lover (a) : For
Betty whispered it, at the time she whispered the rest,
that neither Lovelace nor you had done honourably
by her young mistress. —How cruel, my dear, in you,
to rob the poor Bella of the only Lover she ever had! 
—At the instant too that she was priding herself, that
now at last she should have it in her power not only 

to gratify her own Susceptibilities, but to give an
example to the Flirts of her Sex (a)  (my worship's
self in her eye) how to govern their man with a
silken rein, and without a kerb-bridle! 
Upon the whole, I have now no doubt of their
persevering in favour of the despicable Solmes; and
of their dependence upon the gentleness of your temper,
and the regard you have for their favour, and for
your own reputation. And now I am more than
ever convinced of the propriety of the advice I formerly
gave you, to keep in your own hands the
Estate bequeathed to you by your Grandfather. — 
Had you done so, it would have procured you at least
an outward respect from your Brother and Sister,
which would have made them conceal the envy and
ill-will that now are bursting upon you from hearts
so narrow. 
I must harp a little more upon this string—Do not
you observe, how much your Brother's influence has
overtopped yours, since he has got into fortunes so
considerable; and since you have given some of them
an appetite to continue in themselves the possession of
your Estate, unless you comply with their terms? 
I know your dutiful, your laudable motives; and
one would have thought, that you might have trusted
to a Father who so dearly loved you. But had you
been actually in possession of that Estate, and living
up to it, and upon it (your youth protected from
blighting tongues by the company of your prudent
Norton, as you had proposed) do you think that
your Brother, grudging it to you at the time as he
did, and looking upon it as his right as an only Son,
would have been practising about it, and aiming at
it? I told you some time ago, that I thought your
trials but proportioned to your prudence (b) : But
you will be more than woman, if you can extricate
yourself with honour, having such violent spirits and 

sordid minds in some, and such tyrannical and despotic
wills in others, to deal with. Indeed, all may be
done, and the world be taught further to admire you
for your blind duty and will-less resignation, if you
can persuade yourself to be Mrs. Solmes. 
I am pleased with the instances you give me of
Mr. Lovelace's benevolence to his own tenants, and
with his little gift to your Uncle's. Mrs. Fortescue
allows him to be the best of Landlords: I might have
told you That, had I thought it necessary to put you
into some little conceit of him. He has qualities, in
short, that may make him a tolerable creature on the
other side of Fifty: But God help the poor woman
to whose lot he shall fall till then! Women, I should
say, perhaps; since he may break half a dozen hearts
before that time. —But to the point I was upon—Shall
we not have reason to commend the tenant's grateful
honesty, if we are told, that with joy the poor man
called out your Uncle; and on the spot paid him in
part of his debt those two guineas? —But what shall
we say of that Landlord, who, tho' he knew the
poor man to be quite destitute, could take it; and,
saying nothing while Mr. Lovelace staid, as soon as
he was gone, tell of it, in praise of the poor fellow's
honesty? —Were this so, and were not that Landlord
related to my dearest friend, how should I despise
such a wretch? —But perhaps the Story is aggravated. 
Covetous people have every-one's ill-word: 
And so indeed they ought; because they are only
solicitous to keep that which they prefer to everyone's
good one. —Covetous indeed would they be who
deserved neither, yet expected both! 
I long for your next Letter. Continue to be as
particular as possible. I can think of no other subject
but what relates to you and to your affairs: For
I am, and ever will be, most affectionately, 
Your own,
Anna Howe. 