


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Tuesday, Mar. 21. 
Dr. Bartlett went to town yesterday. He returned
early enough to breakfast with us. He found
at dinner with his patron, the whole Danby family
and Mr. Sylvester; as also, the two masters of the
young gentlemen, with Mr. Galliard, whose son is in
love with Miss Danby, and she with him. There all
the parties had confirmed to them the generous goodness
of Sir Charles, of which he had assured Mr. Sylvester
and the two brothers and sister before. 
I am sorry, methinks, the doctor went to town:
We should otherwise, perhaps, have had the particulars
of all, from the pen of the benevolent man. 
Such joy, such admiration, such gratitude, the doctor
says, were expressed from every mouth, that his own
eyes, as well as Mr. Sylvester's, and most of those
present, more than once, were ready to overflow. 
Every-thing was there settled, and even a match
proposed by Sir Charles, and the proposal received
with approbation on both sides, between the elder Miss
Galliard, and that audacious young man the drug-merchant; 
who recovered, by his behaviour in this
meeting, his reputation with Sir Charles, and everybody. 
The doctor says, that Mr. Hervey and Mr. Poussin,
the two masters of the young gentlemen, are very
worthy men; so is Mr. Galliard: And they behaved
so handsomely on the occasion, that Sir Charles expressed
himself highly pleased with them all. For Mr.
Hervey and Mr. Galliard offered to accept of less
money than Sir Charles made the young people worth; 
the one for a portion with Miss Danby; the other for 

admitting the elder Danby into a partnership with
him, on his marriage with his niece: But Sir Charles
had no notion, he said, of putting young men, of
good characters and abilities, to difficulties at their entrance
into the world: The greatest expences, he observed,
were then incurred. In slight or scanty beginnings,
scanty plans must be laid, and pursued. 
Mr. Galliard then declared, that the younger Danby
should have the handsomer fortune with his daughter,
if she approved of him, for the very handsome one
Miss Danby would carry to his son. 
Sir Charles's example, in short, fired every one with
emulation; and three marriages, with the happiest
prospects, are likely very soon to follow these noble
instances of generosity. Mr. Sylvester proposed the
celebration on one day: In that case, the gentlemen
joined to hope Sir Charles would honour them with his
presence. He assentingly bowed. How many families
are here, at once, made happy! 
Dr. Bartlett, after he had given us this relation,
said, on our joining in one general blessing of his patron,
You know not, Ladies, you know not, my
Lord, what a general Philanthropist your brother is:
His whole delight is in doing good. It has always
been so: And to mend the hearts, as well as fortunes,
of men, is his glory. 
We could not but congratulate the doctor on his
having so considerable a hand (as Sir Charles always,
Lord L. said, delighted to own) in cultivating his
innate good principles, at so critical a time of life, as
that was, in which they became acquainted. 
The doctor very modestly received the compliment,
and, to wave our praises, gave us another instance
of the great manner in which Sir Charles conferred
benefits, as follows: 
He once, said the doctor, when his fortune was not
what it now is, lent a very honest man, a merchant
of Leghorn, when he resided there (as he did sometimes 

for a month or two together, for the conveniency
of the English chapel) a considerable sum; and took
his bond for it: After a while, things not answering
to the poor man's expectation, Mr. Grandison took
notice to me, said the doctor, that he appeared greatly
depressed and dejected, and occasionally came into his
company with such a sense of obligation in his countenance
and behaviour, that he could not bear it:
And why, said he, should I keep it in my power to
distress a man, whose modesty and diffidence shew,
that he deserves to be made easy? —I may die suddenly:
My executors may think it but justice to exact
payment: And that exaction may involve him in
as great difficulties as those were, from which the loan
delivered him. —I will make his heart light. Instead
of suffering him to sigh over his uncertain
prospects at his board, or in his bed, I will make both
his board and his bed easy to him. His wife and his
five children shall rejoice with him; they shall see the
good man's countenance, as it used to do, shine upon
them; and occasionally meet mine with grateful
comfort. 
He then cancelled the bond: And, at the same
time, fearing the man's distress might be deeper than he
owned, offered him the loan of a further sum. But,
by his behaviour upon it, I found, said Mr. Grandison,
that the sum he owed, and the doubt he had of being
able to pay it in time, were the whole of the honest
man's grievance. He declined, with gratitude, the
additional offer, and walked, ever after, erect. 
He is now living, and happy, proceeded the doctor; 
and, just before Mr. Grandison left Italy, would have
made him some part of payment, from the happier
turn in his affairs; which, probably, was owing to his
revived spirits: But Mr. Grandison asked, What he
thought he meant, when he cancelled the obligation? — 
Yet he told him, that it was not wrong in him to
make the tender: For free minds, he said, loved not
to be ungenerously dealt with. 

What a man is this, Lucy! 
No wonder, thus gloriously employed, with my Lord
W. and the Danby's, said Lord L. and perhaps in
other acts of goodness that we know nothing of, besides
the duties of his executorship, that we are deprived
of his company! But some of these, as he has
so good a friend as Dr. Bartlett, he might transfer to
him—and oblige us more with his presence; and the
rather, as he declares it would be obliging himself. 
Ah, my Lord! said the doctor, and looked round
him, his eyes dwelling longest on me—You don't
know—He stopped. We all were silent. He proceeded
—Sir Charles Grandison does nothing without
reason: A good man must have difficulties to encounter
with, that a mere man of the world would
not be embarrassed by. —But how I engage your attention,
Ladies!— 
The doctor arose; for breakfast was over—Dear
doctor, said Miss Grandison, don't leave us—As to
that Bologna, that Camilla, that Bishop—Tell us
more of them, dear doctor. 
Excuse me, Ladies; excuse me, my Lord. He
bowed, and withdrew. 
How we looked at one another! How the fool, in
particular, blushed! How her heart throbbed! —At
what?— 
But, Lucy, give me your opinion—Dr. Bartlett
guesses, that I am far from being indifferent to Sir
Charles Grandison: He must be assured, that my own
heart must be absolutely void of benevolence, if I did
not more and more esteem Sir Charles, for his: And
would Dr. Bartlett be so cruel, as to contribute to
a flame that, perhaps, is with difficulty kept from
blazing out, as one hears new instances of his generous
goodness, if he knew that Sir Charles Grandison
was so engaged, as to render it impossible— 
What shall I say? —O this cruel, cruel suspense! — 
What hopes, what fears, what contradictory conjectures! 

—But all will too soon perhaps—Here he is
come—Sir Charles Grandison is come— 
O no! —A false alarm! —He is not come: It is
only my Lord L. returned from an airing. 
I could beat this girl! this Emily! —It was owing
to her! —A chit! —How we have fluttered each
other! —But send for me down to Northamptonshire,
my dear friends, before I am quite a fool. 
* *
Pray—Do you know, Lucy, What is the business
that calls Mr. Deane to town, at this season of the
year? He has made a visit to Sir Charles Grandison:
For Dr. Bartlett told me, as a grateful compliment,
that Sir Charles was much pleased with him; yet
Mr. Deane did not tell me, that he designed it. I
beseech you, my dear friends—Do not—But you
would not; you could not! —I would be torn in pieces:
I would not accept of—I don't know what I would
say. Only add not disgrace to distress. —But I am
safe, if nothing be done but at the motion of my
grandmamma and aunt Selby. They would not permit
Mr. Deane, or any-body, to make improper visits. 
—But don't you think, that it must look particular
to Sir Charles, to have a visit paid him by a man
expressing for me so much undeserved tenderness and
affection, so long after the affair was over which
afforded him a motive for it? —I dread, as much for
Mr. Deane's sake as my own, every-thing that may
be construed into officiousness or particularity, by so
nice a discerner. Does he not say, that no man is
more quick sighted than himself, to those faults in
women which are owing to want of delicacy? 
I have been very earnest with Lord and Lady L.
and Miss Grandison, that they do not suffer their
friendship for me to lay me under any difficulties with
their brother. They all took my meaning, and promised
to consult my punctilio, as well as my inclination. 
Miss Grandison was more kindly in earnest, 

in her assurances of this nature, than I was afraid she
would be: And my Lord said, It was fit that I
should find even niceness gratified, in this particular. 
[I absolutely confide in you, Lucy, to place hooks
where I forget to put them; and where, in your delicate
mind, you think I ought to put them; that they
may direct your eye (when you come to read out before
my uncle) to omit those passages which very few
men have delicacy or seriousness enough to be trusted
with. Yet, a mighty piece of sagacity, to find out a
girl of little more than Twenty, in Love, as it is
called! and to make a jest of her for it!] —[But I am
peevish, as well as saucy. —This also goes between
hooks.] 
Adieu, my Dear. 

