



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday, May 2. 
Mercury, as the Fabulist tells us,
having the curiosity to know the estimation
he stood in among mortals, descended
in disguise, and, in a Statuary's shop,
cheapened a Jupiter, then a Juno, then
one, then another, of the Dii majores; and, at last,
asked, What price that same Statue of Mercury bore? 
O Sir, says the artist, buy one of the others, and I'll
throw you in that for nothing. 
How sheepish must the god of thieves look, upon
this rebuff to his vanity! 
So thou! —A thousand pounds wouldst thou give
for the good opinion of this single Lady—To be only
thought tolerably of, and not quite unworthy of her
conversation, would make thee happy. And at parting
last night, or rather this morning, thou madest 

me promise a few lines to Edgware, to let thee know
what she thinks of thee, and of thy Brethren. 
Thy thousand pounds, Jack, is all thy own: For most
heartily does she dislike ye all—Thee as much as any of
the rest. 
I am sorry for it too, as to thy part; for two reasons
—One, that I think thy motive for thy curiosity
was Fear or Consciousness: Whereas that of the
Arch-thief was Vanity, intolerable Vanity: And he
was therefore justly sent away with a blush upon his
cheeks to heaven, and could not brag—The other,
that I am afraid, if she dislikes thee, she dislikes me: 
For are we not birds of a feather? 
I must never talk of Reformation, she told me,
having such companions, and taking such delight as I
seemed to take, in their frothy conversation. 
I, no more than you, Jack, imagined she could
possibly like ye: But then, as my friends, I thought
a person of her education would have been more sparing
of her censures. 
I don't know how it is, Belford; but women
think themselves entitled to take any freedoms with
us, while we are unpolite, forsooth, and I can't tell
what, if we don't tell a pack of cursed lyes, and
make black white, in their favour—teaching us to be
hypocrites, yet stigmatizing us, at other times, for
deceivers. 
I defended ye all as well as I could: But you know
there was no attempting ought but a palliative defence,
to one of her principles. 
I will summarily give thee a few of my pleas. 
‘To the pure, every little deviation seemed offensive: 
Yet I saw not, that there was any-thing amiss
the whole evening, either in the words or behaviour
of any of my friends. Some people could
talk but upon one or two subjects: She upon every
one: No wonder, therefore, they talked to what
they understood best; and to mere objects of sense. 

Had she honoured us with more of her conversation,
she would have been less disgusted with ours; 
for she saw how every one was prepared to admire
her, whenever she opened her lips. You, in particular,
had said, when she retired, that Virtue itself
spoke, when she spoke: But that you had such
an awe upon you, after she had favoured us with
an observation or two on a subject started, that
you should ever be afraid, in her company, to be
found most exceptionable, when you intended to be
least so.’ 
Plainly, she said, she neither liked my companions,
nor the house she was in. 
I liked not the house any more than she: Tho' the
people were very obliging, and she had owned they
were less exceptionable to herself, than at first: And
were we not about another of our own? 
She did not like Miss Partington—Let her fortune
be what it would, and she had heard a great deal said
of her fortune, she should not chuse an intimacy with
her. She thought it was a hardship to be put upon
such a difficulty, as she was put upon the preceding
night, when there were lodgers in the front-house,
whom they had reason to be freer with, than, upon
so short an acquaintance, with her. 
I pretended to be an utter stranger as to this particular; 
and, when she explained herself upon it,
condemned Mrs. Sinclair's request, and called it a
confident one. 
She, artfully, made lighter of her denial of the
girl for a bedfellow, than she thought of it, I could
see that; for it was plain, she supposed there was
room for me to think she had been either over-nice,
or over-cautious. 
I offered to resent Mrs. Sinclair's freedom. 
No; there was no great matter in it. It was best
to let it pass. It might be thought more particular
in her to deny such a request, than in Mrs. Sinclair 

to make it, or in Miss Partington to expect it to be
complied with. But as the people below had a large
acquaintance, she did not know how often she might
have her retirements invaded, if she gave way. And
indeed there were Levities in the behaviour of that
young Lady, which she could not so far pass over as
to wish an intimacy with her. 
I said, I liked Miss Partington as little as she could. 
Miss Partington was a silly young creature; who
seemed too likely to justify the watchfulness of her
guardians over her. —But, nevertheless, as to her
general conversation and behaviour last night, I must
own, that I thought the girl (for girl she was, as to
discretion) not exceptionable; only carrying herself
like a free good-natured creature who believed herself
secure in the honour of her company. 
It was very well said of me, she replied: But, if
that young Lady were so well satisfied with her company,
she must needs say, that I was very kind to suppose
her such an innocent—For her own part, she had
seen nothing of the London world: But thought, she
must tell me plainly, that she never was in such company
in her life; nor ever again wished to be in such. 
There, Belford! —Worse off than Mercury! —Art
thou not? 
I was nettled. Hard would be the lot of more discreet
women, as far as I knew, than Miss Partington,
were they to be judged by so rigid a virtue as hers. 
Not so, she said: But if I really saw nothing exceptionable
to a virtuous mind, in that young person's
behaviour, my ignorance of better behaviour was,
she must needs tell me, as pitiable as hers: And it
were to be wished, that minds so paired, for their
own sakes, should never be separated. 
See, Jack, what I get by my charity! 
I thanked her heartily. But said, that I must take
the liberty to observe, that good folks were generally
so uncharitable, that, devil take me, if I would chuse 

to be good, were the consequence to be, that I must
think hardly of the whole world besides. 
She congratulated me upon my charity: But told
me, that to enlarge her own, she hoped it would not
be expected of her to approve of the low company I
had brought her into last night. 
No exception for thee, Belford! —Safe is thy thousand
pounds. 
I saw not, I said, begging her pardon, that she
liked any-body [Plain-dealing for plain-dealing, Jack! 
—Why then did she abuse my friends?] However, let
me but know whom and what she did or did not like; 
and, if possible, I would like and dislike the very
same persons and things. 
She bid me then, in a pet, dislike myself. 
Cursed severe! —Does she think she must not pay for
it one day, or one night? —And if one, many; that's
my comfort. 
I was in such a train of being happy, I said, before
my earnestness to procure her to favour my
friends with her company, that I wished the devil had
had as well my friends as Miss Partington—And yet I
must say, that I saw not how good people could answer
half their end, which is to reform the wicked by precept
as well as example, were they to accompany
only with the good. 
I had like to have been blasted by two or three
flashes of lightning from her indignant eyes; and she
turned scornfully from me, and retired to her own
apartment. 
Once more, Jack, safe, as thou seest, is thy thousand
pounds. 
She says, I am not a polite man: But is she, in
the instance before us, more polite for a woman? 
And now, dost thou not think, that I owe my
Charmer some revenge for her cruelty in obliging such
a fine young creature, and so vast a fortune, as Miss
Partington, to croud into a press-bed with Dorcas the 

maid-servant of the proud refuser? —Miss Partington
too (with tears) declaring by Mrs. Sinclair, that would
Mrs. Lovelace do her the honour of a visit at Barnet,
the best bed and best room in her guardian's house
should be at her service. Thinkest thou, that I could
not guess at her dishonourable fears of me? —That she
apprehended, that the supposed husband would endeavour
to take possession of his own? —And that Miss
Partington would be willing to contribute to such a
piece of justice? 
Thus, then, thou both remindest, and defiest me,
Charmer! —And since thou reliest more on thy own
precaution than upon my honour; be it unto thee,
Fair one, as thou apprehendest! 
And now, Jack, let me know, what thy opinion,
and the opinions of thy brother varlets, are of my
Gloriana. 
I have just now heard, that Hannah hopes to be
soon well enough to attend her young Lady, when in
London. It seems the girl has had no physician. I
must send her one, out of pure love and respect to
her mistress. Who knows but medicine may weaken
nature, and strengthen the disease? —As her malady
is not a fever, very likely it may do so. —But perhaps
the wench's hopes are too forward. Blustering
weather in this month yet. —And that is bad for rheumatic
complaints. 