


Mr. Reeves, To George Selby Esq; 


Friday, Feb. 17. 
Dear Mr. Selby,
No one, at present, but yourself, must see the
contents of what I am going to write. 
You must not be too much surpris'd. 
But how shall I tell you the news; the dreadful
news? —My wife has been ever since three this morning
in violent hysterics upon it. 
You must not—But how shall I say, You must not, 

be too much affected, when we are unable to support
ourselves? 
O my cousin Selby! —We know not what is become
of our dearest Miss Byron! 
I will be as particular as my grief and surprize will
allow. There is a necessity for it, as you will find. 
Mr. Greville, as I apprehend—But to particulars
first. 
We were last night at the Ball in the Hay-market. 
The chairmen who carried the dear creature, and
who as well as our chairmen, were engaged for the
night, were inveigled away to drink somewhere. 
They promised Wilson, my cousin's servant, to return
in half an hour. 
It was then but little more than twelve. 
Wilson waited near two hours, and they not returning,
he hired a chair to supply their place. 
Between two and three, we all agreed to go home. 
The dear creature was fatigued with the notice everybody
took of her. Every-body admired her. She
wanted to go before; but Lady Betty prevailed on her
to stay a little longer. 
I waited on her to her chair, and saw her in it before
I attended Lady Betty and my wife to theirs. 
I saw that neither the chair, nor the chairmen,
were those who brought her. I ask'd the meaning; 
and receiv'd the above particulars after she was in
the chair. 
She hurried into it because of her dress, and being
warm, and no less than four gentlemen following her
to the very chair. 
It was then near three. 
I order'd Wilson to bid the chairmen stop when
they had got out of the croud, till Lady Betty's chair,
and mine, and my wife's, joined them. 
I saw her chair move, and Wilson with his lighted
flambeaux before it; and the four masques who follow'd
her to the chair return into the house. 

When our servants could not find that her chair had
stopt, we supposed that in the hurry, the fellow heard
not my orders; and directed our chairmen to proceed; 
not doubting but we should find her got home before
us. 
We had before agreed to be carried directly home; 
declining Lady Betty's invitation to resume our own
dresses at her house, where we dressed for the Ball. 
We were very much surprised at finding her not
arrived: But concluding that, by mistake, she was
carried to Lady Betty's, and was there expecting us,
we sent thither immediately. 
But, good God! what was our consternation,
when the servants brought us word back, that Lady
Betty had not either seen or heard of her! 
Mr. Greville, as I apprehend— 
But let me give you all the lights on which I ground
my surmises. 
Last night Lady Betty Williams had an hint given
her, as she informed me at the Masquerade, that Mr.
Greville, who took leave of my cousin on Tuesday
evening in order to set out for Northamptonshire the
next morning, was neither gone, nor intended to go,
being, on the contrary, resolved to continue in town
perdue, in order to watch my cousin's visitors. 
He had indeed told her, that she would have half
a dozen spies upon her; and threw out some hints
of jealousy of two of her visitors. 
Sir Hargrave Pollexsen in an Harlequin dress was at
the Ball: He soon discover'd our lovely cousin, and,
notwithstanding his former ill-nature on being rejected
by her, addressed her with the politeness of a man
accustomed to public places. 
He found me out at the side-board a little before
we went off; and ask'd me, if I had not seen Mr.
Greville there? I said, No. 
He ask'd me, If I had not observed a mask distinguished
by a broad-brim'd half-slouched hat, with a 

high flat crown, a short black cloak, a dark lantern
in his hand, holding it up to every one's masque; 
and who, he said, was saluted by every-body as Guido
Vaux? That person he said was Mr. Greville. 
I did indeed observe this person; but recollected
not, that he had the air of Mr. Greville; but thought
him a much more bulky man. But that, as he intended
to have it supposed he had left the town,
might be easily managed. 
Mr. Greville, you know, is a man of enterprize. 
He came to town, having professedly no other material
business but to give obstruction to my cousin's
visitors. He saw she had two new ones. He talk'd
at first of staying in town, and partaking of its diversions,
and even of bespeaking a new equipage. 
But all of a sudden, tho' expecting Mr. Fenwick
would come up, he pretended to leave the town, and
to set out directly for Northamptonshire, without having
obtained any concession from my cousin in his
favour. 
Laying all these circumstances together, I think it
is hardly to be doubted, but Mr. Greville is at the
bottom of this black affair. 
You will therefore take such steps on these lights as
your prudence will suggest to you. If Mr. Greville is
not come down—If Mr. Fenwick—What would I
say? 
The less noise, however, the affair makes, till we
can come at certainty, the better. 
How I dread what that certainty may be! —Dear
creature! 
But I am sure you will think it adviseable to keep
this dreadful affair from her poor grandmother. And
I hope your good lady—Yet her prudent advice may
be necessary. 
I have six people out at different parts of the town,
who are to make enquiries among chairmen, coachmen, &c. 

Her new servant cannot be a villain—What can
one say? —What can one think? 
We have sent to his sister, who keeps an inn in
Smithfield. She has heard nothing of him. 
I have sent after the chairmen who carried her to this
cursed Masquerade. Lady Betty's chairmen, who had
provided the chairs, know them, and their number. 
They are traced with a fare from White's to Berkeleysquare. 
Something may be discovered by means of those
fellows, if they were tamper'd with. They are afraid,
I suppose, to come to demand their but half-earned
money. Woe be to them if they come out to be
rascals! 
I had half a suspicion of Sir Hargrave, as well from
the character given us of him by a friend of mine,
as because of his unpolite behaviour to the dear creature
on her rejecting him: And sent to his house in
Cavendish-square, to know if he were at home; and
if he were, at what time he returned from the Ball. 
Answer was brought that he was in bed, and they
supposed would not be stirring till dinner-time; when
he expected company: And that he returned not from
the Ball till between four and five this morning. 
We sent to Mr. Greville's lodgings. He has actually
discharged them; and the people think (as he told
them so) that he is set out for the country. But he
is master of contrivances enough to manage this. 
There can be no thought that he would give out otherwise
to them, than he did to us. Happy! had we
found him not gone. 
Mr. Greville must be the man! 
You will be so good, as to dispatch the bearer instantly
with what information can be got about Mr.
Greville. 
Ever, ever Yours!
Archibald Reeves. 

