



My dear Lady,
I will be preparing to write to you, as I have
Opportunity, not doubting but this present Letter
must be a long one; and having some Apprehensions,
that, as Things may fall out, I may want
either Head or Heart to write to your Ladyship,
were I to defer it till the Catastrophe of this cruel,
cruel Suspense. 
O what a Happiness am I sunk from! —And
in so few Days too! —O the wicked, wicked
Masquerades! They shall be always followed with
the Execrations of an injur'd Wife in me, who,
but for that wretched Diversion, had still been the
happiest of her Sex! 
But I was too secure! It was fit, perhaps, that
I should be humbled and mortified; and I must try 

to make a Virtue of the cruel Necessity, and see,
if, by the Divine Grace, I cannot bring real Good
out of this appearing Evil. 
The following Letter, in a Woman's Hand,
and sign'd, as you'll see, by a Woman's Name, and
spelt as I spell it, will account to your Ladyship
for my beginning so heavily. It came by the Peny-Post. 

Madame,
‘I ame unknowne to yowe; but yowe are not
so altogathar to mee, becaus I haue bene edefy'd
by yowre pius Behafior at Church, whir I see
yowe with Plaisir everie Sabbaoth Day. I ame
welle acquaintid with the Famely of the Coumptesse
of—; and yowe maie possiblie haue hard
what yowe wishid not to haue hard concerninge
hir. Butt this verie Morninge, I can assur yowe,
hir Ladishippe is gon with yowre Spowse to Tonbrigge;
and theire they are to take Lodginges,
or a Hous; and Mr. B. is after to come to Towne,
and settel Matters to goe downe to hir, where they
are to liue as Man and Wiffe. Make what Use
yowe pleas of thiss Informasion; and belieue me
to haue noe other Motife, than to serue yowe,
because of yowre Vartues, whiche make yowe
deserue a better Retorne. I ame, thos I shall not
sett my trewe Name, 
Yowre grete Admirer and Servant,
Thomasine Fuller.’ 
Wednesday Morninge,
9 o'Clock. 

Just above I called my State, a State of cruel
Suspense! But I recall the Words; for now it is 

no longer Suspense; since, if this Letter says Truth,
I know the worst: And there is too much Appearance,
that it does, let the Writer be who it will,
or his or her Motive what it will; for, after all, I
am apt to fansy this a Contrivance of Mr. Turner;
tho', for fear of ill Consequences, I will not say so. 
And now, Madam, I am endeavouring, by the
Help of Religion, and cool Reflection, to bring
my Mind to bear this heavy Evil, and to recollect
what I was, and how much more honourable an
Estate I am in, than I could ever have expected to
be in; and that my Virtue and good Name are
secured; and I can return innocent to my dear
Father and Mother: And these were once the only
Pride of my Heart. 
Then, additional to what I was, at that Time,
(and yet I pleased myself with my Prospects, poor
as they were) I have honest Parents, bountifully
provided for, thank God, and your ever dear Brother,
for this Blessing!—and not only provided
for—but made useful to him, to the Amount of
their Provision, well nigh! There is a Pride, my
Lady! 
Then I shall have better Conditions from his
Generosity to support myself, than I can wish for,
or make use of. 
Then I have my dear, charming Billy—O
be contented, too lovely, and too happy Rival,
with my Husband; and tear not from me my
dearest Baby, the Pledge, the beloved Pledge, of
our happier Affections, and the dear Remembrance
of what I once was! —But if, my dear Mr. B.
you doubt the Education I can give him, fit for the
Heir to your great Fortune, (for such he must be, 

despised or abandon'd as his poor Mother may be!) and
will remove him from me, and Grief kill me not before
that sad Hour, let me have some Office, not incompatible
with that of his Tutor, that I may endeavour
to instil Virtue into his ductile Mind; for Tutors,
altho' they may make Youth learned, do not always
make them virtuous; and let me watch over his
Steps, and where-ever be goes, let me go: I shall
value no Dangers nor Risques; the most distant
Clime shall be native to me, where-ever my Billy
is; so that I may be a Guard, under God, to his
Morals, that he make no Virgin's Heart sigh, nor
Mother's bleed, as mine has done in both States. 
But, how I rave! will your Ladyship be apt to
say. —This is no good Symptom, you'll think,
that I have reap'd at present that Consolation from
religious Considerations, which, to a right Turn
of Mind, they will afford in the heaviest Misfortunes. 
But this was only in fear they should take my Billy
from me. A thousand pleasing Prospects, that had
begun to dawn on my Mind, I can bear to have
dissipated; but I cannot, indeed I cannot! permit
my dear Mr. B.'s Son and Heir to be torn from me. 
Yet I hope they will not be so cruel; for I will
give them no Provocation to do it, if I can help it. 
No Law-suits, no Complainings, no Asperities of
Expression, much less bitter Reflections, shall they
ever have from me. I will be no Conscience to
them: They will be punished too much, greatly
too much, in their own, for what I wish; and they
shall always be follow'd by my Prayers. I shall
have Leisure for that Exercise, and shall be happy
and serene, when, I doubt, I doubt, they will not
be so! 

But still I am running on in a Strain that shews
my Impatience, rather than my Resignation: Yet
some Struggles must be allow'd me: I could not
have loved, as I love, if I could easily part with
my Interest in so beloved a Husband. —For, Madam,
my Interest I will part with, and will sooner
die, than live with a Gentleman, who has another
Wife, tho' I was the first. —Let Countesses, if they
can, and Ladies of Birth, chuse to humble themselves
to this Baseness—The low-born Pamela
cannot stoop to it. Pardon me, Madam; you
know I only write this with a View to this poor
Lady's Answer to her noble Uncle, of which you
wrote me Word. 




Is now concluding. I hope I am calmer a great
deal. For, being disappointed, in all Likelihood,
in Twenty agreeable Schemes and Projects, I am
now forming new ones, with as much Pleasure to
myself, as I may. For, my Lady, 'tis one's Duty,
you know, to suit one's Mind to one's Condition; 
and I hope I shall be enabled to do Good in Kent,
if I cannot in London, and Bedfordshire, and Lincolnshire. 
God every-where provides us with Objects,
on which to exercise one's Gratitude and Beneficence. 
I am thinking to try to get good Mrs. Jervis
with me. 
Come, Madam, you must not be too much
concern'd for me. After a while, I shall be no
unhappy Person; for tho' I was thankful for my
splendid Fortunes, and should have been glad, to
be sure I should, of continuing in them, with so 

dear a Gentleman; yet a high Estate had never such
dazling Charms with me, as it has with some: If
it had, I could not have resisted so many Temptations,
possibly, as God enabled me to resist. 




Is now come. 'Tis Nine, and no Mr. B.—O
why, as Deborah makes the Mother of Sisera say,
is his Chariot so long in coming? Why tarry the
Wheels of his Chariot? 
I have this Note now at Eleven o'Clock: 

My dearest Pamela,
I Dispatch this Messenger, lest, expecting me
this Night, you should be uneasy. I shall not
be with you till Monday, when I hope to dine
with my dearest Life. 
Ever affectionately Yours.’ 

So I'll go up and pray for him, and then to-bed. 
Yet 'tis a sad thing! —I have had but poor Rest
for a great while; nor shall have any till my Fate is
decided. Hard-hearted Gentleman, he knows under
what Uneasiness he left me! 




If God Almighty hears my Yesterday's, and indeed
my hourly Prayers, the dear Gentleman will
be good still: But my aking Heart, every Time I
think what Company he is in, (for I find the Countess
is certainly one of the Party) bodes me little
Satisfaction. 
He's come! He's come! now, just now come! 
I will have my Trial over before this Night be 

past, if possible. I'll go down, and meet him with
Love unfeigned, and a Duty equal to my Love,
altho' he may forget his to me. If I conquer myself
on this Occasion, I conquer Nature, as your
Ladyship says; and then, by God's Grace, I can
conquer every thing. They have taken their House,
I suppose:—But what need they, when they'll
have one in Bedfordshire, and one in Lincolnshire? 
But they know best. God bless him, and reform
her! That's all the Harm I wish them, or will wish
them! 
The dear Gentleman has receiv'd me with great
Affection and Tenderness. Sure he cannot be so
bad! —Sure he cannot! 
I know, my Dear, said he, I left you in great
Anxiety; but 'tis an Anxiety you have brought
upon yourself; and I have not been easy ever since
I parted from you. 
I am sorry for it, Sir. 
Why, my dear Love, there is still a melancholy
Air in your Countenance: Indeed it seems mingled
with a kind of Joy; I hope at my Return to you. 
But 'tis easy to see which of the two is the most
natural. 
You should see nothing, Sir, that you would not
wish to see, if I could help it. 
I am sorry you cannot. But I am come home to
hear all your Grievances, and to redress them, if in
my Power. 
When, Sir, am I to come upon my Trial? I
have a great deal to say to you. I will tell you
every thing I think. And as it may be the last Grievances,
as you are pleased to call them, I may ever 

trouble you with, you must promise to answer me
not one Word till I have said all I have to say. For,
if it does but hold, I have great Courage; I have
indeed—You don't know half the Sauciness that
is in your Girl yet; but when I come upon my
Trial, you'll wonder at my Boldness. 
What means my Dearest? taking me into his
Arms. You alarm me exceedingly by this moving
Sedateness. 
Don't let it alarm you, Sir! I mean you nothing
but Good! —But I have been preparing myself
to tell you all my Mind. And, as an Instance
of what you may expect from me, sometimes, Sir,
I will be your Judge, and put home Questions to
you; and sometimes you shall be mine, and at last
pronounce Sentence upon me; or, if you won't,
I will upon myself; a severe one to me, it shall
be, but an agreeable one, perhaps, to you! — 
When comes on the Trial, Sir? 
He looked steadily upon me, but was silent. 
And I said, But don't be afraid, Sir, that I will
invade your Province; for tho' I shall count myself
your Judge, in some Cases, you shall be Judge Paramount
still. 
Dear Charmer of my Heart, said he, and
clasped me to his Bosom, what a new Pamela
have I in my Arms! A mysterious Charmer! Let
us instantly go to my Closet or yours, and come
upon our mutual Trial; for you have fir'd my Soul
with Impatience! 
No, Sir, if you please, we will dine first. I have
hardly eaten any thing these Four Days; and your
Company will give me an Appetite perhaps. I
shall be pleas'd to sit down at Table with you, Sir, 

taking his Hand, and trying to smile upon him; 
for the Moments I shall have of your Company,
may be, some time hence, very precious to my Remembrance. 
I was forced then to turn my Head, to hide from
him my Eyes, brimful, as they were, of Tears. 
He took me again into his Arms:—My dearest
Pamela, if you love me, distract not my Soul thus,
by your dark and mysterious Speeches. You are
displeased with me, and I thought I had Reason, of
late, to take something amiss in your Conduct; 
but, instead of your suffering by my Anger, you have
Words and an Air, that penetrate my very Soul. 
O Sir, Sir, treat me not thus kindly! Put on
an angrier Brow, or how shall I retain my Purpose! 
How shall I! 
Dear, dear Creature! make not use of all your
Power to melt me! Half of it is enough. For
there is Eloquence in your Eyes I cannot resist; but
in your present solemn Air, and affecting Sentences,
you mould me to every Purpose of your Heart; so
that I am a mere Machine, a passive Instrument,
to be play'd upon at your Pleasure. 
Dear, kind Sir, how you revive my Heart by
your Goodness! Perhaps I have only been in a
frightful Dream, and am but just now awaken'd! 
—But we will not anticipate our Trial. Only,
Sir, give Orders, that you are not to be spoken
with by any body, when we have din'd; for I
must have you all to myself, without Interruption. 
Just as I had said this, a Gentleman called on
him, and I retir'd to my Chamber, and wrote to
this Place. 

Mr. B. dismiss'd his Friend, without asking him
to dine with him: So I had him all to myself at
Dinner. But we said little, and sat not above a
Quarter of an Hour; looking at each other, he with
Impatience, and some seeming Uneasiness; I with
more Steadiness, I believe; but now-and-then a
Tear starting. 
I could eat but little, tho' I try'd all I could,
and especially as he help'd me, and courted me by
Words of Tenderness and Sweetness—O why
were ever such Things as Masquerades permitted
in a Christian Nation! 
I chose to go into my Closet rather than into
his; and here I sit, waiting the dear Gentleman's
coming up to me. If I keep but my Courage, I
shall be pleased. I know the worst, and that will
help me; for he is too noble to use me roughly,
when he sees I mean not to provoke him by Upbraidings; 
any more than I will act, in this Case,
beneath the Character I ought to assume as his
Wife. 
For, my dear Lady, this is a Point of high
Importance. It has touch'd and rais'd my Soul beyond
its Pitch: I am a new Pamela, as he says,
and a proud Pamela, as he will find—For, Madam,
the Person who can support herself under an
Injury like this, and can resolve to forgive it, has
a Superiority to the Injurer, let him be a Prince,
tho' she were but a Beggar-born. But the Difficulty
will be, how to avoid being melted by my own
Softness, and Love for the Man, more dear to me
than Life; yea, more dear to me, than my Billy;
and than all my Hopes in the charming Boy. But
here he comes! 

Now, Pamela—Now, see what thou canst
do! —Thou knowest the worst! Remember that! 
—And may'st not be unhappy, even at the worst,
if thou truest in God. 
I am commanded, my dear Lady, now to write
particularly my Trial, for a Reason I shall mention
to you in the Conclusion of this Letter; and I must
beg you to favour me with the Return of all my
Letters to you, on this affecting Subject. —The
Reason will appear in its Place—And, Oh! congratulate
me, my dear, dear Lady; for I am happy,
and shall be happier than I ever was; and that I
thought, and so did every body, was impossible. 
But I will not anticipate the Account of my Trial,
and the Effects, the blessed Effects, it has produced. 
Thus, then, it was: 
Mr. B. came up, with great Impatience in his
Looks. I met him at my Chamber-door, with as
sedate a Countenance, as I possibly could put on; 
and my Heart was high with my Purpose, and supported
me better than I could have expected. — 
Yet, on Recollection, now, I impute to myself
something of that kind of Magnanimity, that was
went to inspire the innocent Sufferers of old, for
a still worthier Cause than mine; though their Motives
could hardly be more pure in that one Hope I
had, to be an humble Means of saving the Man I
love and honour, from Errors that might be fatal
to his Soul. 
I took his Hand with Boldness: Dear Sir, leading
him to my Closet, Here is the Bar, at which I
am to take my Trial, pointing to the Backs of
Three Chairs, which I had placed in a join'd Row, 

leaving just Room to go by on each Side—You
must give me, Sir, all my own Way; this is the
first, and perhaps the last Time, that I shall desire
it. —Nay, dear Sir, turning my Face from him,
look not upon me with an Eye of Tenderness: If
you do, I may lose my Purposes, important to me
as they are; and however fantastick my Behaviour
may seem to you, I want not to move your Passions,
(for the good Impressions made upon them, may
be too easily dissipated, by the Winds of Sense)— 
but your Reason: And if that can be done, I am
safe, and shall fear no Relapse. 
What means all this Parade, my Dear! Let
me perish, that was his Word, if I know how to
account for You, or your Humour. 
You will presently, Sir. But give me all my
Way—I pray you do, this once—this one Time
only! 
Well, so; this is your Bar, is it? There's an
Elbow-chair, I see; take your Place in it, Pamela,
and here I'll stand to answer all your Questions. 
No, Sir, that must not be. So I boldly led him
to the Elbow-chair. You are the Judge, Sir; it is
I that am to be try'd. Yet, I will not say I am a
Criminal. I know I am not. But that must be
proved, Sir, you know. 
Well, take your Way; but I fear for your
Head, my Dear, in all this. 
I fear only my Heart, Sir, that's all: But there
you must sit—So, Here (retiring to the Three
Chairs, and leaning on the Backs, Here) I stand. 
And now, my dearest Mr. B. you must begin
first: When you shew'd me the House of Peers,
their Bar, at which Causes are heard, and sometimes 

Peers are try'd, look'd awful to me; and the present
Occasion requires, that this should. Now, dear
Sir, you must be my Accuser, as well as my Judge. 
I have nothing to accuse you of, my Dear,
if I must give into your moving Whimsy. You are
every thing I wish you to be. But for the last Month
you have seem'd to be uneasy, and have not done
me the Justice to acquaint me with your Reasons
for it. 
I was in hopes, my Reasons might prove to be
no Reasons; and I would not trouble you with my
ungrounded Apprehensions. But now, Sir, we are
come directly to the Point; and methinks I stand
here as Paul did before Felix; and, like that poor
Prisoner, if I, Sir, reason of Righteousness, Temperance
and Judgment to come, even to make you,
as the great Felix did, tremble, don't put me off to
another Day, to a more convenient Season, as that
Governor did Paul; for you must bear patiently
with all I have to say. 
Strange, uncommon Girl! how unaccountable
is all this! —Pr'ythee, my Dear, and he pulled
a Chair by him, come and sit down by me, and
without these romantick Airs, let me hear all you
have to say, and teize me not with this Parade. 
No, Sir, let me stand, if you please, while I can
stand; when I am weary, I will sit down at my Bar. 
Now, Sir, since you are so good as to say, you
have nothing but Change of Temper to accuse me
of, I am to answer to that, and assign a Cause; and
I will do it without Evasion, or Reserve: But I beseech
you, say not one Word, but Yes, or No,
to my Questions, till I have said all I have to say; 
and then you shall find me all Silence and Resignation. 

Well, my strange Dear! —But sure your
Head is a little turn'd! —What is your Question? 
Whether, Sir, the Nun—I speak boldly; 
the Case requires it—who follow'd you at the
Masquerade every-where, is not the Countess
of—? 
What then, my Dear? (speaking with Quickness)
—I thought the Occasion of your Sullenness
and Reserve was this! —But, Pamela— 
Nay, Sir, interrupted I, only Yes, or No, if
you please: I will be all Silence by-and-by. 
Yes, then. 
Well, Sir, then let me tell you, for I ask you
not, (it may be too bold in me to multiply Questions)
that she loves you; that you correspond by
Letters with her—Yes, Sir, before that Letter
from her Ladyship came, which you receiv'd from
my Hand in so short and angry a manner, for fear
I should have had a Curiosity to see its Contents,
which would have been inexcusable in me, I own,
if I had. You have talked over to her all your Polygamy
Notions, and her Ladyship seems so well convinced
of them, that she has declar'd to her noble
Uncle, (who expostulated with her on the Occasions
she gave for Talk) that she had rather be a
certain Gentleman's second Wife, than the first to
the greatest Man in England; and you are but just
return'd from a Journey to Tunbridge, in which
that Lady was a Party; and the Motive for it,
I am acquainted with, by a Letter here in my
Hand. 
He was displeased, and frowned: I look'd down,
being resolv'd not to be terrified, if I could help it. 
I have caution'd you, Pamela— 

I know you have, Sir, interrupted I; but be
pleased to answer me, Has not the Countess taken
a House or Lodgings at Tunbridge? 
She has—And what then? 
And is her Ladyship there, or in Town? 
There—And what then? 
Are you to go to Tunbridge, Sir, soon, or not? 
Be pleased to answer me but that one Question. 
I will know, rising up in Anger, your Informants,
Pamela. 
Dear Sir, so you shall in proper Time: You
shall know all, as soon as I am convinc'd, that
your Wrath will not be attended with bad Consequences
to yourself and others. That is wholly
the Cause of my Reserve in this Point; for I have
not a Thought, and never had, since I have been
yours, that I wish to be concealed from you. — 
But, dear Sir, your Knowlege of the Informants
makes nothing at all as to the Truth of the Information. 
—Nor will I press you too home. I doubt
not, you are soon to go down to Tunbridge again. 
I am: And what then? —Must the Consequence
be Crime enough to warrant your Jealousy? 
Dear Sir, don't be so very angry, still looking
down; for I durst not trust myself to look up. I
don't do this, as you charged me in your Letter,
in a Spirit of matrimonial Recrimination: If you
don't tell me, that you see the Countess with Pleasure,
I ask it not of you; nor have I any thing to
say by way of Upbraiding. 'Tis my Misfortune,
that she is too lovely, and too attractive; and it is
the less Wonder, that a fine young Gentleman as
you are, and a fine young Lady as she is should
engage one another's Affections. 

I knew every thing, except what this Letter,
which you shall read presently, communicates, when
you brought the Two noble Sisters to visit me: 
Hence proceeded my Grief; and should I, Sir,
have deserv'd to be what I am, if I was not grieved? 
Religion has help'd me, and God has answer'd my
Supplications, and enabled me to act this new and
uncommon Part before you, at this imaginary Bar. 
You shall see, Sir, that as, on one hand, I want
not, as I said before, to move your Passions in my
Favour; so, on the other, I shall not be terrify'd
by your Displeasure, dreaded by me as it used to
be, and as it will be again, the Moment that my
raised Spirits sink down to their usual Level; or
are diverted from this my long meditated Purpose,
to tell you all my Mind. 
I repeat then, Sir, that I knew all this, when
the Two noble Sisters came to visit your poor Girl,
and to see your Billy. Yet, grave, as the Countess
call'd me, (dear Sir! might I not well be grave,
knowing what I knew?) did I betray any Impatience
of Speech or Action, any Discomposure? 
No, Sir, patting my Hand on my Breast, here
all the Discomposure lay, struggling, vehemently
struggling, now-and-then, and wanting that Vent
ar my Eyes, which, it seems, (overcome by my
Joy, to hear myself favourably spoken of by You
and the Lady) it too soon made itself. But I could
not help it—You might have seen, Sir, I could
not! 
But I want neither to recriminate, nor expostulate,
nor yet, Sir, to form Excuses for my general
Conduct; for that you accuse not in the main. — 
But be pleased, Sir, to read this Letter. It was 

brought by the Peny-Post, as you'll see by the Mark. 
Who the Writer is, I know not. And did you,
Sir, that Knowlege, and your Resentment upon it,
will not alter the Fact, or give it a more favourable
Appearance. 
I stepp'd to him, and giving him the Letter,
came back to my Bar, and sat down on one of the
Chairs while he read it, drying my Eyes; for they
would overflow as I talked, do what I could. 
He was much mov'd at the Contents of this
Letter: Called it'd—n'd Malice, and hop'd he
might find out the Author of it, saying he would
advertise 500 Guineas Reward for the Discoverer. 
He put the Letter in his Pocker: Well, Pamela,
you believe all that you have said, no doubt; and
this Matter has a black Appearance indeed, if you
do. But who was your first Informant? Was that
by Letter, or personally? That d&wblank;n'd Turner, I
doubt not, is at the Bottom of all this. The vain
Coxcomb has had the Insolence to imagine the
Countess would favour an Address of his; and is
enraged to meet with a Repulse; and has taken
Liberties upon it, that have given Birth to all the
Scandals which have been scatter'd about on this
Occasion. Nor do I doubt, but he has been the
Serpent at the Ear of my Eve. 
I stood up at my Bar, and said, Don't be too
hasty, Sir, in your Judgment—You may be mistaken. 
But am I mistaken, Pamela? —You never
yet told me an Untruth in Cases the most important
to you to conceal. Am I mistaken? 
Dear Sir, if I should tell you it is not Mr. Turner,
you'll guess at somebody else: And what avails 

all this to the Matter in hand? You are your own
Master, and must stand and fall by your own Conscience. 
God grant, that that may acquit you! — 
But my Intention is not either to accuse or upbraid
you. 
But, my Dear, to the Fact then: This is a malicious
and a villainous Piece of Intelligence! given
you, perhaps, for the sake of Designs and Views,
that may not yet be proper to be avow'd. 
By God's Grace, Sir, I defy all Designs and
Views, of any one, upon my Honour! 
But, my Dear, the Charge is basely false: We
have not agreed upon any such way of Life. 
Well, Sir, all this only proves, that the Intelligence
may be a little premature. But now let me,
Sir, sit down one Minute or two, to recover my
failing Spirits; and then I'll tell you all I purpose to
do, and all I have to say, and that with as much
Brevity as I can, for fear neither my Head nor my
Heart should perform the Parts I have been so long
endeavouring to prevail upon them to perform. 
I sat down then, he taking the Letter out of
his Pocket, and looking upon it again, with much
Vexation and Anger in his Countenance; and after
a few Tears and Sobs, that would needs be so officious
as to offer their Service, unbidden and undesired,
to introduce what I had to say; I rose up,
my Feet trembling, as well as my Knees; which
however, leaning against the Seats of the Chairs,
which made my Bar, as my Hand held by the Back,
tolerably supported me, I cleared my Voice, wiped
my Eyes, and said: 
You have all the Excuses, dear Mr. B. that a
Gentleman can have, in the Object of your present
Passion. 

Present Passion, Pamela! 
Dear Sir, hear me out, without Interruption. 
The Countess is a charming Lady. She excels
your poor Girl in all those outward Graces of
Form, which your kind Fancy (more valu'd by me
than the Opinion of all the World besides) had
made you attribute to me. And she has all those
additional Advantages, as Nobleness of Birth, of
Alliance, and Deportment, which I want (Happy
for you, Sir, that you had known her Ladyship
some Months ago, before you disgrac'd yourself by
the Honours you have done me!). This, therefore,
frees you from the aggravated Crime of those,
who prefer to their own Ladies less amiable and less
deserving Persons; and I have not the Sting which
those must have, who are contemn'd and ill-treated
for the sake of their Inferiors. Yet cannot the
Countess love you better than your Girl loves you; 
not even for your Person, which must, I doubt, be
her principal Attachment; when I can truly say,
all noble and attracting to the outward Eye as it is,
that is the least Consideration by far with me: No,
Sir, it is your Mind, your generous and beneficent
Mind, that is the principal Object of my Affection; 
and the Pride I took in hoping, that I might be an
humble Means, in the Hands of Providence, to
bless you hereafter as well as here, gave me more
Pleasure than all the Blessings I reaped from your
Name or your Fortune. Judge then, my dearest
Mr. B. what my Grief and my Disappointment
must be! 
But I will not expostulate: I will not, because
it must be to no Purpose; for could my Fondness
for you, and my watchful Duty to you, have kept 

you steady, I should not now have appear'd before
you in this solemn manner; and I know the Charms
of my Rival are too powerful for me to contend
with. Nothing but Divine Grace can touch your
Heart; and that I expect not, from the Nature of
the Case, should be instantaneous. 
I will therefore, Sir, dear as you are to me,
(—Don't look with such tender Surprize upon
me!) give up your Person to my happier, to my
worthier Rival. For, since such is your Will, and
such seem to be your Engagements, what avails it
me to oppose them? 
I have only to beg, therefore, that you will be
so good as to permit me to go down to Kent, to
my dear Parents, who, with many more, are daily
rejoicing in your Favour and Bounty. 
I will there (holding up my folded Hands)
pray for you every Hour of my Life; and for every
one, who shall be dear to you, not excepting your
charming Countess. 
I will never take your Name into my Lips,
nor suffer any other in my Hearing, but with Reverence
and Gratitude, for the Good I and mine have
reap'd at your Hands; nor will I wish to be freed
from my Obligations to you, except you shall chuse
to be divorced from me; and if you should, I will
give your Wishes all the Forwardness that I honourably
can, with regard to my own Character, and
yours, and that of your beloved Baby. 
But you must give me something worth living
for along with me; your Billy and mine! —Unless
it is your Desire to kill me quite; and then,
'tis done, and nothing will stand in your happy
Countess's Way, if you tear from my Arms my 

second earthly Good, after I am depriv'd of You,
my first. 
I will there, Sir, dedicate all my Time to my
first Duties; happier far, than once I could have
hoped to be! And if, by any Accident, any Misunderstanding,
between you, you should part by
Consent, and you will have it so, my Heart shall
be ever yours, and my Hopes shall be resum'd of
being an Instrument still for your future Good, and
I will receive your returning ever-valu'd Heart, as
if nothing had happen'd, the Moment I can be sure
it will be wholly mine. 
For, think not, dear Sir, whatever be your
Notions of Polygamy, that I will, were my Life
to depend upon it, consent to live with a Gentleman,
dear as, God is my Witness, (lifting up
my tearful Eyes) you are to me, who lives in what
I cannot but think open Sin with another! You
know, Sir, and I appeal to you for the Purity, and
I will aver, Piety, of my Motives, when I say this,
that I would not; and as you do know this, I cannot
doubt, but my Proposal will be agreeable to you
both. And I beg of you, dear Sir, to take me at
my Word; and don't let me be tortur'd, as I have
been so many Weeks, with such Anguish of Mind,
that nothing but religious Considerations can make
supportable to me. 
And are you in Earnest, Pamela? coming to
me, and folding me in his Arms over the Chair's
Back, the Seat of which supported my trembling
Knees—Can you so easily part with me? 
I can, Sir, and I will!—rather than divide
my Interest in you, knowingly, with any Lady upon
Earth. But say not, however, Can I part with 



You, Sir; it is You that part with Me: And tell
me, Sir, tell me but, what you had intended should
become of me? 
You talk to me, my dearest Life, as if all you
had heard against me was true; and you would have
me answer you, (would you?) as if it was? 
I want nothing to convince me, Sir, that the
Countess loves you: You know the rest of my
Information: Judge for me, what I can, what I
ought to believe! —You know the Rumours of
the World concerning you: Even I, who stay so
much at home, and have not taken the least Pains
to find out my Wretchedness, nor to confirm it,
since I knew it, have come to the Hearing of it; 
and if you know the Licence taken with both your
Characters, and yet correspond so openly, must it
not look to me, that you value not your Honour
in the World's Eye, nor my Lady hers? I told you,
Sir, the Answer she made to her Uncle. 
You told me, my Dear, as you were told. Be
tender of a Lady's Reputation—for your own
sake. No one is exempted from Calumny; and
even Words said, and the Occasion of saying them
not known, may bear a very different Construction
from what they would have done, had the Occasion
been told. 
This may be all true, Sir: I wish my Lady
would be as tender of her Reputation as I would
be, let her injure me in your Affections as she will. 
But can you say, Sir, that there is nothing between
you, that should not be, according to my Notions
of Virtue and Honour, and according to your own,
which I took Pride in, before that fatal Masquerade? 

You answer me not, continued I; and may I
not fairly presume you are not able to answer me as
I wish to be answered? But come, dearest Sir,
(and I put my Arms round his Neck) let me not
urge you too boldly. I will never forget your
Benefits and your past Kindness to me. I have been
a happy Creature: No one, till within these few
Weeks, was ever so happy as I. I will love you
still with a Passion as ardent as ever I loved you. 
Absence cannot lessen such a Love as mine: I am
sure it cannot. 
I see your Difficulties. You have gone too far
to recede. If you can make it easy to your Conscience,
I will wait with Patience my happier Destiny; 
and I will wish to live, (if I can be convinc'd
you wish me not to die) in order to pray for you,
and to be a Directress to the first Education of my
dearest Baby. 
You sigh, dear Sir; repose your beloved Face
next to my fond Heart. 'Tis all your own: And
ever shall be, let it, or let it not, be worthy of the
Honour in your Estimation. 
But yet, my dear Mr. B. if one could as easily,
in the Prime of sensual Youth, look Twenty Years
forward, as one can Twenty Years back ward, what
an empty Vanity, what a mere Nothing, will be all
those grosser Satisfactions, that now give Wings of
Desire to our debased Appetites? 
Motives of Religion will have their due
Force upon your Mind one Day, I hope; as, blessed
be God, they have enabled me to talk to you
on such a touching Point (after infinite Struggles,
I own) with so much Temper and Resignation; 
and then, my dearest Mr. B. when we come to that 

last Bed, from which the Piety of our Friends shall
lift us, but from which we shall never be able to
raise ourselves; for, dear Sir, your Countess, and
You, and your poor Pamela, must all come to
this!—we shall find what it is will give us the true
Joy, and enable us to support the Pangs of the dying
Hour. —Think you, my dearest Sir, (and I pressed
my Lips to his Forehead, as his Head was reclin'd
on my throbbing Bosom) that then, in that important
Moment, what now gives us the greatest Pleasure,
will have any Part in our Consideration, but as
it may give us Woe or Comfort in the Reflection? 
But I will not, I will not, O best Beloved of
my Soul, afflict you farther! —Why should I thus
sadden all your gaudy Prospects? I have said enough
to such a Heart as yours, if Divine Grace touches
it. And if not, all I can say, will be of no Avail! 
—I will leave you therefore to That, and to your
own Reflections. And after giving you Ten thousand
Thanks for your kind, your indulgent Patience
with me, I will only beg, that I may set out in a
Week for Kent with my dear Billy; that you will
receive one Letter, at least, from me, of Gratitude
and Blessings; it shall not be of Upbraidings and
Exclamations. 
But my Child you must not deny me! for I shall
haunt, like his Shadow, every Place wherein you
shall put my Billy, if you should be so unkind to
deny him to me! —And if, moreover, you will
permit me to have the dear Miss Goodwin with me,
as you had almost given me room to hope, I will
read over all the books! of Education, and digest
them as well as I am able, in order to fend you my
Scheme, and to shew you how fit I hope your 

Indulgence, at least, will make you think me, of
having Two such precious Trusts reposed in me! 
I was silent, waiting in Tears his Answer. But
his generous Heart was touch'd, and seem'd to labour
within him for Expression. 
He came round to me at last, and took me in
his Arms: Exalted Generosity! said he; Nobleminded
Pamela! Let no Bar be put between us
henceforth! No Wonder, when one looks back
to thy first promising Dawn of Excellence, that thy
fuller Day should thus irresistibly dazle such weak
Eyes as mine. Whatever it costs me, and I have
been inconsiderately led on by blind Passion for an
Object too charming, but which I never thought
equal to my Pamela, I will (for it is yet, I bless
God, in my Power) restore to your Virtue a Husband
all your own. 
O Sir, Sir! (and I should have sunk down
with Joy, had not his kind Arms supported me)
what have you said? —Can I be so happy as to
behold you innocent as to Deed; God, of his infinite
Goodness, continue you both so! —And
Oh! that the dear Lady would make me as truly
love her, for the Graces of her Mind, as I admire
her for the Advantages of her Person! 
You are Virtue itself, my dearest Life; and
from this Moment I will reverence you as my tutelary
Angel. I shall behold you with Awe, and
implicitly give up myself to all your Dictates; for
what you say, and what you do, must be ever
right. —But I will not, my dearest Life, too lavishly
promise, lest you should think it the sudden
Effect of Passions thus movingly touch'd, and which
may subside again, when the Soul, as you observed 

in your own Case, sinks to its former Level: But
this I promise you, (and I hope you believe me, and
will pardon the Pain I have given you, which made
me fear, more than once, that your Head was affected,
so uncommon, yet so like your self, has been
the manner of your Acting) that I will break off
a Correspondence, that has given you so much Uneasiness:
And my Pamela may believe, that if I
can be as good as my Word in this Point, she will
never more be in Danger of any Rival whatever. 
But say, my dear Love, (added the charming,
charming Man) say you forgive me; and resume
but your former Chearfulness, and affectionate Regards
to me; else I shall suspect the Sincerity of
your Forgiveness: And you shall indeed go to
Kent; but not without me, nor your Boy neither; 
and, if you insist upon it, the poor Miss you have
wished so often, and so generously to have, shall
be given up absolutely to your Disposal. 
Do you think, my Lady, I could speak any one
distinct Sentence? No indeed I could not—Pardon,
Pardon You, dear Sir!—and I sunk down
on my Knees, from his Arms—All I beg—All
I hope—Your Pardon—my Thankfulness— 
O spare me—spare me but Words—And indeed
I was just choak'd with my Joy: I never was
so in my whole Life before. And my Eyes were in
a manner fixed, as the dear Gentleman told me
afterwards; and that he was a little startled, seeing
nothing but the Whites; for the Sight was out of
its Orbits, in a manner, lifted up to Heaven—in
Ecstasy for a Turn so sudden and so unexpected! 
We were forced to separate soon after; for there
was no bearing each other, so excessive was my Joy, 

and his Goodness. He left me, and went down to
his own Closet. 
Judge my Imployment you will, I am sure,
my dear Lady, I had new Ecstasy to be bless'd
with, in a Thankfulness so exalted, that it left me
all light and pleasant, as if I had shook off Body,
and trod in Air; so much Heaviness had I lost, and
so much Joy had I received! —From Two such
Extremes how was it possible I could presently hit
the Medium! —For when I had given up my beloved
Husband, as lost to me, and had dreaded the
Consequences to his future State; to find him not
only untainted as to Deed, but, in all Probability,
mine upon better and surer Terms than ever— 
O Madam! must not this give a Joy beyond all
Joy, and surpassing all Expression! 
About Eight o'Clock Mr. B. sent me up these
Lines from his Closet, which will explain what I
meant, as to the Papers I must beg your Ladyship
to return me. 

My dear Pamela,
I Have so much real Concern at the Anguish I
have given you, and am so much affected with
the Recollection of the uncommon Scenes which
passed between us just now, that I write, because
I know not how to look so excellent a Creature
in the Face. —You must therefore sup without
me, and take your Mrs. Jervis to-bed with you; 
who, I doubt not, knows all this Affair; and
you may tell her the happy Event. 
‘You must not interfere with me just now, my
Dear, while I am writing upon a Subject which
takes up all my Attention; and which requiring 

great Delicacy, I may, possibly, be all Night,
before I can please myself in it. 
‘I am determined, absolutely, to make good
my Promise to you. But if you have written to
your Mother, to Miss Darnford, or to Lady
Davers, any thing of this Affair, you must shew
me the Copies of your Letters, and let me into
every Tittle how you came by your Information. 
—I solemnly promise you, on my Honour,
(that has not yet been violated to you, and I hope
never will) that not a Soul shall know or suffer
by the Communication, not even Turner; for
I am confident he has had some Hand in it. This
Request you must comply with, if you can confide
in me; for I shall make some Use of it, (as
prudent an one as I am able) for the sake of
every one concern'd, in the Conclusion of the
Correspondence between the Lady and myself. 
Whatever you may have said, in the Bitterness of
your Heart, in the Letters I require to see, or
whatever any of those, to whom they are directed,
shall say, on the bad Prospect, shall be
forgiven, and look'd upon as deserv'd, by 
Your ever-obliged and faithful, &c.’ 

I return'd the following: 

Dearest, dear Sir,
‘I will not break in upon you, while you are
so importantly imploy'd. Mrs. Jervis has indeed
seen my Concern for some time past, and
has heard Rumours, as I know by Hints she has
from time to time given me; but her Prudence,
and my Reserves, have kept us from saying any 

thing to one another of it. Neither my Mother,
nor Miss Darnford, know a Tittle of it from
me. I have received a Letter of Civility from
Miss, and have answered it, taking and giving
Thanks for the Pleasure of each other's Company,
and best Respects from her, and the Lincolnshire
Families, to your dear Self. These, my Copy,
and her Original, you shall see when you please. 
But, in Truth, all that has passed, is between
Lady Davers and me, and I have not kept Copies
of mine; but I will dispatch a Messenger to her
Ladyship for them, if you please, in the Morning,
before 'tis Light; not doubting your kind Promise
of excusing every Thing, and every Body. 
‘I beg, dear Sir, you will take care your Health
suffers not by your sitting up; for the Nights are
cold and damp. 
‘I will, now you have given me the Liberty,
let Mrs. Jervis know how happy you have made
me, by dissipating my Fears, and the idle Rumours,
as I shall call them to her, of Calumniators. 
‘God bless you, dear Sir, for your Goodness
and Favour to 
Your ever-dutiful
P. B.’ 

He was pleased to return me this: 

My dear Life,
‘You need not be in such Haste to send. If
you write to Lady Davers, how the Matter
has ended, let me see the Copy of it: And be
very particular in your, or rather my Trial. It 

shall be a standing Lesson to me for my future Instruction; 
as it will be a fresh Demonstration of
your Excellence, which every Hour I more and
more admire. I am glad Lady Davers only knows
the Matter. I think I ought to avoid seeing you,
till I can assure you, that every thing is accommodated
to your Desire. Longman has sent me
some Advices, which will make it proper for me
to meet him at Bedford or Gloucester. I will not
go to Tunbridge, till I have all your Papers; and
so you'll have Three Days time to procure them. 
Your Boy, and your Penmanship, will find you
no disagreeable Imployment till I return. Nevertheless,
on second Thoughts, I will do myself the
Pleasure of breakfasting with you in the Morning,
to re-assure you of my unalterable Purpose to approve
myself, 
My dearest Life,
Ever faithfully Yours.’ 


Thus, I hope, is happily ended this dreadful
Affair. My next shall inform your Ladyship of the
Particulars of our Breakfast Conversation. But I
would not slip this Post, without acquainting you
with this blessed Turn; and to beg the Favour of
you to send me back my Letters; which will lay a
new Obligation upon, 
Dear Madam,
Your obliged Sister, and humble Servant,
P. B. 
