


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Wedn. Night, Mar. 29. 
Inclose, my Lucy, the doctor's third pacquet. 
From its contents you will pity Sir Charles, as
well as Clementina; and if you enter impartially into
the situation of the family, and allow as much to their
zeal for a religion they are satisfied with, as you will
do for Sir Charles's steadiness in his; you will also pity
them. They are all good; they are all considerate. 
A great deal is to be said for them; tho' much more 

for Sir Charles, who insisted not upon that change of
religion in the Lady, which they demanded from him. 
How great does he appear in my eyes! A confessor,
tho' not a martyr, one may call him, for his religion
and country. —How deep was his distress! A
mind so delicate as his, and wishing for the sake of the
Sex, and the Lady and Family, as he did, rather to
be repulsed by them, than to be obliged himself to decline
their intended favour. 
You will admire the Lady in her sweetly-modest
behaviour, on his first visit before her mother; but
more, for the noble spirit she endeavoured to resume
in her conversation with him in the garden. 
But how great will he appear in your eyes, in the
eyes of my grandmother, and aunt Selby, for that
noble apostrophe! —‘But, O my Religion and my
Country! I cannot, cannot, renounce you! What
can this short life promise, what can it give, to warrant
such a sacrifice!’ 
Yet her conduct, you will find, is not inferior to
his; firmly persuaded, as she is, of the truth of her
religion; and loving him with an ardor that he had
from the first restrained in himself from hopelessness? 
But to admire her as she deserves, I should transcribe
all she says, and his account of her whole behaviour. 
O my dear! Who could have acted as Clementina
acted! —Not, I fear, 
Your Harriet Byron. 


Dr. Bartlett's third Letter.
Your sixth command, madam, is, 
To give you the particulars of Mr. Grandison's
reception from the Marchioness and her Clementina,
on his return to Bologna from Vienna, at
the invitation of Signor Jeronymo. 
Mr. Grandison was received at his arrival with 

great tokens of esteem and friendship, by the Marquis
himself, and by the Bishop. 
Signor Jeronymo, who still kept his chamber, the
introducer being withdrawn, embraced him: And
now, said he, is the affair, that I have had so long in
view, determined upon. O Chevalier! you will be a
happy man. Clementina will be yours: You will be
Clementina's: And now indeed do I embrace my
brother—But I detain you not: Go to the happy
girl: She is with her mother, and both are ready to
receive and welcome you. Allow for the gentle spirit:
She will not be able to say half she thinks. 
Camilla then appeared, to conduct me, says Mr.
Grandison, to her Ladies, in the Marchioness's drawing-room. 
She whispered me in the passage: Welcome,
thrice welcome, best of men! Now will you
be rewarded for all your goodness! 
I found the Marchioness sitting at her toilette,
richly dressed, as in ceremony; but without attendants; 
even Camilla retired, as soon as she had opened
the door for me. 
The lovely Clementina stood at the back of her
mother's chair. She was elegantly dressed: But her
natural modesty, heightened by a glowing consciousness,
that seemed to arise from the occasion, gave her
advantages that her richest jewels could not have given
her. 
The Marchioness stood up. I kissed her hand— 
You are welcome, Chevalier, said she. The only
man on earth that I could thus welcome, or is fit to
be so welcomed! —Clementina, my dear! —turning
round, and taking her hand. 
The young Lady had shrunk back, her complexion
varying; now glowing, now pale—Excuse her voice,
said the condescending mother; her heart bids you
welcome. 
Judge for me, my dear Dr. Bartlett, how I must
be affected at this gracious reception: I, who knew 

not the terms that were to be prescribed to me. 
‘Spare me, dear Lady, thought I, spare me my Conscience,
and take all the world's wealth and glory to
yourselves: I shall be rich enough with Clementina.’ 
The Marchioness seated her in her own chair. I
approached her: But how could I with that grateful
ardor, that, but for my doubts, would have sprung to
my lips? Modest Love, however, was attributed to
me; and I had the praise wholly for that which was
but partly due to it. 
I drew a chair for the Marchioness, and, at her
command, another for myself. The mother took one
hand of her bashful daughter: I presumed to take the
other: The amiable Lady held down her blushing
face, and reproved me not, as she did once before,
on the like freedom, for being too free. Her mother
asked me questions of an indifferent nature; as of my
journey; of the courts I had visited since I left them; 
when I heard from England; after my father; my
sisters: The latter questions in a kind way, as if she
were asking after relations that were to be her own. 
What a mixture of pain had I with the favour
shewn me, and for the favour shewn me! For I questioned
not but a change of religion would be proposed,
and insisted on; and I had no doubt in my
mind about my own. 
After a short conversation the amiable daughter
arose, courtesied low to her mother, with dignity to
me; and withdrew. 
Ah, Chevalier! said the Marchioness, as soon as she
was gone, little did I think, when you left us, that
we should so soon see you again; and on the account
we see you: But you know how to receive your good
fortune with gratitude. Your modesty keeps in countenance
our forwardness. 
I bowed—What could I say? 
I shall leave, so will my Lord, particular subjects
to be talked of, between the Bishop and you. You 

will, if it be not your own fault, have a treasure in
Clementina; and a treasure with her. We shall do
the same things for her, as if she had married the man
we wished her to have when we thought her affections
disengaged. You may believe we love our daughter— 
Else— 
I applauded their indulgent goodness. 
I can have no doubt, Mr. Grandison, that you love
Clementina above all women. 
[I had never seen the woman, Dr. Bartlett, that I
could have loved so well, had I not restrained myself,
at first, from the high notion I knew they had of
their quality and rank; from considerations of the
difference in religion; of the trust and confidence the
family placed in me; and by the resolution I had
made, as a guard to myself from the time of my entering
upon my travels, of never aiming to marry a
foreigner.] 
I assured the Marchioness, that I was absolutely
disengaged in my affections: That not having presumed
to encourage hopes of the good fortune that
seemed to await me, I could hardly yet flatter myself
that so great an happiness was reserved for me. 
She answered, That I deserved it all: That I knew
the value they had for me: That Clementina's regard
was founded in virtue: That my character was my
happiness: That, however, what the world would
say, had been no small point with them; but that
was as good as got over; and she doubted not but all
that depended upon me, would, as well from generosity
as gratitude, be complied with. 
[Here, thought I, is couched the expectation: And
if so, would to heaven I had never seen Italy!] 
The Marquis joined his Lady and me soon after. 
His features had a melancholy cast. This dear girl,
said he, has fastened upon me part of her malady. 
Parents, Chevalier, who are blessed with even hopeful
children, are not always happy. This girl—But no 

more: She is a good child. In the general oeconomy
of Providence, none of the sons of men are unhappy,
but some others are the happier for it. Our son the
Bishop will talk to you upon terms. 
I have hinted to the Chevalier, my Lord, said the
Marchioness, the happiness that awaits him. 
How does the poor girl? —Bashful enough, I suppose! 
Indeed, my Lord, she cannot look up, answered
the Lady. 
Poor thing! I supposed it would be so. 
Why, why, thought I, was I suffered to see this
mother, this daughter, before their conditions were
proposed to me! 
But what indulgent parents are these, Dr. Bartlett? 
What an excellent daughter? Yet not to be happy! 
But how much more unhappily circumstanced did I
think myself! —I, who had rather have been rejected
with disdain by twenty women in turn, than to be
obliged to decline the honour intended me by a family
I reverenced! 
Thus far Mr. Grandison. This, madam, will
answer your question, as to the VIth article; but I
believe a few more particulars will be acceptable. 
The Marquis led me, proceeds Mr. Grandison,
into the chamber of Signor Jeronymo. Your good
fortune, Chevalier, said he, as we entered it, is owing
to Jeronymo, who owes his life to you. I bless
God, we are a family that know not what ingratitude
means. 
I made my acknowlegements both to father and son. 
The Marquis then went into public affairs; and
soon after left us together. 
I was considering, whether I had best tell that sincere
friend my apprehensions in relation to the articles
of religion and residence; for he had with an air of 

humour congratulated me on the philosophical manner
in which I bore my good fortune; when Camilla
entered, and whispered me, of her own head, as she
said, That her young Lady was just gone into the
garden. 
I dare say, it was of her own head: For Camilla
has a great deal of good-nature, and is constantly desirous
of obliging, where she thinks she shall not offend
any-body. 
Follow her then, said Jeronymo, who heard what
Camilla said: Clementina perhaps expects you. 
Camilla waited for me at the entrance into the garden. 
One word, Sir, if you please. I am afraid of
the return of my young Lady's thoughtfulness. She
says, she is ashamed of the poor figure she made before
her mother: She is sure she must look mean in
your eyes. A man to be sent for, Camilla, said she,
in compliment to my weakness! Why did not my
too indulgent father bid me conquer my folly, or die? 
O that I had not owned my attachment! ‘Naughty
Mrs. Beaumont! said she, Had it not been for you,
my own bosom had contained the secret; till shame,
and indignation against myself, had burst my heart!’ 
She is resolved, she says, to resume a spirit becoming
her birth and quality; and I am afraid of her elevations. 
Her great apprehensions are, that, with all
this condescension of her parents, obstacles will arise
on your part. If so, she says she shall not be able to
bear her own reflexions, nor look her friends in the
face. 
My dear Dr. Bartlett, how have I, who have hitherto
so happily escaped the snares by which the feet
of unreflecting youth are often entangled by women
of light fame, been embarrassed by perverse accidents
that have arisen from my friendships with the worthy
of the Sex! Was there ever a more excellent family
than this? —Every individual of it is excellent. And
is not their worthiness, and even their piety, the cause
to which our mutual difficulties are owing? 

But, O my Religion and my Country! I cannot,
cannot renounce you! What can this short life give,
what can it promise, to warrant such a sacrifice! 
I said nothing to Camilla, you may believe, of what
I could or could not do; yet she saw my distress: She
took notice of it. Being firmly persuaded of the excellency
of her own religion, she wondered that a
man of reflexion and reading could be of a contrary
one. Her heart, she said, as well as the heart of her
young Lady, boded an unhappy issue to our Loves:
Heaven avert it! said the honest woman: But what
may we not fear by way of judgment, where a young
Lady—Forgive me, Sir—prefers a man she thinks she
ought not to prefer; and where a gentleman will
not be convinced of errors which the Church condemns? 
She again begged I would forgive her. I praised
her good intention, and sincere dealing; and leaving
her, went into the garden. 
I found the young Lady in the Orange-grove. You
have been in that garden, Dr. Bartlett. 
She turned her face towards me, as I drew near her,
and seeing who it was, stopt. 
Clementina, armed with conscious worthiness, as if
she had resumed the same spirit which had animated
her on the eve of my departure from Bologna, condescended
to advance two or three paces towards
me. 
Lovely woman, thought I, encourage the true
dignity that shines in that noble aspect! —Who knows
what may be our destiny? 
I bowed. Veneration, esteem, and concern, from the
thought of what that might be, all joined to make my
obeisance profound. 
I was going to speak. She prevented me. Her air
and manner were great. 
You are welcome, Sir, said she. My mamma bid
me say welcome. I could not then speak: And she 

was so good to you, as to answer for my heart. My
voice is now found: But tell me—Do I see the same
generous, the same noble Grandison, that I have
heretofore seen? —Or, do I see a man inclined to slight
the creature whom her indulgent parents are determined
to oblige, even to the sacrifice of all their
views? 
You see, madam, the same Grandison, his heart
only oppressed with the honour done him; and with
the fear that the happiness designed for him may yet
be frustrated. If it should, how shall I be able to
support myself? 
[What a difficult situation, my dear Dr. Bartlett,
was mine! —Equally afraid to urge my suit with ardor,
or to be imagined capable of being indifferent to
her favour!] 
What do you fear, Sir? —You have grounds in
your own heart, perhaps, for your fear. If you have,
let me know them. I am not afraid to know them. 
Let me tell you, that I opposed the step taken. I declared,
that I would sooner die, than it should be taken. 
It was to You, they said; and you would know how
to receive as you ought the distinction paid you. I
have a soul, Sir, not unworthy of the spirit of my
ancestors: Tell me what you fear? —I only fear one
thing; and that is, that I should be thought to be
more in your power than in my own. 
Noble Lady! And think you, that while my happiness
is not yet absolutely resolved upon, I have not
reason to fear? —You will always, madam, be in your
own power: You will be most so when in mine. 
My gratitude will ever prompt me to acknowlege
your goodness to me as a condescension. 
But say; tell me, Sir; Did you not, at first receiving
the invitation, despise, in absence, the Clementina,
that now perhaps, in presence, you have the goodness
to pity? 
O that the high-soul'd Clementina would not think 

so contemptibly of the man before her, as she must
think, when she puts a question that would intitle him
to infamy, could he presume to think an answer to it
necessary! 
Well, Sir; I shall see how far the advances made
on the wrong side will be justified, or rather countenanced,
by the advances, or, shall I say (I will if you
please) condescensions to be made on yours. 
[What a petulance, thought I! —But can the generous,
the noble Clementina, knowing that terms will
be proposed, with which in honour and conscience I
cannot comply, put my regard for her on such a test
as this? —I will not suppose that she is capable of
mingling art with her magnanimity.] 
Is this, madam, said I, a generous anticipation? 
Forgive me: But when your friends are so good as to
think me incapable of returning ingratitude for obligation,
I hope I shall not be classed, by their beloved
daughter, among the lowest of mankind. 
Excuse me, Sir; the woman who has been once
wrong, has reason to be always afraid of herself. If
you do not think meanly of me, I will endeavour to
think well of myself; and then, Sir, I shall think
better of you, if better I can think: For, after all,
did I not more mistrust myself than I do you, I should
not perhaps be so capricious as, I am afraid, I sometimes
am. 
The Marquis has hinted to me, madam, That
your brother the Bishop is to discourse with me on the
subject now the nearest to my heart of all others:
May I presume to address myself to their beloved
daughter upon it, without being thought capable of
endeavouring to prepossess her in my favour before my
Lord and I meet? 
I will answer you frankly, Sir: There are preliminaries
to be settled; and, till they are, I that know
there are, do not think myself at liberty to hear you
upon any subject that may tend to prepossession. 

I acquiesce, madam: I would not for the world be
thought to wish for the honour of your attention,
while it is improper for you to favour me with it. 
[I did not know, Dr. Bartlett, but upon a supposition
of a mutual interest between us, as I had hoped
she would allow, Clementina might wish that I would
lead to some particular discourse. Tho' modesty becomes
ours as well as the other sex, yet it would be
an indelicacy not to prevent a Lady, in some certain
cases. But thus discouraged,] Perhaps, madam, said
I, the attendance I do myself the honour to pay you
here, may not be agreeable to the Marquis. 
Then, Sir, you will choose, perhaps, to withdraw. 
But don't—Yes, do. 
I respectfully withdrew; but she taking a winding
alley, which led into that in which I slowly walked,
we met again. I am afraid, said she, I have been a
little petulant: Indeed, Sir, I am not satisfied with
myself. I wish—And there she stopt. 
What, madam, do you wish? Favour me with
your wishes. If it be in my power— 
It is not, interrupted she. I wish I had not been at
Florence. The Lady I was with, is a good woman; 
but she was too hard for me. Perhaps (and she sighed)
had I not been with her, I had been at rest, and
happy, before now; but if I had not, there is a pleasure,
as well as pain, in melancholy. But now I am
so fretful! —If I hated the bitterest enemy I have, as
much as at times I hate myself, I should be a very
bad creature. 
This was spoken with an air so melancholy, as
greatly disturbed me. God grant, thought I, that
the articles of Religion and Residence may be agreed
upon between the Bishop and me! 
Here, my good Miss Byron, I close this Letter. 
Sir Charles has told you, briefly, the event of the conference
between the Bishop and him; and I hasten to
obey you in your next article. 

