



My dear Lady,
It is needful, in order to let you more intelligibly
into the Subject where I left off in my last, that
your Ladyship should know, that your generous Brother
has made me his Almoner, as I was my late dear
Lady's; and has order'd Mr. Longman to pay me 50l.
*  Quarterly, for Purposes of which he requires no
Account, tho' I have one always†  ready to produce; 
and he has given me other Sums to inable me to do
all the Good I can to distressed Objects, at my first
setting out. Thus inabled, your Ladyship knows
not how many honest Hearts I have made glad
already, and how many I hope to rejoice before
a Year is at an End, and yet come within my
Limits. 
Now, Madam, as I knew Mrs. Jervis was far
from being easy in her Circumstances, thinking herself
obliged to pay old‡  Debts for two extravagant
Children who are both dead; and maintaining
in Schooling and Cloaths three of their Children,
which always keeps her bare; I took upon me one
Day, as she and I sat together, at our Needles, to
say to her, (as we are always running over old
Stories, when we are alone) My good Mrs. Jervis,
will you allow me to ask you after your own private
Affairs, and if you are tolerably easy in them? 
You are very good, Madam, said she, to concern
yourself about my poor Matters, so much as
you have to imploy your Thoughts about, and so
much as every Moment of your Time is taken up
from the Hour you rise, to the Time of your Rest. 

But I can with great Pleasure attribute it to your
Bounty, and that of my honoured Master, that I am
easier and easier every Day. 
But tell me, my dear Mrs. Jervis, said I, how
your Matters particularly stand. I love to mingle
Concerns with my Friends, and as I hide nothing
from you, I hope you'll treat me with equal Freedom; 
for I always loved you, and always will; 
and nothing but Death shall divide our Friendship. 
She had Tears of Gratitude in her Eyes, and
taking off her Spectacles, I cannot bear, said she,
so much Goodness! –––Oh! my Lady!––– 
Oh! my Pamela, say, reply'd I. –––How often must
I chide you for calling me anything but your Pamela,
when we are alone together?––– 
My Heart, said she, will burst with your Goodness! –––I cannot bear it!––– 
But you must bear it, and bear still worse Exercises
to your grateful Heart, I can tell you that: 
A pretty thing, truly! Here, I a poor helpless Girl,
raised from Poverty and Distress, by the Generosity
of the best of Gentlemen, only because I was
young and sightly, shall put on Lady-Airs to a
Gentlewoman born, the Wisdom of whose Years,
and her faithful Services, and good Management,
make her a much greater Merit in this Family,
than I can pretend to have! –––––And return,
shall I? in the Day of my Power, Insult and Haughiness
for the Kindness and Benevolence I received
from her in that of my Indigence! ––––Indeed, I
won't forgive you my dear Mrs. Jervis, if I think
you capable of looking upon me in any other
Light than as your Daughter; for you have been
a Mother to me, when the Absence of my own
could not afford me the Comfort, and good Counsel,
I received every Day from you.––– 

Then moving my Chair nearer her, and taking
her Hand, and wiping, with my Handkerchief in my
other, her reverend Cheek, Come, come, my dear
second Mother, said I, call me your Daughter, your
Pamela: I have passed many sweet Hours with you
under that Name: And as I have but too seldom
such an Opportunity as this, open to me your worthy
Heart, and let me know, if I cannot make my
second Mother as easy and happy, as our dear Master
has made my first?––– 
She hung her Head on her Shoulder, and I waited
till the Discharge of her Tears gave Time for Utterance
to her Words; provoking only her Speech,
by saying, You used to have Three Grandchildren to
provide for in Cloaths and Schooling. They are all
living, I hope? 
Yes, Madam, they are living: And your last
Bounty (Twenty Guineas was a great Sum, and
all at once!) made me very easy, and very happy!––– 
How easy, and how happy, Mrs. Jervis? 
Why, my dear Lady, I paid Five to one old
Creditor of my unhappy Sons; Five to a second; 
and Two-and-an-half to two others, in Proportion
to their respective Demands; and with the other
Five I paid off all Arrears of the poor Childrens
Schooling and Maintenance, and every one is
satisfy'd and easy, and all declare they will never
do harsh Things by me, if they are paid no more. 
But, tell me, Mrs. Jervis, what you owe in the
World, put all together; and you and I will contrive,
with Justice to our best Friend, to do all we can, to
make you quite easy; for, at your Time of Life, I
cannot bear, that you shall have any thing to disturb
you, which I can remove; and so my dear Mrs. Jervis,
let me know all. 
Come, I know your Debts, (dear, just, good
Woman, as you are!) like David's Sins, are ever 

before you: So come, putting my Hand in her
Pocket, let me be a friendly Pick-pocket: Let me
take out your Memorandum-Book, and we will
see how all Matters stand, and what can be done. 
Come, I see you are too much moved; your worthy
Heart is too much affected (pulling out her
Book, which she always has about her): I will go
to my Closet, and return presently. 
So I left her to recover her Spirits, and retir'd
with the good Woman's Book to my Closet. 
Your dear Brother stepping into the Parlour just
after I had gone out, Where's your Lady, Mrs.
Jervis? said he; and being told, came up to me,
What ails the good Woman below, my Dear? said
he: I hope, you and she have had no Words! 
No, indeed, Sir, answer'd I. –––If we had, I am
sure it would have been my Fault: But I have
picked her Pocket of her Memorandum-Book, in
order to look into her private Affairs, to see if I
cannot, with Justice to our common Benefactor,
make her as easy as you, Sir, have made my other
dear Parents. 
A Blessing, said the dear Gentleman, upon my
Charmer's benevolent Heart! –––I will leave every
thing to your Discretion, my Dear! –––Do all the
Good you prudently can to your Mrs. Jervis. 
I clasped my bold Arms about him, the starting
Tear testifying my Gratitude: Dearest, dear Sir, said
I, you affect me as much, as I did Mrs. Jervis: 
And if any one but you had a Right to ask, What
ails your Pamela? as you do, What ails Mrs.
Jervis? I must say, I am hourly so much oppress'd
by your Goodness, that there is hardly any bearing
one's own Joy. 
He saluted me, and said, I was a dear obliging
Creature. But, said he, I came to tell you, that
after we have din'd, we'll take a Turn, if you please, 

to Lady Arthur's: She has a Family of London
Friends for her Guests, and begs I will prevail upon
you to give her your Company, and attend you
myself, only to drink Tea with her; for I have told
her, we are to have Friends to sup with us. 
I will attend you, Sir, reply'd I, most willingly; 
altho' I doubt I am to be made a Shew of. 
Something like it, said he ––– For she has promis'd
them this Favour. 
I need not dress otherwise than I am? 
No, he was pleased to say, I was always what he
wished me to be. 
So he left me to my good Works, (those were
his kind Words) and I ran over Mrs. Jervis's Accounts,
and found a Balance drawn of all her Matters,
in one Leaf, in a very clear manner, and a
thankful Acknowlegement to God, for her Master's
last Bounty, “which had inabled her to give Satisfaction
to others, and do herself great Pleasure,” 
as she had written underneath. 
The Balance of all was 35l. II s. and odd Pence; 
and I went to my Escritoire, and took out 40l. and
down I hasted to my good Mrs. Jervis. And I said,
to her, Here, my dear good Friend, is your Pocket-Book; 
but are 35 or 36l. all you owe or are bound
for in the World? 
It is, Madam, said she, and enough too. It is
a great Sum; but 'tis in Four Hands, and they are
all in pretty good Circumstances; and so convinced
of my Honesty, that they will never trouble me
for it; for I have reduced the Debt every Year
something, since I have been in my Master's Service. 
Nor shall it ever be in any Body's Power, said I,
to trouble you. I'll tell you how we'll order it. 
So I sat down and made her sit down by me,
Here, my dear Mrs. Jervis, is 40l. It is not so 

much to me now, as the*  Two Guineas were to
you, that you would have given me, if I would have
accepted of them, at my going away from this
House, to my Father's, as I thought. But I will not
give it you neither, at least at present, as you shall
hear: Indeed I won't make you so uneasy as that
comes to. But here take this, and pay the Thirty-five
Pounds odd Money to the atmost Farthing; 
and the remaining Four Pounds odd will be a little
Fund in Advance towards the Childrens Schooling. 
And thus you shall repay it. I always designed, as our
dear Master added Five Guineas per Annum to your
Salary, in Acknowledgment of the Pleasure he took in
your Services, when I was Pamela Andrews, to add
Five Pounds per Annum to it from the Time I became
Mrs. B. But from that time, for so many Years to
come, you shall receive no more than you did, till the
whole Forty Pounds be repaid. And so, my dear
Mrs. Jervis, you won't have any Obligation to me,
you know, but for the Advance; and that is a poor
Matter, not to be spoken of: And I will have Leave
for it, for fear I should die. 
Had your Ladyship seen the good dear Woman's
Behaviour on this Occasion, you would never have
forgot it. She could not speak: Tears ran down her
Cheeks in plentiful Currents: her modest Hand put
gently from her my offering Hand, and her Bosom
heav'd, and she sobb'd with the painful Tumult that
seem'd to struggle within her, and, which for some
few Moments, made her incapable of speaking. 
At last, I rising, and putting my Arm round
her Neck, and wiping her Eyes, and kissing her
Cheek, she cry'd, My dear, my excellent Lady! 'tis
too much! too much! I cannot bear all this ––– And
then she threw herself at my Feet; for I was not 

strong enough to hinder it, and with uplifted Hands,
May God Almighty, said she –––– I kneeled by her,
and clasping her Hands in mine, both uplifted together
–––May God Almighty, said I, drowning her
Voice with my louder Voice, bless us both together,
for many happy Years! and may He bless and reward
the dear Gentleman who has thus inabled me to
make the Widow's Heart to sing for Joy! 
Dear, good Woman, said I, rising, and raising
her, Do you think you shall outdo me in Prayers
and Praises to the Fountain of all our Mercies? –––Do
you think you shall? –––And while I am impower'd to
do Good to so many worthy Objects abroad, shall I
forget to make my dear Mrs. Jervis happy at home? 
And thus, my Lady, did I force upon the good
Woman's Acceptance the Forty Pounds. 
Permit me, Madam, to close this Letter here,
and to resume the Subject in my next; till when I
have the Honour to be, 
Your Ladyship's most obliged
and faithful Servant,
P. B. 

