

A Young Orphan Lady, of an independent Fortune,
receivable at Age, or Day of Marriage,
will hardly fail of several Attempts to engage
her Affections. And the following general Rules
and Instructions will be of Use to her on these Occasions: 

In the first Place, she ought to mistrust all those
who shall seek to set her against her Guardian, or
those Relations to whom her Fortune or Person is
intrusted: And, next, to be apprehensive of all
such as privately want to be introduced to her, and
who avoid treating with her Guardian first for his
Consent. For she may be assur'd, that if a young
Man has Proposals to make, which he himself
thinks would be accepted by a Person of Years and
Experience, he will apply in a regular way to her
Friends; but if he has not, he will hope to engage
the young Lady's Affections by the means of her
Milaner, her Mantua-maker, or her Servant; and
so by Bribes and Promises endeavour to make his
way to her Favour, in order to take Advantage of
her Youth and Inexperience: For this is the constant
Method of Fortune-hunters, to which many a
worthy young Lady, of good Sense and good Fortune,
has owed her utter Ruin. 
The following are generally the Methods taken
by this Set of Designers: 
These industrious Go-betweens, who hope to
make a Market of a young Lady's Affections,
generally by Letter, or Word of Mouth, if
they have Opportunity, set forth to the young
Lady, 
“That there is a certain young Gentleman of
great Merit, of a handsome Fortune, and fine
Expectations, or prosperous Business, who is fallen
deeply in Love with her. And very probably
the young Lady, having no bad Opinion of
herself, and loving to be admired, believes it
very easily. 
“That he has seen her at Church, or the Opera,
the Play, the Assemblée, &c. and is impatient to
make known his Passion to her. 

“That he is unwilling to apply to her Guardian,
till he knows how his Address will be received by
herself. 
“That, besides, it may very probably be the
Case, that her Guardian may form Obstacles,
which may not be reasonable on her Part to
give into. 
“That, if he has Daughters of his own, he
would perhaps rather see them marry'd first. 
“That he may not care to part with her Fortune,
and the Reputation and Convenience the Management
of it may give him. 
“That he may design to marry her, when he
thinks proper, to some Person agreeable to his
own Interest or Inclinations, without consulting
hers as he ought. 
“That, therefore, it would be best, that her
Guardian should know nothing of the Matter,
till she saw whether she could approve the Gentleman,
or not. 
“That even then she might encourage his Address,
or discountenance it, as she pleased. 
“That, for her the Proposer's part, she had no
Interest in the World, one way or other; and no
View, but to serve the young Lady, and to oblige
a young Gentleman so well qualify'd to
make her happy.” And such-like plausible Assurances; 
ending, perhaps, “with desiring to
bring on an Interview, or, if that will not be admitted,
that she will receive a Letter from him.” 
This kind of Introduction ought always to be
suspected by a prudent young Lady. She ought
with Warmth and Resentment to discourage the officious
Proposer. She ought to acquaint her, 
“That she is resolved never to give way to a
Proposal of this Importance, without the Consent
and Approbation of her Guardian or Friends. 

“That her good Father or Mother, who had
seen the World, and had many Years Experience
of her Guardian's Honour and Qualifications for
such a Trust, knew what they did, when they
put her under his Care. 
“That he had always shewn an honest and generous
Regard for her Welfare. 
“That she took it very unkindly of the Proposer,
to offer to inspire her with Doubts of his
Conduct, when she had none herself, nor Reason
for any. 
“That it was Time enough when he gave her
Reason, to be apprehensive of his sinister Designs,
or of his preferring his own Interest to hers. 
“That it was a very strange Attempt to make
her mistrust a Friend, a Relation, a Gentleman,
who was chosen for this Trust by her dear Parents,
on many Years Experience of his Honour
and Probity, and of whose Goodness to her, for
so long time past, she herself had many Proofs:
And this in Favour of a Person who had a visible
Interest to induce him to this Application; 
whose Person she hardly knew, if at all; whose
Professions she could not judge of; who began by
such mean, such groundless, such unworthy Insinuations:
Who might, or might not, be the Person
he pretended; and who wanted to induce
her to prefer himself, on no Acquaintance at all,
to a Gentleman she had so many Years known; 
and whose Honour, good Character, Reputation,
and Conscience, were all engaged to her as so
many Pledges for his honourable Behaviour to
her. 
“That she the Proposer, and the young Gentleman
too, must have a very indifferent Opinion
of her Gratitude, her Prudence, her Discretion,
to make such an Attempt upon her. 

“That if he could approve himself to a Man
of Years and Experience, who was not to be imposed
upon by blind Passion, in the Light he
wanted to appear in to her, why should he not
apply to him first? 
“That surely it was a very ungenerous as well as
suspicious Method of Proceeding, that he could
find no other way to give her an Opinion of himself, but by endeavouring to depreciate the Character
of a Gentleman, who, by this Method,
plainly appeared to his own Apprehension to stand
in the way of his Proceedings; and that too before
he had try'd him; and which shewed, that
he himself had not Hope of succeeding, but by
Arts of Delusion, Flattery, and a clandestine
Address; and had nothing but her own Inadvertence
and Inexperience to build upon. 
“That, therefore, it behoved her, had she no
other Reason, to reject with Resentment and
Disdain a Conduct so affrontive to her Understanding,
as well as selfish and ungenerous in the
Proposer. 
“That, therefore, she would not countenance
any Interview with a Person capable of acting in
such a manner, nor receive any Letter from him. 
“And lastly, that she desires never to hear of
this Matter again, from her the Proposer, if she
would have her retain for her that good Opinion
which she had hitherto had.” 
This prudent Reasoning and Conduct will make
the Intervener quit her Design upon the young
Lady, if she is not wholly abandoned of all Sense
of Shame, and corrupted by high Bribes and Promises; 
and in this Case, the young Lady will judge
how unfit such a Person is either for her Confident
or Acquaintance. Nor will the Lady lose an humble
Servant worthy of being retain'd or encourag'd: For 

if he be the Person he pretends, he will directly apply
to her Guardian, and have a high Opinion of
her Prudence and Discretion; and if she hears no
more of him, she may conclude, he could not
make good his Pretensions to a Person of Discernment,
and will have Occasion to rejoice in escaping
his designing Arts with so little Trouble to herself. 
If a Lady has had actually a Letter delivered her
from such a Pretender, and that by means of a Person
who has any Share in her Confidence, and
wants a Form of a Letter to send to the Recommender
to discourage the Proceeding; the following,
which has been sent with good Effect, on a
like Occasion, may be proper. 
