


Lady G. To Lady L. 


Selby-house, Friday, June 16.
Here we are, my Caroline: And the happiest
people in the world should we be, if Harriet were
but well, my brother in England, and you and Lord
L. with us. 
Mrs. Selby, Lucy, Nancy, Harriet, met us at
Stony-Stratford, escorted by uncle Selby, and his
kinsman James. 
My Lord and I were Dear, Love, and Life, all the
journey. I was the sweetest-tempered creature! —Joyful
people are not always wise ones. When the heart
is open, silly things will be said; any-thing, in short,
that comes uppermost. I kindly allowed for my Lord's
joy, on twenty occasions. I smiled when he smiled,
laughed-out when he laughed out, did not talk to
any-body else when he directed his discourse to me; 
so that the honest man crowed all the way. It is a
charming thing, thought I, several times, to be on a
foot of good understanding with each other; for now
I can call him honest man, or any names, that lately
would have made him prance and caper; and he takes
every-thing kindly: Nay, two or three times he called
me honest woman; but laughed and looked round him
at the time, as if he were conscious that he had made
a bold, as well as witty retort. 
Let me tell you, Lady L. that I intend to give him
signs when he exceeds, and other signs when he is
right and clever; and I will accept of signs from him,
that he may not be affronted. I am confident that
we shall be in time an amazing happy couple. 

Emily was rejoiced to see her equally beloved and
revered Miss Byron. Miss Byron embraced Emily
with the affection of a sister. My honest man kissed
Miss Byron's hand on one knee, in the fervour of his
love and gratitude; for I had let him know, that he
owed much of his present happiness to her. She congratulated
him whisperingly, in my hearing, on my
being good. 
James Selby almost wept for love over Emily's
hand; while Emily looked as sleek and as shy as a
bird new-caught, for fear of being thought to give
him encouragement, after what you may remember
passed between them at Dunstable. 
Aunt Selby, Lucy, Nancy, were all rapture to see
us: We to see them. We were mother and sisters
the moment we were seated. Uncle Selby began to
crack his jokes upon me in the first half-hour. I spared
him not: And Lord G. will fare the better for him; 
since I must have somebody to play the rogue with. 
Dr. Bartlett was the revered of every heart. By the
way, I am in high credit with that good man, for
my behaviour to my Lord. 
Miss Byron received him with open arms, and even,
as her father, with an offered cheek: And the modest
man was so much affected by her filial regard for him,
that I was obliged, for our own sakes, to whisper her,
to rein-in her joy to see him, that we might have the
pleasure of hearing him talk. 
When we arrived at Selby-house, our joy was renewed,
as if we had not seen each other at Stratford. 
O, I should have told you, that in our journey from
Stratford hither, aunt Selby, Harriet, Emily, and I,
were in one coach: And I had, as we went on, a great
deal of good instruction insinuated to me, by way of
felicitation, on my being so very kind and obliging to
Lord G. And, as if I had been a child (corrected for
being untoward) they endeavoured to coax me into
a perseverance in what they called my duty. Aunt 

Selby, on this occasion, performed the maternal part
with so much good sense, and her praise and her cautions
were so delicately insinuated, that I began to
think, it was almost as pretty to be good as to be
saucy. 
Upon the whole, I really believe Lord G. will have
reason to rejoice, as long as he lives, that he was ruled
by his wife, in changing his Windsor and Oxford
journey for this of Northamptonshire. So right a thing
is it for men to be governable; and, perhaps, you'll
add, for women to keep good company. 
Lord L. thinks you, my sage sister, so good already,
that you need not be better, or I would wish him to
send you down to Selby-house. 
Well may Harriet revere her grandmother. That
venerable woman is good in every sense of the word. 
She is pious, charitable, benevolent, affectionate, condescending
to the very foibles of youth; chearful,
wise, patient under the infirmities of age, having outlived
all her wishes but one; which is, to see her
Harriet happily married: And then, she says, she
hopes to be soon released. Never could she be so
much admired in her blooming youth, tho' she was
then, it seems, deservedly celebrated, both for her
mind and person, as she is now in her declining age. 
You have seen and admire Mrs. Selby. She rises
upon me every hour. It gives one's heart joy, Lady L.
to look forward, beyond the age of youth and flutter,
when we see by these Ladies, that women in their advanced
years may, to express myself in the stile of
Sir Rowland Meredith, be good for something; or
still better, that the matronly time of female life, is
by far the most estimable of all the stages of it; if they
make good wives, good mistresses, and good mothers:
And, let me say, good aunts; were it but to keep in
countenance aunt Gertrude and aunt Nell; who, good
souls! will now hardly ever be mothers. 

Lucy is an excellent young creature. Nancy, when
Lucy is not present, is as excellent. Her cousins Kitty
and Patty Holles are agreeable young women. 
James Selby is a good sort of blundering well-meaning
great boy; who, when he has lived a few years
longer, may make much such a good sort of man,
as my Lord G. There's for you, my once catechizing
sister! Pray be as ready to praise, as you used to
be to blame me. I find duty and love growing fast
upon me. I shall get into a custom of bringing in
Lord G. on every occasion that will do him credit:
And then I shall be like Lady Betty Clemson; who is
so perpetually dinning the ears of her guests with her
domestic superlatives, that we are apt to suspect the
truth of all she says. 
But Harriet, our dear Harriet, is not at all well. 
She visibly falls away; and her fine complexion fades. 
Mr. Deane was here a week ago; and Lucy tells me,
was so much startled at the alteration in her lovely
countenance, that he broke from her, and shed tears
to Lucy. This good girl and Nancy lament to each
other the too-visible change: But when they are with
the rest of the family, they all seem afraid to take notice
of it to one another. She herself takes generous
pains to be lively, chearful, and unapprehensive, for
fear of giving concern to her grandmother and aunt; 
who will sometimes sit and contemplate the alteration,
sigh, and, now-and-then, drop a silent tear, which,
however, they endeavour to smile off, to avoid notice. 
I have already observed, that as these good
Ladies sit in her company, they watch in silent love
every turn of her mild and patient eye, every change
of her charming countenance; for they too well know
to what to impute the inward malady, which has approached
the best of hearts; and they know that the
cure cannot be within the art of the physician. They,
as we do, admire her voice, and her playing. They
ask her for a song, for a lesson on her harpsichord. 

She plays, she sings, at the very first word. In no one
act of chearfulness does she refuse to join. Her grandmother
and her aunt Selby frequently give a private
ball. The old Lady delights to see young people
chearful and happy. She is always present, and directs
the diversion; for she has a fine taste. We are
often to have these Balls, for our entertainment. Miss
Byron, her cousins say, knowing the delight her grandmother
takes in these amusements, for the sake of the
young people, to whom she considers it as a healthful
exercise, as well as diversion, is one of the alertest
in them. She excuses not herself, nor encourages that
supineness that creeps on, and invades a heart ill at
ease. Yet every-one sees, that solitude and retirement
are her choice; tho' she is very careful to have
it supposed otherwise; and, on the first summons,
hastens into company, and joins in the conversation. 
O she is a lovely, and beloved young creature! I think
verily, that tho' she was the admiration of every-body,
when she was with us, yet she is, if possible, more
amiable at home, and among her own relations. Her
uncle Selby raillies her sometimes. But respect, as
well as love, are visible in his countenance, when
he does: In her returns sweetness and reverence are
mingled. She never forgets that the raillier is her
uncle; yet her delicacy is not more apparent, than
that she is mistress of fine talents in that way; but
often restrains them, because she has far more superior
ones to value herself upon. And is not this the case
with my brother also? —Not so, I am afraid, with
your Charlotte. 
All her friends, however, rejoice in our visit to
them, for her sake. They compliment me on my
lively turn; and hope for a happy effect on Miss
Byron from it. 
I cannot accuse her of reserve to me. She owns
her Love for our brother as frankly as she used to do,
after we had torn the secret from her bosom at Colnebrooke. 

She acknowleges to me, that she glories
in it, and will not try to conquer it; because she is
sure the trial will be to no purpose; an excuse, by
the way, that if the conquest be necessary, would better
become the mouth of your Charlotte than that of
our Harriet: And so I have told her. 
She prays for the restoration of Lady Clementina,
and recovery of Signor Jeronymo. She loves to talk
of the whole Italian family; and yet seems fully assured
that Clementina will be the happy woman. But,
surely, Harriet must be our sister. She values herself
upon my brother's so solemnly requesting and claiming
her friendship. True Friendship, she but this morning
argued with me, being disinterested, and more intellectual
than personal, is nobler than Love. Love,
she said, does not always ripen into Friendship, as is
too frequently seen in wedlock. 
But does not the dear creature refine too much
when she argues thus? A calm and easy kind of
esteem, is all I have to judge from in my matrimony. 
I know not what Love is. At the very highest, and
when I was most a fool, my motive was supposed
convenience (in order to be freed from the apprehended
tyranny of a father); and that never carried me
beyond liking. But you, Lady L. were an adept in
the passion. Pray tell me, if there be a difference
between Love and Friendship, which is the noblest? 
Upon my opposing you and Lord L. (so truly one mind)
to her argument, she said, That yours is Love mellowed
into Friendship, upon full proof of the merit of
each: But, that there was a time, that the flame was
Love only, founded in hope of the merit; and the proof
might have been wanting; as it often is, when the
hope has been as strong, and seemingly as well founded,
as in your courtship. 
Harriet, possibly, may argue from her own situation,
in order to make her heart easy; and my brother
is so unquestionably worthy, that Love and Friendship 

may be one thing, in the bosom of a woman admiring
him; since he will not enter into any obligation,
that he cannot, that he will not, religiously perform. 
And if this refinement will make her heart
easier, and enable her to allow his Love to be placed
elsewhere, because of a prior claim, and of circumstances
that call for generous compassion, while she
can content herself with the offered Friendship, I think
we ought to indulge her in her delicate notions. 
Selby-house is a large, convenient, well-furnish'd habitation. 
To-morrow we are to make a visit, with
Lucy and Nancy, to their branch of the Selby Family. 
James is gone before. Those two girls are orphans:
But their grandmother, by their mother's side (a good
old Lady, mother-in-law to Mr. Selby) lives with
them, or, rather, they with her; and loves them. 
On our return, we are to have our first private
Ball, at Shirley-manor; a fine old seat, which, already,
the benevolent owner calls her Harriet's; with
an estate of about 500l. a year round it. 
Adieu, my dear Lady L.—My Lord and you, I
hope, will own me now. Yet are you not sometimes
surprised at the suddenness of my reformation? Shall
I tell you how it came about? To own the truth, I
began to find the man could be stout. “Charlotte,
thought I, what are you about? You mean not to
continue for ever your playful folly. You have no
malice, no wickedness, in your sauciness; only a
little levity: It may grow into habit:—Make your
retreat while you can with honour; before you harden
the man's heart, and find your reformation a
matter of indifference to him. You have a few
good qualities; are not a modern woman; have
neither wings to your shoulders, nor gad-fly in
your cap: You love home. At present the honest
man loves you. He has no vices. Every one loves
you; but all your friends are busy upon your conduct. 
You will estrange them from you. The 

man will not be a King Log—Be you a prudent
Frog, lest you turn him into a Stork. A weak man,
if you suppose him weak, made a tyrant, will be an
insupportable thing. I shall make him appear weak
in the eyes of every-body else, when I have so much
grace left, as would make me rise against any one
who should let me know they thought him so. My
brother will be reflected upon for his solicitude to
carry me to church with a man, whom I shall make
the world think I despise. Harriet will renounce
me. My wit will be thought folly. Does not the
suckling Emily, does not the stale virgin, aunt
Eleanor, think they have a right to blame, entreat,
instruct me? I will be good of choice, and make
my duty received as a favour. I have travelled a
great way in the road of perverseness. I see briars,
thorns, and a pathless track, before me. I may be
benighted: The day is far gone. Serpents may be
in the brakes. I will get home as fast as I can; and
rejoice every one, who now only wonder what is
become of me.” 
These, Lady L. were some of my reasonings. Make
your advantage of them against me, if you can. You
see that your grave wisdom had some weight with my
light folly. Allow a little for constitution now-and-then;
and you shall not have cause to be ashamed of
your sister. 
Let me conclude this subject, half one way, half
t'other—that is to say, half serious, half roguish: If
my Lord would but be cured of his taste for trifles and
nick-knacks, I should, possibly, be induced to consider
him as a man of better understanding than I
once thought him: But who can forbear, sometimes,
to think slightly of a man, who, by effeminacies, and
a Shell and China taste, undervalues himself? I hope
I shall cure him of these foibles; and, if I can, I shall
consider him as a work of my own hands, and be
proud of him, in compliment to myself. 

Let my aunt Eleanor (no more Nell, if I can help
it) know how good I continue to be. And now I will
relieve you and myself, with the assurance that I am,
and ever will be, notwithstanding yours and Lord L's
past severity to me, 
Your truly affectionate Sister,
Ch. G. 

