



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Lord M. and to the
Ladies of his House. 
[In Reply to Miss Montague's of Aug. 7. See No xxv.] 

Tuesday, Aug. 8. 
Excuse me, my good Lord, and my ever-honoured
Ladies, from accepting of your noble quarterly
bounty; and allow me to return, with all grateful 

acknowlegement, and true humility, the inclosed
earnest of your goodness to me. Indeed I have no
need of the one, and cannot possibly want the other: 
But, nevertheless, have such a sense of your generous
favour, that, to my last hour, I shall have pleasure
in contemplating upon it, and be proud of the
place I hold in the esteem of such venerable persons,
to whom I once had the ambition to hope to be
related. 
But give me leave to express my concern, that you
have banished your Kinsman from your presence and
favour: Since now, perhaps, he will be under less
restraint than ever; and since I in particular, who
had hoped by your influences to remain unmolested
for the remainder of my days, may be again subjected
to his persecutions. 
He has not, my good Lord, and my dear Ladies,
offended against you, as he has against me; and yet
you could all very generously intercede for him with
me: And shall I be very improper, if I desire, for
my own peace-sake; for the sake of other poor creatures,
who may be still injured by him, if he be
made quite desperate; and for the sake of all your
worthy family; that you will extend to him that forgiveness
which you hoped for from me? and this the
rather, as I presume to think, that his daring and
impetuous spirit will not be subdued by violent methods; 
since I have no doubt, that the gratifying of
a present passion will be always more prevalent with
him, than any future prospects, however unwarrantable
the one, or beneficial the other. 
Your resentments on my account are extremely
generous, as your goodness to me is truly noble: But
I am not without hope, that he will be properly affected
by the evils he has made me suffer; and that,
when I am laid low and forgotten, your whole honourable
family will be enabled to rejoice in his Reformation; 

and see many of those happy years together,
which, my good Lord, and my dear Ladies,
you so kindly wish to 
Your ever-grateful and obliged
Clarissa Harlowe. 