


Dr. Bartlett. In Continuation. 
[Inclosing the preceding.] 


Thus far, dear Miss Byron (delight of every one
who is so happy as to know you!) reach my
kinsman's extracts from my papers. I will add some
particulars in answer to your enquiries about Mr.
Beauchamp, if writing of a man I so greatly love, I
can write but a few. 
Mr. Beauchamp is a fine young man in his person:
When I call him a second Sir Charles Grandison,
you and the Ladies, and my Lord L. will conceive a
very high idea of his understanding, politeness, and
other amiable qualities. He is of an ancient family. 
His father, Sir Harry Beauchamp, tenderly loves him,
and keeps him abroad equally against both their wills; 
especially against Mr. Beauchamp's, now his beloved
friend is in England. This is done to humour an
imperious, vindictive woman, who, when a widow,
had cast her eyes upon the young gentleman for a 

husband; imagining, that her great wealth (her person
not disagreeable) would have been a temptation
to him. This, however, was unknown to the father; 
who made his addresses to her much about the
time that Mr. Beauchamp had given an absolute denial
(perhaps with too little ceremony) to an overture
made to him by a friend of hers. This enraged
her. She was resolved to be revenged on him; 
and knowing him to be absolutely in his father's
power, as to fortune, gave way to Sir Harry's addresses; 
and on her obtaining such terms as in a great
measure put both father and son in her power, she
married Sir Harry. 
She soon gained an absolute ascendant over her
husband. The son, when his father first made his
addresses to her, was allowed to set out on his travels
with an appointment of 600l. a year. She never
rested till she had got 400l. a year to be struck off; 
and the remaining 200 were so ill remitted, that the
young gentleman would have been put to the greatest
difficulties, had it not been for the truly friendly assistance
of Mr. Grandison. 
Yet it is said, that this Lady is not destitute of
some good qualities, and in cases where the son is not
the subject, behaves very commendably to Sir Harry:
But being a managing woman, and Sir Harry loving
his ease, she has made herself his receiver and treasurer; 
and by that means has put it out of his power,
to act as paternally by his son as he is inclined to do,
without her knowing it. 
The Lady and Sir Harry both, however, profess to
admire the character of Sir Charles Grandison, from
the Letters Mr. Beauchamp has written from time to
time to his father; and from the general report in his
favour: And on this, as well I, as Mr. Beauchamp,
found our hope, that if Sir Charles, by some unsuspected
way, can make himself personally acquainted 

with the Lady, he will be able to induce her
to consent to her son-in-law's recall; and to be reconciled
to him; the rather, as there is no issue by
this marriage; whose interests might strengthen the
Lady's animosity. 
Mr. Beauchamp, in this hope, writes to Sir Charles,
that he can, and will, pay all due respect to his father's
wife, and, as such, treat her as his mother, if
she will consent to his return to his native country:
But declares, that he would stay abroad all his life,
rather than his father should be made unhappy, by
allowing of his coming over against the consent of so
high-spirited a woman. In the mean time he proposes
to set out from Vienna, where he now is, for
Paris, to be near, if Sir Charles, who he thinks can
manage any point he undertakes (and who in this,
will be seconded by his father's love) can prevail with
his mother-in-law. 
I long, Ladies, to have you all acquainted with
this other excellent young man. You, Miss Byron,
I am sure, in particular, will admire Sir Charles
Grandison's, and my Beauchamp: Of spirit so manly,
yet of manners so delicate, I end as I began; He is a
second Sir Charles Grandison. 
I shall think myself, Ladies, very happy, if I can
find it in my power to oblige you, by any communications
you would wish to be made you. But let
me once more recommend it to you, Lady L. Lord L.
and Miss Grandison, to throw off all reserves to the
most affectionate of brothers. He will have none to
you, in cases which he knows will give you pleasure. 
And if he forbears of his own accord to acquaint you
with some certain affairs, it is, because the issue of
them is yet hidden from himself. 
As to Lady Olivia, mentioned to you by good
Lord L. she never can be more to my patron than she
now is. 

Allow me to be, my good Miss Byron, with a true
paternal affection, 
Your admirer and humhle servant,
Ambrose Bartlett. 


Subjoined in a separate paper, by Miss Byron
to her Lucy.
How is this Lucy? Let me collect some of the
contents of these Letters. “If Sir Charles forbear,
of his own accord, to acquaint his sisters with
some certain affairs—“Issue hidden from himself.” 
“Engaged in some affairs at Bologna and Florence,
that embarrass him”—[Is, or was so engaged, means
the Doctor?] “Sir Charles not reserved; yet reserved.” 
—How is all this, Lucy? 
But does the Doctor say, “That I shall particularly
admire Mr. Beauchamp?” —What means the
Doctor by that? —But he cannot affront me so much
as to mean any-thing but to shew his own love to the
worthy young man. The Doctor longs for us to see
him: If I do see him, he must come quickly: For shall
I not soon return to my last, my best refuge, the arms
of my indulgent grandmamma and aunt? —I shall. 
But, dear Lucy, have you any spite in you? Are
you capable of malice—deadly malice? —If you are,
sit down, and wish the person you hate, to be in
Love with a man (I must, it seems, speak out)
whom she thinks, and every-body knows, to be superior
to herself, in every quality, in every endowment,
both of mind and fortune; and be doubtful (far, far
worse is doubtful than sure!) among some faint glimmerings
of hope, whether his affections are engaged; 
and if they are not, whether he can return— 
Ah, Lucy! you know what I mean—Don't let me
speak out. 
But one word more—Don't you think the Doctor's 

compliment at the beginning of his Letter, a little
particular? —“Delight of EVERY-ONE who
is so happy as to know you.” Charming words! 
—But are they, or are they not, officiously inserted? 
—Am I the delight of Sir Charles Grandison's heart? 
Does he not know me? —Weak, silly, vain, humble,
low, yet proud Harriet Byron! —Begone, paper
—mean confession of my conjecturing folly— 
Ah, Lucy, I tore the paper half thro', as you'll see,
in anger at myself; but I will stitch it to the Doctor's
Letter, to be taken off by you, and to be seen by
no body else. 

