



My dear Lady G.
I will chearfully cause to be transcribed for
you the Conversation you desire, between myself,
Mrs. Towers, and Mrs. Arthur, and the Three
young Ladies their Relations, in Presence of the
Dean and his Daughter, and Mrs. Brooks; and glad
I shall be, if it may be of Use to the Two thoughtless
Misses your Neighbours; who, you are pleased
to tell me, are great Admirers of my Story, and my 

Example; and will therefore, as you say, pay greater
Attention to what I write, than to the more passionate
and interested Lessons of their Mamma. 
I am only sorry, that you should have been under
any Concern about the supposed Trouble you give
me, by having mislaid my former Relation of it. 
For, besides obliging my dear Lady G. the Hope,
that I may be able to do Service by it to a Family so
worthy, in a Case so nearly affecting its Honour, as to
make Two headstrong young Ladies recollect what
belongs to their Sex and their Characters, and what
their filial Duties require of them, affords me high
Pleasure; and if it shall be attended with the wish'd
Effects, it will be an Addition to my Happiness. 
I said, cause to be transcribed; because I hope
to answer a double End by it; for, after I had reconsider'd
it, I set Miss Goodwin to transcribe it,
who writes a very pretty Hand, and is not a little
fond of the Task, nor, indeed, of any Task I set
her; and will be more affected, as she performs it,
than she could be by reading it only; altho' she is
a very good Girl at present, and gives me Hopes,
that she will continue to be so. 
As soon as it is done, I will inclose it, that it
may be read to the Parties without this Introduction,
if you think fit. And you will forgive me for having
added a few Observations to this Transcription,
with a View to the Cases of your inconsiderate
young Ladies, and for having corrected the former
Narrative in several Places. 

My dear Lady G.
The Papers you have mislaid, relating to the
Conversation between me and the young Ladies,
Relations of Lady Towers, and Lady Arthur, 

in Presence of these Two last-named Ladies, Mrs.
Brooks, and the worthy Dean, and Miss L. (of
which, in order to perfect your kind Collection of
my Communications, you request another Copy)
contained as follows: 
I first began with apprising you, that I had seen
these Three Ladies twice or thrice before, as Visitors,
at their Kinswomens Houses; so that they and
I were not altogether Strangers to one another:
And my Two Neighbours acquainted me with their
respective Tastes and Dispositions, and gave me their
Histories, preparatory to this Visit, to the following
Effect: 
‘That Miss Stapylton is over-run with
the Love of Poetry and Romance, and delights
much in flowery Language, and metaphorical
Flourishes: Is about Eighteen, wants not either
Sense or Politeness; and has read herself into a
Vein, that is more amorous (that was Lady Towers's
Word) than discreet. Has extraordinary
Notions of a First-sight Love; and gives herself
greater Liberties, with a Pair of fine Eyes, (in
hopes to make sudden Conquests in pursuance of
that Notion) than is pretty in her Sex and Age; 
which makes those who know her not, conclude
her bold and forward; and is more than suspected,
with a Mind thus prepared for instantaneous
Impressions, to have experienced the Argument
to her own Disadvantage, and to be
struck by (before she has stricken) a Gentleman,
whom her Friends think not at all worthy of her,
and to whom she was making some indiscreet
Advances, under the Name of Philoclea to
Philoxenus, in a Letter which she intrusted 

to a Servant of the Family, who, discovering her
Design, prevented her Indiscretion for that Time. 
‘That, in other respects, she has no mean
Accomplishments, will have a fine Fortune, is
genteel in her Person, tho' with some visible Affectation; 
dances well, sings well, and plays prettily
on several Instruments; is fond of reading; 
but affects the Action, and Air, and Attitude, of
a Tragedian; and is too apt to give an Emphasis
in the wrong Place, in order to make an Author
mean more significantly than it is necessary he
should, even where the Occasion is common,
and in a mere historical Fact, that requires as
much Simplicity in the Reader's Accent, as in
the Writer's Style. No Wonder then, that when
she reads a Play, she will put herself into a Sweat,
as Lady Towers says; distorting very agreeable
Features, and making a Multitude of wry Mouths,
with One very pretty one, in order to convince
her Hearers, what a near Neighbour her Heart
is to her Lips. 
‘Miss Cope is a young Lady of Nineteen, lovely
in her Person, with a handsome Fortune in Possession,
and great Prospects. Has a soft and gentle
Turn of Mind, which disposes her to be easily
imposed upon. Is address'd by a Libertine of
Quality, whose Courtship, while permitted, was
Imperiousness; and whose Tenderness, Insult; 
having found the young Lady too susceptible of
Impression, open and unreserv'd, and even valuing
him the more, as it seem'd, for treating her
with ungenerous Contempt; for that she was
always making Excuses for Slights, Ill-manners,
and even Rudeness, which no other young Lady
would forgive. 

‘That this Facility on her Side, and this Insolence
on his, and an over-free, and even indecent
Degree of Ramping, as it is called, with Miss,
which once her Mamma surpris'd them in, made
her Papa forbid his Visits, and her receiving
them. 
‘That this, however, was so much to Miss's
Regret, that she was detected in a Design to elope
to him out of the private Garden-door; which
had she effected, in all Probability, the indelicate
and dishonourable Peer would have triumphed
over her Innocence; having given out since, that
he intended to revenge himself on the Daughter,
for the Disgrace he had receiv'd from the Parents. 
‘That, tho' she was convinc'd of this, 'twas
fear'd she still loved him, and would throw herself
in his way, the first convenient Opportunity; 
urging, that his rash Expressions were the Effect
only of his Passion; for that she knows he loves
her too well, to be dishonourable to her: And, by
the same Degree of favourable Prepossession, she
will have it, That his brutal Roughness, is the
Manliness of his Nature; That his most shocking
Expressions, are Sincerity of Heart; That his
Boasts of his former Lewdness, are but Instances,
that he knows the World; That his Freedoms
with her Person, are but Excess of Love, and innocent
Gaiety of Temper; That his resenting the
Prohibition he has met with, and his Threats,
are other Instances of his Love and his Courage:
And Peers of the Realm ought not to be bound
down by little narrow Rules, like the Vulgar; 
for, truly, their Honour, which is regarded in
the greatest Cases, as equal with the Oath of a 

common Gentleman, is a Security that a Lady may
trust to, if he is not a Profligate indeed; and that
Lord P. cannot be. 
‘That excepting these Weaknesses, Miss has
many good Qualities; is charitable, pious, humane,
humble; sings sweetly, plays on the Spinnet
charmingly; is meek, fearful, and never was
resolute or courageous enough to step out of the
regular Path, till her too flexible Heart became
touched with a Passion, that is said to polish the
most brutal Temper, and therefore her rough
Peer has none of it; and to animate the Dove, of
which Miss Cope has too much. 
‘That Miss Sutton, a young Lady of the
like Age with the Two former, has too lively
and airy a Turn of Mind; affects to be thought
well read in the Histories of Kingdoms, as well
as in polite Literature. Speaks French fluently,
talks upon all Subjects much; and has a great
deal of that flippant Wit, which makes more
Enemies than Friends. However, is innocent, and
unsuspectedly virtuous hitherto; but makes herself
cheap and accessible to Fops and Rakes, and
has not the worse Opinion of a Man for being
such. Listens eagerly to Stories told to the Disadvantage
of Individuals of her own Sex; tho'
affecting to be a great Stickler for the Honour of
the Sex in general: Will unpityingly propagate
such Stories: Thinks (without considering to
what the Imprudence of her own Conduct may
subject her) the Woman that slips, inexcusable; 
and the Man who seduces her, much less faulty:
And by this means, encourages the one Sex in
their Vileness, and gives up the other for their 

Weakness, in a kind of silly Affectation, to shew
her Security in her own Virtue; at the very time
that she is dancing upon the Edge of a Precipice,
presumptuously inattentive to her own Danger.’ 

The worthy Dean, knowing the Ladies Intention
in this Visit to me, brought his Daughter
with him, as if by Accident: For Miss L. with
many good Qualities, is of a remarkably soft Temper,
tho' not so inconsiderately soft as Miss Cope:
But is too credulous; and, as her Papa suspects,
entertains more than a Liking to a wild young Gentleman,
the Heir to a noble Fortune, who makes
Visits to her, full of Tenderness and Respect, but
without declaring himself. This gives the Dean
a good deal of Uneasiness, and he is very desirous,
that Miss should be in my Company on all Occasions; 
as she is so kind to profess a great Regard to
my Opinion and Judgment. 
'Tis easy to see the poor young Lady is in Love; 
and she makes no doubt, that the young Gentleman
loves her: But, alas! why then (for he is not
a bashful Man, as you shall hear) does he not say
so? —He has deceived already Two young Creatures. 
His Father has cautioned the Dean against
his Son. Has told him, that he is sly, subtle, full
of Stratagem, yet has so much Command of himself,
(which makes him more dangerous) as not to
precipitate his Designs; but can wait with Patience,
till he thinks himself secure of his Prey; and then
pulls off the Mask at once; and, if he succeeds,
glories in his Villainy. 
Yet does the Father beg of the Dean to permit
his Visits; for he would be glad he would marry 

Miss L. tho' greatly unequal in Fortune to his Son; 
wishing for nothing so much, as that he would
marry. And the Dean, owing his principal Preferment
to the old Gentleman, cares not to disoblige
him, or affront his Son, without some apparent
Reason for it, especially as the Father is wrapt
up in him, having no other Child, and being himself
half afraid of him, lest, if too much thwarted,
he should fly out intirely. 
So here, Madam, are Four young Ladies of like
Years, and different Inclinations and Tempers, all
of whom may be said to have Dangers to encounter,
resulting from their respective Dispositions:
And who, professing to admire my Character, and
the Example I had set, were brought to me, to be
benefited, as Lady Towers was pleased to say, by
my Conversation: And all was to be as if accidental,
none of them knowing how well I was
acquainted with their several Characters. 
How proud, my dear Lady G. would this Compliment
have made me, from such a Lady as
Mrs. Towers, had I not been as proud as proud
could be before, of the good Opinion of Four beloved
Persons, Mr. B. Lady Davers, the Countess
of C. and your dear Self! 
We were attended only by Polly Barlow, who
was as much concern'd as any body, in some of the
Points that came before us. And as you know this
was in the Time of the Visit paid us by Lord and
Lady Davers, and that noble Countess, 'tis proper
to say, they were abroad together upon a Visit,
from which, knowing how I was to be engag'd,
they excus'd me. 

The Dean was well known to, and valu'd by,
all the Ladies; and therefore was no manner of
Restraint upon the Freedom of our Conversation. 
I was above in my Closet when they came; 
and Lady Towers, having presented each young
Lady to me when I came down, said, being all
seated, I can guess at your Imployment, Mrs. B. –––– 
Writing, I dare say? I have often wish'd to have
you for a Correspondent; for every one who can
boast of that Favour, exalts you to the Skies, and
says, Your Letters exceed your Conversation; but
I always insisted upon it, that that was impossible. 
Lady Towers, said I, is always saying the most
obliging Things in the World of her Neighbours:
But may not one suffer, dear Madam, for these
kind Prepossessions, in the Opinion of greater
Strangers, who will judge more impartially than
your Favour will permit you to do? 
That, said Lady Arthur, will be so soon put
out of Doubt, when Mrs. B. begins to speak, that
we will refer to that, and so put an End to every
thing that looks like Compliment. 
But, Mrs. B. said Lady Towers, may one ask,
What particular Subject was at this Time your Imployment? 
I had been writing, (you must know, Lady G.)
for the sake of suiting Miss Stapylton's flighty Vein; 
a little Sketch of the Style she is so fond of; and
hoped for some such Opportunity as this Question
gave me, to bring it on the Carpet; for my only
Fear, with her, and Miss Cope, and Miss Sutton,
was, that they would deem me too grave; and so
what should fall in the Course of Conversation,
would make the less Impression upon them. For 

even the best Instructions in the World, you know,
will be ineffectual, if the Method of conveying
them is not adapted to the Taste and Temper of the
Person you would wish to influence. And, moreover,
I had a View in it, to make this little Sketch
the Introduction to a future Occasion for some Observations
on the stiff and affected Style of Romances,
which might put Miss out of Conceit with
them, and make her turn the Course of her Studies
another Way; as I shall mention in its Place. 
I answer'd, That I had been meditating upon
the Misfortune of a fine young Lady, who had been
seduced and betrayed by a Gentleman she loved; 
and who, notwithstanding, had the Grace to stop
short, (indeed, later than were to be wished) and
to abandon Friends, Country, Lover, in order to
avoid any further Intercourse with him; and that
God had blessed her Penitence and Resolution,
and she was now very happy in a neighbouring
Dominion. 
A fine Subject! said Miss Stapylton. —Was
the Gentleman a Man of Wit, Madam? Was the
Lady a Woman of Taste? 
The Gentleman, Miss, was all that was desireable
in Man, had he been virtuous: The Lady,
all that was excellent in Woman, had she been
more circumspect. But it was a first Love on both
Sides; and little did she think he could have taken
Advantage of her Innocence, and her Affection for
him! 
A sad, sad Story! said Miss Cope: But, pray,
Madam, did their Friends approve of their Visits? 
For Danger sometimes, as I have heard, arises from
the Cruelty of Friends, who force Lovers upon private 

and clandestine Meetings; when, perhaps,
there can be no material Objection, why the Gentleman
and Lady may not come together. 
Well observ'd, Miss Cope! thought I: How
we are for making every Case applicable to our
own, when our Hearts are fix'd upon a Point! 
It cannot be called Cruelty in Friends, Miss,
said I, when their Cautions, or even Prohibitions,
are so well justify'd by the Event, as in this Case— 
and, generally, by the wicked Arts and Practices of
Seducers. And how happy is it for a Lady, when
she suffers herself to be convinc'd, that those who
have lived Forty Years in the World, may know
twice as much, at least, of that World, as she can
possibly know at Twenty, Ten of which moreover
are almost a Blank! If they do not, the one must be
supposed very ignorant; the other, very knowing. 
But, Miss, the Lady, whose hard Case I was
considering, hop'd too much, and fear'd too little; 
that was her Fault; which made her give Opportunities
to the Gentleman, which neither Liberty
nor Restraint could justify in her. She had not the
Discretion, poor Lady! in this one great Point of
all, that the Ladies I have in my Eye, I dare say,
would have had in her Case. 
I beg Pardon, said Miss, and blush'd. I know
not the Case, and ought to have been silent. 
Ay, Miss, thought I, so you would, had not
you thought yourself more affected by it, than it
were to be wish'd you were. 
I think, said Miss Sutton, the Lady was the
less to be pity'd, as she must know what her Character
requir'd of her; and that Men will generally
deceive, when they are trusted. There are very 

few of them who pretend to be virtuous; and it is
allow'd to be their Privilege to ask, as it is the Ladies
to deny. 
So, Miss, reply'd I, you are supposing a continual
State of War between the Two Sexes; one
offensive, the other defensive: And, indeed, I think
the Notion not altogether amiss; for a Lady will
assuredly be less in Danger, where she rather fears
an Enemy in the Acquaintance she has of that Sex,
than hopes a Friend; especially as so much depends
upon the Issue, either of her Doubt, or of her
Confidence. 
I don't know neither, Madam, return'd Miss,
very briskly, whether the Men should be set out
to us as such Bugbears, as our Mammas generally
represent them. It is making them too considerable; 
and is a kind of Reflection upon the Discretion
and Virtue of our Sex, and supposes us weak
indeed! 
The late Czar, I have read, continued Miss,
took a better Method with the Swedes, who had
often beat him; when, after a great Victory, he
made his Captives march in Procession, thro' the
Streets of his principal City, to familiarize them to
the Russes, and shew them they were but Men. 
Very well observ'd, Miss, reply'd I: But then,
did you not say, that this was thought necessary
to be done, because the Russes had been often defeated
by these Swedes, and thought too highly of
them; and when the Swedes, taking Advantage
of that Prepossession, had the greater Contempt of
the Russes? 
Miss looked a little disconcerted; and being
silent, I proceeded: 

I am very far, Miss, from thinking the Generality
of Men very formidable, if our Sex do Justice
to themselves, and to what their Characters require
of them. Nevertheless, give me Leave to say, that
the Men I thought contemptible, I would not
think worthy of my Company, nor give it to them,
when I could avoid it. And as for those, who are
more to be regarded, I am afraid, that when they
can be assured, that a Lady allows it to be their
Privilege to sue for Favours, it will certainly imbolden
them to solicit, and to think themselves
acting in Character when they put the Lady upon
hers, to refuse them. And yet I am humbly of
Opinion with the Poet: 

He comes too near, who comes to be deny'd.

For these Reasons, Miss, I was pleased with your
Notion, that it would be best to look upon that
Sex, especially if we allow them the Privilege you
speak of, in an hostile Light. 
But permit me to observe, with regard to the
most contemptible of the Species, Fops, Coxcombs,
and Pretty Fellows, that many a good General has
been defeated, when, trusting to his great Strength
and Skill, he has despis'd a truly weak Enemy. 
I believe, Madam, return'd Miss, your Observation
is very just. I have read of such Instances. 
But, dear Madam, permit me to ask, Whether we
speak not too generally, when we condemn every
Man who dresses well, and is not a Sloven, as a
Fop or a Coxcomb? 
No doubt, we do, when this is the Case. But
permit me to observe, that you hardly ever in your
Life, Miss, saw a Gentleman who was very nice 

about his Person and Dress, that had any thing he
thought of greater Consequence to himself, to
regard. 'Tis natural it should be so; for should
not the Man of Body take the greatest Care to set
out and adorn the Part for which he thinks himself
most valuable? And will not the Man of
Mind bestow his principal Care in improving that
Mind? Perhaps, to the Neglect of Dress, and outward
Appearance; which is a Fault. But, surely,
Miss, there is a Middle-way to be observed, in
these, as in most other Cases; for a Man need not
be a Sloven, any more than a Fop. He need not
shew an utter Disregard to Dress, nor yet think it
his first and chicf Concern; be ready to quarrel
with the Wind for discomposing his Peruque, or
fear to put on his Hat, lest he should depress his
Foretop; more dislike a Spot upon his Cloaths,
than in his Reputation: Be a Self-admirer, and
always at the Glass, which he would perhaps never
look into, could it shew him the Deformity of his
Mind, as well as the Finery of his Person:—Who
has a Tailor for his Tutor, and a Milaner for his
School-mistress; who laughs at Men of Sense (excusably
enough, perhaps in Revenge because they
laugh at him): Who calls Learning Pedantry; and
looks upon the Knowlege of the Fashions, as the
only useful Science to a fine Gentleman. 
Pardon me, Ladies: I could proceed with the
Character of this Species of Men; but I need not; 
because every Lady present, I am sure, would despise
such a one, as much as I do, were he to fall in her
way: And the rather, because it is certain, that he
who admires himself, will never admire his Lady as
he ought; and if he maintains his Niceness after 

Marriage, it will be with a Preference to his own
Person: If not, will sink, very probably into the
worst of Slovens. For whoever is capable of one
Extreme, (take almost all the Cases in human Life
through) when he recedes from that, if he be not
a Man of Prudence, will go over into the other. 
But to return to the former Subject, (for the
general Attention encourag'd me to proceed) permit
me, Miss Sutton, to add, That a Lady must run
great Risques to her Reputation, if not to her Virtue,
who will admit into her Company, any Gentleman,
who shall be of Opinion, and know it to
be hers, that it is his Province to ask a Favour, that
it will be her Duty to deny. 
I believe, Madam, said Miss, I spoke these
Words a little too carelesly: But I meant honourable
Questions, to be sure. 
There can be but one honourable Question,
Miss, reply'd I; and that is seldom ask'd, but when
the Affair is brought near a Conclusion, and there
is a Probability of its being granted; and which a
Single Lady, while she has Parents or Guardians,
should never think of permitting to be put to herself,
much less of approving, nor, perhaps, as the
Case may be, of denying. But I make no doubt,
Miss, that you meant honourable Questions. A
young Lady of Miss Sutton's good Sense, and
worthy Character, could not mean otherwise. And
I have said, perhaps, more than I needed to say,
upon this Subject: But we all know how ready
the Presuming of the other Sex are, right or wrong,
to construe the most innocent Meanings in favour
of their own Views. 

Very true, said Miss; but appear'd to be under
an agreeable Confusion, every Lady, by her Eye,
seeming to think she had met with a deserv'd Rebuke; 
and which not seeming to expect, it abated
her Liveliness all the Time after. 
Lady Towers seasonably reliev'd us both from
a Subject too applicable, if I may so express it,
saying, But, dear Mrs. B. will you favour us with
the Result of your Meditation, if you have committed
it to Writing, on the unhappy Case you
mention'd? 
I was rather, Madam, exercising my Fancy than
my Judgment, such as it is, upon the Occasion. I
was aiming at a kind of allegorical or metaphorical
Style, I know not which to call it; and it is not
fit to be read before such Judges, I doubt. 
O pray, dear Madam, said Miss Stapylton,
favour us with it to chuse; for I am a great Admirer
of that Style. 
I have a great Curiosity, said Lady Arthur,
both from the Subject and the Style, to hear what
you have written: And I beg you will oblige us all. 
It is short and unfinish'd. It was written for
the sake of a Friend, who is fond of such a Style; 
and what I shall add to it, will be principally some
slight Observations upon this way of Writing. 
But, let it be ever so censurable, I should be more
so, if I made any Difficulties, after such an unanimous
Request. So taking it out of my Letter-case,
I read as follows: 

“While the Banks of Discretion keep the
proud Waves of Passion within their natural
Chanel, all calm and serene, glides along the 

silver Current, enlivening the adjacent Meadows,
as it passes, with a brighter and more
flow'ry Verdure. But if the Torrents of sensual
Love are permitted to descend from the Hills
of credulous Hope, they may so swell the gentle
Stream, as to make it difficult, if not impossible,
to be retain'd within its usual Bounds. What
then will be the Consequence? —Why, the
Trees of Resolution, and the Shrubs of cautious
Fear, which grew upon the frail Mound, and
whose intertwining Roots had contributed to
support it, being loosen'd from their Hold, they
and all that would swim of the Bank itself, will
be seen floating on the Surface of the triumphant
Waters. 
“But here, a dear Lady, having unhappily
failed, is enabled to set her Foot in the new-made
Breach, while yet it is possible to stop it,
and to say, with little Variation, in the Language
of that Power, which only could enable
her to say it, Hither, ye proud Waves of dissolute
Love, altho' you Have come, yet no farther
Shall ye come; is such an Instance of magnanimous
Resolution and Self-conquest, as is
very rarely to be met with.” 

Miss Stapylton seem'd pleas'd (as I expected)
with what I read, and told me, That she should
take it for a high Favour, if I would permit her,
if it were not improper, to see the whole Letter,
when I had finish'd it. 
I said, I would oblige her with all my Heart. 
But you must not expect, Miss, that altho' I have
written what I have read to you, I shall approve of 

it in my Observations upon it; for I am convinc'd,
that no Style can be proper, which is not plain,
simple, easy, natural, and unaffected. 
She was sure, she was pleas'd to say, That whatever
my Observations were, they would be equally
just and instructive. 
I too, said the Dean, will answer for that; for
I dare say, by what I have already heard, That
Mrs. B. will distinguish properly between the Style,
and the Matter too, which captivates the Imagination,
and that which informs the Judgment. 
Our Conversation, after this, took a more
genetal Turn, as to the Air of it, if I may say so; 
which I thought right, lest the young Ladies should
imagine it was a designed Thing against them:
But yet it was such, that every one of them found
her Character and Taste, little or much, concern'd
in it; and all seem'd, as Lady Towers afterwards
observ'd to me, by their Silence and Attention, to
be busy'd in private Applications. 
The Dean began it, with a high Compliment
to me; having a View, no doubt, by his kind
Praises, to make my Observations have the greater
Weight upon the young Ladies. He was pleased
to say, That it was Matter of great Surprize to
him, that, my tender Years consider'd, I should be
capable of making those Reflections, by which
Persons of twice my Age and Experience might
be instructed. You see, Madam, said he, how
attentive we all are, when your Lips begin to open; 
and I beg we may have nothing to do, but to be
attentive. 
I have had such Advantages, Sir, reply'd I,
from the Observations and Cautions of my late 

excellent Lady, that did you but know half of
them, you would rather wonder I had made no
greater Improvement, than that I have made so
much. She used to think me pretty, and not illtemper'd,
and of course, not incredulous, where I
conceiv'd a good Opinion; and was always arming
me on that Side, as believing I might be the Object
of wicked Attempts, and the rather, as my
low Fortunes subjected me to Danger. For, had
I been born to Rank and Condition, as these
young Ladies here, I should have had Reason to
think of myself, as justly, as, no doubt, they do,
and, of consequence, beyond the Reach of any
vile Intriguer; as I should have been above the
greatest Part of that Species of Mankind, who, for
want of Understanding or Honour, or thro' pernicious
Habits, give themselves up to Libertinism. 
These were great Advantages, no doubt, said
Miss Sutton; but in you, they met with a surprising
Genius, 'tis very plain, Madam; and there is not,
in my Opinion, a Lady in England of your Years,
who would have improv'd by them, as you have
done. 
I answer'd, That I was much oblig'd to her
for her good Opinion: And that I had always
observ'd, that the Person who admir'd any good
Qualities in another, gave a kind of natural Demonstration,
that she had the same in an eminent
Degree herself; altho', perhaps, her modest Diffidence
would not permit her to trace the generous
Principle to its Source. 
The Dean, in order to bring us back again to
the Subject of Credulity, repeated my Remark,
That it was safer, in Cases where so much depended 

upon the Issue, as a Lady's Honour and Reputation,
to fear an Enemy, than to hope a Friend;
and praised my Observation, that even a weak
Enemy is not to be too much despised. 
I said, I had very high Notions of the Honour
and Value of my own Sex, and very mean ones of
the gay and frothy Part of the other; insomuch
that I thought they could have no Strength, but
what was founded in our Weakness: That, indeed,
the Difference of Education must give Men Advantages,
even where the Genius is naturally equal:
That, besides, they have generally more Hardness
of Heart, which makes Ladies, where they meet
not with Men of Honour, to engage with that
Sex upon very unequal Terms; for that it is so
customary with them to make Vows and Promises,
and to set light by them, when made, that an
innocent Lady cannot guard too watchfully against
them; and, in my Opinion, should believe nothing
they said, or even vow'd, but what carry'd Demonstration
with it. 
I remember, continu'd I, my Lady used often
to observe, That there is a Time of Life in all
young Persons, which may properly be called, The
Romantick, which is a very dangerous Period, and
requires therefore a great Guard of Prudence: That
the Risque is not a little augmented by reading
Novels and Romances; and that the Poetical Tribe
have much to answer for on this Head, by reason
of their heighten'd and inflaming Descriptions,
which do much Hurt to thoughtless Minds, and
lively Imaginations. For to those, she would have
it, are principally owing, the Rashness and Indiscretion
of soft and tender Dispositions; which, in 

Breach of their Duty, and even to the Disgrace of
their Sex, too frequently set them upon Enterprizes,
like those they have read in those pernicious Writeings,
which not seldom make them fall a Sacrifice
to the base Designs of some vile Intriguer; and
even in Cases where their Precipitation ends the
best, that is to say, in Marriage, they too frequently
(in direct Opposition to the Cautions and
Commands of their try'd, their experienc'd, and
unquestionable Friends) throw themselves upon an
almost Stranger, who, had he been worthy of
them, would not, nor needed to have taken indirect
Methods to obtain their Favour. 
And the Misfortune is, continu'd I, the most
innocent are generally the most credulous. Such
a Lady would do no Harm to others herself, and
cannot think others would do her any. And with
regard to the particular Person who has obtain'd,
perhaps, a Share in her Confidence, he cannot,
surely, she thinks, be so ingrateful, as to return
irreparable Mischief for her Good-will to him. 
Were all the Men in the World, besides, to prove
false, the beloved Person cannot. 'Twould be
unjust to her own Merit, as well as to his Vows,
to suppose it: And so Design on his Side, and Credulity
and Self-opinion on the Lady's, at last inroll
the unhappy Believer in the List of the too-late
Repenters. 
And what, Madam, said the Dean, has not that
Wretch to answer for, who makes Sport of destroying
a virtuous Character, and delights in being
the wicked Means of throwing, perhaps, upon the
Town, and into the Dregs of Prostitution, a poor
Creature, whose Love for him, and Confidence in 

him, was all her Crime? And who otherwise
might have made a worthy Figure at the Head of
some reputable Family, and so have been an useful
Member of the Commonwealth, propagating good
Examples, instead of Ruin and Infamy, to Mankind? 
To say nothing of, what is still worse, the
dreadful Crime of occasioning the Loss of a Soul; 
since final Impenitence too generally follows the
first Sacrifice which the poor Wretch is seduced to
make of her Honour? 
There are several Gentlemen in our Neighbourhood,
said Mrs. Brooks, who might be benefited
by this touching Reflection, if it was represented
in the same strong Lights from the Pulpit. 
And permit me to say, Mr. Dean, that, I think,
you should give us a Sermon upon this Subject, for
the sake of both Sexes; one for Caution, the other
for Conviction. 
I will think of it, reply'd he. But I am sorry
to say, that we have too many among our younger
Gentry, who would think themselves pointed at,
were I to touch this Subject ever so cautiously. 
I am sure, said Lady Towers, there cannot well
be a more useful one; and the very Reason the
Dean gives, is a convincing Proof of it to me. 
When I have had the Pleasure of hearing the
further Sentiments of such an Assembly as this,
upon the delicate Subject, reply'd this polite Divine,
I shall be better enabled to treat it. And,
pray, Ladies, proceed; for it is from your Conversation,
that I must take my Hints. 
You have nothing to do then, said Lady
Towers, but to engage Mrs. B. to speak; and you
may be sure, we will all be as attentive to her, as 

we shall be to you, when we shall have the Pleasure
to hear so fine a Genius improving upon her
Hints, from the Pulpit. 
I bow'd (as the Dean did) to Lady Towers;
and knowing, that she praised me, with the Dean's
View, in order to induce the young Ladies to give
the greater Attention to what she wish'd I should
speak, I said, It would be a great Presumption in
me, after so high a Compliment, to open my Lips:
Nevertheless, as I was sure, by speaking, I should
have the Benefit of Instruction, whenever it made
them speak, I would not be backward to enter upon
any Subject; for that I should consider myself
as a young Counsel, in some great Cause, who
served but to open it, and prepare the Way for
those of greater Skill and Abilities. 
I beg then, Madam, said Miss Stapylton, you
will open the Cause, be the Subject what it will. 
And I could almost wish, that we had as many
Gentlemen here as Ladies, who would have Reason
to be asham'd of the Liberties they take in
censuring the Conversations of the Tea-table; since
the Pulpit, as the worthy Dean gives us Reason to
hope, may be beholden to that of Mrs. B. 
Nor is it much Wonder, reply'd I; when the
Dean himself is with us, and it is grac'd by so
charming and distinguish'd a Circle. 
If many of our young Gentlemen were here,
said Lady Towers, they might improve themselves
in all the Graces of polite and sincere Complaisance. 
But, compar'd to this, I have generally
heard such trite and coarse Stuff from our Race of
Wou'd-be-wits, that what they say, may be compar'd
to the Fawnings and Salutations of the Ass 

in the Fable, who emulating the Lap-dog, merited
a Cudgel rather than Encouragement. 
But, Mrs. B. continu'd she, begin, I pray you,
to open and proceed in the Cause; for there will
be no Counsel imploy'd but you, I can tell you. 
Then give me a Subject, that will suit me,
Ladies, and you shall see how my Obedience to
your Commands will make me run on. 
Will you, Madam, said Miss Stapylton, give
us a few Cautions and Instructions on a Theme of
your own, That a young Lady should rather fear
too much, than hope too much? A necessary
Doctrine perhaps; but a difficult one to be practised
by a Lady, who has begun to love, and supposes
all Truth and Honour in the Object of her Favour. 
Hope, Miss, said I, in my Opinion, should
never be unaccompany'd by Fear; and the more
Reason will a Lady ever have to fear, and to
suspect herself, and doubt her Lover, when she
once begins to find in her own Breast an Inclination
to him. For then her Danger is doubled,
since she has herself (perhaps, the more dangerous
Enemy of the two) to guard against, as well as
him. 
She may secretly wish the best indeed; but what
has been the Fate of others, may be her own; and
tho' she thinks it not probable from such a faithful
Protester, as he appears to her to be, yet while it
is possible, she should never be off her Guard: Nor
will a prudent Woman trust to his Mercy or Honour,
but to her own Discretion; and the rather,
because, if he mean well, he himself will value
her the more for her Caution, since every Man
desires to have a virtuous and prudent Wife; if not 

well, she will detect him the sooner; and so, by
her Prudence, frustrate all his base Designs. 
The Ladies seeming, by their Silence, to approve
what I said, I proceeded: 
But let me, my dear Ladies, ask, What that
Passion is, which generally we dignify by the
Name of Love; and which, when so dignify'd,
puts us upon a thousand Extravagances? I believe; 
if it were to be examin'd into, it would be found
too generally to owe its Original to ungovern'd
Fancy; and were we to judge of it by the Consequences
that usually attend it, it ought rather to
be called Rashness, Inconsideration, Weakness; any
thing but Love; for, very seldom, I doubt, is the
solid Judgment so much concern'd in it, as the
airy Fancy. But when once we dignify the wild
Misleader with the Name of Love, all the Absurdities,
which we read in Novels and Romances,
take Place, and we are induc'd to follow Examples
that seldom end happily but in them. 
But, permit me further to observe, that Love,
as we call it, operates differently in the Two Sexes,
as to its Effects. For in Woman it is a creeping
Thing, in Man an Incroacher; and this ought, in
my humble Opinion, to be very seriously attended
to. Miss Sutton intimated thus much, when she
observ'd, that it was the Man's Province to ask, the
Lady's to deny:—Excuse me, Miss, the Observation
was just, as to the Mens Notions; altho', methinks,
I would not have a Lady allow of it, except
in Cases of Caution to themselves. 
The Doubt, therefore, proceeded I, which a
Lady has of her Lover's Honour, is needful to preserve
her own, and his too. And if she does him 

Wrong, and he should be too just to deceive her,
she can make him Amends, by Instances of greater
Confidence, when she pleases. But if she has been
accustom'd to grant him little Favours, can she
easily recal them? And will not the Incroacher
grow upon her Indulgence, pleading for a Favour
To-day, which was not refused him Yesterday,
and reproaching her want of Confidence, as a want
of Esteem; till the poor Lady, who, perhaps, has
given way to this creeping, insinuating Passion,
and has avow'd her Esteem for him, puts herself
too much in his Power, in order to manifest, as
she thinks, the Generosity of her Affection; and
so, by Degrees, is carry'd farther than she intended,
or nice Honour ought to have permitted; and all
because, to keep up to my Theme, she hopes too
much, and doubts too little? And, permit me,
Ladies, to add, That there have been Cases, where
a Gentleman himself, pursuing the Dictates of his
incroaching Passion, and finding a Lady too conceding,
has taken Advantages, that, probably, at
first, he did not presume to think of. 
Miss Stapylton said, That Virtue itself spoke
when I spoke; and she was resolv'd, when she
came home, to recollect as much of this Conversation
as she could, and write it down in her
Common-place Book, where it would make a
better Figure than any thing she had there. 
I suppose, Miss, said Lady Towers, your chief
Collections are Flowers of Rhetorick, pick'd up
from the French and English Poets, and Novel-writers. 
I would give something for the Pleasure
of haying it two Hours in my Possession. 

Fie, Madam, reply'd Miss, a little abash'd, How
can you expose your Kinswoman thus, before the
Dean and Mrs. B? 
Lady Towers, Miss, said I, only says this to
provoke you to shew your Collections. I wish I
had the Pleasure of seeing them. I doubt not but
your Common-place Book is a Store-house of
Wisdom. 
There is nothing bad in it, I hope, reply'd
Miss; but I would not, that Mrs. B. should see it,
for the World. But, let me tell you, Madam, (to
Lady Towers) there are many beautiful Things,
and good Instructions, to be collected from Novels,
and Plays, and Romances; and from the poetical
Writers particularly, light as you are pleased to
make of them. Pray, Madam, (to me) have you
ever been at all conversant in such Writers? 
Not a great deal in the former, Miss; there
were very few Novels and Romances, that my
Lady would permit me to read; and those I did,
gave me no great Pleasure; for either they dealt so
much in the Marvellous and Improbable, or were
so unnaturally inflaming to the Passions, and so
full of Love and Intrigue, that hardly any of them
but seem'd calculated to fire the Imagination,
rather than to inform the Judgment. Tilts and
Tournaments, breaking of Spears in Honour of a
Mistress, swimming over Rivers, engaging with
Monsters, rambling in Search of Adventures,
making unnatural Difficulties, in order to shew the
Knight-Errant's Prowess in overcoming them, is
all that is requir'd to constitute the Hero in such
Pieces. And what principally distinguishes the
Character of the Heroine, is, when she is taught 

to consider her Father's House as an inchanted
Castle, and her Lover as the Hero who is to dissolve
the Charm, and to set her at Liberty from
one Confinement, in order to put her into another,
and, too probably, a worse: To instruct her how
to climb Walls, drop from Windows, leap Precipices,
and do twenty other extravagant Things, in
order to shew the mad Strength of a Passion she
ought to be asham'd of: To make Parents and
Guardians pass for Tyrants, and the Voice of Reason
to be drown'd in that of indiscreet Love,
which exalts the other Sex, and debases her own. 
And what is the Instruction, that can be gather'd
from such Pieces, for the Conduct of common
Life? 
Then have I been ready to quarrel with these
Writers for another Reason; and that is, The dangerous
Notion, which they hardly ever fail to propagate,
of a First-sight Love. For there is such
a Susceptibility supposed on both Sides, (which,
however it may pass in a Man, very little becomes
a Lady's Delicacy) that they are smitten with a
Glance; the fictitious blind God is made a real
Divinity: and too often Prudence and Discretion
are the first Offerings at his Shrine. 
I believe, Madam, said Miss Stapylton, blushing,
and playing with her Fan, there have been
many Instances of Peoples Loving at first Sight,
which have ended very happily. 
No doubt of it, Miss, reply'd I. But there are
three Chances to one, that so precipitate a Liking
does not. For where can be the Room for Caution,
for Inquiry, for the Display of Merit, and
Sincerity, and even the Assurance of a grateful 

Return, to a Lady who thus suffers herself to be
prepossess'd? Is it not a random Shot? Is it not a
Proof of Weakness? Is it not giving up the Negative
Voice, which belongs to the Sex, even while
she doubts to meet the Affirmative one from him
she wishes for? 
Indeed, Ladics, continued I, I cannot help concluding,
(and I am the less afraid of speaking my
Mind, because of the Opinion I have of the Prudence
of every Lady that hears me) that where this
Weakness is found, it is no way favourable to a
Lady's Character, nor to that Discretion which
ought to distinguish it. It looks to me, as if a
Lady's Heart were too much in the Power of her
Eye, and that she had permitted her Fancy to be
much more busy than her Judgment. 
Miss Stapylton blush'd, and look'd around her. 
But I have observ'd, Mrs. B. said Lady Towers,
that when you censure any Indiscretion, you
seldom fail to give Cautions how to avoid it:
And pray let us know what is to be done in this
Case? That is to say, How a young Lady ought
to guard against and overcome the first favourable
Impressions? 
What I imagine, reply'd I, a young Lady
ought to do, on any the least favourable Impressions
of this kind, is immediately to withdraw into herself,
as one may say; to reflect upon what she owes
to her Parents, to her Family, to her Character,
and to her Sex; and to resolve to check such a random
Prepossession, which may much more probably,
as I hinted, make her a Prey to the Undeserving
than otherwise, as there are so many of that
Character to One Man of real Merit. 

The most that I apprehend a First-sight Approbation
can do, is to inspire a Liking; and a Liking
is conquerable, if the Person will not brood over it,
till she hatches it into Love. Then every Man and
Woman has a black and a white Side; and it is
easy to set the Imperfections of the Person against
the supposed Perfections, while it is only a Liking. 
But if the busy Fancy be permitted to work as it
pleases, uncheck'd, uncontroul'd, then, 'tis very
likely, were the Lady but to keep herself in Countenance
for receiving first Impressions, she will see
Perfections in the Object, which no living Soul can
see but herself. And it will hardly be expected,
but that, as a Consequence of her first Indiscretion,
she will confirm, as an Act of her Judgment, what
her wild and ungovern'd Fancy had misled her to
think of with so much partial Favour. And too
late, as it may probably happen, she will see and
lament her fatal, and, perhaps, undutiful Error. 
We are talking of the Ladies only, added I (for
I saw Miss Stapylton was become very grave); but
I believe First-sight Love often operates too powerfully
in both Sexes: And where it does so, it will
be very lucky, if either Gentleman or Lady find
Reason, on cool Reflection, to approve a Choice,
which they were so ready to make without Thought. 
'Tis allow'd, my dear Mrs. B. said Lady Towers,
that rash and precipitate Love may operate pretty
much alike in the Rash and Precipitate of both
Sexes; and which-soever loves, generally exalts the
Person beloved, above his or her Merits: But I am
desirous, for the sake of us Maiden Ladies, since
'tis a Science in which you are so great an Adept, to
have your Advice, how we should watch and guard 

against its first Incroachments; and that you will
tell us what you apprehend gives the Men most Advantage
over us. 
Nay, now, Lady Towers, you railly my Presumption
indeed! 
I admire you, Madam, reply'd she, and every
thing you say and do; and I won't forgive you to
call what I so seriously say and think, Raillery. For
my own part, continued she, I never was in Love
yet, nor, I believe, were any of these young Ladies
—(Miss Cope looked a little silly upon this—)
And who can better instruct us to guard our Hearts,
than a Lady who has so well defended her own? 
Why then, Madam, if I must speak, I think,
what gives the other Sex the greatest Advantage,
over even many of the most Deserving of ours, is,
that dangerous Foible, The Love of Praise, and
the Desire to be flatter'd and admir'd: A Passion
that I have observ'd to predominate, more or less,
from Sixteen to Sixty, in most of our Sex. We are
too generally delighted with the Company of those
who extol our Graces of Person or Mind; for, will
not a grateful Lady study hard to return a few Compliments
to a Gentleman, who makes her so many? 
She is concern'd to prove him a Man of distinguishing
Sense, or a polite Man, at least, in regard to
what she thinks of herself; and so the Flatterer shall
be preferr'd to such of the Sincere and Worthy,
as cannot say what they do not think. And by this
means many an excellent Lady has fallen a Prey to
some sordid Designer. 
Then, I think, nothing gives Gentlemen so
much Advantage over our Sex, as to see how readily
a virtuous Lady can forgive the capital Faults of 

the most abandon'd of the other; and that sad, sad
Notion, That a reform'd Rake makes the best Husband;
a Notion that has done more Hurt, and
Discredit too, to our Sex, (as it has given Encouragement
to the profligate, and Discouragement
to the sober Gentlemen) than can be easily imagin'd. 
A fine thing indeed! as if the Wretch,
who had run thro' a Course of Iniquity, to the
endangering of Soul and Body, was to be deem'd
the best Companion for Life, to an innocent and
virtuous young Lady, who is to owe the Kindness
of his Treatment of her, to his having never before
accompany'd with a modest Woman; nor, till his
Interest on one hand, (to which his Extravagance,
perhaps, compels him to attend) and his impair'd
Constitution on the other, oblige him to it, so
much as wish'd to accompany with one; and who
always made a Jest of the marry'd State, and, perhaps,
of every thing either serious or sacred! 
You observe very well, my dear Mrs. B. said
Lady Towers; but People will be apt to think,
that you have less Reason than any of our Sex, to
be severe against the Notion you speak of: For
who was a greater Rake than a certain Gentleman,
and who makes a better Husband? 
Madam, reply'd I, the Gentleman you mean,
never was a common Town-Rake: He is a Gentleman
of Sense, and fine Understanding; and his Reformation,
secondarily, as I may say, has been the
natural Effect of those extraordinary Qualities. But
besides, Madam, I will presume to say, That that
Gentleman, as he has not many Equals in the Nobleness
of his Nature, so is not likely, I doubt, to
have many Followers, in a Reformation begun in 

the Bloom of Youth, upon Self-conviction, and altogether,
humanly speaking, spontaneous. —Those
young Ladies, who would plead his Example, in
Support of this pernicious Notion, should find out
the same generous Qualities in the Gentleman, before
they trust to it; and it will then do less Harm:
tho' even then, I could not wish it to be generally
entertained. 
It is really unaccountable, said Lady Towers,
after all, as Mrs. B. I remember, said, on another
Occasion, That our Sex should not as much insist
upon Virtue and Sobriety, in the Character of a
Gentleman, as the Gentleman, be he ever such a
Rake, does in that of a Lady. And 'tis certainly a
great Encouragement to Libertinism, that a wornout
Debauchee shall think himself at any time good
enough for a Husband, and have the Confidence to
imagine, that a modest Lady will accept of his Address
with a Preference of him to any other. 
I can account for it but one way, said the Dean; 
And that is, that a modest Lady is apt to be diffident
of her own Merit and Understanding, and
she thinks this Diffidence an Imperfection. A Rake
never is: So he has in Perfection a Quality she
thinks she wants; and, knowing too little of the
World, imagines she mends the Matter by accepting
of one who knows too much. 
That's well observ'd, Mr. Dean, said Lady
Towers: But there is another Fault in our Sex,
which Mrs. B. has not touch'd upon; and that is,
The foolish Vanity some Ladies have in the Hopes
of reforming a wild Fellow; and that they shall be
able to do more than any of their Sex before them 

could do: A Vanity that often costs them dear; as
I know in more than one Instance. 
Another Weakness, said I, might be produced
against some of our Sex; who join too readily
to droll upon, and sneer at, the Misfortune of
any poor young Creature, who has shewn too little
Regard for her Honour: And who (instead of speaking
of it with Concern, and inveighing against the
Seducer) too lightly sport with the unhappy Person's
Fall; industriously spread the Knowlege of
it—(I would not look upon Miss Sutton, while I
spoke this—) and avoid her, as one infected; and
yet scruple not to admit into their Company the
vile Aggressor; and even to smile with him, at his
barbarous Jests upon the poor Sufferer of their own
Sex. 
I have known three or four Instances of this in
my Time, said Lady Towers, that Miss Sutton
might not take it to herself; for she look'd down,
and was a little serious. 
This, reply'd I, puts me in mind of a little humorous
Copy of Verses, written, as I believe, by
Mr. B. And which, to the very Purpose we are
speaking of, he calls 
Benefit of making others Misfortunes our own.

Thou'st heard it, or read it, a Million of Times,
That Men are made up of Falshoods and Crimes:
Search all the old Authors, and ransack the new,
Thou'lt find, in Love-stories, scarce One Mortal true.
Then why this complaining? and why this wry Face?
Is it 'cause thou'rt affected most with thy own Case?

Hadst thou sooner made others Misfortunes thy own,
Thou never, thyself, this Disaster hadst known:
Thy compassionate Caution bad kept thee from Evil,
And thou mightst have defy'd Mankind and the Devil.

The Ladies were pleas'd with the Lines; but
Lady Towers wanted to know, she said, at what
Time of Mr. B.'s Life they could be written: Because,
added she, I never suspected before, that the
good Gentleman ever took Pains to write Cautions
or Exhortations to our Sex, to avoid the Delusions
of his own. 
These Verses, and this facetious, but severe
Remark of Lady Towers, made every young Lady
look up with a chearful Countenance; because it
pushed the Ball from Self: And the Dean said to his
Daughter, So, my Dear, You, that have been so
attentive, must let us know, what useful Inferences
you can draw from what Mrs. B. and the other Ladies
have so excellently said? 
I observe, Sir, said Miss, from the Faults the
Ladies have so justly imputed to some of our Sex,
that the Advantage the Gentlemen chiefly have over
us, is from our own Weakness; and that it behoves
a prudent Lady to guard against first Impressions of
Favour, since she will think herself oblig'd, in Compliment
to her own Judgment, to find Reasons, if
possible, to confirm them. 
But I would be glad to know, Ladies, added
Miss, If there be any way, that a Lady can judge,
whether a Gentleman means honourably or not,
in his Address to her? 
Mrs. B. can best inform you of that, Miss L.
said Lady Towers: What say you, Mrs. B.? 

There are a few Signs, answer'd I, easy to be
known, and, I think, almost infallible. 
Pray let's have 'em, said Lady Arthur; and
they all were very attentive. 
These are they, reply'd I: I lay it down as an
undoubted Truth, That true Love is one of the
most respectful Things in the World. It strikes
with Awe and Reverence the Mind of the Gentleman,
who boasts its Impression. It is chaste and
pure in Word and Deed, and cannot bear to have
the least Indecency mingle with it. 
If therefore a Gentleman, be his Birth and Quality
what it will, the higher the worse, presume to
wound a Lady's Ears with indecent Words: If he
endeavour, in his Expressions or Sentiments, to convey
gross or impure Ideas to her Mind: If he is continually
pressing for her Confidence in his Honour:
If he requests Favours which a Lady ought to refuse:
If he can be regardless of his Conduct or Behaviour
to her: If he can use boisterous or rude Freedoms,
either to her Person or Dress—(Here poor
Miss Cope, by her Blushes, bore Witness to her
Case—) If he avoids speaking of Marriage, when
he has a fair Opportunity of doing it—(Here
Miss L. look'd down, and blush'd—) or leaves it
once to a Lady to wonder that he does not: 
In any, or in all of these Cases, he is to be suspected,
and a Lady can have little Hope of such a
Person; nor, as I humbly apprehend, consistent with
Honour and Discretion, encourage his Address. 
The Ladies were so kind, as to applaud all I said,
and so did the Dean. Miss Stapylton, and Miss
Cope, and Miss L. were to try to recollect it when
they came home, and to write down what they 

could remember of the Conversation: And our noble
Guests coming in soon after, with Mr. B. the
Ladies would have departed; but he prevailed upon
them, with some Difficulty, to pass the Evening; 
and Miss L. who has an admirable Finger on the
Harpsichord, as I have heretofore told you, obliged
us with two or three Lessons. Each of the Ladies
did the like, and prevail'd upon me to play a Tune
or two: But Miss Cope, as well as Miss L. surpass'd
me much. We all sung too in Turns, and Mr. B.
took the Violin, in which he excels. Lord Davers
oblig'd us on the Violincello: Mr. H. play'd on the
German Flute, and sung us a Fop's Song, and perform'd
it in Character. So that we had an exceeding
gay Evening, and parted with great Satisfaction
on all Sides, particularly on the young Ladies; for
this put them all into good Humour, and good
Spirits, enlivening the former Scene, which otherwise
might have closed, perhaps, more gravely than
efficaciously. 
The Distance of Time since this Conversation
passed, enables me to add what I could not do,
when I wrote the Account of it, which you have
mislaid: And which take briefly as follows: 
Miss Stapylton, upon her Return home, was as
good as her Word, and wrote down all she could
recollect of the Conversation; and I having
sent her the Letter she had desir'd, containing my
Observations upon the flighty Style she so much
admir'd, she suffered it to have such an Effect upon
her, as to turn the Course of her Reading and
Studies, to weightier and more solid Subjects; and,
avoiding the Gentleman she had begun to favour, 

gave way to her Parents Recommendation; and is
happily marry'd to Sir Jonathan Barnes. 
Miss Cope came to me a Week after this, with
the Leave of both her Parents, and tarry'd with
me Three Days; in which time she open'd all her
worthy Heart to me; and return'd in such a Disposition,
and with such Resolutions, that she never
would see her Peer again; nor receive Letters from
him, which she own'd to me she had done clandestinely
before: And she is now the happy Lady of
Sir Michael Beaumont, who makes her the best of
Husbands, and permits her to follow her charitable
Inclinations, according to a Scheme, which she
prevail'd upon me to give her. 
Miss L. by the Dean's indulgent Prudence and
Discretion, has escaped her Rake; and, upon the
Discovery of an Intrigue he was carrying on with
another, conceived a just Abhorrence of him; and
is since marry'd to Dr. Jenkins, as you know, with
whom she lives very happily. 
Miss Sutton is not quite so well off, as the
Three former; tho' not altogether unhappy neither,
in her Way. She could not indeed conquer her
Love of Dress and Tinsel; and so became the Lady
of Col. Wilson: And they are thus far easy in the
Marriage State, that, being seldom together, in all
Probability they save a Multitude of Misunderstandings; 
for the Colonel loves Gaming, in which he
is generally a Winner; and so passes his Time mostly
in Town. His Lady has her Pleasures, neither
laudable nor criminal ones, which she pursues in
the Country. And now-and-then a Letter passes
on both Sides, by the Inscription and Superscription
of which, they remind one another, that they 

have been once in their Lives at one Church together. 
And what now, my dear Lady G. have I to add
to this tedious Account (for Letter I can hardly call
it) but that I am, with great Affection, 
Your true Friend and Servant,
P. B. 

