



Mr. Lovelace. In Continuation. 

It was now high time to acquaint my spouse, that
Captain Tomlinson was come. And the rather,
as the maid told us, that the lady had asked her, If
such a gentleman (describing him) was not in the
parlour? 
Mrs. Moore went up, and requested, in my name,
that she would give us audience. 
But she return'd, with a desire, that Captain
Tomlinson would excuse her for the present. She
was very ill. Her spirits were too weak to enter into
conversation with him; and she must lie down. 
I was vexed, and, at first, extremely disconcerted. 

The Captain was vexed too. And my concern, thou
mayst believe, was the greater on his account. 
She had been very much fatigued, I own. Her
fits in the morning must have weaken'd her: And
she had carried her resentment so high, that it was
the less wonder she should find herself low, when
her raised spirits had subsided. Very low, I may say; 
if sinkings are proportioned to risings; for she had
been lifted up above the standard of a common mortal. 
The Captain, however, sent up in his own name,
that if he could be admitted to drink one dish of tea
with her, he should take it for a favour; and would
go to town, and dispatch some necessary business, if
possible, to leave his morning free to attend her. 
But she pleaded a violent head-ach; and Mrs.
Moore confirm'd the plea to be just. 
I would have had the Captain lodge there that
night, as well in compliment to him, as introductory
to my intention of entering my self upon my new-taken
apartment. But his hours were of too much
importance to him to stay the evening. 
It was indeed very inconvenient for him, he said,
to return in the morning; but he was willing to do
all in his power to heal this breach, and that as well
for the sakes of me and my lady, as for that of his
dear friend Mr. John Harlowe; who must not know
how far this misunderstanding had gone. He would
therefore only drink one dish of tea with the ladies
and me. 
And accordingly, after he had done so, and I had had
a little private conversation with him, he hurried away. 
His fellow had given him, in the interim, a high
character to Mrs. Moore's servants: And this reported
by the Widow Bevis (who, being no proud
woman, is hail fellow, well met, as the saying is, with
all her aunt's servants), he was a fine gentleman, a
discreet gentleman, a man of sense and breeding, with 

them all: And it was pity, that, with such great
business upon his hands, he should be obliged to come
again. 
My life for yours, audibly whisper'd the Widow
Bevis, There is humour as well as head-ach in Somebody's
declining to see this worthy gentleman. —Ah,
Lord! how happy might some people be, if they
would!— 
No perfect happiness in this world, said I, very
gravely, and with a sigh; for the widow must know
that I heard her. If we have not real unhappiness,
we can make it, even from the overflowings of our
own good fortune. 
Very true, and, Very true, the two widows: A
charming observation, Mrs. Bevis. Miss Rawlins
smil'd her assent to it; and I thought she call'd me
in her heart, Charming man! For she professes to
be a great admirer of moral observations. 
I had hardly taken leave of the Captain, and sat
down again with the women, when Will. came; and
calling me out, ‘Sir, Sir,’ said he, grinning with a
familiarity in his looks, as if what he had to say intitled
him to take liberties; ‘I have got the fellow
down! —I have got old Grimes—Hah, hah, hah,
hah—He is at the Lower-Flask—Almost in the
condition of David's sow, and please your Honour
—[The dog himself not much better] Here is his
letter—from—from Miss Howe—Ha, ha, ha, ha,’ 
laugh'd the varlet; holding it fast, as if to make
conditions with me, and to excite my praises, as well
as my impatience. 
I could have knock'd him down; but he would
have his say out—‘Old Grimes knows not that I
have the letter—I must get back to him before he
misses it—I only made a pretence to go out for a
few minutes—But—but’—and then the dog laugh'd 

again—‘He must stay—Old Grimes must stay—till
I go back to pay the reckoning.’ 
D&wblank;n the prater! —Grinning rascal! —The letter
—The letter!— 
He gather'd in his wide mothe, as he calls it, and
gave me the letter; but with a strut, rather than a
bow; and then sidled off like one of Widow Sorlings's
dunghill cocks, exulting after a great feat performed. 
And all the time that I was holding up the billet to
the light, to try to get at its contents, without breaking
the seal (for, dispatch'd in a hurry, it had no
cover), there stood he laughing, shrugging, playing
off his legs; now stroking his shining chin; now
turning his hat upon his thumb; then leering in my
face, flourishing with his head—O Christ! now-and-then
cry'd the rascal— 
What joy has this dog in mischief! —More than I
can have in the completion of my most favourite
purposes! —These fellows are ever happier than their
masters. 
I was once thinking to rumple up this billet till I
had broken the seal. Young families (Miss Howe's is
not an antient one) love ostentatious sealings: And
it might have been supposed to have been squeez'd in
pieces, in old Grimes's breeches pocket. But I was
glad to be saved the guilt as well as suspicion of
having a hand in so dirty a trick; for thus much of
the contents (enough for my purpose) I was enabled
to scratch out in character, without it; the folds depriving
me only of a few connecting words; which
I have supply'd between hooks. 
My Miss Harlowe, thou knowest, had before
changed her name to Miss Lætitia Beaumont. Another
alias now, Jack: I have learn'd her to be half a
rogue in this instance; for this billet was directed to
her by the name of Mrs. Harriot Lucas. 


‘I congratulate you, my dear, with all my heart
and soul, upon [your escape] from the villain. 
[I long] for the particulars of all. [My mamma] is
out: But expecting her return every minute, I
dispatch'd [your] messenger instantly. [I will endeavour
to come at] Mrs. Townsend without loss
of time; and will write at large in a day or two,
if in that time I can see her. [Mean time I] am
excessively uneasy for a letter I sent you yesterday
by Collins, [who must have left it at] Wilson's
after you got away. [It is of very] great importance. 
[I hope the] villain has it not. I would
not for the world [that he should.] Immediately
send for it, if by so doing, the place you are at
[will not be] discover'd. If he has it, let me
know it by some way [out of] hand. If not, you
need not send.’ 
Ever, ever yours,
A. H. 
June 9. 
O Jack, what heart's-ease does this interception
give me! —I sent the rascal back with the letter to
old Grimes, and charg'd him to drink no deeper. 
He own'd, that he was half seas over, as he phrased
it. 
Dog! said I, are you not to court one of Mrs.
Moore's maids to-night?— 
Cry your mercy, Sir! —I will be sober. —I had
forgot that—But old Grimes is plaguy tough—I
thought I should never have got him down. 
Away, villain! —Let old Grimes come; and on
horseback, too, to the door— 
He shall, and please your Honour, if I can get him
on the saddle, and if he can sit— 
And charge him not to have alighted, nor to have
seen any-body— 

Enough, Sir! familiarly nodding his head, to shew
he took me. And away went the villain: Into the
parlour, among the women, I. 
In a quarter of an hour came old Grimes on horseback,
waving to his saddle-bow, now on this side,
now on that; his head, at others, joining to that of
his more sober beast. 
It look'd very well to the women, that I made no
effort to speak to old Grimes (tho' I wish'd before
them, that I knew the contents of what he brought); 
but, on the contrary, desired that they would instantly
let my spouse know, that her messenger was
return'd. Down she flew, violently as she had the
head-ach! 
O how I pray'd for an opportunity to be reveng'd
of her, for the ingrateful trouble she had given to her
uncle's friend! 
She took the letter from old Grimes with her own
hands, and retired to an inner parlour to read it. 
She presently came out again to the fellow, who
had much ado to sit his horse—Here is your money,
friend. I thought you long. But what shall I do
to get somebody to go to town immediately for me? 
I see you cannot. 
Old Grimes took his money; let fall his hat in
d'offing it; had it given him; and rode away; his
eyes ising-glass, and set in his head, as I saw thro'
the window; and in a manner speechless; all his
language hiccoughs. My dog need not have gone so
deep with this tough old Grimes. —But the rascal was
in his kingdom with him. 
The lady apply'd to Mrs. Moore: She matter'd
not the price. Could a man and horse be engaged for
her? —Only to go for a letter left for her, at one Mr.
Wilson's in Pall-mall. 
A poor neighbour was hired. A horse procured
for him. He had his directions. 

In vain did I endeavour to engage my Beloved,
when she was below. Her head-ach, I suppose, return'd. 
She, like the rest of her sex, can be ill or
well when she pleases— 
I see her drift, thought I: It is to have all her
lights from Miss Howe before she resolves; and to
take her measures accordingly. 
Up she went, expressing great impatience about
the letter she had sent for; and desired Mrs. Moore
to let her know, if I offer'd to send any of my servants
to town—To get at the letter, I suppose, was
her fear. But she might have been quite easy on
that head; and yet perhaps would not, had she
known, that the worthy Captain Tomlinson (who
will be in town before her messenger) will leave there
the important letter: Which I hope will help to
pacify her, and to reconcile her to me. 
O Jack! Jack! thinkest thou that I will take all
this roguish pains, and be so often called villain, for
nothing? 
But yet, is it not taking pains to come at the finest
creature in the world, not for a transitory moment only,
but for one of our lives? —The struggle, Whether
I am to have her in my own way, or in hers? 
But now I know thou wilt be frighten'd out of
thy wits for me—What, Lovelace! wouldst thou let
her have a letter that will inevitably blow thee up; 
and blow up the mother, and all her nymphs!—yet
not intend to reform, to marry? 
Patience, puppy! Canst thou not trust thy master? 