



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;
[In Answer to Letter xcviii.] 

Wedn. Morn. Sept. 6. 
And is she somewhat better? —Blessings upon
thee without number or measure! Let her still
be better and better! Tell me so at least, if she be not
so: For thou knowest not what a joy that poor temporary
reprieve, that she will hold out yet a day or
two, gave me. 
But who told this hard-hearted and death-pronouncing
Doctor, that she will hold it no longer? By
what warrant says he this? What presumption in these
parading solemn fellows of a college which will be my
contempt to the latest hour of my life, if this brother
of it (eminent as he is deemed to be) cannot work an
ordinary miracle in her favour, or rather in mine! 
Let me tell thee, Belford, that already he deserves
the utmost contempt, for suffering this charming clock
to run down so low. What must be his art, if it 

could not wind it up in a quarter of the time he has
attended her, when, at his first visits, the springs and
wheels of life and motion were so good, that they
seemed only to want common care and oiling! 
I am obliged to you for endeavouring to engage her
to see me. 'Twas acting like a friend. If she had
vouchsafed me that favour, she should have seen at
her feet the most abject adorer that ever kneeled to
justly-offended beauty. 
What she bid you, and what she forbid you, to tell
me (the latter for tender considerations); That she forgives
me; and that, could she have made me a good
man, she could have made me a happy one! That she
even loved me! At such a moment to own that she
once loved me! Never before loved any man! That she
prays for me! That her last tear should be shed for
me, could she by it save a soul, doomed, without her,
to perdition! —O!Belford, Belford! I cannot bear it! 
—What a dog, what a devil, have I been to a goodness
so superlative! —Why does she not inveigh against
me? —Why does she not execrate me? —O the triumphant
subduer! Ever above me! —And now to
leave me so infinitely below her! 
Marry and repair, at any time; This, wretch that
I was! was my plea to myself. To give her a lowering
sensibility; to bring her down from among the
stars which her beamy head was surrounded by, that
my Wife, so greatly above me, might not despise
me; this was one of my reptile motives, owing to
my more reptile envy, and to my consciousness of inferiority
to her! —Yet she, from step to step, from
distress to distress, to maintain her superiority; and,
like the Sun, to break out upon me with the greater
refulgence for the clouds that I had contrived to cast
about her—And now to escape me thus! —No power
left me to repair her wrongs! —No alleviation to my
self-reproach! —No dividing of blame with her!— 

Tell her, O tell her, Belford, that her prayers and
wishes, her superlatively generous prayers and wishes,
shall not be vain: That I can, and do repent—and
long have repented: —Tell her of my frequent deep
remorses—It was impossible that such remorses should
not at last produce effectual remorse—Yet she must
not leave me—She must live, if she would wish to
have my contrition perfect—For what can despair produce?— 
* *
I will do every-thing you would have me do, in
the return of your Letters. You have infinitely obliged
me by this last, and by pressing for an admission for
me, tho' it succeeded not. 
Once more, how could I be such a villain to so divine
a creature! Yet love her all the time, as never
man loved woman! —Curse upon my contriving genius! 
Curse upon my intriguing head, and upon my seconding
heart! —To sport with the fame, with the honour,
with the life, of such an angel of a woman! —O my
damn'd incredulity! That, believing her to be a woman,
I must hope to find her a woman! On my incredulity,
that there could be such virtue (virtue for
virtue's sake) in the Sex, founded I my hope of succeeding
with her. 
But say not, Jack, that she must leave us yet. If
she recover, and if I can but re-obtain her favour,
then indeed will life be life to me. The world never
saw such an husband as I will make. I will have no
will but hers. She shall conduct me in all my steps. 
She shall open and direct my prospects, and turn
every motion of my heart as she pleases. 
You tell me in your Letter, that at Eleven o'clock
she had sweet rest; and my servant acquaints me from
Mrs. Smith, that she has had a good night. What
hope does this fill me with! I have given the fellow
five guineas for his good news, to be divided between
him and his fellow-servant. 

Dear, dear Jack! confirm this to me in thy next— 
For Heaven's sake do. —Tell the Doctor I will make
him a present of a thousand guineas if he recover her. 
Ask if a consultation be necessary. 
Adieu, dear Belford! Confirm, I beseech thee, the
hopes that now with sovereign gladness have taken
possession of a heart, that, next to Hers, is 
Thine. 