

Lett.
I.Lovelace, To Belford. Dialogue with Clarissa, the door between
them. Her Letter to him. She will not see him for a
week.
II.From the same. Copies of Letters that pass between them. Goes
to the Commons to try to get the Licence. She shall see him, he
declares, on his return. Love and compassion hard to be separated.
His fluctuating reasonings on their present situation. Is jealous of
her superior qualities. Does justice to her immoveable Virtue.
III.From the same. The Lady escaped. His rage. Makes a solemn
vow of revenge, if once more he get her into his power. His man
Will. is gone in search of her. His hopes. On what grounded. He
will advertise her. Describes her dress. Letter left behind her.
Accuses her (that is to say, Lovelace accuses her) of Niceness,
Prudery, Affectation.
IV.From the same. A Letter to Miss Howe from Clarissa falls into
his hands; which, had it come to hers, would have laid open and detected
all his designs. In it she acquits Clarissa of Prudery, Coquetry,
and undue Reserve. Admires, applauds, blesses her for the example
she has set her Sex, and for the credit she has done it, by her conduct
in the most difficult situations.
This Letter may be considered as a kind of Summary of Clarissa's trials,
persecutions, and exemplary conduct hitherto; and of Mr. Lovelace's
intrigues, plots, and views, so far as Miss Howe could be supposed to
know them, or to guess at them.
A Letter from Lovelace, which further shews the fertility of his contriving
genius.
V.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Informs her of Lovelace's villainy, and
of her escape. Her only concern, what. The course she intends to
pursue.
VI.Lovelace, To Belford. Exults on hearing from his man Will.
that the Lady has refuged herself at Hamstead. Observations in a style
of levity on some passages in the Letter she left behind her. Intimates,
that Tomlinson is arrived to aid his purposes. The chariot is come; 
and now, dressed like a Bridegroom, attended by a footman she never
saw, he is already, he says, at Hamstead.
VII. VIII.From the same. Exults on his contrivances.—By what
means he gets into the Lady's presence at Mrs. Moore's. Her terrors,
fits, exclamations. His plausible tales to Mrs. Moore and Miss
Rawlins. His intrepid behaviour to the Lady. Copies of Letters

from Tomlinson, and of pretended ones from his own Relations, calculated
to pacify and delude her.
IX. X.Lovelace, To Belford. His further arts, inventions, and intrepidity.
—She puts home questions to him. ‘Ungenerous and
ungrateful she calls him. He knows not the value of the heart
he had insulted. He had a plain path before him, after he had
tricked her out of her Father's house: But that now her mind
was raised above fortune and above him.’ His precautionary contrivances.
XI. XII. XIII. XIV. XV. XVI.From the same. Character of
Widow Bevis. Prepossesses the women against Miss Howe. Leads
them to think she is in Love with him. Apt himself to think
so: And why. Women like not novices: And why.–––Their vulgar
aphorism animadverted on.–––Tomlinson arrives. Artful conversation
between them. Miss Rawlins's prudery.—His forged Letter
in imitation of Miss Howe's, No. iv. Other contrivances to delude
the Lady, and attach the women to his party.
XVII. XVIII. XIX. XX.From the same. Particulars of several interesting
conversations between himself, Tomlinson, and the Lady.
Artful management of the two former. Her noble spirit.—He tells
Tomlinson before her, that he never had any proofs of affection from
her. She frankly owns the regard she once had for him. ‘He had
brought her,’ she tells Tomlinson and him, ‘more than once to
own it to him. Nor did his own vanity, she was sure, permit him
to doubt of it. He had kept her soul in suspense an hundred times.’ 
—Both men affected in turn by her noble behaviour, and great
sentiments.—Their pleas, prayers, prostrations, to move her to
relent. Her distress.
XXI. XXII.From the same. His conditional promise to Tomlinson
in the Lady's favour. His pleas and arguments on their present situation,
and on his darling and hitherto baffled views. His whimsical
contest with his Conscience. His last adieu to it.—His strange
levity, which he calls gravity, on the death of Belford's Uncle.
XXIII. XXIV.From the same. She favours him with a meeting in the
garden. Her composure. Her conversation great and noble. But
will not determine any-thing in his favour. It is however evident,
he says, that she has still some tenderness for him. His reasons. An
affecting scene between them. Her ingenuousness and openness of heart.
—She resolves to go to church; but will not suffer him to accompany
her thither. His whimsical debate with the God of Love,
whom he introduces as pleading for the Lady.
XXV. XXVI. XXVII.From the same. He has got the wished-for
Letter from Miss Howe.—Informs him of the manner of obtaining
it.–––His remarks upon it. Observations on female friendships.
Comparison between Clarissa and Miss Howe.
XXVIII.From the same. Another conversation with the Lady. His
plausible arguments to re-obtain her favour ineffectual. His pride
piqued. His revenge incited. New arguments in favour of his wicked
projects. Has notice that a Licence is actually obtained.

XXIX. XXX.Lovelace, To Belford. Copy of the Licence; with his observations
upon it. His scheme for Annual Marriages.—He is
preparing with Lady Betty and Miss Montague to wait upon Clarissa.
Who these pretended Ladies are. How dressed. They give themselves
airs as of quality. Humorously instructs them how to act up
to their assumed characters.
XXXI. XXXII.From the same. Once more is the charmer of his
soul in her old lodgings. Brief account of the horrid imposture.
Steels his heart by revengeful recollections. Her agonizing apprehensions.
Temporary distraction. Is ready to fall into fits.—But all
her distress, all her prayers, her innocence, her virtue, cannot save
her from the most villainous outrage.
XXXIII.Belford, To Lovelace. Vehemently inveighs against him.
Grieves for the Lady. Is now convinced, that there must be a world
after this, to do justice to injured merit. Beseeches him, if he be a
man, and not a devil, to do her all the poor justice now in his
power.
XXXIV.Lovelace, To Belford. Regrets that he ever attempted her.
Aims at extenuation. Does he not see, that he has journeyed on to
this stage with one determined point in view from the first? She is
at present stupefied, he says.
XXXV.From the same. The Lady's affecting behaviour in her delirium.
He owns that Art has been used to her. Begins to feel remorse.
XXXVI.From the same. The Lady writes upon scraps of paper,
which she tears, and throws under the table. Copies of ten of these
rambling papers; and of a Letter to him most affectingly incoherent.
He attempts further to extenuate his villainy. Tries to resume his
usual levity; and forms a scheme to decoy the people at Hamstead
to the infamous woman's in town. The Lady seems to be recovering.
XXXVII.From the same. She attempts to get away in his absence.
Is prevented by the odious Sinclair. He exults in the hope of looking
her into confusion when he sees her. Is told by Dorcas, that she is
coming into the dining-room to find him out.
XXXVIII.From the same. A high scene of her exalted, and of
his depressed behaviour. Offers to make her amends by Matrimony.
She treats his offer with contempt. Afraid Belford plays
him false.
XXXIX.From the same. Wishes he had never seen her. With all
the women he had known till now, it was, Once subdued, and always
subdued. His miserable dejection. His remorse. She attempts
to escape. A mob raised. His quick invention to pacify it.
Out of conceit with himself, and his contrivances.
XL. XLI.From the same. Lord M. very ill. His presence necessary
at M. Hall. Puts Dorcas upon ingratiating herself with her Lady.
—He re-urges marriage to her. She absolutely, from the most
noble motives, rejects him.

XLII.Lovelace, To Belford. Reflects upon himself. It costs, he says,
more pains to be wicked than to be good. The Lady's solemn expostulation
with him. Extols her greatness of soul. Dorcas coming
into favour with her. He is alarmed by another attempt of the Lady
to get off. She is in agonies at being prevented. He tries to intimidate
her. Dorcas pleads for her. On the point of drawing his sword
against himself. The occasion.
XLIII.From the same. Cannot yet persuade himself but the Lady
will be his. Reasons for his opinion. Opens his heart to Belford,
as to his intentions by her. Mortified that she refuses his honest
vows. Her violation but notional. Her triumph greater than her
sufferings. Her will unviolated. He is a better man, he says,
than most Rakes: And why.