


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Sat. Night. 
I have a constant attendant in Lady Clementina. 
She was not to be consoled when I was at worst. 
Wringing her hands, O that she had never come to
England! was her frequent exclamation: And they
apprehended, that her mind would be again disturbed. 
She has not yet recovered her former sedateness. She
gets by herself, when she is not with me. She is often
in tears, and wishes herself in Italy. Sir Charles
is concerned for her. She has something upon her
mind, he says; and asked me, if she had not disclosed
it to me? He wondered she had not; expressing himself
with pleasure on the confidence each has in the
other. 
Sunday, May 13. 
Signor Jeronymo has been pitying to me the
Count of Belvedere. The poor man could not prevail
upon himself to accompany Sir Charles and his
noble guests down. He owned to Jeronymo, that he
had twice set out for Grandison-hall; but both times,
being unable to pursue his intention, turned back. 
Jeronymo told me, that the Count had made his
will, and left all that he could leave, and his whole
personal estate, to their family, in case he should die
unmarried. He would not leave it to Lady Clementina,
lest, if his bequests were to come to her knowlege,
she should think he was so mean, as to expect
that favour from his riches, of which he had no hope
from her esteem. 
The generous Belvedere declares, said Jeronymo,
that should her malady be renewed by means of our
interesting ourselves in his favour, he should be the
most miserable of men. My dear Jeronymo, said he,
at parting in town, tell that Angel of a Woman, that 

I never will solicit her favour, while I shall have reason
to apprehend she has an aversion to me. May Clementina
be happy, and Belvedere must have some
consolation from knowing her to be so, however
wretched he may be on the whole. But assure yourself,
Jeronymo, that I will never be the husband of
any other woman, while she is unmarried. 
I joined with Signor Jeronymo in pitying the Count:
Yet, I must own, that my compassion is still more deeply
engaged for Clementina. But I was affected not a
little, however, when Jeronymo read a passage from
a Letter of the Count, which, at my request, he left
with me; and which I English as follows:—After
his supplications put up to Heaven for her happiness,
whatever became of him–––“But can she be happy,” 
says he, “in her present situation? May there not be
always a struggle between her exalted notion of
duty, and her passion (tho' the noblest that ever
warmed a human breast) which may renew the
disorders of her mind? –––Were she mine–––(Let me
indulge, for one moment, the rapturous supposition)
I could hope to conduct, to guide, to compose,
that noble mind. We would admire, with an
equal affection, that best of men, whose goodness is
not more the object of her Love, than of my veneration. 
Jealous as I am of my honour, I would
satisfy the charmer of my soul, that I approved
of her sisterly Love of a man so excellent. She
would not then be left to the silent distress of her
own heart.” 
What say my Grandmamma, my Aunt, my Lucy? 
Shall I wish the noble Clementina may be prevailed
upon in favour of this really worthy man? Should I,
do you think, be prevailed upon in her situation? 
–––A better question still–––Ought I? 
Monday, May 14. 
My Cousin James has seen me, and I have chid
him too, for having been so hasty to carry bad news 

to Northamptonshire, without staying a day or two,
when he might have carried better. 'Tis true, they
will not permit me to quit my chamber yet: But that
is rather for precautionary than necessary reasons; 
and they have given over chiding me for writing––– 
Their indulgence to me of my pen will convince you,
that I am quite well. 
Lady Clementina most sincerely rejoices in my recovery. 
Yet she is every day more and more thoughtful
and solemn. She is grieved, she tells her mother
(who is troubled at her Solemnity) for her brother
Jeronymo, who indeed is not well. Mr. Lowther
tells us, that he must not expect to be exempt from
temporary pains and disorder: But I am sure the
worthy man would be easier in his own mind, were
his sister to give her hand to the Count of Belvedere. 
I talked to Sir Charles on this subject an hour ago. 
Lady Clementina, my dear Sir, said I, is not happy. 
I question whether she ever will, unless she is allowed
her own way, the veil. 
And that, returned he, has been so long a family-objection,
that the compliance with her wishes, would
break the heart of her mother, at least; and greatly
afflict all the rest. It must not, for their sakes, be
thought of. 
What then, Sir, can be done? 
We must have patience, my dearest life. Her malady
has unsettled her noble mind. She must try her
own schemes; and if she find not happiness in any of
them, she will think of new ones, till at last she fixes. 
Nor, I hope, is the time far off. 
Do you think so, Sir? 
Don't you see, my Love, that the poor Lady is
more and more uneasy with herself? Something is
working in her mind. I have desired her mother to
leave that disturbed mind to its own generous workings. 
Her vehemence, raised by the opposition she met
with, which she considered as a persecution, has for 

some time subsided; and she will probably fall upon reflexions
which she had not time to attend to before. 
Jeronymo thinks, proceeded he, that I might successfully
plead in the Count's favour—But did I not
draw the articles? Did I not propose the terms? Lady
Clementina shall not be prevaricated with. She shuns
me of late–––In apprehension, perhaps, that I will
try my influence over her. She never seems so easy,
as when she is with my dearest Love. You must preserve
that consequence with her, which delicate minds
will ever be of to one another. Some little appearances
of her malady will perhaps, now-and-then,
shew themselves, and unsettle her: But I have no
doubt, if it please God to preserve her reason, that
her present uneasinesses will be productive of some
great change in her schemes, which may end in a
tranquillity of mind, that will make all us who love
her, happy. Mean-time, my dear, let this be our
rule, if you please: Let her lead; let us only follow
–––Persuasion against avowed inclination, you and I,
my Harriet, have always condemned as a degree of
compulsion. Had the admirable Lady been entreated
to take the noble measure she fell upon, when she
rejected me, however great the motives, she would
not have been so happy, as she was, when she found
herself absolute mistress of the question, and could
astonish and surprise us all by her magnanimity. 
Who could resist this reasoning? How well does
he seem to know this excellent woman, when he
considers her unhappy unfixedness, occasioned by a
malady, which will now-and-then (till she can be
settled in some quiet and agreeable way) shew itself
in her conduct, when she has any great part before
her to act! 
Tuesday Afternoon, May 15. 
Lady Clementina, soon after dinner, sent up to
me her Camilla (for I was not at table) to desire a
quarter of an hour's discourse with me in my chamber. 

I gave direction, that nobody should come to
me till I rang. She entered; saw me seated; took
her seat by me; and immediately, with a noble
frankness in her manner, thus began: 
I could not, my dear Lady Grandison, ask the
favour of your ear on the subject I wanted to open
my heart upon to you, till I saw you were perfectly
recovered. God be praised, that you are! What
anxieties did your late indisposition give me! I accused
myself as the cause of it. –––I had engaged you,
thoughtlesly, in too long a walk. You know how Lady
G. how Lady L. were terrified. I overheard them
once that evening talking over their fears to one another. 
Lady G. looked with visible unkindness upon
me. My aid ineffectual, my person in the way, I hurried
to my chamber: Good God! said I (every object
looking strange about me) Where am I? What am I? 
Can I be the same Clementina della Porretta that I
was a few months ago? Can I have brought misery to
the family which was my only refuge? To the man
who–––[She paused: Then lifting up her eyes; Blessed
Virgin! said she, And is Clementina in the house
of the man whom she has been known to regard
above all men; and whom she still does regard; but
not as Olivia supposes?] And then on my knees I
offered up fervent prayers for your health and happiness; 
and that it would please God to return me,
with reputation, to my native country. My eyes
are now opened to the impropriety I have been guilty
of in taking refuge in England; and in remaining
in it, and in your house, and with a man whom I
am known to value. The world has begun to talk:
Cruel Olivia! She will lead and point the talk, as
she would have it believed. I am under obligation
to your goodness, and to that of all your friends, that
they and you think kindly of me, situated as I once
was. I am obliged (Mortifying consideration to a
spirit like mine!) to Sir Charles Grandison's generosity 

and compassion, that he does not despise me. A
girl (forgive me for mentioning it; it is to you only)
has been, by my dear Mrs. Beaumont, proposed, indirectly
at least, for a Pattern to me. How am I
sunk! My pride cannot bear it Had I been allowed
to take the veil, all these improprieties in my conduct
had been prevented; all these mortifications would
have been spared the unhappy Clementina–––Tell me,
advise me, May I not renew my entreaties to be allowed
to take the veil? Give me, as to your sister
(no sister ever loved her sister better than I love you)
your advice: Counsel me what to do, what course
to steer, to recover myself in my own eyes. At present
I hate, I despise, myself. 
With how little reason, my dearest sister, my excellent
friend! All my family revere you: Sir Charles,
his Sisters, and I, love you: Lady G. particularly
admires you: She could not possibly look unkindly
upon you. What has Olivia dared to report? But
did she ever forbear her rash censures? –––What can
I advise you? I see your delicate distress. But suppose
you open your mind to the Marchioness? To
Mrs. Beaumont suppose? She is the most prudent of
women. 
I know their minds already. Their judgments are
not with me. Mrs. Beaumont (indeed without intending
it) has terrified me. My mamma thinks herself
bound by the Articles, and will not speak. 
Suppose, my dearest Lady, you advise with Sir
Charles? You know he is the most delicate-minded
of men. 
I shall ever honour him: But your indisposition has
made me look upon him with more reverence than
familiarity. I have avoided him. An exquisite pain
has seized my heart, on being brought to meditate
the impropriety of my situation: A pain I cannot
describe. Here it used to be (putting her hand to her 

forehead); but here now it is (removing it to her
heart); and at times I cannot bear it. 
Let me beg of Lady Clementina to lay that noble
heart open to Sir Charles. You know his disinterested
affection for you. You know his regard for your
glory. You know that your own mother, your own
Mrs. Beaumont, are not more delicate than he is. 
You may unbosom yourself to him. But such is his
sear of offending you, that you must begin. A small
opening will do. His nice regard for your honour,
for the honour of our sex, will, on a slight encouragement,
spare you all that would be irksome to
you. He has no prejudices in favour or disfavour
of any body. He loves, it is true, he reveres your
whole family; but you more than all the rest. Shall
I say that he made his court to me in your name, and
by your interest; yet acknowleged himself refused by
an Angel? 
Excellent man! –––I will consult him, and in your
presence. 
As to my presence, madam––– 
It must be so, interrupted she: I shall want your
support. Do you be my advocate with him; and if
he will be an advocate for me, I may yet be happy. 
At present, I see but one way to extricate myself with
honour. I dare not propose it. He may. The world
and Olivia will not let me be, in that world, a single
woman, and happy. –––Why should I not be allowed
to quit it by a divine dedication? 
I embraced her; soothed her: But thought of Sir
Charles's advice, not to lead, but follow as she led:
Not one word, as I told her, would I say to him of
what had passed between us, that she might have his
own unprejudiced advice. 
I rang, by her permission. Sally came up. I made
my request, by her, to her master. He found us together. 
Sir Charles, said I, before he could speak, 

Lady Clementina has something on her mind: I have
besought her to consult you. 
I must consult you both, said she. To-morrow
morning, Sir, as early as will suit Lady Grandison,
we will meet for that purpose. 
May the issue of to-morrow's conference be tranquillity
of mind to this excellent Lady! 

