



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Thursday Morn. July 20. 
What, my dearest creature, have been your sufferings! 
—What must have been your anguish
on so disgraceful an insult, committed in the open
streets, and in the broad day! 
No end, I think, of the undeserved calamities of a
dear Soul, who has been so unhappily driven and betrayed
into the hands of a vile Libertine! —How was
I shocked at the receiving of your Letter written by
another hand, and only dictated by you! —You must
be very ill. Nor is it to be wondered at. But I hope
it is rather from hurry, and surprize, and lowness,
which may be overcome, than from a grief given way
to, which may be attended with effects I cannot bear
to think of. 
But whatever you do, my dear, you must not despond! 
Indeed you must not despond! Hitherto you
have been in no fault: But despair would be all your
own; and the worst fault you can be guilty of. 
I cannot bear to look upon another hand instead of
yours. My dear creature, send me a few lines, tho'
ever so few, in your own hand, if possible. —For they
will revive my heart; especially if they can acquaint
me of your amended health. 
I expect your Answer to my Letter of the 13th. We
all expect it with impatience. 
His relations are persons of so much honour —They
are so very earnest to rank you among them —The
wretch is so very penitent: Every one of his family
says he is—Your own are so implacable—Your last
distress, tho' the consequence of his former villainy,
yet neither brought on by his direction, nor with his
knowlege; and so much resented by him—That my
Mother is absolutely of opinion, that you should be his 

—Especially if, yielding to my wishes, as expressed
in my Letter, and those of all his friends, you would
have complied, had it not been for this horrid Arrest. 
I will inclose the copy of the Letter I wrote to Miss
Montague last Tuesday, on hearing that nobody knew
what was become of you; and the Answer to it, under-written
and signed by Lord M. Lady Sarah
Sadleir, and Lady Betty Lawrance, as well as by the
young Ladies; and also by the wretch himself. 
I own, that I like not the turn of what he has written
to me; and before I will further interest myself in
his favour, I have determined to inform myself, by a
friend, from his own mouth, of his sincerity, and
whether his whole inclination be in his request to me,
exclusive of the wishes of his relations. Yet my heart
rises against him, on the supposition that there is the
shadow of a reason for such a question, the woman
Miss Clarissa Harlowe. —But I think, with my Mother,
that Marriage is now the only means left to make
your future life tolerably easy-happy there is no saying. 
—His disgraces, in that case, in the eye of the world
itself, will be more than yours: And to those who
know you, glorious will be your triumph. 
I am obliged to accompany my Mother soon to the
Isle of Wight. My Aunt Harman is in a declining
way, and insists upon seeing us both—and Mr. Hickman
too, I think. 
His Sister, of whom we had heard so much, with
her Lord, were brought t'other day to visit us. She
strangely likes me, or says she does. 
I can't say, but that I think she answers the excellent
character we have heard of her. 
It would be death to me to set out for the little
island, and not see you first: And yet my Mother
(fond of exerting an authority that she herself, by that
exertion, often brings into question) insists, that my
next visit to you must be a congratulatory one, as Mrs.
Lovelace. 

When I know what will be the result of the questions
to be put in my name to that wretch, and what
is your mind on my Letter of the 13th, I shall tell
you more of mine. 
The bearer promises to make so much dispatch, as
to attend you this very afternoon. May he return with
good tidings to 
Your ever-affectionate
Anna Howe! 