



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Monday morning, March 27. 
This morning early my uncle Harlowe came hither. 
He sent me up the inclosed very tender
letter. It has made me wish I could oblige him! — 
You'll see how Mr. Solmes's ill qualities are gloss'd
over in it. What blemishes does affection hide! — 
So, perhaps, may they say to me, What faults does
antipathy bring to light! Be pleased to send me back
this letter of my uncle's, by the first return. I may
possibly try to account for, and wish to obviate, my
being such a formidable creature to my whole family,
as I am represented in it. 

Sunday night, or rather Monday morning. 
I must answer you, tho' against my own intention. 
Every-body loves you; and you know they do. 
The very ground you walk upon is dear to most of
us. But how can we resolve to see you? There is
no standing against your looks and language. It is
the strength of our love makes us decline to see you. 
How can we, when you are resolved not to do, what
we are resolved you shall do? I never, for my part,
loved any creature, as I loved you from your youth
till now. And indeed, as I have often said, Never
was there a young creature so deserving of our love. 
But what is come to you now! —Alas! alas, my dear! 
How you fail in the trial! 
I have read the letters you inclosed. At a proper
time, I may shew them to my brother and sister. But
they will receive nothing from you at present. 
For my part, I could not read your letter to myself,
without being unmann'd. How can you be so unmov'd
yourself, yet be so able to move every-body else? How
could you send such a letter to Mr. Solmes? Fie upon
you! —How strangely are you alter'd? 

Then to treat your brother and sister as you did,
that they don't care to write to you, or to see you. — 
Don't you know where it is written, That soft answers
turn away wrath? But if you will trust to your
sharp-pointed wit, you may wound: But a club
will beat down a sword: And how can you expect,
that they who are hurt by you will not hurt you
again? —Was this the way you used to take to make
us all adore you, as we did? —No, it was your gentleness
of heart and manners, that made every-body, even
strangers, at first sight, treat you as a Lady, and call
you a Lady, tho' not born one, as your mamma was,
any more than your sister; while she was only plain
Miss Harlowe, or Miss Arabella. If you were envied,
why should you sharpen envy, and file up its
teeth to an edge? —You see I write like an impartial
man, and as one that loves you still! 
But since you have display'd your talents, and
spared no-body, and moved every-body, without being
moved, you have but made us stand the closer
and firmer together. This is what I likened to an
imbattled Phalanx, once before. Your aunt Hervey
forbids your writing, for the same reason that I must
not countenance it. We are all afraid to see you,
because we know we shall be made as so many fools. 
Nay, your mamma is so afraid of you, that once or
twice, when she thought you was coming to force
yourself into her presence, she shut the door, and
locked herself in, because she knew she must not see
you upon your terms, and you are resolved you will
not see her upon hers. 
Resolve but to oblige us all, my dearest Miss Clary,
and you shall see how we will clasp you every one by
turns, to our rejoicing hearts! —If the one man has
not the wit, and the parts, and the person, of the
other, no one breathing has a worse heart than that
other: And is not the love of all your friends, and a
sober man (if he be not so polished), to be preferred 

to a debauchee, tho' ever so fine a man, to look at? 
You have such fine talents, that you will be adored
by the one: But the other has as much advantage in
those respects, as you have yourself, and will not set by
them one straw: For husbands are sometimes jealous
of their authority, with witty wives. You will have
in one, a man of virtue. Had you not been so rudely
affronting to him, he would have made your ears
tingle, with what he could have told you of the
other. 
Come, my dear niece, let me have the honour of
doing with you what no-body else yet has been able
to do. Your father, mother, and I, will divide the
pleasure, and the honour, I will again call it, between
us; and all past offences shall be forgiven; and Mr.
Solmes, we will engage, shall take nothing amiss
hereafter, that is just. 
He knows, he says, what a jewel that man will
have, who can obtain your favour; and he will think
light of all he has suffer'd, or shall suffer, in obtaining
you. 
Dear, sweet creature, oblige us: And oblige us
with a grace. It must be done, whether with a grace
or not. I do assure you it must. You must not conquer
father, mother, uncles, every-body: Depend
upon That. 
I have sat up half the night to write This. You don't
know how I am touch'd at reading yours, and writing
this. Yet will I be at Harlowe-place early in the morning. 
So, upon reading this, if you will oblige us all,
send me word to come up to your apartment: And I
will lead you down, and present you to the embraces of
every-one: And you will then see, you have more of
a brother and sister, than of late your prejudices will
let you think you have. This from one who used to
love to stile himself 
Your paternal Uncle,
John Harlowe. 


In about an hour after this kind letter was given
me, my uncle sent up to know, if he should be a
welcome visitor, upon the terms mention'd in his
letter? He bid Betty bring him down a verbal answer: 
A written one, he said, would be a bad sign; 
and he bid her therefore not bring a letter. But I
had just finish'd the inclosed transcription of one I had
been writing. She made a difficulty to carry it; but
was prevailed upon to oblige me, by a token which
these Mrs. Betty's cannot withstand. 

Dear and honoured Sir,
How you rejoice me by your condescending
goodness! —So kind, so paternal a letter!—so
soothing to a wounded heart; and of late what I have
been so little used to! —How am I affected with it! 
Tell me not, dear Sir, of my way of writing: Your
letter has more moved me, than I ever could move
any-body! —It has made me, with all my heart, wish
I could intitle myself to be visited upon your own
terms; and to be led down to my papa and mamma,
by so good and so kind an uncle. 
I will tell you, dearest Sir, what I will do to make
my peace. I have no doubt that Mr. Solmes would
greatly prefer my sister to such a strange, averse creature
as me: His chief, or one of his chief motives to
address me, is, as I have reason to believe, the contiguity
of my grandfather's estate to his own: I will resign
it; for ever I will resign it: And the resignation must
be good, because I will never marry at all: I will
make it over to my sister, and her heirs for ever. I
shall have no heirs, but my brother and her; and I
will receive, as of my papa's bounty, such an annuity
(not in lieu of the estate, but as of his bounty), as he
shall be pleased to grant me, if it be ever so small; 
and whenever I disoblige him, he shall withdraw it,
at his pleasure. 
Will not This be accepted? —Sure it must! —Sure 

it will! —I beg of you, dearest Sir, to propose it; and
second it with your interest. This will answer every
end. My sister has a high opinion of Mr. Solmes. 
I never can have any in the light he is proposed to
me. But as my sister's husband, he will be always
intitled to my respect; and shall have it. 
If this be accepted, grant me, Sir, the honour of a
visit; and do me then the inexpressible pleasure of
leading me down to the feet of my honoured parents,
and they shall find me the most dutiful of children; 
and to the arms of my brother and sister, and
they shall find me the most obliging and most affectionate
of sisters. 
I wait, Sir, for your answer to this proposal, made
with the whole heart of 
Your dutiful and most obliged Niece,
Cl. Harlowe. 

Monday noon. 
I hope this will be accepted: For Betty tells me,
that my uncle Antony and my aunt Hervey are sent
for; and not Mr. Solmes, which I look upon as a favourable
circumstance. With what chearfulness will
I assign over this envied estate! —What a much more
valuable consideration shall I part with it for! —The
love and favour of all my relations! —That love and
favour, which I used for eighteen years together to
rejoice in, and he distinguished by! —And what a
charming pretence will this afford me of breaking
with Mr. Lovelace! And how easy will it possibly
make him, to part with me! 
I found this morning, in the usual place, a letter
from him, in answer, I suppose, to mine of Friday,
which I deposited not till Saturday. But I have not
opened it; nor will I, till I see what effect this new
offer will have. 
Let me but be permitted to avoid the man I hate; 
and I will give up, with all my heart, the man I 

could prefer. To renounce the one, were I really
to value him, as you seem to imagine, can give but
a temporary concern, which time and discretion will
make light: This is a sacrifice which a child owes to
parents and friends, if they insist upon its being made. 
But the other, to marry a man one cannot endure, is
not only a dishonest thing, as to the man; but it is
enough to make a creature, who wishes to be a good
wife, a bad or indifferent one, as I once wrote to
the man himself: And then she can hardly be either
a good mistress; a good friend; or any thing but a
discredit to her family, and a bad example to all
around her. 
Methinks I am loth, in the suspense I am in at
present, to deposite this, because I shall then leave
you in as great: But having been prevented by Betty's
officiousness twice, I will now go down to my little
poultry; and if I have an opportunity, will leave it
in the usual place, where I hope to find something
from you. 
