



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wednesday, April 12. 
I will pursue my melancholy Story. 
Being thus hurried to the chariot, it would have
been to no purpose to have refused entering into it,
had he not in my fright lifted me in, as he did: And
it instantly drove away a full gallop, and stopt not till
it brought us to St. Albans; which was just as the day
shut in. 
I thought I should have fainted several times by the
way. With uplifted hands and eyes, God protect
me, said I often to myself! —Can it be I, that am
here! —My eyes running over, and my heart ready to
burst with sighs as involuntary as my flight. 
How different, how inexpressibly different, the gay
wretch; visibly triumphing (as I could not but construe
his almost rapturous joy) in the success of his arts! 
But overflowing with complimental flourishes, yet respectfully
distant his address, all the way we flew; for
that, rather than galloping, was the motion of the
horses; which took, as I believe, a round-about way,
to prevent being traced. 

I have reason to think, there were other horsemen
at his devotion; three or four different persons, above
the rank of servants, galloping by us now-and-then on
each side of the chariot: But he took no notice of
them; and I had too much grief, mingled with indignation,
notwithstanding all his blandishments, to ask
any questions about them, or any-thing else. 
Think, my dear, what were my thoughts on alighting
from the chariot; having no attendant of my own
Sex; no cloaths but what I had on, and those little
suited for such a journey as I had already taken, and
was still to take: Neither hood nor hat, nor any-thing
but a handkerchief about my neck and shoulders: 
Fatigued to death: My mind still more fatigued than
my body: And in such a foam the horses, that every
one in the Inn we put up at guessed [They could not do
otherwise] that I was a young giddy creature, who
had run away from her friends. This it was easy to
see, by their whispering and gaping; more of the people
of the house also coming in by turns, than were
necessary for the attendance. 
The mistress of the house, whom he sent in to me,
shewed me another apartment; and, seeing me ready
to faint, brought me hartshorn and water; and then,
upon my desiring to be left alone for half an hour,
retired: For I found my heart ready to burst, on revolving
every-thing in my thoughts: And the moment
she was gone, fastening the door, I threw myself into
an old great chair, and gave way to a violent flood of
tears; which a little relieved me. 
Mr. Lovelace, sooner than I wished, sent up the
gentlewoman, who pressed me, in his name, to admit
my Brother, or to come down to him: For he had
told her, I was his Sister; and that he had brought me,
against my will, and without warning, from a friend's
house, where I had been all the winter, in order to
prevent my marrying against the consent of my friends; 
to whom he was now conducting me; and that, 

having given me no time for a travelling-dress, I was
greatly offended at him. 
So, my dear, your frank, your open-hearted friend, was
forced to countenance this tale; which indeed suited me
the better, because I was unable for some time to talk,
speak, or look up; and so my dejection, and grief, and
silence, might very well pass before the gentlewoman
and her niece who attended me, as a fit of sullenness. 
The room I was in being a bed-chamber, I chose to
go down, at his repeated message, attended by the
mistress of the house, to that in which he was. He
approached me with great respect, yet not exceeding a
brotherly politeness, where a Brother is polite; and,
calling me His dearest Sister, asked after the state of my
mind; and hoped I would forgive him; for never
Brother half so well loved a Sister, as he me. 
A wretch! —How naturally did he fall into the
character, altho' I was so much out of mine! 
Unthinking creatures have some comfort in the
shortness of their views; in their unapprehensiveness; 
and that they penetrate not beyond the present moment: 
In short, that they are unthinking! —But, for a person
of my thoughtful disposition, who has been accustomed
to look forward, as well to the possible, as to the probable,
what comfort can I have in my reflections? 
But let me give you the particulars of our conversation
a little before and after our supper-time, joining
both in one. 
When we were alone, he besought me (I cannot
say but with all the tokens of a passionate and respectful
tenderness) to be better reconciled to myself, and to
him: He repeated all the vows of honour and inviolable
affection that he ever made me: He promised to be
wholly governed by me in every future step: He asked
me to give him leave to propose, Whether I chose to
set out next day to either of his Aunts? 
I was silent. I knew not what to say, nor what to do. 
Whether I chose to have private lodgings procured 

for me, in either of those Ladies neighbourhood, as
were once my thoughts? 
I was still silent. 
Whether I chose to go to either of Lord M's Seats; 
that of Berks, or that in the county we were in? 
In lodgings, I said, any-where, where he was not
to be. 
He had promised This, he owned; and he would
religiously keep to his word, as soon as he found all
danger of pursuit over; and that I was settled to my
mind. But, if the place were indifferent to me, London
was the safest, and the most private: And his relations
should all visit me there, the moment I thought
fit to admit them. His Cousin Charlotte, particularly,
should attend me, as my companion, if I would accept
of her, as soon as she was able to go abroad. Mean
time, would I go to Lady Betty Lawrance's (Lady
Sarah was a melancholy woman)? I should be the
most welcome guest she ever received. 
I told him, I wished not to go (immediately, however,
and in the frame I was in, and likely not to be
out of) to any of his relations: That my reputation
was concerned, to have him absent from me: —That,
if I were in some private lodging (the meaner the less
to be suspected, as it would be known, that I went
away by his means; and he would be supposed to have
provided me handsome accommodations) it would be
most suitable both to my mind and to my situation: 
That this might be best, I should think, in the country
for me; in town for him. And no matter how
soon he was known to be there. 
If he might deliver his opinion, he said, it was, that,
since I declined going to any of his relations, London
was the only place in the world to be private in. Every
new-comer in a country-town or village excited a curiosity: 
A person of my figure [And many compliments
he made me] would excite more. Even messages
and letters, where none used to be brought, would 

occasion enquiry. He had not provided a lodging anywhere,
supposing I would chuse to go either to London,
where accommodations of that sort might be
fixed upon in an hour's time, or to Lady Betty's; or
to Lord M's Hertfordshire Seat, where was house-keeper
an excellent woman, Mrs. Greme, such another
as my Norton. 
To be sure, I said, if I were pursued, it would be
in their first passion; and some one of his relations
houses would be the place they would expect to find
me at—I knew not what to do. 
My pleasure should determine him, he said, be it
what it would. Only that I were safe, was all he was
solicitous about. He had lodgings in town; but he
did not offer to propose them. He knew, I would
have more objection to go to them, that I could have
to go to Lord M's, or to Lady Betty's. 
No doubt of it, I replied, with such an indignation
in my manner, as made him-run over with professions,
that he was far from proposing them, or wishing for
my acceptance of them. And again he repeated, That
my Honour and Safety were all he was solicitous
about; assuring me, that my will should be a Law to
him in every particular. 
I was too peevish, and too much afflicted, and indeed
too much incensed against him, to take well anything
he said. 
I thought myself, I said, extremely unhappy. I
knew not what to determine upon: My reputation
now, no doubt, utterly ruined: Destitute of cloaths; 
unfit to be seen by any-body: My very indigence, as
I might call it, proclaiming my folly to every one who
saw me; who would suppose that I had been taken at
advantage, or had given an undue one; and had no
power over either my will or my actions: That I
could not but think I had been dealt artfully with: 
—That he had seemed to have taken, what he might
suppose, the just measure of my weakness, founded 

on my Youth and Inexperience: That I could not forgive
myself for meeting him: That my heart bled for
the distresses of my Father and Mother, on this occasion: 
That I would give the world, and all my hopes
in it, to have been still in my Father's house, whatever
had been my usage: That, let him protest and
vow what he would, I saw something low and selfish in
his Love, that he could study to put a young creature
upon making such a sacrifice of her duty and conscience: 
When a person actuated by a generous Love, must
seek to oblige the object of it, in every-thing essential
to her honour, and to her peace of mind. 
He was very attentive to all I said; never offering
to interrupt me once. His answer to every article,
almost methodically, shewed his memory. 
‘What I had said, he told me, had made him very
grave; and he would answer accordingly. 
‘He was grieved at his heart, to find that he had
so little share in my favour or confidence. 
‘As to my Reputation (he must be very sincere with
me); that could not suffer half so much by the step
I so greatly regretted to have taken, as by the confinement,
and equally foolish and unjust treatment,
I had met with from my relations: That every
mouth was full of blame of them, of my Brother
and Sister particularly; and of wonder at my
patience: That he must repeat what he had written
to me he believed more than once, That my friends
themselves expected, that I should take a proper
opportunity to free myself from their persecutions; 
why else did they confine me? That my exalted
character as he called it, would still bear me out,
with those who knew Me; who knew my Brother's
and Sister's motives; and who knew the wretch they
were for compelling me to have. 
‘With regard to cloaths; Who, as matters were
circumstanced, could expect that I should be able
to bring away any others than those I had on at the 

time? For present use or wear, all the Ladies of
his family would take a pride to supply me: For
future, the product of the best looms, not only
in England, but throughout the world, were at my
command. 
‘If I wanted money, as no doubt I must, he should
be proud to supply me: Would to heaven, he
might presume to hope, there were but one interest
between us!’ 
And then he would fain have had me to accept of
a Bank Note of an hundred Pounds; which, unawares
to me, he put into my hand: But which, you may
be sure, I refused with warmth. 
‘He was inexpressibly grieved and surprised, he
said, to hear me say he had acted artfully by me. 
He came provided, according to my confirmed appointment’ 
[A wretch to upbraid me thus!] ‘to redeem
me from my persecutors; and little expected
a change of sentiment, and that he should have so
much difficulty to prevail upon me, as he had met
with: That perhaps I might think his offer to go into
the garden with me, and to face my assembled relations,
was a piece of Art only: But that if I did, I
wronged him: Since to this hour, seeing my excessive
uneasiness, he wished with all his soul he had
been permitted to accompany me in. It was always
his maxim to brave a threatened danger. Threateners,
where they have an opportunity to put in force
their threats, were seldom to be feared. But had he
been assured of a private stab, or of as many death's
wounds as there were persons in my family (made
desperate as he should have been by my return) he
would have attended me into the house.’ 
So, my dear, what I have to do, is to hold myself
inexcusable for meeting such a determined and audacious
spirit; that's all! I have hardly any question
now, but that he would have contrived some wicked
stratagem or other to have got me away, had I met 

him at a midnight hour, as once or twice I had thoughts
to do; and that would have been more terrible still. 
He concluded this part of his talk, with saying, ‘That
he doubted not, but that had he attended me in, he
should have come off in every one's opinion so well,
that he should have had general leave to renew his
visits.’ 
He went on—‘He must be so bold as to tell me, that
he should have paid a visit of this kind (but indeed accompanied
by several of his trusty friends) had I not
met him; and that very afternoon too; for he could
not tamely let the dreadful Wednesday come, without
making some effort to change their determinations.’ 
What, my dear, was to be done with such a man! 
‘That therefore for my sake, as well as for his
own, he had reason to wish that a disease so desperate
had been attempted to be overcome by as desperate
a remedy. We all know, said he, that great ends
are sometimes brought about by the very means by
which they are endeavoured to be frustrated.’ 
My present situation, I am sure, thought I, affords
a sad evidence of this truth! 
I was silent all this time. My blame was indeed
turned inward. Sometimes, too, I was half-frighted at
his audaciousness: At others, had the less inclination
to interrupt him, being excessively fatigued, and my
spirits sunk to nothing, with the view even of the best
prospects with such a man. 
This gave him opportunity to proceed: And that
he did; assuming a still more serious air. 
‘As to what further remained for him to say, in
answer to what I had said, he hoped I would pardon
him; but, upon his Soul, he was concerned,
infinitely concerned, he repeated (his colour and
his voice rising) that it was necessary for him to observe,
how much I chose rather to have run the
risque of being Solmes's Wife, than to have it in my
power to reward a man, who, I must forgive him, 

had been as much insulted on my account, as I had
been on his—who had watched my commands, and
(pardon me, Madam) every changeable motion of
your pen, all hours, in all weathers, and with a
chearfulness and ardor, that nothing but the most
faithful and obsequious passion could inspire.’ 
I now, my dear, began to revive into a little more
warmth of attention.— 
‘And all, Madam, for what?’ —How I stared!
for he stopt then a moment or two—‘Only, went he
on, to prevail upon you to free yourself from ungenerous
and base oppression’— 
Sir, Sir! indignantly said I— 
‘Hear me but out, dearest Madam! —My heart is
full—I must speak what I have to say—To be told
(for your words are yet in my ears, and at my heart!)
that you would give the world, and all your hopes in
it, to have been still in your cruel and gloomy
Father's house’— 
Not a word, Sir, against my Father! —I will not
bear that— 
‘Whatever had been your usage: —And you have a
credulity, Madam, against all probability, if you believe
you should have avoided being Solmes's Wife: 
That I have put you upon sacrificing your Duty and
Conscience—Yet, dearest creature! see you not the
contradiction that your warmth of temper has surprised
you into, when the reluctance you shewed to
the last to leave your persecutors, has cleared your
Conscience from the least reproach of this sort?’— 
O Sir! Sir! are you so critical then? Are you so
light in your anger, as to dwell upon words?— 
Indeed, my dear, I have since thought, that his
anger was not owing to that sudden impetus, which
cannot be easily bridled; but rather was a sort of
manageable anger, let loose to intimidate me. 
‘Forgive me, Madam—I have just done—Have I
not, in your own opinion, hazarded my life to redeem 

you from oppression? —Yet is not my reward,
after all, precarious? —For, Madam, have you not
conditioned with me (and, hard as the condition is,
most sacredly will I observe it) that all my hope must
be remote? That you are determined to have it in
your power to favour or reject me totally, as you
please?’— 
See, my dear! In every respect my condition
changed for the worse! Is it in my power to take
your advice, if I should think it ever so right to take
it (a) ?— 
‘And have you not furthermore declared, proceeded
he, that you will engage to renounce me for
ever, if your friends insist upon that cruel renunciation,
as the terms of being reconciled to you?’ 
‘But nevertheless, Madam, all the merit of having
saved you from an odious compulsion, shall be mine. 
I glory in it, tho' I were to lose you for ever—As I
see I am but too likely to do, from your present displeasure; 
and especially, if your friends insist upon the terms
you are ready to comply with. 
‘That you are your own mistress, thro' my means,
is, I repeat, my boast. As such, I humbly implore
your favour—And that only upon the conditions I have
yielded to hope for it. —As I do now thus humbly [the
proud wretch falling on one knee] your forgiveness, 

for so long detaining your ear, and for all the plain-dealing
that my undesigning heart would not be benied
to utter by my lips.’ 
O Sir, pray rise! —Let the obliged kneel, if one of
us must kneel! —But nevertheless, proceed not in this
strain, I beseech you. You have had a great deal of
trouble about me: But had you let me know in time,
that you expected to be rewarded for it at the price of
my duty, I should have spared you much of it. 
Far be it from me, Sir, to depreciate merit so
extraordinary. But let me say, that had it not been
for the forbidden correspondence I was teazed by you
into; and which I had not continued (every Letter, for
many Letters, intended to be the last) but because I
thought you a sufferer from my friends; I had not
been either confined or ill-treated: Nor would my
Brother's low-meant violence have had a foundation
to work upon. 
I am far from thinking my case would have been so
very desperate as you imagine, had I staid. My Father
loved me in his heart: He would not see me before; 
and I wanted only to see him, and to be heard; 
and a delay of his sentence was the least thing I expected
from the tryal I was to stand. 
You are boasting of your merits, Sir: Let merit be
your boast: Nothing else can attract me. If personal
considerations had principal weight with me, either in
Solmes's disfavour, or in your favour, I should despise
myself: If you value yourself upon them, in preference
to the person of the poor Solmes, I shall despise you! 
You may glory in your fansied merits in getting me
away: But the cause of your glory, I tell you plainly, is
my shame. 
Make to yourself a title to my regard, which I can
better approve of; or else you will not have so much
merit with me, as you have with yourself. 
But here, Sir, like the first pair (I, at least, driven
out of my paradise) are we recriminating. No 

more shall you need to tell me of your Sufferings, and
your Merits!—your All hours, and All weathers! For
I will bear them in memory as long as I live; and if
it be impossible for me to reward them, be ever ready
to own the obligation. All that I desire of you now,
is, to leave it to myself to seek for some private abode: 
To take the chariot with you to London, or elsewhere: 
And, if I have any further occasion for your assistance
and protection, I will signify it to you, and be
still further obliged to you. 
You are warm, my dearest life! —But indeed there
is no occasion for it. Had I any views unworthy of
my faithful Love for you, I should not have been so
honest in my declarations. 
Then he began again to vow the sincerity of his
intentions. 
But I took him up short: I am willing to believe
you, Sir. It would be insupportable but to suppose
there were a necessity for such solemn declarations [At
this he seemed to collect himself, as I may say, into
a little more circumspection]. If I thought there
were, I would not sit with you here, in a Public Inn,
I assure you, altho' cheated hither, as far as I know,
by methods (You must excuse me, Sir) which but
to suspect, will hardly let me have patience either
with you or with myself. —But no more of this, just
now: Let me, I beseech you, good Sir, bowing [I
was very angry!] let me only know whether you intend
to leave me; or whether I have only escaped
from one confinement to another? 
Cheated hither, as far as you know, Madam! Let
you know (and with that air too, charming, though
grievous to my heart!) if you have only escaped from
one confinement to another—Amazing! perfectly amazeing! 
And can there be a necessity for me to answer
this? —You are absolutely your own mistress. —It
were very strange, if you were not. The moment
you are in a place of safety, I will leave you. To 

one condition only, give me leave to beg your consent: 
It is this: That you will be pleased, now you are so
entirely in your own power, to renew a promise voluntarily
made before; voluntarily, or I would not now
presume to request it; for altho' I would not be thought
capable of growing upon concession, yet I cannot bear
to think of losing the ground your goodness had given
me room to hope I had gained; ‘That, make up
how you please with your relations, you will never
marry any other man, while I am living and single,
unless I should be so wicked as to give new cause
for high displeasure.’ 
I hesitate not to confirm this promise, Sir, upon
your own condition. In what manner do you expect
me to confirm it? 
Only, Madam, by your word. 
Then I never will. 
He had the assurance (I was now in his power) to
salute me as a sealing of my promise, as he called it. 
His motion was so sudden, that I was not aware of it. 
It would have looked affected to be very angry; yet
I could not be pleased, considering this as a leading
freedom, from a spirit so audacious and encroaching: 
And he might see, that I was not. 
He passed all that by with an air peculiar to himself
—Enough, enough, dearest Madam! And now
let me beg of you but to conquer this dreadful uneasiness,
which gives me to apprehend too much for
my jealous love to bear; and it shall be my whole
endeavour to deserve your favour, and to make you
the happiest woman in the world; as I shall be the
happiest of men. 
I broke from him to write to you my preceding
Letter; but refused to send it by his servant, as I told
you. The mistress of the house helped me to a messenger,
who was to carry what you should give him to
Lord M's Seat in Hertfordshire, directed for Mrs.
Greme the housekeeper there. And early in the 

morning, for fear of pursuit, we were to set out that
way: And there he proposed to exchange the chariot-and-six
for a chaise-and-pair of his own, which he had
at that Seat, as it would be a less-noticed conveyance. 
I looked over my little stock of money; and found
it to be no more than Seven guineas and some silver: 
The rest of my stock was but Fifty guineas, and that
five more than I thought it was, when my Sister
challenged me as to the sum I had by me (a) : And
those I left in my escritoire, little intending to go
away with him. 
Indeed my case abounds with a shocking number of
indelicate circumstances. Among the rest, I was
forced to account to him, who knew I could have no
cloaths but what I had on, how I came to have linen
with you (for he could not but know I sent for it); 
lest he should imagine I had an early design to go away
with him, and made that a part of the preparation. 
He most heartily wished, he said, for my mind's
sake, that your Mother would have afforded me her
protection; and delivered himself upon this subject
with equal freedom and concern. 
There are, my dear Miss Howe, a multitude of
punctilios and decorums, which a young creature must
dispense with, who in a situation like mine, makes a
man the intimate attendant of her person. I could
now, I think, give twenty reasons stronger than any I
have heretofore mentioned, why women of the least
delicacy should never think of incurring the danger and
disgrace of taking the step I have been drawn in to take,
but with horror and aversion; and why they should
look upon the man who shall tempt them to it, as the
vilestand most selfish of seducers. 
* *
Before Five o'clock (Tuesday morning) the maid-servant
came up to tell me my Brother was ready, and
that breakfast also waited for me in the parlour. I went 

down with a heart as heavy as my eyes, and received
great acknowlegements and compliments from him
on being so soon dressed, and ready (as he interpreted
it) to continue our journey. 
He had the thought which I had not (for what had
I to do with thinking, who had it not when I stood
most in need of it?) to purchase for me a velvet hood,
and a short cloak, trimmed with silver, without saying
any-thing to me. He must reward himself, the
artful encroacher said, before the landlady and her
maids and niece, for his forethought; and would salute
his pretty sullen Sister! —He took his reward; and,
as he said, a tear with it. While he assured me, still
before them [a vile wretch!] that I had nothing to
fear from meeting with Parents who so dearly loved
me.— 
How could I be complaisant, my dear, to such a man
as this? 
When we had got into the chariot, and it began to
move, he asked me, whether I had any objection to go
to Lord M's Hertfordshire Seat? His Lordship, he
said, was at his Berkshire one. 
I told him, I chose not to go, as yet, to any of
his relations; for that would indicate a plain defiance
to my own. My choice was, to go to a private
lodging, and for him to be at a distance from me: At
least, till I heard how things were taken by my
friends—For that altho' I had but little hopes of a
Reconciliation as it was; yet if they knew I was in
his protection, or in that of any of his friends (which
would be looked upon as the same thing) there would
not be room for any hopes at all. 
I should govern him as I pleased, he solemnly assured
me, in every-thing. But he still thought London was
the best place for me; and if I were once safe there,
and in a lodging to my liking, he would go to M. Hall. 
But, as I approved not of London, he would urge it
no further. 

He proposed, and I consented, to put up at an Inn
in the neighbourhood of The Lawn (as he called Lord
M's Seat in this County) since I chose not to go
thither. And here I got two hours to myself; which
I told him I should pass in writing another Letter to
you (meaning my narrative, which, tho' greatly fatigued,
I had begun at St. Albans) and in one to my
Sister, to apprise the family (whether they were solicitous
about it or not) that I was well; and to beg that
my cloaths, some particular books, and the fifty guineas
I had left in my escritoire, might be sent me. 
He asked, If I had considered whither to have them
directed? 
Indeed not I, I told him: I was a stranger to— 
So was he, he interrupted me; but it struck him by
chance— 
Wicked story-teller! 
But, added he, I will tell you, Madam, how it
shall be managed—If you don't chuse to go to London,
it is, nevertheless, best, that your relations should
think you there; for then they will absolutely despair
of finding you. If you write, be pleased to direct,
To be left for you, at Mr. Osgood's, near Sohosquare. 
Mr. Osgood is a man of reputation: And
this will effectually amuse them. 
Amuse them, my dear! —Amuse whom? —My Father!
—my Uncles! —But it must be so! —All his
expedients ready, you see!— 
I had no objection to this: And I have written accordingly. 
But what answer I shall have, or whether
any, that is what gives me no small anxiety. 
This, however, is one consolation, that, if I have
an answer, and altho' my Brother should be the writer,
it cannot be more severe than the treatment I have of
late received from him and my Sister. 
Mr. Lovelace staid out about an hour and half; and
then came in; impatiently sending up to me no less
than four times, to desire admittance. But I sent him 

word as often, that I was busy; and at last, that I
should be so, till dinner were ready. He then hastened
that, as I heard him now-and-then, with a hearty curse
upon the cook and waiters. 
This is another of his perfections. I ventured
afterwards to check him for his free words, as we sat
at dinner. 
Having heard him swear at his servant, when below,
whom, nevertheless, he owns, to be a good one; It is
a sad life, said I, these Innkeepers live, Mr. Lovelace. 
No; pretty well, I believe—But why, Madam,
think you, that fellows, who eat and drink at other
mens cost, or they are sorry Innkeepers, should be intitled
to pity? 
Because of the soldiers they are obliged to quarter; 
who are generally, I believe, wretched profligates. 
Bless me! said I, how I heard one of them swear and
curse, just now, at a modest meek man, as I judge
by his low voice, and gentle answers! —Well do they
make it a proverb—Like a trooper! 
He bit his lip; arose; turned upon his heel; stept
to the glass; and looking confidently abashed, if I may
so say, Ay, Madam, said he, these troopers are sad
swearing fellows. I think their officers should chastise
them for it. 
I am sure they deserve chastisement, replied I: 
For Swearing is a most unmanly vice, and Cursing as
poor and low a one; since they proclaim the profligate's
want of power, and his wickedness at the same time; 
for, could such a one punish as he speaks, he would
be a fiend! 
Charmingly observed, by my Soul, Madam! —The
next trooper I hear swear and curse, I'll tell him what
an unmanly, and what a poor wretch he is. 
Mrs. Greme came to pay her duty to me, as Mr.
Lovelace called it; and was very urgent with me to
go to her Lord's house; letting me know what handsome
things she had heard her Lord, and his two 

Nieces, and all the family, say of me; and what
wishes for several months past they had put up for the
honour she now hoped would soon be done them all. 
This gave me some satisfaction, as it confirmed
from the mouth of a very good sort of woman all
that Mr. Lovelace had told me. 
Upon enquiry about a private lodging, she recommended
me to a Sister-in-law of hers, eight miles from
thence—Where I now am. And what pleased me
the better, was, that Mr. Lovelace (of whom I could
see she was infinitely observant) obliged her, of his
own motion, to accompany me in the chaise; himself
riding on horseback, with his two servants, and one
of Lord M's. And here we arrived about Four
o'clock. 
But, as I told you in my former, the lodgings are
inconvenient. Mr. Lovelace indeed found great fault
with them: And told Mrs. Greme (who had said, that
they were not worthy of us) that they came not up
even to her account of them. As the house was a
mile from a town, it was not proper for him, he said,
to be so far distant from me, lest any-thing should happen: 
And yet the apartments were not separate and
distinct enough for me to like them, he was sure. 
This must be agreeable enough from him, you will
believe. 
Mrs. Greme and I had a good deal of talk in the
chaise about him: She was very easy and free in her
answers to all I asked; and has, I find, a very serious
turn. 
I led her on to say to the following effect; some
part of it not unlike what Lord M's dismissed Bailiff
had said before; by which I find that all the servants
have a like opinion of him. 
‘That Mr. Lovelace was a generous man: That it
was hard to say, whether the servants of her Lord's
family loved or feared him most: That her Lord had
a very great affection for him: That his two noble 

Aunts were no less fond of him: That his Cousins
Montague were as good-natured young Ladies as
ever lived: That Lord M. and Lady Sarah and
Lady Betty had proposed several Ladies to him, before
he made his addresses to me; and even since; 
despairing to move me and my friends in his favour
—But that he had no thoughts of marrying at all, she
had heard him say, if it were not to me: That as well
her Lord as the two Ladies his Sisters were a good
deal concerned at the ill-usage he received from my
family: But admired my character, and wished to
have him married to me (altho' I were not to have
a shilling) in preference to any other person, from
the opinion that they had of the influence I should
have over him. That, to be sure, Mr. Lovelace
was a wild gentleman: But wildness was a distemper
which would cure itself. That her Lord delighted
in his company, whenever he could get it: 
But that they often fell out; and his Lordship was
always forced to submit—Indeed, was half-afraid
of him, she believed; for Mr. Lovelace would do
as he pleased. She mingled a thousand pities often,
that he acted not up to the talents lent him—Yet
would have it, that he had fine qualities to found a
Reformation upon; and, when the happy day came,
would make amends for all: And of this all his friends
were so assured, that they wished for nothing so
earnestly, as for his marriage.’ 
This, indifferent as it is, is better than my Brother
says of him. 
The people of the house here are very honest-looking
industrious folks: Mrs. Sorlings is the gentlewoman's
name. The farm seems well-stocked, and
thriving. She is a widow; has two sons, men grown,
who vie with each other which shall take most pains
in promoting the common good; and they are both of
them, I already see, more respectful to two modest
young women their Sisters, than my Brother was to
his Sister. 

I believe I must stay here longer than at first I
thought I should. 
I ought to have mentioned, that, before I set out
for this place, I received your kind letter (a) . Everything
is kind from so dear a friend. 
I own, that after I had told you of my absolute
determination not to go away with him, you might
well be surprised, at your first hearing that I was actually
gone. The Lord bless me, my dear, I myself, at
times, can hardly believe it is I, that have been led
to take so strange a step. 
I have not the better opinion of Mr. Lovelace for
his extravagant volubility. He is too full of professions. 
He says too many fine things of me, and to me. True
respect, true value, I think, lies not in words: Words
cannot express it: The silent awe, the humble, the
doubting eye, and even the hesitating voice, better
shew it by much, than, as our beloved Shakespeare
says, 

—The rattling tongue
Of saucy and audacious eloquence.
The man indeed at times is all upon the ecstatic; 
one of his phrases: But, to my shame and confusion,
I must say, that I know too well to what to attribute
his transports. In one word, it is To his triumph, my
dear. And, to impute it to that perhaps equally exposes
my vanity, and condemns my folly. 
We have been alarmed with notions of a pursuit,
founded upon a Letter from his intelligencer. 
How do different circumstances either sanctify or
condemn the same action! —What care ought we to
take not to confound the distinctions of right and
wrong, when Self comes into the question! —I condemned
in Mr. Lovelace the corrupting of a servant
of my Father's; and now I am glad to give a kind of
indirect approbation of that fault, by enquiring of
him what he hears, by that or any other way, of the 

manner in which my relations took my flight. A
preconcerted, forward, and artful flight, it must undoubtedly
appear to them. How grievous is that to
think of! Yet how, as I am situated, can I put
them right? 
Most heavily, he says, they take it; but shew not
so much grief as rage. And he can hardly have patience
to hear of the virulence and menaces of my
Brother against himself. Then a merit is made to me
of his forbearance. 
What a satisfaction am I robbed of, my dearest
friend, when I reflect upon my inconsiderateness! O
that I had it still in my power to say I suffered
wrong, rather than did wrong! That others were more
wanting in their kindness to me than I in duty (where
duty is owing) to them! 
Fie upon me! for meeting the Seducer! —Let all
end as happily as it now may, I have laid up for myself
remorse for my whole life. 
What still more concerns me is, that every time I
see this man, I am still at a greater loss than before
what to make of him. I watch every turn of his
countenance: And I think I see very deep lines in it. 
He looks with more meaning, I verily think, than
he used to look; yet not more serious; not less gay— 
I don't know how he looks—But with more confidence
a great deal than formerly; and yet he never
wanted that. 
But here is the thing: I behold him with fear now,
as conscious of the power my indiscretion has given
him over me. And well may he look more elate,
when he sees me deprived of all the self-supposed significance,
which adorns and exalts a person who has
been accustomed to respect; and who now, by a
conscious inferiority, allows herself to be overcome, and
in a state of obligation, as I may say, to a man who
from an humble suitor to her for her favour, assumes
the consequence and airs of a protector. 

I shall send this, as my former, by a poor man, who
travels every day with pedlary matters. He will leave
is at Mrs. Knollys's, as you direct. 
If you hear any-thing of my Father and Mother,
and of their health, and how my friends were affected
by my unhappy step, pray be so good as to write me
a few lines by the messenger, if his waiting for them
can be known to you. 
I am afraid to ask you, Whether, upon reading
that part of my narrative already in your hands, you
think any sort of extenuation lies for 
Your unhappy
Clarissa Harlowe. 