



My dear Father and Mother,
We arrived here last Night, highly
pleased with our Journey, and the
Occasion of it. May God bless you
both with long Life and Health, to
enjoy your sweet Farm, and pretty
Dwelling, which is just what I wished
it to be. And don't make your grateful Hearts too uneasy
in the Possesston of it, by your modest Diffidence
of your own Worthiness: For, at the same time that
it is what will do Honour to the best of Gentlemen, 

it is not so very extraordinary, considering his Condition,
as that it will give any one Cause to censure
it as the Effect of a too partial and injudicious
Kindness for the Parents of one whom he delighteth
to honour. 
My dear Master (why should I not still call him so,
bound to reverence him as I am, in every Light that he
can shine in to the most obliged and sensible Heart?)
holds his kind Purpose of fitting up the large Parlour
and three Apartments in the commodious Dwelling
he calls yours, for his Entertainment and mine,
when he shall permit me to pay my Duty to you
both, for a few happy Days together; and he has
actually given Orders for that Purpose; and that the
three Apartments be so fitted up, as to be rather
suitable to your Condition, than his own; for, he
says, the plain simple Elegance which he will have to
be observed in the Rooms as well as the Furniture,
will be a Variety in his Retirement to this Place,
that will make him return to his own with the greater
Pleasure; and at the same time, when we are not
there, will be of Use for the Reception of any of
your Friends; and so he shall not, as he kindly
says, rob the good Couple of any of their Accommodations. 
The old Bow-windows he will have preserv'd,
but will not have them sash'd, nor the Woodbinds,
Jessamines and Vines that run up against
them, destroyed; only he will have larger Panes
of Glass, and convenienter Casements, to let in
more of the sweet Air and Light, to make amends
for that obstructed by the Shades of those fragrant
Climbers. For he has mention'd three or four times,
how gratefully they dispens'd their intermingled
Odours to us, when, the last Evening, we stood at
the Window in our Bed-chamber, to hear the responsive 

Songs of two warbling Nightingales, one
at a Distance, the other near, which took up our delighted
Attention for above two Hours, and charm'd
us the more, as we thought their Season had been
over. And when they had done, he made me sing
him one, and called me for it, the sweetest of all
Nightingales, saying, How greatly do the innocent
Pleasures I now hourly taste, exceed the guilty Tumults
that used formerly to agitate my unequal Mind! 
Never talk, my Pamela, as you frequently do, of
Obligation to me: One such Hour as I now enjoy,
is an ample Reward for all the Benefits I can confer
on you and yours in my whole Life! 
The Parlour indeed will be more elegant, tho' that
is to be rather plain than rich, as well in its Wainscot
as Furniture, and to be new floor'd. The dear
Gentleman has already given Orders about it, and
you will soon have Workmen with you to put them
in Execution. The Parlour Doors are to have Brass
Hinges and Locks, and to shut as close, he tells them,
as a Watch-case: For who knows, said he, my Dear,
but we shall have still added Blessings, in two or three
charming Boys and Girls, to place there in their Infancy,
before they can be of Age to be benefited
by your Lessons and Example? And besides, I make
no doubt, but I shall entertain there some of my
chosen Friends, in their Excursions, for a Day or
so. 
How am I, every Hour of my Life, overwhelm'd
with Instances of God Almighty's Goodness and
his! —O spare, blessed Father of Mercies, the precious
Life of this excellent Gentleman! and increase
my Thankfulness, and my Worthiness; and then— 
But what shall I say? —Only that then I may continue
to be what I am; for more bless'd and more happy,
in my own Mind, surely I cannot be. 

The Beds he will have of Cloth, because he
thinks the Situation a little cold, especially when
the Wind is Easterly, and because he purposes
to be down in the early Spring Season now-and-then,
as well as in the latter Autumn; and the Window
Curtains of the same, in one Room red, in the
other green; but plain, lest you should be afraid to
use them occasionally. The Carpets for them will
come down with the other Furniture; for he will
not alter the old Oaken Floors of the Bed-chamber,
nor yet of the little Room he intends for my
Use, to withdraw to, when I chuse not to join in
such Company as may happen to fall in: Which, my
Dear, says he, shall be as little as is possible, only particular
Friends, who may be disposed once in a Year or
two, to see, when I am there, how I live with my
Pamela, and her Parents, and how I pass my Time
in my Retirement, as I shall call this: For otherwise,
perhaps, they will be apt to think I am asham'd of
Company I shall always bepleased with. —Nor are you,
my Dear, continued he, to take this as a Compliment
to yourself, but a Piece of requisite Policy in
me; for who will offer to reproach me for marrying,
as the World thinks, below me, when they shall see,
that such a Reproach, as they would intend it, is so
far from being so to me, that every Day of my Life,
I not only pride myself in my Pamela, but take
Pleasure in owning her Relations as mine, and visiting
them, and receiving Visits from them; and yet
offer not to set them up in such a glaring Light, as if
I would have the World forget (who in that Case
would always take the more Pleasure in remembering)
what they were? And how will it anticipate low
Reflection, when they shall see, I can bend my
Mind to partake with them the Pleasures of their
humble, but decent Life? –––Ay, continued he, and 

be rewarded for it too, with better Health, better
Spirits, and a better Mind; so that, my Dear, added
he, I shall reap more Benefit by what I propose to
do, than I shall confer. 
In this generous manner does this best of Gentlemen
endeavour to disclaim tho' I must be very ungrateful,
if, with me, it did not inhance the proper
Merit of a Beneficence that is natural to him; and
which indeed, as I tell him, may be in one respect
depreciated, inasmuch as (so excellent is his Nature)
he cannot help it, if he would. –––O that it was in
my Power to recompense him for it! But I am poor,
as I have often said, in every thing but Will–––and
that is wholly his:–––And what a Happiness is it to
me, a Happiness I could not so early have hoped for,
that I can say so without Reserve; since the dear
Gentleman requires nothing of me, but what is consistent
with my Duty to the Supreme Benefactor,
the first Mover and Cause of all his own Happiness,
of my Happiness, and of that of my dear, my ever
dear Parents! 
But whither does the inchanting Subject lead me! 
I am running on to my usual Length, tho' I have not
the same Excuse for it; for heretofore I had nothing
to do but to write. Yet, I am sure, if I do exceed a little,
you will be pleased with it; and you have moreover
a Right to rejoice with me in the Days of my Felicity,
after your indulgent Hearts had been so much pained
by a long Succession of my Fears and my Dangers,
which only ought to be remember'd now, as Subjects
of thankful Exultation, by 
Your dutiful and happy Daughter. 

