


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Tuesday Morning, April 18. 
This naughty Lady G. —She is excessively to
blame. Lord L. is out of patience with her. 
So is Lady L. Emily says, she loves her dearly; but
she does not love her ways. Lord G. as Emily tells
me, talks of coming to me; the cause of quarrel
supposed to be not great: But trifles, insisted upon,
make frequently the widest breaches. Whatever it be,
it is between themselves; and neither cares to tell:
But Lord and Lady L. are angry with her, for the ludicrous
manner in which she treats him. 
The misunderstanding happened after my cousin
and I left them last night. I was not in spirits, and
declined staying to cards. Lady Olivia and her aunt
went away at the same time. Whist was the game. 
Lord and Lady L. Dr. Bartlett and Emily, were cast
in. In the midst of their play, Lady G. came hurrying
down stairs to them, warbling an air: Lord G.
followed her, much disturbed. Madam, I must tell
you, said he—Why must, my Lord? I don't bid you. 
Sit still, child, said she to Emily; and took her
seat behind her—Who wins? Who loses? 
Lord G. walked about the room—Lord and Lady
L. were unwilling to take notice, hoping it would go
off; for there had been a few livelinesses on her side at
dinner-time, tho' all was serene at supper. 
Dr. Bartlett offered her his cards. She refused
them—No, doctor, said she, I will play my own
cards: I shall have enough to do to play them well. 
As you manage it, so you will, madam, said Lord
G. 
Don't expose yourself, my Lord: We are before
company. Lady L. you have nothing but trumps in
your hand. 

Let me say a word or two to you, madam, said
Lord G. to her. 
I am all obedience, my Lord. 
She arose. He would have taken her hand: She
put it behind her. 
Not your hand, madam? 
I can't spare it. 
He flung from her, and went out of the room. 
Lord bless me, said she, returning to the cardtable
with a gay unconcern, What strange passionate
creatures are these men! 
Charlotte, said Lady L. I wonder at you. 
Then I give you joy— 
What do you mean, sister?— 
We women love wonder, and the wonder-ful! 
Surely, Lady G. said Lord L. you are wrong. 
I give your Lordship joy, too. 
On what? 
That my sister is always right. 
Indeed, madam, were I Lord G. I should have no
patience. 
A good hint for you, Lady L. I hope you will
take this for a warning, and be good. 
When I behave as you do, Charlotte— 
I understand you, Lady L. you need not speak
out—Every one in their way. 
You would not behave thus, were my brother— 
Perhaps not. 
Dear Charlotte, you are excessively wrong. 
So I think, returned she. 
Why then do you not— 
Mend, Lady L.? All in good time. 
Her woman came in with a message, expressing her
Lord's desire to see her. —The duce is in these men! 
They will neither be satisfied with us, nor without us. 
But I am all obedience: No vow will I break—And
out she went. 
Lord G. not returning presently, and Lord and 

Lady L.'s chariot being come, they both took this opportunity,
in order to shew their displeasure, to go
away without taking leave of their sister. Dr. Bartlett
retired to his apartment. And when Lady G.
came down, she was surprised, and a little vexed, to
find only Emily there. Lord G. came in at another
door—Upon my word, my Lord, this is strange behaviour
in you: You fright away, with your husbandlike
airs, all one's company. 
Good God! —I am astonished at you, madam. 
What signifies your astonishment?—when you have
scared every-body out of the house. 
I, madam! 
You, Sir! Yes, You! —Did you not lord it over
me in my dressing-room? —To be easy and quiet, Did
I not fly to our company in the drawing-room? Did
you not follow me there—with looks—Very pretty
looks for a new-married man, I assure you! Then
did you not want to take me aside—Would not anybody
have supposed it was to express your sorrow for
your odd behaviour? Was I not all obedience? —Did
you not, with very mannish airs, slight me for my
compliance, and fly out of the room? All the company
could witness the calmness with which I returned
to them, that they might not be grieved for me; nor
think our misunderstanding a deep one. Well, then,
when your stomach came down, as I supposed, you
sent for me out: No doubt, thought I, to express his
concern now. —I was all obedience again. 
And did I not beseech you, madam— 
Beseech me, my Lord! —Yes—But with such
looks! —I married, Sir, let me tell you, a man with
another face—See, see, Emily—He is gone again.— 
My Lord flew out of the room in a rage—O these
men, my dear! said she to Emily. 
I know, said Emily, what I could have answered, if
I dared: But it is ill meddling, as I have heard say,
between man and wife. 

Emily says, the quarrel was not made up; but was
carried higher still in the morning. 
She had but just finished her tale, when the following
billet was brought me, from Lady G. 

Tuesday Morning. 
Harriet,
If you love me, if you pity me, come hither this
instant: I have great need of your counsel. I am
resolved to be unmarried; and therefore subscribe myself
by the beloved name of 
Charlotte Grandison. 

I instantly dispatched the following: 

I Know no such person as Charlotte Grandison. I
love Lady G. but can pity only her Lord. I will
not come near you. I have no counsel to give you,
but that you will not jest away your own happiness. 
Harriet Byron. 

In half an hour after, came a servant from Lady G.
with the following Letter: 

So, then, I have made a blessed hand of wedlock. 
My brother gone: My man excessive unruly:
Lord and Lady L. on his side, without enquiring into
merits, or demerits: Lectured by Dr. Bartlett's grave
face: Emily standing aloof; her finger in her eye:
And now my Harriet renouncing me: And all in one
week! 
What can I do? —War seems to be declared: And
will you not turn mediatrix? —You won't, you say. 
Let it alone. Nevertheless, I will lay the whole matter
before you. 
It was last night, the week from the wedding-day
not completed, that Lord G. thought sit to break into
my retirement without my leave—By the way, he was 

a little impertinent at dinner-time; but that I passed
over.— 
What boldness is this, said I! —Pray, Sir, begone— 
Why leave you your company below? 
I come, my dearest life, to make a request to you. 
The man began with civility enough, had he had a
little less of his odious rapture; for he flung his arms
about me, Jenny in presence. A husband's fondness
is enough to ruin these girls. Don't you think, Harriet,
that there is an immorality in it, before them? 
I refuse your request, be it what it will. How dare
you invade me in my retirement? —You may believe,
that I intended not to stay long above, my sister below. 
Does the ceremony, so lately past, authorize
want of breeding? 
Want of breeding, madam! —And he did so
stare! 
Leave me, this instant—I looked good-natured, I
suppose, in my anger; for he declared he would not; 
and again throwing his arms about me as I sat, joined
his sharp face to mine, and presumed to kiss me; 
Jenny still in the room. 
Now, Harriet, you never will desert me in a point
of delicacy, I am sure. You cannot defend these
odious freedoms in a matrimony so young, unless you
would be willing to be served so yourself. 
You may suppose, that then I let loose my indignation
upon him. And he stole out, daring to mutter,
and be displeased. The word devil was in his
mouth. 
Did he call me devil, Jenny? 
No, indeed, madam, said the wench—And, Harriet,
see the ill example of such a free behaviour before
her: She presumed to prate in favour of the man's
fit of fondness; yet, at other times, is a prude of a
girl. 
Before my anger was gone down, in again [It is
truth, Harriet] came the bold wretch. I will not, 

said he, as you are not particularly employed, leave
you—Upon my soul, madam, you don't use me well. 
But if you will oblige me with your company tomorrow
morning— 
No-where, Sir— 
Only to breakfast with Miss Byron, my dear—As
a mark of your obligingness, I request it. 
His dear! —Now I hate a hypocrite, of all things. 
I knew that he had a design to make a shew of his
bride, as his property, at another place; and seeing
me angry, thought he would name a visit agreeable
to me, and which at the same time would give him a
merit with you, and preserve to himself the consequence
of being obliged by his obedient wife, at the
word of authority. 
From this foolish beginning arose our mighty quarrel. 
What vexed me was, the art of the man, and
the evident design he had to get you of his side. He,
in the course of it, threatened me with appealing to
you—To intend to ruin me in the Love of my dearest
friend! Who, that valued that friend, could forgive it? 
You may believe, that if he had not proposed it, and
after such accumulated offences, it was the very visit
that I should have been delighted with. 
Indeed, Sir—Upon my word, my Lord—I do
assure you, Sir,—with a moderate degree of haughtiness—was
what the quarrel arose to, on my side—And,
at last, to a declaration of rebellion—I won't. 
On his side, Upon my soul, madam—Let me perish,
if—and then hesitating—You use me ill, madam. 
I have not deserved—And give me leave to say—I
insist upon being obliged, madam. 
There was no bearing of this, Harriet. —It was a
cool evening; but I took up my fan—Hey-day! said
I, What language is this? —You insist upon it, my
Lord! —I think I am married; Am I not? —And I
took my watch, Half an hour after ten on Monday
night—the—What day of the month is this? —Please 

the Lord, I will note down this beginning moment of
your authoritative demeanour. 
My dear Lady G. [The wretch called me by his
own name, perhaps farther to insult me] if I could
bear this treatment, it is impossible for me to love you
as I do. 
So it is in Love to me, that you are to put on already
all the husband! —Jenny! [Do you see, my
Lord, affecting a whisper, how you dash the poor
wench? How like a fool she looks at our folly!] Remember,
Jenny, that to-morrow morning you carry
my wedding-suits to Mrs. Arnold; and tell her, she
has forgot the hanging-sleeves to the gowns. Let her
put them on out of hand. 
I was proceeding—But he rudely, gravely, and even
with an air of scorn [There was no bearing that, you
know] admonished me; A little less wit, madam, and
a little more discretion, would perhaps better become
you. 
This was too true to be forgiven. You'll say it,
Harriet, if I don't. And to come from a man that
was not overburdened with either—But I had too
great a command of myself to say so. My dependence,
my Lord [This I did say] is upon your judgment:
That will always be a balance to my wit; and,
with the assistance of your reproving Love, will in time
teach me discretion. 
Now, my dear, was not this a high compliment to
him? Ought he not to have taken it as such? Especially
as I looked grave, and dropt him a very fine
courtesy. But either his conscience or his ill-nature
(perhaps you'll say both) made him take it as a reflexion
[True as you are alive, Harriet!]. He bit his
lip. Jenny, begone, said he—Jenny, don't go,
said I. —Jenny knew not which to obey. Upon my
word, Harriet, I began to think the man would have
cuff'd me. —And while he was in his airs of mockmajesty,
I stept to the door, and whipt down to my
company. 

As married people are not to expose themselves to
their friends (who I once heard you sagely remark,
would remember disagreeable things, when the honest
pair had forgot them) I was determined to be prudent. 
You would have been charmed with me, my dear, for
my discretion. I will cheat by-standers, thought I; 
I will make my Lord and Lady L. Dr. Bartlett, and
Emily, whom I had before set in at cards, think we
are egregiously happy—And down I sat, intending,
with a lamblike peaceableness, to make observations on
the play. But soon after, in whipt my indiscreet Lord,
his colour heightened, his features working: And tho'
I cautioned him not to expose himself, yet he assumed
airs that were the occasion, as you shall hear, of
frighting away my company. He withdrew, in consequence
of those airs; and, after a little while (repenting,
as I hoped) he sent for me out. Some wives
would have played the queen Vashti on their tyrant,
and refused to go: But I, all obedience (my vow, so
recently made, in my head) obeyed, at the very first
word: Yet you must think that I (meek as I am naturally)
could not help recriminating. He was too
lordly to be expostulated with. —There was, ‘I tell
you, madam,’ and ‘I won't be told, Sir;’ and
when I broke from the passionate creature, and hoped
to find my company, behold! they were all gone! 
None but Emily left. And thus might poor Lady L.
be sent home, weeping, perhaps, for such an early
marriage-tyranny exerted on her meek sister. 
Well, and don't you think that we looked like a
couple of fools at each other, when we saw ourselves
left alone, as I may say, to fight it out? I did expostulate
with him as mildly as I could: He would have
made it up with me afterwards; but, no! there was
no doing that, as a girl of your nice notions may believe,
after he had, by his violent airs, exposed us both
before so many witnesses. In decency, therefore, I was
obliged to keep it up: And now our misunderstanding 

blazes, and is at such a comfortable height, that if we
meet by accident, we run away from each other by
design. We have already made two breakfast-tables:
Yet I am meek; he is sullen: I make courtesies; he
returns not bows. —Sullen creature, and a rustic! —I
go to my harpsichord; melody enrages him. He is
worse than Saul; for Saul could be gloomily pleased
with the music even of the man he hated. 
I would have got you to come to us: That I
thought was tending to a compliance; for it would
have been condescending too much, as he is so very
perverse, if I had accompanied him to you. He has
a great mind to appeal to you; but I have half raillied
him out of his purpose. I sent to you. What an
answer did you return me! —Cruel Harriet! to deny
your requested mediation in a difference that has arisen
between man and wife. —But let the fire glow. If it
spares the house, and only blazes in the chimney, I
can bear it. 
Cross creature, adieu! If you know not such a
woman as Grandison, Heaven grant that I may; and
that my wishes may be answered as to the person; and
then I will not know a Byron. 

See, Lucy, how high this dear flighty creature
bribes! But I will not be influenced, by her bribery,
to take her part. 

