



My dear Lady,
I will now proceed with my melancholy Account. 
Not knowing what to do, and Mr. B. not
coming near me, and the Clock striking Twelve,
I ventur'd to send this Billet to him, by Polly. 

Dear Sir,
I know you chuse not to be invaded, when
you retire into your Closet; and yet, being
very uneasy, on account of your abrupt Departure,
and heavy Displeasure, I take the Liberty to
write these few Lines. 
‘I own, Sir, that the sudden Flow of Tears
which involuntarily burst from me, at your kind
Expressions to the Countess in my Favour, when
I had thought for more than a Month past, you 

were angry with me, and which had distress'd my
weak Mind beyond Expression, might appear
unaccountable to you. But had you kindly waited
but one Moment, till this Fit, which was rather
owing to my Gratitude, than to Perverseness, had
been over, (and I knew the Time when you
would have generously soothed it!) I should have
had the Happiness of a more serene and favourable
Parting. 
‘Will you suffer me, Sir, to attend you? 
(Polly shall wait your Answer) I dare not come
without your Permission; for should you be as
angry as you were, I know not how I shall bear
it. But if you say I may come down, I hope to
satisfy you, that I intended not any Offence. Do,
dear Sir, permit me to attend you. I can say no
more, than that I am 
Your ever-dutiful
P. B.’ 

Polly return'd with the following. —So,
thought I, a Letter! —I could have spared that, I
am sure. 
I expected no Favour from it. So, tremblingly
open'd it. 

My Dear,
I would not have you sit up for me. We are
getting apace into the matrimonial Recriminations. 
You knew the Time! —So did I, my
Dear! —But it seems that Time is over with
both; and I have had the Mortification, for some
past Weeks, to come home to a very different
Pamela, than I used to leave all Company and all 

Pleasure for. —I hope we shall better understand
one another. But you cannot see me at present
with any Advantage to yourself; and I would
not, that any thing farther should pass, to add to
the Regrets of both. I wish you good Rest. I
will give your Cause a fair Hearing, when I am
more fit, than at present, to hear all your Pleas,
and your Excuses. I cannot be insensible, that
the Reason for the Concern you have lately shewn,
must lie deeper than, perhaps, you'll own, at
present. As soon as you are prepared to speak
all that is upon your Mind, and I to hear it with
Temper, then, we may come to an Eclaircissement. 
Till when I am 
Your affectionate, &c.’ 

My busy Apprehension immediately suggested to
me, that I was to be terrified, with a high Hand,
into a Compliance with some new Scheme or other
that was projecting. But I had resolved to make
their way as clear to one another as was in my
Power, if they would have it so; and so I try'd
to allay my Grief as much as I could; and it being
near One, and hearing nothing from Mr. B. I bad
Polly go to-bed, thinking she would wonder at our
Intercourse by Letter, if I should send again. 
So down I ventur'd, my Feet, however, trembling
all the Way, and tapp'd at the Door of his
Closet. 
Who's that? 
I, Sir: One Word, if you please. Don't be
more angry, however, Sir. 
He open'd the Door: Thus poor Hester, to her
Royal Husband, ventur'd her Life, to break in 

upon him unbidden. But that Eastern Monarch,
great as he was, extended to the fainting Suppliant
the golden Sceptre! 
He took my Hand: I hope, my Dear, by this
Tragedy Speech, we are not to expect any sad Catastrophe
to our present Misunderstanding. 
I hope not, Sir. But 'tis all as God and You
shall please. I am resolv'd to do my Duty, Sir, if
possible. But, indeed, I cannot bear this cruel
Suspense! —Let me know what is to become of
me. —Let me know but what is designed for me,
and you shall be sure of all the Acquiescence, that
my Duty and Conscience can give to your Pleasure. 
What means the dear Creature! What means
my Pamela! —Surely your Head, Child, is a
little affected! 
I can't tell, Sir, but it may! —But let me
have my Trial, that you write about. Appoint
my Day of Hearing, and speedily too; for I would
not bear such another Month, as the last has been,
for the World. 
Come, my Dear, said he, let me attend you to
your Chamber. But your Mind has taken much
too solemn a Turn, to enter further now upon this
Subject. Think as well of me, as I do of you, and
I shall be as happy as ever. 
I wept—Be not angry, dear Sir: Your kind
Words have just the same Effect upon me now, as
in the Afternoon. 
Your Apprehensions, my Dear, must be very
strong, that a kind Word, as you call it, has such
an Effect upon you! But let us wave the Subject
for a few Days, because I am to set out on a little 

Journey at Four, and had not intended to go to-bed
for so few Hours. 
When we came up, I said, I was very bold,
Sir, to break in upon you; but I could not help
it, if my Life had been the Forfeit: And you receiv'd
me with more Goodness than I could have
expected. But will you pardon me, if I ask, Whither
you go so soon? And if you had intended to
have gone without taking Leave of me? 
I go to Tunbridge, my Dear. I should have
stepp'd up, and taken Leave of you, before I went. 
Well, Sir, I will not ask you, Who is of your
Party? —I will not—No, putting my Hand to
his Lips—Don't tell me, Sir: It mayn't be proper. 
Don't fear, my Dear; I won't tell you: Nor
am I certain whether it be proper or not, till we
are come to a better Understanding. —Only,
once more, think as well of me, as I do of you. 
Would to Heaven, thought I, there was the
same Reason for the one, as for the other! 
I intended (for my Heart was full) to enter
further into this Subject, so fatal to my Repose:
But the dear Gentleman had no sooner laid his
Head on the Pillow, but he fell asleep, or feigned
to do so, and that was as prohibitory to my Talking,
as if he had. So I had all my own entertaining
Reflections to myself; which gave me not one
Wink of Sleep; but made me of so much Service
to him, as to tell him, when the Clock struck
Four, that he should not (tho' I did not say so,
you may think, Madam) make my ready Rival
(for I doubted not her being one of the Party) wait
for him. 

He arose, and was dress'd instantly; and saluting
me, bad me be easy and happy, while it was yet in
my own Power. 
He said, He should be back on Saturday Night,
as he believed. And I wish'd him, most fervently,
I am sure! Health, Pleasure, and Safety. 
Here, Madam, must I end this Letter. My
next will, perhaps, contain my Trial, and my Sentence:
God give me but Patience and Resignation,
and then, whatever occurs, I shall not be unhappy:
Especially while I can have, in the last Resource,
the Pleasure of calling myself 
Your Ladyship's most obliged Sister and Servant,
P. B. 

