



I am now come down in my Writing to this present SATURDAY, and a deal I have written. 

My wicked Bed-fellow has very punctual Orders
it seems; for she locks me and herself in, and ties the
two Keys (for there is a double Door to the Room)
about her Wrist, when she goes to Bed. She talks
of the House having been attempted to be broke
open two or three times; whether to fright me, I can't
tell; but it makes me fearful; but not so much as
I should be, if I had not other and greater Fears. 
I slept but little the preceding Night, and got up,
and pretended to sit by the Window, which looks
into the spacious Gardens; but I was writing all the 

time, from Break of Day to her getting up, and
after, when she was absent. 
At Breakfast she presented the two Maids to me,
the Cook and House-maid, poor awkward Souls,
that I can see no Hopes of, they seem so devoted
to her and Ignorance. Yet I am resolv'd, if possible,
to find some way to escape, before this wicked
Master comes. 
There are besides, of Servants, the Coachman
Robert, a Groom, a Helper, a Footman; all but
Robert (and he is accessary to my Ruin) strange
Creatures, that promise nothing; and all likewise
devoted to this Woman. The Gardener looks like
a good honest Man; but he is kept at a Distance; 
and seems reserv'd. 
I wonder'd I saw not Mr. Williams the Clergyman,
but would not ask after him, apprehending
it might give her some Jealousy; but when I had
beheld the rest, he was the only one I had Hopes of; 
for I thought his Cloth would set him above assisting
in my Ruin. —But, in the Afternoon he came; 
for it seems he has a little Latin School in the neighbouring
Village, which he attends, and this brings
him in a little Matter, additional to my Master's
Favour, till something better falls, of which he has
Hopes. 
He is a sensible, sober young Gentleman, and when
I saw him, I confirm'd myself in my Hopes of him; 
for he seem'd to take great Notice of my Distress
and Grief; for I could not hide it; tho' he appear'd
fearful of Mrs. Jewkes, who watch'd all our
Motions and Words. 
He has an Apartment in the House; but is mostly
at a Lodging in the Town, for Conveniency of his
little School; only on Saturday Afternoons and
Sundays; and he preaches sometimes for the Parson
of the Village, which is about three Miles off. 

I hope to go to Church with him to-morrow: 
Sure it is not in her Instructions to deny me. He
can't have thought of every thing. And something
may strike out for me there. 
I have ask'd her, for a Feint, (because she shan't
think I am so well provided) to indulge me with
Pen and Ink, tho' I have been using my own so
freely when her Absence would let me; for I begg'd
to be left to myself as much as possible. She says she
will let me have it, but then I must promise not to send
any Writing out of the House, without her seeing it. 
I said, It was only to divert my Grief, when I was
by myself, as I desired to be; for I lov'd Writing; 
but I had nobody to send to, she knew well
enough. 
No, not at present, may-be, said she; but I am
told you are a great Writer, and it is in my Instructions
to see all you write; so, look you here,
said she, I will let you have a Pen and Ink, and two
Sheets of Paper; for this Employment will keep
you out of worse Thoughts: but I must see them
always when I ask, written or not written. That's
very hard, said I; but may I not have the Closet
in the Room where we lie, to myself, with the Key
to lock up my Things? I believe I may consent to
that, said she, and I will set it in Order for you,
and leave the Key in the Door. And there is a
Spinnet too, said she; if it be in Tune, you may play
to divert you now-and-then; for I know my old
Lady learnt you. 
So I resolv'd to hide a Pen of my own here, and
another there, for fear I should come to be deny'd,
and a little of my Ink in a broken China Cup, and a
little in another Cup; and a Sheet of Paper here-and-there
among my Linen, with a little Wax and a few
Wafers in several Places, lest I should be search'd; 
and something I thought might happen to open a 

Way for my Deliverance, by these or some other
Means. O the Pride, thought I, I shall have, if I
can secure my Innocence, and escape the artful
Wiles of this wicked Master! For, if he comes
hither, I am undone to be sure! For this naughty
Woman will assist him, rather than fail, in the worst
of his Attempts, and he'll have no Occasion to send
her out of the Way, as he would have done Mrs.
Jervis once. So I must set all my little Wits at
Work! 
It is a Grief to me to write, and not to be able
to send to you what I write; but now it is all the
Diversion I have, and if God will favour my Escape
with my Innocence, as I trust he graciously will,
for all these black Prospects, with what Pleasure
shall I read them afterwards! 
I was going to say, Pray for your dutiful Daughter,
as I used; but, alas! you cannot know my
Distress! tho' I am sure I have your Prayers. And
I will write on as Things happen, that if a Way
should open, my Scribble may be ready to send. 
For what I do, must be at a Jirk to be sure. 
O how I want such an obliging honest-hearted Man
as John! 
