


Miss Lucy Selby, To Miss Harriet Byron. 


Ashby-Canons, January 10. 
Your resolution to accompany Mrs. Reeves
to London, has greatly alarmed your
three Lovers. And two of them, at least,
will let you know that it has. Such a
lovely girl as my Harriet, must expect
to be more accountable for her footsteps than one less
excellent and less attractive. 
Mr. Greville, in his usual resolute way, threatene
to follow you to London; and there, he says, he will
watch the motions of every man who approaches you; 
and, if he find reason for it, will early let such man
know his pretensions, and the danger he may run
into if he pretend to be his competitor. But let
me not do him injustice; though he talks of a rival
thus harshly, he speaks of you more highly than man 

ever spoke of woman. Angel and Goddess are
phrases you have been used to from him; and tho'
spoken in his humourous way, yet I am sure he most
sincerely admires you. 
Mr. Fenwick, in a less determined manner, declares,
that he will follow you to town, if you stay
there above one fortnight. 
The gentle Orme sighs his apprehensions, and
wishes you would change your purpose. Tho' hopeless,
he says, it is some pleasure to him that he can
think himself in the same county with you; and
much more, that he can tread in your footsteps to
and from church every Sunday, and behold you there. 
He wonders how your Grandmamma, your Aunt, your
Uncle, can spare you. Your Cousin Reeves's surely,
he says, are very happy in their influences over us all. 
Each of the gentlemen is afraid, that by increasing
the number of your admirers, you will increase his
difficulties: But what is that to them, I asked, when
they already know, that you are not inclined to favour
any of the three? 
If you hold your resolution, and my Cousin Reeves's
their time of setting out, pray let me know, and I
will attend you at my Uncle Selby's, to wish you a
good journey, much pleasure in town, and a return
with a safe and sound heart. My Sister, who,
poor dear girl, continues extremely weak and low,
will spare me for a purpose so indispensable. I will
not have you come to us. I know it would grieve you
to see her in the way she is in. You too much take
to heart the infirmities of your friends which you cannot
cure; and as your Grandmamma lives upon your
smiles, and you rejoice all your friends by your chearfulness,
it would be cruel to make you sad. 
* *
Mr. Greville has just left us. He dropt in
upon us as we were going to dinner. My Grandmother
Selby you know is always pleased with his rattling. 

She prevailed on him to alight, and sit down
with us. All his talk was of you. He repeated his
former threatenings (as I called them to him) on your
going to town. After dinner, he read us a letter from
Lady Frampton relating to you. He read us also some
passages from the copy of his answer, with design, I
believe, that I should ask him to leave it behind him. 
He is a vain creature, you know, and seemed fond of
what he had written. I did ask him. He seemed to
make a scruple of your seeing it; but it was a faint
one. However, he called for pen and ink; and
when it was brought him, scratched over two passages,
and that with so many little flourishes (as you will
see) that he thought they could not be read. But
the ink I furnished him with happening to be paler
than his, you will find he was not cunning enough. 
I promised to return it. 
Send me a line by the bearer, to tell me if your
resolution holds as to the day. 
Adieu, my dearest Harriet. May Angels protect
and guide you whithersoever you go! 
Lucy Selby. 

