


If, my dear Parents, I am not destin'd more
surely than ever for Ruin, I have now more
Comfort before me, than ever I yet knew. And am
either nearer my Happiness or my Misery than ever
I was. God protect me from the latter, if it be his
blessed Will! I have now such a Scene to open
to you, that I know will alarm both your Hopes
and your Fears, as it does mine. And this it is. 
After my Master had din'd, he took a Turn into
the Stables, to look at his Stud of Horses; and,
when he came in, he open'd the Parlour-door,
where Mrs. Jewkes and I sat at Dinner; and, at his
Entrance, we both rose up; but he said, Sit still, sit
still; and let me see how you eat your Victuals, Pamela. 
O, said Mrs. Jewkes, very poorly, Sir, I'll
assure you. No, said I, pretty well, Sir, considering. 
None of your Considerings! said he, Pretty-face, and
tapp'd me on the Cheek. I blush'd, but was glad he
was so good-humour'd; but I could not tell how to
sit before him, nor to behave myself. So he said,
I know, Pamela, you are a nice Carver. My Mother
us'd to say so. My Lady, Sir, said I, was very
good to me, in every thing, and would always make
me do the Honours of her Table for her, when she
was with her few select Friends that she lov'd. Cut
up, said he, that Chicken. I did so. Now, said he,
and took a Knife and Fork, and put a Wing upon
my Plate, let me see you eat that. O Sir, said I,
I have eat a whole Breast of a Chicken already, and
cannot eat so much. But he said, I must eat it for
his sake, and he would learn me to eat heartily: So
I did eat it; but was much confused at his so kind
and unusual Freedom and Condescension. And, 

good Sirs! you can't imagine how Mrs. Jewkes
look'd, and star'd, and how respectful she seem'd to
me, and call'd me good Madam! I'll assure you!
urging me to take a little Bit of Tart. 
My Master took two or three Turns about the
Room, musing and thoughtful, as I had never before
seen him; and at last he went out, saying, I
I am going into the Garden: You know, Pamela,
what I said to you before Dinner. I rose and curcheed,
saying, I would attend his Honour; and he
said, Do, good Girl! 
Well, said Mrs. Jewkes, I see how things will go. 
O Madam, as she call'd me again, I am sure you are
to be our Mistress! And then I know what will become
of me. Ah! Mrs. Jewkes, said I, if I can but
keep myself virtuous, 'tis the utmost of my Ambition; 
and, I hope, no Temptation shall make me otherwise. 
Notwithstanding I had no Reason to be pleas'd
with his Treatment of me before Dinner, yet I made
haste to attend him; and I found him walking by the
Side of that Pond, which, for Want of Grace, and
thro' a sinful Despondence, had like to have been so
fatal to me, and the Sight of which, ever since, has
been a Trouble and Reproach to me. And it was
by the Side of this Pond, and not far from the Place
where I had that dreadful Conflict, that my present
Hopes, if I am not to be deceiv'd again, began to
dawn, which I presume to flatter myself with being
an happy Omen for me, as if God Almighty would
shew your poor sinful Daughter, how well I did, to
put my Affiance in his Goodness, and not to throw
away myself, because my Ruin seem'd inevitable to
my short-sighted Apprehension. 
So he was pleas'd to say, Well, Pamela, I am
glad you are come of your own Accord, as I may 

say: Give me your Hand. I did so; and he look'd at
me very steadily, and pressing my Hand all the time,
at last said, I will now talk to you in a serious
manner. 
You have a great deal of Wit, a great deal of
Penetration, much beyond your Years; and, as I
thought, your Opportunities. You are possess'd of
an open, frank and generous Mind; and a Person so
lovely, that you excel all your Sex in my Eyes. All
these Accomplishments have engag'd my Affections so
deeply, that, as I have often said, I cannot live without
you; and I would divide with all my Soul, my
Estate with you, to make you mine upon my own
Terms. These you have absolutely rejected; and
that, tho' in sawcy Terms enough, yet, in such a
manner, as makes me admire you more. Your
pretty Chit-chat to Mrs. Jewkes, the last Sunday
Night, so innocent, and so full of beautiful Simplicity,
half disarmed my Resolutions before I approach'd
your Bed. And I see you so watchful over your Virtue,
that tho' I hop'd to find it otherwise, I cannot
but say, my Passion for you is increas'd by it. But
now what shall I say further, Pamela? —I will
make you, tho' a Party, my Adviser in this Matter; 
tho' not perhaps my definitive Judge. 
You know I am not a very abandon'd Profligate:
I have hitherto been guilty of no very enormous
or vile Actions. This of seizing you, and confining
you thus, may, perhaps, be one of the worst, at
least to Persons of real Innocence. Had I been
utterly given up to my Passions, I should before
now have gratify'd them, and not have shewn that
Remorse and Compassion for you, which have
repriev'd you more than once, when absolutely in
my Power; and you are as inviolate a Virgin as
you was when you came into my House. 

But, what can I do? Consider the Pride of my
Condition. I cannot endure the Thought of Marriage,
even with a Person of equal or superior
Degree to myself; and have declin'd several Proposals
of that kind: How then, with the Distance
between us, and in the World's Judgment, can I
think of making you my Wife? —Yet I must have
you; I cannot bear the Thoughts of any other Man
supplanting me in your Affections. And the very
Apprehension of that, has made me hate the Name
of Williams, and use him in a manner unworthy of
my Temper. 
Now, Pamela, judge for me; and, since I have
told you thus candidly my Mind, and I see yours is
big with some important Meaning, by your Eyes,
your Blushes, and that sweet Confusion which I behold
struggling in-your Bosom, tell me with like
Openness and Candour, what you think I ought to
do, and what you would have me do. — 
It is impossible for me to express the Agitations
of my Mind on this unexpected Declaration, so contrary
to his former Behaviour. His Manner too had
something so noble, and so sincere, as I thought; that,
alas for me! I found I had Need of all my poor
Discretion, to ward off the Blow which this Treatment
gave to my most guarded Thoughts. I threw
myself at his Feet, for I trembled and could hardly
stand; O Sir, said I, spare your poor Servant's
Confusion; O spare the poor Pamela! —I cannot
say what you ought to do: But I only beg you
will not ruin me; and, if you think me virtuous, if
you think me sincerely honest, let me go to my poor
Parents. I will vow to you, that I will never suffer
myself to be engag'd without your Approbation. As
to my poor Thoughts, of what you ought to do, I
must needs say, that, indeed, I think you ought to 

regard the World's Opinion, and avoid doing any
thing disgraceful to your own Birth and Fortune; 
and therefore, if you really honour the poor Pamela
with your Respect, a little Time, Absence, and the
Conversation of worthier Persons of my Sex, will
effectually enable you to overcome a Regard so unworthy
of your, Condition: And this, good Sir, is
the best Advice I can offer. 
Charming Creature, lovely Pamela, said he, (with
an Ardor, that was never before so agreeable to me)
this generous Manner is of a Piece with all the rest
of your Conduct. But tell me more explicitly,
what you would advise me in the Case. 
O Sir, said I, take not Advantage of my Credulity,
and these my weak Moments; but, were I the first
Lady in the Land, instead of the poor abject Pamela,
I would, I could tell you. But I can say no
more. 
O my dear Father and Mother! now I know you
will indeed be concern'd for me! —For now I am
for myself! —And now I begin to be afraid, I know
too well the Reason, why all his hard Trials of me,
and my black Apprehenfions, would not let me hate
him. 
But be assur'd still, by God's Grace, that I shall
do nothing unworthy of your Pamela; and if I find
that he is still capable of deceiving me, and that this
Conduct is only put on to delude me more, I shall
think nothing in this World so vile and so odious; and
nothing, if he be not the worst of his Kind (as he
says, and, I hope, he is not) so desperately guileful as
the Heart of Man! 
He generously said, I will spare your Confusion,
Pamela. But I hope, I may promise myself, that
you can love me preferably to any other Man; and
that no one in the World has had any Share in your 

Affections; for I am very jealous of what I love
and if I thought you had a secret Whispering in
your Soul, that had not yet come up to a Wish, for
any other Man breathing, I should not forgive myself
to persist in my Affection for you; nor you, if
you did not frankly acquaint me with it. 
As I still continued on my Knees, on the Grass
Slope by the Pond-side, he sat himself down on the
Grass by me, and took me in his Arms, Why hesitates
my Pamela, said-he? —Can you not answer
me with Truth, as I wish? If you cannot, speak,
and I will forgive you. 
O, good Sir, said I, it is not that; indeed it is
not: But a frightful Word or two that you
said to Mrs. Jewkes, when you thought I was not in
hearing, comes cross my Mind; and makes me
dread, that I am in more Danger than ever I was in
my Life. 
You have never found me a common Liar, said
he, (too fearful and foolish Pamela!) nor will
I answer how long I may hold in my present
Mind; for my Pride struggles hard within me,
I'll assure you; and if you doubt me, I have no
Obligation to your Confidence or Opinion. But at
present, I am really sincere in what I say: And I
expect you will be so too; and answer directly my
Question. 
I find Sir, said I, I know not myself; and your
Question is of such a Nature, that I only want to
tell you what I heard, and to have your kind Answer
to it; or else, what I have to say to your Question, may
pave the Way to my Ruin, and shew a Weakness that
I did not believe was in me. 
Well, said he, you may say what you have overheard; 
for, in not answering me directly, you put my
Soul upon the Rack; and half the Trouble I have 

had with you, would have brought to my Arms the
finest Lady in England. 
O Sir, said I, my Virtue is as dear to me, as if I
was of the highest Quality; and my Doubts (for
which you know I have had too much Reason) have
made me troublesome. But now, Sir, I will tell
you what I heard, which has given me great Uneasiness. 
You talked to Mrs. Jewkes of having begun wrong
with me, in trying to subdue me with Terror, and of
Frost, and such-like;—you remember it well:—and
that you would, for the future, change your Conduct,
and try to melt me, that was your Word, by
Kindness. 
I fear not, Sir, the Grace of God supporting me,
that any Acts of Kindness would make me forget
what I owe to my Virtue; but, Sir, I may, I find,
be made more miserable by such Acts, than by Terror; 
because my Nature is too frank and open to
make me wish to be ingrateful; and if I should be
taught a Lesson I never yet learnt, with what Regret
should I descend to the Grave, to think, that I
could not hate my Undoer? And, that, at the last
great Day, I must stand up as an Accuser of the poor
unhappy Soul, that I could wish it in my Power to
save! 
Exalted Girl, said he, what a Thought is that! 
—Why now, Pamela, you excel your self! You have
given me a Hint that will hold me long. But, sweet
Creature, said he, tell me what is this Lesson, which
you never yet learnt, and which you are so afraid of
learning? 
If, Sir, said I, you will again generously spare my
Confusion, I need not say it: But this I will say, in
Answer to the Question you seem most solicitous
about, That I know not the Man breathing that I 

would wish to be marry'd to, or that ever I thought
of with such a Hope. I had brought my Mind so
to love Poverty, that I hop'd for nothing but to
return to the best, tho' the poorest, of Parents; and
to employ myself in serving God, and comforting
them; and you know not, Sir, how you disappointed
my Hopes, and my proposed honest Pleasures,
when you sent me hither. 
Well then, said he, I may promise myself, that
neither the Parson, nor any other Man, is any the
least secret Motive to your stedfast Refusal of my
Offers? Indeed, Sir, said I, you may; and, as you
was pleased to ask, I answer, that I have not the least
Shadow of a Wish, or Thought, for any Man
living. 
But, said he; for I am foolishly jealous, and yet it
shews my Fondness for you; have you not encourag'd
Williams to think you will have him? Indeed,
Sir, said I, I have not; but the very contrary. 
And would you not have had him, said he, if you
had got away by his Means? I had resolv'd, Sir,
said I, in my Mind otherwise; and he knew it, and
the poor Man –– I charge you, said he, say not a
Word in his Favour! You will excite a Whirlwind
in my Soul, if you name him with Kindness, and
then you'll be borne away with the Tempest. 
Sir, said I, I have done! —Nay, said he, but do
not have done; let me know the whole. If you
have any Regard for him, speak out; for, it would
end fearfully for you, for me, and for him, if I
found, that you disguis'd any Secret of your Soul
from me, in this nice Particular. 
Sir, said I, if I have ever given you Cause to think
me sincere—Say then, said he, interrupting me; 
with great Vehemence; and taking both my Hands
between his, Say, That you now, in the Presence 

of God, declare, that you have not any the most
hidden Regard for Williams, or any other Man. 
Sir, said I, I do. As God shall bless me, and
preserve my Innocence, I have not. Well, said he,
I will believe you, Pamela; and in time, perhaps,
I may better bear that Man's Name. And, if I am
convinc'd that you are not prepossess'd, my Vanity
makes me assur'd, that I need not to fear a Place in
your Esteem, equal, if not preferable to any Man
in England. But yet it stings my Pride to the quick,
that you was so easily brought, and at such a short
Acquaintance, to run away with that College Novice! 
O good Sir, said I, may I be heard one Thing,
and tho' I bring upon me your highest Indignation,
I will tell you, perhaps the unnecessary and imprudent,
but yet, the whole Truth. 
My Honesty (I am poor and lowly, and am not
intitled to call it Honour) was in Danger. I saw
no Means of securing myself from your avow'd Attempts. 
You had shew'd you would not stick at
little Matters; and what, Sir, could any body have
thought of my Sincerity, in preferring that to all
other Considerations, if I had not escap'd from
these Dangers, if I could have found any way for
it? —I am not going to say any thing for him; 
but indeed, indeed, Sir, I was the Cause of putting
him upon assisting me in my Escape. I got him
to acquaint me, what Gentry there were in the
Neighbourhood, that I might fly to; and prevail'd
upon him;—Don't frown at me, good Sir, for
I must tell you the whole Truth!—to apply to
one Lady Jones; to Lady Darnford; and he was
so good to apply to Mr. Peters the Minister: but
they all refus'd me; and then it was he let me know,
that there was no honourable Way but Marriage. 

That I declin'd; and he agreed to assist me for
God's sake. 
Now, said he, you are going—I boldly put my
Hand before his Mouth, hardly knowing the Liberty
I took; Pray, Sir, said I, don't be angry; I have
just done—I would only say, That rather than have
staid to be ruin'd, I would have thrown myself upon
the poorest Beggar that ever the World saw, if I
thought him honest. —And I hope, when you duly
weigh all Matters, you will forgive me, and not
think me so bold and so forward as you have been
pleas'd to call me. 
Well, said he, even in this your last Speech, which,
let me tell you, shews more your Honesty of Heart,
than your Prudence, you have not overmuch pleas'd
me. But I must love you; and that vexes me not
a little. But tell me, Pamela; for now the former
Question recurs; Since you so much prize your Honour
and your Virtue; since all Attempts against
that are so odious to you; and, since I have avowedly
made several of these Attempts, do you think
it is possible for you to love me preferably to any
other of my Sex? 
Ah! Sir, said I, and here my Doubt recurs,
that you may thus graciously use me, to take Advantage
of my Credulity. 
Still perverse and doubting, said he! Cannot you
take me as I am at present; and that, I have told
you, is sincere and undesigning, whatever I may
be hereafter?— 
Ah! Sir, reply'd I, what can I say? —I have
already said too much, if this dreadful Hereafter
should take place. Don't bid me say how well I
can—And then, my Face, glowing as the Fire, I,
all abash'd, lean'd upon his Shoulder, to hide my
Confusion. 

He clasp'd me to him with great Ardour, and said,
Hide your dear Face in my Bosom, my beloved
Pamela; your innocent Freedoms charm me! —But
then say, How well—what? 
If you will be good, said I, to your poor Servant,
and spare her, I cannot say too much! But if not,
I am doubly undone! —Undone indeed! 
Said he, I hope my present Temper will hold; 
for I tell you frankly, that I have known in this
agreeable Hour more sincere Pleasure, than I have
experienc'd in all the guilty Tumults that my desiring. 
Soul put me into, in the Hopes of possessing you on
my own Terms. And, Pamela, you must pray for the
Continuance of this Temper; and I hope your
Prayers will get the better of my Temptations. 
This sweet Goodness overpower'd all my Reserves.
I threw myself at his Feet, and embrac'd his Knees:
What Pleasure, Sir, you give me, at these gracious
Words, is not lent your poor Servant to express! 
—I shall be too much rewarded for all my Sufferings,
if this Goodness hold! God grant it may, for your
own Soul's sake, as well as mine. And Oh! how
happy should I be, if— 
He stopt me, and said, But, my dear Girl, what
must we do about the World, and the World's Censure? 
—Indeed, I cannot marry! 
Now was I again struck all of a Heap. However,
soon recollecting myself, Sir, said I, I have not the
Presumption to hope such an Honour. If I may be
permitted to return in Peace and Safety to my poor
Parents, to pray for you there; it is all I at present
request! This, Sir, after all my Apprehensions and
Dangers, will be a great Pleasure to me. And, if I
know my own poor Heart, I shall wish you happy
in a Lady of suitable Degree: And rejoice most
sincerely in every Circumstance that shall make for 

the Happiness of my late good Lady's most beloved
Son! 
Well, said he, this Conversation, Pamela, is gone
farther than I intended it. You need not be afraid,
at this rate, of trusting yourself with me: But it is
I, that ought to be doubtful of myself, when I am
with you! —But, before I say any thing further on
this Subject, I will take my proud Heart to Task; 
and, till then, let every thing be, as if this Conversation
had never pass'd. Only, let me tell you,
that the more Confidence you place in me, the
more you'll oblige me: But your Doubts will only
beget Cause of Doubts. And with this ambiguous
Saying, he saluted me in a more formal manner, if
I may so say, than before, and lent me his Hand,
and so we walk'd towards the House, Side-by-side,
he seeming very thoughtful and pensive, as if he had
already repented him of his Goodness. 
What shall I do, what Steps take, if all this
be designing! —O the Perplexities of these cruel
Doubtings! —To be sure, if he be false, as I may
call it, I have gone too far, much too far! —I am
ready, on the Apprehension of this, to bite my forward
Tongue, (or rather to beat my more forward
Heart, that dictated to that poor Machine) for what
I have said. But sure, at least, he must be sincere
for the Time! —He could not be such a practised
Dissembler! —If he could, O how desperately
wicked is the Heart of Man! —And where could
he learn all these barbarous Arts? —If so, it must
be native surely to the Sex! —But, silent be my
rash Censurings; be hush'd, ye stormy Tumults of
my disturbed Mind; for have I not a Father who is
a Man! —A Man who knows no Guile! who would
do no Wrong!—who would not deceive or oppress 

to gain a Kingdom! —How then can I think it is
native to the Sex? And I must also hope my good
Lady's Son cannot be the worst of Men! —If he is,
hard the Lot of the excellent Woman that bore him! 
—But much harder the Hap of your poor Pamela,
who has fallen into such Hands! —But yet I will
trust in God, and hope the best; and so lay down
any tired Pen for this Time. 
