



To Miss Clarissa Harlowe;
To be left at Mr. Osgood's, near Soho-Square. 

Friday, April 21. 
It was expected you would send again to me, or to
my Aunt Hervey. The inclosed has lain ready for
you therefore by direction. You will have no Answer
from any-body, write to whom you will, and as often
as you will, and what you will. 

It was designed to bring you back by proper authority,
or to send you whither the disgraces you have
brought upon us all, should be in the likeliest way, after
a while, to be forgotten. But I believe that design
is over: So you may range securely—Nobody will
think it worth while to give themselves any trouble
about you. Yet my Mother has obtained leave to send
you your cloaths, of all sorts: But your cloaths only. 
This is a favour you'll see by the within Letter not designed
you: And now not granted for your sake, but
because my poor Mother cannot bear in her sight anything
you used to wear. Read the inclosed, and tremble. 
Arabella Harlowe. 

To the most ungrateful and undutiful of Daughters.
Harlowe-Place, April 15. 
Sister that was!
For I know not what name you are permitted, or
chuse to go by. 
You have filled us all with distraction. My Father,
in the first agitations of his mind, on discovering your
wicked, your shameful Elopement, imprecated, on his
knees, a fearful Curse upon you. Tremble at the recital
of it! —No less, than ‘that you may meet your
punishment, both here and hereafter, by means of
the very wretch, in whom you have chosen to place
your wicked confidence.’ 
Your cloaths will not be sent you. You seem, by
leaving them behind you, to have been secure of them,
whenever you demanded them. But perhaps you could
think of nothing but meeting your fellow: —Nothing
but how to get off your forward self! —For every-thing
seems to have been forgotten but what was to contribute
to your wicked flight. —Yet you judged right, perhaps,
that you would have been detected, had you endeavoured
to get away your cloaths. —Cunning creature!
not to make one step that we could guess at you
by! Cunning to effect your own ruin, and the disgrace
of all the family! 

But does the wretch put you upon writing for your
things, for fear you should be too expensive to him? — 
That's it, I suppose. 
Was there ever a giddier creature? —Yet this is the
celebrated, the blazing Clarissa—Clarissa, what? Harlowe,
no doubt! —And Harlowe it will be, to the disgrace
of us all! 
Your drawings and your pieces are all taken down; 
as is also your own whole-length picture, in the Vandyke
taste, from your late parlour: They are taken
down, and thrown into your closet, which will be
nailed up, as if it were not a part of the house; there
to perish together: For who can bear to see them? 
Yet, how did they use to be shewn to every-body; the
former, for the magnifying of your dainty finger-works; 
the latter, for the imputed dignity (dignity now in the
dust!) of your boasted figure; and this by those fond
parents from whom you have run away with so much,
yet with so little contrivance! 
My Brother vows revenge upon your Libertine— 
For the family's sake he vows it—Not for yours! —For
he will treat you, he declares, like a common creature,
if ever he sees you: And doubts not, that this will be
your fate. 
My Uncle Harlowe renounces you for ever. 
So does my Uncle Antony. 
So does my Aunt Hervey. 
So do I, base unworthy creature! the disgrace of a
good family, and the property of an infamous Rake, as
questionless you will soon find yourself, if you are not
already. 
Your books, since they have not taught you what
belongs to your Family, to your Sex, and to your Education,
will not be sent you. Your Money neither. 
Nor yet the Jewels so undeservedly made yours. For
it is wished you may be seen a beggar along London-streets. 

If all this is heavy, lay your hand to your heart, and
ask yourself, Why you have deserved it? 
Every Man, whom your pride taught you to reject
with scorn (Mr. Solmes excepted, who, however, has
reason to rejoice that he missed you) triumphs in your
shameful Elopement; and now knows how to account
for his being refused. 
Your worthy Norton is ashamed of you, and mingles
her tears with your Mother's; both reproaching
themselves for their shares in you, and in so fruitless an
education. 
Every-body, in short, is ashamed of you: But none
more than 
Arabella Harlowe. 