


DEAR PHILLIPS,
THE very day after I wrote my last, Clinker
was set at liberty—As Martin had foretold, the
accuser was himself committed for a robbery, upon
unquestionable evidence. He had been for some
time in the snares of the thief-taking society; 
who, resenting his presumption in attempting to
incroach upon their monopoly of impeachment,
had him taken up and committed to Newgate, on
the deposition of an accomplice, who has been admitted
as evidence for the king. The postillion
being upon record as an old offender, the chief
justice made no scruple of admitting Clinker to
bail, when he perused the affidavit of Mr. Mead,
importing that the said Clinker was not the person
that robbed him on Blackheath; and honest Humphry
was discharged—When he came home, he
expressed great eagerness to pay his respects to his
master, and here his elocution failed him, but his
silence was pathetic; he fell down at his feet, and
embraced his knees, shedding a flood of tears,
which my uncle did not see without emotion— 
He took snuff in some confusion; and, putting his
hand in his pocket, gave him his blessing in something
more substantial than words—“Clinker,
(said he) I am so well convinced, both of your
honesty and courage, that I am resolved to make
you my life-guard-man on the highway.” 
He was accordingly provided with a case of
pistols, and a carbine to be slung a-cross his shoulders; 
and every other preparation being made, we
set out last Thursday, at seven in the morning; 
my uncle, with the three women in the coach; 

Humphry, well mounted on a black gelding bought
for his use: myself a-horseback, attended by my
new valet, Mr. Dutton, an exceeding coxcomb,
fresh from his travels, whom I have taken upon
trial—The fellow wears a solitaire, uses paint, and
takes rappee with all the grimace of a French
marquis. At present, however, he is in a riding-dress,
jack-boots, leather breeches, a scarlet waistcoat,
with gold binding, a laced hat, a hanger, a
French posting-whip in his hand, and his hair
en queue. 
Before we had gone nine miles, my horse lost
one of his shoes; so that I was obliged to stop at
Barnet to have another, while the coach proceeded
at an easy pace over the common. About a mile
short of Hatfield, the postillions, stopping the carriage,
gave notice to Clinker that there were two
suspicious fellows a-horseback, at the end of a lane,
who seemed waiting to attack the coach. Humphry
forthwith apprised my uncle, declaring he
would stand by him to the last drop of his blood; 
and, unslinging his carbine, prepared for action. 
The 'squire had pistols in the pockets of the coach,
and resolved to make use of them directly; but
he was effectually prevented by his female companions,
who slung themselves about his neck, and
screamed in concert—At that instant, who should
come up at a hand-gallop, but Martin, the highway-man,
who, advancing to the coach, begged
the ladies would compose themselves for a moment; 
then, desiring Clinker to follow him to the
charge, he pulled a pistol out of his bosom, and they
rode up together to give battle to the rogues, who,
having fired at a great distance, fled across the common. 
They were in pursuit of the fugitives when
I came up, not a little alarmed at the shrieks in
the coach, where I found my uncle in a violent
rage, without his periwig, struggling to disentangle 

himself from Tabby and the other two, and
swearing with great vociferation. Before I had
time to interpose, Martin and Clinker returned
from the pursuit, and the former payed his compliments
with great politeness, giving us to understand,
that the fellows had scampered off, and
that he believed they were a couple of raw 'prentices
from London. He commended Clinker for
his courage, and said, if he would give him leave,
he would have the honour to accompany us as far
as Stevenage, where he had some business. 
The 'squire, having recollected and adjusted
himself, was the first to laugh at his own situation;; 
but it was not without difficulty, that Tabby's
arms could be untwisted from his neck, Liddy's
teeth chattered, and Jenkins was threatened with a
fit as usual. I had communicated to my uncle the
character of Martin, as it was described by the
constable, and he was much struck with its singularity
—He could not suppose the fellow had any design
on our company, which was so numerous and
well armed; he therefore thanked him for the
service he had just done them, said he would be
glad of his company, and asked him to dine with
us at Hatfield. This invitation might not have
been agreeable to the ladies, had they known the
real profession of our guest, but this was a secret
to all, except my uncle and myself—Mrs. Tabitha
however, would by no means consent to proceed
with a case of loaded pistols in the coach, and
they were forthwith discharged in complaisance to
her and the rest of the women. 
Being gratified in this particular, she became
remarkably good-humoured, and at dinner behaved
in the most affable manner to Mr. Martin,
with whose polite address and agreeable conversation
she seemed to be much taken. After dinner,
the landlord accosting me in the yard, asked, with 

a significant look, if the gentleman that rode the
sorrel belonged to our company? —I understood
his meaning, but answered no; that he had come
up with us on the common, and helped us to drive
away two fellows, that looked like highwaymen— 
He nodded three times distinctly, as much as to
say, he knows his cue. Then he inquired, if one
of those men was mounted on a bay mare, and the
other on a chesnut gelding with a white streak
down his forehead? and being answered in the affirmative,
he assured me, they had robbed three
post-chaises this very morning—I inquired, in my
turn, if Mr. Martin was of his acquaintance? and,
nodding thrice again, he answered, that he had seen
the gentleman. 
Before we left Hatfield, my uncle, fixing his
eyes on Martin with such expression, as is more
easily conceived than described, asked, if he often
travelled that road? and he replied with a look
which denoted his understanding the question, that
he very seldom did business in that part of the
country. In a word, this adventurer favoured us
with his company to the neighbourhood of Stevenage,
where he took his leave of the coach and me,
in very polite terms, and turned off upon a crossroad,
that led to a village on the left. —At supper,
Mrs. Tabby was very full in the praise of Mr.
Martin's good-sense and good-breeding, and seemed
to regret that she had not a further opportunity
to make some experiment upon his affection. In
the morning, my uncle was not a little surprised to
receive from the waiter, a billet couched in these
words:— 

“Sir,
I could easily perceive from your looks, when
I had the honour to converse with you at Hatfield,
that my character is not unknown to you; 

and, I dare say, you won't think it strange, that
I should be glad to change my present way of
life, for any honest occupation, let it be ever so
humble, that will afford me bread in moderation,
and sleep in safety. —Perhaps you may think
I flatter, when I say, that from the moment I
was witness to your generous concern in the
cause of your servant, I conceived a particular
esteem and veneration for your person; and yet
what I say is true. I should think myself happy,
if I could be admitted into your protection
and service, as a house-steward, clerk, butler, or
bailiff, for either of which places I think myself
tolerably well qualified; and, sure I am, I should
not be found deficient in gratitude and fidelity:
at the same time, I am very sensible how much
you must deviate from the common maxims of
discretion, even in putting my professions to the
trial; but I don't look upon you as a person that
thinks in the ordinary stile; and the delicacy of
my situation will, I know, justify this address to
a heart warmed with benificence and compassion. 
—Understanding you are going pretty far
north, I shall take an opportunity to throw myself
in your way again, before you reach the
borders of Scotland; and I hope, by that time,
you will have taken into consideration the truly
distressful case of, 
“honoured sir,
your very humble,
and devoted servant,
Edward Martin.” 
The 'squire, having perused this letter, put it
into my hand without saying a syllable and,
when I had read it, we looked at each other in
silence. From a certain sparkling in his eyes, I discovered
there was more in his heart, than he cared 

to express with his tongue, in favour of poor Martin; 
and this was precisely my own feeling, which
he did not fail to discern, by the same means of
communication—“What shall we do (said he)
to save this poor sinner from the gallows, and
make him a useful member of the commonwealth? 
And yet the proverb says, Save a thief
from the gallows, and he'll cut your throat.” 
I told him, I really believed Martin was capable of
giving the proverb the lie; and that I should
heartily concur in any step he might take in favour
of his solicitation. We mutually resolved to
deliberate upon the subject, and in the mean time,
proceeded on our journey. The roads, having
been broke up by the heavy rains in the spring,
were so rough, that although we travelled very
slowly, the jolting occasioned such pain to my
uncle, that he was become exceedingly peevish
when we arrived at this place, which lies about
eight miles from the post-road, between, Whetherby
and Boroughbridge. 
Harrigate-water, so celebrated for its efficacy in
the scurvy and other distempers, is supplied from
a copious spring, in the hollow of a wild common,
round which, a good many houses have been built
for the convenience of drinkers, though few of
them are inhabited. Most of the company lodge
at some distance, in five separate inns, situated in
different parts of the common, from whence they
go every morning to the well, in their own carriages. 
The lodgers of each inn form a distinct
society, that eat together; and there is a commodious,
public room, where they breakfast in dishabille,
at separate tables, from eight o'clock till
eleven, as they chance or choose to come in—Here
also they drink tea in the afternoon, and play at
cards or dance in the evening. One custom, however,
prevails, which I look upon as a solecism in 

politeness. —The ladies treat with tea in their turns; 
and even girls of sixteen are not extempted from this
shameful imposition. —There is a public ball by
subscription every night at one of the houses, to
which all the company from the others are admitted
by tickets; and indeed, Harrigate, treads upon the
heels of Bath, in the articles of gaiety and dissipation
—with this difference, however, that here we
are more sociable and familiar. One of the inns is
already full up to the very garrets, having no less
than fifty lodgers, and as many servants. Our family
does not exceed thirty-six; and I should be
sorry to see the number augmented, as our accommodations
won't admit of much increase. 
At present, the company is more agreeable than
one could expect from an accidental assemblage of
persons who are utter strangers to one another. 
—There seems to be a general disposition among us
to maintain good fellowship, and promote the purposes
of humanity, in favour of those who come
hither on the score of health. I see several faces
which we left at Bath, although the majority are
of the Northern counties, and may come from
Scotland for the benefit of these waters—In such
a variety, there must be some originals, among
whom Mrs. Tabitha Bramble is not the most inconsiderable
—No place where there is such an intercourse
between the sexes, can be disagreeable to a
lady of her views and temperament—She has had
some warm disputes at table, with a lame parson
from Northumberland, on the new birth, and the
insignificance of moral virtue; and her arguments
have been reinforced by an old Scotch lawyer, in a
tye-periwig, who, though he has lost his teeth,
and the use of his limbs, can still wag his tongue
with great volubility. He has paid her such fulsome
compliments, upon her piety and learning, as
seem to have won her heart; and she, in her turn, 

treats him with such attention as indicates a design
upon his person; but, by all acounts, he is too
much a fox to be inveigled into any snare that she
can lay for his affection. 
We do not purpose to stay long at Harrigate,
though, at present, it is our head quarters, from
whence we shall make some excursions, to visit
two or three of our rich relations, who are settled
in this county. —Pray, remember me to all our
friends of Jesus, and allow me to be still, 
Yours affectionately,
J. Melford. 
Harrigate, June 23. 