


Peregrine is released. Jolter confounded at his
mysterious conduct. A contest happens between
the poet and painter, who are reconciled by the
mediation of their fellow travellers. 
Our hero, understanding from some expressions
which escaped the prince, that he was
considered in the light of a sharper and assassin,
begged that he might have the liberty of sending
for some vouchers, that would probably vindicate
his character from the malicious aspersions of his
adversary; and this permission being granted, he
wrote a letter to his governor, desiring that he
would bring to him the letters of recommendation
which he had received from the British embassador
at Paris, and such other papers as he
thought conducive to evince the importance of
his situation. 
The billet was given in charge to one of the
subaltern officers on duty, who carried it to the
inn, and demanded to speak with Mr. Jolter. 
Pallet, who happened to be at the door, when 

this messenger arrived, and heard him enquire for
the tutor, ran directly to that gentleman's apartment,
and in manifest disorder told him, that a
huge fellow of a soldier, with a monstrous pair
of whiskers, and a fur-cap as big as a bushel, was
asking for him at the door. The poor governor
began to shake at this intimation, though he was
not conscious of having committed any thing
that could attract the attention of the state; and,
when the officer appeared at his chamber-door,
his confusion increased to such a degree, that his
perception seemed to vanish, and the subaltern
repeated the purport of his errand three times,
before he could comprehend his meaning, or
venture to receive the letter which he presented. 
At length, however, he summoned all his fortitude,
and having perused the epistle, his terror
sunk into anxiety; his ingenious fear immediately
suggested, that Peregrine was confined in a dungeon,
for some outrage he had committed; he
ran with great agitation to a trunk, and taking
out a bundle of papers, followed his conductor,
being attended by the painter, to whom he had
hinted his apprehension. When they passed
through the guard, which was under arms, the
hearts of both died within them; and when they
came into the presence, there was such an expression
of awful horror on the countenance of
Jolter, that the prince, observing his dismay, was
pleased to encourage him with an assurance, that
he had nothing to fear. Thus comforted, he recollected
himself so well as to understand his pupil,
when he desired him to produce the Embassador's
letters; some of which being open, were
immediately read by his highness, who was personally
acquainted with the writer, and knew 

several of the noblemen to whom they were addressed. 
These recommendations were so warm,
and represented the young gentleman in such an
advantageous light, that the prince, convinced of
the injustice his character had suffered by the
misrepresentation of Hornbeck, took our hero by
the hand, asked pardon for the doubts he had
entertained of his honour, declared him from that
moment at liberty, ordered his domesticks to be
enlarged, and offered him his countenance and
protection, as long as he should remain in the
Austrian Netherlands. At the same time, he
cautioned him against indiscretion in the course
of his gallantries; and took his word and honour,
that he should drop all measures of resentment
against the person of Hornbeck, during his residence
in that place. 
The delinquent, thus honourably acquitted,
thanked the prince in the most respectful manner,
for his generosity and candour, and retired
with his two friends, who were amazed and bewildered
in their thoughts, at what they had seen
and heard, the whole adventure still remaining
without the sphere of their comprehension, which
was not at all enlarged by the unaccountable appearance
of Pipes, who, with the valet de chambre,
joined them at the castle-gate. Had Jolter
been a man of a luxuriant imagination, his brain
would undoubtedly have suffered in the investigation
of his pupil's mysterious conduct, which
he strove in vain to unravel; but his intellects
were too solid to be affected by the miscarriage
of his invention; and as Peregrine did not think
proper to make him acquainted with the cause of
his being apprehended, he contented himself with
supposing, that there was a lady in the case. 

The painter, whose imagination was of a more
flimsy texture, formed a thousand chimerical
conjectures, which he communicated to Pickle,
in imperfect insinuations, hoping, by his answers
and behaviour, to discover the truth; but the
youth, in order to tantalize him, eluded all his
enquiries, with such appearance of industry and
art, as heightened his curiosity, while it disappointed
his aim, and inflamed him to such a degree
of impatience, that his wits began to be unsettled,
and Peregrine was fain to recompose his
brain, by telling him in confidence, that he had
been arrested as a spy. This secret he found
more intolerable than his former uncertainty; he
ran from one apartment to another, like a goose
in the agonies of egg-laying, with intention of
disburdening this important load; but, Jolter being
engaged with his pupil, and all the people of
the house ignorant of the only language he could
speak, he was compelled, with infinite reluctance,
to address himself to the doctor, who was, at that
time, shut up in his own chamber. Having knocked
at the door, to no purpose, he peeped through
the key-hole, and saw the physician sitting at a
table, with a pen in one hand, and paper before
him, his head reclined upon his other hand, and
his eyes fixed upon the ceiling, as if he had been
intranced. Pallet, concluding that he was under
the power of some convulsion, endeavoured to
force the door open, and the noise of his efforts
recalled the doctor from his reverie. This poetical
republican, being so disagreeably disturbed,
started up in a passion, and opening the door, no
sooner perceived who had interrupted him, than
he flung it in his face with great fury, and cursed 

him for his impertinent intrusion, which had
deprived him of the most delightful vision that
ever regaled the human fancy. He imagined,
(as he afterwards imparted to Peregrine) that
as he enjoyed himself in walking though the
flowery plain that borders on Parnassus, he was
met by a venerable sage, whom, by a certain
divine vivacity that lightened from his eyes,
he instantly knew to be the immortal Pindar. 
He was immediately struck with reverence and
awe, and prostrated himself before the apparition,
which taking him by the hand, lifted him
gently from the ground; and with words more
sweet than the honey of the Hybla bees, told
him, that of all the moderns, he alone was visited
by that celestial impulse by which himself had
been inspired, when he produced his most applauded
odes. So saying, he led him up the
sacred hill, persuaded him to drink a copious
draught of the waters of the Hippocrene, and
then presented him to the harmonious nine, who
crowned his temples with a laurel-wreath. 
No wonder then, that he was enraged to find
himself cut off from such sublime society. He
raved in Greek against the invader, who was so
big with his own purpose, that, unmindful of the
disgrace he had sustained, and disregarding all the
symptoms of the physician's displeasure, he applied
his mouth to the door, and in eager tone,
“I'll hold you any wager (said he) that I guess
the true cause of Mr. Pickle's imprisonment.” 
To this challenge he received no reply; and
therefore repeated it, adding, “I suppose you
imagine he was taken up for fighting a duel, or
affronting a nobleman, or lying with some man's
wife, or some such matter; but, agad! you was 

never more mistaken in your life; and I'll lay
my Cleopatra against your Homer's head, that in
four and twenty hours you shan't light on the
true reason.” 
The favourite of the muses, exasperated at this
vexatious perseverance of the painter, who he
imagined had come thither to teize and insult
him, “I would (said he) sacrifice a cock to
Æsculapius, were I assured that any person had
been taken up for extirpating such a troublesome
Goth as you are from the face of the earth; and
as for your boasted Cleopatra, which you say
was drawn from your own wife, I believe the
copy has as much of the &grt;&gro; &grk;&gra;&grl;&gro;&grn; as the original. 
But, were it mine, it should be hung up in the
temple of Cloacina, as the picture of that goddess; 
for any other apartment would be disgraced
by its appearance.” “Hark ye, Sir, (replied
Pallet, enraged in his turn at this contemptuous
mention of his darling performance) you may
make as free with my wife as you think proper; 
but 'ware my works, those are the children of
my fancy, conceived by the glowing imagination,
and formed by the art of my own hands:
and you yourself are a Goth, and a Turk, and
a Tartar, and an impudent pretending jackanapes,
to treat with such disrespect a production
which, in the opinions of all the connoisseurs of
the age, will, when finished, be a master-piece
in its kind, and do honour to human genius and
skill. So I say again and again, (and I care
not though your friend Playtor heard me) that
you have no more taste than a drayman's horse,
and that those foolish notions of the ancients
ought to be drubb'd out of you with a good
cudgel, that you might learn to treat men of parts 

with more veneration. Perhaps you may not always
be in the company of one who will hollow
for assistance, when you are on the brink of being
chastised for your insolence, as I did, when
you brought upon yourself the resentment of that
Scot, who, by the Lard! would have paid you
both scot and lot, as Falstaf says, if the French
officer had not put him in arrest.” 
The physician to this declamation, which was
conveyed through the key-hole, answered, that
he (the painter) was a fellow so infinitely below
his consideration, that his conscience upbraided
him with no action of his life, except that of
choosing such a wretch for his companion and
fellow-traveller. That he had viewed his character
through the medium of good nature and
compassion, which had prompted him to give
Pallet an opportunity of acquiring some new ideas
under his immediate instruction; but he had
abused his goodness and condescension in such a
flagrant manner, that he was now determined to
discard him intirely from his acquaintance, and
desired him, for the present, to take himself
away, on pain of being kicked for his presumption. 
Pallet was too much incensed to be intimidated
by this threat, which he retorted with great virulence,
defying him to come forth, that it might
appear which of them was best skilled in that pedestrian
exercise which he immediately began to
practise against the door with such thundering application,
as reached the ears of Pickle and his governor,
who coming out into the passage, and
seeing him thus employed, asked if he had forgot
the chamber-pots of Alost, that he ventured to 

behave in such a manner, as intitled him to a second
prescription of the same nature. 
The doctor understanding that there was company
at hand, opened the door in a twinkling,
and springing upon his antagonist, like a tyger, a
fierce contention would have ensued, to the infinite
satisfaction of our hero, had not Jolter, to
the manifest peril of his own person, interposed,
and partly by force, and partly by exhortations,
put a stop to the engagement before it was fairly
begun. After having demonstrated the indecency
of such a vulgar rencounter betwixt two fellow-citizens
in a foreign land, he begg'd to know the
cause of their dissention, and offered his good offices
towards an accommodation. Peregrine also,
seeing the fray was finished, expressed himself to
the same purpose; and the painter, for obvious
reasons, declining an explanation, his antagonist
told the youth what a mortifying interruption he
had suffered by the impertinent intrusion of Pallet,
and gave him a detail of the particulars of his
vision, as above recited. The arbiter owned, the
provocation was not to be endured, and decreed,
that the offender should make some atonement
for his transgression. Upon which the painter observed,
that howsoever he might have been disposed
to make acknowledgments, if the physician
had signified his displeasure like a gentleman, the
complainant had now forfeited all claim to any
such concessions, by the vulgar manner in which
he had reviled him and his productions; observing,
that if he (the painter) had been inclined to retort
his slanderous insinuations, the republican's
own works would have afforded ample subject for
his ridicule and censure. 

After divers disputes and representations, peace
was at length concluded, on condition, that for
the future the doctor should never mention Cleopatra,
unless he could say something in her praise; 
and that Pallet, in consideration of his having
been the first aggressor, should make a sketch of
the physician's vision, to be engraved and prefixed
to the next edition of his odes. 