


DEAR DOCTOR,
MY niece Liddy is now happily settled for life; 
and captain Lismahago has taken Tabby off my
hands; so that I have nothing further to do, but to
comfort my friend Baynard, and provide for my
son Loyd, who is also fairly joined to Mrs. Winifred
Jenkins —You are an excellent genious at hints. 
—Dr. Arbuthnot was but a type of Dr. Lewis in
that respect. —What you observe of the vestry-clerk
deserves consideration. —I make no doubt but
Matthew Loyd is well enough qualified for the office; 
but, at present, you must find room for him
in the house. —His incorruptible honesty and indefatigable
care will be serviceable in superintending
the œconomy of my farm; tho' I don't mean
that he will interfere with Bayns, of whom I have
no cause to complain. —I am just returned with 

Baynard, from a second trip to his house, where
every thing is regulated to his satisfaction. —He
could not, however, review the apartments without
tears and lamentation, so that he is not yet in
a condition to be left alone; therefore I will not
part with him till the spring, when he intends to
plunge into the avocation of husbandry, which will
at once employ and amuse his attention. —Charles
Dennison has promised to stay with him a fortnight,
to set him fairly afloat in his improvements; 
and Jack Wilson will see him from time to time; 
besides he has a few friends in the country, whom
his new plan of life will not exclude from his society. 
—In less than a year I make no doubt but
he will find himself perfectly at ease both in his
mind and body, for the one had dangerously affected
the other; and I shall enjoy the exquisite pleasure
of seeing my friend rescued from misery and
contempt 
Mrs: Willis being determined to return with her
daughter, in a few days, to Gloucester, our plan
has undergone some alteration. —Jery has persuaded
his brother-in-law to carry his wife to Bath; and
I believe his parents will accompany him thither. 
—For my part, I have no intention to take that
route. —It must be something very extraordinary
that will induce me to revisit either Bath or London. 
My sister and her husband, Baynard and I,
will take leave of them at Gloucester, and make
the best of our way to Brambleton-hall, where I
desire you will prepare a good chine and turkey for
our Christmas dinner. —You must also employ
your medical skill in defending me from the attacks
of the gout, that I may be in good case to receive
the rest of our company, who promise to visit us
in their return from the Bath. As I have laid in
a considerable stock of health, it is to be hoped
you will not have much trouble with me in the way 

of physic, but I intend to work you on the side of
exercise. —I have got an excellent fowling-piece
from Mr. Lismahago, who is a keen sportsman,
and we shall take the heath in all weathers. That
this scheme of life may be prosecuted the more effectually,
I intend to renounce all sedentary amusements,
particularly that of writing long letters; a
resolution, which, had I taken it sooner, might
have saved you the trouble which you have lately
taken in reading the tedious epistles of 
Matt. Bramble 
Nov. 20 