


MY DEAR LETTY,
INEXPRESSIBLE was the pleasure I received
from yours of the 25th, which was last night
put into my hands by Mrs. Brentwood, the milliner,
from Gloucester—I rejoice to hear that my
worthy governess is in good health, and, still more,
that she no longer retains any displeasure towards
her poor Liddy, I am sorry you have lost the society
of the agreeable miss Vaughan; but, I hope,
you won't have cause much longer to regret the
departure of your school companions, as I make
no doubt but your parents will, in a little time,
bring you into the world, where you are so well,
qualified to make a distinguished figure. When
that is the case, I flatter myself you and I shall
meet again, and be happy together; and even improve
the friendship which we contracted in our
tender years—This at least I can promise—It shall
not be for the want of my utmost endeavours, if
our intimacy does not continue for life. 
About five days ago we arrived in London, after
an easy journey from Bath; during which, however,
we were overturned, and met with some
other little incidents, which had like to have occasioned
a misunderstanding betwixt my uncle and
aunt; but now, thank God, they are happily reconciled:
we live in harmony together, and every
day make parties to see the wonders of this vast
metropolis, which, however, I cannot pretend to
describe; for I have not as yet seen one hundredth
part of its curiosities, and I am quite in a maze of
admiration. 

The cities of London and Westminster are
spread out into an incredible extent. The streets,
squares, rows, lanes, and alleys, are innumerable. 
Palaces, public buildings, and churches, rise
in every quarter; and among these last, St. Paul's
appears with the most astonishing preeminence. 
They say it is not so large as St. Peter's at Rome; 
but, for my own part, I can have no idea of any
earthly temple more grand and magnificent. 
But even these superb objects are not so striking
as the crowds of people that swarm in the streets. 
I at first imagined, that some great assembly was
just dismissed, and wanted to stand aside till the
multitude should pass; but this human tide continues
to slow, without interruption or abatement,
from morn till night. Then there is such an infinity
of gay equipages, coaches, chariots, chaises,
and other carriages, continually rolling and shifting
before your eyes, that one's head grows giddy
looking at them; and the imagination is quite confounded
with splendour and variety. Nor is the
prospect by water less grand, and astonishing than
that by land: you see three stupendous bridges,
joining the opposite banks of a broad, deep, and
rapid river; so vast, so stately, so elegant, that
they seem to be the work of giants: betwixt them,
the whole surface of the Thames is covered with
small vessels, barges, boats, and wherries, passing
to and fro; and below the three bridges, such a
prodigious forest of masts, for miles together, that
you would think all the ships in the universe were
here assembled. All that you read of wealth and
grandeur in the Arabian Night's Entertainment,
and the Persian Tales, concerning Bagdad, Dialbekir,
Damascus, Ispahan, and Samarkand, is
here realized. 
Ranelagh looks like the inchanted palace of a
genie, adorned with the most exquisite performances 

of painting, carving, and gilding, enlightened
with a thousand golden lamps, that emulate the
noon-day sun; crowded with the great, the rich,
the gay, the happy, and the fair; glittering with
cloth of gold and silver, lace, embroidery, and
precious stones. While these exulting sons and
daughters of felicity tread this round of pleasure,
or regale in different parties, and separate lodges,
with fine imperial tea and other delicious refreshments,
their ears are entertained with the most ravishing
delights of musick, both instrumental and
vocal. There I heard the famous Tenducci, a
thing from Italy—It looks for all the world like a
man, though they say it is not. —The voice, to be
sure, is neither man's nor woman's; but it is more
melodious than either; and it warbled so divinely,
that, while I listened, I really thought myself in
paradise. 
At nine o'clock, in a charming moon-light evening,
we embarked at Ranelagh for Vauxhall, in
a wherry, so light and slender, that we looked
like so many fairies sailing in a nut-shell. My uncle,
being apprehensive of catching cold upon the
water, went round in the coach, and my aunt
would have accompanied him, but he would not
suffer me to go by water if she went by land; and
therefore she favoured us with her company, as she
perceived I had a curiosity to make this agreeable
voyage—After all, the vessel was sufficiently loaded; 
for, besides the watermen, there was my brother
Jery, and a friend of his, one Mr. Parton, a
country gentleman, of a good fortune, who had
dined at our house—The pleasure of this little excursion
was, however, damped, by my being sadly
frighted at our landing; where there was a terrible
confusion of whorries, and a crowd of people
hawling, and swearing, and quarrelling: nay, a
parcel of ugly-looking fellows came running into 

the water, and laid hold on our boat with great violence,
to pull it ashore; nor would they quit their
hold till my brother struck one of them over the
head with his cane. But this flutter was fully recompensed
by the pleasures of Vauxhall; which I
no sooner entered, than I was dazzled and confounded
with the variety of beauties that rushed all
at once upon my eye. Image to yourself, my dear
Letty, a spacious garden, part laid out in delightful
walks, bounded with high hedges and trees,
and paved with gravel; part exhibiting a wonderful
assemblage of the most picturesque and striking
objects, pavilions, lodges, groves, grottoes, lawns,
temples, and cascades; porticoes, colonades, and
rotundos; adorned with pillars, statues, and
painting: the whole illuminated with an infinite
number of lamps, disposed in different figures of
suns, stars, and constellations; the place crowded
with the gayest company, ranging thro' those blissful
shades, or supping in different lodges, on cold
collations, enlivened with mirth, freedom, and
good humour, and animated by an excellent band
of musick. Among the vocal performers I had the
happiness to hear the celebrated Mrs.&wblank;, whose
voice was so loud and so shrill, that it made my
head ake through excess of pleasure. 
In about half an hour after we arrived we were
joined by my uncle, who did not seem to relish the
place. People of experience and infirmity, my
dear Letty, see with very different eyes from those
that such as you and I make use of—Our evening's
entertainment was interrupted by an unlucky accident. 
In one of the remotest walks we were surprised
with a sudden shower, that set the whole
company a running, and drove us in heaps, one
upon another, into the rotundo; where my uncle,
finding himself wet, began to be very peevish and 

urgent to be gone. My brother went to look for
the coach, and found it with much difficulty; but
as it could not hold us all, Mr. Barton stayed behind. 
It was some time before the carriage could
be brought up to the gate, in the confusion, notwithstanding
the utmost endeavours of our new
footman Humphry Clinker, who lost his scratch
periwig, and got a broken head in the scuffle. The
moment we were seated, my aunt pulled off my
uncle's shoes, and carefully wrapped his poor feet
in her capuchin; then she gave him a mouth-full
of cordial, which she always keeps in her pocket,
and his clothes were shifted as soon as we arrived
at our lodgings; so that, blessed be God, he escaped
a severe cold, of which he was in great terror. 
As for Mr. Barton, I must tell you in confidence,
he was a little particular; but, perhaps, I mistake
his complaisance; and I wish I may, for his sake
—You know the condition of my poor heart; 
which, in spite of hard usage—And yet I ought
not to complain: nor will I, till, farther information. 
Besides Ranelagh and Vauxhall, I have been at
Mrs. Cornely's assembly, which, for the rooms,
the company, the dresses, and decorations, surpasses
all description; but as I have no great turn for
card-playing, I have not yet entered thoroughly
into the spirit of the place: Indeed I am still such a
country hoyden, that I could hardly find patience
to be put in a condition to appear, yet I was not
above six hours under the hands of the hair-dresser,
who stuffed my head with as much black wool
as would have made a quilted petticoat; and, after
all, it was the smallest head in the assembly, except
my aunt's—She, to be sure, was so particular with
her rumpt gown and petticoat, her scanty curls,
her lappet-head, deep triple ruffles, and high stays,
that every body looked at her with surprise; some 

whispered, and some tittered; and lady Griskin,
by whom we were introduced, flatly told her, she
was twenty good years behind the fashion. 
Lady Griskin is a person of fashion, to whom
we have the honour to be related. She keeps a
small rout at her own house, never exceeding ten
or a dozen card-tables, but these are frequented by
the best company in town—She has been so obliging
as to introduce my aunt and me to some of her
particular friends of quality, who treat us with the
most familiar good humour: we have once dined
with her, and she takes the trouble to direct us in
all our motions. I am so happy as to have gained
her good will to such a degree, that she sometimes
adjusts my cap with her own hands; and she has
given me a kind invitation to stay with her all the
winter. This, however, has been cruelly declined
by my uncle, who seems to be (I know not how)
prejudiced against the good lady; for, whenever
my aunt happens to speak in her commendation, I
observe that he makes wry faces, though he says
nothing—Perhaps, indeed, these grimaces may
be the effect of pain arising from the gout and rheumatism,
with which he is sadly distressed—To me,
however, he is always good natured and generous,
even beyond my wish. Since we came hither, he
has made me a present of a suit of clothes, with
trimmings and laces, which cost more money than
I shall mention; and Jery, at his desire, has given
me my mother's diamond drops, which are ordered
to be set a-new; so that it won't be his fault if I
do not glitter among the stars of the fourth or fifth
magnitude. I wish my weak head may not grow
giddy in the midst of all this gallantry and dissipation; 
though, as yet, I can safely declare, I could
gladly give up all these tumultuous pleasures, for
country solitude, and a happy retreat with those we 

love; among whom, my dear Willis will always
possess the first place in the breast of her 
ever affectionate,
Lydia Melford. 
London, May 31. 