


Peregrine sends a message to Mrs. Gauntlet, who
rejects his proposal. He repairs to the garison. 
At length, however, his constitution overcame
his disease, though not before it had
in a great measure tamed the fury of his disposition,
and brought him to a serious consideration
of his conduct. In this humiliation of his spirits,
he reflected with shame and remorse upon his
treachery to the fair, the innocent Emilia; he
remembered his former sentiments in her favour,
as well as the injunctions of his dying uncle; he
recollected his intimacy with her brother, against
which he had so basely sinned; and revolving all
the circumstances of her conduct, found it so
commendable, spirited, and noble, that he deemed
her an object of sufficient dignity to merit his honourable 

addresses, even though his duty had not
been concerned in the decision: but, obligated as
he was, to make reparation to a worthy family,
which he had so grosly injured, he thought he
could not manifest his reformation too soon; and,
whenever he found himself able to hold the pen,
wrote a letter to Mrs. Gauntlet, wherein he acknowledged,
with many expressions of sorrow and
contrition, that he had acted a part altogether
unbecoming a man of honour, and should never
enjoy the least tranquillity of mind, until he
should have merited her forgiveness. He protested,
that although his happiness intirely depended
upon the determination of Emilia, he
would even renounce all hope of being blessed
with her favour, if she could point out any other
method of making reparation to that amiable
young lady, but by laying his heart and fortune
at her feet, and submitting himself to her pleasure
during the remaining part of his life. He
conjured her, therefore, in the most pathetic
manner, to pardon him, in consideration of his
sincere repentance, and use her maternal influence
with her daughter, so as that he might be permitted
to wait upon her with a wedding-ring, as
soon as his health would allow him to undertake
the journey. 
This explanation being dispatched by Pipes,
who had, by this time, found his master, the
young gentleman inquired about the couple whom
he had so unfortunately pursued, and understood
from his valet de chambre, who learn'd the story
from their own mouths, that the lady was the
only daughter of a rich Jew, and her attendant
no other than his apprentice, who had converted
her to christianity, and married her at the same 

time; that this secret having taken air, the old
Israelite had contrived a scheme to separate them
for ever; and they being apprized of his intention,
had found means to elope from his house,
with a view of sheltering themselves in France,
until the affair could be made up: that seeing
three men ride after them with such eagerness
and speed, they never doubted that the pursuers
were her father, accompanied by some friends or
domestics, and on that supposition had fled with
the utmost dispatch and trepidation, until they
had found themselves happily undeceived, at that
very instant, when they expected nothing but
mischief and misfortune: and lastly, the Swiss
gave him to understand, that after having professed
some concern for his deplorable situation,
and enjoyed a slight refreshment, they had taken
their departure for Dover, and, in all likelihood,
were safely arrived at Paris. 
In four and twenty hours after Pipes was
charged with his commission, he brought back an
answer from the mother of Emilia, couched in
these words. 

“SIR,
I received the favour of yours, and am glad,
for your own sake, that you have attained a
due sense and conviction of your unkind and unchristian
behaviour to poor Emy. I thank God,
none of my children were ever so insulted before. 
Give me leave to tell you, Sir, my daughter was
no upstart, without friends or education, but a
young lady as well bred, and better born, than
most private gentlewomen in the kingdom: and
therefore, though you had no esteem for her person,
you ought to have paid some regard to her 

family, which (no disparagement to you, Sir) is
more honourable than your own. As for your
proposal, Miss Gauntlet will not hear of it, being,
that she thinks her honour will not allow her
to listen to any terms of reconciliation; and she
is not yet so destitute, as to embrace an offer to
which she has the least objection. In the mean
time, she is so much indisposed, that she cannot
possibly see company; so I beg you will not take
the trouble of making a fruitless journey to this
place. Perhaps your future conduct may deserve
her forgiveness; and really, as I am concerned
for your happiness, which (you assure me) depends
upon her condescension, I wish with all my
heart it may; and am (notwithstanding all that
has happened) 
Your sincere well-wisher,
Cecilia Gauntlet.” 
From this epistle, and the information of his
messenger, our hero learn'd, that his mistress
had actually profited by his wild-goose-chace, so
as to make a safe retreat to her mother's house; 
and, though sorry to hear of her indisposition, he
was also piqued at her implacability, as well as
at some stately paragraphs of the letter, in which
(he thought) the good lady had consulted her own
vanity rather than her good sense. These motives
of resentment helped him to bear his disappointment
like a philosopher, especially as he had
now quieted his conscience, in proffering to redress
the injury he had done; and, moreover,
found himself, with regard to his love, in a calm
state of hope and resignation. 

A reasonable fit of illness is an excellent medicine
for the turbulence of passion. Such a reformation
had the fever produced in the œconomy
of his thoughts, that he moralized like an apostle,
and projected several prudential schemes for his
future conduct. 
In the mean time, as soon as his health was
sufficiently re-established, he took a trip to the
garison, in order to visit his friends; and learn'd
from Hatchway's own mouth, that he had broke
the ice of courtship to his aunt, and that his addresses
were now fairly afloat; though when he
first declared himself to the widow, after she had
been duly prepared for the occasion, by her niece
and the rest of her friends, she had received his
proposal with a becoming reserve, and piously
wept at the remembrance of her husband, observing,
that she should never meet with his
fellow. 
Peregrine promoted the lieutenant's suit with
all his influence; and all Mrs. Trunnion's objections
to the match being surmounted, it was
determined, that the day of marriage should be
put off for three months, that her reputation
might not suffer by a precipitate engagement. 
His next care was to give orders for erecting a
plain marble monument to the memory of his
uncle, on which the following inscription, composed
posed by the bridegroom, actually appeared in
golden letters. 

Here lies,
Foundered in a fathom and an half,
The Shell
Of
Hawser Trunnion, Esq;
Formerly commander of a squadron
In his Majesty's service,
Who broach'd to, at five P.M. Octr. X.
In the year of his age
Threescore and nineteen. 

He kept his guns always loaded,
And his tackle ready manned,
And never shewed his poop to the enemy,
Except when he took her in tow;
But, his shot being expended,
His match burnt out,
And his upper works decayed,
He was sunk
By death's superior weight of metal.
Nevertheless,
He will be weighed again
At the Great Day,
His rigging refitted,
And his timbers repaired,
And, with one broad-side,
Make his adversary
Strike in his turn.