



The Author's Oeconomy and happy Life among the Houyhnhnms. His great Improvement in Virtue, by conversing with them. Their Conversations. The Author hath Notice given him by his Master that be must depart from the Country. He falls into a Swoon for Grief, but submits. He
contrives and finishes a Canoo, by the Help of a
Fellow-Servant, and puts to Sea at a Venture. 

I Had settled my little Oeconomy to
my own Heart's Content. My Master
had ordered a Room to be made
for me after their Manner, about six
Yards from the House; the Sides and
Floors of which I plaistered with Clay, and covered
with Rush-mats of my own contriving: I
had beaten Hemp, which there grows wild, and
made of it a Sort of Ticking: This I filled with
the Feathers of several Birds I had taken with
Springes made of Yahoos Hairs; and were excellent
Food. I had worked two Chairs with my Knife, 

the Sorrel Nag helping me in the grosser and more
laborious Part. When my Cloaths were worn to
Rags, I made my self others with the Skins of
Rabbets, and of a certain beautiful Animal about the
same Size, called Nnuhnoh, the Skin of which is
covered with a fine Down. Of these I likewise
made very tolerable Stockings. I soaled my Shoes
with Wood which I cut from a Tree, and fitted to
the upper Leather, and when this was worn out,
I supplied it with the Skins of Yahoos, dried in the
Sun. I often got Honey out of hollow Trees,
which I mingled with Water, or eat it with my
Bread. No Man could more verify the Truth of
these two Maxims, That, Nature is very easily satisfied;
and, That, Necessity is the Mother of Invention. 
I enjoyed perfect Health of Body, and Tranquility
of Mind; I did not feel the Treachery or Inconstancy
of a Friend, nor the Injuries of a secret or
open Enemy. I had no Occasion of bribing, flattering
or pimping, to procure the Favour of any
great Man, or of his Minion. I wanted no Fence
against Fraud or Oppression: Here was neither
Physician to destroy my Body, nor Lawyer to ruin
my Fortune: No Informer to watch my Words and
Actions, or forge Accusations against me for Hire:
Here were no Gibers, Censurers, Backbiters, Pickpockets,
Highwaymen, House-breakers, Attorneys,
Bawds, Buffoons, Gamesters, Politicians, Wits,
Spleneticks, tedious Talkers, Controvertists, Ravishers,
Murderers, Robbers, Virtuoso's; no Leaders
or Followers of Party and Faction; no Encouragers
to Vice, by Seducement or Examples: No
Dungeon, Axes, Gibbets, Whipping-posts, or Pillories; 
No cheating Shop-keepers or Mechanicks: 

No Pride, Vanity or Affectation: No Fops, Bullies,
Drunkards, strolling Whores, or Poxes: No
ranting, lewd, expensive Wives: No stupid, proud
Pedants: No importunate, over-bearing, quarrelsome,
noisy, roaring, empty, conceited, swearing
Companions: No Scoundrels raised from the Dust
upon the Merit of their Vices; or Nobility thrown
into it on account of their Virtues: No Lords, Fidlers,
Judges or Dancing-Masters. 
I had the Favour of being admitted to several
Houyhnhnms, who came to visit or dine with my
Master; where his Honour graciously suffered me
to wait in the Room, and listen to their Discourse. 
Both he and his Company would often descend
to ask me Questions, and receive my Answers. I
had also sometimes the Honour of attending my Master
in his Visits to others. I never presumed to
speak, except in answer to a Question; and then I
did it with inward Regret, because it was a Loss
of so much Time for improving my self: But I
was infinitely delighted with the Station of an humble
Auditor in such Conversations, where nothing
passed but what was useful, expressed in the
fewest and most significant Words: Where (as
I have already said) the greatest Decency was
observed, without the least Degree of Ceremony; 
where no Person spoke without being pleased
himself, and pleasing his Companions: Where
there was no Interruption, Tediousness, Heat, or
Difference of Sentiments. They have a Notion,
That when People are met together, a short Silence
doth much improve Conversation: This I found
to be true; for during those little Intermissions of
Talk, new Ideas would arise in their Minds, which 

very much enlivened the Discourse. Their Subjects
are generally on Friendship and Benevolence; on Order
and Oeconomy; sometimes upon the visible Operations
of Nature, or ancient Traditions; upon the
Bounds and Limits of Virtue; upon the unerring
Rules of Reason; or upon some Determinations, to be
taken at the next great Assembly; and often upon the
various Excellencies of Poetry. I may add, without
Vanity, that my Presence often gave them sufficient
Matter for Discourse, because it afforded my
Master an Occasion of letting his Friends into the
History of me and my Country, upon which they
were all pleased to discant in a Manner not very
advantageous to human Kind; and for that Reason
I shall not repeat what they said: Only I may be
allowed to observe, That his Honour, to my great
Admiration, appeared to understand the Nature of
Yahoos much better than myself. He went through
all our Vices and Follies, and discovered many
which I had never mentioned to him; by only
supposing what Qualities a Yahoo of their Country,
with a small Proportion of Reason, might be capable
of exerting: And concluded, with too much
Probability, how vile as well as miserable such a
Creature must be. 
I freely confess, that all the little Knowledge
I have of any Value, was acquired by the Lectures
I received from my Master, and from hearing the
Discourses of him and his Friends; to which I
should be prouder to listen, than to dictate to the
greatest and wisest Assembly in Europe. I admired
the Strength, Comeliness and Speed of the Inhabitants; 
and such a Constellation of Virtues in such
amiable Persons produced in me the highest Veneration. 

At first, indeed, I did not feel that natural
Awe which the Yahoos and all other Animals bear
towards them; but it grew upon me by Degrees,
much sooner than I imagined, and was mingled
with a respectful Love and Gratitude, that they
would condescend to distinguish me from the rest
of my Species. 
When I thought of my Family, my Friends,
my Countrymen, or human Race in general, I
considered them as they really were, Yahoos in
Shape and Disposition, perhaps a little more civilized,
and qualified with the Gift of Speech; but
making no other Use of Reason, than to improve
and multiply those Vices, whereof their Brethren
in this Country had only the Share that Nature
allotted them. When I happened to behold the
Reflection of my own Form in a Lake or Fountain,
I turned away my Face in Horror and detestation
of my self; and could better endure the Sight
of a common Yahoo, than of my own Person. By
conversing with the Houyhnhnms, and looking upon
them with Delight, I fell to imitate their Gait
and Gesture, which is now grown into a Habit; 
and my Friends often tell me in a blunt Way, that
I trot like a Horse; which, however, I take for
a great Compliment: Neither shall I disown, that
in speaking I am apt to fall into the Voice and manner
of the Houyhnhnms, and hear my self ridiculed
on that Account without the least Mortification. 
In the Midst of this Happiness, when I looked
upon my self to be fully settled for Life, my Master
sent for me one Morning a little earlier than
his usual Hour. I observed by his Countenance
that he was in some Perplexity, and at a Loss how 

to begin what he had to speak. After a short Silence,
he told me, he did not know how I would
take what he was going to say: That, in the last general
Assembly, when the Affair of the Yahoos was
entered upon, the Representatives had taken Offence
at his keeping a Yahoo (meaning my self) in
his Family more like a Houyhnhnm than a Brute Animal. 
That, he was known frequently to coverse
with me, as if he could receive some Advantage or
Pleasure in my Company: That, such a Practice
was not agreeable to Reason or Nature, or a thing
ever heard of before among them. The Assembly
did therefore exhort him, either to employ me like
the rest of my Species, or command me to swim
back to the Place from whence I came. That, the
first of these Expedients was utterly rejected by all
the Houyhnhnms, who had ever seen me at his
House or their own: For, they alledged, That because
I had some Rudiments of Reason, added to
the natural Pravity of those Animals, it was to be
feared, I might be able to seduce them into the
woody and mountainous Parts of the Country, and
bring them in Troops by Night to destroy the
Houyhnhnms Cattle, as being naturally of the ravenous
Kind, and averse from Labour. 
My Master added, That he was daily pressed
by the Houyhnhnms of the Neighbourhood to have
the Assembly's Exhortation executed, which he
could not put off much longer. He doubted, it
would be impossible for me to swim to another
Country; and therefore wished I would contrive
some Sort of Vehicle resembling those I had described
to him, that might carry me on the Sea; in
which Work I should have the Assistance of his 

own Servants, as well as those of his Neighbours. 
He concluded, that for his own Part he could have
been content to keep me in his Service as long as
I lived; because he found I had cured myself of
some bad Habits and Dispositions, by endeavouring,
as far as my inferior Nature was capable, to imitate
the Houyhnhnms. 
I should here observe to the Reader, that a
Decree of the general Assembly in this Country,
is expressed by the Word Hnhloayn, which signifies
an Exhortation; as near as I can render it: For
they have no Conception how a rational Creature
can be compelled, but only advised, or exhorted;
because no Person can disobey Reason, without
giving up his Claim to be a rational Creature. 
I was struck with the utmost Grief and Despair
at my Master's Discourse; and being unable to support
the Agonies I was under, I fell into a Swoon
at his Feet: When I came to myself, he told me,
that he concluded I had been dead. (For these
People are subject to no such Imbecillities of Nature)
I answered, in a faint Voice, that Death
would have been too great an Happiness; that although
I could not blame the Assembly's Exhortation,
or the Urgency of his Friends; yet in my
weak and corrupt Judgment, I thought it might
consist with Reason to have been less rigorous. 
That, I could not swim a League, and probably the
nearest Land to theirs might be distant above an
Hundred: That, many Materials, necessary for making
a small Vessel to carry me off, were wholly
wanting in this Country, which however, I would
attempt in Obedience and Gratitude to his Honour, 

although I concluded the thing to be impossible,
and therefore looked on myself as already devoted
to Destruction. That, the certain Prospect of an
unnatural Death, was the least of my Evils: For,
supposing I should escape with Life by some strange
Adventure, how could I think with Temper, of
passing my Days among Yahoos, and relapsing into
my old Corruptions, for want of Examples to lead
and keep me within the Paths of Virtue. That, I
knew too well upon what solid Reasons all the
Determinations of the wise Houyhnhnms were
founded, not to be shaken by Arguments of mine,
a miserable Yahoo; and therefore after presenting
him with my humble Thanks for the Offer of his
Servants Assistance in making a Vessel, and desiring
a reasonable Time for so difficult a Work, I told
him, I would endeavour to preserve a wretched
Being; and, if ever I returned to England, was not
without Hopes of being useful to my own Species,
by celebrating the Praises of the renowned Houyhnhnms,
and proposing their Virtues to the Imitation
of Mankind. 
My Master in a few Words made me a very gracious
Reply, allowed me the Space of two Months
to finish my Boat; and ordered the Sorrel Nag,
my Fellow-Servant, (for so at this Distance I may
presume to call him) to follow my Instructions,
because I told my Master, that his Help would
be sufficient, and I knew he had a Tenderness for
me. 
In his Company my first Business was to go to
that Part of the Coast, where my rebellious Crew
had ordered me to be set on Shore. I got upon a 

Height, and looking on every Side into the Sea,
fancied I saw a small Island, towards the North-East:
I took out my Pocket-glass, and could then
clearly distinguish it about five Leagues off, as I
computed; but it appeared to the Sorrel Nag to be
only a blue Cloud: For, as he had no Conception
of any Country beside his own, so he could not
be as expert in distinguishing remote Objects at
Sea, as we who so much converse in that Element. 
After I had discovered this Island, I considered
no farther; but resolved, it should, if possible, be
the first Place of my Banishment, leaving the Consequence
to Fortune. 
I returned home, and consulting with the
Sorrel Nag, we went into a Copse at some Distance,
where I with my Knife, and he with a
sharp Flint fastened very artificially, after their
Manner, to a wooden Handle, cut down several
Oak Wattles about the Thickness of a Walking-staff,
and some larger Pieces. But I shall not
trouble the Reader with a particular Description
of my own Mechanicks: Let it suffice to say, that
in six Weeks time, with the Help of the Sorrel
Nag, who performed the Parts that required most
Labour, I finished a Sort of Indian Canoo, but
much larger, covering it with the Skins of Yahoos
well stitched together, with hempen Threads of
my own making. My Sail was likewise composed
of the Skins of the same Animal; but I made use
of the youngest I could get, the older being too
tough and thick; and I likewise provided myself
with four Paddles. I laid in a Stock of boiled 

Flesh, of Rabbets and Fowls; and took with me
two Vessels, one filled with Milk, and the other
with Water. 
I tried my Canoo in a large Pond near my Master's
House, and then corrected in it what was
amiss; stopping all the Chinks with Yahoos Tallow,
till I found it stanch, and able to bear me, and my
Freight. And when it was as compleat as I could
possibly make it, I had it drawn on a Carriage very
gently by Yahoos, to the Sea-side, under the Conduct
of the Sorrel Nag, and another Servant. 
When all was ready, and the Day came for my
Departure, I took Leave of my Master and Lady,
and the whole Family, mine Eyes flowing with
Tears, and my Heart quite sunk with Grief. But
his Honour, out of Curiosity, and perhaps (if I may
speak it without Vanity) partly out of Kindness
was determined to see me in my Canoo; and got
several of his neighbouring Friends to accompany
him. I was forced to wait above an Hour for the
Tide, and then observing the Wind very fortunately
bearing towards the Island, to which I intended
to steer my Course, I took a second Leave of my
Master: But as I was going to prostrate myself to
kiss his Hoof, he did me the Honour to raise it
gently to my Mouth. I am not ignorant how
much I have been censured for mentioning this last
Particular. Detractors are pleased to think it improbable,
that so illustrious a Person should descend
to give so great a Mark of Distinction to a
Creature so inferior as I. Neither have I forgot,
how apt some Travellers are to boast of extraordinary
Favours they have received. But, if these
Censurers were better acquainted with the noble 

and courteous Disposition of the Houyhnhnms, they
would soon change their Opinion. 
I paid my Respects to the rest of the Houyhnhnms
in his Honour's Company; then getting into
my Canoo, I pushed off from Shore. 
