



The Author sets out on his Third Voyage. Is taken by Pyrates. The Malice of a Dutchman. His Arrival at an Island. He is received into Laputa. 

I Had not been at home above ten
Days, when Captain William Robinson,
a Cornish Man, Commander of
the Hopewell, a stout Ship of three
Hundred Tuns, came to my House. 
I had formerly been Surgeon of another Ship where 

he was Master, and a fourth Part Owner, in a Voyage
to the Levant. He had always treated me more
like a Brother than an inferior Officer; and hearing
of my Arrival made me a Visit, as I apprehended
only out of Friendship, for nothing passed more
than what is usual after long Absence. But repeating
his Visits often, expressing his Joy to find
me in good Health, asking whether I were now
settled for Life, adding that he intended a Voyage
to the East-Indies, in two Months, at last he plainly
invited me, although with some Apologies, to be
Surgeon of the Ship. That I should have another
Surgeon under me, besides our two Mates; that my
Sallary should be double to the usual Pay; and that
having experienced my Knowledge in Sea-Affairs
to be at least equal to his, he would enter into any
Engagement to follow my Advice, as much as if I
had Share in the Command. 
He said so many other obliging things, and I
knew him to be so honest a Man, that I could not
reject his Proposal; the Thirst I had of seeing the
World, notwithstanding my past Misfortunes, continuing
as violent as ever. The only Difficulty that
remained, was to persuade my Wife, whose Consent
however I at last obtained, by the Prospect of
Advantage she proposed to her Children. 
We set out the 5th Day of August, 1706, and
arrived at Fort St. George, the 11th of April 1707. 
We stayed there three Weeks to refresh our Crew,
many of whom were sick. From thence we went
to Tonquin, where the Captain resolved to continue
some time; because many of the Goods he intended
to buy were not ready, nor could he expect to be
dispatched in several Months. Therefore in hopes 

to defray some of the Charges he must be at, he
bought a Sloop, loaded it with several Sorts of
Goods, wherewith the Tonquinese usually trade to
the neighbouring Islands; and putting Fourteen
Men on Board, whereof three were of the Country,
he appointed me Master of the Sloop, and
gave me Power to traffick, while he transacted his
Affairs at Tonquin. 
We had not sailed above three Days, when a
great Storm arising, we were driven five Days to
the North-North-East, and then to the East; after
which we had fair Weather, but still with a pretty
strong Gale from the West. Upon the tenth Day
we were chased by two Pyrates, who soon overtook
us; for my Sloop was so deep loaden, that she
sailed very slow; neither were we in a Condition to
defend our selves. 
We were boarded about the same Time by both
the Pyrates, who entered furiously at the Head of
their Men; but finding us all prostrate upon our
Faces, (for so I gave Order,) they pinioned us with
strong Ropes, and setting a Guard upon us, went
to search the Sloop. 
I observed among them a Dutchman, who
seemed to be of some Authority, although he were
not Commander of either Ship. He knew us by
our Countenances to be Englishmen, and jabbering
to us in his own Language, swore we should be
tyed Back to Back, and thrown into the Sea. I
spoke Dutch tolerably well; I told him who we
were, and begged him in Consideration of our being
Christians and Protestants, of neighbouring
Countries, in strict Alliance, that he would move
the Captains to take some Pity on us. This inflamed 

his Rage; he repeated his Threatnings, and turning
to his Companions, spoke with great Vehemence,
in the Japanese Language, as I suppose; often using
the Word Christianos. 
The largest of the two Pyrate Ships was commanded
by a Japanese Captain, who spoke a little
Dutch, but very imperfectly. He came up to me,
and after several Questions, which I answered in
great Humility, he said we should not die. I made
the Captain a very low Bow, and then turning to
the Dutchman, said, I was sorry to find more Mercy
in a Heathen, than in a Brother Christian. But
I had soon Reason to repent those foolish Words; 
for that malicious Reprobate, having often endeavoured
in vain to persuade both the Captains that I
might be thrown into the Sea, (which they would
not yield to after the Promise made me, that I
should not die) however prevailed so far as to have
a Punishment inflicted on me, worse in all human
Appearance than Death it self. My Men were sent
by an equal Division into both the Pyrate-Ships,
and my Sloop new manned. As to my self, it was
determined that I should be set a-drift, in a small
Canoe, with Paddles and a Sail, and four Days Provisions; 
which last the Japanese Captain was so
kind to double out of his own Stores, and would
permit no Man to search me. I got down into the
Canoe, while the Dutchman standing upon the
Deck, loaded me with all the Curses and injurious
Terms his Language could afford. 
About an Hour before we saw the Pyrates, I
had taken an Observation, and found we were in
the Latitude of 46 N. and of Longitude 183. 
When I was at some Distance from the Pyrates, I 

discovered by my Pocket-Glass several Islands to the
South-East. I set up my Sail, the Wind being fair,
with a Design to reach the nearest of those Islands,
which I made a Shift to do in about three Hours. 
It was all rocky; however I got many Birds Eggs; 
and striking Fire, I kindled some Heath and dry
Sea Weed, by which I roasted my Eggs. I eat no
other Supper, being resolved to spare my Provisions
as much as I could. I passed the Night under the
Shelter of a Rock, strowing some Heath under me,
and slept pretty well. 
The next Day I sailed to another Island, and
thence to a third and fourth, sometimes using my
Sail, and sometimes my Paddles. But not to trouble
the Reader with a particular Account of my
Distresses; let it suffice, that on the 5th Day, I arrived
at the last Island in my Sight, which lay South-South-East
to the former. 
This Island was at a greater Distance than I expected,
and I did not reach it in less than five
Hours. I encompassed it almost round before I
could find a convenient Place to land in, which
was a small Creek, about three Times the Wideness
of my Canoe. I found the Island to be all rocky,
only a little intermingled with Tufts of Grass, and
sweet smelling Herbs. I took out my small Provisions,
and after having refreshed myself, I secured
the Remainder in a Cave, whereof there were great
Numbers. I gathered Plenty of Eggs upon the
Rocks, and got a Quantity of dry Sea-weed, and
parched Grass, which I designed to kindle the next
Day, and roast my Eggs as well as I could. (For
I had about me my Flint, Steel, Match, and Burning-glass.) 

I lay all Night in the Cave where I
had lodged my Provisions. My Bed was the same
dry Grass and Sea-weed which I intended for Fewel. 
I slept very little; for the Disquiets of my Mind
prevailed over my Wearyness, and kept me awake. 
I considered how impossible it was to preserve my
Life, in so desolate a Place; and how miserable my
End must be. Yet I found my self so listless and
desponding, that I had not the Heart to rise; and
before I could get Spirits enough to creep out of my
Cave, the Day was far advanced. I walked a while
among the Rocks, the Sky was perfectly clear, and
the Sun so hot, that I was forced to turn my Face
from it: When all on a Sudden it became obscured,
as I thought, in a Manner very different from what
happens by the Interposition of a Cloud. I turned
back, and perceived a vast Opake Body between me
and the Sun, moving forwards towards the Island:
It seemed to be about two Miles high, and hid the
Sun six or seven Minutes, but I did not observe the
Air to be much colder, or the Sky more darkned,
than if I had stood under the Shade of a Mountain. 
As it approached nearer over the Place where I was,
it appeared to be a firm Substance, the Bottom flat,
smooth, and shining very bright from the Reflexion
of the Sea below. I stood upon a Height about
two Hundred Yards from the Shoar, and saw this
vast Body descending almost to a Parallel with me,
at less than an English Mile Distance. I took out
my Pocket-Perspective, and could plainly discover
Numbers of People moving up and down the Sides
of it, which appeared to be sloping, but what those
People were doing, I was not able to distinguish. 

The natural Love of Life gave me some inward
Motions of Joy; and I was ready to entertain a
Hope, that this Adventure might some Way or
other help to deliver me from the desolate Place and
Condition I was in. But, at the same Time, the
Reader can hardly conceive my Astonishment, to
behold an Island in the Air, inhabited by Men,
who were able (as it should seem) to raise, or sink,
or put it into a progressive Motion, as they pleased. 
But not being, at that Time, in a Disposition to
philosophise upon this Phænomenon, I rather chose
to observe what Course the Island would take; because
it seemed for a while to stand still. Yet soon
after it advanced nearer; and I could see the Sides
of it, encompassed with several Gradations of Galleries
and Stairs, at certain Intervals, to descend
from one to the other. In the lowest Gallery, I
beheld some People fishing with long Angling Rods,
and others looking on. I waved my Cap, (for my
Hat was long since worn out,) and my Handkerchief
towards the Island; and upon its nearer Approach,
I called and shouted with the utmost
Strength of my Voice; and then looking circumspectly,
I beheld a Crowd gathered to that Side
which was most in my View. I found by their
pointing towards me and to each other, that they
plainly discovered me, although they made no Return
to my Shouting: But I could see four or five
Men running in great Haste up the Stairs to the
Top of the Island, who then disappeared. I happened
rightly to conjecture, that these were sent for
Orders to some Person in Authority upon this Occasion. 

The Number of People increased; and in less
than Half an Hour, the Island was moved and
raised in such a Manner, that the lowest Gallery appeared
in a Parallel of less than an Hundred Yards
Distance from the Height where I stood. I then
put my self into the most supplicating Postures, and
spoke in the humblest Accent, but received no Answer. 
Those who stood nearest over-against me,
seemed to be Persons of Distinction, as I supposed
by their Habit. They conferred earnestly with each
other, looking often upon me. At length one of
them called out in a clear, polite, smooth Dialect,
not unlike in Sound to the Italian; and therefore I
returned an Answer in that Language, hoping at
least that the Cadence might be more agreeable to
his Ears. Although neither of us understood the
other, yet my Meaning was easily known, for the
People saw the Distress I was in. 
They made Signs for me to come down from the
Rock, and go towards the Shoar, which I accordingly
did; and the flying Island being raised to a
convenient Height, the Verge directly over me, a
Chain was let down from the lowest Gallery, with
a Seat fastned to the Bottom, to which I fixed my
self, and was drawn up by Pullies. 
