


Julian passes into the Character of
a Fiddler. 
‘Rome was now the Seat of my Nativity. 
My Mother was an African,
a Woman of no great Beauty, but a
Favourite, I suppose from her Piety, to
Pope Gregory II. Who was my Father, I
know not; but I believe no very considerable
Man: for after the Death of that
Pope, who was, out of his Religion, a very
good Friend of my Mother, we fell into
great Distress, and were at length reduced
to walk the Streets of Rome; nor had either
of us any other Support but a Fiddle, on
which I played with pretty tolerable skill:
for as my Genius turned naturally to Music,
so I had been in my Youth very early instructed
at the Expence of the good Pope. 
This afforded us but a very poor Livelihood:
for tho' I had often a numerous Croud of
Hearers, few ever thought themselves obliged
to contribute the smallest Pittance to
the poor starving Wretch who had given 

them Pleasure. Nay, some of the Graver
Sort after an Hour's Attention to my Music,
have gone away shaking their Heads, and
crying, it was a shame such Vagabonds were
suffered to stay in the City. 
‘To say the truth, I am confident the Fiddle
would not have kept us alive, had we entirely
depended on the Generosity of my Hearers. 
My Mother therefore was forced to use her
own Industry; and while I was soothing
the Ears of the Croud, she applied to their
Pockets, and that generally with such good Success,
that we now began to enjoy a very comfortable
Subsistence; and indeed, had we had
the least Prudence or Forecast, might have
soon acquired enough to enable us to quit
this dangerous and dishonourable Way of
Life: but I know not what is the reason,
that Money got with Labour and Safety is
constantly preserved, while the Produce of
Danger and Ease is commonly spent as easily,
and often as wickedly, as acquired. Thus we
porportioned our Expences rather by what
we had than what we wanted, or even desired; 
and on obtaining a considerable Booty,
we have even forced Nature into the most 

profligate Extravagance; and have been
wicked without Inclination. 
‘We carried on this Method of Thievery
for a long time without Detection: but
as Fortune generally leaves Persons of extraordinary
Ingenuity in the lurch at last; 
so did she us: for my poor Mother was taken
in the Fact, and together with my self,
as her Accomplice, hurried before a Magistrate. 
‘Luckily for us, the Person who was
to be our Judge, was the greatest Lover of
Music in the whole City, and had often sent
for me to play to him, for which, as he
had given me very small Rewards, perhaps
his Gratitude now moved him: but, whatever
was his Motive, he browbeat the Informers
against us, and treated their Evidence
with so little Favour, that their Mouths
were soon stopped, and we dismissed with
Honour; acquitted, I should rather have
said: for we were not suffered to depart, till
I had given the Judge several Tunes on the
Fiddle. 

‘We escaped the better on this Occasion,
because the Person robbed happened to be a
Poet; which gave the Judge, who was a facetious
Person, many Opportunities of jesting. 
He said, Poets and Musicians should
agree together, seeing they had married Sisters,
which he afterwards explained to be
the Sister Arts. And when the Piece of
Gold was produced, he burst into a loud
Laugh, and said it must be the golden Age
when Poets had Gold in their Pockets, and
in that Age there could be no Robbers. He
made many more Jests of the same kind,
but a small Taste will suffice. 
‘It is a common Saying, that Men should
take Warning by any signal Delivery; but
I cannot approve the Justice of it: for to me
it seems, that the Acquittal of a guilty Person
should rather inspire him with Confidence,
and it had this Effect on us: for
we now laughed at the Law and despised its
Punishments, which we found were to be escaped
even against positive Evidence. We imagined
the late Example was rather a Warning
to the Accuser than the Criminal, and 

accordingly proceeded in the most impudent
and flagitious manner. 
‘Among other Robberies, one Night being
admitted by the Servants into the House of an
opulent Priest, my Mother took an opportunity
whilst the Servants were dancing to my
Tunes, to convey away a Silver Vessel; this she
did without the least sacrilegious Intention:
but it seems the Cup, which was a pretty large
one, was dedicated to holy Uses, and only
borrowed by the Priest on an Entertainment
which he made for some of his Brethren. 
We were immediately pursued upon this Robbery,
(the Cup being taken in our possession,)
and carried before the same Magistrate, who
had before behaved to us with so much Gentleness:
but his Countenance was now changed; 
for the moment the Priest appeared
against us, his Severity was as remarkable as
his Candour had been before, and we were
both ordered to be stript and whipt through
the Streets. 
‘This Sentence was executed with great
Severity, the Priest himself attending and
encouraging the Executioner, which he said 

he did for the good of our Souls: but though
our Backs were both flea'd, neither my Mother's
Torments nor my own afflicted me so
much, as the Indignity offered to my poor
Fiddle, which was carried in Triumph before
me, and treated with a Contempt by
the Multitude, intimating a great Scorn for
the Science I had the Honour to profess; 
which, as it is one of the noblest Inventions
of Men, and as I had been always in the highest
degree proud of my Excellence in it, I
suffered so much from the ill Treatment my
Fiddle received, that I would have given all
my Remainder of Skin to have preserved
it from this Affront. 
‘My Mother survived the Whipping a
very short time, and I was now reduced to
great Distress and Misery; till a young Roman
of considerable Rank took a fancy to
me, received me into his Family, and conversed
with me in the utmost Familiarity. 
He had a violent Attachment to Music, and
would learn to play on the Fiddle: but
through want of Genius for the Science, he
never made any considerable progress. However,
I flattered his Performance, and he 

grew extravagantly fond of me for so doing. 
Had I continued this Behaviour, I might
possibly have reaped the greatest Advantages
from his Kindness: but I had raised his
own Opinion of his musical Abilities so high,
that he now began to prefer his Skill to
mine, a Presumption I could not bear. 
One day as we were playing in Concert he
was horribly out; nor was it possible, as he
destroyed the Harmony, to avoid telling
him of it. Instead of receiving my Correction,
he answered, It was my Blunder, and
not his, and that I had mistaken the Key. 
Such an Affront from my own Scholar was
beyond human Patience; I flew into a violent
Passion, I flung down my Instrument
in a Rage, and swore, I was not to be taught
Music at my Age. He answered with as
much Warmth, nor was he to be instructed
by a stroling Fiddler. The Dispute ended in a
Challenge to play a Prize before Judges. This
Wager was determined in my favour: but
the Purchase was a dear one; for I lost my
Friend by it, who now twitting me with
all his Kindness, with my former ignominious
Punishment, and the destitute Condition 

from which I had been by his Bounty
relieved, discarded me for ever. 
‘While I lived with this Gentleman,
I became known, among others to Sabina
a Lady of Distinction, and who valued her
self much on her Taste for Music. She
no sooner heard of my being discarded, than
she took me into her House, where I was
extremely well cloathed and fed. Notwithstanding
which, my Situation was far from
agreeable: for I was obliged to submit to
her constant Reprehensions before Company; 
which gave me the greater Uneasiness,
because they were always wrong; nor
am I certain that she did not by these Provocations
contribute to my Death: for as Experience
had taught me to give up my Resentment
to my Bread, so my Passions, for
want of outward Vent, preyed inwardly on
my Vitals, and perhaps occasioned the Distemper
of which I sicken'd. 
‘The Lady who, amidst all the Faults she
found, was very fond of me; nay, probably
was the fonder of me the more Faults she
found; immediately called in the Aid of 

three celebrated Physicians. The Doctors (being
well feed,) made me seven Visits in three
Days; and two of them were at the Door
to visit me the eighth time, when being
acquainted that I was just dead, they shook
their Heads and departed. 
‘When I came to Minos, he asked me
with a Smile, whether I had brought my
Fiddle with me; and receiving an Answer in
the Negative, he bid me get about my business,
saying, it was well for me that the
Devil was no Lover of Music.’ 