


Giving an Account of as many of our
Hero's Ancestors as can be gathered
out of the Rubbish of Antiquity,
which hath been carefully sifted
for that Purpose. 
Mr. Jonathan Wild, or Wyld (for he
himself did not always agree in one
Method of spelling his Name) was descended
from the Great Wolfstan Wild, who
came over with Hengist, and distinguished
himself very eminently at that famous Festival
where the Britons were so treacherously
murdered by the Saxons; for when
the Word was given, i. e. Nemet eour 

Saxes, Take out your Swords, this Gentleman
being a little hard of hearing, mistook
the Sound for Nemet her Sacs, Take
out their Purses; instead therefore of applying
to the Throat, he immediately applied
to the Pocket of his Guest, and contented
himself with taking all that he had,
without attempting his Life. 
The next Ancestor of our Hero, who
was remarkably eminent, was Wild, surnamed
Langfanger or Longfinger. He
flourished in the Reign of Henry III. and
was strictly attached to Hubert de Burgh,
whose Friendship he was recommended
to by his great Excellence in an Art, of
which Hubert was himself the Inventor: 
He could, without the Knowledge of
the Proprietor, with great Ease and Dexterity
draw forth a Man's Purse from any
Part of his Garment where it was deposited,
and hence he derived his Surname. 
This Gentleman was the first of his Family
who had the Honour to suffer for
the Good of his Country: On whom a
Wit of that Time made the following
Epitaph. 


O Shame o'Justice, Wild is hang'd,
For that'n hath a Pocket fang'd,
While safe old Hubert, and his Gang,
Doth the Pocket of the Nation fang.
Langfenger left a Son named Edward,
whom he had carefully instructed
in the Art for which he himself was so
famous. This Edward served as a Voluntier
under the famous Sir John Falstaffe,
and by his gallant Demeanor so recommended
himself to his Captain, that he
would have certainly been promoted by
him, had Harry the Fifth kept his Word
with his old Companion. 
After the Death of Edward, the Family
remained in some Obscurity down to
the Reign of Charles the First, when James
Wild distinguished himself on both Sides
the Question in the Civil Wars, passing
from one to t'other, as Heaven seemed to
declare itself in Favour of either Party. 
At the End of the Wars, James, not being
rewarded according to his Merits, as
is usually the Case of such impartial 

Persons, he associated himself with a brave
Man of those Times, whose Name was
Hind, and declared open War with both
Parties. He was successful in several Actions,
and spoiled many of the Enemy; 
till at length, being over-powered and taken,
he was, contrary to the Law of Arms,
put basely and cowardly to death, by a
Combination between twelve Men of the
Enemy's Party, who after some Consultation
unanimously agreed on the said Murder. 
This Edward took to Wife Rebecca
the Daughter of the abovementioned John
Hind Esq; by whom he had Issue John,
Edward, Thomas and Jonathan, and three
Daughters, namely, Grace, Charity and
Honour. John followed the Fortunes of
his Father, and suffering with him, left no
Issue. Edward was so remarkable for his
compassionate Temper, that he spent his
Life in soliciting the Causes of the distressed
Captives in Newgate, and is reported
to have held a strict Friendship with
an eminent Divine, who solicited the spiritual
Causes of the said Captives. He 

married Editha Daughter and Coheiress of
Geoffry Snap Gent. who long enjoyed
an Office under the High Sheriff of London
and Middlesex, by which with great
Reputation he acquired a handsome Fortune; 
by her he had no Issue. Thomas
went very young abroad to one of our American
Colonies, and hath not been since
heard of. As for the Daughters, Grace
was married to a Gentleman of Yorkshire,
who dealt in Horses. Charity took to
Husband an eminent Broker of Change-Alley: 
And Honour the youngest, died unmarried. 
She lived many Years in this
Town, was a great frequenter of Plays,
and used to be remarkable for distributing
Oranges to all who would accept of
them. 
Jonathan married Elizabeth Daughter
of Ralph Hollow Esq; and by her had Jonathan,
who is the illustrious Subject of these
Memoirs. 