


Containing Scenes of Softness, Love,
and Honour, all in the GREAT
Style. 
The Count had disposed of his Jewel
for four hundred Pounds, which he
had, by Dexterity, raised to a thousand
Pounds; and that Sum he paid down to
Heartfree, promising him the rest within 

a Month. His House, his Equipage, his
Appearance, but, above all, a certain Plausibility
in his Voice and Behaviour would
have deceived any but one whose GREAT and
wise Heart had dictated to him something
within, which would have secured him
from any Danger of Imposition. Heartfree
therefore did not in the least scruple
giving him Credit, but as he had, in Reality,
procured those Jewels of another, his
own little Stock not being able to furnish
any thing so valuable, he begged the Count
would be so kind to give his Note for the
Money, payable at the time he mentioned,
which that Gentleman did not in the least
scruple; so he paid him the thousand Pound
in Specie, and gave his Note for four thousand
five hundred Pounds more to Heartfree,
who burnt with Gratitude to Wild,
for the noble Customer he had recommended
to him. 
As soon as Heartfree was departed,
Wild, who waited in another Room, came
in, and received the Casket from the
Count, it having been agreed between
them, that it should be deposited in his 

Hands, as he was the original Contriver
of the Scheme, and was to have the largest
Share. Wild having recived the Casket,
offered to meet the Count late that
Evening to come to a Division; but such
was the latter's Confidence in the Honour
of our Hero, that, he said, if it was any
Inconvenience to him, the next Morning
would do altogether as well. This
was more agreeable to Wild, and accordingly
an Appointment being made
for that purpose, he set out in haste to pursue
Heartfree to the Place where the two
Gentlemen were ordered to meet and attack
him. Those Gentlemen, with noble Resolution,
executed their Purpose; they attacked
and spoiled the Enemy of the whole
Sum he had received from the Count. 
As soon as the Engagement was over
and Heartfree left sprawling on the
Ground, our Hero, who wisely declined
trusting the Booty in his Friends Hands, tho'
he had good Experience of their Honour,
made off after the Conquerors; at length they
being all at a Place of Safety, Wild, according
to a previous Agreement, received nine 

Tenths of the Booty; the subordinate Heroes
did indeed profess some little unwillingness
(perhaps more than was strictly
consistent with Honour) to perform their
Contract; but Wild, partly by Argument,
but more by Oaths and Threatnings, prevailed
with them to fulfil their Promise. 
Our Hero having thus with wonderful
Address brought this GREAT and glorious
Action to a happy Conclusion, resolved to
relax his Mind after his Fatigue, in the
Conversation of the Fair. He therefore set
forwards to his lovely Lætitia; but in his
Way, accidentally met with a young Lady
of his Acquaintance, Miss Molly Straddle,
who was taking the Air in Bridges-Street. 
Miss Molly seeing Mr. Wild, stopp'd him,
and with a Familiarity peculiar to a genteel
Town Education, tapp'd or rather
slapp'd him on the Back, and asked him
to treat her with a Pint of Wine, at a
neighbouring Tavern. The Hero, tho' he
loved the chaste Lætitia with excessive
Tenderness, was not of that low sniveling
Breed of Mortals who, as it is generally
expressed, tie themselves to a Woman's 

Apron-Strings; in a Word, who are
tainted with that mean, base, low Vice, of
Constancy; he therefore immediately consented,
and attended her to a Tavern famous
for excellent Wine, known by the Name of
the Rummer and Horshoe, where they retired
to a Room by themselves. Wild was very
vehement in his Addresses, but to no Purpose; 
the young Lady declared she would
grant no Favour till he had made her a
Present; this was immediately complied
with, and the Lover made as happy as he
could desire. 
The immoderate Fondness which Wild
entertained for his dear Lætitia, would not
suffer him to waste any considerable Time
with Miss Straddle. Notwithstanding, therefore,
of all the Endearments and Caresses of
that young Lady, he soon made an Excuse to
go down Stairs, and thence immediately set
forward to Lætitia, without taking any
formal Leave of Miss Straddle, or indeed
of the Drawer, with whom the Lady was
afterwards obliged to come to an Account
for the Reckoning. 

Mr. Wild, on his Arrival at Mr. Snap's,
found only Miss Tishy at home; that young
Lady being employed alone, in Imitation of
Penelope, with her Thread or Worsted; 
only with this Difference, that whereas Penelope
unravelled by Night what she had
knit, or wove, or spun by Day, so what
our young Heroine unravelled by Day, she
knit again by Night. In short, she was
mending a Pair of blue Stockings with red
Clocks; a Circumstance which, perhaps,
we might have omitted, had it not served
to shew that there are still some Ladies of
this Age, who imitate the Simplicity of
the Ancients. 
Wild immediately asked for his Beloved,
and was informed, that she was not
at Home. He then enquired, where she
was to be found, and declared, he would
not depart till he had seen her; nay, not
till he had married her; for, indeed, his
Passion for her was truly honourable, in other
Words, he had so ungovernable a Desire
for her Person, that he would go any
Lengths to satisfy it. He then pulled 

out the Casket, which he swore was full
of the finest Jewels, and that he would give
them all to her, with other Promises; 
which so prevailed on Miss Doshy, who had
not the common Failure of Sisters in envying,
and often endeavouring to disappoint
each other's Happiness; that she desired
Mr. Wild to sit down a few Minutes, whilst
she endeavoured to find her Sister, and to
bring her to him. The Lover thanked her,
and promised to stay till her Return; and
Miss Doshy, leaving Mr. Wild to his Meditations,
fastened him in the Kitchen by
barring the Door (for most of the Doors in
this Mansion were made to be bolted on the
outside) and then slapping to the Door of the
House with great Violence, without going
out at it, she stole softly up Stairs, where
Miss Lætitia was engaged in close Conference
with Mr. Bagshot. Miss Letty, being
informed by her Sister in a Whisper of
what Mr. Wild had said, and what he had
produced, told Mr. Bagshot, that a young
Lady was below to visit her, whom she
would dispatch with all imaginable Haste,
and return to him. She desired him therefore
to stay with Patience for her in the 

mean Time, and that she would leave the
Door unlocked, tho' her Papa would never
forgive her if he should discover it. Bagshot
promised on his Honour, not to step
without his Chamber; and the two young
Ladies went softly down Stairs; when pretending
first to make their Entry into the
House, they repaired to the Kitchen, where
not even the Presence of the chaste Lætitia
could restore that Harmony to the Countenance
of her Lover, which Miss Theodosia
had left him possessed of; for during her
Absence he had discovered the Absence of
that Purse which had been taken from Mr.
Heartfree, and which, indeed, Miss Straddle
had in the Warmth of his amorous
Caresses, unperceived, drawn from him. 
However, as he had that perfect Mastery of
his Temper, or rather of his Muscles, which
is as necessary to form a GREAT Character
as to personate it on the Stage, he soon
conveyed a Smile into his Countenance,
and concealing as well his Misfortune as
his Chagrin at it, began to pay honourable
Addresses to Miss Letty. This young Lady,
amongst many other good Ingredients, had
three very predominant Passions, to wit, 

Vanity, Wantonness, and Avarice. To
satisfy the first of these, she applied Mr.
Smith and Comp. to the second, Mr. Bagshot
and Comp. and our Hero had
the Honour and Happiness of solely engrossing
the third. Now, these three Sorts
of Lovers she had very different Ways of
entertaining. With the first, she was all
gay and coquette; with the second, all fond
and rampant; and with the last, all cold
and reserved. She, therefore, told Mr. Wild,
with a most composed Aspect, that she was
glad he had repented of his Manner of
treating her at their last Interview, where
his Behaviour was so monstrous, that she
had resolved never to see him any more; 
that she was afraid her own Sex would
hardly pardon her the Weakness she was
guilty of in receding from that Resolution,
which she was persuaded she never should
have prevailed with herself to do, had not
her Sister, who was there to confirm what
she said, (as she did with many Oaths) betrayed
her into his Company, by pretending
it was another Person to visit her: But
however, as he now thought proper to
give her more convincing Proofs of his Affection 

(for he had now the Casket in his
Hand) and since she perceived his Designs
were no longer against her Virtue, but were
such as a Woman of Honour might listen
to, she must own—and then she feign'd
an Hesitation, when Theodosia began. “Nay,
Sister, I am resolved you shall counterfeit
no longer. I assure you, Mr. Wild,
she hath the most violent Passion for
you in the World; and if you offer to
go back, since I plainly see Mr. Wild's
Designs are honourable, I will betray all
you have ever said. —How, Sister, (answered
Lætitia) I protest you will drive
me out of the Room: I did not expect
this Usage from you.” Wild then fell
on his Knees, and taking hold of her
Hand, repeated a Speech which, as the
Reader may easily suggest it to himself, I
shall not here minutely set down. He then
offered her the Casket, but she gently rejected
it; and on a second Offer, with a modest
Countenance and Voice, desired to
know what it contained. Wild then open'd
it, and took forth, (with Sorrow I write it,
and with Sorrow will it be read) one of
those beautiful Necklaces, with which at the 

Fair of Bartholomew, they deck the well
whitened Neck of Thalestris Queen of the
Amazons, Anna Bullen, Queen Elizabeth,
or some other High Princess in Drollic
Story. It was indeed composed of that
Paste, which Derdæus Magnus, an ingenious
Toyman, doth at a very moderate Price
dispose of to the second Rate Beaus of the
Metropolis. For, to open a Truth, which we
ask our Reader's Pardon for having concealed
from him so long; the sagacious
Count, wisely fearing, lest some Accident
might prevent Mr. Wild's Return at the
appointed Time, had carefully conveyed
the Jewels which Mr. Heartfree had
brought with him, into his own Pocket; 
and in their Stead had placed in the Casket
these artificial Stones, which, tho' of equal
Value to a Philosopher, and perhaps of a
much greater to a true Admirer of the Compositions
of Art, had not however the same
Charms in the Eyes of Miss Letty; 
who had indeed some Knowledge of
Jewels: For Mr. Snap, with great Reason
considering how valuable a Part of a young
Lady's Education it would be to have his
Daughter instructed in these Things, in an 

Age when young Ladies learn little more
than how to dress themselves, had in her
youth, placed Miss Letty as the Handmaid
(or House-maid, as the Vulgar call
it) of an eminent Pawn-broker. The
lightning, therefore, which should have
flashed from the Jewels, flashed from her
Eyes, and thunder immediately followed
from her Voice. She be-knaved, be-rascalled,
be-rogued the unhappy Hero, who
stood silent, confounded with Astonishment,
but more with Shame and Indignation,
at being thus out-witted and over-reached. 
At length, he recovered his
Spirits, and throwing down the Casket in
a Rage, he snatched the Key from the
Table; and without making any Answer to
the Ladies, who both very plentifully open'd
upon him, or taking any leave of them, he
flew out at the Door, and repaired with
the utmost Expedition to the Count's Habitation. 