


Discourses on the Road, and a Description
of the Palace of Death. 
We were all silent for some Minutes,
till being well shaken into our several
Seats, I opened my Mouth first, and related
what had happened to me after our Separation
in the City we had just left. The rest of
the Company, except the grave female Spirit,
whom our Reader may remember to have
refused giving an Account of the Distemper,
which occasioned her Dissolution, did the
same. It might be tedious to relate these at
large, we shall therefore only mention a very
remarkable Inveteracy, which the Surfeit
declared to all the other Diseases, especially to 

the Fever, who she said, by the Roguery of
the Porters, received Acknowledgements from
numberless Passengers, which were due to
herself. ‘Indeed (says she) those cane-headed
Fellows (for so she called them, alluding, I
suppose, to their Ticket) are constantly
making such Mistakes: there is no Gratitude
in those Fellows; for I am sure they have
greater Obligations to me, than to any other
Disease, except the Vapours.’ These
Relations were no sooner over, than one of the
Company informed us, we were approaching
to the most noble Building he had ever beheld,
and which we learnt from our Coachman,
was the Palace of Death. Its Outside,
indeed, appeared extremely magnificent. Its
Structure was of the Gothic Order: vast
beyond Imagination, the whole Pile consisting
of black Marble. Rows of immense
Yews form an Amphitheatre round it of such
Height and Thickness, that no Ray of the
Sun ever perforates this Grove; where black
eternal Darkness would reign, was it not
excluded by innumerable Lamps, which are
placed in Pyramids round the Grove. So that
the distant Reflection they cast on the Palace,
which is plentifully gilt with Gold on the 

outside, is inconceivably solemn. To this I
may add, the hollow Murmur of Winds
constantly heard from the Grove, and the
very remote Sound of roaring Waters. Indeed,
every Circumstance seems to conspire to
fill the Mind with Horrour and Consternation
as we approach to this Palace. Which we
had scarce time to admire, before our Vehicle
stopped at the Gate, and we were desired to
alight in order to pay our Respects to his most
mortal Majesty, (this being the Title which it
seems he assumes.) The outward Court
was all full of Soldiers, and, indeed, the
whole very much resembled the State of an
earthly Monarch, only more magnificent. 
We past through several Courts, into a vast
Hall, which led to a spacious Stair-case, at
the bottom of which stood two Pages, with
very grave Countenances; whom I recollected
afterwards to have formerly been very eminent
Undertakers, and were in reality the only
dismal Faces I saw here: for this Palace, so
awful and tremendous without, is all gay and
spritely within, so that we soon lost all those
dismal and gloomy Ideas we had contracted in
approaching it. Indeed, the still Silence
maintained among the Guards and Attendants 

resembled rather the stately Pomp of Eastern
Courts, but there was on every Face such
Symptoms of Content and Happiness, that
diffused an Air of Cheerfulness all round. 
We ascended the Stair-case, and past through
many noble Apartments, whose Walls were
adorned with various Battle-pieces in Tapistry,
and which we spent some time in observing. 
These brought to my mind those
beautiful ones I had in my Life-time seen at
Blenheim, nor could I prevent my Curiosity
from enquiring where the Duke of Marlborough's
Victories were placed; (for I think
they were almost the only Battles of any Eminence
I had read of, which I did not meet
with:) when the Skeleton of a Beef-eater
shaking his Head, told me, a certain Gentleman,
one Lewis the 14th, who had great Interest
with his most mortal Majesty, had prevented
any such from being hung up there; 
besides, (says he) his Majesty, hath no great
Respect for that Duke, for he never sent him
a Subject, he could keep from him, nor did he
ever get a single Subject by his means, but
he lost 1000 others for him. We found the
Presence-Chamber, at our Entrance, very full,
and a Buz ran through it, as in all Assemblies 

before the principal Figure enters: for his
Majesty was not yet come out. At the bottom
of the Room were two Persons in close
Conference, one with a square black Cap on
his Head, and the other with a Robe embroidered
with Flames of Fire. These, I was
informed, were a Judge long since dead, and
an Inquisitor-General. I overheard them disputing
with great Eagerness, whether the
one had hanged, or the other burnt the most. 
While I was listning to this Dispute, which
seemed to be in no likelihood of a speedy Decision,
the Emperor entred the Room, and
placed himself between two Figures, one of
which was remarkable for the Roughness,
and the other for the Beauty of his Appearance. 
These were, it seems, Charles the 12th of
Sweden, and Alexander of Macedon. I was
at too great a Distance to hear any of the
Conversation, so could only satisfy my Curiosity
by contemplating the several Personages
present, of whose Names I informed
myself by a Page, who looked as pale and
meagre as any Court Page in the other World,
but was somewhat more modest. He shewed
me here two or three Turkish Emperors,
to whom his most mortal Majesty seemed to 

express much Civility. Here were likewise
several of the Roman Emperors, among whom
none seemed so much caressed as Caligula,
on account, as the Page told me, of his pious
Wish, that he could send all the Romans hither
at one blow. The Reader may be perhaps surprized,
that I saw no Physicians here; as, indeed,
I was myself till informed that they
were all departed to the City of Diseases,
where they were busy in an Experiment to
purge away the Immortality of the Soul. 
It would be tedious to recollect the many
Individuals I saw here: but I cannot omit a
fat Figure well drest in the French Fashion,
who was received with extraordinary Complacence
by the Emperor, and whom I imagined
to be Lewis the 14th himself; but the
Page acquainted me he was a celebrated
French Cook. 
We were at length introduced to the
Royal Presence, and had the Honour to kiss
Hands. His Majesty asked us a few Questions,
not very material to relate, and soon after
retired. 

When we returned into the Yard, we
found our Caravan ready to set out, at which
we all declared ourselves well pleased; for we
were sufficiently tired with the Formality of
a Court, notwithstanding its outward Splendor
and Magnificence. 