


Containing the most memorable Transactions
which passed in the Family of Mr. Allworthy,
from the Time when Tommy
Jones arrived at the Age of Fourteen, till
he attained the Age of Seventeen.  In this
Book the Reader may pick up some Hints
concerning the Education of Children. 



Containing little or nothing. 
The Reader will be pleased to remember
that at the Beginning of the Second
Book of this History, we gave him a
Hint of our Intention to pass over several 

large Periods of Time, in which nothing
happened worthy of being recorded in a
Chronicle of this Kind. 
In so doing, we do not only consult our
own Dignity and Ease; but the Good and
Advantage of the Reader: For besides, that
by these Means we prevent him from throwing
away his Time in reading without either
Pleasure or Emolument, we gave him at all
such Seasons an Opportunity of employing
that wonderful Sagacity, of which he is Master,
by filling up these vacant Spaces of
Time with his own Conjectures; for which
Purpose, we have taken care to qualify him
in the preceding Pages. 
For Instance, What Reader but knows
that Mr. Allworthy felt at first for the Loss
of his Friend, those Emotions of Grief,
which on such Occasions enter into all Men
whose Hearts are not composed of Flint, or
their Heads of as solid Materials? Again,
what Reader doth not know that Philosophy
and Religion, in time, moderated, and at
last extinguished this Grief? The former of
these, reaching the Folly and Vanity of it,
and the latter, correcting it, as unlawful, and
at, the same time assuaging it by raising future
Hopes and Assurances which enable a 

strong and religious Mind to take leave of a
Friend on his Death-bed with little less Indifference
than if he was preparing for a
long Journey; and indeed with little less
Hope of seeing him again. 
Nor can the judicious Reader be at a
greater Loss on Account of Mrs. Bridget
Blifil, who, he may be assured, conducted
herself through the whole Season in which
Grief is to make its Appearance on the Outside
of the Body, with the strictest Regard
to all the Rules of Custom and Decency,
suiting the Alterations of her Countenance
to the several Alterations of her Habit: 
For as this changed from Weeds to Black,
from Black to Grey, from Grey to White,
so did her Countenance change from Dismal
to Sorrowful, from Sorrowful to Sad,
and from Sad to Serious, till the Day came
in which she was allowed to return to her
former Serenity. 
We have mentioned these two as Examples
only of the Task which may be imposed
on Readers of the lowest Class. 
Much higher and harder Exercises of Judgment
and Penetration may reasonably be expected
from the upper Graduates in Criticism. 
Many notable Discoveries will, I 

doubt not, be made by such, of the Transactions
which happened in the Family of our
worthy Man, during all the Years which we
have thought proper to pass over: For tho'
nothing worthy of a Place in this History
occurred within that Period; yet did several
Incidents happen, of equal Importance with
those reported by the daily and weekly Historians
of the Age, in reading which, great
Numbers of Persons consume a considerable
Part of their Time, very little, I am afraid,
to their Emolument. Now, in the Conjectures
here proposed, some of the most
excellent Faculties of the Mind may be employed
to much Advantage, since it is a
more useful Capacity to be able to foretel
the Actions of Men in any Circumstance
from their Characters; than to judge of
their characters from their Actions. The
former, I own, requires the greater Penetration; 
but may be accomplished by true
Sagacity, with no less Certainty than the
latter. 
As we are sensible that much the greatest
Part of our Readers are very eminently possessed
of this Quality, we have left them a
Space of twelve Years to exert it in; and
shall now bring forth our Hero, at about
fourteen Years of Age, not questioning that 

many have been long impatient to be introduced
to his Acquaintance. 



The Hero of this great History appears with
very bad Omens. A little Tale, of so LOW
a Kind, that some may think it not worth
their Notice. A Word or two concerning
a Squire, and more relating to a Game-keeper,
and a Schoolmaster. 
As we determined when we first sat down
to write this History, to flatter no
Man; but to guide our Pen throughout
by the Directions of Truth, we are obliged
to bring our Hero on the Stage in a much
more disadvantageous Manner than we could
wish; and to declare honestly, even at his
first Appearance, that it was the universal
Opinion of all Mr. Allworthy's Family, that
he was certainly born to be hanged. 
Indeed, I am sorry to say, there was too
much Reason for this Conjecture. The Lad
having, from his earliest Years, discovered
a Propensity to many Vices, and especially to
one, which hath as direct a Tendency as any
other to that Fate, which we have just now 

observed to have been prophetically denounced
against him. He had been already
convicted of three Robberies, viz. of robbing
an Orchard, of stealing a Duck out of
a Farmer's Yard, and of picking Master
Blifil's Pocket of a Ball. 
The Vices of this young Man were moreover
heightened by the disadvantageous
Light in which they appeared, when opposed
to the Virtues of Master Blifil, his
Companion: A Youth of so different a
Cast from little Jones, that not only the Family,
but all the Neighbourhood resounded
his Praises. He was indeed a Lad of a remarkable
Disposition; sober, discreet, and
pious beyond his Age. Qualities, which
gained him the Love of every one who
knew him, while Tom Jones was universally
disliked, and many expressed their Wonder
that Mr. Allworthy would suffer such a Lad
to be educated with his Nephew, lest the
Morals of the latter should be corrupted by
his Example. 
An Incident which happened about this
Time, will set the Characters of these two
Lads, more fairly before the discerning
Reader, than is in the Power of the longest
Dissertation. 

Tom Jones, who, bad as he is, must serve
for the Heroe of this History, had only
one Friend among all the Servants of the
Family; for, as to Mrs. Wilkins, she had
long since given him up, and was perfectly
reconciled to her Mistress. This Friend was
the Game-keeper, a Fellow of a loose kind
of Disposition, and who was thought not to
entertain much stricter Notions concerning
the Difference of meum and tuum, than the
young Gentleman himself. And hence,
this Friendship gave Occasion to many sarcastical
Remarks among the Domestics, most
of which were either Proverbs before, or at
least are become so now; and indeed, the
Wit of them all may be comprised in that
short Latin Proverb, “Noscitur a socio,” 
which, I think, is thus expressed in English,
“You may know him by the Company he
keeps.” 
To say the Truth, some of that atrocious
Wickedness in Jones, of which we have just
mentioned three Examples, might perhaps
be derived from the Encouragement he had
received from this Fellow, who, in two or
three Instances, had been what the Law calls
an Accessary after the Fact. For the whole
Duck, and great Part of the Apples were 

converted to the Use of the Game-keeper
and his Family. Tho' as Jones alone was
discovered, the poor Lad bore not only the
whole Smart, but the whole Blame; both
which fell again to his Lot, on the following
Occasion. Contiguous to Mr. Allworthy's
Estate, was the Manor of one of
those Gentlemen, who are called Preservers
of the Game. This Species of Men, from
the great Severity with which they revenge
the Death of a Hare or a Partridge, might
be thought to cultivate the same Superstition
with the Bannians in India; many of
whom, we are told, dedicate their whole
Lives to the Preservation and Protection of
certain Animals, was it not that our English
Bannians, while they preserve them from
other Enemies, will most unmercifully
slaughter whole Horse-loads themselves, so
that they stand clearly acquitted of any such
heathenish Superstition. 
I have, indeed, a much better Opinion of
this Kind of Men than is entertained by
some, as I take them to answer the Order
of Nature, and the good Purposes for which
they were ordained in a more ample Manner
than many others. Now, as Horace tells us,
that there are a Set of human Beings, 


‘Fruges consumere nati
‘Born to consume the Fruits of the Earth.’ 
So, I make no manner of Doubt but that
there are others 

‘Feras consumere nati.
‘Born to consume the Beasts of the Field,’ 
or, as it is commonly called, the Game; 
and none, I believe, will deny, but that those
Squires fulfil this End of their Creation.’ 
Little Jones went one Day a shooting
with the Game-keeper; when, happening to
spring a Covey of Partridges, near the Border
of that Manor, over which Fortune, to
fulfil the wise Purposes of Nature, had planted
one of the Game-Consumers, the Birds flew
into it, and were marked (as it is called) by
the two Sportsmen, in some Furze Bushes,
about two or three hundred Paces beyond
Mr. Allworthy's Dominions. 
Mr. Allworthy had given the Fellow strict
Orders, on Pain of forfeiting his Place, never
to trespass on any of his Neighbours, no
more on those who were less rigid in this
Matter, than on the Lord of this Manor. 

With regard to others, indeed, these Orders
had not been always very scrupulously
kept; but as the Disposition of the Gentleman
with whom the Partridges had taken
sanctuary, was well known, the Game-keeper
had never yet attempted to invade
his Territories. Nor had he done it now,
had not the younger Sportsman, who was
excessively eager to pursue the flying Game,
over-persuaded him; but Jones being very
importunate, the other, who was himself
keen enough after the Sport, yielded to his
Persuasions, entered the Manor, and shot
one of the Partridges. 
The Gentleman himself was at that time
on horseback, at a little Distance from
them; and hearing the Gun go off, he
immediately made towards the Place, and
discovered poor Tom: For the Game-keeper
had leapt into the thickest Part of
the Furze-brake, where he had happily concealed
himself. 
The Gentleman having searched the Lad,
and found the Partridge upon him, denounced
great Vengeance, swearing he would
acquaint Mr. Allworthy. He was as good
as his Word, for he rode immediately to
his House, and complained of the Trespass 

on his Manor, in as high Terms, and as
bitter Language, as if his House had been
broken open, and the most valuable Furniture
stole out of it. He added, that some
other Person was in his Company, tho' he
could not discover him: for that two Guns
had been discharged almost in the same Instant. 
And, says he, “we have found only
this Partridge, but the Lord knows what
Mischief they have done.” 
At his Return home, Tom was presently
convened before Mr. Allworthy. He owned
the Fact, and alledged no other Excuse but
what was really true, viz. that the Covey
was originally sprung in Mr. Allworthy's own
Manor. 
Tom was then interrogated who was with
him, which Mr. Allworthy declared he was
resolved to know, acquainting the Culprit
with the Circumstance of the two Guns, which
had been deposed by the Squire and both his
Servants; but Tom stoutly persisted in asserting
that he was alone; yet, to say the Truth,
he hesitated a little at first, which would
have confirmed Mr. Allworthy's Belief, had
what the Squire and his Servants said,
wanted any further Confirmation. 

The Game-keeper being a suspected Person,
was now sent for, and the Question put
to him; but he, relying on the Promise
which Tom had made him, to take all upon
himself, very resolutely denied being in
Company with the young Gentleman, or indeed
having seen him the whole Afternoon. 
Mr. Allworthy then turned towards Tom,
with more than usual Anger in his Countenance,
and advised him to confess who was
with him; repeating, that he was resolved
to know. The Lad, however, still maintained
his Resolution, and was dismissed
with much Wrath by Mr. Allworthy, who
told him, he should have to the next Morning
to consider of it, when he should be
questioned by another Person, and in another
Manner. 
Poor Jones spent a very melancholy
Night, and the more so, as he was without
his usual Companion: for Master Blifil was
gone abroad on a Visit With his Mother. 
Fear of the Punishment he was to suffer was
on this Occasion his least Evil; his chief
Anxiety being, lest his Constancy should
fail him, and he should be brought to betray 

the Game-keeper, whose Ruin he knew
must now be the Consequence. 
Nor did the Game-keeper pass his Time
much better. He had the same Apprehensions
with the Youth; for whose Honour
he had likewise a much tenderer Regard
than for his Skin. 
In the Morning, when Tom attended the
Reverend Mr. Thwackum, the Person to
whom Mr. Allworthy had committed the
Instruction of the two Boys, he had the
same Questions put to him by that Gentleman,
which he had been asked the Evening
before, to which he returned the same Answers. 
The Consequence of this was, so severe
a Whipping, that it possibly fell little
short of the Torture with which Confessions
are in some Countries extorted from Criminals. 
Tom bore his Punishment with great Resolution; 
and tho' his Master asked him between
every Stroke, whether he would not
confess, he was contented to be flead rather
than betray his Friend, or break the Promise
he had made. 

The Game-keeper was now relieved from
his Anxiety, and Mr. Allworthy himself began
to be concerned at Tom's Sufferings: 
For, besides that Mr. Thwackum, being
highly enraged that he was not able to make
the Boy say what he himself pleased, had
carried his Severity much beyond the good
Man's Intention, this latter began now to
suspect that the Squire had been mistaken; 
which his extreme Eagerness and Anger
seemed to make probable; and as for what
the Servants had said in Confirmation of
their Master's Account, he laid no great
Stress upon that. Now, as Cruelty and
Injustice were two Ideas, of which Mr. Allworthy
could by no Means support the Consciousness
a single Moment, he sent for Tom,
and after many kind and friendly Exhortations,
said, ‘I am convinced, my dear
Child, that my Suspicions have wronged
you; I am sorry that you have been so
severely punished on this Account.’ —And
at last gave him a little Horse to make him
amends; again repeating his Sorrow for
what had past. 
Tom's Guilt now flew in his Face more
than any Severity could make it. He could
more easily bear the Lashes of Thwackum, 

than the Generosity of Allworthy. The
Tears burst from his Eyes, and he fell upon
his Knees, crying, ‘Oh! Sir, you are too
good to me. Indeed, you are. Indeed,
I don't deserve it.’ And at that very Instant,
from the Fullness of his Heart, had
almost betrayed the Secret; but the good
Genius of the Game-keeper suggested to
him what might be the Consequence to the
poor Fellow, and this Consideration sealed
his Lips. 
Thwackum did all he could to dissuade
Allworthy from shewing any Compassion or
Kindness to the Boy, saying, ‘He had persisted
in an Untruth;’ and gave some
Hints, that a second Whipping might probably
bring the Matter to Light. 
But Mr. Allworthy absolutely refused to
consent to the Experiment. He said, the
Boy had suffered enough already, for concealing
the Truth, even if he was guilty,
seeing that he could have no Motive but a
mistaken Point of Honour for so doing. 
Honour! cry'd Thwackum, with some
Warmth, mere Stubborness and Obstinacy! 
Can Honour teach any one to tell a Lie, or
can any Honour exist independent of Religion? 

This Discourse happened at Table when
Dinner was just ended; and there were present
Mr. Allworthy, Mr. Thwackum, and a
third Gentleman who now entered into the
Debate, and whom, before we proceed any
farther, we shall briefly introduce to our
Reader's Acquaintance. 



The Character of Mr. Square the Philosopher,
and of Mr. Thwackum the Divine; 
with a Dispute concerning— 
The Name of this Gentleman who had
then resided some time at Mr. Allworthy's
House, was Mr. Square. His natural
Parts were not of the first Rate, but he
had greatly improved them by a learned
Education. He was deeply read in the Antients,
and a profest Master of all the Works
of Plato and Aristotle. Upon which great
Models he had principally form'd himself,
sometimes according with the Opinion of the
one, and sometimes with that of the other. 
In Morals he was a profest Platonist, and in
Religion he inclined to be an Aristotelian. 

But tho' he had, as we have said, formed
his Morals on the Platonic Model, yet he
perfectly agreed with the Opinion of Aristotle,
in considering that great Man rather
in the Quality of a Philosopher or a Speculatist,
than as a Legislator. This Sentiment he
carried a great way; indeed, so far, as to regard
all Virtue as Matter of Theory only. 
This, it is true, he never affirmed, as I have
heard, to any one; and yet upon the least
Attention to his Conduct, I cannot help
thinking, it was his real Opinion, as it will
perfectly reconcile some Contradictions
which might otherwise appear in his Character. 
This Gentleman and Mr. Thwackum
scarce ever met without a Disputation; for
their Tenets were, indeed, diametrically
opposite to each other. Square held human
Nature to be the Perfection of all Virtue,
and that Vice was a Deviation from our
Nature in the same Manner as Deformity
of Body is. Thwackum, on the contrary,
maintained that the human Mind, since the
Fall, was nothing but a Sink of Iniquity,
till purified and redeemed by Grace. In
one Point only they agreed, which was, in
all their Discourses on Morality never to 

mention the Word Goodness. The favourite
Phrase of the former, was the natural
Beauty of Virtue; that of the latter, was the
divine Power of Grace. The former measured
all Actions by the unalterable Rule of Right,
and the eternal Fitness of Things; the latter
decided all Matters by Authority; but,
in doing this, he always used the Scriptures
and their Commentators, as the Lawyer
doth his Coke upon Lyttleton, where the
Comment is of equal Authority with the
Text. 
After this short Introduction, the Reader
will be pleased to remember, that the
Parson had concluded his Speech with a
triumphant Question, to which he had
apprehended no Answer; viz. Can any
Honour exist independent on Religion? 
To this Square answered, that it was impossible
to discourse philosophically concerning
Words, till their Meaning was first
established; that there were scarce any two
Words of a more vague and incertain Signification,
than the two he had mentioned: 
For that there were almost as many different
Opinions concerning Honour, as concerning
Religion. ‘But, says he, if by
Honour you mean the true natural Beauty 

of Virtue, I will maintain it may exist
independent of any Religion whatever. 
Nay (added he) you yourself will allow
it may exist independent of all but one; 
so will a Mahometan, a Jew, and all the
Maintainers of all the different Sects in
the World.’ 
Thwackum replied, This was arguing
with the usual Malice of all the Enemies to
the true Church. He said, he doubted not but
that all the Infidels and Hereticks in the
World would, if they could, confine Honour
to their own absurd Errors, and damnable
Deceptions; ‘But Honour, says he,
is not therefore manifold, because there
are many absurd Opinions about it; nor
is Religion manifold, because there are
various Sects and Heresies in the World. 
When I mention Religion, I mean the
Christian Religion; and not only the
Christian Religion, but the Protestant Religion; 
and not only the Protestant Religion,
but the Church of England. And,
when I mention Honour, I mean that
Mode of divine Grace which is not only
consistent with, but dependent upon, this
Religion; and is consistent with, and dependent
upon, no other. Now to say
that the Honour I here mean, and which 

was, I thought, all the Honour I could
be supposed to mean, will uphold, much
less dictate, an Untruth, is to assert an
Absurdity too shocking to be conceived.’ 
‘I purposely avoided,’ says Square, ‘drawing
a Conclusion which I thought evident
from what I have said; but if you perceived
it, I am sure you have not attempted
to answer it. However, to drop
the Article of Religion, I think it is plain,
from what you have said, that we have
different Ideas of Honour; or why do
we not agree in the same Terms of its
Explanation? I have asserted, that true
Honour and true Virtue are almost synonimous
Terms, and they are both
founded on the unalterable Rule of Right,
and the eternal Fitness of Things; to which
an Untruth being absolutely repugnant
and contrary, it is certain that true Honour
cannot support an Untruth. In
this, therefore, I think we are agreed; 
but that this Honour can be said to be
founded on Religion, to which it is antecedent,
if by Religion be meant any positive
Law— 
‘I agree,’ answered Thwackum, with
great Warmth, ‘with a Man who asserts 

Honour to be antecedent to Religion!— 
Mr. Allworthy, did I agree—? 
He was proceeding, when Mr. Allworthy
interposed; telling them very coldly, they
had both mistaken his Meaning; for that
he had said nothing of true Honour. —It is
possible, however, he would not have easily
quieted the Disputants, who were growing
equally warm, had not another Matter now
fallen out, which put a final End to the
Conversation at present. 



Containing a necessary Apology for the Author; 
and a childish Incident, which perhaps requires
an Apology likewise. 
Before I proceed farther, I shall beg
leave to obviate some Misconstructions,
into which the Zeal of some few Readers
may lead them; for I would not willingly
give Offence to any, especially to
Men who are warm in the Cause of Virtue
or Religion. 
I hope, therefore, no Man will, by the
grossest Misunderstanding, or Perversion, 

of my Meaning, misrepresent me, as endeavouring
to cast any Ridicule on the greatest
Perfections of Human Nature; and which
do, indeed, alone purify and enoble the
Heart of Man, and raise him above the
Brute Creation. This, Reader, I will venture
to say, (and by how much the better
Man you are yourself, by so much the
more will you be inclined to believe me)
that I would rather have buried the Sentiments
of there two Persons in eternal Oblivion,
than have done any injury to either
of these glorious Causes. 
On the contrary, it is with a View to
their Service that I have taken upon me to
record tile Lives and Actions of two of
their false and pretended Champions. A
treacherous Friend is the most dangerous
Enemy; and I will say boldly, that both
Religion and Virtue have received more
real Discredit from Hypocrites, than the
wittiest Profligates or Infidels could ever
cast upon them: Nay farther, as these two,
in their Purity, are rightly called the Bands
of civil Society, and are indeed the greatest
of Blessings; so when poisoned and corrupted
with Fraud, Pretence and Affectation,
they have become the worst of civil
Curses, and have enabled Men to perpetrate 

the most cruel Mischiefs to their own Species. 
Indeed, I doubt not but this Ridicule
will in general be allowed; my chief Apprehension
is, as many true and just Sentiments
often came from the Mouths of
these Persons, lest the whole should be taken
together, and I should be conceived to ridicule
all alike. Now the Reader will be pleased
to consider, that as neither of these Men
were Fools, they could not be supposed to
have holden none but wrong Principles, and
to have uttered nothing but Absurdities; 
what Injustice, therefore, must I have done
to their Characters, had I selected only what
was bad, and how horridly wretched and
maimed must their Arguments have appeared! 
Upon the whole, it is not Religion or
Virtue, but the Want of them which is here
exposed. Had not Thwackum too much
neglected Virtue, and Square Religion, in
the Composition of their several Systems; 
and had not both Utterly discarded all natural
Goodness of Heart, they had never been
represented as the Objects of Derision in this
History; in which we will now proceed. 

This Matter, then, which put an end
to the Debate mentioned in the last Chapter,
was no other than a Quarrel between
Master Blifil and Tom Jones, the Consequence
of which had been a bloody Nose to
the former; for though Master Blifil, notwithstanding
he was the younger, was in Size
above the other's Match, yet Tom was
much his Superior at the noble Art of Boxing. 
Tom, however, cautiously avoided all Engagements
with that Youth: For besides
that Tommy Jones was an inoffensive Lad
amidst all his Roguery, and really loved
Blifil; Mr. Thwackum being always the
Second of the latter, would have been sufficient
to deter him. 
But Well says a certain Author, No Man
is wise at all Hours; it is therefore no
Wonder that a Boy is not so. A Difference
arising at Play between the two Lads, Master
Blifil called Tom a Beggarly Bastard. 
Upon which the latter, who was somewhat
passionate in his Disposition, immediately
caused that Phænomenon in the Face of the
former, which we have above remembred. 

Master Blifil now, with his Blood running
from his Nose, and the Tears galloping
after from his Eyes, appeared before
his Uncle, and the tremendous Thwackum. 
In which Court an Indictment of Assault,
Battery, and wounding, was instantly preferred
against Tom; who in his Excuse only
pleaded the Provocation, which was indeed
all the Matter that Master Blifil had omitted. 
It is indeed possible, that this Circumstance
might have escaped his Memory; 
for, in his Reply, he positively insisted,
that he had made Use of no such Appellation; 
adding, ‘Heaven forbid such naughty
Words should ever come out of his Mouth.’ 
Tom, though against all Form of Law,
rejoined in Affirmance of the Words. Upon
which Master Blifil said, ‘It is no Wonder. 
Those who will tell one Fib, will hardly stick
at another. If I had told my Master such
a wicked Fib as you have done, I should
be ashamed to shew my Face.’ 
‘What Fib, Child,’ cries Thwackum
pretty eagerly? 

‘Why, he told you that Nobody was
with him a shooting when he killed the
Partridge; but he knows, (here he burst
into a Flood of Tears) yes, he knows; 
for he confessed it to me, that Black Jack
the Game-keeper was there. Nay, he
said,—Yes you did,—deny it if you
can, That you would not have confest
the Truth, though Master had cut you
to Pieces.’ 
At this the Fire flashed from Thwackum's
Eyes; and he cried out in Triumph: ‘Oh
ho! This is your mistaken Notion of
Honour! This is the Boy who was not to
be whipped again!’ But Mr. Allworthy,
with a more gentle Aspect, turned towards
the Lad, and said, ‘Is this true, Child? 
How came you to persist so obstinately in
a Falshood?’ 
Tom said, ‘He scorned a Lie as much
as any one; but he thought his Honour
engaged him to act as he did; for he had
promised the poor Fellow to conceal him; 
which,’ he said, ‘he thought himself farther
obliged to, as the Game-keeper had
begged him not to go into the Gentleman's
Manor, and had at last gone himself in 

Compliance with his Persuasions. He
said, this was the whole Truth of the
Matter, and he would take his Oath of
it;’ and concluded with very passionately
begging Mr. Allworthy, ‘to have Compason
the poor Fellow's Family, especially
as he himself had been only guilty, and
the other had been very difficultly prevailed
on to do what he did. ‘Indeed Sir,’ 
said he, ‘it could hardly be called a Lie
that I told; for the poor Fellow was entirely
innocent of the whole Matter. I
should have gone alone after the Birds; 
nay, I did go at first, and he only followed
me to prevent more Mischief. Do,
pray, Sir, let me be punished, take my
little Horse away again; but pray, Sir,
forgive poor George.’ 
Mr. Allworthy hesitated a few Moments,
and then dismissed the Boys, advising them
to live more friendly and peaceably together. 




The Opinions of the Divine and the Philosopher
concerning the two Boys; with some
Reasons for their Opinions, and other
Matters. 
It is probable, that by disclosing this Secret,
which had been communicated in
the utmost Confidence to him, young Blifil
preserved his Companion from a good Lashing: 
For the Offence of the bloody Nose
would have been of itself sufficient Cause for
Thwackum to have proceeded to Correction; 
but now this was totally absorbed, in the
Consideration of the other Matter; and
with Regard to this, Mr. Allworthy declared
privately, he thought the Boy deserved
Reward rather than Punishment; so
that Thwackum's Hand was withheld by a
general Pardon. 
Thwackum, whose Meditations were full
of Birch, exclaimed against this weak, and,
as he said he would venture to call it,
wicked Lenity. To remit the Punishment
of such Crimes was, he said, to encourage
them. He enlarged much on the Correction
of Children, and quoted many Texts from 

Solomon, and others; which being to be
found in so many other Books, shall not be
found here. He then applied himself to the
Vice of Lying, on which Head he was altogether
as learned as he had been on the
other. 
Square said, he had been endeavouring to
reconcile the Behaviour of Tom with his Idea
of perfect Virtue; but could not. He
owned there was something which at first
Sight appeared like Fortitude in the Action; 
but as Fortitude was a Virtue, and Falshood
a Vice, they could by no Means agree or
unite together. He added, that as this was
in some measure to confound Virtue and
Vice, it might be worth Mr. Thwackum's
Consideration, whether a larger Castigation
might not be laid on, upon that Account. 
As both there learned Men concurred in
censuring Jones, so were they no less unanimous
in applauding Master Blifil. To
bring Truth to light, was by the Parson
asserted to be the Duty of every religious
Man; and by the Philosopher this was declared
to be highly conformable with the
Rule of Right, and the eternal and unalterable
Fitness of Things. 

All this, however, weighed very little
with Mr. Allworthy. He could not be prevailed
on to sign the Warrant for the Execution
of Jones. There was something
within his own Breast with which the invincible
Fidelity which that Youth had preserved,
corresponded much better than it
had done with the Religion of Thwackum,
or with the Virtue of Square. He therefore
strictly ordered the former of these Gentlemen
to abstain from laying violent Hands
on Tom for what had past. The Pedagogue
was obliged to obey those Orders; but not
without great Reluctance, and frequent Mutterings,
that the Boy would be certainly
spoiled. 
Towards the Game-keeper the good Man
behaved with more Severity. He presently
summoned that poor Fellow before him,
and after many bitter Remonstrances, paid
him his Wages, and dismist him from his
Service; for Mr. Allworthy rightly observed
that there was great Difference between being
guilty of a Falsehood to excuse yourself, and
to excuse another. He likewise urged, as
the principal Motive to his inflexible Severity
against this Man, that he had basely
suffered Tom Jones to undergo so heavy a 

Punishment for his Sake, whereas he ought
to have prevented it by making the Discovery
himself. 
When this Story became public, many
People differed from Square and Thwackum,
in judging the Conduct of the two Lads on
the Occasion. Master Blifil was generally
called a sneaking Rascal, a poor-spirited
Wretch; with other Epithets of the like
Kind; whilst Tom was honoured with the
Appellations of a brave Lad, a jolly Dog,
and an honest Fellow. Indeed his Behaviour
to Black George much ingratiated him
with all the Servants; for though that Fellow
was before universally disliked, yet he
was no sooner turned away than he was as
universally pitied; and the Friendship and
Gallantry of Tom Jones was celebrated by
them all with the highest Applause; and
they condemned Master Blifil, as openly as
they durst, without incurring the Danger of
offending his Mother. For all this, however,
poor Tom smarted in the Flesh; for
though Thwackum had been inhibited to exercise
his Arm on the foregoing Account; yet,
as the Proverb says, It is easy to find a
Stick, &c. So was it easy to find a Rod; 
and, indeed, the not being able to find one
was the only thing which could have kept 

Thwackum any long Time from chastising
poor Jones. 
Had the bare Delight in the Sport been
the only Inducement to the Pedagogue, it
is probable, Master Blifil would likewise
have had his Share; but though Mr. Allworthy
had given him frequent Orders to
make no Difference between the Lads, yet
was Thwackum altogether as kind and
gentle to this Youth, as he was harsh, nay
even barbarous, to the other. To say the
Truth, Blifil had greatly gained his Master's
Affections; partly by the profound Respect
he always shewed his Person, but much
more by the decent Reverence with
which he received his Doctrine; for he had
got by Heart, and frequently repeated his
Phrases, and maintained all his Master's
religious Principles with a Zeal which was
surprising in one so young, and which
greatly endeared him to the worthy Preceptor. 
Tom Jones, on the other hand, was not
only deficient in outward Tokens of Respect,
often forgetting to pull off his Hat,
or to bow at his Master's Approach; but was
altogether as unmindful both of his Master's
Precepts and Example. He was indeed a 

thoughtless, giddy Youth, with little Sobriety
in his Manners, and less in his Countenance; 
and would often very impudently
and indecently laugh at his Companion for
his serious Behaviour. 
Mr. Square had the same Reason for his
Preference of the former Lad; for Tom
Jones shewed no more Regard to the learned
Discourses which this Gentleman would
sometimes throw away upon him, than to
those of Thwackum. He once ventured to
make a Jest of the Rule of Right; and at
another Time said, He believed there was
no Rule in the World capable of making
such a Man as his Father, (for so Mr. Allworthy
suffered himself to be called). 
Master Blifil, on the contrary, had Address
enough at sixteen to recommend himself
at one and the same Time to both these
Opposites. With one he was all Religion,
with the other he was all Virtue. And
when both were present, he was profoundly
silent, which both interpreted in his Favour
and their own. 
Nor was Blifil contented with flattering
both these Gentlemen to their Faces; he
took frequent Occasions of praising them 

behind their Backs to Allworthy; before
whom, when they were alone together, and
when his Uncle commended any religious
or virtuous Sentiment (for many such
came constantly from him) he seldom fail'd
to ascribe it to the good Instructions he
had received from either Thwackum or
Square: For he knew his Uncle repeated
all such Compliments to the Persons for
whose Use they were meant; and he found
by Experience the great Impressions which
they made on the Philosopher, as well as
on the Divine: For, to say the Truth, there
is no kind of Flattery so irresistible as this,
at second Hand. 
The young Gentleman, moreover, soon
perceived how extremely grateful all those
Panegyricks on his Instructors were to Mr.
Allworthy himself, as they so loudly resounded
the Praise of that singular Plan of
Education which he had laid down: For
this worthy Man having observed the imperfect
Institution of our public Schools,
and the many Vices which Boys were there
liable to learn, had resolved to educate his
Nephew, as well as the other Lad, whom
he had in a Manner adopted, in his own
House; where he thought their Morals
would escape all that Danger of being corrupted, 

to which they would be unavoidably
exposed in any public School or University. 
Having therefore determined to commit
these Boys to the Tuition of a private Tutor,
Mr. Thwackum was recommended to him for
that Office, by a very particular Friend,
of whose Understanding Mr. Allworthy had
a great Opinion, and in whose Integrity he
placed much Confidence. This Thwackum
was Fellow of a College, where he almost
entirely resided; and had a great Reputation
for Learning, Religion and Sobriety of
Manners. And these were doubtless the
Qualifications by which Mr. Allworthy's
Friend had been induced to recommend
him; tho' indeed this Friend had some
Obligations to Thwackum's Family, who
were the most considerable Persons in a
Borough which that Gentleman represented
in Parliament. 
Thwackum, at his first Arrival, was extremely
agreeable to Allworthy; and indeed
he perfectly answered the Character which
had been given of him. Upon longer Acquaintance,
however, and more intimate
Conversation, this worthy Man saw Infirmities
in the Tutor, which he could have 

wished him to have been without; tho' as
those seemed greatly over-ballanced by his
good Qualities, they did not incline Mr.
Allworthy to part with him; nor would
they indeed have justified such a Proceeding: 
For the Reader is greatly mistaken,
if he conceives that Thwackum appeared to
Mr. Allworthy in the same Light as he doth
to him in this History; and he is as much
deceived, if he imagines, that the most intimate
Acquaintance which he himself could
have had with that Divine, would have informed
him of those Things which we, from
our Inspiration, are enabled to open and
discover. Of Readers who from such Conceits
as these, condemn the Wisdom or
Penetration of Mr. Allworthy, I shall not
scruple to say, that they make a very bad
and ungrateful Use of that Knowledge
which we have communicated to them. 
These apparent Errors in the Doctrine of
Thwackum, served greatly to palliate the
contrary Errors in that of Square, which our
good Man no less saw and condemned. He
thought indeed that the different Exuberancies
of these Gentlemen, would correct their
different Imperfections; and that from both,
especially with his Assistance, the two Lads
would derive sufficient Precepts of true Religion 

and Virtue. If the Event happened
contrary to his Expectations, this possibly
proceeded from some Fault in the Plan itself; 
which the Reader hath my Leave to
discover, if he can: For we do not pretend
to introduce any infallible Characters into
this History; where we hope nothing will
be found which hath never yet been seen
in human Nature. 
To return therefore; the Reader will
not, I think, wonder that the different Behaviour
of the two Lads above commemorated,
produced the different Effects, of
which he hath already seen some Instance; 
and besides this, there was another Reason
for the Conduct of the Philosopher and the
Pedagogue; but this being Matter of great
Importance, we shall reveal it in the next
Chapter. 



Containing a better Reason still for the before
mentioned Opinions. 
It is to be known then, that those two
learned Personages, who have lately
made a considerable Figure on the Theatre 

of this History, had from their first Arrival
at Mr. Allworthy's House, taken so great
an Affection, the one to his Virtue, the
other to his Religion, that they had meditated
the closest Alliance with him. 
For this Purpose they had cast their
Eyes on that fair Widow, whom, tho' we
have not for rome Time made any Mention
of her, the Reader, we trust, hath not
forgot. Mrs. Blifil was indeed the Object
to which they both aspired. 
It may seem remarkable that of four
Persons whom we have commemorated at
Mr. Allworthy's House, three of them
should fix their Inclinations on a Lady who
was never greatly celebrated for her Beauty,
and who was, moreover, now a little
descended into the Vale of Years; but in
reality Bosom Friends, and intimate Acquaintance,
have a kind of natural Propensity
to particular Females at the House of a
Friend; viz. to his Grand-mother, Mother,
Sister, Daughter, Aunt, Niece and Cousin,
when they are rich, and to his Wife, Sister,
Daughter, Niece, Cousin, Mistress or Servant
Maid, if they should be handsome. 

We would not, however, have our Reader
imagine, that Persons of such Characters
as were supported by Thwackum and
Square, would undertake a Matter of this
Kind, which hath been a little censured by
some rigid Moralists, before they had thoroughly
examined it, and considered whether
it was (as Shakespear phrases it) ‘Stuff
o' th' Conscience’ or no. Thwackum was
encouraged to the Undertaking, by reflecting,
that to court your Neighbour's Sister
is no where forbidden, and he knew it was
a Rule in the Construction of all Laws,
that “Expressum facit cessare Tacitum,” the
Sense of which is, “When a Law-giver
sets down plainly his whole Meaning,
we are prevented from making him mean
what we please ourselves.” As some
Instances of Women, therefore, are
mentioned in the divine Law, which forbids
us to covet our Neighbours Goods,
and that of a Sister omitted, he concluded
it to be lawful. And as to Square, who
was in his Person what is called a jolly Fellow,
or a Widow's Man, he easily reconciled
his Choice to the eternal Fitness of Things. 
Now, as both these Gentlemen were industrious
in taking every Opportunity of 

recommending themselves to the Widow,
they apprehended one certain Method was,
by giving her Son the constant Preference
to the Other Lad; and as they conceived
the Kindness and Affection which Mr. Allworthy
shewed the latter, must be highly
disagreeable to her, they doubted not but
the laying hold on all Occasions to degrade
and villify him, would be highly pleasing
to her; who, as she hated the Boy, must
love all those who did him any Hurt. In
this Thwackum had the Advantage; for
while Square could only scarify the poor
Lad's Reputation, he could flea his Skin; 
and indeed he considered every Lash he
gave him as a Compliment paid to his
Mistress; so that he could with the utmost
Propriety repeat this old flogging Line,
“Castigo te non quod odio habeam, sed quod,
Amem; I chastize thee not out of Hatred,
but out of Love.” And this indeed
he often had in his Mouth, or rather, according
to the old Phrase, never more properly
applied, at his Fingers Ends. 
For this Reason principally, the two
Gentlemen concurred, as we have seen
above, in their Opinion concerning the two
Lads; this being indeed almost the only
Instance of their concurring on any Point: 

For beside the Difference of their Principles,
they had both long ago strongly suspected
each others Design, and hated one another
with no little Degree of Inveteracy. 
This mutual Animosity was a good
deal increased by their alternate Successes: 
For Mrs. Blifil knew what they would be
at long before they imagined it; or indeed
intended she should: For they proceeded
with great Caution lest she should be offended,
and acquaint Mr. Allworthy; but
they had no Reason for any such Fear. She
was well enough pleased with a Passion of
which she intended none should have any
Fruits but herself. And the only Fruits
she designed for herself were Flattery and
Courtship; for which Purpose, she soothed
them by Turns, and a long Time
equally. She was indeed rather inclined to
favour the Parson's Principles; but Square's
Person was more agreeable to her Eye; 
for he was a comely Man; whereas the
Pedagogue did in Countenance very nearly
resemble that Gentleman, who in the Harlot's
Progress is seen correcting the Ladies
in Bridewel. 
Whether Mrs. Blifil had been surfeited
with the Sweets of Marriage; or disgusted 

by its Bitters, or from what other Cause it
proceeded, I will not determine; but she
could never be brought to listen to any second
Proposals. However, she at last conversed
with Square, with such a Degree of
Intimacy, that malicious Tongues began to
whisper Things of her, to which, as well for the
Sake of the Lady, as that they were highly
disagreeable to the Rule of Right, and
the Fitness of Things, we will give no Credit; 
and therefore shall not blot our Paper
with them. The Pedagogue, 'tis certain,
whipt on without getting a Step nearer to
his Journey's End. 
Indeed he had committed a great Error,
and that Square discovered much sooner than
himself. Mrs. Blifil (as perhaps the Reader
may have formerly guess'd) was not
over and above pleased with the Behaviour
of her Husband; nay, to be honest, she
absolutely hated him, till his Death at last a
little reconciled him to her Affections. It
will not be therefore greatly wondered at,
if she had not the most violent Regard to
the Offspring she had by him. And, in
fact, she had so little of this Regard, that
in his Infancy she seldom saw her Son, or
took any Notice of him; and hence she acquiesced,
after a little Reluctance, in all 

the Favours which Mr. Allworthy showered
on the Foundling; whom the good Man
called his own Boy, and in all Things put
on an intire Equality with Master Blifil. This
Acquiescence in Mrs. Blifil was considered
by the Neighbours, and by the Family, as
a Mark of her Condescension to her Brother's
Humour, and she was imagined by all
others, as well as Thwackum and Square, to
hate the Foundling in her Heart; nay, the
more Civility she shewed him, the more
they conceived she detested him, and the
surer Schemes she was laying for his Ruin: 
For as they thought it her Interest to hate
him, it was very difficult for her to perswade
them she did not. 
Thwackum was the more confirmed in
his Opinion, as she had more than once
slily caused him to whip Tom Jones, when
Mr. Allworthy, who was an Enemy to this
Exercise, was abroad; whereas she had never
given any such Orders concerning young
Blifil. And this had likewise imposed upon
Square. In reality, though she certainly
hated her own Son; of which, however
monstrous it appears, I am assured she is
not a singular Instance, she appeared, notwithstanding
all her outward Compliance, to
be in her Heart sufficiently displeased with 

all the Favour shewn by Mr. Allworthy to
the Foundling. She frequently complained
of this behind her Brother's Back, and very
sharply censured him for it, both to Thwackum
and Square; nay, she would throw it
in the Teeth of Allworthy himself, when a
little Quarrel or Miff, as it is vulgarly called,
arose between them. 
However, when Tom grew up, and gave
Tokens of that Gallantry of Temper which
greatly recommends Men to Women, this
Disinclination which she had discovered to
him when a Child, by Degrees abated, and
at last she so evidently demonstrated her
Affection to him to be much stronger than
what she bore her own Son, that it was
impossible to mistake her any longer. She
was so desirous of often seeing him, and
discovered such Satisfaction and Delight in
his Company, that before he was eighteen
Years old, he was become a Rival to both
Square and Thwackum; and what is worse,
the whole Country began to talk as loudly
of her Inclination to Tom, as they had before
done of that which she had shewn to
Square; on which Account the Philosopher
conceived the most implacable Hatred for
our poor Hero. 




In which the Author himself makes his Appearance
on the Stage. 
Tho' Mr. Allworthy was not of himself
hasty to see Things in a disadvantageous
Light, and was a Stranger to
the public Voice, which seldom reaches to
a Brother or a Husband, tho' it rings in
the Ears of all the Neighbourhood; yet
was this Affection of Mrs. Blifil to Tom,
and the Preference which she too visibly
gave him to her own Son, of the utmost
Disadvantage to that Youth. 
For such was the Compassion which inhabited
Mr. Allworthy's Mind, that nothing
but the Steel of Justice could ever subdue
it. To be unfortunate in any Respect was
sufficient, if there was no Demerit to counterpoise
it, to turn the Scale of that good
Man's Pity, and to engage his Friendship,
and his Benefaction. 
When therefore he plainly saw Master Blifil
was absolutely detested (for that he was)
by his own Mother, he began, on that Account 

only, to look with an Eye of Compassion
upon him; and what the Effects of
Compassion are in good and benevolent
Minds, I need not here explain to most of
my Readers. 
Henceforward, he saw every Appearance
of Virtue in the Youth thro' the magnifying
End, and viewed all his Faults with the
Glass inverted, so that they became scarce
perceptible. And this perhaps the amiable
Temper of Pity may make commendable; 
but the next Step the Weakness of human
Nature alone must excuse: For he no
sooner perceived that Preference which Mrs.
Blifil gave to Tom, than that poor Youth,
(however innocent) began to sink in his
Affections as he rose in hers. This, it is
true, would of itself alone never have been
able to eradicate Jones from his Bosom; but
it was greatly injurious to him, and prepared
Mr. Allworthy's Mind for those Impressions,
which afterwards produced the
mighty Events, that will be contained hereafter
in this History; and to which, it must
be confest, the unfortunate Lad, by his own
Wantonness, Wildness, and Want of Caution,
too much contributed. 

In recording some Instances of these, we
shall, if rightly understood, afford a very
useful Lesson to those well-disposed Youths,
who shall hereafter be our Readers: For
they may here find that Goodness of Heart,
and Openness of Temper, tho' these may give
them great Comfort within, and administer
to an honest Pride in their own Minds, will
by no Means, alas! do their Business in the
World. Prudence and Circumspection are
necessary even to the best of Men. They
are indeed as it were a Guard to Virtue,
without which she can never be
safe. It is not enough that your Designs,
nay that your Actions are intrinsically good,
you must take Care they shall appear so. 
If your Inside be never so beautiful, you
must preserve a fair Outside also. This
must be constantly looked to, or Malice and
Envy will take Care to blacken it so, that
the Sagacity and Goodness of an Allworthy
will not be able to see through it, and to discern
the Beauties within. Let this, my
young Readers, be your constant Maxim,
That no Man can be good enough to enable
him to neglect the Rules of Prudence; nor
will Virtue herself look beautiful, unless she
be bedecked with the outward Ornaments
of Decency and Decorum. And this Precept, 

my worthy Disciples, if you read
with due Attention, you will, I hope, find
sufficiently enforced by Examples in the following
Pages. 
I ask Pardon for this short Appearance,
by Way of Chorus on the Stage. It is in
Reality for my own Sake, that while I am
discovering the Rocks on which Innocence
and Goodness often split, I may not be misunderstood
to recommend the very Means
to my worthy Readers, by which I intend
to shew them they will be undone. And
this, as I could not prevail on any of my
Actors to speak, I was obliged to declare
myself. 



A childish Incident, in which, however, is
seen a good natur'd Disposition in Tom
Jones. 
The Reader may remember, that
Mr. Allworthy gave Tom Jones a little
Horse, as a kind of smart Money for the
Punishment, which he imagined he had suffered
innocently. 

This Horse Tom kept above half a Year,
and then rode him to a neighbouring Fair,
and sold him. 
At his Return, being questioned by
Thwackum, what he had done with the Money
for which the Horse was sold, he
frankly declared he would not tell him. 
Oho! says Thwackum, you will not!
then I will have it out of your Br&wblank;h; 
that being the Place to which he always applied
for Information, on every doubtful
Occasion. 
Tom was now mounted on the Back of
a Footman, and every Thing prepared for
Execution, when Mr. Allworthy entering
the Room, gave the Criminal a Reprieve,
and took him with him into another Apartment; 
where Mr. Allworthy being only
present with Tom, he put the same Question
to him which Thwackum had before asked
him. 
Tom answered, He could in Duty refuse
him nothing; but as for that tyrannical
Rascal, he would never make him any other
Answer than with a Cudgel, with 

which he hoped soon to be able to pay
him for all his Barbarities. 
Mr. Allworthy very severely reprimanded
the Lad, for his indecent and disrespectful
Expressions concerning his Master; but
much more for his avowing an Intention of
Revenge. He threatened him with the
entire Loss of his Favour, if he ever heard
such another Word from his Mouth; for
he said, he would never support or befriend
a Reprobate. By these and the like Declarations,
he extorted some Compunction
from Tom, in which that Youth was not
over sincere: For he really meditated some
Return for all the smarting Favours he had
received at the Hands of the Pedagogue. He
was, however, brought by Mr. Allworthy to
express a Concern for his Resentment against
Thwackum; and then the good Man, after
some wholesome Admonition, permitted him
to proceed, which he did, as follows. 
‘Indeed, my dear Sir, I love and honour
you more than all the World; I
know the great Obligations I have to you,
and should detest myself, if I thought
my Heart was capable of Ingratitude. 
Could the little Horse you gave me speak,
I am sure he could tell you how fond I 

was of your Present: For I had more
Pleasure in feeding him, than in riding
him. Indeed, Sir, it went to my Heart
to part with him; nor would I have sold
him upon any other Account in the
World than what I did. You yourself,
Sir, I am convinced, in my Case, would
have done the same: For none ever so
sensibly felt the Misfortunes of others. 
What would you feel, dear Sir, if you
thought yourself the Occasion of them? — 
Indeed, Sir, there never was any Misery
like theirs. —Like whose, Child,” says
Allworthy, “what do you mean? Oh,
Sir,’ answered Tom, ‘your poor Game-keeper,
with all his large Family, ever
since your discarding him, have been perishing
with all the Miseries of Cold and
Hunger. I could not bear to see these
poor Wretches naked and starving, and
at the same Time know myself to have
been the Occasion of all their Sufferings. — 
I could not bear it, Sir, upon my Soul, I
could not.” (Here the Tears run down
his Cheeks, and he thus proceeded) ‘It
was to save them from absolute Destruction,
I parted with your dear Present,
notwithstanding all the Value I had for it. 
—I sold the Horse for them, and they
have every Farthing of the Money.’ 

Mr. Allworthy now stood silent for some
Moments, and before he spoke, the Tears
started from his Eyes. He at length dismissed
Tom with a gentle Rebuke, advising
him for the future to apply to him in
Cases of Distress, rather than to use extraordinary
Means of relieving them himself. 
This Affair was afterwards the Subject
of much Debate between Thwackum and
Square. Thwackum held, that this was flying
in Mr. Allworthy's Face, who had intended
to punish the Fellow for his Disobedience. 
He said, in some Instances, what the
World called Charity appeared to him to
be opposing the Will of the Almighty,
which had marked some particular Persons
for Destruction; and that this was in like
manner acting in Opposition to Mr. Allworthy; 
concluding, as usual, with a hearty Recommendation
of Birch. 
Square argued strongly, on the other Side,
in Opposition perhaps to Thwackum, or in
Compliance with Mr. Allworthy, who seemed
very much to approve what Jones had done. 
As to what he urged on this Occasion, as
I am convinced most of my Readers will
be much abler Advocates for poor Jones, 

it would be impertinent to relate it. Indeed
it was not difficult to reconcile to the Rule
of Right, an Action which it would have
been impossible to deduce from the Rule of
Wrong. 



Containing an Incident of a more heinous
Kind, with the Comments of Thwackum
and Square. 
It hath been observed by some Man of
much greater Reputation for Wisdom
than myself, that Misfortunes seldom come
single. An Instance of this may, I believe,
be seen in those Gentlemen who have the
Misfortune to have any of their Rogueries
detected: For here Discovery seldom stops
till the whole is come out. Thus it happened
to poor Tom; who was no sooner pardoned
for selling the Horse, than he was
discovered to have some time before sold a
fine Bible which Mr. Allworthy gave him,
the Money arising from which Sale he had
disposed in the same Manner. This Bible
Master Blifil had purchased, though he had
already such another of his own, partly out
of Respect for the Book, and partly out of 

Friendship to Tom, being unwilling that the
Bible should be sold out of the Family at
half Price. He therefore deposited the said
half Price himself; for he was a very prudent
Lad, and so careful of his Money,
that he had laid up almost every Penny
which he had received from Mr. Allworthy. 
Some People have been noted to be able to
read in no Book but their own. On the contrary,
from the Time when Master Blifil
was first possessed of this Bible, he never
used any other. Nay, he was seen reading
in it much oftner than he had before been
in his own. Now, as he frequently asked
Thwackum to explain difficult Passages to
him, that Gentleman unfortunately took
Notice of Tom's Name, which was written
in many Parts of the Book. This brought
on an Enquiry, which obliged Master Blifil
to discover the whole Matter. 
Thwackum was resolved, a Crime of this
Kind, which he called Sacrilege, should not
go unpunished. He therefore proceeded
immediately to Castigation; and not contented
with that, he acquainted Mr. Allworthy,
at their next Meeting, with this
monstrous Crime, as it appeared to him; 

inveighing against Tom in the most bitter
Terms, and likening him to the Buyers
and Sellers who were driven out of the
Temple. 
Square saw this Matter in a very different
Light. He said, he could not perceive
any higher Crime in selling one Book, than
in selling another. That to sell Bibles was
strictly lawful by all Laws both divine and
human, and consequently there was no Unfitness
in it. He told Thwackum that his
great Concern on this Occasion brought to
his Mind the Story of a very devout Woman,
who out of pure Regard to Religion,
stole Tillotson's Sermons from a Lady of her
Acquaintance. 
This Story caused a vast Quantity of Blood
to rush into the Parson's Face, which of itself
was none of the palest; and he was going to
reply with great Warmth and Anger, had
not Mrs. Blifil, who was present at this
Debate, interposed. That Lady declared
herself absolutely of Mr. Square's Side. She
argued, indeed, very learnedly in Support
of his Opinion; and concluded with saying,
If Tom had been guilty of any Fault, she
must confess her own Son appeared to be
equally culpable; for that she could see no 

Difference between the Buyer and the Seller; 
both of whom were alike to be driven
out of the Temple. 
Mrs. Blifil having declared her Opinion,
put an End to the Debate. Square's Triumph
would almost have stopt his Words,
had he needed them; and Thwackum, besides
that, for Reasons before-mentioned, he
durst not venture at disobliging the Lady,
was almost choaked with Indignation. As
to Mr. Allworthy, he said, Since the Boy
had been already punished, he would not
deliver his Sentiments on the Occasion; and
whether he was, or was not angry with the
Lad, I must leave to the Reader's own
Conjecture. 
Soon after this, an Action was brought
against the Game-keeper by 'Squire Western
(the Gentleman in whose Manor the Partridge
was killed) for Depredations of the
like Kind. This was a most unfortunate
Circumstance for the Fellow, as it not
only of itself threatened his Ruin, but actually
prevented Mr. Allworthy from restoring
him to his Favour: For as that Gentleman
was walking out one Evening with Master
Blifil and young Jones, the latter slily drew
him to the Habitation of Black George; 

where the Family of that poor Wretch,
namely, his Wife and Children, were found
in all the Misery with which Cold, Hunger,
and Nakedness, can affect human Creatures: 
For as to the Money they had received
from Jones, former Debts had consumed
almost the whole. 
Such a Scene as this could not fail of affecting
the Heart of Mr. Allworthy. He
immediately gave the Mother a couple of
Guineas, with which he bid her cloath her
Children. The poor Woman burst into
Tears at this Goodness, and while she was
thanking him, could not refrain from expressing
her Gratitude to Tom; who had,
she said, long preserved both her and hers
from starving. We have not, says she, had a
Morsel to eat, nor have these poor Children
had a Rag to put on, but what his
Goodness hath bestowed on us: For indeed,
besides the Horse and the Bible, Tom had
sacrificed a Night-gown and other Things
to the Use of this distressed Family. 
On their Return home, Tom made use
of all his Eloquence to display the Wretchedness
of these People, and the Penitence
of Black George himself; and in this he succeeded
so well, that Mr. Allworthy said, He 

thought the Man had suffered enough for
what was past; that he would forgive him,
and think of some Means of providing for
him and his Family. 
Jones was so delighted with this News,
that though it was dark when they returned
home, he could not help going back a Mile
in a Shower of Rain to acquaint the poor
Woman with the glad Tidings; but, like
other hasty Divulgers of News, he only
brought on himself the Trouble of contradicting
it: For the Ill-fortune of Black
George made use of the very Opportunity
of his Friend's Absence to overturn all
again. 



In which Master Blifil and Jones appear in
different Lights. 
Master Blifil fell very short of his
Companion in the amiable Quality
of Mercy; but he as greatly exceeded him
in one of a much higher Kind, namely, in
Justice: In which he followed both the Precepts 

and Example of Thwackum and Square; 
for though they would both make frequent
Use of the Word Mercy, yet it was plain,
that in reality Square held it to be inconsistent
with the Rule of Right; and
Thwackum was for doing Justice, and leaving
Mercy to Heaven. The two Gentlemen
did indeed somewhat differ in Opinion
concerning the Objects of this sublime Virtue; 
by which Thwackum would probably
have destroyed one half of Mankind, and
Square the other half. 
Master Blifil then, though he had kept
Silence in the Presence of Jones, yet when
he had better considered the Matter, he 
could by no Means endure the Thought of
suffering his Uncle to confer Favours on the
Undeserving. He therefore resolved immediately
to acquaint him with the Fact
which we have above slightly hinted to the
Readers. The truth of which was as follows: 
The Game-keeper, about a Year after he
was dismissed from Mr. Allworthy's Service,
and before Tom's selling the Horse, being in
Want of Bread, either to fill his own Mouth,
or those of his Family, as he passed through 

a Field belonging to Mr. Western, espied
a Hare sitting in her Form. This Hare
he had basely and barbarously knocked
on the Head, against the Laws of the
Land, and no less against the Laws of
Sportsmen. 
The Higler to whom the Hare was sold, being
unfortunately taken many Months after
with a Quantity of Game upon him, was
obliged to make his Peace with the 'Squire
by becoming Evidence against some Poacher. 
And now Black George was pitched upon by
him as being a Person already obnoxious to
Mr. Western, and one of no good Fame in
the Country. He was, besides, the best
Sacrifice the Higler could make, as he had
supplied him with no Game since; and by
this Means the Witness had an Opportunity
of screening his better Customers: For the
'Squire, being charmed with the Power of
punishing Black George, whom a single
Transgression was sufficient to ruin, made
no further Enquiry. 
Had this Fact been truly laid before
Mr. Allworthy, it might probably have done
the Game-keeper very little Mischief. But
there is no Zeal blinder than that which is 

inspired with the Love of Justice against
Offenders. Master Blifil had forgot the
Distance of the Time. He varied likewise
in the Manner of the Fact; and, by the
hasty Addition of the single Letter S, he
considerably altered the Story; for he said
that George had wired Hares. These Alterations
might probably have been set
right, had not Master Blifil unluckily insisted
on a Promise of Secrecy from Mr. Allworthy,
before he revealed the Matter to him; 
but by that Means, the poor Game-keeper
was condemned, without having any Opportunity
to defend himself: For as the Fact of
killing the Hare, and of the Action brought,
were certainly true, Mr. Allworthy had no
Doubt concerning the rest. 
Short-lived then was the Joy of these poor
People; for Mr. Allworthy the next Morning
declared he had fresh Reason, without
assigning it, for his Anger, and strictly forbad
Tom to mention George any more; 
though as for his Family, he said, he would
endeavour to keep them from starving; but
as to the Fellow himself, he would leave
him to the Laws, which nothing could keep
him from breaking. 

Tom could by no Means divine what had
incensed Mr. Allworthy: For of Master Blifil
he had not the least Suspicion. However,
as his Friendship was to be tired out by
no Disappointments, he now determined to
try another Method of preserving the poor
Game-keeper from Ruin. 
Jones was lately grown very intimate
with Mr. Western. He had so greatly recommended
himself to that Gentleman,
by leaping over five-barred Gates, and by
other Acts of Sportmanship, that the Squire
had declared Tom would certainly make a
great Man, if he had but sufficient Encouragement. 
He often wished he had himself
a Son with such Parts; and one Day very
solemnly asserted at a drinking Bout, that
Tom should hunt a Pack of Hounds for a
thousand Pound of his Money with any
Huntsman in the whole County. 
By such kind of Talents he had so ingratiated
himself with the Squire, that he
was a most welcome Guest at his Table,
and a favourite Companion in his Sport: 
Every Thing which the Squire held most
dear; to wit, his Guns, Dogs, and Horses,
were now as much at the Command of 

Jones, as if they had been his own. He
resolved therefore to make use of this
Favour on Behalf of his Friend Black
George, whom he hoped to introduce into
Mr. Western's Family in the same Capacity
in which he had before served Mr. Allworthy. 
The Reader, if he considers that this Fellow
was already obnoxious to Mr. Western, and
if he considers farther the weighty Business
by which that Gentleman's Displeasure had
been incurred, will perhaps condemn this as
a foolish and desperate Undertaking; but
if he should not totally condemn young
Jones on that Account, he will greatly applaud
him for strengthening himself with all
imaginable Interest on so arduous an Occasion. 
For this Purpose then Tom applied to
Mr. Western's Daughter, a young Lady of
about seventeen Years of Age, whom her
Father, next after those necessary Implements
of Sport just before-mentioned, loved
and esteemed above all the World. Now
as she had some Influence on the Squire,
so Tom had some little Influence on her. 
But this being the intended Heroine of this 

Work, a Lady with whom we are ourselves
greatly in Love, and with whom
many of our Readers will probably be in
Love too before we part, it is by no Means
proper she should make her Appearance at
the End of a Book. 
