


Julian passes into a Fool. 
‘The next Visit I made to the World,
was performed in France, where I
was born in the Court of Lewis III. and
had afterwards the Honour to be preferred to
be Fool to the Prince, who was surnamed
Charles the Simple. But in reality, I know
not whether I might so properly be said to
have acted the Fool in his Court, as to have
made Fools of all others in it. Certain it is,
I was very far from being what is generally
understood by that Word, being a most cunning,
designing, arch Knave. I knew very
well the Folly of my Master and of many
others, and how to make my advantage of
this Knowledge. I was as dear to Charles
the Simple, as the Player Paris was to Domitian,
and, like him, bestowed all manner
of Offices and Honours on whom I pleased. 

This drew me a great Number of Followers
among the Courtiers, who really mistook
me for a Fool, and yet flattered my Understanding. 
There was particularly in the Court
a Fellow, who had neither Honour, Honesty,
Sense, Wit, Courage, Beauty, nor
indeed any one good Quality either of Mind
or Body, to recommend him: but was at
the same time, perhaps, as cunning a Monster
as ever lived. This Gentleman took
it into his head to list under my Banner,
and pursued me so very assiduously with
Flattery, constantly reminding me of my
good Sense, that I grew immoderately fond
of him: for tho' Flattery is not most judiciously
applied to Qualities which the Persons
flattered possess, yet as, notwithstanding
my being well assured of my own Parts,
I past in the whole Court for a Fool, this
Flattery was a very sweet Morsel to me. I
therefore got this Fellow preferred to a Bishopric,
but I lost my Flatterer by it: for
he never afterwards said a civil Thing to
me. 
‘I Never baulked my Imagination for
the Grossness of the Reflection on the Character 

of the greatest Noble, nay even the
King himself; of which, I will give you
a very bold Instance. One day, his simple
Majesty told me, he believed I had so much
Power, that his People looked on me as the
King, and himself as my Fool. At this I
pretended to be angry as with an Affront. 
Why, how now, says the King; Are you
ashamed of being a King? No Sir, says I,
but I am devilishly ashamed of my Fool. 
‘Hebert, Earl of Vermandois, had by
my means been restored to the Favour of
The Simple, (for so I used always to call
Charles.) He afterwards prevailed with the
King to take the City of Arras from Earl
Baldwin, by which means Hebert in exchange
for this City had Peronne restored
to him by Count Altmar. Baldwin came
to Court, in order to procure the Restoration
of his City; but, either through Pride or Ignorance,
neglected to apply to me. As I
met him at Court during his Solicitation, I
told him he did not apply the right way; 
he answered roughly, he should not ask a
Fool's Advice. I replied, I did not wonder
at his Prejudice; since he had miscarried already 

by following a Fool's Advice: but I
told him, there were Fools, who had more
Interest than that he had brought with him
to Court. He answered me surlily, he had
no Fool with him, for that he travelled alone. 
—Ay, my Lord, says I, I often travel
alone, and yet they will have it I always carry
a Fool with me. This raised a Laugh
among the By-standers, on which he gave
me a Blow. I immediately complained of
this Usage to The Simple, who dismissed the
Earl from Court with very hard Words, instead
of granting him the Favour he solicited. 
‘I Give you these rather as a Specimen of
my Interest and Impudence than of my Wit; 
indeed my Jests were commonly more admired
than they ought to be: for perhaps,
I was not in reality much more a Wit
than a Fool. But with the Latitude of unbounded
Scurrility, it is easy enough to attain
the Character of Wit, especially in a
Court, where, as all Persons hate and envy
one another heartily, and are at the same
time obliged by the constrained Behaviour
of Civility to profess the greatest Liking, so 

it is and must be wonderfully pleasant to
them to see the Follies of their Acquaintance
exposed by a third Person. Besides, the
Opinion of the Court is as uniform as the
Fashion, and is always guided by the Will
of the Prince or of the Favourite. I doubt
not that Caligula's Horse was universally
held in his Court to be a good and able Consul. 
In the same manner was I universally
acknowledged to be the wittiest Fool in
the World. Every Word I said raised
Laughter, and was held to be a Jest, especially
by the Ladies; who sometimes laughed
before I had discovered my Sentiment, and
often repeated that as a Jest which I did
not even intend as one. 
‘I Was as severe on the Ladies as on the
Men, and with the same Impunity; but
this at last cost me dear: for once having
joked the Beauty of a Lady, whose Name
was Adelaide, a Favourite of the Simple's; 
she pretended to smile and be pleased at
my Wit with the rest of the Company; 
but in reality, she highly resented it, and
endeavoured to undermine me with the
King. In which she so greatly succeeded 

(for what can't a favourite Woman do with
one who deserves the Surname of Simple?)
that the King grew every day more reserved
to me, and when I attempted any Freedom,
gave me such Marks of his Displeasure; that
the Courtiers (who have all Hawk's Eyes at
a Slight from the Sovereign) soon discerned
it: and indeed, had I been blind enough
not to have discovered that I had lost ground
in the Simple's Favour, by his own Change
in his Carriage towards me, I must have
found it, nay even felt it, in the Behaviour of
the Courtiers: for as my Company was two
days before solicited with the utmost Eagerness,
it was now rejected with as much Scorn. 
I was now the Jest of the Ushers and Pages; 
and an Officer of the Guards, on whom I
was a little jocose, gave me a Box on the Ear,
bidding me make free with my Equals. This
very Fellow had been my Butt for many
Years, without daring to lift his Hand against
me. 
‘But tho' I visibly perceived the Alteration
in the Simple, I was utterly unable to
make any Guess at the Occasion. I had
not the least Suspicion of Adelaide: for besides
her being a very good-humour'd Woman, 

I had often made severe Jests on her
Reputation, which I had all the reason
imaginable to believe had given her no Offence. 
But I soon perceived, that a Woman
will bear the most bitter Censures on her
Morals, easier than the smallest Reflection
on her Beauty: for she now declared publickly,
that I ought to be dismist from
Court, as the stupidest of Fools, and one in
whom there was no Diversion; and that
she wondered how any Person could have so
little Taste, as to imagine I had any Wit. 
This Speech was echoed through the Drawing
Room, and agreed to by all present. Every
one now put on an unusual Gravity on
their Countenance whenever I spoke; and
it was as much out of my power to raise
a Laugh, as formerly it had been for me to
open my Mouth without one. 
‘While my Affairs were in this posture,
I went one day into the Circle,
without my Fool's Dress. The Simple, who
would still speak to me, cried out, So, Fool,
what's the matter now? Sir, answered I
Fools are like to be so common a Commodity
at Court, that I am weary of my Coat. 

How dost thou mean, answered the Simple; 
What can make them commoner now than
usual? —O, Sir, said I, there are Ladies
here make your Majesty a Fool every Day
of their Lives. The Simple took no notice
of my Jest, and several present said my Bones
ought to be broke for my Impudence; but
it pleased the Queen, who knowing Adelaide,
whom she hated, to be the Cause of
my Disgrace, obtained me of the King, and
took me into her Service; so that I was
henceforth called the Queen's Fool, and in
her Court received the same Honour, and
had as much Wit as I had formerly had in
the King's. But as the Queen had really no
Power unless over her own Domestics, I
was not treated in general with that Complacence,
nor did I receive those Bribes and
Presents, which had once fallen to my
share. 
‘Nor did this confined Respect continue
long: for the Queen, who had in fact no
Taste for Humour, soon grew sick of my
Foolery, and forgetting the Cause for which
she had taken me, neglected me so much, 

that her Court grew intolerable to my Temper,
and I broke my Heart and died. 
‘Minos laughed heartily at several things
in my Story, and then telling me, No one
played the Fool in Elysium, bid me go back
again.’ 