


Julian performs the Parts of a
Knight and a Dancing-Master. 
‘I Now mounted the Stage in Sicily, and
became a Knight Templar: but as my
Adventures differ so little from those, I
have recounted you in the Character of a
common Soldier, I shall not tire you with
Repetition. The Soldier and the Captain
differ in reality so little from one another,
that it requires an accurate Judgment to distinguish
them; the latter wears finer Clothes,
and in Time of Success lives somewhat more
delicately: but as to every thing else, they
very nearly resemble one another. 
‘My next Step was into France, where
Fortune assigned me the Part of a Dancing-Master. 
I was so expert in my Profession,
that I was brought to Court in my Youth,
and had the Heels of Philip de Valois, who
afterwards succeeded Charles the Fair, committed
to my Direction. 

‘I Do not remember, that in any of the
Characters in which I appeared on Earth,
I ever assumed to my self a greater Dignity,
or thought my self of more real Importance
than now. I looked on Dancing as the
greatest Excellence of human Nature, and
on my self as the greatest Proficient in it. 
And indeed, this seemed to be the general
Opinion of the whole Court: for I was the
chief Instructor of the Youth of both Sexes,
whose Merit was almost entirely defined by
the Advances they made in that Science,
which I had the Honour to profess. As
to my self, I was so fully persuaded of this
Truth, that I not only slighted and despised
those who were ignorant of Dancing; 
but I thought the highest Character I could
give of any Man, was, that he made a
graceful Bow: for want of which Accomplishment,
I had a sovereign Contempt for
many Persons of Learning; nay, for some
Officers of the Army, and a few even of
the Courtiers themselves. 
‘Though so little of my Youth had
been thrown away in what they call Literature, 

that I could hardly write and read,
yet I composed a Treatise on Education; the
first Rudiments of which, as I taught, were
to instruct a Child in the Science of coming
handsomely into a Room. In this I corrected
many Faults of my Predecessors,
particularly that of being too much in a
hurry, and instituting a Child in the sublimer
Parts of Dancing before they are capable
of making their Honours. 
‘But as I have not now the same high
Opinion of my Profession, which I had then,
I shall not entertain you with a long History
of a Life which consisted of Borées and
Coupées. Let it suffice, that I lived to a very
old Age, and followed my Business as long
as I could crawl. At length I revisited my
old Friend Minos, who treated me with
very little Respect, and bad me dance back
again to Earth. 
‘I Did so, and was now once more born
an Englishman, bred up to the Church, and
at length arrived at the Station of a Bishop. 

‘Nothing was so remarkable in this
Character, as my always voting—* .’ 