


The History of the Wise Man. 
‘I Now returned to Rome, but in a very
different Character. Fortune had now
allotted me a serious Part to act. I had even
in my Infancy a grave Disposition, nor was
I ever seen to smile; which infused an Opinion
into all about me, that I was a Child
of great Solidity: some foreseeing that I 

should be a Judge, and others a Bishop. At
two Years old my Father presented me with
a Rattle, which I broke to pieces with great
indignation. This the good Parent, being extremely
wise, regarded as an eminent Symptom
of my Wisdom, and cried out in a
kind of Extasy, Well said, Boy, I warrant
thou makest a Great Man. 
‘At School, I could never be persuaded
to play with my Mates; not that I spent
my Hours in Learning, to which I was not
in the least addicted, nor indeed had I any
Talents for it. However, the Solemnity of
my Carriage won so much on my Master,
who was a most sagacious Person, that I was
his chief Favourite, and my Example on all Occasions
was recommended to the other Boys,
which filled them with Envy, and me with
Pleasure: but though they envied me, they
all paid me that involuntary Respect, which
it is the Curse attending this Passion to bear
towards its Object. 
‘I Had now obtained universally the Character
of a very wise young Man, which I
did not altogether purchase without Pains; for 

the Restraint I laid on my self in abstaining
from the several Diversions adapted to my
Years, cost me many a yearning: but the
Pride which I inwardly enjoyed in the fancied
Dignity of my Character, made me
some Amends. 
‘Thus I past on, without any thing very
memorable happening to me, till I arrived
at the Age of Twenty-three; when unfortunately
I fell acquainted with a young Neapolitan
Lady, whose Name was Ariadne. 
Her Beauty was so exquisite, that her first
Sight made a violent Impression on me; 
this was again improved by her Behaviour,
which was most genteel, easy, and affable: 
Lastly, her Conversation compleated the
Conquest. In this she discovered a strong
and lively Understanding, with the sweetest
and most benign Temper. This lovely
Creature was about Eighteen when I first
unhappily beheld her at Rome, in a Visit to
a Relation, with whom I had great Intimacy. 
As our Interviews at first were extremely
frequent, my Passions were captivated before
I apprehended the least Danger; and the
sooner probably, as the young Lady herself 

to whom I consulted every Method of Recommendation,
was not displeased with my
being her Admirer. 
‘Ariadne having spent three Months at
Rome, now returned to Naples, bearing my
Heart with her; on the other hand, I had
all the Assurances consistent with the constraint
under which the most perfect Modesty
lays a young Woman, that her own
Heart was not entirely unaffected. I soon
found her Absence gave me an Uneasiness
not easy to be born, or to remove. I now
first applied to Diversions (of the graver sort,
particularly to Music) but in vain; they rather
raised my Desires, and heightened my
Anguish. My Passion at length grew so
violent, that I began to think of satisfying
it. As the first Step to this, I cautiously
enquired into the Circumstances of Ariadne's
Parents, with which I was hitherto unacquainted; 
tho' indeed, I did not apprehend
they were extremely great, notwithstanding
the handsome Appearance of their Daughter
at Rome. Upon Examination, her Fortune
exceeded my Expectation; but was not sufficient
to justify my Marriage with her, in 

the Opinion of the Wise and Prudent. I
had now a violent Struggle between Wisdom
and Happiness, in which, after several
grievous Pangs, Wisdom got the better. I
could by no means prevail with my self to
sacrifice that Character of profound Wisdom,
which I had with such uniform Conduct
obtained, and with such Caution hitherto
preserved. I therefore resolved to conquer
my Affection, whatever it cost me, and
indeed it did not cost me a little. 
‘While I was engaged in this Conflict,
(for it lasted a long time) Ariadne returned to
Rome: Her Presence was a terrible Enemy
to my Wisdom, which even in her Absence
had with great difficulty stood its ground. 
It seems (as she hath since told me in Elysium
with much merriment) I had made
the same Impressions on her which she had
made on me. Indeed, I believe my Wisdom
would have been totally subdued by this
Surprize, had it not cunningly suggested to
me a Method of satisfying my Passion without
doing any Injury to my Reputation. 
This was by engaging her privately as a Mistress,
which was at that time reputable 

enough at Rome, provided the Affair was
managed with an Air of Slyness and Gravity,
tho' the Secret was known to the whole
City. 
‘I Immediately set about this Project,
and employed every Art and Engine to
effect it. I had particularly bribed her Priest,
and an old Female Acquaintance and distant
Relation of hers into my Interest: but
all was in vain; her Virtue opposed the Passion
in her Breast as strongly as Wisdom had
opposed it in mine. She received my Proposals
with the utmost Disdain, and presently
refused to see or hear from me any more. 
‘She returned again to Naples, and left
me in a worse Condition, than before. My
Days I now passed with the most irksome
Uneasiness, and my Nights were restless and
sleepless. The Story of our Amour was
now pretty public, and the Ladies talked of
our Match as certain; but my Acquaintance
denied their Assent, saying, No, no,
he is too wise to marry so imprudently. 
This their Opinion gave me, I own, very
great Pleasure: but to say the truth, scarce 

compensated the Pangs I suffered to preserve
it. 
‘One day, while I was balancing with
myself, and had almost resolved to enjoy my
Happiness, at the Price of my Character,
a Friend brought me word, that Ariadne
was married. This News struck me to the
Soul, and tho' I had Resolution enough to
maintain my Gravity before him, (for which
I suffered not a little the more) the Moment
I was alone, I threw myself into the most
violent Fit of Despair, and would willingly
have parted with Wisdom, Fortune, and
every thing else, to have retrieved her: but
that was impossible, and I had now nothing
but Time to hope a Cure from. This was
very tedious in performing it, and the longer
as Ariadne had married a Roman Cavalier,
was now become my near Neighbour, and
I had the mortification of seeing her make
the best of Wives, and of having the Happiness,
which I had lost, every day before
my Eyes. 
‘If I suffered so much on account of my
Wisdom, in having refused Ariadne, I was 

not much more obliged to it, for procuring
me a rich Widow, who was recommended
to me by an old Friend, as a very prudent
Match, and, indeed, so it was; her
Fortune being superiour to mine, in the
same Proportion as that of Ariadne had been
inferiour. I therefore embraced this Proposal,
and my Character of Wisdom soon
pleaded so effectually for me with the Widow,
who was herself a Woman of great
Gravity and Discretion, that I soon succeeded; 
and as soon as Decency would permit,
(of which this Lady was the strictest
Observer) we were married; being the second
Day of the second Week, of the second
Year, after her Husband's Death: for she
said, she thought some Period of Time above
the Year had a great Air of Decorum. 
‘But prudent as this Lady was, she made
me miserable. Her Person was far from being
lovely; but her Temper was intolerable. 
During fifteen Years Habitation, I never
passed a single Day without heartily cursing
her, and the Hour in which we came together. 
The only Comfort I received in the
midst of the highest Torments, was from 

continually hearing the Prudence of my
Match commended by all my Acquaintance. 
‘Thus you see in the Affairs of Love,
I bought the Reputation of Wisdom pretty
dear. In other Matters, I had it somewhat
cheaper; not that Hypocrisy, which was the
Price I gave for it, gives one no pain. I have
refused myself a thousand little Amusements
with a feign'd Contempt, while I have really
had an Inclination to them. I have often
almost choaked myself to restrain from
laughing at a Jest, and (which was perhaps
to myself the least hurtful of all my Hypocrisy)
have heartily enjoyed a Book in
my Closet, which I have spoke with detestation
of in public. To sum up my
History in short, as I had few Adventures
worth remembring, my whole Life was one
constant Lye; and happy would it have
been for me, if I could as thoroughly have
imposed on myself, as I did on others: for
Reflection, at every turn, would often
remind me I was not so wise as People
thought me; and this considerably embittered
the Pleasure I received from the 

public Commendation of my Wisdom. 
This Self-Admonition, like a Memento mori,
or Mortalis es, must be, in my opinion, a
very dangerous Enemy to Flattery: indeed,
a Weight sufficient to counter-ballance all
the false Praise of the World. But whether
it be, that the generality of wise Men do
not reflect at all, or whether they have, from
a constant Imposition on others, contracted
such a Habit of Deceit, as to deceive themselves; 
I will not determine: it is, I believe,
most certain, that very few wise Men know
themselves what Fools they are, more than
the World doth. Good Gods! could one
but see what passes in the Closet of Wisdom!
how ridiculous a Sight must it be to
behold the wise Man, who despises gratifying
his Palate, devouring Custard; the sober
wise Man with his Dram-bottle; or,
the Anti-Carnalist (if I may be allowed the
Expression) chuckling over a B&wblank;y Book or
Picture, and perhaps caressing his House-Maid! 
‘But to conclude a Character, in which
I apprehend I made as absurd a Figure, as
in any in which I trod the Stage of Earth, 

my Wisdom at last put an end to itself; that
is, occasioned my Dissolution. 
‘A Relation of mine in the Eastern
Part of the Empire, disinherited his Son, and
left me his Heir. This happened in the
depth of Winter, when I was in my grand
Climacteric, and had just recovered of a
dangerous Disease. As I had all the Reason
imaginable to apprehend the Family of the
Deceased would conspire against me, and embezzle
as much as they could, I advised with
a grave and wise Friend, what was proper
to be done; whether I should go myself, or
employ a Notary on this occasion, and defer
my Journey to the Spring. To say the
truth, I was most inclined to the latter; the
rather, as my Circumstances were extremely
flourishing, as I was advanced in Years, and
had not one Person in the World, to whom I
should with pleasure bequeath any Fortune
at my Death. 
‘My Friend told me, he thought my
Question admitted no manner of Doubt or
Debate; that common Prudence absolutely
required my immediate Departure; adding, 

that if the same good luck had happened to
him, he would have been already on his Journey: 
For, continued he, a Man who knows
the World so well as you, would be inexcusable
to give Persons such an Opportunity
of cheating you, who, you must be assured,
will be too well inclined; and as for employing
a Notary, remember that excellent
Maxim, Ne facias per alium, quod fieri
potest per te. I own the Badness of the Season,
and your very late Recovery are unlucky
Circumstances: but a wise Man must
get over Difficulties, when Necessity obliges
him to encounter them. 
‘I Was immediately determined by this
Opinion. The Duty of a wise Man made
an irresistible Impression, and I took the
Necessity for granted, without Examination. 
I accordingly set forward the next Morning; 
very tempestuous Weather soon overtook
me; I had not travelled three Days before I
relapsed into my Fever, and died. 
‘I Was now as cruelly disappointed by
Minos, as I had formerly been happily so. 
I advanced with the utmost Confidence to 

the Gate, and really imagined I should
have been admitted by the Wisdom of my
Countenance, even without any Questions
asked: but this was not my Case; and to
my great Surprize, Minos, with a menacing
Voice, called out to me—You Mr. there,
with the grave Countenance, whither so
fast, pray? Will you please, before you
move any farther forwards, to give me a short
Account of your Transactions below. I
then began, and recounted to him my whole
History, still expecting, at the end of every
Period, that the Gate would be ordered
to fly open: but I was obliged to go quite
through with it, and then Minos, after some
little Consideration, spoke to me as follows. 
‘You, Mr. Wise-man; stand forth, if
you please. Believe me, Sir, a trip back
again to Earth, will be one of the wisest
Steps you ever took, and really more to the
Honour of your Wisdom, than any you
have hitherto taken. On the other side, nothing
could be simpler, than to endeavour
at Elysium; for who, but a Fool, would
carry a Commodity, which is of such infinite
Value in one Place, into another where 

it is of none. But without attempting to
offend your Gravity with a Jest, you must
return to the Place from whence you came:
for Elysium was never designed for those
who are too wise to be happy. 
‘This Sentence confounded me greatly,
especially as it seemed to threaten me with
carrying my Wisdom back again to Earth. 
I told the Judge, tho' he would not admit
me at the Gate, I hoped I had committed
no Crime, while alive, which merited my
being wise any longer. He answered me, I
must take my Chance as to that matter, and
immediately we turned our backs to each
other.’ 