


Containing two Days. 



An Essay to prove that an Author will write
the better, for having some Knowledge of
the Subject on which he writes. 
As several Gentlemen in these Times,
by the wonderful Force of Genius
only, without the least Assistance
of Learning, perhaps, without being well
able to read, have made a considerable Figure 

in the Republic of Letters; the modern
Critics, I am told, have lately begun
to assert, that all kind of Learning is entirely
useless to a Writer; and, indeed, no
other than a kind of Fetters on the natural
Spriteliness and Activity of the Imagination,
which is thus weighed down, and prevented
from soaring to those high Flights
which otherwise it would be able to reach. 
This Doctrine, I am afraid, is, at present,
carried much too far: For why should
Writing differ so much from all other Arts? 
The Nimbleness of a Dancing Master is
not at all prejudiced by being taught to
move; nor doth any Mechanic, I believe,
exercise his Tools the worse by knowing
how to use them. For my own Part, I
cannot conceive that Homer or Virgil would
have writ with more Fire, if, instead of being
Masters of all the Learning of their
Times, they had really been as ignorant as
most of the Authors of the present Age. 
Nor do I believe that all the Imagination,
Fire, and Judgment of Pitt could have
produced those Orations that have made the
Senate of England in these our Times a
Rival in Eloquence to Greece and Rome, if
he had not been so well read in the Writings
of Demosthenes and Cicero, as to have
transfused their whole Spirit into his 

Speeches, and with their Spirit, their
Knowledge too. 
I would not here be understood to insist
on the same Fund of Learning in any
of my Brethren, as Cicero perswades us is
necessary to the Composition of an Orator. 
On the contrary, very little Reading is, I
conceive, necessary to the Poet, less to the
Critic, and the least of all to the Politician. 
For the first, perhaps, Bysse's Art of Poetry,
and a few of our modern Poets, may
suffice; for the second, a moderate Heap
of Plays; and for the last, an indifferent
Collection of political Journals. 
To say the Truth, I require no more
than that a Man should have some little
Knowledge of the Subject on which he
treats, according to the old Maxim of Law,
Quam quisque norit artem in eâ se exerceat. 
With this alone a Writer may sometimes
do tolerably well; and indeed without this,
all the other Learning in the World will
stand him in little stead. 
For Instance, let us suppose that Homer
and Virgil, Aristotle and Cicero, Thucydides
and Livy could have met all together, and
have clubbed their several Talents to have
composed a Treatise on the Art of Dancing; 

I believe it will be readily agreed
they could not have equalled the excellent
Treatise which Mr. Essex hath given us on
that Subject, entitled, The Rudiments of
genteel Education. And, indeed, should the
excellent Mr. Broughton be prevailed on to
set Fist to Paper, and to complete the abovesaid
Rudiments, by delivering down
the true Principles of Athletics, I question
whether the World will have any Cause to
lament, that none of the great Writers,
either ancient or modern, have ever treated
about that noble and useful Art. 
To avoid a Multiplicity of Examples in
so plain a Case, and to come at once to my
Point, I am apt to conceive, that one
Reason why many English Writers have totally
failed in describing the Manners of
upper Life, may possibly be, that in Reality
they know nothing of it. 
This is a Knowledge unhappily not in
the Power of many Authors to arrive at. 
Books will give us a very imperfect Idea of
it; nor will the Stage a much better: The
fine Gentleman formed upon reading the
former will almost always turn out a Pedant,
and he who forms himself upon the
latter, a Coxcomb. 

Nor are the Characters drawn from
these Models better supported. Vanbrugh
and Congreve copied Nature; but they who
copy them draw as unlike the present Age,
as Hogarth would do if he was to paint a
Rout or a Drum in the Dresses of Titian
and of Vandyke. In short, Imitation here
will not do the Business. The Picture must
be after Nature herself. A true Knowledge
of the World is gained only by Conversation,
and the Manners of every Rank must
be seen in order to be known. 
Now it happens that this higher Order of
Mortals is not to be seen, like all the rest
of the Human Species, for nothing, in the
Streets, Shops, and Coffee-houses: Nor are
they shewn, like the upper Rank of Animals,
for so much a Piece. In short, this
is a Sight to which no Persons are admitted,
without one or other of these Qualifications,
viz. either Birth or Fortune; or what is
equivalent to both, the honourable Profession
of a Gamester. And very unluckily for
the World, Persons so qualified, very seldom
care to take upon themselves the bad
Trade of Writing; which is generally entered
upon by the lower and poorer Sort, 

as it is a Trade which many think requires
no Kind of Stock to set up with. 
Hence those strange Monsters in Lace
and Embroidery, in Silks and Brocades,
with vast Wigs and Hoops; which, under
the Name of Lords and Ladies, strut the
Stage, to the great Delight of Attornies
and their Clerks in the Pit, and of Citizens
and their Apprentices in the Galleries; and
which are no more to be found in real Life,
than the Centaur, the Chimera, or any other
Creature of mere Fiction. But to let
my Reader into a Secret, this Knowledge
of upper Life, though very necessary for
the preventing Mistakes, is no very great
Resource to a Writer whose Province is
Comedy, or that Kind of Novels, which,
like this I am writing, is of the comic
Class. 
What Mr. Pope says of Women is
very applicable to most in this Station, who
are indeed so entirely made up of Form
and Affectation, that they have no Character
at all, at least, none which appears. 
I will venture to say the highest Life is
much the dullest, and affords very little
Humour or Entertainment. The various
Callings in lower Spheres produce the great 

Variety of humorous Character; whereas
here, except among the few who are engaged
in the Pursuit of Ambition, and the fewer
still who have a Relish for Pleasure, all is
Vanity and servile Imitation. Dressing and
Cards, eating and drinking, bowing and
curtesying, make up the Business of their
Lives. 
Some there are however of this Rank,
upon whom Passion exercises its Tyranny,
and hurries them far beyond the Bounds
which Decorum prescribes; of these, the
Ladies are as much distinguished by their
noble Intrepidity, and a certain superior
Contempt of Reputation, from the frail
ones of meaner Degree, as a virtuous Woman
of Quality is by the Elegance and
Delicacy of her Sentiments from the honest
Wife of a Yeoman or Shopkeeper. Lady
Bellaston was of this intrepid Character; but
let not my Country Readers conclude from
her, that this is the general Conduct of
Women of Fashion, or that we mean to
represent them as such. They might as
well suppose, that every Clergyman was
represented by Thwackum, or every Soldier
by Ensign Northerton. 

There is not indeed a greater Error than
that which universally prevails among the
Vulgar, who borrowing their Opinion from
some ignorant Satyrists, have affixed the
Character of Lewdness to these Times. 
On the contrary, I am convinced there never
was less of Love Intrigue carried
on among Persons of Condition, than
now. Our present Women have been
taught by their Mothers to fix their
Thoughts only on Ambition and Vanity,
and to despise the Pleasures of Love as unworthy
their Regard; and being afterwards,
by the Care of such Mothers, married without
having Husbands, they seem pretty
well confirmed in the Justness of those Sentiments; 
whence they content themselves,
for the dull Remainder of Life, with the
Pursuit of more innocent, but I am afraid
more childish Amusements, the bare Mention
of which would ill suit with the Dignity
of this History. In my humble Opinion,
the true Characteristic of the present Beau
Monde, is rather Folly than Vice, and the
only Epithet which it deserves is that of
Frivolous. 




Containing Letters and other Matters which
attend Amours. 
Jones had not long been at Home,
before he received the following Letter. 

‘I was never more surprized than when
I found you was gone. When you left
the Room, I little imagined you intended
to have left the House without seeing
me again. Your Behaviour is all of a
Piece, and convinces me how much I
ought to despise a Heart which can doat
upon an Idiot; though I know not whether
I should not admire her Cunning
more than her Simplicity: Wonderful
both! For though she understood not a
Word of what passed between us, she
yet had the Skill, the Assurance,
the—what shall I call it? to deny to
my Face, that she knows you, or ever
saw you before. —Was this a Scheme
laid between you, and have you been
base enough to betray me? —O how 

I despise her, you, and all the World,
but chiefly myself, for—I dare not
write what I should afterwards run mad
to read; but remember, I can detest as
violently as I have loved.’ 
Jones had but little Time given him to
reflect on this Letter, before a second was
brought him from the same Hand; and
this, likewise, we shall set down in the precise
Words. 

‘When you consider the Hurry of Spirits
in which I must have writ, you cannot
be surprised at any Expressions in my
former Note. —Yet, perhaps, on
Reflection, they were rather too warm. 
At least I would, if possible, think all
owing to the odious Playhouse, and to
the Impertinence of a Fool, which detained
me beyond my Appointment. — 
How easy is it to think well of those we
love? —Perhaps you desire I should
think so. I have resolved to see you Tonight,
so come to me immediately. 
‘P. S. I have ordered to be at Home to
none but yourself. 

‘P. S. Mr. Jones will imagine I shall
assist him in his Defence; for I believe
he cannot desire to impose on
me more than I desire to impose on
myself. 
‘P. S. Come immediately.’ 
To the Men of Intrigue I refer the Determination,
whether the angry or the tender
Letter gave the greatest Uneasiness to
Jones. Certain it is, he had no violent
Inclination to pay any more Visits that
Evening, unless to one single Person. However
he thought his Honour engaged, and had
not this been Motive sufficient, he would not
have ventured to blow the Temper of Lady
Bellaston into that Flame of which he had
Reason to think it susceptible, and of which
he feared the Consequence might be a Discovery
to Sophia, which he dreaded. After
some discontented Walks therefore about
the Room, he was preparing to depart,
when the Lady kindly prevented him, not
by another Letter, but by her own Presence. 
She entered the Room very disordered in
her Dress, and very discomposed in her 

Looks, and threw herself into a Chair,
where having recovered her Breath, she
said,—‘You, see, Sir, when Women
have gone one Length too far, they will
stop at none. If any Person would have
sworn this to me a Week ago, I would not
have believed it of myself.’ ‘I hope, Madam,
said Jones, my charming Lady
Bellaston will be as difficult to believe any
thing against one who is so sensible of the
many Obligations she hath conferred upon
him.’ —‘Indeed! says she, sensible
of Obligations! Did I expect to hear
such cold Language from Mr. Jones?’ 
‘Pardon me, my dear Angel, said he, if
after the Letters I have received, the Terrors
of your Anger, though I know not how
I have deserved it’—‘And have I
then, says she with a Smile, so angry a
Countenance? —Have I really brought a
chiding Face with me?’ —‘If there
be Honour in Man, said he, I have done
nothing to merit your Anger. — 
You remember the Appointment you sent
me—I went in Pursuance— 
I beseech you, cry'd she, do not run
through the odious Recital—Answer
me but one Question, and I shall
be easy—Have you not betrayed my 

Honour to her? —Jones fell upon his
Knees, and began to utter the most violent
Protestations, when Partridge came
dancing and capering into the Room,
like one drunk with Joy, crying out, she's
found! she's found! —Here, Sir, here,
she's here,—Mrs. Honour is upon the
Stairs. Stop her a Moment, cries Jones,
—Here, Madam, step behind the
Bed, I have no other Room nor Closet,
nor Place on Earth to hide you in; sure
never was so damn'd an Accident.’ — 
D&wblank;n'd indeed! said the Lady as she
went to her Place of Concealment; and
presently afterwards in came Mrs. Honour. 
‘Hey day! says she, Mr. Jones, what's
the Matter? —That impudent Rascal,
your Servant, would scarce let me
come up Stairs. I hope he hath not
the same Reason now to keep me from
you as he had at Upton. —I suppose
you hardly expected to see me; but you
have certainly bewitched my Lady. Poor
dear young Lady! To be sure, I loves
her as tenderly as if she was my own Sister. 
Lord have Mercy upon you, if you
don't make her a good Husband; and
to be sure, if you do not, nothing can 

be bad enough for you.’ ‘Jones begged
her only to whisper, for that there was a
Lady dying in the next Room.’ ‘A Lady!
cries she; ay, I suppose one of your
Ladies. —O Mr. Jones, there are
too many of them in the World; I believe
we are got into the House of one,
for my Lady Bellaston I darst to say is no
better than she should be. —Hush!
hush! cries Jones, every Word is overheard
in the next Room.’ ‘I don't care
a Farthing, cries Honour, I speaks no
Scandal of any one; but to be sure the
Servants makes no Scruple of saying as
how her Ladyship meets Men at another
Place—where the House goes under
the Name of a poor Gentlewoman, but
her Ladyship pays the Rent, and many's
the good Thing besides, they say, she hath
of her.’ Here Jones, after expressing
the utmost Uneasiness, offered
to stop her Mouth,—‘Hey day!
why sure Mr. Jones you will let me speak,
I speaks no Scandal, for I only says what I
heard from others,—and thinks I to
myself much good may it do the Gentlewoman
with her Riches, if she comes by it
in such a wicked Manner. To be sure it is 

better to be poor and honest.’ ‘The Servants
are Villains, cries Jones, and abuse
their Lady unjustly—Ay to be
sure Servants are always Villains, and so
my Lady says, and won't hear a Word
of it.’ —‘No, I am convinced, says
Jones, my Sophia is above listening to
such base Scandal.’ ‘Nay, I believe it is
no Scandal neither, cries Honour, for
why should she meet Men at another
House? —It can never be for any Good:
for if she had a lawful Design of being
courted, as to be sure any Lady may lawfully
give her Company to Men upon
that Account; why where can be the
Sense’—‘I protest, cries Jones, I can't
hear all this of a Lady of such Honour,
and a Relation of Sophia; besides you
will distract the poor Lady in the next
Room. —Let me intreat you to walk
with me down Stairs. —Nay, Sir, you
won't let me speak, I have done—Here,
Sir, is a Letter from my young Lady,— 
what would some Men give to have this? 
But, Mr. Jones, I think you are not over
and above generous, and yet I have heard
some Servants say; but I am sure you will
do me the Justice to own I never saw the
Colour of your Money.’ Here Jones hastily
took the Letter, and presently after slip'd
five Pieces into her Hand. He then returned 

a thousand Thanks to his dear Sophia
in a Whisper, and begged her to leave
him to read her Letter; she presently departed,
not without expressing much grateful
Sense of his Generosity. 
Lady Bellaston now came from behind
the Curtain. How shall I describe her
Rage? Her Tongue was at first incapable
of Utterance; but Streams of Fire darted
from her Eyes, and well indeed they might,
for her Heart was all in a Flame. And
now as soon as her Voice found Way, instead
of expressing any Indignation against
Honour, or her own Servants, she began
to attack poor Jones. ‘You see, said she,
what I have sacrificed to you, my Reputation,
my Honour,—gone for ever! 
And what Return have I found? Neglected,
slighted for a Country Girl, for
an Idiot.’ —‘What Neglect, Madam, or
what Slight, cries Jones, have I been guilty of? 
—Mr. Jones, said she, it is in vain to dissemble,
if you will make me easy, you
must entirely give her up; and as a Proof
of your Intention, shew me the Letter.’ 
—‘What Letter, Madam? said Jones. 
Nay, surely, said she, you cannot have
the Confidence to deny your having received
a Letter by the Hands of that
Trollop.’ ‘And can your Ladyship, cries 

he, ask of me what I must part with
my Honour before I grant? Have I acted
in such a Manner by your Ladyship? 
Could I be guilty of betraying this poor
innocent Girl to you, what Security could
you have, that I should not act the
same Part by yourself? A Moment's
Reflection will, I am sure, convince you,
that a Man with whom the Secrets of a
Lady are not safe, must be the most contemptible
of Wretches. Very well, said
she—I need not insist on your becoming
this contemptible Wretch in your
own Opinion; for the Inside of the Letter
could inform me of nothing more
than I know already. I see the Footing
you are upon.’ —Here ensued a long
Conversation, which the Reader, who is
not too curious, will thank me for not
inserting at length. It shall suffice therefore
to inform him, that Lady Bellaston
grew more and more pacified, and at
length believed, or affected to believe, his
Protestations, that his meeting with Sophia
that Evening was merely accidental, and every
other Matter which the Reader already
knows, and which as Jones set before
her in the strongest Light, it is plain that
she had in Reality no Reason to be angry
with him. 

She was not however in her Heart perfectly
satisfied with his Refusal to shew her
the Letter, so deaf are we to the clearest
Reason, when it argues against our prevailing
Passions. She was indeed well convinced
that Sophia possessed the first Place
in Jones's Affections; and yet, haughty
and amorous as this Lady was, she submitted
at last to bear the second Place; or to
express it more properly in a legal Phrase,
was contented with the Possession of that
of which another Woman had the Reversion. 
It was at length agreed, that Jones should
for the future visit at the House: for that
Sophia, her Maid, and all the Servants
would place these Visits to the Account of
Sophia; and that she herself would be considered
as the Person imposed upon. 
This Scheme was contrived by the Lady,
and highly relished by Jones, who was indeed
glad to have a Prospect of seeing
his Sophia at any Rate; and the Lady herself
was not a little pleased with the Imposition
on Sophia, which Jones, she thought,
could not possibly discover to her for his
own Sake. 

The next Day was appointed for the first
Visit, and then, after proper Ceremonials,
the Lady Bellaston Home. 



Containing various Matters. 
Jones was no sooner alone, than he
eagerly broke open his Letter, and
read as follows. 
‘Sir, it is impossible to express what I
have suffered since you left this House; and
as I have Reason to think you intend
coming here again, I have sent Honour,
though so late at Night, as she tells me
she knows your Lodgings, to prevent you. 
I charge you, by all the Regard you
have for me, not to think of visiting
here; for it will certainly be discovered; 
nay, I almost doubt from some Things
which have dropt from her Ladyship,
that she is not already without some
Suspicion. Something favourable perhaps
may happen; we must wait with
Patience; but I once more entreat you,
if you have any Concern for my Ease,
do not think of returning hither.’ 

This Letter administred the same Kind
of Consolation to poor Jones, which Job
formerly received from his Friends. Besides
disappointing all the Hopes which he
promised to himself from seeing Sophia,
he was reduced to an unhappy Dilemma,
with Regard to Lady Bellaston; for there
are some certain Engagements, which, as
he well knew, do very difficultly admit of
any Excuse for the Failure; and to go,
after the strict Prohibition from Sophia, he
was not to be forced by any human Power. 
At length, after much Deliberation, which
during that Night supply'd the Place of Sleep,
he determined to feign himself sick: For this
suggested itself as the only means of failing
the appointed Visit, without incensing
Lady Bellaston, which he had more than
one Reason of desiring to avoid. 
The first Thing however which he did
in the Morning was to write an Answer
to Sophia, which he enclosed in one to Honour. 
He then dispatched another to Lady
Bellaston, containing the abovementioned
Excuse; and to this he soon received the
following Answer. 


‘I am vexed that I cannot see you here
this Afternoon, but more concerned for
the Occasion; take great Care of yourself,
and have the best Advice, and I
hope there will be no Danger. —I am
so tormented all this Morning with Fools,
that I have scarce a Moment's Time to
write to you. Adieu. 
‘P. S. I will endeavour to call on you
this Evening at nine. —Be sure
to be alone.’ 
Mr. Jones now received a Visit from
Mrs. Miller, who, after some formal Introduction,
began the following Speech. 
‘I am very sorry, Sir, to wait upon you
on such an Occasion; but I hope you
will consider the ill Consequence which it
must be to the Reputations of my poor
Girls, if my House should once be talked
of as a House of ill Fame. I hope
you won't think me therefore guilty of
Impertinence, if I beg you not to bring
any more Ladies in at that Time of
Night. The Clock had struck two before
one of them went away.’ ‘I do
assure you, Madam, said Jones, the Lady
who was here last Night, and who 

staid the latest (for the other only brought
me a Letter) is a Woman of very great
Fashion, and my near Relation. I don't
know what Fashion she is of, answered
Mrs. Miller, but I am sure no Woman
of Virtue, unless a very near Relation
indeed, would visit a young Gentleman
at ten at Night, and stay four Hours in
his Room with him alone; besides, Sir,
the Behaviour of her Chairmen shews
what she was; for they did nothing but
make Jests all the Evening in the Entry,
and asked Mr. Partridge in the hearing of
my own Maid, if Madam intended to
stay with his Master all Night; with a
great deal of Stuff not proper to be repeated. 
I have really a great Respect for
you, Mr. Jones, upon your own Account,
nay I have a very high Obligation
to you for your Generosity to my
Cousin. Indeed I did not know how very
good you had been till lately. Little
did I imagine to what dreadful Courses
the poor Man's Distress had driven him. 
Little did I think when you gave me the
ten Guineas, that you had given them to
a Highwayman! O Heavens! What
Goodness have you shewn? How have
you preserved this Family. —The Character
which Mr. Allworthy hath formerly 

given me of you, was, I find, strictly
true. —And indeed if I had no
Obligation to you, my Obligations to
him are such, that, on his Account, I
should shew you the utmost Respect in
my Power. —Nay, believe me, dear
Mr. Jones, if my Daughters and my own
Reputation were out of the Case, I
should, for your own Sake, be sorry that
so pretty a young Gentleman should converse
with these Women; but if you
are resolved to do it, I must beg you to
take another Lodging; for I do not myself
like to have such Things carried on
under my Roof; but more especially upon
the Account of my Girls, who have
little, Heaven knows, besides their Characters
to recommend them.’ Jones started
and changed Colour at the Name of Allworthy. 
‘Indeed, Mrs. Miller, answered
he a little warmly, I do not take this at
all kind. I will never bring any Slander
on your House; but I must insist on seeing
what Company I please in my own
Room; and if that gives you any Offence,
I shall, as soon as I am able, look
for another Lodging.’ ‘I am sorry we
must part then, Sir, said she, but I am
convinced Mr. Allworthy himself would
never come within my Doors, if he had 

the least Suspicion of my keeping an ill
House.’ —‘Very well, Madam,’ said
Jones.’ —‘I hope, Sir,’ said she, ‘you
are not angry; for I would not for the
World offend any of Mr. Allworthy's Family. 
I have not slept a wink all Night
about this Matter.’ —‘I am sorry, I have
disturbed your Rest, Madam,’ said Jones,
‘but I beg you will send Partridge up to
me immediately;’ which she promised
to do, and then with a very low Courtesy
retired. 
As soon as Partridge arrived, Jones fell
upon him in the most outrageous manner. 
—‘How often,’ said he, ‘am I to suffer
for your Folly, or rather for my own in
keeping you? Is that Tongue of yours
resolved upon my Destruction?’ —‘What
have I done, Sir?’ answered affrighted
Partridge, ‘Who was it gave you Authority
to mention the Story of the Robbery, or that
the Man you saw here was the Person?’ 
—‘I Sir?’ cries Partridge. ‘Now don't
be guilty of a Falshood in denying it,’ 
said Jones. —‘If I did mention such a
Matter,’ answers Partridge, ‘I am sure,
I thought no Harm: For I should not
have opened my Lips, if it had not been
to his own Friends and Relations, who, I 

imagined, would have let it go no farther.’ 
‘But I have a much heavier Charge
against you,’ cries Jones, ‘than this. How
durst you, after all the Precautions I gave
you, mention the Name of Mr. Allworthy
in this House?’ Partridge denied that he
ever had, with many Oaths. ‘How else,’ 
said Jones, ‘should Mrs. Miller be acquainted
that there was any Connection between
him and me? And it is but this Moment
she told me, she respected me on his Account.’ 
—‘O Lord, Sir,’ said Partridge,
‘I desire only to be heard out; and to be
sure, never was any thing so unfortunate; 
hear me but out, and you will own how
wrongfully you have accused me. When
Mrs. Honour came down Stairs last Night,
she met me in the Entry, and asked me
when my Master had heard from Mr. Allworthy; 
and to be sure Mrs. Miller heard
the very Words; and the Moment Madam
Honour was gone, she called me into
the Parlour to her.’ ‘Mr. Partridge,’ 
says she, ‘What Mr. Allworthy is that the
Gentlewoman mentioned? Is it the
great Mr. Allworthy of Somersetshire?’ 
‘Upon my Word, Madam,’ says I, ‘I
know nothing of the Matter.’ —‘Sure,’ 
says she, ‘your Master is not the Mr.
Jones I have heard Mr. Allworthy talk of?’ 

‘Upon my Word, Madam,’ says I,
‘I know nothing of the Matter.’ —‘Then,’ 
says she, turning to her Daughter Nancy,
says she, ‘as sure as ten Pence this is the
very young Gentleman, and he agrees
exactly with the Squire's Description. The
Lord above knows who it was told her,
for I am the arrantest Villain that ever
walked upon two Legs if ever it came out
of my Mouth. —I promise you, Sir, I can
keep a Secret when I am desired. —Nay,
Sir, so far was I from telling her any
thing about Mr. Allworthy, that I told
her the very direct contrary: For though
I did not contradict it at that Moment,
yet as second Thoughts, they say, are best; 
so when I came to consider that some
body must have informed her, thinks I
to myself, I will put an End to the Story,
and so I went back again into the Parlour
some time afterwards, and says
I, Upon my word, says I, whoever, says
I, told you that this Gentleman was Mr.
Jones, that is, says I, that this Mr. Jones
was that Mr. Jones, told you a confounded
Lie; and I beg, says I, you will
never mention any such Matter, says I:
for my Master, says I, will think I must
have told you so, and I defy any body
in the House, ever to say, I mentioned 

any such Word. To be certain, Sir, it
is a wonderful Thing, and I have been
thinking with myself ever since, how it
was she came to know it: not but I saw an
old Woman here t'other Day a begging
at the Door, who looked as like her we
saw in Warwickshire, that caused all that
Mischief to us. To be sure it is never
good to pass by an old Woman without
giving her something, especially if she
looks at you; for all the World shall
never persuade me but that they have a
great Power to do Mischief, and to
be sure I shall never see an old Woman
again, but I shall think to myself,
Infandum, Regina, jubes renovare Dolorem.’ 
The Simplicity of Partridge set Jones a
laughing, and put a final end to his Anger,
which had indeed seldom any long Duration
in his Mind; and instead of commenting
on his Defence, he told him he intended
presently to leave those Lodgings,
and ordered him to go and endeavour to
get him others. 




Which we hope will be very attentively perused
by young People of both Sexes. 
Partridge had no sooner left Mr.
Jones, than Mr. Nightingale, with whom
he had now contracted a great Intimacy,
came to him, and after a short Salutation, said,
‘So Tom, I hear you had Company very
late last Night. Upon my Soul, you are
a happy Fellow, who have not been in
Town above a Fortnight, and can keep
Chairs waiting at your Door till two in
the Morning.’ He then ran on with
much common-place Raillery of the same
Kind, till Jones at last interrupted him,
saying, ‘I suppose you have received all
this Information from Mrs. Miller, who
hath been up here a little while ago to
give me Warning. The good Woman is
afraid, it seems, of the Reputation of her
Daughters.’ ‘O she is wonderfully nice,
says Nightingale, upon that Account; if
you remember, she would not let Nancy go
with us to the Masquerade.’ ‘Nay, upon
my Honour, I think she's in the Right
of it,’ says Jones; ‘however I have taken 

her at her Word, and have sent Partridge
to look for another Lodging.’ ‘If you
will,’ says Nightingale, ‘we may, I believe,
be again together; for to tell you
a Secret, which I desire you won't mention
in the Family, I intend to quit the
House to-day. —What, hath Mrs.
Miller given you Warning too, my
Friend?’ cries Jones. ‘No,’ answered
the other; ‘but the Rooms are not convenient
enough. —Besides, I am grown
weary of this part of the Town. I want
to be nearer the Places of Diversion; 
so I am going to Pallmall.’ ‘And do
you intend to make a Secret of your going
away?’ said Jones. ‘I promise you,’ 
answered Nightingale, ‘I don't intend to
bilk my Lodgings; but I have a private
Reason for not taking a formal Leave.’ 
‘Not so private,’ answered Jones; ‘I promise
you, I have seen it ever since the
second Day of my coming to the House. 
—Here will be some wet Eyes on your
Departure. —Poor Nancy, I pity her,
faith! —Indeed, Jack, you have
play'd the Fool with that Girl—You
have given her a Longing, which I am
afraid nothing will ever cure her of.’ 
—Nightingale answered, ‘What the Devil
would you have me do? Would you
have me marry her to cure her?’ — 

‘No,’ answered Jones, ‘I would not
have had you make Love to her, as you
have often done in my Presence. I have
been astonished at the Blindness of her
Mother in never seeing it.’ ‘Pugh,
see it!’ cries Nightingale, ‘What the
the Devil should she see?’ ‘Why see,’ 
said Jones, ‘that you have made her
Daughter distractedly in Love with you. 
The poor Girl cannot conceal it a Moment,
her Eyes are never off from you,
and she always colours every time you
come into the Room. Indeed, I pity her
heartily; for she seems to be one of the
best natured, and honestest of human-Creatures.’ 
‘And so, answered Nightingale,
according to your Doctrine, one
must not amuse one's self by any
common Gallantries with Women, for
fear they should fall in love with us.’ 
‘Indeed, Jack,’ said Jones, ‘you wilfully
misunderstand me; I do not fancy Women
are so apt to fall in love; but you
have gone far beyond common Gallantries.’ 
—‘What do you suppose,’ says Nightingale,
‘that we have been a-bed together?’ 
‘No, upon my Honour,’ answered Jones,
very seriously, ‘I do not suppose so ill of
you; nay, I will go farther, I do not
imagine you have laid a regular premeditated
Scheme for the Destruction of the 

Quiet of a poor little Creature, or have
even foreseen the Consequence; for I am
sure thou art a very good-natured Fellow,
and such a one can never be guilty of a
Cruelty of that Kind; but at the same
time, you have pleased your own Vanity,
without considering that this poor Girl
was made a Sacrifice to it; and while you
have had no Design but of amusing an
idle Hour, you have actually given her
Reason to flatter herself, that you had
the most serious Designs in her Favour. 
Prithee, Jack, answer me honestly: To
what have tended all those elegant and
luscious Descriptions of Happiness arising
from violent and mutual Fondness, all
those warm Professions of Tenderness, and
generous, disinterested Love? did you
imagine she would not apply them? or
speak ingenuously, did not you intend
she should?’ ‘Upon my Soul, Tom,’ 
cries Nightingale, ‘I did not think this
was in thee. Thou wilt make an admirable
Parson. —So, I suppose, you would
not go to Bed to Nancy, now, if she
would let you?’ —‘No,’ cries Jones,
‘may I be d&wblank;n'd if I would.’ ‘Tom,
Tom,’ answered Nightingale, last Night,
remember last Night. 

‘—When every Eye was clos'd, and the pale Moon,
‘And silent Stars shone conscious of the Theft.
‘Lookee, Mr. Nightingale,’ said Jones,
‘I am no canting Hypocrite, nor do I
pretend to the Gift of Chastity, more
than my Neighbours. I have been guilty
with Women, I own it; but am not conscious
that I have ever injured any—nor
would I to procure Pleasure to myself, be
knowingly the Cause of Misery to any
human Being.’ 
‘Well, well,’ said Nightingale, ‘I believe
you, and I am convinced you acquit
me of any such Thing.’ 
‘I do, from my Heart,’ answered Jones,
‘of having debauched the Girl, but not
from having gained her Affections.’ 
‘If I have,’ said Nightingale, ‘I am
sorry for it; but Time and Absence will
soon wear off such Impressions. It is a
Receipt I must take myself: For to confess
the Truth to you—I never liked
any Girl half so much in my whole Life; 

but I must let you into the whole Secret,
Tom. My Father hath provided a Match
for me, with a Woman I never saw, and
she is now coming to Town, in order for
me to make my Addresses to her.’ 
At these Words Jones burst into a loud
Fit of Laughter; when Nightingale cried,
—‘Nay, prithee don't turn me into Ridicule. 
The Devil take me if I am not
half mad about this Matter! My poor
Nancy! Oh Jones, Jones, I wish I had a
Fortune in my own Possession.’ 
‘I heartily wish you had,’ cries Jones; 
‘for if this be the Case, I sincerely pity
you both: But surely you don't intend to
go away without taking your Leave of her.’ 
‘I would not,’ answered Nightingale,
‘undergo the Pain of taking Leave for
ten thousand Pound; besides, I am convinced,
instead of answering any good
Purpose, it would only serve to inflame my
poor Nancy the more. I beg therefore,
you would not mention a Word of it today,
and in the Evening or to-morrow
morning I intend to depart.’ 

Jones promised he would not, and said,
upon Reflection he thought, as he had determined
and was obliged to leave her,
he took the most prudent Method. 
He then told Nightingale, he should be
very glad to lodge in the same House with
him; and it was accordingly agreed between
them, that Nightingale should procure
him either the Ground Floor, or the two
Pair of Stairs; for the young Gentleman
himself was to occupy that which was between
them. 
This Nightingale, of whom we shall be
presently obliged to say a little more, was in
the ordinary Transactions of Life a Man of
strict Honour, and what is more rare among
young Gentlemen of the Town, one of
strict Honesty too; yet in Affairs of Love
he was somewhat looser in his Morals; not
that he was even here as void of Principle
as Gentlemen sometimes are, and oftner
affect to be; but it is certain he had been
guilty of some indefensible Treachery to
Women, and had in a certain Mystery called
making Love, practiced many Deceits,
which if he had used in Trade he would
have been counted the greatest Villain upon
Earth. 

But as the World, I know not well for
what Reason, agree to see this Treachery
in a better Light, he was so far from being
ashamed of his Iniquities of this Kind, that
he gloried in them, and would often boast of
his Skill in gaining of Women, and his
Triumphs over their Hearts, for which he
had before this time received some Rebukes
from Jones, who always exprest great
Bitterness against any Misbehaviour to the
fair Part of the Species, who, if considered,
he said, as they ought to be, in the Light
of the dearest Friends, were to be cultivated,
honoured, and caressed with the utmost
Love and Tenderness; but if regarded
as Enemies, were a Conquest of which
a Man ought rather to be ashamed than to
value himself upon it. 




A Short Account of the History of Mrs.
Miller. 
Jones this Day eat a pretty good Dinner
for a sick Man, that is to say, the
larger Half of a Shoulder of Mutton. In
the Afternoon he received an Invitation
from Mrs. Miller to drink Tea: For that
good Woman having learnt, either by
Means of Partridge, or by some other
Means natural or super-natural, that he
had a Connection with Mr. Allworthy, could
not endure the Thoughts of parting with
him in an angry Manner. 
Jones accepted the Invitation; and no
sooner was the Tea-kettle removed, and
the Girls sent out of the Room, than the
Widow, without much Preface, began as
follows: ‘Well, there are very surprizing
Things happen in this World; but certainly
it is a wonderful Business, that I
should have a Relation of Mr. Allworthy
in my House, and never know any
Thing of the Matter. Alas! Sir, you
little imagine what a Friend that best of 

Gentlemen hath been to me and mine. 
Yes, Sir, I am not ashamed to own it; 
it is owing to his Goodness, that I did
not long since perish for Want, and leave
my poor little Wretches, two destitute,
helpless, friendless Orphans, to the Care,
or rather to the Cruelty of the World. 
‘You must know, Sir, though I am
now reduced to get my Living by letting
Lodgings, I was born and bred a Gentlewoman. 
My Father was an Officer of
the Army, and died in a considerable
Rank: But he lived up to his Pay; and
as that expired with him, his Family, at
his Death, became Beggars. We were
three Sisters. One of us had the good
Luck to die soon afterwards of the Smallpox: 
A Lady was so kind to take the
second out of Charity, as she said, to
wait upon her. The Mother of this Lady
had been a Servant to my Grandmother; 
and having inherited a vast Fortune from
her Father, which he had got by Pawn-broking,
was married to a Gentleman of
great Estate and Fashion. She used my
Sister so barbarously, often upbraiding her
with her Birth and Poverty, calling her
in Derision a Gentlewoman, that I believe
she at length broke the Heart of 

the poor Girl. In short, she likewise died
within a Twelvemonth after my Father. 
Fortune thought proper to provide better
for me, and within a Month from his Decease
I was married to a Clergyman, who
had been my Lover a long Time before,
and who had been very ill-used by my
Father on that Account; for though my
poor Father could not give any of us a
Shilling, yet he bred us up as delicately,
considered us, and would have had us
consider ourselves as highly, as if we had
been the richest Heiresses. But my dear
Husband forgot all this Usage, and the
Moment we were become fatherless, he
immediately renewed his Addresses to me
so warmly, that I, who always liked,
and now more than ever esteemed him,
soon comply'd. Five Years did I live in
a State of perfect Happiness with that
best of Men, 'till at last—Oh! cruel,
cruel Fortune that ever separated us, that
deprived me of the kindest of Husbands,
and my poor Girls of the tenderest Parent. 
—O my poor Girls! you never
knew the Blessing which ye lost. —I am
ashamed, Mr. Jones, of this womanish
Weakness; but I shall never mention
him without Tears.’ —‘I ought rather,
Madam,’ said Jones, ‘to be ashamed 

that I do not accompany you.’ — 
‘Well, Sir,’ continued she, ‘I was now
left a second Time in a much worse Condition
than before; besides the terrible
Affliction I was to encounter, I had now
two Children to provide for; and was,
if possible, more pennyless than ever,
when that great, that good, that glorious
Man, Mr. Allworthy, who had some
little Acquaintance with my Husband,
accidentally heard of my Distress, and
immediately writ this Letter to me. Here,
Sir;—here it is; I put it into my Pocket
to shew it you. This is the Letter, Sir; 
I must and will read it you. “Madam,
I heartily condole with you on your late
grievous Loss, which your own good
Sense, and the excellent Lessons you must
have learnt from the worthiest of Men,
will better enable you to bear, than any
Advice which I am capable of giving. 
Nor have I any Doubt that you, whom
I have heard to be the tenderest of
Mothers, will suffer any immoderate Indulgence
of Grief to prevent you from
discharging your Duty to those poor Infants,
who now alone stand in Need of
your Tenderness. 

“However, as you must be supposed
at present to be incapable of much worldly
Consideration, you will pardon my
having ordered a Person to wait on you,
and to pay you Twenty Guineas, which
I beg you will accept 'till I have the
Pleasure of seeing you, and believe me
to be, Madam, &c.’ 
‘This Letter, Sir, I received within a
Fortnight after the irreparable Loss I have
mentioned, and within a Fortnight afterwards,
Mr. Allworthy,—the blessed Mr.
Allworthy, came to pay me a Visit, when
he placed me in the House you now see
me, gave me a large Sum of Money to
furnish it, and settled an Annuity of 50l.
a Year upon me, which I have constantly
received ever since. Judge then, Mr.
Jones, in what Regard I must hold a
Benefactor, to whom I owe the Preservation
of my Life, and of those dear Children,
for whose Sake alone my Life is
valuable. —Do not, therefore, think me
impertinent, Mr. Jones, (since I must esteem
one for whom I know Mr. Allworthy
hath so much Value) if I beg you not to
converse with these wicked Women. You
are a young Gentleman, and do not know 

half their artful Wiles. Do not be angry
with me, Sir, for what I said upon account
of my House; you must be sensible
it would be the Ruin of my poor,
dear Girls. Besides, Sir, you cannot but
be acquainted, that Mr. Allworthy himself
would never forgive my conniving
at such Matters, and particularly with
you.’ 
‘Upon my Word, Madam,’ said Jones,
‘you need make no farther Apology; nor
do I in the least take any Thing ill you
have said; but give me Leave, as no one
can have more Value than myself for Mr.
Allworthy, to deliver you from one Mistake,
which, perhaps, would not be altogether
for his Honour: I do assure
you, I am no Relation of his.’ 
‘Alas! Sir,’ answered she, ‘I know you
are not. I know very well who you are; 
for Mr. Allworthy hath told me all: But
I do assure you, had you been twenty
Times his Son, he could not have expressed
more Regard for you, than he
hath often expressed in my Presence. 
You need not be ashamed, Sir, of what
you are; I promise you no good Person
will esteem you the less on that Account. 

No, Mr. Jones; the Words dishonourable
Birth are Nonsense, as my dear, dear
Husband used to say, unless the Word
dishonourable be applied to the Parents; 
for the Children can derive no
real Dishonour from an Act of which they
are entirely innocent.’ 
Here Jones heaved a deep Sigh, and then
said, ‘Since I perceive, Madam, you really
do know me, and Mr. Allworthy hath
thought proper to mention my Name to
you; and since you have been so explicit
with me as to your own Affairs, I will
acquaint you with some more Circumstances
concerning myself.’ And these
Mrs. Miller having expressed great Desire
and Curiosity to hear, he began and related
to her his whole History, without once
mentioning the Name of Sophia. 
There is a Kind of Sympathy in honest
Minds, by Means of which they give an
easy Credit to each other. Mrs. Miller believed
all which Jones told her to be true,
and exprest much Pity and Concern for
him. She was beginning to comment on the
Story, but Jones interrupted her: For as the
Hour of Assignation now drew nigh, he
began to stipulate for a second Interview 

with the Lady that Evening, which he promised
should be the last at her House; 
swearing, at the same Time, that she was
one of great Distinction, and that nothing
but what was entirely innocent was to pass
between them; and I do firmly believe he
intended to keep his Word. 
Mrs. Miller was at length prevailed on,
and Jones departed to his Chamber, where
he sat alone till Twelve o'Clock, but no
Lady Bellaston appeared. 
As we have said that this Lady had a
great Affection for Jones, and as it must
have appeared that she really had so, the
Reader may perhaps wonder at the first
Failure of her Appointment, as she apprehended
him to be confined by Sickness,
a Season when Friendship seems most to require
such Visits. This Behaviour, therefore,
in the Lady, may, by some, be condemned
as unnatural; but that is not our
Fault; for our Business is only to record
Truth. 




Containing a Scene which we doubt not will
affect all our Readers. 
Mr. Jones closed not his Eyes during
all the former Part of the Night; 
not owing to any Uneasiness which he conceived
at being disappointed by Lady Bellaston; 
nor was Sophia herself, though most
of his waking Hours were justly to be
charged to her Account, the present Cause
of dispelling his Slumbers. In Fact, poor
Jones was one of the best-natured Fellows
alive, and had all that Weakness which is
called Compassion, and which distinguishes
this imperfect Character from that noble
Firmness of Mind, which rolls a Man, as
it were, within himself, and, like a polished
Bowl, enables him to run through the
World without being once stopped by the
Calamities which happen to others. He
could not help, therefore, compassionating
the Situation of poor Nancy, whose Love
for Mr. Nightingale seemed to him so apparent,
that he was astonished at the Blindness
of her Mother, who had more than
once, the preceding Evening, remarked to 

him the great Change in the Temper of her
Daughter, ‘who from being,’ she said, ‘one
of the liveliest, merriest Girls in the
World, was, on a sudden, become all
Gloom and Melancholy.’ 
Sleep, however, at length got the better
of all Resistance; and now, as if he
had really been a Deity, as the Ancients
imagined, and an offended one too, he
seemed to enjoy his dear-bought Conquest. 
—To speak simply, and without any
Metaphor, Mr. Jones slept 'till Eleven the
next Morning, and would, perhaps, have
continued in the same quiet Situation much
longer, had not a violent Uproar awakened
him. 
Partridge was now summoned, who, being
asked what was the Matter, answered,
‘That there was a dreadful Hurricane below
Stairs; that Miss Nancy was in Fits; 
and that the other Sister and the Mother
were both crying and lamenting over her. 
Jones expressed much Concern at this News,
which Partridge endeavoured to relieve, by
saying, with a Smile, ‘He fancied the
young Lady was in no Danger of Death; 
for that Susan (which was the Name of
the Maid) had given him to understand; 

it was nothing more than a common
Affair. In short,’ said he, ‘Miss Nancy
hath had a Mind to be as wise as
her Mother, that's all. She was a little
hungry, it seems, and so sat down to
Dinner before Grace was said, and so there
is a Child coming for the Foundling Hospital.’ 
—‘Prithee leave thy stupid jesting,’ 
cries Jones; ‘is the Misery of these
poor Wretches a Subject of Mirth? Go
immediately to Mrs. Miller, and tell her,
I beg Leave,—Stay, you will make
some Blunder, I will go myself; for she
desired me to breakfast with her.’ He
then rose and dressed himself as fast as he
could; and while he was dressing, Partridge,
notwithstanding many severe Rebukes,
could not avoid throwing forth certain
Pieces of Brutality, commonly called
Jests, on this Occasion. Jones was no sooner
dressed than he walked down Stairs, and
knocking at the Door was presently admitted,
by the Maid, into the outward Parlour, which
was as empty of Company as it was of any
Apparatus for eating. Mrs. Miller was in
the inner Room with her Daughter, whence
the Maid presently brought a Message to
Mr. Jones, ‘that her Mistress hoped he
would excuse the Disappointment, but an
Accident had happened, which made it 

impossible for her to have the Pleasure of
his Company at Breakfast that Day, and
begged his Pardon for not sending him
up Notice sooner.’ Jones ‘desired she
would give herself no Trouble about any
Thing so trifling as his Disappointment; 
that he was heartily sorry for the Occasion; 
and that if he could be of any Service to
her, she might command him.’ He had
scarce spoke these Words, when Mrs. Miller,
who heard them all, suddenly threw
open the Door, and coming out to him,
in a Flood of Tears, said, ‘O Mr.
Jones, you are certainly one of the best
young Men alive. I give you a thousand
Thanks for your kind Offer of your Service; 
but, alas! Sir, it is out of your
Power to preserve my poor Girl. —O my
Child, my Child! She is undone, she is
ruined for ever!’ ‘I hope, Madam,’ 
said Jones, ‘no Villain’—‘O Mr. Jones,’ 
said she, ‘that Villain who Yesterday left
my Lodgings, hath betrayed my poor
Girl; hath destroyed her,—I know you
are a Man of Honour. You have a
good—a noble Heart, Mr. Jones. The
Actions to which I have been myself a
Witness, could proceed from no other. 
I will tell you all: Nay, indeed, it is impossible,
after what hath happened, to 

keep it a Secret. That Nightingale, that
barbarous Villain hath undone my Daughter. 
She is—she is—oh! Mr. Jones, my
Girl is with Child by him; and in that Condition
he hath deserted her. Here! here,
Sir, is his cruel Letter; read it, Mr.
Jones, and tell me if such another Monster
lives.’ The Letter was as follows: 

‘Dear Nancy,
As I found it impossible to mention to
you what I am afraid will be no less shocking
to you, than it is to me, I have taken
this Method to inform you, that my
Father insists upon my immediately paying
my Addresses to a young Lady of
Fortune, whom he hath provided for
my—I need not write the detested
Word. Your own good Understanding
will make you sensible, how entirely I am
obliged to an Obedience, by which I shall
be for ever excluded from your dear
Arms. The Fondness of your Mother
may encourage you to trust her with the
unhappy Consequence of our Love, which
may be easily kept a Secret from the
World, and for which I will take Care to
provide, as I will for you. I wish you
may feel less on this Account than I have
suffered: But summon all your Fortitude 

to your Assistance, and forgive and forget
the Man, whom nothing but the
Prospect of certain Ruin, could have forced
to write this Letter. I bid you forget
me, I mean only as a Lover; but
the best of Friends you shall ever
find in 
‘Your faithful, tho' unhappy
F. N.’ 
When Jones had read this Letter, they
both stood silent during a Minute, looking
at each other; at last he began thus: 
‘I cannot express, Madam, how much I
am shocked at what I have read; yet let
me beg you, in one Particular, to take
the Writer's Advice. Consider the Reputation
of your Daughter,’—‘It is gone,
it is lost, Mr. Jones, cry'd she, as well as her
Innocence. She received the Letter in a
Room-full of Company, and immediately
swooning away upon opening it, the
Contents were known to every one present. 
But the Loss of her Reputation,
bad as it is, is not the worst; I shall lose
my Child; she hath attempted twice to
destroy herself already: And though she
hath been hitherto prevented, vows she 

will not out-live it; nor could I myself
out-live any Accident of that Nature. 
—What then will become of my little
Betsy, a helpless, infant Orphan? And
the poor, little Wretch will, I believe,
break her Heart at the Miseries with which
she sees her Sister and myself distracted,
while she is ignorant of the Cause. —O
'tis the most sensible, and the best-natured
little Thing. The barbarous cruel
—hath destroyed us all. O my poor
Children! Is this the Reward of all my
Cares? Is this the Fruit of all my
Prospects? Have I so cheerfully undergone
all the Labours and Duties of
a Mother? Have I been so tender of
their Infancy, so careful of their Education? 
Have I been toiling so many Years,
denying myself even the Conveniencies of
Life to provide some little Sustenance
for them, to lose one or both in such a Manner?’ 
‘Indeed, Madam,’ said Jones, with
Tears in his Eyes, ‘I pity you from my
Soul.’ —‘O Mr. Jones,’ answered she,
‘even you, though I know the Goodness
of your Heart, can have no Idea of
what I feel. The best, the kindest, the
most dutiful of Children. O my poor
Nancy, the Darling of my Soul; the Delight
of my Eyes; the Pride of my 

Heart: Too much, indeed, my Pride; 
for to those foolish, ambitious Hopes, arising
form her Beauty, I owe her Ruin. 
Alas! I saw with Pleasure the Liking
which this young Man had for her. 
I thought it an honourable Affection; 
and flattered my foolish Vanity with
the Thoughts of seeing her married
to one so much her superior. And a
thousand Times in my Presence, nay, often
in yours, he hath endeavoured to
sooth and encourage these Hopes by the
most generous Expressions of disinterested
Love, which he hath always directed to
my poor Girl, and which I, as well as
she, believed to be real. Could I have
believed that these were only Snares laid
to betray the Innocence of my Child,
and for the Ruin of us all?’ —At
these Words little Betsy came running into
the Room, crying, ‘Dear Mamma,
for Heaven's Sake come to my Sister,
for she is in another Fit, and my Cousin
can't hold her.’ Mrs. Miller immediately
obeyed the Summons; but first ordered
Betsy to stay with Mr. Jones, and
begged him to entertain her a few Minutes,
saying, in the most pathetic Voice,
‘Good Heaven! let me preserve one of my
Children at least.’ 

Jones, in Compliance with this Request,
did all he could to comfort the little Girl,
though he was, in Reality, himself very
highly affected with Mrs. Miller's Story. 
He told her, ‘her Sister would be very
well again soon: That by taking on in
that Manner, she would not only make
her Sister worse, but make her Mother
ill too.’ ‘Indeed, Sir,’ says she,
‘I would not do any Thing to hurt them
for the World. I would burst my Heart,
rather than they should see me cry. —But
my poor Sister can't see me cry. –––I am
afraid she will never be able to see me
cry any more. Indeed, I can't part with
her; indeed I can't. ––––And then poor
Mamma too, what will become of her? 
—She says she will die too, and
leave me; but I am resolved I won't be
left behind.’ ‘And are you not afraid
to die, my little Betsy?’ said Jones. 
‘Yes,’ answered she, ‘I was always afraid
to die; because I must have left my
Mamma, and my Sister; but I am not
afraid of going any where with those I
love.’ 
Jones was so pleased with this Answer,
that he eagerly kissed the Child; and soon 

after Mrs. Miller returned, saying, ‘She
thanked Heaven Nancy was now come to
herself. And now, Betsy,’ says she, ‘you
may go in, for your Sister is better, and
longs to see you.’ She then turned to
Jones, and began to renew her Apologies
for having disappointed him of his Breakfast. 
‘I hope, Madam,’ said Jones, ‘I shall
have a more exquisite Repast than any
you could have provided for me. This,
I assure you, will be the Case, if I can do
any Service to this little Family of Love. 
But whatever Success may attend my Endeavours,
I am resolved to attempt it. I
am very much deceived in Mr. Nightingale,
if, notwithstanding what hath happened,
he hath not much Goodness of
Heart at the Bottom, as well as a very
violent Affection for your Daughter. If
this be the Case, I think the Picture which
I shall lay before him, will affect him. 
Endeavour, Madam, to comfort yourself
and Miss Nancy, as well as you can. I
will go instantly in quest of Mr. Nightingale; 
and I hope to bring you good
News.’ 

Mrs. Miller fell upon her Knees, and invoked
all the Blessings of Heaven upon
Mr. Jones; to which she afterwards added
the most passionate Expressions of Gratitude. 
He then departed to find Mr. Nightingale,
and the good Woman returned to comfort
her Daughter, who was somewhat cheared
at what her Mother told her; and both joined
in resounding the Praises of Mr. Jones. 



The Interview between Mr. Jones and Mr.
Nightingale. 
The Good or Evil we confer on others,
very often, I believe, recoils
on ourselves. For as Men of a benign Disposition
enjoy their own Acts of Beneficence,
equally with those to whom they are done,
so there are scarce any Natures so entirely
diabolical, as to be capable of doing Injuries,
without paying themselves some Pangs,
for the Ruin which they bring on their
Fellow-Creatures. 
Mr. Nightingale, at least, was not such a
Person. On the contrary, Jones found him 

in his new Lodgings, sitting melancholy by
the Fire, and silently lamenting the unhappy
Situation in which he had placed poor
Nancy. He no sooner saw his Friend appear,
than he rose hastily to meet him; and
after much Congratulation said, ‘Nothing
could have been more opportune than
this kind Visit; for I was never more in
the Spleen in my Life.’ 
‘I am sorry,’ answered Jones, ‘that I
bring News very unlikely to relieve you; 
nay, what I am convinced must, of all other,
shock you the most. However, it
is necessary you should know it. Without
further Preface then, I come to you,
Mr. Nightingale, from a worthy Family,
which you have involved in Misery and
Ruin.’ Mr. Nightingale changed Colour
at these Words; but Jones, without regarding
it, proceeded, in the liveliest Manner,
to paint the tragical Story, with
which the Reader was acquainted in the last
Chapter. 
Nightingale never once interrupted the
Narration, though he discovered violent
Emotions at many Parts of it. But when
it was concluded, after fetching a deep Sigh, 

he said, ‘What you tell me, my Friend,
affects me in the tenderest Manner. Sure
there never was so cursed an Accident as
the poor Girl's betraying my Letter. Her
Reputation might otherwise have been
safe, and the Affair might have remained
a profound Secret; and then the Girl
might have gone off never the worse; 
for many such Things happen in this
Town; and if the Husband should suspect
a little, when it is too late, it
will be his wiser Conduct to conceal
his Suspicion both from his Wife and
the World.’ 
‘Indeed, my Friend,’ answered Jones,
‘this could not have been the Case with
your poor Nancy. You have so entirely
gained her Affections, that it is the Loss
of you, and not of her Reputation, which
afflicts her, and will end in the Destruction
of her and her Family.’ ‘Nay, for
that Matter, I promise you,’ cries Nightgale,
‘she hath my Affections so absolutely,
that my Wife, whoever she is to be,
will have very little Share in them.’ 
‘And is it possible then,’ said Jones, ‘you
can think of deserting her?’ ‘Why
what can I do?’ answered the other. 

‘Ask Miss Nancy;’ replied Jones warmly. 
‘In the Condition to which you have reduced
her, I sincerely think she ought to determine
what Reparation you shall make her. 
Her Interest alone, and not yours, ought
to be your sole Consideration. But if you
ask me what you shall do; what can you
do less,’ cries Jones, ‘than fulfil the Expectations
of her Family, and her own. 
Nay, and I sincerely tell you, they were
mine too, ever since I first saw you together. 
You will pardon me, if I presume
on the Friendship you have favoured
me with, moved as I am with Compassion
for those poor Creatures. But
your own Heart will best suggest to you,
whether you have never intended, by
your Conduct, to persuade the Mother, as
well as the Daughter, into an Opinion,
that you designed honourably: And if
so, though there may have been no direct
Promise of Marriage in the Case, I
will leave to your own good Understanding,
how far you are bound to proceed.’ 
‘Nay, I must not only confess what
you have hinted,’ said Nightingale; ‘but
I am afraid even that very Promise you 

mention I have given.’ ‘And can you,
after owning that,’ said Jones, ‘hesitate
a Moment?’ ‘Consider, my Friend,’ 
answered the other; ‘I know you are a
Man of Honour, and would advise no
one to act contrary to its Rules; if there
were no other Objection, can I, after
this Publication of her Disgrace, think of
such an Alliance with Honour?’ ‘Undoubtedly,’ 
replied Jones; ‘and the very
best and truest Honour, which is Goodness,
requires it of you. As you mention a
Scruple of this Kind, you will give me
Leave to examine it. Can you, with Honour,
be guilty of having, under false Pretences,
deceived a young Woman and her
Family, and of having, by these Means,
treacherously robbed her of her Innocence? 
Can you, with Honour, be the knowing,
the wilful, nay, I must add, the artful Contriver
of the Ruin of a Human Being? 
Can you, with Honour, destroy the Fame,
the Peace, nay, probably, both the Life
and Soul too of this Creature? Can Honour
bear the Thought, that this Creature
is a tender, helpless, defenceless
young Woman? A young Woman who
loves, who doats on you, who dies for
you; who hath placed the utmost Confidence
in your Promises; and to that Confidence 

hath sacrificed every Thing which
is dear to her? Can Honour support such
Contemplations as these a Moment?’ 
‘Common Sense, indeed,’ said Nightingale,
‘warrants all you say; but yet you
well know the Opinion of the World is
so much the contrary, that was I to marry
a Whore, tho' my own, I should be
ashamed of ever showing my Face again.’ 
‘Fie upon it, Mr. Nightingale,’ said
Jones, ‘do not call her by so ungenerous a
Name: When you promised to marry
her, she became your Wife, and she hath
sinned more against Prudence than Virtue. 
And what is this World, which
you would be ashamed to face, but the
Vile, the Foolish, and the Profligate? 
Forgive me, if I say such a Shame must
proceed from false Modesty, which always
attends false Honour as its Shadow. 
—But I am well assured there is
not a Man of real Sense and Goodness in
the World, who would not honour and
applaud the Action. But admit no other
would, would not your own Heart,
my Friend, applaud it? And do not the
warm, rapturous Sensations, which we
feel from the Consciousness of an honest, 

noble, generous, benevolent Action, convey
more Delight to the Mind, than
the undeserved Praise of Millions? Set
the Alternative fairly before your Eyes. 
On the one Side, see this poor, unhappy,
tender, believing Girl, in the Arms of her
wretched Mother, breathing her last. Hear
her breaking Heart in Agonies sighing
out your Name; and lamenting, rather
than accusing, the Cruelty which weighs
her down to Destruction. Paint to your
Imagination the Circumstances of her fond,
despairing Parent, driven to Madness, or,
perhaps, to Death, by the Loss of her
lovely Daughter. View the poor, helpless,
Orphan-Infant: And when your
Mind hath dwelt a Moment only on such
Ideas, consider yourself as the Cause of
all; the Ruin of this poor, little, worthy,
defenceless Family. On the other
Side, consider yourself as relieving them
from their temporary Sufferings. Think
with what Joy, with what Transports, that
lovely Creature will fly to your Arms. 
See her Blood returning to her pale
Cheeks, her Fire to her languid Eyes,
and Raptures to her tortured Breast. 
Consider the Exultations of her Mother,
the Happiness of all. Think of this little
Family made, by one Act of yours, 

completely happy. Think of this Alternative,
and sure I am mistaken in my
Friend, if it requires any long Deliberation,
whether he will sink these Wretches
down for ever, or, by one generous, noble
Resolution, raise them all from the
Brink of Misery and Despair, to the
highest Pitch of human Happiness. Add
to this but one Consideration more; the
Consideration that it is your Duty so to
do—That the Misery from which you
will relieve these poor People, is the Misery
which you yourself have wilfully
brought upon them.’ 
‘O my dear Friend,’ cries Nightingale,
‘I wanted not your Eloquence to rouse
me. I pity poor Nancy from my Soul,
and would willingly give any Thing in
my Power, that no Familiarities had ever
passed between us. Nay, believe me, I
had many Struggles with my Passion,
before I could prevail with myself to
write that cruel Letter, which hath caused
all the Misery in that unhappy Family. 
If I had no Inclinations to consult but
my own, I would marry her Tomorrow
Morning; I would, by Heaven; but you
will easily imagine how impossible it would
be to prevail on my Father to consent to 

such a Match; besides, he hath provided
another for me; and Tomorrow, by his
express Command, I am to wait on the
Lady.’ 
‘I have not the Honour to know your
Father,’ said Jones; ‘but suppose he could
be persuaded, would you yourself consent to
the only Means of preserving these poor
People?’ ‘As eagerly as I would pursue
my Happiness,’ answered Nightingale; 
‘for I never shall find it in any other
Woman. —O my dear Friend, could
you imagine what I have felt within these
twelve Hours for my poor Girl, I am
convinced she would not engross all
your Pity. Passion leads me only to
her; and if I had any foolish Scruples
of Honour, you have fully satisfied them: 
Could my Father be induced to comply
with my Desires, nothing would be wanting
to compleat my own Happiness, or
that of my Nancy.’ 
‘Then I am resolved to undertake it,’ 
said Jones. ‘You must not be angry with
me, in whatever Light it may be necessary
to set this Affair, which, you may depend
on it, could not otherwise be long
hid from him; for Things of this Nature 

make a quick Progress, when once
they get abroad, as this unhappily hath
already. Besides, should any fatal Accident
follow, as upon my Soul I am afraid
will, unless immediately prevented,
the Public would ring of your Name,
in a Manner which, if your Father hath
common Humanity, must offend him. 
If you will therefore tell me where I may
find the old Gentleman, I will not lose
a Moment in the Business; which while
I pursue, you cannot do a more generous
Action, than by paying a Visit to the
poor Girl. You will find I have not
exaggerated in the Account I have given
of the Wretchedness of the Family.’ 
Nightingale immediately consented to the
Proposal; and now having acquainted Jones
with his Father's Lodging, and the Coffee-house
where he would most probably find
him, he hesitated a Moment, and then said,
‘My dear Tom, you are going to undertake
an Impossibility. If you knew my
Father, you would never think of obtaining
his Consent. —Stay, there is one
Way—Suppose you told him I was
already married, it might be easier to reconcile
him to the Fact after it was done; 

and, upon my Honour, I am so affected
with what you have said, and I love my
Nancy so passionately, I almost wish it was
done, whatever might be the Consequence.’ 
Jones greatly approved the Hint, and
promised to pursue it. They then separated,
Nightingale to visit his Nancy, and Jones in
quest of the old Gentleman. 



What passed between Jones and old Mr.
Nightingale, with the Arrival of a Person
not yet mentioned in this History. 
Notwithstanding the Sentiment of the
Roman Satyrist, which denies the Divinity
of Fortune; and the Opinion of Seneca
to the same Purpose; Cicero, who was,
I believe, a wiser Man than either of them,
expressly holds the contrary; and certain it
is there are some Incidents in Life so very
strange and unaccountable, that it seems to
require more than human Skill and Foresight
in producing them. 
Of this Kind was what now happened to
Jones, who found Mr. Nightingale the elder 

in so critical a Minute, that Fortune,
if she was really worthy all the Worship she
received at Rome, could not have contrived
such another. In short the old Gentleman
and the Father of the young Lady whom
he intended for his Son, had been hard at
it for many Hours; and the latter was just
now gone, and had left the former delighted
with the Thoughts that he had succeeded
in a long Contention which had been between
the two Fathers of the future Bride
and Bridegroom; in which both endeavoured
to over-reach the other, and, as not rarely
happens in such Cases, both had retreated
fully satisfied of having obtained the Victory. 
This Gentleman whom Mr. Jones now
visited, was what they call a Man of the
World, that is to say, a Man who directs
his Conduct in this World, as one
who being fully persuaded there is no other,
is resolved to make the most of this. In
his early Years he had been bred to Trade,
but having acquired a very good Fortune, he
had lately declined his Business; or to speak
more properly, had changed it from dealing
in Goods to dealing only in Money, of which
he had always a plentiful Fund at Command,
and of which he knew very well how to
make a very plentiful Advantage; sometimes 

of the Necessities of private Men,
and sometimes of those of the Public. He
had indeed conversed so entirely with Money,
that it may be almost doubted, whether he
imagined there was any other thing really
existed in the World; this at least may be
certainly averred, that he firmly believed
nothing else to have any real Value. 
The Reader will, I fancy, allow, that
Fortune could not have culled out a more
improper Person for Mr. Jones to attack
with any Probability of Success, nor could
the whimsical Lady have directed this Attack
at a more unseasonable Time. 
As Money then was always uppermost
in this Gentleman's Thoughts, so the Moment
he saw a Stranger within his Doors,
it immediately occurred to his Imagination,
that such Stranger was either come to bring
him Money, or to fetch it from him. And
according as one or other of these Thoughts
prevailed, he conceived a favourable or unfavourable
Idea of the Person who approached
him. 
Unluckily for Jones, the latter of these
was the Ascendant at present; for as a
young Gentleman had visited him the Day 

before, with a Bill from his Son for a Play
Debt, he apprehended at the first Sight of
Jones, that he was come on such another
Errand. Jones therefore had no sooner
told him that he was come on his Son's
Account, than the old Gentleman, being
confirmed in his Suspicion, burst forth into
an Exclamation, ‘That he would lose his
Labour.’ ‘Is it then possible, Sir, answered
Jones, that you can guess my Business?’ 
‘If I do guess it, replied the other, I repeat
again to you, you will lose your
Labour. What, I suppose you are one
of those Sparks who lead my Son into
all those Scenes of Riot and Debauchery,
which will be his Destruction; but I shall
pay no more of his Bills I promise you. 
I expect he will quit all such Company for
the future. If I had imagined otherwise I
should not have provided a Wife for him; 
for I would be instrumental in the Ruin
of no Body.’ ‘How, Sir, said Jones,
and was this Lady of your providing?’ 
‘Pray, Sir, answered the old Gentleman, how
comes it to be any Concern of yours?’ 
—‘Nay, dear Sir, replied Jones, be not
offended that I interest myself in what
regards your Son's Happiness, for whom
I have so great an Honour and Value. 
It was upon that very Account I came to 

wait upon you. I can't express the Satisfaction
you have given me by what
you say; for I do assure you your Son is
a Person for whom I have the highest
Honour. —Nay, Sir, it is not easy to express
the Esteem I have for you, who
could be so generous, so good, so kind,
so indulgent to provide such a Match for
your Son; a Woman who, I dare
swear, will make him one of the happiest
Men upon Earth.’ 
There is scarce any thing which so happily
introduces Men to our good Liking, as having
conceived some Alarm at their first Appearance; 
when once those Apprehensions
begin to vanish, we soon forget the Fears
which they occasioned, and look on ourselves
as indebted for our present Ease, to those
very Persons who at first rais'd our Fears. 
Thus it happened to Nightingale, who
no sooner found that Jones had no Demand
on him, as he suspected, then he began to be
pleased with his Presence. ‘Pray, good, Sir,
said he, be pleased to sit down. I do not remember
to have ever had the Pleasure of
seeing you before; but if you are a Friend
of my Son, and have any thing to say
concerning this young Lady, I shall be 

glad to hear you. As to her making
him happy, it will be his own Fault if
she doth not. I have discharged my Duty,
in taking Care of the main Article. 
She will bring him a Fortune capable of
making any reasonable, prudent, sober
Man happy.’ ‘Undoubtedly, cries Jones,
for she is in herself a Fortune; so beautiful,
so genteel, so sweet-tempered, and so
well educated; she is indeed a most accomplished
young Lady; sings admirably
well, and hath a most delicate Hand at
the Harpsichord.’ ‘I did not know any
of these Matters, answered the old Gentleman,
for I never saw the Lady; but
I do not like her the worse for what you
tell me; and I am the better pleased with
her Father for not laying any Stress on
these Qualifications in our Bargain. I
shall always think it a Proof of his Understanding. 
A silly Fellow would have
brought in these Articles as an Addition
to her Fortune; but to give him his due,
he never mentioned any such Matter; 
though to be sure they are no Disparagements
to a Woman.’ ‘I do assure you,
Sir, cries Jones, she hath them all in the
most eminent Degree: For my Part I
own I was afraid you might have been a
little backward, a little less inclined to the 

Match: For your Son told me you had
never seen the Lady, therefore I came,
Sir, in that Case, to entreat you, to conjure
you, as you value the Happiness of
your Son, not to be averse to his Match
with a Woman who hath not only all the
good Qualities I have mentioned, but
many more.’ —‘If that was your Business,
Sir, said the old Gentleman, we are both
obliged to you; and you may be perfectly
easy, for I give you my Word I was very
well satisfied with her Fortune.’ ‘Sir, answered
Jones, I honour you every Moment
more and more. To be so easily satisfied,
so very moderate on that Account, is a
Proof of the Soundness of your Understanding,
as well as the Nobleness of your Mind.’ 
—‘Not so very moderate, young Gentleman,
not, not so very moderate, answered the
Father.’ —‘Still more and more noble, replied
Jones, and give me Leave to add sensible: 
For sure it is little less than Madness
to consider Money as the sole Foundation
of Happiness. Such a Woman as this
with her little, her nothing of a Fortune.’ — 
‘I find, cries the old Gentleman, you have
a pretty just Opinion of Money, my
Friend, or else you are better acquainted
with the Person of the Lady than with
her Circumstances. Why pray, what Fortune 

do you imagine this Lady to have?’ — 
‘What Fortune? cries Jones, why too contemptible
a one to be named for your
Son. Well, well, well, said the other, perhaps
he might have done better.’ —‘That
I deny, said Jones, for she is one of the
best of Women.’ ‘Ay, ay, but in Point
for Fortune I mean—answered the other. 
—And yet as to that now, how
much do you imagine your Friend is to
have?’ —‘How much, cries Jones,
how much! —Why at the utmost,
perhaps, 200l.’ ‘Do you mean to banter
me, young Gentleman? said the Father
a little angry.’ —‘No, upon my
Soul, answered Jones, I am in Earnest,
nay I believe I have gone to the utmost
Farthing. If I do the Lady an Injury, I
ask her Pardon.’ ‘Indeed you do, cries
the Father. I am certain she hath fifty
Times that Sum, and she shall produce
fifty to that before I consent that she
shall marry my Son.’ ‘Nay, said Jones,
it is too late to talk of Consent now— 
If she hath not fifty Farthings your Son
is married.’ —‘My Son married! answered
the old Gentleman with Surprise.’ 
‘Nay, said Jones, I thought you was unacquainted
with it.’ —‘My Son married
to Miss Harris! answered he again’ 

—‘To Miss Harris! Said Jones, no Sir, to
Miss Nancy Miller, the Daughter of Mrs.
Miller, at whose House he lodged; a
young Lady, who, though her Mother
is reduced to let Lodgings’—‘Are
you bantering, or are you in Earnest?
cries the Father with a most solemn
Voice.’ ‘Indeed, Sir, answered Jones, I scorn
the Character of a Banterer. I came to
you in most serious Earnest, imagining,
as I find true, that your Son had never
dared acquaint you with a Match so much
inferior to him in Point of Fortune, tho'
the Reputation of the Lady will suffer it
no longer to remain a Secret.’ 
While the Father stood like one struck
suddenly dumb at this News, a Gentleman
came into the Room, and saluted him by
the Name of Brother. 
But though these two were in Consanguinity
so nearly related, they were in their
Dispositions almost the opposites to each other. 
The Brother who now arrived had
likewise been bred to Trade, in which he
no sooner saw himself worth 6000l. than he
purchased a small Estate with the greatest
Part of it, and retired into the Country; 
where he married the Daughter of an unbeneficed 

Clergyman; a young Lady who,
though she had neither Beauty nor Fortune,
had recommended herself to his
Choice, entirely by her good Humour, of
which she possessed a very immoderate
Share. 
With this Woman he had, during twenty-five
Years, lived a Life more resembling
the Model which certain Poets ascribe
to the Golden Age, than any of those Patterns
which are furnished by the present
Times. By her he had four Children, but
none of them arrived at Maturity except
only one Daughter, whom in vulgar Language
he and his Wife had spoiled; that is,
had educated with the utmost Tenderness
and Fondness; which she returned to such
a Degree, that she had actually refused a
very extraordinary Match with a Gentleman
a little turned of forty, because she
could not bring herself to part with her Parents. 
The young Lady whom Mr. Nightingale
had intended for his Son was a near
Neighbour of his Brother, and an Acquaintance
of his Niece; and in reality it was
upon the Account of this projected Match,
that he was now come to Town; not indeed 

to forward, but to dissuade his Brother
from a Purpose which he conceived
would inevitably ruin his Nephew; for he
foresaw no other Event, from a Union with
Miss Harris, notwithstanding the Largeness
of her Fortune, as neither her Person nor
Mind seemed to him to promise any Kind
of matrimonial Felicity; for she was very
tall, very thin, very ugly, very affected,
very silly, and very ill-natured. 
His Brother therefore no sooner mentioned
the Marriage of his Nephew with
Miss Miller, than he exprest the utmost
Satisfaction; and when the Father had very
bitterly reviled his Son, and pronounced
Sentence of Beggary upon him, the Uncle
began in the following Manner. 
‘If you was a little cooler, Brother, I
would ask you whether you love your
Son for his Sake, or for your own. You
would answer, I suppose, and so I suppose
you think, for his Sake; and doubtless it
is his Happiness which you intended in
the Marriage you proposed for him. 
‘Now, Brother, to prescribe Rules of
Happiness to others, hath always appeared
to me very absurd, and to insist on 

this very tyrannical. It is a vulgar
Error I know; but it is nevertheless
an Error. And if this be absurd in
other Things, it is mostly so in the Affair
of Marriage, the Happiness of which
depends entirely in the Affection which
subsists between the Parties. 
‘I have therefore always thought it unreasonable
in Parents to desire to chuse
for their Children on this Occasion, since
to force Affection is an impossible Attempt; 
nay, so much doth Love abhor
Force, that I know not whether through
an unfortunate but incureable Perversness
in our Natures, it may not be even
impatient of Persuasion. 
‘It is, however, true, that though a
Parent will not, I think, wisely prescribe,
he ought to be consulted on this Occasion,
and in Strictness perhaps should at
least have a negative Voice. My Nephew
therefore, I own, in marrying without
asking your Advice, hath been guilty
of a Fault. But honestly speaking,
Brother, have you not a little promoted
this Fault? Have not your frequent Declarations
on this Subject, given him a
moral Certainty of your Refusal, where 

there was any Deficiency in Point of
Fortune? nay, doth not your present Anger
arise solely from that Deficiency? And
if he hath failed in his Duty here, did
not you as much exceed that Authority,
when you absolutely bargained with him
for a Woman without his Knowledge,
whom you yourself never saw, and whom
if you had seen and known as well as I,
it must have been Madness in you, to
have ever thought of bringing into your
Family. 
‘Still I own my Nephew in a Fault; 
but surely it is not an unpardonable Fault. 
He hath acted indeed without your Consent,
in a Matter in which he ought to
have asked it; but it is in a Matter in
which his Interest is principally concerned; 
you yourself must and will acknowledge,
that you consulted his Interest only,
and if he unfortunately differed from
you, and hath been mistaken in his Notion
of Happiness, will you, Brother, if
you love your Son, carry him still wider
from the Point? Will you encrease the
ill Consequences of his simple Choice? 
Will you endeavour to make an Event
certain Misery to him, which may accidentally
prove so? In a Word, Brother, 

because he hath put it out of your Power
to make his Circumstances as affluent
as you would, will you distress them as
much as you can?’ 
By the Force of the true Catholic Faith,
St. Anthony won upon the Fishes. Orpheus
and Amphion went a little farther, and by
the Charms of Music enchanted Things
merely inanimate. Wonderful both! But
neither History nor Fable have ever yet
ventured to record an Instance of any one,
who by Force of Argument and Reason
hath triumphed over habitual Avarice. 
Mr. Nightingale, the Father, instead of
attempting to answer his Brother, contented
himself with only observing, that they
had always differed in their Sentiments concerning
the Education of their Children. 
‘I wish, said he, Brother, you would have
confined your Care to your own Daughter,
and never have troubled yourself
with my Son, who hath, I believe, as
little profited by your Precepts, as by
your Example:’ For young Nightingale
was his Uncle's Godson, and had lived
more with him than with his Father. So
that the Uncle had often declared, he loved
his Nephew almost equally with his own
Child. 

Jones fell into Raptures with this good
Gentleman; and when after much Perswasion,
they found the Father grew still more
and more irritated, instead of appeased,
Jones conducted the Uncle to his Nephew
at the House of Mrs. Miller. 



Containing strange Matters. 
At his Return to his Lodgings, Jones
found the Situation of Affairs greatly
altered from what they had been in at
his Departure. The Mother, the two
Daughters and young Mr. Nightingale were
now sat down to Supper together, when
the Uncle was, at his own Desire, introduced
without any Ceremony into the Company,
to all of whom he was well known; 
for he had several Times visited his Nephew
at that House. 
The old Gentleman immediately walked
up to Miss Nancy, saluted and wished her
Joy, as he did afterwards the Mother and
the other Sister; and lastly, he paid the
proper Compliments to his Nephew, with 

the same good Humour and Curtesy, as if
his Nephew had married his equal or superior
in Fortune, with all the previous requisites
first performed. 
Miss Nancy and her supposed Husband
both turned pale, and looked rather foolish
than otherwise upon the Occasion; but
Mrs. Miller took the first Opportunity of
withdrawing; and having sent for Jones into
the Dining Room, she threw herself at
his Feet, and in a most passionate Flood of
Tears, called him her good Angel, the
Preserver of her poor little Family, with
many other respectful and endearing Appellations,
and made him every Acknowledgment
which the highest Benefit can extract
from the most grateful Hearts. 
After the first Gust of her Passion was a
little over, which she declared, if she had
not vented, would have burst her, she proceeded
to inform Mr. Jones, that all Matters
were settled between Mr. Nightingale
and her Daughter, and that they were to
be married the next Morning: At which
Mr. Jones having exprest much Pleasure,
the poor Woman fell again into a Fit of
Joy and Thanksgiving, which he at length
with Difficulty silenced, and prevailed on 

her to return with him back to the Company,
whom they found in the same good
Humour in which they had left them. 
This little Society now past two or three
very agreeable Hours together, in which
the Uncle, who was a very great Lover of
his Bottle, had so well ply'd his Nephew,
that this latter, though not drunk, began
to be somewhat flustered; and now Mr.
Nightingale taking the old Gentleman with
him up Stairs into the Apartment he had
lately occupied, unbosomed himself as follows. 
‘As you have been always the best and
kindest of Uncles to me, and as you
have shewn such unparalleled Goodness
in forgiving this Match, which to be sure
may be thought a little improvident; I
should never forgive myself if I attempted
to deceive you in any thing.’ He then
confessed the Truth, and opened the whole
Affair. 
‘How, Jack! said the old Gentleman,
and are you really then not married to
this young Woman?’ ‘No, upon my
Honour, answered Nightingale, I have
told you the simple Truth.’ ‘My dear 

Boy, cries the Uncle, kissing him, I am
heartily glad to hear it. I never was better
pleased in my Life. If you had been
married, I should have assisted you as
much as was in my Power, to have made
the best of a bad Matter; but there is a
great Difference between considering a
Thing which is already done and irrecoverable,
and that which is yet to do. Let
your Reason have fair Play, Jack, and
you will see this Match in so foolish and
preposterous a Light, that there will be
no Need of any dissuasive Arguments.’ 
‘How, Sir! replies young Nightingale,
is there this Difference between having
already done an Act, and being in
Honour engaged to do it?’ ‘Pugh, said
the Uncle, Honour is a Creature of the
World's making, and the World hath the
Power of a Creator over it, and may govern
and direct it as they please. Now
you well know how trivial these Breaches
of Contract are thought; even the
grossest make but the Wonder and Conversation
of a Day. Is there a Man who
will be afterwards more backward in giving
you his Sister or Daughter? Or is
there any Sister or Daughter who would
be more backward to receive you? Honour
is not concerned in these Engagements.’ 
Pardon me, dear Sir, cries 

‘Nightingale, I can never think so; and
not only Honour, but Conscience and
Humanity are concerned. I am well satisfied,
that was I now to disappoint the
young Creature, her Death would be the
Consequence, and I should look on myself
as her Murderer; nay, as her Murderer
by the cruellest of all Methods, by
breaking her Heart.’ ‘Break her Heart,
indeed! no, no, Jack, cries the Uncle,
the Hearts of Women are not so soon
broke; they are tough, Boy, they are
tough.’ ‘But, Sir, answered Nightingale,
my own Affections are engaged,
and I never could be happy with any other
Woman. How often have I heard
you say, that Children should be always
suffered to chuse for themselves, and that
you would let my Cousin Harriet do so!’ 
‘Why ay, replied the old Gentleman, so
I would have them; but then I would
have them chuse wisely. —Indeed, Jack,
you must and shall leave this Girl.’ — 
‘Indeed, Uncle, cries the other, I must
and will have her.’ ‘You will, young
Gentleman? said the Uncle; I did not
expect such a Word from you. I should
not wonder if you had used such Language
to your Father, who hath always
treated you like a Dog, and kept you at 

the Distance which a Tyrant preserves
over his Subjects; but I who have lived
with you upon an equal Footing, might
surely expect better Usage: But I know
how to account for it all; it is all owing
to your preposterous Education, in which
I have had too little Share. There is my
Daughter now, whom I have brought up
as my Friend, never doth any thing without
my Advice, nor ever refuses to take
it when I give it her. You have never
yet given her Advice in an Affair of this
Kind, said Nightingale, for I am greatly
mistaken in my Cousin, if she would be
very ready to obey even your most positive
Commands in abandoning her Inclinations.’ 
‘Don't abuse my Girl, answered
the old Gentleman with some Emotion; 
don't abuse my Harriet. I have
brought her up to have no Inclinations
contrary to my own. By suffering her
to do whatever she pleases, I have enured
her to a Habit of being pleased to do
whatever I like.’ ‘Pardon me, Sir, said
Nightingale, I have not the least Design
to reflect on my Cousin, for whom I
have the greatest Esteem; and indeed I
am convinced you will never put her to
so severe a Trial, or lay such hard Commands
on her as you would do on me. 

—But, dear Sir, let us return to the
Company; for they will begin to be uneasy
at our long Absence. I must beg
one Favour of my dear Uncle, which is
that he would not say any thing to shock
the poor Girl or her Mother.’ ‘O you
need not fear me, answered he, I understand
myself too well to affront Women; 
so I will readily grant you that Favour; 
and in Return I must expect another
of you.’ ‘There are but few of your
Commands, Sir, said Nightingale, which
I shall not very chearfully obey.’ ‘Nay,
Sir, I ask nothing, said the Uncle, but
the Honour of your Company home to
my Lodging, that I may reason the Case
a little more fully with you: For I would
if possible have the Satisfaction of preserving
my Family, notwithstanding the
headstrong Folly of my Brother, who,
in his own Opinion, is the wisest Man
in the World.’ 
Nightingale, who well knew his Uncle
to be as headstrong as his Father, submitted
to attend him Home, and then they
both returned back into the Room, where
the old Gentleman promised to carry himself
with the same Decorum which he
had before maintained. 




A short Chapter which concludes the Book. 
The long Absence of the Uncle and
Nephew had occasioned some Disquiet
in the Minds of all whom they had left
behind them; and the more, as during the
preceding Dialogue, the Uncle had more
than once elevated his Voice, so as to
be heard down Stairs; which, though they
could not distinguish what he said, had
caused some evil foreboding in Nancy and
her Mother, and indeed even in Jones himself. 
When the good Company therefore again
assembled, there was a visible Alteration
in all their Faces; and the good Humour
which, at their last Meeting, universally
shone forth in every Countenance, was
now changed into a much less agreeable
Aspect. It was a Change indeed common
enough to the Weather in this Climate,
from Sunshine to Clouds, from June to December. 

This Alteration was not however greatly
remarked by any present; for as every
one was now endeavouring to conceal their
own Thoughts, and to act a Part, they
became all too busily engaged in the Scene
to be Spectators of it. Thus neither the
Uncle nor Nephew saw any Symptoms
of Suspicion in the Mother or Daughter; 
nor did the Mother or Daughter remark
the over-acted Complaisance of the
old Man, nor the counterfeit Satisfaction
which grinned in the Features of the young
one. 
Something like this, I believe, frequently
happens, where the whole Attention of
two Friends being engaged in the Part
which each is to act, in order to impose on
the other, neither sees nor suspects the Art
practised against himself; and thus the
Thrust of both (to borrow no improper
Metaphor on the Occasion) alike takes
Place. 
From the same Reason it is no unusual
Thing for both Parties to be over-reached
in a Bargain, though the one must be always
the greater Loser; as was he who sold a 

blind Horse, and received a bad Note in
Payment. 
Our Company in about half an Hour
broke up, and the Uncle carried off his
Nephew; but not before the latter had assured
Miss Nancy, in a Whisper, that he
would attend her early in the Morning,
and fulfill all his Engagements. 
Jones, who was the least concerned in this
Scene, saw the most. He did indeed suspect
the very Fact; for besides observing the
great Alteration in the Behaviour of the
Uncle, the Distance he assumed, and his
overstrained Civility to Miss Nancy; the
carrying off a Bridegroom from his Bride
at that Time of Night, was so extraordinary
a Proceeding, that it could be only accounted
for, by imagining that young Nightingale
had revealed the whole Truth, which
the apparent Openness of his Temper, and his
being flustered with Liquor, made too probable. 
While he was reasoning with himself,
whether he should acquaint these poor People
with his Suspicion, the Maid of the
House informed him, that a Gentlewoman
desired to speak with him. —He went 

immediately out, and taking the Candle
from the Maid, ushered his Visitant up
Stairs, who in the Person of Mrs. Honour
acquainted him with such dreadful News
concerning his Sophia, that he immediately
lost all Consideration for every other Person; 
and his whole Stock of Compassion was entirely
swallowed up in Reflections on his
own Misery, and on that of his unfortunate
Angel. 
What this dreadful Matter was, the
Reader will be informed, after we have first
related the many preceding Steps which
produced it, and those will be the Subject
of the following Book. 