


A Chapter, of which we are extremely
vain, and which indeed
we look on as our Chef d'Oeuvre,
containing a wonderful Story concerning
the Devil, and as nice a
Scene of Honour as ever happened. 
My Reader, I believe, even if he be a
Gamester, would not thank me
for an exact Relation of every Man's Success; 
let it suffice then that they played till
the whole Money vanished from the Table; 
and whether the Devil himself carried
it away, I will not determine; but very
surprizing it was, that every Person protested
he had lost, nor could any one guess
who, but the Devil, had won. 
But though very probable it is, that this
Arch-Fiend had some Share in the Booty,
it is likely he had not all; Mr. Bagshot being
imagined to be a considerable Winner, 

notwithstanding his Assertions to the contrary; 
for he was seen by several to convey
Money often into his Pocket, and what
is still a little stronger Presumption is, that
the grave Gentleman whom we have mentioned
to have served his Country in two
honourable Capacities, not being willing to
trust alone to the Evidence of his Eyes, had
frequently dived into the said Bagshot's
Pocket, whence tho' he might extract a
few Pieces, he was very sensible he had left
many behind. 
The Gentleman had long indulged his
Curiosity in this Way before Mr. Bagshot, in
the Heat of Gaming, had perceived him: 
But as he was now leaving off Play, he
discovered this ingenious Feat of Dexterity; 
upon which, leaping up from his Chair in
a violent Passion, he cried out, “I thought
I had been among Gentlemen, and Men
of Honour, but, d&wblank;n me, I find we
have a Pickpocket in Company.” The
scandalous Sound of this Word extremely
alarmed the whole Board, nor did they all
shew less Surprize than the Conv&wblank;n
(whose not sitting of late is much lamented) 

would express at hearing there was an
Atheist in the Room: But it more particularly
affected the Gentleman; who likewise
started from his Chair, and with a fierce
Countenance and Accent, said, “Do you
mean Me? D&wblank;n your Eyes, you are
a Rascal and a Scoundrel.” Those Words
would have been immediately succeeded by
Blows, had not the Company interposed,
and with strong Arm witheld the two
Antagonists from each other. It was, however,
a long Time before they could be
prevailed on to sit down, which being at
last happily brought about, Mr. Wild the
elder, who was a well disposed old Man,
advised them to shake Hands and be
Friends; but the Gentleman, who had received
the first Affront, absolutely refused
it, and swore, He would have the Villain's
Blood. Mr. Snap highly applauded the Resolution,
and affirmed that the Affront was
by no Means to be put up by any who
bore the Name of a Gentleman, and that
unless his Friend resented it properly, he
would never execute another Warrant in his
Company; that he had always looked upon
him as a Man of Honour, and doubted 

not but he would prove himself so; and
that if it was his own Case, nothing should
persuade him to put up such an Affront
without proper Satisfaction. The Count
likewise spoke on the same Side, and the
Parties themselves muttered several short
Sentences, purporting their Intentions. At
last, Mr. Wild our Hero, rising slowly
from his Seat, and having fixed the Attention
of all present, began as follows. 
“I have heard, with infinite Pleasure, every
Thing which the two Gentlemen who
spoke last have said, with Relation to
Honour, nor can any Man possibly entertain
a higher and nobler Sense of that
Word, nor a greater Esteem of its inestimable
Value than myself. If we have
no Name to express it by in our Cant
Dictionary, it were well to be wished
we had. It is indeed, the essential Quality
of a Gentleman, and which no Man
who ever was great in the Field, or on
the Road (as others express it) can possibly
be without. But alas! Gentlemen,
What Pity is it, that a Word of such
sovereign Use and Virtue should have so
uncertain and various an Application, 

that scarce two People mean the same
Thing by it. Do not some by Honour
mean Good-Nature and Humanity, which
weak Minds call Virtues? How then! 
Must we deny it to the Great, the Brave,
the Noble, to the Sackers of Towns, the
Plunderers of Provinces, and the Conquerors
of Kingdoms? Were not these Men
of Honour? And yet they scorned those
pitiful Qualities I have mentioned. Again,
some few (or I am mistaken) include
the Idea of Honesty in their Honour. 
And shall we then say, that no
Man who witholds from another what
Law or Justice perhaps calls his own,
or who GREATLY and boldly deprives him
of such Property, is a Man of Honour? 
G&wblank; forbid I should say so in this, or indeed,
in any other good Company. Is
Honour Truth? No. It is not in the
Lie's going from us, but in its coming
to us our Honour is injured. Doth it
then consist in what the Vulgar call Cardinal
Virtues? It would be an Affront
to your Understandings to suppose it, since
we see every Day so many Men of Honour
without any. In what then doth 

the Word Honour consist? Why in itself
alone. A Man of Honour is he
that is called a Man of Honour; and
while he is so called, he so remains, and
no longer. Think not any Thing a Man
commits can forfeit his Honour. Look
abroad into the World, the Prig while
he flourishes is a Man of Honour; when
in Gaol, at the Bar, or the Tree, he is
so no longer. And why is this Distinction? 
Not from his Actions; for those
are often as well known in his flourishing
Estate, as they are afterwards; but
because Men call him a Man of Honour
in the former, and cease to call him so
in the latter Condition. Let us see then,
how hath Mr. Bagshot injured the Gentleman's
Honour? Why, he hath called
him a Pick-pocket, and that probably,
by a severe Construction and a long
round about Way of Reasoning, may
seem a little to derogate from his Honour,
if considered in a very nice Sense. 
Admitting it, therefore, for Argument's
Sake, to be some small Imputation on
his Honour, let Mr. Bagshot give him
Satisfaction; let him doubly and triply 

repair this oblique Injury by directly asserting,
that he believes he is a Man of
Honour.” The Gentleman answered,
he was content to refer it to Mr. Wild,
and whatever Satisfaction he thought sufficient,
he would accept. Let him give me
my Money again first, said Bagshot, and
then I will call him a Man of Honour with
all my Heart. The Gentleman then protested
he had not any, which Snap seconded,
declaring he had his Eyes on him all
the while; but Bagshot remained still unsatisfied,
till Wild, rapping out a hearty
Oath, swore he had not taken a single
Farthing, adding that whoever asserted the
contrary gave him the Lie, and he would
resent it. And now, such was the Ascendency
of this great Man, that Bagshot immediately
acquiesced, and performed the Ceremonies
required: And thus, by the exquisite
Address of our Hero, this Quarrel,
which had so fatal an Aspect, and which
between two Persons so extremely jealous
of their Honour, would most certainly
have produced very dreadful Consequences,
was happily concluded. 

Mr. Wild was indeed a little interested
in this Affair, as he himself had set the
Gentleman to work, and had received the
greatest Part of the Booty, and as to Mr.
Snap's Deposition in his Favour, it was the
usual Height to which the Ardour of that
worthy Person's Friendship too frequently
hurried him. It was his constant Maxim,
That he was a pitiful Fellow who would
stick at a little *  Rapping for his Friend. 