


Containing about three Days. 



A Crust for the Critics. 
In our last initial Chapter, we may be
supposed to have treated that formidable
Set of Men, who are called Critics,
with more Freedom than becomes us; 
since they exact, and indeed generally receive,
great Condescension from Authors. 
We shall in this, therefore, give the Reasons 

of our Conduct to this august Body; 
and here we shall perhaps place them in a
Light, in which they have not hitherto been
seen. 
This Word Critic is of Greek Derivation,
and signifies Judgement. Hence
I presume some Persons who have not understood
the Original, and have seen the
English Translation of the Primitive, have
concluded that it meant Judgment in the
legal Sense, in which it is frequently used as
equivalent to Condemnation. 
I am the rather inclined to be of that
Opinion, as the greatest Number of Critics
hath of late Years been found amongst the
Lawyers. Many of these Gentlemen, from
Despair, perhaps, of ever rising to the Bench
in Westminster-hall, have placed themselves
on the Benches at the Playhouse, where
they have exerted their judicial Capacity,
and have given Judgment, i. e. condemned
without Mercy. 
The Gentlemen would perhaps be well
enough pleased, if we were to leave them
thus compared to one of the most important
and honourable Offices in the Commonwealth,
and if we intended to apply to 

their Favour we would do so; but as we
design to deal very sincerely and plainly
too with them, we must remind them of
another Officer of Justice of a much lower
Rank; to whom, as they not only pronounce,
but execute their own Judgment,
they bear likewise some remote Resemblance. 
But in reality there is another Light in
which these modern Critics may with great
Justice and Propriety be seen; and this
is that of a common Slanderer. If a Person
who prys into the Characters of others,
with no other Design but to discover their
Faults, and to publish them to the World,
deserves the Title of a Slanderer of the Reputations
of Men; why should not a Critic,
who reads with the same malevolent View,
be as properly stiled the Slanderer of the Reputation
of Books? 
Vice hath not, I believe, a more abject
Slave; Society produces not a more odious
Vermin; nor can the Devil receive a Guest
more worthy of him, nor possibly more
welcome to him, than a Slanderer. The
World, I am afraid, regards not this Monster
with half the Abhorrence which he deserves,
and I am more afraid to assign the 

Reason of this criminal Lenity shewn towards
him; yet is is certain that the Thief
looks innocent in the Comparison; nay,
the Murderer himself can seldom stand in
Competition with his Guilt: For Slander
is a more cruel Weapon than a Sword, as
the Wounds which the former gives are
always incurable. One Method, indeed,
there is of killing, and that the basest
and most execrable of all, which bears
an exact Analogy to the Vice here disclaimed
against, and that is Poison. And
Means of Revenge so base, and yet so
horrible, that it was once wisely distinguished
by our Laws from all other Murders,
in the peculiar Severity of the Punishment. 
Besides the dreadful Mischiefs done by
Slander, and the Baseness of the Means by
which this is effected,  and there are other Circumstances
that highly aggravate its atrocious
Quality: For it often proceeds from
no Provocation, and seldom promises itself
any Reward, unless some black and infernal
Mind may propose such  a Reward in the
Thoughts of having procured the Ruin and
Misery of another. 

Shakespear hath nobly touched this Vice,
when he says, 

Who steals my Cash  steals Trash, 'tis something, nothing;
'Twas mine, 'tis his, and hath been Slave to Thousands:
But he who filches from me my good Name,
Robs me of that which not enriches him,
But makes me poor indeed.
With all this my good Reader will doubtless
agree; but much of it will probably
seem too severe, when applied to the Slanderer
of Books. But let it here be considered,
that both proceed from the same
wicked Disposition of Mind, and are alike
void of the Excuse of Temptation. Nor
shall we conclude the Injury done this Way
to be very slight, when we consider a Book
as the Author's Offspring, and indeed as
the Child of his Brain. 
The Reader who hath suffered his Muse to
continue hitherto in a Virgin State, can have
but a very inadequate Idea of this Kind of
paternal Fondness. To such we may parody
the tender Exclamation of Macduff. 

Alas! Thou hast written no Book. But
the Author whose Muse hath brought forth,
will feel the pathetic Strain, perhaps will
accompany me with Tears (especially if his
Darling be already no more) while I mention
the Uneasiness with which the big Muse
bears about her Burden, the painful Labour
with which she produces it, and lastly,
the Care, the Fondness, with which the
tender Father nourishes his Favourite, till
it be brought to Maturity, and produced
into the World. 
Nor is there any paternal Fondness which
seems less to savour of absolute Instinct,
and which may so well be reconciled to
worldly Wisdom as this. These Children
may most truly be called the Riches of their
Father; and many of them have with true
filial Piety fed their Parent in his old Age; 
so that not only the Affection, but the Interest
of the Author may be highly injured
by these Slanderers, whose poisonous Breath
brings his Book to an untimely End. 
Lastly, The Slander of a Book is, in
Truth, the Slander of the Author: For as
no one can call another Bastard, without calling
the Mother a Whore, so neither can
any one give the Names of sad Stuff, horrid 

Nonsense, &c. to a Book, without calling
the Author a Blockhead; which tho'
in a moral Sense it is a preferable Appellation
to that of Villain, is perhaps rather
more injurious to his worldly Interest. 
Now however ludicrous all this may appear
to some, others, I doubt not, will feel
and acknowledge the Truth of it; nay,
may, perhaps, think I have not treated the
Subject with decent Solemnity; but surely
a Man may speak Truth with a smiling
Countenance. In reality, to depreciate a
Book maliciously, or even wantonly, is at
least a very ill-natured Office; and a morose
snarling Critic, may, I believe, be suspected
to be a bad Man. 
I will therefore endeavour in the remaining
Part of this Chapter, to explain the
Marks of this Character, and to shew what
Criticism I here intend to obviate: For I
can never be understood, unless by the very
Persons here meant, to insinuate, that there
are no proper Judges of Writing, or to endeavour
to exclude from the Commonwealth
of Literature any of those noble Critics,
to whose Labours the learned World
are so greatly indebted. Such were Aristotle,
Horace, and Longinus among the Ancients, 

Dacier and Bossu among the French, and
some perhaps among us; who have certainly
been duly authorized to execute at least
a judicial Authority in Foro Literatorio. 
But without ascertaining all the proper
Qualifications of a Critic, which I have touched
on elsewhere, I think I may very boldly
object to the Censures of any one past upon
Works which he hath not himself read. 
Such Censurers as these, whether they speak
from their own Guess or Suspicion, or from
the Report and Opinion of others, may properly
be said to slander the Reputation of the
Book they condemn. 
Such may likewise be suspected of deserving
this Character, who without assigning
any particular Faults, condemn the
whole in general defamatory Terms; such
as vile, dull, da&wblank;d Stuff, &c. and particularly
by the Use of the Monosyllable
Low; a Word which becomes the Mouth of
no Critic who is not Right Honourable. 
Again, tho' there may be some Faults
justly assigned in the Work, yet if those are
not in the most essential Parts, or if they
are compensated by greater Beauties, it will
savour rather of the Malice of a Slanderer, 

than of the Judgment of a true Critic, to
pass a severe Sentence upon the whole,
merely on account of some vicious Part. 
This is directly contrary to the Sentiments
of Horace. 

Verum ubi plura nitent in carmine non ego paucis
Offendor maculis, quas aut incuria fudit,
Aut humana parum cavit natura—
But where the Beauties, more in Number, shine,
I am not angry, when a casual Line
(That with some trivial Faults unequal flows)
A careless Hand, or human Frailty shows.
Mr. Francis.
For as Martial says, Aliter, non fit, Avite,
Liber. No Book can be otherwise composed. 
All Beauty of Character, as well as of Countenance,
and indeed of every Thing human,
is to be tried in this Manner. Cruel indeed
would it be if such a Work as this History,
which hath employed some Thousands of
Hours in the composing, should be liable
to be condemned, because some particular
Chapter, or perhaps Chapters, may be obnoxious
to very just and sensible Objections. 

And yet nothing is more common than the
most rigorous Sentence upon Books supported
by such Objections, which if they
were rightly taken (and that they are not
always) do by no Means go to the Merit of
the whole. In the Theatre especially, a
single Expression which doth not coincide
with the Taste of the Audience, or with any
individual Critic of that Audience, is sure
to be hissed; and one Scene which should
be disapproved, would hazard the whole
Piece. To write within such severe Rules
as these, is as impossible, as to live up to
some splenetic Opinions; and if we judge
according to the Sentiments of some Critics,
and of some Christians, no Author will be
saved in this World, and no Man in the
next. 



The Adventures which Sophia met with,
after her leaving Upton. 
Our History, just before it was obliged
to turn about, and travel backwards,
had mentioned the Departure of Sophia
and her Maid from the Inn; we shall
now therefore pursue the Steps of that lovely 

Creature, and leave her unworthy Lover a
little longer to bemoan his Ill-Luck, or rather
his ill Conduct. 
Sophia having directed her Guide to travel
through Bye-Roads across the Country,
they now passed the Severn, and had scarce
got a Mile from the Inn, when the young
Lady, looking behind her, saw several
Horses coming after on full Speed. This
greatly alarmed her Fears, and she called
to the Guide to put on as fast as possible. 
He immediately obeyed her, and away
they rode a full Gallop. But the
faster they went, the faster were they followed; 
and as the Horses behind were
somewhat swifter than those before, so the
former were at length overtaken. A happy
Circumstance for poor Sophia; whose Fears,
joined to her Fatigue, had almost overpowered
her Spirits; but she was now instantly
relieved by a female Voice, that
greeted her in the softest Manner, and with
the utmost Civility. This Greeting, Sophia,
as soon as she could recover her
Breath, with like Civility, and with the
highest Satisfaction to herself, returned. 

The Travellers who joined Sophia, and
who had given her such Terror, consisted,
like her own Company, of two Females
and a Guide. The two Parties proceeded
three full Miles together before any one offered
again to open their Mouths; when
our Heroine having pretty well got the
better of her Fear; but yet being somewhat
surprized that the other still continued to
attend her, as she pursued no great Road,
and had already passed through several
Turnings, accosted the strange Lady in
a most obliging Tone; and said, ‘She
was very happy to find they were both
travelling the same Way.’ The other,
who, like a Ghost, only wanted to be spoke
to, readily answered, ‘That the Happiness
was entirely hers; that she was a perfect
Stranger in that Country, and was so overjoyed
at meeting a Companion of her
own Sex, that she had perhaps been guilty
of an Impertinence which required great
Apology, in keeping Pace with her.’ 
More Civilities passed between these two
Ladies; for Mrs. Honour had now given
Place to the fine Habit of the Stranger, and
had fallen into the Rear. But tho' Sophia
had great Curiosity to know why the other
Lady continued to travel on through the 

same Bye-Roads with herself, nay, tho' this
gave her some Uneasiness; yet Fear, or
Modesty, or some other Consideration, restrained
her from asking the Question. 
The strange Lady now laboured under a
Difficulty which appears almost below the
Dignity of History to mention. Her Bonnet
had been blown from her Head not less
than five Times within the last Mile; nor
could she come at any Ribbon or Handkerchief
to tye it under her Chin. When
Sophia was informed of this, she immediately
supplied her with a Handkerchief
for this Purpose; which while she was pulling
from her Pocket, she perhaps too much
neglected the Management of her Horse,
for the Beast now unluckily making a false
Step, fell upon his Fore-Legs, and threw
his Fair Rider from his Back. 
Tho' Sophia came Head foremost to the
Ground, she happily received not the least
Damage; and the same Circumstances
which had perhaps contributed to her Fall,
now preserved her from Confusion; for the
Lane which they were then passing was narrow
and very much over-grown with
Trees, so that the Moon could here afford
very little Light, and was moreover,
at present, so obscured in a Cloud, that it 

was almost perfectly dark. By these Means
the young Lady's Modesty, which was extremely
delicate, escaped as free from Injury
as her Limbs, and she was once more
reinstated in her Saddle, having received
no other Harm than a little Fright by her
Fall. 
Day-light at length appeared in its full
Lustre; and now the two Ladies, who were
riding over a Common Side by Side, looking
stedfastly at each other, at the same
Moment both their Eyes became fixed; 
both their Horses stopt, and both speaking
together, with equal Joy pronounced, the
one the Name of Sophia, the other that of
Harriet. 
This unexpected Encounter surprized the
Ladies much more than I believe it will the
sagacious Reader, who must have imagined
that the strange Lady could be no other
than Mrs. Fitzpatrick, the Cousin of Miss
Western, whom we before-mentioned to
have sallied from the Inn a few Minutes after
her. 
So great was the Surprize and Joy which
these two Cousins conceived at this Meeting
(for they had formerly been most intimate
Acquaintance and Friends, and had 

long lived together with their Aunt Western)
that it is impossible to recount half the Congratulations
which passed between them, before
either asked a very natural Question
of the other, namely, whither she was going. 
This at last, however, came first from
Mrs. Fitzpatrick; but easy and natural as
the Question may seem, Sophia found it
difficult to give it a very ready and certain
Answer. She begged her Cousin therefore
to suspend all Curiosity till they arrived at
some Inn, ‘which I suppose,’ says she,
‘can hardly be far distant; and believe me,
Harriet, I suspend as much Curiosity on
my Side; for indeed I believe our Astonishment
is pretty equal.’ 
The Conversation which passed between
these Ladies on the Road, was, I apprehend,
 worth relating; and less certainly
was that between the two Waiting-women: 
For they likewise began to pay
their Compliments to each other. As for
the Guides, they were debarred from the
Pleasure of Discourse, the one being placed
in the Van, and the other obliged to bring
up the Rear. 

In this Posture they travelled many
Hours, till they came into a wide and well-beaten
Road, which, as they turned to the
Right, soon brought them to a very fair
promising Inn; where they all alighted: 
But so fatigued was Sophia, that as she had
sat her Horse during the last five or six
Miles with great Difficulty, so was she now
incapable of dismounting from him without
Assistance. This the Landlord, who had
hold of her Horse, presently perceiving,
offered to lift her in his Arms from her
Saddle; and she too readily accepted the
Tender of his Service. Indeed Fortune
seems to have resolved to put Sophia to the
Blush that Day, and the second malicious
Attempt succeeded better than the first; for
my Landlord had no sooner received the
young Lady in his Arms, than his Feet,
which the Gout had lately very severely
handled, gave way, and down he
tumbled; but at the same Time, with no
less Dexterity than Gallantry, contrived to
throw himself under his charming Burthen,
so that he alone received any Bruise from the
Fall; for the greatest Injury which happened
to Sophia, was a violent Shock given
to her Modesty, by an immoderate Grin
which, at her rising from the Ground, she
observed in the Countenances of most of the
Bye-Standers. This made her suspect what 

had really happened, and what we shall not
here relate, for the Indulgence of those Readers
who are capable of laughing at the
Offence given to a young Lady's Delicacy. 
Accidents of this Kind we have never regarded
in a comical Light; nor will we
scruple to say, that he must have a very
inadequate Idea of the Modesty of a beautiful
young Woman, who would wish to sacrifice
it to so paultry a Satisfaction as can
arise from Laughter. 
This Fright and Shock, joined to the
violent Fatigue which both her Mind and
Body had undergone, almost overcame the
excellent Constitution of Sophia, and
she had scarce Strength sufficient to totter
into the Inn, leaning on the Arm of her
Maid. Here she was no sooner seated than
she called for a Glass of Water; but Mrs.
Honour, very judiciously, in my Opinion,
changed it into a Glass of Wine. 
Mrs. Fitzpatrick hearing from Mrs. Honour,
that Sophia had not been in Bed during
the two last Nights, and observing
her to look very pale and wan with her
Fatigue, earnestly entreated her to refresh
herself with some Sleep. She was yet a
Stranger to her History, or her Apprehensions; 
but had she known both, she would 

have given the same Advice; for Rest was
visibly necessary for her; and their long
Journey through Bye-Roads so entirely removed
all Danger of Pursuit, that she was
herself perfectly easy on that Account. 
Sophia was easily prevailed on to follow
the Counsel of her Friend, which was
heartily seconded by her Maid. Mrs. Fitzpatrick
likewise offered to bear her Cousin
Company, which Sophia, with much Complaisance,
accepted. 
The Mistress was no sooner in Bed, than
the Maid prepared to follow her Example. 
She began to make many Apologies to her
Sister Abigail for leaving her alone in so
horrid a Place as an Inn; but the other
stopped her short, being as well inclined to
a Nap as herself, and desired the Honour of
being her Bedfellow. Sophia's Maid agreed to
give her a Share of her Bed, but put in her
Claim to all the Honour. So after many
Curt'sies and Compliments, to Bed together
went the Waiting-women, as their
Mistresses had done before them. 
It was usual with my Landlord (as indeed
it is with the whole Fraternity) to enquire
particularly of all Coachmen, Footmen,
Postboys, and others, into the Names of 

all his Guests; what their Estate was, and
where it lay. It cannot therefore be wondered
at, that the many particular Circumstances
which attended our Travellers, and
especially their retiring all to Sleep at so extraordinary
and unusual an Hour as ten in
the Morning, should excite his Curiosity. 
As soon therefore as the Guides entered the
Kitchin, he began to examine who the Ladies
were, and whence they came; but the
Guides, tho' they faithfully related all they
knew, gave him very little Satisfaction. 
On the contrary, they rather enflamed his
Curiosity than extinguished it. 
This Landlord had the Character, among
all his Neighbours, of being a very
sagacious Fellow. He was thought to see
farther and deeper into Things than any
Man in the Parish, the Parson himself not
excepted. Perhaps his Look had contributed
not a little to procure him this Reputation; 
for there was in this something
wonderfully wise and significant, especially
when he had a Pipe in his Mouth; which,
indeed, he seldom was without. His Behaviour,
likewise, greatly assisted in promoting
the Opinion of his Wisdom. In
his Deportment he was solemn, if not sullen; 
and when he spoke, which was seldom,
he always delivered himself in a slow 

Voice; and though his Sentences were
short, they were still interrupted with many
Hums and Ha's, Ay, Ays, and other Expletives: 
So that though he accompanied
his Words with certain explanatory Gestures,
such as shaking, or nodding the
Head, or pointing with his Forefinger, he
generally left his Hearers to understand
more than he expressed; nay, he commonly
gave them a Hint, that he knew much
more than he thought proper to disclose. 
This last Circumstance alone, may, indeed,
very well account for his Character of Wisdom,
since Men are strangely inclined to
worship what they do not understand. 
A grand Secret, upon which several Imposers
on Mankind have totally relied for
the Success of their Frauds. 
This politic Person now taking his Wife
aside, asked her, ‘What she thought of
the Ladies lately arrived?’ ‘Think of
them!’ said the Wife, ‘why what should I
think of them?’ ‘I know,’ answered he,
‘what I think. The Guides tell strange
Stories. One pretends to be come from
Gloucester, and the other from Upton; 
and neither of them, for what I can find,
can tell whither they are going. But
what People ever travel across the Country
from Upton hither, especially to London? 

And one of the Maid-Servants, before
she alighted from her Horse, asked,
if this was not the London Road? Now
I have put all these Circumstances together,
and whom do you think I have
found them out to be?’ ‘Nay, answered
she, you know I never pretend to guess
at your Discoveries.’ —‘It is a good
Girl,’ replied he, chucking her under the
Chin; ‘I must own you have always submitted
to my Knowledge of these Matters. 
Why then, depend upon it; mind
what I say,—depend upon it, they are
certainly some of the Rebel Ladies, who,
they say, travel with the young Chevalier; 
and have taken a round-about Way
to escape the Duke's Army.’ 
‘Husband,’ quoth the Wife, ‘you
have certainly hit it; for one of them is
drest as fine as any Princess; and, to be
sure, she looks for all the World like
one. —But yet, when I consider one
Thing. —‘When you consider,’ cries
the Landlord contemptuously—‘Come,
pray let's hear what you consider.’ — 
‘Why it is,’ answered the Wife, ‘that
she is too humble to be any very great
Lady; for while our Betty was warming
the Bed, she called her nothing but Child,
and my Dear, and Sweetheart; and when 

Betty offered to pull off her Shoes and
Stockings, she would not suffer her, saying,
she would not give her the Trouble.’ 
‘Pugh!’ answered the Husband, ‘This
is nothing. Dost think, because you
have seen some great Ladies rude and uncivil
to Persons below them, that none of
them know how to behave themselves
when they come before their Inferiors? 
I think I know People of Fashion when
I see them. I think I do. Did not she
call for a Glass of Water when she came
in? Another Sort of Women would have
called for a Dram; you know they
would. If she be not a Woman of very
great Quality, sell me for a Fool; and,
I believe, those who buy me will have a
bad Bargain. Now, would a Woman of
her Quality travel without a Footman,
unless upon some such extraordinary Occasion?’ 
‘Nay, to be sure, Husband,’ 
cries she, ‘you know these Matters better
than I, or most Folk.’ ‘I think I do
know something,’ said he. To be sure,’ 
answered the Wife, ‘the poor little Heart
looked so piteous, when she sat down in
the Chair, I protest I could not help having
a Compassion for her, almost as much 

as if she had been a poor Body. But
what's to be done, Husband? If an she
be a Rebel, I suppose you intend to betray
her up to the Court. Well, she's a
sweet-tempered, good-humoured Lady, be
she what she will, and I shall hardly refrain
from crying when I hear she is hanged or
beheaded.’ ‘Pooh,’ answered the Husband! 
—‘But as to what's to be done it is
not so easy a Matter to determine. I
hope, before she goes away, we shall
have the News of a Battle: for if the
Chevalier should get the better, she may
gain us Interest at Court, and make our
Fortunes, without betraying her.’ ‘Why
that's true,’ replied the Wife; ‘and I
heartily hope she will have it in her
Power. Certainly she's a sweet good
Lady; it would go horribly against me to
have her come to any Harm.’ ‘Pooh,’ 
cries the Landlord, ‘Women are always
so tender-hearted. Why you would not
harbour Rebels, would you?’ ‘No, certainly,’ 
answered the Wife; ‘and as for
betraying her, come what will on't, Nobody
can blame us. It is what any body
would do in our Case.’ 
While our politic Landlord, who had
not, we see, undeservedly the Reputation 

of great Wisdom among his Neighbours,
was engaged in debating this Matter with
himself, (for he paid little Attention to the
Opinion of his Wife) News arrived that the
Rebels had given the Duke the Slip, and
had got a Day's March towards London; 
and soon after arrived a famous Jacobite
Squire, who, with great Joy in his Countenance,
shook the Landlord by the Hand,
saying, ‘All's our own, Boy, ten thousand
honest Frenchmen are landed in Suffolk. 
Our  England for ever! Ten thousand
French, my brave Lad! I am going to
tap away directly.’ 
This News determined the Opinion of
the wise Man, and he resolved to make his
Court to the young Lady, when she arose; 
for he had now (he said) discovered that
she was no other than Madam Jenny Cameron
herself. 



A very short Chapter, in which however is a
Sun, a Moon, a Star, and an Angel. 
The Sun (for he keeps very good
Hours at this Time of the Year) had
been some Time retired to Rest, when
Sophia arose greatly refreshed by her Sleep; 

which, short as it was, nothing but her extreme
Fatigue could have occasioned; for
tho' she had told her Maid, and perhaps
herself too, that she was perfectly easy, when
she left Upton, yet it is certain her Mind
was a little affected with that Malady which
is attended with all the restless Symptoms
of a Fever, and is perhaps the very Distemper
which Physicians mean (if they mean
any thing) by the Fever on the Spirits. 
Mrs. Fitzpatrick likewise left her Bed at
the same Time; and having summoned her
Maid, immediately dressed herself. She
was really a very pretty Woman, and had
she been in any other Company but that of
Sophia, might have been thought beautiful; 
but when Mrs. Honour of her own Accord
attended (for her Mistress would not suffer
her to be waked) and had equipped our
Heroine, the Charms of Mrs. Fitzpatrick
who had performed the Office of the Morning
Star, which  had preceded greater Glories,
shared the Fate of that Star, and were totally
eclipsed the Moment those Glories
shone forth. 
Perhaps Sophia never looked more beautiful
than she did at this Instant. We
ought not therefore to condemn the Maid 

of the Inn for her Hyperbole; who when
she descended, after having lighted the
Fire, declared, and ratified it with an Oath,
that if ever there was an Angel upon Earth,
she was now above Stairs. 
Sophia had acquainted her Cousin with
her Design to go to London; and Mrs.
Fitzpatrick had agreed to accompany her; 
for the Arrival of her Husband at Upton had
put an End to her Design of going to Bath,
or to her Aunt Western. They had therefore
no sooner finished their Tea, than Sophia
proposed to set out, the Moon then
shining extremely bright, and as for the
Frost she defied it; nor had she any of
those Apprehensions which many young
Ladies would have felt at travelling by
Night; for she had, as we have before observed,
some little Degree of natural Courage; 
and this her present Sensations,
which bordered somewhat on Despair,
greatly encreased. Besides, as she had already
travelled twice with Safety, by the
Light of the Moon, she was the better emboldened
to trust to it a third Time. 
The Disposition of Mrs. Fitzpatrick was
more timorous; for tho' the greater Terrors
had conquered the less, and the Presence 

of her Husband had driven her away
at so unseasonable an Hour from Upton, yet
being now arrived at a Place where she
thought herself safe from his Pursuit, these
lesser Terrors of I know not what, operated
so strongly, that she earnestly entreated her
Cousin to stay till the next Morning, and
not expose herself to the Dangers of travelling
by Night. 
Sophia, who was yielding to an Excess,
when she could neither laugh nor reason her
Cousin out of these Apprehensions, at last
gave Way to them. Perhaps indeed, had
she known of her Father's Arrival at Upton,
it might have been more difficult to have
persuaded her; for as to Jones, she had, I
am afraid, no great Horror at the Thoughts
of being overtaken by him; nay, to confess
the Truth, I believe she rather wished
than feared it; though I might honestly
enough have concealed this Wish from the
Reader, as it was one of those secret spontaneous
Emotions of the Soul, to which the
Reason is often a Stranger. 
When our young Ladies had determined
to remain all that Evening in their Inn,
they were attended by the Landlady, who 

desired to know what their Ladyships
would be pleased to eat. Such Charms
were there in the Voice, in the Manner,
and in the affable Deportment of Sophia,
that she ravished the Landlady to the
highest Degree; and that good Woman,
concluding that she had attended Jenny Cameron,
became in a Moment a staunch
Jacobite, and wished heartily well to the
young Pretender's Cause, from the great
Sweetness and Affability with which she had
been treated by his supposed Mistress. 
The two Cousins began now to impart
to each other their reciprocal Curiosity, to
know what extraordinary Accidents on both
Sides occasioned this so strange and unexpected
Meeting. At last Mrs. Fitzpatrick,
having obtained of Sophia a Promise of
communicating likewise in her Turn, began
to relate what the Reader, if he is desirous
to know her History, may read in the ensuing
Chapter. 




The History of Mrs. Fitzpatrick. 
Mrs. Fitzpatrick, after a Silence of
a few Moments, fetching a deep
Sigh, thus began: 
‘It is natural to the Unhappy to feel a
secret Concern in recollecting those Periods
of their Lives which have been
most delightful to them. The Remembrance
of past Pleasures affects us with a
kind of tender Grief, like what we suffer
for departed Friends; and the Ideas of
both may be said to haunt our Imaginations. 
‘For this Reason, I never reflect without
Sorrow on those Days (the happiest far of
my Life) which we spent together, when
both were under the Care of my Aunt
Western. Alas! why are Miss Graveairs,
and Miss Giddy no more. You remember,
I am sure, when we knew each
other by no other Names. Indeed you
gave me the latter Appellation with too
just Cause. I have since experienced how 

much I deserved it. You, my Sophia,
was always my Superior in every thing,
and I heartily hope you will be so in your
Fortune. I shall never forget the wise
and matronly Advice you once gave me,
when I lamented being disappointed of a
Ball, though you could not be then fourteen
Years old. —O my Sophy, how blest
must have been my Situation, when I
could think such a Disappointment a Misfortune; 
and when indeed it was the
greatest I had ever known.’ 
‘And yet, my dear Harriet,’ answered
Sophia, ‘it was then a serious Matter with
with you. Comfort yourself therefore
with thinking, that whatever you now
lament may hereafter appear as trifling
and contemptible as a Ball would at this
Time.’ 
‘Alas, my Sophia,’ replied the other
Lady, ‘you yourself will think otherwise
of my present Situation; for greatly must
that tender Heart be altered, if my Misfortunes
do not draw many a Sigh, nay
many a Tear, from you. The Knowledge
of this should perhaps deter me
from relating what I am convinced will so
much affect you.’ —Here Mrs. Fitzpatrick 

stopt, till at the repeated Entreaties
of Sophia, she thus proceeded. 
‘Though you must have heard much
of my Marriage, yet as Matters may
probably have been misrepresented, I will
set out from the very Commencement of
my unfortunate Acquaintance with my
present Husband; which was at Bath,
soon after you left my Aunt, and returned
home to your Father. 
‘Among the gay young Fellows, who
were at this Season at Bath, Mr. Fitzpatrick
was one. He was handsome,
degagé, extremely gallant, and in his
Dress exceeded most others. In short,
my Dear, if you was unluckily to see
him now, I could describe him no better
than by telling you he was the very Reverse
of every Thing which he is: For
he hath rusticated himself so long, that
he is become an absolute wild Irishman. 
But to proceed in my Story; the Qualifications
which he then possessed so well
recommended him, that though the People
of Quality at this Time lived separate
from the rest of the Company,
and excluded them from all their Parties,
Mr. Fitzpatrick found Means to gain 

Admittance. It was perhaps no easy
Matter to avoid him; for he required
very little or no Invitation; and as being
handsome and genteel, he found it no
difficult Matter to ingratiate himself with
the Ladies, so, he having frequently
drawn his Sword, the Men did not care
publickly to affront him. Had it not
been for some such Reason, I believe he
would have been soon expelled by his
own Sex; for surely he had no strict
Title to be preferred to the English
Gentry; nor did they seem inclined to
shew him any extraordinary Favour. 
They all abused him behind his Back,
which might probably proceed from
Envy; for he was well received, and
very particularly distinguished by the
Women. 
‘My Aunt, tho' no Person of Quality
herself, as she had always lived about the
Court, was enrolled in that Party: For
by whatever Means you get into the Polite
Circle, when you are once there, it is sufficient
Merit for you that you are there. 
This Observation, young as you was, you
could scarce avoid making from my
Aunt, who was free, or reserved, with 

all People, just as they had more or less
of this Merit. 
‘And this Merit, I believe, it was,
which principally recommended Mr. Fitzpatrick
to her Favour. In which he so
well succeeded, that he was always one
of her private Parties. Nor was he backward
in returning such Distinction; for
he soon grew so very particular in his
Behaviour to her, that the Scandal Club
first began to take Notice of it, and
the better disposed Persons made a Match
between them. For my own Part, I
confess, I made no Doubt but that his
Designs were strictly honourable, as the
Phrase is; that is, to rob a Lady of her
Fortune by Way of Marriage. My Aunt
was, I conceived, neither young enough
nor handsome enough, to attract much
wicked Inclination; but she had matrimonial
Charms in great Abundance. 
‘I was the more confirmed in this Opinion
from the extraordinary Respect
which he shewed to myself, from the first
Moment of our Acquaintance. This I
understood as an Attempt to lessen, if
possible, that Disinclination which my
Interest might be supposed to give me 

towards the Match; and I know not,  but
in some Measure it had that Effect: for
as I was well contented with my own
Fortune, and of all People the least a
Slave to interested Views, so I could not
be violently the Enemy of a Man with
whose Behaviour to me I was greatly
pleased; and the more so, as I was the
only Object of such Respect; for he behaved
at the same Time to many Women
of Quality without any Respect at
all. 
‘Agreeable as this was to me, he soon
changed it into another Kind of Behaviour,
which was perhaps more so. He
now put on much Softness and Tenderness,
and languished and sighed abundantly. 
At Times indeed, whether from
Art or Nature I will not determine, he
gave his usual Loose to Gayety and
Mirth; but this was always in general
Company, and with other Women; for
even in a Country Dance, when he was
not my Partner, he became grave and
put on the softest Look imaginable, the
Moment he approached me. Indeed he
was in all Things so very particular towards
me, that I must have been blind
not to have discovered it. And, and, 

and—‘And you was more pleased still,
my dear Harriet,’ cries Sophia; ‘you need
not be ashamed,’ added she sighing, ‘for
sure there are irresistible Charms in Tenderness,
which too many Men are able
to affect.’ ‘True,’ answered her Cousin,
Men, who in all other Instances want
common Sense, are very Machiavels in
the Art of Loving. I wish I did not
know an Instance. —Well, Scandal now
began to be as busy with me as it had
before been with my Aunt, and some
good Ladies did not scruple to affirm that
Mr. Fitzpatrick had an Intrigue with us
both. 
‘But what may seem astonishing; my
Aunt never saw, nor in the least seemed
to suspect that which was visible enough,
I believe, from both our Behaviours. One
would indeed think, that Love quite
puts out the Eyes of an old Woman. 
In Fact, they so greedily swallow the Addresses
which are made to them, that like
an outragious Glutton, they are not at
Leisure to observe what passes amongst
others at the same Table. This I have
observed in more Cases than my own; 
and this was so strongly verified by my
Aunt, that tho' she often found us together 

at her Return from the Pump, the
least canting Word of his, pretending Impatience
at her Absence, effectually smothered
all Suspicion. One Artifice succeeded
with her to Admiration. This
was his treating me like a little Child,
and never calling me by any other Name
in her Presence, but by  that of pretty
Miss. This indeed did him some Disservice
with your humble Servant; but I
soon saw through it, especially as in her
Absence he behaved to me, as I have said,
in a different Manner. However, if I
was not greatly disobliged by a Conduct
of which I had discovered the Design, I
smarted very severely for it: For my
Aunt really conceived me to be what her
Lover (as she thought him) called me,
and treated me, in all Respects, as a perfect
Infant. To say the Truth, I wonder
she had not insisted on my again wearing
Leading-strings. 
‘At last, my Lover (for so he was)
thought proper, in a most solemn Manner,
to disclose a Secret which I had known
long before. He now placed all the Love
which he had pretended to my Aunt to
my Account. He lamented the Encouragement
she had given him in very pathetic 

Terms, and made a high Merit of
the tedious Hours, in which he had undergone
her Conversation. —What shall I
tell you, my dear Sophia? —Then I will
confess the Truth. I was pleased with
my Man. I was pleased with my Conquest. 
To rival my Aunt delighted me; 
to rival so many other Women charmed
me. In short, I am afraid, I did not behave
as I should do, even upon the very
first Declaration. —I wish I did not almost
give him positive Encouragement
before we parted. 
‘The Bath now talked loudly, I might
almost say, roared against me. Several
young Women affected to shun my Acquaintance,
not so much, perhaps, from
any real Suspicion, as from a Desire of
banishing me from a Company, in which
I too much engrossed their favourite Man. 
And here I cannot omit expressing my
Gratitude to the Kindness intended me by
Mr. Nash; who took me one Day aside,
and gave me Advice, which if I had
followed, I had been a happy Woman. 
“Child,” says he, “I am sorry to see the
Familiarity which subsists between you
and a Fellow who is altogether unworthy
of you, and I am afraid will prove your 

Ruin. As for your old stinking Aunt,
if it was to be no Injury to you, and
my pretty Sophy Western (I assure
you I repeat his Words) I should be
heartily glad, that the Fellow was in
Possession of all that belongs to her. I
never advise old Women: For if they
take it into their Heads to go to the Devil,
it is no more possible, than worth
while, to keep them from him. Innocence
and Youth and Beauty are worthy
a better Fate, and I would save them
from his Clutches. Let me advise you
therefore, dear Child; never suffer this
Fellow to be particular with you again.” 
—Many more Things he said to me,
which I have now forgotten, and indeed
I attended very little to them at that
Time: For Inclination contradicted all
he said, and besides I could not be persuaded,
that Women of Quality would
condescend to Familiarity with such a Person
as he described. 
‘But I am afraid, my Dear, I shall tire
you with a Detail of so many minute
Circumstances. To be concise therefore,
imagine me married; imagine me, with
my Husband, at the Feet of my Aunt,
and then imagine the maddest Woman in 

Bedlam in a raving Fit, and your Imagination
will suggest to you no more than
what really happened. 
‘The very next Day, my Aunt left the
Place, partly to avoid seeing Mr. Fitzpatrick
or my self, and as much perhaps to
avoid seeing any one else; for, tho' I am
told she hath since denied every thing
stoutly, I believe she was then a little
confounded at her Disappointment. Since
that Time, I have written to her many
Letters; but never could obtain an Answer,
which I must own sits somewhat
the heavier, as she herself was, tho' undesignedly,
the Occasion of all my Sufferings: 
For had it not been under the
Colour of paying his Addresses to her,
Mr. Fitzpatrick would never have found
sufficient Opportunities to have engaged
my Heart, which, in other Circumstances,
I still flatter myself would not have been
an easy Conquest to such a Person. Indeed,
I believe, I should not have erred
so grosly in my Choice, if I had relied
on my own Judgment; but I trusted
totally to the Opinion of others, and very
foolishly took the Merit of a Man for
granted, whom I saw so universally well
received by the Women. What is the 

Reason, my Dear, that we who have Understandings
equal to the wisest and greatest
of the other Sex so often make Choice
of the silliest Fellows for Companions and
Favourites? It raises my Indignation to
the highest Pitch, to reflect on the Numbers
of Women of Sense who have been
undone by Fools.’ Here she paused a
Moment; but Sophia making no Answer,
she proceeded as in the next Chapter. 



In which the History of Mrs. Fitzpatrick
is continued. 
‘We remained at Bath no longer than
a Fortnight after our Wedding: 
For as to any Reconciliation with my
Aunt, there were no Hopes; and of my
Fortune, not one Farthing could be
touched till I was at Age, of which I
now wanted more than two Years. My
Husband therefore was resolved to set out
for Ireland; against which I remonstrated
very earnestly, and insisted on a Promise
which he had made me before our Marriage,
that I should never take this Journey
against my Consent; and indeed I 

never intended to consent to it; nor
will any Body, I believe, blame me for
that Resolution; but this, however, I never
mentioned to my Husband, and petitioned
only for the Reprieve of a Month; 
but he had fixed the Day, and to that
Day he obstinately adhered. 
‘The Evening before our Departure, as
we were disputing this Point with great
Eagerness on both Sides, he started suddenly
from his Chair, and left me abruptly,
saying, he was going to the Rooms. 
He was hardly out of the House, when
I saw a Paper lying on the Floor, which,
I suppose, he had carelesly pulled from
his Pocket, together with his Handkerchief. 
This Paper I took up, and finding
it to be a Letter, I made no Scruple
to open and read it, and indeed I read it
so often, that I can repeat it to you almost
Word for Word. This then was the
Letter.’ 

To Mr. Brian Fitzpatrick.
Sir
“Yours received, and am surprized
you should use me in this Manner,
as have never seen any of your Cash, 

unless for one Linsey Woolsey Coat, and
your Bill now is upwards of 150l. Consider,
Sir, how often you have fobbed
me off with your being shortly to be
married to this Lady, and t'other Lady; 
but I can neither live on Hopes or Promises,
nor will my Woollen-draper take
any such in Payment. You tell me you
are secure of having either the Aunt or
the Niece, and that you might have married
the Aunt before this, whose Jointure
you say is immense, but that you prefer
the Niece on account of her ready Money. 
Pray, Sir, take a Fool's Advice
for once, and marry the first you can
get. You will pardon my offering my
Advice, as you know I sincerely wish
you well. Shall draw on you per next
Post, in favour of Messieurs John Drugget
and Company, at fourteen Days, which
doubt not your honouring, and am,” 
Sir,
Your humble Servant,
Sam. Cosgrave. 
‘This was the Letter Word for Word. 
Guess, my dear Girl, guess how this Letter
affected me. You prefer the Niece on 

account of her Ready Money! If every one
of these Words had been a Dagger, I
could with Pleasure have stabbed them into
his Heart; but I will not recount my
frantic Behaviour on the Occasion. I had
pretty well spent my Tears before his
Return home; but sufficient Remains of
them appeared in my swollen Eyes. He
threw himself sullenly into his Chair, and
for a long Time we were both silent. At
length in a haughty Tone, he said, “I
hope, Madam, your Servants have packed
up all your Things; for the Coach
will be ready by Six in the Morning.” 
My Patience was totally subdued by this
Provocation, and I answered, No, Sir,
there is a Letter still remains unpacked,
and then throwing it on the Table, I fell
to upbraiding him with the most bitter
Language I could invent. 
‘Whether Guilt, or Shame, or Prudence,
restrained him, I cannot say; but
tho' he is the most passionate of Men, he
exerted no Rage on this Occasion. He
endeavoured on the contrary to pacify
me by the most gentle Means. He swore
the Phrase in the Letter to which I principally
objected was not his, nor had he
ever written any such. He owned indeed 

the having mentioned his Marriage
and that Preference which he had given
to myself, but denied with many Oaths
the having assigned any such Reason. 
And he excused the having mentioned
any such Matter at all, on account of the
Straits he was in for Money, arising, he
said, from his having too long neglected
his Estate in Ireland. And this, he said,
which he could not bear to discover to
me, was the only Reason of his having
so strenuously insisted on our Journey. 
He then used several very endearing Expressions,
and concluded by a very fond
Caress, and many violent Protestations of
Love. 
‘There was one Circumstance, which,
tho' he did not appeal to it, had much
Weight with me in his Favour, and
that was the Word Jointure in the
Taylor's Letter, whereas my Aunt never
had been married, and this Mr. Fitzpatrick
well knew. —As I imagined therefore
that the Fellow must have inserted
this of his own Head, or from Hearsay,
I persuaded myself he might have ventured
likewise on that odious Line on no
better Authority. What Reasoning was
this, my Dear? Was I not an Advocate
rather than a Judge? —But why do I mention 

such a Circumstance as this, or appeal
to it for the Justification of my Forgiveness! 
–––In short, had he been guilty
of twenty Times as much, half the Tenderness
and Fondness which he used,
would have prevailed on me to have forgiven
him. I now made no farther Objections
to our setting out, which we did
the next Morning, and in a little more
than a Week arrived at the Seat of Mr.
Fitzpatrick. 
‘Your Curiosity will excuse me from relating
any Occurrences which past during
our Journey: For it would indeed be highly
disagreeable to travel it over again, and no
less so to you to travel it over with me. 
‘This Seat then, is an ancient Mansion-House; 
if I was in one of those
merry Humours, in which you have
so often seen me, I could describe it to
you ridiculously enough. It looked as if
it had been formerly inhabited by a Gentleman. 
Here was Room enough, and
not the less Room on account of the Furniture: 
For indeed there was very little
in it. An old Woman who seemed coeval
with the Building, and greatly resembled
her whom Chamont mentions in 

the Orphan, received us at the Gate, and
in a Howl scarce human, and to me unintelligible,
welcomed her Master home. 
In short, the whole Scene was so gloomy
and melancholy, that it threw my Spirits
into the lowest Dejection; which my
Husband discerning, instead of relieving,
encreased, by two or three malicious Observations. 
“There are good Houses,
Madam,” says he, “as you find, in
in other Places besides England; but
perhaps you had rather be in a dirty
Lodgings at Bath.” 
‘Happy, my Dear, is the Woman, who
in any State of Life, hath a cheerful
good-natured Companion to support and
comfort her; but why do I reflect on
happy Situations only to aggravate my
own Misery! My Companion, far from
clearing up the Gloom of Solitude, soon
convinced me, that I must have been
wretched with him in any Place, and in
any Condition. In a Word, he was a
surly Fellow, a Character you have perhaps
never seen: For indeed no Woman
ever sees it exemplified, but in a Father,
a Brother, or a Husband; and tho' you
have a Father, he is not of that Character. 
This surly Fellow had formerly appeared to
me the very Reverse, and so he did still to 

every other Person. Good Heaven! how is
it possible for a Man to maintain a constant
Lie in his Appearance abroad and in
Company, and to content himself with
shewing disagreeable Truth only at home? 
Here, my Dear, they make themselves
Amends for the uneasy Restraint which
they put on their Tempers in the World; 
for I have observed the more merry and
gay, and good-humoured my Husband
hath at any Time been in Company, the
more sullen and morose he was sure to become
at our next private Meeting. How
shall I describe his Barbarity? To my
Fondness he was cold and insensible. My
little comical Ways, which you, my Sophy,
and which others have called so agreeable,
he treated with Contempt. In my
most serious Moments he sung and whistled; 
and whenever was thoroughly dejected
and miserable, he was angry, and
abused me: for though he was never
pleased with my good Humour, nor ascribed
it to my Satisfaction in him; yet
my low Spirits always offended him, and
those he imputed to my Repentance of
having (as he said) married an Irishman. 

‘You will easily conceive, my dear
Graveairs; (I ask your Pardon, I really
forgot myself) that when a Woman makes
an imprudent Match in the Sense of the
World; that is, when she is not an arrant
Prostitute to pecuniary Interest, she
must necessarily have some Inclination and
Affection for her Man. You will as easily
believe that this Affection may possibly
be lessened; nay, I do assure you,
Contempt will wholly eradicate it. This
Contempt I now began to entertain for
my Husband, whom I now discovered
to be–––I must use the Expression—an
errant Blockhead. Perhaps you will wonder
I did not make this Discovery long
before; but Women will suggest a thousand
Excuses to themselves for the Folly
of those they like: Besides, give me Leave
to tell you it requires a most penetrating
Eye to discern a Fool through the Disguises
of Gayety and Good-breeding. 
‘It will be easily imagined, that when I
once despised my Husband, as I confess
to you I soon did, I must consequently
dislike his Company; and indeed I had
the Happiness of being very little troubled
with it; for our House was now most elegantly
furnished, our Cellars well stocked, 

and Dogs and Horses provided in great
Abundance. As my Gentleman therefore
entertained his Neighbours with great
Hospitality, so his Neighbours resorted to
him with great Alacrity; and Sports and
Drinking consumed so much of his Time,
that a small Part of his Conversation, that
is to say, of his Ill-humours, fell to my
Share. 
‘Happy would it have been for me, if
I could as easily have avoided all other
disagreeable Company; but alas! I was
confined to some which constantly tormented
me; and the more, as I saw no
Prospect of being relieved from them. 
These Companions were my own racking
Thoughts, which plagued, and in a
Manner haunted me Night and Day. In
this Situation I past through a Scene, the
Horrors of which can neither be painted
nor imagined. Think, my Dear, figure,
if you can, to yourself what I must have
undergone. I became a Mother by the
Man I scorned, hated, and detested. I
went through all the Agonies and Miseries
of a Lying-in, (ten Times more
painful in such a Circumstance, than the
worst Labour can be, when one endures
it for a Man one loves,) in a Desart, or 

rather indeed a Scene of Riot and Revel,
without a Friend, without a Companion,
or without any of those agreeable Circumstances
which often alleviate, and perhaps
sometimes more than compensate the
Sufferings of our Sex at this Season.’ 



In which the Mistake of the Landlord throws
Sophia into a dreadful Consternation. 
Mrs. Fitzpatrick was proceeding in
her Narrative, when she was interrupted
by the Entrance of Dinner, greatly
to the Concern of Sophia: For the Misfortunes
of her Friend had raised her Anxiety,
and left her no Appetite, but what
Mrs. Fitzpatrick was to satisfy by her Relation. 
The Landlord now attended with a Plate
under his Arm, and with the same Respect
in his Countenance and Address, which he
would have put on, had the Ladies arrived
in a Coach and Six. 
The married Lady seemed less affected
with her own Misfortunes than was her
Cousin: For the former eat very heartily, 

whereas the latter could hardly swallow a
Morsel. Sophia likewise shewed more Concern
and Sorrow in her Countenance than
appeared in the other Lady; who having
observed these Symptoms in her Friend,
begged her to be comforted, saying, ‘Perhaps
all may yet end better than either you
or I expect.’ 
Our Landlord thought he had now an
Opportunity to open his Mouth, and was
resolved not to omit it. ‘I am sorry, Madam,’ 
cries he, ‘that your Ladyship can't
eat; for to be sure you must be hungry
after so long fasting. I hope your Ladyship
is not uneasy at any Thing: For as
Madam there says, all may end better
than any body expects. A Gentleman
who was here just now, brought excellent
News, and perhaps some Folks
who have given other Folks the Slip may
get to London before they are overtaken,
and if they do, I make no Doubt, but
they will find People who will be very
ready to receive them.’ 
All Persons under the Apprehension of
Danger, convert whatever they see and hear
into the Objects of that Apprehension. Sophia
therefore immediately concluded from 

the foregoing Speech, that she was known
and pursued by her Father. She was now
struck with the utmost Consternation, and
for a few Minutes deprived of the Power of
Speech; which she no sooner recovered,
than she desired the Landlord to send his
Servants out of the Room, and then addressing
herself to him, said; ‘I perceive,
Sir, you know who we are; but I beseech
you;—nay, I am convinced, if you
have any Compassion or Goodness, you
will not betray us.’ 
‘I betray your Ladyship,’ quoth the
Landlord! No; (and then he swore several
very hearty Oaths) ‘I would sooner
be cut into ten thousand Pieces. I hate
all Treachery. I! I never betrayed any
one in my Life yet, and I am sure I shall
not begin with so sweet a Lady as your
Ladyship. All the World would very
much blame me if I should, since it will
be in your Ladyship's Power so shortly to
reward me. My Wife can witness for me,
I knew your Ladyship the Moment you
came into the House: I said it was your
Honour, before I lifted you from your
Horse, and I shall carry the Bruises I got
in your Ladyship's Service to the Grave; 
but what signified that, as long as I saved 

your Ladyship. To be sure some People
this Morning would have thought of getting
a Reward; but no such Thought
ever entered into my Head. I would
sooner starve than take any Reward for
betraying your Ladyship.’ 
‘I promise you, Sir, says Sophia, if it
be ever in my Power to reward you, you
shall not lose by your Generosity.’ 
‘Alack-a-day, Madam!’ answered the
Landlord, ‘in your Ladyship's Power! 
Heaven put it as much into your Will. 
I am only afraid your Honour will forget
such a poor Man as an Innkeeper; 
but if your Ladyship should not; I
hope you will remember what Reward
I refused—refused! that is I would
have refused, and to be sure it may
be called refusing; for I might have
had it certainly, and to be sure you might
have been in some Houses;—but for my
Part, I would not methinks for the World
have your Ladyship wrong me so much,
as to imagine I ever thought of betraying
you, even before I heard the good News.’ 
‘What News pray?’ says Sophia, somewhat
eagerly. 

‘Hath not your Ladyship heard it then?’ 
cries the Landlord, ‘nay, like enough: 
For I heard it only a few Minutes ago; 
and if I had never heard it, may the
Devil fly away with me this Instant, if I
would have betrayed your Honour; no,
if I would, may I—Here he subjoined
several dreadful Execrations, which Sophia
at last interrupted, and begged to know
what he meant by the News. —He was going
to answer, when Mrs. Honour came running
into the Room, all pale and breathless,
and cried out, ‘Madam, we are all undone,
all ruined, they are come, they are come!’ 
These Words almost froze up the Blood of
Sophia; but Mrs. Fitzpatrick asked Honour,
who were come? —‘Who? answered she,
‘why the French; several hundred thousands
of them are landed, and we shall
be all murdered and ravished.’ 
As a Miser, who hath in some well-built
City a Cottage value Twenty Shillings,
when at a Distance he is alarmed with the
News of a Fire, turns pale and trembles at
his Loss; but when he finds the beautiful
Palaces only are burnt, and his own Cottage
remains safe, he comes instantly to himself
and smiles at his good Fortune: Or as (for 

we dislike something in the former Simile)
the tender Mother, when terrified with the Apprehension
that her darling Boy is drowned,
is struck senseless and almost dead with
Consternation; but when she is told that
little Master is safe, and the Victory only
with Twelve hundred brave Men gone to
the Bottom, Life and Sense again return,
maternal Fondness enjoys the sudden
Relief from all its Fears, and the general
Benevolence which at another Time would
have deeply felt the dreadful Catastrophe,
lies fast asleep in her Mind. 
So Sophia, than whom none was more
capable of tenderly feeling the general Calamity
of her Country, found such immediate
Satisfaction from the Relief of those Terrors
she had of being overtaken by her Father,
that the Arrival of the French scarce
made any Impression on her. She gently
chid her Maid for the Fright into which she
had thrown her; and said, ‘she was glad it
was no worse; for that she had feared
somebody else was come.’ 
‘Ay, ay,’ quoth the Landlord smiling,
‘her Ladyship knows better things; she
knows the French are our very best Friends,
and come over hither only for our good. 

They are the People who are to make
old England flourish again. I warrant
her Honour thought the Duke was coming; 
and that was enough to put her
into a Fright. I was going to tell your
Ladyship the News. —His Honour's Majesty,
Heaven bless him, hath given the
Duke the Slip; and is marching as fast
as he can to London, and ten thousand
French are landed to join him on the
Road.’ 
Sophia was not greatly pleased with this
News, nor with the Gentleman who related
it; but as she still imagined he knew her
(for she could not possibly have any Suspicion
of the real Truth) she durst not shew
any Dislike. And now the Landlord, having
removed the Cloth from the Table,
withdrew; but at his Departure frequently
repeated his Hopes of being remembred
hereafter. 
The Mind of Sophia was not at all easy
under the Supposition of being known at
this House; for she still applied to herself
many Things which the Landlord had addressed
to Jenny Cameron; she therefore ordered
her Maid to pump out of him by
what Means he had become acquainted 

with her Person, and who had offered him
the Reward for betraying her; she likewise
ordered the Horses to be in Readiness by
four in the Morning, at which Hour Mrs.
Fitzpatrick promised to bear her Company,
and then composing herself as well as she
could, she desired that Lady to continue her
Story. 



In which Mrs. Fitzpatrick concludes her
History. 
While Mrs. Honour, in Pursuance
of the Commands of her Mistress,
ordered a Bowl of Punch, and invited my
Landlord and Landlady to partake of it,
Mrs. Fitzpatrick thus went on with her Relation. 
‘Most of the Officers who were quartered
at a Town in our Neighbourhood
were of my Husband's Acquaintance. Among
these was a Lieutenant, a very pretty
Sort of Man, and who was married to a
Woman so agreeable both in her Temper
and Conversation, that from our first knowing 

each other, which was soon after my
Lying-in, we were almost inseparable
Companions; for I had the good Fortune
to make myself equally agreeable to
her. 
‘The Lieutenant, who was neither a
Sot nor a Sportsman, was frequently of
our Parties; indeed he was very little
with my Husband, and no more than
good Breeding constrained him to be,
as he lived almost constantly at our
House. My Husband often expressed
much Dissatisfaction at the Lieutenant's
preferring my Company to his; 
he was very angry with me on that Account,
and gave me many a hearty Curse
for drawing away his Companions; saying,
“I ought to be d&wblank;ned for having
spoiled one of the prettiest Fellows
in the World, by making a Milk-sop
of him.” 
‘You will be mistaken, my dear Sophia,
if you imagine that the Anger of my
Husband arose from my depriving him
of a Companion; for the Lieutenant was
not a Person with whose Society a Fool
could be pleased; and if I should admit
the Possibility of this, so little Right had
my Husband to place the Loss of his 

Companion to me, that I am convinced
it was my Conversation alone which induced
him ever to come to the House. 
No, Child, it was Envy, the worst and
most rancorous Kind of Envy, the Envy
of Superiority of Understanding. The
Wretch could not bear to see my Conversation
preferred to his, by a Man of
whom he could not entertain the least
Jealousy. O my dear Sophy, you are a
Woman of Sense; if you marry a Man,
as is most probable you will, of less Capacity
than yourself, make frequent Trials
of his Temper before Marriage, and see
whether he can bear to submit to such a
Superiority. —Promise me, Sophy, you
will take this Advice; for you will hereafter
find its Importance.’ ‘It is very
likely I shall never marry at all,’ answered
Sophia; ‘I think, at least, I shall never
marry a Man in whose Understanding I see
any Defects before Marriage; and I promise
you I would rather give up my own,
than see any such afterwards.’ —‘Give up
your Understanding!’ replied Mrs. Fitzpatrick,
‘Oh fie, Child, I will not believe
so meanly of you. Every thing else I
might myself be brought to give up; but
never this. Nature would not have allotted
this Superiority to the Wife in so 

many Instances, if she had intended we
should have all surrendered it to the Husband. 
This indeed Men of Sense never
expect of us; of which the Lieutenant I
have just mentioned was one notable Example; 
for tho' he had a very good
Understanding, he always acknowledged
(as was really true) that his Wife had a
better. And this, perhaps, was one
Reason of the Hatred my Tyrant bore
her. 
‘Before he would be so governed by a
Wife,’ he said, ‘especially such an ugly
B&wblank; (for indeed she was not a regular
Beauty, but very agreeable, and extremely
genteel) he would see all the Women
upon Earth at the Devil,’ which was a
very usual Phrase with him. He said, ‘he
wondered what I could see in her to be
so charmed with her Company; since this
Woman,’ says he, ‘hath come among
us, there is an End of your beloved
Reading, which you pretended to like so
much, that you could not afford Time
to return the Visits of the Ladies, in this
Country; and I must confess I had been
guilty of a little Rudeness this Way; for
the Ladies there are at least no better than
the mere Country Ladies here, and I 

think, I need make no other Excuse
to you for declining any Intimacy with
them.’ 
‘This Correspondence however continued
a whole Year, even all the while
the Lieutenant was quartered in that
Town; for which I was contented to pay
the Tax of being constantly abused in
the Manner above-mentioned by my
Husband; I mean when he was at
home; for he was frequently absent a
Month at a Time at Dublin, and once
made a Journey of two Months to London; 
in all which Journeys I thought it
a very singular Happiness that he never
once desired my Company; nay, by his
frequent Censures on Men who could not
travel, as he phrased it, without a Wife
tied up to their Tail, he sufficiently intimated
that had I been never so desirous
of accompanying him, my Wishes would
have been in vain; but, Heaven knows,
such Wishes were very far from my
Thoughts. 
‘At length my Friend was removed
from me, and I was again left to my Solitude,
to the tormenting Conversation
with my own Reflections, and to apply 

to Books for my only Comfort. I now
read almost all Day long. —How many
Books do you think I read in three
Months?’ ‘I can't guess, indeed, Cousin,’ 
answered Sophia. —‘Perhaps half a Score!’ 
‘Half a Score! half a thousand, Child,’ 
answered the other. ‘I read a good deal
in Daniel's English History of France; a
great deal in Plutarch's Lives; the Atalantis,
Pope's Homer, Dryden's Plays,
Chillingworth, the Countess D'Anois, and
Lock's Human Understanding. 
‘During this Interval I wrote three very
supplicating, and, I thought, moving
Letters to my Aunt; but as I received
no Answer to any of them, my Disdain
would not suffer me to continue my Application.’ 
—Here she stopt, and looking
earnestly at Sophia, said, ‘Methinks, my
Dear, I read something in your Eyes
which reproaches me of a Neglect in another
Place, where I should have met
with a kinder Return.’ ‘Indeed, dear
Harriet,’ answered Sophia, ‘your Story
is an Apology for any Neglect; but indeed
I feel that I have been guilty of a
Remissness, without so good an Excuse. 

‘—Yet pray proceed; for I long, tho'
I tremble, to hear the End.’ 
Thus then Mrs. Fitzpatrick resumed her
Narrative. ‘My Husband now took a
second Journey to England, where he
continued upwards of three Months. During
the greater Part of this Time, I led a
Life which nothing but having led a
worse, could make me think tolerable; 
for perfect Solitude can never be reconciled
to a social Mind, like mine, but
when it relieves you from the Company
of those you hate. What added to my
Wretchedness, was the Loss of my little
Infant: Not that I pretend to have had for
it that extravagant Tenderness of which I
believe I might have been capable under
other Circumstances; but I resolved, in
every Instance, to discharge the Duty of
the tenderest Mother, and this Care prevented
me from feeling the Weight of
that, heaviest of all Things, when it
can be at all said to lie heavy on our
Hands. 
‘I had spent full ten Weeks almost entirely
by myself, having seen no body all
that Time, except my Servants, and a
very few Visitors, when a young Lady, 

a Relation of my Husband, came from
a distant Part of Ireland to visit me. She
had staid once before a Week at my
House, and I then gave her a pressing
Invitation to return; for she was a very
agreeable Woman, and had improved
good natural Parts by a proper Education. 
Indeed she was to me a most welcome
Guest. 
‘A few Days after her Arrival, perceiving
me in very low Spirits, without enquiring
the Cause, which indeed she very
well knew, the young Lady fell to compassionating
my Case. She said, “Tho' Politeness
had prevented me from complaining
of my Husband's Behaviour to his Relations,
yet they all were very sensible of
it, and felt great Concern upon that Account; 
but none more than herself:” 
and after some more general Discourse on
this Head, which I own I could not forbear
countenancing; at last, after much
previous Precaution, and enjoined Concealment,
she communicated to me, as a
profound Secret—that my Husband
kept a Mistress. 
‘You will certainly imagine, I heard
this News with the utmost Insensibility— 

Upon my Word, if you do, your Imagination
will mislead you. Contempt had
not so kept down my Anger to my Husband; 
but that Hatred rose again on this
occasion. What can be the Reason of this? 
Are we so abominably selfish, that we can
be concerned at others having the Possession
even of what we despise? Or are we
not rather abominably vain, and is not
this the greatest Injury done to our Vanity? 
What think you, Sophia?’ 
‘I don't know, indeed,’ answered Sophia,
‘I have never troubled myself with
any of these deep Contemplations; but
I think the Lady did very ill in communicating
to you such a Secret.’ 
‘And yet, my Dear, this Conduct is
natural,’ replied Mrs. Fitzpatrick; ‘and
when you have seen and read as much as
myself, you will acknowledge it to
be so.’ 
‘I am sorry to hear it is natural,’ returned
Sophia; ‘for I want neither Reading
nor Experience, to convince me, that it
is very dishonourable and very ill-natured: 
Nay, it is surely as ill-bred to 

tell a Husband or Wife of the Faults of
each other, as to tell them of their own.’ 
‘Well,’ continued Mrs. Fitzpatrick,
‘my Husband at last returned; and if I
am thoroughly acquainted with my own
Thoughts, I hated him now more than
ever; but I despised him rather less: 
For certainly nothing so much weakens
our Contempt, as an Injury done to
our Pride or our Vanity. 
‘He now assumed a Carriage to me, so
very different from what he had lately
worn, and so nearly resembling his Behaviour
the first Week of our Marriage,
that had I now had any Spark of Love
remaining, he might, possibly, have rekindled
my Fondness for him. But
though Hatred may succeed to Contempt,
and may, perhaps, get the better
of it, Love, I believe, cannot. The
Truth is, the Passion of Love is too restless
to remain contented, without the Gratification
which it receives from its Object; 
and one can no more be inclined
to love without loving, than we can have
Eyes without seeing. When a Husband,
therefore, ceases to be the Object of this
Passion, it is most probable some other 

Man—I say, my dear, if your Husband
grows indifferent to you—if you once come
to despise him—I say,—that is,—if you
have the Passion of Love in you—Lud! 
I have bewildered myself so,—but one
is apt, in these abstracted Considerations,
to lose the Concatenation of Ideas, as Mr.
Locke says. —In short, the Truth is— 
In short, I scarce know what it is; but,
as I was saying, my Husband returned,
and his Behaviour, at first, greatly surprized
me; but he soon acquainted me
with the Motive, and taught me to
account for it. In a Word, then, he
had spent and lost all the ready Money
of my Fortune; and as he could mortgage
his own Estate no deeper, he was
now desirous to supply himself with Cash
for his Extravagance, by selling a little
Estate of mine, which he could not do
without my Assistance; and to obtain
this Favour, was the whole and sole Motive
of all the Fondness which he now
put on. 
‘With this I peremptorily refused to
comply. I told him, and I told him
truly, that had I been possessed of the
Indies at our first Matriage, he might
have commanded it all: For it had been 

a constant Maxim with me, that where a
Woman disposes of her Heart, she should
always deposite her Fortune; but as he
had been so kind, long ago, to restore
the former into my Possession, I was
resolved, likewise, to retain what little remained
of the latter. 
‘I will not describe to you the Passion
into which these Words, and the resolute
Air in which they were spoken, threw
him: Nor will I trouble you with the
whole Scene which succeeded between
us. Out came, you may be well assured,
the Story of the Mistress; and out it
did come, with all the Embellishments
which Anger and Disdain could bestow
upon it. 
‘Mr. Fitzpatrick seemed a little Thunder-struck
with this, and more confused
than I had seen him; tho' his Ideas are
always confused enough, Heaven knows. 
He did not, however, endeavour to exculpate
himself; but took a Method
which almost equally confounded me. 
What was this but Recrimination! He
affected to be jealous;—he may, for
ought I know, be inclined enough to
Jealousy in his natural Temper: Nay, he 

must have had it from Nature, or the
Devil must have put it into his Head: 
For I defy all the World to cast a just
Aspersion on my Character: Nay, the
most scandalous Tongues have never
dared censure my Reputation. My Fame,
I thank Heaven, hath been always as
spotless as my Life; and let Falshood
itself accuse that, if it dare. No, my
dear Graveairs, however provoked, however
ill treated, however injured in my
Love, I have firmly resolved never to
give the least Room for Censure on this
Account. —And yet, my dear, there
are some People so malicious, some
Tongues so venomous, that no Innocence
can escape them. The most undesigned
Word, the most accidental Look, the
least Familiarity, or most innocent Freedom,
will be misconstrued, and magnified
into I know not what, by some People. 
But I despise, my dear Graveairs, I despise
all such Slander. No such Malice,
I assure you, ever gave me an
uneasy Moment. No, no, I promise
you, I am above all that. —But
where was I? O let me see, I told you,
my Husband was jealous—And of
whom, pray? —Why of whom but
the Lieutenant I mentioned to you before. 
He was obliged to resort above a 

Year and more back, to find any Object
for this unaccountable Passion, if, indeed,
he really felt any such, and was not an errant
Counterfeit, in order to abuse me. 
‘But I have tired you already with too
many Particulars. I will now bring my
Story to a very speedy Conclusion. In
short, then, after many Scenes very unworthy
to be repeated, in which my Cousin engaged
so heartily on my Side, that Mr.
Fitzpatrick at last turned her out of Doors; 
when he found I was neither to be soothed
nor bullied into Compliance, he took a
very violent Method indeed. Perhaps you
will conclude he beat me; but this, tho'
he hath approached very near to it, he
never actually did. He confined me to
my Room, without suffering me to have
either Pen, Ink, Paper, or Book; and
a Servant every Day made my Bed, and
brought me my Food. 
‘When I had remained a Week under
this Imprisonment, he made me a Visit,
and, with the Voice of a Schoolmaster,
or, what is often much the same, of a
Tyrant, asked me, “If I would yet comply?” 
‘I answered very stoutly, “That
I would die first.” “Then so you shall, 

and be d&wblank;n'd,” cries he; “for you
shall never go alive out of this Room.” 
‘Here I remained a Fortnight longer; 
and, to say the Truth, my Constancy
was almost subdued, and I began to think
of Submission; when one Day, in the
Absence of my Husband, who was gone
abroad for some short Time, by the greatest
good Fortune in the World, an Accident
happened. —I—at a Time when
I began to give Way to the utmost Despair
—every Thing would be excusable
at such a Time—at that very Time I received
—But it would take up an Hour
to tell you all Particulars—In one
Word, then, (for I will not tire you with
Circumstances) Gold, the common Key
to all Padlocks, opened my Door, and
set me at Liberty. 
‘I now made Haste to Dublin, where I
immediately procured a Passage to England; 
and was proceeding to Bath, in
Order to throw myself into the Protection
of my Aunt, or of your Father, or of
any Relation who would afford it me. 
My Husband overtook me last Night, at
the Inn where I lay, and which you left
a few Minutes before me; but I had the 

good Luck to escape him, and to follow
you. 
‘And thus, my Dear, ends my History: 
A tragical one, I am sure, it is to
myself; but, perhaps, I ought rather to
apologize to you for its Dulness.’ 
Sophia heaved a deep Sigh, and answered,
‘Indeed, Harriet, I pity you from my
Soul;—But what could you expect? 
Why, why, would you marry an Irishman?’ 
‘Upon my Word,’ replied her Cousin,
‘your Censure is unjust. There are, among
the Irish, Men of as much Worth
and Honour, as any among the English: 
Nay, to speak the Truth, Generosity of
Spirit is rather more common among
them. I have known some Examples
there too of good Husbands; and, I believe,
these are not very plenty in England. 
Ask me, rather, what I could expect
when I married a Fool; and I will
tell you a solemn Truth; I did not know
him to be so.’ —‘Can no Man,’ said
Sophia, in a very low and alter'd Voice,
‘do you think, make a bad Husband,
who is not a Fool?’ ‘That,’ answered 

the other, ‘is too general a Negative; but
none, I believe, is so likely as a Fool to
prove so. Among my Acquaintance, the
silliest Fellows are the worst Husbands; 
and I will venture to assert, as a Fact,
that a Man of Sense rarely behaves very
ill to a Wife, who deserves very well.’ 



A dreadful Alarm in the Inn, with the Arrival
of an unexpected Friend of Mrs.
Fitzpatrick. 
Sophia now, at the Desire of her
Cousin, related—not what follows,
but what hath gone before in this History: 
For which Reason the Reader will, I suppose,
excuse me, for not repeating it over
again. 
One Remark, however, I cannot forbear
making on her Narrative, namely, that she
made no more mention of Jones, from the
Beginning to the End, than if there had
been no such Person alive. This I will neither
endeavour to account for, nor to excuse. 
Indeed, if this may be called a Kind
of Dishonesty, it seems the more inexcusable, 

from the apparent Openness and explicit
Sincerity of the other Lady. —But so
it was. 
Just as Sophia arrived at the Conclusion
of her Story, there arrived in the Room
where the two Ladies were sitting, a Noise,
not unlike, in Loudness, to that of a Pack
of Hounds just let out from their Kennel; 
nor, in Shrillness, to Cats when caterwauling; 
or, to Screech-Owls; or, indeed,
more like (for what Animal can resemble
a human Voice) to those Sounds, which,
in the pleasant Mansions of that Gate,
which seems to derive its Name from a Duplicity
of Tongues, issue from the Mouths,
and sometimes from the Nostrils of those
fair River Nymphs, ycleped of old the
Napææ, or the Naïades; in the vulgar
Tongue translated Oyster-Wenches: For
when, instead of the antient Libations of
Milk and Honey and Oil, the rich Distillation
from the Juniper-Berry, or, perhaps,
from Malt, hath, by the early Devotion of
their Votaries, been poured forth in great
Abundance, should any daring Tongue,
with unhallowed License prophane; i. e.
depreciate the delicate fat Milton Oyster,
the Plaice sound and firm, the Flounder
as much alive as when in the Water, the 

Shrimp as big as a Prawn, the fine Cod alive
but a few Hours ago, or any other of
the various Treasures, which those Water-Deities,
who fish the Sea and Rivers,
have committed to the Care of the Nymphs,
the angry Naïades lift up their immortal
Voices, and the prophane Wretch is struck
deaf for his Impiety. 
Such was the Noise, which now burst
from one of the Rooms below; and soon
the Thunder, which long had rattled at a
Distance, began to approach nearer and
nearer, 'till, having ascended by Degrees
up Stairs, it at last entered the Apartment
where the Ladies were. In short, to drop
all Metaphor and Figure, Mrs. Honour having
scolded violently below Stairs, and continued
the same all the Way up, came in to
her Mistress in a most outrageous Passion,
crying out, ‘What doth your Ladyship
think? Would you imagine, that this impudent
Villain, the Master of this House,
hath had the Impudence to tell me, nay,
to stand it out to my Face, that your Ladyship
is that nasty, stinking Wh&wblank;re,
(Jenny Cameron they call her), that runs about
the Country with the Pretender? 
Nay, the lying, saucy Villain, had the
Assurance to tell me, that your Ladyship 

had owned yourself to be so: But I
have clawed the Rascal; I have left
the Marks of my Nails in his impudent
Face. My Lady!’ says I, ‘you
saucy Scoundrel: My Lady is Meat for
no Pretenders. She is a young Lady of
as good Fashion, and Family, and Fortune,
as any in Somersetshire. Did you
never hear of the great Squire Western,
Sirrah? She is his only Daughter; she
is,—and Heiress to all his great Estate. 
My Lady to be called a nasty Scotch
Wh&wblank;re by such a Varlet—To
be sure, I wish I had knocked his Brains
out with the Punch-bowl.’ 
The principal Uneasiness with which Sophia
was affected on this Occasion, Honour
had herself caused, by having in her Passion
discovered who she was. However, as this
Mistake of the Landlord sufficiently accounted
for those Passages which Sophia had
before mistaken, she acquired some Ease
on that Account; nor could she, upon the
whole, forbear smiling. This enraged Honour,
and she cried, ‘Indeed, Madam, I
did not think your Ladyship would have
made a laughing Matter of it. To be
called Whore by such an impudent low
Rascal. Your Ladyship may be angry 

with me, for ought I know, for taking
your Part, since proffered Service, they
say, stinks; but to be sure I could never
bear to hear a Lady of mine called
Whore–––Nor will I bear it. I am sure
your Ladyship is as virtuous a Lady as
ever sat Foot on English Ground, and I
will claw any Villain's Eyes out who dares
for to offer to presume for to say the least
Word to the contrary. No body ever
could say the least ill of the Character of
any Lady that ever I waited upon.’ 
Hinc illæ Lachrymæ; in plain Truth,
Honour had as much Love for her Mistress
as most Servants have, that is to say— 
But besides this, her Pride obliged her to
support the Character of the Lady she waited
on; for she thought her own was in a very
close Manner connected with it. In Proportion
as the Character of her Mistress was
raised, hers likewise, as she conceived, was
raised with it; and, on the contrary, she
thought the one could not be lowered without
the other. 
On this Subject, Reader, I must stop a
Moment to tell thee a Story. ‘The famous
Nell Gwynn, stepping one Day from
a House where she had made a short Visit 

into her Coach, saw a great Mob assembled,
and her Footman all bloody and
dirty; the Fellow being asked, by his
Mistress, the Reason of his being in that
Condition, answered, ‘I have been fighting,
Madam, with an impudent Rascal who
called your Ladyship a Wh&wblank;re. ‘You
Blockhead,’ replied Mrs. Gwynn, ‘at
this Rate you must fight every Day of
your Life; why, you Fool, all the World
knows it.’ “Do they?” cries the Fellow,
in a muttering Voice, after he had
shut the Coach Door, ‘they shan't call
me a Whore's Footman for all that.’ 
Thus the Passion of Mrs. Honour appears
natural enough, even if it were to be no
otherwise accounted for; but, in reality,
there was another Cause of her Anger; for
which we must beg Leave to remind our
Reader of a Circumstance mentioned in the
above Simile. There are indeed certain
Liquors, which being applied to our Passions,
or to Fire, produce Effects the very
Reverse of those produced by Water, as
they serve to kindle and inflame, rather
than to extinguish. Among these, the generous
Liquor called Punch is one. It was
not therefore without Reason, that the learned 

Dr. Cheney used to call drinking Punch
pouring liquid Fire down your Throat. 
Now Mrs. Honour had unluckily poured
so much of this liquid Fire down her Throat,
that the Smoke of it began to ascend into
her Pericranium, and blinded the Eyes of
Reason which is there supposed to keep her
Residence, while the Fire itself from the
Stomach easily reached the Heart, and
there inflamed the noble Passion of Pride. 
So that upon the whole, we shall cease
to wonder at the violent Rage of the
Waiting-woman; tho' at first Sight we must
confess the Cause seems inadequate to the
Effect. 
Sophia, and her Cousin both, did all in
their Power to extinguish these Flames
which had roared so loudly all over the
House. They at length prevailed; or,
to carry the Metaphor one Step farther,
the Fire having consumed all the Fuel which
the Language affords, to wit, every reproachful
Term in it, at last went out of its
own Accord. 
But tho' Tranquility was restored above
Stairs, it was not so below; where my 

Landlady highly resenting the Injury done
to the Beauty of her Husband, by the Flesh-Spades
of Mrs. Honour, called aloud for Revenge
and Justice. As to the poor Man
who had principally suffered in the Engagement,
he was perfectly quiet. Perhaps
the Blood which he lost might have cooled
his Anger: For the Enemy had not only
applied her Nails to his Cheeks, but likewise
her First to his Nostrils, which lamented
the Blow with Tears of Blood in great
Abundance. To this we may add Reflections
on his Mistake; but indeed nothing
so effectually silenced his Resentment, as
the Manner in which he now discovered his
Error; for as to the Behaviour of Mrs.
Honour, it had the more confirmed him in
his Opinion: but he was now assured by
a Person of great Figure, and who was attended
by a great Equipage, that one of
the Ladies was a Woman of Fashion, and
his intimate Acquaintance. 
By the Orders of this Person, the Landlord
now ascended, and acquainted our fair
Travellers, that a great Gentleman below
desired to do them the Honour of waiting
on them. Sophia turned pale, and trembled
at this Message, tho' the Reader will
conclude it was too civil, notwithstanding 

the Landlord's Blunder, to have come from
her Father; but Fear hath the common
Fault of a Justice of Peace, and is apt to
conclude hastily from every slight Circumstance,
without examining the Evidence on
both Sides. 
To ease the Reader's Curiosity, therefore,
rather than his Apprehensions, we proceed
to inform him, that an Irish Peer had arrived
very late that Evening at the Inn in
his Way to London. This Nobleman having
sallied from his Supper at the Hurricane
before commemorated, had seen the
Attendant of Mrs. Fitzpatrick, and upon
a short Enquiry was informed, that her
Lady, with whom he was very particularly
acquainted was above. This Information he
had no sooner received, than he addressed
himself to the Landlord, pacified him, and
sent him up Stairs with Compliments rather
civiler than those which were delivered. 
It may perhaps be wondered at, that the
Waiting-woman herself was not the Messenger
employed on this Occasion; but we
are sorry to say, she was not at present
qualified for that, or indeed for any other
Office. The Rum (for so the Landlord
chose to call the Distillation from Malt) had 

basely taken the Advantage of the Fatigue
which the poor Woman had undergone,
and had made terrible Depredations on her
noble Faculties, at a Time when they were
very unable to resist the Attack. 
We shall not describe this tragical Scene
too fully; but we thought ourselves obliged
by that historic Integrity which we profess,
shortly to hint a Matter which we
would otherwise have been glad to have
spared. Many Historians indeed, for Want
of this Integrity, or of Diligence, to say
no worse, often leave the Reader to find
out these little Circumstances in the Dark,
and sometimes to his great Confusion and
Perplexity. 
Sophia was very soon eased of her causeless
Fright by the Entry of the noble Peer,
who was not only an intimate Acquaintance
of Mrs. Fitzpatrick; but in reality a
very particular Friend of that Lady. To
say Truth, it was by his Assistance, that
she had been enabled to escape from her
Husband; for this Nobleman had the same
gallant Disposition with those renowned
Knights, of whom we read in heroic Story,
and had delivered many an imprisoned
Nymph from Durance. He was indeed as 

bitter an Enemy to the savage Authority
too often exercised by Husbands and Fathers,
over the young and lovely of the
other Sex, as ever Knight Errant was to the
barbarous Power of Enchanters: nay, to
say Truth, I have often suspected that those
very Enchanters with which Romance every
where abounds, were in reality no other
than the Husbands of those Days; and Matrimony
itself was perhaps the enchanted
Castle in which the Nymphs were said to
be confined. 
This Nobleman had an Estate in the
Neighbourhood of Fitzpatrick, and had been
for some Time acquainted with the Lady. 
No sooner therefore did he hear of her Confinement,
than he earnestly applied himself
to procure her Liberty; which he presently
effected, not by storming the Castle, according
to the Example of ancient Heroes; 
but by corrupting the Governor, in Conformity
with the modern Art of War; in
which Craft is held to be preferable to Valour,
and Gold is found to be more irresistable
than either Lead or Steel. 
This Circumstance, however, as the Lady
did not think material  enough to relate to
her Friend, so we would not at that Time 

impart it to the Reader. We rather chose to
leave him a while under a Supposition, that
she had found, or coined, or by some very
extraordinary, perhaps supernatural Means,
had possessed herself of the Money with
which she had bribed her Keeper, than to
interrupt her Narrative by giving a Hint of
what seemed to her of too little Importance
to be mentioned. 
The Peer after a short Conversation,
could not forbear expressing some Surprize
at meeting the Lady in that Place, nor
could he refrain from telling her, he imagined
she had been gone to Bath. Mrs.
Fitzpatrick very freely answered, ‘That she
had been prevented in her Purpose by the
Arrival of a Person she need not mention. 
In short,’ says she, ‘I was overtaken by
my Husband (for I need not affect to
conceal what the World knows too well
already). I had the good Fortune to
escape in a most surprizing Manner, and
am now going to London with this young
Lady, who is a near Relation of mine,
and who hath escaped from as great a
Tyrant as my own.’ 
His Lordship concluding that this Tyrant
was likewise a Husband, made a 

Speech full of Compliments to both the
Ladies, and as full of Invectives against his
own Sex; nor indeed did he avoid some
oblique Glances at the matrimonial Institution
itself, and at the unjust Powers given
by it to Man over the more sensible, and
more meritorious Part of the Species. He
ended his Oration with an Offer of his
Protection, and of his Coach and Six, which
was instantly accepted by Mrs. Fitzpatrick,
and at last, upon her Persuasions, by Sophia. 
Matters being thus adjusted, his Lordship
took his Leave, and the Ladies retired
to Rest, where Mrs. Fitzpatrick entertained
her Cousin with many high Encomiums on
the Character of the noble Peer, and enlarged
very particularly on his great Fondness
for his Wife; saying, she believed he
was almost the only Person of high Rank,
who was entirely constant to the Marriage
Bed. ‘Indeed, added she, my dear Sophy,
that is a very rare Virtue amongst Men of
Condition. Never expect it when you
marry; for, believe me, if you do, you
will certainly be deceived.’ 
A gentle Sigh stole from Sophia at these
Words, which perhaps contributed to form 

a Dream of no very pleasant Kind; but
as she never revealed this Dream to any
one, so the Reader cannot expect to see it
related here. 



The Morning introduced in some pretty Writing. 
A Stage Coach. The Civility of
Chambermaids. The heroic Temper of Sophia. 
Her Generosity. The Return to
it. The Departure of the Company, and
their Arrival at London; with some Remarks
for the Use of Travellers. 
Those Members of the Society, who
are born to furnish the Blessings of
Life, now began to light their Candles, in
order to pursue their daily Labours, for
the Use of those who are born to enjoy
these Blessings. The sturdy Hind now attends
the Levee of his Fellow Labourer the
Ox; the cunning Artificer, the diligent
mechanic spring from their hard Mattress; 
and now the bonny House-maid begins to
repair the disordered Drum-Room, while the
riotous Authors of that Disorder, in broken
interrupted Slumbers, tumble and toss, as if 

the Hardness of Down disquieted their Repose. 
In simple Phrase, the Clock had no sooner
struck Seven, than the Ladies were ready
for their Journey, and at their Desire, his
Lordship and his Equipage were prepared
to attend them. 
And now a Matter of some Difficulty
arose; and this was how his Lordship himself
should be conveyed: For tho' in Stage,
Coaches, where Passengers are properly
considered as so much Luggage, the ingenious
Coachman stows half a Dozen with
perfect Ease into the Place of four: for
well he contrives that the fat Hostess, or well-fed
Alderman, may take up no more Room
than the slim Miss, or taper Master; it being
the Nature of Guts, when well squeezed,
to give Way, and to lie in a narrow Compass; 
yet in these Vehicles which are
called, for Distinction-sake, Gentlemens
Coaches, tho' they are often larger than the
others, this Method of packing is never
attempted. 
His Lordship would have put a short
End to the Difficulty, by very gallantly
desiring to mount his Horse; but Mrs. 

Fitzpatrick would by no Means consent to
it. It was therefore concluded that the Abigails
should by Turns relieve each other on
one of his Lordship's Horses, which was
presently equipped with a Side-Saddle for
that Purpose. 
Every thing being settled at the Inn, the
Ladies discharged their former Guides, and
Sophia made a present to the Landlord,
partly to repair the Bruise which he had received
under herself, and partly on Account
of what he had suffered under the Hands of
her enraged Waiting-woman. And now
Sophia first discovered a Loss which gave
her some Uneasiness; and this was of the
hundred Pound Bank Bill which her Father
had given her at their last Meeting; and
which, within a very inconsiderable Trifle,
was all the Treasure she was at present
worth. She searched every where, and
shook and tumbled all her Things to no
Purpose, the Bill was not to be sound: 
And she was at last fully persuaded that she
had lost it from her Pocket when she had
the Misfortune of tumbling from her Horse
in the dark Lane, as before recorded. A
Fact that seemed the more probable, as
she now recollected some Discomposure in
her Pockets which had happened at that 

Time, and the great Difficulty with which
she had drawn forth her Handkerchief the
very Instant before her Fall, in order to relieve
the Distress of Mrs. Fitzpatrick. 
Misfortunes of this Kind, whatever Inconveniencies
they may be attended with,
are incapable of subduing a Mind in which
there is any Strength, without the Assistance
of Avarice. Sophia therefore, tho' nothing
could be worse timed than this Accident, at
such a Season, immediately got the better
of her Concern, and with her wonted
Serenity and Cheerfulness of Countenance,
returned to her Company. His Lordship
conducted the Ladies into the Vehicle, as
he did likewise Mrs. Honour, who, after
many Civilities, and more Dear Madams,
at last yielded to the well-bred Importunities
of her Sister Abigail, and submitted to
be complimented with the first Ride in the
Coach; in which indeed she would afterwards
have been contented to have pursued
her whole Journey, had not her Mistress,
after several fruitless Intimations, at length
forced her to take her Turn on Horseback. 
The Coach now having received its Company,
began to move forwards, attended 

by many Servants, and by two led Captains,
who had before rode with his Lordship,
and who would have been dismissed
from the Vehicle upon a much less worthy
Occasion, than was this of accommodating
two Ladies. In this they acted only as
Gentlemen; but they were ready at any
Time to have performed the Office of a
Footman, or indeed would have condescended
lower, for the Honour of his Lordship's
Company, and for the Convenience
of his Table. 
My Landlord was so pleased with the
Present he had received from Sophia, that
he rather rejoiced in than regretted his
Bruise, or his Scratches. The Reader
will perhaps be curious to know the Quantum
of this Present, but we cannot satisfy his
Curiosity. Whatever it was, it satisfied
the Landlord for his bodily Hurt; but he
lamented he had not known before how
little the Lady valued her Money; ‘For
to be sure,’ says he, ‘one might have
charged every Article double, and she
would have made no Cavil at the Reckoning.’ 
His Wife however was far from drawing
this Conclusion; whether she really felt any 

Injury done to her Husband more than he
did himself, I will not say; certain it is,
she was much less satisfied with the Generosity
of Sophia. Indeed,’ cries she, ‘my
Dear, the Lady knows better how to dispose
of her Money than you imagine. 
She might very well think we should not
put up such a Business without some Satisfaction,
and the Law would have cost
her an infinite deal more than this poor
little Matter, which I wonder you would
take.’ ‘You are always so bloodily wise,’ 
quoth the Husband, ‘It would have cost
her more, would it? Dost fancy I don't
know that as well as thee? But would any
of that more, or so much, have come
into our Pockets? Indeed, if Son Tom
the Lawyer had been alive, I could have
been glad to have put such a pretty Business
into his Hands. He would have
got a good Picking out of it; but I have
no Relation now who is a Lawyer, and
why should I go to Law for the Benefit
of Strangers? Nay, to be sure,’ answered
she, ‘you must know best.’ ‘I believe I
do,’ replied he. ‘I fancy when Money
is to be got, I can smell it out as well as
another. Every body, let me tell you,
would not have talked People out of this. 
Mind that, I say, every body would not 

have cajoled this out of her, mind that.’ 
The Wife then joined in the Applause of
her Husband's Sagacity; and thus ended
the short Dialogue between them on this
Occasion. 
We will therefore take our Leave of these
good People, and attend his Lordship and
his fair Companions, who made such good
Expedition, that they performed a Journey
of ninety Miles in two Days, and on the second
Evening arrived in London, without
having encountered any one Adventure on
the Road worthy the Dignity of this History
to relate. Our Pen, therefore, shall imitate
the Expedition which it describes, and our
History shall keep Pace with the Travellers
who are its Subject. Good Writers will
indeed do well to imitate the ingenious
Traveller in this Instance, who always proportions
his Stay at any Place, to the Beauties,
Elegancies, and Curiosities, which it
affords. At Eshur, at Stowe, at Wilton,
at Eastbury, and at Prior's Park, Days
are too short for the ravished Imagination; 
while we admire the wondrous Power of
Art in improving Nature. In some of these,
Art chiefly engages our Admiration; in others,
Nature and Art contend for our Applause; 
but in the last, the former seems to 

triumph. Here Nature appears in her richest
Attire, and Art dressed with the modestest
Simplicity, attends its  benignant Mistress. 
Here Nature indeed pours forth the choicest
Treasures which she hath lavished on this
World; and here Human Nature presents
you with an Object which can be only exceeded
in the other. 
The same Taste, the same Imagination,
which luxuriously riots in these elegant Scenes,
can be amused with Objects of far inferior
Note. The Woods, the Rivers, the Lawns
of Devon and of Dorset, attract the Eye of
the ingenious Traveller, and retard his Pace,
which Delay he afterwards compensates by
swiftly scouring over the gloomy Heath of
Bagshot, or that pleasant Plain which extends
itself Westward from Stockbridge, where no
other Object than one single Tree only in
sixteen Miles presents itself to the View, unless
the Clouds, in Compassion to our tired
Spirits, kindly open their variegated Mansions
to our Prospect. 
Not so travels the Money-meditating
Tradesman, the sagacious Justice, the dignified
Doctor, the warm-clad Grazier, with
all the numerous Offspring of Wealth and
Dulness. On they jogg, with equal Pace,
through the verdant Meadows, or over the 

barren Heath, their Horses measuring four
Miles and a half per Hour with the utmost
Exactness; the Eyes of the Beast and of his
Master being alike directed forwards, and
employed in contemplating the same Objects
in the same manner. With equal Rapture
the good Rider surveys the proudest
Boasts of the Architect, and those fair
Buildings, with which some unknown Name
hath adorned the rich Cloathing-Town; 
where heaps of Bricks are piled up as a
Kind of Monument, to shew that Heaps of
Money have been piled there before. 
And now, Reader, as we are in Haste
to attend our Heroine, we will leave to thy
Sagacity to apply all this to the Bœotian
Writers, and to those Authors who are
their Opposites. This thou wilt be abundantly
able to perform without our Aid. 
Bestir thyself therefore on this Occasion; 
for tho' we will always lend thee proper
Assistance in difficult Places, as we do not,
like some others, expect thee to use the
Arts of Divination to discover our Meaning; 
yet we shall not indulge thy Laziness
where nothing but thy own Attention is required,
for thou art highly mistaken if thou
dost imagine that we intended, when we
begun this great Work, to leave thy Sagacity
nothing to do, or that without sometimes 

exercising this Talent, thou wilt be
able to travel through our Pages with any
Pleasure or Profit to thyself. 



Containing a Hint or two concerning Virtue,
and a few more concerning Suspicion. 
Our Company being arrived at London,
were set down at his Lordship's
House, where while they refreshed themselves
after the Fatigue of their Journey,
Servants were dispatched to provide a Lodging
for the two Ladies; for as her Ladyship
was not then in Town, Mrs. Fitzpatrick
would by no Means consent to accept
a Bed in the Mansion of the Peer. 
Some Readers will perhaps condemn this
extraordinary Delicacy, as I may call it, of
Virtue, as too nice and scrupulous; but we
must make Allowances for her Situation,
which must be owned to have been very
ticklish; and when we consider the Malice
of censorious Tongues, we must allow, if
it was a Fault, the Fault was an Excess on
the right Side, and which every Woman
who is in the self-same Situation will do 

well to imitate. The most formal Appearance
of Virtue, when it is only an Appearance,
may perhaps, in very abstracted Considerations,
seem to be rather less commendable
than Virtue itself without this
Formality; but it will however be always
more commended; and this, I believe,
will be granted by all, that it is necessary,
unless in some very particular Cases, for
every Woman to support either the one or
the other. 
A Lodging being prepared, Sophia accompanied
her Cousin for that Evening; 
but resolved early in the Morning to enquire
after the Lady, into whose Protection, as
we have formerly mentioned, she had determined
to throw herself, when she quitted
her Father's House. And this she was the
more eager in doing, from some Observations
she had made during her Journey in
the Coach. 
Now as we would by no Means fix the
odious Character of Suspicion on Sophia,
we are almost afraid to open to our
Reader the Conceits which filled her Mind
concerning Mrs. Fitzpatrick; of whom
she certainly entertained at present some
Doubts; which, as they are very apt to 

enter into the Bosoms of the worst of People,
we think proper not to mention more
plainly, till we have first suggested a Word
or two to our Reader touching Suspicion in
general. 
Of this there have always appeared to me
to be two Degrees. The first of these I
chuse to derive from the Heart, as the extreme
Velocity of its Discernment seems to
denote some previous inward Impulse, and
the rather, as this superlative Degree often
forms its own Objects; sees what is not,
and always more than really exists. This
is that quick-sighted Penetration, whose
Hawk's Eyes no Symptom of Evil can
escape; which observes not only upon the
Actions, but upon the Words and Looks
of Men; and as it proceeds from the Heart
of the Observer, so it dives into the Heart
of the Observed, and there espies Evil, as
it were, in the first Embryo; nay sometimes
before it can be said to be conceived. 
An admirable Faculty, if it were infallible; 
but as this Degree of Perfection is not even
claimed by more than one mortal Being, so
from the Fallibility of such acute Discernment
have arisen many sad Mischiefs and
most grievous Heart-akes to Innocence and
Virtue. I cannot help therefore regarding 

this vast Quicksightedness into Evil, as a
vicious Excess, and as a very pernicious Evil
in itself. And I am the more inclined to this
Opinion, as I am afraid it always proceeds
from a bad Heart, for the Reasons I have
above-mentioned, and for one more, namely,
because I never knew it the Property of
a good one. Now from this Degree of
Suspicion I entirely and absolutely acquit
Sophia. 
A second Degree of this Quality seems to
arise from the Head. This is indeed no
other than the Faculty of seeing what is before
your Eyes, and of drawing Conclusions
from what you see. The former of
these is unavoidable by those who have any
Eyes, and the latter is perhaps no less certain
and necessary a Consequence of our
having any Brains. This is altogether
as bitter an Enemy to Guilt, as the
former is to Innocence, nor can I see it
in an unamiable Light, even though,
through human Fallibility, it should be
sometimes mistaken. For Instance, if a
Husband should accidentally surprize his
Wife in the Lap or in the Embraces of some
of those pretty young Gentlemen who profess
the Art of Cuckoldom, I should not
highly, I think, blame him for concluding 

something more than what he saw, from the
Familiarities which he really had seen, and
which we are at least favourable enough to,
when we call them innocent Freedoms. 
The Reader will easily suggest great
Plenty of Instances to himself; I shall add
but one more, which however unchristian
it may be thought by some, I cannot help
esteeming to be strictly justifiable; and this
is a Suspicion that a Man is capable of doing
what he hath done already, and that it is
possible for one who hath been a Villain
once, to act the same Part again. And
to confess the Truth of this Degree of
Suspicion, I believe  Sophia was guilty. 
From this Degree of Suspicion she had,
in Fact, conceived an Opinion, that her
Cousin was really not better than she should
be. 
The Case, it seems, was this: Mrs. Fitzpatrick
wisely considered, that the Virtue
of a young Lady is, in the World,
in the same Situation with a poor Hare, who 
is certain, whenever it ventures abroad, to
meet its Enemies: For it can hardly meet
any other. No sooner therefore was she determined
to take the first Opportunity of
quitting the Protection of her Husband,
than she resolved to cast herself under the 

Protection of some other Man; and whom
could she so properly chuse to be her Guardian
as a Person of Quality, of Fortune, of
Honour; and who, besides a gallant Disposition
which inclines Men to Knight-Errantry; 
that is, to be the Champions of
Ladies in Distress, had often declared a
violent Attachment to herself, and had already
given her all the Instances of it in his
Power? 
But as the Law hath foolishly omitted this
Office of Vice-Husband, or Guardian to an
eloped Lady; and as Malice is apt to denominate
him by a more disagreeable Appellation; 
it was concluded that his Lordship
should perform all such kind Offices to
the Lady in secret, and without publicly
assuming the Character of her Protector. 
Nay, to prevent any other Person from seeing
him in this Light, it was agreed that
the Lady should proceed directly to Bath,
and that his Lordship should first go to
London, and thence should go down to that
Place by the Advice of his Physicians. 
Now all this Sophia very plainly understood,
not from the Lips or Behaviour of
Mrs. Fitzpatrick; but from the Peer, who
was infinitely less expert at retaining a Secret, 

than was the good Lady; and perhaps
the exact Secrecy which Mrs. Fitzpatrick
had observed on this Head in her Narrative,
served not a little to heighten those
Suspicions which were now risen in the Mind
of her Cousin. 
Sophia very easily found out the Lady she
sought, for indeed there was not a Chairman
in Town to whom her House was not
perfectly well known; and as she received,
in Return of her first Message, a most pressing
Invitation, she immediately accepted it. 
Mrs. Fitzpatrick indeed did not desire her
Cousin to stay with her with more Earnestness
than Civility required. Whether she
had discerned and resented the Suspicion
above-mentioned, or from what other Motive
it arose, I cannot say; but certain it is,
she was full as desirous of parting with Sophia,
as Sophia herself could be of going. 
The young Lady, when she came to take
Leave of her Cousin, could not avoid giving
her a short Hint of Advice. She begged
her, for Heaven's Sake, to take Care
of herself, and to consider in how dangerous
a Situation she stood; adding, she hoped
some Method would be found of reconciling
her to her Husband. ‘You must remember, 

my Dear, says she, the Maxim which
my Aunt Western hath so often repeated
to us both; That whenever the matrimonial
Alliance is broke, and War declared
between Husband and Wife, she can hardly
make a disadvantageous Peace for herself on
any Conditions. These are my Aunt's
very Words, and she hath had a great
deal of Experience in the World.’ Mrs.
Fitzpatrick answered, with a contemptuous
Smile, ‘Never fear me, Child, take Care
of yourself; for you are younger than me. 
I will come and visit you in a few Days; 
but, dear Sophy, let me give you one
Piece of Advice: Leave the Character
of Graveairs in the Country; for, believe
me, it will sit very aukwardly upon you
in this Town.’ 
Thus the two Cousins parted, and Sophia
repaired directly to Lady Bellarston, where
she found a most hearty, as well as most
polite Welcome. The Lady had taken a
great Fancy to her when she had seen her
formerly with her Aunt Western. She was
indeed extremely glad to see her, and was
no sooner acquainted with the Reasons
which induced her to leave the Squire and
fly to London, than she highly applauded 

her Sense and Resolution; and after expressing
the highest Satisfaction in the Opinion
which Sophia had declared she entertained of
her Ladyship, by chusing her House for an
Asylum, she promised her all the Protection
which it was in her Power to give. 
As we have now brought Sophia into
safe Hands, the Reader will, I apprehend,
be contented to deposite her there a
while, and to look a little after other
Personages, and particularly poor Jones,
whom we have left long enough to do Pennance
for his past Offences, which, as is the
Nature of Vice, brought sufficient Punishment
upon him themselves. 