


The Author dies, meets with Mercury,
and is by him conducted to the
Stage which sets out for the other
World. 
On the first of December 1741 * , I
departed this Life, at my Lodgings
in Cheapside. My Body had been
some time dead before I was at liberty to quit
it, lest it should by any accident return to 

Life: this is an Injunction imposed on all
Souls by the eternal Law of Fate, to prevent
the Inconveniencies which would follow. As
soon as the destined Period was expired (being
no longer than till the Body is become
perfectly cold and stiff) I began to move; 
but found my self under a Difficulty of making
my escape, for the Mouth, or Door, was
shut; so that it was impossible for me to go
out at it, and the Windows, vulgarly called
the Eyes, were so closely pulled down by the
Fingers of a Nurse, that I could by no means
open them. At last, I perceived a Beam of
Light glimmering at the top of the House,
(for such I may call the Body I had been inclosed
in) whither ascending, I gently let my
self down through a kind of Chimney, and
issued out at the Nostrils. 
No Prisoner discharged from a long Confinement,
ever tasted the Sweets of Liberty
with a more exquisite Relish, than I enjoyed
in this delivery from a Dungeon wherein
I had been detained upwards of forty Years,
and with much the same kind of Regard I
cast *  my Eyes backwards upon it. 

My Friends and Relations had all quitted
the Room, being all (as I plainly overheard)
very loudly quarrelling below-stairs about my
Will, there was only an old Woman left
above, to guard the Body, as I apprehend. 
She was in a fast Sleep, occasioned, as from her
Savour it seemed, by a comfortable Dose of
Gin. I had no pleasure in this Company,
and therefore as the Window was wide open,
I sallied forth into the open Air: but to my
great astonishment found my self unable to
fly, which I had always during my habitation
in the Body conceived of Spirits; however, I
came so lightly to the Ground, that I did not
hurt my self; and though I had not the Gift
of flying (owing probably to my having neither
Feathers nor Wings) I was capable of
hopping such a prodigious way at once, that
it served my turn almost as well. 
I Had not hopped far, before I perceived
a tall young Gentleman in a Silk Waistcoat,
with a Wing on his left Heel, a Garland on
his Head, and a Caduceus in his right
Hand * . I thought I had seen this Person 

before, but had not time to recollect where,
when he called out to me, and asked me how
long I had been departed. I answered, I was
just come forth. You must not stay here,
replied he, unless you had been murthered; 
in which case, indeed, you might have been
suffered to walk some time: but if you died
a natural Death, you must set out for the
other World immediately. I desired to know
the Way. O, cried the Gentleman, I will
shew you to the Inn whence the Stage proceeds: 
For I am the Porter. Perhaps you
never heard of me, my Name is Mercury. 
Sure, Sir, said I, I have seen you at the Play-House. 
Upon which he smiled, and without
satisfying me, as to that Point, walked
directly forward, bidding me hop after him. 
I obeyed him, and soon found myself in
Warwick-Lane; where Mercury making
a full Stop, pointed at a particular House,
where he bad me enquire for the Stage,
and wishing me a good Journey, took his
Leave, saying, he must go seek after other
Customers. 
I Arrived just as the Coach was setting
out, and found I had no occasion for Enquiry: 

for every Person seemed to know my
Business, the Moment I appeared at the Door: 
The Coachman told me, his Horses were to,
but that he had no Place left; however, tho'
there were already six, the Passengers offered
to make room for me. I thanked them, and
ascended without much Ceremony. We immediately
began our Journey, being seven in
Number; for as the Women wore no Hoops,
three of them were but equal to two Men. 
Perhaps, Reader, thou may'st be pleased
with an Account of this whole Equipage, as
peradventure thou wilt not, while alive, see
any such. The Coach was made by an eminent
Toyman, who is well known to deal in
immaterial Substance, that being the Matter
of which it was compounded. The
Work was so extremely fine, that it was entirely
invisible to the human Eye. The
Horses which drew this extraordinary Vehicle
were all Spiritual, as well as the Passengers. 
They had, indeed, all died in the Service of
a certain Post-Master; and as for the Coachman,
who was a very thin Piece of immaterial
Substance, he had the Honour, while
alive, of driving the Great Peter, or Peter 

the Great, in whose Service his Soul, as well
as Body, was almost starved to death. 
Such was the Vehicle in which I set out,
and now those who are not willing to travel
on with me, may, if they please, stop here; 
those who are, must proceed to the subsequent
Chapters, in which this Journey is continued. 