


Further Particulars relating to Miss
Tishy, which perhaps may not
greatly surprize after the former. 
The Description of a very fine
Gentleman. And a Dialogue between
Wild and the Count, in
which public Virtue is just hinted
at, with &c. 
Mr. Snap had turned the Key a very
few Minutes before a Servant of the
Family called Mr. Bagshot out of the Room,
telling him, there was a Person below who
desired to speak with him; and this was no
other than Miss Lætitia Snap, whose Admirer
Mr. Bagshot had long been, and in
whose tender Breast his Passion had raised
a more ardent Flame than that of any of
his Rivals had been able to raise. Indeed
she was so extremely fond of this Youth,
that she often confessed to her female Confidents,
if she could ever have listened to the 

Thought of living with any one Man, Mr.
Bagshot was he. Nor was she singular in
this Inclination, many other young Ladies
being her Rivals in this Lover, who had
all the great and noble Qualifications necessary
to form a true Gallant, and which Nature
is seldom so extremely bountiful as to
indulge to any one Person. We will endeavour,
however, to describe them all
with as much Exactness as possible. He
was then six Feet high, had large Calves,
broad Shoulders, a ruddy Complexion, with
brown curled Hair, a modest Assurance,
and clean Linen. He had indeed, it must
be confest, some small Deficiencies to counterbalance
these heroic Qualities, for he
was the silliest Fellow in the World, could
neither write nor read, nor had he a single
Grain or Spark of Honour, Honesty, or
Good-nature in his whole Composition. 
As soon as Mr. Bagshot had quitted the
Room, the Count, taking Wild by the
Hand, told him he had something to communicate
to him of very great Importance; 
he then proceeded to inform him, he was
very well convinced that Bagshot was the 

Person who robbed him. Wild started
with great seeming Amazement as this
Discovery, and told the Count with a most
serious Countenance, he advised him to take
Care how he cast any such Reflections on
a Man of Mr. Bagshot's nice Honour; for
he was certain he would not bear it. D&wblank;n
his Honour, quoth the enraged Count, nor
can I bear being robbed; I will apply to a
Justice of Peace. Wild replied with great
Indignation, since he durst entertain such
a Suspicion against his Friend, he would
henceforth disclaim all Acquaintance with
him; that he knew Mr. Bagshot was a Man
of Honour, and his Friend, and consequently
it was impossible he should be guilty of
a bad Action; with much more to the same
purpose, which had not the expected
Weight with the Count; for the latter
seemed still certain as to the Person, and resolute
in applying for Justice, which, he said,
he thought he owed to the Public, as well as
to himself. Wild then changed his Countenance
into a kind of Derision, and spoke as
follows: “Suppose it should be possible
that Mr. Bagshot had, in a Frolic,
(for I will call it no other) taken this 

Method of borrowing your Money, what
will you get by prosecuting him? Not
your Money again; for you hear he was
stript at the Gaming-Table;” (of which
Bagshot had, during their short Confabulation,
informed them) “you will get then
an Opportunity of being still more out
of Pocket by the Prosecution. Another
Advantage you may promise yourself is
the being blown up at every Gaming-House
in Town, for that I will assure
you of; and then much Good may it
do you to sit down with the Satisfaction
of having discharged what it seems you
owe the Public. I am ashamed of my
own Discernment, when I mistook you
for a great Man. Would it not be better
for you to receive Part (perhaps all)
of your Money again by a wise Concealment; 
for however seedy Mr. Bagshot
may be now, if he has really plaid
this Frolic with you, you may believe
he will play it with others, and when he
is in Cash, you may depend on a Restoration; 
the Law will be always in your
Power, and that is the last Remedy 

which a brave or a wise Man would resort
to. Leave the Affair therefore to me; 
I will examine Bagshot, and if I find he
hath plaid you this Trick, I will engage
my own Honour, you shall in the
End be no Loser.” The Count answered: 
“If I was sure to be no Loser, Mr. Wild, I
apprehend you have a better Opinion
of my Understanding than to imagine I
would prosecute a Gentleman for the
sake of the Public. These are foolish
Words of Course, which we learn a ridiculous
Habit of speaking, and will
often break from us without any Design
or Meaning. I assure you all I desire is
a Reimbursement, and if I can, by your
Means, obtain that, the Public may
—” concluding with a Phrase too coarse
to be inserted in a History of this kind. 
They were now informed that Dinner
was ready, and the Company assembled below
Stairs, whither the Reader may, if he please,
attend these Gentlemen. 
There sat down at the Table Mr. Snap,
and the two young Ladies his Daughters, 

Mr. Wild the elder, Mr. Wild the younger,
the Count, Mr. Bagshot, and a grave Gentleman,
who had formerly had the Honour
of carrying Arms in a Regiment of Foot,
and now engaged in the Office (perhaps a
more reputable one) of assisting or following
Mr. Snap in the Execution of the Laws
of his Country. 
Nothing very remarkable passed at
Dinner. The Conversation (as is usual in polite
Company) rolled chiefly on what they
were then eating, and what they had lately
eaten. In which the military Gentleman,
who had served in Ireland, gave them a very
particular Account of a new manner of
roasting Potatoes, and others gave an Account
of other Dishes. In short, an indifferent
By-stander would have concluded
from their Discourse, that they had all come
into this World for no other purpose, than
to fill their Bellies; and indeed if this was
not the chief, it is probable it was the most
innocent Design Nature had in their Formation. 

As soon as the Dish was removed, and
the Ladies retired, the Count proposed a
Game at Hazard, which was immediately
assented to by the whole Company, and
the Dice being immediately brought in, the
Count took up the Box, and demanded
who would set him: To which no one
made any Answer, imagining perhaps the
Count's Pockets to be more empty than
they were; for, in Reality, that Gentleman
(notwithstanding what he had heartily
swore to Mr. Wild) had since his Arrival
at Mr. Snap's, conveyed a Piece of Plate to
pawn, by which Means he had furnished
himself with ten Guineas. The Count,
therefore, perceiving this Backwardness in
his Friends, and probably somewhat guessing
at the Cause of it, took the said Guineas out
of his Pocket, and threw them on the
Table; when lo! (such is the Force of Example)
all the rest began to produce their
Funds, and immediately a considerable Sum
glittering in their Eyes, the Game began. 