


Mrs. Heartfree begins to relate her
Adventures. 
Mrs. Heartfree proceeded thus. “The
Vengeance which the French Captain
exacted on that Villain, (our Hero)
persuaded me, that I was fallen into the
Hands of a Man of Honour and Justice; 
nor, indeed, was it possible for any Person
to be treated with more Respect and
Civility than I now was; but, if this
could not mitigate my Sorrows, when I
reflected on the Condition in which I had
been betrayed to leave all that was dear
to me, much less could it produce such
an Effect, when I discovered, as I soon
did, that I owed it chiefly to a Passion,
which threatned me with great Uneasiness,
as it quickly appeared to be very
violent, and as I was absolutely in the
Power of the Person who possessed it,
or was rather possessed by it. I must
however do him the Justice to say, my
Fears carried my Suspicions farther than 

I afterwards found I had any Reason
for: He did indeed, very soon acquaint
me with his Passion, and used all the
gentle Methods, which frequently succeed
with our Sex, to prevail with me to gratify
it; but never once threatned, nor
had the least Recourse to Force. He did
not even once insinuate to me, that I was
totally in his Power, which I myself saw,
and whence I drew the most dreadful Apprehensions,
well knowing, that as there are
some Dispositions so brutal, that Cruelty
adds a Zest and Savour to their Pleasures; 
so there are others whose gentler Inclinations
are better gratified, when they win
us by softer Methods to comply with
their Desires; yet even these may be often
compelled by an unruly Passion to have
recourse at last to the Means of Violence,
when they despair of Success from Persuasion; 
but I was happily the Captive
of a better Man. My Conqueror was one
of those over whom Passion hath a limited
Jurisdiction, and tho' he was easy enough
to Sin, he was proof against any Temptation
to Villany. 

“We had been two Days almost totally
becalmed, when a brisk Gale rising,
as we were in Sight of Dunkirk, we saw
a Vessel making full Sail towards us. 
The Captain of the Privateer was so
strong, that he apprehended no Danger
but from a Man of War, which the Sailors
discerned this not to be. He therefore
struck his Colours, and furled his Sails
as much as possible, in order to lie by
and expect her, hoping she might be a
Prize.” (Here Heartfree smiling, his
Wife stopp'd and enquired the Cause. He
told her, it was from her using the Sea
Terms so aptly: She laughed, and answered,
he would wonder less at this, when he
heard the long Time she had been on
board: And then proceeded) “This Vessel
now came along-side of us, and hailed
us, having perceived that, on which
we were aboard, to be of her own Country: 
They begged us not to put into Dunkirk,
but to accompany them in their Pursuit
of a large English Merchant-Man, whom
we should easily overtake, and both together
as easily conquer. Our Captain
immediately consented to this Proposition 

and ordered all the Sail to be
crowded. This was most unwelcome
News to me; however, he comforted
me all he could, by assuring me, I had
nothing to fear, that he would be so far
from offering the least Rudeness to me,
that he would at the Hazard of his Life
protect me from it. This Assurance gave
me all the Consolation, which my present
Circumstances and the dreadful Apprehensions
I had on your dear Account
would admit.” (At which Words the tenderest
Glances passed on both Sides between
the Husband and Wife.) 
“We sailed near twelve Hours, when
we came in Sight of the Ship we were
in pursuit of, and which we should probably
have soon come up with, had not
a very thick Mist ravished her from our
Eyes. This Mist continued several Hours,
and when it cleared up we discovered our
Companion at a great Distance from us; 
but what gave us (I mean the Captain
and his Crew) the greatest Uneasiness,
was the Sight of a very large Ship within
a Mile of us, which presently saluted 

us with a Gun, and now appeared to be
a third Rate English Man of War. Our
Captain declared the Impossibility of either
fighting or escaping, and accordingly
struck, without waiting for the Broadside
which was preparing for us, and which
perhaps would have prevented me from
the Happiness I now enjoy.” This occasioned
Heartfree to change Colour, his
Wife therefore past hastily to Circumstances
of a more smiling Complexion. 
“I greatly rejoiced at this Event, as I
thought it would not only restore me to
the safe Possession of my Jewels, but to
what I value beyond all the Treasure in
the Universe. My Expectation, however,
of both these was somewhat crost
for the present: As to the former, I was
told, they should be carefully preserved; 
but that I must prove my Right to them,
before I could expect their Restoration; 
which, if I mistake not, the Captain did
not very eagerly desire I should be able
to accomplish: And as to the latter, I
was acquainted, that I should be put aboard
the first Ship, which they met on 

her Way to England; but that they were
proceeding to the West-Indies. 
“I had not been long aboard the Man
of War, before I discovered just Reason
rather to lament than rejoice at the Exchange
of my Captivity; (for such I concluded
my present Situation to be.) I
had now another Lover in the Captain
of this Englishman, and much rougher
and less gallant than the Frenchman had
been. He used me with scarce common
Civility, as indeed he shewed very little
to any other Person, treating his Officers
little better than a Man of no
great Good-Breeding would exert to his
meanest Servant, and that too on some
very irritating Provocation. As for me,
he addressed me with the Insolence of a
Basha to a Circassian Slave; he talked
to me with the loose Licence in which
the most profligate Libertines converse
with Harlots, and which Women abandoned
only in a moderate Degree detest
and abhor. He often kissed me with
very rude Familiarity, and one Day attempted
further Brutality, when a Gentleman 

on board, and who was in my
Situation, that is, had been taken by a
Privateer and was retaken, rescued me
from his Hands; for which the Captain
confined him, tho' he was not under his
Command, two Days in Irons; when
he was released, (for I was not suffered to
visit him in his Confinement,) I went to
him and thanked him with the utmost
Acknowledgment, for what he had done
and suffered on my Account. The Gentleman
behaved to me in the handsomest
Manner on this Occasion; told me, he was
ashamed of the high Sense I seemed to
entertain of so small an Obligation, of an
Action to which his Duty as a Christian,
and his Honour as a Man, obliged him. 
From this Time I lived in great Familiarity
with this Man, whom I regarded
as my Protector, which he professed
himself ready to be on all Occasions, expressing
the utmost Abhorrence of the
Captain's Brutality, especially that shewn
towards me, and the Tenderness of a Parent
for the Preservation of my Virtue, for
which I was not myself more solicitous
than he appeared. He was, indeed, the only 

Man I had hitherto met, since my unhappy
Departure, who did not endeavour by
all his Looks, Words, and Actions, to assure
me, he had a Liking to my unfortunate
Person. The rest seeming desirous of
sacrificing the little Beauty they complimented,
to their Desires, without the least
Consideration of the Ruin, which I earnestly
represented to them, they were attempting
to bring on me and my future Repose. 
“I now past several Days pretty free
from the Captain's Molestation, till one
fatal Night:” Here perceiving Heartfree
grew pale, she comforted him by an Assurance,
that God had preserved her Chastity,
and again had restored her unsullied to his
Arms; she continued thus: “Perhaps, I
give it a wrong Epithet in the Word fatal; 
but a wretched Night, I am sure I
may call it, for no Woman, who came
off victorious, was, I believe, ever in
greater Danger. One Night, I say, having
drank his Spirits high with Punch,
in Company with the Purser, who was
the only Man in the Ship he admitted
to his Table, he sent for me into his Cabin; 

whither, tho' unwilling, I was obliged
to go. We were no sooner alone
together, than he seized me by the Hand,
and, after affronting my Ears with Discourse
which I am unable to repeat, he
swore a great Oath, that his Passion was
to be dallied with no longer, that I must
not expect to treat him in the Manner,
to which a Set of Blockhead Land-Men
submitted. None of your Coquet Airs,
therefore, with me, Madam, said he, for
I am resolved to have you this Night. 
No struggling nor squawling, for both
will be impertinent. The first Man who
offers to come in here, I will have his
Skin flea'd off at the Gangway. He then
attempted to pull me violently towards
his Bed. I threw myself on my Knees,
and with Tears and Entreaties besought
his Compassion; but this was, I found,
to no Purpose: I then had Recourse to
Threats, and endeavoured to frighten him
with the Consequence; but neither had
this, tho' it seemed to stagger him more
than the other Method, sufficient Force
to deliver me. At last, a Stratagem came
into my Head, of which my perceiving 

him reel, gave me the first Hint, I entreated
a Moment's Reprieve only, when
collecting all the Spirits I could muster,
I put on a constrained Air of Gayety, and
told him with an affected Laugh, he was
the roughest Lover I had ever met with,
and that I believed I was the first Woman
he had ever paid his Addresses to. Addresses,
said he, d&wblank;n your Dresses, I
want to undress you. I then begged him
to let us drink some Punch together; for
that I loved a Can as well as himself,
and never would grant the Favour to
any Man till I had drank a hearty Glass
with him. O, said he, if that be all,
you shall have Punch enough to drown
yourself in. At which Words he rung
the Bell, and ordered in a Gallon of that
Liquor. I was in the mean time obliged
to suffer his nauseous Kisses, and some
Rudenesses which I had great Difficulty
to restrain within moderate Bounds. When
the Punch came in, he took up the Bowl
and drank my Health ostentatiously, in
such a Quantity, that it considerably advanced
my Scheme. I followed him with
Bumpers, as fast as possible, and was 

myself obliged to drink so much, that at
another time it would have staggered my
own Reason, but at present it did not
affect me. At length, perceiving him
very far gone, I watched an Opportunity,
and ran out of the Cabin, resolving to
seek Protection of the Sea, if I could find
no other: But Heaven was now graciously
pleased to relieve me; for in his
Attempt to pursue me, he reeled backwards,
and falling down the Cabin Stairs,
he dislocated his Shoulder, and so bruised
himself, that I was not only preserved
that Night from any Danger of my intended
Ravisher; but the Accident threw
him into a Fever, which endangered his
Life, and whether he ever recovered or
no, I am not certain; for during his delirious
Fits, the eldest Lieutenant commanded
the Ship. This was a virtuous
and a brave Fellow, who had been twenty
five Years in that Post without being able to
obtain a Ship, and had seen several Boys,
the Bastards of Noblemen, put over his
Head. One Day, while the Ship remained
under his Command, an English Vessel
bound to Cork, passed by; myself and my 

Friend, who had lain two Days in Irons on
my Account, went on board this Ship,
with the leave of the good Lieutenant, who
made us such Presents as he was able
of Provisions, and congratulating me
on my Delivery from a Danger to which
none of the Ship's Crew had been Strangers,
he kindly wished us both a safe
Voyage.” 