


In which the foregoing happy Incident
is accounted for. 
But here, though I am convinced my
good-natured Reader may almost
want the Surgeon's Assistance also, and that
there is no Passage in this whole Story,
which can afford him equal Delight; yet
lest our Reprieve should seem to resemble
that in the Beggar's Opera, I shall endeavour
to shew him, that this Incident, which
is undoubtedly true, is at least as natural as
delightful; for, we assure him, we would
rather have suffered half Mankind to be
hang'd, than have saved one contrary to the
strictest Rules of Writing and Probability. 

Be it known then (a Circumstance
which I think highly credible) that the
GREAT Fireblood had been, a few Days
before, taken in the Fact of a Robbery, and
carried before the same Justice of Peace,
who had, on his Evidence, committed
Heartfree to Prison. This Magistrate, who
did indeed no small Honour to the Commission
he bore, duly considered the weighty
Charge committed to him, by which he
was intrusted with Decisions affecting the
Lives, Liberties and Properties of his Countrymen; 
he therefore examined always with
the utmost Diligence and Caution, into every
minute Circumstance. And, as he
had a good deal balanced, even when he
committed Heartfree, on the excellent Character
given him by Friendly and the Maid; 
and, as he was much staggered on finding
of the two Persons, on whose Evidence
alone Heartfree had been committed
and had been since convicted, one, as
he had heard, in Newgate for a Felony,
and the other now brought before him for
a Robbery, he thought proper to put the
Matter very home to Fireblood at this time. 
The young Achates was taken, as we have 

said, in the Fact; so that Denial, he saw,
was in vain. He, therefore, honestly confest
what he knew must be proved; and
desired, on the Merit of the Discoveries he
made, to be admitted as an Evidence against
his Accomplices. This afforded the
happiest Opportunity to the Justice, to satisfy
his Conscience in relation to Heartfree. 
He told Fireblood, that, if he expected
the Favour he solicited, it must be on
Condition, that he revealed the whole Truth
to him concerning the Evidence which he
had lately given against a Bankrupt, and
which some Circumstances had induced a
Suspicion of; that he might depend on it,
the Truth would be discovered by other
Means, and gave some oblique hints, (a Deceit
entirely justifiable) that Wild himself
had offered such a Discovery. The very
Mention of Wild's Name immediately alarmed
Fireblood, who did not in the least
doubt the Readiness of that GREAT Man
to hang any of the Gang, when his own
Interest seemed to require it. He, therefore
hesitated not a Moment; but, having
obtained a Promise from the Justice, that
he should be accepted as an Evidence, he 

discovered the whole Falshood, and that
he had been seduced by Wild to depose as
he had done. 
The Justice having thus luckily and
timely discovered this Scene of Villany, alias
Greatness, lost not a Moment in
using his utmost Endeavours to get the Case
of the unhappy Convict represented to the
Sovereign; who immediately granted him
that gracious Reprieve, which caused such
Happiness to the Persons concerned; and
which, we hope, we have now accounted
for to the Satisfaction of the Reader. Indeed
we had Reason to apprehend, it would at
first very greatly surprize him, and by that
Means lessen the Pleasure of the Critics, a
Sort of People, for whom, and for whose
Entertainment, we have the tenderest Regard,
and to whom we pay all that just
Duty and Respect, which, of common
Right, they ought to receive from every
Author. 
The good Magistrate having obtained
this Reprieve for Heartfree, thought it incumbent
on him to visit him in the Prison, 

and to found, if possible, the Depth of this
Affair, that if he should appear as innocent
as he now began to conceive him, he might
use all imaginable Methods to obtain his
Pardon and Enlargement. 
The next Day therefore after that, when
the miserable Scene above described had
passed, he went to Newgate, where he
found those three Persons, namely Heartfree,
his Wife, and Friendly, sitting together. 
The Justice informed the Prisoner
of the Confession of Fireblood, with the
Steps which he had taken upon it. The
Reader will easily conceive the many outward
Thanks as well as inward Gratitude
which he received from all three; but
those were of very little Consequence to
him, compared with the secret Satisfaction
he felt in his Mind, from reflecting on the
Preservation of Innocence, as he soon after
very clearly perceived was the Case. 
When he entred the Room, Mrs.
Heartfree was speaking with some Earnestness: 
As he perceived, therefore, he had
interrupted her, he begged she would continue 

her Discourse, which, if he prevented
by his Presence, he desired to depart; but
Heartfree would not suffer it. He said,
she had been relating some Adventures,
which perhaps might entertain him to hear,
and which he the rather desired he would,
as they might serve to illustrate the Foundation
on which this Falshood had been
built, which had brought on him all his
Misfortunes. 
The Justice very gladly consented, and
Mrs. Heartfree, at her Husband's Desire,
began the Relation from the first Renewal
of Wild's Acquaintance with her Husband; 
but, tho' this Recapitulation was necessary
for the Information of our good Magistrate,
as it would be useless, and perhaps tedious,
to the Reader, we shall only repeat that
Part of her Story to which he is a Stranger,
beginning with what happened to her,
after Wild had been turned adrift in the
Boat, by the Captain of the French Privateer. 