


Wild proceeds to the highest Consummation
of human Greatness. 
The Day now drew nigh, when our
great Man was to exemplify the last
and noblest Act of Greatness, by which
any Hero can signalize himself. This was
the Day of Execution, or Consummation,
or Apotheosis, (for it is called by different
Names) which was to give our Hero an
Opportunity of facing Death and Damnation,
without any Fear in his Heart, or at
least without betraying any Symptoms of
it in his Countenance. A Completion of
Greatness which is heartily to be wished
to every great Man; nothing being
more worthy of Lamentation than when
Fortune, like a lazy Poet, winds up her
Catastrophe aukwardly, and bestowing too
little Care on her fifth Act, dismisses the
Hero with a sneaking and private Exit,
who had in the former Part of the Drama
performed such notable Exploits, as must
promise to every good Judge among the 

Spectators, a noble, public and exalted
End. 
But she was resolved to commit no such
Error in this Instance. Our Hero was too
much and too deservedly her Favourite, to
be neglected by her in his last Moments: 
Accordingly all Efforts for a Reprieve were
vain, and the Name of Wild stood at the
Head of those who were ordered for Execution. 
From the Time he gave over all Hopes
of Life, his Conduct was truly Great and
Admirable. Instead of shewing any Marks
of Dejection or Contrition, he rather infused
more Confidence and Assurance into his
Looks. He spent most of his Hours in
drinking with his Friends, and with the
good Man above commemorated. In one
of these Compotations, being asked, whether
he was afraid to die, he answered, D&wblank;n
me, it is only a Dance without Music. Another
Time, when one expressed some Sorrow
for his Misfortune, as he termed it,
he said, with great Fierceness, A Man can
die but once. Again, when one of his intimate 

Acquaintance hinted his Hopes, that
he would die like a Man. He cocked his
Hat in Defiance, and cried out greatly,
Zounds! who's afraid? 
Happy would it have been for Posterity,
could we have retrieved any entire Conversation
which passed at this Season, especially
between our Hero and his learned
Comforter; but we have searched many
Pasteboard Records in vain. 
On the Eve of his Apotheosis, Wild's Lady
desired to see him, to which he consented. 
This Meeting was at first very tender
on both Sides; but it could not continue
so: For unluckily some Hints of former
Miscarriages intervening, as particularly
when she asked him, how he could have used
her so barbarously once, as by calling her
B&wblank;? Whether such Language became
a Man, much less a Gentleman? Wild flew
into a violent Passion, and swore she was
the vilest of B&wblank;s, to upbraid him at
such a Season with an unguarded Word
spoke long ago. She replied, with many 

Tears, she was well enough served for her
Folly in visiting such a Brute; but she had
one Comfort however, that it would be the
last time he could ever treat her so; that
indeed she had some Obligation to him,
for that his Cruelty to her would reconcile
her to the Fate he was To-morrow to suffer,
and indeed, nothing but such Brutality
could have made the Consideration of his
shameful Death (so this weak Woman
called Hanging) which was now inevitable to
be born even without Madness. She then
proceeded to a Recapitulation of his Faults
in an exacter Order and with more perfect
Memory than one would have imagined
her capable of; and, it is probable, would
have rehearsed a complete Catalogue, had
not our Hero's Patience failed him, so that
with the utmost Fury and Violence, he
caught her by the Hair and kicked her, as
heartily as his Chains would suffer him, out
of the Room. 
At length, the Morning came, which
Fortune resolutely ordained for the Consummation
of our Hero's Greatness: He
had himself indeed modestly declined the 

public Honours she intended him, and had
taken a Quantity of Laudanum, in order to
retire quietly off the Stage; but we have
already observed in the course of our wonderful
History, that to struggle against this Lady's
Decrees is vain and impotent: And whether
she hath determined you shall be hanged
or be a Prime Minister, it is in either Case lost
Labour to resist. Laudanum, therefore, being
unable to stop the Breath of our Hero, which
the Fruit of Hemp-Seed and not the Spirit
of Poppy-Seed was to overcome, he was at the
usual Hour attended by the proper Gentlemen
appointed for that Purpose, and acquainted
that the Cart was ready. On this Occasion
he exerted that Greatness of Courage,
which hath been so much celebrated
in other Heroes; and knowing it was impossible
to resist, he gravely declared, he
would attend them; he then descended to
that Room where the Fetters of great
Men are knocked off, in a most solemn
and ceremonious Manner. Then shaking
Hands with his Friends (to wit, those who
were conducting him to the Tree) and
drinking their Healths in a Bumper of
Brandy, he ascended the Cart, where he was 

no sooner seated, than he received the Acclamations
of the Multitude, who were
highly ravished with his Greatness. 
The Cart now moved slowly on, being
preceded by a Troop of Horse Guards bearing
Javelins in their Hands, through Streets
lined with Crowds, all admiring the great
Behaviour of our Hero, who rode on sometimes
sighing, sometimes swearing, sometimes
singing or whistling, as his Humour
varied. 
When he came to the Tree of Glory,
he was welcomed with an universal Shout
of the People, who were there assembled in
prodigious Numbers, to behold a Sight
much more rare in popular Cities than one
would reasonably imagine it should be, viz.
the proper Catastrophe of a great
Man. 
But tho' Envy was, through Fear, obliged
to join the general Voice in Applause
on this Occasion, there were not wanting
some who maligned this Completion of
Glory, which was now about to be fulfilled 

to our Hero, and endeavoured to prevent
it by knocking him on the Head as he
stood under the Tree, while the Ordinary
was performing his last Office. They therefore
began to batter the Cart with Stones,
Brickbats, Dirt, and all Manner of mischievous
Weapons, some of which erroneously
playing on the Robes of the Ecclesiastic,
made him so expeditious in his Repetition,
that with wonderful Alacrity he had
ended almost in an Instant, and conveyed
himself into a Place of Safety in a Hackney
Coach where he waited the Conclusion
with the Temper of Mind described in
these Verses 

Suave Mari magno, turbantibus Æquora ventis,
E Terra alterius magnum spectare Laborem.
We must not however omit one Circumstance,
as it serves to shew the most admirable
Conservation of Character in our Hero
to his last Moment, which was, that
whilst the Ordinary was busy in his Ejaculations,
Wild, in the Midst of the Shower
of Stones, &c. which played upon him, applied
his Hands to the Parson's Pocket, and 

emptied it of his Bottle-Screw, which he
carried out of the World in his Hand. 
The Ordinary being now descended from
the Cart, Wild had just Opportunity to cast
his Eyes around the Crowd and give them
a hearty Curse, when immediately the
Horses moved on, and with universal Applause
our Hero swung out of this World. 
Thus fell Jonathan Wild the Great,
by a Death as glorious as his Life had been,
and which was so truly agreeable to it, that
the latter must have been deplorably maimed
and imperfect without the former; a
Death which hath been alone wanting to
complete the Characters of several ancient
and modern Heroes, whose Histories would
then have been read with much greater
Pleasure by the wisest in all Ages. Indeed
we could almost wish, that whenever Fortune
seems wantonly to deviate from her
Purpose and leave her Work imperfect in
this Particular, the Historian would indulge
himself in the Licence of Poetry and Romance,
and even do a Violence to Truth, to
oblige his Reader with a Page, which must 

be the most delightful in all his History,
and which could never fail of producing an
instructive Moral. 