


The Travellers proceed on their Journey,
and meet several Spirits, who
are coming into the Flesh. 
We now came to the Banks of the
great River Cocytus, where we
quitted our Vehicle, and past the Water in a
Boat, after which we were obliged to travel
on foot the rest of our Journey; and now
we met, for the first time, several Passengers
travelling to the World we had left, who informed
us they were Souls going into the
Flesh. 
The two first we met were walking Arm
in Arm in very close and friendly Conference; 
they informed us, that one of them was intended 

for a Duke, and the other for a Hackney
Coachman. As we had not yet arrived
at the Place where we were to deposite our
Passions, we were all surprized at the Familiarity,
which subsisted between Persons of
such different Degrees, nor could the grave
Lady help expressing her Astonishment at it. 
The future Coachman then replied with a
Laugh, that they had exchanged Lots: for that
the Duke had with his Dukedom drawn a
Shrew of a Wife, and the Coachman only a
single State. 
As we proceeded on our Journey, we met
a solemn Spirit walking alone with great
Gravity in his Countenance: our Curiosity
invited us, notwithstanding his Reserve, to ask
what Lot he had drawn. He answered with
a Smile, he was to have the Reputation of a
wise Man with 100000l. in his Pocket, and
that he was practicing the Solemnity, which
he was to act in the other World. 
A Little farther we met a Company of
very merry Spirits, whom we imagined by their
Mirth to have drawn some mighty Lot, but 

on enquiry, they informed us they were to be
Beggars. 
The farther we advanced, the greater
Numbers we met, and now we discovered
two large Roads leading different Ways, and
of very different Appearance; the one all
craggy with Rocks, full as it seemed of boggy
Grounds, and every where beset with Briars,
so that it was impossible to pass through it without
the utmost Danger and Difficulty; the
other, the most delightful imaginable, leading
through the most verdant Meadows, painted
and perfumed with all kinds of beautiful
Flowers; in short, the most wanton Imagination
could imagine nothing more lovely. 
Notwithstanding which, we were surprized
to see great Numbers crouding into the former,
and only one or two solitary Spirits
chusing the latter. On enquiry we were acquainted
that the bad Road was the way to
Greatness, and the other to Goodness. When
we exprest our surprize at the Preference given
to the former, we were acquainted that it
was chosen for the sake of the Music of
Drums and Trumpets, and the perpetual
Acclamations of the Mob; with which, those 

who travelled this way, were constantly saluted. 
We were told likewise, that there
were several noble Palaces to be seen, and
lodged in on this Road, by those who had
past through the Difficulties of it, (which
indeed many were not able to surmount) and
great Quantities of all sorts of Treasure to be
found in it; whereas the other had little inviting
more than the Beauty of the way,
scarce a handsome Building, save one greatly
resembling a certain House by the Bath, to
be seen during that whole Journey; and lastly,
that it was thought very scandalous and
mean-spirited to travel through this, and as
highly honourable and noble to pass by the
other. 
We now heard a violent Noise, when
casting our Eyes forwards, we perceived a
vast Number of Spirits advancing in pursuit of
one, whom they mocked and insulted with
all kinds of Scorn. I cannot give my Reader
a more adequate Idea of this Scene, than
by comparing it to an English Mob conducting
a Pick-pocket to the Water; or by supposing
that an incensed Audience at a Play-house
had unhappily possess'd themselves of the 

miserable damned Poet. Some laughed, some
hiss'd, some squawled, some groaned, some
bawled, some spit at him, some threw dirt at
him. It was impossible not to ask who or what
the wretched Spirit was, whom they treated in
this barbarous manner; when, to our great
Surprize, we were informed that it was a
King: we were likewise told, that this manner
of Behaviour was usual among the Spirits,
to those who drew the Lots of Emperors,
Kings, and other great Men, not from Envy
or Anger, but mere Derision and Contempt
of earthly Grandeur: That nothing was more
common, than for those who had drawn
these great Prizes, (as to us they seemed) to
exchange them with Taylors and Coblers; 
and that Alexander the Great and Diogenes
had formerly done so; he that was afterwards
Diogenes having originally fallen on the Lot
of Alexander. 
And now on a sudden, the Mockery
ceased, and the King Spirit having obtained
a Hearing, began to speak as follows: for we
were now near enough to hear him distinctly. 

‘Gentlemen,
I Am justly surprized at your treating me
in this manner; since whatever Lot I have
drawn, I did not chuse: if therefore it be
worthy of Derision, you should compassionate
me, for it might have fallen to any
of your shares. I know in how low a
Light the Station to which Fate hath assigned
me is considered here, and that,
when Ambition doth not support it, it becomes
generally so intolerable, that there is
scarce any other Condition for which it is
not gladly exchanged: for what Portion, in
the World to which we are going, is so
miserable as that of Care? Should I therefore
consider my self as become by this
Lot essentially your Superiour, and of a
higher Order of Being than the rest of my
Fellow-Creatures: Should I foolishly imagine
my self without Wisdom superiour to
the Wise, without Knowledge to the Learned,
without Courage to the Brave, and without
Goodness and Virtue to the Good and
Virtuous; surely so preposterous, so absurd
a Pride, would justly render me the Object
of Ridicule. But far be it from me to entertain 

it. And yet, Gentlemen, I prize
the Lot I have drawn, nor would I exchange
it with any of your's, seeing it is in
my eye so much greater than the rest. 
Ambition, which I own my self possest of,
teaches me this. Ambition, which makes
me covet Praise, assures me, that I shall enjoy
a much larger Proportion of it than can
fall within your power either to deserve or
obtain. I am then superiour to you all,
when I am able to do more good, and when
I execute that Power. What the Father
is to the Son, the Guardian to the Orphan,
or the Patron to his Client, that am I to
you. You are my Children, to whom I will
be a Father, a Guardian, and a Patron. 
Not one Evening in my long Reign (for so
it is to be) will I repose my self to rest,
without the glorious, the heart-warming Consideration,
that thousands that Night owe
their sweetest Rest to me. What a delicious
Fortune is it to him whose strongest Appetite
is doing good, to have every day the
Opportunity and the Power of satisfying it! 
If such a Man hath Ambition, how happy
is it for him to be seated so on high, that
every Act blazes abroad, and attracts to him 

Praises tainted with neither Sarcasm nor
Adulation; but such as the nicest and most
delicate Mind may relish? Thus therefore,
while you derive your Good from me,
I am your Superiour. If to my strict Distribution
of Justice you owe the Safety of
your Property from domestic Enemies: If
by my Vigilance and Valour you are protected
from foreign Foes: If by my Encouragement
of genuine Industry, every Science,
every Art which can embellish or sweeten
Life is produced and flourishes among you; 
will any of you be so insensible or ungrateful,
as to deny Praise and Respect to him, by
whose Care and Conduct you enjoy these
Blessings? I wonder not at the Censure
which so frequently falls on those in my Station:
but I wonder that those in my Station so
frequently deserve it. What strange Perverseness
of Nature! What wanton Delight in
Mischief must taint his Composition, who
prefers Danger, Difficulty and Disgrace, by doing
evil, to Safety, Ease and Honour, by doing
good? who refuses Happiness in the other
World, and Heaven in this, for Misery there,
and Hell here? But be assured, my Intentions
are different. I shall always endeavour the 

Ease, the Happiness, and the Glory of my
People, being confident that by so doing, I
take the most certain Method of procuring
them all to my self.’ —He then struck directly
into the Road of Goodness, and received
such a Shout of Applause, as I never remember
to have heard equalled. 
He was gone a little way, when a Spirit
limped after him, swearing he would fetch
him back. This Spirit, I was presently informed,
was one who had drawn the Lot of
his Prime Minister. 