


A very wonderful Chapter indeed; 
which, to those who have not read
many Voyages, may seem incredible; 
and which the Reader may
believe or not, as he pleases. 
“We had now proceeded a very
little Way on our next Day's
March, when one of the Sailors cried
out, he spied a Tower on our Left; a
second, looking that Way, said he saw
it move; and indeed so it did towards
us. We presently discovered it was an
Animal of an enormous Bigness, being
of the Elephantine Kind, but so large,
that the Elephant is to it in Size but as
the Crayfish to the Lobster. The Approach
of this vast Animal struck us all
with Terror. As for myself, I felt more
than I had done during our two Tempests; 
for I dreaded less being swallowed
by the unmerciful Ocean, than being
devoured by the Jaws of this Monster, 

which, with a Voice suitable to his Bulk,
now filled all the Wood with his bellowing. 
It was impossible to escape him
by Flight, nor had our Men much time
to consider what Means they might use
for their Defence. Our two Musqueteers
in an instant, therefore, resolved to
discharge their several Pieces at his Eyes,
the one agreeing to aim at the right, the
other at the left. They executed this
bold Resolution with such notable Success,
that the Beast was immediately deprived
of his Sight, the Bullets having
both luckily entred in at the Sight of
the Eyes; a very fortunate Accident for
us, the whole Dimensions of each Eye
being very near equal to the Capaciousness
of a large Hall. The Beast, which
now roared infinitely louder than before,
with the Anguish of the Wound fell to
the Ground. My Friend persuaded the
rest to depart as fast as we could, lest
some others, of the same kind, should
come to his Assistance, which might
prove fatal to us: But the Curiosity of
the Sailors was insatiable; they swore
they would go up to the Monster, and 

examine him; for they apprehended he
was mortally wounded by the Blow: 
Whereas in Reality Windsor Castle, which
our Beast was neither in Size nor Figure
much unlike, would have been in as
much Danger of being battered down by
a Musquet Shot, as this Monster was of
being killed by it. But I almost shudder
with the Remembrance of what I
am now going to relate; for indeed I
take it to be the strangest Instance of
that Intrepidity, so justly remarked in
our Seamen, which can be found on Record. 
In a Word then, one of our Musqueteers
coming up to the Beast as he lay
wallowing on the Ground, and perceiving
his Mouth wide open, marched directly
down his Throat. Had he not
declared his Intention to those near him,
we should have concluded, that he had
been swallowed by the Monster; but as
it was, we imagined him little better
than Felo de se, and gave over all
Thoughts of ever seeing him again, when
suddenly we heard the hollow Report of
a Gun, seemingly at a great Distance. 
One of the Sailors declared the Sound 

came from the Inside of the Animal,
nor had he sooner said so, than a River of
Blood began to issue out at his Mouth,
and shortly after the brave Sailor came
forth at another Passage, which I must
be excused from naming. He informed
us, that he had put the Muzzle of his
Gun against his Heart, and shot two
Bullets into it, which he perceived had
done his Business, and indeed the Monster
was absolutely dead. 
“As soon as the Blood ceased to flow
from his Mouth, our whole Company
marched rank and file through the Body; 
but I could by no means be prevailed
on to follow them, whether I looked
on it as an Indecency, (the Monster being
of the Male kind) or was afraid of making
my Clothes bloody, or from what
other Motive my Aversion arose, is not
necessary to determine. Two of our
Men, with much Labour, brought forth
the Heart. A small Piece of which we
broiled; but the Flesh was unsavoury,
being much coarser than the worst Neck
Beef. I must not take Leave of the 

Monster before I observe, that a whole
Lion was found in him undigested, and
which we concluded he had swallowed a
very little Time before we came up with
him. 
“We now quitted the Monster, and
saw, as we advanced through the Wood,
several wild Beasts, such as Lions,
Wolves, Tygers, and others of the common
Kind; but I must not omit a large
Reptile, we saw, on our third Day's
March, of the Colour and Form of a
Snake; but so immensely long, that he
extended near a Quarter of a Mile; a
Length to which his Largeness was disproportionate,
being no more than about
six times the Size of a moderate Ox. 
This Serpent would certainly have molested
us; but though he stirred as we
walked by his middle, he was fortunately
asleep as we past by his Eyes. This
Day we killed a Bird somewhat resembling
a Lark, but infinitely larger; for
we guest it could not weigh less than
thirty Stone. We drest half the Merry-thought
for our Dinner, and its Flavour 

was so excellent, that I myself for the
first time eat heartily. 
“The next Morning we saw a Fire at
a little Distance from us, when we conceived
ourselves drawing near some human
Habitation; but, on our nearer Approach,
we perceived a very beautiful Bird
just expiring in the Flames. This was
no other than the celebrated Phœnix, so
much spoke of, and so little known. 
We would not suffer such a Rarity to be
consumed; we therefore snatched it from
the Fire, and, being resolved to taste
this elegant Dish, we first picked his
Feathers off, and then roasted him; but
found the Flesh so far from delicious,
that it was greatly distasteful. The Captain
then ordered it to be thrown again
into the Fire, that it might follow its
own Method of propagating its Species. 
“Our Pork was now gone, and we
had nothing left but the Remainder of
the Lark to live on, which indeed would
have been sufficient for a Month's Provision, 

could we have preserved it from
tainting; but as we had no Salt, the extreme
Heat of the Climate soon made it
nauseous both to our Smell and Taste. 
Death now put on a more dreadful
Shape than any he had hitherto worn,
and starving appeared to us inevitable; 
for our Ammunition was all spent, and
we could flatter ourselves with no Likelihood
of finding the Traces of any human
Creature, from whom too, if
found, we apprehended much greater
Probability of Danger, than of Comfort
or Assistance. 
“We had now travelled two Days together
without any Sustenance, when,
coming forth from the Wood, we saw
just before us something resembling the
famous Stone-henge in Wiltshire, and
which we found to be a Bed of Pumpkins; 
but so large that one of them was
more than we could have eaten in two
Months. We scooped out the Inside
with some Tools we had with us, and
then crept all of us into the Shell,
which afforded us a cool Retreat from 

the scorching Beams of the Sun. The
Food was neither grateful nor nourishing; 
so that we soon quitted this Place,
and arrived at the bottom of a high and
steep Hill. I was become so faint with
the immoderate Fatigue of my Journey,
with the intense Heat of the Climate,
and with Hunger, that I threw myself
on the Ground, and declared I could go
no farther. One of the Sailors skipt
nimbly up the Hill, and, with the Assistance
of a speaking Trumpet, informed
us, that he saw a Town a very little
Way off. This News so comforted me,
and gave me such Strength, as well as
Spirits, that, with the Help of my old
Friend, and another who suffered me to
lean on them, I, with much Difficulty,
attained the Summit; but was so absolutely
overcome in climbing it, that I
had no longer sufficient Strength to support
my tottering Limbs, and was obliged
to lay myself again on the Ground; 
nor could they prevail on me to undertake
descending through a very thick
Wood into a Plain, at the End of which
indeed appeared some Houses; but at a 

much greater Distance than the Sailor
had assured us. The little Way, as he
had called it, seeming to me full twenty
Miles, nor was it, I believe, much less.” 