




In which Mr. Booth resumes his Story. 
‘If I am not mistaken, Madam,’ continued
Booth, ‘I was just going to
acquaint you with the Doctor's Opinion,
when we were interrupted by the
Keeper. 
‘The Doctor having heard Counsel on
both Sides, that is to say, Mrs. Harris
for my staying, and Miss Betty for my
going, at last delivered his own Sentiments. 
As for Amelia, she sat silent,
drown'd in her Tears; nor was I myself
in a much better Situation. 

“As the Commissions are not signed,” 
‘said the Doctor,’ “I think you may be
said to remain in your former Regiment; 
and therefore I think you ought
to go on this Expedition; your Duty
to your King and Country, whose
Bread you have eaten, requires it; and
this is a Duty of too high a Nature to
admit the least Deficiency. Regard to
your Character likewise requires your
going: For the World, which might
justly blame your staying at home if the
Case was even fairly stated, will not deal
so honestly by you: You must expect
to have every Circumstance against you
heightened, and most of what makes
for your Defence omitted; and thus you
will be stigmatiz'd as a Coward, without
any Palliation. As the malicious Disposition
of Mankind is too well known,
and the cruel Pleasure which they take
in destroying the Reputations of others; 
the Use we are to make of this Knowledge
is to afford no Handle to Reproach: 
For bad as the World is, it seldom
falls on any Man who hath not
given some flight Cause for Censure,
tho' this, perhaps, is often aggravated
Ten thousand Fold; and when we blame 

the Malice of the Aggravation, we
ought not to forget our own Imprudence
in giving the Occasion. Remember,
my Boy, your Honour is at stake; 
and you know how nice the Honour of
a Soldier is in these Cases. This is a
Treasure, which he must be your Enemy
indeed who would attempt to rob you
of. Therefore you ought to consider
every one as your Enemy, who by desiring
you to stay would rob you of your
Honour.” 
“Do you hear, that, Sister?” ‘cries Miss
Betty.’ –––“Yes, I do hear it,” ‘answered
Amelia, with more Spirit than I
ever saw her exert before,’ “and would
preserve his Honour at the Expence of
my Life. I will preserve it, if it should be
at that Expence; and since it be Dr. Harrison's
Opinion that he ought to go, I
give my Consent. Go, my dear Husband,” 
cry'd she, falling upon her Knees,
“may every Angel of Heaven guard and
preserve you.” –––‘I cannot repeat her
Words without being affected,’ said he,
wiping his Eyes, ‘the Excellence of that
Woman, no Words can paint; Miss Mathews,
she hath every Perfection in Human
Nature. 

‘I will not tire you with the Repetition
of any more that past on that Occasion; 
nor with the Quarrel that ensued between
Mrs. Harris and the Doctor; for
the old Lady could not submit to my
leaving her Daughter in her present Condition. 
She fell severely on the Army, and
cursed the Day in which her Daughter
was married to a Soldier, not sparing the
Doctor for having had some Share in the
Match. I will omit likewise the tender
Scene which past between Amelia and my
self previous to my Departure.’ 
‘Indeed I beg you will not,’ cried Miss
Mathews, ‘nothing delights me more than
Scenes of Tenderness. I should be glad
to know, if possible, every Syllable which
was uttered on both Sides.’ 
‘I will indulge you then,’ cries Booth,
‘as far as is in my Power. Indeed, I
believe, I am able to recollect much the
greatest Part; for the Impression is never
to be effaced from my Memory.’ 
He then proceeded as Miss Mathews
desired; but lest all our Readers should
not be of her Opinion, we will, according 

to our usual Custom, endeavour to accommodate
ourselves to every Taste, and
shall therefore place this Scene in a Chapter
by itself, which we desire all our Readers
who do not love, or who perhaps do not
know the Pleasure of Tenderness, to pass
over; since they may do this without any
Prejudice to the Thread of the Narrative. 



Containing a Scene of the tender Kind. 
‘The Doctor, Madam,’ continued
Booth, ‘spent his Evening at Mrs.
Harris's House, where I sat with him
whilst he smoak'd his Pillow Pipe, as his
Phrase is. Amelia was retired above half
an Hour, to her Chamber, before I went
to her. At my Entrance, I found her
on her Knees, a Posture in which I never
disturbed her. In a few Minutes she
arose, came to me, and embracing me,
said, she had been praying for Resolution
to support the cruellest Moment she had
ever undergone, or could possibly undergo. 
I reminded her how much more
bitter a Farewell would be on a Death-Bed,
when we never could meet in this 

World, at least, again. I then endeavour'd
to lessen all those Objects which
tempted her most, and particularly the
Danger I was to encounter; upon which
Head I seemed a little to comfort her;––– 
but the probable Length of my Absence,
and the Length of my Voyage were Circumstances
which no Oratory of mine
could even palliate.’ “Oh! Heavens,” 
said she, bursting into Tears, “can I
bear to think that Hundreds, Thousands,
for ought I know, of Miles or Leagues,
that Lands and Seas are between us. 
What is the Prospect from that Mount
in our Garden, where I have sat so
many happy Hours with my Billy? what is
the Distance between that and the farthest
Hill which we see from thence, compared
to the Distance which will be between
us? You cannot wonder at this
Idea; you must remember, my Billy, at
this Place, this very Thought came formerly
into my foreboding Mind. I
then begged you to leave the Army. 
Why would you not comply? Did I not
tell you then that the smallest Cottage
we could survey from the Mount, would
be with you a Paradise to me; it would
be so still, why can't my Billy think so? 
Am I so much his Superior in Love? 

Where is the Dishonour, Billy? or if
there be any, will it reach our Ears in
our little Hutt? Are Glory and Fame,
and not his Amelia, the Happiness of
my Husband? Go then purchase them
at my Expence. You will pay a few
Sighs, perhaps a few Tears at parting,
and then new Scenes will drive away the
Thoughts of poor Amelia from your Bosom; 
but what Assistance shall I have in
my Affliction? Not that any Change of
Scene could drive you one Moment from
my Remembrance; yet here every Object
I behold will place your lov'd Idea
in the liveliest Manner before my Eyes. 
This is the Bed in which you have reposed; 
that is the Chair on which you
sat. Upon these Boards you have stood. 
These Books you have read to me. Can
I walk among our Beds of Flowers, without
viewing your Favourites, nay those
which you have planted with your own
Hands? Can I see one Beauty from our
beloved Mount, which you have not
pointed out to me?” –––‘Thus she went
on, the Woman, Madam, you see still
prevailing.’ –––‘Since you mention it,’ 
says Miss Mathews, with a Smile, ‘I own
the same Observation occurred to me. 
It is too natural to us to consider ourselves 

only, Mr. Booth.’ –––‘You shall
hear,’ he cry'd,–––‘At last, the Thoughts
of her present Condition suggested themselves.’ 
—“But if,” said she, “my
Situation, even in Health, will be so
intolerable, how shall I, in the Danger and
Agonies of Child-birth, support your
Absence!” –––‘Here she stop'd, and
looking on me with all the Tenderness
imaginable, cried out,’ “And am I
then such a Wretch to wish for your
Presence at such a Season; ought I not
to rejoice that you are out of the Hearing
of my Cries, or the Knowledge of
my Pains? If I die, will you not have
escaped the Horrors of a Parting Ten
thousand Times more dreadful than
this? Go, go, my Billy; the very Circumstance
which made me most dread
your Departure, hath perfectly reconciled
me to it. I perceive clearly
now that I was only wishing to support
my own Weakness with your Strength,
and to relieve my own Pains at the Price
of yours. Believe me, my Love, I am
ashamed of myself.” –––‘I caught her
in my Arms with Raptures not to be exprest
in Words, called her my Heroine; 
sure none ever better deserved that Name; 
after which we remained for sometime 

speechless, and lock'd in each other's
Embraces.’ –––‘I am convinced,’ said Miss
Mathews, with a Sigh, ‘there are Moments
in Life worth purchasing with Worlds.’–– 
‘At length the fatal Morning came. I
endeavoured to hide every Pang of my
Heart, and to wear the utmost Gaiety
in my Countenance. Amelia acted the
same Part. In these assumed Characters
we met the Family at Breakfast; at their
Breakfast, I mean: for we were both full
already. The Doctor had spent above an
Hour that Morning in Discourse with
Mrs. Harris, and had in some Measure
reconciled her to my Departure. He
now made use of every Art to relieve the
poor distressed Amelia; not by inveighing
against the Folly of Grief, or by seriously
advising her not to grieve; both which
were sufficiently performed by Miss Betty. 
The Doctor, on the contrary, had Recourse
to every Means which might cast
a Veil over the Idea of Grief, and raise
comfortable Images in my Angel's Mind. 
He endeavoured to lessen the supposed
Length of my Absence, by discoursing
on Matters which were more distant in
Time. He said, he intended next Year
to rebuild a Part of his Parsonage-house. 

“—And you, Captain,” says he, “shall
lay the Corner-stone, I promise you;” 
with many other Instances of the like
Nature, which produced, I believe, some
good Effect on us both. 
‘Amelia spoke but little; indeed more
Tears than Words dropt from her; however,
she seemed resolved to bear her Affliction
with Resignation. But when the
dreadful News arrived that the Horses
were ready, and I, having taken my
Leave of all the rest, at last approached
her; she was unable to support the Conflict
with Nature any longer; and clinging
round my Neck, she cried,—“Farewel,
farewel for ever: for I shall never
never, see you more.” At which Words
the Blood entirely forsook her lovely
Cheeks, and she became a lifeless Corps
in my Arms. 
‘Amelia continued so long motionless,
that the Doctor, as well as Mrs. Harris,
began to be under the most terrible Apprehensions:
so they informed me afterwards; 
for at that time I was incapable
of making any Observation. I had indeed
very little more Use of my Senses
than the dear Creature whom I supported. 

At length, however, we were all delivered
from our Fears; and Life again
visited the loveliest Mansion that human
Nature ever afforded it. 
‘I had been, and yet was, so terrified
with what had happened, and Amelia
continued yet so weak and ill, that I determined,
whatever might be the Consequence,
not to leave her that Day: which
Resolution she was no sooner acquainted
with, than she fell on her Knees, crying,
Good Heaven, I thank thee for this Reprieve
at least. Oh! that every Hour
of my future Life could be crammed into
this dear Day. 
‘Our good Friend the Doctor remained
with us. He said, he had intended to
visit a Family in some Affliction; but I
don't know, says he, why I should ride
a dozen Miles after Affliction, when
we have enough here. Of all Mankind
the Doctor is the best of Comforters. As
his excessive Good-nature makes him take
vast Delight in the Office; so his great
Penetration into the human Mind, joined
to his great Experience, renders him the
most wonderful Proficient in it; and
he so well knows when to sooth, when 

to reason, and when to ridicule, that he
never applies any of those Arts improperly,
which is almost universally the
Case with the Physicians of the Mind,
and which it requires very great Judgment
and Dexterity to avoid. 
‘The Doctor principally applied himself
to ridiculing the Dangers of the
Siege, in which he succeeded so well, that
he sometimes forced a Smile even into
the Face of Amelia. But what most comforted
her, were the Arguments he used
to convince her of the Probability of
my speedy, if not immediate Return. 
He said, the general Opinion was, that
the Place would be taken before our Arrival
there. In which Case, we should
have nothing more to do, than to make
the best of our way Home again. 
‘Amelia was so lulled by these Arts,
that she passed the Day much better than
I expected. Though the Doctor could
not make Pride strong enough to conquer
Love; yet, he exalted the former
to make some Stand against the latter; 
insomuch that my poor Amelia, I believe
more than once, flattered herself to speak 

the Language of the World, that her
Reason had gained an entire Victory over
her Passion; till Love brought up a Reinforcement,
if I may use that Term, of
tender Ideas, and bore down all before
him. 
‘In the Evening, the Doctor and I
passed another half Hour together, when
he proposed to me to endeavour to leave
Amelia asleep in the Morning, and promised
me to be at Hand when she awaked,
and to support her with all the Assistance
in his Power. He added, That
nothing was more foolish, than for Friends
to take Leave of each other. It is true
indeed, says he, in the common Acquaintance
and Friendship of the World,
this is a very harmless Ceremony; but
between two Persons, who really love
each other, the Church of Rome never
invented a Penance half so severe as this,
which we absurdly impose on ourselves. 
‘I greatly approved the Doctor's Proposal; 
thanked him, and promised, if
possible, to put it in Execution. He then
shook me by the Hand, and wished me
heartily well, saying, in his blunt Way; 
“Well, Boy, I hope to see thee crowned 

with Laurels at thy Return; one Comfort
I have, at least, that Stone Walls
and a Sea will prevent thee from running
away.”’ 
‘When I had left the Doctor, I repaired
to my Amelia, whom I found in her
Chamber, employed in a very different
Manner from what she had been the
preceding Night; she was busy in packing
up some Trinkets in a Casket, which
she desired me to carry with me. This
Casket was her own Work, and she had
just fastened it as I came to her. 
‘Her Eyes very plainly discovered what
had passed while she was ingaged in her
Work; however, her Countenance was
now serene, and she spoke, at least,
with some Chearfulness. But after some
time, “You must take Care of this Casket,
Billy, said she.” —“You must indeed,
Billy—for—”Here Passion almost choaked
her, till a Flood of Tears gave her Relief,
and then she proceeded—“For I
shall be the happiest Woman that ever
was born when I see it again.” —I told
her, with the Blessing of God that Day
would soon come.’ “Soon!” answered 

she,—“No, Billy, not soon; a Week is an
Age:—but yet the happy Day may
come. It shall, it must, it will! —Yes,
Billy, we shall meet never to part again:
–––even in this World I hope”––––‘Pardon
my Weakness, Miss Mathews, but
upon my Soul I cannot help it,’ cried he,
wiping his Eyes—‘Well, I wonder at
your Patience, and I will try it no longer. 
Amelia, tired out with so long a Struggle
between Variety of Passions, and having
not closed her Eyes during three successive
Nights, towards the Morning fell
into a profound Sleep. In which Sleep I
left her–––and having drest myself with all
the Expedition imaginable, singing, whistling,
hurrying, attempting by every Method
to banish Thought, I mounted my
Horse, which I had over-night ordered
to be ready, and galloped away from
that House where all my Treasure was
deposited. 
‘Thus, Madam, I have, in Obedience
to your Commands, run through a Scene,
which if it hath been tiresome to you,
you must yet acquit me of having obtruded
upon you. This I am convinced
of, that no one is capable of tasting such
a Scene, who hath not a Heart full of 

Tenderness, and perhaps not even then,
unless he hath been in the same Situation.’ 



In which Mr. Booth sets forward on his
Journey. 
‘Well, Madam, we have now
taken our Leave of Amelia. I
rode a full Mile before I once suffered
myself to look back; but now being
come to the Top of a little Hill, the last
Spot I knew which could give me a
Prospect of Mrs. Harris's House, my
Resolution failed; I stopt and cast my
Eyes backward. Shall I tell you what I
felt at that Instant? I do assure you I am
not able. So many tender Ideas crowded
at once into my Mind, that, if I may
use the Expression, they almost dissolved
my Heart. And now, Madam, the
most unfortunate Accident came first
into my Head. This was, that I had
in the Hurry and Confusion left the dear
Casket behind me. The Thought of
going back at first suggested itself; but
the Consequences of that were too apparent. 
I therefore resolved to send my
Man, and in the mean time to ride on 

softly on my Road. He immediately
executed my Orders, and after some time,
feeding my Eyes with that delicious and
yet Heart-felt Prospect, I at last turned my
Horse to descend the Hill, and proceeded
about a hundred Yards, when, considering
with myself, that I should lose no
time by a second Indulgence, I again
turned back, and once more feasted my
Sight with the same painful Pleasure, till
my Man returned, bringing me the
Casket, and an Account that Amelia still
continued in the sweet Sleep I left her. ––– 
I now suddenly turned my Horse for the
last time, and with the utmost Resolution
pursued my Journey. 
‘I perceived my Man at his Return— 
But before I mention any thing of him,
it may be proper, Madam, to acquaint
you who he was. He was the Foster-brother
of my Amelia. This young Fellow
had taken it into his Head to go into
the Army; and he was desirous to
serve under my Command. The Doctor
consented to discharge him; his Mother
at last yielded to his Importunities; 
and I was very easily prevailed on to list
one of the handsomest young Fellows in
England. 

‘You will easily believe I had some little
Partiality to one whose Milk Amelia had
sucked; but as he had never seen the
Regiment, I had no great Opportunity
to shew him any great Mark of Favour. 
Indeed he waited on me as my Servant; 
and I treated him with all the Tenderness
which can be used to one in that
Station. 
‘When I was about to change into the
Horse-guards, the poor Fellow began to
droop, fearing that he should no longer
be in the same Corps with me, tho' certainly
that would not have been the Case. 
However, he had never mentioned one
Word of his Dissatisfaction. —He is indeed
a Fellow of a noble Spirit; but
when he heard that I was to remain where
I was, and that we were to go to Gibraltar
together, he fell into Transports
of Joy little short of Madness. In short,
the poor Fellow had imbibed a very
strong Affection for me; tho' this was
what I knew nothing of till long after. 
‘When he returned to me then, as I
was saying, with the Casket, I observed
his Eyes all over blubbered with Tears. 

I rebuked him a little too rashly on this
Occasion. Heyday! says I, what is the
Meaning of this? I hope I have not a
Milksop with me. If I thought you
would shew such a Face to the Enemy, I
would leave you behind. —Your Honour
need not fear that, answered he, I shall
find no Body there that I shall love well
enough to make me cry. I was highly
pleased with this Answer, in which I
thought I could discover both Sense and
Spirit. I then asked him what had occasioned
those Tears since he had left me; 
(for he had no Sign of any at that time)
and whether he had seen his Mother at
Mrs. Harris's. He answered in the Negative,
and begged that I would ask him
no more Questions; adding, that he was
not very apt to cry, and he hoped he
should never give me such another Opportunity
of blaming him. I mention
this only as an Instance of his Affection
towards me: for I never could account
for those Tears, any otherwise than by
placing them to the Account of that
Distress in which he left me at that time. 
We travelled full forty Miles that Day
without baiting, when arriving at the Inn
where I intended to rest that Night, I retired
immediately to my Chamber, with 

my dear Amelia's Casket, the opening
which was the nicest Repast, and to which
every other Hunger gave way. 
‘It is impossible to mention to you all
the little Matters with which Amelia had
furnished this Casket. It contained Medicines
of all Kinds, which her Mother,
who was the Lady Bountiful of that
Country, had supplied her with. The
most valuable of all to me was a Lock of
her dear Hair, which I have from that
time to this worn in my Bosom. What
would I have then given for a little Picture
of my Angel, which she had lost
from her Chamber about a Month before?
and which we had the highest Reason in
the World to imagine her Sister had taken
away: for the Suspicion lay only between
her and Amelia's Maid, who was of all
Creatures the honestest, and whom her
Mistress had often trusted with Things of
much greater Value: for the Picture,
which was set in Gold, and had two or
three little Diamonds round it, was worth
about twelve Guineas only; whereas
Amelia left Jewels in her Care of much
greater Value.’ 
‘Sure,’ cries Miss Mathews, ‘she could
not be such a paultry Pilferer.’ 

‘Not on account of the Gold or the
Jewels,’ cries Booth. ‘We imputed it to
mere Spite, with which I assure you she
abounds; and she knew that next to
Amelia herself, there was nothing which
I valued so much as this little Picture:
for such a Resemblance did it bear of the
Original, that Hogarth himself did never,
I believe, draw a stronger Likeness Spite
therefore was the only Motive to this
cruel Depredation; and indeed her Behaviour
on the Occasion sufficiently convinced
us both of the Justice of our Suspicion,
tho' we neither of us durst accuse
her; and she herself had the Assurance to
insist very strongly (tho' she could not
prevail) with Amelia to turn away her
innocent Maid, saying, she would not
live in the House with a Thief.’ 
Miss Mathews now discharged some
Curses on Miss Betty, not much worth repeating,
and then Mr. Booth proceeded in
his Relation. 




A Sea-piece. 
‘The next Day we joined the Regiment,
which was soon after to embark. 
Nothing but Mirth and Jollity
were in the Countenance of every Officer
and Soldier; and as I now met several
Friends whom I had not seen for above a
Year before, I passed several happy
Hours, in which poor Amelia's Image
seldom obtruded itself to interrupt my
Pleasure. To confess the Truth, dear
Miss Mathews, the tenderest of Passions
is capable of subsiding; nor is Absence
from our dearest Friends so unsupportable
as it may at first appear. Distance
of Time and Place do really cure what
they seem to aggravate; and taking
Leave of our Friends resembles taking
Leave of the World, concerning which
it hath been often said, that it is not
Death but Dying which is terrible.’ — 
Here Miss Mathews burst into a Fit of
Laughter, and cried, ‘I sincerely ask
your Pardon; but I cannot help laughing
at the Gravity of your Philosophy.’ 
Booth answered, that the Doctrine of the 

Passions had been always his favourite
Study; that he was convinced every Man
acted entirely from that Passion which was
uppermost; ‘Can I then think,’ said he,
‘without entertaining the utmost Contempt
for myself, that any Pleasure upon Earth
could drive the Thoughts of Amelia one
Instant from my Mind? 
‘At length we embarked aboard a
Transport, and sailed for Gibraltar; but
the Wind, which was at first fair, soon
chopped about; so that we were obliged,
for several Days, to beat to Windward,
as the Sea Phrase is. During this time
the Taste which I had of a Sea-faring
Life did not appear extremely agreeable. 
We rolled up and down in a little narrow
Cabbin, in which were three Officers,
all of us extremely Sea-sick; our Sickness
being much aggravated by the
Motion of the Ship, by the View of
each other, and by the Stench of the
Men. But this was but a little Taste indeed
of the Misery which was to follow:
for we were got about six Leagues to
the Westward of Scilly, when a violent
Storm arose at North-east, which soon
raised the Waves to the Height of Mountains. 
The Horror of this is not to be 

adequately described to those who have
never seen the like. The Storm began
in the Evening, and as the Clouds
brought on the Night apace, it was soon
entirely dark; nor had we during many
Hours any other Light than what was
caused by the jarring Elements, which
frequently sent forth Flashes, or rather
Streams of Fire; and whilst these presented
the most dreadful Objects to our
Eyes, the roaring of the Winds, the
dashing of the Waves against the Ship
and each other, formed a Sound altogether
as horrible for our Ears; while our Ship,
sometimes lifted up as it were to the
Skies, and sometimes swept away at once
as into the lowest Abyss, seemed to be
the Sport of the Winds and Seas. The
Captain himself almost gave all for lost,
and exprest his Apprehension of being
inevitably cast on the Rocks of Scilly,
and beat to Pieces. And now, while
some on board were addressing themselves
to the Supreme Being, and others applying
for Comfort to strong Liquors,
my whole Thoughts were entirely engaged
by my Amelia. A thousand tender
Ideas crowded into my Mind. I can
truly say, that I had not a single Consideration
about myself, in which she was not 

concerned. Dying to me was leaving
her, and the Fear of never seeing her
more was a Dagger stuck in my Heart. 
Again, all the Terrors with which this
Storm, if it reached her Ears, must fill
her gentle Mind on my Account, and
the Agonies which she must undergo,
when she heard of my Fate, gave me
such intolerable Pangs, that I now repented
my Resolution, and wished, I own
I wished, that I had taken her Advice, and
preferred Love and a Cottage to all the
dazzling Charms of Honour. 
‘While I was tormenting myself with
those Meditations, and had concluded
myself as certainly lost, the Master came
into the Cabbin, and with a chearful
Voice, assured us that we had escaped
the Danger, and that we had certainly
past to the Westward of the Rock. This
was comfortable News to all present; and
my Captain, who had been some time
on his Knees, leapt suddenly up and
testified his Joy with a great Oath. 
‘A Person unused to the Sea would
have been astonished at the Satisfaction
which now discovered itself in the
Master or in any on board: for the Storm 

still raged with great Violence, and the
Day-light which now appeared, presented
us with Sights of Horror sufficient to terrify
Minds which were not absolute Slaves to
the Passion of Fear; but so great is the
Force of Habit, that what inspires a
Landman with the highest Apprehension
of Danger, gives not the least Concern
to a Sailor, to whom Rocks and Quicksands
are almost the only Objects of Terror. 
‘The Master, however, was a little
mistaken in the present Instance; for he
had not left the Cabbin above an Hour,
before my Man came running to me,
and acquainted me that the Ship was
half full of Water; that the Sailors were
going to hoist out the Boat and save
themselves, and begged me to come
that Moment along with him, as I tendered
my Preservation. With this Account,
which was conveyed to me
in a Whisper, I acquainted both the
Captain and Ensign; and we all together
immediately mounted the Deck, where
we found the Master making use of all
his Oratory to persuade the Sailors that
the Ship was in no Danger; and at the
same time employing all his Authority 

to set the Pumps a-going, which he assured
them would keep the Water under,
and save his dear Lovely Peggy, (for that
was the Name of the Ship) which he
swore he loved as dearly as his own
Soul. 
‘Indeed this sufficiently appeared; for
the Leak was so great, and the Water
flowed in so plentifully, that his Lovely
Peggy was half filled, before he could be
brought to think of quitting her; but
now the Boat was brought along-side the
Ship; and the Master himself, notwithstanding
all his Love for her, quitted his
Ship; and leapt into the Boat. Every
Man present attempted to follow his Example,
when I heard the Voice of my
Servant roaring forth my Name in a
Kind of Agony. I made directly to the
Ship Side, but was too late: for the
Boat being already over laden put directly
off. And now, Madam, I am going
to relate to you an Instance of heroic
Affection in a poor Fellow towards
his Master, to which Love itself, even
among Persons of superior Education,
can produce but few similar Instances. 
My poor Man being unable to get me
with him into the Boat, leapt suddenly 

into the Sea and swam back to the Ship; 
and when I gently rebuked him for his
Rashness, he answered, he chose rather
to die with me, than to live to carry the
Account of my Death to my Amelia; at
the same time bursting into a Flood of
Tears, he cried, “Good Heavens! what
will that poor Lady feel when she hears
of this!” ‘This tender Concern for my
dear Love endeared the poor Fellow
more to me than the gallant Instance
which he had just before given of his
Affection towards myself. 
‘And now, Madam, my Eyes were
shocked with a Sight, the Horror of
which can scarce be imagined: for the
Boat had scarce got four hundred Yards
from the Ship, when it was swallowed up
by the merciless Waves, which now ran so
high, that out of the Number of Persons
which were in the Boat none recovered the
Ship; tho' many of them we saw miserably
perish before our Eyes, some of
them very near us, without any Possibility
of giving them the least Assistance. 
‘But whatever we felt for them, we felt,
I believe, more for ourselves, expecting
every Minute when we should share the 

same Fate. Among the rest one of our
Officers appeared quite stupified with
Fear. I never indeed saw a more miserable
Example of the great Power of
that Passion: I must not, however,
omit doing him Justice, by saying that I
afterwards saw the same Man behave well
in an Engagement, in which he was
wounded. Tho' there likewise he was
said to have betrayed the same Passion of
Fear in his Countenance, and somewhere
else too, which I cannot so properly name
before you. 
‘The other of our Officers was no less
stupified (if I may so express myself)
with Fool-hardiness, and seemed almost
insensible of his Danger. To say the
Truth, I have, from this and some other
Instances which I have seen, been almost
inclined to think, that the Courage as
well as Cowardice of Fools proceeds from
not knowing what is or what is not the
proper Object of Fear: Indeed, we
may account for the extreme Hardiness
of some Men, in the same Manner as for
the Terrors of Children at a Bugbear. 
The Child knows not but that the Bugbear
is the proper Object of Fear, the Blockhead
knows not that a Cannon Ball is so. 

‘As to the remaining Part of the Ship's
Crew, and the Soldiery, most of them
were dead drunk; and the rest were endeavouring,
as fast as they could, to prepare
for Death in the same Manner. 
‘In this dreadful Situation we were
taught that no human Condition should
inspire Men with absolute Despair: for
as the Storm had ceased for some time,
the Swelling of the Sea began considerably
to abate; and we now perceived the
Man of War which convoyed us, at no
great Distance a-Stern. Those aboard
her easily perceived our Distress, and
made towards us. When they came
pretty near, they hoisted out two
Boats to our Assistance. These no sooner
approached the Ship, than they were
instantaneously filled, and I myself got a
Place in one of them, chiefly by the
Aid of my honest Servant, of whose Fidelity
to me on all Occasions I cannot
speak or think too highly. Indeed I got
into the Boat so much the more easily as
a great Number on board the Ship were
rendered by Drink incapable of taking
any Care for themselves. There was
time, however, for the Boat to pass and
repass; so that when we came to call 

over Names, three only, of all that remained
in the Ship, after the Loss of her
own Boat, were missing. 
‘The Captain, Ensign, and myself were
received with many Congratulations by
our Officers on board the Man of War. 
—The Sea Officers too, all except the
Captain, paid us their Compliments, tho'
these were of the rougher Kind, and not
without several Jokes on our Escape. 
As for the Captain himself, we scarce
saw him during many Hours; and when he
appeared he presented a View of Majesty
beyond any that I had ever seen. The
Dignity which he preserved, did indeed
give me rather the Idea of a Mogul, or
a Turkish Emperor, than of any of the
Monarchs of Christendom. To say the
Truth, I could resemble his Walk on the
Deck to nothing but to the Image of
Captain Gulliver strutting among the Lilliputians; 
he seemed to think himself a
Being of an Order superior to all around
him, and more especially to us of the
Land Service. Nay such was the Behaviour
of all the Sea Officers and Sailors
to us and our Soldiers, that instead of
appearing to be Subjects of the same
Prince, engaged in one Quarrel, and 

joined to support one Cause; we Land-Men
rather seemed to be Captives on
board an Enemy's Vessel. This is a
grievous Misfortune, and often proves so
fatal to the Service, that it is great Pity
some Means could not be found of curing
it.’ 
Here Mr. Booth stopt a while, to take
Breath. We will therefore give the same
Refreshment to the Reader. 



The Arrival of Booth at Gibraltar, with what
there befel him. 
‘The Adventures,’ continued Booth,
‘which happened to me from this
Day till my Arrival at Gibraltar, are not
worth recounting to you. After a
Voyage, the Remainder of which was
tolerably prosperous, we arrived in that
Garrison, the natural Strength of which
is so well known to the whole World. 
‘About a Week after my Arrival, it
was my Fortune to be ordered on a Sally-Party,
in which my left Leg was broke
with a Musket Ball; and I should most 

certainly have either perish'd miserably,
or must have owed my Preservation to
some of the Enemy, had not my faithful
Servant carried me off on his Shoulders,
and afterwards, with the Assistance of one
of his Comrades, brought me back into
the Garrison. 
‘The Agony of my Wound was so great,
that it threw me into a Fever, from
whence my Surgeon apprehended much
Danger. I now began again to feel for
my Amelia, and for myself on her Account: 
And the Disorder of my Mind
occasioned by such melancholy Contemplations,
very highly aggravated the Distemper
of my Body; insomuch that it
would probably have proved fatal, had it
not been for the Friendship of one Captain
James, an Officer of our Regiment,
and an old Acquaintance, who is undoubtedly
one of the pleasantest Companions,
and one of the best-natured Men
in the World. This worthy Man, who
had a Head and a Heart perfectly adequate
to every Office of Friendship, stay'd
with me almost Day and Night during
my Illness; and by strengthening my
Hopes, raising my Spirits, and cheering 

my Thoughts, preserved me from Destruction. 
‘The Behaviour of this Man alone is
a sufficient Proof of the Truth of my
Doctrine, that all Men act entirely from
their Passions; for Bob James can never
be supposed to act from any Motive of
Virtue or Religion; since he constantly
laughs at both; and yet his Conduct towards
me alone demonstrates a Degree
of Goodness, which, perhaps, none of
the Votaries of either Virtue or Religion
can equal.’ 
‘You need not take much Pains,’ answered
Miss Mathews, with a Smile, ‘to
convince me of your Doctrine. I have
been always an Advocate for the same. 
I look upon the two Words you mention,
to serve only as Cloaks under which
Hypocrisy may be the better enabled to
cheat the World. I have been of that
Opinion ever since I read that charming
Fellow Mandevil.’ 
‘Pardon me, Madam,’ answered Booth,
‘I hope you do not agree with Mandevil
neither, who hath represented human
Nature as a Picture of the highest Deformity. 

He hath left out of his System
the best Passion which the Mind can
possess, and attempts to derive the Effects
or Energies of that Passion, from the
base Impulses of Pride or Fear. Whereas,
it is as certain that Love exists in the
Mind of Man, as that its opposite Hatred
doth, and the same Reasons will equally
prove the Existence of the one as
the Existence of the other.’ 
‘I don't know, indeed,’ replied the Lady,
‘I never thought much about the
Matter. This I know, that when I read
Mandevil, I thought all he said was true; 
and I have been often told, that he
proves Religion and Virtue to be only
mere Names. However, if he denies
there is any such Thing as Love, that is
most certainly wrong. —I am afraid I can
give him the Lye myself.’ 
‘I will join with you, Madam, in that,’ 
answered Booth, ‘at any Time.’ 
‘Will you join with me?’ answered she,
looking eagerly at him—‘O Mr. Booth, I
know not what I was going to say— 
What—Where did you leave off? —I 

would not interrupt you—but I am impatient
to know something.’ 
‘What, Madam?’ cries Booth, ‘if I
can give you any Satisfaction’— 
‘No, no,’ said she, ‘I must hear all,
I would not for the World break the
Thread of your Story—Besides, I
am afraid to ask—Pray, pray, Sir, go
on.’ 
‘Well, Madam,’ cries Booth, ‘I
think I was mentioning the extraordinary
Acts of Friendship done me by Captain
James; nor can I help taking Notice of the
almost unparallel'd Fidelity of poor Atkinson
(for that was my Man's Name)
who was not only constant in the Assiduity
of his Attendance, but during the
Time of my Danger demonstrated a
Concern for me which I can hardly account
for, as my prevailing on his Captain
to make him a Serjeant was the first
Favour he ever received at my Hands,
and this did not happen till I was almost
perfectly recovered of my broken Leg. 
Poor Fellow! I shall never forget the
extravagant Joy his Halbert gave him; 
I remember it the more because it was 

one of the happiest Days of my own
Life; for it was upon this Day that I
received a Letter from my dear Amelia,
after a long Silence, acquainting me that
she was out of all Danger from her Lying-in. 
‘I was now once more able to perform
my Duty; when (so unkind was the
Fortune of War) the second Time I
mounted Guard, I received a violent
Contusion from the bursting of a Bomb. 
I was felled to the Ground, where I lay
breathless by the Blow, till honest Atkinson
came to my Assistance, and conveyed
me to my Room, where a Surgeon immediately
attended me. 
‘The Injury I had now received, was
much more dangerous in my Surgeon's
Opinion than the former; it caused me to
spit Blood, and was attended with a Fever,
and other bad Symptoms; so that
very fatal Consequences were apprehended. 
‘In this Situation the Image of my Amelia
haunted me Day and Night; and
the Apprehension of never seeing her more
were so intolerable, that I had Thoughts 

of resigning my Commission, and returning
home, weak as I was, that I might
have, at least, the Satisfaction of dying
in the Arms of my Love. Captain
James, however, persisted in dissuading
me from any such Resolution. He told
me my Honour was too much concerned,
attempted to raise my Hopes of Recovery
to the utmost of his Power; 
but chiefly he prevailed on me by suggesting,
that if the worst which I apprehended,
should happen, it was much better
for Amelia, that she should be absent
than present in so melancholy an Hour.’ 
“I know,” cry'd he, “the extreme Joy
which must arise in you from meeting
again with Amelia, and the Comfort of
expiring in her Arms; but consider
what she herself must endure upon the
dreadful Occasion, and you would not
wish to purchase any Happiness at the
Price of so much Pain to her.” ‘This
Argument, at length, prevailed on me; 
and it was after many long Debates resolved,
that she should not even know
my present Condition till my Doom
either for Life or Death was absolutely
fixed.’ 

‘Oh! Heavens! how great! how generous!’ 
cried Miss Mathews. ‘Booth,
thou art a noble Fellow; and I scarce
think there is a Woman upon Earth
worthy so exalted a Passion.’ 
Booth made a modest Answer to the
Compliment which Miss Mathews had paid
him. This drew more Civilities from the
Lady; and these again more Acknowledgments. 
All which we shall pass by, and
proceed with our History. 



Containing Matters which will please some
Readers. 
‘Two Months, and more, had I
continued in a State of Incertainty,
sometimes with more flattering,
and sometimes with more alarming Symptoms; 
when one Afternoon poor Atkinson
came running into my Room, all pale
and out of Breath, and begged me not to
be surprised at his News. I asked him
eagerly what was the Matter, and if it
was any thing concerning Amelia? –––I had
scarce utter'd the dear Name, when she 

herself rushed into the Room, and ran
hastily to me, crying,’ “Yes, it is, it is
your Amelia herself.” 
‘There is nothing so difficult to describe,
and generally so dull when described,
as Scenes of excessive Tenderness.’ 
‘Can you think so?’ says Miss Mathews,
‘surely there is nothing so charming! 
—O! Mr. Booth, our Sex is d–––n'd
by the Want of Tenderness in yours––– 
O were they all like you–––certainly no
Man was ever your Equal.’ 
‘Indeed, Madam,’ cries Booth, ‘you honour
me too much–––But–––well–––when
the first Transports of our Meeting were
over, Amelia began gently to chide me
for having concealed my Illness from her; 
for in three Letters which I had writ
her since the Accident had happened,
there was not the least Mention of it, or
any Hint given by which she could possibly
conclude I was otherwise than in
perfect Health. And when I had excused
myself, by assigning the true Reason,
she cry'd,–––“O Mr. Booth! and do you
know so little of your Amelia, as to think 

I could or would survive you! –––Would
it not be better for one dreadful Sight to
break my Heart all at once, than to break
it by Degrees? ––O Billy! can any thing
pay me for the Loss of this Embrace—” 
But I ask your Pardon–––––how ridiculous
doth my Fondness appear in your
Eyes?’ 
‘How often,’ answered she, ‘shall I
assert the contrary? —What would you
have me say, Mr. Booth? Shall I tell
you I envy Mrs. Booth of all the Women
in the World? Would you believe me if
I did? I hope you—What am I saying? 
—Pray make no farther Apology,
but go on.’ 
‘After a Scene,’ continued he, ‘too tender
to be conceived by many, Amelia informed
me that she had received a Letter
from an unknown Hand, acquainting
her with my Misfortune, and advising
her, if she ever desired to see me more to
come directly to Gibraltar. She said, she
should not have delayed a Moment after
receiving this Letter, had not the same
Ship brought her one from me written
with rather more than usual Gaiety, and
in which there was not the least Mention 

of my Indisposition. This, she said, greatly
puzzled her and her Mother, and the
worthy Divine endeavoured to persuade
her to give Credit to my Letter, and to
impute the other to a Species of Wit
with which the World greatly abounds. 
This consists entirely in doing various
Kinds of Mischief to our Fellow-creatures; 
by belying one, deceiving another, exposing
a third, and drawing in a fourth
to expose himself; in short, by making
some the Objects of Laughter, others of
Contempt; and indeed not seldom, by
subjecting them to very great Inconveniences,
perhaps to Ruin, for the Sake of
a Jest. 
‘Mrs. Harris and the Doctor derived
the Letter from this Species of Wit. 
Miss Betty, however, was of a different
Opinion, and advised poor Amelia to apply
to an Officer whom the Governor had
sent over in the same Ship, by whom the
Report of my Illness was so strongly confirmed,
that Amelia immediately resolved
on her Voyage. 
‘I had a great Curiosity to know the
Author of this Letter; but not the least
Traces of discovering it. The only Person 

with whom I lived in any great Intimacy
was Captain James; and he, Madam,
from what I have already told you,
you will think to be the last Person I
could suspect; besides, he declared upon
his Honour, that he knew nothing of the
Matter; and no Man's Honour is, I believe,
more sacred. There was indeed
an Ensign of another Regiment who
knew my Wife, and who had sometimes
visited me in my Illness; but he was a
very unlikely Man to interest himself
much in any Affairs which did not concern
him; and he too declared he knew
nothing of it.’ 
‘And did you never discover this Secret?’ 
cried Miss Mathews. 
‘Never to this Day,’ answered Booth. 
‘I fancy,’ said she, ‘I could give a
shrewd Guess—What so likely as that
Mrs. Booth, when you left her, should have
given her Foster-brother Orders to send
her Word of whatever befel you? —Yet
stay–––that could not be neither: for then
she would not have doubted whether she
should leave dear England on the Receipt
of the Letter. —No, it must have been 

by some other Means;—yet that I owned
appeared extremely natural to me: for if
I had been left by such a Husband, I
think I should have pursued the same
Method.’ 
‘No, Madam,’ cried Booth, ‘it must
have been conveyed by some other Channel; 
for my Amelia, I am certain, was entirely
ignorant of the Manner; and as
for poor Atkinson, I am convinced he
would not have ventured to take such a
Step without acquainting me. Besides, the
poor Fellow had, I believe, such a Regard
for my Wife, out of Gratitude for
the Favours she hath done his Mother,
that I make no Doubt he was highly rejoiced
at her Absence from my melancholy
Scene. Well, whoever writ it is
a Matter very immaterial; yet as it
seemed so odd and unaccountable an Incident
I could not help mentioning it. 
‘From the Time of Amelia's Arrival
nothing remarkable happened till my
perfect Recovery, unless I should observe
her remarkable Behaviour, so full of Care
and Tenderness that it was perhaps without
a Parallel.’ 

‘O no, Mr. Booth,’ cries the Lady. ‘It
is fully equalled, I am sure, by your Gratitude. 
There is nothing, I believe, so
rare as Gratitude in your Sex, especially
in Husbands. So kind a Remembrance
is indeed more than a Return to such an
Obligation: for where is the mighty Obligation
which a Woman confers, who
being possessed of an inestimable Jewel is
so kind to herself as to be careful and
tender of it? I do not say this to lessen
your Opinion of Mrs. Booth. I have no
Doubt but that she loves you as well as
she is capable. But I would not have
you think so meanly of our Sex, as to
imagine there are not a thousand Women
susceptible of true Tenderness towards
a meritorious Man. —Believe me,
Mr. Booth, if I had received such an Account
of an Accident having happened to
such a Husband, a Mother and a Parson
would not have held me a Moment. I
should have leapt into the first Fishing-boat
I could have found, and bid Defiance
to the Winds and Waves. —O there is
no true Tenderness but in a Woman of
Spirit. I would not be understood all this
while to reflect on Mrs. Booth. I am
only defending the Cause of my Sex; for 

upon my Soul such Compliments to a
Wife are a Satire on all the rest of Womankind.’ 
‘Sure you jest, Miss Mathews,’ answered
Booth, with a Smile. ‘However, if you
please, I will proceed in my Story.’ 



The Captain continuing his Story, recounts
some Particulars which we doubt not to
many good People will appear unnatural. 
‘I was scarce sooner recovered from my
Indisposition than Amelia herself fell
ill. This, I am afraid, was occasioned
by the Fatigues which I could not prevent
her from undergoing on my Account; 
for as my Disease went off with violent
Sweats, during which the Surgeon strictly
ordered that I should lie by myself, my
Amelia could not be prevailed upon to
spend many Hours in her own Bed. 
During my restless Fits she would sometimes
read to me several Hours together; 
indeed it was not without Difficulty that
she ever quitted my Bed-side. These
Fatigues, added to the Uneasiness of her
Mind, overpowered her weak Spirits, 

and threw her into one of the worst Disorders
that can possibly attend a Woman. 
A Disorder very common among the
Ladies, and our Physicians have not
agreed upon its Name. Some call it the
Fever on the Spirits, some a nervous
Fever, some the Vapours, and some the
Hysterics.’ 
‘O say no more,’ cries Miss Mathews,
‘I pity you, I pity you from my Soul. A
Man had better be plagued with all the
Curses of Egypt than with a vapourish
Wife.’ 
‘Pity me, Madam,’ answered Booth! 
‘Pity rather that dear Creature, who,
from her Love and Care of my unworthy
Self, contracted a Distemper, the Horrors
of which are scarce to be imagined. It is
indeed a Sort of Complication of all Diseases
together, with almost Madness
added to them. In this Situation, the
Siege being at an End, the Governor
gave me Leave to attend my Wife to
Montpelier, the Air of which was judged
to be most likely to restore her to Health. 
Upon this Occasion she wrote to her
Mother to desire a Remittance, and set
forth the melancholy Condition of her
Health, and her Necessity for Money, in 

such Terms as would have touched any
Bosom not void of Humanity, tho' a
Stranger to the unhappy Sufferer. Her
Sister answered it, and I believe I have
a Copy of the Answer in my Pocket. I
keep it by me as a Curiosity, and you
would think it more so, could I shew you
my Amelia's Letter.’ He then searched his
Pocket-book, and finding the Letter,
among many others, he read it in the following
Words:’ 

“Dear Sister,
My Mamma being much disordered,
hath commanded me to tell you,
she is both shocked and surprised at your
extraordinary Request, or, as she chuses
to call it, Order for Money. You know,
my Dear, she says, that your Marriage
with this Red-coat Man was entirely
against her Consent, and the Opinion of
all your Family, (I am sure I may here
include myself in that Number) and yet
after this fatal Act of Disobedience, she
was prevailed on to receive you as her
Child; not, however, nor are you so to
understand it, as the Favourite which
you was before. She forgave you; but
this was as a Christian and a Parent; 

still preserving in her own Mind a just
Sense of your Disobedience, and a just
Resentment on that Account. And yet,
notwithstanding this Resentment, she
desires you to remember, that when you
a second time ventured to oppose her
Authority, and nothing would serve you
but taking a Ramble (an indecent one I
can't help saying) after your Fellow,
she thought fit to shew the Excess of a
Mother's Tenderness, and furnished you
with no less than Fifty Pounds for your
foolish Voyage. How can she then be
otherwise than surprised at your present
Demand? Which, should she be so weak
to comply with, she must expect to be
every Month repeated, in order to supply
the Extravagance of a young rakish Officer. 
—You say she will compassionate
your Sufferings; yes, surely she doth
greatly compassionate them, and so do
I too, tho' you was neither so kind, nor
so civil as to suppose I should. But I
forgive all your Slights to me, as well
now as formerly. Nay, I not only forgive,
but I pray daily for you. —But, dear
Sister, what could you expect less than
what hath happened? You should have
believed your Friends, who were wiser
and older than you. I do not here 

mean myself, tho' I own I am eleven
Months and some odd Weeks your Superior; 
tho' had I been younger, I might
perhaps have been able to advise you: for
Wisdom and what some may call Beauty
do not always go together. You will
not be offended at this: for I know in
your Heart you have always held your
Head above some People, whom perhaps
other People have thought better
of; but why do I mention what I scorn
so much? —No, my dear Sister, Heaven
forbid it should ever be said of me, that
I value myself upon my Face—not but
if I could believe Men perhaps—but I
hate and despise Men—you know I do,
my Dear, and I wish you had despised
them as much; but jacta est alia, as the
Doctor says. —You are to make
the best of your Fortune. What Fortune
I mean my Mamma may please
to give you: for you know all is in her
Power. Let me advise you then to
bring your Mind to your Circumstances,
and remember (for I can't help writing
it, as it is for your own Good) the Vapours
are a Distemper which very ill become
a Knapsack. Remember, my
Dear, what you have done; remember
what my Mamma hath done; remember 

we have something of yours to keep,
and do not consider yourself as an only
Child––––No, nor as a favourite Child,
but be pleased to remember, 
“Dear Sister,
Your most affectionate Sister,
And most obedient humble Servant.
E. Harris.” 
‘O brave Miss Betty,’ cried Miss Mathews,
‘I always held her in high Esteem; 
but I protest she exceeds even what I
could have expected from her.’ 
‘This Letter, Madam,’ cries Booth,
‘you will believe was an excellent Cordial
for my poor Wife's Spirits. So dreadful
indeed was the Effect it had upon her,
that as she had read it in my Absence,
I found her at my Return home in the
most violent Fits; and so long was it before
she recovered her Senses, that I
despaired of that blest Event ever happening,
and my own Senses very narrowly
escaped from being sacrificed to my
Despair. However, she came at last to 

herself, and I began to consider of every
Means of carrying her immediately to
Montpelier, which was now become much
more necessary than before. 
‘Tho' I was greatly shocked at the Barbarity
of the Letter; yet I apprehended
no very ill Consequence from it: for as
it was believed all over the Army that
I had married a great Fortune, I had
received Offers of Money, if I wanted it,
from more than one. Indeed, I might
have easily carried my Wife to Montpelier
at any time; but she was extremely
averse to the Voyage, being desirous of
our returning to England, as I had Leave
to do; and she grew daily so much better,
that had it not been for the Receipt
of that cursed—which I have just read to
you, I am persuaded she might have been
able to return to England in the next
Ship. 
‘Among others there was a Colonel in
the Garrison, who had not only offered,
but importuned me to receive Money of
him: I now therefore repaired to him; 
and as a Reason of altering my Resolution,
I produced the Letter, and at the
same time acquainted him with the true 

State of my Affairs. The Colonel read
the Letter, shook his Head, and after
some Silence, said, he was sorry I had
refused to accept his Offer before; but
that he had now so ordered Matters, and
disposed of his Money, that he had not
a Shilling left to spare from his own Occasions. 
‘Answers of the same Kind I had from
several others; but not one Penny could
I borrow of any: for I have been since
firmly persuaded that the honest Colonel
was not content with denying me himself; 
but took effectual Means, by spreading
the Secret I had so foolishly trusted
him with, to prevent me from succeeding
elsewhere: for such is the Nature of Men,
that whoever denies himself to do you a
Favour, is unwilling that it should be
done to you by any other. 
‘This was the first time I had ever felt
that Distress which arises from the Want
of Money; a Distress very dreadful indeed
in a married State: for what can be
more miserable than to see any thing necessary
to the Preservation of a beloved
Creature, and not be able to supply it? 

‘Perhaps you may wonder, Madam,
that I have not mentioned Captain James
on this Occasion; but he was at that
time laid up at Algiers, whither he had
been sent by the Governor, in a Fever. 
However, he returned time enough to
supply me, which he did with the utmost
Readiness, on the very first Mention of
my Distress; and the good Colonel, notwithstanding
his having disposed of his
Money, discounted the Captain's Draught. 
You see, Madam, an Instance in the generous
Behaviour of my Friend James,
how false are all universal Satires against
human Kind. He is indeed one of the
worthiest Men the World ever produced. 
‘But, perhaps, you will be more pleased
still with the extravagant Generosity of
my Serjeant. The Day before the Return
of Mr. James, the poor Fellow came
to me, with Tears in his Eyes, and begged
I would not be offended at what he was
going to mention. He then pulled a
Purse from his Pocket, which contained,
he said, the Sum of Twelve Pounds,
and which he begged me to accept, crying
he was sorry it was not in his Power 

to lend me whatever I wanted. I was so
struck with this Instance of Generosity
and Friendship in such a Person, that I
gave him an Opportunity of pressing me
a second Time before I made him an
Answer. Indeed I was greatly surprised
how he came to be worth that little
Sum, and no less at his being acquainted
with my own Wants. In both which
Points he presently satisfied me. As to
the first, it seems he had plundered a Spanish
Officer of fifteen Pistoles; and as to
the second, he confessed he had it from
my Wife's Maid, who had overheard
some Discourse between her Mistress and
me. Indeed People, I believe, always
deceive themselves who imagine they can
conceal distrest Circumstances from their
Servants: for these are always extremely
quick-sighted on such Occasions.’ 
‘Good Heaven!’ cries Miss Mathews,
‘how astonishing is such Behaviour in so
low a Fellow!’ 
‘I thought so myself,’ answered Booth; 
‘and yet I know not, on a more strict Examination
into the Matter, why we should
be more surprised to see Greatness of
Mind discover itself in one Degree, or 

Rank of Life, than in another. Love, Benevolence,
or what you will please to call
it, may be the reigning Passion in a Beggar
as well as in a Prince; and wherever it
is, its Energies will be the same. 
‘To confess the Truth, I am afraid, we
often compliment what we call upper
Life, with too much Injustice, at the
Expence of the lower. As it is no rare
thing to see Instances which degrade human
Nature, in Persons of the highest
Birth and Education; so I apprehend, that
Examples of whatever is really great
and good, have been sometimes found
amongst those who have wanted all such
Advantages. In Reality, Palaces, I make
no Doubt, do sometimes contain nothing
but Dreariness and Darkness, and the
Sun of Righteousness hath shone forth
with all its Glory in a Cottage.’ 




The Story of Booth continued. 
Mr. Booth thus went on. 
‘We now took Leave of the Garrison,
and having landed at Marseilles, arrived
at Montpelier, without any thing happening
to us worth Remembrance, except
the extreme Sea-sickness of poor Amelia; 
but I was afterwards well repaid for the
Terrors which it occasioned me, by the
good Consequences which attended it:
for I believe it contributed even more
than the Air of Montpelier, to the perfect
Re-establishment of her Health.’ 
‘I ask your Pardon for interrupting you,’ 
cries Miss Mathews, ‘but you never satisfied
me whether you took the Serjeant's
Money. —You have made me half in
Love with that charming Fellow.’ 
‘How can you imagine, Madam,’ answered
Booth, ‘I should have taken from
a poor Fellow what was of so little Consequence
to me, and at the same time of 

so much to him? —Perhaps now you will
derive this from the Passion of Pride.’ 
‘Indeed,’ says she, ‘I neither derive
it from the Passion of Pride, nor from
the Passion of Folly; but methinks you
should have accepted the Offer, and I
am convinced you hurt him very much
when you refused it. But pray proceed
in your Story.’ Then Booth went on as
follows. 
‘As Amelia recovered her Health and
Spirits daily, we began to pass our Time
very pleasantly at Montpelier: for the
greatest Enemy to the French will acknowledge,
that they are the best People
in the World to live amongst for a little
while. In some Countries it is almost as
easy to get a good Estate as a good Acquaintance. 
In England, particularly,
Acquaintance is of almost as slow Growth
as an Oak; so that the Age of Man
scarce suffices to bring it to any Perfection,
and Families seldom contract any great
Intimacy till the Third, or at least the Second
Generation. So shy indeed are we
English of letting a Stranger into our
Houses, that one would imagine we regarded
all such as Thieves. Now the French are 

the very Reverse. Being a Stranger among
them entitles you to the better Place,
and to the greater Degree of Civility; and
if you wear but the Appearance of a
Gentleman, they never suspect you are
not one. Their Friendship indeed seldom
extends so far as their Purse; nor is such
Friendship usual in other Countries. To
say the Truth, Politeness carries Friendship
far enough in the ordinary Occasions
of Life, and those who want this Accomplishment
rarely make Amends for it
by their Sincerity: for Bluntness, or
rather Rudeness, as it commonly deserves
to be called, is not always so much a
Mark of Honesty as it is taken to be. 
‘The Day after our Arrival we became
acquainted with Mons. L'Abbe Bagillard. 
He was a Frenchman of great Wit and
Vivacity, with a greater Share of Learning
than Gentlemen are usually possessed
of. As he lodged in the same House
with us, we were immediately acquainted,
and I liked his Conversation so well,
that I never thought I had too much of
his Company. Indeed I spent so much of
my Time with him, that Amelia (I know
not whether I ought to mention it) grew
uneasy at our Familiarity, and complained 

of my being too little with her, from
my violent Fondness for my new Acquaintance; 
for our Conversation turning
chiefly upon Books, and principally
Latin ones (for we read several of the
Classics together) she could have but little
Entertainment by being with us. 
When my Wife had once taken it into
her Head that she was deprived of my
Company by Mr. Bagillard, it was impossible
to change her Opinion; and tho'
I now spent more of my Time with her
than I had ever done before, she still grew
more and more dissatisfied, till, at last,
she very earnestly desired me to quit my
Lodgings, and insisted upon it with more
Vehemence than I had ever known her
express before. To say the Truth, if that
excellent Woman could ever be thought
unreasonable, I think she was so on this
Occasion. 
‘But in what Light soever her Desires
appeared to me, as they manifestly arose
from an Affection of which I had daily the
most endearing Proofs, I resolved to comply
with her, and accordingly removed to a
distant Part of the Town: For it is my
Opinion that we can have but little Love
for the Person whom we will never indulge 

in an unreasonable Demand. Indeed,
I was under a Difficulty with Regard to
Mons. Bagillard; for as I could not possibly
communicate to him the true Reason
for quitting my Lodgings; so I
found it as difficult to deceive him by a
counterfeit one; besides, I was apprehensive
I should have little less of his Company
than before. I could, indeed, have
avoided this Dilemma by leaving Montpelier; 
for Amelia had perfectly recovered
her Health; but I had faithfully promised
Captain James to wait his Return
from Italy, whither he was gone some
Time before from Gibraltar; nor was it
proper for Amelia to take any long Journey,
she being now near six Months gone
with Child. 
‘This Difficulty, however, proved to
be less than I had imagined it; for my
French Friend, whether he suspected any
thing from my Wife's Behaviour, tho'
she never, as I observed, shew'd him
the least Incivility, became suddenly as
cold on his Side. After our leaving the
Lodgings he never made above two or
three formal Visits; indeed his Time was
soon after entirely taken up by an Intrigue 

with a certain Countess, which blazed all
over Marseilles. 
‘We had not been long in our new Apartments
before an English Officer arrived
at Montpelier, and came to lodge
in the same House with us. This Gentleman,
whose Name was Bath, was of
the Rank of a Major, and had so much
Singularity in his Character, that, perhaps,
you never heard of any like him. 
He was far from having any of those
bookish Qualifications, which had before
caused my Amelia's Disquiet. It is
true, his Discourse generally turned on
Matters of no feminine Kind, War and
martial Exploits being the ordinary Topics
of his Conversation: however, as he
had a Sister with whom Amelia was greatly
pleased, an Intimacy presently grew
between us, and we four lived in one Family. 
‘The Major was a great Dealer in the
Marvellous, and was constantly the little
Hero of his own Tale. This made
him very entertaining to Amelia, who of
all Persons in the World hath the truest
Taste and Enjoyment of the Ridiculous; 
for whilst no one sooner discovers it in the 

Character of another, no one so well conceals
her Knowledge of it from the ridiculous
Person. I cannot help mentioning
a Sentiment of hers on this
Head, as I think it doth her great Honour.’ 
“If I had the same Contempt,” 
said she, “for ridiculous People with the
Generality of the World, I should rather
think them the Objects of Tears than
Laughter; but, in Reality, I have
known several who in some Parts of
their Characters have been extremely
ridiculous, in others have been altogether
as amiable. For Instance,” ‘said
she, “here is the Major who tells of
many Things which he has never seen,
and of others which he hath never done,
and both in the most extravagant Excess; 
and yet how amiable is his Behaviour
to his poor Sister, whom he hath
not only brought over hither for her
Health, at his own Expence, but is
come to bear her Company.” ‘I believe,
Madam, I repeat her very Words; 
for I am very apt to remember what she
says. 
‘You will easily believe, from a Circumstance
I have just mentioned in the
Major's Favour, especially when I have 

told you that his Sister was one of the
best of Girls, that it was entirely necessary
to hide from her all kind of Laughter
at any Part of her Brother's Behaviour. 
To say the Truth, this was easy enough
to do; for the poor Girl was so blinded
with Love and Gratitude, and so highly
honoured and reverenced her Brother, that
she had not the least Suspicion that there
was a Person in the World capable of
laughing at him. 
‘Indeed, I am certain she never made
the least Discovery of our Ridicule; for
I am well convinced she would have resented
it: For besides the Love she bore
her Brother, she had a little Family
Pride, which would sometimes appear. 
To say the Truth, if she had any Fault,
it was that of Vanity; but she was a
very good Girl upon the whole; and
none of us are entirely free from
Faults.’ 
‘You are a good-natured Fellow, Will,’ 
answered Miss Mathews, ‘but Vanity is a
Fault of the first Magnitude in a Woman,
and often the Occasion of many
others.’ 

To this Booth made no Answer; but
continued his Story. 
‘In this Company we passed two or
three Months very agreeably till the Major
and I both betook ourselves to our
several Nurseries; my Wife being brought
to Bed of a Girl, and Miss Bath confined
to her Chamber by a Surfeit, which had
like to have occasioned her Death.’ 
Here Miss Mathews burst into a loud
Laugh, of which when Booth asked the
Reason, she said she could not forbear at the
Thoughts of two such Nurses: ‘And did
you really,’ says she, ‘make your Wife's
Caudle yourself?’ 
‘Indeed, Madam,’ said he, ‘I did, and
do you think that so extraordinary?’ 
‘Indeed I do,’ answered she, ‘I thought
the best Husbands had looked on their
Wives lying in as a Time of Festival
and Jollity. What did you not even get
drunk in the Time of your Wife's Delivery? 
Tell me honestly how you employ'd
yourself at this Time:’ 

‘Why then honestly,’ replied he, ‘and
in Defiance of your Laughter, I lay behind
her Bolster, and supported her in
my Arms, and upon my Soul, I believe
I felt more Pain in my Mind than she
underwent in her Body. And now answer
me as honestly: Do you really
think it a proper Time of Mirth, when
the Creature one loves to Distraction is
undergoing the most racking Torments,
as well as in the most imminent Danger? 
And—but I need not express any more
tender Circumstances.’ 
‘I am to answer honestly,’ cry'd she. — 
‘Yes, and sincerely,’ cries Booth. —‘Why
then honestly and sincerely,’ says she,
‘may I never see Heaven, if I don't think
you an Angel of a Man.’ 
‘Nay, Madam,’ answered Booth—‘but,
indeed, you do me too much Honour,
there are many such Husbands—Nay,
have we not an Example of the like Tenderness
in the Major? Tho' as to him, I
believe, I shall make you laugh. While
my Wife lay in, Miss Bath being extremely
ill, I went one Day to the Door of
her Apartment, to enquire after her 

Health, as well as for the Major, whom
I had not seen during a whole Week. I
knocked softly at the Door, and being
bid open it, I found the Major in his
Sister's Antichamber warming her Posset. 
His Dress was certainly whimsical enough,
having on a Woman's Bed-Gown, and a
very dirty Flannel Night-Cap, which
being added to a very odd Person (for
he is a very aukward thin Man near seven
Feet high) might have formed, in the Opinion
of most Men, a very proper Object
of Laughter. The Major started
from his Seat at my entring into the
Room, and with much Emotion, and a
great Oath, cry'd out, “Is it you, Sir?” 
I then enquired after his and his Sister's
Health. He answer'd, that his Sister was
better, and he was very well,’ “Tho'
I did not expect, Sir,” ‘cry'd he, with
not a little Confusion,’ “to be seen by you
in this Situation.” ‘I told him, I thought
it impossible he could appear in a Situation
more becoming his Character.’ 
“You do not?” ‘answered he.’ “By
G&wblank;I am very much obliged to you
for that Opinion; but I believe, Sir,
however my Weakness may prevail on
me to descend from it, no Man can be
more conscious of his own Dignity than 

myself.” ‘His Sister then called to
him from the inner Room; upon which
he rang the Bell for her Servant, and
then after a Stride or two across the
Room, he said with an elated Aspect,
“I would not have you think, Mr. Booth,
because you have caught me in this
Dishabille, by coming upon me a little
too abruptly, I can't help saying, a little
too abruptly, that I am my Sister's
Nurse. I know better what is due to
the Dignity of a Man, and I have
shewn it in a Line of Battle. —I
think I have made a Figure there,
Mr. Booth, and becoming my Character; 
by G&wblank;I ought not to be
despised too much, if my Nature is not
totally without its Weaknesses.” ‘He
utter'd this, and some more of the same
kind, with great Majesty, or as he call'd
it, Dignity. Indeed, he used some hard
Words that I did not understand; for
all his Words are not to be found in a
Dictionary. Upon the whole, I could
not easily refrain from Laughter; however,
I conquered myself, and soon after
retired from him, astonished that it was
possible for a Man to possess true Goodness,
and be, at the same time, ashamed
of it. 

‘But if I was surprised at what had
past at this Visit, how much more was
I surprised the next Morning, when he
came very early to my Chamber, and
told me he had not been able to sleep
one Wink at what had past between us! 
“There were some Words of yours,” 
says he,’ “which must be further explained
before we part. You told me,
Sir, when you found me in that Situation,
which I cannot bear to recollect,
that you thought I could not appear in
one more becoming my Character; these
were the Words, I shall never forget
them. Do you imagine that there is
any of the Dignity of a Man wanting
in my Character? Do you think that I
have, during my Sister's Illness, behaved
with a Weakness that savours too much
of Effeminacy. I know how much it is
beneath a Man to whine and whimper
about a trifling Girl as well as you, or
any Man; and if my Sister had died, I
should have behaved like a Man on the
Occasion. I would not have you think
I confined myself from Company merely
upon her Account. I was very much
disorder'd myself. And when you surprised
me in that Situation, I repeat 

again in that Situation, her Nurse had
not left the Room three Minutes, and
I was blowing the Fire for fear it should
have gone out.” —‘In this Manner he
ran on almost a Quarter of an Hour, before
he would suffer me to speak. At
last, looking steadfastly in his Face, I
asked him if I must conclude that he
was in earnest.’ —“In earnest,” ‘says
he, repeating my Words; “Do you
then take my Character for a Jest!” 
Lookee, Sir, said I, very gravely, I
think we know one another very well; 
and I have no Reason to suspect you
should impute it to Fear, when I tell you,
I was so far from intending to affront
you, that I meant you one of the highest
Compliments. Tenderness for Women
is so far from lessening, that it
proves a true manly Character. The
manly Brutus shewed the utmost Tenderness
to his Porcia; and the great King
of Sweden, the bravest, and even fiercest
of Men, shut himself up three whole
Days in the midst of a Campaign, and
would see no Company on the Death of
a favourite Sister. At these Words, I
saw his Features soften; and he cry'd out,
D&wblank;n me, I admire the King of
Sweden of all the Men in the World; 

and he is a Rascal that is ashamed of
doing any thing which the King of
Sweden did. —And yet if any King of
Sweden in France was to tell me that his
Sister had more Merit than mine; by
G&blank;I'd knock his Brains about his
Ears. Poor little Betsy! she is the honestest,
worthiest Girl that ever was
born. Heaven be praised, she is recovered; 
for, if I had lost her, I never
should have enjoyed another happy Moment.” 
—‘In this Manner he ran on
some time, till the Tears began to overflow
—which when he perceived, he stopt; 
perhaps he was unable to go on; for he
seemed almost choaked;—after a short
Silence, however, having wip'd his Eyes
with his Handkerchief, he fetched a deep
Sigh, and cry'd, “I am ashamed you
should see this, Mr. Booth; but d&wblank;n
me, Nature will get the better of Dignity.” 
‘I now comforted him with the
Example of Xerxes, as I had before done
with that of the King of Sweden; and
soon after we sat down to Breakfast together
with much cordial Friendship: 
For I assure you, with all his Oddity
there is not a better-natured Man in the
World than the Major.’ 

‘Good-natured, indeed!’ cries Miss
Mathews, with great Scorn. —‘A Fool!
How can you mention such a Fellow
with Commendation?’ 
Booth spoke as much as he could in Defence
of his Friend; indeed he had represented
him in as favourable a Light as
possible, and had particularly left out those
hard Words, with which, as he hath observed
a little before, the Major interlarded
his Discourse. Booth then proceeded as in
the next Chapter. 



Containing very extraordinary Matters. 
‘Miss Bath,’ continued Booth, ‘now
recovered so fast, that she was
abroad as soon as my Wife. Our little
Party Quarrée began to grow agreeable
again; and we mix'd with the Company
of the Place more than we had done
before. Mons. Bagillard now again renewed
his Intimacy; for the Countess
his Mistress was gone to Paris. At
which my Wife at first shewed no Dissatisfaction; 
and I imagined that as she 

had a Friend and Companion of her
own Sex (for Miss Bath and she had contracted
the highest Fondness for each
other) that she would the less miss my
Company. However, I was disappointed
in this Expectation; for she soon began
to express her former Uneasiness,
and her Impatience for the Arrival of
Captain James, that we might entirely
quit Montpelier. 
‘I could not avoid conceiving some little
Displeasure at this Humour of my
Wife, which I was forced to think a
little unreasonable.’ —‘A little, do you
call it,’ says Miss Mathews, ‘Good
Heavens! what a Husband are you!’ — 
‘How little worthy,’ answered he, ‘as
you will say hereafter of such a Wife as
my Amelia. One Day as we were sitting
together, I heard a violent Scream, upon
which my Wife starting up, cry'd out,
“Sure that's Miss Bath's Voice,” and
immediately ran towards the Chamber
whence it proceeded. I followed her; 
and when we arrived, we there beheld
the most shocking Sight imaginable; 
Miss Bath lying dead on the Floor, and
the Major all bloody kneeling by her,
and roaring out for Assistance. Amelia, 

tho' she was herself in little better Condition
than her Friend, ran hastily to
her, bared her Neck, and attempted to
loosen her Stays, while I ran up and
down, scarce knowing what I did, calling
for Water and Cordials, and dispatching
several Servants one after another
for Doctors and Surgeons. 
‘Water, Cordials, and all necessary Implements
being brought, Miss Bath was,
at length, recovered, and placed in her
Chair, when the Major seated himself by
her. And now the young Lady being
restored to Life, the Major, who, till
then, had engaged as little of his own,
as of any other Person's Attention, became
the Object of all our Considerations,
especially his poor Sister's, who had
no sooner recovered sufficient Strength,
than she began to lament her Brother,
crying out, that he was killed; and bitterly
bewailing her Fate, in having revived
from her Swoon to behold so
dreadful a Spectacle. While Amelia applied
herself to sooth the Agonies of her
Friend, I began to enquire into the Condition
of the Major. In which I was
assisted by a Surgeon, who now arrived. 
The Major declared with great Chearfulness, 

that he did not apprehend his
Wound to be in the least dangerous, and
therefore begged his Sister to be comforted,
saying, he was convinced the Surgeon
would soon give her the same
Assurance; but that good Man was
not so liberal of Assurances as the Major
had expected; for as soon as he had
probed the Wound, he afforded no more
than Hopes, declaring that it was a very
ugly Wound; but added, by Way of
Consolation, that he had cured many
much worse.’ 
‘When the Major was drest, his Sister
seemed to possess his whole Thoughts,
and all his Care was to relieve her Grief. 
He solemnly protested, that it was no
more than a Flesh Wound, and not very
deep, nor could, as he apprehended, be
in the least dangerous; and as for the
cold Expressions of the Surgeon, he very
well accounted for them from a Motive
too obvious to be mentioned. From
these Declarations of her Brother, and
the Interposition of her Friends; and
above all, I believe, from that vast Vent
which she had given to her Fright, Miss
Bath seemed a little pacify'd; Amelia
therefore at last prevailed; and as Terror 

abated, Curiosity became the superior
Passion, I therefore now began to enquire
what had occasioned that Accident,
whence all the Uproar arose. 
‘The Major took me by the Hand, and
looking very kindly at me,’ said, “My
dear Mr. Booth, I must begin by asking
your Pardon; for I have done you an
Injury, for which nothing but the Height
of Friendship in me can be an Excuse; 
and therefore nothing but the Height
of Friendship in you can forgive.” 
‘This Preamble, Madam, you will easily
believe, greatly alarmed all the Company,
but especially me. —I answered,
dear Major, I forgive you, let it be what
it will; but what is it possible you can
have done to injure me?’ “That,” ‘replied
he,’ “which I am convinced a
Man of your Honour and Dignity of
Nature, by G&wblank; must conclude to be
one of the highest Injuries. I have taken
out of your own Hands the doing yourself
Justice. I am afraid I have killed
the Man who hath injured your Honour. 
I mean that Villain Bagillard––– 
but I cannot proceed; for you, Madam,” 
‘said he to my Wife,’ “are concerned; 
and I know what is due to the Dignity 

of your Sex.” –––‘Amelia, I observed,
turn'd pale at these Words, but eagerly
begg'd him to proceed.’ –––“Nay, Madam,” 
‘answered he,’ “if I am commanded
by a Lady, it is a part of my
Dignity to obey.” ‘He then proceeded
to tell us, that Bagillard had rallied
him upon a Supposition that he was pursuing
my Wife, with a View of Gallantry; 
telling him that he could never
succeed; giving Hints that if it had been
possible, he should have succeeded himself; 
and ending with calling my poor Amelia
an accomplished Prude; upon which
the Major gave Bagillard a Box in the
Ear, and both immediately drew their
Swords. 
‘The Major had scarce ended his Speech,
when a Servant came into the Room, and
told me there was a Friar below who
desired to speak with me in great Haste. 
I shook the Major by the Hand, and
told him I not only forgave him, but
was extremely obliged to his Friendship; 
and then going to the Fryar, I found
that he was Bagillard's Confessor, from
whom he came to me, with an earnest
Desire of seeing me, that he might ask
my Pardon, and receive my Forgiveness 

before he dy'd, for the Injury he
had intended me. My Wife at first opposed
my going from some sudden Fears
on my Account; but when she was
convinced they were groundless, she consented. 
‘I found Bagillard in his Bed; for
the Major's Sword had passed up to the
very Hilt through his Body. After
having very earnestly asked my Pardon,
he made me many Compliments on the
Possession of a Woman, who, joined to
the most exquisite Beauty, was Mistress
of the most impregnable Virtue; as a
Proof of which, he acknowledged the
Vehemence as well as ill Success of his
Attempts; and to make Amelia's Virtue
appear the brighter, his Vanity was so predominant,
he could not forbear running
over the Names of several Women of
Fashion who had yielded to his Passion,
which, he said, had never raged so violently
for any other as for my poor Amelia; 
and that this Violence, which he had
found wholly unconquerable, he hoped
would procure his Pardon at my Hands. 
It is unnecessary to mention what I said on
the Occasion. I assured him of my entire
Forgiveness; and so we parted. To 

say the Truth, I afterwards thought my
self almost obliged to him for a Meeting
with Amelia, the most luxuriously delicate
that can be imagined. 
‘I now ran to my Wife, whom I embraced
with Raptures of Love and Tenderness. 
When the first Torrent of these
was a little abated, “Confess to me, my
Dear,” ‘said she,’ “could your Goodness
prevent you from thinking me a
little unreasonable in expressing so much
Uneasiness at the Loss of your Company,
while I ought to have rejoiced in
the Thoughts of your being so well entertained? 
I know you must; and then
consider what I must have felt, while I
knew I was daily lessening myself in your
Esteem, and forced into a Conduct, which
I was sensible must appear to you, who was
ignorant of my Motive, to be mean,
vulgar, and selfish. And yet what other
Course had I to take, with a Man whom
no Denial, no Scorn could abash. —But
if this was a cruel Task, how much
more wretched still was the Constraint I
was obliged to wear in hi Presence before
you, to shew outward Civility to the Man
whom my Soul detested, for fear of any
fatal Consequence from your Suspicion; 
and this too, while I was afraid he would 

construe it to be an Encouragement. ––Do
you not pity your poor Amelia when you
reflect on her Situation?” —‘Pity! cry'd
I, my Love, is Pity an adequate Expression
for Esteem, for Adoration? — 
But how, my Love, could he carry this
on so secretly—by Letters?’ “O no,
he offered me many; but I never would
receive but one, and that I return'd him. 
Good G&wblank; I would not have such a
Letter in my Possession for the Universe,
I thought my Eyes contaminated with
reading it.” —‘O brave,’ cry'd Miss
Mathews, ‘Heroic, I protest. 

‘Had I a Wish that did not bear
‘The Stamp and Image of my Dear,
‘I'd pierce my Heart through every Vein,
‘And die to let it out again.’
‘And can you really,’ cry'd he, ‘laugh
at so much Tenderness?’ ‘I laugh at
Tenderness! O Mr. Booth,’ answered
she, ‘Thou knowest but little of Calista.’ 
‘I thought formerly,’ cry'd he, ‘I knew
a great deal, and thought you of all
Women in the World to have the greatest
—of all Women! ‘—Take Care,
Mr. Booth,’ said she. —‘By Heaven, if
you thought so, you thought truly–––But 

what is the Object of my Tenderness––such
an Object as’––––‘Well, Madam,’ says
he, ‘I hope you will find one.’ –––‘I thank
you for that Hope, however,’ says she,
‘cold as it is; but pray go on with your
Story;’ which Command he immediately
obeyed. 



Containing a Letter of a very curious Kind. 
‘The Major's Wound,’ continued
Booth, ‘was really as slight as he
believed it; so that in a very few Days
he was perfectly well; nor was Bagillard,
tho' run through the Body, long
apprehended to be in any Danger of his
Life. The Major then took me aside, and
wishing me heartily joy of Bagillard's
Recovery, told me I should now, by the
Gift of Heaven, have an Opportunity
of doing myself Justice. I answered I
could not think of any such Thing: 
For that when I imagined he was on his
Death-bed, I had heartily and sincerely
forgiven him.’ “Very right,” ‘replied
the Major,’ “and consistent with your
Honour, when he was on his Death-Bed; 
but that Forgiveness was only 

conditional, and is revoked by his Recovery.” ‘I told him I could not
possibly revoke it; for that my Anger
was really gone.’ –––“What hath Anger,” 
‘cry'd he,’ “to do with the Matter? 
The Dignity of my Nature hath
been always my Reason for drawing my
Sword; and when that is concerned, I
can as readily fight with the Man I
love, as with the Man I hate.” –––‘I
will not tire you with the Repetition of
the whole Argument, in which the Major
did not prevail; and I really believe,
I sunk a little in his Esteem upon that
Account, till Captain James, who arrived
soon after, again perfectly reinstated me
in his Favour. 
‘When the Captain was come, there
remained no Cause of our longer Stay at
Montpelier; for as to my Wife, she was
in a better State of Health than I had ever
known her, and Miss Bath had not only
recovered her Health, but her Bloom, and
from a pale Skeleton, was become a
plump, handsome, young Woman. James
was again my Cashier; for far from
receiving any Remittance, it was now a
long time since I had received any Letter
from England, tho' both myself and my 

dear Amelia had written several both to
my Mother and Sister; and now at our
Departure from Montpelier, I bethought
myself of writing to my good Friend
the Doctor, acquainting him with our
Journey to Paris, whither I desired he
would direct his Answer. 
‘At Paris we all arrived, without encountring
any Adventure on the Road worth
relating; nor did any thing of Consequence
happen here during the first Fortnight:
for as you know neither Captain
James nor Miss Bath, it is scarce worth
telling you, that an Affection, which
afterwards ended in a Marriage, began
now to appear between them, in which
it may appear odd to you that I made
the first Discovery of the Lady's Flame,
and my Wife of the Captain's. 
‘The seventeenth Day after our Arrival
at Paris, I received a Letter from the
Doctor, which I have in my Pocket-book; 
and if you please I will read it you: for I
would not willingly do any Injury to his
Words.’ 

The Lady, you may easily believe, desired
to hear the Letter, and Booth read it
as follows. 

“My dear Children,
For I will now call you so, as you
have neither of you now any other
Parent in this World. Of this melancholy
News I should have sent you
earlier Notice, if I had thought you
ignorant of it, or indeed if I had known
whither to have writ. If your Sister hath
received any Letters from you, she hath
kept them a Secret, and perhaps out of
Affection to you hath reposited them in
the same Place where she keeps her
Goodness, and, what I am afraid is
much dearer to her, her Money. The
Reports concerning you have been
various; so is always the Case in Matters
where Men are ignorant: for when
no Man knows what the Truth is, every
Man thinks himself at Liberty to report
what he pleases. Those who wish you
well, Son Booth, say simply that you are
dead; others that you ran away from
the Siege, and was cashiered. As for
my Daughter, all agree that she is a Saint 

above; and there are not wanting those
who hint that her Husband sent her
thither. From this Beginning you will
expect, I suppose, better News than I
am going to tell you; but pray, my
dear Children, why may not I, who
have always laughed at my own Afflictions,
laugh at yours, without the
Censure of much Malevolence? I wish
you could learn this Temper from me; 
for, take my Word for it, nothing truer
ever came from the Mouth of a Heathen
than that Sentence, 

“—Leve fit quod bene fertur Onus * 
“And tho' I must confess, I never
thought Aristotle (whom I do not take
for so great a Blockhead as some who
have never read him) doth not very well
resolve the Doubt which he hath raised
in his Ethics, viz. How can a Man in
the Midst of King Priam's Misfortunes
be called happy? yet I have long thought
that there is no Calamity so great that a
Christian Philosopher may not reasonably
laugh at it. If the Heathen Cicero,
doubting of Immortality (for so wise a
Man must have doubted of that which
had such slender Arguments to support
it) could assert it as the Office of Wisdom 

Humanas res despicere atque infra se
positas arbitrari * . 
“Which Passage, with much more to
the same Purpose, you will find in the
Third Book of his Tusculan Questions.” 
“With how much greater Confidence
may a good Christian despise and even
deride all temporary and even transitory
Evils! If the poor Wretch, who is
trudging on to his miserable Cottage,
can laugh at the Storms and Tempests,
the Rain and Whirlwinds which surround
him, while his richest Hope is
only that of Rest, how much more
chearfully must a Man pass through
such transcient Evils whose Spirits are
buoyed up with the certain Expectation
of finding a noble Palace, and the most
sumptuous Entertainment ready to receive
him? I do not much like the Simile; 
but I cannot think of a better. 
And yet, inadequate as the Simile is, we
may, I think, from the Actions of Mankind,
conclude that they will consider it
as much too strong; for in the Case I
have put off the Entertainment, is there 

any Man so tender or poor-spirited as
not to despise and often to deride the
fiercest of those Inclemencies which I
have mentioned? but in our Journey to
the glorious Mansions of everlasting Bliss,
how severely is every little Rub, every
trifling Accident lamented; and if Fortune
showers down any of her heavier
Storms upon us, how wretched do we
presently appear to ourselves and to
others! The Reason of this can be no
other than that we are not in Earnest in
our Faith; at the best we think with
too little Attention on this our great
Concern. While the most paultry Matters
of this World, even those pitiful
Trifles, those childish Gewgaws, Riches
and Honours, are transacted with the
utmost Earnestness, and most serious
Application, the grand and weighty Affair
of Immortality is postponed and
disregarded, nor ever brought into the
least Competition with our Affairs here. 
If one of my Cloth should begin a Discourse
of Heaven in the Scenes of Business
or Pleasure; in the Court of Requests, at
Garaway's or at White's, would he gain
a Hearing, unless perhaps of some sorry
Jester who would desire to ridicule him? 
Would he not presently acquire the Name
of the mad Parson, and be thought by 

all Men worthy of Bedlant? Or would
he not be treated as the Romans treated
their Aretalogi * , and considered in the
Light of a Bussoon. But why should
I mention those Places of Hurry and
worldly Pursuit? —What Attention do
we engage even in the Pulpit? Here, if
a Sermon be prolonged a little beyond
the usual Hour, doth it not set half the
Audience asleep? as I question not I have
by this Time both my Children. —Well
then, like a good-natured Surgeon, who
prepares his Patient for a painful Operation,
by endeavouring as much as he
can to deaden his Sensation, I will now
communicate to you, in your slumbring
Condition, the News with which I
threatened you. Your good Mother,
you are to know, is dead at last and hath
lest her whole Fortune to her elder
Daughter. —This is all the ill News I
have to tell you. Confess now, if you
are awake, did you not expect it was
much worse? Did not you apprehend
that your charming Child was dead? 
Not in the least so, he is in perfect
Health, and the Admiration of
every Body; what is more, he will 

be taken Care of, with the Tenderness
of a Parent, till your Return. What
Pleasure must this give you! If indeed
any thing can add to the Happiness of
a married Couple, who are extremely
and deservedly fond of each other, and
as you write me, in perfect Health. A
superstitious Heathen would have dreaded
the Malice of Nemesis in your Situation; 
but as I am a Christian I shall venture
to add another Circumstance to your
Felicity, by assuring you that you have
besides your Wife a faithful and zealous
Friend. —Do not therefore, my dear
Children, fall into that Fault which the
excellent Thucydides observes, is too common
in human Nature, to bear heavily
the being deprived of the smaller Good, without
conceiving at the same time any Gratitude
for the much greater Blessings which
we are suffered to enjoy. I have only farther
to tell you, my Son, that when you call
at Mr. Morand's, Rue Dauphine, you will
find yourself worth a hundred Pounds. 
Good Heaven! how much richer are
you than Millions of People who are in
want of nothing! Farewel, and know
me for 
“Your sincere and affectionate Friend.” 

‘There, Madam,’ cries Booth, ‘how do
you like the Letter?’ 
‘Oh! extremely,’ answered she, ‘the
Doctor is a charming Man, I always
loved dearly to hear him preach. I remember
to have heard of Mrs. Harris's
Death above a Year before I left the
Country; but never knew the Particulars
of her Will before. I am extremely
sorry for it, upon my Honour.’ 
‘Oh fy! Madam,’ cries Booth, ‘have
you so soon forgot the chief Purport of
the Doctor's Letter?’ 
‘Ay ay,’ cried she, ‘these are very
pretty Things to read, I acknowledge; 
but the Loss of Fortune is a serious
Matter; and I am sure a Man of Mr.
Booth's Understanding must think so.’ 
‘One Consideration, I must own, Madam,’ 
answered he, ‘a good deal baffled all the
Doctor's Arguments. This was the
Concern for my little growing Family,
who must one Day feel the Loss; nor
was I so easy upon Amelia's Account as
upon my own, tho' she herself put on the
utmost Chearfulness, and stretched her Invention 

to the utmost to comfort me— 
But sure, Madam, there is something
in the Doctor's Letter to admire beyond
the Philosophy of it; what think you of
that easy, generous, friendly Manner in
which he sent me the hundred Pounds?’ 
‘Very noble and great indeed,’ replied
she ‘but pray go on with your Story; for
I long to hear the whole.’ 



In which Mr. Booth relates his Return to
England. 
‘Nothing remarkable, as I remember,
happened during our
Stay at Paris, which we left soon after
and came to London. Here we rested
only two Days, and then, taking Leave
of our Fellow-travellers, we set out for
Wiltshire, my Wife being so impatient to
see the Child, which she had left behind
her, that the Child she carried with her
was almost killed with the Fatigue of the
Journey. 
‘We arrived at our Inn late in the
Evening. Amelia, tho' she had no great
Reason to be pleased with any Part of her 

Sister's Behaviour, resolved to behave to
her, as if nothing wrong had ever happened. 
She therefore sent a kind Note to
her the Moment of our Arrival, giving
her her Option whether she would come to
us at the Inn, or whether we should that
Evening wait on her. The Servant, after
waiting an Hour, brought us an Answer,
excusing her from coming to us so late, as
she was disordered with a Cold, and desiring
my Wife by no Means to think of
venturing out after the Fatigue of her Journey,
saying, she would on that Account
defer the great Pleasure of seeing her
till the Morning, without taking any more
Notice of your humble Servant, than if
no such Person had been in the World,
tho' I had very civilly sent my Compliments
to her. I should not mention this
Trifle, if it was not to shew you the Nature
of the Woman, and that it will be a
kind of Key to her future Conduct. 
‘When the Servant returned, the good
Doctor, who had been with us almost all
the time of his Absence, hurried us away
to his House, where we presently found
a Supper and a Bed prepared for us. My
Wife was eagerly desirous to see her
Child that Night; but the Doctor 

would not suffer it; and as he was at Nurse
at a distant Part of the Town, and the
Doctor assured her he had seen him in
perfect Health that Evening, she suffered
herself at last to be dissuaded. 
‘We spent that Evening in the most
agreeable Manner: for the Doctor's Wit
and Humour, joined to the highest
Chearfulness and Good-nature, made him
the most agreeable Companion in the
World; and he was now in the highest
Spirits, which he was pleased to place to
our Account. We sat together to a very
late Hour: for so excellent is my Wife's
Constitution, that she declared she was
scarce sensible of any Fatigue from her
late Journies. 
‘Amelia slept not a Wink all Night, and
in the Morning early the Doctor accompanied
us to the little Infant. The
Transports we felt on this Occasion are
really unspeakable, nor can any but a
fond Parent conceive, I am certain, the
least Idea of them. Our Imaginations
suggested a hundred agreeable Circumstances,
none of which had perhaps any
Foundation. We made Words and
Meaning out of every Sound, and in 

every Feature found out some Resemblance
to my Amelia, as she did to me. 
‘But I ask your Pardon for dwelling
on such Incidents; and will proceed to
Scenes which to most Persons will be
more entertaining. 
‘We went hence to pay a Visit to Miss
Harris, whose Reception of us was, I
think, truly ridiculous; and as you
know the Lady, I will endeavour to describe
it particularly. At our first Arrival
we were ushered into a Parlour,
where we were suffered to wait almost an
Hour. At length the Lady of the House appeared
in deep Mourning, with a Face,
if possible, more dismal than her Dress,
in which, however, there was every Appearance
of Art. Her Features were
indeed skrewed up to the very Height of
Grief. With this Face, and in the most
solemn Gait, she approached Amelia, and
coldly saluted her. After which she
made me a very distant formal Courtesy,
and we all sat down. A short Silence
now ensued, which Miss Harris at length
broke, with a deep Sigh, and said,
“Sister, here is a great Alteration in this
Place since you saw it last; Heaven hath 

been pleased to take my poor Mother to
itself.” —(Here she wiped her Eyes, and
then continued) “I hope I know my Duty,
and have learned a proper Resignation
to the divine Will; but something is to
be allowed to Grief for the best of Mothers; 
for so she was to us both: and if
at last she made any Distinction, she must
have had her Reasons for so doing. I am
sure I can truly say I never wished, much
less desired it.” ‘The Tears now stood in
poor Amelia's Eyes; indeed she had paid
too many already for the Memory of so
unnatural a Parent. She answered with
the Sweetness of an Angel, that she was
far from blaming her Sister's Emotions
on so tender an Occasion; that she heartily
joined with her in her Grief: for that
nothing which her Mother had done in
the latter Part of her Life, could efface
the Remembrance of that Tenderness
which she had formerly shown her. Her
Sister caught hold of the Word Efface,
and rung the Changes upon it. —“Efface!” 
cried she, “O Miss Emily (for
you must not expect me to repeat Names
that will be for ever odious) I wish indeed
every thing could be effaced. — 
Effaced! O that that was possible; we
might then have still enjoyed, my poor 

Mother: for I am convinced she never
recovered her Grief on a certain Occasion.” 
—Thus she ran on, and after
many bitter Strokes upon her Sister, at
last directly charged her Mother's Death
on my Marriage with Amelia. I could
be silent then no longer. I reminded her
of the perfect Reconciliation between us
before my Departure, and the great
Fondness which she expressed for me; 
nor could I help saying in very plain
Terms, that if she had ever changed
her Opinion of me, as I was not
conscious of having deserved such a
Change by my own Behaviour, I was
well convinced to whose good Offices I
owed it. Guilt hath very quick Ears to
an Accusation. Miss Harris immediately
answered to the Charge. She said such
Suspicions were no more than she expected; 
that they were of a Piece with every
other Part of my Conduct, and gave
her one Consolation, that they served
to account for her Sister Emily's Unkindness,
as well to herself as to her poor
deceased Mother, and in some Measure
lessened the Guilt of it with Regard to
her, since it was not easy to know how
far a Woman is in the Power of her
Husband. My dear Amelia reddened at 

this Reflexion on me; and begged her
Sister to name any single Instance of Unkindness
or Disrespect, in which she had
ever offended. To this the other answered,
(I am sure I repeat her Words,
tho' I cannot mimic either the Voice or
Air with which they were spoken)— 
“Pray, Miss Emily, which is to be the
Judge, yourself or that Gentleman? I
remember the time when I could have
trusted to your Judgment in any Affair; 
but you are now no longer Mistress of
yourself, and are not answerable for your
Actions. Indeed it is my constant Prayer
that your Actions may not be imputed to
you. –––It was the constant Prayer of that
blessed Woman, my dear Mother, who
is now a Saint above; a Saint whose
Name I can never mention without a
Tear, tho' I find you can hear it without
one. –––I cannot help observing some
Concern on so melancholy an Occasion; 
it seems due to Decency; but perhaps (for
I always wish to excuse you) you are
forbid to cry.” The Idea of being bid or
forbid to cry struck so strongly on my
Fancy, that Indignation only could have
prevented me from laughing. But my
Narrative, I am afraid, begins to grow
tedious. –––In short, after hearing, for near 

an Hour, every malicious Insinuation
which a fertile Genius could invent, we
took our Leave, and separated as Persons
who would never willingly meet again. 
‘The next Morning, after this Interview,
Amelia received a long Letter from
Miss Harris; in which, after many bitter
Invectives against me, she excused her
Mother, alledging that she had been
driven to do as she did, in order to
prevent Amelia's Ruin, if her Fortune had
fallen into my Hands. She likewise very
remotely hinted that she would be only a
Trustee for her Sister's Children, and told
her, that on one Condition only she would
consent to live with her as a Sister. 
This was, if she could by any Means
be separated from that Man, as she was
pleased to call me, who had caused so
much Mischief in the Family. 
‘I was so enraged at this Usage, that
had not Amelia intervened, I believe I
should have applied to a Magistrate for
a Search-warrant for that Picture, which
there was so much Reason to suspect she
had stolen; and which, I am convinced,
upon a Search, we should have found
in her Possession.’ 

‘Nay, it is possible enough,’ cries Miss
Mathews; ‘for I believe there is no Wickedness
of which the Lady is not capable.’ 
‘This agreeable Letter was succeeded by
another of the like comfortable kind,
which informed me that the Company in
which I was, being an additional one
raised in the Beginning of the War, was
reduced; so that I was now a Lieutenant
on Half-pay. 
‘Whilst we were meditating on our
present Situation, the good Doctor came
to us. When we related to him the
Manner in which my Sister had treated
us, he cried out, “Poor Soul! I pity
her heartily;” for this is the severest Resentment
he ever expresses; indeed I have
often heard him say, that a wicked Soul
is the greatest Object of Compassion in
the World.’ ––––A Sentiment which we
shall leave the Reader a little time to digest.’ 




In which Mr. Booth concludes his Story. 
‘The next Day the Doctor set out
for his Parsonage, which was about
thirty Miles distant, whither Amelia and
myself accompanied him, and where
we stayed with him all the Time of his
Residence there, being almost three
Months. 
‘The Situation of the Parish under my
good Friend's Care is very pleasant. It
is placed among Meadows washed by a
clear Trout Stream, and flanked on both
Sides with Downs. His House indeed
would not much attract the Admiration
of the Virtuoso. He built it himself,
and it is remarkable only for its Plainness; 
with which the Furniture so well
agrees, that there is no one thing in it that
may not be absolutely necessary, except
Books, and the Prints of Mr. Hogarth,
whom he calls a moral Painter, and says
no Clergyman should be without all his
Works, in the Knowledge of which he
would have him instruct his Parishioners,
as he himself often doth. 

‘Nothing, however, can be imagined
more agreeable than the Life that the
Doctor leads in this homely House, which
he calls his earthly Paradise. All his
Parishioners, whom he treats as his
Children, regard him as their common
Father. Once in a Week he constantly
visits every House in the Parish, examines,
commends, and rebukes, as he
finds Occasion. This is practised likewise
by his Curate in his Absence; and so
good an Effect is produced by this their
Care, that no Quarrels ever proceed
either to Blows or Law-suits; no Beggar
is to be found in the whole Parish; nor
did I ever hear a very profane Oath all
the Time I lived in it. 
‘But to return, from so agreeable a Digression,
to my own Affairs, that are
much less worth your Attention. In the
midst of all the Pleasures I tasted in this
sweet Place, and in the most delightful
Company, the Woman and Man whom
I loved above all Things, melancholy Reflexions
concerning my unhappy Circumstances
would often steal into my Thoughts. 
My Fortune was now reduced to less
than Forty Pounds a Year; I had already 

two Children, and my dear Amelia was
again with Child. 
‘One Day the Doctor found me sitting
by my self, and employed in melancholy
Contemplations on this Subject. He
told me he had observed me growing of
late very serious; that he knew the Occasion,
and neither wondered at, nor
blamed me. He then asked me if I had
any Prospect of going again into the
Army; if not, what Scheme of Life I
proposed to myself. 
‘I told him, that as I had no powerful
Friends, I could have but little Expectations
in a military Way; that I was as
incapable of thinking of any other
Scheme, as all Business required some
Knowledge or Experience, and likewise
Money to set up with; of all which I
was destitute. 
“You must know then,” Child, said
the Doctor, “that I have been thinking
on this Subject as well as you: for I can
think, I promise you, with a pleasant
Countenance.” ‘These were his Words. 
As to the Army, perhaps Means might
be found of getting you another Commission; 

but my Daughter seems to have
a violent Objection to it; and to be plain,
I fancy you yourself will find no Glory
make you amends for your Absence from
her. And for my Part,” said he, “I
never think those Men wise who for any
worldly Interest forego the greatest Happiness
of their Lives. If I mistake not,” 
said he, “a Country Life, where you
could be always together, would make
you both much happier People.” 
‘I answered, that of all Things I preferred
it most; and I believed Amelia
was of the same Opinion. 
‘The Doctor, after a little Hesitation,
proposed to me to turn Farmer, and
offered to let me his Parsonage, which
was then become vacant. He said, it was
a Farm which required but little Stock,
and that little should not be wanting. 
‘I embraced this Offer very eagerly,
and with great Thankfulness, and immediately
repaired to Amelia to communicate
it to her, and to know her Sentiments. 

‘Amelia received the News with the
highest Transports of Joy; she said that
her greatest Fear had always been of my
entring again into the Army. She was
so kind as to say, that all Stations of Life
were equal to her, unless as one afforded
her more of my Company than
another.’ “And as to our Children,” 
‘said she,’ “let us breed them up to an
humble Fortune; and they will be contented
with it: For none,” ‘added my
Angel,’ “deserve Happiness, or indeed,
are capable of it, who make any particular
Station a necessary Ingredient.” 
‘Thus, Madam, you see me degraded
from my former Rank in Life; no longer
Captain Booth, but Farmer Booth at your
Service. 
‘During my first Year's Continuance in
this new Scene of Life, nothing, I think,
remarkable happened; the History of
one Day would, indeed, be the History
of the whole Year.’ 
‘Well, pray then,’ said Miss Mathews,
‘do let us hear the History of that Day; 
I have a strange Curiosity to know how 

you could kill your Time; and do, if
possible, find out the very best Day you
can.’ 
‘If you command me, Madam,’ answered
Booth, ‘you must yourself be accountable
for the Dulness of the Narrative. 
Nay, I believe, you have imposed
a very difficult Task on me; for the greatest
Happiness is incapable of Description.’ 
‘Nay, nay,’ replied she, ‘I can guess at
your greatest Happiness, but describe as
much as you can.’ 
‘I rose then, Madam,” cry'd Booth,— 
‘O the Moment you waked, undoubtedly,’ 
said Miss Mathews.— 
‘Perhaps not so, Madam,’ said he,
‘but usually I rose between Five and
Six.’ 
‘I will have no usually,’ cry'd Miss Mathews,
‘you are confined to a Day, and it
is to be the best and happiest in the
Year.’ 

‘Nay, Madam,’ cries Booth, ‘then I
must tell you the Day in which Amelia
was brought to Bed, after a painful and
dangerous Labour; for that I think
was the happiest Day of my Life.’ 
‘I protest,’ said she, ‘you are become
Farmer Booth, indeed. What a Happiness
have you painted to my Imagination! 
You put me in Mind of a News-Paper,
where my Lady such-a-one is delivered
of a Son, to the great Joy of
some illustrious Family.’ 
‘Why then, I do assure you, Miss Mathews,’ 
cries Booth, ‘I scarce know a
Circumstance that distinguished one Day
from another. The whole was one continued
Series of Love, Health, and
Tranquility. Our Lives resembled a
calm Sea.’— 
‘The dullest of all Ideas,’ cries the
Lady. 
‘I know,’ said he, ‘it must appear dull
in Description; for who can describe the
Pleasures which the Morning Air gives
to one in perfect Health; the Flow of 

Spirits which springs up from Exercise; 
the Delights which Parents feel from
the Prattle, and innocent Follies of their
Children; the Joy with which the tender
Smile of a Wife inspires a Husband; 
or lastly, the chearful, solid Comfort
which a fond Couple enjoy in each
other's Conversation. —All these Pleasures,
and every other of which our Situation
was capable, we tasted in the
highest Degree. Our Happiness was,
perhaps, too great; for Fortune seemed
to grow envious of it, and interposed
one of the most cruel Accidents that could
have befallen us, by robbing us of our
dear Friend the Doctor.’ 
‘I am sorry for it,’ said Miss Mathews. 
‘He was indeed a valuable
Man, and I never heard of his Death
before.’ 
‘Long may it be before any one hears
of it,’ cries Booth. ‘He is, indeed,
dead to us; but will, I hope, enjoy
many happy Years of Life. You know,
Madam, the Obligations he had to his
Patron the Earl; indeed, it was impossible
to be once in his Company without 

hearing of them; I am sure you will
neither wonder that he was chosen to
attend the young Lord in his Travels as his
Tutor, nor that the good Man, however
disagreable it might be (as in Fact it was)
to his Inclinations, should comply with
the earnest Request of his Friend and Patron. 
‘By this Means I was bereft not only
of the best Companion in the World,
but of the best Counsellor; a Loss of
which I have since felt the bitter Consequence: 
For no greater Advantage, I
am convinced, can arrive to a young Man
who hath any Degree of Understanding,
than an intimate Converse with one of
riper Years, who is not only able to advise,
but who knows the Manner of advising. 
By this means alone Youth can
enjoy the Benefit of the Experience of
Age, and that at a Time of Life when
such Experience will be of more Service
to a Man, than when he hath lived long
enough to acquire it of himself. 
‘From Want of my sage Counsellor
I now fell into many Errors. The first
of these was in enlarging my Business, 

by adding a Farm of 100l. a Year to
the Parsonage; in renting which I had
also as bad a Bargain as the Doctor had
before given me a good one. The Consequence
of which was, that whereas at
the End of the first Year, I was worth
upwards of Fourscore Pounds, at the
End of the Second, I was near half that
Sum worse (as the Phrase is) than nothing. 
‘A second Folly I was guilty of, in
uniting Families with the Curate of the
Parish, who had just married, as my
Wife and I thought, a very good Sort of
a Woman. We had not, however, lived
one Month together before I plainly perceived
this good Sort of Woman had
taken a great Prejudice against my Amelia; 
for which, if I had not known something
of the human Passions, and that
high Place which Envy holds among
them, I should not have been able
to account: For so far was my Angel
from having given her any Cause
of Dislike, that she had treated her
not only with Civility but Kindness. 

‘Besides Superiority in Beauty, which,
I believe, all the World would have allowed
to Amelia, there was another
Cause of this Envy, which I am
almost ashamed to mention, as it may
well be called my greatest Folly. You
are to know then, Madam, that from a
Boy I had been always fond of driving
a Coach, in which I valued myself on
having some Skill. This, perhaps, was
an innocent, but I allow it to have been
a childish Vanity. As I had an Opportunity,
therefore, of buying an old
Coach and Harness very cheap, (indeed
they cost me but Twelve Pound) and as
I considered that the same Horses which
drew my Waggons, would likewise draw
my Coach, I resolved on indulging myself
in the Purchase. 
‘The Consequence of setting up this
poor old Coach is inconceivable. Before
this, as my Wife and myself had
very little distinguished ourselves from
the other Farmers and their Wives, either
in our Dress, or our Way of Living,
they treated us as their Equals; 
but now they began to consider us as elevating
ourselves into a State of Superiority, 

and immediately began to envy, hate,
and declare War against us. The neighbouring
little Squires too were uneasy to
see a poor Renter become their Equal in
a Matter in which they placed so much
Merit; and not doubting but it arose in
me from the same Ostentation, they began
to hate me likewise, and to turn my
Equipage into Ridicule; asserting that
my Horses, which were as well matched
as any in the Kingdom, were of different
Colours and Sizes; with much more of
that Kind of Wit, the only Basis of which
is lying. 
‘But what will appear most surprising
to you, Madam, was, that the Curate's
Wife, who being lame, had more Use
of the Coach than my Amelia, (indeed,
she seldom went to Church in any other
Manner) was one of my bitterest Enemies
on the Occasion. If she had ever
any Dispute with Amelia, which all the
Sweetness of my poor Girl could not
sometimes avoid, she was sure to introduce
with a malicious Sneer,’ ‘Tho' my
Husband doth not keep a Coach, Madam.’ 
‘Nay, she took this Opportunity to upbraid
my Wife with the Loss of her Fortune, alledging,’ 
‘That some Folks might have 

had as good Pretensions to a Coach as other
Folks, and a better too, as they brought a
better Fortune to their Husbands. But
that all People had not the Art of making
Brick without Straw.’ 
‘You will wonder, perhaps, Madam,
how I can remember such Stuff, which,
indeed, was a long time only Matter of
Amusement to both Amelia and myself; 
but we, at last, experienced the mischievous
Nature of Envy, and that it
tends rather to produce tragical than comical
Events. My Neighbours now
began to conspire against me. They
nick-named me in Derision, the Squire
Farmer. Whatever I bought, I was sure
to buy dearer; and when I sold, I was
obliged to sell cheaper than any other. 
In fact, they were all united; and while
they every Day committed Trespasses on
my Lands with Impunity, if any of my
Cattle escaped into their Fields, I was
either forced to enter into a Law-suit, or
to make amends four-fold for the Damage
sustained. 
‘The Consequences of all this could be
no other than that Ruin which ensued. 
Without tiring you with Particulars, before 

the End of four Years, I became involved
in Debt near 300l. more than
the Value of all my Effects. My Landlord
seized my Stock for Rent; and to
avoid immediate Confinement in Prison,
I was forced to leave the Country, with
all that I hold dear in the World, my
Wife, and my poor little Family. 
‘In this Condition, I arrived in Town
five or six Days ago. I had just taken
a Lodging in the Verge of the Court,
and had writ my dear Amelia word,
where she might find me, when she had
settled her Affairs in the best Manner she
could. That very Evening, as I was returning
Home from a Coffee-house, a
Fray happening in the Street, I endeavour'd
to assist the injured Party, when
I was seized by the Watch, and after being
confined all Night in the Round-House,
was conveyed in the Morning before a
Justice of Peace, who committed me
hither; where I should probably have
starved, had I not, from your Hands,
found a most unaccountable Preservation. 
—And here, give me leave to assure
you, my dear Miss Mathews, that whatever
Advantage I may have reaped from
your Misfortune, I sincerely lament it; 

nor would I have purchased any Relief
to myself at the Price of seeing you in
this dreadful Place.’ 
He spake these last Words with great
Tenderness: For he was a Man of consummate
Good-nature, and had formerly
had much Affection for this young Lady; 
indeed, more than the Generality of People
are capable of entertaining for any Person
whatsoever. 