


In which the Author first refutes some
idle Opinions concerning Spirits,
and then the Passengers relate their
several Deaths. 
It is the common Opinion, that Spirits
like Owls can see in the dark; nay, and
can then most easily be perceived by others. 
For which Reason, many Persons of good
Understanding, to prevent being terrified with
such Objects, usually keep a Candle burning
by them, that the Light may prevent their
seeing. Mr. Locke, in direct opposition to
this, hath not doubted to assert that you may 

see a Spirit in open Day-light full as well as in
the darkest Night. 
It was very dark when we sat out from
the Inn, nor could we see any more than if
every Soul of us had been alive. We had
travelled a good way, before any one offered
to open his Mouth: Indeed, most of the
Company were fast asleep * : But as I could
not close my own Eyes, and perceived the
Spirit, who sat opposite me, to be likewise
awake, I began to make Overtures of Conversation,
by complaining how dark it was. 
‘And extremely cold too, answered my Fellow-Traveller,
tho' I thank God, as I have
no Body, I feel no Inconvenience from it: 
But you will believe, Sir, that this frosty
Air must seem very sharp to one just issued
forth out of an Oven: for such was the
inflamed Habitation I am lately departed
from. How did you come to your End,
Sir? said I. I was murdered, Sir, answered
the Gentleman. I am surprized then, replied
I, that you did not divert yourself
by walking up and down, and playing 

some merry Tricks with the Murderer. 
Oh, Sir, returned he, I had not that Previlege,
I was lawfully put to death. In
short, a Physician set me on fire, by
giving me Medicines to throw out my Distemper. 
I died of a hot Regimen, as they
call it, in the Small-Pox.’ 
One of the Spirits at that World started
up, and cried out, ‘The Small-Pox! bless
me! I hope I am not in Company with
that Distemper, which I have all my
Life with such Caution avoided, and have
so happily escaped hitherto!’ This Fright
set all the Passengers who were awake
into a loud Laughter; and the Gentleman
recollecting himself with some Confusion,
and not without blushing, asked Pardon,
crying, ‘I protest I dreamt that I was alive. 
Perhaps, Sir, said I, you died of that Distemper,
which therefore made so strong an Impression
on you. No, Sir, answered he, I
never had it in my Life; but the continual
and dreadful Apprehension it kept me so
long under, cannot I see be so immediately
eradicated. You must know, Sir, I avoided
coming to London for thirty Years together, 

for fear of the Small-Pox, till the most urgent
Business brought me thither about five
Days ago. I was so dreadfully afraid of
this Disease, that I refused the second Night
of my Arrival to sup with a Friend, whose
Wife had recovered of it several Months
before, and the same Evening got a Surfeit
by eating too many Muscles, which
brought me into this good Company.’ 
‘I Will lay a Wager, cried the Spirit, who
sat next him, there is not one in the Coach
able to guess my Distemper.’ I desired the
Favour of him, to acquaint us with it, if it
was so uncommon. ‘Why, Sir, (said he) I
died of Honour.’ —‘Of Honour, Sir! repeated
I, with some surprize. Yes, Sir, answered the
Spirit, of Honour, for I was killed in a Duel.’ 
‘For my Part, said a fair Spirit, I was inoculated
last Summer, and had the good
fortune to escape with a very few Marks
in my Face. I esteemed myself now perfectly
happy, as I imagined I had no Restraint
to a full Enjoyment of the Diversions
of the Town; but within a few
days after my coming up, I caught cold 

by over-dancing myself at a Ball, and last
night died of a violent Fever.’ 
After a short Silence, which now ensued,
the fair Spirit who spoke last, it being now
Day-light, addressed herself to a Female, who
sat next her, and asked her to what Chance
they owed the Happiness of her Company. 
She answered, she apprehended to a Consumption: 
But the Physicians were not agreed
concerning her Distemper, for she left two of
them in a very hot Dispute about it, when she
came! out of her Body. ‘And pray, Madam,’
said the same Spirit, to the sixth Passenger,
‘How came you to leave the other World?’ 
But that female Spirit screwing up her Mouth,
answered, she wondered at the Curiosity of
some People; that perhaps Persons had already
heard some Reports of her Death, which
were far from being true: That whatever
was the Occasion of it, she was glad at being
delivered from a World, in which she had
no Pleasure, and where there was nothing
but Nonsense and Impertinence; particularly
among her own Sex, whose loose Conduct
she had long been entirely ashamed of. 

The beauteous Spirit perceiving her Question
gave offence, pursued it no farther. 
She had indeed all the Sweetness and Good-humour,
which are so extremely amiable
(when found) in that Sex, which Tenderness
most exquisitely becomes. Her Countenance
displayed all the Cheerfulness, the Good-nature,
and the Modesty, which diffuse such
Brightness round the Beauty of Seraphina * ,
awing every Beholder with Respect, and
at the same time ravishing him with Admiration. 
Had it not been indeed for our
Conversation on the Small-Pox, I should have
imagined we had been honoured with her
identical Presence. This Opinion might have
been heightened by the good Sense she uttered,
whenever she spoke; by the Delicacy
of her Sentiments, and the Complacence
of her Behaviour, together with a certain
Dignity, which attended every Look, Word
and Gesture; Qualities, which could not fail
making an Impression on a Heart †  so capable 

of receiving it as mine, nor was she long
in raising in me a very violent Degree of
seraphic Love. I do not intend by this, that
sort of Love which Men are very properly
said to make to Women in the lower World,
and which seldom lasts any longer than while
it is making. I mean by seraphic Love, an
extreme Delicacy and Tenderness of Friendship,
of which my worthy Reader, if thou
hast no Conception, as it is probable thou
may'st not, my endeavour to instruct thee
would be as fruitless, as it would be to explain
the most difficult Problems of Sir Isaac Newton,
to one ignorant of vulgar Arithmetic. 
To return therefore to Matters comprehensible
by all Understandings: The Discourse
now turned on the Vanity, Folly, and
Misery of the lower World, from which
every Passenger in the Coach expressed the
highest Satisfaction in being delivered: Tho'
it was very remarkable, that notwithstanding
the Joy we declared at our death, there was
not one of us who did not mention the Accident
which occasioned it as a Thing we
would have avoided if we could. Nay, the
very grave Lady herself, who was the forwardest 

in testifying her Delight, confest inadvertently,
that she left a Physician by her
Bed-side. And the Gentleman, who died of
Honour, very liberally cursed both his Folly,
and his Fencing. While we were entertaining
ourselves with these Matters, on a
sudden a most offensive Smell began to invade
our Nostrils. This very much resembled the
Savour, which Travellers, in Summer, perceive
at their Approach to that beautiful Village
of the Hague, arising from those delicious
Canals, which, as they consist of standing
Water, do at that time emit Odours greatly
agreeable to a Dutch Taste, but not so
pleasant to any other. Those Perfumes,
with the Assistance of a fair Wind, begin
to affect Persons of quick olfactory Nerves at a
League's distance, and increase gradually as
you approach. In the same manner, did the
Smell I have just mentioned, more and more
invade us, till one of the Spirits looking out of
the Coach-Window, declared we were just
arrived at a very large City; and indeed he
had scarce said so, before we found ourselves
in the Suburbs, and at the same time, the
Coachman being asked by another, informed
us, that the Name of this Place was the City 

of Diseases. The Road to it was extremely
smooth, and excepting the abovementioned
Savour, delightfully pleasant. The Streets
of the Suburbs were lined with Bagnio's,
Taverns, and Cooks Shops; in the first we saw
several beautiful Women, but in tawdry
Dresses, looking out at the Windows; and in
the latter, were visibly exposed all kinds of
the richest Dainties: but on our entring the
City, we found, contrary to all we had seen
in the other World, that the Suburbs were
infinitely pleasanter than the City itself. It
was, indeed, a very dull, dark, and melancholy
Place. Few People appeared in the
Streets, and these, for the most part, were old
Women, and here and there a formal grave
Gentleman, who seemed to be thinking,
with large Tie-wigs on, and amber-headed
Canes in their Hands. We were all in hopes,
that our Vehicle would not stop here; but
to our sorrow, the Coach soon drove into an
Inn, and we were obliged to alight. 