


In which Julian relates his Adventures
in the Character of an avaricious
Jew. 
‘The next Character in which I was
destined to appear in the Flesh, was
that of an avaricious Jew. I was born in
Alexandria in Egypt. My Name was
Balthazar. Nothing very remarkable happened
to me, till the Year of the memorable
Tumult, in which the Jews of that
City are reported in History to have massacred
more Christians, than at that time
dwelt in it. Indeed, the truth is, they
did maul the Dogs pretty handsomely; but
I my self was not present: for as all our
People were ordered to be armed, I took
that opportunity of selling two Swords,
which probably I might otherwise never
have disposed of, they being extremely old
and rusty: so that having no Weapon left, I
did not care to venture abroad. Besides, tho'
I really thought it an Act meriting Salvation
to murder the Nazarenes, as the Fact 

was to be committed at Midnight, at which
Time, to avoid Suspicion, we were all to
sally from our own Houses; I could not
persuade my self to consume so much Oil in
sitting up till that Hour: for these Reasons
therefore, I remained at home that Evening. 
‘I Was at this time greatly enamoured
with one Hypatia, the Daughter of a Philosopher; 
a young Lady of the greatest
Beauty and Merit: indeed, she had every
imaginable Ornament both of Mind and
Body. She seemed not to dislike my Person:
but there were two Obstructions to our
Marriage, viz. my Religion and her Poverty:
both which might probably have been got
over, had not those Dogs the Christians murdered
her; and, what is worse, afterwards
burnt her Body: worse, I say, because I
lost by that means a Jewel of some Value,
which I had presented to her, designing, if
our Nuptials did not take place, to demand
it of her back again. 
‘Being thus disappointed in my Love, I
soon after left Alexandria, and went to the 

Imperial City, where I apprehended I should
find a good Market for Jewels on the approaching
Marriage of the Emperor with
Athenais. I disguised my self as a Beggar on
this Journey, for these Reasons: first, as I
imagined I should thus carry my Jewels
with greater Safety; and secondly, to lessen
my Expences: which latter Expedient succeeded
so well, that I begged two Oboli on
my way more than my Travelling cost me,
my Diet being chiefly Roots, and my Drink
Water. 
‘But perhaps, it had been better for me if I
had been more lavish, and more expeditious:
for the Ceremony was over before I reached
Constantinople; so that I lost that glorious
Opportunity of disposing of my Jewels, with
which many of our People were greatly enriched. 
‘The Life of a Miser is very little worth
relating, as it is one constant Scheme of getting
or saving Money. I shall therefore repeat
to you some few only of my Adventures,
without regard to any Order. 

‘A Roman Jew, who was a great Lover
of Falernian Wine, and who indulged himself
very freely with it, came to dine at my
House; when knowing he should meet with
little Wine, and that of the cheaper sort,
sent me in half a dozen Jars of Falernian. 
Can you believe I would not give this Man
his own Wine? Sir, I adulterated it so, that I
made six Jars of them; three, which he and
his Friend drank; the other three I afterwards
sold to the very Person who originally sent
them me, knowing he would give a better
Price than any other. 
‘A Noble Roman came one day to my
House in the Country, which I had purchased,
for half the Value, of a distressed
Person. My Neighbours paid him the Compliment
of some Music, on which account,
when he departed, he left a Piece of Gold
with me, to be distributed among them. 
I pocketed this Money, and ordered
them a small Vessel of four Wine, which I
could not have sold for above two Drachmas,
and afterwards made them pay in Work
three times the Value of it. 

‘As I was not entirely void of Religion,
tho' I pretended to infinitely more than I
had, so I endeavoured to reconcile my
Transactions to my Conscience as well as
possible. Thus I never invited any one to
eat with me, but those on whose Pockets
I had some Design. After our Collation, it
was constantly my Method to set down in a
Book I kept for that purpose, what I thought
they owed me for their Meal. Indeed, this
was generally a hundred times as much
as they could have dined elsewhere for: but
however, it was quid pro quo, if not ad
valorem. Now whenever the Opportunity
offered of imposing on them, I considered it
only as paying my self what they owed me:
indeed, I did not always confine my self
strictly to what I had set down, however extravagant
that was; but I reconciled taking
the Overplus to my self as Usance. 
‘But I was not only too cunning for others,
I sometimes over-reached my self. I
have contracted Distempers for want of
Food and Warmth, which have put me to
the Expence of a Physician: Nay, I once 

very narrowly escaped Death by taking bad
Drugs, only to save one Seven Eighths per
Cent. in the Price. 
‘By these and such like Means, in the
midst of Poverty and every kind of Distress,
I saw my self Master of an immense Fortune:
the casting up and ruminating on
which was my daily and only Pleasure. 
This was however obstructed and embittered
by two Considerations, which against my
Will often invaded my Thoughts. One
would have been intolerable (but that indeed
seldom troubled me) was, that I
must one day leave my darling Treasure. The
other haunted me continually, viz. that
my Riches were no greater. However, I
comforted my self against this Reflection,
by an Assurance that they would increase
daily: On which Head, my Hopes were
so extensive, that I may say with Virgil, 

‘His ego nec Metas Rerum nec Tempora pono.
‘Indeed I am convinced, that had I possessed
the whole Globe of Earth, save one single
Drachma, which I had been certain never to 

be master of, I am convinced, I say, that
single Drachma, would have given me more
Uneasiness than all the rest could afford me
Pleasure. 
‘To say the truth, between my Solicitude
in contriving Schemes to procure Money,
and my extreme Anxiety in preserving
it, I never had one Moment of Ease while
awake, nor of Quiet when in my Sleep. 
In all the Characters through which I have
passed, I have never undergone half the Misery
I suffered in this, and indeed Minos
seemed to be of the same Opinion: for
while I stood trembling and shaking in Expectation
of my Sentence, he bid me go
back about my Business; for that no body
was to be d&wblank;n'd in more Worlds than
one. And indeed, I have since learnt, that
the Devil will not receive a Miser.’ 