


In which our Hero makes a Speech
well worthy to be celebrated; and
the Behaviour of one of the Gang
perhaps more unnatural than any
other Part of this History. 
There was in the Gang a Man
named Blueskin. One of those Merchants
who trade in dead Oxen, Sheep, &c.
in short, what the Vulgar call a Butcher. 
This Gentleman had two Qualities of a 

GREAT Man, viz. undaunted Courage, and
an absolute Contempt of those ridiculous
Distinctions of Meum and Tuum. The
common Forms of exchanging Property by
Trade seemed to him too tedious; he therefore
resolved to quit the mercantile Profession,
and, falling acquainted with some of
Mr.  Wild's People, he provided himself
with Arms, and enlisted of the Gang. In
which he behaved for some time with great
Decency and Order, and submitted to accept
such Share of the Booty with the rest,
as our Hero allotted him. 
But this Subserviency agreed ill with
his Temper; for we should have before
remembered a third heroic Quality, namely,
Ambition, which was no inconsiderable
Part of his Composition. One Day, therefore,
having robbed a Gentleman at Windsor
of a Gold-Watch; which, on its being
advertised in the News-Paper, with a considerable
Reward, was demanded of him by
Wild, he peremptorily refused to deliver
it. 

“How, Mr. Blueskin! says Wild, you
will not deliver the Watch? No, Mr.
Wild, answered he; I have taken it, and
will keep it; or, if I dispose of it, I will
dispose of it myself, and keep the Money
for which I sell it. Sure, replied Wild,
you have not the Assurance to pretend
you have any Property or Right in this
Watch? I am certain, returned Blueskin,
whether I have any Right in it or
no, you can prove none. I will undertake,
cries the other, to shew I have an
absolute Right to it, and that by the
Laws of our Gang, of which I am providentially
at the Head. I know not
who put you at the Head of it, cries
Blueskin; but those who did, certainly
did it for their own Good, that you
might conduct them the better in their
Robberies, inform them of the richest
Booties, prevent Surprize, pack Juries,
bribe Evidence, and so contribute to
their Benefit and Safety; and not to convert
all their Labour and Hazard to your
own Benefit and Advantage. You are
greatly mistaken, Sir, answered Wild; 

you are talking of a legal Society, where
the chief Magistrate is always chosen
for the public Good, which, as we see
in all the legal Societies of the World,
he constantly consults, daily contributing,
by his superiour Skill, to their Prosperity,
and not sacrificing their Good to
his own Wealth, or Pleasure, or Humour: 
But in an illegal Society or Gang,
as this of ours, it is otherwise; for who
would be at the Head of a Gang, unless
for his own Interest? And without a
Head, you know, you cannot subsist. 
Nothing but a Head, and Obedience to
that Head, can preserve a Gang a Moment
from Destruction. It is absolutely
better for you to content yourselves with
a moderate Reward, and enjoy that in
Safety at the Disposal of your Chief,
than to engross the whole with the Hazard
to which you will be liable without
my Protection. And surely there is
none in the whole Gang, who hath less
Reason to complain than you; you have
tasted of my Favours; witness that Piece
of Ribbon you wear in your Hat, with
which I dubbed you Captain. —Therefore 

pray, Captain, deliver the Watch. 
—D&wblank;n your cajoling, says Blueskin: 
Do you think I value myself on
this Bit of Ribband, which I could have
bought myself for six-pence, and wore
without your Leave? Do you imagine I
think myself a Captain, because you
whom I know not empowered to make
one, call me so? The Name of Captain
is but a Shadow: The Men and the
Salary are the Substance: And I am not
to be bubbled with a Shadow. I will
be called Captain no longer, and he
who flatters me by that Name, I shall
think affronts me, and I will knock him
down, I assure you. —Did ever Man
talk so unreasonably, cries Wild. Are
you not respected as a Captain by the
whole Gang since my dubbing you so? 
But it is the Shadow only; it seems,
and you will knock a Man down for affronting
you, who calls you Captain. 
Might not a Man as reasonably tell a
Minister of State: Sir, you have given
me the Shadow only. The Ribbon, or the
Bawble, that you give me, implies that I
have either signalized myself, by some 

great Action, for the Benefit and Glory
of my Country; or at least that I am
descended from those who have done so. 
I know myself to be a Scoundrel, and so
have been those few Ancestors I can remember,
or have ever heard of. Therefore
I am resolved to knock the first Man
down, who calls me Sir, or Right Honourable. 
But all GREAT and wise Men
think themselves sufficiently repaid by
what procures them Honour and Precedence
in the Gang, without enquiring into
Substance; nay, if a Title, or a Feather,
be equal to this Purpose, they are
Substance, and not mere Shadows; but I
have not Time to argue with you at present,
so give me the Watch without any
more Deliberation. I am no more a
Friend to Deliberation than yourself, answered
Blueskin, and so I tell you once
for all, By G&wblank; I never will give
you the Watch, no, nor will I ever hereafter
surrender any Part of my Booty. 
I won it, and I will wear it. Take your
Pistols yourself, and go out on the Highway,
and don't lazily think to fatten
yourself with the Dangers and Pains of 

other People.” At which Words he departed
in a fierce Mood, and repaired to
the Tavern used by the Gang, where he
had appointed to meet some of his Acquaintance,
whom he informed of what
had passed between him and Wild, and advised
them all to follow his Example; 
which they all readily agreed to, and Mr.
Wild's D&wblank;tion was the universal Toast: 
In drinking Bumpers to which, they had
finished a large Bowl of Punch, when a
Constable, with a numerous Attendance,
and Wild at their Head, entered the Room,
and seized on Blueskin, whom his Companions,
when they saw our Hero, did not
dare attempt to rescue. The Watch was
found upon him, which, together with
Wild's Information, was more than sufficient
to commit him to Newgate. 
In the Evening, Wild, and the rest of
those who had been drinking with Blueskin,
met at the Tavern, where nothing
was to be seen but the profoundest Submission
to their Leader. They vilified and
abused Blueskin as much as they had before
abused our Hero, and now repeated the same 

Toast, only changing the Name of Wild
into that of Blueskin. All agreeing with
Wild, that the Watch found in his Pocket,
and which must be a fatal Evidence against
him, was a just Judgment on his Disobedience
and Revolt. 
Thus did this Great Man, by a resolute
and timely Example (for he went directly
to the Justice when Blueskin left
him) quell one of the most dangerous Conspiracies
which could possibly arise in a
Gang; and which, had it been permitted one
Day's Growth, would inevitably have ended
in his Destruction; so much doth it behoove
GREAT Men and Prigs to be eternally on
their Guard, and expeditious in the Execution
of their Purposes; while none but
weak and honest Men can indulge themselves
in Remissness or Repose. 
The Achates, Fireblood, had been present
at both these Meetings; but though he had
a little too hastily concurred in cursing his
Friend, and vowing his Perdition; yet
now he saw all that Scheme dissolved, he
returned to his Integrity; of which he 

gave an incontestable Proof, by informing
Wild of the Measures which had been concerted
against him. In which, he said,
he had pretended to acquiesce, in order the
better to betray them; but this, as he afterwards
confessed on his Death-Bed, i. e. in
the Cart at Tyburn, was only a Copy of his
Countenance; for that he was, at that
Time, as sincere and hearty in his Opposition
to Wild as any of his Companions. 
Our Hero, however, desired him to
keep this a severe Secret; for, he said, as
they had seen their Errors, and repented,
nothing was more noble than Forgiveness. 
But though he was pleased modestly to ascribe
this to his Lenity, it really arose
from much more noble and political Principles. 
He considered that it would be
dangerous to attempt the Punishment of so
many; besides, he flattered himself that
Fear would keep them in Order; and indeed
he concluded, that Fireblood had told
him nothing more than he knew before,
viz. that they were all complete Prigs,
whom he was to govern by their Fears,
and in whom he was to place no more 

Confidence than was necessary, and to watch
them with the utmost Caution and Circumspection; 
for a Rogue, he wisely said,
was like Gunpowder, which, whoever
uses, must do it very cautiously, lest it
blow up himself, instead of executing his
mischievous Purpose against some other
Person or Animal. 
We will now repair to Newgate, it being
the Place where most of the GREAT
Men of this History are hastening as fast as
possible; and, to confess the Truth, it is a
Castle very far from being an improper,
or misbecoming Habitation for any GREAT
Man whatever. And as this Scene will
continue during the Residue of our History,
we shall open it with a new Book,; 
and shall, therefore, take this Opportunity
of closing our third. 