


Elogiums on Constables, &c. And
new Instances of Friendly's Folly. 
To return to my History, which,
having rested itself a little, is now
ready to proceed on its Journey: Fireblood
was the Person chosen by Wild for this
Service. He had, on the late Occasion,
experienced the Talents of this Youth for a
good round Perjury. He immediately,
therefore, found him out, and proposed it 

to him, and, receiving his instant Assent,
they consulted together, and soon framed
an Evidence, which, being communicated
to one of the most bitter and severe Creditors
of Heartfree, by him laid before a
Magistrate, and attested by the Oath of
Fireblood, the Justice granted his Warrant; 
and Heartfree was accordingly apprehended
and brought before him. 
When the Officers came for this poor
Wretch, they found him meanly diverting
himself with his little Children, the youngest
of whom sat on his Knees, and the eldest
was playing at a little Distance from
him with Friendly. The Constable, who
was a very good sort of a Man, but one
very laudably severe in his Office, after acquainting
Heartfree with his Errand, bad
him come along and be d&wblank;d, and leave
those little Bastards; for so, he said, he
supposed they were, for a Legacy to the Parish. 
Heartfree was much surprized at
hearing there was a Warrant for Felony against
him; but he shewed less Concern
than Friendly did in his Countenance. The
eldest Daughter, when she saw the Constable 

lay hold on her Father, immediately
quitted her Play, and, running to him, and
bursting into Tears, cry'd out: You shall
not hurt poor Papa. One of the other Ruffians
offered to take the little one rudely
from his Knees; but Heartfree started up,
and, catching the Fellow by the Collar,
dashed his Head so violently against the
Wall, that, had he had any Brains, he
might possibly have lost them by the
Blow. 
The Constable, like most of those heroic
Spirits who insult Men in Adversity,
had some Prudence mixt with his Zeal for
Justice. Seeing, therefore, this rough
Treatment of his Companion, he began to
pursue more gentle Methods, and very civilly
desired Mr. Heartfree to go with him,
seeing he was an Officer, and obliged to
execute his Warrant; that he was sorry for
his Misfortune, and hoped he would be acquitted. 
The other answered, he should
patiently submit to the Laws of his Country,
and would attend him whither he was
ordered to conduct him; then, taking
Leave of his Children with a tender Kiss, 

he recommended them to the Care of
Friendly; who promised to see them safe
Home, and then to attend him at the Justice's,
whose Name and Abode he had
learnt of the Constable. 
This latter arrived at the Magistrate's
House, just as he had signed the Mittimus
against his Friend; for the Evidence of
Fireblood was so clear and strong, and the
Justice was so incensed against Heartfree,
and so convinced of his Guilt, that he
would hardly hear him speak in his own
Defence, which the Reader perhaps, when
he hears the Evidence against him, will be
less inclined to censure: For this Witness
deposed, “that he had been, by Heartfree
himself, employed to carry the Orders
of Embezzling to Wild, in order to be
delivered to his Wife; that he had been
afterwards present with Wild and her at
the Inn, when they took Coach for Harwich,
where she shewed him the Casket
of Jewels, and desired him to tell her
Husband, that she had fully executed his
Command. 

When Friendly found the Justice obdurate,
and that all he could say had no Effect,
nor was it any way possible for Heartfree
to escape being committed to Newgate,
he resolved to accompany him thither: 
Where, when they arrived, the Keeper
would have confined Heartfree (he having
no Money) amongst the common Felons; 
but Friendly would not permit it, and
advanced every Shilling he had in his Pocket,
to procure a Room in the Press-Yard
for his Friend. 
They spent that Day together, and, in
the Evening, the Prisoner dismissed his
Friend, desiring him, after many Thanks
for his Fidelity, to be comforted on his Account. 
“I know not, says he, how far
God may permit the Malice of my Enemies
to prevail. But whatever my
Sufferings are, I am convinced my Innocence
will somewhere be rewarded. If,
therefore, any fatal Accident should happen
to me, (for he who is in the Hands
of Perjury, may apprehend the worst)
my dear Friendly, be a Father to my 

poor Children,” at which Words the
Tears gushed from his Eyes. The other
begged him not to admit any such Apprehensions; 
for that he would employ his
utmost Diligence in his Service, and doubted
not but to subvert any villainous Design
laid for his Destruction, and to make his
Innocence appear to the World as white as
it was in his own Opinion. 
We cannot help mentioning a Circumstance
here, though we doubt it will appear
very unnatural and incredible to our
Reader; which is, that, notwithstanding
the former Character and Behaviour of
Heartfree, this Story of his embezzling
was so far from surprizing his Neighbours,
that many of them declared they expected
no better from him. Some were assured
he could pay forty Shillings in the Pound,
if he would. Others had overheard Hints
formerly pass between him and Mrs. Heartfree,
which had given them Suspicions. 
And, what is most astonishing of all is,
that many of those who had before censured
him for an extravagant heedless Fool, 

now no less confidently abused him for a
cunning, tricking, avaricious Knave. 