


Master Wild sets out on his Travels,
and returns home again. A very
short Chapter, containing infinitely
more Time and less Matter than
any other in the whole Story. 
We are sorry we cannot indulge our
Reader's Curiosity with a full and
perfect Account of this Accident; but as
there are such various Accounts, one of
which only can be true, and possibly, 

and indeed probably, none; instead of
following the general Method of Historians,
who in such Cases set down the various
Reports, and leave to your own Conjecture
which you will chuse, we shall pass
them all over. 
Certain it is, that whatever this Accident
was, it determined our Hero's Father
to send his Son immediately abroad,
for seven Years; and, which may seem
somewhat remarkable, to his Majesty's
Plantations in America. That Part of the
World being, as he said, freer from Vices
than the Courts and Cities of Europe, and
consequently less dangerous to corrupt a
young Man's Morals. And as for the Advantages,
the old Gentleman thought they
were equal there with those attained in the
politer Climates; for travelling, he said,
was travelling in one Part of the World as
well as another: It consisted in being such
a Time from home, and in traversing
so many Leagues; and appealed to Experience,
whether most of our Travellers
in France and Italy, did not prove at their 

Return, that they might have been sent as
profitably to Norway and Greenland? 
According to these Resolutions of his
Father, the young Gentleman went aboard
a Ship, and with a great deal of good
Company set out for the American Hemisphere. 
The exact Time of his Stay is
somewhat uncertain; most probably longer
than was intended: But howsoever long his
Abode there was, it must be a Blank in
this History; as the whole Story contains
not one Adventure worthy the Reader's Notice; 
being indeed, a continued Scene of
whoring, drinking, and removing from one
Place to another. 
To confess a Truth, we are so ashamed
of the shortness of this Chapter, that we
would have done a Violence to our History,
and have inserted an Adventure or two
of some other Traveller: To which Purpose
we borrowed the Journals of several young
Gentlemen who have lately made the Tour
of Europe; but to our great Sorrow could
not extract a single Incident strong enough
to justify the Theft to our Consciences. 

When we consider the ridiculous Figure
this Chapter must make, being the
History of no less than eight Years, our only
comfort is, that the History of some
Mens lives, and perhaps of some Men who
have made a Noise in the World, are in
Reality as absolute Blanks as the Travels of
our Hero. As, therefore, we shall make sufficient
Amends in the Sequel for this Inanity, we
shall hasten on to Matters of true Importance,
and immense Greatness. At present we content
ourselves with setting down our Hero
where we took him up, after acquainting
our Reader that he went abroad, staid seven
Years, and then came home again. 