


In which the History goes forward about
Twelve Hours. 



Containing Instructions very necessary to be perused
by modern Critics. 
Reader, it is impossible we
should know what Sort of Person
thou wilt be: For, perhaps, thou
may'st be as learned in Human Nature as 

Shakespear himself was, and, perhaps, thou
may'st be no wiser than some of his
Editors. Now lest this latter should be
the Case, we think proper, before we go
any farther together, to give thee a few
wholesome Admonitions; that thou may'st
not as grosly misunderstand and misrepresent
us, as some of the said Editors have misunderstood
and misrepresented their Author. 
First, then, we warn thee not too
hastily to condemn any of the Incidents
in this our History, as impertinent and
foreign to our main Design, because thou
dost not immediately conceive in what
Manner such Incident may conduce to
that Design. This Work may, indeed,
be considered as a great Creation of our
own; and for a little Reptile of a Critic
to presume to find Fault with any of
its Parts, without knowing the Manner in
which the Whole is connected, and before
he comes to the final Catastrophe,
is a most presumptuous Absurdity. The
Allusion and Metaphor we have here
made use of, we must acknowledge to 

be infinitely too great for our Occasion, but
there is, indeed, no other, which is at all
adequate to express the Difference between
an Author of the first Rate, and a Critic of
the lowest. 
Another Caution we would give thee,
my good Reptile, is, that thou dost not find
out too near a Resemblance between certain
Characters here introduced; as for Instance,
between the Landlady who appears in the
Seventh Book, and her in the Ninth. 
Thou art to know, Friend, that there are
certain Characteristics, in which most Individuals
of every Profession and Occupation
agree. To be able to preserve these
Characteristics, and at the same Time to
diversify their Operations, is one Talent of
a good Writer. Again, to mark the nice
Distinction between two Persons actuated
by the same Vice or Folly is another; and
as this last Talent is found in very few
Writers, so is the true Discernment of it
found in as few Readers; though, I believe,
the Observation of this forms a very
principal Pleasure in those who are capable
of the Discovery: Every Person, for Instance,
can distinguish between Sir Epicure
Mammon, and Sir Fopling Flutter; but to
note the Difference between Sir Fopling Flutter 

and Sir Courtly Nice, requires a more exquisite
Judgment: For want of which, vulgar
Spectators of Plays very often do great
Injustice in the Theatre; where I have
sometimes known a Poet in Danger of being
convicted as a Thief, upon much worse
Evidence than the Resemblance of Hands
hath been held to be in the Law. In
reality, I apprehend every amorous Widow
on the Stage would run the Hazard of being
condemned as a servile Imitation of
Dido, but that happily very few of our
Play-house Critics understand enough of
Latin to read Virgil. 
In the next Place, we must admonish
thee, my worthy Friend, (for, perhaps, thy
Heart may be better than thy Head) not
to condemn a Character as a bad one, because
it is not perfectly a good one. If
thou dost delight in these Models of Perfection,
there are Books enow written to
gratify thy Taste; but as we have not, in
the Course of our Conversation, ever happened
to meet with any such Person, we
have not chosen to introduce any such
here. To say the Truth, I a little question
whether mere Man ever arrived at this
consummate Degree of Excellence, as well 

as whether there hath ever existed a Monster
bad enough to verify that 

—nulla virtute redemptum
A vitiis—* 
in Juvenal: Nor do I, indeed, conceive
the good Purposes served by inserting Characters
of such angelic Perfection, or such
diabolical Depravity, in any Work of Invention: 
Since from contemplating either,
the Mind of Man is more likely to be
overwhelmed with Sorrow and Shame,
than to draw any good Uses from such
Patterns; for in the former Instance he
may be both concerned and ashamed to
see a Pattern of Excellence, in his Nature,
which he may reasonably despair of ever
arriving at; and in contemplating the latter,
he may be no less affected with those
uneasy Sensations, at seeing the Nature, of
which he is a Partaker, degraded into so
odious and detestable a Creature. 
In Fact, if there be enough of Goodness
in a Character to engage the Admiration
and Affection of a well-disposed Mind,
though there should appear some of those
little Blemishes, quas humana parum cavit
natura, they will raise our Compassion rather 

ther than our Abhorrence. Indeed, nothing
can be of more moral Use than the
Imperfections which are seen in Examples
of this Kind; since such form a Kind of
Surprize, more apt to affect and dwell
upon our Minds, than the Faults of very
vicious and wicked Persons. The Foibles
and Vices of Men in whom there is great
Mixture of Good, become more glaring
Objects, from the Virtues which contrast
them, and shew their Deformity; and when
we find such Vices attended with their evil
Consequence to our favourite Characters,
we are not only taught to shun them for
our own Sake, but to hate them for the
Mischiefs they have already brought on
those we love. 
And now, my Friend, having given you
these few Admonitions, we will, if you
please, once more set forward with our
History. 




Containing the Arrival of an Irish Gentleman,
with very extraordinary Adventures which ensued at the Inn. 
Now the little trembling Hare, whom
the Dread of all her numerous Enemies,
and chiefly of that cunning, cruel,
carnivorous Animal Man, had confined all
the Day to her Lurking-place, sports wantonly
o'er the Lawns: Now on some hollow
Tree the Owl, shrill Chorister of the
Night, hoots forth Notes which might
charm the Ears of some modern Conoisseurs
in Music: Now in the Imagination of the
half-drunk Clown, as he staggers through
the Church-yard, or rather Charnel-yard,
to his Home, Fear paints the bloody Hobgoblin: 
Now Thieves and Ruffians are awake,
and honest Watchmen fast asleep: 
In plain English, it was now Midnight; 
and the Company at the Inn, as well
those who have been already mentioned in
this History, as some others who arrived
in the Evening, were all in Bed. Susan
Chambermaid, was now only stirring, she
being obliged to wash the Kitchin, before 

she retired to the Arms of the fond, expecting
Ostler. 
In this Posture were Affairs at the Inn,
when a Gentleman arrived there Post. He
immediately alighted from his Horse, and
coming up to Susan, enquired of her, in a
very abrupt and confused Manner, being
almost out of Breath with Eagerness, whether
there was any Lady in the House. 
The Hour of Night, and the Behaviour of
the Man, who stared very wildly all the
Time, a little surprized Susan, so that she
hesitated before she made any Answer:
Upon which the Gentleman, with redoubled
Eagerness, begg'd her to give him a
true Information, saying, he had lost his
Wife, and was come in Pursuit of her. 
‘Upon my Shoul, cries he, I have been
near catching her already in two or three
Places, if I had not found her gone just
as I came up with her. 
‘If she be in the House, do carry me
up in the Dark and shew her to me; and
if she be gone away before me, do tell
me which Way I shall go after her to
meet her, and upon my Shoul, I will
make you the richest poor Woman in
the Nation.’ He then pulled out a 

Handful of Guineas, a Sight which would
have bribed Persons of much greater Consequence
than this poor Wench, to much
worse Purposes. 
Susan, from the Account she had received
of Mrs. Waters, made not the least
Doubt but that she was the very identical. 
Stray whom the right Owner pursued. As
she concluded, therefore, with great Appearance
of Reason, that she never could
get Money in an honester Way than by
restoring a Wife to her Husband, she made
no Scruple of assuring the Gentleman, that
the Lady he wanted was then in the House,
and was presently afterward prevailed upon
(by very liberal Promises, and some Earnest
paid into her Hands) to conduct him
to the Bed-chamber of Mrs. Waters. 
It hath been a Custom long established
in the polite World, and that upon very
solid and substantial Reasons, that a Husband
shall never enter his Wife's Apartment
without first knocking at the Door. 
The many excellent Uses of this Custom
need scarce be hinted to a Reader who
hath any Knowledge of the World: For
by this Means the Lady hath Time to adjust
herself, or to remove any disagreeable 

Object out of the Way; for there are some
Situations, in which nice and delicate Women
would not be discovered by their
Husbands. 
To say the Truth, there are several Ceremonies
instituted among the polished Part
of Mankind, which, tho' they may, to
coarser Judgments, appear as Matters of
mere Form, are found to have much of
Substance in them, by the more discerning; 
and lucky would it have been, had the
Custom abovementioned been observed by
our Gentleman in the present Instance. 
Knock, indeed, he did at the Door, but
not with one of those gentle Raps which is
usual on such Occasions. On the contrary,
when he found the Door locked, he flew
at it with such Violence, that the Lock immediately
gave Way, the Door burst open,
and he fell headlong into the Room. 
He had no sooner recovered his Legs,
than forth from the Bed, upon his Legs likewise
appeared—with Shame and Sorrow are
we obliged to proceed—our Heroe himself,
who, with a menacing Voice, demanded
of the Gentleman who he was,
and what he meant by daring to burst 

open his Chamber in that outrageous Manner. 
The Gentleman at first thought he had
committed a Mistake, and was going to ask
Pardon and retreat, when, on a sudden, as
the Moon shone very bright, he cast his
Eyes on Stays, Gowns, Petticoats, Caps,
Ribbons, Stockings, Garters, Shoes, Clogs,
&c. all which lay in a disordered Manner
on the Floor. All these operating on the
natural Jealousy of his Temper, so enraged
him, that he lost all Power of Speech; 
and without returning any Answer to Jones,
he endeavoured to approach the Bed. 
Jones immediately interposing, a fierce
Contention arose, which soon proceeded to
Blows on both Sides. And now Mrs. Waters
(for we must confess she was in the same Bed)
being, I suppose, awakened from her Sleep,
and seeing two Men fighting in her Bedchamber,
began to scream in the most violent
Manner, crying out Murder! Robbery!
and more frequently Rape! which last, some,
perhaps, may wonder she should mention,
who do not consider that these Words of
Exclamation are used by Ladies in a Fright,
as Fa, la, la, ra, da, &c. are in Music, only 

as the Vehicles of Sound, and without any
fixed Ideas. 
Next to the Lady's Chamber was deposited
the Body of an Irish Gentleman,
who arrived too late at the Inn to have
been mentioned before. This Gentleman
was one of those whom the Irish call a
Calabalaro, or Cavalier. He was a younger
Brother of a good Family, and having
no Fortune at Home, was obliged to look
abroad in order to get one: For which
Purpose he was proceeding to the Bath to
try his Luck with Cards and the Women. 
This young Fellow lay in Bed reading
one of Mrs. Behn's Novels; for he had
been instructed by a Friend, that he would
find no more effectual Method of recommending
himself to the Ladies than the
improving his Understanding, and filling
his Mind with good Literature. He no
sooner, therefore, heard the violent Uproar
in the next Room, than he leapt from
his Bolster, and taking his Sword in one
Hand, and the Candle which burnt by him
in the other, he went directly to Mrs. Waters's
Chamber. 

If the Sight of another Man in his Shirt
at first added some Shock to the Decency of
the Lady, it made her presently Amends by
considerably abating her Fears; for no sooner
had the Calabalaro enter'd the Room, than
he cry'd out: ‘Mr. Fitzpatrick, what the
Devil is the Maning of this?’ Upon
which the other immediately answered,
‘O, Mr. Macklachlan, I am rejoiced you
are here,—This Villain hath debauched
my Wife, and is got into Bed with
her.’—‘What Wife? cries Macklachlan,
do not I know Mrs. Fitzpatrick very well,
and don't I see that the Lady, whom the
Gentleman who stands here in his Shirt is
lying in Bed with, is none of her?’ 
Fitzpatrick now perceiving, as well by
the Glimpse he had of the Lady, as by her
Voice, which might have been distinguished
at a greater Distance than he now stood
from her, that he had made a very unfortunate
Mistake, began to ask many Pardons
of the Lady; and then turning to Jones he
said, ‘I would have you take Notice I do
not ask your Pardon, for you have bate
me; for which I am resolved to have
your Blood in the Morning.’ 

Jones treated this Menace with much
Contempt; and Mr. Macklachlan answered,
‘Indeed, Mr. Fitzpatrick, you may be
ashamed of your ownself, to disturb People
at this Time of Night: If all the
People in the Inn were not asleep, you
would have awakened them as you have
me. The Gentleman has served you
very rightly. Upon my Conscience, tho'
I have no Wife, if you had treated her
so, I would have cut your Throat.’ 
Jones was so confounded with his Fears
for his Lady's Reputation, that he knew
neither what to say or do; but the Invention
of Women is, as hath been observed,
much readier than that of Men. She recollected
that there was a Communication
between her Chamber and that of Mr.
Jones; relying, therefore, on his Honour
and her own Assurance, she answered, ‘I
know not what you mean, Villains! I am
Wife to none of you. Help! Rape! 
Murder! Rape!’—And now the Landlady
coming into the Room, Mrs. Waters
fell upon her with the utmost Virulence,
saying, ‘She thought herself in a sober
Inn, and not in a Bawdy-House; but
that a Set of Villains had broke into her 

Room, with an Intent upon her Honour,
if not upon her Life; and both, she said,
were equally dear to her.’ 
The Landlady now began to roar as
loudly as the poor Woman in Bed had
done before. She cry'd, ‘She was undone,
and that the Reputation of her House,
which was never blown upon before, was
utterly destroyed.’ Then turning to the
Men, she cry'd, ‘What, in the Devil's
Name, is the Reason of all this Disturbance
in the Lady's Room?’ Fitzpatrick,
hanging down his Head, repeated, ‘that
he had committed a Mistake, for which
he heartily asked Pardon,’ and then retired
with his Countryman. Jones, who
was too ingenious to have missed the Hint
given him by his Fair One, boldly asserted,
‘That he had run to her Assistance upon
hearing the Door broke open; with what
Design he could not conceive, unless of
robbing the Lady; which if they intended,
he said, he had had the good Fortune
to prevent.’ ‘I never had a Robbery
committed in my House since I have
kept it,’ cries the Landlady: ‘I wou'd have
you to know, Sir, I harbour no Highwaymen
here; I scorn the Word, thof
I say it. None but honest, good Gentlefolks, 

are welcome to my House; and,
I thank good Luck, I have always had
enow of such Customers; indeed as many
as I could entertain. Here hath been my
Lord &wblank;’ and then she repeated over a
Catalogue of Names and Titles, many of
which we might, perhaps, be guilty of a
Breach of Privilege by inserting. 
Jones, after much Patience, at length interrupted
her, by making an Apology to
Mrs. Waters, for having appeared before
her in his Shirt, assuring her, ‘That nothing
but a Concern for her Safety could
have prevailed on him to do it.’ The
Reader may inform himself of her Answer,
and, indeed, of her whole Behaviour to
the End of the Scene, by considering the
Situation which she affected, being that
of a modest Lady, who was awakened out
of her Sleep by three strange Men in her
Chamber. This was the Part which she undertook
to perform; and, indeed, she executed
it so well, that none of our Theatrical
Actresses could exceed her, in any of
their Performances, either on or off the
Stage. 
And hence, I think, we may very fairly
draw an Argument, to prove how extremely 

natural Virtue is to the Fair Sex: For
tho' there is not, perhaps, one in ten thousand
who is capable of making a good
Actress; and even among these we rarely
see two who are equally able to personate
the same Character; yet this of Virtue
they can all admirably well put on; and
as well those Individuals who have it not,
as those who possess it, can all act it to the
utmost Degree of Perfection. 
When the Men were all departed, Mrs.
Waters recovering from her Fear, recovered
likewise from her Anger, and spoke in
much gentler Accents to the Landlady, who
did not so readily quit her Concern for the
Reputation of the House, in Favour of which
she began again to number the many great
Persons who had slept under her Roof; 
but the Lady stopt her short, and having
absolutely acquitted her of having had any
Share in the past Disturbance, begged to
be left to her Repose, which, she said, she
hoped to enjoy unmolested during the Remainder
of the Night. Upon which the
Landlady, after much Civility, and many
Curt'sies, took her Leave. 




A Dialogue between the Landlady, and Susan
the Chambermaid, proper to be read by all
Innkeepers, and their Servants; with the
Arrival, and affable Behaviour of a beautiful
young Lady; which may teach Persons
of Condition how they may acquire the
Love of the whole World. 
The Landlady remembering that
Susan had been the only Person out
of Bed when the Door was burst open, resorted
presently to her, to enquire into the
first Occasion of the Disturbance, as well as
who the strange Gentleman was, and when
and how he arrived. 
Susan related the whole Story which the
Reader knows already, varying the Truth
only in some Circumstances, as she saw convenient,
and totally concealing the Money
which she had received. But whereas her
Mistress had in the Preface to her Enquiry
spoken much in Compassion for the
Fright which the Lady had been in concerning
any intended Depredations on her
Virtue, Susan could not help endeavouring
to quiet the Concern which her Mistress 

seemed to be under on that Account, by
swearing heartily she saw Jones leap out
from her Bed. 
The Landlady fell into a violent Rage at
these Words. ‘A likely Story truly,’ cried
she, ‘that a Woman should cry out, and
endeavour to expose herself, if that was
the Case! I desire to know what better
Proof any Lady can give of her Virtue
than her crying out, which, I believe,
twenty People can witness for her she did? 
I beg, Madam, you would spread no such
Scandal of any of my Guests: For it will
not only reflect on them, but upon the
House; and I am sure no Vagabonds,
nor wicked beggarly People come here.’ 
‘Well,’ says Susan, ‘then I must not
believe my own Eyes.’ ‘No, indeed must
you not always,’ answered her Mistress,
I would not have believed my own Eyes
against such good Gentlefolks. I have
not had a better Supper ordered this half
Year than they ordered last Night, and
so easy and good-humoured were they,
that they found no Fault with my Worcestershire
Perry, which I sold them for
Champagne; and to be sure it is as well
tasted, and as wholesome as the best Champagne 

in the Kingdom, otherwise I would
scorn to give it 'em, and they drank me
two Bottles. No, no, I will never believe
any Harm of such sober good
Sort of People.’ 
Susan being thus silenced, her Mistress
proceeded to other Matters. ‘And so you
tell me,’ continued she, ‘That the
strange Gentleman came Post, and there
is a Footman without with the Horses; 
why then, he is certainly some of your
great Gentlefolks too. Why did not you
ask him whether he'd have any Supper? 
I think he is in the other Gentleman's
Room, go up and ask whether he called. 
Perhaps he'll order something when he
finds any Body stirring in the House to
dress it. Now don't commit any of your
usual Blunders, by telling him the Fire's
out, and the Fowls alive. And if he
should order Mutton, don't blab out, that
we have none. The Butcher, I know,
killed a Sheep just before I went to Bed,
and he never refuses to cut it up warm
when I desire it. Go, remember there's
all Sorts of Mutton and Fowls; go, open
the Door, with, Gentlemen d'ye call, and
if they say nothing, ask what his Honour
will be pleased to have for Supper. Don't 

forget his Honour. Go; if you don't
mind all these Matters better, you'll never
come to any Thing.’ 
Susan departed, and soon returned with an
Account, that the two Gentlemen were got
both into the same Bed. ‘Two Gentlemen,’ 
says the Landlady, ‘in the same Bed! that's
impossible, they are two errant Scrubs,
I warrant them, and, I believe, young
Squire Allworthy guessed right, that the
Fellow intended to rob her Ladyship: 
For if he had broke open the Lady's
Door with any of the wicked Designs of a
Gentleman, he would never have sneaked
away to another Room to save the Expence
of a Supper and a Bed to himself. 
They are certainly Thieves, and their
searching after a Wife is nothing but a
Pretence.’ 
In these Censures, my Landlady did Mr.
Fitzpatrick great Injustice; for he was
really born a Gentleman, though not worth
a Groat; and tho', perhaps, he had some
few Blemishes in his Heart as well as in his
Head, yet being a sneaking, or a niggardly
Fellow, was not one of them. In reality,
he was so generous a Man, that whereas
he had received a very handsome Fortune 

with his Wife, he had now spent every
Penny of it, except some little Pittance
which was settled upon her; and in order
to possess himself of this, he had used
her with such Cruelty, that together with
his Jealousy, which was of the bitterest
Kind, it had forced the poor Woman to
run away from him. 
This Gentleman then being well tired
with his long Journey from Chester in one
Day, with which, and some good dry Blows
he had received in the Scuffle, his Bones
were so sore, that added to the Soreness of
his Mind, it had quite deprived him of any
Appetite for eating. And being now so
violently disappointed in the Woman, whom
at the Maid's Instance, he had mistaken for
his Wife, it never once entered into his
Head, that she might nevertheless be in the
House, though he had erred in the first Person
he had attacked. He therefore yielded
to the Dissuasions of his Friend from
searching any farther after her that Night,
and accepted the kind Offer of Part of
his Bed. 
The Footman and Post-boy were in a
different Disposition. They were more
ready to order than the Landlady was to 

provide; however, after being pretty well
satisfied by them of the real Truth of the
Case, and that Mr. Fitzpatrick was no Thief,
she was at length prevailed on to set some
cold Meat before them, which they were
devouring with great Greediness, when Partridge
came into the Kitchin. He had
been first awaked by the Hurry which we
have before seen, and while he was endeavouring
to compose himself again on his
Pillow, a Screech-Owl had given him such
a Serenade at his Window, that he leapt in
a most horrible Affright from his Bed, and
huddling on his Cloaths with great Expedition,
ran down to the Protection of the
Company, whom he heard talking below in
the Kitchin. 
His Arrival detained my Landlady from
returning to her Rest: For she was just about
to leave the other two Guests to the
Care of Susan; but the Friend of young
Squire Allworthy was not to be so neglected,
especially as he called for a Pint of Wine to
be mulled. She immediately obeyed, by
putting the same Quantity of Perry to the
Fire: For this readily answered to the Name
of every Kind of Wine. 
The Irish Footman was retired to Bed,
and the Post-boy was going to follow; but 

Partridge invited him to stay, and partake
of his Wine, which the Lad very thankfully
accepted. The Schoolmaster was indeed
afraid to return to Bed by himself; 
and as he did not know how soon he might
lose the Company of my Landlady, he was
resolved to secure that of the Boy, in whose
Presence he apprehended no Danger from
the Devil, or any of his Adherents. 
And now arrived another Post-Boy at
the Gate; upon which Susan being ordered
out, returned, introducing two young Women
in Riding-habits, one of which was so
very richly laced, that Partridge and the
Post-boy instantly started from their Chairs,
and my Landlady fell to her Curt'sies,
and her Ladyships, with great Eagerness. 
The Lady in the rich Habit said, with a
Smile of great Condescension, ‘If you will
give me Leave, Madam, I will warm my
self a few Minutes at your Kitchin Fire,
for it is really very cold; but I must insist
on disturbing no one from their Seats.’ 
This was spoken on account of Partridge, who
had retreated to the other End of the Room,
struck with the utmost Awe and Astonishment
at the Splendor of the Lady's Dress. 
Indeed she had a much better Title to Respect 

than this: For she was one of the
most beautiful Creatures in the World. 
The Lady earnestly desired Partridge to
return to his Seat, but could not prevail. 
She then pulled off her Gloves, and displayed
two Hands, which had every Property
in them, except that of melting, to the
Fire. Her Companion, who was indeed
her Maid, likewise pulled off her Gloves,
and discovered what bore an exact Resemblance,
in Cold and Colour, to a Piece
of frozen Beef. 
‘I wish, Madam,’ quoth the latter,
‘your Ladyship would not think of going
any farther to Night. I am terribly afraid
your Ladyship will not be able to
bear the Fatigue.’ 
‘Why sure,’ cries the Landlady, ‘her
Ladyship's Honour can never intend it. 
O bless me, farther to Night indeed! Let
me beseech your Ladyship not to think
on't. —But to be sure, your Ladyship
can't. What will your Honour be pleased
to have for Supper? I have Mutton
of all Kinds, and some nice Chicken.’— 

‘I think, Madam,’ said the Lady, ‘it
would be rather Breakfast than Supper; 
but I can't eat any Thing, and if I stay,
shall only lie down for an Hour or two. 
However, if you please, Madam, you
may get me a little Sack-whey made
very small and thin.’ 
‘Yes, Madam,’ cries the Mistress of the
House, ‘I have some excellent White-wine. 
‘You have no Sack then,’ says
the Lady.’ ‘Yes, an't please your Honour,
I have; I may challenge the Country
for that—But let me beg your Ladyship
to eat something.’ 
‘Upon my Word, I can't eat a Morsel,’ 
answered the Lady; ‘and I shall be much
obliged to you, if you will please to get my
Apartment ready as soon as possible: For
I am resolved to be on Horseback again in
three Hours.’ 
‘Why Susan,’ cries the Landlady, ‘is
there a Fire lit yet in the Wild-goose? 
I am sorry, Madam, all my best Rooms
are full. Several People of the first Quality
are now in Bed. Here's a great young 

Squire, and a many other great Gentlefolks
of Quality.’ 
Susan answered, ‘That the Irish Gentlemen
were got into the Wild-goose.’ 
‘Was ever any Thing like it,’ says the
Mistress! ‘why the Devil would you not
keep some of the best Rooms for the Quality,
when you know scarce a Day passes
without some calling here? —If they be
Gentlemen, I am certain, when they know
it is for her Ladyship, they will get up
again.’ 
‘Not upon my Account,’ says the Lady. 
‘I will have no Person disturbed for me. 
If you have a Room that is commonly
decent, it will serve me very well, though
it be never so plain. I beg, Madam, you
will not give yourself so much Trouble
on my Account. O, Madam,’ cries the
other, ‘I have several very good Rooms
for that Matter, but none good enough
for your Honour's Ladyship. However,
as you are so condescending to take up
with the best I have, do, Susan, get a
Fire in the Rose this Minute. Will your
Ladyship be pleased to go up now, or
stay till the Fire is lighted? I think, I 

have sufficiently warmed myself,’ answered
the Lady, ‘so if you please I will go
now; I am afraid I have kept People,
and particularly that Gentleman (meaning
Partridge) too long in the Cold already. 
Indeed I cannot bear to think
of keeping any Person from the Fire this
dreadful Weather.’ She then departed
with her Maid, the Landlady marching
with two lighted Candles before her. 
When that good Woman returned, the
Conversation in the Kitchin was all upon
the Charms of the young Lady. There is
indeed in perfect Beauty a Power which
none almost can withstand: For my Landlady,
though she was not pleased at the Negative
given to the Supper, declared she
had never seen so lovely a Creature. Partridge
ran out into the most extravagant
Encomiums on her Face, though he could
not refrain from paying some Compliments
to the Gold Lace on her Habit; the Post-boy
sung forth the Praises of her Goodness,
which were likewise ecchoed by the other
Post-boy, who was now come in. ‘She's
a true good Lady, I warrant her,’ says he: 
For she hath Mercy upon dumb Creatures; 
for she asked me every now and
tan upon the Journey, if I did not think 

she should hurt the Horses by riding too
fast; and when she came in, she charged
me to give them as much Corn as ever
they would eat.’ 
Such Charms are there in Affability, and
so sure is it to attract the Praises of all Kinds
of People. It may indeed be compared to
the celebrated Mrs. Hussy * . It is equally
sure to set off every Female Perfection
to the highest Advantage, and to palliate
and conceal every Defect. A short Reflection
which we could not forbear making
in this Place, where my Reader hath
seen the Loveliness of an affable Deportment; 
and Truth will now oblige us to contrast
it, by shewing the Reverse. 



Containing infallible Nostrums for procuring
universal Disesteem and Hatred. 
The Lady had no sooner laid herself
on her Pillow, than the Waiting-woman
returned to the Kitchin to regale 

with some of those Dainties which her
Mistress had refused. 
The Company at her Entrance, shewed
her the same Respect which they had before
paid to her Mistress, by rising; but
she forgot to imitate her, by desiring them
to sit down again. Indeed it was scarce
possible they should have done so: For she
placed her Chair in such a Posture, as almost
to occupy the whole Fire. She then
ordered a Chicken to be broiled that Instant,
declaring if it was not ready in a
Quarter of an Hour, she would not stay
for it. Now tho' the said Chicken was
then at Roost in the Stable, and required
the several Ceremonies of catching, killing,
and picking, before it was brought
to the Grid-iron, my Landlady would
nevertheless have undertaken to do all within
the Time; but the Guest being unfortunately
admitted behind the Scenes, must
have been Witness to the Fourberie, the
poor Woman was therefore obliged to confess
that she had none in the House; but,
Madam, said she, ‘I can get any kind of
Mutton in an Instant from the Butcher's.’ 
‘Do you think then,’ answered the Waiting-Gentlewoman,
‘that I have the Stomach 

of a Horse to eat Mutton at this
Time of Night? Sure you People that
keep Inns imagine your Betters are like
yourselves. Indeed I expected to get
nothing at this wretched Place. I wonder
my Lady would stop at it. I suppose
none but Tradesmen and Grasiers ever
call here.’ The Landlady fired at this
Indignity offered to her House; however
she suppressed her Temper, and contented
herself with saying, ‘Very good Quality
frequented it, she thanked Heaven!’ 
‘Don't tell me,’ cries the other, ‘of Quality! 
I believe I know more of People of
Quality than such as you. —But, prithee,
without troubling me with any of your
Impertinence, do tell me what I can
have for Supper; for tho' I cannot eat
Horse-flesh, I am really hungry.’ ‘Why
truly, Madam,’ answered the Landlady,
‘you could not have taken me again at
such a Disadvantage: For I must confess,
I have nothing in the House, unless
a cold Piece of Beef, which indeed
a Gentleman's Footman, and the Post-boy,
have almost cleared to the Bone.’ 
‘Woman, said Mrs. Abigail (so for Shortness
we will call her) I intreat you not
to make me sick. If I had fasted a
Month, I could not eat what had been 

touched by the Fingers of such Fellows. 
Is there nothing neat or decent to be
had in this horrid Place?’ ‘What think
you of some Eggs and Bacon, Madam,’ 
said the Landlady. ‘Are your Eggs new
laid? Are you certain they were laid Today? 
And let me have the Bacon cut
very nice and thin; for I can't endure
any Thing that's gross. —Prithee try
if you can do a little tolerably for once,
and don't think you have a Farmer's
Wife, or some of those Creatures in the
House.’ —The Landlady begun then to
handle her Knife; but the other stopt
her, saying, ‘Good Woman, I must insist
upon your first washing your Hands; 
for I am extremely nice, and have been
always used from my Cradle to have every
thing in the most elegant Manner.’ 
The Landlady, who governed herself with
much Difficulty, began now the necessary
Preparations; for as to Susan, she was utterly
rejected, and with such Disdain, that
the poor Wench was as hard put to it, to
restrain her Hands from Violence, as her
Mistress had been to hold her Tongue. 
This indeed Susan did not entirely: For
tho' she literally kept it within her Teeth,
yet there it muttered many ‘marry-come-ups, 

as good Flesh and Blood as yourself,’ with
other such indignant Phrases. 
While the Supper was preparing, Mrs.
Abigail began to lament she had not ordered
a Fire in the Parlour; but she said, that
was now too late. ‘However, said she, I
have Novelty to recommend a Kitchin, for
I do not believe I ever eat in one before.’ 
Then turning to the Post-boys, she asked
them, ‘Why they were not in the Stable
with their Horses? If I must eat my
hard Fare here, Madam,’ cries she to the
Landlady, ‘I beg the Kitchin may be kept
clear, that I may not be surrounded with
all the Black-guards in Town; as for you,
Sir,’ says she to Partridge, ‘you look
somewhat like a Gentleman, and may sit
still if you please, I don't desire to disturb
any body but Mob.’ 
‘Yes, yes, Madam,’ cries Partridge, ‘I
am a Gentleman, I do assure you, and I
am not so easily to be disturbed. Non
semper vox causalis est verbo nominativus. 
This Latin she took to be some Affront,
and answered, ‘You may be a Gentleman,
Sir, but you don't shew yourself as one,
to talk Latin to a Woman.’ Partridge
made a gentle Reply, and concluded with 

more Latin; upon which she tossed up her
Nose, and contented herself by abusing him
with the Name of a great Scholar. 
The Supper being now on the Table,
Mrs. Abigail eat very heartily, for so delicate
a Person; and while a second Course of the
same was by her Order preparing, she said,
‘And so, Madam, you tell me your House
is frequented by People of great Quality?’ 
The Landlady answered in the Affirmative,
saying, ‘There were a great many
very good Quality and Gentlefolks in it
now. There's young Squire Allworthy,
as that Gentleman there knows.’ 
‘And pray who is this young Gentleman
of Quality, this young Squire Allworthy?’ 
said Abigail. 
‘Who should he be,’ answered Partridge,
‘but the Son and Heir of the great
Squire Allworthy of Somersetshire.’ 
‘Upon my Word,’ said she, ‘you tell me
strange News: For I know Mr. Allworthy
of Somersetshire very well, and I know
he hath no Son alive.’ 

The Landlady pricked  her Ears at this,
and Partridge looked a little confounded. 
However, after a short Hesitation, he answered,
‘Indeed, Madam, it is true,
every body doth not know him to be
Squire Allworthy's Son; for he was never
married to his Mother; but his Son he
certainly is, and will be his Heir too as
certainly as his Name is Jones.’ At
that Word, Abigail let drop the Bacon,
which she was conveying to her Mouth,
and cried out, ‘You surprize me, Sir. Is
it possible Mr. Jones should be now in
the House?’ ‘Quare non?’ answered
Partridge, ‘it is possible, and it is certain.’ 
Abigail now made Haste to finish the
Remainder of her Meal, and then repaired
back to her Mistress, when the Conversation
passed, which may be read in the next
Chapter. 




Shewing who the amiable Lady, and her unamiable
Maid, were. 
As in the Month of June, the Damask
Rose, which Chance hath planted
among the Lillies with their candid Hue
mixes his Vermilion: Or, as some playsome
Heifer in the pleasant Month of May
diffuses her odoriferous Breath over the
flowery Meadows: Or as, in the blooming
Month of April, the gentle, constant Dove,
perched on some fair Bough, sits meditating
her Mate; so looking a hundred
Charms, and breathing as many Sweets, her
Thoughts being fixed on her Tommy, with
a Heart as good and innocent, as her Face
was beautiful: Sophia (for it was she herself)
lay reclining her lovely Head on her
Hand, when her Maid entered the Room,
and running directly to the Bed, cried, ‘Madam
—Madam—who doth your Ladyship
think is in the House?’ Sophia starting
up, cried, ‘I hope my Father hath
not overtaken us.’ ‘No, Madam, it is
one worth a hundred Fathers; Mr. Jones
himself is here at this very Instant.’ 
Mr. Jones!’ says Sophia, ‘it is impossible, 

I cannot be so fortunate.’ Her Maid
averred the Fact, and was presently detached
by her Mistress to order him to be
called; for she said she was resolved to see
him immediately. 
Mrs. Honour had no sooner left the
Kitchin in the Manner we have before
seen, than the Landlady fell severely
upon her. The poor Woman had indeed
been loading her Heart with foul
Language for some Time, and now it
scoured out of her Mouth, as Filth doth
from a Mud-Cart, when the Board which
confines it is removed. Partridge likewise
shovelled in his Share of Calumny; and
(what may surprize the Reader) not only
bespattered the Maid, but attempted to sully
the Lilly-white Character of Sophia herself. 
‘Never a Barrel the better Herring,’ cries
he. ‘Noscitur a socio, is a true Saying. It
must be confessed indeed that the Lady in
the fine Garments is the civiller of the
two; but I warrant neither of them are a
Bit better than they should be. A Couple
of Bath Trulls, I'll answer for them; 
your Quality don't ride about at this
Time o' Night without Servants.’ ‘Sbodlikins,
and that's true,’ cries the Landlady,
‘you have certainly hit upon the very
Matter; for Quality don't come into a 

House without bespeaking a Supper, whether
they eat any or no.’ 
While they were thus discoursing, Mrs.
Honour returned, and discharged her Commission,
by bidding the Landlady immediately
wake Mr. Jones, and tell him a
Lady wanted to speak with him. The
Landlady referred her to Partridge, saying,
‘he was the Squire's Friend; but, for her
Part, she never called Men Folks, especially
Gentlemen,’ and then walked sullenly
out of the Kitchin. Honour applied
herself to Partridge; but he refused; ‘For
my Friend,’ cries he, ‘went to Bed very
late, and he would be very angry to be
disturbed so soon.’ Mrs. Honour insisted
still to have him called, saying, ‘She was
sure, instead of being angry, that he
would be to the highest Degree delighted
when he knew the Occasion.’ ‘Another
Time, perhaps, he might,’ cries Partridge; 
‘but non omnia possumus omnes. 
One Woman is enough at once for a reasonable
Man.’ ‘What do you mean by
one Woman, Fellow,’ cries Honour? 
‘None of your Fellow,’ answered Partridge. 
He then proceeded to inform her
plainly, that Jones was in Bed with a
Wench, and made use of an Expression too 

indelicate to be here inserted; which so enraged
Mrs. Honour, that she called him
saucy Jackanapes, and returned in a violent
Hurry to her Mistress, whom she acquainted
with the Success of her Errand, and
with the Account she had received; which,
if possible, she exaggerated, being as angry
with Jones, as if he had pronounced all the
Words that came from the Mouth of Partridge. 
She discharged a Torrent of Abuse
on the Master, and advised her Mistress to
quit all Thoughts of a Man who had never
shewn himself deserving of her. She then
ripped up the Story of Molly Seagrim, and gave
the most malicious Turn to his formerly
quitting Sophia herself; which, I must confess,
the present Incident not a little countenanced. 
The Spirits of Sophia were too much dissipated
by Concern to enable her to stop the
Torrent of her Maid. At last, however,
she interrupted her, saying, ‘I never can
believe this; some Villain hath belied him. 
You say you had it from his Friend; but
surely it is not the Office of a Friend to
betray such Secrets.’ ‘I suppose,’ cries
Honour, ‘the Fellow is his Pimp, for I
never saw so ill-looked a Villain. Besides, 

such proflligate Rakes as Mr. Jones are
never ashamed of these Matters.’ 
To say the Truth, this Behaviour of
Partridge was a little inexcusable; but he
had not slept off the Effect of the Dose
which he swallowed the Evening before; 
which had, in the Morning, received
the Addition of above a Pint of
Wine, or indeed rather of Malt Spirits; 
for the Perry was by no Means pure. Now
that Part of his Head which Nature designed
for the Reservoir of Drink, being
very shallow, a small Quantity of Liquor
overflowed it, and opened the Sluices of his
Heart; so that all the Secrets there deposited
run out. These Sluices were indeed naturally
very ill secured. To give the best-natured
Turn we can to his Disposition, he was a
very honest Man; for as he was the most
inquisitive of Mortals, and eternally prying
into the Secrets of others, so he very faithfully
paid them by communicating, in Return,
every thing within his Knowledge. 
While Sophia tormented with Anxiety,
knew not what to believe, nor what Resolution
to take, Susan arrived with the Sack-Whey. 
Mrs. Honour immediately advised
her Mistress, in a Whisper, to pump this 

Wench, who probably could inform her of
the Truth. Sophia approved it, and began
as follows: ‘Come hither, Child, now
answer me truly what I am going to ask
you, and I promise you I will very well
reward you. Is there a young Gentleman
in this House, a handsome young Gentleman
that—Here Sophia blushed and
was confounded—‘A young Gentleman,’ 
cries Honour, ‘that came hither in Company
with that saucy Rascal who is now
in the Kitchin?’ Susan answered, ‘There
was’—‘Do you know any Thing of any
Lady,’ continues Sophia, ‘any Lady? 
I don't ask you whether she is handsome
or no; perhaps she is not, that's nothing
to the Purpose, but do you know of any
Lady?’ ‘La, Madam,’ cries Honour,
‘you will make a very bad Examiner. 
Harkee, Child,’ says she, ‘Is not that
very young Gentleman now in Bed with
some nasty Trull or other?’ ‘Here Susan
smiled, and was silent.’ ‘Answer
the Question, Child,’ says Sophia, ‘and
here's a Guinea for you.’ ‘A Guinea!
Madam,’ cries Susan; ‘La, what's a
Guinea? If my Mistress should know it,
I shall certainly lose my Place that very
Instant.’ ‘Here's another for you,’ says
Sophia, ‘and I promise you faithfully your 

Mistress shall never know it.’ Susan, after
a very short Hesitation, took the Money,
and told the whole Story, concluding with
saying, ‘If you have a great Curiosity,
Madam, I can steal softly into his Room,
and see whether he be in his own Bed or
no.’ She according did this by Sophia's
Desire, and returned with an Answer in the
Negative. 
Sophia now trembled and turned pale. 
Mrs. Honour begged her to be comforted,
and not to think any more of so worthless a
Fellow. ‘Why there,’ says Susan, ‘I hope,
Madam, your Ladyship won't be offended; 
but pray, Madam, is not your Ladyship's
Name Madam Sophia Western?’ 
How is it possible you should know me?’ 
answered Sophia. ‘Why that Man that
the Gentlewoman spoke of, who is in the
Kitchin, told about you last Night. But
I hope your Ladyship is not angry with
me.’ ‘Indeed, Child,’ said she, ‘I am
not; pray tell me all, and I promise you
I'll reward you.’ ‘Why, Madam,’ continued
Susan, ‘that Man told us all in the
Kitchin, that Madam Sophia Western— 
Indeed I don't know how to bring it out.’ 
—Here she stopt, till having received Encouragement
from Sophia, and being vehemently 

pressed by Mrs. Honour, she proceeded
thus: —‘He told us, Madam, tho'
to be sure it is all a Lie, that your Ladyship
was dying for Love of the young
Squire, and that he was going to the
Wars to get rid of you. I thought to
myself then he was a false-hearted
Wretch; but now to see such a fine,
rich, beautiful Lady as you be forsaken
for such an ordinary Woman; for to be
sure so she is, and another Man's Wife
into the Bargain. It is such a strange
unnatural thing, in a Manner.’ 
Sophia gave her a third Guinea, and telling
her she would certainly be her Friend, if
she mentioned nothing of what had passed,
nor informed any one who she was, dismissed
the Girl with Orders to the Post-Boy to
get the Horses ready immediately. 
Being now left alone with her Maid, she
told her trusty Waiting-woman, ‘That
she never was more easy than at present. 
I am now convinced,’ said she, ‘he is
not only a Villain, but a low despicable
Wretch. I can forgive all rather than
his exposing my Name in so barbarous a
Manner. That renders him the Object of
my Contempt. Yes, Honour, I am now 

easy. I am indeed. I am very easy,’ and
then she burst into a violent Flood of
Tears. 
After a short Interval, spent chiefly by
Sophia, in crying and assuring her Maid
that she was perfectly easy, Susan arrived
with an Account that the Horses were
ready, when a very extraordinary Thought
suggested itself to our young Heroine, by
which Mr. Jones would be acquainted with
her having been at the Inn, in a Way,
which, if any Sparks of Affection for her
remained in him, would be some Punishment,
at least, for his Faults. 
The Reader will be pleased to remember
a little Muff, which hath had the Honour
or being more than once remembered already
in this History. This Muff, ever
since the Departure of Mr. Jones, had been
the constant Companion of Sophia by Day,
and her Bedfellow by Night, and this Muff
she had at this very Instant upon her Arm; 
whence she took it off with great Indignation,
and having writ her Name with her
Pencil upon a Piece of Paper which she
pinned to it, she bribed the Maid to convey
it into the empty Bed of Mr. Jones, in
which, if he did not find it, she charged 

her to take some Method of conveying it
before his Eyes in the Morning. 
Then having paid for what Mrs. Honour
had eaten, in which Bill was included an
Account for what she herself might have
eaten, she mounted her Horse, and once
more assuring her Companion that she was
perfectly easy, continued her Journey. 



Containing, among other Things, the Ingenuity
of Partridge, the Madness of Jones, and
the Folly of Fitzpatrick. 
It was now past Five in the Morning,
and other Company began to rise and
come to the Kitchin, among whom were
the Serjeant and the Coachman, who being
thoroughly reconciled, made a Libation,
or, in the English Phrase, drank a hearty
Cup together. 
In this Drinking nothing more remarkable
happened, than the Behaviour of Partridge,
who, when the Serjeant drank a
Health to King George, repeated only the
Word King: Nor could he be brought to 

utter more: For tho' he was going to fight
against his own Cause, yet he could not be
prevailed upon to drink against it. 
Mr. Jones being now returned to his own
Bed (but from whence he returned we must
beg to be excused from relating) summoned
Partridge from this agreeable Company,
who, after a ceremonious Preface, having
obtained leave to offer his Advice, delivered
himself as follows: 
‘It is, Sir, an old Saying, and a true
one, that a wise Man may sometimes
learn Counsel from a Fool; I wish therefore
I might be so bold as to offer you
my Advice, which is to return home
again, and leave these Horrida Bella,
these bloody Wars, to Fellows who are
contented to swallow Gunpowder, because
they have nothing else to eat. Now
every body knows your Honour wants
for nothing at home; when that's the
Case, why should any Man travel abroad?’ 
‘Partridge,’ cries Jones, ‘thou art certainly
a Coward, I wish therefore thou
would'st return home thyself, and trouble
me no more.’ 

‘I ask your Honour's Pardon,’ cries
Partridge, ‘I spoke on your Account more
than my own; for as to me, Heaven
knows my Circumstances are bad enough,
and I am so far from being afraid, that I
value a Pistol, or a Blunderbuss, or any
such Thing, no more than a Pop gun. 
Every Man must die once, and what signifies
the Manner how; besides, perhaps,
I may come off with the Loss only of an
Arm or a Leg. I assure you, Sir, I was
never less afraid in my Life; and so if
your Honour is resolved to go on, I am
resolved to follow you. But, in that
Case, I wish I might give my Opinion. 
To be sure it is a scandalous Way of travelling,
for a great Gentleman like you
to walk afoot. Now here are two or
three good Horses in the Stable, which
the Landlord will certainly make no
Scruple of trusting you with; but if he
should, I can easily contrive to take
them, and let the worst come to the
worst, the King would certainly pardon
you, as you are going to fight in his
Cause.’ 
Now as the Honesty of Partridge was
equal to his Understanding, and both dealt 

only in small Matters, he would never have
attempted a Roguery of this Kind, had he
not imagined it altogether safe; for he was
one of those who have more Consideration
of the Gallows than of the Fitness of
Things; but, in Reality, he thought he
might have committed this Felony without
any Danger: For, besides that he doubted
not but the Name of Mr. Allworthy would
sufficiently quiet the Landlord, he conceived
they should be altogether safe, whatever
Turn Affairs might take; as Jones, he
imagined, would have Friends enough on
one Side, and as his Friends would as well
secure him on the other. 
When Mr. Jones found that Partridge
was in earnest in this Proposal, he very severely
rebuked him, and that in such bitter
Terms, that the other attempted to laugh
it off, and presently turned the Discourse to
other Matters, saying, he believed they
were then in a Bawdy house, and that he
had with much ado prevented two Wenches
from disturbing his Honour in the Middle
of the Night. ‘Heyday!’ says he, ‘I
believe they got into your Chamber whether
I would or no, for here lies the Muff
of one of them on the Ground.’ Indeed,
as Jones returned to his Bed in the 

Dark, he had never perceived the Muff
on the Quilt, and in leaping into his Bed
he had tumbled it on the Floor. This Partridge
now took up, and was going to put
into his Pocket, when Jones desired to see
it. The Muff was so very remarkable, that
our Heroe might possibly have recollected
it without the Information annexed. But
his Memory was not put to that hard Office,
for at the same Instant he saw and read the
Words Sophia Western upon the Paper
which was pinned to it. His Looks now
grew frantic in a Moment, and he eagerly
cried out, ‘Oh Heavens, how came this
Muff here!’ ‘I know no more than your
Honour,’ cried Partridge; ‘but I saw it
upon the Arm of one of the Women who
would have disturbed you, if I would
have suffered them.’ ‘Where are they?’ 
cries Jones, jumping out of Bed, and laying
hold of his Clothes. ‘Many Miles off, I
believe, by this Time,’ said Partridge. 
And now Jones, upon further Enquiry,
was sufficiently assured that the Bearer of
this Muff was no other than the lovely
Sophia herself. 
The Behaviour of Jones on this Occasion. 
His Thoughts, his Looks, his Words, his
Actions, were such as Beggar all Description. 

After many bitter Execrations on
Partridge, and not fewer on himself, he ordered
the poor Fellow, who was frightened
out of his Wits, to run down and hire
him Horses at any rate; and a very few
Minutes afterwards, having shuffled on his
Clothes, he hastened down Stairs to execute
the Orders himself, which he had just before
given. 
But before we proceed to what passed on
his Arrival in the Kitchin, it will be necessary
to recur to what had there happened
since Partridge had first left it on his Master's
Summons. 
The Serjeant was just marched off with
his Party, when the two Irish Gentlemen
arose, and came down Stairs; both complaining,
that they had been so often waked
by the Noises in the Inn, that they had never
once been able to close their Eyes all
Night. 
The Coach, which had brought the
young Lady and her Maid, and which,
perhaps, the Reader may have hitherto
concluded was her own, was indeed a returned
Coach belonging to Mr. King of
Bath, one of the worthiest and honestest 

Men that ever dealt in Horse-flesh, and
whose Coaches we heartily recommend to
all our Readers who travel that Road. By
which Means they may, perhaps, have the
Pleasure of riding in the very Coach, and
being driven by the very Coachman, that
is recorded in this History. 
The Coachman having but two Passengers,
and hearing Mr. Maclachlan was
bound to Bath, offered to carry him thither
at a very moderate Price. He was induced
to this by the Report of the Ostler, who
said, that the Horse which Mr. Maclachlan
had hired from Worcester, would be much
more pleased with returning to his Friends
there, than to prosecute a long Journey; 
for that the said Horse was rather a two-legged
than a four-legged Animal. 
Mr. Maclachlan immediately closed with
the Proposal of the Coachman, and, at the
same Time, persuaded his Friend Fitzpatrick
to accept of the fourth Place in the
Coach. This Conveyance the Soreness of
his Bones made more agreeable to him than
a Horse, and being well assured of meeting
with his Wife at Bath, he thought a little
Delay would be of no Consequence. 

Maclachlan, who was much the sharper
Man of the two, no sooner heard that this
Lady came from Chester, with the other
Circumstances which he learned from the
Ostler, than it came into his Head that she
might possibly be his Friend's Wife; and
presently acquainted him with this Suspicion,
which had never once occurred to Fitzpatrick
himself. To say the Truth, he was
one of those Compositions which Nature
makes up in too great a Hurry, and forgets
to put any Brains in their Head. 
Now it happens to this Sort of Men, as
to bad Hounds, who never hit off a Fault
themselves; but no sooner doth a Dog of
Sagacity open his Mouth, than they immediately
do the same, and without the Guide
of any Scent, run directly forwards as fast
as they are able. In the same Manner, the
very Moment Mr. Maclachlan had mentioned
his Apprehension, Mr. Fitzpatrick
instantly concurred, and flew directly up
Stairs to surprize his Wife before he knew
where she was; and unluckily (as Fortune
loves to play Tricks with those Gentlemen
who put themselves entirely under her
Conduct) ran his Head against several
Doors and Posts to no Purpose. Much 

kinder was she to me, when she suggested
that Simile of the Hounds, just before inserted,
since the poor Wife may, on these
Occasions, be so justly compared to a hunted
Hare. Like that little wretched Animal
she pricks up her Ears to listen after the
Voice of her Pursuer; like her, flies away
trembling when she hears it; and like her, is
generally overtaken and destroyed in the
End. 
This was not however the Case at present; 
for after a long fruitless Search, Mr. Fitzpatrick
returned to the Kitchin, where, as
if this had been a real Chace, entered a
Gentleman hallowing as Hunters do when
the Hounds are at a Fault. He was just
alighted from his Horse, and had many
Attendants at his Heels. 
Here, Reader, it may be necessary to acquaint
thee with some Matters, which, if
thou dost know already, thou art wiser
than I take thee to be. And this Information
thou shalt receive in the next Chapter. 




In which are concluded the Adventures that
happened at the Inn at Upton. 
In the first Place then, this Gentleman
just arrived was no other Person than
Squire Western himself, who was come hither
in Pursuit of his Daughter; and had
he fortunately been two Hours earlier, he
had not only found her, but his Neice into
the Bargain; for such was the Wife of
Mr. Fitzpatrick, who had run away with
her five Years before, out of the Custody
of that sage Lady Madam Western. 
Now this Lady had departed from the Inn
much about at the same Time with Sophia: 
For having been waked by the Voice of her
Husband, she had sent up for the Landlady,
and being by her apprized of the Matter, had
bribed the good Woman, at an extravagant
Price, to furnish her with Horses for her Escape. 
Such Prevalence had Money in this Family; 
and tho' the Mistress would have turned
away her Maid for a corrupt Hussy, if she
had known as much as the Reader, yet she 

was no more Proof against Corruption herself
than poor Susan had been. 
Mr. Western and his Nephew were not
known to one another; nor indeed would
the former have taken any Notice of the
latter, if he had known him; for this being
a stolen Match, and consequently an unnatural
one in the Opinion of the good Squire,
he had, from the Time of her committing
it, abandoned the poor young Creature,
who was then no more than Eighteen, as a
Monster, and had never since suffered her
to be named in his Presence. 
The Kitchin was now a Scene of universal
Confusion, Western enquiring after his
Daughter, and Fitzpatrick as eagerly after
his Wife, when Jones entered the Room,
unfortunately having Sophia's Muff in his
Hand. 
As soon as Western saw Jones, he set up
the same Holla as is used by Sportsmen
when their Game is in View. He then immediately
run up and laid hold of Jones,
crying, ‘We have got the Dog Fox, I
warrant the Bitch is not far off.’ The
Jargon which followed for some Minutes,
where many spoke different Things 

at the same Time, as it would be very difficult
to describe, so would it be no less unpleasant
to read. 
Jones having, at length, shaken Mr. Western
off, and some of the Company having
interfered between them, our Heroe protested
his Innocence as to knowing any
thing of the Lady; when Parson Supple
stepped up, and said, ‘It is Folly to
deny it; for why, the Marks of Guilt
are in thy Hands. I will myself asseverate
and bind it by an Oath, that the Muff
thou bearest in thy Hand belongeth unto
Madam Sophia; for I have frequently
observed her, of later Days, to bear it
about her.’ ‘My Daughter's Muff!’ 
cries the Squire, in a Rage. ‘Hath he
got my Daughter's Muff! Bear Witness,
the Goods are found upon him. I'll have
him before a Justice of Peace this Instant. 
Where is my Daughter, Villain?’ ‘Sir,’ 
said Jones, ‘I beg you would be pacified. 
The Muff, I acknowledge, is the young
Lady's; but, upon my Honour, I have
never seen her.’ At these Words Western
lost all Patience, and grew inarticulate with
Rage. 

Some of the Servants had acquainted
Fitzpatrick who Mr. Western was. The
good Irishman therefore thinking he had
now an Opportunity to do an Act of Service
to his Uncle, and by that Means
might possibly obtain his Favour, stept up
to Jones, and cried out, ‘Upon my Conscience,
Sir, you may be ashamed of denying
your having seen the Gentleman's
Daughter before my Face, when you
know I found you there upon the Bed together.’ 
Then turning to Western, he
offered to conduct him immediately to the
Room where his Daughter was; which Offer
being accepted, he, the Squire, the Parson,
and some others, ascended directly to
Mrs. Waters's Chamber, which they entered
with no less Violence than Mr. Fitzpatrick
had done before. 
The poor Lady started from her Sleep
with as much Amazement as Terror, and
beheld at her Bed-side a Figure which
might very well be supposed to have escaped
out of Bedlam. Such Wildness and Confusion
were in the Looks of Mr. Western:
who no sooner saw the Lady, than he started
back, showing sufficiently by his Manner, 

before he spoke, that this was not the Person
sought after. 
So much more tenderly do Women value
their Reputation than their Persons, that
tho' the latter seemed now in more Danger
than before, yet as the former was secure,
the Lady screamed not with such Violence
as she had done on the other Occasion. 
However, she no sooner found herself alone,
than she abandoned all Thoughts of further
Repose, and as she had sufficient Reason to
be dissatisfied with her present Lodging,
she dressed herself with all possible Expedition. 
Mr. Western now proceeded to search the
whole House, but to as little Purpose as he
had disturbed poor Mrs. Waters. He
then returned disconsolate into the Kitchin,
where he found Jones in the Custody of his
Servants. 
This violent Uproar had raised all the
People in the House; tho' it was yet
scarcely Day-light. Among these was a
grave Gentleman, who had the Honour to
be in the Commission of the Peace for the 

Country of Worcester. Of which Mr. Western
was no sooner informed, than he offered to
lay his Complaint before him. The Justice
declined executing his Office, as he said he
had no Clerk present, nor no Book about
Justice Business. And that he could not
carry all the Law in his Head about stealing
away Daughters, and such Sort of
Things. 
Here Mr. Fitzpatrick offered to lend him
his Assistance; informing the Company that
he had been himself bred to the Law. (And
indeed he had served three Years as Clerk to
an Attorney in the North of Ireland, when
chusing a genteeler Walk in Life, he quitted
his Master, came over to England, and
set up that Business, which requires no Apprenticeship,
namely, that of a Gentleman,
in which he had succeeded as hath been already
partly mentioned.) 
Mr. Fitzpatrick declared that the Law
concerning Daughters was out of the present
Case; that stealing a Muff was undoubtedly
Felony, and the Goods being found upon
the Person, were sufficient Evidence of the
Fact. 

The Magistrate, upon the Encouragement
of so learned a Coadjutor, and upon
the violent Intercession of the Squire, was
at length prevailed upon to seat himself in the
Chair of Justice, where being placed, upon
viewing the Muff which Jones still held in
his Hand, and upon the Parson's swearing
it to be the Property of Mr. Western, he
desired Mr. Fitzpatrick to draw up a
Commitment, which he said he would
sign. 
Jones now desired to be heard, which was at
last, with Difficulty, granted him. He then
produced the Evidence of Mr. Partridge, as to
the finding it; but what was still more,
Susan deposed that Sophia herself had delivered
the Muff to her, and had ordered
her to convey it into the Chamber where
Mr. Jones had found it. 
Whether a natural Love of Justice, or
the extraordinary Comeliness of Jones, had
wrought on Susan to make the Discovery,
I will not determine; but such were the
Effects of her Evidence, that the Magistrate,
throwing himself back in his Chair, declared
that the Matter was now altogether as clear
on the Side of the Prisoner, as it had before 

been against him; with which the Parson
concurred, saying, The Lord forbid he
should be instrumental in committing an
innocent Person to Durance. The Justice
then arose, acquitted the Prisoner, and
broke up the Court. 
Mr. Western now gave every one present
a hearty Curse, and immediately ordering
his Horses, departed in Pursuit of his
Daughter, without taking the least Notice
of his Nephew Fitzpatrick, or returning any
Answer to his Claim of Kindred, notwithstanding
all the Obligations he had just received
from that Gentleman. In the Violence,
moreover, of his Hurry, and of his
Passion, he luckily forgot to demand the
Muff of Jones: I say luckily; for he would
have died on the Spot rather than have
parted with it. 
Jones likewise, with his Friend Partridge,
set forward the Moment he had
paid his Reckoning, in Quest of his lovely
Sophia, whom he now resolved never more
to abandon the Pursuit of. Nor could he
bring himself even to take Leave of
Mrs. Waters; of whom he detested the
very Thoughts, as she had been, tho' not
designedly, the Occasion of his missing the 

happiest Interview with Sophia, to whom
he now vowed eternal Constancy. 
As for Mrs. Waters, she took the Opportunity
of the Coach which was going to
Bath; for which Place she set out in Company
with the two Irish Gentlemen, the
Landlady kindly lending her her Clothes; 
in Return for which she was contented only
to receive about double their Value, as a
Recompence for the Loan. Upon the
Road she was perfectly reconciled to Mr.
Fitzpatrick, who was a very handsome Fellow,
and indeed did all she could to console
him in the Absence of his Wife. 
Thus ended the many odd Adventures
which Mr. Jones encountered at his Inn at
Upton, where they talk, to this Day, of the
Beauty and lovely Behaviour of the charming
Sophia, by the Name of the Somersetshire
Angel. 




In which the History goes backward. 
Before we proceed any farther in our
History, it may be proper to look a
little back, in order to account for the extraordinary
Appearance of Sophia and her
Father at the Inn at Upton. 
The Reader may be pleased to remember,
that in the Ninth Chapter of the
Seventh Book of our History, we left Sophia,
after a long Debate between Love
and Duty, deciding the Cause, as it usually,
I believe, happens, in Favour of the Former. 
This Debate had arisen, as we have
there shewn, from a Visit which her Father
had just before made her, in order to force
her Consent to a Marriage with Blifil; and
which he had understood to be fully implied
in her Acknowledgment, that she neither
must, nor could refuse any absolute Command
of his. 
Now from this Visit the Squire retired
to his Evening Potation, overjoyed at the
Success he had had with his Daughter; 
and as he was of a social Disposition, and
willing to have Partakers in his Happiness, 

the Beer was ordered to flow very liberally
into the Kitchin; so that before Eleven in
the Evening, there was not a single Person
sober in the House, except only Mrs. Western
herself, and the charming Sophia. 
Early in the Morning a Messenger was
dispatched to summon Mr. Blifil: For tho'
the Squire imagined that young Gentleman
had been much less acquainted than he
really was, with the former Aversion of
his Daughter; as he had not, however, yet
received her Consent, he longed impatiently
to communicate it to him, not doubting
but that the intended Bride herself would
confirm it with her Lips. As to the Wedding,
it had the Evening before been
fixed, by the Male Parties, to be celebrated
on the next Morning save one. 
Breakfast was now set forth in the Parlour,
where Mr. Blifil attended, and where
the Squire and his Sister likewise were assembled; 
and now Sophia was ordered to
be called. 
O Shakespear, had I thy Pen! O, Hogarth,
had I thy Pencil! then would I
draw the Picture of the poor Serving-Man,
who, with pale Countenance, staring Eyes, 

chattering Teeth, faultering Tongue, and
trembling Limbs, 
(E'en such a Man, so faint, so spiritless,
So dull, so dead in Look, so woe-be-gone,
Drew Priam's Curtains in the dead of Night,
And would have told him, half his Troy was burn'd)
entered the Room, and declared,—That
Madam Sophia was not to be found. 
‘Not to be found!’ cries the Squire,
starting from his Chair; ‘Zounds and
D&wblank;nation! Blood and Fury! Where,
when, how, what,—Not to be found!
where?’ 
‘La! Brother,’ said Mrs. Western, with
true political Coldness, ‘you are always
throwing yourself into such violent Passions
for nothing. My Niece, I suppose,
is only walked out into the Garden. I
protest you are grown so unreasonable,
that it is impossible to live in the House
with you.’ 
‘Nay, nay,’ answered the Squire, returning
as suddenly to himself, as he had
gone from himself; ‘if that be all the
Matter, it signifies not much; but, upon 

my Soul, my Mind misgave me, when
the Fellow said she was not to be found.’ 
He then gave Orders for the Bell to be
rung in the Garden, and sat himself contentedly
down. 
No two Things could be more the Reverse
of each other than were the Brother
and Sister, in most Instances; particularly
in this, That as the Brother never foresaw any
Thing at a Distance, but was most sagacious
in immediately seeing every Thing the Moment
it had happened; so the Sister eternally
foresaw at a Distance, but was not so
quick-sighted to Objects before her Eyes. 
Of both these the Reader may have observed
Examples: And, indeed, both their
several Talents were excessive: For as the
Sister often foresaw what never came to
pass, so the Brother often saw much more
than was actually the Truth. 
This was not however the Case at present. 
The same Report was brought from
the Garden, as before had been brought
from the Chamber, that Madam Sophia was
not to be found. 
The Squire himself now sallied forth, and
begun to roar forth the Name of Sophia as
loudly, and in as hoarse a Voice, as whileom 

did Hercules that of Hylas: And as the
Poet tells us, that the whole Shore ecchoed
back the Name of that beautiful Youth; 
so did the House, the Garden, and all
the neighbouring Fields, resound nothing
but the Name of Sophia, in the hoarse
Voices of the Men, and in the shrill Pipes
of the Women; while Echo seemed so
pleased to repeat the beloved Sound, that if
there is really such a Person, I believe Ovid
hath belied her Sex. 
Nothing reigned for a long Time but
Confusion; 'till at last the Squire having
sufficiently spent his Breath, returned to the
Parlour, where he found Mrs. Western and
Mr. Blifil, and threw himself, with the utmost
Dejection in his Countenance, into a
great Chair. 
Here Mrs. Western began to apply the
following Consolation: 
“Brother, I am sorry for what hath happened; 
and that my Niece should have
behaved herself in a Manner so unbecoming
her Family; but it is all your
own Doings, and you have no Body to
thank but yourself. You know she hath 

been educated always in a Manner directly
contrary to my Advice, and now
you see the Consequence. Have I not
a thousand Times argued with you about
giving my Niece her own Will? But
you know I never could prevail upon
you: And when I had taken so much
Pains to eradicate her headstrong Opinions,
and to rectify your Errors in Policy,
you know she was taken out of my
Hands; so that I have nothing to answer
for. Had I been trusted entirely
with the Care of her Education, no such
Accident as this had ever befallen you: 
So that you must comfort yourself by
thinking it was all your own Doing; 
and, indeed, what else could be expected
from such Indulgence?”— 
“Zounds! Sister,’ answered he, “you
are enough to make one mad. Have
I indulged her? Have I given her her
Will? —It was no longer ago than last
Night that I threatened, if she disobeyed
me, to confine her to her Chamber upon
Bread and Water, as long as she lived. 
—You would provoke the Patience
of Job.” 

“Did ever Mortal hear the like?” replied
she. “Brother, if I had not the Patience
of fifty Jobs, you would make
me forget all Decency and Decorum. 
Why would you interfere? Did I not
beg you, did I not entreat you to leave
the whole Conduct to me? You have
defeated all the Operations of the Campaign
by one false Step. Would any
Man in his Senses have provoked a
Daughter by such Threats as these? 
How often have I told you, that English
Women are not to be treated like Ciracessian* 
Slaves. We have the Protection
of the World: We are to be won by
gentle Means only, and not to be hectored,
and bullied, and beat into Compliance. 
I thank Heaven, no Salique
Law governs here. Brother, you have
a Roughness in your Manner which no
Woman but myself would bear. I do not
wonder my Niece was frightned and terrified
into taking this Measure; and to
speak honestly, I think my Niece will be
justified to the World for what she hath 

done. I repeat it to you again, Brother,
you must comfort yourself by remembering
that it is all your own Fault. 
How often have I advised—” Here Western
rose hastily from his Chair, and, venting
two or three horrid Imprecations, ran
out of the Room. 
When he was departed, his Sister expressed
more Bitterness (if possible) against
him, than she had done while he was present; 
for the Truth of which she appealed
to Mr. Blifil, who, with great Complacence,
acquiesced entirely in all she said; 
but excused all the Faults of Mr. Western,
‘as they must be considered,’ he said, ‘to
have proceeded from the too inordinate
Fondness of a Father, which must be allowed
the Name of an amiable Weakness.’ 
‘So much the more inexcusable,’ 
answer'd the Lady; ‘for whom doth he
ruin by his Fondness, but his own Child?’ 
To which Blifil immediately agreed. 
Mrs. Western then began to express great
Confusion on the Account of Mr. Blifil,
and of the Usage which he had received
from a Family to which he intended so much
Honour. On this Subject she treated 

the Folly of her Niece with great Severity; 
but concluded with throwing the whole on
her Brother, who, she said, was inexcusable
to have proceeded so far without better
Assurances of his Daughter's Consent: 
‘But he was (says she) always of a violent,
headstrong Temper; and I can
scarce forgive myself for all the Advice
I have thrown away upon him.’ 
After much of this Kind of Conversation,
which, perhaps, would not greatly entertain
the Reader, was it here particularly
related, Mr. Blifil took his Leave, and returned
home, not highly pleased with his
Disappointment; which, however, the Philosophy
which he had acquired from Square,
and the Religion infused into him by
Thwackum, together with somewhat else,
taught him to bear rather better than
more passionate Lovers bear these Kinds of
Evils. 




The Escape of Sophia. 
It is now Time to look after Sophia; 
whom the Reader, if he loves her half
so well as I do, will rejoice to find escaped
from the Clutches of her passionate Father,
and from those of her dispassionate Lover. 
Twelve Times did the iron Register of
Time beat on the sonorous Bell-metal,
summoning the Ghosts to rise, and walk
their nightly Round. —In plainer Language,
it was Twelve o'Clock, and all the
Family, as we have said, lay buried in
Drink and Sleep, except only Mrs. Western,
who was deeply engaged in reading a political
Pamphlet, and except our Heroine,
who now softly stole down Stairs, and having
unbarred and unlocked one of the
House Doors, sallied forth, and hastened
to the Place of Appointment. 
Notwithstanding the many pretty Arts,
which Ladies sometimes practise, to display
their Fears on every little Occasion, (almost
as many as the other Sex uses to conceal 

theirs) certainly there is a Degree of Courage,
which not only becomes a Woman,
but is often necessary to enable her to discharge
her Duty. It is, indeed, the Idea
of Fierceness, and not of Bravery, which
destroys the Female Character: For who
can read the Story of the justly celebrated
Arria, without conceiving as high an Opinion
of her Gentleness and Tenderness, as
of her Fortitude? At the same Time, perhaps,
many a Woman who shrieks at a
Mouse, or a Rat, may be capable of poisoning
a Husband; or, what is worse, of
driving him to poison himself. 
Sophia, with all the Gentleness which
a Woman can have, had all the Spirit
which she ought to have. When, therefore,
she came to the Place of Appointment,
and, instead of meeting her Maid, as was
agreed, saw a Man ride directly up to her,
she neither screamed out, nor fainted away: 
Not that her Pulse then beat with its
usual Regularity; for she was, at first, under
some Surprize and Apprehension: But
these were relieved almost as soon as raised,
when the Man, pulling off his Hat, asked
her, in a very submissive Manner, ‘If her
Ladyship did not expect to meet another
Lady?’ And then proceeded to inform 

her, ‘that he was sent to conduct her to
that Lady.’ 
Sophia could have no possible Suspicion
of any Falshood in this Account: She
therefore mounted resolutely behind the
Fellow, who conveyed her safe to a Town
about Five Miles distant, where she had the
Satisfaction of finding the good Mrs.
Honour: For as the Soul of the Waiting-Woman
was wrapt up in those very Habiliments
which used to enwrap her Body,
she could by no Means bring herself to
trust them out of her Sight. Upon these,
therefore, she kept Guard in Person, while
she detached the aforesaid Fellow after her
Mistress, having given him all proper Instructions. 
They now debated what Course to take,
in order to avoid the Pursuit of Mr. Western,
who, they knew, would send after
them in a few Hours. The London Road
had such Charms for Honour, that she
was desirous of going on directly; alledging,
that as Sophia could not be missed till
Eight or Nine the next Morning, her Pursuers
would not be able to overtake her,
even though they knew which Way she had
gone. But Sophia had too much at Stake 

to venture any Thing to Chance; nor did
she dare trust too much to her tender
Limbs, in a Contest which was to be decided
only by Swiftness. She resolved,
therefore, to travel across the Country,
for at least Twenty or Thirty Miles, and
then to take the direct Road to London. 
So, having hired her Horses to go Twenty
Miles one Way, when she intended to go
Twenty Miles the other, she set forward
with the same Guide, behind whom she
had ridden from her Father's House; the
Guide having now taken up behind him,
in the Room of Sophia, a much heavier, as
well as much less lovely Burthen; being,
indeed, a huge Portmanteau, well stuffed
with those outside Ornaments, by Means of
which the fair Honour hoped to gain many
Conquests, and, finally, to make her Fortune
in London City. 
When they had gone about Two Hundred
Paces from the Inn, on the London
Road, Sophia rode up to the Guide, and,
with a Voice much fuller of Honey than was
ever that of Anacreon, though his Mouth is
supposed to have been a Bee-hive, begged
him to take the first Turning which led
towards Bristol. 

Reader, I am not superstitious, nor any
great Believer in modern Miracles. I do
not, therefore, deliver the following as a
certain Truth; for, indeed, I can scarce
credit it myself: But the Fidelity of an
Historian obliges me to relate what hath
been confidently asserted. The Horse, then,
on which the Guide rode, is reported to
have been so charmed by Sophia's Voice,
that he made a full Stop, and exprest an
Unwillingness to proceed any farther. 
Perhaps, however, the Fact may be true,
and less miraculous than it hath been represented; 
since the natural Cause seems
adequate to the Effect: For as the Guide at
that Moment desisted from a constant Application
of his armed right Heel, (for, like
Hudibras, he wore but one Spur) it is more
than possible, that this Omission alone might
occasion the Beast to stop, especially as this
was very frequent with him at other Times. 
But if the Voice of Sophia had really an
Effect on the Horse, it had very little on the
Rider. He answered somewhat surlily, ‘That
Measter had ordered him to go a different
Way, and that he should lose his Place, 

if he went any other than that he was
ordered. 
Sophia finding all her Persuasions had no
Effect, began now to add irresistible Charms
to her Voice; Charms, which according to
the Proverb, makes the old Mare trot, instead
of standing still; Charms! to which
modern Ages have attributed all that irresistible
Force, which the Ancients imputed
to perfect Oratory. In a Word, she promised
she would reward him to his utmost
Expectation. 
The Lad was not totally deaf to these
Promises; but he disliked their being indefinite: 
For tho' perhaps he had never
heard that Word, yet that in Fact was his
Objection. ‘He said, Gentlevolks did not
consider the Case of poor Volks; that he
had like to have been turned away the
other Day, for riding about the Country
with a Gentleman from Squire Allworthy's,
who did not reward him as he
should have done.’ 
‘With whom? says Sophia eagerly— 
‘With a Gentleman from Squire Allworthy's,
repeated the Lad, ‘the Squire's
Son, I think, they call 'un.’ —‘Whither? 

which Way did he go? says Sophia. 
Why a little o' one Side o' Bristol, about
twenty Miles off,’ answered the Lad. — 
‘Guide me,’ says Sophia, ‘to the same Place,
and I'll give thee a Guinea, or two, if
one is not sufficient.’ ‘To be certain, said
the Boy, it is honestly worth two, when
your Ladyship considers what a Risk I
run; but, however, if your Ladyship
will promise me the two Guineas, I'll
e'en venture: To be certain it is a sinful
Thing to ride about my Master's Horses; 
but one Comfort is, I can only be turned
away, and two Guineas will partly make
me Amends.’ 
The Bargain being thus struck, the Lad
turned aside into the Bristol Road, and Sophia
set forward in Pursuit of Jones, highly
contrary to the Remonstrances of Mrs.
Honour, who had much more Desire to see
London, than to see Mr. Jones: For indeed
she was not his Friend with her Mistress,
as he had been guilty of some Neglect in
certain pecuniary Civilities, which are by
Custom due to the Waiting-gentlewoman in
all Love Affairs, and more especially in
those of a clandestine Kind. This we impute
rather to the Carelessness of his Temper,
than to any Want of Generosity; but 

perhaps she derived it from the latter Motive. 
Certain it is that she hated him very
bitterly on that Account, and resolved to
take every Opportunity of injuring him with
her Mistress. It was therefore highly unlucky
for her, that she had gone to the very
same Town and Inn whence Jones had started,
and still more unlucky was she, in
having stumbled on the same Guide, and
on this accidental Discovery which Sophia
had made. 
Our Travellers arrived at Hambrook *  at
the Break of Day, where Honour was against
her Will charged to enquire the Rout
which Mr. Jones had taken. Of this, indeed,
the Guide himself could have informed
them; but Sophia, I know not for what
Reason, never asked him the Question. 
When Mrs. Honour had made her Report
from the Landlord, Sophia, with much
Difficulty, procured some indifferent Horses,
which brought her to the Inn, where Jones
had been confined rather by the Misfortune
of meeting with a Surgeon, than by having
met with a broken Head. 
Here Honour being again charged with a
Commission of Enquiry, had no sooner applied 

herself to the Landlady, and had described
the Person of Mr. Jones, than that
sagacious Woman began, in the vulgar
Phrase, to smell a Rat. When Sophia therefore
entered the Room, instead of answering
the Maid, the Landlady addressing herself
to the Mistress, began the following
Speech. ‘Good-lack-a-day! why there
now, who would have thought it! I protest
the loveliest Couple that ever Eye
beheld. I-fackins, Madam, it is no Wonder
the Squire run on so about your
Ladyship. He told me indeed you was
the finest Lady in the World, and to be
sure so you be. Mercy on him, poor
Heart, I bepitied him, so I did, when he
used to hug his Pillow, and call it his
dear Madam Sophia. —I did all I could
to dissuade him from going to the Wars; 
I told him there were Men enow that
were good for nothing else but to be killed,
that had not the Love of such fine
Ladies.’ ‘Sure,’ says Sophia, ‘the
good Woman is distracted. ‘No, no,’ 
cries the Landlady, ‘I am not distracted.’ 
‘What doth your Ladyship think I don't
know then? I assure you he told me all.’ 
‘What saucy Fellow,’ cries Honour, ‘told
you any Thing of my Lady?’ ‘No saucy
Fellow,’ answered the Landlady, ‘but 

the young Gentleman you enquired after,
and a very pretty young Gentleman he is
and he loves Madam Sophia Western to
the Bottom of his Soul’ ‘He love my
Lady! I'd have you to know, Woman,
she is Meat for his Master. —Nay,
Honour,’ said Sophia, interrupting her,
‘don't be angry with the good Woman,
she intends no Harm.’ ‘No, marry don't
I,’ answered the Landlady, emboldened
by the soft Accents of Sophia, and then
launched into a long Narrative too tedious
to be here set down, in which some Passages
dropt, that gave a little Offence to
Sophia, and much more to her Waiting-woman,
who hence took Occasion to abuse
poor Jones to her Mistress the Moment
they were alone together, saying, ‘that he
must be a very pitiful Fellow, and could
have no Love for a Lady, whose Name
he would thus prostitute in an Ale-house.’ 
Sophia did not see his Behaviour in so very
disadvantageous a Light, and was perhaps
more pleased with the violent Raptures of
his Love (which the Landlady exaggerated
as much as she had done every other Circumstance)
than she was offended with the
rest; and indeed she imputed the whole to 

the Extravagance, or rather Ebullience of
his Passion, and to the Openness of his
Heart. 
This Incident, however, being afterward
revived in her Mind, and placed in the
most odious Colours by Honour, served to
heighten and give Credit to those unlucky
Occurrences at Upton, and assisted the
Waiting-woman in her Endeavours to make
her Mistress depart from that Inn without
seeing Jones. 
The Landlady finding Sophia intended
to stay no longer than till her Horses were
ready, and that without either eating or
drinking, soon withdrew; when Honour began
to take her Mistress to Task (for indeed
she used great Freedom) and after a
long Harangue, in which she reminded her
of her Intention to go to London, and gave
frequent Hints of the Impropriety of pursuing
a young Fellow, she at last concluded
with this serious Exhortation: 
‘For Heaven's Sake, Madam, consider
what you are about, and whither you are
going.’ 
This Advice to a Lady who had already 

rode near forty Miles, and in no very agreeable
Season, may seem foolish enough. It
may be supposed she had well considered
and resolved this already; nay, Mrs. Honour,
by the Hints she threw out, seemed
to think so; and this I doubt not is the
Opinion of many Readers, who have, I
make no Doubt, been long since well convinced
of the Purpose of our Heroine, and
have heartily condemned her for it as a
wanton Baggage. 
But in reality this was not the Case. 
Sophia had been lately so distracted between
Hope and Fear, her Duty and Love to her
Father, her Hatred to Blifil, her Compassion,
and (why should we not confess
the Truth) her Love for Jones; which last
the Behaviour of her Father, of her Aunt,
of every one else, and more particularly of
Jones himself, had blown into a Flame,
that her Mind was in that confused State,
which may be truly said to make us ignorant
of what we do, or whither we go, or
rather indeed indifferent as to the Consequence
of either. 
The prudent and sage Advice of her
Maid, produced, however, some cool Reflection; 

and she at length determined to
go to Gloucester, and thence to proceed directly
to London. 
But unluckily a few Miles before she entered
that Town, she met the Hack-Attorney,
who, as is beforementioned, had dined
there with Mr. Jones. This Fellow being
well known to Mrs. Honour, stopt and spoke
to her; of which Sophia at that Time took
little Notice, more than to enquire who he
was. 
But having had a more particular Account
from Honour of this Man afterwards
at Gloucester, and hearing of the great Expedition
he usually made in travelling, for
which (as hath been before observed) he
was particularly famous; recollecting likewise,
that she had overheard Mrs. Honour inform
him, that they were going to Gloucester,
she began to fear lest her Father
might, by this Fellow's Means, be able to
trace her to that City; wherefore if she
should there strike into the London Road,
she apprehended he would certainly be able
to overtake her. She therefore altered her
Resolution; and having hired Horses to
go a Week's Journey, a Way which she 

did not intend to travel, she again set forward
after a light Refreshment, contrary
to the Desire and earnest Entreaties of her
Maid, and to the no less vehement Remonstrances
of Mrs. Whitefield, who from
good Breeding, or perhaps from good Nature
(for the poor young Lady appeared
much fatigued) press'd her very heartily to
stay that Evening at Gloucester. 
Having refreshed herself only with some
Tea, and with lying about two Hours on
the Bed, while her Horses were getting
ready, she resolutely left Mrs. Whitefield's
about eleven at Night, and striking directly
into the Worcester Road, within less than
four Hours arrived at that very Inn where
we last saw her. 
Having thus traced our Heroine very
particularly back from her Departure, till
her Arrival at Upton, we shall in a very
few Words, bring her Father to the same
Place; who having received the first Scent
from the Post-boy, who conducted his
Daughter to Hambrook, very easily traced
her afterwards to Gloucester; whence he pursued
her to Upton, as he had learned Mr.
Jones had taken that Rout (for Partridge, 

to use the Squire's Expression, left every
where a strong Scent behind him) and he
doubted not in the least but Sophia travelled,
or, as he phrased it, ran the same Way. 
He used indeed a very coarse Expression,
which need not be here inserted; as Foxhunters,
who alone would understand it,
will easily suggest it to themselves. 