


Containing twelve Hours. 



Of those who lawfully may, and of those who
may not write such Histories as this. 
Among other good Uses for
which I have thought proper to
institute these several introductory
Chapters, I have considered
them as a Kind of Mark or Stamp,
which may hereafter enable a very indifferent 

Reader to distinguish, what is
true and genuine in this historic kind of
Writing, from what is false and counterfeit. 
Indeed it seems likely that some such Mark
may shortly become necessary, since the favourable
Reception which two or three Authors
have lately procured for their Works
of this Nature from the Public, will probably
serve as an Encouragement to many
others to undertake the like. Thus a Swarm
of foolish Novels, and monstrous Romances
will be produced, either to the great
impoverishing of Booksellers, or to the
great Loss of Time, and Depravation of
Morals in the Reader; nay, often to the
spreading of Scandal and Calumny, and to
the Prejudice of the Characters of many
worthy and honest People. 
I question not but the ingenious Author
of the Spectator was principally induced to
prefix Greek and Latin Mottos to every
Paper from the same Consideration of
guarding against the Pursuit of those Scribblers,
who, having no Talents of a Writer
but what is taught by the Writing master,
are yet nowise afraid nor ashamed to assume
the same Titles with the greatest Genius,
than their good Brother in the Fable was
of braying in the Lion's Skin. 

By the Device therefore of his Motto, it
became impracticable for any Man to presume
to imitate the Spectators, without understanding
at least one Sentence in the
learned Languages. In the same Manner
I have now secured myself from the Imitation
of those who are utterly incapable of
any Degree of Reflection, and whose Learning
is not equal to an Essay. 
I would not be here understood to insinuate,
that the greatest Merit of such historical
Productions can ever lie in these introductory
Chapters; but, in Fact, those
Parts which contain mere Narrative only,
afford much more Encouragement to the Pen
of an Imitator, than those which are composed
of Observation and Reflection. Here I
mean such Imitators as Rowe was of Shakespear,
or as Horace hints some of the Romans
were of Cato, by bare Feet and sour
Faces. 
To invent good Stories, and to tell them
well, are possibly very rare Talents, and
yet I have observed few Persons who have
scrupled to aim at both; and if we examine
the Romances and Novels with which the
World abounds, I think we may fairly conclude, 

that most of the Authors would not
have attempted to shew their Teeth (if
the Expression may be allowed me) in any
other Way of Writing; nor could indeed
have strung together a dozen Sentences on
any other Subject whatever. Scribimus indocti
doctiq; passim * , may be more truly
said of the Historian and Biographer, than
of any other Species of Writing: For all
the Arts and Sciences (even Criticism itself)
require some little Degree of Learning
and Knowledge. Poetry indeed may perhaps
be thought an Exception; but then it
demands Numbers, or something like
Numbers; whereas to the Composition of
Novels and Romances, nothing is necessary
but Paper, Pens and Ink, with the manual
Capacity of using them. This, I conceive,
their Productions shew to be the Opinion
of the Authors themselves; and this must
be the Opinion of their Readers, if indeed
there be any such. 
Hence we are to derive that universal
Contempt, which the World, who always denominate
the Whole from the Majority,
have cast on all historical Writers, who do 

not draw their Materials from Records. And
it is the Apprehension of this Contempt,
that hath made us so cautiously avoid the
Term Romance, a Name with which we
might otherwise have been well enough contented. 
Though as we have good Authority
for all our Characters, no less indeed
than Doomsday Book, or the  the vast authentic
Book of Nature, as is elsewhere
hinted, our Labours have sufficient Title to
the Name of History. Certainly they deserve
some Distinction from those Works,
which one of the wittiest of Men regarded
only as proceeding from a Pruritus, or
indeed rather from a Looseness of the
Brain. 
But besides the Dishonour which is thus
cast on one of the most useful as well as entaining
of all Kinds of Writing, there is
just Reason to apprehend, that by encouraging
such Authors, we shall propagate
much Dishonour of another Kind; I mean
to the Characters of many good and valuable
Members of Society: For the dullest Writers,
no more than the dullest Companions,
are always inoffensive. They have both
enough of Language to be indecent and abusive. 
And surely if the Opinion just
above cited be true, we cannot wonder, 

that Works so nastily derived should be
nasty themselves, or have a Tendency to
make others so. 
To prevent therefore for the future, such
intemperate Abuses of Leisure, of Letters,
and of the Liberty of the Press, especially
as the World seems at present to be more
than usually threatned with them, I shall
here venture to mention some Qualifications,
every one of which are in a pretty
high Degree necessary to this Order of
Historians. 
The first is Genius, without a rich Vein
of which, no Study, says Horace, can avail
us. By Genius I would understand that
Power, or rather those Powers of the Mind,
which are capable of penetrating into all
Things within our Reach and Knowledge,
and of distinguishing their essential Differences. 
These are no other than Invention
and Judgment; and they are both called
by the collective Name of Genius, as they
are of those Gifts of Nature which we bring
with us into the World. Concerning each of
which many seem to have fallen into very
great Errors: For by Invention, I believe,
is generally understood a creative Faculty; 
which would indeed prove most Romance-Writers 

to have the highest Pretensions to
it; whereas by Invention is really meant
no more, (and so the Word signifies) than
Discovery, or finding out; or to explain
it at large, a quick and sagacious Penetration
into the true Essence of all the Objects
of our Contemplation. This, I think, can
rarely exist without the Concomitancy of
Judgment: For how we can be said to
have discovered the true Essence of two
Things, without discerning their Difference,
seems to me hard to conceive; now this
last is the undisputed Province of Judgment,
and yet some few Men of Wit have
agreed with all the dull Fellows in the
World, in representing these two to have
been seldom or never the Property of one
and the same Person. 
But tho' they should be so, they are not
sufficient for our Purpose without a good
Share of Learning; for which I could again
cite the Authority of Horace, and of
many others, if any was necessary to prove
that Tools are of no Service to a Workman,
when they are not sharpened by Art, or
when he wants Rules to direct him in his
Work, or hath no Matter to work upon. 
All these Uses are supplied by Learning: 
For Nature can only furnish us with Capacity, 

or, as I have chose to illustrate it,
with the Tools of our Profession; Learning
must fit them for Use, must direct
them in it; and lastly, must contribute,
Part at least, of the Materials. A competent
Knowledge of History and of the
Belles Lettres, is here absolutely necessary; 
and without this Share of Knowledge at
least, to affect the Character of an Historian,
is as vain as to endeavour at building
a House without Timber or Mortar,
or Brick or Stone. Homer and Milton, who,
though they added the Ornament of Numbers
to their Works, were both Historians
of our Order, were Masters of all the
Learning of their Times. 
Again, there is another Sort of Knowledge
beyond the Power of Learning to bestow,
and this is to be had by Conversation. 
So necessary is this to the understanding the
Characters of Men, that none are more
ignorant of them than those learned Pedants,
whose Lives have been entirely consumed
in Colleges, and among Books: 
For however exquisitely Human Nature
may have been described by Writers, the
true practical System can only be learnt in
the World. Indeed the like happens in
every other Kind of Knowledge. Neither 

Physic, nor Law, are to be practically known
from Books. Nay, the Farmer, the Planter,
the Gardener, must perfect by Experience
what he hath acquired the Rudiments
of by Reading. How accurately soever the
ingenious Mr. Miller may have described the
Plant, he himself would advise his Disciple to
see it in the Garden. As we must perceive,
that after the nicest Strokes of a Shakespear,
or a Johnson, of a Wycherly, or an
Otway, some Touches of Nature will escape
the Reader, which the judicious Action of
a Garrick, of a Cibber, or a Clive * , can
convey to him; so on the real Stage, the
Character shews himself in a stronger and
bolder Light, than he can be described. 
And if this be the Case in those fine and
nervous Descriptions, which great Authors
themselves have taken from Life, how much
more strongly will it hold when the Writer
himself takes his Lines not from Nature, but
from Books! Such Characters are only the
faint Copy of a Copy, and can have neither
the Justness nor Spirit of an Original. 

Now this Conversation in our Historian
must be universal, that is, with all Ranks
and Degrees of Men: For the Knowledge
of what is called High-Life, will not instruct
him in low, nor e converso, will his
being acquainted with the inferior Part of
Mankind, teach him the Manners of the
superior. And though it may be thought
that the Knowledge of either may sufficiently
enable him to describe at least that in
which he hath been conversant; yet he
will even here fall greatly short of Perfection:
for the Follies of either Rank do in
reality illustrate each other. For Instance,
the Affectation of High-life appears more
glaring and ridiculous from the Simplicity
of the Low; and again the Rudeness and
Barbarity of this latter, strikes with much
stronger Ideas of Absurdity, when contrasted
with, and opposed to the Politeness which
controuls the former. Besides, to say the
Truth, the Manners of our Historian will
be improved by both these Conversations: 
For in the one he will easily find Examples
of Plainness, Honesty, and Sincerity; in
the other of Refinement, Elegance, and a
Liberality of Spirit; which last Quality I myself
have scarce ever seen in Men of low
Birth and Education. 

Nor will all the Qualities I have hitherto
given my Historian avail him, unless he
have what is generally meant by a good
Heart, and be capable of feeling. The
Author who will make me weep, says
Horace, must first weep himself. In reality,
no Man can paint a Distress well,
which he doth not feel while he is painting
it; nor do I doubt, but that the most
pathetic and affecting Scenes have been
writ with Tears. In the same Manner it is
with the Ridiculous. I am convinced I never
make my Reader laugh heartily, but where
I have laughed before him, unless it should
happen at any Time, that instead of laughing
with me, he should be inclined to laugh
at me. Perhaps this may have been the
Case at some Passages in this Chapter,
from which Apprehension I will here put
an End to it. 




Containing a very surprizing Adventure indeed,
which Mr. Jones met with in his
Walk with the Man of the Hill. 
Aurora now first opened her Casement,
anglicè, the Day began to
break, when Jones walked forth in Company
with the Stranger, and mounted Mazard
Hill; of which they had no sooner
gained the Summit, than one of the most
noble Prospects in the World presented itself
to their View, and which we would
likewise present to the Reader; but for two
Reasons. First, We despair of making
those who have seen this Prospect, admire
our Description. Secondly, We very much
doubt whether those, who have not seen it,
would understand it. 
Jones stood for some Minutes fixed in
one Posture, and directing his Eyes towards
the South; upon which the old Gentleman
asked, What he was looking at with
so much Attention? ‘Alas, Sir,’ answered
he, with a Sigh, ‘I was endeavouring
to trace out my own Journey 

hither. Good Heavens! what a Distance is
Gloucester from us! What a vast Tract of
Land must be between me and my own
Home.’ ‘Ay, ay, young Gentleman,’ 
cries the other, ‘and, by your Sighing,
from what you love better than your own
Home, or I am mistaken. I perceive
now the Object of your Contemplation is
not within your Sight, and yet I fancy
you have a Pleasure in looking that Way.’ 
Jones answered with a Smile, ‘I find, old
Friend, you have not yet forgot the Sensations
of your Youth. —I own my
Thoughts were employed as you have
guessed.’ 
They now walked to that Part of the
Hill which looks to the North West,
and which hangs over a vast and extensive
Wood. Here they were no sooner arrived,
than they heard at a Distance the most violent
Skreams of a Woman, proceeding
from the Wood below them. Jones listened
a Moment, and then, without saying a
Word to his Companion (for indeed the
Occasion seemed sufficiently pressing) ran,
or rather slid, down the Hill, and without
the least Apprehension or Concern for his
own Safety, made directly to the Thicket
whence the Sound had issued. 

He had not entered far into the Wood
before he beheld a most shocking Sight indeed,
a Woman stript half naked, under
the Hands of a Ruffian, who had put his
Garter round her Neck, and was endeavouring
to draw her up to a Tree. Jones
asked no Questions at this Interval; but
fell instantly upon the Villain, and made
such good Use of his trusty Oaken Stick,
that he laid him sprawling on the Ground,
before he could defend himself, indeed almost
before he knew he was attacked; nor
did he cease the Prosecution of his Blows,
till the Woman herself begged him to forbear,
saying, She believed he had sufficiently
done his Business. 
The poor Wretch then fell upon her
Knees to Jones, and gave him a thousand
Thanks for her Deliverance: He presently
lifted her up, and told her he was highly
pleased with the extraordinary Accident
which had sent him thither for her Relief,
where it was so improbable she should find
any; adding, that Heaven seemed to have
designed him as the happy Instrument of her
Protection. ‘Nay,’ answered she, ‘I
could almost conceive you to be some
good Angel; and to say the Truth, 

you look more like an Angel than a
Man, in my Eye.’ Indeed he was a
charming Figure, and if a very fine Person,
and a most comely Set of Features,
adorned with Youth, Health, Strength,
Freshness, Spirit and Good Nature, can
make a Man resemble an Angel, he certainly
had that Resemblance. 
The redeemed Captive had not altogether
so much of the human-angelic Species; 
she seemed to be, at least, of the middle
Age, nor had her Face much Appearance
of Beauty; but her Cloaths being torn from
all the upper Part of her Body, her Breasts,
which were well formed, and extremely
white, attracted the Eyes of her Deliverer,
and for a few Moments they stood silent,
and gazing at each other; till the Ruffian
on the Ground beginning to move, Jones
took the Garter which had been intended
for another Purpose, and bound both his
Hands behind him. And now, on contemplating
his Face, he discovered, greatly
to his Surprize, and perhaps not a little to
his Satisfaction, this very Person to be no
other than Ensign Northerton. Nor had
the Ensign forgotten his former Antagonist,
whom he knew the Moment he came
to himself. His Surprize was equal to that 

of Jones; but I conceive his Pleasure was
rather less on this Occasion. 
Jones helped Northerton upon his Legs,
and then looking him stedfastly in the Face,
‘I fancy, Sir,’ said he, ‘you did not expect
to meet me any more in this World,
and I confess I had as little Expectation
to find you here. However, Fortune, I
see, hath brought us once more together,
and hath given me Satisfaction for the
Injury I have received, even without my
own Knowledge.’ 
‘It is very much like a Man of Honour
indeed,’ answered Northerton, ‘to take
Satisfaction by knocking a Man down
behind his Back. Neither am I capable
of giving you Satisfaction here, as I have
no Sword; but if you dare behave like
a Gentleman, let us go where I can furnish
myself with one, and I will do by
you as a Man of Honour ought.’ 
‘Doth it become such a Villain as you
are,’ cries Jones, ‘to contaminate the
Name of Honour by assuming it? But I
shall waste no Time in Discourse with
you—Justice requires Satisfaction of you
now, and shall have it.’ Then turning 

to the Woman, he asked her, if she was
near her Home, or if not, whether she was
acquainted with any House in the Neighbourhood,
where she might procure herself
some decent Cloaths, in order to proceed to
a Justice of the Peace. 
She answered, She was an entire Stranger
in that Part of the World. Jones then
recollecting himself, said he had a Friend
near, who would direct them; indeed he
wondered at his not following; but, in
Fact, the Good Man of the Hill, when our
Heroe departed, sat himself down on the
Brow, where, tho' he had a Gun in his
Hand, he with great Patience and Unconcern,
had attended the Issue. 
Jones then stepping without the Wood,
perceived the old Man sitting as we have
just described him; he presently exerted his
utmost Agility, and with surprizing Expedition
ascended the Hill. 
The old Man advised him to carry the
Woman to Upton, which, he said, was the
nearest Town, and there he would be sure
of furnishing her with all manner of Conveniencies. 
Jones having received his Direction
to the Place, took his Leave of the
Man of the Hill, and desiring him to direct 

Partridge the same Way, returned hastily
to the Wood. 
Our Heroe, at his Departure to make
this Enquiry of his Friend, had considered,
that as the Ruffian's Hands were tied behind
him, he was incapable of executing
any wicked Purposes on the poor Woman. 
Besides, he knew he should not be beyond
the Reach of her Voice, and could return
soon enough to prevent any Mischief. He
had moreover declared to the Villain, that
if he attempted the least Insult, he would
be himself immediately the Executioner of
Vengeance on him. But Jones unluckily
forgot that tho' the Hands of Northerton
were tied, his Legs were at Liberty; nor
did he lay the least Injunction on the Prisoner,
that he should not make what use of
these he pleased. Northerton therefore having
given no Parole of that Kind, thought
he might, without any Breach of Honour,
depart, not being obliged, as he imagined,
by any Rules, to wait for a formal Discharge. 
He therefore took up his Legs,
which were at Liberty, and walked off
thro' the Wood, which favoured his Retreat; 
nor did the Woman, whose Eyes
were perhaps rather turned towards her Deliverer,
once think of his Escape, or give 

herself any Concern or Trouble to prevent
it. 
Jones therefore, at his Return, found the
Woman alone. He would have spent some
Time in searching for Northerton; but she
would not permit him; earnestly entreating
that he would accompany her to the Town
whither they had been directed. ‘As to
the Fellow's Escape,’ said she, ‘it gives
me no Uneasiness: For Philosophy and
Christianity both preach up Forgiveness
of Injuries. But for you, Sir, I am
concerned at the Trouble I give you, nay
indeed my Nakedness may well make
me ashamed to look you in the Face; 
and if it was not for the Sake of your
Protection, I should wish to go alone.’ 
Jones offered her his Coat; but, I know
not for what Reason, she absolutely refused
the most earnest Solicitations to accept it. 
He then begged her to forget both the
Causes of her Confusion. ‘With Regard
to the former,’ says he, ‘I have done no
more than my Duty in protecting you; 
and as for the latter, I will entirely remove
it, by walking before you all the
Way; for I would not have my Eyes offend
you, and I could not answer for my 

Power of resisting the attractive Charms
of so much Beauty.’ 
Thus our Heroe and the redeemed Lady
walked in the same Manner as Orpheus and
Eurydice marched heretofore: But tho' I
cannot believe that Jones was designedly
tempted by his Fair One to look behind him,
yet as she frequently wanted his Assistance
to help her over Stiles, and had besides
many Trips and other Accidents, he was
often obliged to turn about. However, he
had better Fortune than what attended poor
Orpheus; for he brought his Companion,
or rather Follower, safe into the famous
Town of Upton. 



The Arrival of Mr. Jones, with his Lady,
at the Inn, with a very full Description of
the Battle of Upton. 
Tho' the Reader, we doubt not, is
very eager to know who this Lady
was, and how she fell into the Hands of
Mr. Northerton; we must beg him to
suspend his Curiosity for a short Time, as
we are obliged, for some very good Reasons, 

which hereafter perhaps he may guess,
to delay his Satisfaction a little longer. 
Mr. Jones and his fair Companion no
sooner entered the Town, than they went
directly to that Inn which, in their Eyes,
presented the fairest Appearance to the
Street. Here Jones, having ordered a Servant
to shew a Room above Stairs, was
ascending, when the dishevelled Fair hastily
following, was laid hold on by the Master
of the House, who cried, ‘Hey day,
where is that Beggar Wench going? stay
below Stairs, I desire you;’ but Jones at
that Instant thundered from above, ‘Let
the Lady come up,’ in so authoritative a
Voice, that the good Man instantly withdrew
his Hands, and the Lady made the
best of her Way to the Chamber. 
Here Jones wished her Joy of her safe
Arrival, and then departed, in order, as he
promised, to send the Landlady up with
some Cloaths. The poor Woman thanked
him heartily for all his Kindness, and said,
She hoped she should see him again soon,
to thank him a thousand Times more. 
During this short Conversation, she covered
her white Bosom as well as she could possibly
with her Arms: For Jones could not 

avoid stealing a sly Peep or two, tho' he
took all imaginable Care to avoid giving
any Offence. 
Our Travellers had happened to take up
their Residence at a House of exceeding
good Repute, whither Irish Ladies of strict
Virtue, and many Northern Lasses of the
same Predicament, were accustomed to resort
in their Way to Bath. The Landlady
therefore would by no Means have admitted
any Conversation of a disreputable Kind
to pass under her Roof. Indeed so foul
and contagious are all such Proceedings,
that they contaminate the very innocent
Scenes where they are committed, and give
the Name of a bad House, or of a House
of ill Repute, to all those where they are
suffered to be carried on. 
Not that I would intimate, that such
strict Chastity as was preserved in the Temple
of Vesta can possibly be maintained at a
public Inn. My good Landlady did not
hope for such a Blessing, nor would any of
the Ladies I have spoken of, or indeed any
others of the most rigid Note, have expected
or insisted on any such Thing. But
to exclude all vulgar Concubinage, and to
drive all Whores in Rags from within the 

Walls, is within the Power of every one. 
This my Landlady very stiffly adhered to,
and this her virtuous Guests, who did not
travel in Rags, would very reasonably have
expected of her. 
Now it required no very blameable Degree
of Suspicion, to imagine that Mr.
Jones and his ragged Companion had certain
Purposes in their Intention, which,
tho' tolerated in some Christian Countries,
connived at in others, and practised in all; 
are however as expressly forbidden as Murder,
or any other horrid Vice, by that Religion
which is universally believed in those Countries. 
The Landlady therefore had no
sooner received an Intimation of the Entrance
of the abovesaid Persons, than she
began to meditate the most expeditious
Means for their Expulsion. In order to
this, she had provided herself with a long
and deadly Instrument, with which, in
Times of Peace, the Chambermaid was wont
to demolish the Labours of the industrious
Spider. In vulgar Phrase, she had taken
up the Broomstick, and was just about to
sally from the Kitchen, when Jones accosted
her with a Demand of a Gown, and other
Vestments, to cover the half-naked Woman
above Stairs. 

Nothing can be more provoking to the
human Temper, nor more dangerous to
that cardinal Virtue, Patience, than Solicitations
of extraordinary Offices of Kindness,
on Behalf of those very Persons with whom
we are highly incensed. For this Reason
Shakespear hath artfully introduced his Desdemona
soliciting Favours for Cassio of her
Husband, as the Means of enflaming not only
his Jealousy, but his Rage, to the highest
Pitch of Madness; and we find the unfortunate
Moor less able to command his Passion
on this Occasion, than even when he beheld
his valued Present to his Wife in the
Hands of his supposed Rival. In Fact, we
regard these Efforts as Insults on our Understanding,
and to such the Pride of Man
is very difficultly brought to submit. 
My Landlady, though a very good-tempered
Woman, had, I suppose, some
of this Pride in her Composition; for Jones
had scarce ended his Request, when she fell
upon him with a certain Weapon, which,
tho' it be neither long, nor sharp, nor hard,
nor indeed threatens from its Appearance
with either Death or Wound, hath been
however held in great Dread and Abhorrence
by many wise Men; nay, by many 

brave ones; insomuch that some who have
dared to look into the Mouth of a loaded
Cannon, have not dared to look into a
Mouth where this Weapon was brandished; 
and rather than run the Hazard of its Execution,
have contented themselves with
making a most pitiful and sneaking Figure
in the Eyes of all their Acquaintance. 
To confess the Truth, I am afraid Mr.
Jones was one of these; for tho' he was
attacked and violently belaboured with the
aforesaid Weapon, he could not be provoked
to make any Resistance; but in a
most cowardly Manner applied, with many
Entreaties, to his Antagonist to desist from
pursuing her Blows; in plain English, he
only begged her with the utmost Earnestness
to hear him; but before he could obtain
his Request, my Landlord himself entered
into the Fray, and embraced that Side
of the Cause which seemed to stand very
little in need of Assistance. 
There are a Sort of Heroes who are
supposed to be determined in their chusing
or avoiding a Conflict by the Character and
Behaviour of the Person whom they are to
engage. These are said to know their Man,
and Jones, I believe, knew his Woman; 
for tho' he had been so submissive to her, 

he was no sooner attacked by her Husband,
than he demonstrated an immediate Spirit of
Resentment, and enjoined him Silence under
a very severe Penalty; no less than that,
I think, of being converted into Fuel for
his own Fire. 
The Husband, with great Indignation,
but with a Mixture of Pity, answered,
‘You must pray first to be made able; I
believe I am a better Man than yourself; 
ay, every Way, that I am;’ and presently
proceeded to discharge half a dozen Whores
at the Lady above Stairs, the last of which
had scarce issued from his Lips, when a
swinging Blow from the Cudgel that Jones
carried in his Hand assaulted him over the
Shoulders. 
It is a Question whether the Landlord or
the Landlady was the most expeditious in
returning this Blow. My Landlord, whose
Hands were empty, fell to with his Fist,
and the good Wife, uplifting her Broom,
and aiming at the Head of Jones, had probably
put an immediate End to the Fray,
and to Jones likewise, had not the Descent
of this Broom been prevented,—not by
the miraculous Intervention of any Heathen
Deity, but by a very natural, tho' fortunate 

Accident; viz. by the Arrival of Partridge; 
who entered the House at that Instant
(for Fear had caused him to run every Step
from the Hill) and who, seeing the Danger
which threatned his Master, or Companion,
(which you chuse to call him) prevented so
sad a Catastrophe, by catching hold of the
Landlady's Arm, as it was brandished aloft
in the Air. 
The Landlady soon perceived the Impediment
which prevented her Blow; and being
unable to rescue her Arm from the
Hands of Partridge, she let fall the Broom,
and then leaving Jones to the Discipline of
her Husband, she fell with the utmost
Fury on that poor Fellow, who had already
given some Intimation of himself, by crying,
‘Zounds! do you intend to kill my
Friend?’ 
Partridge, though not much addicted to
Battle, would not however stand still when
his Friend was attacked; nor was he much
displeased with that Part of the Combat
which fell to his Share: He therefore returned
my Landlady's Blows as soon as he
received them; and now the Fight was
obstinately maintained on all Parts, and it
seemed doubtful to which Side Fortune 

would incline, when the naked Lady, who
had listened at the Top of the Stairs to the
Dialogue which preceded the Engagement,
descended suddenly from above, and without
weighing the unfair Inequality of two
to one, fell upon the poor Woman who
was boxing with Partridge; nor did that
great Champion desist, but rather redoubled
his Fury, when he found fresh Succours
were arrived to his Assistance. 
Victory must now have fallen to the Side
of the Travellers (for the bravest Troops
must yield to Numbers) had not Susan the
Chambermaid came  luckily to support her
Mistress. This Susan was as two-handed
a Wench (according to the Phrase) as any
in the Country, and would, I believe, have
beat the famed Thalestris herself, or any of
her subject Amazons; for her Form was robust
and manlike, and every way made for
such Encounters. As her Hands and Arms
were formed to give Blows with great
Mischief to an Enemy, so was her Face as
well contrived to receive Blows without any
great Injury to herself: Her Nose being
already flat to her Face; her Lips were so
large, that no Swelling could be perceived
in them, and moreover they were so hard,
that a Fist could hardly make any Impression 

on them. Lastly, her Cheek-Bones
stood out, as if Nature had intended them
for two Bastions to defend her Eyes in those
Encounters for which she seemed so well
calculated, and to which she was most wonderfully
well inclined. 
This fair Creature entering the Field of
Battle, immediately filed to that Wing where
her Mistress maintained so unequal a Fight
with one of either Sex. Here she presently
challenged Partridge to single Combat. 
He accepted the Challenge, and a most
desperate Fight began between them. 
Now the Dogs of War being let loose,
began to lick their bloody Lips; now Victory
with Golden Wings hung hovering in
the Air. Now Fortune taking her Scales
from her Shelf, began to weigh the Fates
of Tom Jones, his Female Companion, and
Partridge, against the Landlord, his Wife,
and Maid; all which hung in exact Ballance
before her; when a good-natured Accident
put suddenly an End to the bloody
Fray, with which half of the Combatants
had already sufficiently feasted. This Accident
was the Arrival of a Coach and four; 
upon which my Landlord and Landlady
immediatly desisted from fighting, and at 

their Entreaty obtained the same Favour of
their Antagonists; but Susan was not so
kind to Partridge, for that Amazonian Fair
having overthrown and bestrid her Enemy,
was now cuffing him lustily with both her
Hands, without any Regard to his Request
of a Cessation of Arms, or to those loud
Exclamations of Murder which he roared
forth. 
No sooner, however, had Jones quitted
the Landlord, than he flew to the Rescue
of his defeated Companion, from whom
he with much Difficulty drew off the enraged
Chambermaid; but Partridge was not
immediately sensible of his Deliverance; 
for he still lay flat on the Floor, guarding
his Face with his Hands, nor did he cease
roaring till Jones had forced him to look
up, and to perceive that the Battle was at
an End. 
The Landlord who had no visible Hurt,
and the Landlady hiding her well scratched
Face with her Handkerchief, ran both
hastily to the Door to attend the Coach,
from which a young Lady and her Maid
now alighted. These the Landlady presently
ushered into that Room where Mr.
Jones had at first deposited his fair Prize, 

as it was the best Apartment in the House. 
Hither they were obliged to pass through
the Field of Battle, which they did with
the utmost Haste, covering their Faces
with their Handkerchiefs, as desirous to
avoid the Notice of any one. Indeed their
Caution was quite unnecessary: For the
poor unfortunate Helen, the fatal Cause of all
the Bloodshed, was entirely taken up in endeavouring
to conceal her own Face, and Jones
was no less occupied in rescuing Partridge
from the Fury of Susan; which being happily
effected, the poor Fellow immediately
departed to the Pump to wash his Face,
and to stop that bloody Torrent which Susan
had plentifully set a flowing from his Nostrils. 



In which the Arrival of a Man of War
puts a final End to Hostilities, and causes
the Conclusion of a firm and lasting Peace
between all Parties. 
A serjeant and a File of Musqueteers,
with a Deserter in their Custody, arrived
about this Time. The Serjeant presently
enquired for the principal Magistrate
of the Town, and was informed by my 

Landlord, that he himself was vested in
that Office. He then demanded his Billets,
together with a Mug of Beer, and complaining
it was cold, spread himself before
the Kitchen Fire. 
Mr. Jones was at this Time comforting
the poor distressed Lady, who sat down at
a Table in the Kitchen, and leaning her
Head upon her Arm, was bemoaning her
Misfortunes; but lest my fair Readers
should be in Pain concerning a particular
Circumstance, I think proper here to acquaint
them, that before she had quitted
the Room above Stairs, she had so well
covered herself with a Pillowbere which she
there found, that her Regard to Decency
was not in the least violated by the Presence
of so many Men as were now in the Room. 
One of the Soldiers now went up to the
Serjeant, and whispered something in his
Ear; upon which he stedfastly fixed his
Eyes on the Lady, and having looked at
her for near a Minute, he came up to her,
saying, ‘I ask Pardon, Madam, but I am certain
I am not deceived, you can be no
other Person than Captain Waters's Lady.’ 

The poor Woman, who in her present
Distress had very little regarded the Face of
any Person present, no sooner looked at the
Serjeant, than she presently recollected him,
and calling him by his Name, answered,
‘That she was indeed the unhappy Person he
imagined her to be; but added, I wonder
any one should know me in this Disguise.’ 
To which the Serjeant replied, ‘he
was very much surprized to see her Ladyship
in such a Dress, and was afraid some
Accident had happened to her.’ ‘An
Accident hath happened to me, indeed,’ 
says she, ‘and I am highly obliged to
this Gentleman (pointing to Jones) that
it was not a fatal one, or that I am now
living to mention it.’ ‘Whatever the
Gentleman hath done,’ cries the Serjeant,
‘I am sure the Captain will make him
Amends for it; and if I can be of any
Service, your Ladyship may command
me, and I shall think myself very happy
to have it my Power to serve your Ladyship; 
and so indeed may any one, for I
know the Captain will well reward them
for it.’ 
The Landlady who heard from the Stairs
all that past between the Serjeant and Mrs. 

Waters, came hastily down, and running
directly up to her, began to ask Pardon
for the Offences she had committed, begging
that all might be imputed to Ignorance
of her Quality: For, ‘Lud! Madam,’ 
says she, ‘how should I have
imagined that a Lady of your Fashion
would appear in such a Dress? 
I am sure, Madam, if I had once suspected
that your Ladyship was your
Ladyship, I would sooner have burnt
my Tongue out, than have said what I
have said: And I hope your Ladyship
will accept of a Gown, till you can
get your own Cloaths.’ 
‘Prithee Woman,’ says Mrs. Waters,
‘cease your Impertinence: How can you
imagine I should concern myself about
any thing which comes from the Lips of
such low Creatures as yourself. But I
am surprized at your Assurance in thinking,
after what is past, that I will condescend
to put on any of your dirty
Things. I would have you know,
Creature, I have a Spirit above that.’ 
Here Jones interfered, and begg'd Mrs.
Waters to forgive the Landlady, and to
accept her Gown: ‘For I must confess,’ 

cries he, ‘our Appearance was a little suspicious
when first we came in; and I am
well assured, all this good Woman did,
was, as she professed, out of Regard to
the Reputation of her House.’ 
‘Yes, upon my truly was it,’ says she; 
‘the Gentleman speaks very much like a
Gentleman, and I see very plainly is so; 
and to be certain the House is well known
to be a House of as good Reputation as
any on the Road, and tho' I say it, is
frequented by Gentry of the best Quality,
both Irish and English. I defy any Body
to say black is my Eye, for that Matter. 
And, as I was saying, if I had
known your Ladyship to be your Ladyship,
I would as soon have burnt my
Fingers as have affronted your Ladyship; 
but truly where Gentry come and spend
their Money, I am not willing that they
should be scandalized by a Set of poor
shabby Vermin, that wherever they go,
leave more Lice than Money behind
them; such Folks never raise my Compassion: 
For to be certain, it is foolish
to have any for them, and if our Justices
did as they ought, they would be all
whipt out of the Kingdom; for to be
certain it is what is most fitting for them. 

But as for your Ladyship, I am heartily
sorry your Ladyship hath had a Misfortune,
and if your Ladyship will do me
the Honour to wear my Cloaths till you
can get some of your Ladyship's own, to
be certain the best I have is at your Ladyship's
Service.’ 
Whether Cold, Shame, or the Persuasions
of Mr. Jones prevailed most with Mrs.
Waters, I will not determine; but she suffered
herself to be pacified by this Speech
of my Landlady, and retired with that good
Woman, in order to apparel herself in a
decent Manner. 
My Landlord was likewise beginning his
Oration to Jones, but was presently interrupted
by that generous Youth, who shook
him heartily by the Hand; and assured
him of entire Forgiveness, saying, ‘If
you are satisfied, my worthy Friend, I
promise you I am;’ and indeed in one
Sense the Landlord had the better Reason
to be satisfied; for he had received a Belly-full
of Drubbing, whereas Jones had scarce
felt a single Blow. 
Partridge, who had been all this Time
washing his bloody Nose at the Pump, returned 

into the Kitchen at the Instant when
his Master and the Landlord were shaking
Hands with each other. As he was of a
peaceable Disposition, he was pleased with
those Symptoms of Reconciliation; and tho'
his Face bore some Marks of Susan's Fist, and
many more of her Nails, he rather chose to
be contented with his Fortune in the last
Battle, than to endeavour at bettering it
in another. 
The heroic Susan was likewise well contented
with her Victory, tho' it had cost
her a Black-Eye, which Partridge had given
her at the first Onset. Between these
two, therefore, a League was struck, and
those Hands which had been the Instruments
of War, became now the Mediators
of Peace. 
Matters were thus restored to a perfect
Calm, at which the Serjeant, tho' it may
seem so contrary to the Principles of his
Profession, testified his Approbation. ‘Why
now, that's friendly, said he; D&wblank;n
me, I hate to see two People bear Ill-will
to one another, after they have had a
Tussel. The only Way when Friends
quarrel, is to see it out fairly in a friendly
Manner, as a Man may call it, either 

with Fist, or Sword, or Pistol, according
as they like, and then let it be
all over: For my own Part, d&wblank;n me
if ever I love my Friend better than when
I am fighting with him. To bear Malice
is more like a Frenchman than an Englishman.’ 
He then proposed a Libation as a necessary
Part of the Ceremony at all Treaties
of this Kind. Perhaps the Reader may here
conclude that he was well versed in antient
History; but this, tho' highly probable,
as he cited no Authority to support the
Custom, I will not affirm with any Confidence. 
Most likely indeed it is, that he
founded his Opinion on very good Authority,
since he confirmed it with many violent
Oaths. 
Jones no sooner heard the Proposal, than
immediately agreeing with the learned Serjeant,
he ordered a Bowl, or rather a large
Mug, filled with the Liquor used on these
Occasions to be brought in, and then began
the Ceremony himself. He placed his Right
Hand in that of the Landlord, and
seizing the Bowl with his Left, uttered the
usual Words, and then made his Libation. 
After which the same was observed by all
present. Indeed there is very little Need of 

being particular in describing the whole
Form, as it differed so little from those
Libations of which so much is recorded in
ancient Authors, and their modern Transcribers. 
The principal Difference lay in
two Instances: For first, the present Company
poured the Liquor only down their
Throats; and, 2dly, The Serjeant, who
officiated as Priest, drank the last; but he
preserved, I believe, the antient Form
in swallowing much the largest Draught of
the whole Company, and in being the only
Person present who contributed nothing
towards the Libation, besides his good
Offices in assisting at the Performance. 
The good People now ranged themselves
round the Kitchin Fire, where good Humour
seemed to maintain an absolute Dominion,
and Partridge not only forgot his
shameful Defeat, but converted Hunger into
Thirst, and soon became extremely facetious. 
We must, however, quit this agreeable
Assembly for a while, and attend
Mr. Jones to Mrs. Waters's Apartment,
where the Dinner which he had bespoke
was now on the Table. Indeed it took no
long Time in preparing, having been all
drest three Days before, and required nothing 

thing more from the Cook than to warm
it over again. 



An Apology for all Heroes who have good
Stomachs, with a Description of a Battle
of the amorous Kind. 
Heroes, notwithstanding the high
Ideas, which by the Means of Flatterers
they may entertain of themselves, or
the World may conceive of them, have
certainly more of mortal than divine about
them. However elevated their Minds may
be, their Bodies at least (which is much the
major Part of most) are liable to the worst
Infirmities and subject to the vilest Offices of
human Nature. Among these latter the
Act of Eating, which hath by several wise
Men been considered as extremely mean
and derogatory from the Philosophic Dignity,
must be in some Measure performed
by the greatest Prince, Heroe, or
Philosopher upon Earth; nay, sometimes
Nature hath been so frolicksome as to exact
of these dignified Characters, a much more
exorbitant Share of this Office, than she 

hath obliged those of the lowest Order to
perform. 
To say the Truth, as no known Inhabitant
of this Globe is really more than Man,
so none need be ashamed of submitting to
what the Necessities of Man demand; but
when those great Personages I have just
mentioned, condescend to aim at confining
such low Offices to themselves; as when
by hoarding or destroying, they seem desirous
to prevent any others from eating,
they then surely become very low and despicable. 
Now after this short Preface, we think it no
Disparagement to our Heroe to mention the
immoderate Ardour with which he laid
about him at this Season. Indeed it may
be doubted, whether Ulysses, who by the
Way seems to have had the best Stomach
of all the Heroes in that eating Poem of the
Odyssey, ever made a better Meal. Three
Pounds at least of that Flesh which formerly
had contributed to the Composition
of an Ox, was now honoured with becoming
Part of the individual Mr. Jones. 
This Particular we thought ourselves obliged
to mention, as it may account for our 

Heroe's temporary Neglect of his fair Companion; 
who eat but very little, and was indeed
employed in Considerations of a very different
Nature, which passed unobserved by
Jones, till he had entirely satisfied that Appetite
which a Fast of twenty-four Hours
had procured him; but his Dinner was no
sooner ended, than his Attention to other
Matters revived; with these Matters therefore
we shall now proceed to acquaint the
Reader. 
Mr. Jones, of whose personal Accomplishments
we have hitherto said very little, was
in reality, one of the handsomest young Fellows
in the World. His Face, besides
being the Picture of Health, had in it the
most apparent Marks of Sweetness and
Good-Nature. These Qualities were indeed
so characteristical in his Countenance, that
while the Spirit and Sensibility in his Eyes,
tho' they must have been perceived by an
accurate Observer, might have escaped the
Notice of the less discerning, so strongly
was this Good-nature painted in his Look,
that it was remarked by almost every one
who saw him. 

It was, perhaps, as much owing to this,
as to a very fine Complection, that his Face
had a Delicacy in it almost inexpressible,
and which might have given him an Air
rather too effeminate, had it not been joined
to a most masculine Person and Mein; 
which latter had as much in them of the
Hercules, as the former had of the Adonis. 
He was besides active, genteel, gay and
good-humoured, and had a Flow of Animal
Spirits, which enlivened every Conversation
where he was present. 
When the Reader hath duly reflected on
these many Charms which all centered in
our Heroe, and considers at the same
Time the fresh Obligations which Mrs. Waters
had to him, it will be a Mark of more
Prudery than Candour to entertain a bad
Opinion of her, because she conceived a very
good Opinion of him. 
But whatever Censures may be passed
upon her, it is my Business to relate Matters
of Fact with Veracity. Mrs. Waters
had, in Truth, not only a good Opinion of
our Heroe, but a very great Affection for
him. To speak out boldly at once, she
was in Love, according to the present universally 

received Sense of that Phrase, by
which Love is applied indiscriminately to
the desirable Objects of all our Passions,
Appetites, and Senses, and is understood
to be that Preference which we give to one
Kind of Food rather than to another. 
But tho' the Love to these several Objects
may possibly be one and the same in all
Cases, its Operations however must be allowed
to be different; for how much soever
we may be in Love with an excellent Surloin
of Beef, or Bottle of Burgundy; with
a Damask Rose, or Cremona Fiddle; yet do
we never smile, nor ogle, nor dress, nor
flatter, nor endeavour by any other Arts or
Tricks to gain the Affection of the said
Beef, &c. Sigh indeed we sometimes may; 
but it is generally in the Absence, not in the
Presence of the beloved Object. For otherwise
we might possibly complain of their Ingratitude
and Deafness, with the same Reason
as Pasiphae doth of her Bull, whom she
endeavoured to engage by all the Coquetry
practised with good Success in the Drawing
Room, on the much more sensible, as well
as tender, Hearts of the fine Gentlemen
there. 

The contrary happens, in that Love
which operates between Persons of the same
Species, but of different Sexes. Here we
are no sooner in Love, than it becomes our
principal Care to engage the Affection of
the Object beloved. For what other Purpose
indeed are our Youth instructed in
all the Arts of rendering themselves agreeable? 
If it was not with a View to this
Love, I question whether any of those
Trades which deal in setting off and adorning
the Human Person would procure a
Livelihood. Nay, those great Polishers of
our Manners, who are by some thought to
teach what principally distinguishes us from
the Brute Creation, even Dancing-Masters
themselves, might possibly find no Place in
Society. In short, all the Graces which
young Ladies and young Gentlemen too
learn from others; and the many Improvements
which, by the Help of a Looking-glass,
they add of their own, are in Reality
those very Spicula & Faces Amoris, so often
mentioned by Ovid; or, as they are sometimes
called in our own Language, The whole
Artillery of Love. 
Now Mrs. Waters and our Heroe had no
sooner sat down together, than the former 

began to play this Artillery upon the latter. 
But here, as we are about to attempt a Description
hitherto unessayed either in Prose
or Verse, we think proper to invoke the Assistance
of certain Aerial Beings, who will,
we doubt not, come kindly to our Aid on
this Occasion. 
‘Say then, you Graces, you that inhabit
the heavenly Mansions of Seraphina's
Countenance; for you are truly Divine,
are always in her Presence, and well know
all the Arts of charming.  Say, what
were the Weapons now used to captivate
the Heart of Mr. Jones.’ 
‘First, from two lovely blue Eyes,
whose bright Orbs flashed Lightning at
their Discharge, flew forth two pointed
Ogles. But happily for our Heroe, hit
only a vast Piece of Beef which he was
then conveying into his Plate, and harmless
spent their Force. The fair Warrior
perceived their Miscarriage, and immediately
from her fair Bosom drew forth a
deadly Sigh. A Sigh, which none could
have heard unmoved, and which was
sufficient at once to have swept off a dozen
Beaus; so soft, so sweet, so tender,
that the insinuating Air must have found 

its subtle Way to the Heart of our Heroe,
had it not luckily been driven from
his Ears by the coarse Bubbling of some
bottled Ale, which at that Time he
was pouring forth. Many other Weapons
did she assay; but the God of
Eating (if there be any such Deity; for I
do not confidently assert it) preserved his
Votary; or perhaps it may not be Dignus
vindice nodus, and the present Security
of Jones may be accounted for by natural
Means: For as Love frequently preserves
from the Attacks of Hunger, so may
Hunger possibly, in some Cases, defend us
against Love. 
‘The Fair One, enraged at her frequent
Disappointments, determined on a short
Cessation of Arms. Which Interval
she employed in making ready every Engine
of Amorous Warfare for the renewing
of the Attack, when Dinner should
be over. 
‘No sooner then was the Cloth removed,
than she again began her Operations. 
First, having planted her Right
Eye side-ways against Mr. Jones, she
shot from its Corner a most penetrating
Glance; which, tho' great Part of its 

Force was spent before it reached our
Heroe, did not vent itself absolutely without
Effect. This the Fair One perceiving,
hastily withdrew her Eyes, and
leveled them downwards as if she was
concerned for what she had done: Tho'
by this Means she designed only to draw
him from his Guard, and indeed to open
his Eyes, through which she intended to
surprize his Heart. And now, gently
lifting up those two bright Orbs which
had already begun to make an Impression
on poor Jones, she discharged a
Volley of small Charms at once from her
whole Countenance in a Smile. Not a
Smile of Mirth, nor of Joy; but a Smile
of Affection, which most Ladies have
always ready at their Command, and
which serves them to show at once their
Good-Humour, their pretty Dimples, and
their white Teeth. 
‘This Smile our Heroe received full in
his Eyes, and was immediately staggered
with its Force. He then began to see the
Designs of the Enemy, and indeed to feel
their Success. A Parley now was set on
Foot between the Parties; during which
the artful Fair so slily and imperceptibly
carried on her Attack, that she had almost 

subdued the Heart of our Heroe, before
she again repaired to Acts of Hostility. 
To confess the Truth, I am afraid Mr.
Jones maintained a Kind of Dutch Defence,
and treacherously delivered up the
Garrison without duly weighing his Allegiance
to the fair Sophia. In short, no
sooner had the amorous Parley ended,
and the Lady had unmasked the Royal
Battery, by carelessly letting her Handkerchief
drop from her Neck, than the
Heart of Mr. Jones was entirely taken,
and the fair Conqueror enjoyed the usual
Fruits of her Victory.’ 
Here the Graces think proper to end
their Description, and here we think proper
to end the Chapter. 



A friendly Conversation in the Kitchen, which
had a very common, tho' not very friendly
Conclusion. 
While our Lovers were entertaining
themselves in the Manner which
is partly described in the foregoing Chapter; 
they were likewise furnishing out an Entertainment 

for their good Friends in the
Kitchen. And this in a double Sense, by
affording them Matter for their Conversation,
and, at the same Time, Drink to enliven
their Spirits. 
There were now assembled round the
Kitchen Fire, besides my Landlord and
Landlady, who occasionally went backward
and forward, Mr. Partridge, the Serjeant,
and the Coachman who drove the young
Lady and her Maid. 
Partridge having acquainted the Company
with what he had learnt from the Man
of the Hill, concerning the Situation in
which Mrs. Waters had been found by
Jones, the Serjeant proceeded to that Part
of her History which was known to him. 
He said, she was the Wife of Mr. Waters,
who was a Captain in their Regiment, and
had often been with him at Quarters. 
‘Some Folks,’ says he, ‘used indeed to
doubt whether they were lawfully married
in a Church or no. But, for my Part,
that's no Business of mine; I must own,
if I was put to my Corporal Oath, I believe
she is little better than one of us,
and I fancy the Captain may go to Heaven
when the Sun shines upon a rainy 

Day. But if he does, that is neither here
nor there, for he won't want Company. 
And the Lady, to give the Devil his
Due, is a very good Sort of Lady, and
loves the Cloth, and is always desirous to
do strict Justice to it; for she hath begged
off many a poor Soldier, and, by her
Good-will, would never have any of them
punished. But yet, to be sure, Ensign
Northerton and she were very well acquainted
together, at our last Quarters, that
is the very Right and Truth of the Matter. 
But the Captain he knows nothing about
it; and as long as there is enough for
him too, what does it signify! He loves
her not a bit the worse, and I am certain
would run any Man through the Body
that was to abuse her, therefore I don't
abuse her, for my Part. I only repeat
what other Folks say; and to be
certain, what every body says, there
must be some Truth in.’ ‘Ay, ay, a
great deal of Truth, I warrant you,’ 
cries Partridge, ‘Veritas odium parit.’ 
‘All a Parcel of scandalous Stuff,’ answered
the Mistress of the House. ‘I am
sure now she is drest, she looks like a very
good Sort of Lady, and she behaves herself
like one; for she gave me a Guinea
for the Use of my Cloaths.’ ‘A very 

good Lady indeed,’ cries my Landlord,
‘and if you had not been a little too hasty,
you would not have quarrelled with her
as you did at first.’ ‘You need mention
that with my truly,’ answered she,
‘if it had not been for your Nonsense, nothing
had happened. You must be medling
with what did not belong to you,
and throw in your Fool's Discourse.’ 
‘Well, well,’ answered he, ‘what's past
cannot be mended, so there's an End of
the Matter.’ ‘Yes,’ cries she, ‘for
this once, but will it be mended ever the
more hereafter? This is not the first
Time I have suffered for your Numscull's
Pate. I wish you would always hold
your Tongue in the House, and meddle
only in Matters without Doors which
concern you. Don't you remember what
happened about seven Years ago? —Nay,
my Dear,’ returned he, ‘don't rip up
old Stories. Come, come, all's well,
and I am sorry for what I have done.’ 
The Landlady was going to reply, but was
prevented by the Peace-making Serjeant,
sorely to the Displeasure of Partridge, who
was a great Lover of what is called Fun,
and a great Promoter of those harmless
Quarrels which tend rather to the Production
of comical than tragical Incidents. 

The Serjeant asked Partridge whither he
and his Master were travelling. ‘None of
your Magisters,’ answered Partridge, ‘I
am no Man's Servant, I assure you; for
tho' I have had Misfortunes in the World,
I write Gentleman after my Name; and
as poor and simple as I may appear
now, I have taught Grammar School
in my Time. Sed hei mihi non sum quod
fui.’ ‘No Offence, I hope, Sir,’ said
the Serjeant, ‘where then, if I may venture
to be so bold, may you and your
Friend be travelling?’ —‘You have now
denominated us right,’ says Partridge. 
‘Amici Sumus. And I promise you my
Friend is one of the greatest Gentlemen
in the Kingdom,’ (at which Words both
Landlord and Landlady pricked up their
Ears). ‘He is the Heir of Squire Allworthy.’ 
‘What, the Squire who doth so
much Good all over the Country,’ cries
my Landlady? ‘Even he,’ answered Partridge. 
‘Then I warrant,’ says she, ‘he'll
have a swinging great Estate hereafter.’ 
‘Most certainly,’ answered Partridge. 
‘Well,’ replied the Landlady, ‘I thought
the first Moment I saw him he looked
like a good Sort of Gentleman; but my
Husband here, to be sure, is wiser than 

any body.’ ‘I own, my Dear,’ cries
he, ‘it was a Mistake.’ ‘A Mistake indeed!’ 
answered she; ‘but when did you
ever know me to make such Mistakes?’ — 
‘But how comes it, Sir,’ cries the Landlord,
‘that such a great Gentleman walks
about the Country afoot?’ ‘I don't
know,’ returned Partridge, ‘great Gentlemen
have Humours sometimes. He
hath now a dozen Horses and Servants
at Gloucester, and nothing would serve
him, but last Night, it being very hot
Weather, he must cool himself with a
Walk to yon high Hill, whither I likewise
walked with him to bear him
Company; but if ever you catch me
there again: For I was never so frightened
in all my Life. We met with the
strangest Man there.’ ‘I'll be hanged,’ 
cries the Landlord, ‘if it was not the Man
of the Hill, as they call him; if indeed
he be a Man; but I know several People
who believe it is the Devil that lives
there.’ ‘Nay, nay, like enough,’ says
Partridge, ‘and now you put me in the
Head of it, I verily and sincerely believe
it was the Devil; tho' I could not perceive
his cloven Foot; but perhaps he
might have the Power given him to hide
that, since evil Spirits can appear in what 

Shapes they please.’ ‘And pray, Sir,’ 
says the Serjeant, ‘no Offence I hope; 
but pray what Sort of a Gentleman is the
Devil? For I have heard some of our
Officers say, There is no such Person, and
and that it is only a Trick of the Parson's,
to prevent their being broke; for if it
was publickly known that there was no
Devil, the Parsons would be of no more
Use than we are in Time of Peace.’ 
‘Those Officers,’ says Partridge, ‘are
very great Scholars, I suppose.’ ‘Not
much of Schollards neither,’ answered the
Serjeant, ‘they have not half your Learning,
Sir, I believe; and to be sure, I
thought there must be a Devil, notwithstanding
what they said, tho' one of them
was a Captain; for methought, thinks I
to myself, if there be no Devil, how can
wicked People be sent to him, and I have
read all that upon a Book.’ ‘Some of
your Officers,’ quoth the Landlord, ‘will
find there is a Devil, to their Shame, I
believe. I don't question but he'll pay
off some old Scores, upon my Account. 
Here was one quartered upon me half a
Year, who had the Conscience to take up
one of my best Beds, tho' he hardly spent
a Shilling a Day in the House, and suffered
his Men to roast Cabbages at the 

Kitchen Fire, because I would not give
them a Dinner on a Sunday. Every good
Christian must desire there should be a
Devil for the Punishment of such
Wretches.’ ‘Harkee, Landlord,’ said
the Serjeant, ‘don't abuse the Cloth, for I
won't take it.’ ‘D&wblank;n the Cloth,’ answered
the Landlord, ‘I have suffered
enough by them. ‘Bear Witness, Gentlemen,’ 
says the Serjeant, ‘he curses the
King, and that's High Treason.’ ‘I
curse the King! you Villain,’ said the
Landlord. ‘Yes you did,’ cries the
Serjeant, ‘you cursed the Cloth, and that's
cursing the King. It's all one and the
same; for every Man who curses the
Cloth, would curse the King if he durst; 
so for Matter o' that, it's all one and the
same Thing.’ ‘Excuse me there, Mr.
Serjeant,’ quoth Partridge, ‘that's a
Non Sequitur.’ ‘None of your outlandish
Linguo,’ answered the Serjeant, leaping
from his Seat, ‘I will not sit still and
hear the Cloth abused.’ —‘You mistake
me, Friend,’ cries Partridge, ‘I did not
mean to abuse the Cloth; I only said
your Conclusion was a Non Sequitur.’*  

‘You are another,’ cries the Serjeant, ‘an
you come to that. No more a Sequitur
than yourself. You are a Pack of Rascals,
and I'll prove it; for I will fight the best
Man of you all for twenty Pound.’ This
Challenge effectually silenced Partridge,
whose Stomach for drubbing did not so soon
return, after the hearty Meal which he
had lately been treated with; but the Coachman,
whose Bones were less sore, and whose
Appetite for Fighting was somewhat sharper,
did not so easily brook the Affront, of
which he conceived some Part at least fell
to his Share. He started therefore from
his Seat, and advancing to the Serjeant,
swore he looked on himself to be as good
a Man as any in the Army, and offered to
box for a Guinea. The military Man accepted
the Combat, but refused the Wager; 
upon which both immediately stript and
engaged, till the Driver of Horses was so
well mauled by the Leader of Men, that he
was obliged to exhaust his small Remainder
of Breath in begging for Quarter. 
The young Lady was now desirous to
depart, and had given Orders for her Coach
to be prepared; but all in vain; for the
Coachman was disabled from performing his
Office for that Evening. An antient Heathen 

would perhaps have imputed this Disability
to the God of Drink, no less than to
the God of War; for, in Reality, both the
Combatants had sacrificed as well to the
former Deity as to the latter. To speak
plainly, they were both dead drunk, nor
was Partridge in a much better Situation. 
As for my Landlord, drinking was his
Trade, and the Liquor had no more Effect
on him, than it had on any other Vessel in
his House. 
The Mistress of the Inn being summoned
to attend Mr. Jones and his Companion, at
their Tea, gave a full Relation of the latter
Part of the foregoing Scene; and at the
same Time expressed great Concern for the
young Lady, ‘who,’ she said, ‘was under
the utmost Uneasiness at being prevented
from pursuing her Journey. She is a
sweet pretty Creature,’ added she, and I
‘am certain I have seen her Face before. 
I fancy she is in Love, and running away
from her Friends. Who knows but some
young Gentleman or other may be expecting
her, with a Heart as heavy as her
own.’ 
Jones fetched a hearty Sigh at those
Words; of which, tho' Mrs. Waters 

observed it, she took no Notice while the
Landlady continued in the Room; but after
the Departure of that good Woman,
she could not forbear giving our Heroe
certain Hints of her suspecting some very
dangerous Rival in his Affections. The
aukward Behaviour of Mr. Jones on this
Occasion convinced her of the Truth, without
his giving her a direct Answer to any of
her Questions; but she was not nice enough
in her Amours to be greatly concerned at
the Discovery. The Beauty of Jones highly
charmed her Eye; but, as she could not
see his Heart, she gave herself no concern
about it. She could feast heartily at the
Table of Love, without reflecting that some
other already had been, or hereafter might be,
feasted with the same Repast. A Sentiment
which, if it deals but little in Refinement,
deals however much in Substance; 
and is less capricious, and perhaps less ill-natured
and selfish than the Desires of those
Females who can be contented enough to
abstain from the Possession of their Lovers,
provided they are sufficiently satisfied that
no one else possesses them. 




Containing a fuller Account of Mrs. Waters,
and by what Means she came into that
distressful Situation from which she was rescued
by Jones. 
Though Nature hath by no
Means mixed up an equal Share either
of Curiosity or Vanity in every human
Composition, there is perhaps no Individual
to whom she hath not allotted such
a Proportion of both, as requires much Art
and Pains too, to subdue and keep under. 
A Conquest, however, absolutely necessary
to every one who would in any Degree deserve
the Characters of Wisdom or Good-Breeding. 
As Jones therefore might very justly be
called a well-bred Man, he had stifled all
that Curiosity which the extraordinary Manner
in which he had found Mrs. Waters,
must be supposed to have occasioned. He
had indeed at first thrown out some few
Hints to the Lady; but when he perceived
her industriously avoiding any Explanation,
he was contented to remain in Ignorance, 

the rather as he was not without Suspicion,
that there were some Circumstances
which must have raised her Blushes, had she
related the whole Truth. 
Now, since it is possible that some of our
Readers may not so easily acquiesce under
the same Ignorance, and as we are very desirous
to satisfy them all, we have taken uncommon
Pains to inform ourselves of the
real Fact, with the Relation of which we
shall conclude this Book. 
This Lady then had lived some Years with
one Captain Waters, who was a Captain in
the same Regiment to which Mr. Northerton
belonged. She past for that Gentleman's
Wife, and went by his Name; and
yet, as the Serjeant said, there were some
Doubts concerning the Reality of their
Marriage, which we shall not at present
take upon us to resolve. 
Mrs. Waters, I am sorry to say it, had
for some Time contracted an Intimacy with
the above mentioned Ensign, which did no
great Credit to her Reputation. That she
had a remarkable Fondness for that young
Fellow is most certain; but whether she indulged
this to any very criminal Lengths, 

is not so extremely clear, unless we will
suppose that Women never grant every Favour
to a Man but one, without granting
him that one also. 
The Division of the Regiment to which
Captain Waters belonged, had two Days
preceded the March of that Company to
which Mr. Northerton was the Ensign; so
that the former had reached Worcester, the
very Day after the unfortunate Rencounter
between Jones and Northerton, which we
have before recorded. 
Now it had been agreed between Mrs.
Waters and the Captain, that she should
accompany him in his March as far as Worcester,
where they were to take their Leave
of each other, and she was thence to return
to Bath, where she was to stay till the
End of the Winter's Campaign against the
Rebels. 
With this Agreement Mr. Northerton
was made acquainted. To say the Truth,
the Lady had made him an Assignation at
this very Place, and promised to stay at
Worcester till his Division came thither; 
with what View, and for what Purpose must
be left to the Reader's Divination: For 

though we are obliged to relate Facts, we
are not obliged to do a Violence to our Nature
by any Comments to the Disadvantage
of the loveliest Part of the Creation. 
Northerton no sooner obtained a Release
from his Captivity, as we have seen, than
he hasted away to overtake Mrs. Waters; 
which, as he was a very active nimble
Fellow, he did at the last mentioned City,
some few Hours after Captain Waters had
left her: At his first Arrival he made no
Scruple of acquainting her with the unfortunate
Accident, which he made appear
very unfortunate indeed: For he totally
extracted every Particle of what could be
called Fault, at least in a Court of Honour,
though he left some Circumstances which
might be questionable in a Court of Law. 
Women, to their Glory be it spoken, are
more generally capable of that violent and
apparently disinterested Passion of Love,
which seeks only the Good of its Object,
than Men. Mrs. Waters, therefore, was
no sooner apprized of the Danger to which
her Lover was exposed, than she lost every
Consideration besides that of his Safety; 
and this being a Matter equally agreeable 

to the Gentleman, it became the immediate
Subject of Debate between them. 
After much Consultation on this Matter,
it was at length agreed, that the Ensign
should go a-cross the Country to Hereford,
whence he might find some Conveyance
to one of the Sea-Ports in Wales, and
thence might make his Escape abroad. In
all which Expedition Mrs. Waters declared
she would bear him Company; and for
which she was able to furnish him with
Money, a very material Article to Mr. Northerton,
she having then in her Pocket three
Bank Notes to the Amount of 90l. besides
some Cash, and a Diamond Ring of
pretty considerable Value on her Finger. 
All which she, with the utmost Confidence,
revealed to this wicked Man, little suspecting
she should by these Means inspire him
with a Design of robbing her. Now as
they must, by taking Horses from Worcester,
have furnished any Pursuers with the
Means of hereafter discovering their Rout,
the Ensign proposed, and the Lady presently
agreed to make their first Stage on
Foot; for which Purpose the Hardness of
the Frost was very seasonable. 

The main Part of the Lady's Baggage
was already at Bath, and she had nothing
with her at present besides a very
small Quantity of Linnen, which the Gallant
undertook to carry in his own Pockets. 
All Things, therefore, being settled
in the Evening, they arose early the next
Morning, and at Five o'Clock departed
from Worcester, it being then above two
Hours before Day. But the Moon which
was then at the full, gave them all the
Light she was capable of affording. 
Mrs. Waters was not of that delicate Race
of Women who are obliged to the Invention
of Vehicles for the Capacity of removing
themselves from one Place to another,
and with whom consequently a Coach is
reckoned among the Necessaries of Life. 
Her Limbs were indeed full of Strength
and Agility, and as her Mind was no less
animated with Spirit, she was perfectly able
to keep Pace with her nimble Lover. 
Having travelled on for some Miles in
a High Road, which Northerton said he was
informed led to Hereford, they came at the
Break of Day to the Side of a large Wood,
where he suddenly stopped, and affecting 

to meditate a Moment with himself, expressed
some Apprehensions from travelling
any longer in so public a Way. 
Upon which he easily persuaded his fair
Companion to strike with him into a Path
which seemed to lead directly through the
Wood, and which at length brought them
both to the Bottom of Mazard-Hill. 
Whether the execrable Scheme which he
now attempted to execute, was the Effect
of previous Deliberation, or whether it now
first came into his Head, I cannot determine. 
But being arrived in this lonely
Place, where it was very improbable he
should meet with any Interruption; he suddenly
slipped his Garter from his Leg, and
laying violent Hands on the poor Woman,
endeavoured to perpetrate that dreadful and
detestable Fact, which we have before commemorated,
and which the providential Appearance
of Jones did so fortunately prevent. 
Happy was it for Mrs. Waters, that she
was not of the weakest Order of Females; 
for no sooner did she perceive by his tying
a Knot in his Garter, and by his Declarations,
what his Hellish Intentions were, 

than she stood stoutly to her Defence,
and so strongly struggled with her Enemy,
screaming all the while for Assistance, that
she delayed the Execution of the Villain's
Purpose several Minutes, by which Means
Mr. Jones came to her Relief, at that very Instant
when her Strength failed, and she was
totally overpowered, and delivered her from
the Ruffian's Hands, with no other Loss
than that of her Cloaths, which were torn
from her Back, and of the Diamond Ring,
which during the Contention either dropped
from her Finger, or was wrenched
from it by Northerton. 
Thus, Reader, we have given thee the
Fruits of a very painful Enquiry, which
for thy Satisfaction we have made into this
Matter. And here we have opened to thee
a Scene of Folly, as well as Villainy, which
we could scarce have believed a human
Creature capable of being guilty of; had
we not remembered that this Fellow was
at that Time firmly persuaded, that he had
already committed a Murther, and had forfeited
his Life to the Law. As he concluded
therefore that his only Safety lay in
Flight, he thought the possessing himself of
this poor Woman's Money and Ring, 

would make him Amends for the additional
Burthen he was to lay on his Conscience. 
And here, Reader, we must strictly caution
thee, that thou dost not take any Occasion from
the Misbehaviour of such a Wretch as this,
to reflect on so worthy and honourable a
Body of Men, as are the Officers of our
Army in general. Thou wilt be pleased
to consider, that this Fellow, as we have
already informed thee, had neither the
Birth nor Education of a Gentleman, nor
was a proper Person to be enrolled among
the Number of such. If therefore his
Baseness can justly reflect on any besides
himself, it must be only on those who gave
him his Commission. 