


A Scheme so deeply laid that it
shames all the Politics of this our
Age; with Digression and Sub-digression. 
Wild having now, to the Hatred
he bore Heartfree on Account of
those Injuries he had done him, an additional
Spur from this Injury received; (for
so it appeared to him, who no more than
the most ignorant, considered how truly
he deserved it) applied his utmost Industry
to accomplish the Ruin of one whose very
Name sounded odious in his Ears; when
luckily a Scheme arose in his Imagination,
which not only promised to effect it securely; 
but, (which pleased him most) by
Means of the Mischief he had already done
him; and which would at once load him
with the Imputation of having committed
what he himself had done for him, and
would bring on him the severest Punishment
for a Fact, of which he was not only 

innocent, but had already so greatly suffered
by. And this was no other than to charge
him with having conveyed away his Wife,
with his most valuable Effects, in order to
defraud his Creditors. 
He no sooner started this Thought than
he immediately resolved on putting it in
Execution. What remained to consider
was only the Quomodo, and the Person or
Tool to be employed; for the Stage of the
World differs from that in Drury-Lane
principally in this; that whereas on the
latter, the Hero, or chief Figure, is almost
continually before your Eyes, whilst the
Under-actors are not seen above once in an
Evening; now, on the former, the Hero,
or great Man, is always behind the
Curtain, and seldom or never appears, or
doth any thing in his own Person. He doth
indeed, in this grand Drama, rather perform
the Part of the Prompter, and instructs
the well-drest Figures, who are strutting
in public on the Stage, what to say and do. 
To say the Truth, a Puppet-show will illustrate
our Meaning better, where it is the
Master of the Show (the great Man) 

who dances and moves every thing; whether
it be the King of Muscovy, or whatever
other Potentate, alias Puppet, which
we behold on the Stage; but he himself
wisely keeps out of Sight; for should he
once appear, the whole Motion would be
at an End. Not that any one is ignorant
of his being there, or supposes that the
Puppets are not mere Sticks of Wood, and
he himself the sole Mover; but as this (tho'
every one knows it) doth not appear visibly,
i. e. to their Eyes, no one is ashamed
of consenting to be imposed upon; of
helping on the Drama, calling the several
Sticks or Puppets by the Names which
the Master hath allotted to them, and assigning
to each the Character which the
great Man is pleased they shall move in,
or rather in which he himself is pleased to
move them. 
It would be to suppose thee, gentle
Reader, one of very little Knowledge in
this World, to imagine thou hast never
seen some of these Puppet-Shews, which
are so frequently acted on the GREAT
Stage; but though thou shouldst have resided 

all thy Days in those remote Parts of
this Island, which GREAT Men seldom visit; 
yet, if thou hast any Penetration, thou
must have had some Occasions to admire
both the Solemnity of Countenance in
the Actor, and the Gravity in the Spectator,
while some of those Farces are carried
on, which are acted almost daily in every
Village in the Kingdom. He must have a
very despicable Opinion of Mankind indeed,
who can conceive them to be imposed
on as often as they appear to be so. 
The Truth is, they are in the same Situation
with the Readers of Romances; who,
though they know the whole to be one entire
Fiction, nevertheless agree to be deceived; 
and as these find Amusement,
so do the others find Ease and Convenience
in this Concurrence. But this being a
Sub-digression, I return to my Digression. 
A great Man ought to do his Business
by others; to employ Hands, as we have
before said, to his Purposes, and keep himself
as much behind the Curtain as possible; 
and though it must be acknowledged that
two very GREAT Men, whose Names will 

be both recorded in History, did, in former
Times, come forth themselves on the Stage; 
and did hack and hew, and lay each other
most cruelly open to the Diversion of the
Spectators; yet this must be mentioned rather
as an Example of Avoidance, than Imitation,
and is to be ascribed to the Number
of those Instances which serve to evince
the Truth of these Maxims: Nemo mortalium
omnibus horis sapit. Ira furor brevis
est, &c. 