


What happened to Julian in the Characters
of a General, an Heir, a
Carpenter, and a Beau. 
‘The next Step I took into the World,
was at Apollonia in Thrace; where
I was born of a beautiful Greek Slave, who
was the Mistress of Eutyches, a great Favourite
of the Emperor Zeno. That Prince
at his Restoration, gave me the Command
of a Cohort, I being then but fifteen Years
of Age; and a little afterwards, before I had
ever seen an Army, preferred me, over the
Heads of all the old Officers, to be a Tribune. 
‘As I found an easy Access to the Emperor,
by means of my Father's Intimacy
with him, he being a very good Courtier, or
in other Words, a most prostitute Flatterer; 
so I soon ingratiated myself with Zeno, and
so well imitated my Father in flattering
him, that he would never part with me
from about his Person. So that the first
armed Force I ever beheld, was that with 

which Martian surrounded the Palace, where
I was then shut up with the rest of the Court. 
‘I Was after put at the Head of a Legion,
and ordered to march into Syria,
with Theodoric the Goth; that is, I mean my
Legion was so ordered: for as to myself, I
remained at Court, with the Name and
Pay of a General, without the Labour or
the Danger. 
‘As nothing could be more gay, i. e.
debauched, than Zeno's Court, so the Ladies
of gay Disposition had great sway in it; particularly
one, whose Name was Fausta,
who, tho' not extremely handsome, was by
her Wit and Spriteliness very agreeable to
the Emperor. With her I lived in good
Correspondence, and we together disposed
of all kinds of Commissions in the Army,
not to those who had most Merit, but who
would purchase at the highest Rate. My
Levee was now prodigiously thronged by
Officers, who returned from the Campaigns; 
who, tho' they might have been convinced,
by daily Example, how ineffectual a Recommendation
their Services were, still continued 

indefatigable in Attendance, and behaved
to me with as much Observance and
Respect, as I should have been entitled to,
for making their Fortunes, while I suffered
them and their Families to starve. 
‘Several Poets, likewise, addressed
Verses to me, in which they celebrated my
Military Atchievements; and what, perhaps,
may seem strange to us at present, I received
all this Incense with most greedy Vanity,
without once reflecting, that as I did not deserve
these Compliments, they should rather
put me in mind of my Defects. 
‘My Father was now dead, and I became
so absolute in the Emperor's Grace, that
one unacquainted with Courts would scarce
believe the Servility with which all kinds
of Persons, who entered the Walls of the
Palace, behaved towards me. A Bow, a
Smile, a Nod from me, as I past through
cringing Crouds, were esteemed as signal
Favours, but a gracious Word made any one
happy; and, indeed, had this real Benefit
attending it, that it drew on the Person, on
whom it was bestowed, a very great Degree 

of Respect from all others; for these are of
current Value in Courts, and, like Notes in
trading Communities, are assignable from
one to the other. The Smile of a Court-Favourite
immediately raises the Person who
receives it, and gives a Value to his Smile
when conferred on an Inferiour: thus the
Smile is transferred from one to the other,
and the Great Man at last is the Person to
discount it. For instance, a very low Fellow
hath a desire for a Place. To whom is he
to apply? Not to the Great Man; for to
him he hath no Access. He therefore applies
to A, who is the Creature of B, who
is the Tool of C, who is the Flatterer of
D, who is the Catamite of E, who is the
Pimp of F, who is the Bully of G, who is
the Buffoon of I, who is the Husband of
K, who is the Whore of L, who is the
Bastard of M, who is the Instrument of
the Great Man. Thus the Smile descending
regularly from the Great Man to A, is
discounted back again, and at last paid by
the Great Man. 
‘It is manifest, that a Court would subsist
as difficultly without this kind of Coin, as a 

trading City without Paper Credit. Indeed,
they differ in this, that their Value is
not quite so certain, and a Favourite may
protest his Smile without the Danger of
Bankruptcy. 
‘In the midst of all this Glory, the Emperor
died, and Anastasius was preferred to
the Crown. As it was yet uncertain whether
I should not continue in favour, I was
received as usual at my Entrance into the
Palace, to pay my Respects to the new Emperor; 
but I was no sooner rumped by him,
than I received the same Compliment from
all the rest; the whole Room, like a Regiment
of Soldiers, turning their Backs to me
all at once, my Smile now was become of
equal Value with the Note of a broken
Banker, and every one was as cautious not
to receive it. 
‘I Made as much haste as possible from
the Court, and shortly after from the City
retreating to the Place of my Nativity,
where I spent the Remainder of my Days
in a retired Life in Husbandry, the only 

Amusement for which I was qualified,
having neither Learning nor Virtue. 
‘When I came to the Gate, Minos
again seemed at first doubtful, but at length
dismissed me; saying, tho' I had been guilty
of many heinous Crimes, in as much as I
had, tho' a General, never been concerned
in spilling human Blood, I might return again
to Earth. 
‘I Was now again born in Alexandria,
and, by great Accident, entring into the
Womb of my Daughter-in-Law, came
forth my own Grandson, inheriting that Fortune
which I had before amassed. 
‘Extravagance was now as notoriously
my Vice, as Avarice had been formerly; 
and I spent, in a very short Life, what
had cost me the Labour of a very long one
to rake together. Perhaps, you will think
my present Condition was more to be envied
than my former: but upon my Word it was
very little so; for by possessing every thing
almost before I desired it, I could hardly ever
say, I enjoyed my Wish: I scarce ever knew 

the Delight of satisfying a craving Appetite. 
Besides, as I never once thought, my Mind
was useless to me, and I was an absolute
Stranger to all the Pleasures arising from it. 
Nor, indeed, did my Education qualify me
for any Delicacy in other Enjoyments; so
that in the midst of Plenty I loathed every
thing. Taste for Elegance, I had none; and
the greatest of corporeal Blisses I felt no
more from, than the lowest Animal. In a
word, as while a Miser I had Plenty without
daring to use it, so now I had it without
Appetite. 
‘But if I was not very happy in the
height of my Enjoyment, so I afterward
became perfectly miserable; being soon overtaken
by Disease, and reduced to Distress,
'till at length with a broken Constitution,
and broken Heart, I ended my wretched
Days in a Goal: nor can I think the Sentence
of Minos too mild, who condemned me, after
having taken a large Dose of Avarice, to
wander three Years on the Banks of Cocytus,
with the Knowledge of having spent the
Fortune in the Person of the Grandson, 

which I had raised in that of the Grandfather. 
‘The Place of my Birth, on my return
to the World, was Constantinople, where my
Father was a Carpenter. The first Thing I
remember was, the Triumph of Belisarius; 
which was, indeed, a most noble Shew: but
nothing pleased me so much as the Figure
of Gelimer, King of the African Vandals,
who being led Captive on this Occasion,
reflecting with Disdain on the Mutation of
his own Fortune, and on the ridiculous
empty Pomp of the Conqueror, cried out,
Vanity, Vanity, all is mere Vanity. 
‘I Was bred up to my Father's Trade,
and you may easily believe so low a Sphere
could produce no Adventures worth your
Notice. However, I married a Woman I
liked, and who proved a very tolerable
Wife. My Days were past in hard Labour,
but this procured me Health, and I enjoyed
a homely Supper at night with my Wife,
with more Pleasure than I apprehend greater
Persons find at their luxurious Meals. My 

Life had scarce any Variety in it, and at my
Death, I advanced to Minos with great Confidence
of entring the Gate: but I was unhappily
obliged to discover some Frauds I
had been guilty of in the Measure of my
Work, when I worked by the Foot, as well
as my Laziness, when I was employed by
the Day. On which account when I attempted
to pass, the angry Judge laid hold
on me by the Shoulders, and turned me
back so violently, that had I had a Neck of
Flesh and Bone, I believe he would have
broke it.’ 