


Containing a Portion of Time, somewhat
longer than Half a Year. 



Of The SERIOUS in writing; and for
what Purpose it is introduced. 
Peradventure there may be no Parts
in this prodigious Work which will
give the Reader less Pleasure in the perusing,
than those which have given the Author
the greatest Pains in composing. Among
these probably may be reckoned those initial 

Essays which we have prefixed to the
historical Matter contained in every Book; 
and which we have determined to be essentially
necessary to this kind of Writing,
of which we have set ourselves at the
Head. 
For this our Determination we do not
hold ourselves strictly bound to assign any
Reason; it being abundantly sufficient that
we have laid it down as a Rule necessary to
be observed in all Prosai-comi-epic Writing. 
Who ever demanded the Reasons of
that nice Unity of Time or Place which is
now established to be so essential to dramatick
Poetry? What Critick hath been ever
asked why a Play may not contain two
Days as well as one, or why the Audience
(provided they travel like Electors, without
any Expence) may not be wasted Fifty
Miles as well as five! Hath any Commentator
well accounted for the Limitation
which an ancient Critic hath set to the
Drama, which he will have contain neither
more nor less than five Acts; or hath any
one living attempted to explain, what the
modern Judges of our Theatres mean by
that Word low; by which they have happily
succeeded in banishing all Humour
from the Stage, and have made the Theatre 

as dull as a Drawing-Room? Upon all
these Occasions, the World seems to have
embraced a Maxim of our Law, viz. Cuicunq; 
in Arte sua perito credendum est: For
it seems, perhaps, difficult to conceive
that any one should have had enough of
Impudence, to lay down dogmatical Rules
in any Art or Science without the least
Foundation. In such Cases, therefore,
we are apt to conclude there are sound
and good Reasons at the Bottom, tho' we
are unfortunately not able to see so far. 
Now, in Reality, the World have paid too
great a Compliment to Critics, and have
imagined them Men of much greater Profundity
than they really are. From this
Complaisance, the Critics have been emboldened
to assume a Dictatorial Power,
and have so far succeeded that they are now
become the Masters, and have the Assurance
to give Laws to those Authors,
from whose Predecessors they originally
received them. 
The Critic, rightly considered, is no
more than the Clerk, whose Office is is to
transcribe the Rules and Laws laid down by
those great Judges, whose vast Strength of
Genius hath placed them in the Light of 

Legislators in the several Sciences over
which they presided. This Office was all
which the Critics of old aspired to, nor did
they ever dare to advance a Sentence, without
supporting it by the Authority of the
Judge from whence it was borrowed. 
But in Process of Time, and in Ages
of Ignorance, the Clerk began to invade
the Power and assume the Dignity of his
Master. The Laws of Writing were no
longer founded on the Practice of the
Author, but on the Dictates of the Critic. 
The Clerk became the Legislator, and
those very peremptorily gave Laws, whose
Business it was, at first, only to transcribe
them. 
Hence arose an obvious, and, perhaps,
an unavoidable Error: For these Critics
being Men of shallow Capacities, very easily
mistook mere Form for Substance. 
They acted as a Judge would, who should
adhere to the lifeless Letter of Law, and reject
the Spirit. Little Circumstances which
were, perhaps, accidental in a great Author,
were, by these Critics, considered to constitute
his chief Merit, and transmitted as Essentials
to be observed by all his Successors. To
these Encroachments, Time and Ignorance, 

the two great Supporters of Imposture, gave
Authority; and thus, many Rules for good
Writing have been established, which have
not the least Foundation in Truth or Nature; 
and which commonly serve for no other
Purpose than to curb and restrain Genius, in
the same Manner; as it would have restrained
the Dancing-master, had the many
excellent Treatises on that Art, laid it
down as an essential Rule, that every Man
must dance in Chains. 
To, avoid, therefore, all Imputation
of laying down a Rule for Posterity, founded
only on the Authority of ipse dixit; 
for which, to say the Truth, we have not
the profoundest Veneration; we shall here
wave the Privilege above contended for,
and proceed to lay before the Reader, the
Reasons which have induced us, to intersperse
these several digressive Essays, in the
Course of this Work. 
And here we shall of Necessity be led to
open a new Vein of Knowledge, which,
if it hath been discovered, hath not, to
our Remembrance, been wrought on by
any antient or modern Writer. This
Vein is no other than that of Contrast,
which runs through all the Works of the 

Creation, and may probably have a large
Share in constituting in us the Idea of all
Beauty, as well natural as artificial: For
what demonstrates the Beauty and Excellence
of any thing, but its Reverse? 
Thus the Beauty of Day, and that of
Summer, is set off by the Horrors of
Night and Winter. And I believe, if it
was possible for a Man to have seen only
the two former, he would have a very
imperfect Idea of their Beauty. 
But to avoid too serious an Air: Can it
be doubted, but that the finest Woman in
the World would lose all Benefit of her
Charms, in the Eye of a Man who had
never seen one of another Cast? The
Ladies themselves seem so sensible of this,
that they are all industrious to procure
Foils; nay, they will become Foils to
themselves; for I have observed, (at Bath
particularly,) that they endeavour to appear
as ugly as possible in the Morning,
in order to set off that Beauty which they
intend to shew you in the Evening. 
Most Artists have this Secret in Practice,
tho' some, perhaps, have not much
studied the Theory. The Jeweller knows
that the finest Brilliant requires a Foil; and 

the Painter, by the Contrast of his Figures,
often acquires great Applause. 
A great Genius among us, will illustrate
this Matter fully. I cannot, indeed, range
him under any general Head of common
Artists, as he hath a Title to be placed
among those 

Inventas, qui vitam excoluere per Artes.
Who by invented Arts have Life improv'd. 
I mean here the Inventor of that most
exquisite Entertainment, called the English
Pantomime. 
This Entertainment consisted of two
Parts, which the Inventor distinguished by
the Names of the Serious and the Comic. 
The Serious exhibited a certain Number
of Heathen Gods and Heroes, who were
certainly the worst and dullest Company
into which an Audience was ever introduced; 
and (which was a Secret known to
few) were actually intended so to be, in
order to contrast the Comic Part of the Entertainment,
and to display the Tricks of
Harlequin to the better Advantage. 

This was, perhaps, no very civil Use
of such Personages; but the Contrivance
was nevertheless ingenious enough, and had
its Effect. And this will now plainly appear,
if instead of Serious and Comic, we
supply the Words Duller and Dullest; for
the Comic was certainly duller than any
thing before shewn on the Stage, and
could only be set off by that superlative
Degree of Dulness, which composed the
Serious. So intolerably serious, indeed,
were these Gods and Heroes, that Harlequin
(tho' the English Gentleman of that
Name is not at all related to the French
Family, for he is of a much more serious
Disposition) was always welcome on the
Stage, as he relieved the Audience from
worse Company. 
Judicious Writers have always practised
this Art of Contrast, with great Success. 
I have been surprized that Horace should
cavil at this Art in Homer; but indeed he
contradicts himself in the very next Line. 

Indignor quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus,
Verum Operi longo fas est obripere Somnum.

I grieve if e'er great Homer chance to sleep,
Yet Slumbers on long Works have right to
creep. 
For we are not here to understand, as,
perhaps, some have, that an Author actually
falls asleep while he is writing. It is
true that Readers are too apt to be so overtaken; 
but if the Work was as long as any
of Oldmixon, the Author himself is too
well entertained to be subject to the least
Drowsiness. He is, as Mr. Pope observes, 

Sleepless himself to give his Readers Sleep.
To say the Truth, these soporific Parts are
so many Scenes of Serious artfully interwoven,
in order to contrast and set off the
rest; and this is the true Meaning of a late
facetious Writer, who told the Public, that
whenever he was dull, they might be assured
there was a Design in it. 
In this Light then, or rather in this
Darkness, I would have the Reader to
consider these initial Essays. And after this
Warning, if he shall be of Opinion, that
he can find enough of Serious in other 

Parts of this History, he may pass over
these, in which we profess to be laboriously
dull, and begin the following Books, at
the second Chapter. 



In which Mr. Jones receives many friendly
Visits during his Confinement; with some
fine Touches of the Passion of Love, scarce
visible to the naked Eye. 
Tom Jones had many Visitors
during his Confinement, tho' some,
perhaps, were not very agreeable to him. 
Mr. Allworthy saw him almost every Day; 
but tho' he pitied Tom's Sufferings, and
greatly approved the gallant Behaviour
which had occasioned them, yet he thought
this was a favourable Opportunity to bring
him to a sober Sense of his indiscreet Conduct; 
and that wholsome Advice for that
Purpose, could never be applied at a more
proper Season than at the present; when
the Mind was softened by Pain and Sickness,
and alarmed by Danger; and when
its Attention was unembarrassed with those
turbulent Passions, which engage us in the
Pursuit of Pleasure. 

At all Seasons, therefore, when
the good Man was alone with the Youth,
especially when the latter was totally at
Ease, he took Occasion to remind him of
his former Miscarriages, but in the mildest
and tenderest Manner, and only in order to
introduce the Caution, which he prescribed
for his future Behaviour; ‘on which alone’ 
he assured him, ‘would depend his own
Felicity, and the Kindness which he
might yet promise himself to receive at
the Hands of his Father by Adoption
unless he should hereafter forfeit his Good
Opinion: For as to what had past,’ he
said, ‘it should be all forgotten and forgiven. 
He, therefore, advised him to
make a good Use of this Accident, that
so in the End it might prove a Visitation
for his own Good.’ 
Thwackum was likewise pretty assiduous
in his Visits; and he too considered a sick
Bed to be a convenient Scene for Lectures. 
His Stile, however, was more severe than
Mr. Allworthy's: He told his Pupil,
‘that he ought to look on his broken
Limb as a Judgment from Heaven on
his Sins. That it would become him
to be daily on his Knees, pouring forth 

Thanksgivings that he had broken his Arm
only, and not his Neck; which latter,’ 
he said, ‘was very probably reserved
for some future Occasion, and that perhaps,
not very remote. For his Part,’ he said,
he had often wondered some Judgment
had not overtaken him before; but it
might be perceived by this, that divine
Punishments, tho' slow, are always sure.’ 
Hence likewise he advised him ‘to foresee,
with equal Certainty, the greater
Evils which were yet behind, and which
were as sure as this, of overtaking him
in his State of Reprobacy. These are,’ 
said he, ‘to be averted only by such a
thorough and sincere Repentance, as is
not to be expected or hoped for, from one
so abandoned in his Youth, and whose
Mind, I am afraid, is totally corrupted. 
It is my Duty, however, to exhort you
to this Repentance, tho' I too well know
all Exhortations will be vain and fruitless. 
But liberavi Animam meam. I can accuse my
own Conscience of no Neglect; tho' it is,
at the same time, with the utmost Concern,
I see you travelling on to certain
Misery in this World, and to as certain
Damnation in the next.’ 

Square talked in a very different Strain,
He said, ‘such Accidents as a broken Bone
were below the Consideration of a wise
Man. That it was abundantly sufficient
to reconcile the Mind to any of these
Mischances, to reflect that they are liable
to befal the wisest of Mankind, and are
undoubtedly for the Good of the whole.’ 
He said, ‘it was a mere Abuse of Words,
to call those Things Evils, in which there
was no moral Unfitness; that Pain,
which was the worst Consequence of such
Accidents, was the most contemptible
thing in the World;’ with more of the
like Sentences, extracted out of the Second
Book of Tully's Tusculan Questions, and
from the Great Lord Shaftesbury. In pronouncing
these he was one Day so eager,
that he unfortunately bit his Tongue; and
in such a Manner, that it not only put an
End to his Discourse, but created much
Emotion in him, and caused him to mutter
an Oath or two: But what was worst of
all, this Accident gave Thwackum, who
was present, and who held all such Doctrine
to be heathenish and atheistical, an
Opportunity to clap a Judgment on his
Back. Now this was done with so malicious
a Sneer, that it totally unhinged (if
I may so say) the Temper of the Philosopher, 

which the Bite of his Tongue had
somewhat ruffled; and as he was disabled
from venting his Wrath at his Lips, he
had possibly found a more violent Method
of revenging himself, had not the Surgeon,
who was then luckily in the Room, contrary
to his own Interest, interposed, and
preserved the Peace. 
Mr. Blifil visited his Friend Jones but
seldom, and never alone. This worthy
young Man, however, professed much Regard for him,
and as great Concern at his
Misfortune; but cautiously avoided any
Intimacy, lest, as he frequently hinted, it
might contaminate the Sobriety of his own
Character: For which Purpose, he had
constantly in his Mouth that Proverb in
which Solomon speaks against Evil Communication. 
Not that he was so bitter as
Thwackum; for he always expressed some
Hopes of Tom's Reformation; ‘which,’ 
he said, ‘the unparallelled Goodness shewn
by his Uncle on this Occasion, must
certainly effect, in one not absolutely
abandoned;’ but concluded, ‘if Mr. Jones
ever offends hereafter, I shall not be able
to say a Syllable in his Favour.’ 

As to Squire Western, he was seldom out
of the Sick Room; unless when he was engaged
either in the Field, or over his Bottle. 
Nay, he would sometimes retire hither to
take his Beer, and it was not without Difficulty,
that he was prevented from forcing
Jones to take his Beer too: For no Quack
ever held his Nostrum to be a more general
Panacea, than he did this; which, he said,
had more Virtues in it than was in all the
Physic in an Apothecary's Shop. He
was, however, by much Entreaty, prevailed
on to forbear the Application of
this Medicine; but from serenading his
Patient every Hunting Morning with the
Horn under his Window, it was imposble
to withhold him; nor did he ever
lay aside that Hollow, with which he
entered into all Companies, when he visited
Jones, without any Regard to the sick Person's
being at that Time either awake or
asleep. 
This boisterous Behaviour, as it meant
no Harm, so happily it effected none, and
was abundantly compensated to Jones, as
soon as he was able to sit up, by the Company
of Sophia, whom the Squire then
brought to visit him; nor was it, indeed, 

long before Jones was able to attend her to
the Harpsichord, where she would kindly
condescend, for Hours together, to charm
him with the most delicious Music, unless
when the Squire thought proper to interrupt
her, by insisting on Old Sir Simon, or some
other of his favourite Pieces. 
Notwithstanding the nicest Guard which
Sophia endeavoured to set on her Behaviour,
she could not avoid letting some Appearances
now and then slip forth: For
Love may again be likened to a Disease in
this, that when it is denied a Vent in one
Part, it will certainly break out in another. 
What her Lips therefore concealed, her
Eyes, her Blushes, and many little involuntary
Actions, betrayed. 
One Day when Sophia was playing on the
Harpsichord, and Jones was attending, the
Squire came into the Room, crying, ‘There,
Tom, I have had a Battle for thee below
Stairs with thick Parson Thwackum. —He
hath been a telling Allworthy, before my
Face, that the broken Bone was a Judgment
upon thee. D&wblank;n it, says I, how
can that be? Did not he come by it in Defence
of a young Woman? A Judgment
indeed! Pox, if he never doth any thing 

worse, he will go to Heaven sooner than
all the Parsons in the Country. He hath
more reason to glory in it, than to be
ashamed of it.’ ‘Indeed, Sir,’ says
Jones, ‘I have no Reason for either; but
if it preserved Miss Western, I shall always
think it the happiest Accident of my Life.’ 
‘—And to gu,’ said the Squire, ‘to zet
Allworthy against thee vor it. —D&wblank;n 'un,
if the Parson had unt had his Petticuoats
on, I should ha lent un a Flick; for I
love thee dearly, my Boy, and d&wblank;n
me if there is any thing in my Power
which I won't do for thee. Sha't take
thy Choice of all the Horses in my Stable
to-morrow Morning, except only the
Chevalier and Miss Slouch.’ Jones thanked
him, but declined accepting the Offer. — 
‘Nay,’ added the Squire, ‘Shat ha the sorrel
Mare that Sophy rode. She cost me fifty
Guineas, and comes six Years old this Grass. 
If she had cost me a thousand,’ cries Jones
passionately, ‘I would have given her to the
Dogs.’ Pooh! pooh!’ answered Western,
what because she broke thy Arm. Shouldst
forget and forgive. I thought hadst been
more a Man than to bear Malice against
a dumb Creature.’ —Here Sophia interposed,
and put an End to the Conversation, 

by desiring her Father's Leave to play to
him; a Request which he never refused. 
The Countenance of Sophia had undergone
more than one Change during the
foregoing Speeches; and probably she imputed
the passionate Resentment which Jones
had expressed against the Mare to a different
Motive from that from Which her Father
had derived it. Her Spirits Were at this
Time in a visible Flutter; and she played
so intolerably ill, that had not Western soon
fallen asleep, he must have remarked it. 
Jones, however, who was sufficiently awake,
and was not without an Ear any more than
without Eyes, made some Observations; 
which being joined to all which the Reader
may remember to have passed formerly,
gave him pretty strong Assurances, when
he came to reflect on the whole, that all
was not well in the tender Bosom of Sophia. 
An Opinion which many young Gentlemen
will, I doubt not, extremely wonder at his
not having been well confirmed in long ago. 
To confess the Truth, he had rather too
much Diffidence in himself, and was not
forward enough in seeing the Advances of
a young Lady; a Misfortune which can only
be cured by that early Town Education,
which is at present so generally in Fashion. 

When these Thoughts had fully taken
Possession of Jones, they occasioned a
Perturbation in his Mind, which, in a Constitution
less pure and firm than his, might
have been, at such a Season, attended with
very dangerous Consequences. He was
truly sensible of the great Worth of Sophia. 
He extremely liked her Person, no less admired
her Accomplishments, and tenderly
loved her Goodness. In Reality, as he had
never once entertained any Thought of possessing
her, nor had ever given the least voluntary
Indulgence to his Inclinations, he
had a much stronger Passion for her than he
himself was acquainted with. His Heart
now brought forth the full Secret, at the
same Time that it assured him the adorable
Object returned his Affection. 



Which all, who have no Heart, will think
to contain much ado about nothing. 
The Reader will perhaps imagine,
the Sensations which now arose in
Jones to have been so sweet and delicious,
that they would rather tend to produce a 

cheerful Serenity in the Mind, than any of
those dangerous Effects which we have
mentioned; but in fact, Sensations of this
Kind, however delicious, are, at their first
Recognition, of a very tumultuous Nature,
and have very little of the Opiate in them. 
They were, moreover, in the present Case,
embittered with certain Circumstances, which
being mixed with sweeter Ingredients, tended
altogether to compose a Draught that might
be termed bitter-sweet; than which, as nothing
can be more disagreeable to the Palate,
so nothing, in the metaphorical Sense,
can be so injurious to the Mind. 
For first, though he had sufficient Foundation
to flatter himself on what he had
observed in Sophia, he was not yet free from
Doubt of misconstruing Compassion, or, at
best, Esteem, into a warmer Regard. He
was far from a sanguine Assurance that
Sophia had any such Affection towards him,
as might promise his Inclinations that Harvest,
which, if they were encouraged and
nursed, they would finally grow up to require. 
Besides, if he could hope to find no
Bar to his Happiness from the Daughter,
he thought himself certain of meeting an
effectual Bar in the Father; who, though
he was a Country Squire in his Diversions, 

was perfectly a Man of the World in whatever
regarded his Fortune; had the most
violent Affection for this only Daughter,
and had often signified, in his Cups, the
Pleasure he proposed in seeing her married
to one of the richest Men in the County. 
Jones was not so vain and senseless a Coxcomb
as to expect, from any Regard which
Western had professed for him, that he
would ever be induced to lay aside these
Views of advancing his Daughter. He
well knew that Fortune is generally the
principal, if not the sole Consideration,
which operates on the best of Parents in
these Matters: For Friendship makes us
warmly espouse the interest of others; but is
very cold to the Gratification of their Passions. 
Indeed, to feel the Happiness which
may result from this, it is necessary we
should possess the Passion ourselves. As he
had therefore no Hopes of obtaining her
Father's Consent, so he thought to endeavour
to succeed without it, and by such
Means to frustrate the Great Point of Mr.
Western's Life, was to make a very ill Use
of his Hospitality, and a very ungrateful
Return to the many little Favours received
(however roughly) at his Hands. If he
saw such a Consequence with Horror and
Disdain, how much more was he shocked 

with what regarded Mr. Allworthy; to
whom, as he had more than filial Obligations,
so had he for him more than filial
Piety. He knew the Nature of that good
Man to be so averse to any Baseness or
Treachery, that the least Attempt of such a
Kind would make the guilty Person for ever
odious to his Eyes, and the Name of that Person
a detestable Sound in his Ears. The Appearance
of such unsurmountable Difficulties
was sufficient to have inspired him with
Despair, however ardent his Wishes had
been; but even these were controlled by
Compassion for another Woman. The Idea
of lovely Molly now intruded itself before
him. He had sworn eternal Constancy in
her Arms, and she had as often vowed never
to outlive his deserting her. He now
fair her in all most shocking Postures of
Death; nay, he considered all the Miseries
of Prostitution to which she would be liable,
and of which he would be doubly the Occasion; 
first by seducing, and then by deserting
her; for he well knew the Hatred which
all her Neighbours, and even her own
Sisters, bore her, and how ready they would
all be to tear her to Pieces. Indeed he had
exposed her to more Envy than Shame, or
rather to the latter by Means of the former: 
For many Women abused her for being a 

Whore, while they envied her her Lover
and her Finery, and would have been themselves
glad to have purchased these at the
same Rate. The Ruin, therefore, of the
poor Girl must, he foresaw, unavoidably
attend his deserting her; and this Thought
stung him to the Soul. Poverty and Distress
seemed to him to give none a Right
of aggravating those Misfortunes. The
Meanness of her Condition did not represent
her Misery as of little Consequence in
his Eyes, nor did it appear to justify, or
even to palliate, his Guilt, in bringing that
Misery upon her. But why do I mention
Justification; his own Heart would not suffer
him to destroy a human Creature, who,
he thought, loved him, and had to that
Love sacrificed her Innocence. His own
good Heart pleaded her Cause; not as a
cold venal Advocate; but as one interested
in the Event, and which must itself deeply
share in all the Agonies its Owner brought
on another. 
When this cunning Advocate had sufficiently
raised the Pity of Jones, by painting
poor Molly in all the Circumstances of
Wretchedness; it artfully called in the
Assistance of another Passion, and represented
the Girl in all the amiable Colours of 

Youth, Health, and Beauty; as one greatly the
Object of Desire, and much the more so,
at least to a good Mind, from being, at the
same time, the Object of Compassion. 
Amidst these Thoughts, poor Jones passed
a long sleepless Night, and in the Morning
the Result of the whole was to abide by
Molly, and to think no more of Sophia. 
In this virtuous Resolution he continued
all the next Day till the Evening, cherishing
the Idea of Molly, and driving Sophia from
his Thoughts; but in the fatal Evening,
a very trifling Accident set all his Passions
again on Float, and worked so total a
Change in his Mind, that we think it decent
to communicate it in a fresh Chapter. 



A little Chapter, in which is contained a little
Incident. 
Among other Visitants, who paid
their Compliments to the young Gentleman
in his Confinement, Mrs. Honour
was one. The Reader, perhaps, when he
reflects on some Expressions which have formerly 

dropt from her, may conceive that
she herself had a very particular Affection
for Mr. Jones; but, in reality, it was no
such thing. Tom was a handsome young
Fellow; and for that Species of Men Mrs.
Honour had some Regard; but this was
perfectly indiscriminate: For having been
crossed in the Love which she bore a certain
Nobleman's Footman, who had basely deserted
her after a Promise of Marriage, she
had so securely kept together the broken
Remains of her Heart, that no Man had
ever since been able to possess himself of any
single Fragment. She viewed all handsome
Men with that equal Regard and Benenevolence,
which a sober and virtuous Mind
bears to all the Good. —She might, indeed,
be called a Lover of Men, as Socrates was
a Lover of Mankind, preferring one to another
for corporeal, as he for mental Qualifications; 
but never carrying this Preference
so far as to cause any Perturbation
in the philosophical Serenity of her Temper. 
The Day after Mr. Jones had had that
Conflict with himself, which we have seen
in the preceding Chapter, Mrs. Honour
came into his Room, and finding him alone,
began in the following Manner: ‘La, Sir,
where do you think I have been? I warrants 

you, you would not guess in fifty Years; 
but if you did guess, to be sure, I
must not tell you neither.’ ‘Nay, if it
be something which you must not tell me,’ 
said Jones, ‘I shall have the Curiosity to
enquire, and I know you will not be
so barbarous to refuse me.’ ‘I don't
know,’ cries she, ‘why I should refuse
you neither, for that Matter; for to be
sure you won't mention it any more. And
for that Matter, if you knew where I had
been, unless you knew what I had been
about, it would not signify much. Nay,
I don't see why it should be kept a Secret,
for my Part; for to be sure she is the
best Lady in the World.’ Upon this,
Jones began to beg earnestly to be let into
this Secret, and faithfully promised not to
divulge it. She then proceeded thus. ‘Why,
you must know, Sir, my young Lady
sent me to enquire after Molly Seagrim,
and to see whether the Wench wanted any
thing; to be sure, I did not care to go,
methinks; but Servants must do what
they are ordered. —How could you undervalue
yourself so, Mr. Jones? —So my
Lady bid me go, and carry her some
Linnen, and other Things. —She
is too good. If such forward Sluts
were sent to Bridewell, it would be better 

for them. I told my Lady, says I, Madam,
Your La'ship is encouraging Idleness—’ 
‘And was my Sophia so good?’ 
says Jones. —‘My Sophia! I assure you,
marry come up,’ answered Honour. ‘And
yet if you knew all. —Indeed, if I was
as Mr. Jones, I should look a little higher
than such Trumpery as Molly Seagrim.’ 
‘What do you mean by these Words,’ replied
Jones, ‘If I knew all?’ ‘I mean
what I mean,’ says Honour. ‘Don't
you remember putting your Hands in my
Lady's Muff once? I vow I could almost
find in my Heart to tell, if I was certain
my Lady would never come to the Hearing
on't.’ —Jones then made several solemn
Protestations. And Honour proceeded
—‘then, to be sure, my Lady gave me
that Muff; and afterwards, upon hearing
what you had done—‘Then you
told her what I had done!’ interrupted
Jones. ‘If I did, Sir,’ answered she, ‘you
need not be angry with me. Many's the
Man would have given his Head to have
had my Lady told, if they had known— 
for, to be sure, the biggest Lord in the
Land might be proud—but, I protest, I
have a great Mind not to tell you.’ Jones
fell to Entreaties, and soon prevailed on her
to go on thus. ‘You must know then, Sir, 

that my Lady had given this Muff to
me; but about a Day or two after I had
told her the Story, she quarrels with her
new Muff, and to be sure it is the prettiest
that ever was seen. Honour,’ says
she,—‘this is an odious Muff;—it is too
big for me,—I can't wear it—till I can
get another, you must let me have my
old one again, and you may have this in
the room on't—for she's a good Lady, and
scorns to give a Thing and take a Thing,
I promise you that. So to be sure I
fetched it her back again, and, I believe,
she hath worn it upon her Arm almost
ever since, and I warrants hath given it
many a Kiss when nobody hath seen her.’ 
Here the Conversation was interrupted
by Mr. Western himself, who came to summon
Jones to the Harpsichord; whither
the poor young Fellow went all pale and
trembling. This Western observed, but,
on seeing Mrs. Honour, imputed it to a
wrong Cause; and having given Jones
a hearty Curse between Jest and Earnest,
he bid him beat abroad, and not poach up
the Game in his Warren. 
Sophia looked this Evening with more
than usual Beauty, and we may believe it
was no small Addition to her Charms, in 

the Eye of Mr. Jones, that she now happened
to have on her Right Arm this very
Muff. 
She was playing one of her Father's favourite
Tunes, and he was leaning on her
Chair, when the Muff fell over her Fingers,
and put her out. This so disconcerted the
Squire, that he snatched the Muff from her,
and with a hearty Curse threw it into the
Fire. Sophia instantly started up, and
with the utmost Eagerness recovered it from
the Flames. 
Though this Incident will probably appear
of little Consequence to many of our
Readers, yet, trifling as it was, it had so
violent an Effect on poor Jones, that we
thought it our Duty to relate it. In reality,
there are many little Circumstances too
often omitted by injudicious Historians,
from which Events of the utmost Importance
arise. The World may indeed be
considered as a vast Machine, in which the
great Wheels are originally set in Motion
by those which are very minute, and almost
imperceptible to any but the strongest
Eyes. 

Thus, not all the Charms of the incomparable
Sophia; not all the dazzling Brightness,
and languishing Softness of her Eyes; 
the Harmony of her Voice, and of her Person; 
not all her Wit, good Humour,
Greatness of Mind, or Sweetness of Disposition,
had been able so absolutely to conquer
and enslave the Heart of poor Jones,
as this little Incident of the Muff. Thus
the Poet sweetly sings of Troy. 

—Captiq; dolis lachrymisq; coacti
Quos neq; Tydides, nec Larissæus Achilles,
Non anni domuore decem, non mille Carinæ.
What Diomede, or Thetis' greater Son,
A thousand Ships, nor ten Years Siege had done,
False Fears, and fawning Words, the City won.
Dryden.
The Citadel of Jones was now taken by
Surprize. All those Considerations of Honour
and Prudence, which our Heroe had
lately with so much military Wisdom placed
as Guards over the Avenues of his Heart,
ran away from their Posts, and the God
of Love marched in in Triumph. 




A very long Chapter, containing a very
great Incident. 
But though this victorious Deity easily
expelled his avowed Enemies from the
Heart of Jones, he found it more difficult
to supplant the Garrison which he himself
had placed there. To lay aside all Allegory,
the Concern for what must become
of poor Molly, greatly disturbed and perplexed
the Mind of the worthy Youth. 
The superior Merit of Sophia, totally ecclipsed,
or rather extinguished all the Beauties
of the poor Girl; but Compassion instead
of Contempt succeeded to Love. He
was convinced the Girl had placed all her
Affections, and all her Prospect of future
Happiness in him only. For this he
had, he knew, given sufficient Occasion,
by the utmost Profusion of Tenderness towards
her: A Tenderness which he had
taken every Means to persuade her he
would always maintain. She, on her Side,
had assured him of her firm Belief in his
Promise, and had with the most solemn
Vows declared, that on his fulfilling, or 

breaking these Promises, it depended, whether
she should be the happiest, or the most
miserable of Womankind. And to be the
Author of this highest Degree of Misery to
a human Being, was a Thought on which
he could not bear to ruminate a single Moment. 
He considered this poor Girl as
having sacrificed to him every Thing in her
little Power; as having been at her own
Expence the Object of his Pleasure; as
sighing and languishing for him even at
that very Instant. Shall then, says he, my
Recovery, for which she hath so ardently
wished; shall my Presence which she hath
so eagerly expected, instead of giving her
that Joy with which she hath flattered herself,
cast her at once down into Misery and
Dispair? Can I be such a Villain? Here,
when the Genius of poor Molly seem'd triumphant,
the Love of Sophia towards him,
which now appeared no longer dubious,
rushed upon his Mind, and bore away
every Obstacle before it. 
At length it occurred to him, that he
might possibly be able to make Molly
amends another Way; namely, by giving
her a Sum of Money. This nevertheless,
he almost despaired of her accepting, when
he recollected the frequent and vehement 

Assurances he had received from her, that
the World put in Ballance with him, would
make her no Amends for his Loss. However,
her extreme Poverty, and chiefly her
egregious Vanity (somewhat of which hath
been already hinted to the Reader,) gave
him some little Hope, that notwithstanding
all her avowed Tenderness, she might in
Time be brought to content herself with a
Fortune superiour to her Expectation, and
which might indulge her Vanity, by setting
her above all her Equals. He resolved
therefore, to take the first Opportunity of
making a Proposal of this Kind. 
One Day accordingly, when his Arm was
so well recovered, that he could walk easily
with it slung in a Sash, he stole forth, at a
Season when the Squire was engaged in his
Field Exercises, and visited his Fair one. 
Her Mother and Sisters, whom he found
taking their Tea, informed him first that
Molly was not at Home; but afterwards,
the elder Sister acquainted him with a malicious
Smile, that she was above Stairs abed. 
Tom had no Objection to this Situation
of his Mistress, and immediately ascended
the Ladder which led towards her
Bed-Chamber; but when he came to the
Top, he, to his great Surprize, found the 

Door fast; nor could he for some Time
obtain any Answer from within; for Molly,
as she herself afterwards informed him, was
fast asleep. 
The Extremes of Grief and Joy have
been remarked to produce very similar Effects; 
and when either of these rushes on
us by Surprize, it is apt to create such a
total Perturbation and Confusion, that we
are often thereby deprived of the Use of all
our Faculties. It cannot therefore be wondered
at, that the unexpected Sight of
Mr. Jones should so strongly operate on
the Mind of Molly, and should overwhelm her
with such Confusion, that for some Minutes
she was unable to express the great Raptures,
with which the Reader will suppose
she was affected on this Occasion. As for
Jones, he was so entirely possessed, and as
it were enchanted by the Presence of his
beloved Object, that he for a while forgot
Sophia, and consequently the principal Purpose
of his Visit. 
This, however, soon recurred to his
Memory; and after the first Transports of
their Meeting were over, he found Means
by Degrees to introduce a Discourse on the
fatal Consequences which must attend their 

Amour, if Mr. Allworthy, who had strictly
forbidden him ever seeing her more, should
discover that he still carried on this Commerce. 
Such a Discovery, which his Enemies
gave him Reason to think would be
unavoidable, must, he said, end in his
Ruin, and consequently in hers. Since,
therefore, their hard Fates had determined
that they must separate, he advised her to
bear it with Resolution, and swore he would
never omit any Opportunity through the
Course of his Life, of shewing her the Sincerity
of his Affection, by providing for her
in a Manner beyond her utmost Expectation,
or even beyond her Wishes, if ever
that should be in his Power; concluding,
at last, that she might soon find some Man
who would marry her, and who would
make her much happier than she could be
by leading a disreputable Life with him. 
Molly remained a few Moments in Silence,
and then bursting into a Flood of
Tears, she began to upbraid him in the following
Words. ‘And is this your Love
for me, to forsake me in this Manner,
now you have ruined me? How often,
when I have told you that all Men are
false and Perjury alike, and grow tired
of us as soon as ever they have had their 

wicked Wills of us, how often have you
sworn you would never forsake me? And
can you be such a perjury Man after all? 
What signifies all the Riches in the World
to me without you, now you have gained
my Heart, so you have—you have—? 
Why do you mention another Man to me? 
I can never love any other Man as long
as I live. All other Men are nothing to
me. If the greatest Squire in all the
Country would come a suiting to me tomorrow,
I would not give my Company
to him. No, I shall always hate and despise
the whole Sex for your Sake—’ 
She was proceeding thus, when an Accident
put a Stop to her Tongue, before it
had run out half its Career. The Room,
or rather Garret, in which Molly lay, being
up one Pair of Stairs, that is to say, at
the Top of the House, was of a sloping
Figure, resembling the great Delta of the
Greeks. The English Reader may, perhaps,
form a better Idea of it, by being
told, that it was impossible to stand upright
any where but in the Middle. Now, as
this Room wanted the Conveniency of a
Closet, Molly had, to supply that Defect,
nailed up an old Rug against the Rafters of
the House, which enclosed a little Hole 

where her best Apparel, such as the Remains
of that Sack which we have formerly mentioned,
some Caps, and other Things with
which she had lately provided herself, were
hung up and secured from the Dust. 
This inclosed Place exactly fronted the
Foot of the Bed, to which, indeed, the
Rug hung so near, that it served, in a Manner,
to supply the Want of Curtains. 
Now, whether Molly in the Agonies of
her Rage, pushed this Rug with her Feet; 
or, Jones might touch it; or whether
the Pin or Nail gave way of its own
Accord, I am not certain; but as Molly pronounced
those last Words, which are recorded
above, the wicked Rug got loose from its
Fastning, and discovered every thing hid behind
it; where among other female Utensils
appeared—(with Shame I write it,
and with Sorrow will it be read)—the
Philosopher Square, in a Posture (for the
Place would not near admit his standing
upright) as ridiculous as can possibly be
conceived. 
The Posture, indeed, in which he stood,
was not greatly unlike that of a Soldier who
is tyed Neck and Heels; or rather resembling
the Attitude in which we often 

see Fellows in the public Streets of London,
who are not suffering but deserving Punishment
by so standing. He had a Night-cap
belonging to Molly on his Head, and his two
large Eyes, the Moment the Rug fell,
stared directly at Jones; so that when the
Idea of Philosophy was added to the Figure
now discovered, it would have been
very difficult for any Spectator to have restrained
from immoderate Laughter. 
I question not but the Surprize of the
Reader will be here equal to that of Jones; 
as the Suspicions which must arise from the
Appearance of this wise and grave Man in
such a Place, may seem so inconsistent
with that Character, which he hath, doubtless,
maintained hitherto, in the Opinion
of every one. 
But to confess the Truth, this Inconsistency
is rather imaginary than real. Philosophers
are composed of Flesh and Blood
as well as other human Creatures; and
however sublimated and refined the Theory
of these may be, a little practical Frailty
is as incident to them as to other Mortals. It
is, indeed, in Theory only and not in Practice,
as we have before hinted, that consists the
Difference: For tho' such great Beings think 

much better and more wisely, they always
act exactly like other Men. They know
very well how to subdue all Appetites and
Passions, and to despise both Pain and Pleasure; 
and this Knowledge affords much
delightful Contemplation, and is easily
acquired; but the Practice would be vexatious
and troublesome; and, therefore, the
same Wisdom which teaches them to know
this, teaches them to avoid carrying it into
Execution. 
Mr. Square happened to be at Church, on
that Sunday when, as the Reader may be
pleased to remember, the Appearance of
Molly in her Sack had caused all that Disturbance. 
Here he first observed her and
was so pleased with her Beauty, that he
prevailed with the young Gentlemen to
change their intended Ride that Evening,
that he might pass by the Habitation of Molly,
and, by that Means, might obtain a second
Chance of seeing her. This Reason, however,
as he did not at that time mention
to any, so neither did we think proper to
communicate it then to the Reader. 
Among other Particulars which constituted
the Unfitness of Things in Mr. Square's
Opinion, Danger and Difficulty were two. 

The Difficulty, therefore, which he apprehended
there might be in corrupting
this young Wench, and the Danger which
would accrue to his Character on the
Discovery, were such strong Dissuasives,
that it is probable, he at first intended to have
contented himself with the pleasing Ideas
which the Sight of Beauty furnishes us with. 
These the gravest Men, after a full Meal of
serious Meditation, often allow themselves
by Way of Desert: For which Purpose,
certain Books and Pictures find their Way
into the most private Recesses of their
Study, and a certain liquorish Part of natural
Philosophy is often the principal Subject
of their Conversation. 
But when the Philosopher heard a Day or
two afterwards, that the Fortress of Virtue
had already been subdued, he began to give a
larger Scope to his Desires. His Appetite
was not of that squeamish Kind which cannot
feed on a Dainty because another hath
tasted it. In short, he liked the Girl the
better for the Want of that Chastity, which,
if she had possessed it, must have been a
Bar to his Pleasures; he pursued, and obtained
her. 

The Reader will be mistaken, if he
thinks Molly gave Square the Preference to
her younger Lover: On the contrary, had
she been confined to the Choice of one only,
Tom Jones would, undoubtedly, have been,
of the two, the victorious Person. Nor
was it solely the Consideration that two
are better than one (tho' this had its proper
Weight) to which Mr. Square owed
his Success; the Absence of Jones during
his Confinement was an unlucky Circumstance; 
and in that Interval, some well
chosen Presents from the Philosopher so
softened and unguarded the Girl's Heart,
that a favourable Opportunity became irresistable,
and Square triumphed over the
poor Remains of Virtue which subsisted
in the Bosom of Molly. 
It was now about a Fortnight since this
Conquest, when Jones paid the above-mentioned
Visit to his Mistress, at a time
when she and Square were in Bed together. 
This was the true Reason why the Mother
denied her as we have seen; for as the
old Woman shared in the Profits arising
from the Iniquity of her Daughter, she
encouraged and protected her in it to the
utmost of her Power; but such was the
Envy and Hatred which the elder Sister 

bore towards Molly, that, notwithstanding
she had some Part of the Booty, she
would willingly have parted with this
to ruin her Sister, and spoil her Trade. 
Hence she had acquainted Jones with her
being above Stairs in Bed, in Hopes that
he might have caught her in Square's Arms. 
This, however, Molly found Means to prevent,
as the Door was fastned; which
gave her an Opportunity of conveying her
Lover behind that Rug or Blanket where
he now was unhappily discovered. 
Square no sooner made his Appearance
than Molly flung herself back in her Bed,
cried out she was undone, and abandoned
herself to Despair. This poor Girl, who
was yet but a Novice in her Business, had not
arrived to that Perfection of Assurance
which helps off a Town Lady in any Extremity; 
and either prompts her with an
Excuse, or else inspires her to brazen out the
Matter with her Husband; who from Love
of Quiet, or out of Fear of his Reputation,
and sometimes, perhaps, from Fear
of the Gallant, who, like Mr. Constant in
the Play, wears a Sword, is glad to shut his
Eyes, and contented to put his Horns in
his Pocket: Molly, on the contrary, was
silenced by this Evidence, and very fairly 

gave up a Cause which she had hitherto
with so many Tears, and with such solemn
and vehement Protestations of the purest
Love and Constancy, maintained. 
As to the Gentleman behind the Arras,
he was not in much less Consternation. He
stood for a while motionless, and seemed
equally at a Loss what to say, or whither to
direct his Eyes. Jones, tho' perhaps the
most astonished of the three, first found his
Tongue; and, being immediately recovered
from those uneasy Sensations, which Molly
by her Upbraidings had occasioned, he
burst into a loud Laughter, and then saluting
Mr. Square, advanced to take him
by the Hand, and to relieve him from his
Place of Confinement. 
Square, being now arrived in the Middle
of the Room, in which Part only he could
stand upright, looked at Jones with a very
grave Countenance, and said to him,
‘Well, Sir, I see you enjoy this mighty
Discovery, and, I dare swear, taste great
Delight in the Thoughts of exposing me; 
but if you will consider the Matter fairly, you
will find you are yourself only to blame. I
am not guilty of corrupting Innocence. I
have done nothing for which that Part of 

the World which judges of Matters by the
Rule of Right will condemn me. Fitness
is governed by the Nature of Things,
and not by Customs, Forms, or municipal
Laws. Nothing is, indeed, unfit
which is not unnatural.’ ‘Well reasoned,
old Boy,’ answered Jones; ‘but why
dost thou think I should desire to expose
thee? I promise thee, I was never better
pleased with thee in my Life; and unless
thou hast a Mind to discover it thyself,
this Affair may remain a profound Secret
for me.’ ‘Nay, Mr. Jones,’ replied
Square, ‘I would not be thought to undervalue
Reputation. Good Fame is a
Species of the Kalon and it is by no
Means fitting to neglect it. Besides to
murder one's own Reputation, is a kind
of Suicide, a detestable and odious Vice. 
If you think proper, therefore, to conceal
any Infirmity of mine; (for such I
may have, since no Man is perfectly perfect;)
I promise you I will not betray myself. 
Things may be fitting to be done,
which are not fitting to be boasted of:
for by the perverse Judgment of the
World, That often becomes the Subject of
Censure, which is, in Truth, not only
innocent but laudable.’ ‘Right!’ cries
Jones, ‘what can be more innocent than 

the Indulgence of a natural Appetite? or what more laudable than the Propagation
of our Species?’ ‘To be serious
with you,’ answered Square, ‘I profess
they always appeared so to me.’ ‘And
yet,’ said Jones, ‘you was of a different
Opinion when my Affair with this Girl
was first discovered.’ ‘Why, I must
confess,’ says Square, ‘as the Matter
was misrepresented to me by that Parson
Thwackum, I might condemn the
Corruption of Innocence: It was that,
Sir, it was that—and that—: For
you must know, Mr. Jones, in the Consideration
of Fitness, very minute Circumstances,
Sir, very minute Circumstances
cause great Alteration.’ —‘Well,’ 
cries Jones, ‘be that as it will, it shall be
your own Fault, as I have promised you,
if you ever hear any more of this Adventure. 
Behave kindly to the Girl, and
I will never open my Lips concerning
the Matter to any one. And, Molly, do
you be faithful to your Friend, and I will
not only forgive your Infidelity to me; 
but will do you all the Service I can.’ 
So saying, he took a hasty Leave, and
slipping down the Ladder, retired with
much Expedition. 

Square was rejoyced to find this Adventure
was likely to have no worse Conclusion; 
and as for Molly, being recovered
from her Confusion, she began at first to upbraid
Square with having been the Occasion
of her Loss of Jones; but that Gentleman
soon found the Means of mitigating
her Anger, partly by Caresses, and partly
by a small Nostrum from his Purse, of
wonderful and approved Efficacy in purging
off the ill Humours of the Mind, and in
restoring it to a good Temper. 
She then poured forth a vast Profusion
of Tenderness towards her new Lover; 
turned all she had said to Jones, and Jones
himself into Ridicule, and vowed, tho' he
had had the Possession of her Person, that
none but Square had ever been Master of
her Heart. 




By comparing which with the former, the
Reader may possibly correct some Abuse
which he hath formerly been guilty of, in
the Application of the Word Love. 
The Infidelity of Molly, which Jones
had now discovered, would, perhaps,
have vindicated a much greater Degree of
Resentment than he expressed on the Occasion; 
and if he had abandoned her directly
from that Moment, very few, I
believe, would have blamed him. 
Certain, however, it is, that he saw her
in the Light of Compassion; and tho' his
Love to her was not of that Kind which
could give him any great Uneasiness at
her Inconstancy, yet was he not a little
shocked on reflecting that he had himself
originally corrupted her Innocence; for to
this Corruption he imputed all the Vice,
into which she appeared now so likely to
plunge herself. 

This Consideration gave him no little
Uneasiness, till Betty, the elder Sister, was
so kind some time afterwards entirely to
cure him by a Hint, that one Will Barnes,
and not himself, had been the first Seducer
of Molly; and that the little Child, which
he had hitherto so certainly concluded to be
his own, might very probably have an
equal Title at least, to claim Barnes for its
Father. 
Jones eagerly pursued this Scent when
he had first received it; and in a very
short Time was sufficiently assured that the
Girl had told him Truth, not only by the
Confession of the Fellow, but, at last, by
that of Molly herself. 
This Will Barnes was a Country Gallant,
and had acquired as many Trophies of this
Kind as any Ensign or Attorney's Clerk in the
Kingdom. He had, indeed, reduced several
Women to a State of utter Profligacy, had
broke the Hearts of some, and had the Honour
of occasioning the violent Death of one
poor Girl, who had either drowned herself,
or, what was rather more probable, had
been drowned by him. 

Among other of his Conquests, this Fellow
had triumphed over the Heart of Betty
Seagrim. He had made love to her long
before Molly was grown to be a fit Object
of that Pastime; but had afterwards deserted
her, and applied to her Sister, with
whom he had almost immediate Success. 
Now Will had, in reality, the sole Possession
of Molly's Affection, while Jones and
Square were almost equally Sacrifices to her
Interest, and to her Pride. 
Hence had grown that implacable Hatred
which we have before seen raging in
the Mind of Betty; though we did not
think it necessary to assign this Cause sooner,
as Envy itself was alone adequate to all the
Effects we have mentioned. 
Jones was become perfectly easy by Possession
of this Secret with Regard to Molly; 
but as to Sophia, he was far from being in a
State of Tranquility; nay, indeed, he was
under the most violent Perturbation: His
Heart was now, if I may use the Metaphor,
entirely evacuated, and Sophia took absolute
Possession of it. He loved her with an
unbounded Passion, and plainly saw the tender
Sentiments she had for him; yet could not 

this Assurance lessen his Despair of obtaining
the Consent of her Father, nor the Horrors
which attended his Pursuit of her by any
base or treacherous Method. 
The Injury which he must thus do to
Mr. Western, and the Concern which would
accrue to Mr. Allworthy, were Circumstances
that tormented him all Day, and
haunted him on his Pillow at Night. His
Life was a constant Struggle between Honour
and Inclination, which alternately
triumphed over each other in his Mind. 
He often resolved, in the Absence of Sophia,
to leave her Father's House, and to see her
no more; and as often, in her Presence,
forgot all those Resolutions, and determined
to pursue her at the Hazard of his Life,
and at the Forfeiture of what was much
dearer to him. 
This Conflict began soon to produce very
strong and visible Effects: For he lost all
his usual Sprightliness and Gaiety of
Temper, and became not only melancholy
when alone, but dejected and absent in
Company; nay, if ever he put on a forced
Mirth, to comply with Mr. Western's Humour,
the Constraint appeared so plain, that
he may seem to have been giving the 

strongest Evidence of what he endeavoured
to conceal by such Ostentation. 
It may, perhaps, be a Question, whether
the Art which he used to conceal his Passion,
or the Means which honest Nature employed
to reveal it, betrayed him most: 
For while Art made him more than ever
reserved to Sophia, and forbad him to address
any of his Discourse to her; nay, to avoid
meeting her Eyes, with the utmost Caution; 
Nature was no less busy in counterplotting
him. Hence, at the Approach of the young
Lady, he grew pale; and if this was sudden,
started. If his Eyes accidentally met
hers, the Blood rushed into his Cheeks, and
his Countenance became all over Scarlet. 
If common Civility ever obliged him to
speak to her, as to drink her Health at Table,
his Tongue was sure to faulter. If he
touched her his Hand, nay his whole
Frame trembled. And if any Discourse
tended, however remotely, to raise the
Idea of Love, an involuntary Sigh seldom
failed to steal from his Bosom. Most of
which Accidents Nature was wonderfully
industrious to throw daily in his Way. 
All these Symptoms escaped the Notice
of the Squire; but not so of Sophia. She 

soon perceived these Agitations of Mind in
Jones, and was at no Loss to discover the
Cause; for indeed she recognized it in her
own Breast. And this Recognition is, I
suppose, that Sympathy which hath been so
often noted in Lovers, and which will sufficiently
account for her being so much
quicker-sighted than her Father. 
But, to say the Truth, there is a more simple
and plain Method of accounting for that
prodigious Superiority of Penetration which
we must observe in some Men over the rest
of the human Species, and one which will not
only serve in the Case of Lovers, but of all
others. For whence is it that the Knave is
generally so quick sighted to those Symptoms
and Operations of Knavery which
often dupe an honest Man of a much
better Understanding? There surely is no
general Sympathy among Knaves, nor have
they, like Free Masons, any common Sign of
Communication. In reality, it is only because
they have the same thing in their Heads,
and their Thoughts are turned the same
Way. Thus, that Sophia saw, and that
Western did not see the plain Symptoms of
Love in Jones can be no Wonder, when
we consider that the Idea of Love never entered
into the Head of the Father, whereas 

the Daughter, at present, thought of nothing
else. 
When Sophia was well satisfied of the
violent Passion which tormented poor Jones,
and no less certain that she herself was its
Object, she had not the least Difficulty in
discovering the true Cause of his present Behaviour. 
This highly endeared him to her,
and raised in her Mind two of the best Affections
which any Lover can wish to raise
in a Mistress. These were Esteem and
Pity; for sure the most outragiously rigid
among her Sex will excuse her pitying a
Man, whom she saw miserable on her own
Account; nor can they blame her for
esteeming one who visibly from the most
honourable Motives, endeavoured to smother
a Flame in his own Bosom, which,
like the famous Spartan Theft, was preying
upon, and consuming his very Vitals. Thus
his Backwardness, his Shunning her, his
Coldness and his Silence, were the forwardest,
the most diligent, the warmest,
and most eloquent Advocates; and wrought
so violently on her sensible and tender Heart,
that she soon felt for him all those gentle
Sensations which are consistent with a virtuous
and elevated female Mind—In short,
all which Esteem, Gratitude and Pity, can 

inspire in such, towards an agreeable Man
—Indeed, all which the nicest Delicacy can
allow—In a Word,—she was in Love
with him to Distraction, 
One Day, this young Couple accidentally
met in the Garden, at the End of two
Walks, which were both bounded by that
Canal in which Jones had formerly risqued
drowning to retrieve the little Bird that
Sophia had there lost. 
This Place had been of late much frequented
by Sophia. Here she used to ruminate,
with a Mixture of Pain and Pleasure,
on an Incident, which, however trifling in
itself, had possibly sown the first Seeds of
that Affection which was now arrived to
such Maturity in her Heart. 
Here then this young Couple met. They
were almost close together before either of
them knew any Thing of the other's Approach. 
A By-stander would have discovered
sufficient Marks of Confusion, in the
Countenance of each; but they felt too much
themselves to make any Observation. As
soon as Jones had a little recovered his first Surprize,
he accosted the young Lady with
some of the ordinary Forms of Salutation, 

which she in the same Manner returned,
and their Conversation began, as usual, on
the delicious Beauty of the Morning. Hence
they past to the Beauty of the Place, on
which Jones launched forth very high
Encomiums. When they came to the
Tree whence he had formerly tumbled
into the Canal, Sophia could not help reminding
him of that Accident, and said,
‘I fancy, Mr. Jones, you have some little
shuddering when you see that Water.’ 
‘I assure you, Madam,’ answered Jones,
‘the Concern you felt at the Loss of
your little Bird, will always appear to
me the highest Circumstance in that Adventure. 
Poor little Tommy, there is the
Branch he stood upon. How could the
little Wretch have the Folly to fly away
from that State of Happiness in which
I had the Honour to place him? His
Fate was a just Punishment for his Ingratitude.’ 
‘Upon my Word, Mr. Jones,’ 
said she, ‘your Gallantry very narrowly
escaped as severe a Fate. Sure, the Remembrance
must affect you.’ ‘Indeed,
Madam,’ answered he, ‘if I have any
Reason to reflect with Sorrow on it, it is,
perhaps, that the Water had not been a
little deeper, by which I might have
escaped many bitter Heart-achs, that Fortune 

seems to have in Store for me. ‘Fie,
Mr. Jones,’ replied Sophia, ‘I am sure
you cannot be in Earnest now. This
affected Contempt of Life is only an
Excess of your Complaisance to me. 
You would endeavour to lessen the Obligation
of having twice ventured it for
my Sake. Beware the third Time.’ — 
She spoke these last Words with a Smile and
a Softness inexpressible. Jones answered
with a Sigh, ‘He feared it was already
too late for Caution,’—and then looking
tenderly and stedfastly on her, he cry'd,
‘Oh! Miss Western,—Can you desire me
to live? Can you wish me so ill?’ —Sophia
looking down on the Ground, answered
with some Hesitation, ‘Indeed,
Mr. Jones, I do not wish you ill.’ — 
‘Oh! I know too well that heavenly Temper,’ 
cries Jones, ‘that divine Goodness
which is beyond every other Charm.’ 
‘Nay, now,’ answered she, ‘I understand
you not. —I can stay no longer,—I—. I
would not be understood,’ cries he, ‘nay,
I can't be understood. I know not what
I say. Meeting you here so unexpectedly
—I have been unguarded—for Heaven's
Sake pardon me, if I have said
any Thing to offend you—I did not
mean it—indeed, I would rather have 

died—nay, the very Thought would
kill me.’ ‘You surprize me,’ answered
she,—‘How can you possibly think you
have offended me?’ ‘Fear, Madam,’ 
says he, ‘easily runs into Madness; and
there is no Degree of Fear like that which
I feel of offending you. How can I
speak then? Nay don't look angrily at
me, one Frown will destroy me. —I
mean nothing—Blame my Eyes, or
blame those Beauties—What am I saying? 
Pardon me if I have said too much. 
My Heart overflowed. I have struggled
with my Love to the utmost, and have
endeavoured to conceal a Fever which
preys on my Vitals, and will, I hope,
soon make it impossible for me ever to
offend you more.’ 
Mr. Jones now fell a trembling as if he
had been shaken with the Fit of an Ague. 
Sophia, who was in a Situation not very
different from his, answered in these
Words: ‘Mr. Jones, I will not affect to
misunderstand you; indeed I understand
you too well; but for Heaven's Sake,
if you have any Affection for me, let
me make the best of my way into the
House. I wish I may be able to support
myself thither.’ 

Jones, who was hardly able to support
himself, offered her his Arm, which she
condescended to accept, but begged he
would not mention a Word more to her of
this Nature at present. He promised he
would not, insisting only on her Forgiveness
of what Love, without the Leave of
his Will, had forced from him: This, she
told him, he knew how to obtain by his future
Behaviour; and thus this young Pair
tottered and trembled along, the Lover
not once daring to squeeze the Hand of
his Mistress, tho' it was locked in his. 
Sophia immediately retired to her Chamber,
where Mrs. Honour and the Hartshorn
were summoned to her Assistance. As to
poor Jones, the only Relief to his distempered
Mind, was an unwelcome Piece of News,
which, as it opens a Scene of a different
Nature from those in which the Reader
hath lately been conversant, will be communicated
to him in the next Chapter. 




In which Mr. Allworthy appears on a Sick-Bed. 
Mr. Western was become so fond of
Jones, that he was unwilling to part
with him, tho' his Arm had been long
since cured; and Jones, either from his
Love of Sport, or from some other Reason,
was easily persuaded to continue at his
House, which he did sometimes for a
Fortnight together without paying a single
Visit at Mr. Allworthy's; nay, without ever
hearing from thence. 
Mr. Allworthy had been for some Days
indisposed with a Cold, which had been
attended with a little Fever. This he had,
however, neglected, as it was usual with
him to do all Manner of Disorders which
did not confine him to his Bed, or prevent
his several Faculties from performing their
ordinary Functions. A Conduct which we
would by no Means be thought to approve
or recommend to Imitation: For
surely the Gentlemen of the Æsculapian
Art are in the Right in advising, that the 

Moment the Disease is entered at one Door,
the Physician should be introduced at the
other; what else is meant by that old
Adage: Vinienti occurrite Morbo? “Oppose
a Distemper at its first Approach.” 
Thus the Doctor and the Disease meet in
fair and equal Conflict; whereas, by giving
Time to the latter, we often suffer him
to fortify and entrench himself, like a
French Army; so that the learned Gentleman
finds it very difficult, and sometimes
impossible to come at the Enemy. Nay
sometimes by gaining Time, the Disease
applies to the French military Politics,
and corrupts Nature over to his Side, and
then all the Powers of Physick must arrive
too late. Agreeable to these Observations
was, I remember, the Complaint of the
great Doctor Misaubin, who used very pathetically
to lament the late Applications
which were made to his Skill: Saying,
‘Bygar, me believe my Pation take me for
de Undertaker: For dey never send for
me till de Physicion have kill dem.’ 
Mr. Allworthy's Distemper, by Means
of this Neglect, gained such Ground, that
when the Increase of his Fever obliged him
to send for Assistance, the Doctor at his
first Arrival shook his Head, wished he had 

been sent for sooner, and intimated that he
thought him in very imminent Danger. Mr.
Allworthy, who had settled all his Affairs
in this world, and was as well prepared,
as it is possible for human Nature to be,
for the other, received this Information
with the utmost Calmness and Unconcern. 
He could, indeed, whenever he laid himself
down to Rest, say with Cato in the
tragical Poem, 

—Let Guilt or Fear
Disturb Man's Rest, Cato knows neither of them;
Indifferent in his Choice, to sleep or die.
In Reality, he could say this with ten
times more Reason and Confidence than
Cato, or any other proud Fellow among
the ancient or modern Heroes: For he
was not only devoid of Fear; but might be
considered as a faithful Labourer, when at
the End of Harvest, he is summoned to
receive his Reward at the Hands of a bountiful
Master. 
The good Man gave immediate Orders for
all his Family to be summoned round him. 
None of these were then abroad, but Mrs. 

Blifil, who had been some Time in London,
and Mr. Jones, whom the Reader hath just
parted from at Mr. Western's and who received
this Summons just as Sophia had
left him. 
The News of Mr. Allworthy's Danger
(for the Servant told him he was dying)
drove all Thoughts of Love out of his
Head. He hurried instantly into the Chariot
which was sent for him, and ordered
the Coachman to drive with all imaginable
Haste; nor did the Idea of Sophia, I believe,
once occur to him on the Way. 
And now, the whole Family, namely,
Mr. Blifil, Mr. Jones, Mr. Thwackum, Mr.
Square, and some of the Servants (for such
were Mr. Allworthy's Orders) being all assembled
round his Bed, the good Man sat
up in it, and was beginning to speak,
when Blifil fell to blubbering; and began
to express very loud and bitter Lamentations. 
Upon this Mr. Allworthy shook
him by the Hand, and said, ‘Do not sorrow
thus, my dear Nephew, at the most
ordinary of all human Occurrences. 
When Misfortunes befal our Friends we
are ustly grieved: For those are Accidents 

which might often have been avoided,
and which may seem to render
the Lot of one Man, more peculiarly unhappy
than that of others; but Death
is certainly unavoidable, and is that common
Lot, in which alone the Fortunes
of all Men agree; nor is the Time when
this happens to us material. If the
wisest of Men hath compared Life to a
Span, surely we may be allowed to consider
it as a Day. It is my Fate to leave
it in the Evening; but those who are
taken away earlier, have only lost a few
Hours, at the best little worth lamenting,
and much oftner Hours of Labour
and Fatigue, of Pain and Sorrow. One
of the Roman Poets, I remember,
likens our leaving Life to our Departure
from a Feast. A Thought which hath
often occurred to me, when I have seen
Men struggling to protract an Entertainment,
and to enjoy the Company of their
Friends a few Moments longer. Alas!
how short is the most protracted of such
Enjoyments! How immaterial the Difference
between him who retires the soonest,
and him who stays the latest! This
is seeing Life in the best View, and this
Unwillingness to quit our Friends is the 

most amiable Motive, from which we
can derive the Fear of Death; and yet
the longest Enjoyment which we can
hope for of this Kind is of so trivial a
Duration, that it is to a wise Man truly
contemptible. Few Men, I own, think
in this Manner: for, indeed, few Men
think of Death 'till they are in its Jaws. 
However gigantic and terrible an Object
this may appear when it approaches
them, they are nevertheless incapable of
seeing it at any Distance; nay, tho' they
have been ever so much frightned and
alarmed when they have apprehended
themselves in Danger of dying, they are
no sooner cleared from this Apprehension
than even the Fears of it are erased from
their Minds. But alas! he who escapes
from Death is not pardoned, he is only
reprieved, and reprieved to a short Day. 
‘Grieve, therefore, no more, my dear
Child, on this Occasion; an Event which
may happen every Hour, which every
Element, nay almost every Particle of
Matter that surrounds us is capable of
producing, and which must and will most
unavoidably reach us all at last, ought
neither to occasion our Surprize, nor our
Lamentation. 

‘My Physician having acquainted me
(which I take very kindly of him) that I
am in Danger of leaving you all
very shortly, I have determined to say a
few Words to you at this our Parting,
before my Distemper, which I find grows
very fast upon me, puts it out of my
Power. 
‘But I shall waste my Strength too much. 
—I intended to speak concerning
my Will, which tho' I have settled
long ago, I think proper to mention
such Heads of as concern any of you,
that I may have the Comfort of perceiving
you are all satisfied with the Provision
I have there made for you. 
‘Nephew Blifil, I leave you the Heir to
my whole Estate, except only 500l. a Year
which is to revert to you after the Death
of your Mother, and except one other
Estate of 500l. a Year, and the Sum of
6000l. which I have bestowed in the following
Manner. 
‘The Estate of 500l. a Year I have
given to you, Mr. Jones. And as I
know the Inconvenience which attends 

the Want of ready Money, I have added
1000l. in Specie. In this I know not
whether I have exceeded, or fallen short
of your Expectation. Perhaps you will
think I have given you too little, and
the World will be as ready to condemn
me for giving you too much; but the
latter Censure I despise, and as to the
former, unless you should entertain that
common Error, which I have often heard
in my Life pleaded as an Excuse for a
total Want of Charity; namely, that
instead of raising Gratitude by voluntary
Acts of Bounty, we are apt to raise Demands,
which of all others are the most
boundless, and most difficult to satisfy. — 
Pardon me the bare Mention of this, I
will not suspect any such Thing.’ 
Jones flung himself at his Benefactor's
Feet, and taking eagerly hold of his Hand,
assured him, his Goodness to him, both now,
and at all other Times, had so infinitely
exceeded not only his Merit, but his Hopes,
that no Words could express his Sense of
it. ‘And I assure you, Sir, said he, your
present Generosity hath left me no other
Concern than for the present melancholy
Occasion. —Oh, my Friend! my Father!’ 

Here his Words choaked him, and he turned
away to hide a Tear which was starting
from his Eyes. 
Allworthy then gently squeezed his Hand,
and proceeded thus. ‘I am convinced,
my Child, that you have much Goodness,
Generosity and Honour in your
Temper; if you will add Prudence and
Religion to these, you must be happy: 
For the three former Qualities, I admit,
make you worthy of Happiness, but they
are the latter only which will put you in
Possession of it. 
‘One thousand Pound I have given to
you Mr. Thwackum; a Sum, I am convinced,
which greatly exceeds your Desires
as well as your Wants. However,
you will receive it as a Memorial of my
Friendship; and whatever Superfluities
may redound to you, that Piety which
you so rigidly maintain, will instruct you
how to dispose of it. 
‘A like Sum, Mr. Square, I have bequeathed
to you. This, I hope, will enable
you to pursue your Profession with better
Success than hitherto. I have often observed 

with Concern, that Distress is more apt
to excite Contempt than Commiseration,
especially among Men of Business, with
whom Poverty is understood to indicate
Want of Ability. But the little I have
been able to leave you, will extricate you
from those Difficulties with which you
have formerly struggled, and then I doubt
not but you will meet with sufficient
Prosperity to supply what a Man of your
Philosophical Temper will require. 
‘I find myself growing faint, so I shall
refer you to my Will for my Disposition
of the Residue. My Servants will there
find some Tokens to remember me by,
and there are a few Charities which, I trust,
my Executors will see faithfully performed. 
Bless you all. I am setting out a little
before you—’ 
Here a Footman came hastily into the
Room, and said there was an Attorney from
Salisbury, who had a particular Message,
which he said he must communicate to Mr.
Allworthy himself: That he seemed in a
violent Hurry, and protested he had so
much Business to do, that if he could cut
himself into four Quarters, all would not be
sufficient. 

Go, Child, said Allworthy to Blifil, see
what the Gentleman wants. I am not able
to do any Business now, nor can he have
any with me, in which you are not at present
more concerned than myself. Besides
I really am—I am incapable of seeing any
one at present, or of any longer Attention. 
He then saluted them all, saying,
perhaps he should be able to see them again,
but he should be now glad to compose himself
a little, finding that he had too much
exhausted his Spirits in Discourse. 
Some of the Company shed Tears at their
Parting; and even the Philosopher Square
wiped his Eyes, albeit unused to the melting
Mood. As to Mrs. Wilkins, she dropt her
Pearls as fast as the Arabian Trees their
Medicinal Gums; for this was a Ceremonial
which that Gentlewoman never omitted
on a proper Occasion. 
After this Mr. Allworthy again laid himself
down on his Pillow, and endeavoured
to compose himself to Rest. 




Containing Matter rather natural than pleasing. 
Besides Grief for her Master, there
was another Source for that briny
Stream which so plentifully rose above the
two mountainous Cheek Bones of the Housekeeper. 
She was no sooner retired, than
she began to mutter to herself in the following
pleasant Strain. ‘Sure Master
might have made some Difference, methinks,
between me and the other Servants. 
I suppose he hath left me Mourning; 
but, i-fackins! if that be all, the
Devil shall wear it for him for me. I'd
have his Worship know I am no Beggar. 
I have saved five hundred Pound in his
Service, and after all to be used in this
Manner. It is a fine Encouragement to
Servants to be honest; and to be sure,
if I have taken a little Something now
and then, others have taken ten times as
much; and now we are all put in a
Lump together. If so be that it be so,
the Legacy may go to the Devil with 

him that gave it. No, I won't give it
up neither, because that will please some
Folks. No, I'll buy the gayest Gown
I can get, and dance over the old Curmudgeon's
Grave in it. This is my Reward
for taking his Part so often, when
all the Country have cried Shame of him
for breeding up his Bastard in that Manner; 
but he is going now where he must
pay for all. It would have becomed him
better to have repented of his Sins on his
Death-bed, than to glory in them, and
give away his Estate out of his own Family
to a mis-begotten Child. Found
in his Bed, forsooth! A pretty Story! 
Ay, ay, those that hide know where to
find. Lord forgive him, I warrant he
hath many more Bastards to answer for,
if the Truth was known. One Comfort
is, they will be all known where he is a
going now. ‘The Servants will find some
Token to remember me by.’ Those were
the very Words, I shall never forget
them, if I was to live a thousand Years. 
Ay, ay, I shall remember you for huddling
me among the Servants. One
would have thought he might have mentioned
my Name as well as that of Square; 
but he is a Gentleman forsooth, though 

he had not Clothes to his Back when he
came hither first. Marry come up with
such Gentlemen! though he hath lived
here these many Years, I don't believe
there is arrow Servant in the House
ever saw the Colour of his Money. The
Devil shall wait upon such Gentlemen for
me.’ Much more of the like kind she
muttered to herself; but this Taste shall
suffice to the Reader. 
Neither Thwackum nor Square were much
better satisfied with their Legacies. Tho'
they breathed not their Resentment so loud,
yet from the Discontent which appeared in
their Countenances, as well as from the following
Dialogue, we collect that no great
Pleasure reigned in their Minds. 
About an Hour after they had left the
sick Room, Square met Thwackum in the
Hall, and accosted him thus, ‘Well, Sir,
have you heard any News of your Friend
since we parted from him? ‘If you mean
Mr. Allworthy,’ answered Thwackum, ‘I
think you might rather give him the Appellation
of your Friend: For he seems
to me to have deserved that Title.’ ‘The
Title is as good on your Side,’ replied 

Square, ‘for his Bounty, such as it is, hath
been equal to both.’ ‘I should not have
mentioned it first,’ cries Thwackum, ‘but
since you begin, I must inform you I am
of a different Opinion. There is a wide
Distinction between voluntary Favours
and Rewards. The Duty I have done
in his Family, and the Care I have taken
in the Education of his two Boys, are
Services for which some Men might have
expected a greater Return. I would not
have you imagine I am therefore dissatisfied; 
for St. Paul hath taught me to be
content with the little I have. Had the
Modicum been less, I should have known
my Duty. But though the Scripture
obliges me to remain contented, it doth
not enjoin me to shut my Eyes to my
own Merit, nor restrain me from seeing,
when I am injured by an unjust Comparison. 
Since you provoke me,’ returned
Square, ‘that Injury is done to me: Nor
did I ever imagine Mr. Allworthy had
held my Friendship so light, as to put
me in Ballance with one who received
his Wages: I know to what it is owing; 
it proceeds from those narrow Principles
which you have been so long endeavouring
to infuse into him, in Contempt of 

every Thing which is great and noble. 
The Beauty and Loveliness of Friendship
is too strong for dim Eyes, nor can it
be perceived by any other Medium, than
that unerring Rule of Right which you have
so often endeavoured to ridicule, that you
have perverted my Friend's Understanding.’ 
‘I wish,’ cries Thwackum, in a Rage,
I wish for the Sake of his Soul, your
damnable Doctrines have not perverted
his Faith. It is to this, I impute his
present Behaviour so unbecoming a Christian. 
Who but an Atheist could think
of leaving the Worked without having first
made up his Account? without confessing
his Sins, and receiving that Absolution
which he knew he had one in the House
duly authorised to give him? He will
feel the Want of these Necessaries when
it is too late. When he is arrive at that
Place where there is Wailing and Gnashing
of Teeth. It is then he will find in
what mighty Stead that Heathen Goodess,
that Virtue which you and al other Deists
of the Age adore, will stand him. He
will then summon his Priest when there is
none to be found, and will lament the
Want of that Absolution, without which
no Sinner can be safe.’ ‘If it be so material,’ 

says Squire, ‘Why don't you present
it him of your own Accord?’ ‘It hath
no Virtue,’ cries Thwackum, ‘but to
those who have sufficient Grace to require
it. But why do I talk thus to a Heathen
and an Unbeliever? It is you who
have taught him this Lesson, for which
you have been well rewarded in this
World, as I doubt not your Disciple will
soon be in the other.’ ‘I know not what
you mean by my Reward,’ said Square,
but if you hint at that pitiful Memorial of
our Friendship, which he hath thought
fit to bequeath me, I despise it, and nothing
but the unfortunate Situation of my
Circumstances should prevail on me to
accept it.’ 
The Physician now arrived, and began
to enquire of the two Disputants, How we
all did above Stairs? ‘In a miserable Way,’ 
answered Thwackum. ‘It is no more than I
expected,’ cries the Doctor; ‘but pray what
Symptoms have appeared since I left you?’ 
‘No good ones, I am afraid,’ replied Thwackum,
‘after what past at our Departure, I
think there were little Hopes.’ The bodily
Physician, perhaps, misunderstood the
Curer of Souls, and before they came to 

an Explanation, Mr. Blifil came to them
with a most melancholy Countenance, and
acquainted them that he brought sad News: 
For that his Mother was dead at Salisbury. 
That she had been seized on the Road
home with the Gout in her Head and Stomach,
which had carried her off in a few
Hours. ‘Good-lack-a-day,’ says the Doctor, ‘One cannot answer for Events; but I
wish I had been at Hand to have been called
in. The Gout is a Distemper which it
is difficult to treat, yet I have been remarkably
successful in it.’ Thwackum and
Square both condoled with Mr. Blifil for the
Loss of his Mother, which the one advised
him to bear like a Man, and the other like
a Christian. The young Gentleman said,
he knew very well we were all mortal, and
he would endeavour to submit to his Loss,
as well as he could. That he could not,
however, help complaining a little against
the peculiar Severity of his Fate, which
brought the News of so great a Calamity
to him by Surprize, and that at a Time when
he hourly expected the severest Blow he was
capable of feeling from the Malice of
Fortune. He said, the present Occasion
would put to the Test those excellent Rudiments,
which he had learnt from Mr. 

Thwackum and Mr. Square, and it would be
entirely owing to them, if he was enabled
to survive such Misfortunes. 
It was now debated whether Mr. Allworthy
should be informed of the Death of
his Sister: This the Doctor violently opposed,
in which, I believe, the whole College
will agree with him; but Mr. Blifil
said he had received such positive and repeated
Orders from his Uncle never to
keep any Secret from him, for Fear of the
Disquietude which it might give him, that
he durst not think of Disobedience, whatever
might be the Consequence. He said,
for his Part, considering the religious and
philosophic Temper of his Uncle, he could
not agree with the Doctor in his Apprehensions. 
He was therefore resolved to
communicate it to him: For if his Uncle
recovered (as he heartily prayed he might)
he knew he would never forgive an Endeavour
to keep a Secret of this Kind from
him. 
The Physician was forced to submit to
these Resolutions which the two other
learned Gentlemen very highly commended. 
So together moved Mr. Blifil and the 

Doctor towards the sick Room; where the
Physician first entered, and approached the
Bed, in order to feel his Patient's Pulse, which
he had no sooner done, than he declared he
was much better, that the last Application
had succeeded to a Miracle, and had
brought the Fever to intermit. So that, he
said, there appeared now to be as little
Danger as he had before apprehended
there were Hopes. 
To say the Truth, Mr. Allworthy's Situation
had never been so bad, as the great
Caution of the Doctor had represented it; 
but as a wise General never despises his
Enemy, however inferior his Force may
be, so neither doth a wise Physician ever
despise a Distemper, however inconsiderable. 
As the former preserves the same
strict Discipline, places the same Guards,
and employs the same Scouts, tho' the
Enemy be never so weak; so the latter
maintains the same Gravity of Countenance,
and shakes his Head with the same significant
Air, let the Distemper be never so
trifling. And both, among many other
good ones, may assign this solid Reason for
their Conduct, that by these Means the
greater Glory redounds to them if they gain 

the Victory, and the less Disgrace if by
any unlucky Accident they should happen
to be conquered. 
Mr. Allworthy had no sooner lifted up his
Eyes, and thanked Heaven for these Hopes
of his Recovery; then Mr. Blifil drew near
with a very dejected Aspect, and having
applied his Handkerchief to his Eye, either
to wipe away his Tears, or as Ovid somewhere
expresses himself on another Occasion, 

Si nullus erit, tamen excute nullum.
‘If there be none, wipe away that none.’
he communicated to his Uncle what the
Reader hath been just before acquainted
with. 
Allworthy received the News with Concern,
with Patience, and with Resignation. 
He dropt a tender Tear, then composed
his Countenance, and at last cried, ‘The
Lord's Will be done in every Thing.’ 
He now enquired for the Messenger; but
Blifil told him, it had been impossible to 

detain him a Moment; for he appeared
by the great Hurry he was in to have some
Business of Importance on his Hands: That
he complained of being hurried, and driven
and torn out of his Life, and repeated
many Times, that if he could divide himself
into four Quarters, he knew how to
dispose of every one. 
Allworthy then desired Blifil to take Care
of the Funeral. He said, he would have
his Sister deposited in his own Chapel; and
as to the Particulars, he left them to his own
Discretion, only mentioning the Person
whom he would have employed on this
Occasion. 




Which, among other Things, may serve as a
Comment on that Saying of Æschines, that
Drunkenness shews the Mind of a
Man, as a Mirrour reflects his Person. 
The Reader may, perhaps, wonder
at hearing nothing of Mr. Jones in
the last Chapter. In fact, his Behaviour was
so different from that of the Persons there
mentioned, that we chose not to confound
his Name with theirs. 
When the good Man had ended his
Speech, Jones was the last who deserted the
Room. Thence he retired to his own
Apartment, to give Vent to his Concern; 
but the Restlessness of his Mind would not
suffer him to remain long there; he slipped
softly, therefore, to Allworthy's Chamber
Door, where he listened a considerable Time
without hearing any Kind of Motion within,
unless a violent snoring, which at last his
Fears misrepresented as Groans. This so
alarmed him, that he could not forbear entering
the Room; where he found the good 

Man in the Bed in a sweet composed Sleep,
and his Nurse snoring in the above-mentioned
hearty Manner, at the Bed's-Feet. 
He immediately took the only Method of
silencing this thorough Bass, whose Music
he feared might disturb Mr. Allworthy; and
then sitting down by the Nurse, he remained
motionless till Blifil and the Doctor
came in together, and waked the sick Man; 
in order that the Doctor might feel his
Pulse, and that the other might communicate
to him that Piece of News, which, had
Jones been apprized of it, would have had
great Difficulty of finding its Way to Mr.
Allworthy's Ear at such a Season. 
When he first heard Blifil tell his Uncle
this Story, Jones could hardly contain the
Wrath which kindled in him at the other's
Indiscretion, especially as the Doctor shook
his Head, and declared his Unwillingness
to have the Matter mentioned to his Patient. 
But as his Passion did not so far deprive him
of all Use of his Understanding, as to hide
from him the Consequences which any violent
Expressions towards Blifil might have
on the Sick, this Apprehension stilled his
Rage, at the present; and he grew afterwards
so satisfied with finding that this
News had, in fact, produced no Mischief, 

that he suffered his Anger to die in his
own Bosom, without ever mentioning it to
Blifil. 
The Physician dined that Day at Mr. Allworthy's; 
and having after Dinner visited
his Patient, he returned to the Company,
and told them, that he had now the Satisfaction
to say, with Assurance, that his Patient
was out of all Danger: That he had
brought his Fever to a perfect Intermission,
and doubted not by throwing in the Bark
to prevent its Return. 
This Account so pleased Jones, and threw
him into such immoderate Excess of Rapture,
that he might be truly laid to be
drunk with Joy. An Intoxication which
greatly forwards the Effects of Wine; and
as he was very free too with the Bottle on
this Occasion, (for he drank many Bumpers
to the Doctor's Health, as well as to
other Toasts,) he became very soon literally
drunk. 
Jones had naturally violent animal Spirits. 
These being set on Float, and augmented
by the Spirit of Wine, produced
most extravagant Effects. He kissed the
Doctor, and embraced him with the most 

passionate Endearments; swearing that, next
to Mr. Allworthy himself, he loved him
‘of all Men living.’ ‘Doctor,’ added he,
‘you deserve a Statue to be erected to you
at the public Expence, for having preserved
a Man, who is not only the Darling
of all good Men who know him, but
a Blessing to Society, the Glory of his
Country, and an Honour to Human Nature. 
D&wblank;n me if I don't love him better
than my own Soul.’ 
‘More shame for you,’ cries Thwackum. 
‘Though I think you have reason to love
him, for he hath provided very well for
you. And, perhaps, it might have been
better for some Folks, that he had not
lived to see just Reason of revoking his
Gist.’ 
Jones now, looking on Thwackum with
inconceivable Disdain, answered; ‘And
doth thy mean Soul imagine that any
such Considerations could weigh with me? 
No, let the Earth open and swallow her
own Dirt (if I had Millions of Acres I
would say it) rather than swallow up my
dear glorious Friend.’ 


Quis Desiderio sit Pudor aut modus
Tam chari Capitis? *  
The Doctor now interposed, and prevented
the Effects of a Wrath which was
kindling between Jones and Thwackum; after
which the former gave a Loose to Mirth,
sang two or three amorous Songs, and fell
into every frantic Disorder which unbridled
Joy is apt to inspire; but so far was he from
any Disposition to quarrel, that he was
ten times better humoured, if possible, than
when he was sober. 
To say Truth, nothing is more erroneous
than the common Observation, That
Men who are ill-natured and quarrelsome
when they are drunk, are very worthy Persons
when they are sober: For Drink, in
reality, doth not reverse Nature, or create
Passions in Men, which did not exist in
them before. It takes away the Guard of
Reason, and consequently forces us to produce
those Symptoms, which many, when 

sober, have Art enough to conceal. It
heightens and inflames our Passions (generally
indeed that Passion which is uppermost
in our Mind) so that the angry Temper,
the amorous, the generous, the good-humoured,
the avaricious, and all other
Dispositions of Men, are in their Cups
heightened and exposed. 
And yet as no Nation produces so many
drunken Quarrels, especially among the
lower People, as England; (for, indeed,
with them, to drink and to fight together
are almost synonimous Terms;) I would
not, methinks, have it thence concluded
that the English are the worst-natured People
alive. Perhaps the Love of Glory only
is at the Bottom of this; so that the fair Conclusion
seems to be, that our Countrymen have
more of that Love, and more of Bravery,
than any other Plebeians. And this the
rather, as there is seldom any thing ungenerous,
unfair, or ill-natured, exercised on
those Occasions: Nay, it is common for the
Combatants to express Good-will for each
other, even at the Time of the Conflict; 
and as their drunken Mirth generally ends
in a Battle, so do most of their Battles end
in Friendship. 

But to return to our History. Tho'
Jones had shewn no Design of giving Offence,
yet Mr. Blifil was highly offended at
a Behaviour which was so inconsistent with
the sober and prudent Reserve of his own
Temper. He bore it too with the greater
Impatience, as it appeared to him very indecent
at this Season; ‘when,’ as he said,
‘the House was a House of Mourning, on
the Account of his dear Mother; and if it
had pleased Heaven to give them some
Prospect of Mr. Allworthy's Recovery, it
would become them better to express the
Exultations of their Hearts in Thanksgiving
than in Drunkenness and Riots; which were
properer Methods to encrease the divine
Wrath, than to avert it.’ Thwackum, who
had swallowed more Liquor than Jones,
but without any ill Effect on his Brain, seconded
the pious Harangue of Blifil; but
Square, for Reasons which the Reader may
probably guess, was totally silent. 
Wine had not so totally overpowered
Jones, as to prevent his recollecting on  Mr.
Blifil's Loss, the Moment it was mentioned. 
As no Person, therefore, was more
ready to confess and condemn his own Errors,
he offered to shake Mr. Blifil by the 

Hand, and begged his Pardon, saying,
‘His excessive Joy for Mr. Allworthy's Recovery
had driven every other Thought out
of his Mind.’ 
Blifil scornfully rejected his Hand; and,
with much Indignation, answered, ‘It was
little to be wondered at, if tragical Spectacles
made no Impressions on the Blind; but,
for his Part, he had the Misfortune to
know who his Parents were, and consequently
must be affected with their Loss.’ 
Jones, who, notwithstanding his good
Humour, had some Mixture of the irascible
in his Constitution, leaped hastily from
his Chair, and catching hold of Blifil's Collar,
cried out, ‘D&wblank;n you for a Rascal,
do you insult me with the Misfortune of
my Birth?’ He accompanied these Words
with such rough Actions, that they soon got the better
of Mr. Blifil's peaceful Temper; 
and a Scuffle immediately ensued,
which might have produced Mischief, had
it not been prevented by the Interposition
of Thwackum and the Physician; for the
Philosophy of Square rendered him superior
to all Emotions, and he very calmly smoaked
his Pipe, as was his Custom in all Broils, 

unless when he apprehended some Danger
of having it broke in his Mouth. 
The Combatants being now prevented
from executing present Vengeance on each
other, betook themselves to the common
Resources of disappointed Rage, and vented
their Wrath in Threats and Defiance. In
this kind of Conflict, Fortune, which,
in the personal Attack, seemed to incline
to Jones, was now altogether as favourable
to his Enemy. 
A Truce, nevertheless, was at length
agreed on, by the Mediation of the neutral
Parties, and the whole Company again sat
down at the Table; where Jones being prevailed
on to ask Pardon, and Blifil to give
it, Peace was restored, and every thing
seemed in Statu quo. 
But though the Quarrel was, in all Appearance,
perfectly reconciled, the Good-humour
which had been interrupted by it,
was by no means restored. All Merriment was
now at an End, and the subsequent Discourse
consisted only of grave Relations of Matters
of Fact, and of as grave Observations upon
them. A Species of Conversation, in which,
though there is much of Dignity and Instruction, 

there is but little Entertainment. 
As we presume, therefore, only to convey
this last to the Reader, we shall pass by
whatever was said, till the rest of the Company
having, by Degrees, dropped off, left
Square and the Physician only together; at
which Time the Conversation was a little
heightened by some Comments on what had
happened between the two young Gentlemen; 
both of whom the Doctor declared to
be no better than Scoundrels; to which Appellation
the Philosopher, very sagaciously
shaking his Head, agreed. 



Shewing the Truth of many Observations of
Ovid, and of other more grave Writers,
who have proved, beyond Contradiction,
that Wine is often the Fore-runner of Incontinency. 
Jones retired from the Company,
in which we have seen him engaged,
into the Fields, where he intended to cool
himself by a Walk in the open Air, before
he attended Mr. Allworthy. There, whilst
he renewed those Meditations on his dear
Sophia, which the dangerous Illness of his 

Friend and Benefactor had for some time
interrupted, an Accident happened, which
with Sorrow we relate, and With Sorrow,
doubtless, will it be read; however, that
historic Truth to which we profess so inviolable
an Attachment, obliges us to communicate
it to Posterity. 
It was now a pleasant Evening in the
latter End of June, when our Heroe was
walking in a most delicious Grove, where
the gentle Breezes fanning the Leaves, together
with the sweet Trilling of a murmuring
Stream, and the melodious Notes
of Nightingales formed all together the
most enchanting Harmony. In this Scene,
so sweetly accommodated to Love, he meditated
on his dear Sophia. While his
wanton Fancy roved unbounded over all
her Beauties, and his lively Imagination
painted the charming Maid in various ravishing
Forms, his warm Heart melted
with Tenderness, and at length throwing
himself on the Ground by the Side of a
gently murmuring Brook, he broke forth
into the following Ejaculation. 
‘O Sophia, would Heaven give thee to
my Arms, how blest would be my Condition! 
Curst be that Fortune which sets 

a Distance between us. Was I but possessed
of thee, one only Suit of Rags thy
whole Estate, is there a Man on Earth
whom I would envy! How contemptible
would the brightest Circassian Beauty,
drest in all the Jewels of the Indies, appear
to my Eyes! But why do I mention
another Woman? could I think my
Eyes capable of looking at any other
with Tenderness, these Hands should
tear them from my Head. No, my
Sophia, if cruel Fortune separates us
for ever, my Soul shall doat on thee alone. 
The chastest Constancy will I ever
preserve to thy Image. Tho' I should
never have Possession of thy charming
Person, still shalt thou alone have Possession
of my Thoughts, my Love, my
Soul. Oh! my fond Heart is so wrapt
in that tender Bosom, that the brightest
Beauties would for me have no Charms,
nor would a Hermit be colder in their
Embraces. Sophia, Sophia alone shall be
mine. What Raptures are in that Name! 
I will engrave it on every Tree.’ 
At these Words he started up, and beheld
—not his Sophia—no, nor a Circassian
Maid richly and elegantly attired for
the Grand Signior's Seraglio. No; without 

a Gown, in a Shift that was somewhat
of the coarsest, and none of the cleanest,
bedewed likewise with some odoriferous
Effluvia, the Produce of the Day's Labour,
with a Pitch-fork in her Hand, Molly Seagrim
approached. Our Hero had his Pen-knife
in his Hand, which he had drawn for
the before-mentioned Purpose, of carving
on the Bark; when the Girl coming near
him cry'd out with a Smile, ‘You don't
intend to kill me,’ Squire, I hope!’ 
‘Why should you think I would kill you?’ 
answered Jones. ‘Nay,’ replied she, ‘after
your cruel Usage of me when I saw you
last, killing me would, perhaps, be too
great Kindness for me to expect.’ 
Here ensued a Parly, which, as I do not
think myself obliged to relate, I shall omit. 
It is sufficient that it lasted a full Quarter of
an Hour, at the Conclusion of which they
retired into the thickest Part of the Grove. 
Some of my Readers may be inclined to
think this Event unnatural. However, the
Fact is true; and, perhaps, may be sufficiently
accounted for, by suggesting that
Jones probably thought one Woman better
than none, and Molly as probably imagined
two Men to be better than one. Besides 

the before-mentioned Motive assigned to
the present Behaviour of Jones, the Reader
will be likewise pleased to recollect in his
Favour, that he was not at this Time perfect
Master of that wonderful Power of
Reason, which so well enables grave and
wise Men to subdue their unruly Passions,
and to decline any of these prohibited Amusements. 
Wine now had totally subdued
this Power in Jones. He was, indeed, in a
Condition, in which if Reason had interposed,
tho' only to advise, she might have
received the Answer which one Cleostratus
gave many Years ago to a silly Fellow,
who asked him if he was not ashamed to be
drunk? ‘Are not you,’ said Cleostratus,
‘ashamed to admonish a drunken Man?’ — 
To say the Truth, in a Court of Justice,
Drunkenness must not be an Excuse, yet in
a Court of Conscience it is greatly so; 
and therefore Aristotle, who commends the
Laws of Pittacus, by which drunken Men
received double Punishment for their Crimes,
allows there is more of Policy than Justice
in that Law. Now, if there are any Transgressions
pardonable from Drunkenness,
they are certainly such as Mr. Jones was
at present guilty of; on which Head I could
pour forth a vast Profusion of Learning,
if I imagined it would either entertain my 

Reader, or teach him any Thing more than
he knows already. For his Sake, therefore,
I shall keep my Learning to myself,
and return to my History. 
It hath been observed, that Fortune seldom
doth Things by Halves. To say
Truth, there is no End to her Freaks
whenever she is disposed to gratify or displease. 
No sooner had our Heroe retired
with his Dido, but 

Speluncam Blifil, Dux et Divinus eandem
Deveniunt.—
the Parson and the young 'Squire, who
were taking a serious Walk, arrived at the
Stile which leads into the Grove, and the
latter caught a View of the Lovers, just as
they were sinking out of Sight. 
Blifil knew Jones very well, tho' he was
at above a hundred Yards Distance, and he
was as positive to the Sex of his Companion,
tho' not to the individual Person. He
started; blessed himself, and uttered a
very solemn Ejaculation. 
Thwackum express'd some Surprize at
these sudden Emotions, and asked the 

Reason of them. To which Blifil answered,
‘he was certain he had seen a Fellow
and Wench retire together among the
Bushes, which he doubted not was with
some wicked Purpose.’ As to the Name
of Jones he thought proper to conceal it,
and why he did so must be left to the Judgment
of the sagacious Reader: For we never
chuse to assign Motives to the Actions of
Men, when there is any possibility of our
being mistaken. 
The Parson, who was not only strictly
chaste in his own Person; but a great Enemy
to the opposite Vice in all others, fired
at this Information. He desired Mr. Blifil
to conduct him immediately to the Place,
which as he approached, he breathed forth
Vengeance mixed with Lamentations; nor
did he refrain from casting some oblique
Reflections on Mr. Allworthy; insinuating
that the Wickedness of the Country was
principally owing to the Encouragement
he had given to Vice, by having exerted
such Kindness to a Bastard, and by having
mitigated that just and wholsome Rigour
of the Law, which allots a very severe
Punishment to loose Wenches. 

The Way, through which our Hunters
were to pass in Pursuit of their Game, was
so beset with Briars, that it greatly obstructed
their Walk, and caused, besides, such a
rustling that Jones had sufficient Warning
of their Arrival, before they could surprize
him; nay, indeed, so incapable was
Thwackum of concealing his Indignation,
and such Vengeance did he mutter forth
every Step he took, that this alone must
have abundantly satisfied Jones, that he was
(to use the Language of Sportsmen) found sitting. 



In which a Simile in Mr. Pope's Period of a
Mile, introduces as bloody a Battle as can
possibly be fought, without the Assistance of
of Steel or cold Iron. 
As in the Season of RUTTING
(an uncouth Phrase, by which the
Vulgar denote that gentle Dalliance, which
in the *   well-wooded Forest of Hampshire,
passes between Lovers of the Ferine Kind) 

if while the lofty crested Stag meditates
the amorous Sport, a Couple of Puppies,
or any other Beasts of hostile Note, should
wander so near the Temple of Venus Ferina,
that the fair Hind should shrink from the
Place, touched with that Somewhat, either
of Fear or Frolic, of Nicety or Skittishness,
with which Nature hath bedecked all Females,
or hath, at least, instructed them
how themselves to put on; lest, thro' the
Indelicacy of Males, the Samean Mysteries
should be pryed into by unhallowed Eyes: 
For at the Celebration of these Rites, the
female Priestess cries out with her in Virgil
(who was then probably hard at Work on
such Celebration) 

—Procul, O procul este, profani;
Proclamat Vates, totoque absistite Luco.
—Far hence be Souls prophane,
The Sibyl cry'd, and from the Grove abstain.
Dryden.
If, I say, while these sacred Rites, which
are in common to Genus omne Animantium,
are in Agitation between the Stag and his
Mistress, any hostile Beasts should venture
too near, on the first Hint given by the
frighted Hind, fierce and tremendous rushes
forth the Stag to the Entrance of the 

Thicket; there stands he Centinel over his
Love, stamps the Ground with his Foot,
and with his Horns brandished aloft in Air,
proudly provokes the apprehended Foe to
Combat. 
Thus, and more terrible, when he perceived
the Enemy's Approach, leap'd forth
our Heroe. Many a Step advanced he forwards,
in order to conceal the trembling
Hind, and, if possible, to secure her Retreat. 
And now Thwackum having first
darted some livid Lightning from his fiery
Eyes, began to thunder forth, ‘Fie upon
it! Fie upon it! Mr. Jones. Is it possible
you should be the Person!’ ‘You see,’ 
answered Jones, ‘it is possible I should be
here.’ ‘And who,’ said Thwackum, ‘is
that wicked Slut with you?’ ‘If I have
any wicked Slut with me,’ cries Jones,
it is possible I shall not let you know who
she is.’ ‘I command you to tell me
immediately,’ says Thwackum, ‘and I
would not have you imagine, young Man,
that your Age, tho' it hath somewhat
abridged the Purpose of Tuition, hath
totally taken away the Authority of the
Master. The Relation of the Master
and Scholar is indelible, as, indeed, all
other Relations are: For they all derive
their Original from Heaven. I would 

have you think yourself, therefore,
as much obliged to obey me now, as
when I taught you your first Rudiments.’ 
‘I believe you would,’ cries Jones, ‘but
that will not happen, unless you had the
same Birchen Argument to convince me.’ 
‘Then I must tell you plainly,’ said
Thwackum, ‘I am resolved to discover the
wicked Wretch.’ ‘And I must tell you
plainly,’ returned Jones, ‘I am resolved
you shall not.’ Thwackum then offered to
advance, and Jones laid hold of his Arms; 
which Mr. Blifil endeavoured to rescue, declaring
‘he would not see his old Master
insulted.’ 
Jones now finding himself engaged with
two, thought it necessary to rid himself of
one of his Antagonists as soon as possible. 
He, therefore, applied to the weakest first; 
and letting the Parson go, he directed a
Blow at the young 'Squire's Breast, which
luckily taking Place, reduced him to measure
his Length on the Ground. 
Thwackum was so intent on the Discovery,
that the Moment he found himself at Liberty,
he stept forward directly into the
Fern, without any great Consideration of
what might, in the mean Time, befal his
Friend; but he had advanced a very few 

Paces into the Thicket, before Jones having
defeated Blifil, overtook the Parson, and
dragged him backward by the Skirt of his
Coat. 
This Parson had been a Champion in his
Youth, and had won much Honour by his
Fist, both at School and at the University. 
He had now, indeed, for a great Number
of Years, declined the Practice of that noble
Art; yet was his Courage full as strong as
his Faith, and his Body no less strong than
either. He was moreover, as the Reader
may, perhaps, have conceived, somewhat
irascible in his Nature. When he looked
back, therefore, and saw his Friend stretched
out on the Ground, and sound himself
at the same Time so roughly handled by
one who had formerly been only passive
in all Conflicts between them, (a Circumstance
which highly aggravated the whole)
his Patience at length gave Way; he threw
himself into a Posture of Offence, and collecting
all his Force, attacked Jones in the
Front, with as much Impetuosity as he had
formerly attacked him in the Rear. 
Our Heroe received the Enemy's Attack
with the most undaunted Intrepidity, and
his Bosom resounded with the Blow. This 

he presently returned with no less Violence,
aiming likewise at the Parson's Breast; 
but he dextrously drove down the Fist
of Jones, so that it reached only his Belly,
where two Pounds of Beef and as many of
Pudding were then deposited, and whence
consequently no hollow Sound could proceed. 
Many lusty Blows, much more pleasant
as well as easy to have seen, than to read or
describe, were given on both Sides; at last
a violent Fall in which Jones had thrown
his Knees into Thwackum's Breast, so
weakened the latter, that Victory had been
no longer dubious, had not Blifil, who
had now recovered his Strength, again renewed
the Fight, and, by engaging with
Jones, given the Parson a Moment's Time
to shake his Ears, and to regain his Breath. 
And now both together attacked our
Heroe, whose Blows did not retain that
Force with which they had fallen at first; 
so weakened was he by his Combat with
Thwackum: For tho' the Pedagogue chose
rather to play Solos on the human Instrument,
and had been lately used to those
only, yet he still retained enough of his ancient
Knowledge to perform his Part very
well in a Duet. 

The Victory, according to modern Custom,
was like to be decided by Numbers,
when, on a sudden, a fourth Pair of Fists
appeared in the Battle, and immediately
paid their Compliments to the Parson; the
Owner of them, at the same Time, crying
out, ‘Are not you ashamed and be d&wblank;nd
to you, to fall two of you upon one?’ 
The Battle, which was of the Kind, that
for Distinction's Sake is called Royal, now
raged with the utmost Violence during a few
Minutes; till Blifil being a second Time laid
sprawling by Jones, Thwackum condescended
to apply for Quarter to his new Antagonist,
who was now found to be Mr. Western himself. 
For in the Heat of the Action none of
the Combatants had recognized him. 
In Fact, that honest 'Squire, happening
in his Afternoon's Walk with some Company,
to pass through the Field where the
bloody Battle was fought, and having concluded
from seeing three Men engaged,
that two of them must be on a Side, he
hastened from his Companions, and with
more Gallantry than Policy, espoused the
Cause of the weaker Party. By which generous
Proceeding, he very probably prevented 

Mr. Jones from becoming a Victim
to the Wrath of Thwackum, and to the pious
Friendship which Blifil bore his old Master: 
For besides the Disadvantage of such
Odds, Jones had not yet sufficiently recovered
the former Strength of his broken
Arm. This Reinforcement, however, soon
put an End to the Action, and Jones
with his Ally obtained the Victory. 



In which is seen a more moving Spectacle,
than all the Blood in the Bodies of
Thwackum and Blifil and of Twenty
other such, is capable of producing. 
The rest of Mr. Western's Company
were now come up, being just at the
Instant when the Action was over. These
were the honest Clergyman, whom we
have formerly seen at Mr. Western's Table,
Mrs. Western the Aunt of Sophia; and
lastly, the lovely Sophia herself. 
At this Time, the following was the
Aspect of the bloody Field. In one Place,
lay on the Ground, all pale and almost
breathless, the vanquished Blifil. Near him 

stood the Conqueror Jones, almost covered
with Blood, part of which was naturally his
own, and part had been lately the Property
of the Reverend Mr. Thwackum. In
a third Place stood the said Thwackum, like
King Porus, sullenly submitting to the
Conqueror. The last Figure in the Piece
was Western the Great, most gloriously forbearing
the vanquished Foe. 
Blifil, in whom there was little Sign of
Life, was at first the principal Object of the
Concern of every one, and particularly of
Mrs. Western, who had drawn from her
Pocket a Bottle of Hartshorn, and was
herself about to apply it to his Nostrils; 
when on a sudden the Attention of the
whole Company was diverted from poor
Blifil, whose Spirit, if it had any such Design,
might have now taken an Opportunity
of stealing off to the other World,
without any Ceremony. 
For now a more melancholy as more
lovely Object lay motionless before them. 
This was no other than the charming Sophia
herself, who, from the Sight of Blood,
or from Fear for her Father, or from some
other Reason, had fallen down in a Swoon,
before any one could get to her Assistance. 

Mrs. Western first saw her, and screamed. 
Immediately two or three Voices cried out,
‘Miss Western is dead’ Hartshorn, Water; 
every Remedy were called for, almost
at one and the same Instant. 
The Reader may remember, that in our
Description of this Grove, we mentioned
a murmuring Brook, which Brook did not
come there, as such gentle Streams flow
through vulgar Romances, with no other
Purpose than to murmur. No; Fortune
had decreed to enoble this little Brook with
a higher Honour than any of those which
wash the Plains of Arcadia, ever deserved. 
Jones was rubbing Blifil's Temples: For
he began to fear he had given him a Blow
too much, when the Words Miss Western
and Death rushed at once on his Ear. He
started up, left Blifil to his Fate, and flew
to Sophia, whom, while all the rest were
running against each other backward and
forward looking for Water in the dry
Paths, he caught up in his Arms, and then
ran away with her over the Field to the
Rivulet above-mentioned; where, plunging
himself into the Water, he contrived to besprinkle 

her Face, Head, and Neck very
plentifully. 
Happy was it for Sophia, that the same
Confusion which prevented her other
Friends from serving her, prevented them
likewise from obstructing Jones. He had
carried her half ways before they knew
what he was doing, and he had actually
restored her to Life before they reached
the Water-side: She stretched out her
Arms, opened her Eyes, and cried, ‘Oh,
Heavens!’ just as her Father, Aunt and
the Parson came up. 
Jones, who had hitherto held this lovely
Burthen in his Arms, now relinquished his
Hold; but gave her at the same Instant a
tender Caress, which, had her Senses been
then perfectly restored, could not have
escaped her Observation. As she expressed,
therefore no Displeasure at this Freedom,
we suppose she was not sufficiently recovered
from her Swoon at the Time. 
This tragical Scene was now converted
into a sudden Scene of Joy. In this, our
Heroe was, most certainly, the principal
Character: For as he probably felt more
extatic Delight in having saved Sophia, 

than she herself received from being saved; 
so neither were the Congratulations paid to
her, equal to what were conferred on Jones,
especially by Mr. Western himself, who,
after having once or twice embraced his
Daughter, fell to hugging and kissing
Jones. He called him the Preserver of Sophia,
and declared there was nothing, except
her, or his Estate, which he would
not give him; but upon Recollection, he
afterwards excepted his Fox-hounds, the
Chevalier, and Miss Slouch (for so he
called his favourite Mare). 
All Fears for Sophia being now removed,
Jones became the Object of the Squire's
Consideration. ‘Come, my Lad,’ says
Western, ‘D'off thy Quoat and wash thy
Feace: For att in a devilish Pickle, I
promise thee. Come, come, wash thyself,
and shat go Huome with me; and
wel zee to vind thee another Quoat.’ 
Jones immediately complied; threw off
his Coat, went down to the Water, and
washed both his Face and Bosom: For the
latter was as much exposed, and as bloody
as the former: But tho' the Water could
clear off the Blood, it could not remove the
black and blue Marks which Thwackum had 

imprinted on both his Face and Breast, and
which, being discerned by Sophia, drew
from her a Sigh, and a Look full of inexpressible
Tenderness. 
Jones receiv'd this full in his Eyes, and it
had infinitely a stronger Effect on him than
all the Contusions which he had received
before. An Effect, however, widely different; 
for so soft and balmy was it, that,
had all his former Blows been Stabs, it
would for some Minutes have prevented his
feeling their Smart. 
The Company now moved backwards,
and soon arrived where Thwackum had got
Mr. Blifil again on his Legs. Here we cannot
suppress a pious Wish, that all Quarrels
were to be decided by those Weapons only,
with which Nature, knowing what is
proper for us, hath supplied us; and that
cold Iron was to be used in digging no
Bowels, but those of the Earth. Then
would War, the Pastime of Monarchs, be
almost inoffensive, and Battles between
great Armies might be fought at the particular
Desire of several Ladies of Quality; 
who, together with the Kings themselves,
might be actual Spectators of the Conflict. 
Then might the Field be this Moment well 

strewed with human Carcasses, and the next,
the dead Men, or infinitely the greatest Part
of them, might get up, like Mr. Bayes's
Troops, and march off either at the Sound
of a Drum or Fiddle, as should be previously
agreed on. 
I would avoid, if possible, treating this
Matter ludicrously, lest grave Men and Politicians,
whom I know to be offended at a
Jest, may cry Pish at it; but, in reality,
might not a Battle be as well decided by
the greater Number of broken Heads,
bloody Noses, and black Eyes, as by the
greater Heaps of mangled and murdered
human Bodies? Might not Towns be contended
for in the same Manner? Indeed,
this may be thought too detrimental a
Scheme to the French Interest, since they
would thus lose the Advantage they have
over other Nations, in the Superiority of
their Engineers: But when I consider the
Gallantry and Generosity of that People, I
am persuaded they would never decline putting
themselves upon a Par with their Adversary; 
or, as the Phrase is, making themselves his Match. 
But such Reformations are rather to be
wished than hoped for; I shall content myself, 

therefore, with this short Hint, and return
to my Narrative. 
Western began now to enquire into the
original Rise of this Quarrel. To which
neither Blifil nor Jones gave any Answer; 
but Thwackum said surlily, ‘I believe,
the Cause is not far off; if you beat the
Bushes well you may find her.’ ‘Find
her!’ replied Western, ‘what, have you
been fighting for a Wench?’ ‘Ask the
Gentleman in his Wastecoat there,’ said
Thwackum, ‘he best knows.’ ‘Nay,
then,’ cries Western, ‘it is a Wench certainly
—Ah, Tom, Tom; thou art a liquorish
Dog—but come, Gentlemen, be
all Friends, and go home with me, and
make final Peace over a Bottle.’ ‘I ask
your Pardon, Sir,’ says Thwackum, ‘it
is no such slight Matter for a Man of my
Character to be thus injuriously treated,
and buffetted by a Boy; only because I
would have done my Duty, in endeavouring
to detect and bring to Justice a
wanton Harlot; but, indeed, the principal
Fault lies in Mr. Allworthy and yourself: 
For, if you put the Laws in Execution,
as you ought to do, you would soon
rid the Country of these Vermin.’ 

‘I would as soon rid the Country of Foxes,’ 
cries Western.’ ‘I think we ought to encourage
the recruiting those Numbers which
we are every Day losing in the War: But
where is she? —Prithee, Tom, shew me.’ 
He then began to beat about, in the same
Language, and in the same Manner, as if
he had been beating for a Hare, and at last
cried out, ‘Soho! Puss is not far off. 
Here's her Form, upon my Soul; I believe
I may cry stole away.’ And indeed
so he might, for he had now discovered the
Place whence the poor Girl had, at the Beginning
of the Fray, stolen away, upon as
many Feet as a Hare generally uses in travelling. 
Sophia now desired her Father to return
home; saying, she found herself
very faint, and apprehended a Relapse. 
The Squire immediately complied with
his Daughter's Request (for he was the
fondest of Parents). He earnestly endeavoured
to prevail with the whole Company
to go and sup with him; but Blifil and
Thwackum absolutely refused; the former
saying, There were more Reasons than he
could then mention, why he must decline
this Honour; and the latter declaring (perhaps 

rightly) that it was not proper for a
Person of his Function to be seen at any
Place in his present Condition. 
Jones was incapable of refusing the Pleasure
of being with his Sophia. So on he
marched with Squire Western and his Ladies,
the Parson bringing up the Rear. This
had, indeed, offered to tarry with his Brother
Thwackum, professing, his Regard for
the Cloth would not permit him to depart; 
but Thwackum would not accept the Favour,
and, with no great Civility, pushed him after
Mr. Western. 
Thus ended this bloody Fray; and thus
shall end the fifth Book of this History. 