


The strange and yet natural Escape
of our Hero. 
Our Hero having with wonderful
Resolution thrown himself headlong
into the Sea, as we have mentioned, was
miraculously within two Minutes after replaced
in his Boat; and this without the Assistance
of a Dolphin or Sea-Horse, or any
other Fish or Animal, who are always as
ready at Hand when a Poet or Historian
pleases to call for them to carry a Hero
through a Sea; as any Chairman at a Coffee-House
Door near St. James's, to convey 

a Beau over a Street, and preserve his
white Stockings. The Truth is, we do not
chuse to have any Recourse to Miracles,
from the strict Observance we pay to that
Rule of Horace, 

Nec Deus intersit nisi dignus vindice nodus.
The Meaning of which is, Do not bring
in a supernatural Agent when you can do
without him; and indeed, we are much
deeper read in natural than supernatural
Causes. We will therefore endeavour to account
for this extraordinary Event from the
former of these; and in doing this it will
be necessary to disclose some profound Secrets
to our Reader, extremely well worth
his knowing, and which may serve him to
account for many Occurrences of the Phænomenous
Kind which have lately appeared
in this our Hemisphere. 
Be it known then, that the Great Alma
Mater Nature, is of all other Females the
most obstinate, and tenacious of her Purpose. 
So true is that Observation, 


Naturam expellas furca licet, usque recurret.
Which I need not render in English, it being
to be found in a Book which most fine
Gentlemen read. Whatever Nature, therefore,
purposes to herself, she never suffers
any Reason, Design or Accident, to frustrate. 
Now, tho' it may seem to a shallow
Observer, that some Persons were designed
by Nature for no Use or Purpose
whatever; yet certain it is, that no Man
is born into the World without his particular
Allotment; viz. some to be Kings,
some Statesmen, some Embassadors, some
Bishops, some Generals, and so on. Of
these there be two Kinds, those to whom
Nature is so generous to give some Endowment,
qualifying them for the Parts she intends
them afterwards to act on this Stage; 
and those whom she uses as Instances of her
unlimited Power; and for whose Preferment
to such and such Stations, Solomon
himself could have invented no other Reason
than that Nature designed them so. 
These latter some great Philosophers have,
to shew them to be the Favourites of Nature, 

distinguished by the honourable Appellation
of Naturals. Indeed the true
Reason of the general Ignorance of Mankind
on this Head seems to be this; That
as Nature chuses to execute these her Purposes
by certain second Causes or Tools, and
as many of these second Causes seem so totally
foreign to her Design, the Wit of Man,
which like his Eye, sees best directly forward
and very little and imperfectly, what is
oblique, is not able to discern the End by the
Means. Thus, how a handsome Wife or
Daughter should contribute to execute her
original Designation of a General; or how
Flattery should denote a Judge, or Impiety
and Atheism, a Bishop, he is not capable of
comprehending. And indeed, we ourselves,
wise as we are, are forced to reason ab
effectu, and if we were asked what Nature
had intended such Men for, before she herself
had by the Event demonstrated her Purpose,
it is possible we might be sometimes
puzzled to declare; for it must be confessed,
that at first Sight, and to a Man uninspired,
great Fortitude of Mind with a vast Capacity
and Knowledge, might induce a Belief
in the Beholder, that such Endowments 

were by Nature designed for Power and
Honour rather than the reverse; whereas
daily Experience convinces us of the
contrary, and drives us as it were into the
Opinion I have here disclosed. 
Now, Nature having originally intended
our great Man for that final Exaltation,
which as it is the most proper and becoming
End of all great Men, it were heartily
to be wished they might all arrive at; 
would by no Means be diverted from her
Purpose. She therefore no sooner spied him
in the Water, then she softly whispered in
his Ear to attempt the Recovery of his
Boat; which Call he immediately obeyed,
and being a good Swimmer with great Facility
accomplished it. 
Thus we think this Passage in our History,
at first so greatly surprising, is very
naturally accounted for; and our Relation
rescued from the Prodigious which, tho' it
often occurs in Biography, is not to be encouraged
nor much commended on any
Occasion, unless when absolutely necessary
to prevent the History's being at an End. 

Secondly, We hope our Hero is justified from
that Imputation of want of Resolution,
which must be fatal to the Greatness of
his Character. 