


Containing the Days. 



An Invocation. 
Come, bright Love of Fame, inspire
my glowing Breast: Not thee
I call, who over swelling Tides of
Blood and Tears, dost bear the Heroe on to
Glory, while Sighs of Millions waft his
spreading Sails; but thee, fair, gentle 

Maid, whom Mnesis, happy Nymph, first on
the Banks of Hebrus didst produce. Thee,
whom Mæonia educated, whom Mantua
charm'd, and who, on that fair Hill which
overlooks the proud Metropolis of Britain,
sat, with thy Milton, sweetly tuning the Heroic
Lyre; fill my ravished Fancy with the
Hopes of charming Ages yet to come. Foretel
me that some tender Maid, whose Grandmother
is yet unborn, hereafter, when, under
the fictitious Name of Sophia, she reads the
real Worth which once existed in my Charlotte,
shall, from her sympathetic Breast, send
forth the heaving Sigh. Do thou teach me
not only to foresee, but to enjoy, nay, even
to feed on future Praise. Comfort me by
a solemn Assurance, that when the little
Parlour in which I sit at this Instant, shall
be reduced to a worse furnished Box, I
shall be read, with Honour, by those who
never knew nor saw me, and whom I shall
neither know nor see. 
And thou, much plumper Dame, whom
no airy Forms nor Phantoms of Imagination
cloathe: Whom the well-seasoned
Beef, and Pudding richly stained with
Plumbs delight. Thee, I call; of whom in
a Trachtchugt in some Dutch Canal the 

fat Ufrow Gelt, impregnated by a jolly
Merchant of Amsterdam, was delivered: In
Grubstreet-School didst thou suck in the
Elements of thy Erudition. Here hast
thou, in thy maturer Age, taught Poetry
to tickle not the Fancy, but the Pride of
the Patron. Comedy from thee learns a
grave and solemn Air; while Tragedy
storms loud, and rends th' affrighted Theatres
with its Thunder. To sooth thy wearied
Limbs in Slumber, Alderman History
tells his tedious Tale; and again to awaken
thee, Monsieur Romance performs
his surprizing Tricks of Dexterity. Nor
less thy well-fed Bookseller obeys thy Influence. 
By thy Advice the heavy, unread,
Folio Lump, which long had dozed on
the dusty Shelf, piece-mealed into Numbers,
runs nimbly through the Nation. 
Instructed by thee some Books, like Quacks,
impose on the World by promising Wonders; 
while others turn Beaus, and trust
all their Merits to a gilded Outside. Come,
thou jolly Substance, with thy shining Face,
keep back thy Inspiration, but hold forth
thy tempting Rewards; thy shining, chinking
Heap; thy quickly-convertible Bank-bill,
big with unseen Riches; thy often-varying
Stock; the warm, the comfortable House; 

and, lastly, a fair Portion of that bounteous
Mother, whose flowing Breasts yield redundant
Sustenance for all her numerous Offspring,
did not some too greedily and wantonly
drive their Brethren from the Teat. 
Come thou, and if I am too tasteless of thy
valuable Treasures, warm my Heart with
the transporting Thought of conveying
them to others. Tell me, that through
thy Bounty, the prattling Babes, whose innocent
Play hath often been interrupted by
my Labours, may one Time be amply rewarded
for them. 
And now this ill-yoked Pair, this lean
Shadow and this fat Substance, have
prompted me to write, whose Assistance
shall I invoke to direct my Pen? 
First, Genius; thou Gift of Heaven; 
without whose Aid, in vain we struggle against
the Stream of Nature. Thou, who
dost sow the generous Seeds which Art
nourishes, and brings to Perfection. Do
thou kindly take me by the Hand, and lead
me through all the Mazes, the winding Labyrinths
of Nature. Initiate me into all those
Mysteries which profane Eyes never beheld. 
Teach me, which to thee is no difficult Task, 

to know Mankind better than they know
themselves. Remove that Mist which dims
the Intellects of Mortals, and causes them
to adore Men for their Art, or to detest
them for their Cunning in deceiving others,
when they are, in reality, the Objects only
of Ridicule, for deceiving themselves. Strip
off the thin Disguise of Wisdom from Self-Conceit,
of Plenty from Avarice, and of
Glory from Ambition. Come thou, that
hast inspired thy Aristophanes, thy Lucian,
thy Cervantes, thy Rabelais, thy Moliere, thy
Shakespear, thy Swift, thy Marivaux, fill my
Pages with Humour; 'till Mankind learn
the Good-Nature to laugh only at the Follies
of others, and the Humility to grieve
at their own. 
And thou, almost the constant Attendant
on true Genius, Humanity, bring all
thy tender Sensations. If thou hast already
disposed of them all between thy Allen and
thy Lyttleton, steal them a little while from
their Bosoms. Not without these the tender
Scene is painted. From these alone proceed
the noble, disinterested Friendship, the
melting Love, the generous Sentiment, the
ardent Gratitude, the soft Compassion, the
candid Opinion; and all those strong Energies 

of a good Mind, which fill the moistened
Eyes with Tears, the glowing Cheeks
with Blood, and swell the Heart with Tides
of Grief, Joy and Benevolence. 
And thou, O Learning, (for without thy
Assistance nothing pure, nothing correct,
can Genius produce) do thou guide my
Pen. Thee, in thy favourite Fields, where
the limpid, gently rolling Thames washes
thy Etonian Banks, in early Youth I have
worshipped. To thee, at thy birchen Altar,
with true Spartan Devotion, I have
sacrificed my Blood. Come, then, and
from thy vast, luxuriant Stores, in long
Antiquity piled up, pour forth the rich Profusion. 
Open thy Mæonian and thy Mantuan
Coffers, with whatever else includes
thy Philosophic, thy Poetic, and thy Historical
Treasures, whether with Greek or Roman
Characters thou hast chosen to inscribe
the ponderous Chests: Give me a-while
that Key to all thy Treasures, which to thy
Warburton thou hast entrusted. 
Lastly, come Experience long conversant
with the Wise, the Good, the Learned,
and the Polite. Nor with them only, 

but with every Kind of Character, from
the Minister at his Levee, to the Bailiff in
his Spunging-House; from the Dutchess at
her Drum, to the Landlady behind her Bar. 
From thee only can the Manners of Mankind
be known; to which the recluse Pendant,
however great his Parts, or extensive
his Learning may be, hath ever been a
Stranger. 
Come all these, and more, if possible; 
for arduous is the Task I have undertaken: 
And without all your Assistance, will, I
find, be too heavy for me to support. But
if you all smile on my Labours, I hope still
to bring them to a happy Conclusion. 




What befel Mr. Jones on his Arrival in
London. 
The learned Dr. Misaubin used to
say, that the proper Direction to
him was, To Dr. Misaubin, in the World; 
intimating, that there were few People in
it to whom his great Reputation was not
known. And, perhaps, upon a very nice
Examination into the Matter, we shall find
that this Circumstance bears no inconsiderable
Part among the many Blessings of
Grandeur. 
The great Happiness of being known to
Posterity, with the Hopes of which we so
delighted ourselves in the preceding Chapter,
is the Portion of few. To have the
several Elements which compose our Names,
as Sydenham expresses it, repeated a thousand
Years hence, is a Gift beyond the
Power of Title and Wealth; and is scarce to
be purchased, unless by the Sword and the
Pen. But to avoid the scandalous Imputation,
while we yet live, of being one 

whom No-body knows, (a Scandal, by the
by, as old as the Days of Homer * ) will
always be the envied Portion of those, who
have a legal Title either to Honour or
Estate. 
From that Figure, therefore, which the
Irish Peer, who brought Sophia to Town,
hath already made in this History, the
Reader will conclude, doubtless, it must
have been an easy Matter to have discovered
his House in London, without knowing the
particular Street or Square which he inhabited,
since he must have been one whom
every Body knows. To say the Truth, so
it would have been to any of those Tradesmen
who are accustomed to attend the Regions
of the Great: For the Doors of the
Great are generally no less easy to find, than
it is difficult to get Entrance into them. But
Jones, as well as Partridge, was an entire
Stranger in London; and as he happened to
arrive first in a Quarter of the Town, the Inhabitants
of which have very little Intercourse
with the Housholders of Hanover or Grosvenor
Square, (for he entered through Grays-Inn
Lane) so he rambled about some Time,
before he could even find his Way to those 

happy Mansions, where Fortune segregates
from the Vulgar, those magnanimous Heroes,
the Descendants of ancient Britons, Saxons, or
Danes, whose Ancestors being born in better
Days, by sundry Kinds of Merit, have entailed
Riches and Honour on their Posterity. 
Jones being at length arrived at those terrestrial
Elysian Fields, would now soon have
discovered his Lordship's Mansion; but the
Peer unluckily quitted his former House
when he went for Ireland; and as he was
just entered into a new one, the Fame of
his Equipage had not yet sufficiently blazed
in the Neighbourhood: So that after a successless
Enquiry 'till the Clock had struck
Eleven, Jones, at last, yielded to the
Advice of Partridge, and retreated to the
Bull and Gate in Holborn, that being the
Inn where he had first alighted, and where
he retired to enjoy that Kind of Repose,
which usually attends Persons in his Circumstances. 
Early in the Morning he again set forth
in Pursuit of Sophia; and many a weary
Step he took to no better Purpose than before. 
At last, whether it was that Fortune
relented, or whether it was no longer in her
Power to disappoint him, he came into the 

very Street which was honoured by his Lordship's
Residence; and being directed to the
House, he gave one gentle Rap at the Door. 
The Porter, who, from the Modesty of
the Knock, had conceived no high Idea of
the Person approaching, conceived but little
better from the Appearance of Mr.
Jones, who was drest in a Suit of Fustian,
and had by his Side the Weapon formerly
purchased of the Serjeant; of which, tho'
the Blade might be composed of well-tempered
Steel, the Handle was composed only
of Brass, and that none of the brightest. 
When Jones, therefore, enquired after the
young Lady, who had come to Town with
his Lordship, this Fellow answered surlily,
‘That there were no Ladies there.’ Jones
then desired to see the Master of the House; 
but was informed that his Lordship would
see no Body that Morning. And upon
growing more pressing, the Porter said,
‘He had positive Orders to let no Person
in; but if you think proper,’ said he, ‘to
leave your Name, I will acquaint his
Lordship; and if you call another Time,
you shall know when he will see you.’ 

Jones now declared, ‘that he had very
particular Business with the young Lady,
and could not depart without seeing her.’ 
Upon which the Porter, with no very agreeable
Voice or Aspect, affirmed, ‘That
there was no young Lady in that House,
and,’ consequently, ‘none could he see;’ 
adding, ‘Sure you are the strangest Man
I ever met with; for you will not take an Answer.’ 
I have often thought, that by the particular
Description of Cerberus the Porter of
Hell, in the 6th Æneid, Virgil might possibly
intend to satyrize the Porters of the
great Men in his Time; the Picture, at
least, resembles those who have the Honour
to attend at the Doors of our great Men. 
The Porter in his Lodge, answers exactly
to Cerberus in his Den, and, like him, must
be appeased by a Sop, before Access can be
gained to his Master. Perhaps Jones might
have seen him in that Light, and have recollected
the Passage, where the Sybil, in
order to procure an Entrance for Æneas,
presents the Keeper of the Stygian Avenue
with such a Sop. Jones, in like Manner,
now began to offer a Bribe to the human
Cerberus, which a Footman overhearing, 

instantly advanced, and declared, ‘if Mr.
Jones would give him the Sum proposed,
he would conduct him to the Lady.’ Jones
instantly agreed, and was forthwith conducted
to the Lodging of Mrs. Fitzpatrick,
by the very Fellow who had attended the
Ladies thither the Day before. 
Nothing more aggravates ill Success than
the near Approach to Good. The Gamester,
who loses his Party at Piquet by a single
Point, laments his bad Luck ten Times
as much as he who never came within a
Prospect of the Game. So in a Lottery,
the Proprietors of the next Numbers to that
which wins the great Prize, are apt to account
themselves much more unfortunate than
their Fellow-Sufferers. In short, these kind
of hair-breadth Missings of Happiness, look
like the Insults of Fortune, who may be
considered as thus playing Tricks with us,
and wantonly diverting herself at our Expence. 
Jones, who more than once already had
experienced this frolicksome Disposition of
the Heathen Goddess, was now again
doomed to be tantalized in the like Manner: 
For he arrived at the Door of Mrs.
Fitzpatrick, about ten Minutes after the 

Departure of Sophia. He now addressed
himself to the Waiting-woman belonging
to Mrs. Fitzpatrick; who told him the disagreeable
News, that the Lady was gone,
but could not tell him whither; and the
same Answer he afterwards received from
Mrs. Fitzpatrick herself. For as that Lady
made no doubt but that Mr. Jones was a
Person detached from her Uncle Western,
in Pursuit of his Daughter, so she was too
generous to betray her. 
Though Jones had never seen Mrs. Fitzpatrick,
yet he had heard that a Cousin of
Sophia was married to a Gentleman of that
Name. This, however, in the present Tumult
of his Mind, never once recurred to
his Memory: But when the Footman, who
had conducted him from his Lordship's,
acquainted him with the great Intimacy between
the Ladies, and with their calling
each other Cousin, he then recollected the
Story of the Marriage which he had formerly
heard; and as he was presently convinced
that this was the same Woman, he
became more surprized at the Answer which
he had received, and very earnestly desired
Leave to wait on the Lady herself; but she
as positively refused him that Honour. 

Jones, who, though he had never seen a
Court, was better bred than most who frequent
it, was incapable of any rude or abrupt
Behaviour to a Lady. When he had
received, therefore, a peremptory Denial, he
retired for the present, saying to the waiting
Woman, ‘That if this was an improper
Hour to wait on her Lady, he would
return in the Afternoon; and that he then
hoped to have the Honour of seeing her.’ 
The Civility with which he uttered this, added
to the great Comeliness of his Person,
made an Impression on the Waiting-Woman,
and she could not help answering; 
‘Perhaps, Sir, you may:’ And, indeed, she
afterwards said every Thing to her Mistress,
which she thought most likely to prevail
on her to admit a Visit from the handsome
young Gentleman; for so she called
him. 
Jones very shrewdly suspected, that Sophia
herself was now with her Cousin, and
was denied to him; which he imputed to
her Resentment of what had happened at
Upton. Having, therefore, dispatched Partridge
to procure him Lodgings, he remained
all Day in the Street, watching the Door
where he thought his Angel lay concealed; 

but no Person did he see issue forth, except
a Servant of the House. And in the Evening
he returned to pay his Visit to Mrs.
Fitzpatrick, which that good Lady at last
condescended to admit. 
There is a certain Air of natural Gentility,
which it is neither in the Power of
Dress to give, nor to conceal. Mr. Jones,
as hath been before hinted, was possessed of
this in a very eminent Degree. He met,
therefore, with a Reception from the Lady,
somewhat different from what his Apparel
seemed to demand; and after he had paid
her his proper Respects, was desired to
sit down. 
The Reader will not, I believe, be desirous
of knowing all the Particulars of this
Conversation, which ended very little to the
Satisfaction of poor Jones. For though Mrs.
Fitzpatrick soon discovered the Lover, (as
all Women have the Eyes of Hawks in
those Matters yet she still thought it was
such a Lover, as a generous Friend of the
Lady should not betray her to. In short,
she suspected this was the very Mr. Blifil,
from whom Sophia had flown, and all the
Answers which she artfully drew from Jones,
concerning Mr. Allworthy's Family, confirmed 

her in this Opinion. She therefore
strictly denied any Knowledge concerning
the Place whither Sophia was gone; nor
could Jones obtain more than a Permission
to wait on her again the next Evening. 
When Jones was departed, Mrs. Fitzpatrick
communicated her Suspicion concerning
Mr. Blifil, to her Maid; who answered,
‘Sure, Madam, he is too pretty a
Man, in my Opinion, for any Woman in
the World to run away from. I had rather
fancy it is Mr. Jones.’ —Mr. Jones,’ 
said the Lady, ‘what Jones?’ For Sophia
had not given the least Hint of any such
Person in all their Conversation: But Mrs.
Honour had been much more communicative,
and had acquainted her Sister Abigail
with the whole History of Jones, which this
now again related to her Mistress. 
Mrs. Fitzpatrick no sooner received this
Information, than she immediately agreed
with the Opinion of her Maid; and, what
is very unaccountable, saw Charms in the
gallant, happy Lover, which she had overlooked
in the slighted Squire. ‘Betty,’ says
she, ‘you are certainly in the right: He
is a very pretty Fellow, and I don't wonder
that my Cousin's Maid should tell 

you so many Women are fond of him; 
I am sorry now I did not inform him
where my Cousin was: And yet if he be
so terrible a Rake as you tell me, it is a
Pity she should ever see him any more; 
for what but her Ruin can happen from
marrying a Rake and a Beggar against
her Father's Consent. I protest, if he be
such a Man as the Wench described him
to you, it is but an Office of Charity to
keep her from him; and, I am sure, it
would be unpardonable in me to do otherwise,
who have tasted so bitterly of the
Misfortunes attending such Marriages.’ 
Here she was interrupted by the Arrival
of a Visitor, which was no other than his
Lordship; and as nothing passed at this
Visit either new or extraordinary, or any
Ways material to this History, we shall here
put an End to this Chapter. 




A Project of Mrs. Fitzpatrick, and her Visit
to Lady Bellaston. 
When Mrs. Fitzpatrick retired to
Rest, her Thoughts were entirely
taken up by her Cousin Sophia and Mr.
Jones. She was, indeed, a little offended with
the former, for the Disingenuity which she
now discovered. In which Meditation she
had not long exercised her Imagination, before
the following Conceit suggested itself: 
That could she possibly become the Means
of preserving Sophia from this Man, and
of restoring her to her Father, she should,
in all human Probability, by so great a
Service to the Family, reconcile to herself
both her Uncle and her Aunt Western. 
As this was one of her most favourite
Wishes, so the Hope of Success seemed so
reasonable, that nothing remained but to
consider of proper Methods to accomplish
her Scheme. To attempt to reason the
Case with Sophia, did not appear to her one
of those Methods: For as Betty had reported
from Mrs. Honour, that Sophia had 

a violent Inclination to Jones, she conceived,
that to dissuade her from the Match,
was an Endeavour of the same Kind as it
would be, very heartily and earnestly to
entreat a Moth not to fly into a Candle. 
If the Reader will please to remember,
that the Acquaintance which Sophia had
with Lady Bellaston, was contracted at
the House of Mrs. Western, and must
have grown at the very Time when
Mrs. Fitzpatrick lived with this latter Lady,
he will want no Information, that Mrs.
Fitzpatrick must have been acquainted with
her likewise. They were, besides, both
equally her distant Relations. 
After much Consideration, therefore, she
resolved to go early in the Morning to
that Lady, and endeavour to see her, unknown
to Sophia, and to acquaint her with
the whole Affair. For she did not in the
least doubt, but that the prudent Lady,
who had often ridiculed romantic Love,
and indiscreet Marriages, in her Conversation,
would very readily concur in her
Sentiments concerning this Match, and
would lend her utmost Assistance to prevent
it. 

This Resolution she accordingly executed; 
and the next Morning before the
Sun, she huddled on her Cloaths, and at a
very unfashionable, unseasonable, unvisitable
Hour went to Lady Bellaston, to
whom she got Access, without the least
Knowledge or Suspicion of Sophia, who
though not asleep, lay at that Time awake
in her Bed, with Honour snoring by her
Side. 
Mrs. Fitzpatrick made many Apologies
for this early, abrupt Visit, at an Hour
‘when,’ she said, ‘she should not have
thought of disturbing her Ladyship, but
upon Business of the utmost Consequence.’ 
She then opened the whole Affair, told all
she had heard from Betty; and did not forget
the Visit which Jones had paid to herself
the preceding Evening. 
Lady Bellaston answered with a Smile,
‘Then you have seen this terrible Man,
Madam; pray is he so very fine a Figure
as he is represented? For Etoff entertained
me last Night almost two Hours with
him. The Wench I believe is in Love
with him by Reputation.’ Here the
Reader will be apt to wonder, but the 

Truth is that Mrs. Etoff who had the Honour
to pin and unpin the Lady Bellaston,
had received complete Information
concerning the said Mr. Jones, and had
faithfully conveyed the same to her Lady
last Night (or rather that Morning) while
she was undressing; on which Accounts he
had been detained in her Office above the
Space of an Hour and half. 
The Lady indeed, though generally well
enough pleased with the Narratives of Mrs.
Etoff at those Seasons, gave an extraordinary
Attention to her Account of Jones,
for Honour had described him as a very
handsome Fellow, and Mrs. Etoff in her
Hurry added so much to the Beauty of his
Person to her Report, that Lady Bellaston
began to conceive him to be a kind of Miracle
in Nature. 
The Curiosity which her Woman had
inspired, was now greatly increased by Mrs.
Fitzpatrick, who spoke as much in Favour
of the Person of Jones, as she had before
spoken in Dispraise of his Birth, Character
and Fortune. 
When Lady Bellaston had heard the
whole, she answered gravely, ‘Indeed 

Madam, this is a Matter of great Consequence. 
Nothing can certainly be more
commendable than the Part you act, and
I shall be very glad to have my Share in
the Preservation of a young Lady of so
much Merit, and for whom I have so
much Esteem.’ 
‘Doth not your Ladyship think, says
Mrs. Fitzpatrick eagerly, that it would
be the best Way to write immediately to
my Uncle, and acquaint him where my
Cousin is?’ 
The Lady pondered a little upon this, and
thus answered—‘Why, no, Madam, I think
not. Di Western hath described her Brother
to me to be such a Brute, that I cannot
consent to put any Woman under his
Power who hath escaped from it. I have
heard he behaved like a Monster to his
own Wife; for he is one of those Wretches
who think they have a Right to tyrannize
over us, and from such I shall ever
esteem it the Cause of my Sex to rescue
any Woman who is so unfortunate to be
under their Power. —The Business,
dear Cousin, will be only to keep Miss
Western from seeing this young Fellow,
till the good Company, which she will 

have an Opportunity of meeting here,
give her a properer Turn.’ 
‘If he should find her out, Madam,
answered the other, your Ladyship may
be assured he will leave nothing unattempted
to come at her.’ 
‘But Madam, replied the Lady, it is
impossible he should come here,—tho'
indeed it is possible he may get some Intelligence
where she is, and then may
lurk about the House. —I wish therefore
I knew his Person.’ 
‘Is there no Way, Madam, by which I
could have a Sight of him? For otherwise
you know, Cousin, she may contrive to
see him here without my Knowledge.’ Mrs.
Fitzpatrick answer'd, that he had threatened
her with another Visit that Afternoon, and
that if her Ladyship pleased to do her the
Honour of calling upon her then, she
would hardly fail of seeing him between
six and seven, and if he came earlier she
would, by some Means or other, detain
him till her Ladyship's Arrival.’ — 
Lady Bellaston replied, ‘she would come
the Moment she could get from Dinner,
which she supposed would be by seven at
farthest, for that it was absolutely necessary 

she should be acquainted with his Person. 
Upon my Word, Madam, says she, it was
very good to take this Care of Miss Western,
but common Humanity as well as Regard
to our Family requires it of us both, for
it would be a dreadful Match indeed.’ 
Mrs. Fitzpatrick failed not to make a
proper Return to the Compliment which
Lady Bellaston had bestow'd on her Cousin,
and after some little immaterial Conversation
withdrew, and getting as fast as she
could into her Chair unseen by Sophia or
Honour, returned home. 



Which consists of Visiting. 
Mr. Jones had walked within Sight
of a certain Door during the whole
Day, which, though one of the shortest,
appeared to him to be one of the longest
in the whole Year. At length the Clock
having struck five he returned to Mrs. Fitzpatrick,
who, though it was a full Hour
earlier than the decent Time of visiting,
receiv'd him very civilly; but still persisted
in her Ignorance concerning Sophia. 

Jones in asking for his Angel, had
drop'd the Word Cousin; upon which Mrs.
Fitzpatrick said, ‘Then, Sir, you know we are
related, and as we are, you will permit
me the Right of enquiring into the Particulars
of your Business with my Cousin.’ 
Here Jones hesitated a good while, and at
last answered, He had a considerable Sum of
Money of hers in his Hands, which he
desired to deliver to her. He then produced
the Pocket-book, and acquainted Mrs. Fitzpatrick
with the Content, and with the
Method in which they came into his Hands. 
He had scarce finished his Story when a
most violent Noise shook the whole House. 
To attempt to describe this Noise to those
who have heard it would be in vain, and
to aim at giving any Idea of it to those
who have never heard the like, would be
still more vain: For it may be truly said, 

——Non acuta
Sic geminant Corybantes Æra.
The Priests of Cybele do not so rattle their
sounding Brass. 
In short a Footman knocked, or rather
thundered at the Door. Jones was a little 

surprised at the Sound, having never heard
it before; but Mrs. Fitzpatrick very calmly
said, that as some Company were coming,
she could not make him any Answer now; 
but if he pleased to stay till they were gone,
she intimated she had something to say to
him. 
The Door of the Room now flew open,
and, after pushing in her Hoop sideways
before her, entered Lady Bellaston, who having
first made a very low Curtesy to Mrs.
Fitzpatrick, and as low a one to Mr. Jones,
was ushered to the upper End of the Room. 
We mention these minute Matters for
the Sake of some Country Ladies of our
Acquaintance, who think it contrary to the
Rules of Modesty to bend their Knees to a
Man. 
The Company were hardly well settled,
before the Arrival of the Peer lately mentioned
caused a fresh Disturbance and a
Repetition of Ceremonials. 
These being over, the Conversation began
to be (as the Phrase is) extremely brilliant. 
However, as nothing past in it which
can be thought material to this History, or, 

indeed, very material in itself, I shall omit
the Relation; the rather as I have known
some very fine polite Conversation grow
extreamly dull, when transcribed into
Books, or repeated on the Stage. Indeed
this mental Repast is a Dainty, of
which those who are excluded from polite
Assemblies, must be contented to remain as
ignorant as they must of the several Dainties
of French Cookery, which are only served
at the Tables of the Great. To say the
Truth, as neither of these are adapted to
every Taste, they might both be often
thrown away on the Vulgar. 
Poor Jones was rather a Spectator of this
elegant Scene, than an Actor in it; for
though in the short Interval before the
Peer's Arrival, Lady Bellaston first, and
afterwards Mrs. Fitzpatrick, had addressed
some of their Discourse to him; yet no
sooner was the noble Lord entered, than he
engrossed the whole Attention of the two
Ladies to himself; and as he took no more
Notice of Jones than if no such Person
had been present, unless by now and then
staring at him, the Ladies followed his
Example. 

The Company had now staid so long,
that Mrs. Fitzpatrick plainly perceived they
all designed to stay out each other. She
therefore resolved to rid herself of Jones, he
being the Visitant, to whom she thought
the least Ceremony was due. Taking
therefore an Opportunity of a Cessation of
Chat, she addressed herself gravely to him,
and said, ‘Sir, I shall not possibly be able
to give you an Answer To-night, as to
that Business; but if you please to leave
Word where I may send to you To-morrow’— 
Jones had natural, but not artificial good
Breeding. Instead therefore of communicating
the Secret of his Lodgings to a Servant,
he acquainted the Lady herself with
it particularly, and soon after very ceremoniously
withdrew. 
He was no sooner gone, than the great
Personages who had taken no Notice of
him present, began to take much Notice of
him in his Absence; but if the Reader hath
already excused us from relating the more
brilliant Part of this Conversation, he will
surely be very ready to excuse the Repetition
of what may be called vulgar Abuse: 

Though, perhaps, it may be material
to our History to mention an Observation
of Lady Bellaston, who took her Leave
in a few Minutes after him, and then said
to Mrs. Fitzpatrick, at her Departure. ‘I
am satisfied on the Account of my Cousin,
she can be in no Danger from this
Fellow.’ 
Our History shall follow the Example
of Lady Bellaston, and take Leave of the
present Company, which was now reduced
to two Persons; between whom, as nothing
passed, which in the least concerns
us or our Reader, we shall not suffer ourselves
to be diverted by it from Matters
which must seem of more Consequence to
all those who are at all interested in the Affairs
of our Heroe. 




An Adventure which happened to Mr. Jones,
at his Lodgings, with some Account of a
young Gentleman who lodged there, and of
the Mistress of the House, and her two
Daughters. 
The next Morning as early as it was
decent, Jones attended at Mrs. Fitzpatrick's
Door, where he was answered that
the Lady was not at Home; an Answer
which surprised him the more, as he had
walked backwards and forwards in the
Street from Break of Day; and if she had
gone out, he must have seen her. This
Answer, however, he was obliged to receive,
and not only now, but to five several
Visits which he made her that Day. 
To be plain with the Reader, the noble
Peer had from some Reason or other,
perhaps from a Regard for the Lady's Honour,
insisted that she should not see Mr.
Jones, whom he looked on as a Scrub, any
more; and the Lady had complied in
making that Promise to which we now see her
so strictly adhere. 

But as our gentle Reader may possibly
have a better Opinion of the young Gentleman
than her Ladyship, and may even
have some Concern, should it be apprehended,
that during this unhappy Separation
from Sophia, he took up his Residence either
at an Inn, or in the Street; we shall
now give an Account of his Lodging,
which was indeed in a very reputable
House, and in a very good Part of the
Town. 
Mr. Jones then had often heard Mr. Allworthy
mention the Gentlewoman at whose
House he used to lodge when he was in
Town. This Person, who as Jones likewise
knew, lived in Bond-Street, was the Widow
of a Clergyman, and was left by him at
his Decease, in Possession of two Daughters,
and of a compleat Set of Manuscript
Sermons. 
Of these two Daughters, Nancy, the elder,
was now arrived at the Age of seventeen,
and Betty, the younger, at that of
ten. 
Hither Jones had dispatched Partridge,
and in this House he was provided with a 

Room for himself in the second Floor, and
with one for Partridge in the fourth. 
The first Floor was inhabited by one of
those young Gentlemen, who, in the last
Age were called Men of Wit and Pleasure
about Town, and properly enough: 
For as Men are usually denominated from
their Business or Profession, so Pleasure may
be said to have been the only Business or
Profession of those Gentlemen to whom
Fortune had made all useful Occupations
unnecessary. Play-Houses, Coffee-Houses
and Taverns were the Scenes of their
Rendezvous. Wit and Humour were the
Entertainment of their looser Hours, and
Love was the Business of their more serious
Moments. Wine and the Muses conspired
to kindle the brightest Flames in
their Breasts; nor did they only admire,
but some were able to celebrate the Beauty
they admired, and all to judge of the Merit
of such Compositions. 
Such therefore were properly called the
Men of Wit and Pleasure; but I question
whether the same Appellation may, with
the same Propriety, be given to those young
Gentlemen of our Times, who have the 

same Ambition to be distinguished for Parts
Wit certainly they have nothing to do with. 
To give them their due, they soar a Step
higher than their Predecessors, and may be
called Men of Wisdom and Vertù (take
heed you do not read Virtue). Thus at
an Age when the Gentlemen abovementioned
employed their Time in toasting the
Charms of a Woman, or in making Sonnets
in her Praise; in giving their Opinion
of a Play at the Theatre, or of a Poem at
Will's or Button's; these Gentlemen are
considering of Methods to bribe a Corporation,
or meditating Speeches for the
House of Commons, or rather for the Magazines. 
But the Science of Gaming is
that which above all others employs their
Thoughts. These are the Studies of their
graver Hours, while for their Amusements
they have the vast Circle of Connoisseurship,
Painting, Music, Statuary, and natural
Philosophy, or rather unnatural,
which deals in the Wonderful, and knows
nothing of Nature, except her Monsters
and Imperfections. 
When Jones had spent the whole Day in
vain Enquiries after Mrs. Fitzpatrick, he returned
at last disconsolate to his Apartment. 
Here while he was venting his
Grief in private, he heard a violent Uproar 

below Stairs; and soon after a female Voice
begged him for Heaven's Sake to come and
prevent Murder. Jones, who was never backward
on any Occasion, to help the Distressed,
immediately ran down Stairs; when stepping
into the Dining-room, whence all the Noise
issued, he beheld the young Gentleman of
Wisdom and Vertù just before mentioned,
pinned close to the Wall by his Footman,
and a young Woman standing by, wringing
her Hands, and crying out, ‘He will be
murdered, he will be murdered;’ and indeed
the poor Gentleman seemed in some
Danger of being choaked, when Jones flew
hastily to his Assistance, and rescued him
just as he was breathing his last, from the
unmerciful Clutches of the Enemy. 
Though the Fellow had received several
Kicks and Cuffs from the little Gentleman,
who had more Spirit than Strength, he
had made it a kind of Scruple of Conscience
to strike his Master, and would have
contented himself with only choaking
him; but towards Jones he bore no such
Respect: He no sooner therefore found
himself a little roughly handled by his new
Antagonist, than he gave him one of those
Punches in the Guts, which, tho' the Spectators 

at Broughton's Amphitheatre have such
exquisite Delight in Seeing them, convey
but very little Pleasure in the Feeling. 
The lusty Youth had no sooner received
this Blow, than he meditated a most grateful
Return; and now ensued a Combat between
Jones and the Footman, which was
very fierce, but short; for this Fellow was
no more able to contend with Jones, than
his Master had before been to contend with
him. 
And now Fortune, according to her usual
Custom, reversed the Face of Affairs, the
former Victor lay breathless on the Ground,
and the vanquished Gentleman had recovered
Breath enough to thank Mr. Jones for
his seasonable Assistance: He received likewise
the hearty Thanks of the young Woman
present, who was indeed no other than
Miss Nancy, the eldest Daughter of the
House. 
The Footman having now recovered his
Legs, shook his Head at Jones, and with
a sagacious Look, cry'd,—O d&wblank;n me,
I'll have nothing more to do with you, you
have been upon the Stage, or I am d&wblank;nably
mistaken: And indeed we may forgive 

this his Suspicion; for such was the Agility
and Strength of our Heroe, that he was
perhaps a Match for one of the first Rate
Boxers, and could, with great Ease, have
beaten all the muffled *  Graduates of Mr.
Broughton's School. 
His Master foaming with Wrath, ordered
his Man immediately to strip, to which
the latter very readily agreed, on Condition
of receiving his Wages. This Condition
was presently complied with, and the
Fellow was discharged. 

And now the young Gentleman whose
Name was Nightingale, very strenuously insisted,
that his Deliverer should take Part
of a Bottle of Wine with him; to which
Jones, after much Entreaty, consented; 
tho' more out of complaisance than Inclination; 
for the Uneasiness of his Mind fitted
him very little for Conversation at this
Time. Miss Nancy likewise, who was the
only Female then in the House, her Mamma
and Sister being both gone to the Play,
condescended to favour them with her Company. 
When the Bottle and Glasses were on
the Table, the Gentleman began to relate
the Occasion of the preceding Disturbance. 
‘I hope, Sir, said he to Jones, you will
not, from this Accident, conclude, that
I make a Custom of striking my Servants; 
for I assure you this is the first
Time I have been guilty of it in my Remembrance,
and I have passed by many
provoking Faults in this very Fellow, before
he could provoke me to it; but when
you hear what hath happened this Evening,
you will, I believe, think me excuseable. 
I happened to come home several 

Hours before my usual Time, when
I found four Gentlemen of the Cloth at
Whisk by my Fire;—and my Hoyle, Sir,
—my best Hoyle, which cost me a Guinea,
lying open on the Table, with a Quantity
of Porter spilt on one of the most material
Leaves of the whole Book. This,
you will allow, was provoking; but I
said nothing till the rest of the honest
Company were gone, and then gave the
Fellow a gentle Rebuke, who, instead of
expressing any Concern, made me a pert
Answer, “That Servants must have their
Diversions as well as other People; that
he was sorry for the Accident which had
happened to the Book; but that several
of his Acquaintance had bought the
same for a Shilling; and that I might
stop as much in his Wages if I pleased:” 
I now gave him a severer Reprimand than
before, when the Rascal had the Insolence
to—In short he imputed my early
coming Home to—In short, he cast
a Reflection,—He mentioned the
Name of a young Lady, in a Manner
—In such a Manner that incensed me
beyond all Patience, and, in my Passion,
I struck him.’ 

Jones answered, ‘That he believed no
Person living would blame him; for my
Part, said he, I confess I should, on the
last mentioned Provocation, have done
the same Thing.’ 
Our Company had not sat long before
they were joined by the Mother and Daughter,
at their Return from the Play. And
now they all spent a very chearful Evening
together, for all but Jones were heartily merry,
and even he put on as much constrained
Mirth as possible. Indeed half his natural
Flow of animal Spirits, joined to the
Sweetness of his Temper, was sufficient to
make a most amiable Companion; and notwithstanding
the Heaviness of his Heart, so
agreeable did he make himself on the present
Occasion, that, at their breaking up, the
young Gentleman earnestly desired his further
Acquaintance. Miss Nancy was well
pleased with him; and the Widow, quite
charm'd with her new Lodger, invited him
with the other, next Morning to Breakfast. 
Jones, on his Part, was no less satisfied. 
As for Miss Nancy, tho' a very little Creature,
she was extremely pretty, and the Widow
had all the Charms which can adorn a Woman
near fifty. As she was one of the 

most innocent Creatures in the World, so
she was one of the most chearful. She never
thought, nor spoke, nor wished any ill, and
had constantly that Desire of pleasing, which
may be called the happiest of all Desires in
this, that it scarce ever fails of attaining its
Ends, when not disgraced by Affectation. 
In short, though her Power was very small,
she was in her Heart one of the warmest
Friends. She had been a most affectionate
Wife, and was a most fond and tender
Mother. 
As our History doth not, like a News-Paper,
give great Characters to People
who never were heard of before, nor
will ever be heard of again; the Reader
may hence conclude, that this excellent
Woman will hereafter appear to be of some
Importance in our History. 
Nor was Jones a little pleased with the
young Gentleman himself, whose Wine he
had been drinking. He thought he discerned
in him much good Sense, though a
little too much tainted with Town Foppery; 
but what recommended him most to Jones
were some Sentiments of great Generosity
and Humanity, which occasionally dropt
from him; and particularly many Expressions
of the highest Disinterestedness in the 

Affair of Love. On which Subject the young
Gentleman delivered himself in a Language
which might have very well become an Arcadian
Shepherd of Old, and which appeared
very extraordinary when proceeding from
the Lips of a modern fine Gentleman, but
he was only one by Imitation, and meant by
Nature for a much better Character. 



What arrived while the Company were at
Breakfast, with some Hints concerning the
Government of Daughters. 
Our Company brought together in
the Morning the same good Inclinations
towards each other, with which they
had separated the Evening before; but poor
Jones was extreme disconsolate; for he had
just received Information from Partridge,
that Mrs. Fitzpatrick had left her Lodging,
and that he could not learn whither she was
gone. This News highly afflicted him,
and his Countenance, as well as his Behaviour,
in Defiance of all his Endeavours
to the contrary, betrayed manifest Indications
of a disordered Mind. 
The Discourse turned at present, as before,
on Love; and Mr. Nightingale again
expressed many of those warm, generous, and
disinterested Sentiments upon this Subject,
which wise and sober Men call romantic 

but which wise and sober Women generally
regard in a better Light. Mrs. Miller,
(for so the Mistress of the House was called)
greatly approved these Sentiments; 
but when the young Gentleman appealed
to Miss Nancy, she answered only, ‘That she
believed the Gentleman who had spoke the
least, was capable of feeling the most.’ 
This Compliment was so apparently directed
to Jones, that we should have been
sorry had he passed it by unregarded. He
made her indeed a very polite Answer,
and concluded with an oblique Hint, that
her own Silence subjected her to a Suspicion
of the same Kind: For indeed she had
scarce opened her Lips either now, or the
last Evening. 
‘I am glad, Nanny, says Mrs. Miller,
the Gentleman hath made the Observation; 
I protest I am almost of his Opinion. 
What can be the Matter with you,
Child? I never saw such an Alteration. What
is become of all your Gayety? Would
you think, Sir, I used to call her my
little Prattler. She hath not spoke twenty
Words this Week.’ 
Here their Conversation was interrupted
by the Entrance of a Maid-Servant, who 

brought a Bundle in her Hands, which,
she said, ‘was delivered by a Porter for
Mr. Jones.’ She added, ‘that the Man
immediately went away, saying, it required
no Answer.’ 
Jones expressed some Surprize on this Occasion,
and declared it must be some Mistake: But the Maid persisting that she was
certain of the Name, all the Women were
desirous of having the Bundle immediately
opened; which Operation was at length
performed by little Betsy, with the Consent of
Mr. Jones; and the Contents were found
to be a Domino, a Mask, and a Masquerade
Ticket. 
Jones was now more positive than ever,
in asserting, that these Things must have
been delivered by Mistake; and Mrs. Miller
herself expressed some Doubt, and said,
‘she knew not what to think.’ But when
Mr. Nightingale was asked, he delivered a
very different Opinion. ‘All I can conclude
from it, Sir,’ said he, ‘is, that you
are a very happy Man: For I make no
doubt but these were sent you by some
Lady whom you will have the Happiness
of meeting at the Masquerade.’ 

Jones had not a sufficient Degree of Vanity
to entertain any such flattering Imagination; 
nor did Mrs. Miller herself give
much Assent to what Mr. Nightingale had
said, 'till Miss Nancy having listed up the
Domino, a Card dropt from the Sleeve, in
which was written as follows: 

To Mr. Jones.

The Queen of the Fairies sends you this,
Use her Favours not amiss.
Mrs. Miller and Miss Nancy now both agreed
with Mr. Nightingale; nay, Jones
himself was almost persuaded to be of the
same Opinion. And as no other Lady but
Mrs. Fitzpatrick, he thought, knew his
Lodging, he began to flatter himself with
some Hopes, that it came from her, and
that he might possibly see his Sophia. These
Hopes had surely very little Foundation; but
as the Conduct of Mrs. Fitzpatrick, in not
seeing him according to her Promise, and
in quitting her Lodgings, had been very
odd and unaccountable, he conceived some
faint Hopes, that she (of whom he had
formerly heard a very whimsical Character)
might possibly intend to do him that Service, 

in a strange Manner, which she declined
doing by more ordinary Methods. 
To say the Truth, as nothing certain could
be concluded from so odd and uncommon
an Incident, he had the greater Latitude
to draw what imaginary Conclusions from
it he pleased. As his Temper therefore
was naturally sanguine, he indulged it on
this Occasion, and his Imagination worked
up a thousand Conceits, to favour and support
his Expectations of meeting his dear
Sophia in the Evening. 
Reader, if thou hast any good Wishes
towards me, I will fully repay them, by
wishing thee to be possessed of this sanguine
Disposition of Mind: Since, after having
read much, and considered long on that
Subject of Happiness which hath employed
so many great Pens, I am almost inclined
to fix it in the Possession of this Temper; 
which puts us, in a Manner, out of the
Reach of Fortune, and makes us happy
without her Assistance. Indeed the Sensations
of Pleasure it gives are much
more constant, as well as much keener
than those which that blind Lady bestows; 
Nature having wisely contrived, that some
Satiety and Languor should be annexed to
all our real Enjoyments, lest we should be 

so taken up by them, as to be stopt from
further Pursuits. I make no Manner of
doubt but that, in this Light, we may see
the imaginary future Chancellor just called
to the Bar, the Archbishop in Crape, and
the Prime-Minister at the Tail of an Opposition,
more truly happy than those who
are invested with all the Power and Profit
of these respective Offices. 
Mr. Jones having now determined to
go to the Masquerade that Evening, Mr.
Nightingale offered to conduct him thither. 
The young Gentleman, at the same Time,
offered Tickets to Miss Nancy and her Mother; 
but the good Woman would not accept
them. She said, ‘She did not conceive
the Harm which some People imagined
in a Masquerade; but that such extravagant
Diversions were only proper
for Persons of Quality and Fortune, and
not for young Women who were to get
their Living, and could, at best, hope to
be married to a good Tradesman.’ —‘A
Tradesman!’ cries Nightingale, you shan't
undervalue my Nancy. There is not a
Nobleman upon Earth above her Merit.’ 
‘O fie! Mr. Nightingale,’ answered Mrs.
Miller, ‘you must not fill the Girl's Head
with such Fancies: But if it was her good 

Luck (says the Mother with a Simper)
to find a Gentleman of your generous
Way of thinking, I hope she would
make a better Return to his Generosity,
than to give her Mind up to extravagant
Pleasures. Indeed where young Ladies
bring great Fortunes themselves, they
have some Right to insist on spending
what is their own; and on that Account,
I have heard the Gentlemen say, a Man has
sometimes a better Bargain with a poor
Wife, than with a rich one. —But let
my Daughters marry whom they will,
I shall endeavour to make them Blessings
to their Husbands: —I beg, therefore, I
may hear of no more Masquerades. Nancy
is, I am certain, too good a Girl to desire
to go; for she must remember when
you carried her thither last Year, it almost
turned her Head; and she did not return
to herself, or to her Needle, in a
Month afterwards.’ 
Though a gentle Sigh which stole from
the Bosom of Nancy, seemed to argue some
secret Disapprobation of these Sentiments,
she did not dare openly to oppose them. 
For as this good Woman had all the Tenderness,
so she had preserved all the Authority
of a Parent; and as her Indulgence to 

the Desires of her Children, was only restrained,
by her Fears for their Safety and
future Welfare, so she never suffered those
Commands, which proceeded from such
Fears, to be either disobeyed or disputed. 
And this the young Gentleman who had
lodged two Years in the House, knew so
well, that he presently acquiesced in the
Refusal. 
Mr. Nightingale, who grew every Minute
fonder of Jones, was very desirous of
his Company that Day to Dinner at the
Tavern, where he offered to introduce him
to some of his Acquaintance; but Jones
begged to be excused, ‘as his Cloaths,’ he
said, ‘were not yet come to Town.’ 
To confess the Truth, Mr. Jones was
now in a Situation, which sometimes happens
to be the Case of young Gentlemen of
much better Figure than himself. In short,
he had not one Penny in his Pocket; a
Situation in much greater Credit among the
ancient Philosophers, than among the modern
wise Men who live in Lombard Street,
or those who frequent White's Chocolate-House. 
And, perhaps, the great Honours
which those Philosophers have ascribed
to an empty Pocket, may be one of the 

Reasons of that high Contempt in which
they are held in the aforesaid Street and
Chocolate-House. 
Now if the antient Opinion, that Men
might live very comfortably on Virtue only,
be, as the modern wise Men just above-mentioned
pretend to have discovered, a notorious
Error; no less false is, I apprehend,
that Position of some Writers of Romance,
that a Man can live altogether on Love: 
For however delicious Repasts this may afford
to some of our Senses or Appetites,
it is most certain it can afford none to others. 
Those, therefore, who have placed
too great a Confidence in such Writers,
have experienced their Error when it was
too late; and have found that Love was no
more capable of allaying Hunger, than a
Rose is capable of delighting the Ear, or a
Violin of gratifying the Smell. 
Notwithstanding, therefore, all the Delicacies
which Love had set before him,
namely, the Hopes of seeing Sophia at the
Masquerade; on which, however ill-founded
his Imagination might be, he had voluptuously
feasted during the whole Day, the Evening
no sooner came, than Mr. Jones began
to languish for some Food of a grosser 

Kind. Partridge discovered this by Inuition,
and took the Occasion to give some oblique
Hints concerning the Bank-bill, and when
those were rejected with Disdain, he collected
Courage enough once more to mention
a Return to Mr. Allworthy. 
‘Partridge,’ cries Jones, ‘you cannot
see my Fortune in a more desperate Light
than I see it myself; and I begin heartily
to repent, that I suffered you to leave a
Place, where you was settled, and to follow
me. However, I insist now on your
returning Home; and for the Expence
and Trouble which you have so kindly
put yourself to on my Account, all the
Cloaths I left behind in your Care, I desire
you would take as your own. I am
sorry I can make you no other Acknowledgment.’ 
He spoke these Words with so pathetic
an Accent, that Partridge, among whose
Vices Ill-Nature or Hardness of Heart were
not numbered, burst into Tears; and after
swearing he would not quit him in his Distress,
he began with the most earnest Intreaties
to urge his return Home. ‘For
Heavens Sake, Sir,’ says he, do but consider: 
What can your Honour do? How 

is it possible you can live in this Town
without Money? Do what you will, Sir,
or go wherever you please, I am resolved
not to desert you. —But pray, Sir, consider,
—Do pray, Sir, for your own
Sake, take it into your Consideration; 
and I'm sure,’ says he, ‘that your own
Good-Sense will bid you return Home.’ 
‘How often shall I tell thee,’ answered
Jones, ‘that I have no Home to return to. 
Had I any Hopes that Mr. Allworthy's
Doors would be open to receive me, I
want no Distress to urge me: —Nay,
there is no other Cause upon Earth, which
could detain me a Moment from flying to
his Presence, but, alas! that I am for
ever banished from it. His last Words
were,—O Partridge, they still ring in
my Ears—His last Words were, when he
gave me a Sum of Money, what it was
I know not, but considerable I'm sure it
was. —His last Words were—“I am
resolved from this Day forward, on no
Account, to converse with you any
more.” 
Here Passion stopt the Mouth of Jones; 
as Surprize, for a Moment, did that of
Partridge: But he soon recovered the Use 

of Speech, and after a short Preface, in
which he declared he had no Inquisitiveness
in his Temper, enquired, what Jones meant
by a considerable Sum; he knew not how
much; and what was become of the Money? 
In both these Points he now received full
Satisfaction; on which he was proceeding to
comment, when he was interrupted by a
Message from Mr. Nightingale, who desired
his Master's Company in his Apartment. 
When the two Gentlemen were both attired
for the Masquerade, and Mr. Nightingale
had given Orders for Chairs to be sent for,
a Circumstance of Distress occurred to Jones,
which will appear very ridiculous to many
of my Readers. This was how to procure
a Shilling; but if such Readers will
reflect a little on what they have themselves
felt from the Want of a thousand Pound,
or, perhaps, of ten or twenty, to execute a
favourite Scheme, they will have a perfect
Idea of what Mr. Jones felt on this Occasion. 
For this Sum, therefore, he applied
to Partridge, which was the first he had
permitted him to advance, and was the last
he intended that poor Fellow should advance
in his Service. To say the Truth, 

Partridge had lately made no Offer of this
Kind; whether it was that he desired to see
the Bank-bill broke in upon, or that Distress
should prevail on Jones to return
Home, or from what other Motive it proceeded,
I will not determine. 



Containing the whole Humours of a Masquerade. 
Our Cavaliers now arrived at that
Temple, where Heydegger, the great
Arbiter Deliciarum, the great High-Priest
of Pleasure presides; and, like other Heathen
Priests, imposes on his Votaries by
the pretended Presence of the Deity, when
in reality no such Deity is there. 
Mr. Nightingale having taken a Turn or
two with his Companion, soon left him,
and walked off with a Female, saying,
‘Now you are here, Sir, you must beat
about for your own Game.’ 
Jones began to entertain strong Hopes
that his Sophia was present; and these
Hopes gave him more Spirits than the 

Lights, the Music, and the Company; 
though these are pretty strong Antidotes against
the Spleen. He now accosted every
Woman he saw, whose Stature, Shape, or
Air, bore any Resemblance to his Angel. 
To all of whom he endeavoured to say
something smart, in order to engage an
Answer, by which he might discover that
Voice which he thought it impossible he
should mistake. Some of these answered
by a Question, in a squeaking Voice, Do
you know me? Much the greater Numbers
said, I don't know you, Sir; and nothing
more. Some called him an impertinent
Fellow; some made him no Answer at
all; some said, Indeed I don't know your
Voice, and I shall have nothing to say to
you; and many gave him as kind Answers
as he could wish, but not in the Voice
he desired to hear. 
Whilst he was talking with one of these
last, (who was in the Habit of a Shepherdess)
a Lady in a Domino came up to
him, and slapping him on the Shoulder,
whispered him, at the same Time, in the
Ear, ‘If you talk any longer with that
Trollop, I will acquaint Miss Western.’ 

Jones no sooner heard that Name, than,
immediately quitting his former Companion,
he applied to the Domino, begging
and entreating her to shew him the Lady
she had mentioned, if she was then in the
Room. 
The Mask walked hastily to the upper
End of the innermost Apartment before she
spoke, and then, instead of answering him,
sat down, and declared she was tired. Jones
sat down by her, and still persisted in his
Entreaties; at last the Lady coldly answered,
‘I imagined Mr. Jones had been a
more discerning Lover, than to suffer any
Disguise to conceal his Mistress from
him.’ ‘Is she here then, Madam?’ replied
Jones, with much Vehemence. Upon
which the Lady cry'd,—‘Hush, Sir,
you will be observed. —I promise you,
upon my Honour, Miss Western is not
here.’ 
Jones now taking the Mask by the Hand,
sell to entreating her in the most earnest
Manner, to acquaint him where he might
find Sophia: And when he could obtain no
direct Answer, he began to upbraid her
gently for having disappointed him the Day 

before; and concluded, saying, ‘Indeed,
my good Fairy Queen, I know your Majesty
very well, notwithstanding the affected
Disguise of your Voice. Indeed,
Mrs. Fitzpatrick, it is a little cruel to divert
yourself at the Expence of my Torments.’ 
The Mask answered, ‘Though you have
so ingeniously discovered me, I must still
speak in the same Voice, lest I should
be known by others. And do you think,
good Sir, that I have no greater Regard
for my Cousin, than to assist in carrying
on an Affair between you two, which
must end in her Ruin, as well as your own? 
Besides, I promise you, my Cousin is not
mad enough to consent to her own Destruction,
if you are so much her Enemy
as to tempt her to it.’ 
‘Alas, Madam, said Jones, you little
know my Heart, when you call me an
Enemy of Sophia.’ 
‘And yet to ruin any one, cries the other,
you will allow, is the Act of an
Enemy; and when by the same Act you
must knowingly and certainly bring Ruin
on yourself, is it not Folly or Madness, 

as well as Guilt? Now, Sir, my Cousin
hath very little more than her Father
will please to give her; very little for one
of her Fashion,—you know him, and
you know your own Situation.’ 
Jones vowed he had no such Design on
Sophia, ‘That he would rather suffer the
most violent of Deaths than sacrifice her
Interest to his Desires. He said, he knew
how unworthy he was of her every Way; 
that he had long ago resolved to quit all
such aspiring Thoughts, but that some
strange Accidents had made him desirous
to see her once more, when he promised
he would take Leave of her for ever. No,
Madam, concluded he, my Love is not
of that base Kind which seeks its own
Satisfaction, at the Expence of what is
most dear to its Object. I would sacrifice
every Thing to the Possession of my
Sophia, but Sophia herself.’ 
Though the Reader may have already
conceived no very sublime Idea of the
Virtue of the Lady in the Mask; and tho'
possibly she may hereafter appear not to
deserve one of the first Characters of her
Sex; yet, it is certain, these generous Sentiments
made a strong Impression upon her, 

and greatly added to the Affection she had
before conceived for our young Heroe. 
The Lady now, after a Silence of a few
Moments, said, ‘She did not see his
Pretensions to Sophia so much in the
Light of Presumption, as of Imprudence. 
Young Fellows, says she, can never
have too aspiring Thoughts. I love
Ambition in a young Man, and I would
have you cultivate it as much as possible. 
Perhaps you may succeed with those
who are infinitely superior in Fortune,
nay, I am convinced there are Women,
—but don't you think me a strange
Creature, Mr. Jones, to be thus giving
Advice to a Man, with whom I am so
little acquainted, and one with whose
Behaviour to me I have so little Reason
to be pleased?’ 
Here Jones began to apologize, and
to hope he had not offended in any thing
he had said of her Cousin. —To which
the Mask answered, ‘And are you so
little versed in the Sex, to imagine you
can well affront a Lady more, than by
entertaining her with your Passion for another
Woman? If the Fairy Queen had 

had no better Opinion of your Gallantry,
she would scarce have appointed you to
meet her at a Masquerade.’ 
Jones had never less Inclination to an Amour
than at present; but Gallantry to the
Ladies was among his Principles of Honour; 
and he held it as much incumbent on him
to accept a Challenge to Love, as if it
had been a Challenge to Fight. Nay, his
very Love to Sophia made it necessary for
him to keep well with the Lady, as he made
no doubt but she was capable of bringing
him into the Presence of the other. 
He began therefore to make a very
warm Answer to her last Speech, when a
Mask, in the Character of an old Woman,
joined them. This Mask was one of those
Ladies who go to a Masquerade only to
vent Ill-nature, by telling People rude
Truths, and by endeavouring, as the Phrase
is, to spoil as much Sport as they are able. 
This good Lady therefore, having observed
Jones, and his Friend, whom she well
knew, in close Consultation together in a
Corner of the Room, concluded she could
no where satisfy her Spleen better than by
interrupting them. She attacked them
therefore, and soon drove them from their 

Retirement; nor was she contented with
this, but pursued them to every Place
which they shifted to avoid her; till Mr.
Nightingale seeing the Distress of his Friend,
at last relieved him, and engaged the old
Woman in another Pursuit. 
While Jones and his Mask were walking
together about the Room, to rid themselves
of the Teazer, he observed his Lady speak
to several Masks, with the same Freedom
of Acquaintance as if they had been barefaced. 
He could not help expressing his
Surprise at this, saying, ‘Sure, Madam,
you must have infinite Discernment to
know People in all Disguises.’ To which
the Lady answered, ‘You cannot conceive
any Thing more insipid and childish than
a Masquerade to the People of Fashion,
who in general know one another as well
here, as when they meet in an Assembly
or a Drawing-room; nor will any Woman
of Condition converse with a Person
with whom she is not acquainted. In
short, the Generality of Persons whom
you see here, may more properly be
said to kill Time in this Place, than in
any other; and generally retire from
hence more tired than from the longest
Sermon. To say the Truth, I begin to 

be in that Situation myself, and if I have
any Faculty at guessing, you are not
much better pleased. I protest it would
be almost Charity in me to go Home for
your Sake.’ ‘I know but one Charity equal
to it, cries Jones, and that is to suffer
me to wait on you Home. Sure, answered
the Lady, you have a strange Opinion
of me, to imagine, that upon such
an Acquaintance, I would let you into my
Doors at this Time o'Night. I fancy
you impute the Friendship I have shewn
my Cousin, to some other Motive. Confess
honestly; don't you consider this
contrived Interview as little better than a
downright Assignation? Are you used,
Mr. Jones, to make these sudden Conquests? 
I am not used, Madam, said Jones,
to submit to such sudden Conquests; 
but as you have taken my Heart by
Surprize, the rest of my Body hath
a Right to follow; so you must pardon
me if I resolve to attend you
wherever you go.’ He accompanied
these Words with some proper Actions; 
upon which the Lady, after a gentle Rebuke,
and saying their Familiarity would
be observed, told him ‘She was going to
sup with an Acquaintance, whither she 

hoped he would not follow her; for if
you should, said she, I shall be thought
an unaccountable Creature, though my
Friend indeed is not censorious, yet I
hope you won't follow me: I protest I
shall not know what to say, if you do.’ 
The Lady presently after quitted the
Masquerade, and Jones, notwithstanding
the severe Prohibition he had received, presumed
to attend her. He was now reduced
to the same Dilemma we have mentioned
before, namely, the Want of a Shilling,
and could not relieve it by borrowing as
before. He therefore walked boldly on after
the Chair in which his Lady rode,
pursued by a grand Huzza from all the
Chairmen present, who wisely take the best
Care they can to discountenance all walking
afoot by their Betters. Luckily however
the Gentry who attend at the Opera-House
were too busy to quit their Stations,
and as the Lateness of the Hour prevented
him from meeting many of their
Brethren in the Street, he proceeded without
Molestation, in a Dress, which, at another
Season, would have certainly raised
a Mob at his Heels. 

The Lady was set down in a Street, not
far from Hanover-Square, where the Door
being presently opened, she was carried in,
and the Gentleman, without any Ceremony,
walked in after her. 
Jones and his Companion were now together
in a very well-furnished and well-warm'd
Room, when the Female still
speaking in her Masquerade Voice, said,
she was surprized at her Friend, who must
absolutely have forgot her Appointment; 
at which after venting much Resentment,
she suddenly exprest some Apprehension
from Jones, and asked him what the World
would think of their having been alone
together in a House at that Time of Night? 
But instead of a direct Answer to so important
a Question, Jones began to be very
importunate with the Lady to unmask, and
at length having prevailed, there appeared
not Mrs. Fitzpatrick, but the Lady Bellaston
herself. 
It would be tedious to give the particular
Conversation which consisted of very common
and ordinary Occurrences, and which
lasted from two till six o'Clock in the
Morning. It is sufficient to mention all 

of it that is any wise material to this History. 
And this was a Promise that the
Lady would endeavour to find out Sophia,
and in a few Days bring him to an
Interview with her, on Condition that he
would then take his Leave of her. When
this was thoroughly settled, and a second
Meeting in the Evening appointed at the
same Place, they separated; the Lady returned
to her House, and Jones to his Lodgings. 



Containing a Scene of Distress, which will
appear very extraordinary to most of our
Readers. 
Jones having refreshed himself with
a few Hours Sleep, summoned Partridge
to his Presence; and delivering
him a Bank Note of fifty Pounds, ordered him
to go and change it. Partridge received this
with sparkling Eyes, though when he came
to reflect farther, it raised in him some
Suspicions not very advantagious to the
Honour of his Master; to these the dreadful
Idea he had of the Masquerade, the
Disguise in which his Master had gone out
and returned, and his having been abroad
all Night, contributed. In plain Language, 

the only Way he could possibly find to account
for the Possession of this Note, was
by Robbery; and, to confess the Truth,
the Reader, unless he should suspect it was
owing to the Generosity of Lady Bellaston,
can hardly imagine any other. 
To clear therefore the Honour of Mr.
Jones, and to do Justice to the Liberality
of the Lady, he had really received this
Present from her, who, though she did not
give much in to the Hackney Charities of
the Age, such as building Hospitals, &c.
was not, however, entirely void of that
Christian Virtue; and conceived (very
rightly I think) that a young Fellow of
Merit, without a Shilling in the World,
was no improper Object of this Virtue. 
Mr. Jones and Mr. Nightingale had
been invited to dine this Day with Mrs.
Cannister.  At the appointed Hour therefore
the two young Gentlemen, with the
two Girls, attended in the Parlour, where
they waited from three till almost five before
the good Woman appeared. She had
been out of Town to visit a Relation, of
whom, at her Return, she gave the following
Account. 

‘I hope, Gentlemen, you will pardon
my making you wait; I am sure if you
knew the Occasion. —I have been to
see a Cousin of mine, about six Miles off,
who now lies in. —It should be a Warning
to all Persons (says she, looking at her
Daughters) how they marry indiscreetly. 
There is no Happiness in this World,
without a Competency. O Nancy! how
shall I describe the wretched Condition in
which I found your poor Cousin; she
hath scarce lain in a Week, and there
was she, this dreadful Weather, in a cold
Room, without any Curtains to her Bed,
and not a Bushel of Coals in her House
to supply her with Fire: Her second Son,
that sweet little fellow, lies ill of a Quinzy
in the same Bed with his Mother,
for there is no other Bed in the House. 
Poor little Tommy! I believe, Nancy, you
will never see your Favourite any more,
for he is really very ill. The rest of the
Children are in pretty good Health; but
Molly, I am afraid, will do herself an
Injury; she is but thirteen Years old,
Mr. Nightingale, and yet, in my Life, I
never saw a better Nurse: She tends both
her Mother and her Brother; and what
is wonderful in a Creature so young, she 

shows all the Chearfulness in the World to
her Mother; and yet I saw her. —I saw
the poor Child, Mr. Nightingale, turn about,
and privately wipe the Tears from
her Eyes.’ Here Mrs. Miller, was prevented,
by her own Tears, from going on,
and there was not, I believe, a Person present,
who did not accompany her in them; 
at length she a little recovered herself, and
proceeded thus, ‘In all this Distress the
Mother supports her Spirits in a surprising
Manner. The Danger of her Son fits
heaviest upon her, and yet she endeavours
as much as possible to conceal even this
Concern, on her Husband's Account. 
Her Grief, however, sometimes gets the
better of all her Endeavours; for she was
always extravagantly fond of this Boy,
and a most sensible, sweet-tempered Creature
it is. I protest I was never more affected
in my Life, than when I heard
the little Wretch, who is hardly yet seven
Years old, while his Mother was wetting
him with her Tears, beg her to be comforted. 
—Indeed, Mamma, cry'd the
Child, I shan't die, God Almighty, I'm
sure, won't take Tommy away; let Heaven
be ever so fine a Place, I had rather stay
here and starve with you and my Papa,
than go to it. —Pardon me, Gentlemen, 

I can't help it, (says she, wiping her
Eyes) such Sensibility and Affection in a
Child—And yet, perhaps, he is least
the Object of Pity, for a Day or two
will, most probably, place him beyond
the Reach of all human Evils. The
Father is indeed most worthy of Compassion. 
Poor Man, his Countenance is
the very Picture of Horror, and he looks
rather like one dead than alive. Oh Heavens!
what a Scene did I behold at my
first coming into the Room! The good
Creature was lying behind the Bolster,
supporting at once both his Child and his
Wife. He had nothing on but a thin
Waistcoat, for his Coat was spread over
the Bed, to supply the Want of Blankets
—When he rose up, at my Entrance,
I scarce knew him. As comely a Man,
Mr. Jones, within this Fortnight, as you
ever beheld; Mr. Nightingale hath seen
him. His Eyes sunk, his Face pale,
with a long Beard. His Body shivering
with Cold, and worn with Hunger too; 
for my Cousin says, she can hardly prevail
upon him to eat. —He told me
himself in a Whisper—he told me— 
I can't repeat it—he said he could
not bear to eat the Bread his Children
wanted. And yet, can you believe it, 

Gentlemen? In all this Misery, his Wife
has as good Cawdle as if she lay in, in the
midst of the greatest Affluence; I tasted
it, and I scarce ever tasted better—The
Means of procuring her this,’ he said,
‘he believed was sent him by an Angel
from Heaven; I know not what
he meant, for I had not Spirits enough
to ask a single Question.’ 
This was a Love-Match, as they call it
on both Sides; that is, a Match between
two Beggars. I must indeed say I never
saw a fonder Couple; but what is their
Fondness good for, but to torment each other? 
‘Indeed, Mamma, cries Nancy, I
have always looked on my Cousin Anderson
(for that was her Name) as one of the
happiest of Women. I am sure’ says
Mrs. Miller, ‘the Case at present is much
otherwise; for any one might have
discerned that the tender Consideration
of each other's Sufferings, makes the
most intolerable Part of their Calamity,
both to the Husband and the Wife. 
Compared to which, Hunger and Cold,
as they affect their own Persons only, are
scarce Evils. Nay, the very Children,
the youngest, which is not two Years
old, excepted, feel in the same Manner; 
for they are a most loving Family; and 

if they had but a bare Competency,
would be the happiest People in the
World. I never saw the least Sign of Misery
at her House, replied Nancy; I am sure my
Heart bleeds for what you now tell me. — 
O Child,’ answered the Mother, ‘she
hath always endeavoured to make the best
of every Thing. They have always been
in great Distress; but, indeed, this absolute
Ruin hath been brought upon them
by others. The poor Man was Bail for
the Villain his Brother; and about a
Week ago, the very Day before her
Lying-in, their Goods were all carried away,
and sold by an Execution. He
sent a Letter to me of it by one of the
Bailiffs, which the Villain never delivered. 
—What must he think of my suffering
a Week to pass before he heard
of me?’ 
It was not with dry Eyes that Jones
heard this Narrative; when it was ended,
he took Mrs. Miller apart with him into
another Room, and delivering her his Purse,
in which was the Sum of 50l. desired her
to send as much of it as she thought proper
to these poor People. The Look which
Mrs. Miller gave Jones, on this Occasion,
is not easy to be described. She burst into
a Kind of Agony of Transport, and cry'd 

out,—‘Good Heavens! Is there such a
Man in the World?’ —But recollecting
herself, she said, ‘Indeed I know one
such; but can there be another?’ ‘I hope,
Madam,’ cries Jones, ‘there are many
who have common Humanity: For to relieve
such Distresses in our Fellow-Creatures,
can hardly be called more.’ Mrs.
Miller then took ten Guineas, which were
the utmost he could prevail with her to accept,
and said, ‘she would find some
Means of conveying them early the next
Morning;’ adding, ‘that she had herself
done some little Matter for the poor
People, and had not left them in quite so
much Misery as she found them.’ 
They then returned to the Parlour,
where Nightingale express'd much Concern
at the dreadful Situation of these Wretches,
whom, indeed, he knew; for he had seen
them more than once at Mrs. Miller's. 
He inveighed against the Folly of making
onesself liable for the Debts of others; 
vented many bitter Execrations against the
Brother; and concluded with wishing something
could be done for the unfortunate
Family. ‘Suppose, Madam,’ said he, ‘you
should recommend them to Mr. Allworthy? 
Or what think you of a Collection? 

I will give them a Guinea with all my
Heart.’ 
Mrs. Miller made no Answer; and Nancy,
to whom her Mother had whispered
the Generosity of Jones, turned pale upon
the Occasion; though if either of them
was angry with Nightingale, it was surely
without Reason. For the Liberality of
Jones, if he had known it, was not an Example
which he had any Obligation to follow; 
and there are Thousands who would
not have contributed a single Halfpenny,
as indeed he did not in Effect, for he made
no Tender of any thing; and therefore as
the others thought proper to make no Demand,
he kept his Money in his Pocket. 
I have in Truth observed, and shall never
have a better Opportunity than at present
to communicate my Observation, that
the World are in general divided into
two Opinions concerning Charity, which
are the very reverse of each other. One
Party seems to hold, that all Acts of
this Kind are to be esteemed as voluntary
Gifts, and however little you give (if indeed
no more than your good Wishes) you
acquire a great Degree of Merit in so doing. 
—Others, on the contrary, appear to 

be as firmly persuaded, that Beneficence is a
positive Duty, and that whenever the Rich
fall greatly short of their Ability in relieving
the Distresses of the Poor, their pitiful
Largesses are so far from being meritorious,
that they have only performed their
Duty by Halves, and are in some Sense
more contemptible than those who have entirely
neglected it. 
To reconcile these different Opinions is
not in my Power. I shall only add, that
the Givers are generally of the former Sentiment,
and the Receivers are almost universally
inclined to the latter. 



Which treats of Matters of a very different
Kind from those in the preceding Chapter. 
In the Evening Jones met his Lady again,
and a long Conversation again ensued
between them; but as it consisted only
of the same ordinary Occurrences as before,
we shall avoid mentioning Particulars,
which we despair of rendring agreeable
to the Reader; unless he is one whose
Devotion to the Fair Sex, like that of the
Papists to their Saints, wants to be raised by 

the Help of Pictures. But I am so far
from desiring to exhibit such Pictures to the
Public, that I would wish to draw a Curtain
over those that have been lately set forth in
certain French Novels; very bungling Copies
of which have been presented us here,
under the Name of Translations. 
Jones grew still more and more impatient
to see Sophia; and finding, after repeated
Interviews with Lady Bellaston, no Likelihood
of obtaining this by her Means; for,
on the contrary, the Lady began to treat
even the Mention of the Name of Sophia
with Resentment; he resolved to try some
other Method. He made no Doubt but
that Lady Bellaston knew where his Angel
was, so he thought it most likely, that some
of her Servants should be acquainted with
the same Secret. Partridge therefore was
employed to get acquainted with those Servants,
in order to fish this Secret out of
them. 
Few Situations can be imagined more
uneasy than that to which his poor Master
was at present reduced; for besides the Difficulties
he met with in discovering Sophia,
besides the Fears he had of having disobliged
her, and the Assurances he had received 

from lady Bellaston of the Resolution
which Sophia had taken against him,
and of her having purposely concealed herself
from him, which he had sufficient Reason
to believe might be true; he had still
a Difficulty to combat, which it was not in
the Power of his Mistress to remove, however
kind her Inclination might have been. 
This was the exposing of her to be disinherited
of all her Father's Estate, the almost
inevitable Consequence of their coming
together without a Consent, which he
had no Hopes of ever obtaining. 
Add to all these the many Obligations
which Lady Bellaston, whose violent Fondness
we can no longer conceal, had heaped
upon him; so that by her Means he was
now become one of the best dress'd Men
about Town; and was not only relieved
from those ridiculous Distresses we have before
mentioned, but was actually raised to
a State of Affluence, beyond what he had
ever known. 
Now though there are many Gentlemen
who very well reconcile it to their Consciences
to possess themselves of the whole
Fortune of a Woman, without making her
any Kind of Return; yet to a Mind the 

Proprietor of which doth not deserve to be
hang'd, nothing is, I believe, more irksome
than to support Love with Gratitude
only; especially where Inclination pulls the
Heart a contrary Way. Such was the unhappy
Case of Jones; for tho' the virtuous
Love which he bore to Sophia, and which
left very little Affection for any other Woman
had been entirely out of the Question,
he could never have been able to have made
an adequate Return to the generous Passion
of this Lady, who had indeed been once
an Object of Desire; but was now entered
at least into the Autumn of Life; though
she wore all the Gayety of Youth both in
her Dress and Manner; nay, she contrived
still to maintain the Roses in her Cheeks; 
but these, like Flowers forced out of Season
by Art, had none of that lively blooming
Freshness with which Nature, at the
proper Time, bedecks her own Productions. 
She had, besides, a certain Imperfection,
which renders some Flowers, tho'
very beautiful to the Eye, very improper
to be placed in a Wilderness of Sweets,
and what above all others is most disagreeable
to the Breath of Love. 

Though Jones saw all these Discouragements
on the one Side, he felt his Obligations
full as strongly on the other; nor did
he less plainly discern the ardent Passion
whence those Obligations proceeded, the
extreme Violence of which if he failed to
equal, he well knew the Lady would think
him ungrateful; and, what is worse, he
would have thought himself so. He knew
the tacit Consideration upon which all her
Favours were conferred; and as his Necessity
obliged him to accept them, so his
Honour, he concluded, forced him to pay
the Price. This therefore he resolved to
do, whatever Misery it cost him, and to
devote himself to her, from that great
Principle of Justice, by which the Laws
of some Countries oblige a Debtor who is
no otherwise capable of discharging his
Debt, to become the Slave of his Creditor. 
While he was meditating on these Matters,
he received the following Note from
the Lady. 
‘A very foolish, but a very perverse Accident
hath happened since our last Meeting,
which makes it improper I should 

see you any more at the usual Place. I
will, if possible, contrive some other
Place by To-morrow. In the mean Time,
Adieu.’ 
This Disappointment, perhaps, the Reader
may conclude was not very great; but
if it was, he was quickly relieved; for in
less than an Hour afterwards another Note
was brought him from the same Hand,
which contained as follows. 
‘I have altered my Mind since I wrote,
a Change, which if you are no Stranger
to the tenderest of all Passions, you will
not wonder at. I am now resolved to
see you this Evening, at my own House,
whatever may be the Consequence. Come
to me exactly at seven; I dine abroad,
but will be at Home by that Time. A
Day, I find, to those that sincerely love
seems longer than I imagined. 
‘If you should accidentally be a few
Moments before me, bid them shew you
into the Drawing-Room.’ 
To confess the Truth, Jones was less
pleased with this last Epistle, than he had
been with the former, as he was prevented 

by it from complying with the earnest Entreaties
of Mr. Nightingale, with whom he
had now contracted much Intimacy and
Friendship. These Entreaties were to go
with that young Gentleman and his Company
to a new Play, which was to be acted
that Evening, and which a very large Party
had agreed to damn, from some Dislike
they had taken to the Author, who was a
Friend to one of Mr. Nightingale's Acquaintance. 
And this Sort of Fun, our
Heroe, we are ashamed to confess, would
willingly have preferred to the above kind
Appointment; but his Honour got the
better of his Inclination. 
Before we attend him to this intended
Interview with the Lady, we think
proper to account for both the preceding
Notes, as the Reader may possibly be not
a little surprized at the Imprudence of Lady
Bellaston in bringing her Lover to the
very House where her Rival was lodged. 
First then the Mistress of the House
where these Lovers had hitherto met, and
who had been for some Years a Pensioner
to that Lady, was now become a Methodist,
and had that very Morning waited
upon her Ladyship, and after rebuking 

her very severely for her past Life, had positively
declared, that she would, on no
Account, be instrumental in carrying on any
of her Affairs for the future. 
The Hurry of Spirits into which this
Accident threw the Lady, made her despair
of possibly finding any other Convenience
to meet Jones that Evening; but as she began
a little to recover from her Uneasiness
at the Disappointment, she set her Thoughts
to work, when luckily it came into her Head
to propose to Sophia to go to the Play,
which was immediately consented to, and
a proper Lady provided for her Companion. 
Mrs. Honour was likewise dispatched
with Mrs. Etoff on the same Errand of
Pleasure; and thus her own House was
left free for the safe Reception of Mr. Jones,
with whom she promised herself two or three
Hours of uninterrupted Conversation, after
her Return from the Place where she dined,
which was at a Friend's House in a pretty
distant Part of the Town, near her old
Place of Assignation, where she had engaged
herself before she was well apprized of
the Revolution that had happened in the
Mind and Morals of her late Confidante. 




A Chapter which, though short, may draw
Tears from some Eyes. 
Mr. Jones was just dress'd to wait on
Lady Bellaston, when Mrs. Miller
rapp'd at his Door; and being admitted,
very earnestly desired his Company below
Stairs to drink Tea in the Parlour. 
Upon his Entrance into the Room, she
presently introduced a Person to him, saying,
‘This, Sir, is my Cousin, who hath
been so greatly beholden to your Goodness,
for which he begs to return you his
sincerest Thanks.’ 
The Man had scarce entered upon that
Speech, which Mrs. Miller had so kindly
prefaced, when both Jones and he looking
stedfastly at each other, showed at once
the utmost Tokens of Surprize. The
Voice of the latter began instantly to faulter; 
and, instead of finishing his Speech,
he sunk down into a Chair, crying, ‘It is
so, I am convinced it is so!’ 

‘Bless me, what's the Meaning of this,
cries Mrs. Miller, you are not ill, I
hope, Cousin? Some Water, a Dram this
Instant.’ 
‘Be not frighted, Madam, cries Jones,
I have almost as much Need of a Dram
as your Cousin. We are equally surprized
at this unexpected Meeting. Your
Cousin is an Acquaintance of mine, Mrs.
Miller.’ 
‘An Acquaintance! cries the Man,— 
Oh Heaven!’ 
‘Ay, an Acquaintance, repeated Jones,
and an honoured Acquaintance too. 
When I do not love and honour the
Man who dares venture every thing to
preserve his Wife and Children from instant
Destruction, may I have a Friend
capable of disowning me in Adversity.’ 
‘O you are an excellent young Man,
cries Mrs. Miller,—yes, indeed, poor
Creature! he hath ventured every thing
—If he had not had one of the best of
Constitutions it must have killed him.’ 

‘Cousin, cries the Man, who had now
pretty well recovered himself; this is the
Angel from Heaven whom I meant. 
This is he to whom before I saw you, I
owed the Preservation of my Peggy. He
it was to whose Generosity every Comfort,
every Support which I have procured
for her was owing. He is indeed
the worthiest, bravest, noblest of all human
Beings. O, Cousin, I have Obligations
to this Gentleman of such a Nature!’ 
‘Mentioning nothing of Obligations,’ cries
Jones eagerly, ‘not a Word, I insist upon
it, not a Word. (Meaning, I suppose,
that he would not have him betray the
Affair of the Robbery to any Person)— 
If by the Trifle you have received from
me, I have preserved a whole Family,
sure Pleasure was never bought so cheap.’ 
‘O, Sir, cries the Man, I wish you could
this Instant see my House. If any Person
had ever a Right to the Pleasure you
mention, I am convinced it is yourself. 
My Cousin tells me, she acquainted you
with the Distress in which she found us. 

That, Sir, is all greatly removed, and
chiefly by your Goodness. —My Children
have now a Bed to lie on,— 
and they have—they have— 
eternal Blessings reward you for it,— 
they have Bread to eat. My little Boy
is recovered; my Wife is out of Danger,
and I am happy. All, all owing
to you, Sir, and to my Cousin here, one
of the best of Women. Indeed, Sir, I
must see you at my House. —Indeed my
Wife must see you, and thank you. —My
Children too must express their Gratitude. 
—Indeed, Sir, they are not
without a Sense of their Obligation; but
what is my Feeling when I reflect to
whom I owe, that they are now capable
of expressing their Gratitude. — 
Oh, Sir! the little Hearts which you
have warmed had now been cold as Ice
without your Assistance.’— 
Here Jones attempted to prevent the
poor Man from proceeding; but indeed the
Overflowing of his own Heart would of
itself have stopped his Words. And now Mrs.
Miller likewise began to pour forth Thanksgivings,
as well in her own Name, as in
that of her Cousin, and concluded with 

saying, she doubted not but such Goodness
would meet a glorious Reward. 
Jones answered, ‘He had been sufficiently
rewarded already. Your Cousin's
Account, Madam, said he, hath given
me a Sensation more pleasing than I have
ever known. He must be a Wretch
who is unmoved at hearing such a Story; 
how transporting then must be the
Thought of having happily acted a Part
in this Scene. If there are Men who
cannot feel the Delight of giving Happiness
to others, I sincerely pity them,
as they are incapable of tasting what is,
in my Opinion, a greater Honour, a
higher Interest, and a sweeter Pleasure,
than the ambitious, the avaritious, or the
voluptuous Man can ever obtain.’ 
The Hour of Appointment being now
come, Jones was forced to take a hasty Leave,
but not before he had heartily shaken his
Friend by the Hand, and desired to see
him again as soon as possible; promising,
that he would himself take the first Opportunity
of visiting him at his own House. 
He then stept into his Chair, and proceeded
to Lady Bellaston's, greatly exulting in
the Happiness which he had procured to this 

poor Family; nor could he forbear reflecting
without Horror on the dreadful Consequences
which must have attended them,
had he listened rather to the Voice of strict
Justice, than to that of Mercy when he
was attacked on the high Road. 
Mrs. Miller sung forth the Praises of
Jones during the whole Evening, in which
Mr. Enderson, while he stayed, so passionately
accompanied her, that he was often
on the very Point of mentioning the Circumstances
of the Robbery. However, he
luckily recollected himself, and avoided an
Indiscretion which would have been so
much the greater, as he knew Mrs. Miller
to be extremely strict and nice in her Principles. 
He was likewise well apprized of the
Loquacity of this Lady; and yet such was
his Gratitude, that it had almost got the
better both of Discretion and Shame, and
made him publish that which would have
defamed his own Character, rather than omit
any Circumstances which might do the
fullest Honour to his Benefactor. 




In which the Reader will be surprized. 
Mr. Jones was rather earlier than the
Time appointed, and earlier than
the Lady, whose Arrival was hindered not
only by the Distance of the Place where she
dined, but by some other cross Accidents,
very vexatious to one in her Situation of
Mind. He was accordingly shewn into
the Drawing-Room, where he had not
been many Minutes before the Door opened,
and in came—no other than Sophia
herself, who had left the Play before
the End of the first Act; for this, as
we have already said, being a new Play,
at which two large Parties met, the one to
damn, and the other to applaud, a violent
Uproar, and an Engagement between the
two Parties had so terrified our Heroine,
that she was glad to put herself under the
Protection of a young Gentleman, who
safely conveyed her to her Chair. 
As Lady Bellaston had acquainted her
that she should not be at Home till late,
Sophia expecting to find no one in the
Room, came hastily in, and went directly
to a Glass which almost fronted her, without 

once looking towards the upper End
of the Room, where the Statue of Jones
now stood motionless. —In this Glass it
was, after contemplating her own lovely
Face, that she first discovered the said Statue; 
when instantly turning about, she
perceived the Reality of the Vision: Upon
which she gave a violent Scream, and scarce
preserved herself from fainting, till Jones
was able to move to her, and support her
in his Arms. 
To paint the Looks or Thoughts of either
of these Lovers is beyond my Power. 
As their Sensations, from their mutual Silence,
may be judged to have been too
big for their own Utterance, it cannot be
supposed, that I should be able to express
them: And the Misfortune is, that few of
my Readers have been enough in Love, to
feel by their own Hearts what past at this
Time in theirs. 
After a short Pause, Jones, with faultering
Accents, said,—‘I see, Madam,
you are surprized.’ —‘Surprized!’ answered
she; ‘Oh Heavens! Indeed, I am
surprized. I almost doubt whether you
are the Person you seem.’ ‘Indeed,’ 
cries he, ‘my Sophia, pardon me, Madam, 

for this once calling you so, I am that
very wretched Jones, whom Fortune, after
so many Disappointments, hath, at
last, kindly conducted to you. Oh! my
Sophia, did you know the thousand Torments
I have suffered in this long, fruitless
Pursuit’—‘Pursuit of whom?’ 
said Sophia, a little recollecting herself, and
assuming a reserved Air. —‘Can you be
so cruel to ask that Question?’ cries
Jones. ‘Need I say of you?’ ‘Of me?’ 
answered Sophia: ‘Hath Mr. Jones then
any such important Business with me?’ 
‘To some, Madam,’ cries Jones, ‘this
might seem an important Business,’ (giving
her the Pocket-Book). ‘I hope,
Madam, you will find it of the same
Value, as when it was lost.’ Sophia
took the Pocket-Book, and was going
to speak, when he interrupted her, thus; 
—‘Let us not, I beseech you, lose
one of these precious Moments which
Fortune hath so kindly sent us. —O
my Sophia, I have Business of a much superior
Kind. —Thus, on my Knees, let
me ask your Pardon.’ —‘My Pardon?’ 
cries she;—‘Sure, Sir, after what is
past you cannot expect, after what I have
heard—‘I scarce know what I say,’ 
answered Jones. ‘By Heavens! I scarce 

wish you should pardon me. O my Sophia,
henceforth never cast away a
Thought on such a Wretch as I am. If
any Remembrance of me should ever
intrude to give a Moment's Uneasiness
to that tender Bosom, think of
my Unworthiness; and let the Remembrance
of what past at Upton blot me for
ever from your Mind’— 
Sophia stood trembling all this while. 
Her Face was whiter than Snow, and her
Heart was throbbing through her Stays. 
But at the mention of Upton, a Blush arose
in her Cheeks, and her Eyes, which before
she had scarce lifted up, were turned upon
Jones with a Glance of Disdain. He understood
this silent Reproach, and replied
to it thus: ‘O my Sophia, my only Love,
you cannot hate or despise me more for
what happened there, than I do myself: But yet
do me the Justice to think, that my
Heart was never unfaithful to you. That
had no Share in the Folly I was guilty
of; it was even then unalterably yours. 
Though I despaired of possessing you,
nay, almost of ever seeing you more, I
doated still on your charming Idea, and
could seriously love no other Woman. 
But if my Heart had not been engaged, 

she, into whose Company I accidentally
fell at that cursed Place, was not an Object
of serious Love. Believe me, my
Angel, I never have seen her from that
Day to this; and never intend, or desire,
to see her again.’ Sophia, in her Heart,
was very glad to hear this; but forcing
into her Face an Air of more Coldness than
she yet had assumed; ‘Why,’ said she,
‘Mr. Jones, do you take the Trouble to
make a Defence, where you are not accused? 
If I thought it worth while to
accuse you, I have a Charge of an unpardonable
Nature indeed.’ ‘What is
it, for Heaven's Sake?’ answered Jones,
trembling and pale, expecting to hear of
his Amour with Lady Bellaston. ‘Oh,’ 
said she, ‘how is it possible! Can every
Thing noble, and every Thing base, be
lodged together in the same Bosom?’ 
Lady Bellaston, and the ignominious Circumstance
of having been kept rose again
in his Mind, and stopt his Mouth from any
Reply. ‘Could I have expected,’ proceeded
Sophia, ‘such Treatment from you? 
Nay, from any Gentleman, from any
Man of Honour? To have my Name
traduced in Public; in Inns, among the
meanest Vulgar! To have any little Favours,
that my unguarded Heart may 

have too lightly betray'd me to grant,
boasted of there! Nay, even to hear that
you had been forced to fly from my
Love!’ Nothing could equal Jones's
Surprize at these Words of Sophia; but
yet, not being guilty, he was much less
embarrassed how to defend himself, than if
she had touched that tender String, at which
his Conscience had been alarmed. By some
Examination he presently found, that her
supposing him guilty of so shocking an
Outrage against his Love, and her Reputation,
was entirely owing to Partridge's
Talk at the Inns, before Landlords and
Servants; for Sophia confessed to him, it
was from them that she received her Intelligence. 
He had no very great Difficulty to
make her believe that he was entirely innocent
of an Offence so foreign to his Character; 
but she had a great deal to hinder
him from going instantly Home, and putting
Partridge to Death, which he more than
once swore he would do. This Point being
cleared up, they soon found themselves so
well pleased with each other, that Jones
quite forgot he had begun the Conversation
with conjuring her to give up all
Thoughts of him; and she was in a Temper
to have given Ear to a Petition of a
very different Nature: For before they were 

aware, they had both gone so far, that he
let fall some Words that sounded like a
Proposal of Marriage. To which she replied,
‘That, did not her Duty to her
Father forbid her to follow her own Inclinations,
Ruin with him would be more
welcome to her, than the most affluent
Fortune with another Man.’ At the
mention of the Word Ruin he started, let
drop her Hand, which he had held for
Some Time, and striking his Breast with his
own, cried out, ‘Oh, Sophia, can I then
ruin thee? No; by Heavens, no! I never
will act so base a Part. Dearest Sophia,
whatever it costs me, I will renounce
you; I will give you up: I will
tear all such Hopes from my Heart, as
are inconsistent with your real Good. My
Love I will ever retain, but it shall be in
Silence; it shall be at a Distance from
you; it shall be in some foreign Land; 
 whence no Voice, no Sigh of my
Despair, shall ever reach and disturb your
Ears. And when I am dead’—He
would have gone on, but was stop by a
Flood of Tears which Sophia let fall in his
Bosom, upon which she leaned, without
being able to speak one Word. He kissed
them off, which, for some Moments, she
allowed him to do without any Resistance; 

but then recollecting herself, gently withdrew
out of his Arms; and, to turn the
Discourse from a Subject too tender, and
which she found she could not support, bethought
herself to ask him a Question she
had never had Time to put to him before,
‘How he came into that Room?’ He begun
to stammer, and would, in all Probability,
have raised her Suspicions by the
Answer he was going to give, when, at
once, the Door opened, and in came Lady
Bellaston. 
Having advanced a few Steps, and seeing
Jones and Sophia together, she suddenly
stopt; when after a Pause of a
few Moments, recollecting herself with admirable
Presence of Mind, she said,—tho'
with sufficient Indications of Surprise both
in Voice and Countenance—‘I thought,
Miss Western, you had been at the
Play?’ 
Though Sophia had had no Opportunity
of learning of Jones, by what Means he
had discovered her, yet as she had not the
least Suspicion of the real Truth, or that
Jones and Lady Bellaston were acquainted; 
so she was very little confounded: And
the less, as the Lady had, in all their Conversations 

on the Subject, entirely taken
her Side against her Father. With very
little Hesitation, therefore, she went through
the whole Story of what had happened at
the Playhouse, and the Cause of her hasty
Return. 
The Length of this Narrative gave Lady
Bellaston an Opportunity of rallying her
Spirits, and of considering in what Manner
to act. And as the Behaviour of Sophia
gave her Hopes that Jones had not betray'd
her, she put on an Air of Good-Humour,
and said, ‘I should not have
broke in so abruptly upon you, Miss
Western, if I had known you had Company.’ 
Lady Bellaston fixed her Eyes on Sophia
whilst she spoke these Words. To which
that poor young Lady, having her Face
overspread with Blushes and Confusion, answered,
in a stammering Voice, ‘I am sure,
Madam, I shall always think the Honour
of your Ladyship's Company.&wblank;’ ‘I
hope, at least,’ cries Lady Bellaston, ‘I
interrupt no Business.’ —‘No, Madam,’ 
answered Sophia, ‘our Business
was at an End. Your Ladyship may be
pleased to remember, I have often mentioned 

the Loss of my Pocket-Book which
this Gentleman having very luckily found,
was so kind to return to me with the Bill in it.’ 
Jones, ever since the Arrival of Lady
Bellaston, had been ready to sink with
fear. He sat kicking his Heels, playing
with his Fingers, and looking more like a
Fool, if it be possible, than a young booby
Squire, when he is first introduced into a
polite Assembly. He began, however, now
to recover himself; and taking a Hint from
the Behaviour of Lady Bellaston, who, he
saw, did not intend to claim any Acquaintance
with him, he resolved as entirely to
affect the Stranger on his Part. He
said, ‘Ever since he had had the Pocket-Book
in Diligence in enquiring out the
Lady whose Name was writ in it; but
never till that Day could be so fortunate
to discover her.’ 
Sophia had, indeed, mentioned the Loss
of her Pocket-Book to Lady Bellaston; but
as Jones, for some Reason or other, had
never once hinted to her that it was in his
Possession, she believed not one Syllable of 

what Sophia now said, and wonderfully admired
the extreme Quickness of the young
Lady, in inventing such an Excuse. The
Reason of Sophia's leaving the Play-house
met met with no better Credit; and though she
could not account for the Meeting between
these two Lovers, she was firmly perswaded
it was not accidental. 
With an affected Smile, therefore, she
said—‘Indeed, Miss Western, you have had
very good Luck in recovering your Money. 
Not only as it fell into the Hands of a
Gentleman of Honour, but as he happened
to discover to whom it belonged. 
I think you would not consent to have it
advertised. —It was great good Fortune,
Sir, that you found out to whom
the Note belonged.’ 
‘O Madam,’ cries Jones, ‘it was inclosed
in a Pocket-Book, in which the
young Lady's Name was written.’ 
‘That was very fortunate indeed,’ cries
the Lady;—‘And it was no less so,
that you heard Miss Western was at my
House; for she is very little known.’ 

Jones had at length perfectly recovered his
Spirits; and as he conceived he had now
an Opportunity of satisfying Sophia, as to
the Question she had asked him just before
Lady Bellaston came in, he proceeded thus:
‘Why, Madam,’ answered he, ‘it was
by the luckiest Chance imaginable I made
this Discovery. I was mentioning what
I had found, and the Name of the Owner,
the other Night, to a Lady at the Masquerade,
who told me, she believed she
knew where I might see Miss Western; 
and if I would come to her House the
next Morning, she would inform me. 
I went according to her Appointment,
but she was not at Home; nor could I
ever meet with her till this Morning,
when she directed me to your Ladyship's
House. I came accordingly, and did
myself the Honour to ask for your Ladyship; 
and upon my saying that I had
very particular Business, a Servant shewed
me into this Room; where I had not
been long before the young Lady returned
from the Play.’ 
Upon his mentioning the Masquerade,
he look'd very slyly at Lady Bellaston, without 

any Fear of being remarked by Sophia; 
for she was visibly too much confounded to
make any Observations. This Hint a little
alarmed the Lady, and she was silent; 
when Jones, who saw the Agitations of
Sophia's Mind, resolved to take the only
Method of relieving her, which was by retiring: 
But before he did this, he said, ‘I
believe, Madam, it is customary to give
some Reward on these Occasions;—I
must insist on a very high one for my
Honesty;—It is, Madam, no less than the
Honour of being permitted to pay another
Visit here.’ 
‘Sir,’ replied the Lady, ‘I make no
Doubt that you are a Gentleman, and my
Doors are never shut to People of
Fashion.’ 
Jones then, after proper Ceremonials, departed,
highly to his own Satisfaction, and
no less to that of Sophia; who was terribly
alarmed lest Lady Bellaston should
discover what she knew already but too
well. 
Upon the Stairs Jones met his old Acquaintance
Mrs. Honour, who, notwithstanding 

all she had said against him, was
now so well-bred to behave with great Civility. 
This Meeting proved indeed a
lucky Circumstance, as he communicated
to her the House where he lodged, with
which Sophia was unacquainted. 



In which the Thirteenth Book is concluded. 
The elegant Lord Shaftsbury somewhere
objects to telling too much
Truth: By which it may be fairly inferred,
that, in some Cases, to lie, is not only excusable
but commendable. 
And surely there are no Persons who may
so properly challenge a Right to this commendable
Deviation from Truth, as young
Women in the Affair of Love; for which
they may plead Precept, Education, and
above all, the Sanction, nay, I may say, the
Necessity of Custom, by which they are restrained,
not from submitting to the honest
Impulses of Nature (for that would be
a foolish Prohibition) but from owning
them. 

We are not, therefore, ashamed to say,
that our Heroine now pursued the Dictates
of the abovementioned Right Honourable
Philosopher. As she was perfectly satisfied
then, that Lady Bellaston was ignorant
of the Person of Jones, so she determined
to keep her in that Ignorance,
though at the Expence of a little Fibbing. 
Jones had not been long gone, before
Lady Bellaston cry'd, ‘Upon my Word,
a good pretty young Fellow; I wonder
who he is: For I don't remember ever
to have seen his Face before.’ 
‘Nor I neither, madam,’ cries Sophia. 
‘I must say he behaved very handsomely
in relation to my Note.’ 
‘Yes; and he is a very handsome Fellow,’ 
said the Lady; ‘don't you think
so?’ 
‘I did not take much Notice of him,’ 
answered Sophia; ‘but I thought he seemed
rather awkward and ungenteel than
otherwise.’ 
‘You are extremely right,’ cries Lady
Bellaston: ‘You may see, by his Manner, 

that he hath not kept good Company. 
Nay, notwithstanding his returning
your Note, and refusing the Reward,
I almost question whether he is a Gentleman. 
—I have always observed there is
a Something in Persons well-born, which
others can never acquire. —I think I
will give Orders not to be at Home to
him.’ 
‘Nay sure, Madam,’ answered Sophia,
one can't suspect after what he hath
done: —Besides, if your Ladyship observed
him, there was an Elegance in his
Discourse, a Delicacy, a Prettiness of
Expression that, that— 
‘I confess,’ said Lady Bellaston, ‘the
Fellow hath Words—And indeed, Sophia,
you must forgive me, indeed you must.’ 
‘I forgive your Ladyship!’ said Sophia. 
‘Yes indeed you must,’ answered she
‘laughing; for I had a horrible Suspicion
when I first came into the Room—I
vow you must forgive it; but I suspected
it was Mr. Jones himself.’ 

‘Did your Ladyship indeed?’ cries Sophia,
blushing, and affecting a Laugh. 
‘Yes, I vow I did,’ answered she,
‘I can't imagine what put-it into my
Head: For, give the Fellow his due, he
was genteelly drest; which, I think, dear
Sophy, is not commonly the Case with
your Friend.’ 
‘This Raillery,’ cries Sophia, ‘is a little
cruel, Lady Bellaston, after my Promise
to your Ladyship.’ 
‘Not at all, Child,’ said the Lady;— ‘It would have been cruel before; but after
you have promised me never to marry
without your Father's Consent, in which
you know is implied your giving up
Jones, sure you can bear a little Raillery
on a Passion which was pardonable enough
in a young Girl in the Country,
and of which you tell me you have so
entirely got the better. What must I
think, my dear Sophy, if you cannot bear
a little Ridicule even on his Dress? I
shall begin to fear you are very far gone
indeed; and almost question whether you
have dealt ingenuously with me.’ 

‘Indeed, Madam,’ cries Sophia, ‘your
Ladyship mistakes me, if you imagine I
had any Concern on his Account.’ 
‘On his Account?’ answered the Lady: 
‘You must have mistaken me; I went no
farther than his Dress;—for I would not
injure your Taste by any other Comparison
—I don't imagine, my dear Sophy,
if your Mr. Jones had been such a Fellow
as this—’ 
‘I thought,’ says Sophia, ‘your Ladyship
had allowed him to be handsome.’— 
‘Whom, pray?’ cried the Lady, hastily. 
‘Mr. Jones,’ answered Sophia;—and
immediately recollecting herself, ‘Mr.
Jones!—no, no; I ask your Pardon;—I
mean the Gentleman who was just now
here.’ 
‘O Sophy! Sophy!’ cries the Lady; ‘this
Mr. Jones, I am afraid, still runs in your
Head.’ 
‘Then upon my Honour, Madam,’ 
said Sophia, ‘Mr. Jones is as entirely indifferent 

to me, as the Gentleman who
just now left us.’ 
‘Upon my Honour,’ said Lady Bellaston,
‘I believe it. Forgive me, therefore,
a little innocent Raillery; but I promise
you I will never mention his Name
any more.’ 
And now the two Ladies separated, infinitely
more to the Delight of Sophia, than
of Lady Bellaston, who would willingly
have tormented her Rival a little longer,
had not Business of more Importance called
her away. As for Sophia, her Mind was
not perfectly easy under this first Practice
of Deceit; upon which, when she retired
to her Chamber, she reflected with the
highest Uneasiness and conscious Shame. 
Nor could the peculiar Hardship of her
Situation, and the Necessity of the Case, at
all reconcile her Conduct to her Mind; 
the Frame of which was too delicate to bear
the Thought of having been guilty of a
Falshood, however qualified by Circumstances. 
Nor did this Thought once suffer
her to close her Eyes during the whole succeeding
Night. 