


Containing Incidents very surprizing. 
“The Captain declared, he would,
without Delay, proceed to the
Town before him; in which Resolution
he was seconded by all the Crew; but
when I could not be persuaded, nor was
I able to travel any farther before I had
rested myself, my old Friend protested,
he would not leave me, but would stay
behind as my Guard; and, when I had
refreshed myself with a little Repose, he
would attend me to the Town, whence
the Captain promised, he would not depart,
before he had seen us. 
“They were no sooner departed than
(having first thanked my Protector for 

his Care of me) I resigned myself to
sleep, which immediately closed my Eyelids,
and would probably have detain'd me
very long in his gentle Dominion, had
I not been awaked with a Squeeze by
the Hand by my Guard; which I at
first thought intended to alarm me with
the Danger of some wild Beast; but I
soon perceived it arose from a softer Motive,
and that a gentle Swain was the
only wild Beast I had to apprehend. 
“He began now to disclose his Passion
in the strongest Manner imaginable, indeed
with a Warmth rather beyond that
of both my former Lovers; but as yet
without any Attempt of Force. On
my Side Remonstrances were made in
more bitter Exclamations and Revilings
than I had used to any, that Villain
Wild excepted. I told him, he was the
basest and most treacherous Wretch alive; 
that his having cloaked his iniquitous
Designs under the Appearance of
Virtue and Friendship, added an ineffable
Degree of Horrour to them; that I
detested him of all Mankind the most, 

and, could I be brought to yield to Prostitution,
he should never enjoy the Ruins of
my Honour. He suffered himself not to be
provoked by this Language, but only
changed his Method of Solicitation from
Flattery to Bribery. He unript the Lining
of his Wastcoat, and pulled forth
several Jewels; these, he said, he had
preserved from infinite Danger to the
happiest purpose, if I could be won by
them. I rejected them often with the
utmost Indignation, till at last, casting
my Eye, rather by Accident than Design,
on a Diamond Necklace, a Thought,
like Lightning, shot through my Mind,
and, in an instant, I remembered, that
this was the very Necklace you had sold
the cursed Count, the Cause of all our
Misfortunes. The Confusion of Ideas,
into which this Surprize hurried me,
prevented my reflecting on the Villain
who then stood before me: But the first
Recollection presently told me, it could
be no other than the Count himself, the
wicked Tool of Wild's Barbarity. Good
God, what was then my Condition! 
How shall I describe the Tumult of 

Passions which then laboured in my
Breast! However, as I was happily unknown
to him, the least Suspicion on
his Side was altogether impossible. He imputed,
therefore, the Eagerness with which
I gazed on the Jewels, to a very wrong
Cause, and endeavoured to put as much
additional Softness into his Countenance
as he was able. My Fears were a little
quieted, and I was resolved to be very liberal
of Promises, and hoped so thoroughly
to persuade him of my Venality, that
he might, without any Doubt, be drawn
in to wait the Captain and Crew's Return,
who would, I was very certain,
not only preserve me from his Violence,
but secure the Restoration of what you
had been so cruelly robbed of. But, alas!
I was mistaken.” Mrs. Heartfree
again perceiving Symptoms of the utmost
Disquietude in her Husband's Countenance,
cry'd out: “My Dear, Don't you apprehend
any Harm. —But, to deliver you
as soon as possible from your Anxiety. 
—When he perceived I declined the
Warmth of his Addresses he begged me
to consider; he changed at once the 

Tone of his Features, and, in a very different
Voice from what he had hitherto
affected, he swore, I should not deceive
him as I had the Captain; that Fortune
had kindly thrown an Opportunity in
his Way, which, he was resolved not
foolishly to lose; and concluded with a
violent Oath, that he was determined to
enjoy me that Moment; and, therefore, I
knew the Consequence of Resistance. 
He then caught me in his Arms, and began
such rude Attempts, that I skreamed
out with all the Force I could, tho'
I had so little Hopes of being rescued,
when there suddenly rushed forth from
a Thicket, a Creature, which, at his first
Appearance, and in the hurry of Spirits
I then was, I did not take for a Man; 
but indeed had he been the fiercest of
wild Beasts, I should have rejoiced at
his devouring us both. I scarce perceived
he had a Musquet in his Hand, before
he struck my Ravisher such a Blow
with it, that he felled him at my Feet. 
He then advanced with a gentle Air towards
me, and told me in French, he
was extremely glad he had been luckily 

present to my Assistance. He was naked,
except his middle and his Feet, if I
can call a Body so which was covered
with Hair almost equal to any Beast
whatever. Indeed his Appearance was
so horrid in my Eyes, that the Friendship
he had shewn me, as well as his
courteous Behaviour, could not entirely
remove the Dread I had conceived from
his Figure. I believe he saw this very
visibly; for he begged me not to be
frightened, since, whatever Accident had
brought me thither, I should have Reason
to thank God for meeting him, at whose
Hands I might assure my self of the utmost
Civility and Protection. In the
midst of all this Consternation, I had Spirits
enough to take up the Casket of
Jewels, which the Villain, in falling,
had dropt out of his Hands, and conveyed
it into my Pocket, before he recovered
himself, which he now began
to do. My Deliverer told me, I seemed
extremely weak and faint, and desired
me to refresh myself at his little Hut,
which, he said, was hard by. If his
Demeanour had been less kind and obliging, 

my desperate Situation must have
lent me Confidence; for sure the Alternative
could not be doubtful, whether I
should rather trust this Man, who, notwithstanding
his savage Outside, expressed
so much Devotion to serve me, which
at least I was not certain of the Falshood
of, or abide with one whom I so perfectly
well knew to be an accomplished
Villain. I, therefore, committed my
self to his Guidance, though with
Tears in my Eyes, and begged him to
have Compassion on my Innocence,
which was absolutely in his Power. He
said, the Treatment he had been Witness
of, which, he supposed, was from one,
who had broken his Trust towards me,
sufficiently justified my Suspicion; but
begged me to dry my Eyes, and he
would soon convince me, that I was
with a Man of different Sentiments. 
The kind Accents which accompanied
these Words, gave me some Comfort,
which was assisted by the Re-possession
of our Jewels by an Accident, so strongly
savouring of the Disposition of Providence
in my Favour. 

“We walked together to his Hut, or
rather Cave; for it was under Ground,
on the Side of a Hill; the Situation was
very pleasant, and, from its Mouth, we
overlooked a large Plain, and the Town
I had before seen. As soon as I entered
it, he desired me to sit down on a Bench
of Turf, which served him for Chairs,
and then laid before me some Fruits, the
wild Product of that Country, one or
two of which had an excellent Flavour. 
He likewise produced some baked Flesh,
a little resembling that of Venison. He
then brought forth a Bottle of Brandy,
which, he said, had remained with him
ever since his settling there, now above
thirty Years; during all which Time he
had never opened it, his only Liquor being
Water; that he had reserved this
Bottle as a Cordial in Sickness; but, he
thanked God, he had never yet had Occasion
for it. He then acquainted me,
that he was a Hermite; that he had been
formerly cast away on that Coast, with
his Wife, whom he dearly loved, but
could not preserve from perishing; on
which Account he had resolved never 

to return to France, which was his native
Country, but to devote himself to
Prayer, and a holy Life, placing all his
Hopes in the blest Expectation of meeting
that dear Woman again in Heaven,
where, he was convinced, she was now
a Saint, and an Interceder for him. He
said, he had exchanged a Watch with
the King of that Country, whom he described
to be a very just and good Man,
for a Gun, some Powder, Shot, and
Ball; with which he sometimes provided
himself Food, but more generally
used it in defending himself against wild
Beasts; so that his Diet was chiefly of
the vegetable kind. He told me many
more Circumstances, which I may relate
to you hereafter: But, to be as concise
as possible at present, he at length greatly
comforted me, by promising to conduct
me to a Sea-port, where I might
have an Opportunity to meet with some
Vessels trafficking for Slaves; and whence
I might once more commit myself to
that Element, which, though I had already
suffered so much on it, I must again 

trust, to put me in Possession of all
I loved. 
“The Character he gave me of the Inhabitants
of the Town we saw below
us, and of their King, made me desirous
of being conducted thither; especially as
I very much wished to see the Captain
and Sailors, who had behaved very kindly
to me, and with whom, notwithstanding
all the civil Behaviour of the Hermit,
I was rather easier in my Mind,
than alone with this single Man; but he
dissuaded me greatly from attempting
such a Walk, till I had recreated my
Spirits with Rest, desiring me to repose
myself on his Couch of Turf, saying,
that he himself would retire without the
Cave, where he would remain as my
Guard. I accepted this kind Proposal; 
but it was long before I could procure any
Slumber: However, at length, Weariness
prevailed over my Tears, and I enjoyed
several Hours Sleep. When I awaked,
I found my faithful Centinel on
his Post, and ready at my Summons. 
This Behaviour infused some Confidence 

into me, and I now repeated my Request,
that he would go with me to the
Town below; but he answered, it would
be better advised to take some Repast
before I undertook the Journey, which I
should find much longer than it appear'd. 
I consented, and he set forth a greater
Variety of Fruits than before, of which I
eat very plentifully: My Collation being
ended, I renewed the Mention of my
Walk; but he still persisted in dissuading
me, telling me, that I was not yet strong
enough; that I could repose myself no
where with greater Safety, than in his
Cave; and that, for his Part, he could
have no greater Happiness than that of
attending me, adding with a Sigh, it was
a Happiness he should envy any other,
more than all the Gifts of Fortune. You
may imagine, I began now to entertain
Suspicions; but he presently removed all
Doubt, by throwing himself at my Feet,
expressing the warmest Passion for me. 
I should have now sunk with Despair,
had he not accompanied these Professions
with the most vehement Protestations,
that he would never offer me any 

other Love but that of Entreaty, and that
he would rather die the most cruel Death
by my Coldness, than gain the highest
Bliss by becoming the Occasion of a
Tear of Sorrow to these bright Eyes,
which, he said, were Stars, under whose
benign Influence alone, he could enjoy,
or indeed, suffer Life.” She was repeating
many more Compliments he made her,
when a horrid Uproar, which alarmed the
whole Gate, put a Stop to her Narration at
present. It is impossible for me to give the
Reader a better Idea of the Noise which
now arose, than by desiring him to imagine
I had the hundred Tongues the Poet once
wished for, and was vociferating from them
all at once, by hollowing, scolding, crying,
swearing, bellowing, and in short, by every
different Articulation which is within the
Scope of the human Organ. 