


In which Wild, after many fruitless
Endeavours to discover his
Friend, moralizes on his Misfortune
in a Speech, which may be of Use (if
rightly understood) to some other
considerable Speech-Makers. 
Not the highest-fed Footman of the
highest-bred Woman of Quality
knocks with more Impetuosity, than Wild
did at the Count's Door, which was
immediately opened by a well-drest Livery
Man, who answered, his Master was not
at Home. Wild, not satisfied with this,
searched the House, but to no purpose; he
then ransacked all the Gaming-Houses in
Town, but found no Count: Indeed that
Gentleman had taken Leave of his House
the same Instant Mr. Wild had turned his
Back, and, equipping himself with Boots
and a Post-horse, without taking with him
either Servant, Clothes, or any Necessaries,
for the Journey of a great Man, made such 

mighty Expedition that he was now upwards
of twenty Miles on his Way to Harwich. 
WILD, finding his Search ineffectual,
resolved to give it over for that Night; he
then retired to his Seat of Contemplation,
a Night-Cellar, where, without a single
Farthing in his Pocket, he called for a
Sneaker of Punch, and, placing himself on
a Bench by himself, he softly vented the
following Soliloquy: 
“How vain is human Greatness! 
What avail superiour Abilities, and
a noble Defiance of those narrow Rules
and Bounds which confine the Vulgar; 
when our best concerted Schemes are liable
to be defeated! How unhappy is
the State of Priggism! How impossible
for human Prudence to foresee and
guard against every Circumvention! It is
even as a Game of Chess, where, while
the Rook, or Knight, or Bishop, is busied
in forecasting some great Enterprize,
a worthless Pawn interposes, and disconcerts
his Scheme. Better had it been for 

me to have observed the simple Laws of
Friendship and Morality, than thus to
ruin my Friend for the Benefit of others. 
I might have commanded his Purse to
any degree of Moderation, I have now
disabled him from the Power of serving
me. Well! but that was not my Design. 
If I cannot arraign my own Conduct,
why should I, like a Woman or a
Child, sit down and lament the Disappointment
of Chance! But can I acquit
myself of all Neglect? Did I not misbehave
in putting it into the Power of others
to outwit me? But that is impossible
to be avoided. In this a Prig is more
unhappy than any other: A cautious
Man may, in a Crowd, preserve his own
Pockets by keeping his Hands in them; 
but while he employs his Hands in another's
Pocket, how shall he be able to defend
his own? Indeed in this Light what can
be imagined more miserable than a Prig? 
How dangerous are his Acquisitions!
how unsafe, how unquiet his Possessions! 
Why then should any Man wish to be a
Prig, or where is his Greatness? 
I answer, in his Mind: 'Tis the inward 

Glory, the secret Consciousness of doing
great and wonderful Actions, which can
alone support the truly GREAT Man,
whether he be a Conqueror, a Tyrant,
a Minister, or a Prig. These
must bear him up against the private
Curse and public Imprecation, and while
he is hated and detested by all Mankind,
must make him inwardly satisfied with
himself. For what but some such inward
Satisfaction as this could inspire Men
possessed of Wealth, of Power, of every
human Blessing, which Pride, Avarice,
or Luxury could desire, to forsake their
Homes, abandon Ease and Repose, and,
at the Expence of Riches, Pleasures, at
the Price of Labour and Hardship, and
at the Hazard of all that Fortune hath liberally
given them, could send them at the
Head of a Multitude of Prigs, called an
Army, to molest their Neighbours; to
introduce Rape, Rapine, Bloodshed, and
every kind of Misery on their own Species? 
What but some such glorious Appetite
of Mind could inflame Princes,
endowed with the greatest Honours, and
enriched with the most plentiful Revenues, 

to desire maliciously to rob those
Subjects, who are content to sweat for
their Luxury, and to bow down
their Knees to their Pride, of their
Liberties, and to reduce them to an absolute
Dependence on their own Wills,
and those of their brutal Successors! 
What other Motive could seduce a Subject,
possest of great Property in his
Community, to betray the Interest of his
Fellow-Subjects, of his Brethren, and his
Posterity, to the wanton Disposition of
such Princes! Lastly, what less Inducement
could persuade the Prig to forsake
the Methods of acquiring a safe, an honest,
and a plentiful Livelihood, and, at
the Hazard of even Life itself and what
is mistakenly called Dishonour, to break
openly and bravely through the Laws of
his Country, for uncertain, unsteddy,
and unsafe Gain! Let me then hold
myself contented with this Reflection,
that I have been wise, though unsuccessful,
and am a GREAT, though an unhappy
Man. 

His Soliloquy and his Punch concluded
together; for he had at every Pause comforted
himself with a Sip. And now it came
first into his Head, that it would be more
difficult to pay for it, than it was to swallow
it, when, to his great Pleasure, he beheld,
at another Corner of the Room, one
of the Gentlemen whom he had employed
in the Attack on Heartfree, and who, he
doubted not, would readily lend him a
Guinea or two; but he had the Mortification,
on applying to him, to hear that the
Gaming-Table had stript him of all the
Booty which his own Generosity had left in
his Possession. He was therefore obliged to
pursue his usual Method on such Occasions; 
so, cocking his Hat fiercely, he marched
out of the Room without making
any Excuse, or any one daring to make
the least Demand. 