




Of writing Lives in general, and
particularly of Pamela; with a
Word by the bye of Colley Cibber
and others. 
It is a trite but true Observation, that
Examples work more forcibly on the
Mind than Precepts: And if this be
just in what is odious and blameable,
it is more strongly so in what is amiable
and praise-worthy. Here Emulation most 

effectually operates upon us, and inspires
our Imitation in an irresistible manner. A
good Man therefore is a standing Lesson
to all his Acquaintance, and of far greater
use in that narrow Circle than a good
Book. 
But as it often happens that the best
Men are but little known, and consequently
cannot extend the Usefulness of their Examples
a great way; the Writer may be
called in aid to spread their History farther,
to present the amiable Pictures to
those who have not the Happiness of knowing
the Originals; and by communicating
such valuable Patterns to the World, may
perhaps do a more extensive Service to
Mankind than the Person whose Life originally
afforded the Pattern. 
In this Light I have always regarded
those Biographers who have recorded the
Actions of great and worthy Persons of
both Sexes. Not to mention those antient
Writers which of late days are little read
being written in obsolete, and, as they are
generally thought, unintelligible Languages; 
such as Plutarch, Nepos, and others which
I heard of in my Youth, our own Language
affords many of excellent Use and
Instruction, finely calculated to sow the Seeds 

of Virtue in Youth, and very easy to be
comprehended by Persons of moderate Capacity. 
Such are the History of John the
Great, who, by his brave and heroic Actions
against Men of large and athletic Bodies,
obtained the glorious Appellation of
the Giant-killer; that of an Earl of Warwick,
whose Christian Name was Guy; 
the Lives of Argalus and Parthenia, and
above all, the History of those seven worthy
Personages, the Champions of Christendom. 
In all these, Delight is mixed with
Instruction, and the Reader is almost as
much improved as entertained. 
But I pass by these and many others,
to mention two Books lately published,
which represent an admirable Pattern of
the amiable in either Sex. The former of
these which deals in Male-Virtue, was
written by the great Person himself, who
lived the Life he hath recorded, and is by
many thought to have lived such a Life only
in order to write it. The other is communicated
to us by an Historian who borrows
his Lights, as the common Method is,
from authentic Papers and Records. The
Reader, I believe, already conjectures, I
mean, the Lives of Mr. Colley Cibber, and
of Mrs. Pamela Andrews. How artfully
doth the former, by insinuating that he 

escaped being promoted to the highest Stations
in Church and State, teach us a Contempt
of worldly Grandeur! how strongly
doth he inculcate an absolute Submission to
our Superiors! Lastly, how completely
doth he arm us against so uneasy, so wretched
a Passion as the Fear of Shame; how clearly
doth he expose the Emptiness and Vanity
of that Fantom, Reputation! 
What the Female Readers are taught
by the Memoirs of Mrs. Andrews, is so
well set forth in the excellent Essays or Letters
prefixed to the second and subsequent
Editions of that Work, that it would be
here a needless Repetition. The authentic
History with which I now present the
public, is an Instance of the great Good
that Book is likely to do, and of the Prevalence
of Example which I have just observed:
since it will appear that it was by
keeping the excellent Pattern of his Sister's
Virtues before his Eyes, that Mr. Joseph
Andrews was chiefly enabled to preserve his
Purity in the midst of such great Temptations; 
I shall only add, that this Character of
Male-Chastity, tho' doubtless as desirable,
as becoming in one Part of the human Species,
as in the other, is almost the only Virtue
which the great Apologist hath not given
himself for the sake of giving the Example
to his Readers. 




Of Mr. Joseph Andrews his Birth, Parentage,
Education, and great Endowments,
with a Word or two concerning
Ancestors. 
Mr. Joseph Andrews, the Hero of our
ensuing History, was esteemed to be
the only Son of Gaffar and Gammer Andrews,
and Brother to the illustrious Pamela,
whose Virtue is at present so famous. 
As to his Ancestors, we have searched with
great Diligence, but little Success: being
unable to trace them farther than his Great
Grandfather, who, as an elderly Person in
the Parish remembers to have heard his
Father say, was an excellent Cudgel-player. 
Whether he had any Ancestors before this,
we must leave to the Opinion of our curious
Reader, finding nothing of sufficient
Certainty to relie on. However, we cannot
omit inserting an Epitaph which an
ingenious Friend of ours hath communicated. 

Stay Traveller, for underneath this Pew
Lies fast asleep that merry Man Andrew;
When the last Day's great Sun shall gild the Skies,
Then he shall from his Tomb get up and rise.

Be merry while thou can'st: for surely thou
Shall shortly be as sad as he is now.
The Words are almost out of the Stone
with Antiquity. But it is needless to observe,
that Andrew here is writ without
an s, and is besides a Christian Name. My
Friend moreover conjectures this to have
been the Founder of that Sect of laughing
Philosophers, since called Merry Andrews. 
To wave therefore a Circumstance, which,
tho' mentioned in conformity to the exact
Rules of Biography, is not greatly material; 
I proceed to things of more consequence. 
Indeed it is sufficiently certain,
that he had as many Ancestors, as the best
Man living; and perhaps, if we look five
or six hundred Years backwards, might be
related to some Persons of very great Figure
at present, whose Ancestors within half the
last Century are buried in as great Obscurity. 
But suppose for Argument's sake
we should admit that he had no Ancestors
at all, but had sprung up, according to the
modern Phrase, out of a Dunghill, as
the Athenians pretended they themselves
did from the Earth, would not this*  Autokopros
have been justly entitled to all the 

Praise arising from his own Virtues? Would
it not be hard, that a Man who hath no
Ancestors should therefore be render'd incapable
of acquiring Honour, when we see
so many who have no Virtues, enjoying
the Honour of their Forefathers? At
ten Years old (by which Time his Education
was advanced to Writing and Reading)
he was bound an Apprentice, according
to the Statute, to Sir Thomas Booby, an
Uncle of Mr. Booby's by the Father's side. 
Sir Thomas having then an Estate in his
own hands, the young Andrews was at
first employed in what in the Country they
call keeping Birds. His Office was to perform
the Part the Antients assigned to the
God Priapus, which Deity the Moderns
call by the Name of Jack-o'-Lent: but his
Voice being so extremely musical, that it
rather allured the Birds than terrified them,
he was soon transplanted from the Fields
into the Dog-kennel, where he was placed
under the Huntsman, and made what Sportsmen
term a Whipper-in. For this Place likewise
the Sweetness of his Voice disqualified
him: the Dogs preferring the Melody of
his chiding to all the alluring Notes of the
Huntsman, who soon became so incensed at
it, that he desired Sir Thomas to provide
otherwise for him; and constantly laid
every Fault the Dogs were at, to the Account 

of the poor Boy, who was now
transplanted to the Stable. Here he soon
gave Proofs of Strength and Agility, beyond
his Years, and constantly rode the
most spirited and vicious Horses to water
with an Intrepidity which surprized every
one. While he was in this Station, he
rode several Races for Sir Thomas, and this
with such Expertness and Success, that the
neighbouring Gentlemen frequently solicited
the Knight, to permit little Joey (for
so he was called) to ride their Matches. 
The best Gamesters, before they laid their
Money, always enquired which Horse
little Joey was to ride, and the Betts were
rather proportioned by the Rider than by
the Horse himself; especially after he had
scornfully refused a considerable Bribe to
play booty on such an Occasion. This extremely
raised his Character, and so pleased
the Lady Booby, that she desired to have
him (being now seventeen Years of Age)
for her own Foot-boy. 
Joey was now preferred from the Stable
to attend on his Lady; to go on her Errands,
stand behind her Chair, wait at her
Tea-table, and carry her Prayer-Book to
Church; at which Place, his Voice gave
him an Opportunity of distinguishing
himself by singing Psalms: he behaved 

likewise in every other respect so well a
divine Service, that it recommended him
to the Notice of Mr. Abraham Adams the
Curate; who took an Opportunity one
Day, as he was drinking a Cup of Ale
in Sir Thomas's Kitchin, to ask the young
Man several Questions concerning Religion; 
with his Answers to which he was
wonderfully pleased. 



Of Mr. Abraham Adams the Curate,
Mrs. Slipslop the Chambermaid, and
others. 
Mr. Abraham Adams was an excellent
Scholar. He was a perfect
Master of the Greek and Latin Languages; 
to which he added a great Share of
Knowledge in the Oriental Tongues, and
could read and translate French, Italian
and Spanish. He had applied many Years to
the most severe Study, and had treasured
up a Fund of Learning rarely to be met
with in a University. He was besides a
Man of good Sense, good Parts, and good
Nature; but was at the same time as entirely
ignorant of the Ways of this World, as
an Infant just entered into it could possibly 

be. As he had never any Intention to deceive,
so he never suspected such a Design
in others. He was generous, friendly and
brave to an Excess; but Simplicity was his
Characteristic: he did, no more than Mr.
Colley Cibber, apprehend any such Passions
as Malice and Envy to exist in Mankind,
which was indeed less remarkable in a
Country Parson than in a Gentleman who
hath past his Life behind the Scenes, a Place
which hath been seldom thought the School
of Innocence; and where a very little Observation
would have convinced the great
Apologist, that those Passions have a real
Existence in the human Mind. 
His Virtue and his other Qualifications,
as they rendered him equal to his Office,
so they made him an agreeable and valuable
Companion, and had so much endeared
and well recommended him to a Bishop,
that at the Age of Fifty, he was provided
with a handsome Income of twenty-three
Pounds a Year; which however, he could
not make any great Figure with: because
he lived in a dear Country, and was a
little incumbered with a Wife and six
Children. 
It was this Gentleman, who, having,
as I have said, observed the singular Devotion
of young Andrews, had found means 

to question him, concerning several Particulars; 
as how many Books there were
in the New Testament? which were they?
how many Chapters they contained? and
such like; to all which Mr. Adams said,
he answer'd much better than Sir Thomas,
or two other neighbouring Justices of the
Peace could probably have done. 
Mr. Adams was wonderfully sollicitous
to know at what Time, and by what Opportunity
the Youth became acquainted with
these Matters: who told him, that he had
very early learnt to read and write by the
Goodness of his Father, who, though he
had not Interest enough to get him into
a Charity School, because a Cousin of his
Father's Landlord did not vote on the right
side for a Church-warden in a Borough
Town, yet had been himself at the Expence
of Sixpence a Week for his Learning. 
That he had ever since he was in Sir
Thomas's Family, employed all his Hours
of Leisure in reading good Books; that he
had read the Bible, the Whole Duty of Man,
and Thomas à Kempis; and that as often as
he could, without being perceived, he had
studied a great good Book which lay open
in the Hall Window, where he had read, as
how the Devil carried away half a Church
in Sermon-time, without hurting one of the
Congregation; and as how a Field of Corn 

ran away down a Hill with all the Trees
upon it, and covered another Man's Meadow. 
This sufficiently assured Mr. Adams, that the
good Book meant could be no other than
Baker's Chronicle. 
The Curate, surprized to find such
Instances of Industry and Application
in a young Man, who had never met
with the least Encouragement, asked him,
if he did not extremely regret the want
of a liberal Education, and the not having
been born of Parents, who might have
indulged his Talents and Desire of Knowledge? 
To which he answered, “He hoped
he had profited somewhat better from
the Books he had read, than to lament
his Condition in this World. That for
his part, he was perfectly content with
the State to which he was called, that
he should endeavour to improve his Talent,
which was all required of him, but
not repine at his own Lot, nor envy
those of his Betters.” “Well said, my
Lad, reply'd the Curate, and I wish some
who have read many more Books, had
profited so much by them.” 
Adams had no nearer Access to Sir
Thomas, or my Lady, than by the waiting
Gentlewoman: For Sir Thomas was too 

apt to estimate Men merely by their Dress,
or Fortune; and my Lady was a Woman
of Gaiety, who had been bless'd with a
Town-Education, and never spoke of any
of her Country Neighbours, by any other
Appellation than that of Brutes. They
both regarded the Curate as a kind of Domestic
only belonging to the Parson of the
Parish, who was at this time at variance
with the Knight on Suits, which he then
had for Tithes with seven Tenants of his
Manor, in order to set aside a Modus, by
which the Parson proposed an Advantage
of several Shillings per annum, and by these
Suits had greatly impoverished himself,
and utterly undone the poor Tenants. 
Mrs. Slipslop the Waiting-Gentlewoman,
being herself the Daughter of a Curate,
preserved some Respect for Adams; 
she professed great Regard for his Learning,
and would frequently dispute with
him on Points of Theology; but always
insisted on a Deference to be paid to her
Understanding, as she had been frequently
at London, and knew more of the World
than a Country Parson could pretend to. 
She had in these Disputes a particular
Advantage over Adams: for she was
a mighty Affecter of hard Words, which 

she used in such a manner, that the Parson,
who durst not offend her, by calling
her Words in question, was frequently at
some loss to guess her meaning, and would
have been much less puzzled by an Arabian
Manuscript. 
To her therefore, Adams mentioned the
Case of young Andrews, and desired her
to recommend him to her Lady as a Youth
very susceptible of Learning, and one,
whose Instruction in Latin he would himself
undertake; by which means he might
be qualified for a higher Station than that
of a Footman: and added, she knew it
was in his Master's power easily to provide
for him in a better manner. He therefore
desired, that the Boy might be left
behind under his Care. 
“La Mr. Adams, said Mrs. Slipslop, do
you think my Lady will suffer any Preambles
about such a Matter? She he is going
to London very concisely, and I am
confidous would not leave Joey behind
her on any account; for he is one of
the genteelest young Fellows you may
see in a Summer's Day, and I am confidous
she would as soon think of parting
with a Pair of her Grey-Mares: for
she values herself as much on one as
the other.” Adams would have interrupted, 

but she proceeded: “And why
is Latin more necessitous for a Footman
than a Gentleman? It is very proper
that you Clargymen must learn it, because
you can't preach without it: but
I have heard Gentlemen say in London,
that it is fit for no body else. I am
confidous my Lady would be angry with
me for mentioning it, and I shall draw
myself into no such Delemy.” At
which words her Lady's Bell rung, and
Mr. Adams was forced to retire; nor could
he gain a second Opportunity with her before
their London Journey, which happened
a few Days afterwards. However, Andrews
behaved very thankfully and gratefully
to him for his intended Kindness,
which he told him he never would forget,
and at the same time received from the
good Man many Admonitions concerning
the Regulation of his future Conduct, and
his Perseverance in Innocence and Industry. 




What happened after their Journey to
London. 
No sooner was young Andrews arrived
at London, than he began to scrape
an Acquaintance with his party-colour'd
Brethren, who endeavour'd to make him
despise his former Course of Life. His
Hair was cut after the newest Fashion,
and became his chief Care. He went abroad
with it all the Morning in Papers,
and drest it out in the Afternoon; they
could not however teach him to game,
swear, drink, nor any other genteel Vice the
Town abounded with. He applied most
of his leisure Hours to Music, in which
he greatly improved himself, and became
so perfect a Connoisseur in that Art, that he
led the Opinion of all the other Footmen
at an Opera, and they never condemned
or applauded a single Song contrary to his
Approbation or Dislike. He was a little
too forward in Riots at the Play-Houses
and Assemblies; and when he attended
his Lady at Church (which was but seldom)
he behaved with less seeming Devotion
than formerly: however, if he was
outwardly a pretty Fellow, his Morals remained
entirely uncorrupted, tho' he was 

at the same time smarter and genteeler,
than any of the Beaus in Town, either in
or out of Livery. 
His Lady, who had often said of him
that Joey was the handsomest and genteelest
Footman in the Kingdom, but that it
was pity he wanted Spirit, began now to
find that Fault no longer; on the contrary,
she was frequently heard to cry out, Aye,
there is some Life in this Fellow. She plainly
saw the Effects which Town-Air hath
on the soberest Constitutions. She would
now walk out with him into Hyde-Park in
a Morning, and when tired, which happened
almost every Minute, would lean on
his Arm, and converse with him in great
Familiarity. Whenever she stept out of
her Coach she would take him by the Hand,
and sometimes, for fear of stumbling, press
it very hard; she admitted him to deliver
Messages at her Bed-side in a Morning,
leered at him at Table, and indulged him
in all those innocent Freedoms which Women
of Figure may permit without the
least sully of their Virtue. 
But tho' their Virtue remains unsullied,
yet now and then some small Arrows
will glance at the Shadow of it, their
Reputation; and so it fell out to Lady 

Booby, who happened to be walking Arm
in Arm with Joey one Morning in Hyde-Park,
when Lady Tittle and Lady Tattle
came accidentally by in their Coach. Bless
me, says Lady Tittle, can I believe my,
Eyes? Is that Lady, Booby? Surely, says
Tattle. But what makes you surprized? 
Why is not that her Footman, reply'd
Tittle? At which Tattle laughed and cryed,
An old Business, I assure you, is it possible you
should not have heard it? The whole Town
hath known it this half Year. The Consequence
of this Interview was a Whisper
through a hundred Visits, which were
separately performed by the two Ladies* 
the same Afternoon, and might have had
a mischievous Effect, had it not been stopt
by two fresh Reputations which were published
the Day afterwards, and engrossed
the whole Talk of the Town. 
But whatever Opinion or Suspicion the
scandalous Inclination of Defamers might
entertain of Lady Booby's innocent Freedoms,
it is certain they made no Impression
on young Andrews, who never offered to 

encroach beyond the Liberties which his
Lady allowed him. A Behaviour which
she imputed to the violent Respect he preserved
for her, and which served only to
heighten a something she began to conceive,
and which the next Chapter will
open a little farther. 



The Death of Sir Thomas Booby, with
the affectionate and mournful Behaviour
of his Widow, and the great Purity
of Joseph Andrews. 
At this Time, an Accident happened
which put a stop to these agreeable
Walks, which probably would have soon
puffed up the Cheeks of Fame, and caused
her to blow her brazen Trumpet through
the Town, and this was no other than the
Death of Sir Thomas Booby, who departing
this Life, left his disconsolate Lady confined
to her House as closely as if she herself
had been attacked by some violent
Disease. During the first six Days the
poor Lady admitted none but Mrs. Slipslop
and three Female Friends who made a
Party at Cards: but on the seventh she
ordered Joey, whom for a good Reason we 

shall hereafter call Joseph, to bring up
her Tea-kettle. The Lady being in Bed,
called Joseph to her, bad him sit down,
and having accidentally laid her hand on
his, she asked him, if he had never been
in Love? Joseph answered, with some
Confusion, “it was time enough for one
so young as himself to think on such
things.” As young as you are, reply'd
the Lady, I am convinced you are no
Stranger to that Passion; “Come Joey,” 
says she, “tell me truly, who is the happy
Girl whose Eyes have made a Conquest
of you?” Joseph returned, “that
all Women he had ever seen were equally
indifferent to him.” “O then,” said the
Lady, “you are a general Lover. Indeed
you handsome Fellows, like handsome
Women, are very long and difficult
in fixing: but yet you shall never
persuade me that your Heart is so insusceptible
of Affection; I rather impute
what you say to your Secrecy, a
very commendable Quality, and what I
I am far from being angry with you for. 
Nothing can be more unworthy in a
young Man than to betray any Intimacies
with the Ladies.” Ladies! Madam,
said Joseph, I am sure I never had the Impudence
to think of any that deserve that
Name. “Don't pretend to too much Modesty, 

said she, for that sometimes may
be impertinent: but pray, answer me
this Question, Suppose a Lady should
happen to like you, suppose she should
prefer you to all your Sex, and admit
you to the same Familiarities as you
might have hoped for, if you had been
born her equal, are you certain that no
Vanity could tempt you to discover her? 
Answer me honestly, Joseph, Have you
so much more Sense and so much more
Virtue than you handsome young Fellows
generally have, who make no
scruple of sacrificing our dear Reputation
to your Pride, without considering
the great Obligation we lay on you,
by our Condescension and Confidence? 
Can you keep a Secret, my Joey.” 
Madam says he, “I hope your Ladyship
can't tax me with ever betraying the
Secrets of the Family, and I hope, if
you was to turn me away, I might have
that Character of you.” “I don't intend
to turn you away, Joey,” said she, and
sighed, “I am afraid it is not in my
power.” She then raised herself a
little in her Bed, and discovered one of the
whitest Necks that ever was seen; at which
Joseph blushed, La! says she, in an affected
Surprize, “what am I doing? I have
trusted myself with a Man alone, naked 

in Bed; suppose you should have
any wicked Intentions upon my Honour,
how should I defend myself?” Joseph
protested that he never had the least
evil Design again her. “No, says she, perhaps
you may not call your Designs wicked,
and perhaps they are not so.” —He swore
they were not. “You misunderstand me,
says she, I mean if they were against
my Honour, they may not be wicked,
but the World calls them so. But then,
say you, the World will never know
any thing of the Matter, yet would not
that be trusting to your Secrecy? Must
not my Reputation be then in your
power? Would you not then be my
Master?” Joseph begged her Ladyship
to be comforted, for that he would
never imagine the least wicked thing against
her, and that he had rather die a
thousand Deaths than give her any reason
to suspect him. “Yes, said she, I must
have Reason to suspect you. Are you
not a Man? and without Vanity I may
pretend to some Charms. But perhaps
you may fear I should prosecute you; 
indeed I hope you do, and yet Heaven
knows I should never have the Confidence
to appear before a Court of Justice, and
you know, Joey, I am of a forgiving
Temper. Tell me Joey, don't you think 

I should forgive you?” “Indeed Madam,
says Joseph, I will never do any thing
to disoblige your Ladyship.” “How,
says she, do you think it would not disoblige
me then? Do you think I would
willingly suffer you?” “I don't understand
you, Madam,” says Joseph. 
“Don't you, said she, then you are either a
Fool or pretend to be so, I find I was
mistaken in you, so get you down Stairs,
and never let me see your Face again:
your pretended Innocence cannot impose
on me.” “Madam, said Joseph,
I would not have your Ladyship think
any Evil of me. I have always endeavoured
to be a dutiful Servant both to
you and my Master.” “O thou Villain,
answered my Lady, Why did'st thou
mention the Name of that dear Man,
unless to torment me, to bring his precious
Memory to my Mind, (and then
she burst into a Fit of Tears)” “Get thee
from my Sight, I shall never endure
thee more.” At which Words she
turned away from him, and Joseph retreated
from the Room in a most disconsolate
Condition, and writ the Letter which
the Reader will find in the next Chapter. 




How Joseph Andrews writ a Letter
to his Sister Pamela. 

To Mrs. Pamela Andrews, living with
Squire Booby.
“Dear Sister,
Since I received your Letter of
your good Lady's Death, we have
had a Misfortune of the same kind in
our Family. My worthy Master, Sir
Thomas, died about four Days ago, and
what is worse, my poor Lady is certainly
gone distracted. None of the Servants expected
her to take it so to heart, because
they quarrelled almost every day of their
Lives: but no more of that, because
you know, Pamela, I never loved to
tell the Secrets of my Master's Family; 
but to be sure you must have known
they never loved one another, and I
have heard her Ladyship wish his Honour
dead above a thousand times:
but no body knows what it is to lose a
Friend till they have lost him. 
“Don't tell any body what I write,
because I should not care to have Folks 

say I discover what passes in our Family:
but if it had not been so great a Lady,
I should have thought she had had a
mind to me. Dear Pamela, don't tell
any body: but she ordered me to sit
down by her Bed-side, when she was in
naked Bed; and she held my Hand, and
talked exactly as a Lady does to her
Sweetheart in a Stage-Play, which I
have seen in Covent-Garden, while she
wanted him to be no better than he
should be. 
“If Madam be mad, I shall not care
for staying long in the Family; so I
heartily wish you could get me a Place
either at the Squire's, or some other
neighbouring Gentleman's, unless it be
true that you are going to be married
to Parson Williams, as Folks talk, and
then I should be very willing to be his
Clerk: for which you know I am qualified,
being able to read, and to set a
Psalm. 
“I fancy, I shall be discharged very
soon; and the Moment I am, unless I
hear from you, I shall return to my old
Master's Country Seat, if it be only to
see Parson Adams, who is the best Man
in the World. London is a bad Place, 

and there is so little good Fellowship,
that next-door Neighbours don't know
one another. Pray give my Service to
all Friends that enquire for me; so I
rest 
Your Loving Brother,
Joseph Andrews.” 
As soon as Joseph had sealed and directed
this Letter, he walked down Stairs,
where he met Mrs. Slipslop, with whom we
shall take this Opportunity to bring the
Reader a little better acquainted. She was
an antient Maiden Gentlewoman of about
Forty-five Years of Age, who having made
a small Slip in her Youth had continued a
good Maid ever since. She was not at
this time remarkably handsome; being
very short, and rather too corpulent in
Body, and somewhat red, with the Addition
of Pimples in the Face. Her Nose
was likewise rather too large, and her Eyes
too little; nor did she resemble a Cow so
much in her Breath, as in two brown
Globes which she carried before her; one
of her Legs was also a little shorter than the
other, which occasioned her to limp as she
walked. This fair Creature had long cast
the Eyes of Affection on Joseph, in which
she had not met with quite so good Success 

as she probably wished, tho' besides the
Allurements of her native Charms, she
had given him Tea, Sweetmeats, Wine,
and many other Delicacies, of which by
keeping the Keys, she had the absolute Command. 
Joseph however, had not returned
the least Gratitude to all these Favours, not
even so much as a Kiss; tho' I would not
insinuate she was so easily to be satisfied:
for surely then he would have been highly
blameable. The truth is, she was arrived at
an Age when she thought she might indulge
herself in any Liberties with a Man, without
the danger of bringing a third Person
into the World to betray them. She
imagined, that by so long a Self-denial,
she had not only made amends for the
small Slip of her Youth above hinted at:
but had likewise laid up a Quantity of
Merit to excuse any future Failings. In a
word, she resolved to give a loose to her
amorous Inclinations, and pay off the Debt
of Pleasure which she found she owed herself,
as fast as possible. 
With these Charms of Person; and in
this Disposition of Mind, she encountered
poor Joseph at the Bottom of the Stairs,
and asked him if he would drink a Glass
of something good this Morning. Joseph,
whose Spirits were not a little cast down, 

very readily and thankfully accepted the
Offer; and together they went into a
Closet, where having delivered him a full
Glass of Ratifia, Ratisia and desired him to sit
down, Mrs. Slipslop thus began: 
“Sure nothing can be a more simple
Contract in a Woman, than to place
her Affections on a Boy. If I had ever
thought it would have been my Fate, I
should have wished to die a thousand
Deaths rather than live to see that Day. 
If we like a Man, the lightest Hint sophisticates. 
Whereas a Boy proposes
upon us to break through all the Regulations
of Modesty, before we can make
any Oppression upon him.” Joseph,
who did not understand a Word she said,
answered, “yes Madam;—” “Yes Madam!” 
reply'd Mrs. Slipslop with some
Warmth, “Do you intend to result my
Passion? Is it not enough, ungrateful as
you are, to make no Return to all the
Favours I have done you: but you
must treat me with Ironing? Barbarous
Monster! how have I deserved that
my Passion should be resulted and
treated with Ironing?” “Madam,” 
answered Joseph, “I don't understand
your hard Words: but I am certain,
you have no Occasion to call me ungrateful: 

for so far from intending you
any Wrong. I have always loved you
as well as if you had been my own Mother.” 
“How, Sirrah!” says Mrs.
Slipslop in a Rage: “Your own Mother! 
Do you assinuate that I am old enough
to be your Mother? I don't know what a
Stripling may think: but I believe a Man
would refer me to any Green-Sickness
silly Girl whatsomdever: but I ought to
despise you rather than be angry with you,
for referring the Conversation of Girls
to that of a Woman of Sense.” “Madam,” 
says Joseph, “I am sure I have
always valued the Honour you did me
by your Conversation; for I know you
are a Woman of Learning.” “Yes but,
Joseph,” said she a little softened by
the Compliment to her Learning, “If
you had a Value for me, you certainly
would have found some Method of
shewing it me; for I am convicted you
must see the Value I have for you. Yes,
Joseph, my Eyes whether I would or
no, must have declared a Passion I cannot
conquer. —Oh! Joseph!—” 
As when a hungry Tygress, who long
had traversed the Woods in fruitless search,
sees within the Reach of her Claws a
Lamb, she prepares to leap on her Prey; 

or as a voracious Pike, of immense Size,
surveys through the liquid Element a Roach
or Gudgeon which cannot escape her Jaws,
opens them wide to swallow the little Fish:
so did Mrs. Slipslop prepare to lay her violent
amorous Hands on the poor Joseph,
when luckily her Mistress's Bell rung, and
delivered the intended Martyr from her
Clutches. She was obliged to break off
abruptly, and defer the Execution of her
Purpose to some other Time. We shall
therefore return to the Lady Booby, and
give our Reader some Account of her Behaviour,
after she was left by Joseph in a
Temper of Mind not greatly different from
that of the inflamed Slipslop. 



Sayings of wise Men. A Dialogue between
the Lady and her Maid, and
a Panegyric or rather Satire on the
Passion of Love, in the sublime Style. 
It is the Observation of some antient
Sage, whose Name I have forgot, that
Passions operate differently on the human
Mind, as Diseases on the Body, in proportion
to the Strength or Weakness, Soundness 

or Rottenness of the one and the
other. 
We hope therefore, a judicious Reader
will give himself some Pains to observe,
what we have so greatly laboured to describe,
the different Operations of this
Passion of Love in the gentle and cultivated
Mind of the Lady Booby, from those
which it effected in the less polished and
coarser Disposition of Mrs. Slipslop. 
One other Philosopher, whose Name
also at present escapes my Memory, hath
somewhere said, that Resolutions taken in
the Absence of the beloved Object are
very apt to vanish in its Presence; on both
which wise Sayings the following Chapter
may serve as a Comment. 
No sooner had Joseph left the Room in
the Manner we have before related, than
the Lady, enraged at her Disappointment,
began to reflect with Severity on her Conduct. 
Her Love was now changed to Disdain,
which Pride assisted to torment her. 
She despised herself for the Meanness of her
Passion, and Joseph for its ill Success. 
However, she had now got the better of
it in her own Opinion, and determined
immediately to dismiss the Object. After 

much tossing and turning in her Bed, and
many Soliloquies, which, if we had no
better Matter for our Reader, we would
give him; she at last rung the Bell as
above-mentioned, and was presently attended
by Mrs. Slipslop, who was not much
better pleased with Joseph, than the Lady
herself. 
Slipslop, said Lady Booby, when did
you see Joseph? The poor Woman was so
surprized at the unexpected Sound of his
Name, at so critical a time, that she had
the greatest Difficulty to conceal the Confusion
she was under from her Mistress,
whom she answered nevertheless, with pretty
good Confidence, though not entirely
void of Fear of Suspicion, that she had
not seen him that Morning. “I am afraid,” 
said Lady Booby, “he is a wild
young Fellow.” “That he is,” said Slipslop,
“and a wicked one too. To my
knowledge he games, drinks, swears and
fights eternally: besides he is horribly indicted
to Wenching.” “Ay!” said the Lady! 
“I never heard that of him.” “O Madam,” 
answered the other, “he is so lewd
a Rascal that if your Ladyship keeps him
much longer, you will not have one Virgin
in your House except myself. And yet I
can't conceive what the Wenches see in 

him, so be so foolishly fond as they are; 
in my Eyes he is as ugly a Scarecrow as
I ever upheld.” “Nay,” said the Lady,
the Boy is well enough. —“La Ma'am,” 
cries Slipslop, “I think him the ragmaticallest
Fellow in the Family.” “Sure, Slipslop,” 
says she, “you are mistaken: but
which of the Women do you most suspect?” 
“Madam,” says Slipslop, “there is
Betty the Chamber-Maid, I am almost convicted,
is with Child by him.” “Ay!” says
the Lady, “then pray pay her her Wages
instantly. I will keep no such Sluts
in my Family. And as for Joseph, you
may discard him too.” “Would your
Ladyship have him paid off immediately?” 
cries Slipslop, “for perhaps, when
Betty is gone, he may mend; and really
the Boy is a good Servant, and a strong
healthy luscious Boy enough.” “This
Morning,” answered the Lady with some
Vehemence. “I wish Madam,” cries Slipslop,
“your Ladyship would be so good as
to try him a little longer.” “I will not
have my Commands disputed,” said the
Lady, “sure you are not fond of him
yourself.” “I Madam?” cries Slipslop,
reddening, if not blushing, “I should
be sorry to think your Ladyship had any
reason to respect me of Fondness for a
Fellow; and if it be your Pleasure, I shall 

fulfill it with as much reluctance as possible.” 
“As little, I suppose you mean,” 
said the Lady; “and so about it instantly.” 
Mrs. Slipslop went out, and the Lady had
scarce taken two turns before she fell to
knocking and ringing with great Violence. 
Slipslop, who did not travel post-haste, soon
returned, and was countermanded as to
Joseph, but ordered to send Betty about her
Business without delay. She went out a
second time with much greater alacrity than
before; when the Lady began immediately
to accuse herself of Want of Resolution,
and to apprehend the Return of her Affection
with its pernicious Consequences:
she therefore applied herself again to the
Bell, and resummoned Mrs. Slipslop into
her Presence; who again returned, and was
told by her Mistress, that she had consider'd
better of the Matter, and was absolutely
resolved to turn away Joseph; which
she ordered her to do immediately. Slipslop,
who knew the Violence of her Lady's
Temper, and would not venture her Place
for any Adonis or Hercules in the Universe,
left her a third time; which she had
no sooner done, than the little God Cupid,
fearing he had not yet done the Lady's
Business, took a fresh Arrow with
the sharpest Point out of his Quiver, and
shot it directly into her Heart: in other 

and plainer Language, the Lady's Passion
got the better of her Reason. She
called back Slipslop once more, and told
her, she had resolved to see the Boy, and
examine him herself; therefore bid her send
him up. This wavering in her Mistress's
Temper probably put something into the
Waiting-Gentlewoman's Head, not necessary
to mention to the sagacious Reader. 
Lady Booby was going to call her back
again, but could not prevail with herself. 
The next Consideration therefore was, how
she should behave to Joseph when he came
in. She resolved to preserve all the Dignity
of the Woman of Fashion to her Servant,
and to indulge herself in this last
View of Joseph (for that she was most
certainly resolved it should be) at his own
Expence, by first insulting, and then discarding
him. 
O Love, what monstrous Tricks dost
thou play with thy Votaries of both Sexes! 
How dost thou deceive them, and make
them deceive themselves! Their Follies
are thy Delight. Their Sighs make thee
laugh, and their Pangs are thy Merriment! 

Not the Great Rich, who turns Men
into Monkeys, Wheelbarrows, and whatever
else best humours his Fancy, hath
so strangely metamorphosed the human
Shape; nor the Great Cibber, who confounds
all Number, Gender, and breaks
through every Rule of Grammar at his
Will, hath so distorted the English Language,
as thou dost metamorphose and distort
the human Senses. 
Thou puttest out our Eyes, stoppest
up our Ears, and takest away the power
of our Nostrils; so that we can neither
see the largest Object, hear the loudest
Noise, nor smell the most poignant Perfume. 
Again, when thou pleasest, thou
can'st make a Mole-hill appear as a Mountain; 
a Jew's-Harp sound like a Trumpet; 
and a Dazy smell like a Violet. Thou
can'st make Cowardice brave, Avarice generous,
Pride humble, and Cruelty tender-hearted. 
It short, thou turnest the
Heart of Man inside-out, as a Juggler doth
a Petticoat, and bringest whatsoever pleaseth
thee out from it. If there be any
one who doubts all this, let him read the
next Chapter. 




In which, after some very fine Writing,
the History goes on, and relates the
Interview between the Lady and Joseph; 
where the latter hath set an
Example, which we despair of seeing
followed by his Sex, in this vicious
Age. 
Now the Rake Hesperus had called
for his Breeches, and having well
rubbed his drowsy Eyes, prepared to dress
himself for all Night; by whose Example
his Brother Rakes on Earth likewise leave
those Beds, in which they had slept away
the Day. Now Thetis the good Housewife
began to put on the Pot in order to regale
the good Man Phœbus, after his daily Labours
were over. In vulgar Language, it
was in the Evening when Joseph attended
his Lady's Orders. 
But as it becomes us to preserve the
Character of this Lady, who is the Heroine
of our Tale; and as we have naturally
a wonderful Tenderness for that beautiful
Part of the human Species, called the
Fair Sex; before we discover too much of 

her Frailty to our Reader, it will be proper
to give him a lively Idea of that vast
Temptation, which overcame all the Efforts
of a modest and virtuous Mind; and
then we humbly hope his Good-nature will
rather pity than condemn the Imperfection
of human Virtue. 
Nay, the Ladies themselves will, we
hope, be induced, by considering the uncommon
Variety of Charms, which united
in this young Man's Person, to bridle their
rampant Passion for Chastity, and be at
least, as mild as their violent Modesty and
Virtue will permit them, in censuring the
Conduct of a Woman, who, perhaps, was
in her own Disposition as chaste as those
pure and sanctified Virgins, who, after a
Life innocently spent in the Gaieties of
the Town, begin about Fifty to attend
twice per diem, at the polite Churches and
Chapels, to return Thanks for the Grace
which preserved them formerly amongst
Beaus from Temptations, perhaps less powerful
than what now attacked the Lady
Booby. 
Mr. Joseph Andrews was now in the
one and twentieth Year of his Age. He
was of the highest Degree of middle Stature. 
His Limbs were put together with 

great Elegance and no less Strength. 
His Legs and Thighs were formed in the
exactest Proportion. His Shoulders were
broad and brawny, but yet his Arms hung
so easily, that he had all the Symptoms of
Strength without the least clumsiness. His
Hair was of a nut-brown Colour, and was
displayed in wanton Ringlets down his
Back. His Forehead was high, his Eyes
dark, and as full of Sweetness as of Fire. His
Nose a little inclined to the Roman. His
Teeth white and even. His Lips full red,
and soft. His Beard was only rough on
his Chin and upper Lip; but his Cheeks,
in which his Blood glowed, were overspread
with a thick Down. His Countenance
had a Tenderness joined with a Sensibility
inexpressible. Add to this the
most perfect Neatness in his Dress, and an
Air, which to those who have not seen
many Noblemen, would give an Idea of
Nobility. 
Such was the Person who now appeared
before the Lady. She viewed him some
time in Silence, and twice or thrice before
she spake, changed her Mind as to
the manner in which she should begin. 
At length, she said to him, “Joseph, I
am sorry to hear such Complaints against
you; I am told you behave so 

rudely to the Maids, that they cannot
do their Business in quiet; I mean those
who are not wicked enough to hearken
to your Solicitations. As to others, they
may not, perhaps call you rude: for
there are wicked Sluts who make one
ashamed of one's own Sex; and are as
ready to admit any nauseous Familiarity
as Fellows to offer it; nay, there
are such in my Family: but they shall
not stay in it; that impudent Trollop,
who is with Child by you, is discharged
by this time.” 
As a Person who is struck through
the Heart with a Thunderbolt, looks extremely
surprised, nay, and perhaps, is so
too. —Thus the poor Joseph received
the false Accusation of his Mistress; he
blushed and looked confounded, which she
misinterpreted to be Symptoms of his Guilt,
and thus went on. 
“Come hither, Joseph: another Mistress
might discard you for these Offences; 
But I have a Compassion for
your Youth, if I could be certain you
would be no more guilty. And consider,
Child, (laying her Hand carelessly
upon his) you are a handsome young
Fellow, and might do better; you might 

make your Fortune—.” “Madam,” 
said Joseph, “I do assure your Ladyship, I
don't know whether any Maid in the
House is Man or Woman—”. “Oh
fie! Joseph,” answer'd the Lady, “don't
commit another Crime in denying the
Truth. I could pardon the first; but I
hate a Lyar.” “Madam,” cries Joseph,
“I hope your Ladyship will not be offended
at my asserting my Innocence:
and by all that is Sacred, I have never
offered more than Kissing.” “Kissing!” 
said the Lady, “do you call that no Crime?
Kissing, Joseph, is but a Prologue to a
Play. Can I believe a young Fellow of
your Age and Complexion will be content
with Kissing? No, Joseph, there
is no Woman who grants that but will
grant more, and I am deceived greatly
in you, if you would not put her closely
to it. What would you think, Joseph,
if I admitted you to kiss me?” Joseph
reply'd, “He would sooner die than have
any such Thought.” “And yet, Joseph,” 
returned she, “Ladies have admitted
their Footmen to such Familiarities; and
Footmen, I confess to you, much less
deserving them; Fellows without half
your Charms: for such might almost
excuse the Crime. Tell me, therefore,
Joseph, if I should admit you to 

such Freedom, what would you think
of me?—tell me freely.” “Madam,” said
Joseph, “I should think your Ladyship
condescended a great deal below yourself.” 
“Pugh!” said she, “that I am to
answer to myself: but would not you insist
on more? Would you be contented
with a Kiss? Would not your Inclinations
be all on fire rather by such a Favour?” 
“Madam,” said Joseph, “if
they were, I hope I should be able to
control them, without suffering them to
get the better of my Virtue.” —You
have heard, Reader, Poets talk of the Statue
of Surprize; you have heard likewise,
or else you have heard very little, how
Surprize made one of the Sons of Cræsus
speak tho' he was dumb. You have seen
the Faces, in the Eighteen-penny Gallery,
when through the Trap-Door, to soft or
no Musick, Mr. Bridgewater, Mr. William
Mills, or some other of ghostly Appearance,
hath ascended with a Face all pale
with Powder, and a Shirt all bloody with
Ribbons; but from none of these, nor
from Phidias, or Praxiteles, if they should
return to Life—no, not from the inimitable
Pencil of my Friend Hogarth, could
you receive such an Idea of Surprize, as
would have entered in at your Eyes, had
they beheld the Lady Booby, when those last 

Words issued out from the Lips of Joseph. 
—“Your Virtue! (said the Lady recovering
after a Silence of two Minutes) I
shall never survive it. Your Virtue!
Intolerable Confidence! Have you the
Assurance to pretend, that when a Lady
demeans herself to throw aside the Rules
of Decency, in order to honour you
with the highest Favour in her Power,
your Virtue should resist her Inclination? 
That when she had conquer'd
her own Virtue, she should find an Obstruction
in yours?” “Madam,” said Joseph
“I can't see why her having no Virtue
should be a Reason against my having
any. Or why, because I am a Man,
or because I am poor, my Virtue must
be subservient to her Pleasures.” “I am
out of patience,” cries the Lady: “Did
ever Mortal hear of a Man's Virtue! 
Did ever the greatest, or the gravest
Men pretend to any of this Kind! Will
Magistrates who punish Lewdness, or
Parsons, who preach against it, make any
scruple of committing it? And can a Boy,
a Stripling, have the Confidence to talk
of his Virtue?” “Madam,” says Joseph,
“that Boy is the Brother of Pamela, and
would be ashamed, that the Chastity of
his Family, which is preserved in her,
should be stained in him. If there are
such Men as your Ladyship mentions, 

I am sorry for it, and I wish they had
an Opportunity of reading over those
Letters, which my Father hath sent me
of my Sister Pamela's, nor do I doubt but
such an Example would amend them.” 
You impudent Villain, cries the Lady
in a Rage, “Do you insult me with the
Follies of my Relation, who hath exposed
himself all over the Country upon
your Sister's account? a little Vixen,
whom I have always wondered my late
Lady John Booby ever kept in her
House. Sirrah! get out of my sight,
and prepare to set out this Night, for
I will order you your Wages immediately,
and you shall be stripped and
turned away.—” “Madam,” says
Joseph, “I am sorry I have offended your
Ladyship, I am sure I never intended it.” 
“Yes, Sirrah,” cries she, “you have
had the Vanity to misconstrue the little
innocent Freedom I took in order to
try, whether what I had heard was true. 
O' my Conscience, you have had the
Assurance to imagine, I was fond of
you myself.” Joseph was going to
speak, when she refused to hear him, and
ordered him instantly to leave the Room. 
He was no sooner gone, than she
burst forth into the following Exclamation: 

“Whither doth this violent Passion hurry
us? What Meannesses do we submit
to from its Impulse? Wisely we resist
its first and least Approaches; for it is
then only we can assure ourselves the
Victory. No Woman could ever safely
say, so far only will I go. Have I
not exposed myself to the Refusal of
my Footman? I cannot bear the Reflection.” 
Upon which she applied herself
to the Bell, and rung it with infinite
more Violence than was necessary; 
the faithful Slipslop attending near at hand: 
To say the truth, she had conceived a
Suspicion at her last Interview with her
Mistress; and had waited ever since in
the Antichamber, having carefully applied
her Ears to the Key-Hole during
the whole time, that the preceeding Conversation
passed between Joseph and the
Lady. 




What passed between the Lady and
Mrs. Slipslop, in which we prophesy
there are some Strokes which every one
will not truly comprehend at the first
Reading. 
“Slipslop,” said the Lady,
“I find too much Reason to believe
all thou hast told me of this wicked Joseph; 
I have determined to part with him
instantly; so go you to the Steward,
and bid him pay him his Wages.” 
Slipslop, who had preserved hitherto a Distance
to her Lady, rather out of Necessity
than Inclination, and who thought
the Knowledge of this Secret had thrown
down all Distinction between them, answered
her Mistress very pertly, “She
wished she knew her own Mind; and
that she was certain she would call her
back again, before she was got half way
down stairs.” The Lady replied, “she
had taken a Resolution, and was resolved
to keep it.” “I am sorry for it,” 
cries Slipslop; “and if I had known you
would have punished the poor Lad so
severely, you should never have heard a 

Particle of the Matter. Here's a Fuss
indeed, about nothing.” “Nothing!” 
returned my Lady; “Do you think I will
countenance Lewdness in my House?” 
“If you will turn away every Footman,” 
said Slipslop, “that is a lover of the Sport,
you must soon open the Coach-Door
yourself, or get a Sett of Mophrodites
to wait upon you; and I am sure I hated
the Sight of them even singing in an
Opera.” “Do as I bid you,” says my
Lady, “and don't shock my Ears with
with your beastly Language.” “Marry-come-up,” 
cries Slipslop, “People's Ears
are sometimes the nicest Part about
them.” 
The Lady, who began to admire the
new Style in which her Waiting-Gentlewoman
delivered herself, and by the Conclusion
of her Speech, suspected somewhat of
the Truth, called her back, and desired
to know what she meant by that extraordinary
degree of Freedom which she
thought proper to indulge to her Tongue. 
“Freedom!” says Slipslop, “I don't
know what you call Freedom, Madam; 
Servants have Tongues as well as their
Mistresses.” “Yes, and saucy ones
too,” answered the Lady; “but I assure
you I shall bear no such Impertinence.” 

“Impertinence! I don't know
that I am impertinent,” says Slipslop. 
“Yes indeed you are,” cries my
Lady; “and unless you mend your Manners,
this House is no Place for you.” 
“Manners!” cries Slipslop, “I never was
thought to want Manners nor Modesty
neither; and for Places, there are more
Places than one; and I know what I
know.” “What do you know, Mistress,” 
answered the Lady? “I am not
obliged to tell that to every body,” says
Slipslop, “any more than I am obliged to
keep it a Secret.” “I desire you would
provide yourself,” answered the Lady. 
“With all my heart,” replied the Waiting-Gentlewoman; 
and so departed in a
Passion, and slapped the Door after her. 
The Lady too plainly perceived that
her Waiting-Gentlewoman knew more than
she would willingly have had her acquainted
with; and this she imputed to Joseph's
having discovered to her what past at the
first Interview. This therefore blew up
her Rage against him, and confirmed her
in a Resolution of parting with him. 
But the dismissing Mrs. Slipslop was a
Point not so easily to be resolved upon:
she had the utmost Tenderness for her Reputation, 

as she knew on that depended
many of the most valuable Blessings of
Life; particularly Cards, making Court'sies
in public Places, and above all, the Pleasure
of demolishing the Reputations of others,
in which innocent Amusement she
had an extraordinary Delight. She therefore
determined to submit to any Insult
from a Servant, rather than run a Risque
of losing the Title to so many great Privileges. 
She therefore sent for her Steward, Mr.
Peter Pounce; and ordered him to pay
Joseph his Wages, to strip off his Livery
and turn him out of the House that Evening. 
She then called Slipslop up, and after
refreshing her Spirits with a small Cordial
which she kept in her Closet, she began in
the following manner: 
“Slipslop, why will you, who know my
passionate Temper, attempt to provoke
me by your Answers? I am convinced
you are an honest Servant, and should
be very unwilling to part with you. I
believe likewise, you have found me an
indulgent Mistress on many Occasions,
and have as little Reason on your side
to desire a change. I can't help being 

surprized therefore, that you will take
the surest Method to offend me. I mean
repeating my Words, which you know
I have always detested.” 
The prudent Waiting-Gentlewoman,
had duly weighed the whole Matter, and
found on mature Deliberation, that a
good Place in Possession was better than
one in Expectation; as she found her Mistress
therefore inclined to relent, she
thought proper also to put on some small
Condescension; which was as readily accepted:
and so the Affair was reconciled,
all Offences forgiven, and a Present of a
Gown and Petticoat made her as an Instance
of her Lady's future Favour. 
She offered once or twice to speak in
favour of Joseph: but found her Lady's
Heart so obdurate, that she prudently dropt
all such Efforts. She considered there were
more Footmen in the House, and some as
stout Fellows, tho' not quite so handsome
as Joseph: besides, the Reader hath already
seen her tender Advances had not met
with the Encouragement she might have
reasonably expected. She thought she had
thrown away a great deal of Sack and
Sweet-meats on an ungrateful Rascal; and
being a little inclined to the Opinion of that 

female Sect, who hold one lusty young
Fellow to be near as good as another
lusty young Fellow, she at last gave up
Joseph and his Cause, and with a Triumph
over her Passion highly commendable,
walked off with her Present, and with
great Tranquility paid a visit to a Stone-Bottle,
which is of sovereign Use to a
Philosophical Temper. 
She left not her Mistress so easy. The
poor Lady could not reflect, without
Agony, that her dear Reputation was in
the power of her Servants. All her Comfort,
as to Joey, was that she hoped he did
not understand her Meaning; at least, she
could say for herself, she had not plainly
express'd any thing to him; and as to Mrs.
Slipslop, she imagined she could bribe her
to Secrecy. 
But what hurt her most was, that in
reality she had not so entirely conquered her
Passion; the little God lay lurking in her
Heart, tho' Anger and Disdain so hoodwinked
her, that she could not see him. 
She was a thousand times on the very
Brink of revoking the Sentence she had
passed against the poor Youth. Love became
his Advocate, and whispered many
things in his favour. Honour likewise 

endeavoured to vindicate his Crime, and
Pity to mitigate his Punishment; on the
other side, Pride and Revenge spoke as
loudly against him: and thus the poor
Lady was tortured with Perplexity; opposite
Passions distracting and tearing her
Mind different ways. 
So have I seen, in the Hall of Westminster; 
where Serjeant Bramble hath been retained
on the right Side, and Serjeant Puzzle
on the left; the Balance of Opinion (so equal
were their Fees) alternately incline to either
Scale. Now Bramble throws in an Argument,
and Puzzle's Scale strikes the Beam; 
again, Bramble shares the like Fate, overpowered
by the Weight of Puzzle. Here
Bramble hits, there Puzzle strikes; here
one has you, there t'other has you; 'till at
last all becomes one Scene of Confusion
in the tortured Minds of the Hearers; equal
Wagers are laid on the Success, and neither
Judge nor Jury can possibly make
any thing of the Matter; all Things are so
enveloped by the careful Serjeants in Doubts
and Obscurity. 
Or as it happens in the Conscience,
where Honour and Honesty pull one way,
and a Bribe and Necessity another. —If it
was only our present Business to make Similies, 

we could produce many more to
this Purpose: but a Similie (as well as a
Word) to the Wise. We shall therefore see
a little after our Hero, for whom the Reader
is doubtless in some pain. 



Joseph writes another Letter: His
Transactions with Mr. Peter Pounce,
&c. with his Departure from Lady
Booby. 
The disconsolate Joseph, would not
have had an Understanding sufficient
for the principal Subject of such a Book as
this, if he had any longer misunderstood
the Drift of his Mistress; and indeed that he
did not discern it sooner, the Reader will be
pleased to apply to an Unwillingless in
him to discover what he must condemn in
her as a Fault. Having therefore quitted
her Presence, he retired into his own Garret,
and entered himself into an Ejaculation
on the numberless Calamities which
attended Beauty, and the Misfortunes it
was to be handsomer than one's Neighbours. 
He then sat down and addressed himself
to his Sister Pamela, in the following
Words: 


“Dear Sister Pamela,
Hoping you are well, what News
have I to tell you! O Pamela,
my Mistress is fallen in love with me— 
That is, what great Folks call falling in
love, she has a mind to ruin me; but
I hope, I shall have more Resolution
and more Grace than to part with my
Virtue to any Lady upon-Earth. 
“Mr. Adams has often told me, that
Chastity is as great a Virtue in a Man as
in a Woman. He says he never knew
any more than his Wife, and I shall endeavour
to follow his Examples. Indeed,
it is owing entirely to his excellent Sermons
and Advice, together with your
Letters, that I have been able to resist a
Temptation, which he says no Man complies
with, but he repents in this World,
or is damned for it in the next; and why
should I trust to Repentance on my
Death-bed, since I may die in my sleep? 
What fine things are good Advice and
good Examples! But I am glad she
turned me out of the Chamber as she
did: for I had once almost forgotten
every word Parson Adams had ever said
to me. 

I don't doubt, dear Sister, but you
will have Grace to preserve your Virtue
against all Trials; and I beg you earnestly
to pray, I may be enabled to preserve
mine: for truly, it is very severely attacked
by more than one: but, I hope I
shall copy your Example, and that of
Joseph, my Name's-sake; and maintain
my Virtue against all Temptations.” 
Joseph had not finished his Letter, when
he was summoned down stairs by Mr. Peter
Pounce, to receive his Wages: for, besides
that out of eight Pounds a Year, he
allowed his Father and Mother four, he
had been obliged, in order to furnish himself
with musical Instruments, to apply to
the Generosity of the aforesaid Peter,
who, on urgent Occasions, used to advance
the Servants their Wages: not before they
were due, but before they were payable; 
that is, perhaps, half a Year after they
were due, and this at the moderate Premiums
of fifty per Cent. or a little more; 
by which charitable Methods, together with
lending Money to other People, and even
to his own Master and Mistress, the honest
Man had, from nothing, in a few Years
amassed a small Sum of twenty thousand
Pounds or thereabouts. 

Joseph having received his little Remainder
of Wages, and having stript off
his Livery, was forced to borrow a Frock
and Breeches of one of the Servants: (for
he was so beloved in the Family, that they
would all have lent him any thing) and
being told by Peter, that he must nor stay
a Moment longer in the House, than was
necessary to pack up his Linnen, which
he easily did in a very narrow Compass; 
he took a melancholy Leave of his Fellow-Servants,
and set out at seven in the
Evening. 
He had proceeded the length of two
or three Streets, before he absolutely determined
with himself, whether he should
leave the Town this Night, or procuring
a Lodging, wait 'till the Morning, At
last, the Moon, shining very bright, helped
him to come to a Resolution of beginning
his Journey immediately, to which likewise
he had some other Inducements which
the Reader, without being a Conjurer, cannot
possibly guess; 'till we have given him
those hints, which it may be now proper
to open. 




Of several new Matters not expected. 
It is an Observation sometimes made,
to indicate our Idea of a simple Fellow,
That he is easily to be seen through: Nor
do I believe it a more improper Denotation
of a simple Book. Instead of applying
this to any particular Performance,
we chuse rather to remark the contrary in
this History, where the Scene opens itself
by small degrees, and he is a sagacious
Reader who can see two Chapters before
him. 
For this reason, we have not hitherto
hinted a Matter which now seems necessary
to be explained; since it may be wondered
at, first, that Joseph made such extraordinary
haste out of Town, which hath
been already shewn; and secondly, which
will be now shewn; that instead of proceeding
to the Habitation of his Father and
Mother, or to his beloved Sister Pamela,
he chose rather to set out full speed to the
Lady Booby's Country Seat, which he had
left on his Journey to London. 

Be it known then, that in the same Parish
where this Seat stood, there lived a
young Girl whom Joseph (tho' the best
of Sons and Brothers) longed more impatiently
to see than his Parents or his Sister. 
She was a poor Girl, who had been formerly
bred up in Sir John's Family; whence
a little before the Journey to London, she
had been discarded by Mrs. Slipslop on
account of her extraordinary Beauty: for I
never could find any other reason. 
This young Creature (who now lived
with a Farmer in the Parish) had been always
beloved by Joseph, and returned his
Affection. She was two Years only younger
than our Hero. They had been acquainted
from their Infancy, and had conceived a
very early liking for each other, which had
grown to such a degree of Affection, that
Mr. Adams had with much ado prevented
them from marrying; and persuaded them
to wait, 'till a few Years Service and Thrift
had a little improved their Experience, and
enabled them to live comfortably together. 
They followed this good Man's Advice; 
as indeed his Word was little less
than a Law in his Parish: for as he had 

shewn his Parishioners by a uniform Behaviour
of thirty-five Years duration, that
he had their Good entirely at heart; so
they consulted him on every Occasion, and
very seldom acted contrary to his Opinion. 
Nothing can be imagined more tender
than was the parting between these two
Lovers. A thousand Sighs heaved the
Bosom of Joseph; a thousand Tears distilled
from the lovely Eyes of Fanny, (for
that was her Name.) Tho' her Modesty
would only suffer her to admit his eager
Kisses, her violent Love made her more
than passive in his Embraces; and she
often pulled him to her Breast with a soft
Pressure, which, tho' perhaps it would
not have squeezed an Insect to death,
caused more Emotion in the Heart of Joseph,
than the closest Cornish Hug could
have done. 
The Reader may perhaps wonder, that
so fond a Pair should during a Twelve-month's
Absence never converse with one
another; indeed there was but one Reason
which did, or could have prevented them; 
and that was, that poor Fanny could neither
write nor read, nor could she be prevailed
upon to transmit the Delicacies of 

her tender and chaste Passion, by the
Hands of an Amanuensis. 
They contented themselves therefore
with frequent Enquiries after each other's
Health, with a mutual Confidence in each
other's Fidelity, and the Prospect of their
future Happiness. 
Having explained these Matters to our
Reader, and, as far as possible, satisfied all
his Doubts, we return to honest Joseph,
whom we left just set out on his Travels
by the Light of the Moon. 
Those who have read any Romance or
Poetry antient or modern, must have been
informed, that Love hath Wings; by which
they are not to understand, as some young
Ladies by mistake have done, that a Lover
can fly: the Writers, by this ingenious
Allegory, intending to insinuate no more,
than that Lovers do not march like Horse-Guards; 
in short, that they put the best
Leg foremost, which our lusty Youth,
who could walk with any Man, did so
heartily on this Occasion, that within four
Hours, he reached the famous House of
Hospitality well known to the Western Traveller. 
It presents you a Lion on the Sign-Post:
and the Master, who was christened 

Timotheus, is commonly called plain Tim. 
Some have conceived that he hath particularly
chosen the Lion for his Sign, as he
doth in Countenance greatly resemble that
magnanimous Beast, tho' his Disposition
favours more of the Sweetness of the
Lamb. He is a Person well received among
all forts of Men, being qualified to
render himself agreeable to any; as he is
well versed in History and Politicks, hath
a smattering in Law and Divinity, cracks
a good Jest, and plays wonderfully well
on the French Horn. 
A violent Storm of Hail forced Joseph
to take Shelter in this Inn, where he
remembered Sir John had dined in his way
to Town. Joseph had no sooner seated himself
by the Kitchin-Fire, than Timotheus,
observing his Livery began to condole the
loss of his late Master; who was, he said,
his very particular and intimate Acquaintance,
with whom he had cracked many a
merry Bottle, aye many a dozen in his
Time. He then remarked that all those
Things were over now, all past, and just
as if they had never been; and concluded
with an excellent Observation on the Certainty
of Death, which his Wife said was
indeed very true. A Fellow now arrived
at the same Inn with two Horses, one of 

which he was leading farther down into
the Country to meet his Master; these he
put into the Stable, and came and took his
Place by Joseph's Side, who immediately
knew him to be the Servant of a neighbouring
Gentleman, who used to visit at their
House. 
This Fellow was likewise forced in by
the Storm; for he had Orders to go twenty
Miles farther that Evening, and luckily on
the same Road which Joseph himself intended
to take. He therefore embraced
this Opportunity of complimenting his
Friend with his Master's Horses, (notwithstanding
he had received express commands
to the contrary) which was readily
accepted: and so after they had drank a
loving Pot, and the Storm was over, they
set out together. 




Containing many surprizing Adventures,
which Joseph Andrews met with on
the Road, scarce credible by those who
have never travelled in a Stage-Coach. 
Nothing remarkable happened
on the Road, 'till their arrival at the
Inn, whither the Horses were ordered; 
where they came about two in the Morning. 
The Moon then shone very bright,
and Joseph making his Friend a present of
a Pint of Wine, and thanking him for the
favour of his Horse, notwithstanding all
Entreaties to the contrary, proceeded on
his Journey on foot. 
He had not gone above two Miles,
charmed with the hopes of shortly seeing
his beloved Fanny, when he was met by
two Fellows in a narrow Lane, and ordered
to stand and deliver. He readily
gave them all the Money he had, which
was somewhat less than two Pounds; and
told them he hoped they would be so generous
as to return him a few Shillings, to
defray his Charges on his way home. 

One of the Ruffians answered with an
Oath, Yes, we'll give you something presently:
but first strip and be d&wblank;n'd to you. 
—Strip, cry'd the other, or I'll blow
your Brains to the Devil. Joseph, remembring
that he had borrowed his Coat
and Breeches of a Friend; and that he
should be ashamed of making any Excuse
for not returning them, reply'd, he hoped
they would not insist on his Clothes, which
were not worth much; but consider the
Coldness of the Night. You are cold, are
you, you Rascal! says one of the Robbers,
I'll warm you with a Vengeance; and damning
his Eyes, snapt a Pistol at his Head:
which he had no sooner done, than the
other levelled a Blow at him with his Stick,
which Joseph, who was expert at Cudgel-playing,
caught with his, and returned the
Favour so successfully on his Adversary,
that he laid him sprawling at his Feet, and
at the same Instant received a Blow from
behind, with the Butt-end of a Pistol from
the other Villain, which felled him to the
Ground, and totally deprived him of his
Senses. 
The Thief, who had been knocked
down, had now recovered himself; and
both together fell to be-labouring poor Joseph 

with their Sticks, till they were convinced
they had put an end to his miserable
Being: They then stript him entirely
naked, threw him into a Ditch, and
departed with their Booty. 
The poor Wretch, who lay motionless a
long time, just began to recover his
Senses as a Stage-Coach came by. The
Postillion hearing a Man's Groans, stopt his
Horses, and told the Coachman, “He was
certain there was a dead Man lying in
the Ditch, for he heard him groan.” 
“Go on, Sirrah,” says the Coachman,
“we are confounded late, and have no
time to look after dead Men.” A
Lady, who heard what the Postillion said,
and likewise heard the Groan, called eagerly
to the Coachman, “To stop and see
what was the matter.” Upon which
he bid the Postillion “alight, and look
into the Ditch.” He did so, and returned,
“That there was a Man sitting upright
as naked as ever he was born. — 
O J&wblank;sus,” cry'd the Lady, “A naked
Man! Dear Coachman, drive on and
leave him.” Upon this the Gentlemen
got out of the Coach; and Joseph begged
them, “to have Mercy upon him: For
that he had been robbed, and almost
beaten to death.” “Robbed,” cries an
old Gentleman; “Let us make all the 

haste imaginable, or we shall be robbed
too.” A young Man, who belonged
to the Law answered, “He wished
they had past by without taking any
Notice: But that now they might be
proved to have been last in his Company; 
if he should die, they might be
called to some account for his Murther. 
He therefore thought it adviseable to
save the poor Creature's Life, for their
own sakes, if possible; at least, if he
died, to prevent the Jury's finding that
they fled for it. He was therefore of
Opinion, to take the Man into the Coach,
and carry him to the next Inn.” The
Lady insisted, “That he should not come
into the Coach. That if they lifted him
in, she would herself alight: for she
had rather stay in that Place to all
Eternity, than ride with a naked Man.” 
The Coachman objected, “That he could
not suffer him to be taken in, unless
some body would pay a Shilling for his
Carriage the four Miles.” Which the two
Gentlemen refused to do; but the Lawyer,
who was afraid of some Mischief happening
to himself if the Wretch was left behind
in that Condition, saying, “No Man
could be too cautious in these Matters,
and that he remembred very extraordinary
Cases in the Books, threatned the 

Coachman, and bid him deny taking him
up at his Peril; for that if he died, he
should be indicted for his Murther, and
if he lived, and brought an Action against
him, he would willingly take a
Brief in it.” These Words had a sensible
Effect on the Coachman, who was well
acquainted with the Person who spoke
them; and the old Gentleman abovementioned,
thinking the naked Man would
afford him frequent Opportunities of shewing
his Wit to the Lady, offered to join
with the Company in giving a Mug of
Beer for his Fare; till partly alarmed by the
Threats of the one, and partly by the Promises
of the other, and being perhaps a little
moved with Compassion at the poor Creature's
Condition, who stood bleeding and
shivering with the Cold, he at length agreed; 
and Joseph was now advancing to the
Coach, where seeing the Lady, who held
the Sticks of her Fan before her Eyes, he
absolutely refused, miserable as he was, to
enter, unless he was furnished with sufficient
Covering, to prevent giving the least
Offence to Decency. So perfectly modest
was this young Man; such mighty Effects
had the spotless Example of the amiable
Pamela, and the excellent Sermons of Mr.
Adams wrought upon him. 

Though there were several great Coats
about the Coach, it was not easy to get
over this Difficulty which Joseph had started. 
The two Gentlemen complained they
were cold, and could not spare a Rag; 
the Man of Wit saying, with a Laugh,
that Charity began at home; and the Coachman,
who had two spread under him,
refused to lend either, lest they should
be made bloody; the Lady's Footman desired
to be excused for the same Reason,
which the Lady herself, notwithstanding
her Abhorence of a naked Man, approved:
and it is more than probable, poor
Joseph, who obstinately adhered to his
modest Resolution, must have perished,
unless the Postillion, (a Lad who hath been
since transported for robbing a Hen-roost)
had voluntarily stript off a great Coat, his
only Garment, at the same time swearing a
great Oath, (for which he was rebuked
by the Passengers) “That he would rather
ride in his Shirt all his Life, than
suffer a Fellow-Creature to lie in so miserable
a Condition.” 
Joseph, having put on the great Coat,
was lifted into the Coach, which now proceeded
on its Journey. He declared himself
almost dead with the Cold, which gave the
Man of Wit an occasion to ask the Lady, 

if she could not accommodate him
with a Dram. She answered with some
Resentment, “She wondered at his asking
her such a Question; but assured him,
She never tasted any such thing.” 
The Lawyer was enquiring into the
Circumstances of the Robbery, when the
Coach stopt, and one of the Ruffians, putting
a Pistol in, demanded their Money
of the Passengers; who readily gave it
them; and the Lady, in her Fright, delivered
up a little silver Bottle, of about a
half-pint Size, which, the Rogue clapping
it to his Mouth, and drinking her Health,
declared held some of the best Nantes
he had ever tasted: this the Lady afterwards
assured the Company was the Mistake
of her Maid, for that she had ordered
her to fill the Bottle with Hungary
Water. 
As soon as the Fellows were departed,
the Lawyer, who had, it seems, a
Case of Pistols in the Seat of the Coach,
informed the Company, that if it had
been Day-light, and he could have come
at his Pistols, he would not have submitted
to the Robbery; he likewise set forth,
that he had often met Highwaymen when
he travelled on horseback, but none ever 

durst attack him; concluding, that if he
had not been more afraid for the Lady
than for himself, he should not have now
parted with his Money so easily. 
As Wit is generally observed to love
to reside in empty Pockets; so the Gentleman,
whose Ingenuity we have above remark'd,
as soon as he had parted with
his Money, began to grow wonderfully
facetious. He made frequent Allusions to
Adam and Eve, and said many excellent
things on Figs and Fig-Leaves; which
perhaps gave more Offence to Joseph than
to any other in the Company. 
The Lawyer likewise made several very
pretty Jests, without departing from his
Profession. He said, “If Joseph and the
Lady were alone, he would be the more
capable of making a Conveyance to her, as
his Affairs were not fettered with any Incumbrance; 
he'd warrant, he soon suffered
a Recovery by a Writ of Entry,
which was the proper way to create Heirs
in Tail; that for his own part, he would
engage to make so firm a Settlement in a
Coach, that there should be no Danger
of an Ejectment;” with an Inundation of
the like Gibbrish, which he continued to
vent till the Coach arrived at an Inn, 

where one Servant-Maid only was up in
readiness to attend the Coachman, and furnish
him with cold Meat and a Dram. 
Joseph desired to alight, and that he might
have a Bed prepared for him, which the
Maid readily promised to perform; and
being a good-natur'd Wench, and not so
squeamish as the Lady had been, she clapt
a large Faggot on the Fire, and furnishing
Joseph with a great Coat belonging to one
of the Hostlers, desired him to sit down
and warm himself, whilst she made his
Bed. The Coachman, in the mean time,
took an Opportunity to call up a Surgeon,
who lived within a few Doors: after which,
he reminded his Passengers how late they
were, and after they had taken Leave of
Joseph, hurried them off as fast as he
could. 
The Wench soon got Joseph to bed,
and promised to use her Interest to borrow
him a Shirt; but imagined, as she afterwards
said, by his being so bloody, that
he must be a dead Man: she ran with all
speed to hasten the Surgeon, who was more
than half drest, apprehending that the
Coach had been overturned and some Gentleman
or Lady hurt. As soon as the
Wench had informed him at his Window,
that it was a poor foot Passenger who 

had been stripped of all he had, and almost
murdered; he chid her for disturbing
him so early, slipped off his Clothes again,
and very quietly returned to bed
and to sleep. 
Aurora now began to shew her blooming
Cheeks over the Hills, whilst ten
Millions of feathered Songsters, in jocund
Chorus, repeat Odes a thousand times
sweeter than those of our Laureate, and
sing both the Day and the Song; when the
Master of the Inn, Mr. Tow-wouse, arose,
and learning from his Maid an Account of
the Robbery, and the Situation of his poor
naked Guest, he shook his Head, and
cried, Good-lack-a-day! and then ordered
the Girl to carry him one of his own
Shirts. 
Mrs. Tow-wouse was just awake, and
had stretched out her Arms in vain to fold
her departed Husband, when the Maid
entered the Room. “Who's there, Betty?” 
“Yes Madam.” “Where's your Master?” 
“He's without, Madam; he hath sent me
for a Shirt to lend to a poor naked Man,
who hath been robbed and murdered.” 
“Touch one, if you dare, you Slut,” said
Mrs. Tow-wouse, “your Master is a pretty
sort of a Man to take in naked Vagabonds, 

and clothe them with his own
Clothes. I shall have no such Doings.— 
If you offer to touch any thing, I will
throw the Chamber-Pot at your Head. 
Go, send your Master to me.” “Yes
Madam,” answered Betty. As soon as
he came in, she thus began: “What the
Devil do you mean by this, Mr. Tow-wouse? 
Am I to buy Shirts to lend to
a sett of scabby Rascals?” “My Dear,” 
said Mr. Tow-wouse, “this is a poor
Wretch.” “Yes,” says she, “I know
it is a poor Wretch, but what the Devil
have we to do with poor Wretches? 
The Law makes us provide, for too many
already. We shall have thirty or
forty poor Wretches in red Coats shortly.” 
“My Dear,” cries Tow-wouse,
“this Man hath been robbed of all he has.” 
“Well then,” says she, “where's his
Money to pay his Reckoning? Why
does not such a Fellow go to an Ale-house? 
I shall send him packing as soon
as I am up, I assure you.” “My
Dear,” said he, “common Charity
won't suffer you to do that.” “Common
Charity, a F&wblank;t!” says she, “Common
Charity teaches us to provide for ourselves,
and our Families; and I and
mine won't be ruined by your Charity,
I assure you.” “Well,” says he, “my 

Dear, do as you will when you are up,
you know I never contradict you.” 
“No,” says she, “if the Devil was to contradict
me, I would make the House too
hot to hold him.” 
With such like Discourses they consumed
near half an Hour, whilst Betty provided
a Shirt from the Hostler, who was one
of her Sweethearts, and put it on poor Joseph. 
The Surgeon had likewise at last visited
him, had washed and drest his Wounds,
and was now come to acquaint Mr. Tow-wouse,
that his Guest was in such extreme
danger of his Life, that he scarce saw any
hopes of his Recovery. —“Here's a pretty
Kettle of Fish,” cries Mrs. Tow-wouse,
“you have brought upon us! We are like
to have a Funeral at our own expence.” 
Tow-wouse, (who notwithstanding his
Charity, would have given his Vote as
freely as he ever did at an Election, that any
other House in the Kingdom, should have
had quiet Possession of his Guest) answered,
“My Dear, I am not to blame: he was
brought hither by the Stage-Coach; and
Betty had put him to bed before I was
stirring.” “I'll Betty her,” says she— 
At which, with half her Garments on, the
other half under her Arm, she sallied out
in quest of the unfortunate Betty, whilst
Tow-wouse and the Surgeon went to pay a 

Visit to poor Joseph, and enquire into the
Circumstance of this melancholy Affair. 



What happened to Joseph during his
Sickness at the Inn, with the curious
Discourse between him and Mr.
Barnabas the Parson of the Parish. 
As soon as Joseph had communicated
a particular History of the Robbery,
together with a short Account of himself,
and his intended Journey, he asked the
Surgeon “If he apprehended him to be
in any Danger:” To which the Surgeon
very honesty answered, “He feared
he was; for that his Pulse was very
exalted and feverish, and if his Fever
should prove more than Symptomatick,
it would be impossible to save him.” 
Joseph, fetching a deep Sigh, cried, “Poor
Fanny, I would I could have lived to see
thee! but G&wblank;'s Will be done.” 
The Surgeon then advised him, “If
he had any worldly Affairs to settle,
that he would do it as soon as possible; 
for though he hoped he might recover, 

yet he thought himself obliged to
acquaint him he was in great danger,
and if the malign Concoction of his Humours
should cause a suscitation of his
Fever, he might soon grow delirious,
and incapable to make his Will.” Joseph
answered, “That it was impossible
for any Creature in the Universe to be
in a poorer Condition than himself: for
since the Robbery he had not one thing
of any kind whatever, which he could
call his own.” I had a poor little Piece
of Gold which they-took away, that would
be a Comfort to me in all my Afflictions; 
but surely, Fanny, I want nothing to remind
me of thee. I have thy dear Image
in my Heart, and no Villain can ever tear
it thence. 
Joseph desired Paper and Pens to write
a Letter, but they were refused him; and
he was advised to use all his Endeavours
to compose himself. They then left him; 
and Mr. Tow-wouse sent to a Clergyman
to come and administer his good Offices
to the Soul of poor Joseph, since the Surgeon
despaired of making any successful
Applications to his Body. 
Mr. Barnabas (for that was the Clergyman's
Name came as soon as sent for, 

and having first drank a Dish of Tea with
the Landlady, and afterwards a Bowl of
Punch with the Landlord, he walked up
to the Room where Joseph lay: but, finding
him asleep, returned to take the
other Sneaker, which when he had finished,
he again crept softly up to the Chamber-Door,
and, having opened it, heard
the Sick Man talking to himself in the following
manner: 
“O most adorable Pamela! most virtuous
Sister, whose Example could alone
enable me to withstand all the
Temptations of Riches and Beauty, and
to preserve my Virtue pure and chaste,
for the Arms of my dear Fanny, if
it had pleased Heaven that I should
ever have come unto them. What
Riches, or Honours, or Pleasures can
make us amends for the Loss of Innocence? 
Doth not that alone afford us
more Consolation, than all worldly Acquisitions? 
What but Innocence and Virtue
could give any Comfort to such a
miserable Wretch as I am? Yet these
can make me prefer this sick and painful
Bed to all the Pleasures I should have
found in my Lady's. These can make
me face Death without Fear; and
though I love my Fanny more than ever 

Man loved a Woman; these can teach
me to resign myself to the Divine Will
without repining. O thou delightful
charming Creature, would Heaven have
indulged thee to my Arms, the poorest,
humblest State would have been a Paradise; 
I could have lived with thee in
the lowest Cottage, without envying the
Palaces, the Dainties, or the Riches of
any Man breathing. But I must leave
thee, leave thee for ever, my dearest
Angel, I must think of another World,
and I heartily pray thou may'st meet
Comfort in this.” —Barnabas thought
he had heard enough; so down stairs
he went, and told Tow-wouse he could
do his Guest no Service: for that he was
very light-headed, and had uttered nothing
but a Rhapsody of Nonsense all the
time he stayed in the Room. 
The Surgeon returned in the Afternoon,
and found his Patient in a higher
Fever than when he left him, though not
delirious: for notwithstanding Mr. Barnabas's
Opinion, he had not been once
out of his Senses since his arrival at the
Inn. 
Mr. Barnabas was again sent for, and
with much difficulty prevailed on to make 

another Visit. As soon as he entered
the Room, he told Joseph, “He was
come to pray by him, and to prepare
him for another World: In the first
place therefore, he hoped he had repented
of all his Sins?” Joseph answered,
“He hoped he had: but there was
one thing which he knew not whether
he should call a Sin; if it was, he
feared he should die in the Commission
of it, and that was the Regret of parting
with a young Woman, whom he
loved as tenderly as he did his Heartstrings?” 
Barnabas bid him be assured,
that “any Repining at the Divine Will,
was one of the greatest Sins he could
commit; that he ought to forget all
carnal Affections, and think of better
things.” Joseph said, “That neither
in this World nor the next, he could
forget his Fanny, and that the Thought,
however grievous, of parting from her
for ever, was not half so tormenting,
as the Fear of what she would suffer
when she knew his Misfortune.” Barnabas
said, “That such Fears argued a
Diffidence and Despondence very criminal; 
that he must divest himself of
all human Passion, and fix his Heart
above.” Joseph answered, “That was
what he desired to do, and should be 

obliged to him, if he would enable
him to accomplish it.” Barnabas replied,
“That must be done by Grace.” 
“Joseph besought him to discover how he
might attain it.” Barnabas answered,
“By Prayer and Faith.” He then questioned
him concerning his Forgiveness of
the Thieves. Joseph answered, “He
feared, that was more than he could
do: for nothing would give him more
Pleasure than to hear they were taken.” 
“That,” cries Barnabas, “is for the sake
of Justice.” “Yes,” said Joseph,
“but if I was to meet them again, I am
afraid I should attack them, and kill
them too, if I could.” “Doubtless,” 
answered Barnabas, “it is lawful to kill
a Thief: but can you say, you forgive
them as a Christian ought?” Joseph
desired to know what that Forgiveness
was. “That is, answered Barnabas, to
forgive them as—as—it is to forgive
them as—in short, it is to forgive
them as a Christian.” Joseph reply'd,
“He forgave them as much as he
could.” “Well, well,” said Barnabas,
“that will do.” “He then demanded
of him, if he remembered any
more Sins unrepented of; and if he did,
he desired him to make haste and repent
of them as fast as he could: that 

they might repeat over a few Prayere
together.” Joseph answered, “He
could not recollect any great Crimes
he had been guilty of, and that those he
had committed, he was sincerely sorry
for.” Barnabas then proceeded to Prayer
with all the expedition he was master of:
Some Company then waiting for him below
in the Parlour, where the Ingredients
for Punch were all in Readiness; but no
one would squeeze the Oranges till he
came. 
Joseph complained he was dry, and
desired a little Tea; which Barnabas reported
to Mrs. Tow-wouse, who answered,
“She had just done drinking it, and could
not be slopping all day;” but ordered
Betty to carry him up some Small Beer. 
Betty obeyed her Mistress's Commands; 
but Joseph, as soon as he had
tasted it, said, he feared it would encrease
his Fever, and that he longed very much
for Tea: To which the good-natured
Betty answered, he should have Tea, if
there was any in the Land; she accordingly
went and bought him some herself, and
attended him with it; where we will leave
her and Joseph together for some time, to
entertain the Reader with other Matters. 




Being very full of Adventures, which
succeeded each other at the Inn. 
It was now the Dusk of the Evening,
when a grave Person rode into the Inn,
and committing his Horse to the Hostler,
went directly into the Kitchin, and having
called for a Pipe of Tobacco, he took
his place by the Fire-side; where several
other Persons were likewise assembled. 
The Discourse ran altogether on the
Robbery which was committed the Night
before, and on the poor Wretch, who lay
above in the dreadful Condition, in which
we have already seen him. Mrs. Tow-wouse
said, “She wondered what the devil
Tom Whipwell meant by bringing
such Guests to her House, when there
were so many Ale-houses on the Road
proper for their Reception? But she assured
him, if he died, the Parish should
be at the Expence of the Funeral.” She
added, “Nothing would serve the Fellow's
Turn but Tea, she would assure
him.” Betty, who was just returned
from her charitable Office, answered, she
believed he was a Gentleman: for she never 

saw a finer Skin in her Life. “Pox
on his Skin,” replied Mrs. Tow-wouse,
“I suppose, that is all we are like to
have for the Reckoning. I desire no
such Gentlemen should ever call at the
Dragon;” (which it seems was the Sign
of the Inn.) 
The Gentleman lately arrived discovered
a great deal of Emotion at the Distress
of this poor Creature, whom he observed
not to be fallen into the most compassionate
Hands. And indeed, if Mrs.
Tow-wouse had given no Utterance to the
Sweetness of her Temper, Nature had taken
such Pains in her Countenance, that
Hogarth himself never gave more Expression
to a Picture. 
Her Person was short, thin, and crooked. 
Her Forehead projected in the middle,
and thence descended in a Declivity
to the Top of her Nose, which was sharp
and red, and would have hung over her
Lips, had not Nature turned up the end
of it. Her Lips were two Bits of Skin,
which, whenever she spoke, she drew together
in a Purse. Her Chin was pecked,
and at the upper end of that Skin, which
composed her Cheeks, stood two Bones,
that almost hid a Pair of small red eyes. 

Add to this, a Voice most wonderfully
adapted to the Sentiments it was to convey,
being both loud and hoarse. 
It is not easy to say, whether the Gentleman
had conceived a greater Dislike
for his Landlady, or Compassion for her
unhappy Guest. He enquired very earnestly
of the Surgeon, who was now come
into the Kitchin, “Whether he had any
hopes of his Recovery?” he begged
him, to use all possible means towards
it, telling him, “it was the duty of
Men of all Professions, to apply their
Skill gratis for the Relief of the Poor
and Necessitous.” The Surgeon answered,
“he should take proper care: but he defied
all the Surgeons in London to do him
any good.” “Pray, Sir,” said the Gentleman,
“What are his Wounds?” — 
“Why, do you know any thing of
Wounds,” says the Surgeon, (winking
upon Mrs. Tow-wouse?) “Sir, I have a
small smattering in Surgery,” answered
the Gentleman, “a smattering,—ho, ho,
ho!” said the Surgeon, “I believe it is a
smattering indeed.” 
The Company were all attentive, expecting
to hear the Doctor, who was what they
call a dry Fellow, expose the Gentleman. 

He began therefore with an Air of Triumph: 
“I suppose, Sir, you have travelled.” 
“No really, Sir,” said the Gentleman. 
“Ho! then you have practised in the Hospitals,
perhaps.” —“No, Sir,” “Hum!
not that neither?” “Whence, Sir, then,
if I may be so bold to enquire, have you
got your Knowledge in Surgery?” 
“Sir,” answered the Gentleman, “I do
not pretend to much; but, the little I
know I have from Books.” “Books!” 
cries the Doctor. —“What, I suppose
you have read Galen and Hippocrates!” 
“No, Sir,” said the Gentleman. “How!
you understand Surgery,” answers the
Doctor, “and not read Galen and Hippocrates!” 
“Sir,” cries the other, “I believe
there are many Surgeons who never
read these Authors.” “I believe so too,” 
says the Doctor, “more shame for them:
but thanks to my Education: I have
them by heart, and very seldom go
without them both in my Pocket.” 
“They are pretty large Books,” said the
Gentleman. “Aye,” said the Doctor, “I
believe I know how large they are better
than you.” (at which he fell a winking,
and the whole Company burst into a
Laugh.) 

The Doctor pursuing his Triumph,
asked the Gentleman, “if he did not understand
Physick as well as Surgery.” 
“Rather better,” answered the Gentleman.” 
“Aye, like enough,” cries the
Doctor, with a wink. “Why, I know a
little of Physick too.” “I wish I knew
half so much,” said Tow-wouse, “I'd
never wear an Apron again.” “Why,
I believe, Landlord,” cries the Doctor,
there are few Men, tho' I say it, within
twelve Miles of the Place, that handle
a Fever better. —Veniente occurrite
Morbo: That is my Method, I suppose
Brother, you understand Latin?” “A
little,” says the Gentleman.” “Aye, and
Greek now I'll warrant you: Ton dapomibominos
poluflosboio Thalasses. But I
have almost forgot these things, I could
have repeated Homer by heart once.” — 
Efags! the Gentleman has got a Traytor,” 
says Mrs. Tow-wouse; at which
they all fell a laughing. 
The Gentleman, who had not the least
affection for joking, very contentedly suffered
the Doctor to enjoy his Victory; 
which he did with no small Satisfaction:
and having sufficiently sounded his Depth,
he told him, “he was thoroughly convinced 

of his great Learning and Abilities; 
and that he would be obliged to
him, if he would let him know his opinion
of his Patient's Case above stairs.” 
“Sir,” says the Doctor, “his Case is that
of a dead Man. —The Contusion on
his Head has perforated the internal
Membrane of the Occiput, and divellicated
that radical small minute invisible
Nerve, which coheres to the Pericranium; 
and this was attended with a Fever
at first symptomatick, then pneumatick,
and is at length grown deliruus, or delirious,
as the Vulgar express it.” 
He was proceeding in this learned manner,
when a mighty Noise interrupted
him. Some young Fellows in the Neighbourhood
had taken one of the Thieves,
and were bringing him into the Inn. Betty
ran up Stairs with this News to Joseph; 
who begged they might search for a little
piece of broken Gold, which had a Ribband
tied on it, and which he could swear
to amongst all the Hoards of the richest
Man in the Universe. 
Notwithstanding the Fellow's persisting
in his Innocence, the Mob were very
busy in searching him, and presently, among
other things, pulled out the Piece 

of Gold just mentioned; which Betty no
sooner saw, than she laid violent hands on
it, and conveyed it up to Joseph, who received
it with raptures of Joy, and hugging
it in his Bosom declared, he could now die
contented. 
Within a few Minutes afterwards,
came in some other Fellows, with a Bundle
which they had found in a Ditch; and
which was indeed the Clothes which had
been stripped off from Joseph, and the
other things they had taken from him. 
The Gentleman no sooner saw the Coat,
than he declared he knew the Livery; and
that if it had been taken from the poor
Creature above stairs, he desired he might
see him: for that he was very well acquainted
with the Family to whom that
Livery belonged. 
He was accordingly conducted up by
Betty: but what, Reader, was the surprize
on both sides, when he saw Joseph
was the Person in Bed; and when Joseph
discovered the Face of his good Friend
Mr. Abraham Adams. 
It would be impertinent to insert a Discourse
which chiefly turned on the relation 

of Matters already well known to the
Reader: for as soon as the Curate had satisfied
Joseph concerning the perfect Health
of his Fanny, he was on his side very inquisitive
into all the Particulars which had
produced this unfortunate Accident. 
To return therefore to the Kitchin,
where a great variety of Company were
now assembled from all the Rooms of the
House, as well as the Neighbourhood: so
much delight do Men take in contemplating
the Countenance of a Thief: 
Mr. Tow-wouse began to rub his
Hands with pleasure, at seeing so large an
Assembly; who would, he hoped, shortly
adjourn into several Apartments, in order
to discourse over the Robbery; and drink
a Health to all honest Men: but Mrs. Tow-wouse,
whose Misfortune it was commonly
to see things a little perversly, began
to rail at those who brought the Fellow
into her House; telling her Husband,
“they were very likely to thrive, who
kept a House of entertainment for Beggars
and Thieves.” 
The Mob had now finished their search; 
and could find nothing about the Captive
likely to prove any Evidence: for as to the 

Clothes, tho' the Mob were very well satisfied
with that Proof; yet, as the Surgeon
observed, they could not convict him, because
they were not found in his Custody; 
to which Barnabas agreed: and added,
that these were Bona Waviata, and belonged
to the Lord of the Manor. 
“How,” says the Surgeon, “do you
say these Goods belong to the Lord of
the Manor?” “I do,” cried Barnabas. 
“Then I deny it,” says the Surgeon. 
“What can the Lord of the Manor
have to do in the Case? Will any
one attempt to persuade me that what a
Man finds is not his own?” “I have
heard,” (says an old Fellow in the Corner)
“Justice Wise-one say, that if every
Man had his right, whatever is found
belongs to the King of London.” “That
may be true,” says Barnabas, “in some
sense: for the Law makes a difference
between things stolen, and things found:
for a thing may be stolen that never is
found; and a thing may be found that
never was stolen. Now Goods that are
both stolen and found are Waviata; 
and they belong to the Lord of the Manor.” 
“So the Lord of the Manor is
the Receiver of stolen Goods:” (says the 

Doctor) at which there was a universal
Laugh, being first begun by himself. 
While the Prisoner, by persisting in his
Innocence, had almost (as there was no
Evidence against him) brought over Barnabas,
the Surgeon, Tow-wouse, and several
others to his side; Betty informed
them, that they had over-looked a little
Piece of Gold, which she had carried up
to the Man in bed; and which he offered
to swear to amongst a Million, aye, amongst
ten Thousand. This immediately
turned the Scale against the Prisoner; and
every one now concluded him guilty. It
was resolved therefore, to keep him secured
that Night, and early in the Morning to
carry him before a Justice. 




Shewing how Mrs. Tow-wouse was a
little mollified; and how officious
Mr. Barnabas and the Surgeon were
to prosecute the Thief: With a Dissertation
accounting for their Zeal; 
and that of many other Persons not
mentioned in this History. 
Betty told her Mistress, she believed
the Man in Bed was a greater Man
than they took him for: for besides the extreme
Whiteness of his Skin, and the Softness
of his Hands; she observed a very great Familiarity
between the Gentleman and him; 
and added, she was certain they were intimate
Acquaintance, if not Relations. 
This somewhat abated the severity of
Mrs. Tow-wouse's Countenance. She said,
“God forbid she should not discharge the
duty of a Christian, since the poor Gentleman
was brought to her House. She
had a natural antipathy to Vagabonds:
but could pity the Misfortunes of a Christian
as soon as another.” Tow-wouse
said, “If the Traveller be a Gentleman,
tho' he hath no Money about him now, 

we shall most likely be paid hereafter; 
so you may begin to score whenever you
will.” 
Barnabas, and the Surgeon went up
to Joseph, to satisfy themselves concerning
the piece of Gold. Joseph was with difficulty
prevailed upon to shew it them; but
would by no Entreaties be brought to deliver
it out of his own Possession. He, however,
attested this to be the same which
had been taken from him; and Betty was
ready to swear to the finding it on the
Thief. 
The only Difficulty that remained, was
how to produce this Gold before the Justice:
for as to carrying Joseph himself, it seemed
impossible; nor was there any greater likelihood
of obtaining it from him: for he
had fastened it with a Ribband to his Arm,
and solemnly vowed, that nothing but irresistible
Force should ever separate them; 
which Resolution, Mr. Adams, in clenching
a Fist rather less than the Knuckle of
an Ox, declared he would support him. 
A Dispute arose on this Occasion concerning
Evidence, not very necessary to
be related here; after which the Surgeon
dress'd Mr. Joseph's Head; still persisting 

in the imminent Danger in which his
Patient lay: but concluding with a very
important Look, “that he began to have
some hopes; that he should send him a
Sanative soporiferous Draught, and would
see him in the Morning.” After which
Barnabas and he departed, and left Mr.
Joseph and Mr. Adams together. 
Adams informed Joseph of the occasion of
this Journey which he was making to London,
namely to publish three Volumes of Sermons; 
being encouraged, he said, by an
Advertisement lately set forth by a Society
of Booksellers, who proposed to purchase
any Copies offered to them at a Price to be
settled by two Persons: but tho' he imagined
he should get a considerable Sum of
Money on this occasion, which his Family
were in urgent need of; he protested, “he
would not leave Joseph in his present
Condition:” finally, he told him, “he
had nine Shillings and three-pence-half-penny
in his Pocket, which he was welcome
to use as he pleased.” 
This Goodness of Parson Adams brought
Tears into Joseph's Eyes; he declared
he had now a second Reason to desire
life, that he might shew his Gratitude
to such a Friend.” Adams bid him 

be chearful, for that he plainly saw the
Surgeon, besides his Ignorance, desired
to make a Merit of curing him, tho' the
Wounds in his Head, he perceived, were
by no means dangerous; that he was convinced
he had no Fever, and doubted not
but he would be able to travel in a day or
two.” 
These Words infused a Spirit into
Joseph; he said, “he found himself very
sore from the Bruises, but had no reason
to think any of his Bones injured, or
that he had received any Harm in his
Inside; unless that he felt something
very odd in his Stomach: but knew not
whether that might not arise from not
having eaten one Morsel for above twenty-four
Hours.” Being then asked, if
he had any Inclination to eat, he answered
in the Affirmative; then Parson Adams desired
him to name what he had the greatest
fancy for; whether a poached Egg, or
Chicken-broth: he answered, “he could eat
both very well; but that he seemed to
have the greatest Appetite for a piece of
boiled Beef and Cabbage.” 
Adams was pleased with so perfect a
Confirmation that he had not the least Fever:
but advised him to a lighter Diet, for 

that Evening. He accordingly eat either
a Rabbit or a Fowl, I never could with
any tolerable Certainty discover which; 
was by Mrs. Tow-wouse's order conveyed
into a better Bed, and equipped with one
of her Husband's Shirts. 
In the Morning early, Barnabas and the
Surgeon came to the Inn, in order to see
the Thief conveyed before the Justice. 
They had consumed the whole Night in
debating what Measures they should take
to produce the Piece of Gold in Evidence
against him: for they were both extremely
zealous in the Business, tho' neither of
them were in the least interested in the Prosecution; 
neither of them had ever received
any private Injury from the Fellow,
nor had either of them ever been suspected
of loving the Publick well enough, to give
them a Sermon or a Dose of Physick for
nothing. 
To help our Reader therefore as much
as possible to account for this Zeal, we
must inform him, that as this Parish was
so unfortunate to have no Lawyer in it; 
there had been a constant Contention between
the two Doctors, spiritual and physical,
concerning their Abilities in a Science,
in which, as neither of them professed 

it, they had equal Pretensions to dispute
each other's Opinions. These Disputes
were carried on with great Contempt
on both sides, and had almost divided the
Parish; Mr. Tow-wouse and one half of
the Neighbours inclining to the Surgeon,
and Mrs. Tow-wouse with the other half to
the Parson. The Surgeon drew his Knowledge
from those inestimable Fountains,
called the Attorney's Pocket-Companion,
and Mr. Jacob's Law-Tables; Barnabas,
trusted entirely to Wood's Institutes. It
happened on this Occasion, as was pretty
frequently the Case, that these two learned
Men differed about the sufficiency of Evidence:
the Doctor being of opinion, that the
Maid's Oath would convict the Prisoner
without producing the Gold; the Parson,
è contra, totis viribus. To display their
Parts therefore before the Justice and the
Parish was the sole Motive, which we can
discover, to this Zeal, which both of them
pretended to be for publick Justice. 
O Vanity! How little is thy Force acknowledged,
or thy Operations discerned? 
How wantonly dost thou deceive Mankind
under different Disguises? Sometimes
thou dost wear the Face of Pity,
sometimes of Generosity: nay, thou hast
the Assurance even to put on those glorious 

Ornaments which belong only to heroick
Virtue. Thou odious, deformed Monster!
whom Priests have railed at, Philosophers
despised, and Poets ridiculed: Is there a
Wretch so abandoned as to own thee for an
Acquaintance in publick? yet, how few
will refuse to enjoy thee in private? nay,
thou art the Pursuit of most Men through
their Lives. The greatest Villanies are
daily practised to please thee: nor is the
meanest Thief below, or the greatest
Hero above thy notice. Thy Embraces
are often the sole Aim and sole Reward of
the private Robbery, and the plundered
Province. It is, to pamper up thee, thou
Harlot, that we attempt to withdraw from
others what we do not want, or to withhold
from them what they do. All our
Passions are thy Slaves. Avarice itself
is often no more than thy Hand-maid,
and even Lust thy Pimp. The Bully Fear
like a Coward, flies before thee, and Joy
and Grief hide their Heads in thy Presence. 
I Know thou wilt think, that whilst I
abuse thee, I court thee; and that thy Love
hath inspired me to write this sarcastical
Panegyrick on thee: but thou art deceived,
I value thee not of a farthing; nor will it
give me any Pain, if thou should'st prevail
on the Reader to censure this Digression 

as errant Nonsense: for know to thy
Confusion, that I have introduced thee
for no other Purpose than to lengthen out
a short Chapter; and so I return to my
History. 



The escape of the Thief. Mr. Adams's
Disappointment. The Arrival of
two very extraordinary Personages,
and the Introduction of Parson Adams
to Parson Barnabas. 
Barnabas and the Surgeon being
returned, as we have said, to the
Inn, in order to convey the Thief before
the Justice, were greatly concerned to find
a small Accident had happened which somewhat
disconcerted them; and this was no
other than the Thief's Escape, who had
modestly withdrawn himself by Night, declining
all Ostentation, and not chusing, in
imitation of some great Men, to distinguish
himself at the Expence of being pointed
at. 
When the Company had retired the
Evening before, the Thief was detained 

in a Room where the Constable, and one of
the young Fellows who took him, were
planted as his Guard. About the second
Watch, a general Complaint of Drowth
was made both by the Prisoner and his
Keepers. Among whom it was at last agreed,
that the Constable should remain on Duty,
and the young Fellow should call up the
Tapster; in which Disposition the young
Fellow apprehended not the least Danger,
as the Constable was well armed, and could
besides easily summon him back to his Assistance,
if the Prisoner made the least Attempt
to gain his Liberty. 
The young Fellow had not long left the
Room, before it came into the Constable's
Head, that the Prisoner might leap on
him by surprize, and thereby, preventing
him of the use of his Weapons, especially
the long Staff in which he chiefly confided,
might reduce the Success of a Struggle to
an equal Chance. He wisely therefore, to
prevent this Inconvenience, slipt out of the
Room himself and locked the Door, waiting
without with his Staff in his Hand,
ready lifted to fell the unhappy Prisoner,
if by ill Fortune he should attempt to
break out. 

But as it hath been discovered by some
great Man or other, (for I would by no
means be he understood to affect the Honour
of making any such Discovery) human Life
very much resembles a Game at Chess:
for, as in the latter, while a Gamester is too
attentive to secure himself very strongly on
one side the Board, he is apt to leave an unguarded
Opening on the other; so doth it
often happen in Life; and so did it happen
on this Occasion: for whilst the cautious
Constable with such wonderful Sagacity
had possessed himself of the Door, he most
unhappily forgot the Window. 
The Thief who played on the other
side, no sooner perceived this Opening,
than he began to move that way; and finding
the Passage easy, he took with him
the young Fellow's Hat; and without any
Ceremony, stepped into the Street, and
made the best of his Way. 
The young Fellow returning with a
double Mug of Strong Beer was a little
surprized to find the Constable at the Door:
but much more so, when, the Door being
opened, he perceived the Prisoner had
made his Escape, and which way: he
threw down the Beer, and without uttering 

any thing to the Constable, except a hearty
Curse or two, he nimbly leapt out at the
Window, and went again in pursuit of
his Prey: being very unwilling to lose the
Reward which he had assured himself of. 
The Constable hath not been discharged
of Suspicion on this account: It hath been
said, that not being concerned in the taking
the Thief, he could not have been entitled
to any part of the Reward, if he had
been convicted. That the Thief had several
Guineas in his Pocket; that it was very
unlikely he should have been guilty of such
an Oversight. That his Pretence for leaving
the Room was absurd: that it was his
constant Maxim, that a wise Man never
refused Money on any Conditions: That
at every Election, he always had sold his
Vote to both Parties, &c. 
But notwithstanding these and many
other such Allegations, I am sufficiently
convinced of his Innocence; having been
positively assured of it, by those who received
their Informations from his own
Mouth. 
All the Family were now up, and with
many others assembled in the Kitchin,
where Mr. Tow-wouse was in some Tribulation; 

the Surgeon having declared, that
by Law, he was liable to be indicted for
the Thief's Escape, as it was out of his
House: He was a little comforted however
by Mr. Barnabas's Opinion, that as
the Escape was by Night, the Indictment
would not lie. 
Mrs. Tow-wouse delivered herself in the
following Words: “Sure never was such
a Fool as my Husband! would any other
Person living have left a Man in
the Custody of such a drunken, drowsy
Blockhead as Tom Suckbribe;” (which
was the Constable's Name) “and if he
could be indicted without any harm to
his Wife and Children, I should be glad
of it.” (Then the Bell rung in Joseph's
Room) “Why Betty, John Chamberlain,
where the Devil are you all? Have you
no Ears, or no Conscience, not to tend
the Sick better? —See what the Gentleman
wants; why don't you go yourself,
Mr. Tow-wouse? but any one may die
for you; you have no more feeling than
a Deal-Board. If a Man lived a Fortnight
in your House without spending a
Penny, you would never put him in
mind of it. See whether he drinks Tea
or Coffee for Breakfast.” “Yes, my
Dear,” cry'd Tow-wouse. She then 

asked the Doctor and Mr. Barnabas what
Morning's Draught they chose, who answered,
they had a Pot of Syder-and, at
the Fire; which we will leave them merry
over, and return to Joseph. 
He had rose pretty early this Morning:
but tho' his Wounds were far from threatning
any danger, he was so sore with the
Bruises, that it was impossible for him
to think of undertaking a Journey yet; 
Mr. Adams therefore, whose Stock was visibly
decreased with the Expences of Supper
and Breakfast, and which could not survive
that Day's Scoring, began to consider
how it was possible to recruit it. At
last he cry'd, “He had luckily hit on a
sure Method, and though it would oblige
him to return himself together with
Joseph, it mattered not much.” He
then sent for Tow-wouse, and taking him
into another Room, told him, “He wanted
to borrow three Guineas, for which
he would put ample Security in his
Hands.” Tow-wouse who expected a
Watch, or Ring, or something of double the
Value, answered, “He believed he could
furnish him.” Upon which Adams pointing
to his Saddle-Bag told him with a Face and
Voice full of Solemnity, “that there were
in that Bag no less than nine Volumes 

of Manuscript Sermons, as well worth
a hundred Pound as a Shilling was worth
twelve Pence, and that he would deposite
one of the Volumes in his Hands
by way of Pledge; not doubting but
that he would have the Honesty to return
it on his Repayment of the Money:
for otherwise he must be a very
great loser, seeing that every Volume
would at least bring him ten Pounds,
as he had been informed by a neighbouring
Clergyman in the Country: for,
said he, as to my own part, having never
yet dealt in Printing, I do not pretend
to ascertain the exact Value of such
things.” 
Tow-wouse, who was a little surprized
at the Pawn, said (and not without some
Truth) “That he was no Judge of the
Price of such kind of Goods; and as
for Money, he really was very short.” 
Adams answered, “Certainly he would not
scruple to lend him three Guineas, on
what was certainly worth at least ten.” 
The Landlord replied, “He did not believe
he had so much Money in the
House, and besides he was to make up
a Sum. He was very confident the Books
were of much higher Value, and heartily
sorry it did not suit him.” He then 

cry'd out, Coming Sir! though no body
called, and ran down Stairs without any
Fear of breaking his Neck. 
Poor Adams was extremely dejected at
this Disappointment, nor knew he what
farther Stratagem to try. He immediately
apply'd to his Pipe, his constant Friend
and Comfort in his Afflictions; and leaning
over the Rails, he devoted himself to
Meditation, assisted by the inspiring Fumes
of Tobacco. 
He had on a Night-Cap drawn over
his Wig, and a short great Coat, which
half covered his Cassock; a Dress, which
added to something comical enough in
his Countenance, composed a Figure likely
to attract the Eyes of those who were
not over-given to Observation. 
Whilst he was smoaking his Pipe in
this Posture, a Coach and Six, with a numerous
Attendance, drove into the Inn. 
There alighted from the Coach a young
Fellow, and a Brace of Pointers, after which
another young Fellow leapt from the Box,
and shook the former by the hand, and
both together with the Dogs were instantly
conducted by Mr. Tow-wouse into
an Apartment; whither as they passed, 

they entertained themselves with the following
short facetious Dialogue. 
“You are a pretty Fellow or a Coachman,
Jack!” says he from the Coach,
“you had almost overturned us just now.” 
“Pox take you,” says the Coachman, “if
I had only broke your Neck, it would
have been saving somebody else the trouble:
but I should have been sorry for
the Pointers.” “Why, you Son of a
B&wblank;,” answered the other, “if no body
could shoot better than you, the Pointers
would be of no use.” “D&wblank;n
me,” says the Coachman, “I will shoot
with you, five Guineas a Shot.” “You
be hang'd,” says the other, “for five
Guineas you shall shoot at my A&wblank;.” 
“Done,“ says the Coachman, “I'll pepper
you better than ever you was peppered
by Jenny Bouncer.” “Pepper
your Grand-mother,” says the other,
“here's Tow-wouse will let you shoot at
him for a Shilling a time.” “I know
his Honour better,” cries Tow-wouse,
“I never saw a surer shot at a Partridge. 
Every Man misses now and then; but
if I could shoot half as well as his Honour,
I would desire no better Livelihood
than I could get by my Gun.” 
“Pox on you,” said the Coachman, “you 

demolish more Game now than your
Head's worth. There's a Bitch, Tow-wouse,
by G&wblank; she never blinked*  a
Bird in her Life.” “I have a Puppy,
not a Year old, shall hunt with her for
a hundred,” cries the other Gentleman. 
“Done,” says the Coachman, “but you
will be pox'd before you make the Bett. 
If you have a mind for a Bett, cries the
Coachman, I will match my spotted Dog
with your white Bitch for a hundred,
play or pay.” “Done,” says the other,
“and I'll run Baldface against Slouch with
you for another.” “No,” cries he from
the Box, “but I'll venture Miss Jenny
against Baldface, or Hannibal either.” 
“Go to the Devil,” cries he from the
Coach, “I will make every Bett your own
way, to be sure! I will match Hannibal
with Slouch for a thousand, if you dare,
and I say done first.” 
They were now arrived, and the Reader
will be very contented to leave them,
and repair to the Kitchin, where Barnabas,
the Surgeon, and an Exciseman were
smoaking their Pipes over some Syderand,
whither the Servants, who attended
the two noble Gentlemen we have just seen
alight, were now arrived. 

“Tom,” cries of the Footmen,
“there's Parson Adams smoaking his Pipe
in the Gallery.” “Yes,” says Tom, “I
pulled off my Hat to him, and the Parson
spoke to me.” 
“Is the Gentleman a Clergyman then?” 
says Barnabas, (for his Cassock had been
tied up when first he arrived,) “Yes, Sir,” 
answered the Footman, “and one there
be but few like.” “Ay,” said Barnabas,
“if I had known it sooner, I should
have desired his Company; but what
say you, Doctor, shall we adjourn into
a Room, and invite him to take part
of a Bowl of Punch?” 
This Proposal was immediately agreed
to, and executed; and Parson Adams accepting
the Invitation; much Civility passed
between the two Clergymen, who both
declared the great Honour they had for
the Cloth. They had not been long together
before they entered into a Discourse
on small Tithes, which continued a full
Hour, without the Doctor or the Exciseman's
having one Opportunity to offer a
Word. 

It was then proposed to begin a general
Conversation and the Exciseman opened
on foreign Affairs: but a Word unluckily
dropping from one of them introduced
a Dissertation on the Hardships
suffered by the inferiour Clergy; which, after
a long Duration, concluded with bringing
the three Volumes of Sermons on the
Carpet. 
Barnabas greatly discouraged poor
Adams; he said, “The Age was so wicked,
that no body read Sermons: Would
you think it, Mr. Adams, (said he) I
once intended to print a Volume of Sermons
myself, and they had the Approbation
of two or three Bishops: but
what do you think a Bookseller offered
me?” “Twelve Guineas perhaps (cried
Adams.)” “Not Twelve Pence, I assure
you,” answered Barnabas, “nay
the Dog refused me a Concordance in
Exchange. —At last, I offered to give
him the printing them, for the sake of
dedicating them to that very Gentleman
who just now drove his own Coach into
the Inn, and I assure you, he had
the Impudence to refuse my Offer: by
which means I lost a good Living, that
was afterwards given away in exchange 

for a Pointer, to one who—but I will
not say any thing against the Cloth. So
you may guess, Mr. Adams, what you
are to expect; for if Sermons would have
gone down, I believe—I will not be
vain: but to be concise with you, three
Bishops said, they were the best that
ever were writ: but indeed there are
a pretty moderate number printed already,
and not all sold yet.” —“Pray,
Sir,” says Adams, “to what do you think
the Numbers may amount? “Sir,” answered
Barnabas, “a Bookseller told me he
believed five thousand Volumes at least.” 
“Five thousand!” quoth the Surgeon,
“what can they be writ upon? I remember,
when I was a Boy, I used to read one
Tillotson's Sermons; and I am sure, if a
Man practised half so much as is in one
of those Sermons, he will go to Heaven.” 
“Doctor,” cried Barnabas, “you
have a profane way of talking, for which
I must reprove you. A Man can never
have his Duty too frequently inculcated
into him. And as for Tillotson,
to be sure he was a good Writer, and
said things very well: but Comparisons
are odious, another Man may write as
well as he—I believe there are some
of my Sermons,”—and then he apply'd
the Candle to his Pipe. —“And I 

believe there are some of my Discourses,” 
cries Adams, “which the Bishops would
not think totally unworthy of being printed; 
and I have been informed, I might
procure a very large Sum (indeed an
immense one) on them.” “I doubt
that;” answered Barnabas: “however,
if you desire to make some Money of
them, perhaps you may sell them by advertising
the Manuscript Sermons of a
Clergyman lately deceased, all warranted
Originals, and never printed. And now
I think of it, I should be obliged to
you, if there be ever a Funeral one among
them, to lend it me: for I am
this very day to preach a Funeral Sermon,
for which I have not penned a Line,
though I am to have a double Price.” 
Adams answered, “He had but one, which
he feared would not serve his purpose,
being sacred to the Memory of a Magistrate,
who had exerted himself very
singularly in the Preservation of the Morality
of his Neighbours, insomuch, that
he had neither Ale-house, nor lewd Women
in the Parish where he lived”.— 
“No,” replied Barnabas, “that will not
do quite so well; for the Deceased, upon
whose Virtues I am to harangue, was
a little too much addicted to Liquor, and
publickly kept a Mistress. —I believe 

I must take a common Sermon, and trust
to my Memory to introduce something
handsome on him.” “—To your Invention
rather,” (said the Doctor) “your
Memory will be apter to put you out:
for no Man living remembers any thing
good of him.” 
With such kind of spiritual Discourse,
they emptied the Bowl of Punch, paid
their Reckoning, and separated: Adams
and the Doctor went up to Joseph; Parson
Barnabas departed to celebrate the aforesaid
Deceased, and the Exciseman descended
into the Cellar to gage the Vessels. 
Joseph was now ready to sit down to
a Loin of Mutton, and waited for Mr.
Adams, when he and the Doctor came in. 
The Doctor having felt his Pulse, and examined
his Wounds, declared him much
better, which he imputed to that Sanative
soporiferous Draught, a Medicine,
“whose Virtues,” he said, “were never
to be sufficiently extolled:” And great
indeed they must be, if Joseph was so much
indebted to them as the Doctor imagined,
since nothing more than those Effluvia,
which escaped the Cork, could have contributed
to his Recovery: for the Medicine 

had stood untouched in the Window
ever since its arrival. 
Joseph passed that day and the three
following with his Friend Adams, in which
nothing so remarkable happened as the
swift Progress of his Recovery. As he
had an excellent Habit of Body, his Wounds
were now almost healed, and his Bruises
gave him so little uneasiness, that he pressed
Mr. Adams to let him depart, told
him he should never be able to return sufficient
Thanks for all his Favours; but begged
that he might no longer delay his Journey
to London. 
Adams, notwithstanding the Ignorance,
as he conceived it, of Mr. Tow-wouse, and
the Envy (for such he thought it) of Mr.
Barnabas, had great Expectations from his
Sermons: seeing therefore Joseph in so good
a way, he told him he would agree to his
setting out the next Morning in the Stage-Coach,
that he believed he should have
sufficient after the Reckoning paid, to procure
him one Day's Conveyance in it, and
afterwards he would be able to get on, on
foot, or might be favoured with a lift in
some Neighbour's Waggon, especially as
there was then to be a Fair in the Town
whither the Coach would carry him, to 

which Numbers from his Parish resorted. 
—And as to himself, he agreed to proceed
to the great City. 
They were now walking in the Inn
Yard, when a fat, fair, short Person rode
in, and alighting from his Horse went
directly up to Barnabas, who was smoaking
his Pipe on a Bench. The Parson and
the Stranger shook one another very lovingly
by the Hand, and went into a Room
together. 
The Evening now coming on, Joseph
retired to his Chamber, whither the good
Adams accompanied him; and took this
Opportunity to expatiate on the great Mercies
God had lately shewn him, of which
he ought not only to have the deepest
inward Sense; but likewise to express outward
Thankfulness for them. They therefore
fell both on their Knees, and spent
a considerable time in Prayer and Thanksgiving. 
They had just finished, when Betty came
in and told Mr. Adams, Mr. Barnabas
desired to speak to him on some Business
of Consequence below Stairs. Joseph desired,
if it was likely to detain him long,
he would let him know it, that he might 

go to Bed, which Adams promised, and
in that Case, they wished one another good
Night. 



A pleasant Discourse between the two
Parsons and the Bookseller, which
was broke off by an unlucky Accident
happening in the Inn, which produced
a Dialogue between Mrs. Tow-wouse
and her Maid of no gentle kind. 
As soon as Adams came into the Room,
Mr. Barnabas introduced him to the
Stranger, who was, he told him, a Bookseller,
and would be as likely to deal with
him for his Sermons as any Man whatever. 
Adams, saluting the Stranger, answered
Barnabas, that he was very much
obliged to him, that nothing could be more
convenient, for he had no other Business
to the great City, and was heartily desirous
of returning with the young Man
who was just recovered of his Misfortune. 
He then snapt his Fingers (as was usual
with him) and took two or three turns
about the Room in an Extasy. —And
to induce the Bookseller to be as expeditious 

as possible, as likewise to offer him
a better Price for his Commodity, he assured
him, their meeting was extremely
lucky to himself: for that he had the most
pressing Occasion for Money at that time,
his own being almost spent, and having
a Friend then in the same Inn who was
just recovered from some Wounds he had
received from Robbers, and was in a most
indigent Condition. 
As soon as he had seated himself, the
Stranger began in these Words, “Sir, I
do not care absolutely to deny engaging
in what my Friend Mr. Barnabas
recommends: but Sermons are mere
Drugs. The Trade is so vastly stocked
with them, that really unless they
come out with the Name of Whitfield
or Westley, or some other such great Man,
as a Bishop, or those sort of People,
I don't care to touch, unless now it
was a Sermon preached on the 30th
of January, or we could say in the Title
Page, published at the earnest Request
of the Congregation, or the Inhabitants:
but truly for a dry Piece of
Sermons, I had rather be excused; especially
as my Hands are so full at present. 
However, Sir, as Mr. Barnabas
mentioned them to me, I will, if you 

please, take the Manuscript with me to
Town, and send you my Opinion of it
in a very short time.” 
O, said Adams, if you desire it, I will
read two or three Discourses as a Specimen. 
This Barnabas, who loved Sermons
no better than a Grocer doth Figs,
immediately objected to, and advised Adams
to let the Bookseller have his Sermons; 
telling him, if he gave him a Direction,
he might be certain of a speedy
Answer: Adding, he need not scruple
trusting them in his Possession. No, said
the Bookseller, if it was a Play that had
been acted twenty Nights together, I believe
it would be safe. 
Adams did not at all relish the last
Expression; he said, he was sorry to hear
Sermons compared to Plays, “Not by
me, I assure you,” cry'd the Bookseller,
though I don't know whether the licensing
Act may not shortly bring them
to the same footing: but I have formerly
known a hundred Guineas given
for a Play—.” “More shame for those
who gave it,” cry'd Barnabas. “Why
so?” said the Bookseller, “for they got
hundreds by it.” “But is there no
difference between conveying good or ill 

Instructions to Mankind?” said Adams; 
“would not an honest Mind rather lose
Money by the one, than gain it by the
the other?” “If you can find any such,
I will not be their Hinderance,” answered
the Bookseller, “but I think those
Persons who get by preaching Sermons,
are the properest to lose by printing
them: for my part, the Copy that fells
best, will be always the best Copy in my
Opinion; I am no Enemy to Sermons
but because they don't sell: for I would
as soon print one of Whitfield's, as any
Farce whatever.” 
“Whoever prints such Heterodox
Stuff, ought to be hanged,” says Barnabas. 
“Sir,” said he, turning to Adams,
this Fellow's Writings (I know not whether
you have seen them) are levelled at
the Clergy. He would reduce us to the
Example of the Primitive Ages forsooth!
and would insinuate to the People, that
a Clergyman ought to be always preaching
and praying. He pretends to understand
the Scripture literally, and would
make Mankind believe, that the Poverty
and low Estate, which was recommended
to the Church in its Infancy,
and was only temporary Doctrine adapted
to her under Persecution, was to be 

preserved in her flourishing and established
State. Sir, the Principles of Toland,
Woolston, and all the Free-Thinkers, are
not calculated to do half the Mischief,
as those professed by this Fellow and his
Followers.” 
“Sir,” answered Adams, “if Mr. Whitfield
had carried his Doctrine no farther
than you mention, I should have
remained, as I once was, his Well-Wisher. 
I am myself as great an Enemy to
the Luxury and Splendour of the Clergy
as he can be. I do not, more than
he, by the flourishing Estate of the
Church, understand the Palaces, Equipages,
Dress, Furniture, rich Dainties,
and vast Fortunes of her Ministers. Surely
those, which favour so strongly of
this World, become not the Servants of
ore who professed his Kingdom was not
of it: but when he began to call Nonsense
and Enthusiasm in to his Aid, and
to set up the detestable Doctrine of Faith
against good Works, I was his Friend
no longer; for surely, that Doctrine was
coined in Hell, and one would think
none but the Devil himself could have
the Confidence to preach it. For can
any thing be more derogatory to the
Honour of God, than for Men to imagine 

that the All-wise Being will hereafter
say to the Good and Virtuous, Notwithstanding
the Purity of thy Life, notwithstanding
that constant Rule of Virtue
and Goodness in which you walked upon
Earth, still as thou did'st not believe
every thing in the true Orthodox manner,
thy want of Faith shall condemn thee? 
Or on the other side, can any Doctrine
have a more pernicious Influence on Society
than a Persuasion, that it will be
a good Plea for the Villain at the last
day; Lord, it is true I never obeyed one of
thy Commandments, yet punish me not, for
I believe them all?” “I suppose, Sir,” 
said the Bookseller, “your Sermons are
of a different Kind.” “Ay, Sir,” said
Adams, “the contrary, I thank Heaven,
is inculcated in almost every Page, or
I should belye my own Opinion, which
hath always been, that a virtuous and
good Turk, or Heathen, are more acceptable
in the sight of their Creator,
than a vicious and wicked Christian, tho'
his Faith was as perfectly Orthodox as
St. Paul's himself.” —“I wish you Success,” 
says the Bookseller, “but must
beg to be excused, as my Hands are
so very full at present; and indeed I am
afraid, you will find a Backwardness in
the Trade, to engage in a Book which 

the Clergy would be certain to cry
down.” “God forbid,” says Adams,
any Books should be propagated which
the Clergy would cry down: but if you
mean by the Clergy, some few designing
factious Men, who have it at Heart
to establish some favourite Schemes at the
Price of the Liberty of Mankind, and
the very Essence of Religion, it is not
in the power of such Persons to decry
any Book they please; witness that excellent
Book called, A Plain Account
of the Nature and End of the Sacrament; 
a Book written (if I may venture
on the Expression) with the Pen of an
Angel, and calculated to restore the
true Use of Christianity, and of that Sacred
Institution: for what could tend
more to the noble Purposes of Religion,
than frequent cheerful Meetings among
the Members of a Society, in which
they should in the Presence of one another,
and in the Service of the supreme
Being, make Promises of being good,
friendly and benevolent to each other? 
Now this excellent Book was attacked
by a Party, but unsuccessfully.” At
these Words Barnabas fell a ringing with
all the Violence imaginable, upon which
a Servant attending, he bid him “bring
a Bill immediately: for that he was in 

Company, for aught he knew, with the
Devil himself; and he expected to hear
the Alcoran, the Leviathan, or Woolston
commended, if he staid a few Minutes
longer.” Adams desired, “as he
was so much moved at his mentioning
a Book, which he did without apprehending
any possibility of Offence, that
he would be so kind to propose any
Objections he had to it, which he would
endeavour to answer.” “I propose Objections!” 
said Barnabas, “I never read
a Syllable in any such wicked Book; I
never saw it in my Life, I assure you.” 
—Adams was going to answer, when
a most hideous Uproar began in the Inn. 
Mrs. Tow-wouse, Mr. Tow-wouse, and
Betty, all lifting up their Voices together:
but Mrs. Tow-wouse's Voice, like a Bass
Viol in a Concert, was clearly and distinctly
distinguished among the rest, and
was heard to articulate the following
Sounds. —O you damn'd Villain, is this
the Return to all the Care I have taken
of your Family? This the Reward of
my Virtue? Is this the manner in which
you behave to one who brought you
a Fortune, and preferred you to so many
Matches, all your Betters? To abuse my
Bed, my own Bed, with my own Servant:
but I'll maul the Slut, I'll tear 

her nasty Eyes out; was ever such a pitiful
Dog, to take up with such a mean
Trollop? If she had been a Gentlewoman
like my self, it had been some excuse,
but a beggarly saucy dirty Servant-Maid. 
Get you out of my House, you
Whore”. To which, she added another
Name, which we do not care to
stain our Paper with. —It was a monosyllable,
beginning with a B&wblank;, and
indeed was the same, as if she had pronounced
the Words, She Dog. Which Term,
we shall, to avoid Offence, use on this Occasion. 
Betty had borne all hitherto with
Patience, and had uttered only Lamentations:
but the last Appellation stung her
to the Quick, “I am a Woman as well
as yourself,” she roared out, “and no She-Dog? 
And if I have been a little naughty,
I am not the first; if I have been
no better than I should be,” cries she
sobbing, “that's no Reason you should call
me out of my Name.” “Huzzy, huzzy,” 
says Mrs. Tow-wouse, “have you
the Impudence to answer me? Did I
not catch you, you saucy—” and then again
repeated the terrible word so odious
to Female Ears. “I can't bear that Name,” 
answered Betty, “if I have been wicked,
I am to answer for it myself in the other
World, but I have done nothing 

that's unnatural, and I will go out of your
House this Moment: for I will never
be called She Dog, by any Mistress in
England.” Mrs. Tow-wouse then armed
herself with the Spit: but was prevented
from executing any dreadful Purpose
by Mr. Adams, who confined her Arms
with the Strength of a Wrist, which Hercules
would not have been ashamed of. 
Mr. Tow-wouse being caught, as our Lawyers
express it, with the Manner, and having
no Defence to make, very prudently
withdrew himself, and Betty committed
herself to the Protection of the Hostler,
who, though he was not pleased with what
had happened, was in her Opinion rather
a gentler Beast than her Mistress. 
Mrs. Tow-wouse, at the Intercession of
Mr. Adams, and finding the Enemy vanished,
began to compose herself We will therefore
leave her in this Temper, to open to
the Reader the Steps which led to a Catastrophe,
common enough, and comical
enough too, perhaps in modern History,
yet often fatal to the Repose and Well-being
of Families, and the Subject of many
Tragedies, both in Life and on the Stage. 




The History of Betty the Chambermaid,
and an Account of what occasioned
the violent Scene in the preceding
Chapter. 
Betty, who was the Occasion of
all this Hurry, had some good Qualities. 
She had Good-nature, Generosity
and Compassion, but unhappily her Constitution
was composed of those warm Ingredients,
which, though the Purity of
Courts or Nunneries might have happily
controuled, were by no means able to
endure the ticklish Situation of a Chamber-maid
at an Inn, who is daily liable
to the Solicitations of Lovers of all Complexions,
to the dangerous Addresses of
fine Gentlemen of the Army, who sometimes
are obliged to reside with them a
whole Year together, and above all are
exposed to the Caresses of Footmen, Stage-Coachmen,
Drawers, and others, all of
which employ the whole Artillery of kissing,
flattering, bribing, and every other Weapon
which is to be found in the whole Armory
of Love, against them. 

Betty, who was about one and twenty,
had now lived three Years in this dangerous
Situation, during which she had
escaped pretty well. An Ensign of Foot
was the first Person who made any Impression
on her Heart; he did indeed raise
a Flame in her, which required the Care
of a Surgeon to cool. 
While she burnt for him, several others
burnt for her. Officers of the Army,
young Gentlemen travelling the Western
Circuit, inoffensive Squires, and some
of graver Character were set afire by her
Charms! 
At length, having perfectly recovered
the Effects of her first unhappy Passion,
she seemed to have vowed a State of perpetual
Chastity. She was long deaf to all
the Sufferings of her Lovers, till one day
at a neighbouring Fair, the Rhetorick of
John the Hostler, with a new Straw Hat,
and a Pint of Wine, made a second Conquest
over her. 
She did not however feel any of those
Flames on this Occasion, which had been
the Consequence of her former Amour; 
nor indeed those other ill Effects, which 

prudent young Women very justly apprehend
from too absolute an Indulgence
to the pressing Endearments of their Lovers. 
This latter, perhaps, was a little owing
to her not being entirely constant to
John, with whom she permitted Tom
Whipwell the Stage-Coachman, and now
and then a handsome young Traveller, to
share her Favours. 
Mr. Tow-wouse had for some time
cast the languishing Eyes of Affection
on this young Maiden. He had laid
hold on every Opportunity of saying tender
things to her, squeezing her by the
Hand, and sometimes of kissing her Lips:
for as the Violence of his Passion had considerably
abated to Mrs. Tow-wouse; so
like Water, which it stopt from its usual
Current in one Place, it naturally sought
a vent in another. Mrs. Tow-wouse is
thought to have perceived this Abatement,
and probably it added very little to the
natural Sweetness of her Temper: for tho'
she was as true to her Husband, as the
Dial to the Sun, she was rather more desirous
of being shone on, as being more
capable of feeling his Warmth. 
Ever since Joseph's arrival, Betty had
conceived an extraordinary Liking to him, 

which discovered itself more and more,
as he grew better and better; till that fatal
Evening, when she was warming his
Bed, her Passion grew to such a Height,
and so perfectly mastered both her Modesty
and her Reason, that after many
fruitless Hints, and sly Insinuations, she at
last threw down the Warming-Pan, and
embracing him with great Eagerness, swore
he was the handsomest Creature she had
ever seen. 
Joseph in great Confusion leapt from
her, and told her, he was sorry to see
a young Woman cast off all Regard to
Modesty: but she had gone too far
to recede, and grew so very indecent,
that Joseph was obliged, contrary to his
Inclination, to use some Violence to her,
and taking her in his Arms, he shut her
out of the Room, and locked the Door. 
How ought Man to rejoice, that his
Chastity is always in his own power, that
if he hath sufficient Strength of Mind, he
hath always a competent Strength of Body
to defend himself: and cannot, like a
poor weak Woman, be ravished against
his Will. 

Betty was in the most violent Agitation
at this Disappointment. Rage and
Lust pulled her Heart, as with two Strings,
two different Ways; one Moment she
thought of stabbing Joseph, the next, of
taking him in her Arms, and devouring
him with Kisses; but the latter Passion
was far more prevalent. Then she thought
of revenging his Refusal on herself: but
whilst she was engaged in this Meditation,
happily Death presented himself to
her in so many Shapes of drowning, hanging,
poisoning, &c. that her distracted
Mind could resolve on none. In this
Perturbation of Spirit, it accidentally occurred
to her Memory, that her Master's
Bed was not made, she therefore went directly
to his Room; where he happened
at that time to be engaged at his Bureau. 
As soon as she saw him, she attempted to
retire: but he called her back, and taking
her by the hand, squeezed it so tenderly,
at the same time whispering so many
soft things into her Ears, and, then pressed
her so closely with his Kisses, that the
vanquished Fair-One, whose Passions were
already raised, and which were not so whimsically
capricious that one Man only could
lay them, though perhaps, she would have
rather preferred that one: The vanquished 

Fair-One quietly submitted, I say, to
her Master's Will, who had just attained
the Accomplishment of his Bliss, when
Mrs. Tow-wouse unexpectedly entered the
Room, and caused all that Confusion which
we have before seen, and which it is not
necessary at present to take any farther
Notice of. 
As every Reader of any Speculation,
or Experience, though not married himself,
may easily conjecture, that it concluded
with the Discharge of Betty, the Submission
of Mr. Tow-worse, with some things
to be performed on his side by way of
Gratitude for his Wife's Goodness in being
reconciled to him, with many hearty
Promises never to offend any more in the
like manner: and lastly, his quietly and
contentedly bearing to be reminded of his
Transgressions, as a kind of Penance, once
or twice a Day, during the Residue of
his Life. 

The End of the First Book.