


In which a young Hero, of wonderful
good Promise, makes his first Appearance,
with many other great
Matters. 
Our Hero next applied himself to
another of his Gang, who instantly
received his Orders, and instead of hesitating
at a single Murther, asked if he should
blow out the Brains of all the Passengers,
Coachman and all. But Wild, whose Moderation
we have before noted, would not
permit him; and therefore having given him
an exact Description of the devoted Person,
with his other necessary Instructions, he dismissed
him, with strictest Orders to avoid,
if possible, doing hurt to any other Person. 
The Name of this Youth, who will
hereafter make some Figure in this History,
being the Achates of our Æneas, or rather
the Hæphestion of our Alexander was Fireblood. 

He had every Qualification to make
a Second-Rate great Man; or in other
Words, he was completely equipped for
the Tool of a Real or First-Rate great
Man. We shall therefore (which is the
properest Way of dealing with this Kind
of Greatness) describe him negatively,
and content ourselves with telling
our Reader what Qualities he had
not: In which Number were Humanity,
Modesty, and Fear, not one Grain of any
of which was mingled in his whole Composition. 
We will now leave this Youth, who
was esteemed the most promising of the
whole Gang, and whom Wild often declared
to be one of the prettiest Lads he had
ever seen, of which Opinion, indeed, were
most other People of his Acquaintance; we
will however leave him at his Entrance on
this Enterprize, and keep our Attention
fixed on our Hero, whom we shall observe
taking large Strides towards the Summit
of human Glory. 

Wild, immediately at his Return to
Town, went to pay a Visit to Miss Lætitia
Snap; for he had that Weakness of suffering
himself to be enslaved by Women, so
naturally incident to Men of Heroic Disposition; 
to say the Truth, it might more
properly be called a Slavery to his own Appetite; 
for could he have satisfied that, he
had not cared three Farthings what had become
of the little Tyrant for whom he
profest so violent a Regard. Here he was
informed that Mr. Heartfree had been conveyed
to Newgate the Day before, the Writ
being then returnable. He was somewhat
concerned at this News; not from any
Compassion for the Misfortunes of Heartfree,
whom he hated with such Inveteracy,
that one would have imagined he had suffered
the same Injuries from him which he
had done towards him. His Concern therefore
had another Motive: In Fact, he was
uneasy at the Place of Mr. Heartfree's
Confinement, as it was to be the Scene of
his future Glory, and where consequently
he should be frequently obliged to see a 

Face which Hatred and not Shame, made
him detest the Sight of. 
To prevent this, therefore, several Methods
suggested themselves to him. At first,
he thought of removing him out of the
Way by the ordinary Method of Murther,
which he doubted not but Fireblood would
be very ready to execute; for that Youth
had at their last Interview, sworn, D&wblank;n
his Eyes, he thought there was no better
Pastime than blowing a Man's Brains out. 
But besides the Danger of this Method, it
did not look horrible nor barbarous enough
for the last Mischief which he should do
to Heartfree. Considering, therefore, a little
farther with himself, he at length came to
a Resolution to hang him if possible, the
very next Sessions. 
Now, tho' the Observation, How apt Men
are to hate those they injure, or how unforgiving
they are of the Injuries they do themselves,
be common enough, yet I do not remember
to have ever seen the Reason of this
strange Phænomenon, as at first it appears. 
Know therefore, Reader, that with much and 

severe Scrutiny we have discovered this Hatred
to be founded on the Passion of Fear,
and to arise from an Apprehension that
the Person whom we have ourselves
greatly injured, will use all possible Endeavours
to revenge and retaliate the Injuries
we have done him. An Opinion so
firmly established in bad and Great Minds
(and those who confer Injuries on others,
have seldom very good, or mean ones) that
no Benevolence nor even Beneficence on
the injured Side, can eradicate it. On the
contrary they refer all these Acts of Kindness
to Imposture and Design of lulling their
Suspicion, till an Opportunity offers of
striking a surer and severer Blow; and thus
while the good Man who hath received
it, hath truly forgotten the Injury, the evil
Mind which did it, hath it in lively and
fresh Remembrance. 
As we scorn to keep any such Discoveries
secret from our Readers, whose Instruction
as well as Diversion, we have greatly
considered in this History, we have here
digressed somewhat to communicate the following
short Lesson to those who are simple, 

and well inclined; Tho' as a Christian thou
art obliged, and we advise thee to forgive thy
Enemy; never trust the Man who
hath Reason to suspect that you
know he hath injured you. 