


In which the History advances about two
Days. 



Too short to need a Preface. 
There are a Set of Religious, or
rather Moral Writers, who teach
that Virtue is the certain Road to
Happiness, and Vice to Misery in this
World. A very wholesome and comfortable 

Doctrine, and to which we have but one
Objection, namely, That it is not true. 
Indeed if by Virtue these Writers mean,
the Exercise of those Cardinal Virtues,
which like good House-wives stay at home,
and mind only the Business of their own
Family, I shall very readily concede the
Point: For so surely do all these contribute
and lead to Happiness, that I would
almost wish, in Violation of all the antient
and modern Sages, to call them rather by
the Name of Wisdom, than by that of
Virtue: For with regard to this Life, no
System, I conceive, was ever wiser than
that of the antient Epicureans, who held
this Wisdom to constitute the chief Good; 
nor foolisher than that of their Opposites,
those modern Epicures, who place all Felicity
in the abundant Gratification of every
sensual Appetite. 
But if by Virtue is meant (as I almost
think it ought) a certain relative Quality,
which is always busying itself without Doors,
and seems as much interested in pursuing the
Good of others as its own; I cannot so easily
agree that this is the surest way to human
Happiness; because I am afraid we must
then include Poverty and Contempt, with 

all the Mischiefs which Backbiting, Envy,
and Ingratitude can bring on Mankind in
our Idea of Happiness; nay, sometimes perhaps
we shall be obliged to wait upon the
said Happiness to a Goal, since many by
the above Virtue have brought themselves
thither. 
I have not now Leisure to enter upon so
large a Field of Speculation, as here seems
opening upon me; my Design was to wipe
off a Doctrine that lay in my Way; since
while Mr. Jones was acting the most virtuous
Part imaginable in labouring to preserve
his fellow Creatures from Destruction,
the Devil, or some other evil Spirit, one
perhaps cloathed in human Flesh, was hard
at Work to make him completely miserable
in the Ruin of his Sophia. 
This therefore would seem an Exception
to the above Rule, if indeed it was a Rule; 
but as we have in our Voyage through Life
seen so many other Exceptions to it, we
chuse to dispute the Doctrine on which it is
founded, which we don't apprehend to be
Christian, which we are convinced is not
true, and which is indeed destructive of one
of the noblest Arguments that Reason 

alone can furnish for the Belief of Immortality. 
But as the Reader's Curiosity (if he hath
any) must be now awake, and hungry, we
shall provide to feed it as fast as we can. 



In which is opened a very black Design
against Sophia. 
I remember a wise old Gentleman, who
used to say, when Children are doing
nothing, they are doing Mischief. I will
not enlarge this quaint Saying to the most
beautiful Part of the Creation in general; 
but so far I may be allowed, that when the
Effects of female Jealousy do not appear
openly in their proper Colours of Rage and
Fury, we may suspect that mischievous Passion
to be at work privately, and attempting
to undermine, what it doth not attack above-ground. 
This was exemplified in the Conduct of
the Lady Bellaston, who under all the
Smiles which she wore in her Countenance,
concealed much Indignation against Sophia; 

and as she plainly saw that this young
Lady stood between her and the full Indulgence
of her Desires, she resolved to get
rid of her by some Means or other; nor
was it long before a very favourable Opportunity
of accomplishing this, presented
itself to her. 
The Reader may be pleased to remember,
that when Sophia was thrown into that Consternation
at the Play-house, by the Wit
and Humour of a Set of young Gentlemen,
who call themselves the Town, we
informed him, that she had put herself under
the Protection of a young Nobleman,
who had very safely conducted her to her
Chair. 
This Nobleman, who frequently visited
Lady Bellaston, had more than once seen
Sophia there, since her Arrival in Town,
and had conceived a very great liking to
her; which Liking, as Beauty never looks
more amiable than in Distress, Sophia had
in this Fright so encreased, that he might
now without any great Impropriety be said
to be actually in love with her. 
It may easily be believed that he would
not suffer so handsome an Occasion of improving 

his Acquaintance with the beloved
Object as now offered itself to elapse, when
even Good-breeding alone might have
prompted him to pay her a Visit. 
The next Morning therefore, after this
Accident he waited on Sophia, with the
usual Compliments and Hopes that she had
received no Harm from her last Night's
Adventure. 
As Love, like Fire, when once thoroughly
kindled, is soon blown into a Flame; 
Sophia in a very short time completed her
Conquest. Time now flew away unperceived,
and the Noble Lord had been two
Hours in Company with the Lady, before
it entered into his Head that he had made
too long a Visit. Tho' this Circumstance
alone would have alarmed Sophia, who was
somewhat more a Mistress of Computation
at present; she had indeed much more
pregnant Evidence from the Eyes of her
Lover of what past within his Bosom; 
nay, though he did not make any open
Declaration of his Passion, yet many of
his Expressions were rather too warm, and
too tender to have been imputed to Complaisance,
even in the Age when such Complaisance
was in Fashion; the very Reverse of 

which is well known to be the reigning
Mode at present. 
Lady Bellaston had been apprised of his
Lordship's Visit at his first Arrival; and
the Length of it very well satisfied her that
Things went as she wished, and as indeed
she had suspected the second time she saw
this young Couple together. This Business
she rightly, I think, concluded, that she
should by no means forward by mixing in
the Company while they were together; 
she therefore ordered her Servants, that
when my Lord was going, they should tell
him, she desired to speak with him, and
employed the intermediate Time in meditating
how best to accomplish a Scheme
which she made no doubt but his Lordship
would very readily embrace the Execution
of. 
Lord Fellamar (for that was the Title
of this young Nobleman) was no sooner introduced
to her Ladyship, than she attacked
him in the following Strain: ‘Bless me,
my Lord, are you here yet? I thought
my Servants had made a Mistake and let
you go away; and I wanted to see you
about an Affair of some Importance.’ 
—‘Indeed, Lady Bellaston,’ said he, ‘I 

don't wonder you are astonished at the
Length of my Visit: For I have staid
above two Hours, and I did not think I
had staid above half a one.’ —‘What
am I to conclude from thence, my
Lord?’ said she, ‘The Company must be
very agreeable which can make Time
slide away so very deceitfully.’ — 
‘Upon my Honour,’ said he, ‘the most
agreeable I ever saw. Pray tell me,
Lady Bellaston, who is this blazing Star
which you have produced among us all of
a sudden?’ —‘What blazing Star, my
Lord?’ said she, affecting a Surprize. 
—‘I mean,’ said he, ‘the Lady I saw
here the other Day, whom I had last
Night in my Arms at the Play-House,
and to whom I have been making that
unreasonable Visit.’ —‘O my Cousin
Western,’ said she, ‘why that blazing
Star, my Lord, is the Daughter of a
Country Booby Squire, and hath been in
Town about a fortnight, for the first
Time.’ —‘Upon my Soul,’ said he,
‘I should swear she had been bred in a
Court; for besides her Beauty, I never
saw any thing so genteel, so sensible, so
polite.’ —‘O brave!’ cries the Lady,
‘My Cousin hath you, I find.’ —‘Upon
my Honour,’ answered he, ‘I wish she 

had: for I am in Love with her to Distraction.’ 
—‘Nay, my Lord,’ said she,
‘it is not wishing yourself very ill neither,
for she is a very great Fortune, I assure
you she is an only Child, and her Father's
Estate is a good 3000l. a Year.’ ‘Then I
can assure you, Madam,’ answered the Lord,
‘I think her the best Match in England.’ 
‘Indeed, my Lord,’ replied she, ‘if you like
her, I heartily wish you had her.’ ‘If
you think so kindly of me, Madam,’ 
said he, ‘as she is a Relation of yours, will
you do me the Honour to propose it to
her Father?’ ‘And are you really then
in earnest?’ cries the Lady, with an affected
Gravity. ‘I hope, Madam,’ answered
he, ‘you have a better Opinion of
me, than to imagine I would jest with
your Ladyship in an Affair of this Kind.’ 
‘Indeed then,’ said the Lady, ‘I will
most readily propose your Lordship to
her Father, and I can, I believe, assure
you of his joyful Acceptance of the Proposal; 
but there is a Bar, which I am almost
ashamed to mention, and yet it is
one you will never be able to conquer. 
You have a Rival, my Lord, and a Rival
who, though I blush to name him, neither
you, nor all the World will ever be
able to conquer.’ ‘Upon my Word, 

Lady Bellaston,’ cries he, ‘you have
struck a damp to my Heart which hath
almost deprived me of Being.’ ‘Fie!
my Lord,’ said she, ‘I should rather
hope I had struck Fire into you. A
Lover, and talk of Damps in your Heart! 
I rather imagined you would have asked
your Rival's Name, that you might have
immediately entered the Lifts with him.’ 
‘I promise you, Madam,’ answered he, ‘there
are very few Things I would not undertake
for your charming Cousin; but pray who
is this happy Man?’ —‘Why he is,’ 
said she, ‘what I am sorry to say most happy
Men with us are, one of the lowest
Fellows in the World. He is a Beggar,
a Bastard, a Foundling, a Fellow in
meaner Circumstances than one of your
Lordship's Footmen.’ ‘And is it possible,’ 
cried he, that a young Creature with
such Perfections, should think of bestowing
herself so unworthily?’ ‘Alas! my
Lord,’ answered she, ‘consider the Country
—the Bane of all young Women is
the Country. There they learn a Set of
romantic Notions of Love and I know
not what Folly, which this Town and
good Company can scarce eradicate in a
whole Winter.’ ‘Indeed, Madam,’ replied
my Lord, ‘your Cousin is of too 

immense a Value to be thrown away: 
Such Ruin as this must be prevented.’ 
‘Alas!’ cries she, ‘my Lord, how can it
be prevented? The Family have already
done all in their Power; but the Girl is,
I think, intoxicated, and nothing less
than Ruin will content her. And to deal
more openly with you, I expect every
Day to hear she is run away with him.’ 
‘What you tell me, Lady Bellaston,’ answered
his Lordship, ‘affects me most
tenderly, and only raises my Compassion
instead of lessening my Adoration of
your Cousin. Some Means must be found
to preserve so inestimable a Jewel. Hath
your Ladyship endeavoured to reason with
her?’ Here the Lady affected a Laugh.
and cried, ‘My dear Lord, sure you
know us better than to talk of reasoning
a young Woman out of her Inclinations. 
These inestimable Jewels are as deaf as
the Jewels they wear; Time, my Lord,
Time is the only Medicine to cure their
Folly; but this is a Medicine, which I
am certain she will not take; nay, I live
in hourly Horrors on her Account. In
short nothing but violent Methods will
do.’ ‘What is to be done?’ cries my
Lord, ‘what Methods are to be taken? — 
Is there any Method upon Earth? — 

Oh! Lady Bellaston! there is nothing which
I would not undertake for such a Reward.’ 
—‘I really know not,’ answered the Lady,
after a Pause, and then pausing again, she
cried out,—‘Upon my Soul, I am at
my Wit's End on this Girl's Account. — 
If she can be preserved, something must
be done immediately, and as I say, nothing
but violent Methods will do. — 
If your Lordship hath really this Attachment
to my Cousin, (and to do her Justice,
except in this silly Inclination, of
which she will soon see her Folly, she is
every way deserving,) I think there may
be one Way, indeed it is a very disagreeable
one, and what I am almost afraid to
think of. —It requires great Spirit, I
promise you.’ ‘I am not conscious, Madam,’ 
said he, ‘of any Defect there, nor
am I, I hope, suspected of any such. It
must be an egregious Defect indeed,
which could make me backward on this
Occasion.’ ‘Nay, my Lord,’ answered
she, ‘I am far from doubting you. I am
much more inclined to doubt my own
Courage: for I must run a monstrous
Risque. In short, I must place such a
Confidence in your Honour as a wise Woman
will scarce ever place in a Man on any
Consideration.’ In this Point likewise my 

Lord very well satisfied her; for his Reputation
was extremely clear, and common
Fame did him no more than Justice, in
speaking well of him. ‘Well then,’ said
she, ‘my Lord,—I—I vow, I can't
bear the Apprehension of it—No,
it must not be. —At least every other Method
shall be tried. Can you get rid of
your Engagements and dine here to-day? 
Your Lordship will have an Opportunity
of seeing a little more of Miss Western. — 
I promise you we have no time to lose. 
Here will be no body but Lady Betty, and
Miss Eagle, and Colonel Hampsted, and
Tom Edwards, they will all go soon— 
and I shall be at home to no body. 
Then your Lordship may be a little more
explicit. Nay, I will contrive some Method
to convince you of her Attachment
to this Fellow.’ My Lord made proper
Compliments, accepted the Invitation, and
then they parted to dress, it being now past
three in the Morning, or to reckon by the
old Style, in the Afternoon. 




A further Explanation of the foregoing
Design. 
Tho' the Reader may have long since
concluded Lady Bellaston to be a
Member (and no inconsiderable one) of the
Great World, she was in reality a very considerable
Member of the Little World; by
which Appellation was distinguished a very
worthy and honourable Society which not
long since flourished in this Kingdom. 
Among other good Principles upon which
this Society was founded, there was one
very remarkable; for as it was a Rule of
an honourable Club of Heroes, who assembled
at the close of the late War, that all the
Members should every Day fight once at
least; so 'twas in this, that every Member
should, within the twenty-four Hours, tell
at least one merry Fib, which was to be
propagated by all the Brethren and Sisterhood. 
Many idle Stories were told about this
Society, which from a certain Quality may 

be perhaps not unjustly supposed to have
come from the Society themselves. As, that
the Devil was the President, and that he
sat in Person in an elbow Chair at the upper
End of the Table; but upon very strict Enquiry,
I find there is not the least Truth in
any of those Tales, and that the Assembly
consisted in reality of a Set of very good sort
of People, and the Fibs which they propagated
were of a harmless Kind, and
tended only to produce Mirth and good
Humour. 
Edwards was likewise a Member of
this comical Society. To him therefore
Lady Bellaston applied as a proper Instrument
for her Purpose, and furnished him
with a Fib, which he was to vent whenever
the Lady gave him her Cue; and this was
not to be till the Evening when all the Company
but Lord Fellamar and himself were
gone, and while they were engaged in a
Rubbers at Whist. 
To this Time then, which was between
seven and eight in the Evening, we will convey
our Reader; when Lady Bellaston, Lord
Fellamar, Miss Western, and Tom being engaged
at Whist, and in the last Game of
their Rubbers, Tom received his Cue from 

Lady Bellaston, which was, I protest Tom,
you are grown intolerable lately; you used
to tell us all the News of the Town, and
now you know no more of the World than
if you lived out of it. 
Mr. Edwards then began as follows: 
‘The Fault is not mine, Madam; It lies
in the Dulness of the Age that doth nothing
worth talking of—O la! tho' now
I think on't, there hath a terrible Accident
befallen poor Col. Wilcox. —Poor Ned
—You know him my Lord, every
body knows him; faith! I am very much
concerned for him.’ 
‘What is it, pray?’ says Lady Bellaston. 
‘Why, he hath killed a Man this Morning
in a Duel, that's all.’ 
His Lordship, who was not in the Secret,
asked gravely, whom he had killed; to
which Edwards answered, ‘A young Fellow
we none of us know; a Somersetshire
Lad just come to town, one Jones his
Name is; a near Relation of one Mr. Allworthy,
of whom your Lordship I believe
hath heard. I saw the Lad lie dead 

in a Coffee-house. —Upon my Soul he
is one of the finest Corpses I ever saw in
my Life.’ 
Sophia, who just began to deal as
Tom had mentioned that a Man was killed,
stopt her Hand, and listened with Attention,
(for all Stories of that Kind affected
her) but no sooner had he arrived at the
latter part of the Story, then she began to
deal again; and having dealt three Cards
to one, and seven to another, and ten to
a third, at last dropt the rest from her Hand,
and fell back in her Chair. 
The Company behaved as usually on
these Occasions. The usual Disturbance
ensued, the usual Assistance was summoned,
and Sophia at last, as it is usual, returned
again to Life, and was soon after, at her
earnest Desire, led to her own Apartment; 
where, at my Lord's Request, Lady Bellaston
acquainted her with the Truth, attempted
to carry it off as a Jest of her own,
and comforted her with repeated Assurances,
that neither his Lordship, nor Tom, though
she had taught him the Story, were in the
true Secret of the Affair. 

There was no farther Evidence necessary
to convince Lord Fellamar how
justly the Case had been represented to him
by Lady Bellaston; and now at her Return
into the Room, a Scheme was laid between
those two noble Persons, which, though it
appeared in no very heinous Light to his
Lordship, (as he faithfully promised, and
faithfully resolved too, to make the Lady
all the subsequent amends in his Power by
Marriage;) yet many of our Readers, we
doubt not, will see with just Detestation. 
The next Evening at seven was appointed
for the fatal Purpose, when Lady Bellaston
undertook that Sophia should be alone,
and his Lordship should be introduced to her. 
The whole Family were to be regulated for
the Purpose, most of the Servants dispatched
out of the House, and for Mrs. Honour
who, to prevent any Suspicion, was to be
left with her Mistress till his Lordship's Arrival,
Lady Bellaston herself was to engage her
in an Apartment as distant as possible from
the Scene of the intended Mischief, and out
of the Hearing of Sophia. 
Matters being thus agreed on, his Lordship
took his Leave, and her Ladyship retired 

to Rest, highly pleased with a Project
of which she had no reason to doubt
the Success, and which promised so effectually
to remove Sophia from being any future
Obstruction to her Amour with Jones,
by a Means of which she should never appear
to be guilty, even if the Fact appeared
to the World; but this she made no doubt
of preventing by huddling up a Marriage,
to which she thought the ravished Sophia
would easily be brought to consent, and
at which all the rest of her Family would
rejoice. 
But Affairs were not in so quiet a Situation
in the Bosom of the other Conspirator. 
His Mind was tost in all the the distracting
Anxiety so nobly described by Shakespear. 
Between the Acting of a dreadful Thing,
And the first Motion, all the Interim is
Like a Phantasma, or a hideous Dream: 
The Genius and the mortal Instruments
Are then in Council; and the State of Man,
Like to a little Kingdom, suffers then
The Nature of an Insurrection.—
Though the Violence of his Passion had
made him eagerly embrace the first Hint
of this Design, especially as it came from 

a Relation of the Lady, yet when that
Friend to Reflection, a Pillow, had placed the
Action itself in all its natural black Colours
before his Eyes, with all the Consequences
which must, and those which might probably
attend it; his Resolution began to abate,
or rather indeed to go over to the
other Side; and after a long Conflict which
lasted a whole Night between Honour and
Appetite, the former at length prevailed,
and he determined to wait on Lady Bellaston
and to relinguish the Design. 
Lady Bellaston was in Bed, though very
late in the Morning, and Sophia sitting by
her Bedside, when the Servant acquainted
her that Lord Fellamar was below in the
Parlour, upon which her Ladyship desired
him to stay, and that she would see him
presently; but the Servant was no sooner
departed than poor Sophia began to intreat
her Cousin not to encourage the Visits of
that odious Lord (so she called him though
a little unjustly) upon her Account. ‘I
see his Design,’ said she, ‘for he made
downright Love to me Yesterday Morning; 
but as I am resolved never to admit
it, I beg your Ladyship not to leave us
alone together any more, and to order 

the Servants that if he enquires for me I
may be always denied to him.’ 
‘La! Child,’ says Lady Bellaston, ‘you
Country Girls have nothing but Sweet-Hearts
in your Head; you fancy every
Man who is civil to you is making Love. 
He is one of the most gallant young Fellows
about Town, and I am convinced
means no more than a little Gallantry. 
Make Love to you indeed! I wish with
all my Heart he would, and you must be
an arrant mad Woman to refuse him.’ 
‘But as I shall certainly be that mad Woman,’ 
cries Sophia, ‘I hope his Visits
shall not be intruded upon me.’ 
‘O Child,’ said Lady Bellaston, ‘you
need not be so fearful, if you resolve to
run away with that Jones, I know no Person
who can hinder you.’ 
‘Upon my Honour, Madam,’ cries
Sophia, ‘your Ladyship injures me. I will
never run away with any Man; nor will
I ever marry contrary to my Father's Inclinations.’ 

‘Well, Miss Western,’ said the Lady,
‘if you are not in a Humour to see Company
this Morning, you may retire to
your own Apartment; for I am not
frightned at his Lordship, and must send
for him up into my Dressing Room.’ 
Sophia thanked her Ladyship and withdrew; 
and presently afterwards Fellamar
was admitted up Stairs. 



By which it will appear how dangerous an
Advocate a Lady is, when she applies her
Eloquence to an ill Purpose. 
When Lady Bellaston heard the
young Lord's Scruples, she treated
them with the same Disdain with which one of
those Sages of the Law, called Newgate Solicitors,
treats the Qualms of Conscience in a
young Witness. ‘My dear Lord,’ said she,
‘you certainly want a Cordial. I must send
to Lady Edgely for one of her best Drams. 
Fie upon it! have more Resolution. Are
you frightned by the Word Rape? Or
are you apprehensive—? Well, if the 

Story of Helen was modern, I should
it unnatural. I mean the Behaviour
of Paris, not the Fondness of the Lady; 
for all Women love of a Man of Spirit. 
There is another Story of the Sabine Ladies,
—and that too, I thank Heaven, is
very ancient. Your Lordship, perhaps,
will admire my Reading; but I think
Mr. Hook tells us they made tolerable
good Wives afterwards. I fancy few of
my married Acquaintance were ravished
by their Husbands.’ ‘Nay, dear Lady
Bellaston,’ cried he, ‘don't ridicule me
in this Manner.’ ‘Why, my good Lord,’ 
answered she, ‘do you think any Woman
in England would not laugh at you
in her Heart, whatever Prudery she might
wear in her Contenance? —You force
me to use a strange Kind of Language,
and to betray my Sex most abominably: 
But I am contented with knowing my Intentions
are good, and that I am endeavouring
to serve my Cousin; for I think
you will make her a Husband notwithstanding
this; or, upon my Soul, I would
not even persuade her to fling herself away
upon an empty Title. She should not
upbraid me hereafter with having lost a
Man of Spirit; for that his Enemies allow
this poor young Fellow to be.’ 

Let those who have had the Satisfaction
of hearing Reflections of this Kind from a
Wife or a Mistress, declare whether they
are!are at all sweetened by coming from a Female
Tongue. Certain it is they sunk
deeper into his Lordship, than any Thing
which Demosthenes or Cicero could have said
on the Occasion. 
Lady Bellaston perceiving she had fired
the young Lord's Pride, began now, like a
‘true Orator, to rouse other Passions to
its Assistance. ‘My Lord,’ says she, in
a graver Voice, ‘you will be pleased to remember
you mentioned this Matter to me
first; for I would not appear to you in
the Light of one who is endeavouring to
put off my Cousin upon you. Fourscore
thousand Pounds do not stand in Need
of an Advocate to recommend them. 
Nor doth Miss Western,’ said he, ‘require
any Recommendation from her Fortune; 
for in my Opinion, no Woman
ever had half her Charms.’ ‘Yes, yes,
my Lord;’ replied the Lady, looking in
the Glass, ‘there have been Women with
more than half her Charms, I assure you; 
not that I need lessen her on that Account. 
She is a most delicious Girl, 

that's certain; and within these few Hours
she will be in the Arms of one, who
surely doth not deserve her, tho' I will
give him his due, I believe he is truly a
Man of Spirit.’ 
‘I hope so, Madam,’ said my Lord; 
‘though I must own he doth not deserve
her; for unless Heaven, or your Ladyship
disappoint me, she shall within that
Time be in mine.’ 
‘Well spoken, my Lord,’ answered the
Lady. ‘I promise you no Disapointment
shall happen from my Side; and
within this Week I am convinced I shall
call your Lordship my Cousin in Public.’ 
The Remainder of this Scene consisted
entirely of Raptures, Excuses, and Compliments,
very pleasant to have heard from
the Parties; but rather dull when related
at second Hand. Here, therefore, we shall
put an End to this Dialogue, and hasten
to the fatal Hour, when every Thing was
prepared for the Destruction of poor Sophia. 

But this being the most tragical Matter
in our whole History, we shall treat it in a
Chapter by itself. 



Containing some Matters which may affect, and
others which may surpize the Reader. 
The Clock had now struck Seven,
and poor Sophia, alone and melancholy,
sat reading a Tragedy. It was the
Fatal Marriage, and she was now come to
that Part where the poor, distrest Isabella
disposes of her Wedding-Ring. 
Here the Book dropt from her Hand,
and a Shower of Tears ran down into her
Bosom. In this Situation she had continued
a Minute, when the Door opened, and in
came Lord Fellamar. Sophia started from
Chair at his Entrance; and his Lordship
advancing forwards, and making a
low Bow said, ‘I am afraid, Miss Westerr,
I break in upon you abruptly.’ ‘Indeed,
my Lord,’ says she, ‘I must own
myself a little surprized at this unexpected
Visit.’ ‘If this Visit be unexpected, 

Madam,’ answered Lord Fellamar, ‘my
Eyes must have been very faithless Interpreters
of my Heart, when last I had the
Honour of seeing you: For surely you
could not otherwise have hoped to detain
my Heart in your Possession, without receiving
a Visit from its Owner.’ Sophia,
confus'd as she was, answered this Bombast
(and very properly, I think,) with a
Look of inconceivable Disdain. My Lord
then made another and a longer Speech of
the same Sort. Upon which Sophia, trembling,
said, ‘Am I really to conceive your
Lordship to be out of your Sense? Sure,
my Lord, there is no other Excuse for
such Behaviour.’ —‘I am, indeed, Madam,
in the Situation you suppose,’ cries
his Lordship; ‘and sure you will pardon
the Effects of a Frenzy which you yourself
have occasioned: For Love hath so totally
deprived me of Reason, that I am scarce
accountable for any of my Actions.’ 
‘Upon my Word, my Lord,’ said Sophia,
‘I neither understand your Words nor
your Behaviour.’ —‘Suffer me then,
Madam,’ cries he, ‘at your Feet to explain
both, by laying open my Soul to
you, and declaring that I doat on you
to the highest Degree of Distraction. O
most adorable, most divine Creature! 

what Language can express the Sentiments
of my Heart?’ ‘I do assure you, my
Lord,’ said Sophia, ‘I shall not stay to
hear any more of this.’ ‘Do not,’ cries
he, ‘think of leaving me thus cruelly: 
Could you know half the Torments which
I feel, that tender Bosom must pity what
those Eyes have caused.’ Then fetching a
deep Sigh, and laying Hold of her Hand,
he ran on for some Minutes in a Strain
which would be little more pleasing to the
Reader, than it was to the Lady; and at
last concluded with a Declaration, ‘That
if he was Master of the World, he would
lay it at her Feet.’ Sophia then forcibly
pulling away her Hand from his, answered,
with much Spirit, ‘I promise you, Sir,
your World and its Master, I should
spurn from me with equal Contempt.’ 
She then offered to go, and Lord Fellamar
again laying Hold of her Hand, said,
‘Pardon me, my beloved Angel, Freedoms
which nothing but Despair could
have tempted me to take. —Believe me,
could I have had any Hope that my Title
and Fortune, neither of them inconsiderable,
unless when compared with
your Worth, would have been accepted,
I had, in the humblest Manner, presented
them to your Acceptance. —But I 

cannot lose you. —By Heaven, I will
sooner part with my Soul. —You are,
you must, you shall be only mine.’ 
‘My Lord,’ said she, ‘I intreat you to
desist from a vain Pursuit; for, upon my
Honour, I will never hear you on this
Subject. Let go my Hand, my Lord,
for I am resolved to go from you this
Moment, nor will I ever see you more.’ 
‘Then, Madam,’ cries his Lordship, ‘I
must make the best Use of this Moment; 
for I cannot, nor will not live without
you.’ —‘What do you mean, my
Lord?’ said Sophia; ‘I will raise the Family.’ 
‘I have no Fear, Madam,’ answered
he, but of losing you, ‘and that I
am resolved to prevent, the only Way
which Despair points to me.’ —He
then caught her in his Arms; upon which
she screamed so loud, that she must have
alarmed some one to her Assistance, had
not Lady Bellaston taken Care to remove
all Ears. But a more lucky Circumstance
happened for poor Sophia; another
Noise now broke forth, which almost
drowned her Cries: For now the whole
House rung with ‘Where is she? D&wblank;n
me, I'll unkennel her this Instant. 
Shew me her Chamber, I say. Where is 

my Daughter, I know she's in the House,
and I'll see her if she's above Ground. 
Shew me where she is.’ —At which
last Words the Door flew open, and in
came Squire Western, with his Parson, and
a Set of Myrmidons at his Heels. 
How miserable must have been the Condition
of poor Sophia, when the enraged
Voice of her Father was welcome to her
Ears? Welcome indeed it was, and luckily
did he come; for it was the only Accident
upon Earth, which could have preserved
the Peace of her Mind from being for ever
destroyed. 
Sophia, notwithstanding her Fright, presently
knew her Father's Voice; and his
Lordship, notwithstanding his Passion, knew
the Voice of Reason, which peremptorily
assured him, it was not now a Time for the
Perpetration of his Villainy. Hearing,
therefore, the Voice approach, and hearing
likewise whose it was; for as the Squire
more than once roared forth the Word
Daughter, so Sophia, in the Midst of her
Struggling, cried out upon her Father); he
thought proper to relinquish his Prey, having
only disordered her Handkerchief, and 

with his rude Lips committed Violence on
her lovely Neck. 
If the Reader's Imagination doth not assist
me, I shall never be able to describe the
Situation of these two Persons when Western
came into the Room. Sophia tottered
into a Chair, where she sat disordered, pale,
breathless, bursting with Indignation at Lord
Fellamar; affrighted, and yet more rejoiced
at the Arrival of her Father. 
His Lordship sat down near her, with
the Bag of his Wig hanging over one of
his Shoulders, the rest of his Dress being
somewhat disordered, and rather a greater
Proportion of Linnen than is usual appearing
at his Bosom. As to the rest, he was
amazed, affrighted, vexed, and ashamed. 
As to Squire Western, he happened, at
this Time, to be overtaken by an Enemy,
which very frequently pursues, and seldom
fails to overtake most of the Country Gentlemen
in this Kingdom. He was literally
speaking drunk; which Circumstance, together
with his natural Impetuosity, could
produce no other Effect, than his running
immediately up to his Daughter, upon
whom he fell foul with his Tongue in the 

most inveterate Manner; nay, he had probably
committed Violence with his Hands, had
not the Parson interposed, saying, ‘For Heaven's
Sake, Sir, animadvert that you are
in the House of a great Lady. Let me
beg you to mitigate your Wrath; it
should minister a Fullness of Satisfaction
that you have found your Daughter; for
as to Revenge, it belongeth not unto us. 
I discern great Contrition in the Countenance
of the young Lady. I stand assured,
if you will forgive her, she will repent
her of all past Offences, and return
unto her Duty.’ 
The Strength of the Parson's Arms had
at first been of more Service than the
Strength of his Rhetoric. However, his
last Words wrought some Effect, and the
Squire answered, ‘I'll forgee her if she wull
ha un. If wot ha un, Sophy, I'll forgee
thee all. Why dost unt speak? Shat ha
un? D&wblank;n me, shat ha un? Why dost
unt answer? Was ever such a stubborn
Tuoad?’ 
‘Let me intreat you, Sir, to be a little
more moderate,’ said the Parson; ‘you 

frighten the young Lady so, that you deprive
her of all Power of Utterance.’ 
‘Power of mine A &wblank;, answered the
Squire. You take her Part then, you do? 
A pretty Parson, truly, to side with an
undutiful Child. Yes, yes, I will gee
you a Living with a Pox. I'll gee un to
the Devil sooner.’ 
‘I humbly crave your Pardon, said the
Parson, I assure your Worship, I meant
no such Matter.’ 
My Lady Bellaston now entered the
Room, and came up to the Squire, who
no sooner saw her, than resolving to follow
the Instructions of his Sister, he made her
a very civil Bow, in the rural Manner, and
paid her some of his best Compliments. 
He then immediately proceeded to his Complaints,
and said, ‘There, my Lady Cousin,
there stands the most undutiful Child
in the World; she hankers after a beggarly
Rascal, and won't marry one of the
greatest Matches in all England, that we
have provided for her.’ 
‘Indeed, Cousin Western, answered the
Lady, I am persuaded you wrong my
Cousin. I am sure she hath a better Understanding. 

I am convinced she will
not refuse what she must be sensible is so
much to her Advantage.’ 
This was a wilful Mistake in Lady Bellaston; 
for she well knew whom Mr. Western
meant; tho' perhaps she thought he
would easily be reconciled to his Lordship's
Proposals. 
‘Do you hear there, quoth the Squire
what her Ladyship says? All your Family
are for the Match.’ ‘Come, Sophy,
be a good Girl, and be dutiful, and
make your Father happy.’ 
‘If my Death will make you happy, Sir,
answered Sophia, you will shortly be so.’ 
‘It's a Lie, Sophy, it's a d&wblank;nd Lie,
and you know it, said the Squire.’ 
‘Indeed, Miss Western, said Lady Bellaston,
you injure your Father; he hath
nothing in View but your Interest in this
Match; and I and all your Friends must
acknowledge the highest Honour done to
your Family in the Proposal.’ 
‘Ay, all of us, quoth the Squire; nay,
it was no Proposal of mine. She knows 

it was her Aunt proposed it to me first. 
—Come, Sophy, once more let me beg
you to be a good Girl, and gee me your
Consent before your Cousin.’ 
‘Let me give him your Hand, Cousin,
said the Lady. It is the Fashion now-a-days
to dispense with Time and long Courtships.’ 
‘Pugh, said the Squire, what signifies
Time; won't they have Time enough to
court afterwards? People may court very
well after they have been a-bed together.’ 
As Lord Fellamar was very well assured,
that he was meant by Lady Bellaston, so
never having heard nor suspected a Word
of Blifil, he made no doubt of his being
meant by the Father. Coming up therefore
to the Squire, he said, ‘Though I
have not the Honour, Sir, of being personally
known to you; yet as I find, I
have the Happiness to have my Proposals
accepted, let me intercede, Sir, in Behalf
of the young Lady, that she may
not be more solicited at this Time.’ 
‘You intercede, Sir! said the Squire,
why, who the Devil are you?’ 

‘Sir, I am Lord Fellamar, answered
he, and am the happy Man, whom I
hope you have done the Honour of accepting
for a Son-in-law.’ 
‘You are a Son of a B&wblank;, replied
the Squire, for all your laced Coat. You
my Son-in-Law, and be d&wblank;nd to you!’ 
‘I shall take more from you, Sir, than
from any Man, answered the Lord; but
I must inform you, that I am not used
to hear such Language without Resentment.’ 
‘Resent my A&wblank;, quoth the Squire. 
Don't think I am afraid of such a Fellow
as thee art? Because hast a got a Spit
there dangling at thy Side. Lay by your
Spit and I'll give thee enough of meddling
with what doth not belong to thee. 
—I'll teach you to Father-in-law me. 
I'll lick thy Jacket.’ 
‘It's very well, Sir, said my Lord, I
shall make no Disturbance before the Ladies. 
I am very well satisfied. Your
humble Servant, Sir; Lady Bellaston, your
most obedient.’ 

His lordship was no sooner gone, than
Lady Bellaston coming up to Mr. Western,
said, ‘Bless me, Sir, what have you done? 
You know not whom you have affronted; 
he is a Nobleman of the first Rank
and Fortune, and Yesterday made Proposals
to your Daughter; and such as I
am sure you must accept with the highest
Pleasure.’ 
‘Answer for yourself, Lady Cousin, said
the Squire, I will have nothing to do with
any of your Lords. My Daughter shall
have an honest Country Gentleman; I
have pitched upon one for her,—and
she shall ha' un. —I am sorry for the
Trouble she hath given your Ladyship
with all my Heart.’ Lady Bellaston made
a civil Speech upon the Word Trouble,
to which the Squire answered, ‘Why that's
kind,—and I would do as much for your
Ladyship. To be sure Relations should
do for one another. So I wish your Ladyship
a good Night. —Come, Madam,
you must go along with me by fair
Means, or I'll have you carried down to
the Coach.’ 
‘Sophia said she would attend him without
Force; but begged to go in a Chair, 

for she said she should not be able to ride
any other Way.’ 
‘Prithee, cries the Squire, wout unt
persuade me canst not ride in a Coach,
wouldst? That's a pretty Thing surely. 
No, no, I'll never let thee out of my
Sight any more till art married, that I
promise thee.’ ‘Sophia told him she saw
he was resolved to break her Heart.’ ‘O
break thy Heart and be d&wblank;nd, quoth
he, if a good Husband will break it: I
don't value a Brass Varden, not a Hapenny
of any undutiful B&wblank; upon Earth.’ 
He then took violently hold of her Hand; 
upon which the Parson once more interfered,
begging him to use gentle Methods. 
At that the Squire thundered out a
Curse, and bid the Parson hold his Tongue,
saying, ‘At'n't in Pulpit now? when art a
got up there I never mind what dost say; 
but I won't be Priest-ridden, nor taught
how to behave myself by thee. I wish
your Ladyship a good Night. Come along,
Sophy, be a good Girl, and all shall
be well. Shat ha un, d&wblank;n me, shat ha
un.’ 
Mrs. Honour appeared below Stairs, and
with a low Curtesy to the Squire, offered 

to attend her Mistress; but he pushed her
away, saying, ‘Hold, Madam, hold,
you come no more near my House.’ 
‘And will you take my Maid away from
me,’ said Sophia? ‘Yes, indeed, Madam,
will I, cries the Squire: you need not
fear being without a Servant, I will get
you another Maid, and a better Maid
than this, who, I'd lay five Pound to a
Crown, is no more a Maid than my
Grannum. No, no, Sophy, she shall
contrive no more Escapes I promise you.’ 
He then packed up his Daughter and the
Parson into the Hackney Coach, after
which he mounted himself, and ordered it
to drive to his Lodgings. In the Way
thither he suffered Sophia to be quiet, and
entertained himself with reading a Lecture
to the Parson on good Manners, and a proper
Behaviour to his Betters. 
It is possible he might not so easily have
carried off his Daughter from Lady Bellaston,
had that good Lady desired to have
detained her; but in reality she was not a
little pleased with the Confinement into
which Sophia was going; and as her Project
with Lord Fellamar had failed of Success,
she was well contented that other violent 

Methods were now going to be used
in Favour of another Man. 



By what Means the Squire came to discover
his Daughter. 
Though the Reader in many Histories
is obliged to digest much more
unaccountable Appearances than this of
Mr. Western, without any Satisfaction at
all; yet as we dearly love to oblige him
whenever it is in our Power, we shall now
proceed to shew by what Method the Squire
discovered where his Daughter was. 
In the third Chapter then of the preceding
Book, we gave a Hint (for it is not
our Custom to unfold at any Time more
than is necessary for the Occasion) that Mrs.
Fitzpatrick, who was very desirous of reconciling
herself to her Uncle and Aunt Western,
thought she had a probable Opportunity
by the Service of preserving Sophia
from committing the same Crime which had
drawn on herself the Anger of her Family. 
After much Deliberation therefore she resolved
to inform her Aunt Western where
her Cousin was, and accordingly she writ 

the following Letter, which we shall give
the Reader at length for more Reasons than
one. 

‘Honoured Madam,
The Occasion of my writing this will
perhaps make a Letter of mine agreeable
to my dear Aunt, for the Sake of one of
her Nieces, though I have little Reason
to hope it will be so on the account of
another. 
‘Without more Apology, as I was coming
to throw my unhappy Self at your
Feet, I met, by the strangest Accident in
the World, my Cousin Sophy, whose History
you are better acquainted with than
myself, though, alas! I know infinitely
too much; enough indeed to satisfy me,
that unless she is immediately prevented,
she is in Danger of running into the same
fatal Mischief, which, by foolishly and
ignorantly refusing your most wise and
prudent Advice, I have unfortunately
brought on myself. 
‘In short, I have seen the Man, nay
I was most part of Yesterday in his Company,
and a charming young Fellow I
promise you he is. By what Accident 

he came acquainted with me is too tedious
to tell you now; but I have this
Morning changed my Lodging to avoid
him, lest he should by my Means discover
my Cousin; for he doth not yet
know where she is, and it is adviseable
he should not till my Uncle hath secured
her. —No Time therefore is to be
lost, and I need only inform you, that
she is now with Lady Bellaston, whom I
have seen, and who hath, I find, a Design
of concealing her from her Family. 
You know, Madam, she is a strange
Woman; but nothing could misbecome
me more, than to presume to give any
Hint to one of your great Understanding
and great Knowledge of the World, besides
barely informing you of the Matter
of Fact. 
‘I hope, Madam, the Care which I have
shewn on this Occasion for the Good of my
Family, will recommend me again to the
Favour of a Lady who hath always exerted so
much Zeal for the Honour and true Interest
of us all; and that it may be a Means of
restoring me to your Friendship, which
hath made so great a Part of my former, 

and is so necessary to my future Happiness. 
I am, 
‘With the utmost Respect,
Honoured Madam,
Your most dutiful obliged Niece,
And most Obedient
Humble Servant,
Harriet Fitzpatrick.’ 
Mrs. Western was now at her Brother's
House, where she had resided ever since
the Flight of Sophia, in order to administer
Comfort to the poor Squire in his Affliction. 
Of this Comfort which she doled out
to him in daily Portions, we have formerly
given a Specimen. 
She was now standing with her Back to
the Fire, and with a Pinch of Snuff in her
Hand was dealing forth this daily Allowance
of Comfort to the Squire while he
smoaked his Afternoon Pipe, when she received
the above Letter; which she had no
sooner read than she delivered it to him,
saying, ‘There, Sir, there is an Account
of your lost Sheep. Fortune hath again
restored her to you, and if you will be 

governed by my Advice, it is possible you
may yet preserve her.’ 
The Squire had no sooner read the Letter
than he leap'd from his Chair, threw
his Pipe into the Fire, and gave a loud
Huzza for Joy. He then summoned his Servants,
called for his Boots, and ordered the
Chevalier and several other Horses to be saddled,
and that Parson Supple should be immediately
sent for. Having done this, he
turned to his Sister, caught her in his
Arms, and gave her a close Embrace, saying,
‘Zounds! you don't seem pleased,
one would imagine you was sorry I have
found the Girl.’ 
‘Brother, answered she, the deepest
Politicians who see to the Bottom discover
often a very different Aspect of Affairs,
from what swims on the Surface. 
It is true indeed, Things do look rather
less desperate than they did formerly in
Holland, when Lewis the fourteenth was
at the Gates of Amsterdam; but there is
a Delicacy required in this Matter, which
you will pardon me, Brother, if I suspect
you want. There is a Decorum to
be used with a Woman of Figure, such
as Lady Bellaston, Brother, which requires 

a Knowledge of the World superior, I
am afraid, to yours.’ 
‘Sister, cries the Squire, I know you
have no Opinion of my Parts; but I'll
shew you on this Occasion who is Fool. 
Knowledge quotha! I have not been in
the Country so long without having some
Knowledge of Warrants and the Law of
the Land. I know I may take my own
wherever I can find it. Shew me my
own Daughter, and if I don't know how
to come at her, I'll suffer you to call me
Fool as long as I live. There be Justices
of Peace in London, as well as in other
Places.’ 
‘I protest, cries she, you make me tremble
for the Event of this Matter, which
if you will proceed by my Advice, you
may bring to so good an Issue. Do you
really imagine, Brother, that the House
of a Woman of Figure is to be attacked by
Warrants and brutal Justices of the Peace? 
I will inform you how to proceed. As
soon as you arrive in Town, and have got
yourself into a decent Dress (for indeed,
Brother, you have none at present fit to
appear in) you must send your Compliments
to Lady Bellaston, and desire 

Leave to wait on her. When you are
admitted to her Presence, as you certainly
will be, and have told her your Story,
and have made proper Use of my Name,
(for I think you only just know one another
by Sight, though you are Relations,) I
am confident she will withdraw her Protection
from my Niece, who hath certainly
imposed upon her. This is the only
Method. —Justices of Peace indeed!
do you imagine any such Event can arrive
to a Woman of Figure in a civilized
Nation?’ 
‘D&wblank;n their Figures, cries the Squire; 
a pretty civilized Nation truly, where
Women are above the Law. And what
must I stand sending a Parcel of Compliments
to a confounded Whore, that keeps
away a Daughter from her own natural
Father? I tell you, Sister, I am not so
ignorant as you think me. —I know
you would have Women above the Law,
but it is all a Lie; I heard his Lordship
say at 'Size, that no one is above the
Law. But this of yours is Hannover
Law, I suppose.’ 

‘Mr. Western, said she, I think you daily
improve in Ignorance. —I protest
you are grown an errant Bear.’ 
‘No more a Bear than yourself, Sister
Western, said the Squire. —Pox! you may
talk of your Civility an you will, I am
sure you never shew any to me. I am no
Bear, no, nor no Dog neither, though I
know Somebody, that is something that
begins with a B&wblank;, but Pox! I will
shew you I have a got more good-Manners
than some Folks.’ 
‘Mr. Western, answered the Lady, you
may say what you please, Je vous mesprise
de tout mon Cœur. I shall not therefore
be angry. —Besides, as my Cousin with
that odious Irish Name justly says, I
have that Regard for the Honour and
true Interest of my Family, and that
Concern for my Niece, who is a Part of
it, that I have resolved to go to Town
myself upon this Occasion; for indeed,
indeed, Brother, you are not a fit Minister
to be employed at a polite Court. — 
Greenland—Greenland should always be the
Scene of the Tramontane Negotiation.’ 

‘I thank Heaven,’ cries the Squire, ‘I don't
understand you, now. You are got to your
Hannoverian Linguo. However, I'll shew
you I scorn to be behind-hand in Civility
with you; and as you are not angry for
what I have said, so I am not angry for
what you have said. Indeed I have always
thought it a Folly for Relations to quarrel; 
and if they do now and then give a
hasty Word, why People should give
and take; for my Part I never bear Malice; 
and I take it very kind of you to
go up to London, for I never was there
but twice in my Life, and then I did
not stay above a Fortnight at a Time; 
and to be sure I can't be expected to
know much of the Streets and the Folks
in that Time. I never denied that you
know'd all these Matters better than I. 
For me to dispute that would be all as
one, as for you to dispute the Management
of a Pack of Dogs, or the finding
a Hare sitting, with me. —Which I promise
you, says she, I never will. —Well,
and I promise you, returned he, that I
never will dispute the t'other.’ 
Here then a League was struck (to borrow
a Phrase from the Lady) between the
contending Parties; and now the Parson 

arriving, and the Horses being ready, the
Squire departed, having promised his Sister
to follow her Advice, and she prepared to
follow him the next Day. 
But having communicated these Matters
to the Parson on the Road, they both agreed
that the prescribed Formalities might
very well be dispensed with; and the Squire
having changed his Mind, proceeded in
the Manner we have already seen. 



In which various Misfortunes befal poor
Jones. 
Affairs were in the aforesaid Situation,
when Mrs. Honour arrived
at Mrs. Miller's, and called Jones out from
the Company, as we have before seen, with
whom, when she found herself alone, she
began as follows. 
‘O my dear Sir, how shall I get Spirits
to tell you; you are undone, Sir, and
my poor Lady's undone, and I am undone.’ 
‘Hath any thing happened to
Sophia?’ cries Jones, staring like a Madman. 
‘All that is bad, cries Honour,
O I shall never get such another Lady! 

O that I should ever live to see this Day!’ 
At these Words Jones turned pale as Ashes,
trembled and stammered; but Honour went
on. ‘O, Mr. Jones, I have lost my Lady
for ever.’ ‘How! What! for Heaven's
Sake tell me. —O my dear Sophia!’— 
‘You may well call her so, said Honour,
she was the dearest Lady to me. —I
shall never have such another Place.’ — 
‘D&wblank;n your Place, cries Jones, where is? what! what is become of my Sophia?’ 
‘Ay, to be sure, cries she, Servants may be
d&wblank;n'd. It signifies nothing what becomes
of them, tho' they are turned away, and
ruined ever so much. To be sure they are
not Flesh and Blood like other People. No
to be sure, it signifies nothing what becomes
of them. ––If you have any Pity, any Compassion,
cries Jones, I beg you will instantly
tell me what hath happened to Sophia?’ 
‘To be sure I have more Pity for you than
you have for me, answered Honour; I don't
d&wblank;n you because you have lost the sweetest
Lady in the World. To be sure you
are worthy to be pitied, and I am worthy
to be pitied too: For to be sure if ever
there was a good Mistress’—What
hath happened, cries Jones, in almost a
raving Fit. —What?—What? said
Honour! why the worst that could have
happened both for you and for me. — 

‘Her Father is come to town, and hath
carried her away from us both.’ Here
Jones fell on his Knees in Thanksgiving
that it was no worse. —‘No worse! repeated
Honour, what could be worse for either
of us? He carried her off, swearing she
should marry Mr. Blifil; that's for your
Comfort; and for poor me, I am turned
out of Doors.’ ‘Indeed Mrs. Honour, answered
Jones, you frightned me out of
my Wits. I imagined some most dreadful
sudden Accident had happened to Sophia; 
something, compared to which, even
the seeing her married to Blifil would be
a Trifle; but while there is Life, there
are Hopes, my dear Honour. Women in
this Land of Liberty cannot be married
by actual brutal Force.’ ‘To be sure, Sir,
said she, that's true. There may be some
Hopes for you; but alack-a-day! what
Hopes are there for poor me? And to be
sure, Sir, you must be sensible I suffer all this
upon your Account. All the Quarrel the
Squire hath to me is for taking your Part,
as I have done, against Mr. Blifil.’ ‘Indeed
Mrs. Honour, answered he, I am sensible of
my Obligations to you, and will leave
nothing in my Power undone to make you
amends.’ ‘Alas, Sir, said she, what can
make a Servant amends for the Loss of one
Place, but the getting another altogether 

as good!’ —‘Do not despair, Mrs. Honour,
said Jones, I hope to reinstate you
again in the same.’ ‘Alack-a-day, Sir, said
she, how can I flatter myself with such
Hopes, when I know it is a Thing impossible; 
for the Squire is so set against
me: and yet if you should ever have my
Lady, as to be sure I now hopes heartily
you will; for you are a generous good-natured
Gentleman, and I am sure you
loves her, and to be sure she loves you
as dearly as her own Soul; it is a Matter
in vain to deny it; because as why,
every Body that is in the least acquainted
with my Lady, must see it; for, poor
dear Lady, she can't dissemble; and if
two People who loves one another a'n't
happy, why who should be so? Happiness
don't always depend upon what People
has; besides, my Lady has enough
for both. To be sure therefore as one
may say, it would be all the Pity in the
World to keep two such Loviers asunder; 
nay, I am convinced for my
Part, you will meet together at last; for
if it is to be, there is no preventing it. 
If a Marriage is made in Heaven, all the
Justices of Peace upon Earth can't break
it off. To be sure I wishes that Parson
Supple had but a little more Spirit to tell the 

Squire of his Wickedness in endeavouring
to force his Daughter contrary to her
Liking; but then his whole Dependance
is on the Squire, and so the poor Gentleman,
though he is a very religious good
sort of Man and talks of the Badness of
such Doings behind the Squire's Back,
yet he dares not say his Soul is his own to
his Face. To be sure I never saw him
make so bold as just now, I was afeard
the Squire would have struck him. — 
I would not have your Honour be
melancholy, Sir, nor despair; Things
may go better, as long as you are sure
of my Lady, and that I am certain you
may be, for she never will be brought to
consent to marry any other Man. Indeed,
I am terribly afeard the Squire will
do her a Mischief in his Passion: For he
is a prodigious passionate Gentleman, and
I am afeard too the poor Lady will be
brought to break her Heart, for she is as
tender-hearted as a Chicken; it is pity methinks,
she had not a little of my Courage. 
If I was in Love with a young Man, and
my Father offered to lock me up, I'd tear
his Eyes out, but I'd come at him; but
then there's a great Fortune in the Case,
which it is in her Father's Power either to 

give her or not; that, to be sure, may
make some Difference.’ 
Whether Jones gave strict Attention to
all the foregoing Harangue, or whether it
was for want of any Vacancy in the Discourse,
I cannot determine; but he never
once attempted to answer, nor did she once
stop, till Partridge came running into the
Room, and informed him that the great
Lady was upon the Stairs. 
Nothing could equal the Dilemma to
which Jones was now reduced. Honour
knew nothing of any Acquaintance that
subsisted between him and Lady Bellaston,
and she was almost the last Person in the
World to whom he would have communicated
it. In this Hurry and Distress, he
took (as is common enough) the worst
Course, and instead of exposing her to the
Lady, which would have been of little
Consequence, he chose to expose the Lady
to her; he therefore resolved to hide Honour,
whom he had but just time to convey behind
the Bed, and to draw the Curtains. 
The Hurry in which Jones had been all
Day engaged on Account of his poor Landlady
and her Family, the Terrors occasioned 

by Mrs. Honour, and the Confusion
into which he was thrown by the sudden Arrival
of Lady Bellaston, had altogether driven
former Thoughts out of his Head; so that
it never once occur'd to his Memory to act
the Part of a sick Man; which indeed, neither
the Gayety of his Dress, nor the Freshness
of his Countenance would have at all
supported. 
He received her Ladyship therefore rather
agreeably to her Desires than to her
Expectations, with all the good Humour he
could muster in his Countenance, and without
any real or affected Appearance of the
least Disorder. 
Lady Bellaston no sooner entered the
Room, than she squatted herself down on
the Bed: ‘So, my dear Jones,’ said she,
‘you find nothing can detain me long from
you. Perhaps I ought to be angry with
you, that I have neither seen nor heard
from you all Day; for I perceive your
Distemper would have suffered you to
come abroad; Nay, I suppose you have
not sit in your Chamber all Day drest up
like a fine Lady to see Company after a
Lying-in; but however, don't think I
intend to scold you: For I never will give 

you an Excuse for the cold Behaviour of
a Husband, by putting on the ill Humour
of a Wife.’ 
‘Nay, Lady Bellaston,’ said Jones, ‘I
am sure your Ladyship will not upbraid
me with neglect of Duty, when I only
waited for Orders. Who, my dear Creature,
hath Reason to complain? Who
missed an Appointment last Night, and
left an unhappy Man to expect, and wish,
and sigh, and languish?’ 
‘Do not mention it, my dear Mr. Jones,’ 
cried she. ‘If you knew the Occasion, you
would pity me. In short, it is impossible to
conceive what Women of Condition
are obliged to suffer from the Impertinence
of Fools, in order to keep up the Farce of
the World. I am glad however, all your
languishing and wishing have done you
no harm: for you never looked better
in your Life. Upon my Faith! Jones,
you might at this Instant sit for the Picture
of Adonis.’ 
There are certain Words of Provocation
which Men of Honour hold can only properly
be answered by a Blow. Among
Lovers possibly there may be some Expressions 

which can only be answered by a Kiss. 
The Compliment which Lady Bellaston now
made Jones seems to be of this Kind, especially
as it was attended with a Look in
which the Lady conveyed more soft Ideas
than it was possible to express with her
Tongue. 
Jones was certainly at this Instant in one of
the most disagreeable and distrest situations
imaginable; for to carry on the Comparison
we made use of before, tho' the Provocation
was given by the Lady, Jones could not receive
Satisfaction, nor so much as offer to ask it, in
the Presence of a third Person; Seconds in
this kind of Duels not being according to
the Law of Arms. As this Objection did
not occur to Lady Bellaston, who was ignorant
of any other Woman being there but
herself, she waited some time in great Astonishment
for an Answer from Jones, who
conscious of the ridiculous Figure he made,
stood at a Distance, and not daring to give
the proper Answer, gave none at all. Nothing
can be imagined more comic, nor
yet more tragical than this Scene would
have been, if it had lasted much longer. 
The Lady had already changed Colour two
three times; had got up from the Bed and
sat down again, while Jones was wishing 

the Ground to sink under him, or the
House to fall on his Head, when an odd
Accident freed him from an Embarassment
out of which neither the Eloquence of a
Cicero, nor the Politicks of a Machiavel could
have delivered him, without utter Disgrace. 
This was no other than the Arrival of
young Nightingale dead drunk; or rather
in that State of Drunkenness which deprives
Men of the Use of their Reason,
without depriving them of the Use of their
Limbs. 
Mrs. Miller and her Daughters were in
Bed, and Partridge was smoaking his Pipe
by the Kitchen Fire; so that he arrived at
Mr. Jones's Chamber Door without any Interruption. 
This he burst open, and was
entering without any Ceremony, when Jones
started from his Seat, and ran to oppose him; 
which he did so effectually, that Nightingale
never came far enough within the
Door to see who was sitting on the Bed. 
Nightingale had in Reality mistaken
Jones's Apartment for that in which himself
had lodged; he therefore strongly insisted
on coming in, often swearing that he would
not be kept from his own Bed. Jones, however,
prevailed over him, and delivered him 

into the Hands of Partridge, whom the
Noise on the Stairs soon summoned to his
Master's Assistance. 
And now Jones was unwillingly obliged to
return to his own Apartment, where at the
very Instant of his Entrance he heard Lady
Bellaston venting an Exclamation, though
not a very loud one; and at the same time,
saw her flinging herself into a Chair in a
vast Agitation, which in a Lady of a tender
Constitution would have been an Hysteric
Fit. 
In reality the Lady, frightened with the
Struggle between the two Men, of which she
did not know what would be the Issue, as
she heard Nightingale swear many Oaths he
would come to his own Bed, attempted to
retire to her known Place of Hiding, which
to her great Confusion she found already
occupied by another. 
‘Is this Usage to be borne, Mr. Jones?’ 
cries the Lady, ‘—basest of Men! — 
What Wretch is this to whom you have
exposed me?’ ‘Wretch!’ cries Honour,
bursting in a violent Rage from her Place
of Concealment—‘marry come up!— 
Wretch forsooth! —As poor a Wretch as 

I am, I am honest, that is more than
some Folks who are richer can say.’ 
Jones, instead of applying himself directly
to take off the Edge of Mrs. Honour's Resentment,
as a more experienced Gallant
would have done, fell to cursing his Stars,
and lamenting himself as the most unfortunate
Man in the World; and presently after,
addressing himself to Lady Bellaston, he fell to
some very absurd Protestations of Innocence. 
By this time the Lady having recovered
the Use of her Reason, which she had as
ready as any Woman in the World, especially
on such Occasions, calmly replied; 
‘Sir, you need make no Apologies, I see
now who the Person is; I did not at first
know Mrs. Honour; but now I do, I can
suspect nothing wrong between her and
you; and I am sure she is a Woman of
too good Sense to put any wrong Constructions
upon my Visit to you; I have
been always her Friend, and it may be in
my Power to be much more so hereafter.’ 
Mrs. Honour was altogether as placable,
as she was passionate. Hearing therefore
Lady Bellaston assume the soft Tone, she
likewise softened her's. ‘I'm sure, 

Madam,’ says she, ‘I have been always
ready to acknowledge your Ladyship's
Friendships to me; sure I never had so
good a Friend as your Ladyship— 
and to be sure now I see it is your Ladyship
that I spoke to, I could almost bite my
Tongue off for very mad. —I Constructions
upon your Ladyship—to
be sure it doth not become a Servant as I
am to think about such a great Lady— 
I mean I was a Servant: for indeed I am
no Body's Servant now, the more miserable
Wretch is me. —I have lost the best
Mistress.’ —Here Honour thought
fit to produce a Shower of Tears. —‘Don't
cry, Child,’ says the good Lady, ‘Ways
perhaps may be found to make you amends. 
Come to me to-morrow Morning.’ 
She then took up her Fan which
lay on the Ground, and without even looking
at Jones, walked very majestically out
of the Room; there being a kind of Dignity
in the Impudence of Women of Quality,
which their Inferiors vainly aspire to attain
to in Circumstances of this Nature. 
Jones followed her down Stairs, often offering
her his Hand, which she absolutely
refused him, and got into her Chair without
taking any Notice of him as he stood bowing
before her. 

At his Return up Stairs, a long Dialogue
past between him and Mrs. Honour, while
she was adjusting herself after the Discomposure
she had undergone. The Subject of
this was his Infidelity to her young Lady; 
on which she enlarged with great Bitterness; 
but Jones at last found means to reconcile
her, and not only so, but to obtain a Promise
of most inviolable Secrecy, and
that she would the next Morning endeavour
to find out Sophia, and bring him
a further Account of the Proceedings of the
Squire. 
Thus ended this unfortunate Adventure
to the Satisfaction only of Mrs. Honour; 
for a Secret (as some of my Readers will
perhaps acknowledge from Experience) is often
a very valuable Possession; and that not
only to those who faithfully keep it, but
sometimes to such as whisper it about till
it come to the Ears of every one, except the
ignorant Person, who pays for the supposed
concealing of what is publicly known. 




Short and Sweet. 
Notwithstanding all the
Obligations she had received from
Jones, Mrs. Miller could not forbear in the
Morning some gentle Remonstrances for the
Hurricane which had happened the preceding
Night in his Chamber. These were however
so gentle and so friendly; professing, and
indeed truly, to aim at nothing more than the
real good of Mr. Jones himself, that he, far
from being offended, thankfully received the
Admonition of the good Woman, expressed
much Concern for what had past, excused it
as well as he could, and promised never
more to bring the same Disturbances into
the House. 
But though Mrs. Miller did not refrain
from a short Expostulation in private at
their first meeting, yet the Occasion of his
being summoned down Stairs that Morning
was of a much more agreeable Kind; being
indeed to perform the Office of a Father to
Miss Nancy, and to give her in Wedlock to
Mr. Nightingale, who was now ready drest, 

and full as sober as many of my Readers
will think a Man ought to be who receives
a Wife in so imprudent a Manner. 
And here perhaps it may be proper to
account for the Escape which this young
Gentleman had made from his Uncle, and
for his Appearance in the Condition in
which we have seen him the Night before. 
Now when the Uncle had arrived at his
Lodgings with his Nephew, partly to indulge
his own Inclinations (for he dearly
loved his Bottle) and partly to disqualify his
Nephew from the immediate Execution of
his Purpose, he ordered Wine to be set on
the Table; with which he so briskly ply'd
the young Gentleman, that this latter,
who, though not much used to Drinking,
did not detest it so as to be guilty of Disobedience
or of want of Complaisance by
refusing, was soon completely finished. 
Just as the Uncle had obtained this Victory,
and was preparing a Bed for his Nephew,
a Messenger arrived with a Piece of
News, which so entirely disconcerted and
shocked him, that he in a Moment lost all
Consideration for his Nephew, and his 

whole Mind became entirely taken up with
his own Concerns. 
This sudden and afflicting News was no
less than that his Daughter had taken the
Opportunity of almost the first Moment of
his Absence, and had gone off with a Neighbouring
young Clergyman; against whom
tho' her Father could have had but one Objection,
namely, that he was worth nothing,
yet she had never thought proper to
communicate her Amour even to that Father; 
and so artfully had she managed, that
it had never been once suspected by any, till
now that it was consummated. 
Old Mr. Nightingale no sooner received
this Account, than in the utmost Confusion
he ordered a Post-Chaise to be instantly got
ready, and having recommended his Nephew
to the Care of a Servant, he directly
left the House, scarce knowing what he
did, not whither he went. 
The Uncle being thus departed, when
the Servant came to attend the Nephew to
Bed, had waked him for that Purpose, and
had at last made him sensible that his Uncle
was gone, he, instead of accepting the
kind Offices tendered him, insisted on a 

Chair being called; with this the Servant,
who had received no strict Orders to the
contrary, readily complied; and thus being
conducted back to the House of Mrs. Miller,
he had staggered up to Mr. Jones's
Chamber, as hath been before recounted. 
This Bar of the Uncle being now removed
(though young Nightingale knew not as
yet in what Manner) and all Parties being
quickly ready, the Mother, Mr. Jones, Mr.
Nightingale, and his Love stept into a
Hackney-Coach, which conveyed him to
Doctor's Commons; where Miss Nancy was,
in vulgar Language, soon made an honest
Woman, and the poor Mother became in
the purest Sense of the Word, one of the
happiest of all human Beings. 
And now Mr. Jones having seen his good
Offices to that poor Woman and her Family
brought to a happy Conclusion, began
to apply himself to his own Concerns; but
here lest many of my Readers should
censure his Folly for thus troubling himself
with the Affairs of others, and lest some few
should think he acted more disinterestedly
than indeed he did, we think proper to
assure our Reader, that he was so far from
being unconcerned in this Matter, that he 

had indeed a very considerable Interest in
bringing it to that final Consummation. 
To explain this seeming Paradox at once,
he was one who could truly say with him in
Terence, Homo sum: Nihil humani a me alienum
puto. He was never an indifferent Spectator
of the Misery or Happiness of any one; 
and he felt either the one or the other in
greater Proportion as he himself contributed
to either. He could not therefore be the
Instrument of raising a whole Family from
the lowest State of Wretchedness to the
highest Pitch of Joy without conveying
great Felicity to himself; more perhaps than
worldly Men often purchase to themselves
by undergoing the most severe Labour, and
often by wading through the deepest Iniquity. 
Those Readers who are of the same Complexion
with him will perhaps think this
short Chapter contains abundance of Matter; 
while others may probably wish, short as it
is, that it had been totally spared as impertinent
to the main Design, which I suppose
they conclude is to bring Mr. Jones to the
Gallows, or if possible, to a more deplorable Catastrophe. 




Containing Love-Letters of several Sorts. 
Mr. Jones at his Return Home, found
the following Letters lying on his
Table, which he luckily opened in the Order
they were sent. 

LETTER I.
‘Surely I am under some strange Infatuation; 
I cannot keep my Resolutions a
Moment, however strongly made or justly
founded. Last Night I resolved never
to see you more; this Morning I am
willing to hear if you can, as you say,
clear up this Affair. And yet I know
that to be impossible. I have said every
Thing to myself which you can invent. 
—Perhaps not. Perhaps your Invention
is stronger. Come to me therefore
the Moment you receive this. If you can
forge an Excuse, I almost promise you
to believe it. Betrayed to—I will
think no more. —Come to me directly. — 
—This is the third Letter I have writ,
the two former are burnt—I am almost 

inclined to burn this too—I wish I preserve
my Senses. —Come to me presently.’ 

LETTER II.
‘If you ever expect to be forgiven, or
even suffered within my Doors, come to
me this Instant.’ 

LETTER III.
‘I now find you was not at Home when
my Notes came to your Lodgings. The
Moment you receive this let me see you; 
—I shall not stir out; nor shall any Body
be let in but yourself. Sure nothing can
detain you long.’ 
Jones had just read over these three Billets,
when Mr. Nightingale came into the
Room. ‘Well, Tom,’ said he, ‘any News
from Lady Bellaston, after last Night's
Adventure?’ (for it was now no Secret to
any one in that House who the Lade was.) 
‘The Lady Bellaston?’ answered Jones very
gravely. —‘Nay, dear Tom,’ cries Nightingale,
‘don't be so reserved to your Friends. 
Though I was too drunk to see her last
Night, I saw her at the Masquerade, Do 

you think I am ignorant who the Queen of
the Fairies is?’ ‘And did you really then
know the Lady at the Masquerade?’ said
Jones. ‘Yes, upon my Soul, did I,’ said Nightingale,
‘and have given you twenty Hints of
it since, though you seemed always so
tender on that Point, that I wou'd not
speak plainly. I fancy,my Friend, by
your extreme Nicety in this Matter, you
are not so well acquainted with the Character
of the Lady, as with her Person. 
Don't be angry, Tom, but, upon my Honour,
you are not the first young Fellow
she hath debauched. Her Reputation is
in no Danger, believe me.’ 
Though Jones had no Reason to imagine
the Lady to have been of the vestal Kind
when his Amour began, yet as he was thoroughly
ignorant of the Town, and had
very little Acquaintance in it, he had yet no
Knowledge of that Character which is vulgarly
called a Demirep; that is to say, a
Woman who intrigues with every Man she
likes, under the Name and Appearance of
Virtue; and who, though some over-nice
Ladies will not be seen with her, is visited,
(as they term it) by the whole Town; in
short, whom every Body knows to be what
no Body calls her. 

When he found, therefore, that Nightingale
was perfectly acquainted with his Intrigue,
and began to suspect, that so scrupulous
a Delicacy as he had hitherto observed,
was not quite necessary on the Occasion,
he gave a Latitude to his Friend's
Tongue, and desired him to speak plainly
what he knew, or had ever heard of the
Lady. 
Nightingale, who in many other Instances,
was rather too effeminate in his Disposition,
had a pretty strong Inclination to Tittle-Tattle. 
He had no sooner, therefore, received
a full Liberty of speaking from
Jones, than he entered upon a long Narrative
concerning the Lady; which, as it
contained many Particulars highly to her
Dishonour, we have too great a Tenderness
for all Women of Condition to repeat; 
we would cautiously avoid giving
an Opportunity to the future Commentators
on our Works, of making any
malicious Application; and of forcing us
to be, against our Will, the Author of
Scandal, which never entered into our
Head. 

Jones having very attentively heard all
that Nightingale had to say, fetched a deep
Sigh, which the other observing, cried,
‘Heyday! Why thou art not in Love I
hope! Had I imagined my Stories would
have affected you, I promise you should
never have heard them.’ ‘O my dear
Friend,’ cries Jones, ‘I am so entangled
with this Woman, that I know no how
to extricate myself.’ ‘In Love indeed? 
No, my Friend, but I am under Obligations
to her, and very great ones. Since you know
so much, I will be very explicit with you. It
is owing perhaps solely to her, that I have
not, before this, wanted a Bit of Bread. 
How can I possibly desert such a Woman? 
And yet I must desert her, or be guilty of
the blackest Treachery to one, who deserves
infinitely better of me than she can: 
A Woman, my Nightingale, for whom I
have a Passion which few can have an
Idea of. I am half distracted with Doubts
how to act.’ And is this other, pray, an honourable
Mistress? cries Nightingale. 
Honourable? answered Jones; ‘No
Breath ever yet durst sully her Reputation. 
The sweetest Air is not purer, the
limpid Stream not clearer than her Honour. 

She is all over, both in Mind
and Body, consummate Perfection. She
is the most beautiful Creature in the Universe; 
and yet she is Mistress of such
noble, elevated Qualities, that though she
is never from my Thoughts, I scarce ever
think of her Beauty, but when I see it.’ 
‘And can you, my good Friend,’ cries
Nightingale, ‘with such an Engagement as
this upon your Hands, hesitate a Moment
about quitting such a—’ ‘Hold,
said Jones, ‘no more Abuse of her; I detest
the Thought of Ingratitude.’ ‘Pooh!
answered the other, ‘you are not the first
upon whom she hath conferred Obligations
of this Kind. She is remarkably
liberal where she likes; though, let me
tell you, her Favours are so prudently
bestowed, that they should rather raise a
Man's Vanity, than his Gratitude.’ In
short, Nightingale proceeded so far on this
Head, and told his Friend so many Stories
of the Lady, which he swore to the Truth
of, that he entirely removed all Esteem for
her from the Breast of Jones; and his Gratitude
was lessened in Proportion. Indeed he
began to look on all the Favours he had received,
rather as Wages than Benefits,
which not only depreciated her, but himself
too in his own Conceit, and put him quite 

out of Humour with both. From this
Disgusts, his Mind, by a natural Transition,
turned towards Sophia: Her Virtue, her
Purity, her Love to him, her Sufferings on
his Account, filled all his Thoughts, and
made his Commerce with Lady Bellaston
appear still more odious. The Result of
all was, that though his turning himself out
of her Service, in which Light he now saw
his Affair with her, would be the Loss of
his Bread, yet he determined to quit her,
if he could but find a handsome Pretence:
which having communicated to his Friend,
Nightingale considered a little, and then
said, ‘I have it, my Boy; I have found
out a sure Method: Propose Marriage
to her, and I would venture Hanging
upon the Success.’ ‘Marriage!’ cries
Jones. ‘Ay, propose Marriage,’ answered
Nightingale, ‘and she will declare off in
a Moment. I knew a young Fellow
whom she kept formerly, who made the
Offer to her in earnest, and was presently
turned off for his Pains.’ 
Jones declared he could not venture the
Experiment. ‘Perhaps,’ said he, ‘she
may be less shocked at this Proposal from
one Man than from another. And if she
should take me at my Word, where am 

I then? Caught in my own Trap, and
undone for ever.’ ‘No;’ answered
Nightingale, ‘not if I can give you an Expedient,
by which you may, at any Time,
get out of the Trap.’ —‘What Expedient
can that be?’ reply'd Jones.’ —‘This,
answered Nightingale. ‘The young Fellow
I mentioned, who is one of the most
intimate Acquaintances I have in the
World, is so angry with her for some ill
Offices she hath since done him, that I am
sure he would, without any Difficulty,
give you a Sight of her Letters; upon
which!which you may decently break with her,
and declare off before the Knot is ty'd, if
she should really be willing to tie it, which
I am convinced she will not.’ 
After some Hesitation, Jones, upon the
Strength of this Assurance, consented; but
as he swore he wanted the Confidence to
propose the Matter to her Face, he wrote
the following Letter, which Nightingale
dictated. 

‘Madam,
I am extremely concerned, that, by an
unfortunate Engagement abroad, I should
have missed receiving the Honour of
your Ladyship's Commands the Moment 

they came; and the Delay which I must
now suffer of vindicating myself to your
Ladyship, greatly adds to this Misfortune. 
O Lady Bellaston, what a Terror
have I been in for Fear your Reputation
should be exposed by these perverse Accidents. 
There is one only Way to secure it. 
I need not name what that is. Only permit
me to say, that as your Honour is as
dear to me as my own, so my sole Ambition
is to have the Glory of laying my
Liberty at your Feet; and believe me
when I assure you, I can never be made
completely happy, without you generously
bestow on me a legal Right of calling you
mine for ever. I am, 
‘Madam,
With most profound Respect,
Your Ladyship's most Obliged,
Obedient Humble Servant,
Thomas Jones.’ 
To this she presently returned the following
Answer. 


‘Sir,
When I read over your serious Epistle,
I could, from its Coldness and Formality,
have sworn that you had already
the legal Right you mention; nay that
we had, for many Years, composed that
monstrous Animal a Husband and Wife. 
Do you really then imagine me a Fool? 
Or do you fancy yourself capable of so
entirely persuading me out of my Senses,
that I should deliver my whole Fortune
into your Power, in order to enable you
to support your Pleasures at my Expence. 
Are these the Proofs of Love
which I expected? Is this the Return
for—but I scorn to upbraid you, and
am in great Admiration of your profound
Respect. 
‘P. S.: I am prevented from revising: 
—Perhaps I have said more than I
meant. —Come to me at Eight this
Evening.’ 
Jones, by the Advice of his Privy-Council,
reply'd: 


‘Madam,
It is impossible to express how much I
am shocked at the Suspicion you entertain
of me. Can Lady Bellaston have
conferred Favours on a Man whom she
could believe capable of so base a Design? 
Or can she treat the most solemn Tie
of Love with Contempt? Can you imagine,
Madam, that if the Violence of my
Passion, in an unguarded Moment, overcame
the Tenderness which I have for
your Honour, that I would think of indulging
myself in the Continuance of an
Intercourse, which could not possibly
escape long the Notice of the World; 
and which, when discovered, must prove
so fatal to your Reputation? If such be
your Opinion of me, I must pray for a
sudden Opportunity of returning those
pecuniary Obligations, which I have been
so unfortunate to receive at your Hands; 
and for those of a more tender Kind, I
shall ever remain, &c.’ And so concluded
in the very Words with which he had
concluded the former Letter. 
The Lady answered as follows. 


‘I see you are a Villain; and I despise
you from my Soul. If you come here,
I shall not be at Home.’ 
Though Jones was well satisfied with his
Deliverance from a Thraldom which those
who have ever experienced it will, I apprehend,
allow to be none of the lightest, he was
not, however, perfectly easy in his Mind. 
There was, in this Scheme, too much of
Fallacy to satisfy one who utterly detested
every Species of Falshood or Dishonesty: 
Nor would he, indeed, have submitted to
put it in Practice, had he not been involved
in a distressful Situation, where he was obliged
to be guilty of some Dishonour, either
to the one Lady or the other; and
surely the Reader will allow, that every good
Principle, as well as Love, pleaded strongly
in Favour of Sophia. 
Nightingale, highly exulted in the Success
of his Stratagem, upon which he received
many Thanks, and much Applause from
his Friend. He answered, ‘Dear Tom, we
have conferred very different Obligations
on each other. To me you owe the regaining
your Liberty; to you I owe the 

Loss of mine. But if you are as happy
in the one Instance, as I am in the other,
I promise you we are the two happiest Fellows
in England.’ 
The two Gentlemen were now summoned
down to Dinner, where Mrs. Miller,
who performed herself the Office of Cook,
had exerted her best Talents, to celebrate
the Wedding of her Daughter. This joyful
Circumstance, as she ascribed principally
to the friendly Behaviour of Jones, her
whole Soul was fired with Gratitude towards
him, and all her Looks, Words, and
Actions were so busied in expressing it, that
her Daughter, and even her new Son-in-Law,
were very little the Objects of her
Consideration. 
Dinner was just ended when Mrs. Miller
received a Letter; but as we have had
Letters enough in this Chapter, we shall
communicate the Contents in our next. 




Consisting partly of Facts, and partly of Observations
upon them. 
The Letter then which arrived at the
End of the preceding Chapter was
from Mr. Allworthy, and the Purport of it
was his Intention to come immediately to
Town, with his Nephew Blifil, and a Desire
to be accommodated with his usual
Lodgings, which were the first Floor for
himself, and the second for his Nephew. 
The Chearfulness which had before display'd
itself in the Countenance of the poor
Woman, was a little clouded on this Occasion. 
This News did indeed a good deal
disconcert her. To require so disinterested
a Match with her Daughter, by presently
turning her new Son-in-Law out of Doors,
appeared to her very unjustifiable on the one
Hand; and on the other, she could scarce
bear the Thoughts of making any Excuse
to Mr. Allworthy, after all the Obligations
received from him, for depriving him
of Lodgings which were indeed strictly 

his Due: For that Gentleman, in conferring
all his numberless Benefits on others,
acted by a Rule diametrically opposite to
what is practiced by most generous People. 
He contrived, on all Occasions, to hide his
Beneficence not only from the World, but
even from the Object of it. He constantly
used the Words Lend and Pay, instead of
Give; and by every other Method he could
invent, always lessened the Favours he
conferred with his Tongue, while he was
heaping them with both his Hands. When
he settled the Annuity of 50l. a Year,
therefore, on Mrs. Miller, he told her, ‘It
was in Consideration of always having
her First-Floor when he was in Town,’ 
(which he scarce ever intended to be) ‘but
that she might let it at any other Time,
for that he would always send her a
Month's Warning.’ He was now, however,
hurried to Town so suddenly, that he
had no Opportunity of giving such Notice; 
and this Hurry probably prevented him,
when he wrote for his Lodgings, adding,
if they were then empty: For he would most
certainly have been well satisfied to have relinquished
them on a less sufficient Excuse,
than what Mrs. Miller could now have
made. 

But there are a Sort of Persons, who, as
Prior excellently well remarks, direct their
Conduct by something 
Beyond the fix'd and settled Rules
Of Vice and Virtue in the Schools:
Beyond the Letter of the Law.
To these it is so far from being sufficient
that their Defence would acquit them at
the Old-Bailey, that they are not even contented,
though Conscience, the severest of
all Judges, should discharge them. Nothing
short of the Fair and Honourable will
satisfy the Delicacy of their Minds; and if
any of their Actions fall short of this Mark,
they mope and pine, are as uneasy and restless
as a Murderer, who is afraid of a
Ghost, or of the Hangman. 
Mrs. Miller was one of these. She could
not conceal her Uneasiness at this Letter; 
with the Contents of which she had no
sooner acquainted the Company, and given
some Hints of her Distress, than Jones, her
good Angel, presently relieved her Anxiety. 
‘As for myself, Madam,’ said he,
‘my Lodging is at your Service at a 

Moment's Warning; and Mr. Nightingale,
I am sure, as he cannot yet prepare
a House fit to receive his Lady, will consent
to return to his new Lodging, whither
Mrs. Nightingale will certainly consent
to go.’ With which Proposal both
Husband and Wife instantly agreed. 
The Reader will easily believe, that the
Cheeks of Mrs. Miller began again to glow
with additional Gratitude to Jones; but,
perhaps, it may be more difficult to persuade
him that Mr. Jones having, in his
last Speech, called her Daughter Mrs.
Nightingale, (it being the first Time that agreeable
Sound had ever reached her Ears)
gave the fond Mother more Satisfaction,
and warmed her Heart more towards Jones,
that his having dissipated her present
Anxiety. 
The next Day was then appointed for the
Removal of the new-married Couple, and of
Mr. Jones, who was likewise to be provided
for in the same House with his Friend. 
And now the Serenity of the Company was
again restored, and they past the Day in
the utmost Chearfulness, all except Jones,
who, though he outwardly accompanied 

the rest in their Mirth, felt many a bitter
Pang on the Account of his Sophia; which
were not a little heightened by the News of
Mr. Blifil's coming to Town, (for he clearly
saw the Intention of his Journey:) And
what greatly aggravated his Concern was,
that Mrs. Honour, who had promised to
enquire after Sophia, and to make her Report
to him early the next Evening, had
disappointed him. 
In the Situation that he and his Mistress
were in at this Time, there were scarce any
Grounds for him to hope that he should
hear any good News; yet he was as impatient
to see Mrs. Honour, as if he had expected
she would bring him a Letter with
an Assignation in it from Sophia, and bore
the Disappointment as ill. Whether this
Impatience arose from that natural Weakness
of the Human Mind, which makes it
desirous to know the worst, and renders
Uncertainty the most intolerable of Pains; 
or whether he still flattered himself with
some secret Hopes, we will not determine. 
But that it might be the last, whoever has
loved cannot but know. For of all the Powers
exercised by this Passion over our Minds,
one of the most wonderful is that of supporting
Hope in the midst of Despair. Difficulties,
Improbabilities, nay Impossibilities 

are quite overlook'd by it; so that to any
Man extremely in Love, may be applied
what Addison says of Cæsar, 
The Alps, and Pyrenæans sink before him! 
Yet it is equally true, that the same Passion
will sometimes make Mountains of Molehills,
and produce Despair in the midst of
Hope; but these cold Fits last not long in
good Constitutions. Which Temper Jones
was now in, we leave the Reader to guess,
having no exact Information about it; but
this is certain, that he had spent two Hours
in Expectation, when being unable any loner
to conceal his Uneasiness, he retired to
his room; where his Anxiety had almost
made him frantick, when the following
Letter was brought him from Mrs. Honour,
with which we shall present the Reader verbatim
& literatim. 

“SIR,
I shud sartenly haf kaled on you a cordin
too mi Prommiss haddunt itt bin that
hur Lashipp prevent mee; for too bee sur,
Sir, you nose very wel that evere Persun
must luk furst at ome, and sarrenly such
anuther offar mite not ave ever hapned,
so as I shud ave bin justly to blam, had
I not excepted of it when her Laship
was so veri kind as to offar to mak
mee hur one Uman without mi ever
askin any such thing, to bee sur shee is 

won of thee best Ladis in thee Wurld,
and Pepil who safe to thee Kontrari
must bee veri wiket Pepil in thare Harts. 
To be sur if ever I ave sad any thing of that
Kine it as bin thru Ignorens and I am
hartili sorri for it. I nose your Onor
to be a Genteelman of more Onur and
Onesty, if I ever said ani such thing
to repete it to hurt a pore Servant that
as alwais ad thee gratest Respect in thee
World for ure Onur. To be sur won
shud kepe wons Tung within one's
Teeth, for no Boddi nose what may hapen; 
and too bee sur if ani Boddi ad
tolde mee Yesterday, that I shud haf
bin in so gud a Place to Day, I shud not
haf beleeved it; for too bee sur I never
was a dremd of any such Thing, nor
shud I ever ha soft after ani other Bodi's
Plase; but as her Laship wass so kine of
her one a cord too give it mee without
askin, to be sure Mrs. Etoff herself, nor
no other Bodi can blam mee for exceptin
such a Thing when it fals in mi Waye. I
beg ure Onur not too mention ani thing
of what I haf sad, for I wish ure Onur
all thee gud Luk in thee Wurld; and
I don't cuestion butt thatt u will haf
Madam Sofia in the End; butt ass to 

miself ure Onur nose I kant bee of ani
farder Sarvis to u in that Matar, nou
bein under thee Cumand off anuthar
Parson, and nott mi one Mistress. I
begg ure Onur to say nothing of what
past, and belive me to be, Sir, 
“Ure Onur's umble Sarvant
To Cumand till Deth,
Honour Blackmore.” 
Various were the Conjectures which
Jones entertained for this Step of Lady
Bellaston; who in Reality had little further
Design than to secure within her own House
the Repository of a Secret, which she chose
should make no farther Progress than it had
made already; but mostly she desired to
keep it from the Ears of Sophia; for tho'
that young Lady was almost the only one
who would never have repeated it again,
her Ladyship could not persuade herself of
this; since as she now hated poor Sophia
with most implacable Hatred, she conceived
a reciprocal Hatred to herself to be lodged
in the tender Breast of our Heroine, where
no such Passion had never yet found an Entrance. 

While Jones was terrifying himself with
the Apprehension of a thousand dreadful
Machinations, and deep political Designs,
which he imagined to be at the Bottom of
the Promotion of Honour, Fortune, who
hitherto seems to have been an utter Enemy
to his Match with Sophia, try'd a new
Method to put a final End to it, by throwing
a Temptation in the Way of Jones,
which in his present desperate Situation it
seemed unlikely he should be able to resist. 



Containing curious, but not unprecedented
Matter. 
There was a Lady, one Mrs. Hunt,
who had often seen Jones at the
House where he lodged, being intimately
acquainted with the Women there, and indeed
a very great Friend to Mrs. Miller. 
Her Age was about thirty, for she owned
six and twenty; her Face and Person very
good, only inclining a little too much to be
fat. She had been married young by her
Relations to an Old Turkey Merchant, who
having got a great Fortune, had left off 

Trade. With him she lived without Reproach,
but not without Pain, in a State of
great Self denial, for about twelve Years; 
and her Virtue was rewarded by his dying,
and leaving her very rich. The first Year
of her Widowhood was just at an End,
and she had past it in a good deal of Retirement,
seeing only a few particular
Friends, and dividing her Time between
her Devotions and Novels, of which she
was always extremely fond. Very good
Health, a very warm Constitution, and a
great deal of Religion made it absolutely
necessary for her to marry again; and she
resolved to please herself in her second Husband,
as she had done her Friends in the
first. From her the following Billet was
brought to Jones. 

‘Sir,
From the first Day I saw you I doubt
my eyes have told you too plainly, that
you were not indifferent to me; but neither
my Tongue nor my Hand should
have ever avowed it, had not the Ladies
of the Family where you are lodged given
me such a Character of you, and told
me such Proofs of your Virtue and Goodness,
as convince me you are not only 

the most agreeable, but the most worthy
of Men. I have also the Satisfaction to
hear from them, that neither my Person,
Understanding or Character are disagreeable
to you. I have a Fortune sufficient
to make us both happy, but which cannot
make me so without you. In thus
disposing of myself I know I shall incur
the Censure of the World, but if I did
not love you more than I fear the World
I should not be worthy of you. One
only Difficulty stops me: I am informed
you are engaged in a Commerce of Galantry
with a Woman of Fashion. If
you think it worth while to sacrifice that
to the Possession of me, I am yours; if
not forget my Weakness, and let this
remain an eternal Secret between you
and 
‘Arabella Hunt.’ 
At the reading of this Jones was put into
a violent Flutter. His Fortune was then
at a very low Ebb, the Source being stopt
from which hitherto he had been supplied. 
Of all he had received from Lady Bellaston
not above five Guineas remained, and that
very Morning he had been dunned by a
Tradesman for twice that Sum. His honourable 

Mistress was in the Hands of her
Father, and he had scarce any Hopes ever
to get her out of them again. To be subsisted
at her Expence from that little Fortune
she had independent of her Father,
went much against the Delicacy both of his
Pride and his Love. This Lady's Fortune
would have been exceeding convenient
to him, and he could have no Objection
to her in any Respect. On the contrary,
he liked her as well as he did any Woman
except Sophia. But to abandon Sophia, and
marry another, that was impossible; he
could not think of it upon any Account. 
Yet why should he not, since it was plain
she could not be his? Would it not be
kinder to her, than to continue her longer
engaged in a hopeless Passion for him? 
Ought he not to do so in Friendship to her? 
This Notion prevailed some Moments, and
he had almost determined to be false to her
from a high Point of Honour; but that
Refinement was not able to stand very
long against the Voice of Nature, which
cried in his Heart, that such Friendship
was Treason to Love. At last he called
for Pen, Ink and Paper, and writ as follows
to Mrs. Hunt. 


‘Madam,
It would be but a poor Return to the
Favour you have done me, to sacrifice any
Gallantry to the Possession of you,
and I would certainly do it, tho' I were
not disengaged, as at present I am, from
any Affair of that Kind. But I should
not be the honest Man you think me, if
I did not tell you, that my Affections are
engaged to another, who is a Woman of
Virtue, and one that I never can leave,
though it is probable I shall never possess
her. God forbid that in Return of your
Kindness to me, I should do you such an
Injury, as to give you my Hand, when
I cannot give my Heart. No, I had
much rather starve than be guilty of that. 
Even though my Mistress were married
to another, I would not marry you unless
my Heart had entirely effaced all Impressions Impressions
of her. Be assured that your
Secret was not more safe in your own
Breast, than in that of 
‘Your most obliged, and
Grateful Humble Servant,
T. Jones.’ 

When our Heroe had finished and sent
this Letter, he went to his Scrutore, took
our Miss Western's Muff, kiss'd it several
Times, and then strutted some Turns about
his Room with more Satisfaction of
Mind than ever any Irishman felt in carrying
off a Fortune of fifty Thousand
Pounds. 



A Discovery made by Partridge. 
While Jones was exulting in the
Consciousness of his Integrity, Partridge
came capering into the Room, as was
his Custom when he brought, or fancied he
brought, any good Tidings. He had been
dispatched that Morning, by his Master,
with Orders to endeavour, by the Servants
of Lady Bellaston, or by any other Means,
to discover whither Sophia had been conveyed; 
and he now returned, and with a
joyful Countenance told our Heroe, that
he had found the lost Bird. ‘I have seen,
Sir, says he, black George, the Gamekeeper,
who is one of the Servants whom
the Squire hath brought with him to 

Town. I knew him presently, though I
have not seen him these several Years; 
but you know, Sir, he is very remarkable
Man, or to use a purer Phrase, he
hath a most remarkable Beard, the largest
and blackest I ever saw. It was some
Time however before black George could
recollect me.’ —‘Well, but what is your
good News? cries Jones, what do you
know of my Sophia?’ ‘You shall
know presently, Sir, answered Partridge,
I am coming to it as fast as I can. — 
You are so impatient, Sir, you would
come at the Infinitive Mood, before you
can get to the Imperative. As I was
saying, Sir, it was some Time before he
recollected my Face.’ —‘Confound your
Face, cries Jones, what of my Sophia?’ 
—‘Nay, Sir, answered Partridge, I know
nothing more of Madam Sophia, than
what I am going to tell you; and I
should have to you all before this if you
had not interrupted me; but if you look
so angry at me, you will frighten all of
it out of my Head, or to use a purer
Phrase, out of my Memory. I never
saw you look so angry since the Day we
left Upton, which I shall remember, if I
was to live a thousand Years.’ —‘Well,
pray go on in your own Way, said Jones, 

you are resolved to make me mad I find.’ 
‘Not for the World, answered Partridge, I have suffered enough for that already; 
which, as I said, I shall bear in my Remembrance
the longest Day I have to
live.’ —‘Well, but black George? cries
Jones.’ —‘Well, Sir, as I was saying,
it was a long Time before he could recollect
me, for indeed I am very much
altered since I saw him. Non sum qualis
eram. I have had Troubles in the World,
and nothing alters a Man so much as
Grief. I have heard it will change the
Colour of a Man's Hair in a Night. 
However, at last, know me he did, that's
sure enough; for we are both of an Age,
and were at the same Charity School. 
George was a great Dunce, but no Matter
for that; all Men do not thrive in the
World according to their Learning. I
am sure I have Reason to say so; but it
will be all one a Thousand Years hence. 
Well, Sir,—where was I? —O—well, we
no sooner knew each other, than after
many hearty Shakes by the Hand, we agreed
to go to an Alehouse and take a
Pot, and by good Luck the Beer was
some of the best I have met with since I
have been in Town. —Now, Sir, I am
coming to the Point; for no sooner did 

I name you, and told him, that you and
I came to Town together, and had lived
together ever since, than he called for an
other Pot, and swore he would drink
to your Health; and indeed he drank
your Health so heartily, that I was overjoyed
to see there was so much Gratitude
left in the World; and after we had emptied
that Pot, I said I would be my Pot
too, and so we drank another to your
Health; and then I made haste Home
to tell you the News.’ 
‘What News? cries Jones, you have not
mentioned a Word of my Sophia!’ 
—‘Bless me! I had like to have forgot that. 
Indeed we mentioned a great deal about
young Madam Western, and George told
me all; that Mr. Blifil is coming to Town
in order to be married to her. He had
best make haste then, says I, or some Body
will have her before he comes, and indeed,
says I, Mr. Seagrim, it is a Thousand
Pities some Body should not have
her; for he certainly loves her above all
the Women in the World. I would have
both you and she know, that it is not for
her Fortune he follows her; for I can assure
you as to Matter of that, there is
another Lady, one of much greater Quality 

and Fortune than she can pretend to,
who is so fond of Somebody, that she
comes after him Day and Night.’ Here
Jones fell into a Passion with Partridge, for
having, as he said, betrayed him; but the
poor Fellow answered, he had mentioned
no Name; ‘Besides, Sir, said he, I can
assure you, George is sincerely your Friend,
and wished Mr. Blifil at the Devil more
than once; nay, he said he would do any
thing in his Power upon Earth to serve
you; and so I am convinced he will. — 
Betray you indeed! why I question whether
you have a better Friend than George
upon Earth, except myself, or one that
would go farther to serve you.’ 
‘Well, says Jones, a little pacified, you
say this Fellow, who I believe indeed is
enough inclined to be my Friend, lives
in the same House with Sophia?’ 
‘In the same House! answered Partridge,
why, Sir, he is one of the Servants of the
Family, and very well drest I promise
you he is; if it was not for his black
Beard you would hardly know him.’ 

‘One Service then at least he may do
me, says, Jones; sure he can certainly convey
a Letter to my Sophia.’ 
‘You have hit the Nail ad unguem, cries
Partridge; how came I not to think of
it? I will engage he shall do it upon the
very first mentioning.’ 
‘Well then, said Jones, do you leave
me at present, and I will write a Letter
which you shall deliver to him To-morrow
Morning; for I suppose you know where
to find him.’ 
‘O yes, Sir, answered Partridge, I shall
certainly find him again, there is no Fear
of that. The Liquor is too good for
him to stay away long. I make no doubt
but he will be there every Day he stays in
Town.’ 
‘So you don't know the Street then
where my Sophia is lodged? cries Jones.’ 
‘Indeed, Sir, I do, says Partridge.’ 
‘What is the Name of the Street? cries Jones.’ 

‘The Name, Sir, why here, Sir, just
by, answered Partridge, not above a
Street or two off. I don't indeed know
the very Name; for as he never told me,
if I had asked, you know it might have
put some suspicion into his Head. No,
no, Sir, let me alone for that. I am
too cunning for that, I promise you.’ 
‘Thou art most wonderfully cunning
indeed, replied Jones; however I will
write to my Charmer, since I believe you
will be cunning enough to find him Tomorrow
at the Alehouse.’ 
And now having dismissed the sagacious
Partridge, Mr. Jones sat himself down to
write, in which Employment we shall leave
him for a Time. And here we put an End
to the Fifteenth Book. 