


Farther Conferences between the
Count and Master Wild, with other
Matters of the GREAT Kind. 
Being met the next Morning, the
Count, (who, though he did not agree
with the whole of his Friend's Doctrine,
was, however, highly pleased with
his Argument) began to bewail the Misfortune
of his Captivity, and the Backwardness
of Friends to assist each other in their
Necessities; but what vexed him, he said,
most, was the Cruelty of the Fair; for he
entrusted Wild with the Secret of his having
had an Intrigue with Miss Theodosia,
the eldest of the Miss Snaps, ever since his
Confinement, but could not prevail with
her to set him at Liberty. Wild answered,
with a Smile: “It was no Wonder a Woman
should wish to confine her Lover,
where she might be sure of having him
entirely to herself; but added, he believed
he could tell him a Method of certainly
procuring his Escape.” The Count 

eagerly besought him to acquaint him with
it. Wild told him: “Bribery was the
surest Means, and advised him to apply
to the Maid.” The Count thanked him,
but returned: “That he had not a Farthing
left besides one Guinea, which he
had then given her to change.” To
which Wild said: “He must make it up
with Promises, which he supposed he
was Courtier enough to know how to
put off.” The Count greatly applauded
the Advice, and said, he hoped he should be
able in Time to persuade him to condescend
to be a Great Man, for which he was so
perfectly well qualified. 
This Method being concluded on, the
two Friends sat down to Cards, a Circumstance
which I should not have mentioned
but for the sake of observing the prodigious
Force of Habit; for, though the Count
knew, if he won never so much of Mr.
Wild, he should not receive a Shilling, yet
could he not refrain from packing the
Cards; nor could Wild keep his Hands out
of his Friend's Pockets, though he knew
there was nothing in them. 

When the Maid came home, the Count
began to put it to her; offered her all he
had, and promised Mountains in futuro; 
but all in vain, the Maid's Honesty was
impregnable. She said, “She would not
break her Trust for the World; no, not
if she could gain a Million of Money by
it.” Upon which Wild stepping up,
and telling her: “She need not fear losing her
Place, for it would never be found out; 
that they could throw a Pair of Sheets
into the Street, by which it might appear
he got out at Window; that he
himself would swear he saw him descending; 
that the Money would be so
much Gains in her Pocket; that, besides
his Promises, which he might depend on
being performed, she would receive from
him twenty Shillings and Nine-pence in
ready Money, (for she had only laid out
Three-pence in plain Spanish) and that
besides his Honour, the Count should
leave a Pair of Gold Buttons (which
afterwards turned out to be Brass) of
great Value in her Hands as a farther
Pawn; and, lastly, that he himself would 

lend his Friend Eighteen pence, being all
he had about him, to deposite in præsenti.” 
These Arguments at length prevailed
with the Maid, who had always the Reputation
of a very honest Servant; and she
promised faithfully in the Evening to open
the Door to the Count. 
Thus did our young Hero, not only
lend his Rhetorick, which few People care
to do without a Fee, but his Money too,
Eighteen pence, a Sum which many a good
Man would have made eighteen Excuses
before he would have parted with to his
Friend, and procured him his Liberty. 
But it would be highly derogatory from
the GREAT Character of Wild, should the
Reader imagine he lent such a Sum as eighteen
pence to a Friend without the least View of
serving himself. As, therefore, he may easily
account for it in a manner more advantageous
to our Hero's Reputation, by concluding
that he had some interested View
in the Count's Enlargement, we hope he 

will judge with Charity, especially as the
Sequel makes it not only reasonable but necessary
to suppose he had some such
View. 
A long Intimacy and Friendship subsisted
between the Count and Mr. Wild, who,
being by the Advice of the Count dressed
in good Cloaths, was by him introduced
into the best Company. They constantly
frequented the Assemblies, Auctions, Gaming-Tables,
and Play-Houses; at which
last they saw two Acts every Night, and
then retired without paying, being it seems
an immemorial Privilege which the Beaus
of the Town prescribe for to themselves. 
This, however, did not suit Wild's Temper
who called it a Cheat, and objected against
it, as requiring no Dexterity but
what every Blockhead might put in Execution. 
He said it was a Custom very
much savouring of the Sneaking-Budge,
but neither so honourable nor so ingenious. 
Wild now made a considerable Figure,
and passed for a Gentleman of great Fortune 

in the Funds. Women of Quality
treated him with great Familiarity, young
Ladies began to spread their Charms for
him, when an Accident happened that put
a Stop to his Continuance in a Way of
Life too insipid and inactive to afford Employment
for those great Talents, which
were designed to make a much more considerable
Figure in the World, than attends
the Character of a Beau or a pretty
Gentleman. 