




In which the History looks backwards. 
Before we proceed farther with
our History, it may be proper to
look back a little, in order to account
for the late Conduct of Doctor
Harrison; which, however inconsistent it
may have hitherto appeared, when examined
to the Bottom, will be found, I apprehend,
to be truly congruous with all
the Rules of the most perfect Prudence,
as well as with the most consummate
Goodness. 
We have already partly seen in what
Light Booth had been represented to the
Doctor abroad. Indeed, the Accounts 

which were sent of the Captain, as well
by the Curate as by a Gentleman of the
Neighbourhood, were much grosser and
more to his Disadvantage, than the Doctor
was pleased to set them forth in his Letter
to the Person accused. What Sense he
had of Booth's Conduct was, however,
manifest by that Letter. Nevertheless he
resolved to suspend his final Judgment
'till his Return; and tho' he censured him,
would not absolutely condemn him without
ocular Demonstration. 
The Doctor on his Return to his Parish
found all the Accusations which had been
transmitted to him, confirmed by many
Witnesses, of which the Curate's Wife,
who had been formerly a Friend to Amelia,
and still preserved the outward Appearance
of Friendship, was the strongest. She
introduced all with I am sorry to say it; 
and it is Friendship which bids me speak; 
and it is for their Good it should be told
you; after which Beginnings, she never
concluded a single Speech without some
horrid Slander and bitter Invective. 
Besides the malicious Turn which was
given to these Affairs in the Country,
which were owing a good deal to Misfortune, 

and some little perhaps to Imprudence,
the whole Neighbourhood rung
with several gross and scandalous Lies, which
were merely the Inventions of his Enemies,
and of which the Scene was laid in London
since his Absence. 
Poisoned with all this Malice, the
Doctor came to Town, and learning where
Booth lodged, went to make him a Visit. 
Indeed, it was the Doctor, and no other
who had been at his Lodgings that Evening
when Booth and Amelia were walking
in the Park; and concerning which the
Reader may be pleased to remember so
many strange and odd Conjectures. 
Here the Doctor saw the little Gold
Watch, and all those fine Trinkets with
which the noble Lord had presented the
Children; and which from the Answers
given him by the poor ignorant innocent
Girl, he could have no Doubt had been
purchased within a few Days by Amelia. 
This Account tallied so well with the
Ideas he had imbibed of Booth's Extravagance
in the Country, that he firmly
believed both the Husband and Wife to
be the vainest, silliest, and most unjust 

People alive. It was, indeed, almost incredible,
that two rational Beings should
be guilty of such Absurdity; but monstrous
and absurd as it was, ocular Demonstration
appeared to be the Evidence
against them. 
The Doctor departed from their Lodgings
enraged at this supposed Discovery,
and unhappily for Booth, was engaged to
Supper that very Evening with the Country
Gentleman of whom Booth had rented
a Farm. As the poor Captain happened
to be the Subject of Conversation, and
occasioned their comparing Notes, the
Account which the Doctor gave of what
he had seen that Evening, so incensed the
Gentleman to whom Booth was likewise
a Debtor, that he vowed he would take a
Writ out against him the next Morning,
and have his Body alive or dead. And
the Doctor was at last persuaded to do the
same. Mr. Murphy was thereupon immediately
sent for, and the Doctor in his
Presence repeated again what he had seen
at his Lodgings, as the Foundation of his
suing him, which the Attorney, as we
have before seen, had blabbed to Atkinson. 

But no sooner did the Doctor hear
that Booth was arrested, than the wretched
Condition of his Wife and Family
began to affect his Mind. The Children,
who were to be utterly undone
with their Father, were intirely innocent; 
and as for Amelia herself, though he
thought he had most convincing Proofs
of very blameable Levity; yet his former
Friendship and Affection to her
were busy to invent every Excuse, till,
by very heavily loading the Husband,
they lightened the Suspicion against the
Wife. 
In this Temper of Mind he resolved to
pay Amelia a second Visit, and was on his
Way to Mrs. Ellison, when the Serjeant
met him, and made himself known to him. 
The Doctor took his old Servant into a
Coffee-house, where he received from him
such an Account of Booth and his Family,
that he desired the Serjeant to shew him
presently to Amelia; and this was the Cordial
which we mentioned at the End of
the Ninth Chapter of the preceding
Book. 

The Doctor became soon satisfied concerning
the Trinkets which had given him so
much Uneasiness, and which had brought
so much Mischief on the Head of poor
Booth. Amelia likewise gave the Doctor some
Satisfaction as to what he had heard of her
Husband's Behaviour in the Country, and
assured him, upon her Honour, that Booth
could so well answer every Complaint
against his Conduct, that she had no Doubt
but that a Man of the Doctor's Justice and
Candour would entirely acquit him, and
would consider him as an innocent unfortunate
Man, who was the Object of a good
Man's Compassion, not of his Anger or
Resentment. 
This worthy Clergyman, who was not
desirous of finding Proofs to condemn the
Captain, or to justify his own vindictive
Proceedings, but, on the contrary, rejoiced
heartily in every Piece of Evidence
which tended to clear up the Character of
his Friend, gave a ready Ear to all which
Amelia said. To this, indeed, he was induced
by the Love he always had for that
Lady, by the good Opinion he entertained
of her, as well as by Pity for her present 

Condition, than which nothing appeared
more miserable; for he found her in the
highest Agonies of Grief and Despair, with
her two little Children crying over their
wretched Mother. These are, indeed, to
a well disposed Mind, the most tragical
Sights that human Nature can furnish,
and afford a juster Motive to Grief and
Tears in the Beholder, than it would be
to see all the Heroes who have ever infested
the Earth, hanged all together in a
String. 
The Doctor felt this Sight as he ought. 
He immediately endeavoured to comfort
the Afflicted; in which he so well succeeded,
that he restored to Amelia sufficient Spirits to
give him the Satisfaction we have mentioned: 
After which, he declared he would
go and release her Husband; which he accordingly
did, in the Manner we have above
related. 




In which the History goes forward. 
We now return to that Period of our
History, to which we had brought
it at the End of our last Book. 
Booth and his Friends arrived, from the
Bailiff's, at the Serjeant's Lodgings; where
Booth immediately ran up Stairs to his
Amelia; between whom I shall not attempt
to describe the Meeting. Nothing certainly
was ever more tender or more joyful. 
This however I will observe, that a very
few of these exquisite Moments, of which
the best Minds only are capable, do, in
Reality, over-balance the longest Enjoyments
which can ever fall to the Lot of the
worst. 
Whilst Booth and his Wife were feasting
their Souls with the most delicious mutual
Endearments, the Doctor was fallen to
play with the two little Children below
Stairs. While he was thus engaged, the
little Boy did somewhat amiss; upon which
the Doctor said, ‘If you do so any more,
I will take your Papa away from you 

again’—‘Again, Sir,’ said the Child,
‘why was it you then that took away my
Papa before?’ ‘Suppose it was,’ said the
Doctor, ‘would not you forgive me?’ 
‘Yes,’ cries the Child, ‘I would forgive
you; because a Christian must forgive
every Body; but I should hate you as
long as I live.’ 
The Doctor was so pleased with the
Boy's Answer, that he caught him in his
Arms, and kiss'd him, at which Time, Booth
and his Wife returned. The Doctor asked
which of them was their Son's Instructor
in his Religion: Booth answered, that he
must confess Amelia had all the Merit of
that Kind. ‘I should have rather thought
he had learnt of his Father,’ cries the
Doctor, ‘for he seems a good Soldier-like
Christian, and professes to hate his Enemies
with a very good Grace.’ 
‘How, Billy,’ cries Amelia. ‘I am sure
I did not teach you so.’ 
‘I did not say I would hate my Enemies,
Madam,” cries the Boy. ‘I only
said I would hate Papa's Enemies; sure,
Mamma, there is no Harm in that: nay,
I am sure there is no Harm in it; for I 

have heard you say the same thing a thousand
Times.’ 
The Doctor smiled on the Child, and
chucking him under the Chin told him,
he must hate no Body: And now Mrs.
Atkinson, who had provided a Dinner for
them all, desired them to walk up, and
partake of it. 
And now it was that Booth was first
made acquainted with the Serjeant's Marriage; 
as was Dr. Harrison, both of whom
greatly felicitated him upon it. 
Mrs. Atkinson, who was, perhaps, a little
more confounded than she would have
been had she married a Colonel, said, ‘If
I have done wrong, Mrs. Booth is to answer
for it; for she made the Match: 
Indeed, Mr. Atkinson, you are greatly
obliged to the Character which this Lady
gives of you.’ ‘I hope he will deserve
it,’ said the Doctor; ‘and if the Army
hath not corrupted a good Boy, I believe
I may answer for him.’ 
While our little Company were enjoying
that Happiness which never fails to attend
Couversation, where all present are 

pleased with each other, a Visitant arrived,
who was, perhaps, not very welcome to
any of them. This was no other than Colonel
James, who entering the Room with
much Gaiety went directly up to Booth,
embraced him, and expressed great Satisfaction
at finding him there; he then made
an Apology for not attending him in the
Morning, which he said had been impossible; 
and that he had with the utmost Difficulty
put off some Business of great Consequence,
in order to serve him this Afternoon; 
‘but I am glad on your Account,’ 
cried he to Booth, ‘that my Presence was
not necessary.’ 
Booth himself was extremely satisfied
with this Declaration, and failed not to return
him as many Thanks as he would
have deserved, had he performed his Promise; 
but the two Ladies were not quite
so well satisfied. As for the Serjeant, he
had slipt out of the Room when the Colonel
entered, not entirely out of that
Bashfulness which we have remarked him
to be tainted with; but, indeed, from
what had past in the Morning he hated
the Sight of the Colonel, as well on the
Account of his Wife as on that of his
Friend. 

The Doctor, on the contrary, on what
he had formerly heard from both Amelia
and her Husband of the Colonel's Generosity
and Friendship, had built so good an
Opinion of him, that he was very much
pleased with seeing him, and took the first
Opportunity of telling him so. ‘Colonel,’ 
said the Doctor, ‘I have not the Happiness
of being known to you; but I have
long been desirous of an Acquaintance
with a Gentleman, in whose Commendation
I have heard so much from
some present.’ The Colonel made a proper
Answer to this Compliment, and they
soon entered into a familiar Conversation
together: For the Doctor was not difficult
of Access; indeed, he held the strange
Reserve, which is usually practised in this
Nation between People who are in any
Degree Strangers to each other, to be very
unbecoming the Christian Character. 
The two Ladies soon left the Room; and
the Remainder of the Visit, which was not
very long, past in Discourse on various common
Subjects, not worth recording. In
the Conclusion, the Colonel invited Booth
and his Lady, and the Doctor, to dine
with him the next Day. 

To give Colonel James his due Commendation,
he had shewn a great Command
of himself, and great Presence of
Mind on this Occasion: For to speak the
plain Truth, the Visit was intended to
Amelia alone; nor did he expect, or, perhaps,
desire, any thing less than to find the
Captain at Home. The great Joy which
he suddenly conveyed into his Countenance
at the unexpected Sight of his Friend, is
to be attributed to that noble Art which is
taught in those excellent Schools called
the several Courts of Europe. By this
Men are enabled to dress out their Countenances
as much at their own Pleasure, as
they do their Bodies; and to put on
Friendship with as much Ease as they can
a laced Coat. 
When the Colonel and Doctor were
gone, Booth acquainted Amelia with the
Invitation he had received. She was so
struck with the News, and betrayed such
visible Marks of Confusion and Uneasiness,
that they could not have escaped Booth's
Observation, had Suspicion given him the
least Hint to remark: But this, indeed,
is the great Optic Glass helping us to discern
plainly almost all that passes in the 

Minds of others, without some Use of
which nothing is more purblind than human
Nature. 
Amelia having recovered from her first
Perturbation, answered, ‘My Dear, I will
dine with you wherever you please to lay
your Commands on me. ’ —‘I am obliged
to you, my dear Soul,’ cries Booth, ‘your
Obedience shall be very easy; for my
Command will be, that you shall always
follow your own Inclinations.’ ‘My Inclinations,’ 
answered she, ‘would, I am
afraid, be too unreasonable a Confinement
to you; for they would always lead
me to be with you and your Children,
with at most a single Friend or two, now
and then.’ ‘O my Dear,’ replied he,
‘large Companies give us a greater Relish
for our own Society when we return to it; 
and we shall be extremely merry, for Dr.
Harrison dines with us.’ ‘I hope you will,
my Dear,’ cries she; ‘but I own I should
have been better pleased to have enjoyed
a few Days with yourself and the Children,
with no other Person but Mrs. Atkinson,
for whom I have conceived a violent Affection,
and who would have given us
but little Interruption. However, if you 

have promised, I must undergo the Penance.’ 
‘Nay, Child,’ cry'd he, ‘I
am sure I would have refused, could I
have guessed it had been in the least disagreeable
to you; tho' I know your Objection’ 
—‘Objection!’ cries Amelia eagerly,
‘I have no Objection.’ ‘Nay, nay,’ 
said he, ‘come be honest, I know your
Objection, tho' you are unwilling to own
it.’ ‘Good Heavens!’ cry'd Amelia,
frighten'd, ‘what do you mean? what
Objection?’ ‘Why,’ answered he, ‘to
the Company of Mrs. James; and I must
confess she hath not behaved to you lately
as you might have expected; but you
ought to pass all that by for the Sake of
her Husband, to whom we have both so
many Obligations; who is the worthiest,
honestest, and most generous Fellow in
the Universe, and the best Friend to me
that ever Man had.’ 
Amelia, who had far other Suspicions,
and began to fear that her Husband had discovered
them, was highly pleased when she
saw him taking a wrong Scent. She gave,
therefore, a little into the Deceit, and acknowledged
the Truth of what he had
mentioned; but said, that the Pleasure she
should have in complying with his Desires, 

would highly recompense any Dissatisfaction,
which might arise on any other
Account; and shortly after ended the Conversation
on this Subject, with her chearfully
promising to fulfil his Promise. 
In reality, poor Amelia had now a most
unpleasant Task to undertake: For she
thought it absolutely necessary to conceal
from her Husband the Opinion she had
conceived of the Colonel; for as she knew
the Characters, as well of her Husband as
of his Friend, or rather Enemy, (both being
often synonymous in the Language of the
World) she had the utmost Reason to apprehend
something very fatal might attend her
Husband's entertaining the same Thought
of James, which filled and tormented her
own Breast. 
And as she knew that nothing but these
Thoughts could justify the least unkind,
or indeed, the least reserved Behaviour to
James; who had, in all Appearance, conferred
the greatest Obligations upon Booth
and herself, she was reduced to a Dilemma,
the most dreadful that can attend
a virtuous Woman, as it often gives the
highest Triumph, and sometimes no little 

Advantage to the Men of professed Gallantry. 
In short, to avoid giving any Umbrage
to her Husband, Amelia was forced to act in
a Manner, which she was conscious must
give Encouragement to the Colonel: A
Situation which, perhaps, requires as great
Prudence and Delicacy, as any in which
the Heroic Part of the female Character
can be exerted. 



A Conversation between Dr. Harrison and
others. 
The next Day, Booth and his Lady,
with the Doctor, met at Colonel
James's, where Colonel Bath likewise
made one of the Company. 
Nothing very remarkable past at Dinner,
or till the Ladies withdrew. During
this Time, however, the Behaviour of
Colonel James was such as gave some Uneasiness
to Amelia, who well understood
his Meaning, tho' the Particulars were
too refined and subtle to be observed by
any other present. 

When the Ladies were gone, which
was as soon as Amelia could prevail on
Mrs. James to depart, Colonel Bath, who
had been pretty brisk with Champagne at
Dinner, soon began to display his Magnanimity. 
‘My Brother tells me, young
Gentleman,’ said he to Booth, ‘that
you have been used very ill lately by
some Rascals; and I have no Doubt but
you will do yourself Justice.’ 
Booth answered, that he did not know
what he meant. ‘Since I must mention
it then,’ cries the Colonel, ‘I hear
you have been arrested; and I think
you know what Satisfaction is to be required
by a Man of Honour.’ 
‘I beg, Sir,’ says the Doctor, ‘no
more may be mentioned of that Matter. 
I am convinced, no Satisfaction will be
required of the Captain, till he is able
to give it.’ 
‘I do not understand what you mean
by able,’ cries the Colonel–––To which
the Doctor answered, that it was of too
tender a Nature to speak more of. 

‘Give me your Hand, Doctor,’ cries
the Colonel, ‘I see you are a Man of
Honour, tho' you wear a Gown. It is,
as you say, a Matter of a tender Nature. 
Nothing, indeed, is so tender as
a Man's Honour. Curse my Liver, if
any Man; I mean, that is, if any Gentleman,
was to arrest me–––I would as
surely cut his Throat as––– 
‘How, Sir!’ said the Doctor, ‘Would
you compensate one Breach of the Law
by a much greater, and pay your Debts
by committing Murder?’ 
‘Why do you mention Law between
Gentlemen?’ says the Colonel. ‘A Man
of Honour wears his Law by his Side. 
And can the Resentment of an Affront
make a Gentleman guilty of Murder?
and what greater Affront can one Man
cast upon another, than by arresting
him? I am convinced, that he who
would put up an Arrest, would put up
a Slap in the Face.’ 
Here the Colonel looked extremely
fierce, and the Divine stared with Astonishment
at this Doctrine; when Booth,
who well knew the Impossibility of opposing 

the Colonel's Humour with Success,
began to play with it; and having
first conveyed a private Wink to the
Doctor, he said, there might be Cases undoubtedly
where such an Affront ought to
be resented; but that there were others,
where any Resentment was impracticable: 
‘As for Instance,’ said he, ‘where the
Man is arrested by a Woman.’ 
‘I could not be supposed to mean that
Case,’ cries the Colonel, ‘and you are
convinced I did not mean it.’ 
‘To put an End to this Discourse at
once, Sir,’ said the Doctor, ‘I was the
Plaintiff, at whose Suit this Gentleman
was arrested.’ 
‘Was you so, Sir!’ cries the Colonel,
‘then I have no more to say. Women
and the Clergy are upon the same Footing. 
The long-robed Gentry are exempted
from the Laws of Honour.’ 
‘I do not thank you for that Exemption,
Sir,’ cries the Doctor; ‘and if
Honour and Fighting are, as they seem
to be, synonymous Words with you, I
believe there are some Clergymen, who, 

in Defence of their Religion, or their
Country, or their Friend, the only justifiable
Causes of fighting, except bare
Self-defence, would fight as bravely as
yourself, Colonel; and that without
being paid for it.’ 
‘Sir, you are privileged,’ says the Colonel
with great Dignity, ‘and you have
my Leave to say what you please. I respect
your Order, and you cannot offend
me.’ 
‘I will not offend you, Colonel,’ cries
the Doctor, ‘and our Order is very much
obliged to you; since you profess so
much Respect to us, and pay none to
our Master.’ 
‘What Master, Sir?’ said the Colonel. 
‘That Master,’ answered the Doctor,
who hath expressly forbidden all that
cutting of Throats, to which you discover
so much Inclination.’ 
‘O, your Servant, Sir,’ said the Colonel,
‘I see what you are driving at; 
but you shall not persuade me to think, 

that Religion forces me to be a Coward.’ 
‘I detest and despise the Name as much
as you can,’ cries the Doctor; ‘but
you have a wrong Idea of the Word,
Colonel. What were all the Greeks and
Romans? Were these Cowards; and
yet did you ever hear of this Butchery,
which we call Duelling, among
them?’ 
‘Yes, indeed, have I,’ cries the Colonel. 
‘What else is all Mr. Pope's Homer
full of, but Duels? Did not, what's
his Name, one of the Agamemnons fight
with that paultry Rascal Paris? and
Diomede with, what d'ye call him there; 
and Hector with, I forget his Name, he
that was Achilles's Bosom-friend; and
afterwards with Achilles himself? Nay,
and in Dryden's Virgil, is there any
Thing almost besides fighting?’ 
‘You are a Man of Learning, Colonel,’ 
cries the Doctor, ‘but—’ 
‘I thank you for that Compliment,’ 
said the Colonel–––‘No, Sir, I do not
pretend to Learning; but I have some 

little Reading, and I am not ashamed
to own it.’ 
‘But are you sure, Colonel,’ cries the
Doctor, ‘that you have not made a small
Mistake? For I am apt to believe, both
Mr. Pope and Mr. Dryden (tho' I cannot
say I ever read a Word of either of
them) speak of Wars between Nations,
and not of private Duels: For of the
latter, I do not remember one single
Instance in all the Greek or Roman Story. 
In short, it is a modern Custom, introduced
by barbarous Nations since the
Times of Christianity; tho' it is a direct
and audacious Defiance of the Christian
Law, and is consequently much more
sinful in us, than it would have been
in the Heathens.’ 
‘Drink about, Doctor,’ cries the Colonel,
‘and let us call a new Cause: For
I perceive we shall never agree on this. 
You are a Churchman, and I don't expect
you to speak your Mind.’ 
‘We are both of the same Church, I
hope,’ cries the Doctor. 

‘I am of the Church of England, Sir,’ 
answered the Colonel, ‘and will fight for
it to the last Drop of my Blood.’ 
‘It is very generous in you, Colonel,’ 
cries the Doctor, ‘to fight so zealously
for a Religion by which you are to be
damned.’ 
‘It is well for you, Doctor,’ cries the
Colonel, ‘that you wear a Gown: For
by all the Dignity of a Man, if any
other Person had said the Words you
have just uttered, I would have made
him eat them—Ay, d&wblank;n me, and
my Sword into the Bargain.’ 
Booth began to be apprehensive that
this Dispute might grow too warm; in
which Case he feared that the Colonel's
Honour, together with the Champagne,
might hurry him so far as to forget the
Respect due, and which he professed to
pay, to the sacerdotal Robe. Booth,
therefore, interposed between the Disputants,
and said, the Colonel had very
rightly proposed to call a new Subject: 
For that it was impossible to reconcile accepting
a Challenge with the Christian 

Religion, or refusing it with the modern
Notion of Honour. ‘And you must allow
it, Doctor,’ said he, ‘to be a very
hard Injunction for a Man to become
infamous; and more especially for a
Soldier, who is to lose his Bread into
the Bargain.’ 
‘Ay, Sir,’ says the Colonel with an
Air of Triumph, ‘What say you to
that?’ 
‘Why, I say,’ cries the Doctor, ‘that
it is much harder to be damned on the
other Side.’ 
‘That may be,’ said the Colonel, ‘but
damn me, if I would take an Affront
of any Man breathing for all that. 
And yet I believe myself to be as good
a Christian as wears a Head. My Maxim
is never to give an Affront, nor ever
to take one; and I say that is the
Maxim of a good Christian; and no
Man shall ever persuade me to the contrary.’ 
‘Well, Sir,’ said the Doctor, ‘since
that is your Resolution, I hope no Man
will ever give you an Affront.’ 

‘I am obliged to you for your Hope,
Doctor,’ cries the Colonel with a Sneer; 
‘and he that doth, will be obliged to you
for lending him your Gown: For by
the Dignity of a Man, nothing out of
Petticoats I believe dares affront me.’ 
Colonel James had not hitherto joined
in the Discourse. In Truth, his Thoughts
had been otherwise employed; nor is it
very difficult for the Reader to guess what
had been the Subject of them. Being
waked, however, from his Reverie, and
having heard the two or three last Speeches,
he turned to his Brother, and asked him,
why he would introduce such a Topic of
Conversation before a Gentleman of Dr.
Harrison's Character? 
‘Brother,’ cried Bath, ‘I own it was
wrong, and I ask the Doctor's Pardon; 
I know not how it happened to arise: 
For you know, Brother, I am not used
to talk of these Matters. They are generally
Poltroons that do. I think I
need not be beholden to my Tongue to
declare I am none. I have shewn myself
in a Line of Battle. I believe
there is no Man will deny that; I believe 

may say, no Man dares deny, that I have
done my Duty’— 
The Colonel was thus proceeding to
prove that his Prowess was neither the
Subject of his Discourse, nor the Object
of his Vanity, when a Servant entered,
and summoned the Company to Tea with
the Ladies; a Summons which Colonel
James instantly obeyed, and was followed
by all the rest. 
But as the Tea-table Conversation, tho'
extremely delightful to those who are engaged
in it, may probably appear somewhat
dull to the Reader, we will here put
an End to the Chapter. 



A Dialogue between Booth and Amelia. 
The next Morning early, Booth
went by Appointment and waited
on Colonel James; whence he returned
to Amelia, in that Kind of Disposition
which the great Master of human Passions
would describe in Andromache, when he
tells us she cried and smiled at the same
Instant. 

Amelia plainly perceived the Discomposure
of his Mind, in which the opposite
Affections of Joy and Grief were struggling
for the Superiority, and begged to
know the Occasion; upon which Booth
spoke as follows. 
‘My Dear,’ said he, ‘I had no Intention
to conceal from you what hath
past this Morning between me and the
Colonel, who hath oppressed me, if I
may use that Expression, with Obligations. 
Sure never Man had such a
Friend; for never was there so noble,
so generous a Heart–––I cannot help this
Ebullition of Gratitude, I really can
not.’ –––Here he paused a Moment and
wiped his Eyes, and then proceeded; 
‘You know, my Dear, how gloomy the
Prospect was Yesterday before our Eyes,
how inevitable Ruin stared me in the Face; 
and the dreadful Idea of having entailed
Beggary on my Amelia and her Posterity
racked my Mind: For, tho' by the
Goodness of the Doctor I had regained
my Liberty, the Debt yet remained; 
and if that worthy Man had a Design of
forgiving me his Share, this must have
been my utmost Hope; and the Condition 

in which I must still have found
myself need not to be expatiated on. 
In what Light then shall I see, in what
Words shall I relate the Colonel's Kindness! 
O, my dear Amelia, he hath removed
the whole Gloom at once, hath
driven all Despair out of my Mind,
and hath filled it with the most sanguine,
and at the same Time, the most reasonable
Hopes of making a comfortable
Provision for yourself and my dear
Children. In the first Place then, he
will advance me a Sum of Money to
pay off all my Debts; and this on a
Bond to be repaid only when I shall become
Colonel of a Regiment, and not
before. In the next Place, he is gone
this very Morning to ask a Company
for me, which is now vacant in the
West-Indies; and as he intends to push
this with all his Interest, neither he nor
I have any Doubt of his Success. Now,
my Dear, comes the third, which, tho'
perhaps it ought to give me the greatest
Joy, such is, I own, the Weakness of
my Nature, it rends my very Heart-strings
asunder. –––I cannot mention it: 
For I know it will give you equal Pain
–––tho' I know on all proper Occasions
you can exert a manly Resolution. ––– 

You will not, I am convinced, oppose
it, whatever you must suffer in complying
–––O, my dear Amelia, I must suffer
likewise; yet I have resolved to bear it
–––You know not what my poor Heart
hath suffered since he made the Proposal
–––It is Love for you alone which could
persuade me to submit to it–––Consider
our Situation, consider that of our Children; 
reflect but on those poor Babes,
whose future Happiness is at Stake, and
it must arm your Resolution. It is your
Interest and theirs that reconciled me to
a Proposal, which, when the Colonel
first made it, struck me with the utmost
Horror: He hath, indeed, from these
Motives persuaded me into a Resolution,
which I thought impossible for any one
to have persuaded me into–––O, my dear
Amelia, let me intreat you to give me
up to the Good of your Children; as I
have promised the Colonel to give you
up to their Interest and your own. If
you refuse these Terms, we are still undone; 
for he insists absolutely upon them
–––Think then, my Love, however
hard they may be, Necessity compels
us to submit to them. I know in what
Light a Woman who loves like you,
must consider such a Proposal; and yet 

how many Instances have you of Women,
who, from the same Motives, have
submitted to the same!’ 
‘What can you mean, Mr. Booth?’ 
cries Amelia trembling. 
‘Need I explain my Meaning to you
more?’ answered Booth. –––‘Did I not
say, I must give up my Amelia?’ 
‘Give me up!’ said she. 
‘For a Time only, I mean,’ answered
he; ‘for a short time perhaps. The Colonel
himself will take Care it shall not
be long–––for I know his Heart; I shall
scarce have more Joy in receiving you
back, than he will have in restoring you
to my Arms. In the mean Time, he
will not only be a Father to my Children,
but a Husband to you.’ 
‘A Husband to me!’ said Amelia. 
Yes, my Dear; a kind, a fond, a
tender, an affectionate Husband. If I
had not the most certain Assurances of
this, doth my Amelia think I could be
prevailed on to leave her? –––No, my 

Amelia, he is the only Man on Earth,
who could have prevailed on me–––; but
I know his House, his Purse, his Protection
will be all at your Command––– 
And as for any Dislike you have conceived
to his Wife, let not that be any
Objection: For I am convinced he will
not suffer her to insult you; besides she
is extremely well-bred, and how much
soever she may hate you in her Heart,
she will at least treat you with Civility.’ 
‘Nay, the Invitation is not his but
hers; and I am convinced they will
both behave to you with the greatest
Friendship; his I am sure will be sincere,
as to the Wife of a Friend entrusted to
his Care; and hers will, from good
Breeding, have not only the Appearances,
but the Effects of the truest
Friendship.’ 
‘I understand you, my Dear, at last,’ 
said she, (indeed she had rambled into
very strange Conceits from some Parts of
his Discourse) ‘and I will give you my
Resolution in a Word–––I will do the
Duty of a Wife; and that is, to attend
her Husband wherever he goes. 

Booth attempted to reason with her, but
all to no Purpose. She gave, indeed,
a quiet Hearing to all he said, and even
to those Parts which most displeased
her Ears; I mean those in which he exaggerated
the great Goodness and disinterested
Generosity of his Friend; but her
Resolution remained inflexible, and resisted
the Force of all his Arguments with a
Steadiness of Opposition, which it would
have been almost excusable in him to have
construed into Stubbornness. 
The Doctor arrived in the midst of the
Dispute, and having heard the Merits of
the Cause on both Sides, delivered his
Opinion in the following Words. 
‘I have always thought it, my dear
Children, a Matter of the utmost Nicety,
to interfere in any Differences between
Husband and Wife; but since you both
desire me with such Earnestness, to give
you my Sentiments on the present Contest
between you, I will give you my
Thoughts as well as I am able. In
the first Place then, can any thing be
more reasonable than for a Wife to desire
to attend her Husband? It is, as 

my favourite Child observes, no more
than a Desire to do her Duty; and I
make no Doubt but that is one great
Reason of her insisting on it. And how
can you yourself oppose it? Can Love
be it's own Enemy; or can a Husband
who is fond of his Wife, content himself
almost on any Account with a long
Absence from her?’ 
‘You speak like an Angel, my dear
Doctor Harrison,’ answered Amelia; ‘I
am sure if he loved as tenderly as I do,
he could on no Account submit to it.’ 
‘Pardon me, Child,’ cries the Doctor,
‘there are some Reasons which would not
only justify his leaving you, but which
must force him, if he hath any real
Love for you, joined with Common
Sense, to make that Election. If it
was necessary, for Instance, either to
your Good, or to the Good of your
Children, he would not deserve the
Name of a Man, I am sure not that of
a Husband, if he hesitated a Moment. 
Nay, in that Case I am convinced, you
yourself would be an Advocate for what
you now oppose. I fancy therefore I
mistook him, when I apprehended he 

said that the Colonel made his leaving
you behind as the Condition of getting
him the Commission: For I know my
dear Child hath too much Goodness, and
too much Sense, and too much Resolution
to prefer any temporary Indulgence
of her own Passions to the solid Advantages
of her whole Family.’ 
‘There, my Dear,’ cries Booth, ‘I
knew what Opinion the Doctor would
be of. Nay I am certain, there is not
a wise Man in the Kingdom who would
say otherwise.’ 
‘Don't abuse me, young Gentleman,’ 
said the Doctor, ‘with Appellations I
don't deserve.’ 
‘I abuse you, my dear Doctor!’ cries
Booth. 
‘Yes, my dear Sir,’ answered the
Doctor; ‘you insinuated slily that I was
wise, which, as the World understand
the Phrase, I should be ashamed of; 
and my Comfort is, that no one can
accuse me justly of it; I have just
given an Instance of the contrary, by
throwing away my Advice.’ 

‘I hope, Sir,’ cries Booth, ‘that will
not be the Case.’ 
‘Yes, Sir,’ answered the Doctor. ‘I
know it will be the Case in the present
Instance; for either you will not go at
all, or my little Turtle here will go
with you.’ 
‘You are in the Right, Doctor,’ cries
Amelia. 
‘I am sorry for it,’ said the Doctor; 
‘for then I assure you, you are in the
wrong.’ 
‘Indeed,’ cries Amelia, ‘if you knew
all my Reasons, you would say they
were very strong ones.’ 
‘Very probably,’ cries the Doctor––– 
‘The Knowledge that they are in the
Wrong, is a very strong Reason to some
Women to continue so.’ 
‘Nay, Doctor,’ cries Amelia, ‘you
shall never persuade me of that. I will
not believe that any human Being ever did 

an Action merely because they knew it
to be wrong.’ 
‘I am obliged to you, my dear Child,’ 
said the Doctor, ‘for declaring your Resolution
of not being persuaded. Your
Husband would never call me a wise
Man again, if after that Declaration I
should attempt to persuade you.’ 
‘Well, I must be content,’ cries Amelia,
‘to let you think as you please.’ 
‘That is very gracious, indeed,’ said
the Doctor. ‘Surely in a Country where
the Church suffers others to think as
they please, it would be very hard if
they had not themselves the same Liberty. 
And yet, as unreasonable as the
Power of controuling Men's Thoughts
is represented, I will shew you how you
shall controul mine whenever you desire
it.’ 
‘How, pray!’ cries Amelia. ‘I should
greatly esteem that Power.’ 
‘Why whenever you act like a wise
Woman,’ cries the Doctor, ‘you will
force me to think you so; and whenever 

you are pleased to act as you do now,
I shall be obliged, whether I will or no,
to think as I do now.’ 
‘Nay, dear Doctor,’ cries Booth, ‘I
am convinced my Amelia will never do
any thing to forfeit your good Opinion. 
Consider but the cruel Hardship of
what she is to undergo; and you will
make Allowances for the Difficulty she
makes in complying. To say the Truth,
when I examine my own Heart, I have
more Obligations to her than appear at
first Sight: For by obliging me to find
Arguments to persuade her, she hath
assisted me in conquering myself. Indeed,
if she had shewn more Resolution,
I should have shewn less.’ 
‘So you think it necessary then,’ said the
Doctor, ‘that there should be one Fool at
least in every married Couple. A mighty
Resolution truly, and well worth your valuing
yourself upon, to part with your
Wife for a few Months in order to make
the Fortune of her and your Children. 
When you are to leave her too in the
Care and Protection of a Friend that
gives Credit to the old Stories of
Friendship, and doth an Honour to 

Human Nature. What in the Name
of Goodness, do either of you think
that you have made a Union to endure
for ever? How will either of you bear
that Separation which must some time
or other, and perhaps very soon, be the
Lot of one of you? Have you forgot
that you are both mortal? –––As for
Christianity, I see you have resigned all
Pretensions to it: For I make no
Doubt, but that you have so set your
Hearts on the Happiness you enjoy
here together, that neither of you ever
think a Word of Hereafter.’ 
Amelia now burst into Tears, upon
which Booth begged the Doctor to proceed
no further. Indeed, he would not
have wanted the Caution: For, however
blunt he appeared in his Discourse, he
had a Tenderness of Heart which is rarely
found among Men; for which I know no
other Reason, than that true Goodness is
rarely found among them: For I am
firmly persuaded that the latter never possessed
any Human Mind in any Degree,
without being attended by as large a
Portion of the former. 

Thus then ended the Conversation on
this Subject; what followed is not worth
relating till the Doctor carried off Booth
with him to take a Walk in the Park. 



A Conversation between Amelia and Doctor
Harrison, with the Result. 
Amelia being left alone, began to
consider seriously of her Condition; 
she saw it would be very difficult to resist
the Importunities of her Husband, backed
by the Authority of the Doctor; especially
as she well knew how unreasonable
her Declarations must appear to every
one who was ignorant of her real Motives
to persevere in it. On the other Hand,
she was fully determined, whatever might
be the Consequence, to adhere firmly to
her Resolution of not accepting the Colonel's
Invitation. 
When she had turned the Matter every
Way in her Mind, and vexed and tormented
herself with much uneasy Reflexion
upon it, a Thought at last occurred
to her, which immediately brought 

her some Comfort. This was, to make a
Confident of the Doctor, and to impart
to him the whole Truth. This Method,
indeed, appeared to her now to be so adviseable,
that she wondered she had not
hit upon it sooner; but it is the Nature
of Despair to blind us to all the Means of
Safety, however easy and apparent they
may be. 
Having fixed her Purpose in her Mind,
she wrote a short Note to the Doctor, in
which she acquainted him that she had
something of great Moment to impart to
him, which must be an entire secret from
her Husband, and begged that she might
have an Opportunity of communicating
it as soon as possible. 
Doctor Harrison received the Letter
that Afternoon, and immediately complied
with Amelia's Request in visiting
her. He found her drinking Tea with
her Husband and Mrs. Atkinson, and sat
down and joined the Company. 
Soon after the Removal of the Tea-table,
Mrs. Atkinson left the Room. The
Doctor then turning to Booth; said, ‘I
hope, Captain, you have a true Sense 

of the Obedience due to the Church,
tho' our Clergy do not often exact it. 
However, it is proper to exercise our
Power sometimes in order to remind
the Laity of their Duty. I must tell
you therefore, that I have some private
Business with your Wife; and I expect
your immediate Absence.’ 
‘Upon my Word, Doctor,’ answered
Booth, ‘no Popish Confessor, I firmly
believe, ever pronounced his Will and
Pleasure with more Gravity and Dignity; 
none therefore was ever more immediately
obeyed then you shall be.’ Booth
then quitted the Room, and desired the
Doctor to recall him when his Business
with the Lady was over. 
Doctor Harrison promised he would,
and then turning to Amelia, he said, ‘Thus
far, Madam, I have obeyed your Commands,
and am now ready to receive
the important Secret which you mention
in your Note.’ 
Amelia now informed her Friend of
all she knew, all she had seen and heard,
and all that she suspected of the Colonel. 
The good Man seemed greatly shocked 

at the Relation, and remained in a silent
Astonishment. —Upon which, Amelia
said. ‘Is Villany so rare a Thing, Sir,
that it should so much surprize you?’ 
‘No, Child,’ cries he; ‘but I am shocked
at seeing it so artfully disguised under
the Appearance of so much Virtue. 
And to confess the Truth, I believe my
own Vanity is a little hurt in having
been so grossly imposed upon. Indeed,
I had a very high Regard for this Man; 
for, besides the great Character given of
him by your Husband, and the many
Facts I have heard so much redounding
to his Honour, he hath the fairest and
most promising Appearance I have ever
yet beheld–––A good Face they say, is a
Letter of Recommendation. O Nature,
Nature, why art thou so dishonest, as
ever to send Men with these false Recommendations
into the World!’ 
‘Indeed, my dear Sir, I begin to grow
entirely sick of it,’ cries Amelia: ‘For
sure all Mankind almost are Villains
in their Hearts.’ 
‘Fie, Child,’ cries the Doctor. ‘Do
not make a Conclusion so much to the
Dishonour of the great Creator. The 

Nature of Man is far from being in itself
Evil: It abounds with Benevolence,
Charity and Pity, coveting Praise and
Honour, and shunning Shame and Disgrace. 
Bad Education, bad Habits,
and bad Customs, debauch our Nature,
and drive it Headlong as it were into
Vice. The Governors of the World,
and I am afraid the Priesthood, are answerable
for the Badness of it. Instead
of discouraging Wickedness to the utmost
of their Power, both are too apt
to connive at it. In the great Sin of
Adultery for Instance; hath the Government
provided any Law to punish
it; or doth the Priest take any Care to
correct it? On the contrary, is the
most notorious Practice of it any Detriment
to a Man's Fortune or to his Reputation
in the World? Doth it exclude
him from any Preferment in the State,
I had almost said in the Church? Is it
any Blot in his Escutcheon? Any Bar to
his Honour? Is he not to be found every
Day in the Assemblies of Women of
the highest Quality? In the Closets of
the greatest Men, and even at the Tables
of Bishops? What Wonder then, if
the Community in general treat this monstrous
Crime as Matter of Jest, and that 

Men give way to the Temptations of a
violent Appetite, when the Indulgence
of it is protected by Law and countenanced
by Custom. I am convinced
there are good Stamina in the Nature
of this very Man: For he hath done
Acts of Friendship and Generosity to
your Husband, before he could have
any evil Design on your Chastity; and
in a Christian Society, which I no more
esteem this Nation to be, than I do any
Part of Turky, I doubt not but this
very Colonel would have made a worthy
and valuable Member.’ 
‘Indeed, my dear Sir,’ cries Amelia,
you are the wisest as well as best Man
in the World—’ 
‘Not a Word of my Wisdom,’ cries
the Doctor. ‘I have not a Grain–––I am
not the least versed in the Chrematistic* 
Art, as an old Friend of mine calls it. 
I know not how to get a single Shilling,
nor how to keep it in my Pocket
when I have it.’ 
‘But you understand Human Nature
to the Bottom,’ answered Amelia; ‘and 

your Mind is a Treasury of all ancient
and modern Learning.’ 
‘You are a little Flatterer,’ cries the
Doctor; ‘but I dislike you not for it. 
And to shew you I don't, I will return
your Flattery; and tell you, you have
acted with great Prudence in concealing
this Affair from your Husband; but
you have drawn me into a Scrape: For
I have promised to dine with this Fellow
again To-morrow; and you have
made it impossible for me to keep my
Word.’ 
‘Nay but, dear Sir,’ cries Amelia, ‘for
Heaven's Sake take Care. If you shew
any kind of Disrespect to the Colonel,
my Husband may be led into some
Suspicion—Especially after our Conference.’ 
‘Fear nothing, Child. I will give
him no Hint; and that I may be certain
of not doing it, I will stay away. 
You do not think, I hope, that I will
join in a chearful Conversation with
such a Man; that I will so far betray
my Character as to give any Countenance
to such flagitious Proceedings. 

Besides, my Promise was only conditional; 
and I do not know whether I could
otherwise have kept it: For I expect
an old Friend every Day, who comes
to Town twenty Miles on Foot to see
me; whom I shall not part with on
any Account: For as he is very poor,
he may imagine I treat him with Disrespect.’ 
‘Well, Sir,’ cries Amelia, ‘I must
admire you, and love you for your
Goodness.’ 
‘Must you love me?’ cries the Doctor. 
‘I could cure you now in a Minute if I
pleased.’ 
‘Indeed, I defy you, Sir,’ said Amelia. 
‘If I could but persuade you,’ answered
he, ‘that I thought you not
handsome, away would vanish all Ideas
of Goodness in an Instant. Confess
honestly, would they not?’ 
‘Perhaps I might blame the Goodness
of your Eyes,’ replied Amelia; ‘and
that is perhaps an honester Confession
than you expected. But do, pray, Sir, 

be serious; and give me your Advice
what to do. Consider the difficult Game
I have to play: For I am sure, after
what I have told you, you would not
even suffer me to remain under the
Roof of this Colonel.’ 
‘No, indeed, would I not,’ said the
Doctor, ‘whilst I have a House of my
own to entertain you.’ 
‘But how to dissuade my Husband,’ 
continued she, ‘without giving him any
Suspicion of the real Cause, the Consequences
of his guessing at which, I
tremble to think upon.’ 
‘I will consult my Pillow upon it,’ 
said the Doctor, ‘and in the Morning
you shall see me again. In the mean
time be comforted, and compose the
Perturbations of your Mind.’ 
‘Well, Sir,’ said she, ‘I put my
whole Trust in you.’ 
‘I am sorry to hear it,’ cries the Doctor. 
‘Your Innocence may give you a very
confident Trust in a much more powerful
Assistance. However, I will do all 

I can to serve you; and now if you
please we will call back your Husband: 
For upon my Word he hath shewn a
good Catholic Patience. And where is
the honest Serjeant and his Wife? I am
pleased with the Behaviour of you both
to that worthy Fellow, in Opposition
to the Custom of the World; which
instead of being formed on the Precepts
of our Religion to consider each other
as Brethren, teaches us to regard those
who are a Degree below us, either in
Rank or Fortune, as a Species of Beings
of an inferior Order in the Creation.’ 
The Captain now returned into the
Room, as did the Serjeant and Mrs. Atkinson; 
and the two Couple, with the
Doctor, spent the Evening together in
great Mirth and Festivity; for the Doctor
was one of the best Companions in the
World; and a Vein of Cheerfulness, Good-Humour
and Pleasantry, ran through his
Conversation, with which it was impossible
to resist being pleased. 




Containing as surprizing an Accident as is
perhaps recorded in History. 
Booth had acquainted the Serjeant
with the great Goodness of Colonel
James, and with the cheerful Prospects
which he entertained from it. This Atkinson
behind the Curtain communicated
to his Wife. The Conclusions which she
drew from it, need scarce be hinted to the
Reader. She made, indeed, no Scruple
of plainly and bluntly telling her Husband
that the Colonel had a most manifest Intention
to attack the Chastity of Amelia. 
This Thought gave the poor Serjeant
great Uneasiness, and after having kept
him long awake, tormented him in his
Sleep with a most horrid Dream, in which
he imagined that he saw the Colonel
standing by the Bed-side of Amelia, with
a naked Sword in his Hand, and threatening
to stab her instantly, unless she complied
with his Desires. Upon this, the
Serjeant started up in his Bed, and catching
his Wife by the Throat, cried out,
‘D&wblank;n you, put up your Sword this 

Instant, and leave the Room, or by
Heaven I'll drive mine to your Heart's
Blood.’ 
This rough Treatment immediately
roused Mrs. Atkinson from her Sleep, who
no sooner perceived the Position of her
Husband, and felt his Hand grasping her
Throat, than she gave a violent Shriek,
and presently fell into a Fit. 
Atkinson now waked likewise, and soon
became sensible of the violent Agitations
of his Wife. He immediately leapt out
of Bed, and running for a Bottle of Water
began to sprinkle her very plentifully; 
but all to no Purpose, she neither spoke
nor gave any Symptoms of Recovery. 
Atkinson then began to roar aloud; upon
which Booth, who lay under him, jumpt
from his Bed, and ran up with the lighted
Candle in his Hand. The Serjeant had
no sooner taken the Candle, than he ran
with it to the Bed-side. Here he beheld
a Sight which almost deprived him of
his Senses. The Bed appeared to be all
over Blood, and his Wife weltring in the
midst of it. Upon this, the Serjeant almost
in a Frenzy, cried out, O Heavens! 
‘I have killed my Wife. I have stabbed 

her. I have stabbed her. —“What
can be the Meaning of all this?” said
Booth. —‘O Sir,’ cries the Serjeant, ‘I
dreamt I was rescuing your Lady from
the Hands of Colonel James, and I have
killed my poor Wife.’ —Here he threw
himself upon the Bed by her, caught her
in his Arms, and behaved like one frantic
with Despair. 
By this Time, Amelia had thrown on a
wrapping Gown, and was come up into
the Room, where the Serjeant and his Wife
were lying on the Bed, and Booth standing
like a motionless Statue by the Bed-side. 
Amelia had some Difficulty to conquer the
Effects of her own Surprize on this Occasion; 
for a more ghastly and horrible Sight
than the Bed presented, could not be conceived. 
Amelia sent Booth to call up the Maid
of the House, in order to lend her Assistance; 
but before his Return, Mrs. Atkinson
began to come to herself; and soon
after, to the inexpressible Joy of the Serjeant,
it was discovered she had no Wound. 
Indeed, the delicate Nose of Amelia soon
made that Discovery, which the grosser
Smell of the Serjeant, and perhaps his 

Fright had prevented him from making: 
For now it appeared that the red Liquor
with which the Bed was stained, tho' it
may perhaps sometimes run through the
Veins of a fine Lady, was not what is properly
called Blood; but was, indeed, no
other than Cherry Brandy, a Bottle of
which Mrs. Atkinson always kept in her
Room to be ready for immediate Use; and
to which she used to apply for Comfort in all
her Afflictions. This the poor Serjeant, in
his extreme Hurry, had mistaken for a Bottle
of Water. Matters were now soon accommodated,
and no other Mischief appeared to
be done, unless to the Bed-Cloaths. Amelia
and Booth returned back to their Room; and
Mrs. Atkinson rose from her Bed, in order
to equip it with a Pair of clean Sheets. 
If she afterwards read a short Curtain
Lecture to the Serjeant, he found Means
at length to appease and satisfy her. 
And thus this Adventure would have
ended without producing any Kind of
Consequence, had not the Words which
the Serjeant uttered in his Frenzy, made
some slight Impression on Booth: So much,
at least, as to awaken his Curiosity; so that
in the Morning when he arose, he sent for
the Serjeant, and desired to hear the Particulars 

of this Dream, since Amelia was
concerned in it. 
The Serjeant, at first, seem'd unwilling
to comply, and endeavoured to make Excuses. 
This, perhaps, encreased Booth's
Curiosity, and he said, ‘Nay I am resolved
to hear it. Why, you Simpleton,
do you imagine me weak enough to be
affected by a Dream, however terrible it
may be?’ 
‘Nay, Sir,’ cries the Serjeant, ‘as for
that Matter Dreams have sometimes fallen
out to be true. —One of my own,
I know, did so, concerning your Honour: 
For when you courted my young
Lady, I dreamt you was married to her; 
and yet it was at a Time when neither
I myself, nor any of the Country, thought
you would ever obtain her. But Heaven
forbid this Dream should ever come to
pass.’ 
‘Why, what was this Dream?’ cries
Booth. ‘I insist on knowing.’ 
To be sure, Sir,’ cries the Serjeant,
‘I must not refuse you; but, I hope, you 

will never think any more of it. Why
then, Sir, I dreamt that your Honour
was gone to the West-Indies, and had left
my Lady in the Care of Colonel James; 
and last Night, I dreamt, the Colonel
came to my Lady's Bed-side, offering to
ravish her; and with a drawn Sword in
his Hand threaten'd to stab her that
Moment, unless she would comply with
his Desires. How I came to be by, I
know not; but, I dreamt, I rushed upon
him, caught him by the Throat, and
swore I would put him to Death, unless
he instantly left the Room. —Here I
waked, and this was my Dream. I never
paid any Regard to a Dream in my
Life—but, indeed, I never dreamt any
thing so very plain as this. It appeared
downright Reality. I am sure I have
left the Marks of my Fingers in my
Wife's Throat. I would not have
taken a hundred Pound to have used her
so.’ 
‘Faith,’ cries Booth, ‘it was an odd
Dream—and not so easily to be accounted
for, as that you had formerly of my
Marriage; for as Shakespear says, Dreams
denote a foregone Conclusion. Now it is 

impossible you should ever have thought
of any such Matter as this.’ 
‘However, Sir,’ cries the Serjeant, ‘it is
in your Honour's Power to prevent any
Possibility of this Dream's coming to
pass, by not leaving my Lady to the Care
of the Colonel: If you must go from
her, certainly there are other Places where
she may be with great Safety; and since
my Wife tells me that my Lady is so
very unwilling, whatever Reasons she
may have, I hope your Honour will
oblige her.’ 
‘Now I recollect it,’ cries Booth, ‘Mrs.
Atkinson hath once or twice dropt some
disrespectful Words of the Colonel. 
He hath done something to disoblige
her.’ 
‘He hath, indeed, Sir,’ replied the
Serjeant: ‘He hath said that of her which
she doth not deserve, and for which, if
he had not been my superior Officer, I
would have cut both his Ears off. —Nay,
for that Matter, he can speak ill of other
People besides her.’ 

‘Do you know, Atkinson,’ cries Booth,
very gravely, ‘that you are talking of the
dearest Friend I have?’ 
‘To be honest then,’ answered the Serjeant,
‘I do not think so. If I did, I
should love him much better than I do.’ 
‘I must and will have this explained,’ 
cries Booth. ‘I have too good an Opinion
of you, Atkinson, to think you would drop
such Things as you have, without some
Reason—and I will know it.’ 
‘I am sorry I have dropt a Word,’ 
cries Atkinson. ‘I am sure I did not intend
it; and your Honour hath drawn it
from me unawares.’ 
‘Indeed, Atkinson,’ cries Booth, ‘you
have made me very uneasy, and I must
be satisfied.’ 
‘Then, Sir,’ said the Serjeant, ‘you
shall give me your Word of Honour; 
or I will be cut into Ten thousand Pieces
before I will mention another Syllable.’ 

‘What shall I promise?’ said Booth. 
‘That you will not resent any thing I
shall lay to the Colonel,’ answered Atkinson. 
‘Resent!—Well, I give you my Honour,’ 
said Booth. 
The Serjeant made him bind himself
over and over again; and then related to
him the Scene which formerly past between
the Colonel and himself, as far as concerned
Booth himself; but concealed all that
more immediately related to Amelia. 
‘Atkinson,’ cries Booth, ‘I cannot be
angry with you; for I know you love
me, and I have many Obligations to
you; but you have done wrong in censuring
the Colonel for what he said of
me. I deserve all that he said; and his
Censures proceeded from his Friendship.’ 
‘But it was not so kind, Sir,’ said Atkinson,
‘to say such Things to me who am
but a Serjeant, and at such a Time too.’ 

‘I will hear no more,’ cries Booth. ‘Be
assured you are the only Man I would
forgive on this Occasion; and I forgive
you only on Condition you never speak
a Word more of this Nature. —This
silly Dream hath intoxicated you.’ 
‘I have done, Sir,’ cries the Serjeant. 
‘I know my Distance, and whom I am to
obey; but I have one Favour to beg of your
Honour, never to mention a Word of
what I have said to my Lady; for I
know she never would forgive me; I
know she never would, by what my Wife
hath told me. Besides, you need not
mention it, Sir, to my Lady; for she
knows it all already, and a great deal
more.’ 
Booth presently parted from the Serjeant,
having desired him to close his Lips on
this Occasion, and repaired to his Wife, to
whom he related the Serjeant's Dream. 
Amelia turned as white as Snow, and
fell into so violent a trembling, that Booth
plainly perceived her Emotion, and immediately
partook of it himself. —‘Sure,
my Dear,’ said he, staring wildly, ‘there 

is more in this than I know. A silly
Dream could not so discompose you. I
beg you, I intreat you to tell me—hath
ever Colonel James’— 
At the very Mention of the Colonel's
Name, Amelia fell on her Knees, and
begged her Husband not to frighten
her. 
‘What do I say, my dear Love,’ cried
Booth, ‘that can frighten you?’ 
‘Nothing, my Dear,’ said she. —‘But
my Spirits are so discomposed with the
dreadful Scene I saw last Night, that a
Dream, which, at another Time, I should
have laughed at, hath shocked me. Do
but promise me that you will not leave
me behind you, and I am easy.’ 
‘You may be so,’ cries Booth; ‘for I
will never deny you any Thing. —But
make me easy too. I must know, if
you have seen any thing in Colonel James
to displease you.’ 
‘Why should you suspect it?’ cries Amelia. 

‘You torment me to Death,’ cries Booth. 
‘By Heavens! I will know the Truth. 
Hath he ever said or done any thing
which you dislike?’ 
‘How, my Dear,’ said Amelia, ‘can
you imagine I should dislike a Man, who
is so much your Friend? Think of all
the Obligations you have to him, and
then you may easily resolve yourself. 
Do you think, because I refuse to stay
behind you in his House, that I have
any Objection to him? —No, my Dear,
had he done a thousand Times more
than he hath, was he an Angel instead
of a Man, I would not quit my Billy. — 
There's the Sore, my Dear; there's the
Misery to be left by you.’ 
Booth embraced her with the most passionate
Raptures, and looking on her with
inexpressible Tenderness, cry'd—‘Upon
my Soul, I am not worthy of you. —I
am a Fool, and yet you cannot blame
me. —If the stupid Miser hoards, with
such Care, his worthless Treasure; if he
watches it with such Anxiety; if every
Apprehension of another's sharing the
least Part, fills his Soul with such 

Agonies; O Amelia! what must be my
Condition, what Terrors must I feel
while I am watching over a Jewel of
such real, such inestimable Worth?’ 
‘I can, with great Truth, return the
Compliment,’ cries Amelia. ‘I have my
Treasure too; and am so much a Miser,
that no Force shall ever tear me from
it.’ 
‘I am ashamed of my Folly,’ cries
Booth; ‘and yet it is all from extreme
Tenderness. Nay, you yourself are the
Occasion. —Why will you ever attempt
to keep a Secret from me? Do you
think I should have resented to my Friend
his just Censure of my Conduct?’— 
‘What Censure, my dear Love?’ cries
Amelia. 
‘Nay, the Serjeant hath told me all,’ 
cries Booth—Nay, and that he hath told
it to you—Poor Soul! thou couldst not
endure to hear me accused, tho' never
so justly, and by so good a Friend. Indeed,
my Dear, I have discovered the
Cause of that Resentment to the Colonel,
which you could not hide from 

me—I love you, I adore you for it. Indeed
I could not forgive a slighting
Word on you. —But why do I compare
Things so unlike? What the Colonel
said of me was just and true; every Reflexion
on my Amelia must be false and
villanous.’ 
The Discernment of Amelia was extremely
quick; and she now perceived what had
happened, and how much her Husband
knew of the Truth. She resolved therefore
to humour him, and fell severely on
Colonel James for what he had said to
the Serjeant, which Booth endeavoured all
he could to soften; and thus ended this
Affair, which had brought Booth to the
very Brink of a Discovery, which must
have given him the highest Torment,
if it had not produced any of those
tragical Effects which Amelia apprehended. 




In which the Author appears to be Master of
that profound Learning called The Knowledge
of the Town. 
Mrs. James now came to pay a
Morning's Visit to Amelia. She
entered the Room with her usual Gaiety,
and after a slight Preface, addressing herself
to Booth, said, she had been quarrelling
with her Husband on his Account. 
‘I know not,’ said she, ‘what he means
by thinking of sending you the Lord
knows whither. I have insisted on his
asking something for you nearer home. 
And it would be the hardest Thing in
the World, if he should not obtain it. 
Are we resolved never to encourage
Merit; but to throw away all our Preferments
on those who do not deserve
them? What a Set of contemptible
Wretches do we see strutting about the
Town in Scarlet!’ 
Booth made a very low Bow, and modestly
spoke in Disparagement of himself. 
To which she answered, ‘Indeed, Mr.
Booth, you have Merit. I have heard 

it from my Brother, who is a Judge
of those Matters; and I am sure cannot
be suspected of Flattery. He is your
Friend as well as myself; and we will
never let Mr. James rest till he hath got
you a Commission in England.’ 
Booth bowed again, and was offering to
speak, but she interrupted him, saying,
‘I will have no Thanks, nor no fine
Speeches. If I can do you any Service,
I shall think I am only paying the Debt
of Friendship to my dear Mrs. Booth.’ 
Amelia, who had long since forgot the Dislike
she had taken to Mrs. James at her first
seeing her in Town, had attributed it to
the right Cause, and had begun to resume
her former Friendship for her, expressed
very warm Sentiments of Gratitude on
this Occasion. She told Mrs. James, she
should be eternally obliged to her if she
could succeed in her kind Endeavours; 
for that the Thoughts of parting again
with her Husband had given her the utmost
Concern. ‘Indeed,’ added she,
‘I cannot help saying, he hath some Merit
in the Service: For he hath received
two dreadful Wounds in it, one of which
very greatly endangered his Life; and, 

I am convinced, if his Pretensions were
backed with any Interest, he would not
fail of Success.’ 
‘They shall be backed with Interest,’ 
cries Mrs. James, ‘if my Husband hath
any. He hath no Favour to ask for
himself, nor for any other Friend that I
know of; and, indeed, to grant a
Man his just Due, ought hardly to be
thought a Favour. Resume your old
Gaiety, therefore, my dear Emily. Lord!
I remember the Time when you was
much the gayer Creature of the two. 
But you make an arrant Mope of yourself,
by confining yourself at home. 
One never meets you any where. Come,
you shall go with me to the Lady Betty
Castleton's.’ 
‘Indeed, you must excuse me, my
Dear,’ answered Amelia, ‘I do not know
Lady Betty.’ 
‘Not know Lady Betty! How is that
possible? –––But no Matter, I will introduce
you–––She keeps a Morning Rout; 
hardly a Rout, indeed; a little Bit of a
Drum––––only four or five Tables. ––– 
Come, take your Capuchine; you positively 

shall go–––Booth, you shall go
with us too. Tho' you are with your
Wife, another Woman will keep you
in Countenance.’ 
‘La! Child,’ cries Amelia, ‘how you
rattle!’ 
‘I am in Spirits,’ answered Mrs. James,
this Morning: For I won four Rubbers
together last Night; and betted the
Things, and won almost every Bet. I
am in Luck, and we will contrive to be
Partners–––Come.’ 
‘Nay, Child, you shall not refuse Mrs.
James,’ said Booth. 
‘I have scarce seen my Children Today,’ 
answered Amelia. ‘Besides, I
mortally detest Cards.’ 
‘Detest Cards!’ cries Mrs. James. 
‘How can you be so stupid? I would
not live a Day without them–––Nay,
indeed, I do not believe I should be able
to exist. Is there so delightful a Sight
in the World, as the four Honours in
one's own Hand, unless it be three natural 

Aces at Bragg–––And you really
hate Cards!’ 
‘Upon Reflexion,’ cries Amelia, ‘I
have sometimes had great Pleasure in
them–––in seeing my Children build
Houses with them. My little Boy is so
dexterous, that he will sometimes build
up the whole Pack.’ 
‘Indeed, Booth,’ cries Mrs. James,
‘this good Woman of yours is strangely
altered since I knew her first; but she
will always be a good Creature.’ 
‘Upon my Word, my Dear,’ cries
Amelia, ‘you are altered too very greatly; 
but I doubt not to live to see you alter
again, when you come to have as many
Children as I have.’ 
‘Children!’ cries Mrs. James, ‘you
make me shudder. How can you envy
me the only Circumstance which makes
Matrimony comfortable?’ 
‘Indeed, my Dear,’ said Amelia, ‘you
injure me: For I envy no Woman's
Happiness in Marriage.’ At these
Words, such Looks past between Booth 

and his Wife as, to a sensible By-stander,
would have made all the Airs of Mrs.
James appear in the highest Degree contemptible,
and would have rendered herself
the Object of Compassion. Nor could
that Lady avoid looking a little silly on
the Occasion. 
Amelia now, at the earnest Desire of her
Husband, accoutered herself to attend
her Friend; but first she insisted on visiting
her Children, to whom she gave several
hearty Kisses, and then recommending
them to the Care of Mrs. Atkinson,
she and her Husband accompanied Mrs.
James to the Rout; where few of my fine
Readers will be displeased to make Part
of the Company. 
The two Ladies and Booth then entered
an Apartment beset with Card-tables, like
the Rooms at Bath and Tunbridge. Mrs.
James immediately introduced her Friends
to Lady Betty; who received them very
civilly, and presently engaged Booth and
Mrs. James in a Party at Whist: For,
as to Amelia, she so much declined playing,
that as the Party could be filled without
her, she was permitted to sit by. 

And now, who should make his Appearance
but the noble Peer, of whom so
much honourable Mention hath already
been made in this History. He walked
directly up to Amelia, and addressed her
with as perfect a Confidence, as if he had
not been in the least conscious of having
in any Manner displeased her; tho' the
Reader will hardly suppose, that Mrs.
Ellison had kept any Thing a Secret from
him. 
Amelia was not, however, so forgetful. 
She made him a very distant Curtesy,
would scarce vouchsafe an Answer to any
Thing he said; and took the first Opportunity
of shifting her Chair, and retiring
from him. 
Her Behaviour, indeed, was such, that
the Peer plainly perceived, that he should
get no Advantage by pursuing her any
farther at present. Instead, therefore, of
attempting to follow her, he turned on
his Heel, and addressed his Discourse to
another Lady; tho' he could not avoid
often casting his Eyes towards Amelia as
long as she remained in the Room. 

Fortune, which seems to have been generally
no great Friend to Mr. Booth,
gave him no extraordinary Marks of her
Favour at Play. He lost two full Rubbers,
which cost him five Guineas; after
which, Amelia, who was uneasy at his
Lordship's Presence, begged him in a
Whisper to return home; with which Request
he directly complied. 
Nothing, I think, remarkable happened
to Booth, unless the Renewal of his Acquaintance
with an Officer whom he had
known abroad, and who made one of his
Party at the Whist-table. 
The Name of this Gentleman, with
whom the Reader will hereafter be better
acquainted, was Trent. He had formerly
been in the same Regiment with
Booth, and there was some Intimacy between
them. Captain Trent exprest great
Delight in meeting his Brother Officer,
and both mutually promised to visit each
other. 
The Scenes which had past the preceding
Night and that Morning, had so
confused Amelia's Thoughts, that in the 

Hurry in which she was carried off by
Mrs. James, she had entirely forgot her
Appointment with Dr. Harrison. When
she was informed at her Return home,
that the Doctor had been to wait upon
her, and had expressed some Anger at her
being gone out, she became greatly uneasy,
and begged of her Husband to go
to the Doctor's Lodgings, and make her
Apology. 
But lest the Reader should be as angry
with the Doctor, as he had declared himself
with Amelia, we think proper to explain
the Matter. Nothing then was farther
from the Doctor's Mind than the Conception
of any Anger towards Amelia. 
On the contrary, when the Girl answered
him, that her Mistress was not at home,
the Doctor said with great good Humour,
‘How! not at home! then tell your
Mistress she is a giddy Vagabond, and
I will come to see her no more till she
sends for me.’ –––This the poor Girl,
from misunderstanding one Word, and half
forgetting the rest, had construed into
great Passion, several very bad Words,
and a Declaration that he would never see
Amelia any more. 




In which two Strangers make their Appearance. 
Booth went to the Doctor's Lodgings,
and found him engaged with his
Country-friend and his Son, a young Gentleman
who was lately in Orders; both
whom the Doctor had left, to keep his
Appointment with Amelia. 
After what we mentioned at the End of
the last Chapter, we need take little Notice
of the Apology made by Booth, or
the Doctor's Reception of it, which was
in his peculiar Manner. ‘Your Wife,’ 
said he, ‘is a vain Hussy to think herself
worth my Anger; but tell her, I have
the Vanity myself to think I cannot be
angry without a better Cause. And
yet tell her, I intend to punish her for
her Levity: For if you go abroad, I
have determined to take her down with
me into the Country, and make her do
Penance there till your Return.’ 
‘Dear Sir,’ said Booth, ‘I know not
how to thank you, if you are in earnest.’ 

‘I assure you then I am in earnest,
cries the Doctor; ‘but you need not
thank me, however, since you know
not how’––– 
‘But would not that, Sir,’ said Booth,
‘be shewing a Slight to the Colonel's Invitation?
and you know I have so many
Obligations to him.’ 
‘Don't tell me of the Colonel,’ cries
the Doctor, ‘the Church is to be first
served. Besides, Sir, I have Priority
of Right, even to you yourself. You stole
my little Lamb from me: For I was
her first Love.’ 
‘Well, Sir,’ cries Booth, ‘if I should
be so unhappy to leave her to any one,
she must herself determine; and, I
believe, it will not be difficult to guess
where her Choice will fall: For of all
Men, next to her Husband, I believe,
none can contend with Dr. Harrison
in her Favour.’ 
‘Since you say so,’ cries the Doctor,
–––fetch her hither to Dinner with us: 
For I am at least so good a Christian 

to love those that love me–––I will shew
you my Daughter, my old Friend; for
I am really proud of her–––and you may
bring my Grand-children with you, if
you please.’ 
Booth made some Compliments, and
then went on his Errand. As soon as he
was gone, the old Gentleman said to the
Doctor, ‘Pray, my good Friend, what
Daughter is this of yours? I never so
much as heard that you was married.’ 
‘And what then,’ cries the Doctor,
‘did you ever hear that a Pope was married?
and yet some of them have had
Sons and Daughters, I believe; but,
however, this young Gentleman will absolve
me without obliging me to Penance.’ 
‘I have not yet that Power,’ answered
the young Clergyman: ‘For I am only
in Deacon's Orders.’ 
‘Are you not?’ cries the Doctor; 
‘why then I will absolve myself. You
are to know then, my good Friend,
that this young Lady was the Daughter
of a Neighbour of mine, who is since 

dead, and whose Sins I hope are forgiven: 
For she had too much to answer
for on her Child's Account. Her Father
was my intimate Acquaintance and
Friend; a worthier Man, indeed, I
believe never lived. He died suddenly
when his Children were Infants; and,
perhaps, to the Suddenness of his Death
it was owing, that he did not recommend
any Care of them to me. However,
I, in some Measure, took that
Charge upon me; and particularly of
her whom I call my Daughter. Indeed,
as she grew up, she discovered so many
good Qualities, that she wanted not the
Remembrance of her Father's Merit to
recommend her. I do her no more than
Justice, when I say, she is one of the
best Creatures I ever knew. She hath
a Sweetness of Temper, a Generosity of
Spirit, an Openness of Heart—in a
Word, she hath a true Christian Disposition. 
I may call her an Israelite indeed,
in whom there is no Guile.’ 
‘I wish you Joy of your Daughter,’ 
cries the old Gentleman: ‘For to a Man
of your Disposition, to find out an adequate
Object of your Benevolence, is,
I acknowledge, to find a Treasure.’ 

‘It is, indeed, a Happiness,’ cries the
Doctor. 
‘The greatest Difficulty,’ added the
Gentleman, ‘which Persons of your Turn
of Mind meet with, is in finding proper
Objects of their Goodness: For nothing
sure can be more irksome to a generous
Mind, than to discover, that it
hath thrown away all its good Offices on
a Soil that bears no other Fruit than Ingratitude.’ 
‘I remember,’ cries the Doctor, ‘Phucylides
saith, 
&grM;&grhg; &grk;&gra;&grk;&grog;&grn; &gresc;&gru; &grera;&grr;&grx;&grhi;&grst;&grcolon; &grs;&grp;&gre;&gria;&grr;&gre;&gri;&grn; &grisa;&grs;&gro;&grn; &gres;&grs;&grt;&grap; &gres;&grn;&grig; 
&grp;&groa;&grn;&grt;&grwi; * . 
‘But he speaks more like a Philosopher
than a Christian. I am more pleased
with a French Writer, one of the best,
indeed, that I ever read; who blames
Men for lamenting the ill Return which
is so often made to the best Offices † . A
true Christian can never be disappointed 

if he doth not receive his Reward in this
World: The Labourer might as well
complain, that he is not paid his Hire in
the Middle of the Day.’ 
‘I own, indeed,’ said the Gentleman,
‘if we see it in that Light’— 
‘And in what Light should we see it?’ 
answered the Doctor. ‘Are we like Agrippa,
only almost Christians? Or, is Christianity
a Matter of bare Theory, and
not a Rule for our Practice?’ 
‘Practical undoubtedly, undoubtedly
practical,’ cries the Gentleman. ‘Your
Example might indeed have convinced
me long ago, that we ought to do Good
to every one.’ 
‘Pardon me, Father,’ cries the young
Divine, ‘that is rather a Heathenish than
a Christian Doctrine. Homer, I remember,
introduces in his Iliad one Axylus,
of whom he says,’ 

—&grF;&gria;&grl;&gro;&grst; &grd;&grap; &grhsc;&grn; &gras;&grn;&grq;&grr;&grwa;&grp;&gro;&gri;&grs;&gri;&grcolon;
&grP;&graa;&grn;&grt;&gra;&grst; &grg;&grag;&grr; &grf;&gri;&grl;&grea;&gre;&grs;&grk;&gre;&grn; * . 

‘But Plato, who of all the Heathens came
nearest to the Christian Philosophy, condemned
this as impious Doctrine; so
Eustathius tells us, Folio 474.’ 
‘I know he doth,’ cries the Doctor,
and so Barnes tells us, in his Note upon
the Place; but if you remember the
rest of the Quotation, as well as you
do that from Eustathius, you might have
added the Observation which Mr. Dryden
makes in Favour of this Passage,
that he found not in all the Latin Authors
so admirable an Instance of extensive
Humanity. You might have likewise
remembred the noble Sentiment,
with which Mr. Barnes ends his Note,
the Sense of which is taken from the
Fifth Chapter of Matthew,’ 

—&grorg;&grst; &grk;&gra;&grig; &grf;&graa;&gro;&grst; &grhs;&gre;&grl;&gria;&gro;&gri;&gro;
&grM;&gria;&grg;&grd;&grap; &gras;&grg;&gra;&grq;&groc;&gri;&grs;&gri; &grk;&gra;&grk;&groc;&gri;&grs;&gria; &grt;&grap; &gres;&grp;&grap; &gras;&grn;&grd;&grr;&graa;&grs;&gri;&grn; &gres;&grx;&gra;&grn;&gra;&grt;&grea;&grl;&grl;&gre;&gri;
‘It seems, therefore, as if this Character
rather became a Christian than a Heathen: 
For Homer could not have transcribed
it from any of his Deities. Whom
is it, therefore, we imitate by such extensive
Benevolence?’ 

‘What a prodigious Memory you have,’ 
cries the old Gentleman! ‘Indeed, Son,
you must not contend with the Doctor
in these Matters.’ 
‘I shall not give my Opinion hastily,’ 
cries the Son. ‘I know again what Mr.
Poole, in his Annotations, says on that
Verse of St. Matthew—That it is only
to heap Coals of Fire upon their Heads
—How are we to understand, pray, the
Text immediately preceding? Love
your Enemies, bless them that curse
you, do Good to them that hate you.’ 
‘You know, I suppose, young Gentleman,’ 
said the Doctor, ‘how these
Words are generally understood—The
Commentator you mention, I think,
tells us, that Love is not here to be taken
in the strict Sense, so as to signify the
Complacency of the Heart; you may
hate your Enemies as God's Enemies,
and seek due Revenge of them for his
Honour; and for your own Sakes too
you may seek moderate Satisfaction of
them; but then, you are to love them
with a Love consistent with these Things
—that is to say, in plainer Words, you 

are to love them and hate them, and
bless and curse, and do them Good and
Mischief.’ 
‘Excellent! admirable!’ said the old
Gentleman, ‘You have a most inimitable
Turn to Ridicule.’ 
‘I do not approve Ridicule,’ said the
Son, ‘on such Subjects.’ 
‘Nor I neither,’ cries the Doctor, ‘I
will give you my Opinion, therefore,
very seriously. The two Verses taken
together contain a very positive Precept,
delivered in the plainest Words, and yet
illustrated by the clearest Instance, in the
Conduct of the Supreme Being; and lastly,
the Practice of this Precept is most
nobly inforced by the Reward annexed
—that ye may be the Children, and so
forth. No Man, who understands what
it is to love, and to bless, and to do
Good, can mistake the Meaning. But
if they required any Comment, the
Scripture itself affords enow. If thine
Enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst,
give him Drink; not rendering Evil for
Evil, or Railing for Railing, but contrariwise, 

Blessing–––They do not, indeed,
want the Comments of Men, who, when
they cannot bend their Minds to the
Obedience of Scripture, are desirous to
wrest Scripture to a Compliance with
their own Inclinations.’ 
‘Most nobly and justly observed,’ cries
the old Gentleman. ‘Indeed, my good
Friend, you have explained the Text
with the utmost Perspicuity.’ 
‘But if this be the Meaning,’ cries the
Son, ‘there must be an End of all Law
and Justice—for I do not see how any
Man can prosecute his Enemy in a Court
of Justice.’ 
‘Pardon me, Sir,’ cries the Doctor. 
‘Indeed, as an Enemy, merely and from
a Spirit of Revenge, he cannot nor he
ought not to prosecute him; but as an
Offender against the Laws of his Country,
he may and it is his Duty so to do: 
Is there any Spirit of Revenge in the
Magistrates or Officers of Justice, when
they punish Criminals? Why do such,
ordinarily I mean, concern themselves
in inflicting Punishments, but because
it is their Duty? And why may not a 

private Man deliver an Offender into the
Hands of Justice, from the same laudable
Motive? Revenge, indeed, of all
Kinds is strictly prohibited; wherefore,
as we are not to execute it with our own
Hands, so neither are we to make Use
of the Law as the Instrument of private
Malice, and to worry each other with
Inveteracy and Rancour. And where is
the great Difficulty in obeying this wise,
this generous, this noble Precept? If
Revenge be, as a certain Divine, not
greatly to his Honour, calls it, the most
luscious Morsel the Devil ever dropt into
the Mouth of a Sinner, it must be allowed
at least to cost us often extremely
dear. It is a Dainty, if indeed it be one,
which we come at with great Inquietude,
with great Difficulty, and with great
Danger. However pleasant it may be
to the Palate, while we are feeding on it,
it is sure to leave a bitter Relish behind
it; and so far, indeed, it may be called
a luscious Morsel, that the most greedy
Appetites are soon glutted, and the most
eager Longing for it is soon turned into
Loathing and Repentance. I allow there
is something tempting in its outward Appearance; 
but it is like the beautiful
Colour of some Poisons, from which, 

however they may attract our Eyes, a
Regard to our own Welfare commands
us to abstain. And this is an Abstinence
to which Wisdom alone, without any
divine Command, hath been often found
adequate; with Instances of which, the
Greek and Latin Authors every where
abound. May not a Christian, therefore,
be well ashamed of making a
Stumbling-block of a Precept, which is
not only consistent with his worldly Interest,
but to which so noble an Incentive
is proposed?’ 
The old Gentleman fell into Raptures at
this Speech, and after making many Compliments
to the Doctor upon it, he turned
to his Son, and told him, he had an Opportunity
now of learning more in one
Day, than he had learnt at the University
in a Twelve-month. 
The Son replied, that he allowed the
Doctrine to be extremely good in general,
and that he agreed with the greater Part; 
‘but I must make a Distinction,’ said he. 
However, he was interrupted from his
Distinction at present; for now Booth returned
with Amelia and the Children. 




A Scene of modern Wit and Humour. 
In the Afternoon, the old Gentleman
proposed a Walk to Vauxhall; a Place
of which, he said, he had heard much,
but had never seen it. 
The Doctor readily agreed to his Friend's
Proposal, and soon after ordered two
Coaches to be sent for to carry the whole
Company. But when the Servant was
gone for them, Booth acquainted the Doctor
that it was yet too early. ‘Is it so,’ 
said the Doctor? ‘why then I will carry
you first to one of the greatest and highest
Entertainments in the World.’ 
The Children pricked up their Ears at
this; nor did any of the Company guess
what he meant; and Amelia asked what
Entertainment he could carry them to at
that Time of the Day. 
‘Suppose,’ says the Doctor, ‘I should
carry you to Court.’ 

‘At Five o'Clock in the Afternoon!’ 
cries Booth. 
‘Ay, suppose I should have Interest
enough to introduce you into the Presence.’ 
‘You are jesting, dear Sir,’ cries
Amelia. 
‘Indeed, I am serious,’ answered the
Doctor. ‘I will introduce you into that
Presence, compared to whom the greatest
Emperor on the Earth is many Millions of
Degrees meaner than the most contemptible
Reptile is to him. What Entertainment
can there be to a rational Being equal
to this? Was not the Taste of Mankind
most wretchedly depraved, where would
the vain Man find an Honour, or where
would the Love of Pleasure propose so
adequate an Object as divine Worship? 
With what Ecstasy must the Contemplation
of being admitted to such a Presence
fill the Mind! The pitiful Courts of
Princes are open to few, and to those
only at particular Seasons; but from this
glorious and gracious Presence, we are
none of us, and at no time excluded.’ 

The Doctor was proceeding thus, when
the Servant returned, saying the Coaches
were ready; and the whole Company with
the greatest Alacrity attended the Doctor
to St. James's Church. 
When the Service was ended, and they
were again got into their Coaches, Amelia
returned the Doctor many Thanks for the
Light in which he had placed Divine
Worship; assuring him, that she had never
before had so much Transport in her Devotion
as at this Time, and saying, she
believed she should be the better for this
Notion he had given her, as long as she
lived. 
The Coaches being come to the Water
Side, they all alighted, and getting into
one Boat proceeded to Vauxhall. 
The extreme Beauty and Elegance of
this Place is well known to almost every
one of my Readers; and happy is it for me
that it is so; since to give an adequate
Idea of it, would exceed my Power of
Description. To delineate the particular
Beauties of these Gardens, would, indeed,
require as much Pains and as much Paper 

too, as to rehearse all the good Actions
of their Master; whose Life proves the
Truth of an Observation which I have
read in some Ethic Writer, that a truly
elegant Taste is generally accompanied
with an Excellency of Heart; or in other
Words, that true Virtue is, indeed, nothing
else but true Taste. 
Here our Company diverted themselves,
with walking an Hour or two before the
Music began. Of all the Seven, Booth
alone had ever been here before; so that
to all the rest, the Place with it's other
Charms, had that of Novelty. When the
Music played, Amelia, who stood next to
the Doctor, said to him in a Whisper,
‘I hope I am not guilty of Profaneness; 
but in Pursuance of that cheerful Chain
of Thoughts with which you have inspired
me this Afternoon, I was just
now lost in a Reverie, and fancied myself
in those blissful Mansions which we
hope to enjoy hereafter. The delicious
Sweetness of the Place, the enchanting
Charms of the Music, and the Satisfaction
which appears in every One's Countenance,
carried my Soul almost to Heaven
in it's Ideas. I could not have, indeed, 

imagined there had been any thing
like this in this World.’ 
The Doctor smiled, and said, ‘You
see, dear Madam, there may be Pleasures
of which you could conceive no
Idea, till you actually enjoyed them.’ 
And now the little Boy, who had long
withstood the Attractions of several Cheese-Cakes
that passed to and fro, could contain
no longer, but asked his Mother to
give him one; saying, ‘I am sure my
Sister would be glad of another, tho' she
is ashamed to ask.’ The Doctor over-hearing
the Child proposed that they
should all retire to some Place where they
might sit down and refresh themselves,
which they accordingly did. Amelia now
missed her Husband; but as she had three
Men in her Company, and one of them
was the Doctor, she concluded herself and
her Children to be safe, and doubted not
but that Booth would soon find her out. 
They now sat down, and the Doctor
very gallantly desired Amelia to call for
what she liked. Upon which the Children
were supplied with Cakes; and some Ham
and Chicken were provided for the rest of 

the Company. With which while they
were regaling themselves with the highest
Satisfaction, two young Fellows walking
Arm in Arm came up, and when they came
opposite to Amelia, they stood still, staring
Amelia full in the Face, and one of them cried
aloud to the other, ‘D&wblank;n me, my Lord,
if she is not an Angel!’ —My Lord stood
still staring likewise at her, without speaking
a Word—When two others of the same
Gang came up—and one of them cried— 
‘Come along, Jack, I have seen her before; 
but she is too well manned already. 
Three &wblank; are enough for one Woman,
or the Devil is in it.’ Here he repeated a
scandalous Nick-Name for the Clergy,
with which I shall not stain my Paper. 
‘D&wblank;n me,’ says he that spoke first,
and whom they called Jack, ‘I will have
a Brush at her, if she belonged to the
whole Convocation.’ And so saying he
went up to the young Clergyman, and
cried—‘Doctor, sit up a little, if you please,
and don't take up more Room in a Bed
than belongs to you.’ At which Words,
he gave the young Man a Push, and seated
himself down directly over-against Amelia,
and leaning both his Elbows on the Table,
he fixed his Eyes on her in a Manner with 

which Modesty can neither look, nor bear
to be looked at. 
Amelia seemed greatly shocked at this
Treatment; upon which the Doctor removed
her within him, and then facing
the Gentleman, asked him what he meant
by this rude Behaviour—Upon which my
Lord stept up and said, ‘Don't be impertinent,
old Gentleman. Do you think
such Fellows as you, are to keep D&wblank;n
me, such fine Wenches, D&wblank;n me, to
yourselves, D&wblank;n me?’ 
‘No, no,’ cries Jack, ‘the old Gentleman
is more reasonable. Here's the Fellow
that eats up the Tithe Pig. Don't you
see how his Mouth waters at her—Where's
your slabbering Bib?’ For tho' the Gentleman
had rightly guessed he was a Clergyman; 
yet, he had not any of those Insignia
on, with which it would have been improper
to have appeared there. 
‘Such Boys as you,’ cries the young
Clergyman, ‘ought to be well whipped at
School, instead of being suffered to become
Nusances in the Society.’ 

‘Boys, Sir!’ says Jack, ‘I believe I
am as good a Man as yourself, Mr. &wblank; 
and as good a Scholar too. Bos Fur Sus
quotque Sacerdos. –––Tell me what's next. 
D&wblank;n me, I'll hold you fifty Pounds
—you don't tell me what's next.’ 
‘You have him, Jack,’ cries my Lord,
‘It's over with him, D&wblank;n me. He
can't strike another Blow.’ 
‘If I had you in a proper Place,’ cries
the Clergyman, ‘you should find I would
strike a Blow, and a pretty hard one
too.’ 
‘There,’ cries my Lord, ‘there is the
Meekness of the Clergyman—There
spoke the Wolf in the Sheep's Cloathing. 
D&wblank;n me, how big he looks—You
must be civil to him, faith! or else he
will burst with Pride.’ 
‘Ay, ay,’ cries Jack, ‘let the Clergy
alone for Pride, there's not a Lord in
the Kingdom now hath half the Pride of
that Fellow.’ 

‘Pray, Sir,’ cries the Doctor, turning
to the other, ‘are you a Lord?’ 
‘Yes, Mr. &wblank;,’ cries he, I have
that Honour, indeed.’ 
‘And I suppose you have Pride too,’ 
said the Doctor. 
‘I hope I have, Sir,’ answered he, ‘at
your Service.’ 
‘If such a one as you, Sir,’ cries the Doctor,
‘who are not only a Scandal to the Title
you bear as a Lord, but even as a Man,
can pretend to Pride, why will you not
allow it to a Clergyman? I suppose, Sir,
by your Dress you are in the Army, and
by the Ribbon in your Hat, you seem to
be proud of that too. How much
greater and more honourable is the Service
in which that Gentleman is enlisted
than yours. Why then should you object
to the Pride of the Clergy, since
the lowest of the Function is in reality
every way so much your Superior?’ 
‘Tida Tidu Tidum,’–––cries my Lord. 

‘However, Gentlemen,’ cries the Doctor,
‘if you have the least Pretension to that
Name, I beg you will put an End to
your Frolick; since you see it gives so
much Uneasiness to the Lady. Nay, I
entreat you, for your own Sakes; for
here is one coming who will talk to you
in a very different Stile from ours.’ 
‘One coming!’ cries my Lord–––‘what
care I who is coming?’ 
‘I suppose it is the Devil,’ cries Jack:
‘For here are two of his Livery Servants
already.’ 
‘Let the Devil come as soon as he will,
cries my Lord, ‘D&wblank;n me if I have
not a Kiss.’ 
Amelia now fell a trembling, and her
Children perceiving her Fright, both hung
on her, and began to cry—when Booth
and Captain Trent both came up. 
Booth seeing his Wife disordered asked
eagerly what was the Matter. At the
same time, the Lord and his Companion
seeing Captain Trent, whom they well 

knew–––said both together–––‘What, doth
this Company belong to you?’ When
the Doctor with great Presence of Mind,
as he was apprehensive of some fatal
Consequence if Booth should know what
had past, said, ‘So, Mr. Booth, I am glad
you are returned; your poor Lady here
began to be frighted out of her Wits. 
But now you have him again,’ said he
to Amelia, ‘I hope you will be easy.’ 
Amelia, frighted as she was, presently
took the Hint, and greatly chid her
Husband for leaving her; but the little Boy
was not so quick-sighted, and cried–––‘Indeed,
Papa, those naughty Men there
have frighted my Mamma out of her
Wits.’ 
‘How!’ cries Booth, a little moved. 
‘Frighten'd! hath any one frighten'd you,
my Dear?’ 
‘No, my Love,’ answered she, ‘nothing. 
I know not what the Child
means. Every thing is well, now I see
you safe.’ 
Trent had been all the while talking aside
with the young Sparks; and now addressing 

himself to Booth, said, ‘Here hath
been some little Mistake; I believe my
Lord mistook Mrs. Booth for some other
Lady.’ 
‘It is impossible,’ cries my Lord, ‘to
know every one. —I am sure, if I had
known the Lady to be a Woman of
Fashion, and an Acquaintance of Captain
Trent, I should have said nothing
disagreeable to her; but if I have, I ask
her Pardon, and the Company's.’ 
‘I am in the Dark,’ cries Booth. ‘Pray,
what is all this Matter?’ 
‘Nothing of any Consequence,’ cries
the Doctor, ‘nor worth your enquiring
into—You hear it was a Mistake of the
Person; and I really believe his Lordship,
that all proceeded from his not
knowing to whom the Lady belonged.’ 
‘Come, come,’ says Trent, ‘there is
nothing in the Matter, I assure you. I
will tell you the whole another Time.’ 
‘Very well, since you say so,’ cries
Booth, ‘I am contented.’ So ended the 

Affair, and the two Sparks made their Congee
and sneaked off. 
‘Now they are gone,’ said the young
Gentleman, ‘I must say, I never saw two
worse-bred Jackanapes, nor Fellows that
deserved to be kick'd more. If I had
had them in another Place, I would have
taught them a little more Respect to the
Church.’ 
‘You took rather a better Way,’ answered
the Doctor, ‘to teach them that
Respect.’ 
Booth now desired his Friend Trent to sit
down with them, and proposed to call for
a fresh Bottle of Wine; but Amelia's Spirits
were too much disconcerted to give
her any Prospect of Pleasure that Evening. 
She therefore laid hold of the Pretence of
her Children, for whom she said the Hour
was already too late; with which the Doctor
agreed. So they paid their Reckoning,
and departed; leaving to the two Rakes,
the Triumph of having totally dissipated
the Mirth of this little innocent Company,
who were before enjoying complete Satisfaction. 




A curious Conversation between the Doctor,
the young Clergyman, and the young Clergyman's
Father. 
The next Morning when the Doctor
and his two Friends were at Breakfast,
the young Clergyman, in whose Mind
the injurious Treatment he had received
the Evening before, was very deeply impressed,
renewed the Conversation on that
Subject. ‘It is a Scandal,’ said he, ‘to
the Government, that they do not preserve
more Respect to the Clergy, by
punishing all Rudeness to them with the
utmost Severity. It was very justly observed
of you, Sir,’ says he to the Doctor,
‘that the lowest Clergyman in England
is in real Dignity superior to the
highest Nobleman. What then can be
so shocking as to see that Gown, which
ought to entitle us to the Veneration of
all we meet, treated with Contempt and
Ridicule? Are we not, in Fact, Embassadors
from Heaven, to the World; and
do they not, therefore, in denying us
our due Respect, deny it in Reality to
him that sent us?’ 

‘If that be the Case,’ says the Doctor; 
‘it behoves them to look to themselves; 
for he who sent us is able to exact most
severe Vengeance for the ill Treatment
of his Ministers.’ 
‘Very true, Sir,’ cries the young one; 
‘and I heartily hope he will; but those
Punishments are at too great a Distance
to insuse Terror into wicked Minds. 
The Government ought to interfere with
its immediate Censures. Fines and Imprisonments
and corporal Punishments
operate more forcibly on the human
Mind than all the Fears of Damnation.’ 
‘Do you think so?’ cries the Doctor; 
‘than I am afraid Men are very little
in earnest in those Fears.’ 
‘Most justly observed,’ says the old
Gentleman. ‘Indeed, I am afraid that is
too much the Case.’ 
‘In that,’ said the Son, ‘the Government
is to blame. Are not Books of
Infidelity, treating our holy Religion as
a mere Imposture; nay, sometimes, as 

a mere Jest, published daily, and spread
abroad amongst the People with perfect
Impunity?’ 
‘You are certainly in the Right,’ says
the Doctor, ‘there is a most blameable
Remissness with Regard to these Matters; 
but the whole Blame doth not lie
there; some little Share of the Fault is,
I am afraid, to be imputed to the Clergy
themselves.’ 
‘Indeed, Sir,’ cries the young one, ‘I
did not expect that Charge from a Gentleman
of your Cloth: Do the Clergy
give any Encouragement to such Books? 
Do they not, on the contrary, cry loudly
out against the suffering them? This
is the invidious Aspersion of the Laity; 
and I did not expect to hear it confirmed
by one of our own Cloth.’ 
‘Be not too impatient, young Gentleman,’ 
said the Doctor. ‘I do not absolutely
confirm the Charge of the Laity. 
It is much too general, and too severe; 
but even the Laity themselves do not attack
them in that Part to which you
have applied your Defence. They are
not supposed such Fools as to attack 

that Religion to which they owe their
temporal Welfare. They are not taxed
with giving any other Support to Infidelity,
than what it draws from the ill
Examples of their Lives; I mean of the
Lives of some of them. Here too the Laity
carry their Censures too far: For there are
very few or none of the Clergy, whose Lives,
if compared with those of the Laity,
can be called profligate; but such, indeed,
is the perfect Purity of our Religion; 
such is the Innocence and Virtue, which
it exacts to entitle us to its glorious Rewards,
and to skreen us from its dreadful
Punishments, that he must be a very good
Man indeed who lives up to it. Thus then
these Persons argue. This Man is educated
in a perfect Knowledge of Religion, he
is learned in its Laws, and is by his
Profession obliged in a Manner to have
them always before his Eyes. The Rewards
which it promises to the Obedience
of these Laws are so great, and the Punishments
threatned on Disobedience so
dreadful, that it is impossible but all
Men must fearfully fly from the one,
and as eagerly pursue the other. If
therefore such a Person lives in direct
Opposition to, and in a constant Breach of
these Laws, the Inference is obvious. 

There is a pleasant Story in Matthew
Paris, which I will tell you as well as I
can remember it. Two young Gentlemen,
I think they were Priests, agreed together,
that whosoever died first, should return
and acquaint his Friend with the Secrets
of the other World. One of them died
soon after, and fulfilled his Promise. The
whole Relation he gave is not very material,
but among other Things he produced
one of his Hands which Satan had
made use of, to write upon as the Moderns
do on a Card, and had sent his
Compliments to the Priests, for the
Number of Souls, which the wicked
Examples of their Lives daily sent to
Hell. This Story is the more remarkable,
as it was written by a Priest, and
a great Favourer of his Order.’ 
‘Excellent,’ cried the old Gentleman,
‘What a Memory you have!’ 
‘But, Sir,’ cries the young one, ‘a Clergyman
is a Man as well as another; and
if such perfect Purity be expected’— 
‘I do not expect it, cries the Doctor,
and I hope it will not be expected of us. 
The Scripture itself gives us this Hope, 

where the best of us are said to fall twenty
Times a Day. But sure, we may
not allow the Practice of any of those
grosser Crimes which contaminate the
whole Mind. We may expect an Obedience
to the Ten Commandments, and
an Abstinence from such notorious Vices; 
as in the first Place, Avarice, which indeed
can hardly subsist without the
Breach of more Commandments than
one; indeed it would be excessive Candour
to imagine, that a Man, who so
visibly sets his whole Heart not only on
this World, but on one of the most
worthless Things in it, (for so is Money
without regard to its Uses,) should be at
the same Time laying up his Treasure
in Heaven. Ambition is a second Vice
of this Sort; we are told we cannot serve
God and Mammon. I might have
applied this to Avarice, but I chose rather
to mention it here. When we see a
Man sneaking about in Courts and Levees,
and doing the dirty Work of great
Men from the Hopes of Preferment, can
we believe that a Fellow, whom we see
to have so many hard Taskmasters upon
Earth, ever thinks of his Master which
is in Heaven? Must he not himself
think, if he ever reflects at all, that 

so glorious a Master will disdain and
disown a Servant, who is the dutiful
Tool of a Court Favourite; and employed
either as the Pimp of his Pleasure,
or sometimes perhaps made a dirty
Channel, to assist in the Conveyance of
that Corruption, which is clogging up
and destroying the very Vitals of his
Country?’ 
‘The last Vice which I shall mention,
is Pride. There is not in the Universe
a more ridiculous, nor a more contemptible
Animal than a proud Clergyman; 
a Turkey-cock or a Jackdaw, are Objects
of Veneration when compared with
him. I don't mean by Pride, that noble
Dignity of Mind, to which Goodness
can only administer an adequate Object,
which delights in the Testimony of
its own Conscience, and could not without
the highest Agonies bear its Condemnation. 
By Pride, I mean, that
saucy Passion, which exults in every little
eventual Pre-eminence over other
Men; such are the ordinary Gifts of
Nature, and the paultry Presents of Fortune,
Wit, Knowledge, Birth, Strength,
Beauty, Riches, Titles and Rank. That
Passion which is ever-aspiring, like a silly 

Child, to look over the Heads of all
about them; which while it servilely adheres
to the Great, flies from the Poor,
as if afraid of Contamination; devouring
greedily every Murmur of Applause,
and every Look of Admiration, pleased
and elated with all kind of Respect, and
hurt and enflamed with the Contempt
of the lowest and most despicable of
Fools, even with such as treated you
last Night disrespectfully at Vauxhall. 
Can such a Mind as this be fixed on
Things above? Can such a Man reflect
that he hath the ineffable Honour to be
employed in the immediate Service of his
great Creator, or can he please himself with
the Heart-warming Hope, that his
Ways are acceptable in the Sight of
that glorious, that incomprehensible Being?’ 
‘Hear, Child, hear,’ cries the old Gentlemen,
‘hear and improve your Understanding. 
Indeed, my good Friend, no
one retires from you without carrying
away some good Instructions with him. 
Learn of the Doctor, Tom, and you will
be the better Man as long as you live.’ 

‘Undoubtedly, Sir,’ answered Tom, ‘the
Doctor hath spoken a great deal of excellent
Truth, and, without a Compliment
to him, I was always a great Admirer
of his Sermons, particularly of
their Oratory. But, 

Nec tamen hoc tribuens dederim quoque cætera.
‘I cannot agree that a Clergyman is obliged
to put up with an Affront, any
more than another Man, and more especially
when it is paid to the Order.’ 
‘I am very sorry, young Gentleman,’ 
cries the Doctor, ‘that you should be
ever liable to be affronted, as a Clergyman; 
and, I do assure you, if I had
known your Disposition formerly, the
Order should never have been affronted
through you.’ 
The old Gentleman now began to check
his Son, for his Opposition to the Doctor,
when a Servant delivered the latter a Note
from Amelia, which he read immediately
to himself, and it contained the following
Words; 


‘My dear Sir,
Something hath happened since I saw
you, which gives me great Uneasiness,
and I beg the Favour of seeing you
as soon as possible, to advise with you
upon it. 
‘I am,
your most obliged,
and dutiful Daughter,
Amelia Booth.’ 
The Doctor's Answer was, that he would
wait on the Lady directly; and then turning
to his Friend, he asked him if he would
not take a Walk in the Park before Dinner. 
‘I must go,’ says he, ‘to the Lady
who was with us last Night, for I am
afraid by her Letter, some bad Accident
hath happened to her. Come, young
Gentleman, I spoke a little too hastily to
you just now, but I ask your Pardon. 
Some Allowance must be made to the
Warmth of your Blood. I hope we
shall in Time both think alike.’ 

The old Gentleman made his Friend another
Compliment, and the young one declared,
he hoped he should always think,
and act too, with the Dignity becoming his
Cloth. After which, the Doctor took his
Leave for a while, and went to Amelia's
Lodgings. 
As soon as he was gone, the old Gentleman
fell very severely on his Son. ‘Tom,
says he, ‘how can you be such a Fool, to
undo by your Perverseness all that I
have been doing? Why will you not
learn to study Mankind with the Attention
which I have employed to that Purpose? 
Do you think, if I had affronted
this obstinate old Fellow as you do, I
should ever have engaged his Friendship?’ 
‘I cannot help it, Sir,’ said Tom, ‘I
have not studied six Years at the University,
to give up my Sentiments to
every one. It is true, indeed, he put
together a Set of sounding Words; but,
in the main, I never heard any one talk
more foolishly.’ 
‘What of that,’ cries the Father, ‘I
never told you he was a wise Man, nor 

did I ever think him so. If he had
any Understanding, he would have been
a Bishop long ago, to my certain Knowledge. 
But, indeed, he hath been always
a Fool in private Life; for I question
whether he is worth 100l. in the World,
more than his annual Income. He hath
given away above half his Fortune to the
Lord knows who. I believe I have had
above 200l. of him, first and last; and
would you lose such a Milch-cow as this
for Want of a few Compliments. Indeed,
Tom, thou art as great a Simpleton as
himself. How do you expect to rise in
the Church, if you can't temporize, and
give into the Opinion of your Superiors?’ 
‘I dont know, Sir,’ cries Tom, ‘what
you mean by my Superiors. In one Sense,
I own, a Doctor of Divinity is superior
to a Batchelor of Arts, and so far I am
ready to allow his Superiority; but I understand
Greek and Hebrew as well as
he, and will maintain my Opinion against
him, or any other in the Schools.’ 
‘Tom,’ cries the old Gentleman, ‘till
thou gettest the better of thy Conceit, I
shall never have any Hopes of thee. If
thou art wise, thou wilt think every Man 

thy Superior, of whom thou canst get
any thing; at least thou wilt persuade
him that thou thinkest so, and that is sufficient. 
Tom, Tom, thou hast no Policy
in thee.’ 
‘What have I been learning these seven
Years,’ answered he, ‘in the University? 
However, Father, I can account for your
Opinion. It is the common Failing of
old Men to attribute all Wisdom to themselves. 
Nestor did it long ago; but, if
you will enquire my Character at College,
I fancy you will not think I want to go to
School again.’ 
The Father and Son then went to take
their Walk, during which the former repeated
many good Lessons of Policy to his
Son, not greatly, perhaps, to his Edification. 
In Truth, if the old Gentleman's
Fondness had not, in a great Measure,
blinded him to the Imperfections of his
Son, he would have soon perceived that he
was sowing all his Instructions in a Soil
so choaked with Self-Conceit, that it was
utterly impossible they should ever bear
any Fruit. 