







The following work is delivered to the
world as the first of a series of performances, which the
favorable reception of this will induce the writer to publish.
His purpose is neither selfish nor temporary, but aims at the
illustration of some important branches of the moral constitution
of man. Whether this tale will be classed with the
ordinary or frivolous sources of amusement, or be ranked
with the few productions whose usefulness secures to them
a lasting reputation, the reader must be permitted to decide.
The incidents related are extraordinary and rare. Some
of them, perhaps, approach as nearly to the nature of miracles
as can be done by that which is not truly miraculous.
It is hoped that intelligent readers will not disapprove of the
manner in which appearances are solved, but that the solution
will be found to correspond with the known principles
of human nature. The power which the principal person is
said to possess can scarcely be denied to be real. It must
be acknowledged to be extremely rare; but no fact, equally
uncommon, is supported by the same strength of historical
evidence.






Some readers may think the conduct of the younger Wieland
impossible. In support of its possibility the writer must
appeal to Physicians, and to men conversant with the latent
springs and occasional perversions of the human mind. It
will not be objected that the instances of similar delusion
are rare, because it is the business of moral painters to
exhibit their subject in its most instructive and memorable
forms. If history furnishes one parallel fact, it is a sufficient
vindication of the writer; but most readers will probably
recollect an authentic case, remarkably similar to that of
Wieland.
It will be necessary to add, that this narrative is addressed,
in an epistolary form, by the lady whose story it contains,
to a small number of friends, whose curiosity, with regard
to it, had been greatly awakened. It may likewise be mentioned,
that these events took place between the conclusion
of the French and the beginning of the revolutionary war.
The memoirs of Carwin, alluded to at the conclusion of the
work, will be published or suppressed according to the
reception which is given to the present attempt.

C. B. B.
September 3, 1798.

