

At parting with you, my purpose was to reach the abode
of the Hadwins as speedily as possible. I travelled therefere
with diligence. Setting out so early, I expected, though on
foot, to reach the end of my journey before noon. The
activity of muscles is no obstacle to thought. So far from
being inconsistent with intense masing, it is, in my own
case, propitious to that state of mind.
Probably no one had stronger motives for ardent meditation
than I. My second journey to the city was prompted
by reasons, and attended by incidents, that seemed to have
a present existence. To think upon them, was to view, more
deliberately and thoroughly, objects and persons that still
hovered in my sight. Instead of their attributes being
already seen, and their consequences at an end, it seemed
as if a series of numerous years and unintermitted contemplation
were requisite to comprehend them fully, and bring
into existence their most momentous effects.
If men be chiefly distinguished from each other by the
modes in which attention is employed, either on external





and sensible objects, or merely on abstract ideas and the
creatures of reflection, I may justly claim to be enrolled
in the second class. My existence is a series of thoughts
rather than of motions. Ratiocination and deduction leave
my senses unemployed. The fulness of my fancy renders
my eye vacant and inactive. Sensations do not precede
and suggest, but follow and are secondary to the acts of
my mind.
There was one motive, however, which made me less inattentive
to the scene that was continually shifting before
and without me than I am wont to be. The loveliest form
which I had hitherto seen, was that of Clemenza Lodi. I
recalled her condition as I had witnessed it, as Welbeck
had described, and as you had painted it. The past was
without remedy; but the future was, in some degree, within
our power to create and to fashion. Her state was probably
dangerous. She might already be forlorn, beset with
temptation or with anguish; or danger might only be approaching
her, and the worst evils be impending ones.
I was ignorant of her state. Could I not remove this
ignorance? Would not some benefit redound to her from
beneficient and seasonable interposition?
You had mentioned that her abode had lately been with
Mrs. Villars, and that this lady still resided in the country.
The residence had been sufficiently described, and I perceived
that I was now approaching it. In a short time I
spied its painted roof and five chimnies through an avenue
of catalpas.
When opposite the gate which led into this avenue, I
paused. It seemed as if this moment were to decide upon
the liberty and innocence of this being. In a moment I
might place myself before her, ascertain her true condition,
and point out to her the path of honor and safety. This
opportunity might be the last. Longer delay might render
interposition fruitless.
But how was I to interpose? I was a stranger to her language,
and she was unacquainted with mine. To obtain
access to her, it was necessary only to demand it. But
how should I explain my views and state my wishes when




an interview was gained? And what expedient was it in
my power to propose?
Now, said I, I perceive the value of that wealth which I
have been accustomed to despise. The power of eating
and drinking, the nature and limits of existence and physical
enjoyment, are not changed or enlarged by the increase
of wealth. Our corporeal and intellectual wants are
supplied at little expense; but our own wants are the wants
of others, and that which remains, after our own necessities
are obviated, it is always easy and just to employ in
relieving the necessities of others.
There are no superfluities in my store. It is not in my
power to supply this unfortunate girl with decent raiment
and honest bread. I have no house to which to conduct
her. I have no means of securing her from famine and
cold.
Yet, though indigent and feeble, I am not destitute of
friends and of home. Cannot she be admitted to the same
asylum to which I am now going? This thought was sudden
and new. The more it was revolved, the more plausible
it seemed. This was not merely the sole expedient, but
the best that could have been suggested.
The Hadwins were friendly, hospitable, unsuspicious.
Their board, though simple and uncouth, was wholesome
and plenteous. Their residence was sequestered and obscure,
and not obnoxious to impertinent inquiries and malignant
animadversion. Their frank and ingenuous temper
would make them easy of persuasion, and their sympathies
were prompt and overflowing.
I am nearly certain, continued I, that they will instantly
afford protection to this desolate girl. Why shall I not anticipate
their consent, and present myself to their embraces
and their welcomes in her company?
Slight reflection shewed me, that this precipitation was
improper. Whether Wallace had ever arrived at Malverton?
Whether Mr. Hadwin had escaped infection? whether
his house were the abode of security and quiet, or a
scene of desolation? Were questions yet to be determined.
The obvious and best proceeding was to hasten forward,
to afford the Hadwins, if in distress, the feeble consolations
of my friendship; or, if their state were happy,




to procure their concurrence to my scheme respecting
Clemenza.
Actuated by these considerations, I resumed my journey.
Looking forward, I perceived a chaise and horse standing
by the left hand fence, at the distance of some hundred
yards. This object was not uncommon or strange, and,
therefore, it was scarcely noticed. When I came near, however,
methought I recognised in this carriage the same in
which my importunities had procured a seat for the languishing
Wallace, in the manner which I have formerly related.
It was a crazy vehicle and old fashioned. When once
seen it could scarcely be mistaken or forgotten. The horse
was held by his bridle to a post, but the seat was empty.
My solicitude with regard to Wallace's destiny, of which he
to whom the carriage belonged might possibly afford me
some knowledge, made me stop and reflect on what measures
it was proper to pursue.
The rider could not be at a great distance from this spot.
His absence would probably be short. By lingering a few
minutes an interview might be gained, and the uncertainty
and suspense of some hours be thereby precluded. I therefore
waited, and the same person whom I had formerly encountered
made his appearance, in a short time, from under
a copse that skirted the road.
He recognised me with more difficulty than attended my
recognition of him. The circumstances, however, of our
first meeting were easily recalled to his remembrance. I
eagerly inquired when and where he had parted with the
youth who had been, on that occasion, entrusted to his care.
He answered, that, on leaving the city and inhaling the
purer air of the fields and woods, Wallace had been, in a
wonderful degree, invigorated and refreshed. An instantaneous
and total change appeared to have been wrought in
him. He no longer languished with fatigue or fear, but
became full of gaiety and talk.
The suddenness of this transition; the levity with which
he related and commented on his recent dangers and evils,
excited the astonishment of his companion, to whom he not
only communicated the history of his disease, but imparted
many anecdotes of a humorous kind. Some of these my
companion repeated. I heard them with regret and




dissatisfaction. They betokened a mind vitiated by intercourse
with the thoughtless and depraved of both sexes, and particularly
with infamous and profligate women.
My companion proceeded to mention, that Wallace's
exhiliration lasted but for a short time, and disappeared as
suddenly as it had appeared. He was seized with deadly
sickness, and insisted upon leaving the carriage, whose
movements shocked his stomach and head to an insupportable
degree. His companion was not void of apprehensions
on his own account, but was unwilling to desert him, and
endeavored to encourage him. His efforts were vain.
Though the nearest house was at the distance of some
hundred yards, and though it was probable that the inhabitants
of this house would refuse to accommodate one in his
condition, yet Wallace could not be prevailed on to proceed;
and, in spite of persuasion and remonstrance, left the carriage
and threw himself on the grassy bank beside the road.
This person was not unmindful of the hazard which he
incurred by contact with a sick man. He conceived himself
to have performed all that was consistent with duty to
himself and to his family; and Wallace, persisting in affirming
that, by attempting to ride farther, he should merely
hasten his death, was at length left to his own guidance.
These were unexpected and mournful tidings. I had
fondly imagined, that his safety was put beyond the reach of
untoward accidents. Now, however, there was reason to
suppose him to have perished by a lingering and painful
disease, rendered fatal by the selfishness of mankind, by the
want of seasonable remedies, and exposure to inclement
airs. Some uncertainty, however, rested on his fate. It
was my duty to remove it, and to carry to the Hadwins no
mangled and defective tale. Where, I asked, had Wallace
and his companion parted?
It was about three miles further onward. The spot and
the house within view from the spot, were accurately described.
In this house it was possible that Wallace had
sought an asylum, and some intelligence respecting him
might be gained from its inhabitants. My informant was
journeying to the city, so that we were obliged to separate.
In consequence of this man's description of Wallace's
deportment, and the proofs of a dissolute and thoughtless





temper which he had given, I began to regard his death as
an event less deplorable. Such a one was unworthy of a
being so devoutly pure, so ardent in fidelity and tenderness
as Susan Hadwin. If he loved, it was probable that in defiance
of his vows, he would seek a different companion.
If he adhered to his first engagements, his motives would be
sordid, and the disclosure of his latent defects might produce
more exquisite misery to his wife, than his premature death
or treacherous desertion.
The preservation of this man, was my sole motive for
entering the infected city, and subjecting my own life to the
hazards, from which my escape may almost be esteemed
miraculous. Was not the end disproportioned to the means?
Was there arrogance in believing my life a price too great
to be given for his?
I was not, indeed, sorry for the past. My purpose was
just, and the means which I selected, were the best my
limited knowledge supplied. My happiness should be drawn
from reflecting on the equity of my intentions. That these
intentions were frustrated by the ignorance of others, or my
own, was the consequence of human frailty. Honest purposes,
though they may not bestow happiness on others,
will, at least, secure it to him who fosters them.
By these reflections my regrets were dissipated, and I
prepared to rejoice alike, whether Wallace should be found
to have escaped or to have perished. The house to which
I had been directed was speedily brought into view. I
inquired for the master or mistress of the mansion, and was
conducted to a lady of a plain and housewifely appearance.
My curiosity was fully gratified. Wallace, whom my
description easily identified, had made his appearance at
her door on the evening of the day on which he left the
city. The dread of the fever was descanted on with copious
and rude eloquence. I supposed her eloquence on this
theme to be designed to apologize to me for her refusing
entrance to the sick man. The peroration, however, was
different. Wallace was admitted, and suitable attention
paid to his wants.
Happily, the guest had nothing to struggle with but extreme
weakness. Repose, nourishing diet, and salubrious




airs restored him in a short time to health. He lingered
under this roof for three weeks, and then, without any professions
of gratitude, or offers of pecuniary remuneration, or
information of the course which he determined to take, he
left them.
These facts, added to that which I had previously known,
threw no advantageous light upon the character of Wallace.
It was obvious to conclude, that he had gone to Malverton,
and thither there was nothing to hinder me from following
him.
Perhaps, one of my grossest defects is a precipitate temper.
I choose my path suddenly, and pursue it with impetuous
expedition. In the present instance, my resolution
was conceived with unhesitating zeal, and I walked the faster
that I might the sooner execute it. Miss Hadwin deserved
to be happy. Love was in her heart the all-absorbing sentiment.
A disappointment there was a supreme calamity.
Depravity and folly must assume the guise of virtue before
it can claim her affection. This disguise might be maintained
for a time, but its detection must inevitably come, and the
sooner this detection takes place the more beneficial it must
prove.
I resolved to unbosom myself, with equal and unbounded
confidence, to Wallace and his mistress. I would choose
for this end, not the moment when they were separate, but
that in which they were together. My knowledge, and the
sources of my knowledge, relative to Wallace, should be unfolded
to the lady with simplicity and truth. The lover
should be present, to confute, to extenuate, or to verify the
charges.
During the rest of the day these images occupied the
chief place in my thoughts. The road was miry and dark,
and my journey proved to be more tedious and fatiguing
than I expected. At length, just as the evening closed, the
well known habitation appeared in view. Since my departure,
winter had visited the world, and the aspect of nature
was desolate and dreary. All around this house was vacant,
negligent, forlorn. The contrast between these appearances
and those which I had noticed on my first approach to
it, when the ground and the trees were decked with the
luxuriance and vivacity of summer, was mournful, and




seemed to foretoken ill. My spirits drooped as I noticed
the general inactivity and silence.
I entered, without warning, the door that led into the parlor.
No face was to be seen or voice heard. The chimney
was ornamented, as in summer, with evergreen shrubs.
Though it was now the second month of frost and snow, fire
did not appear to have been lately kindled on this hearth.
This was a circumstance from which nothing good could
be deduced. Had there been those to share its comforts,
who had shared them on former years, this was the place
and hour at which they commonly assembled. A door on
one side led, through a narrow entry, into the kitchen. I
opened this door, and passed towards the kitchen.
No one was there but an old man, squatted in the chimney
corner. His face, though wrinkled, denoted undecayed
health and an unbending spirit. A homespun coat, leathern
breeches wrinkled with age, and blue yarn hose, were well
suited to his lean and shrivelled form. On his right knee
was a wooden bowl, which he had just replenished from a
pipkin of hasty pudding still smoking on the coals; and in
his left hand a spoon, which he had, at that moment, plunged
into a bottle of molasses that stood beside him.
This action was suspended by my entrance. He looked
up and exclaimed, hey day! who's this that comes into
other people's houses without so much as saying “by your
leave?” What's thee business? Who's thee want?
I had never seen this personage before. I supposed it to
be some new domestic, and inquired for Mr. Hadwin.
Ah! replied he with a sigh, William Hadwin. Is it him
thee wants? Poor man! He is gone to rest many days
since.
My heart sunk within me at these tidings. Dead, said I,
do you mean that he is dead?—This exclamation was uttered
in a tone of some vehemence. It attracted the attention of
some one who was standing without, who immediately entered
the kitchen. It was Eliza Hadwin. The moment
she beheld me she shrieked aloud, and, rushing into my
arms, fainted away.
The old man dropped his bowl; and, starting from his
seat, stared alternately at me and at the breathless girl. My
emotion, made up of joy, and sorrow, and surprise, rendered




me for a moment powerless as she. At length, he said, I
understand this. I know who thee is, and will tell her thee's
come. So saying he hastily left the room.
