

I mounted the stage coach at day-break the next day,
in company with a sallow Frenchman from Saint Domingo,
his fiddle-case, an ape, and two female blacks. The
Frenchman, after passing the suburbs, took out his violin and
amused himself with humming to his own tweedle tweedle.
The monkey now and then mounched an apple, which was
given to him from a basket by the blacks, who gazed with
stupid wonder, and an exclamatory La! La! upon the
passing scenery; or chattered to each other in a sort of
open-mouthed, half articulate, monotonous, and sing-song
jargon.
The man looked seldom either on this side or that; and
spoke only to rebuke the frolicks of the monkey, with a
Tenez! Dominique! Prenez garde! Diable noir!
As to me my thought was busy in a thousand ways. I




sometimes gazed at the faces of my four companions, and
endeavored to discern the differences and samenesses between
them. I took an exact account of the features,
proportions, looks, and gestures of the monkey, the Congolese,
and the Creole Gaul. I compared them together,
and examined them apart. I looked at them in a thousand
different points of view, and pursued, untired and
unsatiated, those trains of reflections which began at each
change of tone, feature, and attitude.
I marked the country as it successively arose before me,
and found endless employment in examining the shape and
substance of the fence, the barn and the cottage, the aspect
of earth and of heaven. How great are the pleasures of
health and of mental activity.
My chief occupation, however, related to the scenes into
which I was about to enter. My imaginations were, of
course, crude and inadequate; and I found an uncommon
gratification in comparing realities, as they successively occurred,
with the pictures which my wayward fancy had depicted.
I will not describe my dreams. My proper task is to
relate the truth. Neither shall I dwell upon the images suggested
by the condition of the country through which I
passed. I will confine myself to mentioning the transactions
connected with the purpose of my journey.
I reached Baltimore at night. I was not so fatigued, but
that I could ramble through the town. I intended, at present,
merely the gratification of a stranger's curiosity. My visit
to Mrs. Watson and her brother I designed should take
place on the morrow. The evening of my arrival I deemed
an unseasonable time.
While roving about, however, it occurred to me, that it
might not be impolitic to find the way to their habitation even
now. My purposes of general curiosity would equally be
served whichever way my steps were bent; and, to trace
the path to their dwelling, would save me the trouble of
inquiries and interrogations tomorrow.
When I looked forward to an interview with the wife of
Watson, and to the subject which would be necessarily discussed
at that interview, I felt a trembling and misgiving at
my heart. Surely, thought I, it will become me to exercise
immeasurable circumspection and address; and yet how




little are these adapted to the impetuosity and candor of my
nature.
How am I to introduce myself? What am I to tell her?
That I was a sort of witness to the murder of her husband?
That I received from the hand of his assassin the letter which
I afterwards transmitted to her? and, from the same hands,
the bills contained in his girdle?
How will she start and look aghast? What suspicions
will she harbor? What inquiries shall be made of me?
How shall they be disarmed and eluded, or answered? Deep
consideration will be necessary before I trust myself to such
an interview. The coming night shall be devoted to reflection
upon this subject.
From these thoughts I proceeded to inquiries for the
street mentioned in the advertisement, where Mrs. Watson
was said to reside. The street, and, at length, the habitation,
was found. Having reached a station opposite, I paused
and surveyed the mansion. It was a wooden edifice of
two stories; humble, but neat. You ascended to the door
by several stone steps. Of the two lower windows, the
shutters of one were closed, but those of the other were
open. Though late in the evening, there was no appearance
of light or fire within.
Beside the house was a painted fence, through which
was a gate leading to the back of the building. Guided by
the impulse of the moment, I crossed the street to the gate,
and, lifting the latch, entered the paved alley, on one side
of which was a paled fence, and on the other the house,
looking through two windows into the alley.
The first window was dark like those in front; but at the
second a light was discernible. I approached it, and, looking
through, beheld a plain but neat apartment, in which
parlour, kitchen, and nursery seemed to be united. A fire
burnt cheerfully in the chimney, over which was a teakettle.
On the hearth sat a smiling and playful cherub of a boy,
tossing something to a black girl who sat opposite, and whose
innocent and regular features wanted only a different hue
to make them beautiful. Near it, in a rocking chair, with
a sleeping babe in her lap, sat a female figure in plain but
neat and becoming attire. Her posture permitted half her





face to be seen, and saved me from any danger of being
observed.
This countenance was full of sweetness and benignity,
but the sadness that veiled its lustre was profound. Her
eyes were now fixed upon the fire and were moist with the
tears of remembrance, while she sung, in low and scarcely
audible strains, an artless lullaby.
This spectacle exercised a strange power over my feelings.
While occupied in meditating on the features of the
mother, I was unaware of my conspicuous situation. The
black girl having occasion to change her situation, in order
to reach the ball which was thrown at her, unluckily caught
a glance of my figure through the glass. In a tone of half
surprise and half terror, she cried out—O! see dare! a
man!
I was tempted to draw suddenly back, but a second
thought shewed me the impropriety of departing thus abruptly,
and leaving behind me some alarm. I felt a sort of
necessity for apologizing for my intrusion into these precincts,
and hastened to a door that led into the same apartment.
I knocked. A voice somewhat confused bade me enter.
It was not till I opened the door and entered the room, that
I fully saw in what embarrassments I had incautiously involved
myself.
I could scarcely obtain sufficient courage to speak, and
gave a confused assent to the question—“Have you business
with me, sir?” She offered me a chair, and I sat
down. She put the child, not yet awakened, into the arms
of the black, who kissed it and rocked it in her arms with
great satisfaction, and, resuming her seat, looked at me with
inquisitiveness mingled with complacency.
After a moment's pause, I said—I was directed to this
house as the abode of Mr. Ephraim Williams. Can he be
seen, madam?
He is not in town at present. If you will leave a message
with me, I will punctually deliver it.
The thought suddenly occurred, whether, any more was
needful than merely to leave the bills suitably enclosed, as
they already were, in a packet. Thus all painful explanations
might be avoided, and I might have reason to




congratulate myself on his seasonable absence. Actuated by these
thoughts, I drew forth the packet, and put it into her hand,
saying, I will leave this in your possession, and must earnestly
request you to keep it safe until you can deliver it into
his own hands.
Scarcely had I said this before new suggestions occurred.
Was it right to act in this clandestine and mysterious manner?
Should I leave these persons in uncertainty respecting
the fate of a husband and a brother? What perplexities,
misunderstandings, and suspenses might not grow out of
this uncertainty; and ought they not to be precluded at any
hazard to my own safety or good name?
These sentiments made me involuntarily stretch forth my
hand to retake the packet. This gesture, and other singnificances
in my manners, joined to a trembling consciousness
in herself, filled my companion with all the tokens of confusion
and fear. She alternately looked at me and at the
paper. Her trepidation increased, and she grew pale.
These emotions were counteracted by a strong effort.
At length she said, falteringly, I will take good care of
them, and will give them to my brother.
She rose and placed them in a drawer, after which she
resumed her seat.
On this occasion all my wariness forsook me. I cannot explain
why my perplexity and the trouble of my thoughts were
greater upon this than upon similar occasions. However it
be, I was incapable of speaking, and fixed my eyes upon
the floor. A sort of electrical sympathy pervaded my companion,
and terror and anguish were strongly manifested in
the glances which she sometimes stole at me. We seemed
fully to understand each other without the aid of words.
This imbecility could not last long. I gradually recovered
my composure, and collected my scattered thoughts.
I looked at her with seriousness, and steadfastly spoke—
Are you the wife of Amos Watson?
She started.—I am, indeed. Why do you ask? Do
you know any thing of —? There her voice failed.
I replied with quickness, yes. I am fully acquainted
with his destiny.
Good God! she exclaimed in a paroxysm of surprise,
and bending eagerly forward, my husband is then alive.




This packet is from him. Where is he? When have you
seen him?
'Tis a long time since.
But where, where is he now? Is he well? Will he return
to me?
Never.
Merciful Heaven! looking upwards and clasping her
hands, I thank thee at least for his life! But why has he
forsaken me? Why will he not return?
For a good reason, said I, with augmented solemnity, he
will never return to thee. Long ago was he laid in the cold
grave.
She shrieked; and, at the next moment, sunk in a swoon
upon the floor. I was alarmed. The two children shrieked,
and ran about the room terrified and unknowing what they
did. I was overwhelmed with somewhat like terror, yet I
involuntarily raised the mother in my arms, and cast about
for the means of recalling her from this fit.
Time to effect this had not elapsed, when several persons,
apparently Mrs. Watson's neighbors, and raised by the outcries
of the girls, hastily entered the room. They looked
at me with mingled surprise and suspicion; but my attitude,
being not that of an injurer but helper; my countenance,
which shewed the pleasure their entrance, at this critical
moment, afforded me; and my words, in which I besought
their assistance, and explained, in some degree, and briefly,
the cause of those appearances, removed their ill thoughts.
Presently, the unhappy woman, being carried by the new
comers into a bed-room adjoining, recovered her sensibility.
I only waited for this. I had done my part. More information
would be useless to her, and not to be given by me,
at least, in the present audience, without embarrassment and
peril. I suddenly determined to withdraw, and this, the attention
of the company being otherwise engaged, I did without
notice. I returned to my inn, and shut myself up in
my chamber. Such was the change which, undesigned,
unforeseen, half an hour had wrought in my situation. My
cautious projects had perished in their conception. That
which I had deemed so arduous, to require such circumspect
approaches, such well concerted speeches, was done.
I had started up before this woman as if from the pores of




the ground. I had vanished with the same celerity, but had
left her in possession of proofs sufficient that I was neither
spectre nor demon. I will visit her, said I, again. I will
see her brother, und know the full effect of my disclosure.
I will tell them all that I myself know. Ignorance would be
no less injurious to them than to myself; but, first, I will see
the Maurices.
