

Domestic and studious occupations did not wholly engross
the attention of Constantia. Social pleasures were
precious to her heart, and she was not backward to form
fellowships and friendships, with those around her. Hitherto
she had met with no one entitled to an uncommon portion
of regard, or worthy to supply the place of the friend of her
infancy. Her visits were rare, and as yet, chiefly confined
to the family of Mr. Melbourne. Here she was treated
with flattering distinctions, and enjoyed opportunities of extending
as far as she pleased, her connexions with the gay
and opulent. To this she felt herself by no means inclined,
and her life was still eminently distinguished by love of privacy,
and habits of seclusion.
One morning, feeling an indisposition to abstraction, she
determined to drop in, for an hour, on Mrs. Melbourne.
Finding Mrs. Melbourne's parlor unoccupied, she proceeded
unceremoniously, to an apartment on the second floor,
where that lady was accustomed to sit. She entered, but
this room was likewise empty. Here she cast her eyes on
a collection of prints, copied from the Farnese collection, and
employed herself, for some minutes, in comparing the forms
of Titiano and the Caracchi.
Suddenly, notes of peculiar sweetness were wafted to her
ear from without. She listened with surprise, for the tones
of her father's lute were distinctly recognized. She hied
to the window, which chanced to look into a back court.
The music was perceived to come from the window of the
next house. She recollected her interview with the purchaser
of her instrument, at the musical shop, and the powerful
impression which the stranger's countenance had made
upon her.






The first use she had made of her recent change of fortune,
was to endeavor the recovery of this instrument. The
musical dealer, when reminded of the purchase, and interrogated
as to the practicability of regaining the lute, for
which she was willing to give treble the price, answered
that he had no knowledge of the foreign lady, beyond what
was gained at the interview which took place in Constantia's
presence. Of her name, residence, and condition, he knew
nothing, and had endeavored in vain to acquire knowledge.
Now this incident seemed to have furnished her with the
information she so earnestly sought. This performer was
probably the stranger herself. Her residence so near the
Melbournes, and in a house which was the property of the
magistrate, might be means of information as to her condition,
and perhaps of introduction to a personal acquaintance.
While engaged in these reflections, Mrs. Melbourne entered
the appartment. Constantia related this incident to
her friend, and stated the motives of her present curiosity.
Her friend willingly imparted what knowledge she possessed
relative to this subject. This was the sum.
This house had been hired, previously to the appearance
of yellow fever, by an English family, who left their native
soil, with a view to a permanent abode in the new world.
They had scarcely taken possession of the dwelling, when
they were terrified by the progress of the epidemic. They
had fled from the danger, but this circumstance, in addition
to some others, induced them to change their scheme. An
evil so unwonted as pestilence, impressed them with a belief
of perpetual danger, as long as they remained on this side
of the ocean. They prepared for an immediate return to
England.
For this end their house was relinquished, and their splendid
furniture destined to be sold by auction. Before this
event could take place, application was made to Mr. Melbourne,
by a lady, whom his wife's description shewed to
be the same with her of whom Constantia was in search.
She not only rented the house, but negotiated by means of
her landlord, the purchase of the furniture.
Her servants were blacks, and all but one, who officiated
as steward, unacquainted with the English language. Some
accident had proved her name to be Beauvias. She had




no visitants, very rarely walked abroad, and then only in
the evening with a female servant in attendance. Her hours
appeared to be divided between the lute and the pen. As
to her previous history or her present sources of subsistence,
Mrs. Melbourne's curiosity had not been idle, but no consistent
information was obtainable. Some incident had given
birth to the conjecture, that she was wife, or daughter, or
sister of Beauvias, the partizan of Brissot, whom the faction
of Marat had lately consigned to the scaffold, but this conjecture
was unsupported by suitable evidence.
This tale by no means diminished Constantia's desire of
personal intercourse. She saw no means of effecting her
purpose. Mrs. Melbourne was unqualified to introduce her,
having been discouraged in all the advances she had made
towards a more friendly intercourse. Constantia reflected
that her motives to seclusion, would probably induce this
lady to treat others as her friend had been treated.
It was possible, however, to gain access to her, if not as
a friend, yet as the original proprietor of the lute. She determined
to employ the agency of Roseveldt, the musical
shopman, for the purpose of re-buying this instrument. To
enforce her application, she commissioned this person, whose
obliging temper entitled him to confidence, to state her inducements
for originally offering it for sale, and her motives
for desiring the repossession on any terms which the lady
thought proper to dictate.
Roseveldt fixed an hour in which it was convenient for
him to execute her commission. This hour having passed,
Constantia, who was anxious respecting his success, hastened
to his house. Roseveldt delivered the instrument, which
the lady, having listened to his pleas and offers, directed to
be gratuitously restored to Constantia. At first, she had
expressed her resolution to part with it on no account, and
at no price. Its music was her only recreation, and this
instrument surpassed any she had ever before seen, in the
costliness and delicacy of its workmanship. But Roseveldt's
representations produced an instant change of resolution,
and she not only eagerly consented to restore it, but refused
to receive any thing in payment.
Constantia was deeply affected by this unexpected generosity.
It was not her custom to be outstripped in this




career. She now condemned herself for her eagerness
to regain this instrument. During her father's blindness, it
was a powerful, because the only solace of his melancholy.
Now he had no longer the same anxieties to encounter, and
books and the pencil were means of gratification always at
hand. The lute, therefore, she imagined, could be easily
dispensed with by Mr. Dudley, whereas its power of consoling
might be as useful to the unknown lady, as it had formerly
been to her father. She readily perceived in what
manner it became her to act. Roseveldt was commissioned
to re-deliver the lute, and to intreat the lady's acceptance of
it. The tender was received without hesitation, and Roseveldt
dismissed without any inquiry relative to Constantia.
These transactions were reflected on by Constantia with
considerable earnestness. The conduct of the stranger, her
affluent and lonely state, her conjectural relationship to the
actors in the great theatre of Europe, were mingled together
in the fancy of Constantia, and embellished with the conceptions
of her beauty, derived from their casual meeting at
Roseveldt's. She forgot not their similitude in age and sex,
and delighted to prolong the dream of future confidence
and friendship to take place between them. Her heart sighed
for a companion, fitted to partake in all her sympathies.
This strain, by being connected with the image of a
being like herself, who had grown up with her from childhood,
who had been entwined with her earliest affections,
but from whom she had been severed from the period at
which her father's misfortunes commenced, and of whose
present condition she was wholly ignorant, was productive of
the deepest melancholy. It filled her with excruciating, and
for a time irremediable sadness. It formed a kind of paroxysm,
which like some febrile affections, approach and retire
without warning, and against the most vehement struggles.
In this mood, her fancy was thronged with recollections of
scenes, in which her friend had sustained a part. Their
last interview was commonly revived in her remembrance
so forcibly, as almost to produce a lunatic conception of its
reality. A ditty which they sung together on that occasion,
flowed to her lips. If ever human tones were qualified to
convey the whole soul, they were those of Constantia when
she sung;—







The breeze awakes, the bark prepares,
To waft me to a distant shore;
But far beyond this world of cares,
We meet again to part no more.

These fits were accustomed to approach and to vanish by
degrees. They were transitory but not infrequent, and
were pregnant with such agonizing tenderness, such heartbreaking
sighs, and a flow of such bitter yet delicious tears,
that it were not easily decided whether the pleasure or the
pain surmounted. When symptoms of their coming were
felt, she hastened into solitude, that the progress of her feelings
might endure no restraint.
On the evening of the day, on which the lute had been
sent to the foreign lady, Constantia was alone in her chamber,
immersed in desponding thoughts. From these she
was recalled by Fabian, her black servant, who announced
a guest. She was loth to break off the thread of her present
meditations, and inquired with a tone of some impatience,
who was the guest? The servant was unable to tell;
it was a young lady whom he had never before seen; she
had opened for herself, and entered the parlor without previous
notice.
Constantia paused at this relation. Her thoughts had recently
been fixed upon Sophia Westwyn. Since their parting
four years before, she had heard no tidings of this woman.
Her fears imagined no more probable cause of her
friend's silence than her death. This, however, was uncertain.
The question now occurred, and brought with it
sensations that left her no power to move; was this the
guest?
Her doubts were quickly dispelled, for the stranger, taking
a light from the table, and not brooking the servant's delay,
followed Fabian to the chamber of his mistress. She entered
with careless freedom, and presented, to the astonished
eyes of Constantia, the figure she had met at Roseveldt's,
and the purchaser of her lute.
The stranger advanced towards her with quick steps, and
mingling tones of benignity and sprightliness, said;—
I have come to perform a duty. I have received from
you to-day a lute, that I valued almost as my best friend.
To find another in America, would not, perhaps, be possible;




but, certainly, none equally superb and exquisite as this can
be found. To shew how highly I esteem the gift, I have
come in person to thank you for it.—There she stopped.
Constantia could not suddenly recover from the extreme
surprise into which the unexpectedness of this meeting, had
thrown her. She could scarcely sufficiently suppress this
confusion, to enable her to reply to these rapid effusions of
her visitant, who resumed, with augmented freedom;—
I came, as I said, to thank you, but, to say the truth,
that was not all. I came likewise to see you. Having done
my errand, I suppose I must go. I would fain stay longer
and talk to you a little; will you give me lieve?
Constantia, scarcely retrieving her composure, stammered
out a polite assent. They seated themselves, and the visitant,
pressing the hand which she had taken, proceeded in
a strain so smooth, so flowing, sliding from grave to gay,
blending vivacity with tenderness, interpreting Constantia's
silence with so keen sagacity, and accounting for the singularities
of her own deportment, in a way so respectful to her
companion, and so worthy of a steadfast and pure mind in
herself, that every embarrassment and scruple, were quickly
banished from their interview.
In an hour the guest took her leave. No promise of repeating
her visit, and no request that Constantia would repay
it, was made. Their parting seemed to be the last;
whatever purpose having been contemplated, appeared to be
accomplished by this transient meeting. It was of a nature
deeply to interest the mind of Constantia. This was the
lady who talked with Roseveldt, and bargained with Melbourne,
and they had been induced by appearances, to suppose
her ignorant of any language but French; but her
discourse, on the present occasion, was in English, and was
distinguished by unrivalled fluency. Her phrases and habits
of pronouncing, were untinctured with any foreign mixture,
and bespoke the perfect knowledge of a native of America.
On the next evening, while Constantia was reviewing this
transaction, calling up and weighing the sentiments which
the stranger had uttered, and indulging some regret at the
unlikelihood of their again meeting, Martinette, (for I will
henceforth call her by her true name,) entered the apartment
as abruptly as before. She accounted for the visit,




merely by the pleasure it afforded her, and proceeded in a
strain even more versatile and brilliant, than before. This
interview ended like the first, without any tokens, on the
part of the guest, of resolution or desire to renew it, but a
third interview took place on the ensuing day.
Henceforth Martinette became a frequent but hasty visitant,
and Constantia became daily more enamored of her new
acquaintance. She did not overlook peculiarities in the conversation
and deportment of this woman. These exhibited
no tendencies to confidence, or traces of sympathy. They
merely denoted large experience, vigorous faculties and masculine
attainments. Herself was never introduced, except
as an observer, but her observations, on government and
manners, were profound and critical.
Her education seemed not widely different, from that
which Constantia had received. It was classical and mathematical,
but to this was added a knowledge of political and
military transactions in Europe, during the present age,
which implied the possession of better means of information,
than books. She depicted scenes and characters, with the
accuracy of one who had partaken and witnessed them herself.

Constantia's attention had been chiefly occupied by personal
concerns. Her youth had passed in contention with
misfortune, or in the quietudes of study. She could not be
unapprised of contemporary revolutions and wars, but her
ideas respecting them were indefinite and vague. Her
views and her inferences on this head, were general and
speculative. Her acquaintance with history was exact and
circumstantial, in proportion as she retired backward from
her own age. She knew more of the siege of Mutina than
of that of Lisle; more of the machinations of Cataline and
the tumults of Clodius, than of the prostration of the Bastile,
and the proscriptions of Marat.
She listened, therefore, with unspeakable eagerness to
this reciter, who detailed to her, as the occasion suggested,
the progress of action and opinion, on the theatre of France
and Poland. Conceived and rehearsed as this was, with
the energy and copiousness of one who sustained a part in
the scene, the mind of Constantia was always kept at the
pitch of curiosity and wonder.






But while this historian described the features, personal
deportment, and domestic character of Antoinette, Mirabeau
and Robespierre, an impenetrable veil was drawn over her
own condition. There was a warmth and freedom in her
details, which bespoke her own co-agency in these events,
but was unattended by transports of indignation or sorrow, or
by pauses of abstraction, such as were likely to occur in one
whose hopes and fears had been intimately blended with
public events.
Constantia could not but derive humiliation from comparing
her own slender acquirements with those of her companion.
She was sensible that all the differences between
them, arose from diversities of situation. She was eager to
discover in what particulars this diversity consisted. She
was for a time withheld by scruples, not easily explained,
from disclosing her wishes. An accident however occurred,
to remove these impediments. One evening, this unceremonious
visitant discovered Constantia busily surveying a
chart of the Mediterranean sea. This circumstance led the
discourse to the present state of Syria and Cyprus. Martinette
was copious in her details. Constantia listened for a
time, and when a pause ensued, questioned her companion
as to the means she possessed of acquiring so much knowledge.
This question was proposed with diffidence, and
prefaced by apologies.
Instead of being offended by your question, replied the
guest, I only wonder that it never before occurred to you.
Travellers tell us much. Volney and Mariti would have
told you nearly all that I have told. With these I have conversed
personally, as well as read their books, but my knowledge
is, in truth, a species of patrimony. I inherit it.
Will you be good enough, said Constantia, to explain
yourself?
My mother was a Greek of Cyprus. My father was a
Sclavonian of Ragusa, and I was born in a garden at
Aleppo.
That was a singular concurrence.
How singular? That a nautical vagrant like my father,
should sometimes anchor in the bay of Naples. That a
Cyprian merchant should carry his property and daughter
beyond the reach of a Turkish Sangiack, and seek an





asylum so commodious as Napoli; that my father should have
dealings with this merchant, see, love, and marry his daughter,
and afterwards procure, from the French government, a
consular commission to Aleppo; that the union should, in
due time, be productive of a son and daughter, are events
far from being singular. They happen daily.
And may I venture to ask if this be your history?
The history of my parents. I hope you do not consider
the place of my birth as the sole or the most important circumstance
of my life.
Nothing would please me more than to be enabled to
compare it with other incidents. I am apt to think that
your life is a tissue of surprising events. That the daughter
of a Ragusan and Greek, should have seen and known
so much; that she should talk English with equal fluency
and more correctness than a native; that I should now be
conversing with her in a corner so remote from Cyprus and
Sicily, are events more wonderful than any which I have
known.
Wonderful! Pish! Thy ignorance, thy miscalculation
of probabilities is far more so. My father talked to me
in Sclavonic. My mother and her maids talked to me
in Greek. My neighbors talked to me in a medley of
Arabic, Syriac and Turkish. My father's secretary was
a scholar. He was as well versed in Lysias and Xenophon,
as any of their contemporaries. He labored for
ten yearsto enable me to read a language, essentially the
same with that I used daily to my nurse and mother. Is it
wonderful then that I should be skilful in Sclavonic, Greek,
and the jargon of Aleppo? To have refrained from learning
was impossible. Suppose a girl, prompt, diligent, inquisitive,
to spend ten years of her life partly in Spain; partly in
Tuscany; partly in France, and partly in England. With
her versatile curiosity and flexible organs, would it be possible
for her to remain ignorant of each of these languages?
Latin is the mother of them all, and presents itself, of
course, to her studious attention.
I cannot easily conceive motives which should lead you,
before the age of twenty, through so many scenes.
Can you not? You grew and flourished, like a frail Mimosa,
in the spot where destiny had planted you. Thank




my stars, I am somewhat better than a vegetable. Necessity,
it is true, and not choice, set me in motion, but I am
not sorry for the consequences.
Is it too much, said Constantia, with some hesitation, to
request a detail of your youthful adventures?
Too much to give, perhaps, at a short notice. To such
as you, my tale might abound with novelty, while to others,
more acquainted with vicissitudes, it would be tedious and
flat. I must be gone in a few minutes. For that and for
better reasons, I must not be minute. A summary, at present,
will enable you to judge how far a more copious narrative
is suited to instruct or to please you.
