

The features of one whom I had seen so transiently as
Wallace, may be imagined to be not easily recognised,





 especially when those features were tremulous and deathful.
Here, however, the differences were too conspicuous to
mislead me. I beheld one in whom I could recollect none
that bore resemblance. Though ghastly and livid, the
traces of intelligence and beauty were undefaced. The life
of Wallace was of more value to a feeble individual, but
surely the being that was stretched before me, and who was
hastening to his last breath, was precious to thousands.
Was he not one in whose place I would willingly have
died? The offering was too late. His extremities were
already cold. A vapor, noisome and contagious, hovered
over him. The flutterings of his pulse had ceased. His
existence was about to close amidst convulsion and pangs.
I withdrew my gaze from this object, and walked to a
table. I was nearly unconscious of my movements. My
thoughts were occupied with contemplations of the train of
horrors and disasters that pursue the race of man. My
musings were quickly interrupted by the sight of a small
cabinet, the hinges of which were broken and the lid half
raised. In the present state of my thoughts, I was prone
to suspect the worst. Here were traces of pillage. Some
casual or mercenary attendant, had not only contributed to
hasten the death of the patient, but had rifled his property
and fled.
This suspicion would, perhaps, have yielded to mature
reflections, if I had been suffered to reflect. A moment
scarcely elapsed, when some appearance in the mirror,
which hung over the table, called my attention. It was a
human figure, nothing could be briefer than the glance that
I fixed upon this apparition, yet there was room enough for
the vague conception to suggest itself, that the dying man
had started from his bed and was approaching me. This
belief was, at the same instant, confuted, by the survey of
his form and garb. One eye, a scar upon his cheek, a
tawny skin, a form grotesquely misproportioned, brawny as
Hercules, and habited in livery, composed, as it were, the
parts of one view.
To perceive, to fear, and to confront this apparition were
blended into one sentiment. I turned towards him with the
swiftness of lightning, but my speed was useless to my




 safety. A blow upon my temple was succeeded by an
utter oblivion of thought and of feeling. I sunk upon the
floor prostrate and senseless.
My insensibility might be mistaken by observers for death,
yet some part of this interval was haunted by a fearful
dream. I conceived myself lying on the brink of a pit,
whose bottom the eye could not reach. My hands and legs
were fettered, so as to disable me from resisting two grim
and gigantic figures, who stooped to lift me from the earth.
Their purpose methought was to cast me into this abyss. My
terrors were unspeakable, and I struggled with such force,
that my bonds snapt and I found myself at liberty. At
this moment my senses returned and I opened my eyes.
The memory of recent events was, for a time, effaced by
my visionary horrors. I was conscious of transition from
one state of being to another, but my imagination was still
filled with images of danger. The bottomless gulf and my
gigantic persecutors were still dreaded. I looked up with
eagerness. Beside me I discovered three figures, whose
character or office were explained by a coffin of pine boards
which lay upon the floor. One stood with hammer and
nails in his hand, as ready to replace and fasten the lid of
the coffin, as soon as its burthen should be received.
I attempted to rise from the floor, but my head was dizzy
and my sight confused. Perceiving me revive, one of the
men, assisted me to regain my feet. The mist and confusion
presently vanished, so as to allow me to stand unsupported
and to move. I once more gazed at my attendants,
and recognised the three men, whom I had met in High-street,
and whose conversation I have mentioned that I
overheard. I looked again upon the coffin. A wavering
recollection of the incidents that led me hither and of the
stunning blow which I had received, occurred to me. I
saw into what error appearances had misled these men, and
shuddered to reflect, by what hairbreadth means I had
escaped being buried alive.
Before the men had time to interrogate me, or to comment
upon my situation, one entered the apartment, whose
habit and mien tended to encourage me. The stranger was
characterized by an aspect full of composure and benignity,
a face in which the serious lines of age were blended with




 the ruddiness and smoothness of youth, and a garb that
bespoke that religious profession, with whose benevolent
doctrines the example of Hadwin had rendered me familiar.

On observing me on my feet, he betrayed marks of surprise
and satisfaction. He addressed me in a tone of
mildness.
Young man, said he, what is thy condition? Art thou
sick? If thou art, thou must consent to receive the best
treatment which the times will afford. These men will convey
thee to the hospital at Bush Hill.
The mention of that contagious and abhorred receptacle,
inspired me with some degree of energy. No, said I, I am
not sick, a violent blow reduced me to this situation. I
shall presently recover strength enough to leave this spot,
without assistance.
He looked at me, with an incredulous but compassionate
air; I fear thou dost deceive thyself or me. The necessity
of going to the hospital is much to be regretted, but on the
whole it is best. Perhaps, indeed, thou hast kindred or
friends who will take care of thee.
No, said I; neither kindred nor friends. I am a stranger
in the city. I do not even know a single being.
Alas! returned the stranger with a sigh, thy state is sorrowful—
but how camest thou hither? continued he, looking
around him, and whence comest thou?
I came from the country. I reached the city a few
hours ago. I was in search of a friend who lived in this
house.
Thy undertaking was strangely hazardous and rash; but
who is the friend thou seekest? Was it he who died in
that bed, and whose corpse has just been removed?
The men now betrayed some impatience; and inquired
of the last comer, whom they called Mr. Estwick, what
they were to do. He turned to me, and asked if I were
willing to be conducted to the hospital?
I assured him that I was free from disease, and stood
in no need of assistance; adding, that my feebleness was
owing to a stunning blow received from a ruffian on my
temple. The marks of this blow were conspicuous, and




 after some hesitation he dismissed the men; who, lifting the
empty coffin on their shoulders, disappeared.
He now invited me to descend into the parlor; for, said
he, the air of this room is deadly. I feel already as if I
should have reason to repent of having entered it.
He now inquired into the cause of those appearances
which he had witnessed. I explained my situation as clearly
and succinctly as I was able.
After pondering, in silence, on my story;—I see how
it is, said he; the person whom thou sawest in the agonies
of death was a stranger. He was attended by his servant
and a hired nurse. His master's death being certain,
the nurse was despatched by the servant to procure a coffin.
He probably chose that opportunity to rifle his master's
trunk, that stood upon the table. Thy unseasonable entrance
interrupted him; and he designed, by the blow
which he gave thee, to secure his retreat before the arrival
of a hearse. I know the man, and the apparition thou
hast so well described, was his. Thou sayest that a friend
of thine lived in this house—thou hast come too late to be
of service. The whole family have perished. Not one was
suffered to escape.
This intelligence was fatal to my hopes. It required some
efforts to subdue my rising emotions. Compassion not only
for Wallace, but for Thetford, his father, his wife and his
child, caused a passionate effusion of tears. I was ashamed
of this useless and childlike sensibility; and attempted to
apologize to my companion. The sympathy, however, had
proved contagious, and the stranger turned away his face to
hide his own tears.
Nay, said he, in answer to my excuses, there is no need
to be ashamed of thy emotion. Merely to have known this
family, and to have witnessed their deplorable fate, is sufficient
to melt the most obdurate heart. I suspect that thou
wast united to some one of this family, by ties of tenderness
like those which led the unfortunate Maravegli hither.
This suggestion was attended, in relation to myself, with
some degree of obscurity; but my curiosity was somewhat
excited by the name that he had mentioned. I inquired into
the character and situation of this person, and particularly
respecting his connexion with this family.







Maravegli, answered he, was the lover of the eldest
daughter and already betrothed to her. The whole family,
consisting of helpless females, had placed themselves under
his peculiar guardianship. Mary Walpole and her children
enjoyed in him a husband and a father.
The name of Walpole, to which I was a stranger, suggested
doubts which I hastened to communicate. I am in
search, said I, not of a female friend, though not devoid of
interest in the welfare of Thetford and his family. My
principal concern is for a youth, by name, Wallace.
He looked at me with surprise. Thetford! this is not his
abode. He changed his habitation some weeks previous to
the fever. Those who last dwelt under this roof were an
English woman, and seven daughters.
This detection of my error somewhat consoled me. It
was still possible that Wallace was alive and in safety. I
eagerly inquired whither Thetford had removed, and whether
he had any knowledge of his present condition.
They had removed to No. —, in Market street. Concerning
their state he knew nothing. His acquaintance with
Thetford was imperfect. Whether he had left the city or
had remained, he was wholly uninformed.
It became me to ascertain the truth in these respects. I
was preparing to offer my parting thanks to the person by
whom I had been so highly benefited; since, as he now informed
me, it was by his interposition that I was hindered from
being enclosed alive in a coffin. He was dubious of my
true condition, and peremptorily commanded the followers
of the hearse to desist. A delay of twenty minutes, and
some medical application, would, he believed, determine
whether my life was extinguished or suspended. At the
end of this time, happily, my senses were recovered.
Seeing my intention to depart he inquired why, and whither
I was going? Having heard my answer.—Thy design, resumed
he, is highly indiscreet and rash. Nothing will sooner
generate this fever than fatigue and anxiety. Thou hast
scarcely recovered from the blow so lately received. Instead
of being useful to others this precipitation will only disable
thyself. Instead of roaming the streets and inhaling this
unwholesome air, thou hadst better betake thyself to bed




 and try to obtain some sleep. In the morning, thou wilt be
better qualified to ascertain the fate of thy friend, and afford
him the relief which he shall want.
I could not but admit the reasonableness of these remonstrances,
but where should a chamber and bed be sought?
It was not likely that a new attempt to procure accommodation
at the inns, would succeed better than the former.
Thy state, replied he, is sorrowful. I have no house to
which I can lead thee. I divide my chamber and even my
bed with another, and my landlady could not be prevailed
upon to admit a stranger. What thou wilt do, I know not.
This house has no one to defend it. It was purchased and
furnished by the last possessor, but the whole family, including
mistress, children, and servants, were cut off in a single
week. Perhaps, no one in America can claim the property.
Meanwhile plunderers are numerous and active. A house
thus totally deserted, and replenished with valuable furniture
will, I fear, become their prey. To night nothing can be
done towards rendering it secure, but staying in it. Art
thou willing to remain here till the morrow?
Every bed in the house has probably sustained a dead
person. It would not be proper, therefore, to lie in any one
of them. Perhaps, thou mayest find some repose upon this
carpet. It is, at least, better than the harder pavement,
and the open air.
This proposal, after some hesitation I embraced. He
was preparing to leave me, promising, if life were spared to
him, to return early in the morning. My curiosity respecting
the person whose dying agonies I had witnessed, prompted
me to detain him a few minutes.
Ah! said he, this perhaps, is the only one of many victims
to this pestilence whose loss the remotest generations may
have reason to deplore. He was the only descendant of an
illustrious house of Venice. He has been devoted from his
childhood to the acquisition of knowledge and the practice
of virtue. He came hither, as an enlightened observer, and
after traversing the country, conversing with all the men in
it eminent for their talents or their office; and collecting a
fund of observations, whose solidity and justice have seldom
been paralleled, he embarked, three months ago, for Europe.
Previously to his departure, he formed a tender connexion




 with the eldest daughter of this family. The mother and her
children had recently arrived from England. So many
faultless women, both mentally and personally considered, it
was not my fortune to meet with before. This youth well
deserved to be adopted into this family. He proposed to
return with the utmost expedition to his native country, and
after the settlement of his affairs, to hasten back to America,
and ratify his contract with Fanny Walpole.
The ship in which he embarked, had scarcely gone twenty
leagues to sea, before she was disabled by a storm, and
obliged to return to port. He posted to New York, to gain
a passage in a packet shortly to sail. Meanwhile this malady
prevailed among us. Mary Walpole was hindered by her
ignorance of the nature of that evil which assailed us, and
the counsel of injudicious friends, from taking the due precautions
for her safety. She hesitated to fly till flight was
rendered impracticable. Her death added to the helplessness
and distraction of the family. They were successively
seized and destroyed by the same pest.
Maravegli was apprized of their danger. He allowed the
packet to depart without him, and hastened to rescue the
Walpoles from the perils which encompassed them. He
arrived in this city time enough to witness the interment of
the last survivor. In the same hour he was seized himself
by this disease; the catastrophe is known to thee.
I will now leave thee to thy repose. Sleep is no less
needful to myself than to thee; for this is the second night
which has passed without it. Saying this, my companion
took his leave.
I now enjoyed leisure to review my situation. I experienced
no inclination to sleep. I lay down for a moment,
but my comfortless sensations and restless contemplations
would not permit me to rest. Before I entered this house, I
was tormented with hunger, but my craving had given place
to inquietude and loathing. I paced, in thoughtful and
anxious mood, across the floor of the apartment.
I mused upon the incidents related by Estwick, upon the
exterminating nature of this pestilence, and on the horrors
of which it was productive. I compared the experience of
the last hours, with those pictures which my imagination
had drawn in the retirements of Malverton. I wondered




 at the contrariety that exists between the scenes of the
city and the country; and fostered, with more zeal than
ever, the resolution to avoid those seats of depravity and
danger.
Concerning my own destiny, however, I entertained no
doubt. My new sensations assured me that my stomach
had received this corrosive poison. Whether I should die
or live, was easily decided. The sickness which assiduous
attendance and powerful prescriptions might remove, would,
by negligence and solitude, be rendered fatal; but from
whom could I expect medical or friendly treatment?
I had indeed a roof over my head. I should not perish
in the public way; but what was my ground for hoping to
continue under this roof? My sickness being suspected, I
should be dragged in a cart to the hospital; where I should,
indeed, die; but not with the consolation of loneliness and
silence. Dying groans were the only music, and livid
corpses were the only spectacle to which I should there be
introduced.
Immured in these dreary meditations, the night passed
away. The light glancing through the window awakened
in my bosom a gleam of cheerfulness. Contrary to my
expectations, my feelings were not more distempered, notwithstanding
my want of sleep, than on the last evening.
This was a token that my state was far from being so desperate
as I suspected. It was possible, I thought, that this
was the worst indisposition to which I was liable.
Meanwhile the coming of Estwick was impatiently expected.
The sun arose, and the morning advanced, but he
came not. I remembered that he talked of having reason
to repent his visit to this house. Perhaps he, likewise, was
sick, and this was the cause of his delay. This man's
kindness had even my love. If I had known the way to
his dwelling, I should have hastened thither, to inquire into
his condition, and to perform for him every office that humanity
might enjoin; but he had not afforded me any information
on that head.
