







Having gratified my curiosity in this respect,
Wallace proceeded to remind me of the circumstances of
our first interview. He had entertained doubts whether I
was the person, whom he had met at Lesher's. I acknowledged
myself to be the same, and inquired, in my turn, into
the motives of his conduct on that occasion.
I confess, said he, with some hesitation, I meant only to
sport with your simplicity and ignorance. You must not
imagine, however, that my stratagem was deep-laid and deliberately
executed. My professions at the tavern were sincere.
I meant not to injure but to serve you. It was not till I
reached the head of the stair-case, that the mischievous contrivance
occurred. I foresaw nothing, at the moment, but
ludicrous mistakes and embarrassment. The scheme was
executed almost at the very moment it occurred.
After I had returned to the parlour. Thetford charged
me with the delivery of a message in a distant quarter of the
city. It was not till I had performed this commission, and
had set out on my return, that I fully revolved the consequences
likely to flow from my project.
That Thetford and his wife would detect you in their
bed-chamber was unquestionable. Perhaps, weary of my
long delay, you would have fairly undressed and gone to bed.
The married couple would have made preparation to follow
you, and when the curtain was undrawn, would discover a




robust youth, fast asleep, in their place. These images,
which had just before excited my laughter, now produced
a very different emotion. I dreaded some fatal catastrophe
from the fiery passions of Thetford. In the first transports
of his fury he might pistol you, or, at least, might command
you to be dragged to prison.
I now heartlily repented of my jest and hastened home that
I might prevent, as far as possible, the evil effects that might
flow from it. The acknowledgment of my own agency in
this affair, would at least, transfer Thetford's indignation to
myself to whom it was equitably due.
The married couple had retired to their chamber, and no
alarm or confusion had followed. This was an inexplicable
circumstance. I waited with impatience till the morning
should furnish a solution of the difficulty. The morning
arrived. A strange event, had, indeed, taken place in their
bed-chamber. They found an infant asleep in their bed.
Thetford had been roused twice in the night, once by a
noise in the closet and, afterwards, by a noise at the door.
Some connection between these sounds and the foundling,
was naturally suspected. In the morning the closet was examined,
and a coarse pair of shoes was found on the floor.
The chamber door, which Thetford had locked in the evening,
was discovered to be open, as likewise a window in the
kitchen.
These appearances were a source of wonder and doubt to
others, but were perfectly intelligible to me. I rejoiced
that my stratagem had no more dangerous consequence, and
admired the ingenuity and perseverance with which you had
extricated yourself from so critical a state.
This narrative was only the verification of my own guesses.
Its facts were quickly supplanted in my thoughts by the disastrous
picture he had drawn of the state of the hospital. I
was confounded and shocked by the magnitude of this evil.
The cause of it was obvious. The wretches whom money
could purchase, were of course, licentious and unprincipled,




superintended and controlled they might be useful instruments,
but that superintendence could not be bought.
What qualities were requisite in the governor of such an
institution? He must have zeal, diligence and perseverance.
He must act from lofty and pure motives. He must
be mild and firm, intrepid and compliant. One perfectly
qualified for the office it is desirable, but not possible, to
find. A dispassionate and honest zeal in the cause of duty
and humanity, may be of eminent utility. Am I not endowed
with this zeal? Cannot my feeble efforts obviate some portion
of this evil?
No one has hitherto claimed this disgustful and perillous
situation. My powers and discernment are small, but if
they be honestly exerted they cannot fail to be somewhat
beneficial.
The impulse, produced by these reflections, was to hasten
to the City-hall, and make known my wi&longs;hes. This impulse
was controlled by recollections of my own indisposition, and
of the &longs;tate of Wallace. To deliver this youth to his friends
was the strongest obligation. When this was discharged,
I might return to the city, and acquit myself of more comprehensive
duties.
Wallace had now enjoyed a few hours rest, and was persuaded
to begin the journey. It was now noon-day, and the
sun darted insupportable rays. Wallace was more sensible
than I of their unwholesome influence. We had not reached
the suburbs, when his strength was wholly exhausted, and
had I not supported him, he would have sunk upon the pavement.

My limbs were scarcely less weak, but my resolutions
were much more &longs;trenuous than his, I made light of his indisposition,
and endeavoured to persuade him that his vigour
would return in proportion to his distance from the city. The
moment we should reach a shade, a short respite would restore
us to health and cheerfulness.






Nothing could revive his courage or induce him to go on.
To return or to proceed was equally impracticable. But,
should he be able to return, where should he find a retreat!
The danger of relapse was imminent: his own chamber
at Thetford's was unoccupied. If he could regain this house,
might I not procure him a physician and perform for him the
part of nurse.
His present situation was critical and mournful. To remain
in the street, exposed to the malignant fervours of the sun,
was not to be endured. To carry him in my arms, exceeded
my strength. Should I not claim the assistance of the first
passenger that appeared?
At that moment a horse and chaise passed us. The
vehicle proceeded at a quick pace. He that rode in it
might afford us the succour that we needed. He might be
persuaded to deviate from his course and convey the helpless
Wallace to the house we had just left.
This thought instantly impelled me forward. Feeble as I
was, I even ran with speed, in order to overtake the vehicle.
My purpose was effected with the utmo&longs;t difficulty. It fortunately
happened that the carriage contained but one person,
who stopped at my request. His countenance and guise was
mild and encouraging.
Good friend, I exclaimed, here is a young man too indisposed
to walk. I want him carried to his lodgings. Will
you, for money or for charity, allow him a place in your
chaise, and set him down where I shall direct? Observing
tokens of hesitation, I continued, you need have no fears
to perform this office. He is not sick, but merely feeble.
I will not ask twenty minutes, and you may ask what reward
you think proper.
Still he hesitated to comply. His business, he said, had
not led him into the city. He merely passed along the &longs;kirst of
it, whence he conceived that no danger would arise. He was
desirous of helping the unfortunate, but he could not think
of risqueing his own life, in the cause of a stranger, when





he had a wife and children depending on his existence and
exertions, for bread. It gave him pain to refuse, but he
thought his duty to himself and to others required that he
should not hazard his safety by compliance.
This plea was irrisistable. The mildness of his manner
shewed, that he might have been overpowered by persuasion
or tempted by reward. I would not take advantage of his
tractability; but should have declined his assistance, even if
it had been spontaneously offered. I turned away from him
in silence, and prepared to return to the spot where I had
left my friend. The man prepared to resume his way.
In this perplexity, the thought occured to me, that, since
this person was going into the country, he might, possibly,
consent to carry Wallace along with him. I confided greatly
in the salutary influence of rural airs. I believed that debility
constituted the whole of his complaint; that continuance in
the city might occasion his relapse, or, at least, procrastinate
his restoration.
I once more addressed myself to the traveller, and inquired
in what direction, and how far he was going. To my unspeakable
satisfaction, his answer informed me, that his home lay
beyond Mr. Hadwin's, and that his road carried him directly
past that gentleman's door. He was willing to receive Wallace
into his chaise, and to leave him at his uncle's.
This joyous and auspicious occurrence surpassed my fondest
hopes. I hurried with the pleasing tidings to Wallace, who
eagerly consented to enter the carriage. I thought not at
the moment of myself, or how far the same means of escaping
from my danger might be used. The stranger could not
be anxious on my account; and Wallace's dejection and
weakness may apologize for his not soliciting my company,
or expressing his fears for my safety. He was no sooner
seated, than the traveller hurried away. I gazed after them,
motionless and mute, till the carriage turning a corner, passed
beyond my sight.






I had now leisure to revert to my own condition, and to
ruminate on that series of abrupt and diversified events that
had happened, during the few hours which had beer, passed
in the city: the end of my coming was thus speedily and
satisfactorily accomplished. My hopes and fears had rapidly
fluctuated; but, respecting this young man, had now subsided
into calm and propitious certainty. Before the decline of
the sun, he would enter his paternal roof, and diffuse ineffable
joy throughout that peaceful and chaste asylum.
This contemplation, though rapturous and soothing speedily
gave way to reflections on the conduct which my duty
required, and the safe departure of Wallace, afforded me
liberty to pursue. To offer myself as a superintendent of the
hospital was still my purpose. The languors of my frame
might terminate in sickness, but this event it was useless to
anticipate. The lofty scite and pure airs of Bush-hill might
tend to dissipate my languors and restore me to health. At
least, while I had power, I was bound to exert it to the
wisest purpofes. I refolved to feek the City-hall immediately,
and, for that end, crossed the intermediate fields which separated
Sassafras from Chesnut-street.
More urgent considerations had diverted my attention from
the money which I bore about me, and from the image of the
desolate lady to whom it belonged. My intentions, with
regard to her, were the same as ever; but now it occurred to
me, with new force, that my death might preclude an interview
between us, and that it was prudent to dispose, in some
useful way, of the money which would otherwise be left to
the sport of chance.
The evils which had befallen this city were obvious and
enormous. Hunger and negligence had exasperated the malignity
and facilitated the progress of the pestilence. Could
this money be more usefully employed than in alleviating
these evils? During my life, I had no power over it, but my
death would justify me in prescribing the course which it
should take.






How was this course to be pointed out? How might I
place it, so that I should effect my intentions without relinquishing
the possession during my life.
These thoughts were superseded by a tide of new sensations.
The weight that incommoded my brows and my stomach
was suddenly increased. My brain was usurped by
some benumbing power, and my limbs refused to support
me. My pulsations were quickened, and the prevalence of
fever could no longer be doubted.
Till now, I had entertained a faint hope, that my indisposition
would vanish of itself. This hope was at an end. The
grave was before me, and my projects of curiosity or benevolence
were to sink into oblivion. I was not bereaved of the
powers of reflection. The consequences of lying in the road,
friendless and unprotected, were sure. The first passenger
would notice me, and hasten to summon one of those carriages
which are busy night and day, in transporting its victims to
the hospital.
This fate was, beyond all others, abhorrent to my imagination.
To hide me under some roof, where my existence
would be unknown and unsuspected, and where I might perish
unmolested and in quiet, was my present wish. Thetford's
or Medlicote's might afford me such an asylum, if it were
possible to reach it.
I made the most strenuous exertions; but they could not
carry me forward more than an hundred paces. Here I rested
on steps, which, on looking up, I perceived to belong to
Welbeck's house.
This incident was unexpected. It led my reflections into
a new train. To go farther, in the present condition of my
frame, was impossible. I was well acquainted with this
dwelling. All its avenues were closed. Whether it had
remained unoccupied since my flight from it, I could not
decide. It was evident that, at present, it was without inhabitants.
Possibly it might have continued in the same
condition in which Welbeck had left it. Beds of sofas might




be found, on which a sick man might rest, and be fearless
of intrusion.
This inference was quickly overturned by the obvious supposition,
that every avenue was bolted and locked. This,
however, might not be the condition of the bath-house, in
which there was nothing that required to be guarded with
unusual precautions. I was suffocated by inward, and scorched
by external heat; and the relief of bathing and drinking,
appeared inestimable.
The value of this prize, in addition to my desire to avoid
the observation of passengers, made me exert all my remnant
of strength. Repeated efforts at length enabled me to
mount the wall; and placed me, as I imagined, in security.
I swallowed large draughts of water as soon as I could reach
the well.
The effect was, for a time, salutary and delicious. My fervours
were abated, and my faculties relieved from the weight
which had lately oppressed them. My present condition was
unspeakably more advantageous than the former. I did not
believe that it could be improved, till, casting my eye vaguely
over the building, I happened to observe the shutters of a
lower window partly opened.
Whether this was occasioned by design or by accident there
was no means of deciding. Perhaps, in the precipitation of the
latest possessor, this window had been overlooked. Perhaps it
had been unclosed by violence, and afforded entrance to a
robber. By what means soever it had happened, it undoubtedly
afforded ingress to me. I felt no scruple in profiting by
this circumstance. My purposes were not dishonest. I should
not injure or purloin any thing. It was laudable to feek a
refuge from the well-meant perfecutions of thofe who governed
the city. All I sought was the privilege of dying alone.
Having gotten in at the window. I could not but remark that
the furniture and its arrangements had undergone no alteration
in my abfence. I moved softly from one apartment to




another, till at length I entered, that which had formerly been
Welbeck's bed-chamber.
The bed was naked of covering. The cabinets and closets
exhibited their fastenings broken. Their contents were gone.
Whether these appearances had been produced by midnight
robbers or by the ministers of law, and the rage of the creditors
of Welbeck, was a topic of fruitless conjecture.
My design was now effected. This chamber should be the
scene of my disease and my refuge from the charitable cruelty
of my neighbours. My new sensations, conjured up the
hope that my indisposition might prove a temporary evil.
Instead of pestilential or malignant fever it might be an harmless
intermittent. Time would ascertain its true nature,
meanwhile I would turn the carpet into a coverlet, supplying
my pitcher with water, and administered without sparing, and
without fear, that remedy which was placed within my reach.
