



To Henry Colden.
Philadelphia, Dec. 3.
S I R.






My Daughter informs me that the letter
she has just dispatched to you, contains her
resolution of never seeing you more. I likewise
discover that she has requested, and expects a
reply from you, in which, she doubts not, you
will confirm her resolution.
You, no doubt, regard me as your worst enemy.
No request from me can hope to be complied
with, yet I cannot forbear suggesting the
propriety of your refraining from making any
answer to my daughter's letter.
In my treatment of you I shall not pretend
any direct concern for your happiness. I am
governed, whether erroneously or not, merely
by views to the true interest of Mrs. Talbot,
which in my opinion, forbids her to unite herself
to you. But if that union be calculated to
bereave her of happiness, it cannot certainly be
conducive to yours. If you consider the matter
rightly, therefore, instead of accounting me an




enemy, you will rank me among your benefactors.

You have shewn yourself, in some instances,
not destitute of generosity. It is but justice to
acknowledge that your late letter to me avows
sentiments such as I by no means expected,
and makes me disposed to trust your candour
to acquit my intention at least of some of
the consequences of your father's resentment.
I was far from designing to subject you to
violence or ignominy, and meant nothing by my
application to him but your genuine and lasting
happiness.
I dare not hope that it will ever be in my
power to appease that resentment which you
feel for me. I cannot expect that you are so
far raised above the rest of men, that any action
will be recommended to you by its tendency
to oblige me: Yet I cannot conceal from you
that your reconcilement with your father will
give me peculiar satisfaction.
I ventured on a former occasion to make you
an offer, on condition of your going to Europe,
which I now beg leave to repeat. By accepting
the inclosed bill, and embarking for a foreign
land without any further intercourse, personally
or by letter, with my daughter, and after reconciliation
with your father, you will confer a
very great favour on one, who, notwithstanding
appearances, has acted in a manner that becomes


Your true friend,
M. Fielder.

