

Thus was I delivered from my prison, and restored to
the enjoyment of the air and the light. Perhaps the chance
was almost miraculous that led me to this opening. In any
other direction, I might have involved myself in an inextricable
maze, and rendered my destruction sure; but what
now remained to place me in absolute security? Beyond
the fire I could see nothing; but since the smoke rolled
rapidly away, it was plain that on the opposite side the cavern
was open to the air.
I went forward, but my eyes were fixed upon the fire;
presently, in consequence of changing my station, I perceived
several feet, and the skirts of blankets. I was somewhat
startled at these appearances. The legs were naked,
and scored into uncouth figures. The moccasins which lay
beside them, and which were adorned in a grotesque manner,
in addition to other incidents, immediately suggested
the suspicion that they were Indians. No spectacle was
more adapted than this to excite wonder and alarm. Had
some mysterious power snatched me from the earth, and
cast me, in a moment, into the heart of the wilderness?
Was I still in the vicinity of my paternal habitation, or was
I thousands of miles distant?
Were these the permanent inhabitants of this region, or
were they wanderers and robbers? While in the heart of
the mountain I had entertained a vague belief that I was still
within the precinets of Norwalk. This opinion was shaken
for a moment by the objects which I now beheld, but it insensibly
returned; yet, how was this opinion to be reconciled
to appearances so strange and uncouth, and what
measure did a due regard to my safety enjoin me to take?







I now gained a view of four brawny and terrific figures,
stretched upon the ground. They lay parallel to each
other, on their left sides; in consequence of which their
faces were turned from me. Between each was an interval
where lay a musket. Their right hands seemed placed
upon the stocks of their guns, as if to seize them on the first
moment of alarm.
The aperture through which these objects were seen,
was at the back of the cave, and some feet from the ground.
It was merely large enough to suffer a human body to pass.
It was involved in profound darkness, and there was no
danger of being suspected or discovered as long as I maintained
silence, and kept out of view.
It was easily imagined that these guests would make but
a short sojourn in this spot. There was reason to suppose
that it was now night, and that after a short repose, they
would start up and resume their journey. It was my first
design to remain shrouded in this covert till their departure,
and I prepared to endure imprisonment and thirst somewhat
longer.
Meanwhile my thoughts were busy in accounting for this
spectacle. I need not tell thee that Norwalk is the termination
of a sterile and narrow tract, which begins in the Indian
country. It forms a sort of rugged and rocky vein, and
continues upwards of fifty miles. It is crossed in a few places
by narrow and intricate paths, by which a communication is
maintained between the farms and settlements on the opposite
sides of the ridge.
During former Indian wars, this rude surface was sometimes
traversed by the Red-men, and they made, by means
of it, frequent and destructive inroads into the heart of the
English settlements. During the last war, notwithstanding
the progress of population, and the multiplied perils of such
an expedition, a band of them had once penetrated into
Norwalk, and lingered long enough to pillage and murder
some of the neighboring inhabitants.
I have reason to remember that event. My father's
house was placed on the verge of this solitude. Eight of
these assassins assailed it at the dead of night. My parents
and an infant child were murdered in their beds; the house




was pillaged, and then burnt to the ground. Happily, myself
and my two sisters were abroad upon a visit. The preceding
day had been fixed for our return to our father's house,
but a storm occurred, which made it dangerous to cross the
river, and by obliging us to defer our journey, rescued us
from captivity or death.
Most men are haunted by some species of terror or antipathy,
which they are, for the most part, able to trace to
some incident which befel them in their early years. You
will not be surprised that the fate of my parents, and the
sight of the body of one of this savage band, who, in the
pursuit that was made after them, was overtaken and killed,
should produce lasting and terrific images in my fancy. I
never looked upon, or called up the image of a savage
without shuddering.
I knew that, at this time, some hostilities had been committed
on the frontier; that a long course of injuries and
encroachments had lately exasperated the Indian tribes;
that an implacable and exterminating war was generally
expected. We imagined ourselves at an inaccessible distance
from the danger, but I could not but remember that
this persuasion was formerly as strong as at present, and
that an expedition, which had once succeeded, might possibly
be attempted again. Here was every token of enmity
and bloodshed. Each prostrate figure was furnished with
a rifled musket, and a leathern bag tied round his waist,
which was, probably, stored with powder and ball.
From these reflections, the sense of my own danger was
revived and enforced, but I likewise ruminated on the evils
which might impend over others. I should, no doubt, be
safe by remaining in this nook; but might not some means
be pursued to warn others of their danger? Should they
leave this spot, without notice of their approach being given
to the fearless and pacific tenants of the neighboring district,
they might commit, in a few hours, the most horrid and
irreparable devastation.
The alarm could only be diffused in one way. Could
I not escape, unperceived, and without alarming the sleepers,
from this cavern? The slumber of an Indian is broken
by the slightest noise; but if all noise be precluded, it is
commonly profound. It was possible, I conceived, to leave




my present post, to descend into the cave, and issue forth
without the smallest signal. Their supine posture assured
me that they were asleep. Sleep usually comes at their
bidding, and if, perchance, they should be wakeful at an
unseasonable moment, they always sit upon their haunches,
and, leaning their elbows on their knees, consume the tedious
hours in smoking. My peril would be great. Accidents
which I could not foresee, and over which I had no
command, might occur to awaken some one at the moment
I was passing the fire. Should I pass in safety, I might
issue forth into a wilderness, of which I had no knowledge,
where I might wander till I perished with famine, or where
my footsteps might be noted and pursued, and overtaken
by these implacable foes. These perils were enormous
and imminent; but I likewise considered that I might be
at no great distance from the habitations of men, and,
that my escape might rescue them from the most dreadful
calamities. I determined to make this dangerous experiment
without delay.
I came nearer to the aperture, and had, consequently, a
larger view of this recess. To my unspeakable dismay, I
now caught a glimpse of one, seated at the fire. His back
was turned towards me so that I could distinctly survey his
gigantic form and fantastic ornaments.
My project was frustrated. This one was probably commissioned
to watch and to awaken his companions when a
due portion of sleep had been taken. That he would not
be unfaithful or remiss in the performance of the part assigned
to him was easily predicted. To pass him without exciting
his notice, and the entrance could not otherwise be
reached, was impossible. Once more I shrunk back and
revolved with hopelessness and anguish, the necessity to
which I was reduced.
This interval of dreary foreboding did not last long.
Some motion in him that was seated by the fire attracted my
notice. I looked, and beheld him rise from his place and
go forth from the cavern. This unexpected incident led my
thoughts into a new channel. Could not some advantage
be taken of his absence? Could not this opportunity be
seized for making my escape? He had left his gun and
hatched on the ground. It was likely, therefore, that he had




not gone far, and would speedily return. Might not these
weapons be seized, and some provision be thus made against
the danger of meeting him without, or of being pursued?
Before a resolution could be formed, a new sound saluted
my ear. It was a deep groan, succeeded by sobs that seemed
struggling for utterance, but were vehemently counteracted
by the sufferer. This low and bitter lamentation apparently
proceeded from some one within the cave. It could not be
from one of this swarthy band. It must then proceed from
a captive, whom they had reserved for torment or servitude,
and who had seized the opportunity afforded by the absence
of him that watched, to give vent to his despair.
I again thrust my head forward, and beheld, lying on the
ground, apart from the rest, and bound hand and foot, a
young girl. Her dress was the coarse russet garb of the
country, and bespoke her to be some farmer's daughter.
Her features denoted the last degree of fear and anguish,
and she moved her limbs in such a manner as shewed that
the ligatures by which she was confined, produced, by their
tightness, the utmost degree of pain.
My wishes were now bent not only to preserve myself,
and to frustrate the future attempts of these savages, but
likewise to relieve this miserable victim. This could only
be done by escaping from the cavern and returning with
seasonable aid. The sobs of the girl were likely to rouse
the sleepers. My appearance before her would prompt
her to testify her surprise by some exclamation or shriek.
What could hence be predicted but that the band would
start on their feet, and level their unerring pieces at my head!
I know not why I was insensible to these dangers. My
thirst was rendered by these delays intolerable. It took from
me, in some degree, the power of deliberation. The murmurs
which had drawn me hither continued still to be heard.
Some torrent or cascade could not be far distant from the
entrance of the cavern, and it seemed as if one draught of
clear water was a luxury cheaply purchased by death itself.
This, in addition to considerations more disinterested, and
which I have already mentioned, impelled me forward.
The girl's cheek rested on the hard rock, and her eyes
were dim with tears. As they were turned towards me, however,
I hoped that my movements would be noticed by her





gradually and without abruptness. This expectation was
fulfilled. I had not advanced many steps before she discovered
me. This moment was critical beyond all others
in the course of my existence. My life was suspended, as
it were, by a spider's thread. All rested on the effect which
this discovery should make upon this feeble victim.
I was watchful of the first movement of her eye, which
should indicate a consciousness of my presence. I labored,
by gestures and looks, to deter her from betraying her emotion.
My attention was, at the same time, fixed upon the
sleepers, and an anxious glance was cast towards the quarer
whence the watchful savage might appear.
I stooped and seized the musket and hatchet. The
space beyond the fire was, as I expected, open to the air.
I issued forth with trembling steps. The sensations inspired
by the dangers which environed me, added to my recent
horrors, and the influence of the moon, which had now
gained the zenith, and whose lustre dazzled my long benighted
senses, cannot be adequately described.
For a minute, I was unable to distinguish objects. This
confusion was speedily corrected, and I found myself on the
verge of a steep. Craggy eminences arose on all sides. On
the left hand was a space that offered some footing, and
hither I turned. A torrent was below, me, and this path
appeared to lead to it. It quickly appeared in sight, and all
foreign cares were, for a time, suspended.
This water fell from the upper regions of the hill, upon a
flat projecture which was continued on either side, and on
part of which I was now standing. The path was bounded
on the left by an inaccessible wall, and on the right terminated
at the distance of two or three feet from the wall, in a
precipice. The water was eight or ten paces distant, and
no impediment seemed likely to rise between us. I rushed
forward with speed.
My progress was quickly checked. Close to the falling
water, seated on the edge, his back supported by the rock,
and his legs hanging over the precipice, I now beheld the
savage who left the cave before me. The noise of the
cascade and the improbability of interruption, at least from
this quarter, had made him inattentive to my motions.






I paused. Along this verge lay the only road by which I
could reach the water, and by which I could escape. The
passage was completely occupied by this antagonist. To
advance towards him, or to remain where I was, would produce
the same effect. I should, in either case, be detected.
He was unarmed; but his outcries would instantly summon
his companions to his aid. I could not hope to overpower
him, and pass him in defiance of his opposition. But if this
were effected, pursuit would be instantly commenced. I
was unacquainted with the way. The way was unquestionably
difficult. My strength was nearly annihilated; I should
be overtaken in a moment, or their deficiency in speed
would be supplied by the accuracy of their aim. Their
bullets, at least, would reach me.
There was one method of removing this impediment.
The piece which I held in my hand was cocked. There
could be no doubt that it was loaded. A precaution of this
kind would never be omitted by a warrior of this hue. At
a greater distance than this, I should not fear to reach the
mark. Should I not discharge it, and, at the same moment,
rush forward to secure the road which my adversary's
death would open to me?
Perhaps you will conceive a purpose like this to have argued
a sanguinary and murderous disposition. Let it be
remembered, however, that I entertained no doubts about
the hostile designs of these men. This was sufficiently indicated
by their arms, their guise, and the captive who attended
them. Let the fate of my parents be, likewise,
remembered. I was not certain but that these very men
were the assassins of my family, and were those who had
reduced me and my sisters to the condition of orphans and
dependants. No words can describe the torments of my
thirst. Relief to these torments, and safety to my life, were
within view. How could I hesitate?
Yet I did hesitate. My aversion to bloodshed was not
to be subdued but by the direst necessity. I knew, indeed,
that the discharge of a musket would only alarm the enemies
which remained behind; but I had another and a better
weapon in my grasp. I could rive the head of my adversary,
and cast him headlong, without any noise which should
be heard, into the cavern.






Still I was willing to withdraw, to re-enter the cave, and
take shelter in the darksome recesses from which I had
emerged. Here I might remain, unsuspected, till these detested
guests should depart. The hazards attending my reentrance
were to be boldly encountered, and the torments
of unsatisfied thirst were to be patiently endured, rather
than imbrue my hands in the blood of my fellow-men. But
this expedient would be ineffectual if my retreat should be
observed by this savage. Of that I was bound to be incontestibly
assured. I retreated, therefore, but kept my eye
fixed at the same time upon the enemy.
Some ill fate decreed that I should not retreat unobserved.
Scarcely had I withdrawn three paces when he started from
his seat, and, turning towards me, walked with a quick pace.
The shadow of the rock, and the improbability of meeting
an enemy here, concealed me for a moment from his observation.
I stood still. The slightest motion would have attracted
his notice. At present, the narrow space engaged
all his vigilance. Cautious footsteps, and attention to the
path, were indispensable to his safety. The respite was
momentary, and I employed it in my own defence.
How otherwise could I act? The danger that impended
aimed at nothing less than my life. To take the life of another
was the only method of averting it. The means were
in my hand, and they were used. In an extremity like this,
my muscles would have acted almost in defiance of my
will.
The stroke was quick as lightning, and the wound mortal
and deep. He had not time to descry the author of his fate;
but, sinking on the path, expired without a groan. The
hatchet buried itself in his breast, and rolled with him to the
bottom of the precipice.
Never before had I taken the life of a human creature.
On this head, I had, indeed, entertained somewhat of religious
scruples. These scruples did not forbid me to defend
myself, but they made me cautious and reluctant to
decide. Though they could not withhold my hand, when
urged by a necessity like this, they were sufficient to make
me look back upon the deed with remorse and dismay.
I did not escape all compunction in the present instance,
but the tumult of my feelings was quickly allayed. To




quench my thirst was a consideration by which all others
were supplanted. I approached the torrent, and not only
drank copiously, but laved my head, neck, and arms, in
this delicious element.
