

Tho' I cannot see my Fancy with
the Hopes of Praise or Profit from
the following Book, yet I am willing
to plead its Cause, and deliver it
with as fair a Title as I can to my Reader's
Approbation, to which ('tis said) Books of
this Kind have very little Right. For the Grave
dislike them for treating on so gay a Subject; 
and the Sparks, for confining the Subject to
such strict Rules of Virtue and Honour: So
that a Romance is like the Husband in the
Fable, whose Young Wife pull'd out all his grey
Hairs, and his Old one, the black. Thus it
far'd with this Kind of Heroic Love of late; 
it has been, as it were, rally'd out of Practice,
and its Professors laugh'd out of Countenance,
while Interest and loose Gallantry have been set
up in its Place, and monopolized all its Business
and Effects. How far this has been an
Inlet to that Deluge of Libertinism which has
overflow'd the Age, the many unhappy Marriages,
and unkind Separations, may inform us,
and at the same Time shew how proper an Ingredient
Love is towards the making an happy
Marriage; for where Love is not the Cement, 
as well as Interest the Foundation, the Superstructure
of Conjugal Faith seldom stands long; 
the first Wind that blows at the Change of Honey-Moon,
will go near to shake, if not quite
overthrow, the Fabrick. Nor can it be otherwise
expected, since a Blessing from Heaven attends
not on those who enter the holy State of
Matrimony thro' the Gate of Perjury, by vowing
everlasting Love where their Affections
scarce surmount Indifferency, but count upon a
Beau Gallant or a Coquet Mistress, to answer
all Hymeneal Happiness; so it is but just they
fail of that Felicity in their Espousals, they
aim'd not at in their Courtship. To these it is
not strange that heroic Love appears a Fantom
or Chimera; but to those who aim at a happy
Marriage, by the Way of Virtue and Honour,
need consider but very little, to find that it lyes
thro', or borders upon, Heroic Love; so that Romances
(which commonly treat of this virtuous
Affection) are not to be discarded as wholly
Useless. 
In the next Place, the Study of these Books
helps to open the Understanding of young Readers,
to distinguish between real Worth and superficial
Appearances, whereby they discern that
it is not a laced Coat, or a large Wig, that
makes a Cæsar or a Scipio; nor all the Utensils
of the Toilet can make a compleat Heroine,
but true Virtue and Honour: Wherefore, one
may reasonably conclude, that it is many Times
Want of Helps to make this Distinction, which 
causes young People to make Shipwreck of their
Fortune. The hopeful young Heir brings Home
a Player or Exchange-Maid, wherewith to
bless his Father's grey Hairs; and the young Lady
recompenses her Mother's careful Education
with some beggarly Beau, or rake-hell Gamester,
who, perhaps, never had Luck in his Life but
in winning of her. Whereas, 'tis to be hoped,
that a View of those worthy Characters which
Romances represent, might assist them to avoid
such dangerous Naufrages, and fix their Affections
where Duty and Merit require: And not
only so, but even in a regular Affection, they
may find Assistance from these Kind of Writings,
to demean themselves gracefully. For,
since Love is the Passion which generally attends
Youth, it is very hard they should be the only
Part of Mankind that must act a Scene on this
World's Theatre, without being permitted to
con their Part before-hand. But beside these
Love-Lectures, the young Readers may also
reap many Handfuls of good Morality, and
likewise gather some Gleanings of History, and
Acquaintance with the ancient Poets. In short,
I think I may say of Romances, as Mr. Herbert
says of Poetry, and hope, that a pleasant
Story may find him who flies a serious
Lecture. 
I might add many Things to evince the Advantage
as well as the Innocence of these Kind
of Writings; but since the Archbishop of Cambray
and Mr. Dryden have done it in Fact, 
I think I need say no more, but refer my Reader
to those great Authors, whose Writings
have pleas'd all the World; tho' I think I may
say, none have found better Reception than their
Romances, Telemachus on the one Part, and
Chaucer's Tales reviv'd on the other. 
Now, after what has been alledg'd in general,
something may be expected of this in particular; 
but that's very difficult, it being as nauseous
to praise one's own Writing, as to complement
one's own Face; and to dispraise it, is to
hinder the Bookseller, and affront the Reader,
in offering him a Book not worth ones own Suffrage. 
However, one may venture (without Offence)
to use the Words of some that have read
it in Manuscript: First, that the Author was
certainly in Love when 'twas wrote; so, 'tis
to be hoped, that that Passion is rightly represented. 
In the next Place 'twas liked, because
'twas free from long Speeches, and tedious
Descriptions of Towns, Places, Sieges, Battles,
Horses and their Trappings, &c. Nevertheless,
I have since put in one Description, (and but
one) which is pretty long, and that is of a Garden; 
but it being added since the Book was
compos'd, those who love not Descriptions may
pass it over unread, without any Prejudice to
the substantial Part of the Story. 
Another Reader was pleas'd to say, It was a
Mark of great Virtue in the Author, that could
render such an idle Subject both pure and useful; 
so, 'tis to be hoped, there is nothing opposite to real 
Virtue. I am sure, if I knew or thought there
were, I would burn both the Copy and my Fingers,
rather than employ them towards its Publication; 
but I trust it is such, as no Body need
fear to read, nor the Author blush to own. 'Tis
true, there are the Characters of two or three
ill Persons; but they are inserted by Way of Abhorrence. 
The Story of Turpius, indeed, is so
unnatural, that if I could have alter'd, or taken
it away, without unravelling the whole, I would
have done it, and not have made the Daughter
of so ill a Man, Wife to so great an Hero; nor
would have compos'd so improbable a Story, but
that I had heard of such a Kind of Transaction
in our Times, and so wrote the Character to render
it detestable. I call him Turpius, as being
more wicked than
Clodius, who was such an ill
Liver in his Time, as caus'd that Proverb, Clodius
accusat Mœchos. But if these Characters
are disagreeable to the serious Reader, there are
others to make amends: But whether there be
any that will hit the general Humour of the
Age or not, is doubtful; since there is none
that will teach a Gentleman to scorn his Country-Seat,
nor a Tradesman his Shop. Lewdness is
not approv'd in Youth, nor Moroseness made
the Character of Old Age; the latter of which,
I think, has been the crying Fault of many of
these Kinds of Writings. The elder, and consequently
the wiser Part of Mankind, have been
render'd ridiculous, morose, and troublesome,
as if good Humour was inconsistent with Years 
and both Wit and Manners to be laid aside, together
with tawdry Cloaths; and as the Face
ceases to be smooth, the Manners must grow
rough. Such Characters, as they are an Affront
to the Aged, so they are often prejudicial to the
Young, who are too apt to build Disobedience on
that Foundation; and when their wise Parents
oppose their Follies, are apt to draw a Parallel
between them and those ill Characters they have
met withal. This Consideration, I think, ought
to make every Author careful how he represents
these Persons; one Stroke of a Pen being capable
of doing more Mischief than many Volumes
can repair. 
As to the Historical Part, I suppose the Reader
does not expect much Exactness, it being a
Romance, not an History; so, it matters not
who, or who, were Co-temporaries; but there having
been such and such Names and Families,
one may reasonably suppose that some of the
Children, or Branches of those Families, flourish'd
all at the same Time; which is sufficient
to vindicate the Book, in that Point, from extreme
Absurdity. 
The Language, I hope, the Reader will accept
as it is, it being the familiar Stile of the Age,
neither so obsolete, nor so refin'd, as to render
it obstruse; at least, I design'd it so: But if in
this, or any Thing else, I have fail'd to gratify
the Reader's Expectation, I am very ready to
beg Pardon, correct, and amend. In the mean
Time, adieu. 
