







I was resident in this city during the year 1793. Many
motives contributed to detain me, though departure was
easy and commodious, and my friends were generally solicitous
for me to go. It is not my purpose to enumerate
these motives, or to dwell on my present concerns and
transactions, but merely to compose a narrative of some
incidents with which my situation made me acquainted.
Returning one evening, somewhat later than usual, to my
own house, my attention was attracted, just as I entered the
porch, by the figure of a man, reclining against the wall at
a few paces distant. My sight was imperfectly assisted by
a far-off lamp; but the posture in which he sat, the hour,
and the place, immediately suggested the idea of one disabled
by sickness. It was obvious to conclude that his
disease was pestilential. This did not deter me from approaching
and examining him more closely.
He leaned his head against the wall, his eyes were shut,
his hands clasped in each other, and his body seemed to be
sustained in an upright position merely by the cellar door,
against which he rested his left shoulder. The lethargy
into which he was sunk, seemed scarcely interrupted by my
feeling his hand and his forehead. His throbbing temples
and burning skin indicated a fever, and his form, already
emaciated, seemed to prove that it had not been of short
duration.






There was only one circumstance that hindered me from
forming an immediate determination in what manner this
person should be treated. My family consisted of my wife
and a young child. Our servant maid had been seized, three
days before, by the reigning malady, and, at her own request,
had been conveyed to the hospital. We ourselves enjoyed
good health, and were hopeful of escaping with our lives.
Our measures for this end had been cautiously taken and
carefully adhered to. They did not consist in avoiding the
receptacles of infection, for my office required me to go
daily into the midst of them; nor in filling the house with
the exhalations of gunpowder, vinegar, or tar. They consisted
in cleanliness, reasonable exercise, and wholesome
diet. Custom had likewise blunted the edge of our apprehensions.
To take this person into my house, and bestow
upon him the requisite attendance, was the scheme that first
occurred to me. In this, however, the advice of my wife
was to govern me.
I mentioned the incident to her. I pointed out the danger
which was to be dreaded from such an inmate. I desired
her to decide with caution, and mentioned my resolution to
conform myself implicitly to her decision. Should we refuse
to harbor him, we must not forget that there was a hospital
to which he would, perhaps, consent to be carried, and
where he would be accommodated in the best manner the
times would admit.
“Nay,” said she, “talk not of hospitals. At least let
him have his choice. I have no fear about me, for my
part, in a case where the injunctions of duty are so obvious.
Let us take the poor, unfortunate wretch into
our protection and care, and leave the consequences to
Heaven.”
I expected and was pleased with this proposal. I returned
to the sick man, and, on rousing him from his
stupor, found him still in possession of his reason. With
a candle near, I had an opportunity of viewing him more
accurately.
His garb was plain, careless, and denoted rusticity. His
aspect was simple and ingenuous, and his decayed visage
still retained traces of uncommon but manlike beauty. He
had all the appearances of mere youth, unspoiled by luxury




 and uninured to misfortune. I scarcely ever beheld an
object which laid so powerful and sudden a claim to my
affection and succor.
“You are sick,” said I, in as cheerful a tone as I could
assume. “Cold bricks and night airs are comfortless attendants
for one in your condition. Rise, I pray you, and
come into the house. We will try to supply you with accommodations
a little more suitable.”
At this address he fixed his languid eyes upon me.
“What would you have?” said he. “I am very well as I
am. While I breathe, which will not be long, I shall breathe
with more freedom here than elsewhere. Let me alone—
I am very well as I am.”
“Nay,” said I, “this situation is unsuitable to a sick
man. I only ask you to come into my house, and receive
all the kindness that it is in our power to bestow. Pluck
up courage and I will answer for your recovery, provided
you submit to directions, and do as we would have you.
Rise, and come along with me. We will find you a physician
and a nurse, and all we ask in return is good spirits and
compliance.”
“Do you not know,” he replied, “what my disease is?
Why should you risk your safety for the sake of one, whom
your kindness cannot benefit, and who has nothing to give
in return?”
There was something in the style of this remark, that
heightened my prepossession in his favor, and made me
pursue my purpose with more zeal. “Let us try what we
can do for you,” I answered. “If we save your life, we
shall have done you some service, and as for recompense,
we will look to that.”
It was with considerable difficulty that he was persuaded
to accept our invitation. He was conducted to a chamber,
and the criticalness of his case requiring unusual attention,
I spent the night at his bedside.
My wife was encumbered with the care both of her infant
and her family. The charming babe was in perfect health,
but her mother's constitution was frail and delicate. We
simplified the household duties as much as possible, but still
these duties were considerably burthensome to one not used
to the performance, and luxuriously educated. The addition




 of a sick man was likely to be productive of much fatigue.
My engagements would not allow me to be always at
home, and the state of my patient, and the remedies necessary
to be prescribed, were attended with many noxious
and disgustful circumstances. My fortune would not allow
me to hire assistance. My wife, with a feeble frame and
a mind shrinking, on ordinary occasions, from such offices,
with fastidious scrupulousness, was to be his only or principal
nurse.
My neighbors were fervent in their well-meant zeal, and
loud in their remonstrances on the imprudence and rashness
of my conduct. They called me presumptuous and
cruel in exposing my wife and child, as well as myself,
to such imminent hazard, for the sake of one, too, who
most probably was worthless, and whose disease had doubtless
been, by negligence or mistreatment, rendered incurable.

I did not turn a deaf ear to these censurers. I was aware
of all the inconveniences and perils to which I thus spontaneously
exposed myself. No one knew better the value of
that woman whom I called mine, or set a higher price upon
her life, her health, and her ease. The virulence and activity
of this contagion, the dangerous condition of my patient,
and the dubiousness of his character, were not forgotten by
me; but still my conduct in this affair received my own
entire approbation. All objections on the score of my
friend were removed by her own willingness and even solicitude
to undertake the province. I had more confidence
than others in the vincibility of this disease, and in the
success of those measures, which we had used for our
defence against it. But, whatever were the evils to accrue
to us, we were sure of one thing; namely, that the consciousness
of having neglected this unfortunate person,
would be a source of more unhappiness than could possibly
redound from the attendance and care that he would
claim.
The more we saw of him, indeed, the more did we congratulate
ourselves on our proceeding. His torments were
acute and tedious, but in the midst even of delirium, his
heart seemed to overflow with gratitude, and to be actuated
by no wish but to alleviate our toil and our danger. He




 made prodigious exertions to perform necessary offices for
himself. He suppressed his feelings and struggled to maintain
a cheerful tone and countenance, that he might prevent
that anxiety which the sight of his sufferings produced in us.
He was perpetually furnishing reasons why his nurse should
leave him alone, and betrayed dissatisfaction whenever she
entered his apartment.
In a few days, there were reasons to conclude him out of
danger; and in a fortnight, nothing but exercise and nourishment
were wanting to complete his restoration. Meanwhile
nothing was obtained from him but general information,
that his place of abode was Chester County, and that
some momentous engagement induced him to hazard his
safety by coming to the city in the height of the epidemic.
He was far from being talkative. His silence seemed to
be the joint result of modesty and unpleasing remembrances.
His features were characterized by pathetic seriousness, and
his deportment by a gravity very unusual at his age. According
to his own representation, he was no more than
eighteen years old, but the depth of his remarks indicated
a much greater advance. His name was Arthur Mervyn.
He described himself as having passed his life at the plough
tail and the threshing floor; as being destitute of all scholastic
instruction; and as being long since bereft of the
affectionate regards of parents and kinsmen.
When questioned as to the course of life which he meant
to pursue, upon his recovery, he professed himself without
any precise object. He was willing to be guided by the
advice of others, and by the lights which experience should
furnish. The country was open to him, and he supposed
that there was no part of it in which food could not be purchased
by his labor. He was unqualified, by his education,
for any liberal profession. His poverty was likewise an
insuperable impediment. He could afford to spend no time
in the acquisition of a trade. He must labor, not for future
emolument, but for immediate subsistence. The only pursuit
which his present circumstances would allow him to
adopt, was that which, he was inclined to believe, was likewise
the most eligible. Without doubt his experience was
slender, and it seemed absurd to pronounce concerning that
of which he had no direct knowledge; but so it was, he




 could not outroot from his mind the persuasion that to plough,
to sow, and to reap were employments most befitting a
reasonable creature, and from which the truest pleasure and
the least pollution would flow. He contemplated no other
scheme than to return, as soon as his health should permit,
into the country, seek employment where it was to be had,
and acquit himself in his engagements with fidelity and diligence.

I pointed out to him various ways in which the city might
furnish employment to one with his qualifications. He had
said that he was somewhat accustomed to the pen. There
were stations in which the possession of a legible hand was
all that was requisite. He might add to this a knowledge
of accounts, and thereby procure himself a post in some
mercantile or public office.
To this he objected, that experience had shewn him unfit
for the life of a penman. This had been his chief occupation
for a little while, and he found it wholly incompatible
with his health. He must not sacrifice the end for the
means. Starving was a disease preferable to consumption.
Besides, he labored merely for the sake of living, and he
lived merely for the sake of pleasure. If his tasks should
enable him to live, but at the same time, bereave him of all
satisfaction, they inflicted injury and were to be shunned as
worse evils than death.
I asked to what species of pleasure he alluded, with which
the business of a clerk was inconsistent.
He answered, that he scarcely knew how to describe it.
He read books when they came in his way. He had lighted
upon few, and, perhaps, the pleasure they afforded him was
owing to their fewness; yet, he confessed that, a mode of life
which entirely forbade him to read, was by no means to his
taste. But this was trivial. He knew how to value the
thoughts of other people, but he could not part with the
privilege of observing and thinking for himself. He wanted
business which would suffer at least nine tenths of his attention
to go free. If it afforded agreeable employment to that
part of his attention which it applied to its own use, so much
the better; but if it did not, he should not repine. He
should be content with a life whose pleasures were to its
pains as nine are to one. He had tried the trade of a




 copyist, and in circumstances more favorable than it was likely
he should ever again have an opportunity of trying it, and
he had found that it did not fulfil the requisite conditions.
Whereas the trade of ploughman was friendly to health,
liberty, and pleasure.
The pestilence, if it may so be called, was now declining.
The health of my young friend allowed him to breathe the
fresh air and to walk.—A friend of mine, by name Wortley,
who had spent two months from the city, and to whom, in
the course of a familiar correspondence, I had mentioned
the foregoing particulars, returned from his rural excursion.
He was posting, on the evening of the day of his arrival,
with a friendly expedition, to my house, when he overtook
Mervyn going in the same direction. He was surprised to
find him go before him into my dwelling, and to discover,
which he speedily did, that this was the youth whom I had
so frequently mentioned to him. I was present at their
meeting.
There was a strange mixture in the countenance of Wortley,
when they were presented to each other. His satisfaction
was mingled with surprise, and his surprise with
anger. Mervyn, in his turn, betrayed considerable embarrassment.
Wortley's thoughts were too earnest on some
topic to allow him to converse. He shortly made some excuse
for taking leave, and, rising, addressed himself to the
youth with a request that he would walk home with him.
This invitation, delivered in a tone which left it doubtful
whether a compliment or menace were meant, augmented
Mervyn's confusion. He complied without speaking, and
they went out together;—my wife and I were left to comment
upon the scene.
It could not fail to excite uneasiness. They were evidently
no strangers to each other. The indignation that
flashed from the eyes of Wortley, and the trembling consciousness
of Mervyn were unwelcome tokens. The former
was my dearest friend, and venerable for his discernment
and integrity. The latter appeared to have drawn
upon himself the anger and disdain of this man. We already
anticipated the shock which the discovery of his unworthiness
would produce.
In a half hour Mervyn returned. His embarrassment




 had given place to dejection. He was always serious, but
his features were now overcast by the deepest gloom. The
anxiety which I felt would not allow me to hesitate long.
“Arthur,” said I, “something is the matter with you.
Will you not disclose it to us? Perhaps you have brought
yourself into some dilemma out of which we may help you
to escape. Has any thing of an unpleasant nature passed
between you and Wortley?”
The youth did not readily answer. He seemed at a loss
for a suitable reply. At length he said, that something disagreeable
had indeed passed between him and Wortley.
He had had the misfortune to be connected with a man by
whom Wortley conceived himself to be injured. He had
borne no part in inflicting this injury, but had nevertheless
been threatened with ill treatment if he did not make disclosures
which, indeed, it was in his power to make, but
which he was bound, by every sanction, to withhold. This
disclosure would be of no benefit to Wortley. It would
rather operate injuriously than otherwise; yet it was endeavored
to be wrested from him by the heaviest menaces.—
There he paused.
We were naturally inquisitive as to the scope of these
menaces; but Mervyn entreated us to forbear any further discussion
of this topic. He foresaw the difficulties to which
his silence would subject him. One of its most fearful consequences
would be the loss of our good opinion. He knew
not what he had to dread from the enmity of Wortley.
Mr. Wortley's violence was not without excuse. It was
his mishap to be exposed to suspicions which could only be
obviated by breaking his faith. But, indeed, he knew not
whether any degree of explicitness would confute the charges
that were made against him; whether, by trampling on his
sacred promise, he should not multiply his perils instead of
lessening their number. A difficult part had been assigned
to him; by much too difficult for one, young, improvident,
and inexperienced as he was.
Sincerity, perhaps, was the best course. Perhaps, after
having had an opportunity for deliberation, he should conclude
to adopt it; meanwhile he entreated permission to retire to
his chamber. He was unable to exclude from his mind





 ideas which yet could, with no propriety, at least at present,
be made the theme of conversation.
These words were accompanied with simplicity and
pathos, and with tokens of unaffected distress.
“Arthur,” said I, “you are master of your actions and
time in this house. Retire when you please; but you will
naturally suppose us anxious to dispel this mystery. Whatever
shall tend to obscure or malign your character will of
course excite our solicitude. Wortley is not short sighted or
hasty to condemn. So great is my confidence in his integrity
that I will not promise my esteem to one who has irrecoverably
lost that of Wortley. I am not acquainted with
your motives to concealment, or what it is you conceal, but
take the word of one who possesses that experience which
you complain of wanting, that sincerity is always safest.”
As soon as he had retired, my curiosity prompted me to
pay an immediate visit to Wortley. I found him at home.
He was no less desirous of an interview, and answered my
inquiries with as much eagerness as they were made.
“You know,” said he, “my disastrous connexion with
Thomas Welbeck. You recollect his sudden disappearance
last July, by which I was reduced to the brink of ruin. Nay,
I am, even now, far from certain that I shall survive that
event. I spoke to you about the youth who lived with him,
and by what means that youth was discovered to have crossed
the river in his company on the night of his departure.
This is that very youth.
“This will account for my emotion at meeting him at
your house; I brought him out with me. His confusion
sufficiently indicated his knowledge of transactions between
Welbeck and me. I questioned him as to the fate of that
man. To own the truth, I expected some well digested lie;
but he merely said, that he had promised secrecy on that
subject, and must therefore be excused from giving me any
information. I asked him if he knew, that his master, or
accomplice, or whatever was his relation to him, absconded in
my debt? He answered that he knew it well; but still
pleaded a promise of inviolable secrecy as to his hiding
place. This conduct justly exasperated me, and I treated
him with the severity which he deserved. I am half ashamed




 to confess the excesses of my passion; I even went so far
as to strike him. He bore my insults with the utmost patience.
No doubt the young villain is well instructed in his
lesson. He knows that he may safely defy my power.—
From threats I descended to entreaties. I even endeavored
to wind the truth from him by artifice. I promised him a
part of the debt if he would enable me to recover the whole.
I offered him a considerable reward if he would merely
afford me a clue by which I might trace him to his retreat;
but all was insufficient. He merely put on an air of perplexity
and shook his head in token of non-compliance.”
Such was my friend's account of this interview. His
suspicions were unquestionably plausible; but I was disposed
to put a more favorable construction on Mervyn's behavior.
I recollected the desolate and pennyless condition
in which I found him, and the uniform complacency and
rectitude of his deportment for the period during which we
had witnessed it. These ideas had considerable influence
on my judgment, and indisposed me to follow the advice of
my friend, which was to turn him forth from my doors that
very night.
My wife's prepossessions were still more powerful advocates
of this youth. She would vouch, she said, before any
tribunal, for his innocence; but she willingly concurred with
me in allowing him the continuance of our friendship on no
other condition than that of a disclosure of the truth. To
entitle ourselves to this confidence we were willing to engage,
in our turn, for the observance of secrecy, so far, that no
detriment should accrue from this disclosure to himself or
his friend.
Next morning at breakfast, our guest appeared with a
countenance less expressive of embarrassment than on the
last evening. His attention was chiefly engaged by his own
thoughts, and little was said till the breakfast was removed.
I then reminded him of the incidents of the former day, and
mentioned that the uneasiness which thence arose to us had
rather been increased than diminished by time.
“It is in your power, my young friend,” continued I,
“to add still more to this uneasiness, or to take it entirely
away. I had no personal acquaintance with Thomas Welbeck.
I have been informed by others that his character,




 for a certain period, was respectable, but that, at length, he
contracted large debts, and, instead of paying them, absconded.
You, it seems, lived with him. On the night of his
departure you are known to have accompained him across
the river, and this, it seems, is the first of your re-appearance
on the stage. Welbeck's conduct was dishonest. He ought
doubtless to be pursued to his asylum and be compelled to
refund his winnings. You confess yourself to know his
place of refuge, but urge a promise of secrecy. Know you
not that to assist, or connive at the escape of this man was
wrong? To have promised to favor his concealment and
impunity by silence was only an aggravation of this wrong.
That, however, is past. Your youth, and circumstances,
hitherto unexplained, may apologize for that misconduct,
but it is certainly your duty to repair it to the utmost of
your power. Think whether by disclosing what you know,
you will not repair it.”
“I have spent most of last night,” said the youth, “in
reflecting on this subject. I had come to a resolution, before
you spoke, of confiding to you my simple tale. I perceive
in what circumstances I am placed, and that I can
keep my hold of your good opinion only by a candid deportment.
I have indeed given a promise which it was wrong,
or rather absurd, in another to exact, and in me to give;
yet none but considerations of the highest importance would
persuade me to break my promise. No injury will accrue
from my disclosure to Welbeck. If there should, dishonest
as he was, that would be a sufficient reason for my silence.
Wortley will not, in any degree, be benefited by any communication
that I can make. Whether I grant or withhold
information, my conduct will have influence only on my own
happiness, and that influence will justify me in granting it.
“I received your protection when I was friendless and
forlorn. You have a right to know whom it is that you
protected. My own fate is connected with the fate of Welbeck,
and that connexion, together with the interest you are
pleased to take in my concerns, because they are mine,
will render a tale worthy of attention which will not be recommended
by variety of facts or skill in the display of them.
“Wortley, though passionate, and, with regard to me, unjust,
may yet be a good man; but I have no desire to make




 him one of my auditors. You, Sir, may, if you think proper,
relate to him afterwards what particulars concerning
Welbeck it may be of importance for him to know; but at
present, it will be well if your indulgence shall support me to
the end of a tedious but humble tale.”
The eyes of my Eliza sparkled with delight at this proposal.
She regarded this youth with a sisterly affection
and considered his candor, in this respect, as an unerring
test of his rectitude. She was prepared to hear and to
forgive the errors of inexperience and precipitation. I did
not fully participate in her satisfaction, but was nevertheless
most zealously disposed to listen to his narrative.
My engagements obliged me to postpone this rehearsal-till
late in the evening. Collected then round a cheerful hearth,
exempt from all likelihood of interruption from without, and
our babe's unpractised senses, shut up in the sweetest and
profoundest sleep, Mervyn, after a pause of recollection,
began.
