







I wandered over this deserted mansion, in a considerable
degree, at random. Effluvia of a pestilential nature,
assailed me from every corner. In the front room of the
second story, I imagined that I discovered vestiges of that
catastrophe which the past night had produced. The bed
appeared as if some one had recently been dragged from it.
The sheets were tinged with yellow, and with that substance
which is said to be characteristic of this disease, the
gangrenous or black vomit. The floor exhibited similar
stains.
There are many, who will regard my conduct as the last
refinement of temerity, or of heroism. Nothing, indeed,
more perplexes me than a review of my own conduct.
Not, indeed, that death is an object always to be dreaded,
or that my motive did not justify my actions; but of all
dangers, those allied to pestilence, by being mysterious and
unseen, are the most formidable. To disarm them of their
terrors, requires the longest familiarity. Nurses and physicians
soonest become intrepid or indifferent; but the rest
of mankind recoil from the scene with unconquerable
loathing.
I was sustained, not by confidence of safety, and a belief
of exemption from this malady, or by the influence of habit,
which inures us to all that is detestable or perilous, but by a
belief that this was as eligible an avenue to death as any
other; and that life is a trivial sacrifice in the cause of duty.
I passed from one room to the other. A portmanteau,
marked with the initials of Wallace's name, at length attracted
my notice. From this circumstance I inferred that
this apartment had been occupied by him. The room was
neatly arranged, and appeared as if no one had lately used
it. There were trunks and drawers. That which I have
mentioned, was the only one that bore marks of Wallace's
ownership. This I lifted in my arms with a view to remove
it to Medlicote's house.
At that moment, methought I heard a footstep slowly and




 lingeringly ascending the stair. I was disconcerted at this
incident. The footstep had in it a ghost-like solemnity and
tardiness. This phantom vanished in a moment, and yielded
place to more humble conjectures. A human being approached,
whose office and commission were inscrutable.
That we were strangers to each other was easily imagined;
but how would my appearance, in this remote chamber, and
loaded with another's property, be interpreted? Did he
enter the house after me, or was he the tenant of some
chamber hitherto unvisited; whom my entrance had awakened
from his trance and called from his couch?
In the confusion of my mind, I still held my burthen
uplifted. To have placed it on the floor, and encountered
this visitant, without this equivocal token about me, was
the obvious proceeding. Indeed, time only could decide
whether these footsteps tended to this, or to some other
apartment.
My doubts were quickly dispelled. The door opened,
and a figure glided in. The portmanteau dropped from my
arms, and my heart's blood was chilled. If an apparition
of the dead were possible, and that possibility I could not
deny, this was such an apparition. A hue, yellowish and
livid; bones, uncovered with flesh; eyes, ghastly, hollow,
wo-begone, and fixed in an agony of wonder upon me;
and locks, matted and negligent, constituted the image which
I now beheld. My belief of somewhat preternatural in
this appearance, was confirmed by recollection of resemblances
between these features and those of one who was
dead. In this shape and visage, shadowy and death-like as
they were, the lineaments of Wallace, of him who had misled
my rustic simplicity on my first visit to this city, and
whose death I had conceived to be incontestably ascertained,
were forcibly recognised.
This recognition, which at first alarmed my superstition,
speedily led to more rational inferences. Wallace had been
dragged to the hospital. Nothing was less to be suspected
than that he would return alive from that hideous receptacle,
but this was by no means impossible. The figure that stood
before me, had just risen from the bed of sickness, and
from the brink of the grave. The crisis of his malady had




 passed, and he was once more entitled to be ranked among
the living.
This event, and the consequences which my imagination
connected with it, filled me with the liveliest joy. I thought
not of his ignorance of the causes of my satisfaction, of the
doubts to which the circumstances of our interview would
give birth, respecting the integrity of my purpose. I forgot
the artifices by which I had formerly been betrayed, and
the embarrassments which a meeting with the victim of his
artifices would excite in him; I thought only of the happiness
which his recovery would confer upon his uncle and
his cousins.
I advanced towards him with an air of congratulation,
and offered him my hand. He shrunk back, and exclaimed
in a feeble voice, Who are you? What business have you
here?
I am the friend of Wallace, if he will allow me to be so.
I am a messenger from your uncle and cousins at Malverton.
I came to know the cause of your silence, and to afford you
any assistance in my power.
He continued to regard me with an air of suspicion and
doubt. These I endeavored to remove by explaining the
motives that led me hither. It was with difficulty that he
seemed to credit my representations. When thoroughly
convinced of the truth of my assertions, he inquired with
great anxiety and tenderness concerning his relations; and
expressed his hope that they were ignorant of what had
befallen him.
I could not encourage his hopes. I regretted my own
precipitation in adopting the belief of his death. This
belief had been uttered with confidence, and without stating
my reasons for embracing it, to Mr. Hadwin. These
tidings would be borne to his daughters, and their grief
would be exasperated to a deplorable, and, perhaps, to a
fatal degree.
There was but one method of repairing or eluding this
mischief. Intelligence ought to be conveyed to them of his
recovery. But where was the messenger to be found?
No one's attention could be found disengaged from his own
concerns. Those who were able or willing to leave the
city, had sufficient motives for departure, in relation to




 themselves. If vehicle or horse were procurable for money,
ought it not to be secured for the use of Wallace himself,
whose health required the easiest and speediest conveyance
from this theatre of death?
My companion was powerless in mind as in limbs. He
seemed unable to consult upon the means of escaping from
the inconveniences by which he was surrounded. As soon
as sufficient strength was regained, he had left the hospital.
To repair to Malverton was the measure which prudence
obviously dictated; but he was hopeless of effecting it.
The city was close at hand; this was his usual home; and
hither his tottering and almost involuntary steps conducted
him.
He listened to my representations and counsels, and
acknowledged their propriety. He put himself under my
protection and guidance, and promised to conform implicitly
to my directions. His strength had sufficed to bring him
thus far, but was now utterly exhausted. The task of
searching for a carriage and horse devolved upon me.
In effecting this purpose, I was obliged to rely upon my
own ingenuity and diligence. Wallace, though so long a
resident in the city, knew not to whom I could apply, or by
whom carriages were let to hire. My own reflections taught
me, that this accommodation was most likely to be furnished
by innkeepers, or that some of those might at least inform
me of the best measures to be taken. I resolved to set out
immediately on this search. Meanwhile, Wallace was persuaded
to take refuge in Medlicote's apartments; and to
make, by the assistance of Austin, the necessary preparation
for his journey.
The morning had now advanced. The rays of a sultry
sun had a sickening and enfeebling influence, beyond any
which I had ever experienced. The drought of unusual
duration had bereft the air and the earth of every particle
of moisture. The element which I breathed appeared to
have stagnated into noxiousness and putrefaction. I was
astonished at observing the enormous diminution of my
strength. My brows were heavy, my intellects benumbed,
my sinews enfeebled, and my sensations universally unquiet.
These prognostics were easily interpreted. What I chiefly
dreaded was, that they would disable me from executing




 the task which I had undertaken. I summoned up all my
resolution, and cherished a disdain of yielding to this ignoble
destiny. I reflected that the source of all energy, and
even of life, is seated in thought; that nothing is arduous
to human efforts; that the external frame will seldom languish,
while actuated by an unconquerable soul.
I fought against my dreary feelings, which pulled me to
the earth. I quickened my pace, raised my drooping eye-lids,
and hummed a cheerful and favorite air. For all that
I accomplished during this day, I believe myself indebted
to the strenuousness and ardor of my resolutions.
I went from one tavern to another. One was deserted;
in another the people were sick, and their attendants refused
to hearken to my inquiries or offers; at a third, their horses
were engaged. I was determined to prosecute my search
as long as an inn or a livery stable remained unexamined,
and my strength would permit.
To detail the events of this expedition, the arguments and
supplications which I used to overcome the dictates of avarice
and fear, the fluctuation of my hopes and my incessant
disappointments, would be useless. Having exhausted all
my expedients ineffectually, I was compelled to turn my
weary steps once more to Medlicote's lodgings.
My meditations were deeply engaged by the present circumstances
of my situation. Since the means which were
first suggested, were impracticable, I endeavored to investigate
others. Wallace's debility made it impossible for him
to perform this journey on foot; but would not his strength
and his resolution suffice to carry him beyond Schuylkill?
A carriage or horse, though not to be obtained in the
city, could, without difficulty, be procured, in the country.
Every farmer had beasts for burthen and draught. One of
these might be hired at no immoderate expense, for half a
day.
This project appeared so practicable and so specious,
that I deeply regretted the time and the efforts which had
already been so fruitlessly expended. If my project, however,
had been mischeivous, to review it with regret, was
only to prolong and to multiply its mischiefs. I trusted that
time and strength would not be wanting to the execution of
this new design.






On entering Medlicote's house, my looks, which, in spite
of my languors, were sprightly and confident, flattered Wallace
with the belief that my exertions had succeeded. When
acquainted with their failure, he sunk as quickly into hopelessness.
My new expedient was heard by him with no
marks of satisfaction. It was impossible, he said, to move
from this spot by his own strength. All his powers were
exhausted by his walk from Bushhill.
I endeavored, by arguments and railleries, to revive his
courage. The pure air of the country would exhilirate him
into new life. He might stop at every fifty yards, and rest
upon the green sod. If overtaken by the night, we would
procure a lodging, by address and importunity; but if every
door should be shut against us, we should at least, enjoy the
shelter of some barn, and might diet wholesomely upon the
new laid eggs that we should find there. The worst treatment
we could meet with, was better than continuance in
the city.
These remonstrances had some influence, and he at length
consented to put his ability to the test. First, however, it
was necessary to invigorate himself by a few hours rest. To
this, though with infinite reluctance, I consented.
This interval allowed him to reflect upon the past, and to
inquire into the fate of Thetford and his family. The intelligence,
which Medlicote had enabled me to afford him, was
heard with more satisfaction than regret. The ingratitude
and cruelty with which he had been treated, seemed to have
extinguished every sentiment, but hatred and vengeance. I
was willing to profit by this interval to know more of Thetford,
than I already possessed. I inquired why Wallace,
had so perversely neglected the advice of his uncle and
cousin, and persisted to brave so many dangers when flight
was so easy.
I cannot justify my conduct, answered he. It was in the
highest degree, thoughtless and perverse. I was confident
and unconcerned as long as our neighborhood was free from
disease, and as long as I forbore any communication with
the sick; yet I should have withdrawn to Malverton, merely
to gratify my friends, if Thetford had not used the most
powerful arguments to detain me. He labored to extenuate
the danger.






Why not stay, said he, as long as I and my family stay?
Do you think that we would linger here, if the danger were
imminent. As soon as it becomes so, we will fly. You
know that we have a country house prepared for our reception.
When we go, you shall accompany us. Your services
at this time are indispensable to my affairs. If you
will not desert me, your salary next year shall be double;
and that will enable you to marry your cousin immediately.
Nothing is more improbable than that any of us should be
sick, but if this should happen to you, I plight my honor
that you shall be carefully and faithfully attended.
These assurances were solemn and generous. To make
Susan Hadwin my wife, was the scope of all my wishes
and labors. By staying I should hasten this desirable event,
and incur little hazard. By going, I should alienate the
affections of Thetford; by whom, it is but justice to acknowledge,
that I had hitherto been treated with unexampled
generosity and kindness; and blast all the schemes I had
formed for rising into wealth.
My resolution was by no means steadfast. As often as a
letter from Malverton arrived, I felt myself disposed to
hasten away, but this inclination was combated by new arguments
and new entreaties of Thetford.
In this state of suspense, the girl by whom Mrs. Thetford's
infant was nursed, fell sick. She was an excellent
creature, and merited better treatment than she received.
Like me, she resisted the persuasions of her friends, but
her motives for remaining were disinterested and heroic.
No sooner did her indisposition appear, than she was
hurried to the hospital. I saw that no reliance could be
placed upon the assurances of Thetford. Every consideration
gave way to his fear of death. After the girl's departure,
though he knew that she was led by his means to
execution,—yet he consoled himself with repeating and believing
her assertions, that her disease was not the fever.
I was now greatly alarmed for my own safety. I was
determined to encounter his anger and repel his persuasions;
and to depart with the market man, next morning. That
night, however, I was seized with a violent fever. I knew
in what manner patients were treated at the hospital, and
removal thither was to the last degree abhorred.






The morning arrived, and my situation was discovered.
At the first intimation, Thetford rushed out of the house,
and refused to re-enter it till I was removed. I knew not
my fate, till three ruffians made their appearance at my
bedside, and communicated their commission.
I called on the name of Thetford and his wife. I entreated
a moment's delay, till I had seen these persons, and
endeavored to procure a respite from my sentence. They
were deaf to my entreaties, and prepared to execute their
office by force. I was delirious with rage and terror. I
heaped the bitterest execrations on my murderer; and by
turns, invoked the compassion, and poured a torrent of reproaches
on, the wretches whom he had selected for his
ministers. My struggles and outcries were vain.
I have no perfect recollection of what passed till my arrival
at the hospital. My passions combined with my disease,
to make me frantic and wild. In a state like mine, the
slightest motion could not be endured without agony. What
then must I have felt, scorched and dazzled by the sun,
sustained by hard boards, and borne for miles over a rugged
pavement?
I cannot make you comprehend the anguish of my
feelings. To be disjointed and torn piece-meal by the rack,
was a torment inexpressibly inferior to this. Nothing excites
my wonder, but that I did not expire before the cart
had moved three paces.
I knew not how, or by whom I was moved from this
vehicle. Insensibility came at length to my relief. After a
time I opened my eyes, and slowly gained some knowledge
of my situation. I lay upon a mattress, whose condition
proved that a half-decayed corpse had recently been dragged
from it. The room was large, but it was covered with
beds like my own. Between each, there was scarcely the
interval of three feet. Each sustained a wretch, whose
groans and distortions, bespoke the desperateness of his condition.

The atmosphere was loaded by mortal stenches. A vapor,
suffocating and malignant, scarcely allowed me to
breathe. No suitable receptacle was provided for the evacuations
produced by medicine or disease. My nearest
neighbor was struggling with death, and my bed, casually





 extended, was moist with the detestable matter which had
flowed from his stomach.
You will scarcely believe that, in this scene of horrors, the
sound of laughter should be overheard. While the upper
rooms of this building, are filled with the sick and the dying,
the lower apartments are the scene of carousals and mirth.
The wretches who are hired, at enormous wages, to tend
the sick and convey away the dead, neglect their duty and
consume the cordials, which are provided for the patients,
in debauchery and riot.
A female visage, bloated with malignity and drunkenness,
occasionally looked in. Dying eyes were cast upon her,
invoking the boon, perhaps, of a drop of cold water, or her
assistance to change a posture which compelled him to behold
the ghastly writhings or deathful smile of his neighbor.
The visitant had left the banquet for a moment, only to
see who was dead. If she entered the room, blinking eyes
and reeling steps, shewed her to be totally unqualified for
ministering the aid that was needed. Presently, she disappeared
and others ascended the staircase, a coffin was
deposited at the door, the wretch, whose heart still quivered,
was seized by rude hands, and dragged along the floor into
the passage.
O! how poor are the conceptions which are formed, by
the fortunate few, of the sufferings to which millions of their
fellow beings are condemned. This misery was more
frightful, because it was seen to flow from the depravity of
the attendants. My own eyes only would make me credit
the existence of wickedness so enormous. No wonder that
to die in garrets, and cellars, and stables, unvisited and unknown,
had, by so many, been preferred to being brought
hither.
A physician cast an eye upon my state. He gave some
directions to the person who attended him. I did not comprehend
them, they were never executed by the nurses, and
if the attempt had been made, I should probably have refused
to receive what was offered. Recovery was equally
beyond my expectations and my wishes. The scene which
was hourly displayed before me, the entrance of the sick,
most of whom perished in a few hours, and their departure




 to the graves prepared for them, reminded me of the fate to
which I, also, was reserved.
Three days passed away, in which every hour was expected
to be the last. That, amidst an atmosphere so contagious
and deadly, amidst causes of destruction hourly
accumulating, I should yet survive, appears to me nothing
less than miraculous. That of so many conducted to this
house, the only one who passed out of it alive, should be
myself, almost surpasses my belief.
Some inexplicable principle rendered harmless those potent
enemies of human life. My fever subsided and vanished.
My strength was revived, and the first use that I
made of my limbs, was to bear me far from the contemplation
and sufferance of those evils.
