

While musing upon these facts, I could not but reflect
with astonishment on the narrow escapes which Mervyn's
virtue had experienced. I was by no means certain that
his fame or his life was exempt from all danger, or that the
suspicions which had already been formed respecting him,
could possibly be wiped away. Nothing but his own narrative,
repeated with that simple but nervous eloquence,
which we had witnessed, could rescue him from the most
heinous charges. Was there any tribunal that would not
acquit him on merely hearing his defence?
Surely the youth was honest. His tale could not be the
fruit of invention; and yet, what are the bounds of fraud?
Nature has set no limits to the combinations of fancy. A
smooth exterior, a show of virtue, and a specious tale, are,
a thousand times, exhibited in human intercourse by craft
and subtlety. Motives are endlessly varied, while actions
continue the same; and an acute penetration may not find
it hard to select and arrange motives, suited to exempt from
censure any action that a human being can commit.
Had I heard Mervyn's story from another, or read it in
a book, I might, perhaps, have found it possible to suspect
the truth; but, as long as the impression, made by his tones,
gestures and looks, remained in my memory, this





suspicion was impossible. Wickedness may sometimes be ambiguous,
its mask may puzzle the observer; our judgment
may be made to falter and fluctuate, but the face of Mervyn
is the index of an honest mind. Calm or vehement,
doubting or confident, it is full of benevolence and candor.
He that listens to his words may question their truth, but he
that looks upon his countenance when speaking, cannot
withhold his faith.
It was possible, however, to find evidence, supporting or
confuting his story. I chanced to be acquainted with a
family, by name Althorpe, who were natives of that part of
the country where his father resided. I paid them a visit,
and, after a few preliminaries, mentioned, as if by accident,
the name of Mervyn. They immediately recognised this
name as belonging to one of their ancient neighbors. The
death of the wife and sons, and the seduction of the only
daughter by Colvill, with many pathetic incidents connected
with the fate of this daughter, were mentioned.
This intelligence induced me to inquire of Mrs. Althorpe,
a sensible and candid woman, if she were acquainted with
the recent or present situation of this family.
I cannot say much, she answered, of my own knowledge.
Since my marriage, I am used to spend a few weeks of
summer, at my father's, but am less inquisitive than I once
was into the concerns of my old neighbors. I recollect,
however, when there, last year, during the fever, to have
heard that Sawny Mervyn had taken a second wife; that
his only son, a youth of eighteen, had thought proper to be
highly offended with his father's conduct, and treated the
new mistress of the house with insult and contempt. I
should not much wonder at this, seeing children are so apt
to deem themselves unjustly treated by a second marriage
of their parent, but it was hinted that the boy's jealousy and
discontent was excited by no common cause. The new
mother was not much older than himself, had been a servant
of the family, and a criminal intimacy had subsisted
between her, while in that condition, and the son. Her
marriage with his father was justly accounted by their neighbors,
a most profligate and odious transaction. The son,
perhaps, had, in such a case, a right to scold, but he ought




not to have carried his anger to such extremes as have been
imputed to him. He is said to have grinned upon her with
contempt, and even to have called her strumpet in the presence
of his father and of strangers.
It was impossible for such a family to keep together.
Arthur took leave one night to possess himself of all his
father's cash, mount the best horse in his meadow, and
elope. For a time, no one knew whither he had gone.
At last, one was said to have met with him in the streets
of this city, metamorphosed from a rustic lad into a fine
gentleman. Nothing could be quicker than this change, for
he left the country on a Saturday morning, and was seen
in a French frock and silk stockings, going into Christ's
Church the next day. I suppose he kept it up with a high
hand, as long as his money lasted.
My father paid us a visit last week, and among other
country news, told us that Sawny Mervyn had sold his
place. His wife had persuaded him to try his fortune in
the Western Country. The price of his hundred acres here
would purchase a thousand there, and the man being very
gross and ignorant, and withal, quite a simpleton, found no
difficulty in perceiving that a thousand are ten times more
than a hundred. He was not aware that a rood of ground
upon Schuylkill is tenfold better than an acre on the
Tennessee.
The woman turned out to be an artful profligate. Having
sold his ground and gotten his money, he placed it in her
keeping, and she, to enjoy it with the more security, ran
away to the city; leaving him to prosecute his journey to
Kentucky, moneyless and alone. Sometime after, Mr Althorpe
and I were at the play, when he pointed out to me
a group of females in an upper box, one of whom was no
other than Betty Lawrence. It was not easy to recognise,
in her present gaudy trim, all flaunting with ribbons and
shining with trinkets the same Betty who used to deal out
pecks of potatoes and superintend her basket of cantilopes in
the Jersey market, in pasteboard bonnet and linsey petticoat.
Her companions were of the infamous class. If Arthur
were still in the city, there is no doubt that the mother and
son might renew the ancient terms of their acquaintance.
The old man thus robbed and betrayed, sought




consolation in the bottle, of which he had been at all times over fond.
He wandered from one tavern to another till his credit was
exhausted, and then was sent to jail, where, I believe, he is
likely to continue till his death. Such, my friend, is the
history of the Mervyns.
What proof, said I, have you of the immoral conduct of
the son? Of his mistreatment of his mother, and his elopement
with his father's horse and money?
I have no proof but the unanimous report of Mervyn's
neighbors. Respectable and honest men have affirmed, in
my hearing, that they had been present when the boy treated
his mother in the way that I have described. I was, besides,
once in company with the old man, and heard him bitterly
inveigh against his son, and charge him with the fact of stealing
his horse and money. I well remember that tears rolled
from his eyes while talking on the subject. As to his being
seen in the city the next day after his elopement, dressed in
a most costly and fashionable manner, I can doubt that as
little as the rest, for he that saw him was my father, and you
who know my father, know what credit is due to his eyes
and his word. He had seen Arthur often enough not to be
mistaken, and described his appearance with great exactness.
The boy is extremely handsome, give him his due; his dark
hazle eyes, auburn hair, and very elegant proportions. His
air and gate have nothing of the clown in them. Take
away his jacket and trowsers, and you have as spruce a fellow
as ever came from dancing-school or college. He is
the exact picture of his mother, and the most perfect contrast
to the sturdy legs, squat figure, and broad, unthinking,
sheepish face of the father that can be imagined. You must
confess that his appearance here is a pretty strong proof of
the father's assertions. The money given for these clothes
could not possibly have been honestly acquired. It is to be
presumed that they were bought or stolen, for how else
should they have been gotten?
What was this lad's personal deportment during the life
of his mother, and before his father's second marriage?
Very little to the credit of his heart or his intellects.
Being the youngest son, the only one who at length survived,
and having a powerful resemblance to herself, he became
the mother's favorite. His constitution was feeble, and he




loved to stroll in the woods more than to plough or sow.
This idleness was much against his father's inclination and
judgment; and, indeed, it was the foundation of all his vices.
When he could be prevailed upon to do any thing it was in
a bungling manner, and so as to prove that his thoughts
were fixed on any thing except his business. When his assistance
was wanted he was never to be found at hand.
They were compelled to search for him among the rocks
and bushes, and he was generally discovered sauntering
along the bank of the river, or lolling in the shade of a tree.
This disposition to inactivity and laziness, in so young a man,
was very strange. Persons of his age are rarely fond of
work, but then they are addicted to company, and sports,
and exercises. They ride, or shoot, or frolic; but this being
moped away his time in solitude, never associated with other
young people, never mounted a horse but when he could
not help it, and never fired a gun or angled for a fish in his
life. Some people supposed him to be half an idiot, or, at
least, not to be right in his mind; and, indeed, his conduct
was so very perverse and singular, that I do not wonder at
those who accounted for it in this way.
But, surely, said I, he had some object of pursuit. Perhaps
he was addicted to books.
Far from it. On the contrary, his aversion to school was
as great as his hatred of the plough. He never could get
his lessons or bear the least constraint. He was so much
indulged by his mother at home, that tasks and discipline of
any kind were intolerable. He was a perpetual truant; till
the master one day attempting to strike him, he ran out of
the room and never entered it more. The mother excused
and countenanced his frowardness, and the foolish father was
obliged to give way. I do not believe he had two month's
schooling in his life.
Perhaps, said I, he preferred studying by himself, and at
liberty. I have known boys endowed with great curiosity
and aptitude to learning, who never could endure set tasks,
and spurned at the pedagogue and his rod.
I have known such likewise, but this was not one of them.
I know not whence he could derive his love of knowledge
or the means of acquiring it. The family were totally
illiterate. The father was a Scotch peasant, whose




ignorance was so great that he could not sign his name. His
wife, I believe, could read, and might sometimes decypher
the figures in an almanac, but that was all. I am apt to
think, that the son's ability was not much greater. You
might as well look for silver platters or marble tables in his
house, as for a book or a pen.
I remember calling at their house one evening in the
winter before last. It was intensely cold; and my father,
who rode with me, having business with Sawny Mervyn, we
stopped a minute at his gate; and, while the two old men
were engaged in conversation, I begged leave to warm myself
by the kitchen fire. Here, in the chimney corner, seated
on a block, I found Arthur busily engaged in knitting stockings!
I thought this a whimsical employment for a young
active man. I told him so, for I wanted to put him to the
blush; but he smiled in my face, and answered, without the
least discomposure, just as whimsical a business for a young
active woman. Pray, did you never knit a stocking?
Yes; but that was from necessity. Were I of a different
sex, or did I possess the strength of a man, I should rather
work in my field or study my book.
Rejoice that you are a woman, then, and are at liberty to
pursue that which costs least labor and demands most skill.
You see, though a man, I use your privilege, and prefer
knitting yarn to threshing my brain with a book or the barn
floor with a flail.
I wonder, said I contemptuously, you do not put on the
petticoat as well as handle the needle.
Do not wonder, he replied; it is because I hate a petticoat
incumbrance as much as I love warm feet. Look there
(offering the stocking to my inspection) is it not well done?
I did not touch it, but sneeringly said, excellent! I wonder
you do not apprentice yourself to a tailor.
He looked at me with an air of ridiculous simplicity, and
said, how prone the woman is to wonder. You call the
work excellent, and yet wonder that I do not make myself
a slave to improve my skill! Did you learn needle work
from seven year's squatting on a tailor's board? Had you
come to me, I would have taught you in a day.
I was taught at school.
And paid your instructer?






To be sure.
'Twas liberty and money thrown away. Send your sister,
if you have one, to me, and I will teach her without either
rod or wages. Will you?
You have an old and a violent antipathy, I believe, to any
thing like a school.
True. It was early and violent. Had not you?
No. I went to school with pleasure; for I thought to
read and write were accomplishments of some value.
Indeed? Then I misunderstood you just now. I thought
you said, that, had you the strength of a man, you should
prefer the plough and the book to the needle. Whence, supposing
you a female, I inferred that you had a woman's love
for the needle and a fool's hatred of books.
My father calling me from without, I now made a motion
to go. Stay, continued he with great earnestness, throwing
aside his knitting apparatus, and beginning in great haste to
pull off his stockings. Draw these stockings over your shoes.
They will save your feet from the snow while walking to
your horse.
Half angry, and half laughing, I declined the offer. He
had drawn them off, however, and holding them in his hand,
be persuaded, said he; only lift your feet, and I will slip
them on in a trice.
Finding me positive in my refusal, he dropped the stockings;
and, without more ado, caught me up in his arms,
rushed out of the room, and, running barefoot through the
snow, set me fairly on my horse. All was done in a moment,
and before I had time to reflect on his intentions.
He then seized my hand, and, kissing it with great fervor,
exclaimed, a thousand thanks to you for not accepting my
stockings. You have thereby saved yourself and me the
time and toil of drawing on and drawing off. Since you have
taught me to wonder, let me practise the lesson in wondering
at your folly, in wearing worsted shoes and silk stockings
at a season like this. Take my counsel, and turn your
silk to worsted and your worsted to leather. Then may
you hope for warm feet and dry. What! Leave the gate
without a blessing on your counsellor?
I spurred my horse into a gallop, glad to escape from




so strange a being. I could give you many instances of
behaviour equally singular, and which betrayed a mixture of
shrewdness and folly, of kindness and impudence, which
justified, perhaps, the common notion that his intellects were
unsound. Nothing was more remarkable than his impenetrability
to ridicule and censure. You might revile him for
hours, and he would listen to you with invincible composure.
To awaken anger or shame in him was impossible. He
would answer, but in such a way as to show him totally
unaware of your true meaning. He would afterwards talk
to you with all the smiling affability and freedom of an old
friend. Every one despised him for his idleness and folly,
no less conspicuous in his words than his actions; but no
one feared him, and few were angry with him, till after the
detection of his commerce with Betty, and his inhuman
treatment of his father.
Have you good reasons for supposing him to have been
illicitly connected with that girl?
Yes. Such as cannot be discredited. It would not be
proper for me to state these proofs. Nay, he never denied
it. When reminded, on one occasion, of the inference
which every impartial person would draw from appearances,
he acknowledged, with his usual placid effrontery, that the
inference was unavoidable. He even mentioned other concurring
and cotemporary incidents, which had eluded the
observation of his censurer, and which added still more
force to the conclusion. He was studious to palliate the
vices of this woman, as long as he was her only paramour;
but after her marriage with his father, the tone was
changed. He confessed that she was tidy, notable, industrious;
but, then, she was a prostitute, When charged with
being instrumental in making her such, and when his companions
dwelt upon the depravity of reviling her for vices
which she owed to him: True, he would say, there is depravity
and folly in the conduct you describe. Make me
out, if you please, to be a villain. What then? I was
talking, not of myself, but of Betty. Still this woman is a
prostitute. If it were I that made her such, with more
confidence may I make the charge. But think not that I
blame Betty. Place me in her situation, and I should have
acted just so. I should have formed just such notions of




my interest, and pursued it by the same means. Still, say
I, I would fain have a different woman for my father's wife,
and the mistress of his family.
