
That man therefore that doth thus
deceive and beguile his neighbour,
imitateth the Devil; he taketh his
examples from him, and not from
God, the Word, or good men: and
this did Mr. Badman.
And now to your second question:2. Question.
To wit, What I would have a man
do, that is in his Creditors debt, and
that can neither pay him, nor go on in
a trade any longer?
Answ. First of all: If this be
his case, and he knows it, let him
not run one penny further in his
Creditors debt. For that cannot
be done with good conscience. He
that knowes he cannot pay, and yet
will run into debt; does knowingly
wrong and defraud his neighbour,
and falls under that sentence of the
Word of God,How those that are Banckrupts should deal with their consciencies. The wicked borroweth
and payeth not again. Yea worse,
he borrows though at the very same
time he knows that he cannot pay again.
He doth also craftily take away
what is his Neighbours. That is
therefore the first thing that I would
propound to such: Let him not run
any further into his Creditors debt.

Secondly, After this, let him consider,Good advice.
how, and by what means he
was brought into such a condition,
that he could not pay his just debts.
To wit, whether it was by his own
remisness in his Calling, by living
too high in Dyet or Apparel, by lending
too lavishingly that which was
none of his own, to his loss; or whether
by the immediate hand and
Judgment of God.
If by searching, he findes, that
this is come upon him through remisness
in his Calling Extravagancies
in his Family, or the like; let him
labour for a sence of his sin and wickedness,
for he has sinned against
the Lord: First, in his being slothfull
in business, and in not providing,
to wit, of his own,  by the sweat of
his brows, or other honest ways,
for those of his own house. And secondly,
in being lavishing in Dyet
and Apparel in the Family, or in
lending to others that which was
none of his own. This cannot be
done with good conscience: it is
both against reason and nature, and
therefore must be a sin against God.
I say therefore, if thus this debtor

hath done, if ever he would live
quietly in conscience, and comfortably
in his condition for the future,
let him humble himself before God,
and repent of this his wickedness.
For he that is slothfull in his work, is
brother to him that is a great master. 
To be slothfull and a waster too, is
to be as it were a double sinner.
But again, as this man should enquire
into these things, so he should
also into this. How came I into this
way of dealing in which I have now
miscarried? is it a way that my Parents
brought me up in, put me Apprentice
to, or that by providence
I was first thrust into? or is it a way
into which I have twisted my self,
as not being contented with my
first lot, that by God and my Parents
I was cast into? This ought
duly to be considered. *Good counsel again. And if
upon search, a man shall find that
he is out of the place and Calling
into which he was put by his Parents,
or the Providence of God,
and has miscarried in a new way,
that through pride and dislike of
his first state he has chose rather
to embrace; his miscarriage is his

sin, the fruit of his Pride, and a token
of the Judgment of God upon him
for his leaving of his first state. And
for this he ought, as for the former,
to be humble and penitent before the
Lord.
But if by search, he finds,How to find that thy decay came by the Judgement of God, or by thy miscarriage. that
his poverty came by none of these;
if by honest search, he finds it so,
and can say with good conscience,
I went not out of my place and state
in which God by his providence had
put me; but have abode with God in
the calling wherein I was called, and
have wrought hard, and fared meanly,
been civilly apparelled, and have not
directly, nor indirectly made away
with my Creditors goods: Then has
his fall come upon him by the immediate
hand of God, whether by visible
or invisible wayes. For sometimes
it comes by visible wayes, to
wit, by Fire, by Thieves, by loss of
Cattel, or the wickedness of sinful
dealers, &c. And sometimes by
means invisible, and then no man
knows how; we only see things are
going, but cannot see by what way
they go. Well, Now suppose that
a man, by an immediate hand of

God is brought to a morsel of Bread,
what must he do now?Another question.
I answer: His surest way is still
to think, that this is the fruit of
some sin, though possibly not sin in
the management of his calling, yet
of some other sin. God casteth away
the substance of the wicked.  Therefore
let him still humble himself before 
his God, because his hand is
upon him, and say, What sin is this,
for which this hand of God is upon
me? and let him be diligent to find
it out, for some sin is the cause of
this Judgment;  for God doth not
willingly afflict nor grieve the children
of men. Either the heart is
too much set upon the world, or Religion
is too much neglected in thy
Family, or some thing. There is a
Snake in the grass, a Worm in the
gourd; some sin in thy bosom, for
the sake of which God doth thus deal
with thee.
Thirdly,Good advice again. This thus done, let that
man again consider thus with himself:
Perhaps God is now changing
of my Condition and state in the
world; he has let me live in fashion,
in fulness, and abundance of worldly

glory, and I did not to his glory
improve, as I should, that his good
dispensation to me. But when I
lived in full and sat pasture, I did
there lift up the heel: Therefore he
will now turn me into hard Commons, 
that with leanness, and hunger,
and meanness, and want, I may
spend the rest of my days. But let
him do this without murmering, and
repining; let him do it in a godly
manner, submitting himself to the
Judgment of God.  Let the rich rejoyce
in that he is made low.
This is duty, and it may be priviledg
to those that are under this hand
of God. And for thy encouragement
to this hard work, (for this is a
hard work) consider of these four
things.
1. This is right lying down underConsiders four things.
Gods hand, and the way to be exalted
in Gods time: when God would
have Job embrace the Dunghill, he
embraces it, and says,  The Lord
giveth, and the Lord hath taken away,
blessed be the name of the Lord.
2. Consider, That there are blessings
also that attend a low condition,
more than all the world are aware.

of. A poor condition has preventing
mercy attending of it. The
poor, because they are poor, are
not capable of sinning against God as
the rich man does.
3.  The Poor can more clearly
see himself preserved by the providence
of God than the rich, for he
trusteth in the abundance of his
riches.
4. It may be God has made thee
poor, because he would make thee
rich.  Hearken my beloved brethren,
hath not God chosen the poor of this
world, rich in Faith, and heirs of a
Kingdom which God hath promised
to them that love him?
I am perswaded, if men upon
whom this hand of God is, would
thus quietly lye down, and humble
themselves under it, they would
find more peace, yea, more blessing
of God attending them in it, than
the most of men are aware of. But
this is an hard Chapter, and therefore
I do not expect that many
should either read it with pleasure,
or desire to take my counsel.
Having thus spoken to the Broken
man, with reference to his own

self; I will now speak to him as he
stands related to his Creditors.
In the next place therefore, let
him fall upon the most †Honest dealing with Creditors. honest way
of dealing with his Creditors, and
that I think must be this.
First, Let him timely make them
acquainted with his condition, and
also do to them these three things.
1. Let him heartily, and unfeignedly
ask them forgiveness for the
wrong that he has done them.
2. Let him proffer them all, and
the whole all that ever he has in the
world; let him hide nothing, let
him strip himself to his raiment for
them; let him not keep a Ring, a
Spoon, or any thing from them.
3. If none of these two will satisfie
them, let him proffer them his
Body, to be at their dispose, to wit,
either to abide imprisonment their
pleasure, or to be at their service, till
by labour and travel he hath made
them such amends as they in reason
think fit, (only reserving something
for the succour of his poor and distressed
Family out of his labour,
which in Reason, and Conscience,
and Nature, he is bound also to take

care of:) Thus shall he make them
what amends he is able, for the
Wrong that he hath done them
in wasting and spending of their
Estates.
By thus doing, he submits himself
to Gods rod, commits himself to
the dispose of his Providence; yea,
by thus doing, he casteth the lot of
his present and future condition
into the lap of his Creditors, and
leaves the whole dispose thereof to
the Lord,  even as he shall order and
incline their hearrs to do with him.
And let that be either to forgive
him; or to take that which he hath
for satisfaction; or to lay his body
under affliction, this way or that,
according to Law; can he, I say,
thus leave the whole dispose to God,
let the issue be what it will, that
man shall have peace in his mind
afterward. And the comforts of
that state, (which will be comforts
that attend Equity, Justice, and
Duty,) will be more unto him, because
more according to Godliness,
than can be the comforts that are
the fruits of Injustice, Fraudulency,
and Deceit. Besides, this is the

way to engage God to favour him
by the sentence of his Creditors;
(for He can intreat them to use him
kindly, ) and he will do it when his
ways are pleasing in his sight: When
a mans ways please the Lord,  his enemies
shall be at peace with him; And
surely, for a man to seek to make
restitution for wrongs done, to the
utmost of his power, by what he is,
has, and enjoys in this world, is the
best way, in that capacity, and
with reference to that thing, that
a man can at this time be found
active in.
But he that doth otherwise, abides
in his sin, refuses to be disposed of
by the Providence of God, chuseth
an high Estate, though not attained
in Gods way; when Gods Will is,
that he should descend into a low
one: yea, he desperately saith in
his heart and actions, I will be
mine own chooser, and that in
mine own way, whatever happens
or follows thereupon.
Atten. You have said well, in my
mind. But suppose now, that Mr.
Badman was here, could he not object
as to what you have said, saying,

Go and teach your Brethren, that are
Professors, this lesson, for they, as I
am, are guilty of Breaking; yea I am
apt to think of that which you call
my Knavish way of breaking;A heavy blot upon Religion. to wit,
of breaking before they have need to
break. But if not so, yet they are
guilty of neglect in their Calling, of
living higher, both in Fare and
Apparrel, than their Trade or Income
will maintain. Besides, that
they do break, all the world very well
knowes, and that they have the
art to plead for a composition, is very
well known to men; and that it is
usual with them, to hide their Linnen,
their Plate, their Jewels, and
('tis to be thought, sometimes Money
and Goods besides,) is as common as
four eggs a penny. And thus they beguile
men, debauch their consciencies,
sin against their Profession, and make,
'tis to be feared, their lusts in all this,
and the fulfilling of them, their end.
I say, if Mr. Badman was here to object
thus unto you, what would be your
reply?
Wise. What! Why I would say,
I hope no Good man, no man of good
conscience, no man that either feareth

God, regardeth the credit
of Religion, the peace of Gods
people, or the salvation of his own
soul, will do thus.
Professors, such perhaps there
may be, and who, upon earth can
help it? Jades there be of all colours.
*If Knaves will make profession their cloak to be vile, who can help it? If men will profess, and
make their profession a stalking-Horse
to beguile their neighbours
of their estates, as Mr. Badman himself
did, when he beguiled her that
now is with sorrow his wife, who
can help it? The Churches of old
were pestered with such, and therefore
no marvel if these perilous difficult
times be so. But mark how
the Apostle words it:  Nay you do
wrong and defraud, and that your
Brethren: Know you not, that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God? Be not deceived, neither
Fornicator, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers,
nor Effeminate, nor abusers
of themselves with Mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards,
nor Revilers, nor Extortioners,
shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
None of these shall be saved in
this state, nor shall profession deliver

them from the censure of the
Godly, when they shall be manifest
such to be. But their profession we
cannot help: How can we help
it, if men should ascribe to themselves
the title of Holy ones, Godly
ones, Zealous ones, Self-denying ones,
or any other such glorious title? and
while they thus call themselves, they
should be the veryest Rogues for all
evil, sin, and villany imaginable,
who could help it? True, they are
a scandal to Religion, a grief to the
honest hearted, an offence to the
world, and a stumbling stone to the
weak, and these offences have come,
do come, and will come, do what
all the world can; but wo be to them
through whom they come;  let such
professors therefore be disowned by
all true Christians, and let them be
reckoned among those base men of
the world which by such actions
they most resemble: They are Mr.
Badmans Kindred.
*Let such be disowned of all good men. For they are a shame to Religion,
I say these slithy, rob-Shop, pick-pocket
men, they are a shame to
Religion, and religious men should
be ashamed of them. God puts

such an one among the Fools of the
world, therefore let not Christians
put them among those that are wise
for heaven. As the Partridge sitteth
on eggs, and hatcheth them not,  so he
that getteth riches and not by right,
shall leave them in the midst of his
dayes, and at his end shall be a fool.
And the man under consideration is
one of these, and therefore must
look to fall by this Judgment.
A professor! and practice such
villianies as these! such an one is
not worthy to bear that name any
longer. We may say to such as the
Prophet spake to their like, to wit,
to the rebellious that were in the
house of Israel. Goe ye, serve every
man his Idols:—  If ye will not hearken
to the Law and Testament of
God, to lead your lives thereafter:
but pollute Gods holy name no more
with your Gifts, and with your Idols.
Goe professors, Goe; leave off
profession, unless you will lead your
lives according to your profession.
Better never profess, than to make
profession a stalking-horse to sin,
Deceit, to the Devil, and Hell.
The ground and rules of Religion

allow not any such thing: Receive us,
says the Apostle,  we have wronged
no man, we have corrupted no man,
we have defrauded no man. Intimating,
that those that are guilty of
wronging, corrupting or defrauding
of any, should not be admitted to
the fellowship of Saints, no not
into the common catalogue of Brethren
with them.
Nor can men with all their Rhetorick,
and Eloquent speaking prove
themselves fit for the Kingdom of
Heaven,  or men of good conscience
on earth. O that godly plea
of Samuel: Behold here I am, says
he,  witness against me, before the
Lord, and before his Anointed, whose
Oxe have I taken, or whose Ass have
I taken, or whom have I defrauded,
whom have I oppressed, &c? This
was to do like a man of good conscience
indeed. And in this his Appeal,
he was so Justified in the consciencies
of the whole Congregation,
that they could not but with one
voice, as with one mouth, break
out joyntly and say,  Thou hast not
defrauded us, nor oppressed us.
A Professor, and defraud, away

with him! a Professor should not
owe any man any thing, but love.
A professor should provide things,
not of other mens, but of his own, of
his own honest getting, and that not
onely in the sight of God, but of all
men; that he may adorn the Doctrine
of God our Saviour in all
things.
Atten. *A question. But suppose God should
blow upon a Professor in his Estate,
and Calling, and he should be run out
before he is aware, must he be accounted
to be like Mr. Badman, and lie under
the same reproach as he?
Wise. *  No: If he hath dutifully
done what he could to avoid it. It
is possible for a Ship to sink at sea, notwithstanding
the most faithfull endeavour
of the most skilful Pilot under
Heaven. And thus, as I suppose,
it was with the Prophet that left his
wife in debt to the hazarding the 
slavery of her children by the Creditors.
He was no profuse man, nor
one that was given to defraud, for the
Text says he feared God; yet, as
I said, he was run out more than
she could pay.
If God would blow upon a man,

who can help it? and he will do so
sometimes,  because he will change
dispensations with men, and because
he will trye their Graces.God does sometimes blow upon his own people. How they should doe at that time. Yea,
also because he will overthrow the
wicked with his Judgments; and
all these things are seen in Job. But
then the consideration of this, should
bid men have a care that they be
honest, lest this comes upon them
for their sin: It should also bid them
beware of launching further into the
world, than in an honest way by ordinary
means they can Godlily
make their retreat; for the further
in, the greater fall. It should also
teach them, to begg of God his blessing
upon their endeavours, their
honest and lawfull endeavours. And
it should put them upon a diligent
looking to their steps, that if in their
going they should hear the Ice
crack, they may timely goe back
again.
These things considered, and duely
put in practice, if God will blow
upon a man, then let him be content,
and with Job embrace the
dunghill; let him give unto all their
dues, and not fight against the Providence

of God, (but humble himself
rather under his mighty hand,)
which comes to strip him naked and
bare: for he that doth otherwise,
fights against God; and declares that
he is a stranger to that of Paul;  I
know both how to be abased, and I know
how to abound; every where, in all
things, I am instructed both to be full,
and to be hungry, both to abound, and
to suffer need.
Atten. But Mr. Badman would
not, I believe, have put this difference
'twixt things feigned, and those that
fall of necessity.
Wise. If he will not, God will,
Conscience will; and that not thine
own only, but the Consciences of
all those that have seen the way, and
that have known the truth of the condition
of such an one.
Atten. Well: Let us at this time
leave this matter, and return again
to Mr. Badman.
Wise. With all my heart will I
proceed to give you a relation of
what is yet behind of his Life, in
order to our discourse of his Death.
Atten. But pray do it with as much
brevity as you can.

Wise. Why? are you a weary
of my relating of things?
Atten. No. But it pleases me to
hear a great deal in few words.
Wise. I profess not my self an
artist that way, but yet as briefly as
I can, I will pass through what of
his Life is behind; and again I shall
begin with his fraudulent dealing (as
before I have shewed with his Creditors,
so now) with his Customers,
and those that he had otherwise to
deal withall.
He dealt by deceitfull Weights
and Measures.More of Mr. Badmans fraudulent dealing. He used deceitful weights and scales. He kept weights to
buy by, and weights to sell by;
measures to buy by, and measures
to sell by: those he bought by were
too big, those he sold by were too
little.
Besides, he could use a thing called
slight of hand, if he had to do with
other mens weights and measures,
and by that means make them
whether he did buy or sell, yea
though his Customer or Chapman
looked on, turn to his own advantage.
Moreover, he had the art to misreckon
men in their Accounts

whether by weight, or measure, or
money, and would often do it to
his worldly advantage, and their
loss: What say you to Mr. Badman
now?
And if a question was made of his
faithfull dealing, he had his servants
ready, that to his purpose he had
brought up, that would avouch and
swear to his Book, or word: this
was Mr. Badmans practice; What
think you of Mr. Badman now?
Atten. Think! Why I can think
no other but that he was a man left to
himself, a naughty man; for these, as
his other, were naughty things; if
the tree, as indeed it may, ought to
be judged, what it is by its fruits;
then Mr. Badman must needs be a
bad Tree. But pray, for my further
satisfaction, shew me now by the Word
of God, the evil of this his practice:
and first of his using false Weights and
Measures.
Wise. The evil of that! why the
evil of that appears to every eye:
the Heathens, that live like Beasts
and Bruits in many things, do abominate
and abhorr such wickedness
as this. Let a man but look upon

these things as he goes by, and he
shall see enough in them from the
light of nature to make him loath so
base a practice; although Mr. Badman
loved it.
Atten. But shew me something out
of the Word against it, will you?
Wise. I will willingly do it. And
first we will look into the Old Testament:
You shall,  saith God there,
do no unrighteousness in Judgment, in
mete-yard, in weights or in measures,
a just Ballance, a just Weight, a just
Ephah, and a just Hin shall you have.
This is the Law of God,Of Just weights and measures. and that
which all men according to the Law
of the land ought to obey. So again:
Ye shall have just Ballances,  and
a just Ephah, &c.
Now having shewed you the Law,
I will also shew you how God takes
swerving therefrom.  A false Ballance
is not good;  a false Ballance
is an abomination to the Lord. Some
have just Weights but false Ballances,The evil of deceitful Ballances, Weights and Measures.
and by vertue of those false Ballances,
by their just Weights, they
deceive the Countrey: Wherefore,
God first of all commands that the
Ballance be made Just: A just Ballance

shalt thou have. Else they
may be, yea are, decievers, notwithstanding
their just weights.
Now, having commanded that
men have a just Ballance, and testifying
that a false one is an abomination
to the Lord, he proceedeth also
unto weight and measure.
Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers
weights, a great and a small;
that is one to buy by, and another
to sell by, as Mr. Badman had.  Thou
shalt not have in thy house divers
measures, a great and a small, (and
these had Mr. Badman also) but thou
shalt have a perfect and a just weight;
a perfect and a just measure shalt thou
have, that thy days may be lengthened
in the land which the Lord thy
God giveth thee. For all that do
such things, (that is, that use false
Weights and Measures) and all
that do unrighteously are abomination
to the Lord. See now both how
plentiful, and how punctual the
Scripture is in this matter. But perhaps
it may be objected, that all this
is old Law, and therefore hath nothing
to do with us under the New
Testament. (Not that I think

you, neighbour, will object thus:)
Well, to this foolish objection, let us
make an Answer. First, he that
makes this objection, if he doth it
to overthrow the authority of those
Texts, discovereth that himself is
first cousen to Mr. Badman:The Old and New Law commands all men to be honest and upright in their weights and measures. For
a Just man is willing to speak reverently
of those commands. That
man therefore hath, I doubt, but
little conscience, if any at all that
is good, that thus objecteth against
the Text: but let us look into the
New Testament, and there we shall
see how Christ confirmeth the same:
Where he commandeth that men
make to others good measure, including
also that they make good
weight; telling such that doe thus, or
those that do it not, that they may be
encouraged to do it;  Good measure,
pressed down, shaken together, and
running over, shall men give into your
bosom; for with the same measure that
ye mete withall, it shall be measured
to you again: To wit, both from
God and man. For as God will
shew his indignation against the false
man, by taking away even that
he hath, so he will deliver up the

false man to the Oppressor, and the
Extortioner shall catch from him, as
well as he hath catched from his
neighbour; therefore another Scripture
saith, When thou shalt cease to
deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously
with thee. That the New
Testament also, hath an inspection
into mens Trading, yea even with
their weights and measures, is evident
from these general exhortations.
Defraud not; lye not one to another;Pat Scriptures for our purpose.
let no man goe beyond his brother in
any matter, for God is the avenger
of all such: whatsoever you do, do it
heartily, as unto the Lord, doing all
in his name, to his glory; and the like.
All these injunctions and commandments
do respect our life and conversation
among men, with reference
to our dealing, trading, and so
consequently they forbid false, deceitful,
yea all doings that are corrupt.
Having thus in a word or two
shewed you,Where false weights and measures are to be found. that these things are
bad; I will next, for the conviction
of those that use them, shew you,
where God saith they are to be
found.

1.1. With evil doers. They are not to be found
in the house of the good and godly
man, for he, as his God, abhorrs
them; but they are to be found in
the house of evil doers, such as Mr.
Badmans is.  Are there, saith the
Prophet, yet the treasures of wickedness
in the house of the wicked, and
the scant measure that is abomination?
Are they there yet, notwithstanding
Gods forbidding, notwithstanding
Gods tokens of anger against
those that do such things? O how
loth is a wicked man to let goe a
sweet, a gainful sin, when he hath
hold of it! They hold fast deceit,
they refuse to let it goe.
2.2. With the merciless and Oppressors. These deceitful Weights and
Measures are not to be found in
the house of the Mercifull, but in
the house of the Cruel; in the house
of them that love to oppress. The
Ballances of deceit are in his hand, 
he loveth to oppress. He is given to
oppression and cruelty, therefore
he useth such wicked things in his
calling. Yea he is a very cheat, and
as was hinted before, concerning
Mr. Badmans breaking, so I say now,
concerning his using these deceitful

weights and measures, it is as bad,
as base, as to take a purse, or pick
a pocket; for it is a plain robbery,
it takes away from a man that
which is his own, even the price of
his money.
3.3. With such as would swallow up the poor. The deceitful Weights and
Measures are not to be found in
the house of such as relieve the belly,
and that cover the loyns of the poor,
but of such as indeed would swallow
them up.  Hear ye this, ye that
swallow up the needy, and that make
the poor of the land to fail, saying,
When will the new Moon be gone that
we may sell corn, and the Sabbath that
we may set forth Wheat, making the
Ephah small and the Sheckle great,
(making the Measure small, and
the Price great) and falsifying the
Ballances by deceit, that ye may buy
the poor for silver, and the needy for
a pair of shooes, and sell the refuse
of the Wheat. The Lord hath sworn
by the exellencie of Jacob, surely I
will not forget any of their works.
So detestable and vile a thing is this
in the sight of God.
4. God abominates the thoughts
of calling of those that use false

weights and measures, by any other
term than,4. With impure ones. that they be Impure
ones, or the like: Shall I count
them pure (saith he) with the bag 
of deceitful weights? no by no means,
they are impure ones, their hands
are defiled, deceitful gain is in their
houses, they have gotten what they
have by coveting an evil Covetousness,
and therefore must and
shall be counted among the impure,
among the wicked of the
world.
Thus you see how full and plain
the Word of God is, against this
sin, and them that use it. And therefore
Mr. Badman, for that he used
by these things thus to rook and
cheat his neighbours, is rightly rejected
from having his Name in,
and among the catalogue of the
godly.
Atten. But I am perswaded, that
the using of these things, and the doing
by them thus deceitfully, is not
counted so great an evil by some.
Wise. Whether it be counted
an evil or a vertue, by men, it mattereth
not; you see by the Scriptures,
the Judgment of God upon

it. It was not counted an evil by
Mr. Badman, nor is it by any that
still are treading in his steps. But,
I say, 'tis no matter how men
esteem of things, let us adhere to
the Judgment of God. And the
rather, because when we our selves
have done weighing and measuring
to others, then God will weigh and
measure both us and our actions.
And when he doth so, as he will do
shortly, then wo be to him to
whom, and of whose actions it
shall be thus said by him:  Tekel,
Thou art weighed in the Ballances,
and art found wanting. God will
then recompense their evil of deceiving
upon their own head, when
he shall shut them out of his presence,
favour, and kingdom, for
ever and ever.
Atten. But 'tis a wonder, that
since Mr. Badmans common practice
was to do thus, that some one or more
did not find him out, and blame him
for this his wickedness.
Wise. For the generality of people,
he went away clever with his
Knavery. For what with his Ballance,
his false Ballance, and good

weight, and what with his slight of
hand to boot, he beguiled, sometimes
a little, and sometimes more,
most that he had to deal with: Besides,
those that use this naughty
trade, are either such as blind men
with a shew of Religion, or by hectoring
the buyer out by words. I
must confess Mr. Badman was notHow Mr. Badman did cheat, and hide his cheating.
so arch at the first; that is, to do it
by shew of Religion; for now he
began to grow threadbare, (though
some of his brethren are arch enough
this way, yea and of his sisters too,
for I told you at first that there was
a great many of them, and never
a one of them good:) but for hectoring,
for swearing, for lying, if
these things would make weight
and measure, they should not be
wanting to Mr. Badmans Customers.
Atten. Then it seems he kept good
Weights, and a bad Ballance; well
that was better than that both should
be bad.
Wise. Not at all. There lay the
depth of his deceit: For if any at
any time found fault, that he used
them hardly, and that they wanted

their weight of things; he would
reply:Good Weights and a bad Ballance a deep piece of Knavery. Why did you not see them
weighed? will you not believe your
own eyes: If you question my
weights, pray carry them whether
you will, I will maintain them to be
good and just. The same he would
say of his scales. So he blinded all,
by his Ballance.
Atten. This is cunning indeed:
but as you say, there must be also something
done or said, to blind therewith,
and this I perceive Mr. Badman
bad.
Wise. Yes. He had many ways
to blind, but he was never clever
at it, by making a shew of Religion,
(though he cheated his wife therewith:)
for he was, especially by
those that dwelt near him, too well
known to do that, though he would
bungle at it as well as he could.
But there are some that are arch villains
this way; they shall to view live
a whole life Religiously, and yet
shall be guilty of these most horrible
sins: And yet Religion in it self
is never the worse, nor yet the true
professors of it. But as Luther says,
In the name of God begins all mischief.

For Hypocrites have no other way
to bring their evils to maturity, but
by using and mixing the Name of
God and Religion therewith. Thus
they become whited Walls;  for by
this white,A cloak of Religion to blind Mr. Cheats Knavery. the white of Religion,
the dirt of their actions is hid. Thus
also they become graves that appear
not, and they that goe over them,
(that have to do with them) are
not aware of them, but suffer themselves
to be deluded by them. Yea,
if there shall, as there will sometimes,
rise a doubt in the heart of
the buyer about the weight and
measure he should have, why, he
suffereth his very sences to be also
deluded, by recalling of his Chapmans
Religion to mind, and thinks
verily that not his good chapman
but himself is out; for he dreams
not that his chapman can deceive.
But if the buyer shall find it out, and
shall make it apparent, that he is
beguiled; then shall he be healed
by having amends made, and perhaps
fault shall be laid upon servants,
&c. and so Master Cheat
shall stand for a right honest man
in the eye of his Customer, though

the next time he shall pick his
pocket again.
Some *Some plead Custom to cheat. plead Custom for their
Cheat, as if that could acquit them
before the Tribunal of God: And
others say, it came to them for so
much, and therefore another must
take it for so much, though there is
wanting both as to weight and measure:
but in all these things there are
Juggles; or if not, such must know,
*  That that which is altogather just,
they must doe. Suppose that I be
cheated my self with a brass half-Crown,
must I therefore cheat another
therewith? if this be bad in the
whole, it is also bad in the parts.
Therefore however thou art dealt
withall in thy buying, yet thou
must deal justly in selling, or thou
sinnest against thy soul, and art become
as Mr. Badman. And know,
that a pretence to custom is nothing
worth. 'Tis not custom, but good
conscience that will help at Gods
Tribunal.
Atten. But I am perswaded, that
that which is gotten by men this way,
doth them but little good.
Wise. I am of your mind for that,

but this is not considered by those
thus minded. For if they can get it,
though they get, as we say, the
Devil and all, by their getting,
yet they are content, and count
that their getting is much.
Little good! Why do you think
they consider that? No: no more
than they consider what they shall
doe in the Judgment, at the day of
God Almighty,They get nothing that cozen and cheat. for their wrong getting
of what they get, and that is
just nothing at all.
But to give you a more direct
answer. This kind of getting, is
so far off from doing them little
good, that it doth them no good at
all; because thereby they lose their
own souls;  What shall it profit a man
if he shall gain the whole world, and
lose his own soul? He loseth then,
he loseth greatly that getteth after
this fashion. This is the man that
is penny-wise and pound-foolish; this
is he that loseth his good Sheep for a
halfpennyworth of tarr; that loseth
a soul for a little of the world. And
then what doth he get thereby, but
loss and dammage? Thus he getteth,
or rather loseth about the world

to come: But what doth he get in
this world,  more than travel and
sorrow, vexation of spirit, and disappointment?
Men aim at blessedness
in getting, I mean, at temporal
blessedness; but the man that thus
getteth, shall not have that. For
though an Inheritance after this manner
may be hastily gotten at the beginning,
yet the end thereof shall
not be blessed. They gather it indeed,
and think to keep it too, but
what says Solomon? God casteth it
away. The Lord will not suffer the
soul of the righteous to famish, but he
casteth away the substance of the
wicked.
The time, as I said, that they
do enjoy it, it shall doe them no
good at all; but long to be sure they
must not have it. For God will
either take it away in their life time,
or else in the generation following,
according to that of Job: He, the
wicked, may prepare it,  but the just
shall put it on, and the innocent shall
divide the silver.
Consider that also that is written
in the Proverbs: A good man leaveth
an Inheritance to his childrens

children, and the wealth of the sinner
is laid up for the just.  What
then doth he get thereby, that getteth
by dishonest means? why he
getteth Sin and Wrath, Hell and
Damnation; and now tell me how
much he doth get.
This, I say, is his getting; so that
as David says, we may be bold to
say too: I beheld the wicked in great
prosperity, and presently I cursed his
habitation: for it cannot prosper with
him. Fluster and huff, and make
a doe for a while he may, but God
hath determined that both he and it
shall melt like grease, and any observing
man may see it so. Behold,
the unrighteous man in a way of
Injustice getteth much, and loadeth
himself with thick Clay, but
anon it withereth, it decayeth,
and even he, or the Generation
following decline, and return to
beggery.
And this Mr. Badman, notwithstanding
his cunning and crafty
tricks to get money, did dye, no
body can tell whether worth a farthing
or no.
Atten. He had all the bad tricks,

I think, that it was possible for a man
to have, to get money; one would
think that he should a been rich.
Wise. You reckon too fast,More of Mr. Badmans Bad tricks. if you
count these all his bad tricks to
get money: For he had more besides.
If his customers were in his Books
(as it should goe hard but he would
have them there; at least, if he
thought he could make any advantage
of them,) then, then would he
be sure to impose upon them his
worst, even very bad Comodity,
yet set down for it the price that the
best was sold at: like those that sold
the Refuse Wheat, or the worst of
the wheat; making the Sheckle great, 
yet hoisting up the price: This was
Mr. Badmans way. *Another art to cheat withall. He would sell
goods that cost him not the best
price by far, for as much as he sold
his best of all for. He had also a
trick to mingle his comodity, that
that which was bad might goe off
with the less mistrust.
Besides, if his customers at any
time paid him money, let them
look to themselves, and to their Acquitances,
for he would usually attempt

to call for that payment again,
specially if he thought that there was
hopes of making a prize thereby,
and then to be sure if they could not
produce good and sufficient ground
of the payment, a hundred to one
but they payed it again. Sometimes
the honest Chapman would
appeal to his servants for proof of
the payment of money, but they
were trained up by him to say after
his mind, right or wrong: so
that, relief that way, he could get
none.
Atten. It is a bad, yea an abominable
thing for a man to have such
servants. For by such means a poor
customer may be undone and not know
how to help himself. Alas! if the
master be so unconscionable, as I percieve
Mr. Badman was, to call for
his money twice, and if his servant
will swear that it is a due debt, where is
any help for such a man? he must sink,
there is no remedy.
Wise. This is very bad, but this
has been a practice, and that hundreds
of years agoe. But what
saith the Word of God?  I will punish
all those that leap upon the

threshold,Servants, observe these words. which fill their masters
houses with violence and deceit.
Mr. Badman also had this art;
could he get a man at advantage,
that is, if his chapman durst not go
from him, or if the comodity he
wanted could not for the present
be conveniently had elsewhere;
Then let him look to himself, he
would surely make his purse-strings
crack; he would exact upon him
without any pity or conscience.
Atten. That was Extortion, was it
not? I pray let me hear your Judgmen
of Extortion, what it is, and when
committed?
Wise.Of Extortion. Extortion is a screwing from
men more than by the Law of God
or men is right; and it is committed
sometimes by them in Office, about
Fees, Rewards, and the like: but
'tis most commonly committed by
men of Trade, who without all conscience,
when they have the advantage,
will make a prey of their
neighbour. And thus was Mr.
Badman an Extortioner; for although
he did not exact, and force
away, as Bailifs and Clarks have
used to doe; yet he had his opportunities,

and such cruelty to make
use of them, that he would often,
in his way, be Extorting, and forcing
of money out of his Neighbours
pocket. For every man that makes
a prey of his advantage upon his
neighbours necessities, to force from
him more than in reason and conscience,
according to the present
prizes of things such comodity is
worth; may very well be called
an Extortioner, and Judged for one
that hath No inheritance in the Kingdom 
of God.
Atten. Well, this Badman was a
sad wretch.
Wise. Thus you have often said
before. But now we are in discourse
of this, give me leave a little to goe
on. We have a great many people
in the Countrey too that live all their
dayes in the practice, and so under
the guilt of Extortion: people, alas!
that think scorn to be so accounted.
As for Example:Who are Extortioners. There is a poor
body that dwells, we will suppose,
so many miles from the Market;
and this man wants a Bushel of
Grist, a pound of Butter, or a Cheese
for himself, his wife and poor children:

But dwelling so far from the
Market, if he goes thither, he shall
lose his dayes work, which will be
eight pence or ten pence dammage
to him, and that is something to a
poor man. So he goeth to one of
his Masters or Dames for what he
wanteth, and asks them to help
him with such a thing: Yes, say
they, you may have it; but withall
they will give him a gripe, perhaps
make him pay as much (or more)
for it at home, as they can get
when they have carryed it five
miles to a Market, yea and that
too for the Refuse of their Commodity.
But in this the Women
are especially faulty, in the sale of
their Butter and Cheese, &c. Now
this is a kind of Extortion, it is a
making a prey of the necessity
of the poor, it is a grinding of
their faces, a buying and selling of
them.
But above all, your *Hucksters. Hucksters,
that buy up the poor mans Victuals
by whole-sale, and sell it to him again
for unreasonable gains, by retale,
and as we call it, by piecemeal;
they are got into a way,

after a stingeing rate, to play their
game upon such by Extortion: I mean
such who buy up Butter, Cheese,
Eggs, Bacon, &c. by whole sale, and
sell it again (as they call it) by
penny worths, two penny worths,
a half penny worth, or the like, to
the poor, all the week after the market
is past.
These, though I will not condemn
them all, do, many of them,
bite and pinch the poor by this kind 
of evil dealing. These destroy the
poor because he is poor, and
that is a grievious sin. He that oppresseth
the poor to increase his riches,
and that giveth to the rich, shall surely
come to want. Therefore he
saith again, Rob not the poor because
he is poor, neither oppress the afflicted
in the gate; for the Lord will plead
their cause, and spoil the soul of them
that spoile them.
Oh that he that gripeth and grindeth
the face of the poor, would take
notice of these two Scriptures!
Here is threatned the destruction
of the Estate, yea and of the Soul
too, of them that oppress the poor.
Their Soul we shall better see where,

and in what condition that is in,
when the day of Doom is come;
but for the Estates of such, they
usually quickly moulter; and that
sometimes all men, and sometimes
no man knows how.
Besides, these are Usurers, yea
they take usury for victuals,  which
thing the Lord has forbidden. And because
they cannot so well do it on
the Market-day, therefore they do
it, as I said, when the market is
over; for then the poor falls into their
mouths, and are necessitated to have,
as they can, for their need, and they
are resolved they shall pay soundly
for it. Perhaps some will find fault
for my medling thus with other
folks matters, and for my thus prying
into the secrets of their iniquity.
But to such I would say, since such
actions are evil, 'tis time they were
hissed out of the world. For all that
doe such things, offend against God,
wrong their neighbour, and like Mr.
Badman doe provoke God to Judgment.
God knows, there is abundance
of deceit in the world!
Wise. Deceit! Aie, but I have not
told you the thousandth part of it;

nor is it my business now to rake to
the bottom of that dunghill: what
would you say, if I should anatomize
some of those vile wretches called
Pawn-Brokers, that lend Money and
Goods to poor people, who are by
necessity forced to such an inconvenience;
and will make, by one
trick or other, the Interest of what
they so lend, amount to thirty, forty,
yea sometimes fifty pound by
the year; notwithstanding the Principal
is secured by a sufficient pawn;
which they will keep too at last, if
they can find any shift to cheat the
wretched borrower.
Atten. Say! Why such Miscreants
are the pest and Vermin of the Common-wealth,
not fit for the society of
men; but methinks by some of those
things you Discoursed before, you
seem to import that it is not lawful
for a man to make the best of his
own.
Wise.Whether it be lawful for a man to make the best of his own. Proved in negative by 8 reasons If by making the best,
you mean, to sell for as much as
by hook or crook he can get for his
comodity; then I say, it is not lawful.
And if I should say the contrary,
I should justifie Mr. Badman

and all the rest of that Gang: but
that I never shall doe, for the Word
of God condemns them. But that it
is not lawful for a man at all times,
to sell his commodity for as much as
he can, I prove by these reasons.
First, If it be lawful for me alway
to sell my commodity as dear,
or for as much as I can, then 'tis lawful
for me to lay aside in my dealing
with others, good conscience,
to them, and to God: but it is not
lawful for me, in my dealing with
others, to lay aside good conscience,
&c. Therefore it is not lawful
for me always to sell my commodity
as dear, or for as much as I
can.
That *Good conscience must be used in selling. it is not lawful to lay aside
good conscience in our dealings,
has already been proved in
the former part of our discourse: but
that a man must lay it aside that will
sell his commodity always as dear
or for as much as he can, is plainly
manifest thus.
1. He that will (as is mentioned
afore) sell his commodity as dear asWe must not make a prey of our neighbours Ignorance.
he can, must sometimes make a
prey of the ignorance of his chapman:

but that he cannot doe with a
good conscience (for that is to
overreach, and to goe beyond my
chapman, and is forbidden, 1 Thess.
4. 6.) Therefore he that will sell his
commodity, as afore, as dear, or for
as much as he can, must of necessity
lay aside good conscience.
2. He that will sell his commodity
always as dear as he can,Nor of his Neighbours Necessity. must needs,
sometimes make a prey of his neighbours
necessity; but that he cannot
doe with a good conscience, (for
that is to goe beyond and defraud
his neighbour, contrary to 1 Thess.
4. 6.) Therefore he that will sell his
commodity, as afore, as dear, or for
as much as he can, must needs cast off
and lay aside a good conscience.
3.Nor of his Fondness of our commodity. He that will (as afore) sell his
commodity as dear, or for as much
as he can, must, if need be, make a
prey of his neighbours fondness; but
that a man cannot doe with a good
conscience, for that is still a going
beyond him, contrary to 1 Thess.
4. 6.) Therefore, he that will sell his
commodity as dear, or for as much
as he can, must needs cast off, and lay
aside good conscience.

The same also may be said for
buying;We must use good conscience in buying. no man may always buy
as cheap as he can, but must also
use good conscience in buying; The
which he can by no means use and
keep, if he buyes always as cheap as
he can, and that for the reasons urged
before. For such will make a
prey of the ignorance, necessity, and
fondness of their chapman, the which
they cannot doe with a good consceince.
When Abraham would buy a
Burying-place of the Sons of Heth,
thus he said unto them. Intreat for
me to Ephron the son of Zohar, that
he may give me the cave of Machpelah,
which he hath, in the end
of his field. For as much as it is
worth shall he give it me. Gen. 23. 
8, 9. He would not have it under
foot, he scorned it, he abhored it:
It stood not with his Religion, Credit,
nor Conscience. So also when
David, would buy a field of Ornon
the Jebusite: Thus he said unto him:
Grant me the place of the threshingfloor, 
that I may build an Altar there
unto the Lord. Thou shalt give it me
for the full price. He also, as Abraham,

made conscience of this kind
of dealing: he would not lie at catch
to go beyond, no not the Jebusite,
but will give him his full price for
his field. For he knew that there
was wickedness, as in selling too dear
so in buying too cheap, therefore he
would not do it.
There ought therefore to be good
conscience used, as in selling, so in
buying; for 'tis also unlawful for a
man to goe beyond or to defraud
his neighbour in buying; yea 'tis unlawful
to doe it in any matter, and
God will plentifully avenge that
wrong: as I also before have forewarned
and testified. See also the
*Levit. 25. 14. text in the margent. But,
Secondly, if it be lawful for me always
to sell my commodity as dear,
or for as much as I can, then it is
lawful for me to deal with my neighbour
without the use of *Charity must be used in our dealings. charity:
but it is not lawful for me to lay aside,
or to deal with my neighbour
without the use of charity, therefore it
is not lawful for me always to sell my
commodity to my neighbour for as
much as I can. A man in dealing
should as really design his Neighbours

good, profit, and advantage,
as his own: For this is to exercise
Charity in his dealing.
That I should thus use, or exercise
charity towards my Neighbour
in my buying and selling, &c.
with him, is evident from the general
command:  [Let all your things
be done in charity:] But that a man
cannot live in the exercise of chatity,
that selleth, as afore, as dear, or that
buyeth as cheap as he can, is evident
by these reasons.
1. He that sells his commodity as
dear, or for as much money (always)
as he can, seeks himself,
and himself only;  (but charity seeketh
not her own, nor her own only:)
So then, he that seeks himself, and
himself onely, as he that sells (as
afore) as dear as he can, does;
maketh not use of, nor doth he
exercise charity, in his so dealing.
2. He that selleth his commodity
(always) for as much as he can get,
hardeneth his heart against all reasonable
entreaties of the buyer. But
he that doth so, cannot exercise
charity in his dealing; therefore it is

not lawful for a man to sell his commodity,
as afore, as dear as he can.
Thirdly, If it be lawful for me to
sell my commodity, as afore, as dear
as I can, then there can be no sin in
my Trading,  how unreasonably soever
I manage my calling, whether
by Lying,There may be and is sin in trading. Swearing, Cursing, Cheating;
for all this is but to sell my commodity
as dear as I can: but that
there is sin in these, is evident,
therefore I may not sell my commodity
always as dear as I can.
Fourthly, He that sells, as afore, as
dear as he can, offereth violence to
the law of Nature: for that saith,
Doe unto all men,  even as ye would
that they should doe unto you.A man in trading must not offer violence to the Law of nature. Now,
was the Seller a Buyer, he would
not that he of whom he buyes,
should sell him always as dear as he
can; therefore he should not sell so
himself,  when it is his lot to sell, and
others to buy of him.
Fifthly,We must not abuse the Gift we have in the knowledge of earthly things. He that selleth, as afore,
as dear as he can, makes use of that
instruction, that God hath not given
to others, but sealed up in his hand,
to abuse his Law, and to wrong his
neighbour withall: which indeed is

contrary to God. God hath given
thee more skill, more knowledge
and understanding in thy commodity
than he hath given to him that would
buy of thee. But what! canst thou
think, that God has given thee this,
that thou mightest thereby make a
prey of thy neighbour? that thou
mightest thereby goe beyond and
beguile thy neighbour? No, verily;
but he hath given thee it, for his
help; that thou mightest in this,
be eyes to the blind, and save thy
neighbour from that dammage, that
his ignorance, or necessity, or fondness
would betray him into the
hands of.
Sixthly, In all that a man does, 
*An eye to the glory of God in all we should have. he should have an eye to the glory
of God, but that he cannot have that
sells his commodity always for as
much as he can, for the reasons
urged before.
Seventhly, All that a man does,
he should doe in the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ; that is, as being
commanded,  and authorized to doe
it by him: but he that selleth always
as dear as he can, cannot so
much as pretend to this, without

horrid blaspheming of that Name,
because commanded by him to doe
otherwise.
Eightly, and lastly, In all that a
man does, he should have an eye to
the day of Judgment, and to the consideration
of how his actions will be
esteemed of in that day.  Therefore
there is not any man can or ought
to sell always as dear as he can: unless
he will, yea he must say, in so
doing, I will run the hazard of the
tryal of that day,
If thou sell ought unto thy neighbour, 
or buyest ought of thy neighbour,
ye shall not oppress one another.
Atten. But why doe you put in
those cautionary words? They must
not sell [always] as dear, nor buy
[always] as cheap as they can: doe
you not thereby intimate that a man
may sometimes do so?
Wise. I doe indeed intimate that
somtimes the seller may sell as dear,
and the buyer buy as cheap as he
can; but this is allowable only in
these cases: When he that sells is a
Knave, and lays aside all good conscience
in selling; or when the buyer
is a Knave, and layes aside all good

conscience in buying. If the buyer
therefore lights of a Knave, or if the
seller lights of a Knave, then let them
look to themselves: but yet so, as
not to lay aside conscience, because
he that thou dealest with doth so:
but how vile or base soever the chapman
is, do thou keep thy commodity
at a reasonable price: or if thou
buyest, offer reasonable gain for the
thing thou wouldest have: and if
this will not do with the buyer or
seller, then seek thee a more honest
chapman: If thou objectest, But I
have not skil to know when a penny-worth
is before me: Get some that
have more skill than thy self in that
affair, and let them in that matter
dispose of thy money. But if there
were no Knaves in the world, these
objections need not be made.
And thus, my very good neighbour,
have I given you a few of
my reasons, why a man that hath
it, should not always sell too dear,
nor buy as cheap as he can: but
should use good Conscience to God,
and Charity to his Neighbour in
both.
Atten. But were some men here, to

hear you, I believe they would laugh
you to scorn.
Wise. I question not that at all,
for so, *Badman used to laugh at them that told him of his faults. Mr. Badman used to doe,
when any man told him of his faults:
he used to think himself wiser than
any, and would count, as I have
hinted before, that he was not arrived
to a manly spirit that did stick
or boggle at any wickedness. But
let Mr. Badman and his fellowes
laugh, I will bear it, and still give
them good counsel. But I will remember
also, for my further relief
and comfort, that thus they
that were covetous of old, served
the Son of God himself.  It is their
time to laugh now, that they may
mourn in time to come. And, I say
again, when they have laughed
out their laugh; He that useth not
good conscience to God, and charity
to his neighbour, in buying and
selling, dwells next dore to an Infidel,
and is near of kin to Mr. Badman.
Atten. Well, but what will you
say to this question?A question. (you know that
there is no settled price set by God upon
any Commodity that is bought or sold
under the Sun; but all things that

we buy and sell, do ebbe and flow,
as to price, like the Tide:) How
(then) shall a man of a tender conscience
doe, neither to wrong the seller,
buyer, nor himself, in buying and selling
of commodities?
Wise.An answer. This Question is thought
to be frivolous by all that are of Mr.
Badmans way; 'tis also difficult in
it self: yet I will endeavour to shape
you an Answer, and that first to the
matter of the question; to wit, How
a Tradesman should, in Trading,
keep a good conscience; (A buyer or
seller either.) Secondly, How he should
prepare himself to this work, and live
in the practice of it.
For the first: *Preparations to be a good dealer. He must observe
what hath been said before, to wit,
he must have conscience to God,
charity to his neighbour; and I will
add, much moderation in dealing.
Let him therefore keep within the
bounds of the affirmative of those
eight reasons that before were urged
to prove, that men ought not in
their Dealing, but to do Justly and
mercifully twixt man and man; and
then there will be no great fear of
wronging the seller, buyer, or himself.

But particularly to prepare, or instruct
a man to this work:
1. Let the Tradesman or others
consider, that there is not that in
great Gettings, and in abundance,
which the most of men do suppose:
For all that a man has over and
above what serves for his present
necessity and supply, serves only to
feed the lusts of the eye.  For what
good is there to the owners thereof,
save the beholding of them with their
eyes? Men also, many times, in
getting of riches,  get therewith a
snare to their soul: But few get
good by getting of them. But this
consideration, Mr. Badman could
not abide.
2. Consider, that the getting of
wealth dishonestly (as he does, that
getteth it without good conscience
and charity to his neighbour,) is a
great offender against God. Hence
he says,  I have smitten mine hands
at thy dishonest gain, which thou hast
made. It is a manner of speech that
shews anger in the very making of
mention of the Crime. Therefore,
3. Consider, that a little honestly

gotten, though it may yield thee
but a dinner of herbs at a time, will
yield more peace therewith, than
will a stalled Ox, ill gotten. Better
is a little with righteousness,  than
great revenues without right.
4. Be thou confident, that Gods
eyes are upon all thy wayes, and
that he pondereth all thy goings,
and also that he marks them, writes
them down, and seals them up in
a bag, against the time to come. 
5. Be thou sure that thou remembrest,
that thou knowest not the day
of thy death. Remember also, that
when death comes, God will give
thy substance, for the which thou
hast laboured, and for the which
perhaps thou hast hazarded thy
soul, to one, thou knowest not who,
nor whether he shall be a wise man
or a fool. And then,  what profit hath
he that laboureth for the wind?
Besides, thou shalt have nothing
that thou mayest so much as carry
away in thine hand. Guilt shall goe
with thee, if thou hast got it dishonestly,
and they also to whom
thou shalt leave it, shall receive it to
their hurt.

These things duly considered, and
made use of by thee to the preparing
of thy heart to thy calling of buying
or selling; I come in the next place
to shew thee how thou shouldest
live in the practick part of this
art. Art thou to buy or sell?
1. If thou sellest, do not commend;
if thou buyest, do not dispraise,
any otherwise, but to give the
thing that thou hast to do with, its
just value and worth; for thou canst
not do otherwise knowingly, but
of a covetous and wicked mind.
Wherefore else are comodities over-valued
by the Seller, and also undervalued
by the Buyer.  It is naught,
it is naught, says the buyer, but when he
hath got his bargain he boasteth thereof.
What hath this man done now
but lyed in the dispraising of his bargain?
and why did he dispraise it,
but of a covetous mind, to wrong
and beguile the seller?
2. Art thou a seller, and do things
grow dear? set not thy hand to help,
or hold them up higher; this cannot
be done without wickedness neither;
for this is a making of the 
sheckle great: Art thou a buyer, and

do things grow dear? use no cunning
or deceitful language to pull them
down: for that cannot be done but
wickedly too. What then shall we
do? will you say. Why I answer:
Leave things to the providence of
God, and do thou with moderation
submit to his hand. But since, when
they are growing dear, the hand
that upholds the price, is, for the
time, more strong than that which
would pull it down; That being the
hand of the seller, who loveth to have
it dear, specially if it shall rise in his
hand: therefore I say, do thou take
heed, and have not a hand in it.
The which thou mayest have to thine
own and thy neighbours hurt, these
three ways:
1. By crying out scarcity, scarcity,
beyond the truth and state of things:
especially take heed of doing of
this by way of a prognostick for time
to come. 'Twas for *A Judgment of God. 2 King. 7. this for which he
was trodden to death in the gate of
Samaria, that you read of in the book
of Kings. This sin has a double evil
in it. 1. It belieth the present
blessing of God, amongst us: and,
2. It undervalueth the riches of his

goodness, which can make all good
things to abound towards us.
2. This wicked thing may be
done by hoarding up, when the hunger
and Necessity of the poor calls
for it. Now that God may shew
his dislike against this, he doth, as
it were, license the people to curse
such an hoarder up.  He that withholdeth
corn, the people shall curse him,
but blessing shall be upon the head of
him that selleth it.
3. But if things will rise, do thou
be grieved; Be also moderate in all
thy sellings, and be sure let the poor
have a pennyworth, and sell thy
Corn to those in necessity: Which
then thou wilt do, when thou shewest
mercy to the poor in thy selling
to him, and when thou for his sake,
because he is poor, undersellest the
market. This is to buy and sell
with good conscience: thy buyer
thou wrongest not, thy Conscience
thou wrongest not, thy self thou
wrongest not,  for God will surely
recompense thee.
I have spoken concerning Corn,
but thy duty is, to let thy moderation
in all things be known unto all men, 
the Lord is at hand.

Atten. Well, Sir, now I have heard
enough of Mr. Badmans naughtiness,
pray now proceed to his Death.
Wise. Why Sir, the Sun is not
so low, we have yet three hours to
night.
Atten. Nay; I am not in any great
hast, but I thought you had even now
done with his Life.
Wise. Done! no, I have yet much
more to say.
Atten. Then he has much more
wickedness than I thought he had.
Wise. That may be.Mr Badman a very proud man. But let us
proceed: This Mr. Badman, added
to all his wickedness this, He was
a very proud man, a Very proud man.
He was exceeding proud and haughty
in mind; He looked, that what
he said, ought not, must not be contradicted
or opposed. He counted
himself as wise as the wisest in
the Countrey, as good as the best,
and as beautiful as he that had most
of it. He took great delight in
praising of himself, and as much
in the praises that others gave him.
He could not abide that any should
think themselves above him, or that
their wit or personage should by

others be set before his.Of pride in general. He had
scarce a fellowly carriage for his
equals. But for those that were of
an inferior ranck, he would look
over them in great contempt. And
if at any time he had any remote occasion
of having to do with them,
he would shew great height, and a
very domineering spirit. So that in
this it may be said that Solomon gave
a characteristical note of him, when
he said:  Proud and haughty scorner
is his name, who dealeth in proud
wrath. He never thought his Dyet
well enough dressed, his Cloathes
fine enough made, or his Praise enough
refined.
Atten. This Pride, is a sin that
sticks as close to nature I think, as
most sins. There is Uncleanness and
Pride, I know not of any two gross sins
that stick closer to men then they.
They have, as I may call it, an interest
in Nature; it likes them because
they most suit its lusts and fancies:
and therefore no marvel though Mr.
Badman was tainted with pride, since
he had so wickedly given up himself
to work all iniquity with greediness.
Wise. You say right; Pride, is

a sin that sticks close to Nature, and
is one of the first follies wherein it
shews it self to be polluted.Pride sticks close to nature. For
even in Childhood, even in little
children, Pride will first of all shew
it self; it is a hasty, an early appearance
of the sin of the soul. It, as I may
say, is that corruption that strives
for predominancy in the heart, and
therefore usually comes out first.
But though children are so incident
to it, yet methinks those of more
years, should be ashamed thereof.
I might at the first have begun with
Mr. Badmans Pride, only I think it
is not the Pride in Infancy, that
begins to make a difference betwixt
one and another, as did, and
do those wherewith I began my
relation of his life: therefore I passed
it over, but now, since he had no
more consideration of himself, and
of his vile and sinful state, but to be
proud when come to years; I have
taken the occasion in this place to
make mention of his pride.
Atten. But pray, if you can remember
them, tell me of some places of
Scripture that speak against pride.
I the rather desire this, because that

pride is now a reigning sin, and I happen
sometimes to fall into the company
of them that in my conscience are proud,
very much, and I have a mind also to
tell them of their sin; now when I tell
them of it, unless I bring Gods word too,
I doubt they will laugh me to scorn.
Wise. Laugh you to scorn! the
Proud man will laugh you to scorn,
bring to him what Text you can,
except God shall smite him in his
conscience by the Word: Mr. Badman
did use to serve them so that did
use to tell him of his: and besides,
when you have said what you can,
they will tell you they are not proud,
and that you are rather the proud
man, else you would not judge,
nor so malapertly meddle with
other mens matters as you do. Nevertheless,
since you desire it, I will
mention two or three texts: They
are these.  Pride and arrogancy do
I hate. A mans pride shall bring him
low. And he shall bring down their
pride.  And all the proud, and all
that do wickedly shall be as stubble,
and the day that comes shall burn them
up. This last, is a dreadful Text;
it is enough to make a proud man

shake: God, saith he, will make
the proud ones as stubble; that is, as
fuel for the fire, and the day that
cometh shall be like a burning oven,
and that day shall burn them up,
saith the Lord. But Mr. Badman
could never abide to hear pride
spoken against, nor that any should
say of him, He is a proud man.
Atten. What should be the reason of
that?
Wise. He did not tell me the reason;Proud men do not love to be called proud.
but I suppose it to be that which
is common to all vile persons. They
love this Vice, but care not to bear
its name. The Drunkard loves the
sin, but loves not to be called a drunkard.
The Thief loveth to steal,
but cannot abide to be called a thief,
the whore loveth to commit uncleanness,
but loveth not to be called a
Whore: And so Mr. Badman loved
to be proud, but could not abide to
be called a proud man. The sweet of
sin, is desirable to polluted and corrupted
man, but the name thereof,
is a blot in his Scutcheon.
Atten. 'Tis true that you have said:
but pray how many sorts of pride
are there?

Wise.Two sorts of pride. There are two sorts of
Pride; Pride of Spirit, and Pride of
Body. The first of these is thus made
mention of in the Scriptures.  Every
one that is proud in heart is abomination
to the Lord. A high look, and a
proud heart, and the plowing of the
wicked is sin. The patient in spirit is
better than the proud in spirit. Bodily
pride these Scriptures mention.
In that day the Lord shall take away
the bravery of their tinckling ornaments
about their feet, and their
cauls, and their round tires like the
Moon, the chains, and the bracelets,
and the mufflers, the bonnets, and the ornaments
of the legs, and the headbands,
and the tablets, and the ear-rings,
the rings, and the Nose-jewels: The
changable suits of Apparell,  and the
mantles, and the wimples, and the
crisping pins, the glasses, and the
fine linnen, and the hoods and the
vails. By these expressions it is evident
that there is Pride of Body,
as well as Pride of Spirit, and that
both are sin, and so abominable to
the Lord. But these Texts Mr.
Badman could never abide to read,
they were to him as Mcaiah was to

Ahab, they never spake good of him,
but evil.
Atten.Wicked men do hate that word that reproves their vice. I suppose that it was not
Mr. Badmans case alone even to maligne
those Texts that speak against
their vices: For I believe, that most
ungodly men, (where the Scriptures
are) have a secret antipathy against
those Words of God that do most plainly
and fully rebuke them for their
sins.
Wise. That is out of doubt, and
by that antipathy, they shew, that
sin and Satan are more welcome to
them than are the wholsome instructions
of life and godliness.
Atten. Well, but not to goe off from
our discourse of Mr. Badman. You
say he was proud: but will you shew
me now some symptoms of one that is
proud?
Wise. Yes, that I will:Signes of a proud man in general. And first I
will shew you some symptoms of
Pride of Heart. Pride of heart, is
seen by outward things, as Pride of
Body in general, is a sign of pride of
heart; for all proud gestures of the
body flow from Pride of heart: 
therefore Solomon saith; There is a
generation, O how lofty are their eyes,

and their eye-lids are lifted up: And
again;  There is that exalteth their
gate, their going. Now these lofty
eyes,  and this exalting of the
gate, is a sign of a Proud heart: for
both these actions come from the
heart: for out of the heart-comes
Pride, in all the visible appearances
of it.In particular. But more particularly:
1. Heart Pride is discovered by
a stretched out Neck, and by mincing
as they go. For the wicked,
the Proud, have a proud Neck, a
proud Foot, a proud Tongue, by
which this their going is exalted.
This is that which makes them look
scornfully, speak ruggedly, and carry
it huffingly among their Neighbours.
2. A proud heart, is a persecuting
one:  The wicked through his pride
doth persecute the poor.
3.  A prayerless man is a proud
man.
4.  A contentious man is a proud
man.
5.  The disdainful man is a proud
man.
6.  The man that oppresses his
neighbour is a proud man.

7. He that hearkeneth not to Gods
Word with reverence and fear,  is a
proud man.
8. And he that calls the proud happy, 
is, be sure, a proud man. All these
are proud in heart, and this their
pride of heart doth thus discover it
self.
As to bodily *Of outward pride. pride, it is discovered,
that is, something of it, by all
the particulars mentioned before;
for though they are said to be symptoms
of pride of heart, yet they
are symptoms of that pride, by their
shewing of themselves in the Body.
You know diseases that are within,
are seen oft-times by outward and
visible Signs, yet by them very
signs even the outside is defiled also.
So all those visible signs of heart-pride,
are signs of bodily pride also.
But to come to more outward
signs: The putting on of Gold,  and
Pearls, and costly array; the pleating
of the hair, the following of
fashions, the seeking by gestures
to imitate the proud, either by
speech, looks, dresses, goings, or
other fools baubles, (of which at
this time the world is full) all these,

and many more, are signs, as of a
proud heart, so of bodily pride also.
But Mr.Mr. Badman was not for having pride called pride. Badman would not allow,
by any means, that this should be
called Pride, but rather neatness, handsomness,
comeliness, cleanliness, &c.
neither would he allow that following
of fashions was any thing else,
but because he would not be proud,
singular, and esteemed fantastical by
his neighbours.
Atten. But I have been told, that
when some have been rebuked for their
pride, they have turned it again
upon the brotherhood of those by whom
they have been rebuked: saying,
Physician heal thy Friends, look at
home, among your Brotherhood, even
among the wisest of you, and see if you
your selves be clear, even you professors:
for who is prouder than you
professors? scarcesly the Devil himself.
Wise.Professors guilty of the sin of pride. My heart akes at this answer,
because there is too much
cause for it. This very Answer
would Mr. Badman give his wife,
when she (as she would sometimes)
reproved him for his pride:

We shall have, says he, great amendments
in living now, for the Devil
is turned a corrector of vice: For
no sin reigneth more in the world,
quoth he, than pride among professors.
And who can contradict
him? let us give the Devil his due,
the thing is too apparent for any man
to deny.
And I doubt not but the same
answer is ready in the mouths of
Mr. Badmans friends; for they may
and do see pride display it self in the
Apparel and carriages of professors;
one may say, almost as much, as
among any people in the Land, the
more is the pity. Ay, and I fear that
even their Extravagancies in this,
hath hardened the heart of many a
one, as I perceive it did somewhat
the heart of Mr. Badman himself.
For mine own part, I have seen
many my self, and those Church-members
too, so deckt and bedaubed
with their Fangles and Toyes,
and that when they have been at the
solemn Appointments of God, in the
way of his Worship, that I have
woudred with what face such painted
persons could sit in the place

where they were without swounding.
But certainly the holiness of
God, and also the pollution of themselves
by sin, must needs be very
far out of the minds of such people,
what profession soever they
make.
I have read of an Whores forehead,
and I have read of christian-shamefacedness; 
I have read of costly
array, and of that which becometh
women professing Godliness,
with good works; but if I might
speak, I know what I know, and
could say, and yet do no wrong,
that which would make some professors
stink in their places; but now
I forbear.
Atten. Sir, you seem to be greatly
concerned at this, but what if I
shall say more? it is whispered, that
some good Ministers have countenanced
their people in their light and
wanton Apparrel, yea have pleaded
for their Gold, and Pearls, and costly
array, &c.
Wise. I know not what they have
pleaded for, but 'tis easily seen that
they tolerate, or at least wise, wink
and connive at such things, both in

their Wives and Children. And so
from the Prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness
gone forth into all the land.
*  And when the hand of the Rulers
are chief in a trespass, who can keep
their people from being drowned in
that trespass?
Atten. This is a lamentation, and
must stand for a lamentation.
Wise. So it is, and so it must.Pride in professors a shame and stumbling-block to the world.
And I will add, it is a shame, it is a
reproach, it is a stumbling block to
the blind; for though men be as
blind as Mr. Badman himself, yet
they can see the foolish lightness
that must needs be the bottom of
all these apish and wanton extravagancies.
But many have their
excuses ready; to wit, their Parents,
their Husbands, and their
breeding calls for it, and the like:
yea, the examples of good people
prompt them to it: but all these
will be but the Spiders webb, when
the thunder of the Word of the
great God shall rattle from Heaven
against them, as it will at Death or
Judgment; but I wish it might do
it before. But alas! these excuses
are but bare pretences, these proud

ones love to have it so. I once
talked with a Maid, by way of reproof,
for her fond and gaudy garment.
&rhand; But she told me, The Tailor
would make it so: when alas, poor
proud Girle, she gave order to the
Taylor so to make it. Many make
Parents, and Husbands, and Taylors,
&c. the Blind to others, but
their naughty hearts, and their giving
of way thereto, that is the original
cause of all these evils.
Atten. Now you are speaking of the
cause of pride,Why pride is in such request. pray shew me yet further
why pride is now so much in request?
Wise. I will shew you what I
think are the reasons of it.
1.1 Reason. The first is, Because such persons
are led by their own hearts,  rather
than by the Word of God.
I told you before, that the original
fountain of pride is the heart. For
out of the heart comes pride; it is
therefore because they are led by
their hearts, which naturally tends
to lift them up in pride.  This pride of
heart, tempts them, and by its deceits
overcometh them; yea it doth
put a bewitching vertue into their

Peacocks feathers, and then they
are swallowed up with the vanity of
them.
2. Another reason why professors
are so proud, (for those we are talking
of now) is because they are more
apt to take example by those that
are of the World, than they are to
take example of those that are Saints
indeed. Pride is of the world. For
all that is of the world,  the lusts of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, are not of the Father
but of the world. Of the world therefore
Professors learn to be proud.
But they should not take them for
example. It will be objected, No,
nor your saints neither, for you are as
proud as others: Well, let them take
shame that are guilty. But when I
say, professors should take example
for their life by those that are saints
indeed, I mean as Peter says: They
should take example of those that
were in old time, the saints; for
saints of old time were the best,
therefore to these he directeth us
for our pattern.  Let the wives conversation
be chast, and also coupled
with fear. Whose adorning, saith Peter,

let it not be that outward adorning,
of pleating the hair, and of wearing of
gold, or of putting on of Apparel:
but let it be the hidden man of the
heart, in that which is not corruptible,
even the ornament of a meek and
quiet spirit, which is in the sight of
God of great price. For after this
manner, in the old time, the holy
women also who trusted in God, adorned
themselves, being in subjection to
their own husbands.
3.3 Reason. Another reason is, Because
they have forgotten the pollution of
their Nature. For the remembrance
of that, must needs keep us humble,
and being kept humble, we shall
be at a distance from pride. The
proud and the humble are set in opposition;
(God resisteth the proud,
but giveth grace to the humble.)
And can it be imagined, that a sensible
Christian should be a proud one;
sence of baseness tends to lay us low,
not to lift us up with pride; not
with pride of Heart, nor pride of
Life: But when a man begins to
forget what he is, then he, if ever,
begins to be proud.
Methinks it is one of the most

senceless and ridiculous things in
the world, that a man should be
proud of that which is given him on
purpose to cover the shame of his
nakedness with.
4. Persons that are proud,4 Reason. have
gotten God and his Holiness out of
their sight. If God was before them,
as he is behind their back; And if
they saw him in his holiness, as he
sees them in their sins and shame,
they would take but little pleasure
in their apisn Knacks. The Holiness
of God makes the Angels cover 
their faces, crumbles Christians,
when they behold it, into dust and
ashes: and as his Majesty is, such is
his Word; Therefore they abuse
it, that bring it to countenance
pride.
Lastly,5 Reason. But what can be the end
of those that are proud, in the decking
of themselves after their antick
manner? why are they for going
with their Bulls-foretops, with their
naked shoulders, and Paps hanging
out like a Cows bag? why are they
for painting their faces, for stretching
out their necks, and for putting
of themselves into all the Formalities

which proud Fancy leads them to?
Is it because they would honour
God? because they would adorn
the Gospel? because they would
beautifie Religion, and make sinners
to fall in love with their own salvation?
No, no. It is rather to please
their lusts, to satisfie their wild and
extravagant fancies; and I wish
none doth it to stir up lust in others,
to the end they may commit uncleanness
with them. I believe, whatever
is their end, this is one of the
great designes of the Devil: and I
believe also, that Satan has drawn
more into the sin of uncleanness, by
the spangling shew of fine cloaths,
than he could possibly have drawn
unto it, without them. I wonder
what it was, that of old was called
the Attire of an Harlot: certainly it
could not be more bewitching and
tempting than are the garments
of many professors this day.
Atten. I like what you say very
well, and I wish that all the proud
Dames in England that profess, were
within the reach and sound of your
words.
Wise. What I have said, I believe

is true; but as for the proud
Dames in England that profess, they
have Moses and the Prophets, and if
they will not hear them, how then
can we hope that they should recieve
good by such a dull sounding Ramshorn
as I am? However, I have said
my mind, and now if you will, we
will proceed to some other of Mr.
Badmans doings.
Atten. No:The evil effects of the sin of Pride. pray before you shew
me any thing else of Mr. Badman,
shew me yet more particularly the evil
effects of this sin of Pride.
Wise. With all my heart, I will
answer your request.
1. Then:1. Evil effect. 'Tis pride that makes
poor Man so like the Devil in Hell,
that he cannot in it be known to be
the Image and similitude of God.
The Angels when they became Devils, 
'twas through their being lifted
or puffed up with pride. 'Tis pride
also that lifteth or puffeth up the
heart of the sinner, and so makes
him to bear the very image of the
Devil.
2.2 Evil effect. Pride makes a man so odious
in the sight of God, that he shall
not, must not come nigh his Majesty

Though the Lord be high,  yet
hath he respect to the lowly, but the
proud he knows afar off. Pride sets
God and the Soul at a distrance;
pride will not let a man come nigh
God, nor God will not let a proud
man come nigh unto him: Now this
is a dreadful thing.
3.3 Evil effect. As pride sets, so it keeps God
and the Soul at a distance. God resisteth
the proud; resists, that is, he
opposes him, he thrusts him from
him, he contemneth his person and
all his performances. Come in to
Gods Ordinances, the proud man
may; but come into his presence,
have communion with him, or blessing
from him,  he shall not. For
the high God doth resist him.
4.4 Evil effect. The Word saith, that The Lord
will destroy the House of the proud. 
He will destroy his House; it may
be understood, he will destroy him
and his. So he destroyed proud Pharaoh,
so he destroyed proud Corah,
and many others.
5.5 Evil effect. Pride, where it comes, and is
entertained, is a certain forerunner
of some Judgment that is not far 
behind. When pride goes before,

shame and destruction will follow
after. When pride cometh,  then cometh
shame. Pride goeth before destruction,
and a haughty spirit before
a fall.
6.6 Evil effect. Persisting in pride makes the
condition of a poor man as remediless
as is that of the Devils themselves. 
And this I fear was Mr. Badmans
condition, and that was the reason
that he died so as he did; as I shall
shew you anon.
But what need I thus talk of theA general character of Mr. Badman.
particular actions, or rather prodigious
sins of Mr. Badman, when his
whole Life and all his actions,
went as it were to the making up
one massie body of sin? Instead of
believing that there was a God, his
Mouth, his Life and Actions declared,
that he believed no such thing.
His transgression said within my heart, 
that there was no fear of God before
his eyes.A brief relation of Mr. Badmans ways. Instead of honouring of
God, and of giving glory to him
for any of his Mercies, or under
any of his good Providences towards
him (for God is good to all, and
lets his Sun shine, and his Rain fall

upon the unthankful and unholy,)
he would ascribe the glory to other
causes. If they were Mercies, he
would ascribe them (if the open
face of the providence did not give
him the lye) to his own wit, labour,
care, industry, cunning, or the
like: if they were Crosses, he would
ascribe them, or count them the offspring
of Fortune, ill Luck, Chance,
the ill mannagement of matters, the
ill will of neighbours, or to his wifes
being Religious, and spending, as he
called it, too much time in Reading,
Praying, or the like. It was not in
his way to acknowledge God, (that
is, graciously) or his hand in things.
But,  as the Prophet saith; Let favour
be shewed to the wicked, yet will
he not learn righteousne&esset;. And again,
They returned not to him that smote 
them, nor did they seek the Lord
of hosts. This was Mr. Badmans
temper,  neither Mercies nor Judgment
would make him seek the
Lord. Nay, as another Scripture
sayes,  he would not see the works
of God, nor regard the operations
of his hands either in mercies or
in Judgments. But further, when

by Providence he has been cast under
the best Means for his soul, (for,
as was shewed before, he having
had a good master, and before him a
good father, and after all a good
wife, and being sometimes upon a
Journey, and cast under the hearing
of a good Sermon, as he would
sometimes for novelties sake go to
a good Preacher; ) he was
always without heart to make use
thereof:  In this land of righteousness
he would deal unjustly, and
would not behold the majesty of the
Lord.
Instead of reverencing the Word, 
when he heard it preached, read,
or discoursed of, he would sleep,
talk of other Business, or else object
against the authority, harmony,
and wisdom of the Scriptures.
Saying, How do you know them to
be the Word of God? how do you
know that these sayings are true?
The Scriptures, he would say, were
as a Nose of Wax, and a man may
turn them whithersoever he lists: one
Scripture says one thing, and another
sayes the quite contrary; Besides,
they make mention of a thousand

imposibilities; they are the cause of
all dissensions and discords that are in
the Land: Therefore you may
(would he say) still think what you
will, but in my mind they are best
at ease that have least to do with
them.
Instead of loving and honouringGood men Mr. Badmans song.
of them that did bear in their Foreheads
the Name, and in their Lives
the Image of Christ, they should be
his Song, the matter of his Jests,
and the objects of his slanders. He
would either make a mock at their
sober deportment, their gracious language,
quiet behaviour, or else desperately
swear that they did all in
deceit and hypocrisie. He would
endeavour to render godly men
as odious and contemptable as he
could; any lyes that were made by
any, to their disgrace, those he
would avouch for truth, and would
not endure to be controlled. He was
much like those that the prophet 
speaks of, that would sit and slander
his mothers son; yea, he would
speak reproachfully of his wife,
though his conscience told him, and
many would testifie, that she was a

very vertuous woman. He would
also raise slanders of his wives friends
himself, affirming that their doctrine
tended to lasciviousness, and that in
their assemblies they acted and did
unbeseeming men and women, that
they committed uncleanness, &c.
He was much like those that affirmed
the Apostle should say,  Let us
do evil that good may come: Or like
those of whom it is thus written;
Report, say they,  and we will report
it. And if he could get any thing
by the end that had scandal in it, if
it did but touch professors, how falsely
soever reported; Oh! then he
would glory, laugh, and be glad,
and lay it upon the whole party:
Saying, Hang them Rogues, there
is not a barrel better Herring of all
the holy Brotherhood of them: Like
to like, quoth the Devil to the Collier,
this is your precise Crew. And
then he would send all home with a
curse.
Atten. If those that make profession
of Religion be wise, Mr. Badmans
watchings and words will make
them the more wary and careful in all
things.

Wise.When the wicked watch, Gods people should be wary. You say true. For when
we see men do watch for our halting,
and rejoyce to see us stumble and
fall, it should make us so much
abundance the more careful.
I do think it was as delightful to
Mr. Badman to hear, raise, and tell
lies, and lying stories of them that
fear the Lord, as it was for him to
go to bed when a weary. But we
will at this time let these things pass.
For as he was in these things bad
enough, so he added to these, many
more the like.
He was an *Badman an angry, envious man. angry, wrathfull, envious
man, a man that knew not
what meekness or gentleness meant,
nor did he desire to learn. His natural
temper was to be surly, huffie,
and rugged, and worse; and he so
gave way to his temper, as to this,
that it brought him to be furious and
outrageous in all things, specially
against goodness it self, and against
other things too, when he was displeased.
Atten.  Solomon saith, He is a fool
that rageth.
Wise.  He doth so; and sayes
moreover, That anger rests in the bosom

of fools. And truly, if it be a
sign of a Fool to have anger rest in
his bosom, then was Mr. Badman,
notwithstanding the conceit that he
had of his own abilities, a Fool of
no small size.
Atten. Fools are mostly most wise
in their own eyes.
Wise. True. But I was a saying,
that if it be a sign that a man is a
Fool, when Anger rests in his bosom;
Then what is it a sign of, think
you, when Malice and Envy rests
there? For to my knowledge Mr.
Badman was as malicious and as envious
a man as commonly you can
hear of.
Atten. Certainly,Whence Envy flows. malice and envy
flow from pride and arrogancy, and
they again from ignorance, and ignorance
from the Devil; And I
thought, that since you spake of the
pride of Mr. Badman before, we
should have something of these before
we had done.
Wise. Envy flows from Ignorance
indeed. And this Mr. Badman
was so envious an one, where
he set against, that he would swell
with it, as a Toad, as we say,

swells with poyson. He whom he
maligned, might at any time even
read envy in his face wherever he
met with him, or in whatever he
had to do with him.
His envy was so rank and strong,
that if it at any time turned its head
against a man, it would hardly
ever be pulled in again: He would
watch over that man to do him
mischief, as the Cat watches over
the Mouse to destroy it; yea, he
would wait seven years, but he
would have an opportunity to hurt
him, and when he had it, he would
make him feel the weight of his
Envy.
Envy is a devilish thing, the Scripture
intimates that none can stand
before it.  A stone is heavy, and the
sand weighty, but a fools wrath is
heavier than them both. Wrath is
cruel,Envie the worst of the four. and anger is outrageous, but
who can stand before envy?
This Envy, for the foulness of it,
is reckoned among the foulest Villanies
that are,  as adultery, murder,
drunkenness, revellings, witchcrafts,
heresies, seditions, &c. Yea,
it is so malignant a corruption, that

it rots the very bones of him in
whom it dwells.  A sound heart is
life to the flesh, but envy the rottenness
of the bones.
Atten. This envy is the very Father
and Mother of a great many
hideous and prodigious wickednesses:
I say, it is the very *Envy is the father and mother of a many wickednesses. Father and
Mother of them; it both begets
them, and also nourishes them up,
till they come to their cursed maturity
in the bosom of him that entertains
them.
Wise. You have given it a very
right description, in calling of it the
Father and Mother of a great many
other prodigious wickednesses: for
it is so venomous and vile a thing,
that it puts the whole course of
Nature out of order, and makes it
fit for nothing but confusion, and a
hold for every evil thing. For where
envy and strife is, there is confusion, 
and every evil work. Wherefore, I
say, you have rightly called it, The
very Father and Mother of a great
many other sins. And now for our
further edification, I will reckon up
some of the births of Envy.Some of the births of Envy.
1. Envy, as I told you before, it

rotteth the very bones of him that
entertains it. And,
2. As you have also hinted, it is
heavier than a Stone, than Sand;
yea, and I will add, It falls like a
Mill-stone upon the head. Therefore,
3. It kills him that throws it, and
him at whom it is thrown. Envy
slayeth the silly one.  That is, him in
whom it resides, and him who is
its object.
4.  'Twas that also that slew Jesus
Christ himself;  for his adversaries
persecuted him through their
envy.
5. Envy was that by vertue of
which Joseph was sold by his Brethren 
into Egypt.
6.  'Tis envy that hath the hand
in making of variance among Gods
Saints.
7. 'Tis envy in the hearts of Sinners,
that stirres them up to thrust 
Gods Ministers out of their coasts.
8. What shall I say? 'Tis envy
that is the very Nursery of whisperings,
debates, backbitings, slanders,
reproaches, murders, &c.
'Tis not possible to repeat all the

particular fruits of this sinfull root.
Therefore, it is no marvel that Mr.
Badman was such an ill natured man,
for the great roots of all manner of
wickedness were in him, unmortified,
unmaimed, untouched.
Atten. But it is *A rare thing. a rare case, even
this of Mr. Badman, that he should
never in all his life be touched with
remorse for his ill-spent life.
Wise. Remorse, I cannot say he
ever had, if by remorse you mean
repentance for his evils.Mr. Badman under some trouble of mind. Yet twice
I remember he was under some
trouble of mind about his condition:
Once when he broke his legg
as he came home drunk from the
Ale-house; and another time when
he fell sick, and thought he should
die: Besides these two times, I do
not remember any more.
Atten. Did he break his legg
then?
Wise. Yes: Once, as he came
home drunk from the Ale-house.
Atten. Pray how did he break
it?
Wise.Mr. Badman brake his legg. Why upon a time he was
at an Ale-house, that wicked house,
about two or three miles from

home, and having there drank hard
the greatest part of the day, when
night was come, he would stay no
longer, but calls for his horse, gets
up, and like a Mad-man (as drunken
persons usually ride) away he
goes, as hard as horse could lay legs
to the ground. Thus he rid, till
coming to a dirty place, where his
horse flouncing in, fell, threw his
master, and with his fall broke his
legg: so there he lay. But you
would not think how he *He swears. swore at
first. But after a while, he comeing
to himself, and feeling by his
pain, and the uselesness of his legg,
what case he was in, and also fearing
that this bout might be his death;
he began to crie out after the manner
of such; *He prays. Lord help me, Lord
have mercy upon me, good God
deliver me, and the like. So there he
lay, till some came by, who took him
up, carried him home, where he
lay for some time, before he could
go abroad again.
Atten. And then, you say, he called
upon God.
Wise. He cryed out in his pain,
and would say, O God, and O Lord,

help me: but whether it was that
his sin might be pardoned, and his
soul saved, or whether to be rid of
his pain, I will not positively determine;
though I fear it was but for
the last; because,It has no good effect upon him. when his pain was
gone, and he had got hopes of mending,
even before he could go abroad,
he cast off prayer, and began his old
game; to wit, to be as bad as he was
before. He then would send for his
old campanions; his Sluts also would
come to his house to see him, and
with them he would be, as well as he
could for his lame leg, as vicious as
they could be for their hearts.
Atten. 'Twas a wonder he did not
break his neck.
Wise. His neck had gone instead
of his leg, but that God was long-suffering
towards him; he had deserved
it ten thousand times over.
There have been many, as I have
heard, and as I have hinted to you
before, that have taken their Horses
when drunk, as he; but they
have gone from the pot to the grave;
for they have broken their necks
'twixt the Ale-house and home. &rhand;One 
hard by us also drunk himself dead;

he drank, and dyed in his drink.
Atten. 'Tis a sad thing to dye
drunk.
Wise. So it is: But yet I wonder
thar no more do so. For considering
the hainousness of that sin,
and with how many other sins it isHow many sins do accompany drunkenness.
accompanied, as with oaths, blasphemies,
lyes, revellings, whoreings,
brawlings, &c. it is a wonder
to me, that any that live in that sin
should escape such a blow from heaven
that should tumble them into
their graves. Besides, when I consider
also how, when they are as
drunk as beasts, they, without all
fear of danger, will ride like Bedlams
and mad men, even as if they
did dare God to meddle with them
if he durst, for their being drunk:
I say, I wonder that he doth not
withdraw his protecting providences
from them, and leave them to
those Dangers and Destructions
that by their sin they have deserved,
and that by their Bedlam madness
they would rush themelves into:
only I consider again, that he has
appointed a day wherein he will 
reckon with them, and doth also

commonly make Examples of some,
to shew that he takes notice of their
sin, abhors their way, and will
count with them for it at the set
time.
Atten. It is worthy of our remark,
to take notice how God, to shew his
dislike of the sins of men, strikes some
of them down with a blow; as the
breaking of Mr. Badmans legg, for
doubtless that was a stroak from heaven.
Wise. It is worth our remark indeed.
It was an open stroak, it
fell upon him while he was in the
height of his sin: And it looks much
like to that in Job;  Therefore
he knoweth their works, and overturneth
them in the night, so that
they are destroyed. He striketh them
as wicked men in the open sight of
others: Or as the Margent reads it,
in the place of beholders. He layes
them with his stroak in the place of
beholders. There was Mr. Badman
laid, his stroak was taken notice of
by every one: his broken legg was
at this time the Town-talk. *An open stroak. Mr.
Badman has broken his legg, sayes
one: How did he break it? sayes

another: As he came home drunk
from such an Ale-house, said a
third; A Judgment of God upon
him, said a fourth. This his sin, his
shame, and punishment, are all made
conspicuous to all that are about
him. I will here tell you another
story or two.
I have read in Mr.  Clark's Looking-glass
for Sinners; That upon a
time, a certain drunken fellow boasted
in his Cups, that there was neither
Heaven nor Hell; also he said,
He believed, that man had no Soul,
and that for his own part, he would
sell his soul to any that would buy it.
Then did one of his companions buy
it of him for a cup of Wine; and
presently the Devil in mans shape
bought it of that man again at the
the same price; and so in the presence
of them all laid hold on this
Soul-seller, and carried him away
through the Air, so that he was never
more heard of.
In pag. 148. he tells us also: That
there was one at Salisbury, in the
midst of his health drinking and carousing
in a Tavern; and he drank
a health to the Devil, saying, That

if the Devil would not come and
pledge him, he would not believe
that there was either God or Devil.
Whereupon his companions stricken
with fear, hastened out of the room:
and presently after, hearing a hideous
noise, and smelling a stinking
favour, the Vintner ran up into
the chamber; and coming in, he
missed his Guest, and found the window
broken, the Iron barr in it
bowed, and all bloody: But the
man was never heard of afterwards.
Again, in pag. 149. he tells us
of a Bailiff of Hedly: Who upon a
Lords Day being drunk at Melford,
got upon his horse, to ride through
the streets, saying, That his horse
would carry him to the Devil: and
presently his horse threw him, and
broke his neck. These things are
worse than the breaking of Mr.
Badmans Leg, and should be a caution
to all of his friends that are
living, left they also fall by their
sin into these sad Judgements of
God.
But, as I said, Mr. Badman
quickly forgot all, his conscience

was choaked, before his legg was
healed. And therefore, before he
was well of the fruit of one sin, he
tempts God to send another Judgment
to seize upon him: And so he
did quickly after. For not many
months after his legg was well, he
had a very dangerous fit of sickness,Mr. Badman fallen sick.
insomuch that now he began to
think he must dye in very deed.
Atten. Well, and what did he think
and do then?
Wise. He thought he must go
to Hell;His conscience is wounded. this I know, for he could
not forbear but say so. To my
best remembrance, he lay crying
out all one night for fear, and at
times he would so tremble, that he
would make the very bed shake
under him. *He cryes out in his sickness. But, Oh! how the
thoughts of Death, of Hell-fire, and
of eternal Judgment, did then wrack
his conscience. Fear might be seen
in his face, and in his tossings to
and fro: It might also be heard in
his words, and be understood by
his heavy groans. He would often
cry, I am undone, I am undone; my
vile life has undone me.
Atten. Then his former atheistical

thoughts and principles, were too
weak now to support him from the
fears of eternal damnation.
Wise. Aie! they were too weak
indeed. They may serve to stifle
conscience, when a man is in the
midst of his prosperity, and to harden
the heart against all good counsel
when a man is left of God, and
given up to his reprobate mind:
*His Atheism will not help him now. But alas, atheistical thoughts, Notions
and Opinions, must shrink and
melt away, when God sends, yea
comes with sickness to visit the soul
of such a sinner for his sin. There
was a man dwelt about 12 miles off
from us, that had so trained up himself
in his atheistical Notions, that at
last he attempted to write a book
against Jesus Christ, and against the
divine Authority of the Scriptures.
(But I think it was not printed:)
Well, after many days God struck
him with sickness, whereof he dyed.
So, being sick, and musing upon
his former doings, the Book that
he had written came into his mind,
and with it such a sence of his evil
in writing of it, that it tore his Conscience
as a Lyon would tare a Kid.

He lay therefore upon his death-bedA dreadful example of Gods anger.
in sad case, and much affliction of
conscience: some of my friends also
went to see him; and as they were
in his chamber one day, he hastily
called for Pen Ink and Paper, which
when it was given him, he took it
and writ to this purpose. I, such
an one, in such a Town, must goe to
Hell-fire, for writing a Book against
Jesus Christ, and against the Holy
Scriptures: &rhand;And would also have
leaped out of the window of his
house to have killed himself, but
was by them prevented of that:
so he dyed in his bed, such a death
as it was. 'Twill be well if others
take warning by him.
Atten. This is a remarkable story.
Wise. 'Tis as true as remarkable;
I had it from them that I dare
believe, who also themselves were
eye and ear witnesses; and also
that catcht him in their arms, and
saved him when he would have
leaped out of his chamber-window,
to have destroyed himself.
Atten. Well, you have told me
what were Mr. Badmans thoughts

(now, being sick) of his condition;
pray tell me also what he then did
when he was sick?
Wise. Did! he did many things,
which I am sure he never thought
to have done, and which, to be
sure, was not looked for of his wife
and children.
In this fit of sickness,What Mr. Badman did more when he was sick. his Thoughts
were quite altered about his wife;
I say his Thoughts, so far as could be
judged by his words and carriages to
her. For now she was his good
wife, his godly wife, his honest
wife, his duck, and dear, and all.
Now he told her, that she had the
best of it, she having a good Life to
stand by her, while his debaucheries
and ungodly Life did always stare
him in the face. Now he told her,
the counsel that she often gave him,
was good; though he was so bad as
not to take it.
Now he would hear her talk toGreat alteration made in Mr. Badman.
him, and he would lie sighing by
her while she so did. Now he would
bid her pray for him, that he might
be delivered from Hell.
He would also now consent, that
some of her good Ministers might

come to him to comfort him; and
he would seem to shew them kindness
when they came, for he would
treat them kindly with words, and
hearken diligently to what they
said, only he did not care that they
should talk much of his ill spent life,
because his conscience was clogged
with that already; he cared not now
to see his old companions, the
thoughts of them was a torment to
him: and now he would speak kindly
to that child of his that took after
its mothers steps, though he could
not at all abide it before.
He also desired the prayers of
good people, that God of his mercy
would spare him a little longer,
promising that if God would but
let him recover this once, what a
new, what a penitent man he would
be toward God, and what a loving
husband he would be to his wife:
what liberty he would give her, yea
how he would goe with her himself
to hear her Ministers, and how
they should go hand in hand in the
way to heaven together.
Atten. Here was a fine shew of
things; I'le warrant you, his wife was
glad for this.

Wise. His wife! Aie,The Town-talk of Mr. Badmans change. and a many
good people besides: it was noysed all
over the Town, what a great change
there was wrought upon Mr. Badman;
how sorry he was for his sins,
how he began to love his wife, how
he desired good men should pray to
God to spare him; and what promises
he now made to God in his
sickness, that if ever he should raise
him from his sick bed to health
again, what a new penitent man
he would be towards God, and
what a loving husband to his good
wife.
Well, ministers prayed, and good
people rejoyced, thinking verily
that they now had gotten a man
from the Devil; nay, some of the
weaker sort did not stick to say that
God had began a work of Grace in
his heart; and his wife, poor woman,His wife is comforted.
you cannot think how apt she
was to believe it so; she rejoyced,
and she hoped as she would have
it. But, alas! alas! in little time
things all proved otherwise.
After he had kept his Bed aMr. Badman recovers and returns to his old course.
while, his distemper began to abate,
and he to feel himself better, so

he in little time was so finely mended,
that he could walk about the
house, and also obtained a very fine
stomach to his food: and now did
his wife and her good friends stand
gaping, to see Mr. Badman fulfill
his promise of becoming new towards
God, and loving to his wife:
but the contrary only shewed it
self. For so soon as ever he had hopes
of mending, and found that his
strength began to renew, his trouble
began to goe off his heart, and
he grew as great a stranger to his
frights and fears, as if he had never
had them.
But verily, I am apt to think,
that one reason of his no more regarding,
or remembring of his
sick-bed fears, and of being no better
for them, was, some words that
the Doctor that supplied him with
Physick said to him when he was
mending. For as soon as Mr. Badman
began to mend, the Doctor
comes and sits him down by him in
his house, and there fell into discourse
with him about the nature of
his disease; and among other things
they talked of Badmans trouble,

and how he would cry out, tremble,
and express his fears of going
to Hell when his sickness lay pretty
hard upon him. To which the
Doctor replyed:Ignorant physicians kill souls while they cure bodyes. That those fears
and Out-cries did arise from the
height of his distemper, for that disease
was often attended with lightness
of the head, by reason the sick party
could not sleep, and for that the vapours
disturbed the brain: But you
see Sir, quoth he, that so soon as you
got sleep and betook your self to rest,
you quickly mended, and your head
settled, and so those frenzies left
you.
And was it so indeed, thought
Mr. Badman; was my troubles, only
the effects of my distemper, and
because ill vapours got up into my
brain? Then surely, since my Physician
was my Saviour, my Lust again
shall be my God. So he never
minded Religion more, but betook
him again to the world, his lusts and
wicked companions: And there was
an end of Mr. Badmans Conversion.
Atten. I thought, (as you told me
of him) that this would be the result of

the whole; for I discerned by your relating
of things, that the true symptoms
of conversion were wanting in
him, and that those that appeared to
be any thing like them, were only such
as the reprobates may have,
Wise. You say right, for there
wanted in him, when he was most
sensible, a sence of the pollution
of his Nature;  he only had guilt for
his sinful actions, the which Cain,
and Pharaoh, and Saul, and Judas,
those reprobates, have had before
him.
Besides,The true symptoms of conversion wanting in all Mr. Badmans sence of sin and desires of mercy. the great things that he desired,
were, to be delivered from going
to Hell, (and who would willingly?)
and that his life might be lengthened
in this world. We find not by all that
he said or did, that Jesus Christ the
Saviour was desired by him, from a
sence of his need of his Righteousness
to cloath him, and of his Spirit to
sanctifie him.
His own strength was whole in
him, he saw nothing of the treachery
of his own heart; for had he, he would
never have been so free to make promises
to God of amendment. He
would rather have been afraid, that

if he had mended, he should have
turned with the dog to his vomit, and
have begged prayers of Saints, and
assistance from heaven upon that account,
that he might have been kept
from doing so.
'Tis true he did beg prayers of
good people,  and so did Pharaoh of
Moses and Aaron, and Simon Magus
of Simon Peter,
His mind also seemed to be turned
to his wife and child; but alas!
'twas rather from conviction that
God had given him concerning their
happy estate over his, than for that
he had any true love to the work of
God that was in them. True,
some shews of kindness he seemed
to have for them, and so had rich
Dives, when in Hell,  to his five
brethren that were yet in the world;
yea he had such love, as to wish them
in Heaven, that they might not
come thither to be tormented.
Atten. Sick-bed Repentance is seldom
good for any thing.
Wise. *Of sick-bed repentance, and that it is to be suspected. You say true, it is very
rarely good for any thing indeed.
Death is unwelcom to Nature, and
usually when sickness and death visit

the sinner; the first taking of him
by the shoulder, and the second
standing at the Bed-chamber door
to receive him; then the sinner begins
to look about him, and to bethink
with himself, These will have
me away before God; and I know
that my Life has not been as it
should, how shall I do to appear
before God! Or if it be more the
sence of the punishment, and the
place of the punishment of sinners,
that also is starting to a desiled conscience,
now rouzed by deaths lumbring
at the door.
And hence usually is sick-bed Repentance,
and the matter of it: To
wit, to be saved from Hell, and
from Death, and that God will restore
again to health till they mend;
concluding that it is in their power
to mend, as is evident by their
large and lavishing promises to do
it.
I have known many, that, when
they have been sick, have had large
measures of this kind of Repentance,
and while it has lasted, the noyse
and sound thereof, has made the
Town to ring again: but alas! how

long has it lasted? oft-times scarce
so long as untill the party now sick
has been well. It has passed away
like a mist or a vapour, it has been
a thing of no continuance. But this
kind of Repentance is by God compared
to the howling of a dog. And
they have not cried unto me with their 
heart, when they howled upon their
bed.
Atten. Yet one may see, by this,A sign of the desperateness of mans heart.
the desperateness of mans heart: for
what is it but desperate wickedness, to
make promise to God of amendment,
if he will but spare them; and yet so
soon as they are recovered (or quickly
after,) fall to sin as they did before,
and never to regard their promise
more.
Wise.  It is a sign of desperateness
indeed; yea, of desperate madness.
For surely, they must needs
think, that God took notice of their
promise, that he heard the words
that they spake, and that he hath laid
them up against the time to come;
and will then bring out, and testifie
to their faces, that they flattered him
with their mouth, and lyed unto
him with their tongue, when they lay

sick,  to their thinking, upon their
death-bed, and promised him that if
he would recover them they would
repent and amend their ways. But
thus, as I have told you, Mr. Badman
did. He made great promises
that he would be a New man, that
he would leave his sins, and become
a Convert, that he would love, &c.
his godly wife, &c. Yea many
fine words had Mr. Badman in his
sickness, but no good actions when
he was well.
Atten. And how did his good
wife take it, when she saw that he had
no Amendment, but that be returned
with the Dog to his vomit, to
his old courses again?
Wise. Why it *Mr. Badmans wifes heart is broken. broke her heart,
it was a worse disappointment to
her than the cheat that he gave her
in marriage: At least she laid it
more to heart, and could not so well
grapple with it. You must think
that she had put up many a prayer
to God for him before, even all the
time that he had carried it so badly
to her, and now when he was so
affrighted in his sickness, and so desired
that he might live and mend,

poor woman, she thought that the
time was come for God to answer
her prayers; nay, she did not let
with gladness, to whisper it out
amongst her Friends, that 'twas so:
but when she saw her self disappointed
by her husbands turning Rebel
again, she could not stand up under
it, but falls into a languishing distemper,
and in a few weeks gave up
the Ghost.
Atten. Pray how did she dye?
Wise. Die! she dyed bravely;
full of comfort of the faith of her
Interest in Christ, and by him, of
the world to come: she had many
brave Expressions in her sickness,
and gave to those that came to visit
her many signs of her salvation;
the thoughts of the Grave, but
specially of her Rising again, were
sweet thoughts to her. She would
long for Death, because she knew
it would be her Friend. She behaved
her self like to some that
were making of them ready to go
meet their Bridegroom. *Her Christian speech. Now,
said she, I am going to rest from
my sorrows, my sighs, my tears, my
mournings and complaints: I have

heretofore longed to be among the
Saints, but might by no means be
suffered to goe, but now I am going,
(and no man can stop me)
to the great Meeting,  to the general
Assembly, and Church of the
first-born which are written in Heaven.
There I shall have my hearts
desire;Her talk to her friends. there I shall worship without
Temptation or other impediment;
there I shall see the face of
my Jesus, whom I have loved,
whom I have served, and who now,
I know, will save my soul. I have
prayed often for my husband, that
he might be converted, but there
has been no answer of God in that
matter; Are my prayers lost? are
they forgotten? are they thrown
over the barr? No; they are hanged
upon the horns of the golden
Altar, and I must have the benefit
of them my self, that moment that
I shall enter into the gates, in at
which the righteous Nation that
keepeth truth shall enter: I say,
I shall have the benefit of them. I
can say as holy David; I say, I can
say of my husband, as he could of his
enemies.  As for me, when they were

sick my cloathing was of sack-cloth,
I humbled my soul with fasting, and
my prayer returned into my bosom.
My prayers are not lost, my tears
are yet in Gods bottle; I would
have had a Crown, and Glory for
my husband, and for those of my
children that follow his steps; but
so far as I can see yet, I must
rest in the hope of having all my
self.
Atten. Did she talk thus openly?
Wise. No; this she spake but
to one or two of her most intimate
acquaintance, who were permitted
to come and see her, when she
lay languishing upon her death-bed.
Atten. Well, but pray go on in
your relation, this is good: I am glad
to hear it, this is as a cordial to my
heart while we sit thus talking under
this tree.
Wise.Her talk to her husband. When she drew near her
end, she called for her husband,
and when he was come to her, she
told him, That now he and she must
part, and said she, God knows,
and thou shalt know, that I have

been a loving, faithful Wife unto
thee; my prayers have been many
for thee; and as for all the abuses
that I have received at thy hand,
those I freely and heartily forgive,
and still shall pray for thy conversion,
even as long as I breathe in
this world. But husband, I am
going thither, where no bad man
shall come, and if thou dost not convert,
thou wilt never see me more
with comfort; let not my plain
words offend thee: I am thy dying
wife, and of my faithfulness
to thee, would leave this Exhortation
with thee: Break off thy sins,
fly to God for mercy while mercies
gate stands open; remember, that
the day is coming, when thou, though
now lusty and well, must lye at the
gates of death, as I do: And what
wilt thou then do, if thou shalt be
found with a naked soul, to meet
with the Cherubims with their flaming
swords? yea, what wilt thou
then do, if Death and Hell shall
come to visit thee, and thou in thy
sins, and under the Curse of the
Law?
Atten. This was honest and plain:

but what said Mr. Badman to
her?
Wise.He diverts her discourse. He did what he could to
divert her talk, by throwing in
other things; he also shewed some
kind of pity to her now, and would
ask her, What she would have? and
with various kind of words put her
out of her talk; for when she see
that she was not regarded, she fetcht
a deep sigh, and lay still. So he
went down, and then she called
for her Children, and began to talk
to them.Her speech to her children that were rude. And first she spake to
those that were rude, and told them
the danger of dying before they
had grace in their hearts. She told
them also, that Death might be
nearer them than they were aware
of; and bid them look, when they
went through the Church-yard
again, if there was not little graves
there. And, ah children, said she,
will it not be dreadful to you, if
we only shall meet at the day of
Judgment, and then part again,
and never see each other more?
And with that she wept, the Children
(also) wept; so she held on
her discourse: Children, said she,

I am going from you,  I am going
to Jesus Christ,  and with him there
is neither sorrow, nor sighing, nor
pain, nor tears, nor death. Thither
would I have you go also, but
I can neither carry you, nor fetch
you thither; but if you shall turn
from your sins to God, and shall
beg mercy at his hands by Jesus
Christ, you shall follow me, and
shall, when you dye, come to the
place where I am going, that
blessed place of Rest: and then we
shall be for ever together, beholding
the face of our Redeemer, to our
mutual and eternal joy. So she
bid them remember the words of a
dying mother when she was cold in
her grave, and themselves were hot
in their sins, if perhaps her words
might put check to their vice, and
that they might remember and turn
to God.
Then they all went down; but
her *Her speech to her darling. Darling, to wit, the child that
she had most love for, because it
followed her ways. So she addressed
her self to that. Come to me, said
she, my sweet child, thou art the
child of my joy: I have lived to

see thee a Servant of God; thou
shalt have eternal life. I, my sweet
heart, shall goe before, and thou
shalt follow after;  if thou shalt hold
the beginning of thy confidence stedfast
to the end. When I am gone, do
thou still remember my words, love
thy Bible, follow my Ministers,
deny ungodliness still, and if troublous
times shall come, set an higher
price upon Christ, his Word and
Wayes, and the testimony of a
good conscience, than upon all the
world besides. Carry it kindly and
dutifully to thy Father, but choose
none of his ways. If thou mayest,
goe to service, choose that, rather
than to stay at home; but then be
sure to choose a service where thou
mayest be helped forwards in the
way to heaven; and that thou mayest
have such a service, speak to
my Minister, he will help thee, if
possible, to such an one.
I would have thee also, my dear
child, to love thy Brothers and Sisters,
but learn none of their naughty
tricks.  Have no fellowship with the
unfruitfull works of darkness, but
rather reprove them. Thou hast

Grace, they have none: do thou
therefore beautifie the way of salvation
before their eyes, by a
godly life and conformable conversation
to the revealed will of God,
that thy Brothers and Sisters may
see and be the more pleased with the
good wayes of the Lord.
If thou shalt live to marry, take
heed of being served as I was; that
is, of being beguiled with fair
words, and the flatteries of a lying
tongue. But first be sure of godliness.
Yea, as sure as it is possible
for one to be in this world: trust
not thine own eyes, nor thine own
Judgment; I mean as to that persons
godliness that thou art invited
to marry. Ask counsel of good
men, and do nothing therein, if he
lives, without my Ministers advice. I
have also my self desired him to
look after thee. Thus she talked
to her children, and gave them
counsel, and after she had talked to
this a little longer, she kiss'd it, and
bid it go down.
Well, in short, her time drew
on, and the day that she must die.
So she *Her death. died with a soul full of

Grace, an heart full of comfort,
and by her death ended a life full
of trouble. Her husband made a
Funerall for her, perhaps because
he was glad he was rid of her, but
we will leave that to be manifest at
Judgment.
Atten. This Woman died well:
And now we are talking of the dying
of Christians, I will tell you a
story of one that died some time since
in our Town. The man was a godly
old Puritan, for so the godly were called
in time past. This man after a
long, and godly life, fell sick, of
the sickness whereof he died. And
as he lay drawing on, the woman that
looked to him thought she heard
Musick, and that the sweetest that
ever she heard in her life, which also
continued untill he gave up the Ghost:
&rhand;now when his soul departed from him,
the Musick seemed to withdraw and
to go further and further off from
the house, and so it went untill the
sound was quite gone out of hearing.
Wise. What do you think that
might be?
Atten. For ought I know, the melodious

Notes of Angels, that were
sent of God to fetch him to Heaven.
Wise. I cannot say but that God
goes out of his Ordinary Road
with us poor mortals sometimes.
I cannot say this of this woman, but
yet she had better musick in her
heart than sounded in this womans
ears.
Atten. I believe so; but pray tell
me, did any of her other children hearken
to her words, so as to be bettered
in their souls thereby?
Wise.One of her children converted by her dying words. One of them did, and became
a very hopefull young man:
but for the rest I can say nothing.
Atten. And what did Badman do
after his wife was dead?
Wise. Why even as he did before,
he scarce mourned a fortnight
for her, and his mourning then
was, I doubt, more in fashion than in
heart.
Atten. Would he not sometimes
talk of his Wife, when she was
dead?
Wise. Yes, when the fit took
him, and could commend her too

extremely; saying, she was a good,
godly, vertuous woman. But this
is not a thing to be wondred at: It
is common with wicked men, to hate
Gods Servants while alive, and to
commend them when they are dead.
So served the Pharisees the Prophets: 
Those of the Prophets that
were dead, they commended; and
those of them that were alive they
condemned.
Atten. But did not Mr. Badman
marry again quickly?
Wise. No, not a good while after:Mr. Badmans base language.
and when he was asked the
reason, he would make this slighty
answer, Who would keep a Cow of
their own, that can have a quart of
milk for a penny? Meaning, Who
would be at the charge to have a
Wife, that can have a Whore when
he listeth? So villanous, so abominable
did he continue after the
death of his wife. Yet at last there
was one was too hard for him. For,He marryes again, and how he got this last wife.
getting of him to her upon a time,
and making of him sufficiently
drunk, she was so cunning as to get
a promise of marriage of him, and
so held him to it, and forced him

to marry her.What she was, and how they lived. And she, as the saying
is, was as good as he, at all his vile
and ranting tricks: she had her companions
as well as he had his, and
she would meet them too at the
Tavern and Ale-house, more commonly
than he was aware of. To
be plain, she was a very Whore, and
had as great resort came to her,
where time and place was appointed,
as any of them all. Aie, and
he smelt it too, but could not tell
how to help it. For if he began to
talk, she could lay in his dish the
whores that she knew he haunted,
and she could fit him also with cursing
and swearing, for she would
give him Oath for Oath, and Curse
for Curse.
Atten. What kind of Oaths would
she have?
Wise. Why damn her, and sink her,
and the like.
Atten. These are provoking things.
Wise. So they are: but God doth
not altogether let such things goe
unpunished in this life. Something
of this I have shewed you already,
and will here give you one or
two Instances more.

There lived, saith one, in the year
1551. in a City of Savoy,  a man who
was a monstrous Curser and Swearer,
and though he was often admonished
and blamed for it, yet would
he by no means mend his manners.
At length a great plague happening
in the City, he withdrew himself
into a Garden, where being again
admonished to give over his wickedness,
he hardned his heart more,
Swearing, Blaspheming God, and
giving himself to the Devil: And
immediately the Devil snatched
him up suddenly, his wife and kinswoman
looking on, and carried him
quite away. The Magistrates advertised
hereof, went to the place
and examined the Woman, who
justified the truth of it.
Also at Oster in the Dutchy of
Magalapole, (saith Mr. Clark) a
wicked Woman, used in her cursing
to give her self body and soul to the
Devil, and being reproved for it,
still continued the same; till (being
at a Wedding-Feast) the Devil came
in person, and carried her up into the
Air, with most horrible outcries and
roarings: And in that sort carried

her round about the Town, that the
Inhabitants were ready to dye for
fear: And by and by he tore her in
four pieces, leaving her four quarters
in four several high-wayes; and
then brought her Bowels to the
Marriage-feast, and threw them
upon the Table before the Maior of
the Town, saying, Behold, these
dishes of meat belong to thee, whom
the like destruction waiteth for, if
thou dost not amend thy wicked
life.
Atten. Though God forbears to
deal thus with all men that thus rend
and tare his Name, and that immediate
Judgments do not overtake them;
yet he makes their lives by other
Judgments bitter to them, does he
not?
Wise. Yes, yes. And for proof,
I need goe no further than to this
Badman and his wife; for their railing,
and cursing, and swearing ended
not in words: They would fight
and fly at each other, and that like
Cats and Dogs. But it must be looked
upon as the hand and Judgment
of God upon him for his villany;
he had an honest woman before, but

she would not serve his turn, and
therefore God took her away, and
gave him one as bad as himself.
Thus that measure that he meted
to his first wife, this last did
mete to him again. And this is a
punishment, wherewith sometimes
God will punish wicked men. So
said Amos to Amaziah: Thy wife
shall be an Harlot in the City.  With
this last wife Mr. Badman lived a
pretty while; but, as I told you before,
in a most sad and hellish manner.
And now he would bewail his first
wifes death: not of love that he
had to her Godliness, for that he
could never abide, but for that she
used alwayes to keep home, whereas
this would goe abroad; his first
wife was also honest, and true to
that Relation, but this last was a
Whore of her Body: The first woman
loved to keep things together,
but this last would whirl them about
as well as he: The first would be
silent when he chid, and would take
it patiently when he abused her,
but this would give him word for
word, blow for blow, curse for
curse; so that now Mr. Badman,

had met with his match: *He is punished in his last wife for his bad carriages towards his first. God had
a mind to make him see the baseness
of his own life, in the wickedness of
his wives. †He is not at all the better. But all would not do
with Mr. Badman, he would be Mr.
Badman sttll: This Judgment did not
work any reformation upon him, no,
not to God nor man.
Atten. I warrant you that Mr.
Badman thought when his wife was
dead, that next time he would match
far better.
Wise. What he thought I cannot
tell, but he could not hope for
it in this match. For here he knew
himself to be catcht, he knew that
he was by this woman intangled,
and would therefore have gone back
again, but could not. He knew her,
I say, to be a Whore before, and
therefore could not promise himself
a happy life with her. For he or she
that will not be true to their own
soul, will neither be true to husband
nor wife. And he knew that she was
not true to her own soul, and therefore
could not expect she should be true
to him: but Solomon says, An whore
is a deep pit, and Mr. Badman found
it true. For when she had caught

him in her pit, she would never
leave him till she had got him to promise
her Marriage; and when she had
taken him so far, she forced him to
marry indeed: And after that, they
lived that life that I have told you.
Atten. But did not the neighbours
take notice of this alteration that Mr.
Badman had made?
Wise. Yes;None did pity him for his sorrow, but looked upon it as a just reward. and many of his
Neighbours, yea, many of those
that were carnal said, 'Tis a righteous
Judgment of God upon him,
for his abusive carriage and language
to his other wife: for they were
all convinced that she was a vertuous
woman, and that he, vile wretch,
had killed her, I will not say, with,
but with the want of kindness.
Atten. And how long I pray did
they live thus together?
Wise. Some fourteen or sixteen* Badman and this last wife part as poor as Howlets.
years, even untill (though she also
brought somthing with her) they had
sinned all away, and parted as poor as
Howlets. And, in reason, how could
it be otherwise? he would have his
way, and she would have hers; he among
his companions, and she among
hers; he with his Whores, and she with

her Rogues; and so they brought
their Noble to Nine-pence.
Atten. Pray of what disease did
Mr. Badman die, for now I perceive
we are come up to his death?
Wise.Mr. Badmans sickness and diseases of which he died. I cannot so properly say that
he died of one disease, for there were
many that had consented, and laid
their heads together to bring him
to his end. He was dropsical, he
was consumptive, he was surfeited,
was gouty, and, as some say, he
had a tang of the Pox in his bowels.
Yet the Captain of all these men of
death that came against him to take
him away, was the Consumption, for
'twas that that brought him down to
the grave.
Atten. Although I will not say,
but the best men may die of a consumption,
a dropsie, or a furfeit; yea, that
these may meet upon a man to end
him: yet I will say again, that many
times these diseases come through mans
inordinate use of things. Much
drinking brings dropsies, consumptions,
surfeits, and many other diseases;
and I doubt, that Mr. Badmans
death did come by his abuse of himself
in the use of lawfull and unlawfull

things. I ground this my sentence
upon that report of his life that you at
large have given me.
Wise. I think verily that you
need not call back your sentence;
for 'tis thought by many, that by
his Cups and his Queans he brought
himself to this his destruction: he
was not an old man when he dyed,
nor was he naturally very feeble,
but strong, and of a healthy complexion:
Yet, as I said, he moultered
away, and went, when he set
a going, rotten to his Grave. And
that which made him stink when he
was dead, I mean, that made him
stink in his Name and Fame, was,
that he died with a spice of the
foul disease upon him: A man whose
life was full of sin, and whose death
was without repentance.
Atten. These were blemishes sufficient
to make him stink indeed.
Wise. They were so, and they
did do it. No man could speak
well of him when he was gone.
*Badmans name stinks when he is dead. His Name rotted above ground,
as his Carkass rotted under. And
this is according to the saying of
the wise man:  The memory of the

just is blessed, but the name of the wicked
shall rot.
This Text, in both the parts of
it, was fulfilled upon him and the
woman that he married first. For
her Name still did flourish, though
she had been dead almost seventeen
years; but his began to stink and
rot, before he had been buried
seventeen dayes.
Atten. That man that dieth with
a life full of sin, and with an heart
void of repentance, although he should
die of the most Golden disease (if
there were any that might be so called)
I will warrant him his Name
shall stink, and that in Heaven and
Earth.
Wise. You say true; and therefore
doth the name of Cain, Pharoah,
Saul, Judas, and the Pharisees,
though dead thousands of years
agoe, stink as fresh in the nostrils
of the world as if they were but newly
dead.
Atten. I do fully acquiesce with
you in this.  But, Sir, since you have
charged him with dying impenitent,
pray let me see how you will prove it:
not that I altogether doubt it, because

you have affirmed it, but yet
I love to have proof for what men say
in such weighty matters.
Wise. When I said, he died without
repentance, I meant, so far as
those that knew him, could judge,
when they compared his Life, the
Word, and his Death together.
Atten. Well said, they went the
right way to find out whether he had,
that is, did manifest that he had
repentance or no. Now then shew
me how they did prove he had
none?
Wise. So I will: And first,1 Proof that he died impenitent. this
was urged to prove it. He had not
in all the time of his sickness, a sight
and sence of his sins, but was as secure,
and as much at quiet, as
if he had never sinned in all his
life.
Atten. I must needs confess that
this is a sign he had none. For how
can a man repent of that of which
he hath neither sight nor sence? But
'tis strange that he had neither sight
nor sence of sin now, when he had
such a sight and sence of his evil before:
I mean when he was sick before.

Wise. He was, as I said, as secure
now, as if he had been as sinless as an
Angel; though all men knew what
a sinner he was, for he carried his
Sins in his Forehead. His debauched
Life was read and known of all men;
but his Reputation was read and
known of no man; for, as I said,
he had none. And for ought I know,
the reason why he had no sence of
his sins now, was because he profited
not by that sence that he had
of them before. He liked not to
retain that knowledge of, God then,
that caused his sins to come to remembrance:
Therefore God gave
him up now to a reprobate mind,
to hardness and stupidity of Spirit;
and so was that Scripture fulfilled
upon him,  He hath blinded their
eyes. And that, Let their eyes be
darkned that they may not see.  Oh!
for a man to live in sin, and to goe
out of the world without Repentance
for it, is the saddest Judgement
that can overtake a man.
Atten. But, Sir, although both
you and I have consented thatNo sence of sin, no repentance, proved. without
a sight and sence of sin there can
be do Repentance, yet that is but

our bare Say-so; let us therefore now
see if by the Scripture we can make
it good.
Wise. That is easily done. The
three thousand that were converted,
(Acts the second,) repented not,  till
they had sight and sence of their sins:
Paul repented not till he had sight 
and sence of his sins:  the Jailor repented
not till he had sight and sence
of his sins: nor could they. For of
what should a man repent? The
Answer is, of Sin.  What is it to
Repent of sin? The answer is, To
be sorry for it, to turn from it. But
how can a man be sorry for it, that
has neither sight nor sence of it. David
did, not only commit sins, but
abode impenitent for them, untill
Nathan the Prophet was sent from 
God to give him a sight and sence
of them; and then, but not till then,
he indeed repented of them. Job,
in order to his Repentance, cries
unto God,  Shew me wherefore thou
contendest with me. And again,  That
which I see not teach thou me, I have
born chastisement, I will not offend
any more: That is, not in what I
know, for I will repent of it; nor

yet in what I know not, when thou
shalt shew me it.
Also Ephraims Repentance was 
after he was turned to the sight
and sence of his sins, and after he
was instructed about the evil of
them.
Atten. These are good testimonies
of this truth, and doe (if matter of
fact, with which Mr. Badman is
charged, be true,) prove indeed that
he did not repent, but as he lived,
so he dyed in his sin:  For without
Repentance a man is sure to dye in
his sin; for they will lie down in the
dust with him, rise at the Judgement
with him, hang about his Neck like
Cords and Chains when he standeth 
at the Barre of Gods Tribunal, and
goe with him too, when he goes away
from the Judgment-seat, with a Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting 
fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels; and there shall fret
and gnaw his Conscience,  because
they will be to him a never-dying 
worm.
Wise. You say well; and I will
add a word or two more to what
I have said: Repentance, as it is

not produced without a sight and
sence of sin, so every sight and sence
of sin cannot produce it: I mean,
every sight and sence of sin *Every sight and sence of sin cannot produce repentance. cannot
produce that Repentance, that
is Repentance unto salvation; repentance
never to be repented of. For
it is yet fresh before us, that Mr.
Badman had a sight and sence of sin,
in that fit of sickness that he had
before, but it dyed without procuring
any such godly fruit; as was
manifest by his so soon returning
with the Dog to his Vomit. Many
people think also that Repentance
stands in Confession of sin only, but
they are very much mistaken; For
Repentance, as was said before, is
a being sorry for, and a turning
from transgression to God by Jesus
Christ. Now, if this be true,
that every sight and sence of sin will
not produce Repentance, then Repentance
cannot be produced there
where there is no sight and sence of
sin. That every sight and sence of
sin will not produce repentance, to
wit, the godly repentance that we
are speaking of, is manifest in Cain,
Pharaoh, Saul and Judas, who all of

them had sence, great sence of sin, but
none of them repentance unto life.
Now I conclude, that Mr. Badman
did die impenitent, and so a death
most miserable.
Atten. But pray now, before we
conclude our discourse of Mr. Badman,
give me another proof of his
dying in his sins.
Wise.2 proof that he died impenitent. Another proof is this. He
did not desire a sight and sence of sins,
that he might have repentance for
them. Did I say he did not desire
it, I will add, he greatly desired
to remain in his security: and that
I shall prove by that which follows.
First, He could not endure that any
man, now, should talk to him of
his sinfull life, and yet that was the
way to beget a sight and sence of
sin, and so of repentance from it,
in his soul. But, I say, he could
not endure such discourse. Those
men that did offer to talk unto him
of his ill-spent Life, they were
as little welcome to him in the time
of his last sickness,  as was Elijah
when he went to meet with Ahab,
as he went down to take possession
of Naboths Vineyard. Hast thou

found me, said Ahab, O mine enemy?
So would Mr. Badman say in his
heart to and of those that thus did
come to him, though indeed they
came even of love, to convince him
of his evil life, that he might have
repented thereof, and have obtained
mercy.
Atten. Did good men then goe to
see him in his last sickness?
Wise. Yes: Those that were his
first wifes acquaintance, they went
to see him, and to talk with, and
to him, if perhaps he might now, at
last, bethink himself, and cry to
God for mercy.
Atten. They did well to try now
at last if they could save his soul
from Hell: But pray how can you tell
that he did not care for the company of
such?
Wise. Because of the differing
Carriage that he had for them,
from what he had when his old carnal
companions came to see him:
When his old Companions came
to see him, he would stir up himself
as much as he could both by
words and looks, to signifie they
were welcome to him; he would

also talk with them freely, and
look pleasantly upon them, though
the talk of such could be none other
but such as David said, carnal men
would offer to him, when they
came to visit him in his sickness:
If he comes to see me,  says he, he
speaketh vanity, his heart gathereth
iniquity to it self. But these kind
of talks, I say, Mr. Badman better
brooked, than he did the company
of better men.
But I will particularly give
you a Character *How Badman carried it to good men when they came to visit him in his last sickness. of his carriage
to good men (and good talk) when
they came to see him.
1. When they were come, he
would seem to fail in his spirits at the
sight of them.
2. He would not care to answer
them to any of those questions that
they would at times put to him, to
feel what sence he had of sin, death,
Hell, and Judgment: But would
either say nothing, or answer them
by way of evasion, or else by telling
of them he was so weak and spent
that he could not speak much.
3. He would never shew forwardness
to speak to, or talk with

them, but was glad when they held
their tongues. He would ask them
no question about his state and another
world, or how he should escape
that damnation that he had deserved.
4. He had got a haunt at last to
bid his wife and keeper, when these
good people attempted to come to
see him, to tell them that he was asleep
or inclining to sleep, or so weak
for want thereof, that he could not
abide any noyse. And so they
would serve them time after time,
till at last they were discouraged
from coming to see him any
more.
5. He was so hardned, now, in
this time of his sickness, that he
would talk, when his companions
came unto him, to the disparagement
of those good men (and of their good
doctrine too) that of love did come
to see him, and that did labour to
convert him.
6. When these good men went
away from him, he would never
say, Pray when will you be pleased
to come again, for I have a desire
to more of your company, and

to hear more of your good instruction?
No not a word of that, but
when they were going would scarce
bid them drink, or say, Thank you
for your good company, and good instruction.
7. His talk in his sickness with
his companions, would be of the
World, as Trades, Houses, Lands,
great Men, great Titles, great places,
outward Prosperity, or outward
Adversity, or some such carnal
thing.
By all which I conclude, that
he did not desire a sence and sight of
his sin, that he might repent and be
saved.
Atten. It must needs be so as you
say, if these things be true that you
have asserted of him. And I do the
rather believe them, because I think
you dare not tell a lie of the
dead.
Wise. I was one of them that
went to him, and that beheld his
carriage and manner of way, and
this is a true relation of it that I have
given you.
Atten. I am satisfied. But pray
if you can, shew me now by the Word,

what sentence of God doth pass upon
such men?
Wise. Why, the man that is thus
averse to repentance, that desires not
to hear of his sins, that he might
repent and be saved; is said to be a
man that saith unto God, Depart from
me,  for I desire not the knowledge
of thy wayes. He is a man that sayes
in his heart and with his actions,
I have loved strangers,  (sins) and
after them I will goe. He is a man
that shuts his eyes, stops his ears, 
and that turneth his spirit against 
God. Yea he is the man that is at
enmity with God, and that abhorres
him with his soul.
Atten. What other signe can you
give me that Mr. Badman died without
repentance?
Wise. Why,3 Proof that he died impenitent. he did never heartily
cry to God for mercy all the
time of his affliction. True, when
sinking fits, stitches, or pains took
hold upon him, then he would say
as other carnal men use to do,
Lord help me, Lord strengthen me,
Lord deliver me, and the like:
But to cry to God for mercy, that
he did not, but lay, as I hinted

before, as if he never had sinned.
Atten. That is another bad sign
indeed; for crying to God for mercy,
is one of the first signs of repentance.
When Paul lay repenting of his sin,
upon his bed, the Holy Ghost said
of him,  Behold he prayes. But he
that hath not the first sins of repentance,
'tis a sign he hath none of the
other, and so indeed none at all.
I do not say, but there may be crying,
where there may be no sign of
repentance. They cryed, says David,
to the Lord,  but he answered them
not; but that he would have done, if
their cry had been the fruit of repentance.
But, I say, if men may cry and
yet have no repentance, be sure, they
have none, that cry not at all. It is
said in Job,  They cry not when he
bindeth them that is, because they
have no repentance; no repentance,
no cryes; false repentance, false cryes;
true repentance, true cryes.
Wise. I know that it is as possible
for a man to forbear crying that
hath repentance, as it is for a man to
forbear groaning that feeleth deadly
pain. He that looketh into the

Book of Psalms, (where repentance
is most lively set forth even
in its true and proper effects,)
shall there find, that crying, strong
crying, hearty crying, great crying,
and uncessant crying, hath been
the fruits of repentance: (But none
of this had this Mr. Badman, therefore
he dyed in his sins.)
That Crying is an inseparable
effect of repentance, is seen in these
Scriptures. Have mercy upon me, 
O God, according to the multitude
of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions.
O Lord, rebuke me not in
thine anger, neither chasten me in thy
hot displeasure. Have mercy upon me,
O Lord, for I am weak. O Lord,  heal
me for my bones are vexed. My
soul is also vexed, but thou, O Lord, how
long: Return, O Lord, deliver my soul:
O save me for thy mercies sake:  O
Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath,
neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure;
for thine arrows stick fast in me,
and thy hand presseth me sore. There
is no soundness in my flesh, because of
thine anger, neither is there any rest in
my bones, because of my sin. For mine
iniquities are gone over mine head,

as an heavy burthen, they are too heavy
for me. My wounds stink and are corrupt;
because of my foolishness. I am
troubled, I am bowed down greatly,
I goe mourning all the day long. My
loyns are filled with a loathsom disease,
and there is no soundness in my flesh.
I am feeble, and sore broken, I have
roared by reason of the disquietness of
my heart.
I might give you a great number
more of the holy sayings of good
men, whereby they express how they
were, what they felt, and whether
they cryed or no, when repentance
was wrought in them. Alas, alas, it is
as possible for a man, when the
pangs of Guilt are upon him to
forbear praying, as it is for a woman
when pangs of travel are upon
her to forbear crying. If all the
world should tell me that such a man
hath repentance, yet if he is not a
praying man, I should not be perswaded
to believe it.
Atten. I know no reason why you
should: for there is nothing can demonstrate
that such a man hath it.
But pray Sir, what other sign have
you, by which you can prove that Mr.

Badman died in his sins, and so in a
state of damnation?
Wise. I have this to prove it.4 Proof that he died impenitent.
Those who were his old sinfull companions
in the time of his health,
were those whose company and
carnal talk he most delighted in, in
the time of his sickness. I did occasionally
hint this before, but now I
make it an argument of his want of
grace: for where there is indeed a
work of Grace in the heart, that
work doth not only change the
heart, thoughts and desires, but the
conversation also; yea conversation
and company too. When Paul had a
work of grace in his soul, he assayed
to Joyn himself to the Disciples. He
was for his old companions in their
abominations no longer: he was now
a Disciple,  and was for the company
of Disciples. And he was with them
coming in and going out in Jerusalem.
Atten. I thought something when
I heard you make mention of it before.
Thought I, this is a shrewd sign that
he had not grace in his heart. Birds of
a feather, thought I, will flock together:
If this man was one of Gods children,
he would heard with Gods children,

his delight would be with, and in
the company of Gods children. As
David said,  I am a companion of all
them that fear thee, and of them that
keep thy precepts.
Wise. You say well, for what fellowship
hath he that believeth with
an Infidel? And although it be true,
that all that joyn to the godly are not
godly, yet they that shall inwardly
choose the company of the ungodly
and open profane, rather than the
company of the godly, as Mr. Badman
did; surely are not godly men,
but profane. He was, as I told you, out
of his element, when good men did
come to visit him, but then he was
where he would be, when he had
his vain companions about him.
Alas! grace, as I said, altereth all,
heart, life, company, and all; for by
it the heart and man is made new:
and a new heart, a new man, must
have objects of delight that are new,
and like himself:  Old things are passed
away; Why? For all things are become
new. Now if all things are
become new, to wit, heart, mind,
thoughts, desires, and delights,
it followeth by consequence that the

company must be answerable: hence
it is said, That they that believed
were together;  that they went to their
own company;  that they were added to
the Church; that they were of one
heart and of one soul; and the like.
Now if it be objected, that Mr.
Badman was sick, and so could not
goe to the godly, yet he had a
tongue in his head, and could, had
he had an heart, have spoken to some
to call or send for the godly to come
to him. Yea, he would have done so;
yea the company of all others, specially
his fellow sinners, would, even in
every appearance of them before
him, have been a burden and a grief
unto him. His heart and affection
standing bent to good, good companions
would have suited him best.
But his Companions were his old
Associates, his delight was in them,
therefore his heart and soul were
yet ungodly.
Atten. Pray how was he when he
drew near his end? for I perceive
that what you say of him now, hath
reference to him, and to his actions,
at the beginning of his sickness? Then
he could endure company, and much

talk; besides, perhaps then he thought
he should recover and not die, as afterwards
he had cause to think, when he
was quite wasted with pining sickness,
when he was at the graves mouth. But
how was he, I say, when he was (as
we say) at the graves mouth, within
a step of death? when he saw, and
knew, and could not but know, that
shortly he must dye, and appear before
the Judgment of God?
Wise. Why *How Mr. Badman was when near his End. there was not any
other alteration in him, than what
was made by his disease upon his
body: sickness, you know, will alter
the body, also pains and stitches
will make men groan; but for his
mind, he had no alteration there.
His mind was the same, his heart
was the same. He was the self-same
Mr. Badman still: not onely in
Name but Conditions, and that to
the very day of his death: yea, so
far as could be gathered to the very
moment in which he died.
Atten. Pray how was he in his
death? was Death strong upon him?
or did he dye with ease, quietly?
Wise. As quietly as a †He died like a Lamb. Lamb.
There seemed not to be in it,

to standers by, so much as a strong
struggle of Nature: and as for his
Mind, it seemed to be wholly at
quiet. But pray why do you ask
me this question?
Atten. Not for mine own sake,
but for others. For there is such
*The opinion of the Ignorant about his mauner of dying. an opinion as this among the ignorant:
That if a man dies, as they
call it, like a Lamb, that is, quietly,
and without that consternation of
mind that others shew in their death,
they conclude, and that beyond all
doubt, that such an owe is gone to
Heaven, and is certainly escaped the
wrath to come.
Wise. There is no Judgment to
be made by a quiet death, of the
Eternal state of him that so dieth.
Suppose one man should die quietly,
another should die suddenly, and
a third should die under great consternation
of spirit; no man can
Judge of their eternall condition by
the manner of any of these kinds
of deaths. He that dies quietly,
suddenly, or under consternation of
spirit, may goe to Heaven, or may
goe to Hell; no man can tell whether
a man goes, by any such manner

of death. The *How we must judge whether men dye well or no. Judgment therefore
that we make of the eternall condition
of a man, must be gathered
from another consideration: To
wit, Did the man die in his sins?
did he die in unbelief? did he die
before he was born again? then he
is gone to the Devil and hell, though
he died never so quietly. Again,
Was the man a good man? had he
faith and holiness? was he a lover and
a Worshipper of God by Christ, according
to his Word? Then he is gone
to God and Heaven, how suddenly,
or in what consternation of mind
soever he died: But Mr. Badman
was naught, his life was evil, his
wayes were evil; evil to his end:
he therefore went to Hell and to
the Devil, how quietly soever he
died.
Indeed there is, in some cases, a
Judgment to be made of a mans
eternal condition by the manner
of the death he dieth. *When we may judge of a mans eternal state by the manner of his death. As suppose
now a man should murder himself,
or live a wicked life, and after that
die in utter despair; these men without
doubt do both of them goe to
Hell. And here I will take an occasion

to speak of two of Mr. Badmans
Brethren, (for you know I told
you before that he had Brethren,)
and of the manner of their death.
One of them killed himself, and
the other after a wicked life died in
utter despair. Now I should not be
afraid to conclude of both these, that
they went by, and through their
death to hell.
Atten. Pray tell me concerning
the first, how he made away himself?
Wise. Why, he took a knife and
cut his own Throat, and immediately
gave up the Ghost and died. Now
what can we judge of such a mans
condition; since the Scripture saith,
No murderer hath eternall life, &c.
but that it must be concluded, that
such an one is gone to Hell. He was
a murderer, a Self-murderer; and
he is the worst murderer, one that
slays his own body and soul: nor
doe we find mention made of any
but cursed ones that doe such kind of
deeds. I say, no mention made in
holy Writ of any others, but such,
that murder themselves.
And this is a sore Judgment of

God upon men, when God shall;
for the sins of such, give them up
to be their own Executioners, or
rather to execute his Judgment and
Anger upon themselves. And let me
earnestly give this Caution to sinners.
Take heed, Sirs, break off your sins, lest
God serves you as he served Mr. Badmans
Brother: That is, lest he gives
you up to be your own Murderers.
Atten. Now you talk of this. &rhand;I
did once know a man, a Barber, that
took his own Raisor, and out his own
Throat, and then put his head out of
his Chamber-window, to shew the neighbours
what he had done, and after a
little while died.
&rhand; Wise. I can tell you a more dreadfull
thing than this: I mean as to the
manner of doing the fact. *The story of John Cox. There
was about twelve years since, a man
that lived at Brafield by Northampton,
(named John Cox) that murdered
himself; the manner of his
doing of it was thus. He was a poor
man, and had for some time been
sick (and the time of his sickness
was about the beginning of
Hay-time;) and taking too many
thoughts how he should live afterwards,

if he lost his present season
of work, he fell into deep despair
about the world, and cryed out to
his wife the morning before he killed
himself, saying, We are undone.
But quickly after, he desired his
wife to depart the room, Because,
said he, I will see if I can get any
rest; so she went out: but he instead
of sleeping, quickly took his
Raisor, and therewith cut up a
great hole in his side, out of which
he pulled, and cut off some of his
guts, and threw them, with the
blood up and down the Chamber.
But this not speeding of him so soon
as he desired, he took the same Raisor
and therewith cut his own throat.
His wife then hearing of him sigh
and fetch his wind short, came again
into the room to him, and seeing
what he had done, she ran out and
called in some Neighbours, who
came to him where he lay in a
bloody manner, frightfull to behold.
Then said one of them to him,
Ah! John, what have you done?
are you not sorry for what you have
done? He answered roughly, 'Tis
too late to be sorry. Then said the

same person to him again, Ah! John,
pray to God to forgive thee this
bloody act of thine. At the hearing
of which Exhortation, he seemed
much offended, and in angry manner
said, Pray! and with that flung
himself away to the wall, and so after
a few gasps died desperately. When
he had turned him of his back, to
the wall, the blood ran out of his
belly as out of a boul, and soaked
quite through the bed to the boards,
and through the chinks of the boards
it ran pouring down to the ground.
Some said, that when the neighbours
came to see him, he lay groaping
with his hand in his bowels, reaching
upward, as was thought, that
he might have pulled or cut out
his heart. 'Twas said also, that some
of his Liver had been by him torn
out and cast upon the boards, and
that many of his guts hung out of the
bed on the side thereof. But I cannot
confirm all particulars; but the
general of the story, with these circumstances
above mentioned, is
true; I had it from a sober and credible
person, who himself was one
that saw him in this bloody state,

and that talked with him, as was
hinted before.
Many other such dreadful things
might be told you, but these are enough,
and too many too, if God
in his wisdom had thought necessary
to prevent them.
Atten. This is a dreadful Story:
and I would to God that it might be
a warning to others to instruct them
to fear before God, and pray, lest he
gives them up to doe as John Cox
hath done. For surely self-murderers
cannot go to Heaven: and therefore,
as you have said, he that dieth by his
own hands, is certainly gone to Hell.
But speak a word or two of the other
man you mentioned.
Wise. What? of a wicked man
dying in Despair?
Atten. Yes, of a wicked man dying
in despair.
Wise. Well then: *Of dying in Despair. This Mr.
Badmans other Brother was a very
wicked man, both in Heart and
Life; I say in Heart, because he
was so in Life, nor could any thing
reclaim him; neither good Men,
good Books, good Examples, nor
Gods Judgements. Well, after he

had lived a great while in his sins,
God smote with a sickness of which
he died. Now in his sickness his
Conscience began to be awakened,
and he began to roar out of his ill-spent
Life, insomuch that the Town
began to ring of him. Now when
it was noysed about, many of the
Neighbours came to see him, and
to read by him, as is the common
way with some; but all that they
could doe, could not abate his terror,
&rhand; but he would lie in his Bed
gnashing of his teeth, and wringing
of his wrists, concluding upon
the Damnation of his Soul, and in
that horror and despair he dyed;
not calling upon God; but distrusting
in his Mercy, and Blaspheming
of his Name.
Atten. This brings to my mind a
man that a Friend of mine told me
of. He had been a wicked liver; so
when he came to die, he fell into despair,
and having concluded that
God had no mercy for him, he addressed
himself to the Devil for favour, &rhand; saying,
Good Devil be good unto me.
Wise.  This is almost like Saul,
who being forsaken of God, went

to the Witch of Endor, and so to the
Devil for help. But alas, should
I set my self to collect these dreadful
Stories, it would be easie in
little time to present you with hundreds
of them: But I will conclude
as I began; They that are their
own Murderers, or that die in Despair,
after they have lived a life of
wickedness, do surely go to Hell.
And here I would put in a Caution:
Every one that dieth under
consternation of spirit; that is, under
amazement and great fear, do
not therefore die in Despair: For
a good man may have this for his
bands in his death,  and yet go to
Heaven and Glory. For, as I said
before, He that is a good man, a
man that hath Faith and Holiness,
a lover and Worshipper of God by
Christ, according to his Word, may
die in consternation of spirit: for
Satan will not be wanting to assault
good men upon their death-bed,
but they are secured by the Word
and Power of God; yea, and are
also helped, though with much agony
of spirit, to exercise themselves
in Faith and Prayer, the which he

that dieth in Despair, can by no
means doe. But let us return to
Mr. Badman, and enter further
Discourse of the manner of his
Death.
Atten. I think you and I are both
of a mind; for just now I was thinking
to call you back to him also. And
pray now, since it is your own motion
to return again to him, let us
discourse a little more of his quiet and
still death.
Wise.Further discourse of Mr. Badmans death. With all my heart. You
know we were speaking before of
the manner of Mr. Badmans death:
How that he dyed very stilly and
quietly; upon which you made observation,
that the common people
conclude, that if a man dyes quietly,
and as they call it, like a Lamb, he is
certainly gone to Heaven: when
alas, if a wicked man dyes quietly,
if a man that has all his dayes lived
in notorious sin, dyeth quietly; his
quiet dying is so far off from being a
sign of his being saved, that it is
an uncontrollable proof of his damnation.
This was Mr. Badmans
case, he lived wickedly even to the
last, and then went quietly out of the

world: therefore Mr. Badman is gone
to Hell.
Att. Well, but since you are upon it,
and also so confident in it, to wit, that
a man that lives a wicked life till he
dyes, and then dyes quietly, is gone to
Hell; let me see what shew of proof
you have for this your opinion.
Wise.He that after a sinfull life dies quietly, that is, without repentance, goes to Hell. I Proof. My first argument is drawn
from the Necessity of repentance: No
man can be saved except he repents,
nor can he repent that sees not, that
knows not that he is a sinner, and he
that knows himself to be a sinner,
will, I will warrant him, be molested
for the time by that knowledge.
This, as it is testified by all the Scriptures,
so it is testified by Christian
experience. He that knows himself
to be a sinner, is molested, especially
if that knowledge comes not
to him untill he is cast upon his
death-bed; molested, I say, before
he can dye quietly. Yea, he is molested,
dejected and cast down, he
is also made to cry out, to hunger
and thirst after mercy by Christ, and
if at all he shall indeed come to dye
quietly, I mean with that quietness
that is begotten by Faith and Hope

in Gods mercy (to the which Mr.
Badman and his brethren were utter
strangers,) his quietness is distinguished
by all Judicious observers,
by what went before it, by what it
flows from, and also by what is the
fruit thereof.
I must confess I am no admirer
of sick-bed repentance, for I think
verily it is seldom *Sick-bed repentance seldom good for any thing. good for any
thing: but I say, he that hath lived
in sin and profaneness all his dayes, as
Mr. Badman did, and yet shall dye
quietly, that is, without repentance
steps in 'twixt his life and death,
he is assuredly gone to Hell, and is
damned.
Atten. This does look like an argument
indeed; for Repentance must
come, or else we must goe to Hell-fire:
and if a lewd liver shall (I mean that
so continues till the day of his death,)
yet goe out of the world quietly, 'tis a
sign that he dyed without repentance,
and so a sign that he is damned.
Wise. I am satisfied in it, for my
part, and that from the Necessity,
and Nature of repentance. It is necessary,
because. God calls for it, and

will not pardon sin without it: Except
ye repent ye shall all likewise perish.  This is that which God hath
said, and he will prove but a fool-hardy
man that shall yet think to goe
to Heaven and glory without it.
Repent, for the Ax is laid to the root
of the tree, every tree therefore that
bringeth not forth good fruit, (but
no good fruit can be where there is
not sound repentance) shall be hewn
down, and cast into the fire. This
was Mr. Badmans case, he had attending
of him a sinfull life, and that
to the very last, and yet dyed quietly,
that is, without repentance;
he is gone to Hell and is damned.
For the Nature of repentance, I have
touched upon that already, and
shewed, that it never was where a
quiet death is the immediate companion
of a sinfull life; and therefore
Mr. Badman is gone to Hell.
Secondly,2 Proof. My second argument
is drawn from that blessed Word of
Christ, While the strong man armed
keeps the house, his goods are in peace,
till a stronger than he comes: but the
strong man armed kept Mr. Badmans
house, that is, his heart, and

soul, and body, for he went from a
sinfull life quietly out of this world:
the stronger did not disturb by intercepting
with sound repentance, betwixt
his sinful life and his quiet
death: Therefore Mr. Badman is
gone to Hell.
The strong man armed is the
Devil, and quietness is his security.
The Devil never fears losing of the
sinner, if he can but keep him quiet:
can he but keep him quiet in a sinfull
life, and quiet in his death, he is
his own. Therefore he saith, his
goods are in peace; that is, out of danger.
There is no fear of the Devils
losing such a soul, I say, because
Christ, who is the best Judge in this
matter, saith, his goods are in peace,
in quiet, and out of danger.
Atten. This is a good one too; for
doubtless, *Peace in a sinfull state is a sign of damnation. peace and quiet with sin,
is one of the greatest signs of a damnable
state.
Wise. So it is. Therefore, when
God would shew the greatness of his
anger against sin and sinners in one
word, he saith, They are joyned to
Idols,  let them alone. Let them alone,
that is, disturb them not; let them

goe on without controll; let the
Devil enjoy them peaceably, let him
carry them out of the world unconverted
quietly. This is one of the
sorest of Judgments, and bespeaketh
the burning anger of God against sinfull
men. See also when you come
home, the fourteenth Verse of the
Chapter last mentioned in the Margent:
I will not punish your daughters
when they commit Whoredom.
I will let them alone, they shall live
and dye in their sins. But,
Thirdly,3 Proof. My third argument is
drawn from that saying of Christ:
He hath blinded their eyes,  and hardened
their hearts; that they should
not see with their eyes, nor understand
with their hearts, and be converted,
and I should heal them.
There are three things that I will
take notice of from these words.
1. The first is, That there can be
no conversion to God where the eye
is darkned, and the heart hardened.
The eye must first be made to see,
and the heart to break and relent
under and for sin, or else there can
be no conversion. He hath blinded
their eyes, and hardned their hearts,

lest they should see, and understand
and (So) be converted. And this was
clearly Mr. Badmans case, he lived
a wicked life, and also died with
his eyes shut, and heart hardened,
as is manifest, in that a sinful life was
joyned with a quiet death; and all
for that he should not be converted,
but partake of the fruit of his sinfull
life in Hell fire.
2. The second thing that I take
notice of from these words is, That
this is a dispensation and manifestation
of Gods anger against a man
for his sin. When God is angry
with men, I mean, when he is so angry
with them, this among many
is one of the Judgments that he
giveth them up unto, to wit, to
blindness of mind, and hardness of
heart, which he also suffereth to
accompany them till they enter in
at the gates of death. And then,
and there, and not short of then
and there, their eyes come to be
opened. Hence it is said of the
rich man mentioned in Luke,  He dyed,
and in Hell he lift up his eyes:
Implying that he did not lift them up
before: He neither saw what he had

done, nor whither he was going, till
he came to the place of execution,
even into Hell. He died asleep in
his soul; he dyed besotted, stupified,
and so consequently for quietness,
like a Child or Lamb, even as Mr.
Badman did: this was a sign of Gods
anger; he had a mind to damn him
for his sins, and therefore would
not let him see nor have an heart to
repent for them, lest he should convert,
and his damnation, which God
had appointed, should be frustrate:
lest they should be converted, and I
should heal them.
3. The third thing that I take notice
of from hence, is, That a sinfull
life and a quiet death annexed to it,
is the ready, the open, the beaten,
the common high-way to Hell: there
is no surer sign of Damnation, than
for a man to dye quietly after a sinfull
life. I do not say that all wicked
men, that are molested at their death
with a sence of sin and fears of Hell,
do therefore goe to Heaven, (for
some are also made to see, and are
left to despair (not converted by seeing)
that they might go roaring out
of this world to their place:) But I

say, there is no surer sign of a mans
Damnation, than to dye quietly
after a sinful life; than to sin, and
dye with his eyes shut; than to sin,
and dye with an heart that cannot
repent.  He hath blinded their eyes
and hardened their heart, that they
should not see with their eyes, nor
understand with their heart;  (no,
not so long as they are in this world)
lest they should see with their eyes,
and understand with their heart, and
should be converted, and I should heal
them.
God has a Judgment for wicked
men; God will be even with wicked
men:  God knows how to reserve
the ungodly to the day of
Judgment to be punished: And this
is one of his wayes by which he
doth it. Thus it was with Mr. Badman.
4.4 Proof. Fourthly, It is said in the Book
of Psalms, concerning the wicked,
There is no bands in their death,  but
their strength is firm. By no bands,
he means no troubles, no gracious
chastisements, no such corrections
for sin as fall to be the Lot of Gods
people for theirs; yea, that many

times falls to be theirs, at the time
of their death. Therefore he adds
concerning the wicked, They are not
troubled (then) like other men, neither
are they plagued like other men;
but go as securely out of the world,
as if they had never sinned against
God, and put their own souls into
danger of damnation. There is no
band in their death. They seem to
go unbound, and set at liberty, out
of this world, though they have lived
notoriously wicked all their dayes
in it. The Prisoner that is to dye
at the Gallows for his wickedness,
must first have his Irons knock't off
his legs; so he seems to goe most at
liberty, when indeed he is going to
be executed for his transgressions.
Wicked men also have no bands in
their death, they seem to be more
at liberty when they are even at the
Wind-up of their sinfull life, than at
any time besides.
Hence you shall have them boast
of their Faith and Hope in Gods
Mercy, when they lye upon their
death-bed; yea, you shall have
them speak as confidently of their
salvation, as if they had served God

all their dayes: when the truth is, the
bottom of this their boasting is, because
they have no bands in their
death.
Their sin and base life comes not
into their mind to correct them, and
bring them to repentance; but presumptuous
thoughts, and an hope and
faith of the Spiders (the Devils) 
making, possesseth their soul, to their
own eternal undoing.
Hence wicked mens hope, is said
to dye, not before, but with them;
they give up the Ghost together.
And thus did Mr. Badman. His sins
and his hope went with him to the
Gate, but there his hope left him,
because it dyed there; but his sins
went in with him, to be a worm to
gnaw him in his conscience for ever
and ever.
The opinion therefore of the common
people concerning this kind of
dying, is *A frivolous opinion. frivolous and vain; for
Mr. Badman died like a Lamb, or as
they call it, like a Chrisom child, quietly
and without fear. I speak not this
with reference to the strugling of nature
with death, but as to the strugling
of the conscience with the Judgment

of God. I know that Nature
will struggle with death. I have seen
a Dog and Sheep dye hardly: And
thus may a wicked man doe, because
there is an antipathy betwixt
nature and death. But even while,
even then, when Death and Nature
are strugling for mastery, the soul,
the conscience, may be as besotted,
as benummed, as senceless and ignorant
of its miserable state, as the
block or bed on which the sick lyes:
And thus they may dye like a Chrisom
child in shew, but indeed like
one who by the Judgment of God is
bound over to eternal damnation;
and that also by the same Judgment
is kept from seeing what they
are, and whither they are going,
till they plunge down among the
flames.
And as it is a very great Judgment
of God on wicked men that
so dye, (for it cuts them off from
all possibility of repentance, and so of
salvation) *When a wicked man dyes in his sins quietly, it is a Judgment of God upon his wicked beholder. so it is as great a Judgment
upon those that are their companions
that survive them. For by
the manner of their death, they dying
so quietly, so like unto chrisom

children, as they call it, they are
hardened, and take courage to go
on in their course.
For comparing their life with their
death, their sinful cursed lives with
their child-like, Lamb-like death,
they think that all is well, that no
damnation is happened to them;
Though they lived like Devils incarnate,
yet they dyed like harmless
ones. There was no whirl-wind,
no tempest, no band, nor plague in
their death: They dyed as quietly as
the most godly of them all, and had
as great saith and hope of salvation,
and would talk as boldly of salvation
as if they had assurance of it.
But as was their hope in life, so was
their death: Their hope was without
tryal, because it was none of
Gods working, and their death was
without molestation, because so
was the Judgment of God concerning
them.
But I say, at this their survivers
take heart to tread their steps, and to
continue to live in the breach of the
Law of God; yea they carry it statelily
in their villanies; for so it follows
in the Psalm. There is no bands in

their death, but their strength is firm,
&c.  Therefore pride compasseth them
(the survivors) about as a chain,
violence covereth them as a garment.
Therefore they take courage to
do evil, therefore they pride themselves
in their iniquity. Therefore,
Wherefore? Why, because their
fellows died, after they had lived
long in a most profane and wicked
life, as quietly and as like to Lambs,
as if they had been innocent.
Yea, they are bold, by seeing
this, to conclude, that God, either
does not, or will not take notice of
their sins. They speak wickedly,  they
speak loftily. They speak wickedly
of sin, for that they make it better
than by the Word it is pronounced
to be. They speak wickedly
concerning oppression, that they
commend, and count it a prudent
act. They also speak loftily: They set
their mouth against the Heavens, &c.
And they say, How doth God know,
and is there knowledge in the most
High? And all this, so far as I can
see, ariseth in their hearts from the
beholding of the quiet and lamb-like
death of their companions.

Behold these are the ungodly that
prosper in the world,  (that is, by wicked
ways) they increase in riches.
This therefore is a great Judgment
of God, both upon that man
that dyeth in his sins, and also upon
his companion that beholdeth him
so to dye. He sinneth, he dyeth in
his sins, and yet dyeth quietly.
What shall his companion say to
this? What Judgment shall he make
how God will deal with him, by beholding
the lamb-like death of his
companion? Be sure, he cannot, as
from such a fight say, Wo be to me,
for Judgment is before him: He
cannot gather, that sin is a dreadful
and a bitter thing, by the childlike
death of Mr. Badman. But
must rather, if he judgeth according
to what he sees, or according to
his corrupted reason, conclude with
the wicked ones of old, That every
one that doth euil,  is good in the sight
of the Lord, and he delighteth in them;
or where is the God of Judgment?
Yea, this is enough to puzzle the
wisest man. David himself was put
to a stand, by beholding the quiet
death of ungodly men. Verily, sayes

he, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and have
washed my hands in innocency. Psal. 73. 13.
They, to appearance fare better by far than I:
Their eyes stand out with fatness, they have
more than heart can wish; But all the day
long have I been plagued, and chastned every
morning. This, I say, made David wonder,
yea, and Job and Jeremiah too: But he goeth
into the Sanctuary, and then he understands
their end, nor could he understand it before.
I went into the Sanctuary of God: What
place was that? why there where he might
enquire of God, and by him be resolved of
this matter: Then, says he, understood I their
end. Then I saw, that thou hast set them in
slippery places, and that thou castest them
down to destruction. Castest them down,
that is, suddenly, or as the next words say,
As in a moment they are utterly consumed
with terrors: which terrors did not cease
them on their sick-bed, for they had no
bands in their death. The terrors therefore
ceased them there, where also they are holden
in them for ever. This he found out, I say,
but not without great painfulness, grief and
pricking in his reins: so deep, so hard and
so difficult did he find it, rightly to come to
a determination in this matter.
And indeed, this is a deep Judgment of God
towards ungodly sinners; it is enough to stagger

a whole world, only the Godly that are in
the world have a Sanctuary to go to, where the
Oracle and Word of God is, by which his
Judgements, and a reason of many of them are
made known to, and understood by them.
Atten. Indeed this is a staggering dispensation.
It is full of the wisdom and anger of God.
And I believe, as you have said, that it is full
of Judgment to the world. Who would have
imagined, that had not known Mr. Badman,
and yet had seen him die, but that he had been
a man of an holy life and conversation, since
he died so stilly, so quietly, so like a Lamb or
Chrisom child? Would they not, I say, have
concluded, that he was a righteous man? or that
if they had known him and his life, yet to see
him die so quietly, would they not have concluded
that he had made his peace with God? Nay
further, if some had known that he had died in
his sins, and yet that he died so like a Lamb,
would they not have concluded, that either God
doth not know our fins, or that he likes them; or
that he wants power, or will, or heart, or skill to
punish them; since Mr. Badman himself went
from a sinfull life so quietly, so peaceably, and so
like a Lamb as he did?
Wise. Without controversie, this is an heavy
judgment of God upon wicked men; (Job. 21. 23.)
one goes to Hell in peace, another goes to Hell
in trouble; one goes to Hell being sent thither

by his own hands; another goes to Hell, being
sent thither by the hand of his companion;
one goes thither with his eyes shut, and
another goes thither with his eyes open; one
goes thither roaring, and another goes thither
boasting of Heaven and Happiness all
the way he goes: One goes thither like
Mr. Badman himself, and others go thither
as did his Brethren. But above all, Mr. Badmans'
death, as to the manner of dying, is
the fullest of Snares and Traps to wicked
men; therefore they that die as he, are the
greatest stumble to the world: They goe,
and goe, they go on peaceably from Youth
to old Age, and thence to the Grave, and
so to Hell, without noyse: They goe as an
Ox to the slaughter, and as a fool to the correction
of the Stocks; that is, both sencelesly
and securely. O! but being come at the gates
of Hell! O! but when they see those gates
set open for them: O! but when they see
that that is their home, and that they must
go in thither, then their peace and quietness
flies away for ever: Then they roar like
Lions, yell like Dragons, howl like Dogs,
and tremble at their Judgment, as do the
Devils themselves. Oh! when they see they
must shoot the Gulf and Throat of Hell!
when they shall see that Hell hath shut her
ghastly Jaws upon them! when they shall

open their eyes, and find themselves within
the belly and bowels of Hell! then they will
mourn, and weep, and hack, and gnash their
teeth for pain. But this must not be (or if it
must, yet very rarely) till they are gone out of
the sight and hearing of those mortals whom
they do leave behind them alive in the world.
Atten. Well, my good Neighbour Wiseman,
I perceive that the Sun grows low, and that you
have come to a conclusion with Mr. Badmans
Life and Death; and therefore I will take my
leave of you. Only first, let me tell you, I am
glad that I have met with you to day, and
that our hap was to fall in with Mr. Badmans
state. I also thank you for your freedom with
me, in granting of me your reply to all my questions:
I would only beg your Prayers, that God
will give me much grace, that I may neither
live nor die as did Mr. Badman.
Wise. My good Neighbour Attentive, I
wish your welfare in Soul and Body; and if
ought that I have said of Mr. Badmans Life
and Death, may be of benefit unto you, I
shall be heartily glad; only I desire you to
thank God for it, and to pray heartily for me,
that I with you may be kept by the Power
of God through Faith unto Salvation.
Atten. Amen. Farewell.
Wise. I wish you heartily Farewell.