


A Discovery of some Matters concerning
the chaste Lætitia, which
must wonderfully surprize, and perhaps
affect our Reader. 
Mr. WILD was no sooner departed,
than the fair Conqueress opening
the Door of a Closet, called forth a young
Gentleman, whom she had there enclosed
at the Approach of the other. The Name
of this Gallant was Tom Smirk. He was
Apprentice to a Tallow-Chandler, and 

was indeed the greatest Beau, and the greatest
Favourite of the Ladies, at the End of
the Town where he lived. As we take
Dress to be the Characteristic or efficient
Quality of a Beau, we shall, instead of giving
any Character of this young Gentleman,
content ourselves with describing his
Dress only to our Readers. He wore, then,
a Pair of white Stockings on his Legs, and
Pumps on his Feet; his Buckles were a
large Piece of Pinchbeck Plate, which almost
covered his whole Foot. His Breeches
were of red Plush, which hardly reached
his Knees; his Wastecoat was a white Dimity
richly embroidered with yellow Silk,
over which he wore a blue Plush coat with
Metal Buttons, a smart Sleeve, and a Cape
reaching half way down his Back. His
Wig was of a brown Colour, covering almost
half his Pate, on which was hung
on one Side a little laced Hat, but cocked
with great Smartness. Such was the accomplished
Smirk, who, at his issuing forth
from the Closet, was received with open
Arms by the amiable Lætitia. She addressed
him by the tender Name of Dear
Tommy; and told him she had dismist the 

odious Creature whom her Father intended
for her Husband, and had now nothing
to interrupt her Happiness with him. 
Here, Reader, thou must pardon us if
we stop a while to lament the Capriciousness
of Nature in forming this charming
Part of the Creation, designed to complete
the Happiness of Man; with their soft Innocence
to allay his Ferocity, with their
Sprightliness to sooth his Cares, and with
their constant Friendship to relieve all the
Troubles and Disappointments which can
happen to him. Seeing, then, that this is
universally certain, that these are the Blessings
chiefly sought after, and generally found
in every Wife, how must we lament that
Disposition in these lovely Creatures, which
leads them to prefer in their Favour those
Individuals of the other Sex, who do not
seem intended by Nature as her greatest
Master-piece. For surely, however useful
they may be in the Creation, as we are
taught, that nothing, not even a Louse, is
made in vain; yet these Beaus, even that
most splendid and honoured Part, which,
in this our Island, Nature loves to distinguish 

in Red, are not, as some think,
the noblest Part of the Creation. For my
own Part, let any Man chuse to himself
two Beaus, let them be Captains or Colonels,
as well dressed Men as ever lived, really
as fine Men, I would venture to oppose
a single Sir Isaac Newton, a Shakespear,
a Milton, or perhaps some few others
to both these Beaus; nay, and I very
much doubt, whether it had not been better
for the World in general, that neither
of these Beaus had ever been born, than
that it should have wanted the Benefit arising
to it from the Labour of any one of
those Persons. 
If this be true, how melancholy must
be the Consideration, that any single Beau,
especially if he have but half a Yard of
Ribbon in his Hat, shall weigh heavier, in
the Scales of female Affection, than twenty
Sir Isaac Newtons. How must our Reader,
who perhaps had wisely accounted for
the Resistance which the chaste Lætitia
had made to the violent Addresses of the
ravished (or rather ravishing) Wild from
that Lady's impregnable Virtue, how must 

he blush, I say, to perceive her quit the
Strictness of her Carriage, and abandon
herself to those loose Freedoms which she
indulged to Smirk. But, alas! when we
discover all, as, to preserve the Fidelity of
our History, we must, when we relate that
every Familiarity had past between them,
and that the FAIR Lætitia (for we must,
in this single Instance, imitate Virgil, where
he drops the pius and the pater, and drop
our favourite Epithet of chaste) the FAIR
Lætitia had, I say, made Smirk as happy
as Wild desired to be, what must then be
our Reader's Confusion? We will, therefore,
draw a Curtain over this Scene, from that
Philogyny which is in us, and proceed to
Matters, which, instead of dishonouring
the human Species, will greatly raise and
ennoble it. 
