




Matter prefatory in Praise of Biography. 
Notwithstanding the Preference
which may be vulgarly given to
the Authority of those Romance-Writers,
who intitle their Books, the
History of England, the History of
France, of Spain, &c. it is most certain,
that Truth is only to be found in
their Works who celebrate the Lives of
Great Men, and are commonly called 

Biographers, as the others should indeed be
termed Topographers or Chorographers: 
Words which might well mark the Distinction
between them; it being the
Business of the latter chiefly to describe
Countries and Cities, which, with the Assistance
of Maps, they do pretty justly,
and may be depended upon: But as to
the Actions and Characters of Men, their
Writings are not quite so authentic, of which
there needs no other Proof than those eternal
Contradictions, occurring between two
Topographers who undertake the History
of the same Country: For instance, between
my Lord Clarendon and Mr. Whitlock,
between Mr. Echard and Rapin, and
many others; where Facts being set forth
in a different Light, every Reader believes
as he pleases, but all agree in the Scene,
where it is supposed to have happen'd. 
Now with us Biographers the Case is different,
the Facts we deliver may be relied
on, tho' we often mistake the Age
and Country wherein they happened: For
tho' it may be worth the Examination of
Critics, whether the Shepherd Chrysostom,
who, as Cervantes informs us, died for
Love of the fair Marcella, who hated him; 
was ever in Spain, will any one doubt but
that such a silly Fellow hath really existed. 
Is there in the World such a Sceptic as to 

disbelieve the Madness of Cardenio, the Perfidy
of Ferdinand, the impertinent Curiosity
of Anselmo, the Weakness of Camilla,
the irresolute Friendship of Lothario; tho'
perhaps as to the Time and Place where
those several Persons lived, that good
Historian may be deplorably deficient: 
But the most known Instance of this kind
is in the true History of Gil-Blas, where
the inimitable Biographer hath made a
notorious Blunder in the Country of Dr.
Sanglardo, who used his Patients as a
Vintner doth his Wine-Vessels, by letting
out their Blood, and filling them up
with Water. The same Writer hath likewise
erred in the Country of his Archbishop,
as well as that of those great Personages
whose Understandings were too sublime
to taste any thing but Tragedy, and
perhaps in many others. The same Mistakes
may likewise be observed in Scarron, the
Arabian Nights, the History of Marianne
and Le Paisan Parvenu, and perhaps
some few other Writers of this Class,
whom I have not read, or do not at present
recollect; for I would by no means
be thought to comprehend those great
Genius's the Authors of immense Romances,
or the modern Novel and Atalantis
Writers; who without any Assistance
from Nature or History, record Persons 

who never were, or will be, and Facts
which never did nor possibly can happen: 
Whose Heroes are of their own Creation,
and their Brains the Chaos whence all their
Materials are collected. Not that such
Writers deserve no Honour; so far otherwise,
that perhaps they merit the highest:
for what can be nobler than to be as an
Example of the wonderful Extent of human
Genius. One may apply to them
what Balzac says of Aristotle, that they
are a second Nature; for they have no
Communication with the first; by which
Authors of an inferiour Class, who can
not stand alone, are obliged to support
themselves as with Crutches; but these of
whom I am now speaking, seem to be
possessed of those Stilts, which the excellent
Voltaire tells us in his Letters carry the
Genius far off, but with an irregular
Pace. Indeed far out of the sight of the
Reader, 
Beyond the Realm of Chaos and old Night.
But, to return to the former Class, who
are contented to copy Nature, instead
of forming Originals from their confused
heap of Matter in their own Brains; 
is not such a Book as that which records
the Atchievements of the renowned Don
Quixotte, more worthy the Name of a 

History than even Mariana's; for whereas
the latter is confined to a particular Period
of Time, and to a particular Nation; the
former is the History of the World in
general, at least that Part which is polished
by Laws, Arts and Sciences; and
of that from the time it was first polished
to this day; nay and forwards, as
long as it shall so remain. 
I shall now proceed to apply these
Observations to the Work before us; for
indeed I have set them down principally
to obviate some Constructions, which
the Good-nature of Mankind, who are
always forward to see their Friends Virtues
recorded, may put to particular parts. 
I question not but several of my Readers
will know the Lawyer in the Stage-Coach,
the Moment they hear his Voice. It is
likewise odds, but the Wit and the Prude
meet with some of their Acquaintance, as
well as all the rest of my Characters. To
prevent therefore any such malicious Applications,
I declare here once for all, I
describe not Men, but Manners; not an
Individual, but a Species. Perhaps it
will be answered, Are not the Characters
then taken from Life? To which I answer
in the Affirmative; nay, I believe
I might aver, that I have writ little more 

than I have seen. The Lawyer is not
only alive, but hath been so these 5000
Years, and I hope G&wblank; will indulge his
Life as many yet to come. He hath not
indeed confined himself to one Profession,
one Religion, or one Country; but when
the first mean selfish Creature appeared on
the human Stage, who made Self the
Centre of the whole Creation; would
give himself no Pain, incur no Danger,
advance no Money to assist, or preserve
his Fellow-Creatures; then was our Lawyer
born; and whilst such a Person as I have
described, exists on Earth, so long shall
he remain upon it. It is therefore doing
him little Honour, to imagine he endeavours
to mimick some little obscure Fellow,
because he happens to resemble him
in one particular Feature, or perhaps in
his Profession; whereas his Appearance
in the World is calculated for much more
general and noble Purposes, than to expose
one pitiful Wretch, to the small Circle
of his Acquaintance; but to hold the
Glass to thousands in their Closets, that
they may contemplate their Deformity,
and endeavour to reduce it, and thus by
suffering private Mortification may avoid
public Shame. This places the Boundary
between, and distinguishes the Satirist
from the Libeller; for the former privately 

corrects the Fault for the Benefit of
the Person, like a Parent; the latter publickly
exposes the Person himself, as an
Example to others, like an Executioner. 
There are besides little Circumstances
to be considered, as the Drapery of a Picture,
which tho' Fashion varies at different
Times, the Resemblance of the Countenance
is not by those means diminished. 
Thus, I believe, we may venture to say,
Mrs. Tow-wouse is coeval with our Lawyer,
and tho' perhaps during the Changes,
which so long an Existence must have passed
through, she may in her Turn have
stood behind the Bar at an Inn, I will not
scruple to affirm, she hath likewise in the
Revolution of Ages sat on a Throne. 
In short where extreme Turbulency of
Temper, Avarice, and an Insensibility of
human Misery, with a Degree of Hypocrisy,
have united in a female Composition,
Mrs. Tow-wouse was that Woman; and
where a good Inclination eclipsed by a
Poverty of Spirit and Understanding, hath
glimmer'd forth in a Man, that Man
hath been no other than her sneaking
Husband. 
I shall detain my Reader no longer
than to give him one Caution more of 

an opposite kind: For as in most of our
particular Characters we mean not to lash
Individuals, but all of that like sort; so in
our general Descriptions, we mean not
Universals, but would be understood with
many Exceptions: For instance, in our
Description of high People, we cannot be
intended to include such, as whilst they
are an Honour to their high Rank, by
a well-guided Condescension, make their
Superiority as easy as possible, to those
whom Fortune hath chiefly placed below
them. Of this number I could name a
Peer no less elevated by Nature than by
Fortune, who whilst he wears the noblest
Ensigns of Honour on his Person, bears
the truest Stamp of Dignity on his Mind,
adorned with Greatness, enriched with
Knowledge, and embelished with Genius. 
I have seen this Man relieve with Generosity,
while he hath conversed with
Freedom, and be to the same Person a
Patron and a Companion. I could name
a Commoner raised higher above the Multitude
by superiour Talents, than is in
the power of his Prince to exalt him; 
whose Behaviour to those he hath obliged
is more amiable than the Obligation
itself, and who is so great a Master of
Affability, that if he could divest himself
of an inherent Greatness in his Manner, 

would often make the lowest of his Acquaintance
forget who was the Master of
that Palace, in which they are so courteously
entertained. These are Pictures
which must be, I believe, known: I declare
they are taken from the Life, nor
are intended to exceed it. By those high
People therefore whom I have described,
I mean a Set of Wretches, who while they
are a Disgrace to their Ancestors, whose
Honours and Fortunes they inherit, (or
perhaps a greater to their Mother, for such
Degeneracy is scarce credible) have the
Insolence to treat those with disregard,
who have been equal to the Founders of
their own Splendor. It is, I fancy, impossible
to conceive a Spectacle more
worthy of our Indignation, than that of a
Fellow who is not only a Blot in the
Escutcheon of a great Family, but a Scandal
to the human Species, maintaining a
supercilious Behaviour to Men who are an
Honour to their Nature, and a Disgrace to
their Fortune. 
And now, Reader, taking these Hints
along with you, you may, if you please,
proceed to the Sequel of this our true
History. 




A Night-Scene, wherein several wonderful
Adventures befel Adams and
his Fellow-Travellers. 
It was so late when our Travellers left
the Inn or Ale-house, (for it might be
called either) that they had not travelled
many Miles before Night overtook them,
or met them, which you please. The
Reader must excuse me if I am not particular
as to the Way they took; for as
we are now drawing near the Seat of the
Boobies; and as that is a ticklish Name,
which malicious Persons may apply according
to their evil Inclinations to several
worthy Country 'Squires, a Race of Men
whom we look upon as entirely inoffensive,
and for whom we have an adequate
Regard, we shall lend no assistance to any
such malicious Purposes. 
Darkness had now overspread the
Hemisphere, when Fanny whispered Joseph,
“that she begged to rest herself a little,
for that she was so tired, she could walk
no farther.” Joseph immediately prevailed
with Parson Adams, who was as 

brisk as a Bee, to stop. He had no sooner
seated himself, than he lamented the loss
of his dear Æschylus; but was a little
comforted, when reminded, that if he had
it in his possession, he could not see to
read. 
The Sky was so clouded, that not a
Star appeared. It was indeed, according
to Milton, Darkness visible. This was
a Circumstance however very favourable
to Joseph; for Fanny, not suspicious of
being overseen by Adams, gave a loose
to her Passion, which she had never done
before; and reclining her Head on his
Bosom, threw her Arm carelesly round
him, and suffered him to lay his Cheek
close to hers. All this infused such Happiness
into Joseph, that he would not have
changed his Turf for the finest Down in
the finest Palace in the Universe. 
Adams sat at some distance from the
Lovers, and being unwilling to disturb
them, applied himself to Meditation; in
which he had not spent much time, before
he discovered a Light at some distance,
that seemed approaching towards him. 
He immediately hailed it, but to his
Sorrow and Surprize it stopped for a moment
and then disappeared. He then 

called to Joseph, asking him, “if he had
not seen the Light.” Joseph answered,
he had.” “And did you not mark how
it vanished.” (returned he) “tho' I
am not afraid of Ghosts, I do not absolutely
disbelieve them.” 
He then entered into a Meditation on
those unsubstantial Beings, which was soon
interrupted, by several Voices which he
thought almost at his Elbow, tho' in fact
they were not so extremely near. However,
he could distinctly hear them agree
on the Murther of any one they met. 
And a little after heard one of them say,
“he had killed a dozen since that day
Fortnight.” 
Adams now fell on his Knees, and committed
himself to the care of Providence; 
and poor Fanny, who likewise heard
those terrible Words, embraced Joseph so
closely, that had not he, whose Ears were
also open, been apprehensive on her account,
he would have thought no danger
too dear a Price for such Embraces. 
Joseph now drew forth his Penknife,
and Adams having finished his Ejaculations,
grasped his Crabstick, his only
Weapon, and coming up to Joseph would 

have had him quit Fanny, and place her
in their Rear: but his Advice was fruitless,
she clung closer to him, not at all
regarding the Presence of Adams, and
in a soothing Voice declared, “she would
die in his Arms.” Joseph clasping her
with inexpressible Eagerness, whispered
her, “that he preferred Death in hers, to
Life out of them.” Adams brandishing
his Crabstick, said, “he despised Death as
much as any Man, and then repeated
aloud,” 

“Est hic, est animus lucis contemptor,—illum,
“Qui vita bene credat emi quo tendis, Honorem.”
Upon this the Voices ceased for a moment,
and then one of them called out,
“D&wblank;n you, who is there?” To which
Adams was prudent enough to make no
Reply; and of a sudden he observed half
a dozen Lights, which seemed to rise
all at once from the Ground, and advance
briskly towards him. This he immediately
concluded to be an Apparition,
and now beginning to conceive that the
Voices were of the same kind, he called
out, “In the Name of the L&wblank;d what
would'st thou have?” He had no sooner
spoke, than he heard one of the Voices 

cry out, “D&wblank;n them, here they come;” 
and soon after heard several hearty Blows,
as if a number of Men had been engaged
at Quarterstaff. He was just advancing
towards the Place of Combat, when
Joseph catching him by the Skirts, begged
him that they might take the Opportunity
of the dark, to convey away Fanny
from the Danger which threatned her. 
He presently complied, and Joseph lifting
up Fanny, they all three made the best of
their way, and without looking behind
them or being overtaken, they had travelled
full two Miles, poor Fanny not once
complaining of being tired; when they
saw far off several Lights scattered at a
small distance from each other, and at the
same time found themselves on the Descent
of a very steep Hill. Adams's Foot
slipping, he instantly disappeared, which
greatly frightned both Joseph and Fanny; 
indeed, if the Light had permitted them
to see it, they would scarce have refrained
laughing to see the Parson rolling
down the Hill, which he did from top to
bottom, without receiving any harm. He
then hollowed as loud as he could, to inform
them of his safety, and relieve them
from the Fears which they had conceived
for him. Joseph and Fanny halted some
time, considering what to do; at last they 

advanced a few Paces, where the Declivity
seemed least steep; and then Joseph
taking his Fanny in his Arms, walked
firmly down the Hill, without making a
false step, and at length landed her at the
bottom, where Adams soon came to
them. 
Learn hence, my fair Countrywomen,
to consider your own Weakness, and the
many Occasions on which the strength of
a Man may be useful to you; and duly
weighing this, take care, that you match
not yourselves with the spindle-shanked
Beaus and Petit Maîtres of the Age, who
instead of being able like Joseph Andrews,
to carry you in lusty Arms through the
rugged ways and downhill Steeps of Life,
will rather want to support their feeble
Limbs with your Strength and Assistance. 
Our Travellers now moved forwards,
whither the nearest Light presented itself,
and having crossed a common Field, they
came to a Meadow, whence they seemed
to be at a very little distance from the
Light, when, to their grief, they arrived
at the Banks of a River. Adams here
made a full stop, and declared he could
swim, but doubted how it was possible to
get Fanny over; to which Joseph answered, 

“if they walked along its Banks they
might be certain of soon finding a
Bridge, especially as by the number
of Lights they might be assured a
Parish was neat.” “Odso, that's true indeed,” 
said, Adams, “I did not think
of that.” Accordingly Joseph's Advice
being taken, they passed over two Meadows,
and came to a little Orchard,
which led them to a House. Fanny begged
of Joseph to knock at the Door, assuring
him, “she was so weary that she
could hardly stand on her Feet.” Adams
who was foremost performed this Ceremony,
and the Door being immediately opened,
a plain kind of a Man appeared at
it; Adams acquainted him, “that they
had a young Woman with them, who
was so tired with her Journey, that he
should be much obliged to him, if he
would suffer her to come in and rest
herself.” The Man, who saw Fanny by
the Light of the Candle which he held in
his Hand, perceiving her innocent and
modest Look, and having no Apprehensions
from the civil Behaviour of Adams,
presently answered, the young Woman
was very welcome to rest herself in his
House, and so were her Company. He
then ushered them into a very decent
Room, where his Wife was sitting at a 

Table; she immediately rose up, and assisted
them in setting forth Chairs, and desired
them to sit down, which they had no
sooner done, than the Man of the House
asked them if they would have any thing
to refresh themselves with? Adams thanked
him, and answered, he should be obliged
to him for a Cup of his Ale, which was
likewise chosen by Joseph and Fanny. 
Whilst he was gone to fill a very large
Jugg with this Liquor, his Wife told Fanny
she seemed greatly fatigued, and desired her
to take something stronger than Ale; but
she refused, with many thanks, saying it
was true, she was very much tired, but
a little Rest she hoped would restore her. 
As soon as the Company were all seated,
Mr. Adams, who had filled himself with
Ale, and by publick Permission had lighted
his Pipe; turned to the Master of the
House, asking him, “if evil Spirits did
not use to walk in that Neighbourhood?” 
To which receiving no answer, he began
to inform him of the Adventure which
they had met with on the Downs; nor
had he proceeded far in his Story, when
somebody knocked very hard at the Door. 
The Company expressed some Amazement,
and Fanny and the good Woman turned
pale; her Husband went forth, and whilst
he was absent, which was some time, they 

all remained silent looking at one another,
and heard several Voices discoursing pretty
loudly. Adams was fully persuaded that
Spirits were abroad, and began to meditate
some Exorcisms; Joseph a little inclined
to the same Opinion: Fanny was
more afraid of Men, and the good Woman
herself began to suspect her Guests,
and imagined those without were Rogues
belonging to their Gang. At length the
Master of the House returned, and laughing,
told Adams he had discovered his
Apparition; that the Murderers were
Sheep-stealers, and the twelve Persons
murdered were no other than twelve Sheep. 
Adding that the Shepherds had got the better
of them, had secured two, and were
proceeding with them to a Justice of
Peace. This Account greatly relieved
the Fears of the whole Company; but
Adams muttered to himself, “He was
convinced of the truth of Apparations
for all that.” 
They now sat chearfully round the
Fire, 'till the Master of the House having
surveyed his Guests, and conceiving that
the Cassock, which having fallen down,
appeared under Adams's Great-Coat, and
the shabby Livery on Joseph Andrews,
did not well suit with the Familiarity between 

them, began to entertain some suspicions,
not much to their Advantage:
addressing himself therefore to Adams, he
said, “he perceived he was a Clergyman
by his Dress, and supposed that honest
Man was his Footman.” “Sir,” answered
Adams, “I am a Clergyman at your Service; 
but as to that young Man, whom
you have rightly termed honest, he is
at present in no body's Service, he never
lived in any other Family than that
of Lady Booby, from whence he was
discharged, I assure you, for no Crime.” 
Joseph said, “he did not wonder the Gentleman
was surprized to see one of Mr.
Adams's Character condescend to so
much goodness with a poor Man.” 
“Child,” said Adams, “I should be
ashamed of my Cloth, if I thought a
poor Man, who is honest, below my notice
or my familiarity. I know not how
those who think otherwise, can profess
themselves followers and servants of
him who made no distinction, unless,
peradventure, by preferring the Poor to
the Rich. “Sir,” said he, addressing
himself to the Gentleman, “these two
poor young People are my Parishioners,
and I look on them and love them as
my Children. There is something singular
enough in their History, but I 

have not now time to recount it.” The
Master of the House, notwithstanding the
Simplicity which discovered itself in Adams,
knew too much of the World to give
a hasty Belief to Professions. He was
not yet quite certain that Adams had any
more of the Clergyman in him than his
Cassock. To try him therefore further,
he asked him, “if Mr. Pope had lately published
any thing new?” Adams answered,
he had heard great Commendations of
that Poet, but that he had never read, nor
knew any of his Works.” “Ho! ho!” 
says the Gentleman to himself, “have
I caught you?” “What,” said he,
“have you never seen his Homer?” Adams
answered “he had never read any Translation
of the Classicks.” “Why truly,” 
reply'd the Gentleman, “there is a Dignity
in the Greek Language which I
think no modern Tongue can reach.” “Do
you understand Greek, Sir,” said Adams
hastily. “A little Sir,” answered the
Gentleman. “Do you know, Sir, where I
can buy an Æschylus, an unlucky Misfortune
lately happened to mine.” Æschylus
was beyond the Gentleman, tho' he
knew him very well by Name; he therefore
returning back to Homer, asked Adams
“what Part of the Iliad he thought most
excellent.” Adams return'd, “His Question 

would be properer, what kind of
Beauty was the chief in Poetry, for that
Homer was equally excellent in them all.” 
“And indeed what Cicero says of a complete
Orator, may well be applied to
a great Poet; who ought to comprehend
all Perfections. Indeed Homer
did this in the most excellent degree; 
it is not without Reason therefore that
the Philosopher, in the 22d Chap. of
his Poeticks, mentions him by no other
Appellation than that of The Poet: He
was the Father of the Drama, as well
as the Epic: Not of Tragedy only,
but of Comedy also; for his Margites,
which is deplorably lost, bore, says Aristotle,
the same Analogy to Comedy, as his
Odyssey and Iliad to Tragedy. To
him therefore we owe Aristophanes, as
well as Euripides, Sophocles, and my
poor Æschylus. But if you please
we will confine ourselves (at least
for the present) to the Iliad, his noblest
Work; tho' neither Aristotle, nor
Horace give it the Preference, as I
remember, to the Odyssey. First
then as to his Subject, can any thing
be more simple, and at the same time
more noble? He is rightly praised 

by the first of those judicious Critics,
for not chusing the whole War, which,
tho' he says, it hath a compleat Beginning
and End, would have been too
great for the Understanding to comprehend
at one View. I have therefore often
wondered why so correct a Writer as
Horace should in his Epistle to Lollius
call him the Trojani Belli Scriptorem. 
Secondly, his Action, termed by Aristotle
Pragmaton Systasis; is it possible
for the Mind of Man to conceive an
Idea of such perfect Unity, and at the
same time so replete with Greatness? 
And here I must observe what I do not
remember to have seen noted by any,
the Harmotton, that agreement of his
Action to his Subject: For as the Subject
is Anger, how agreeable is his Action,
which is War? from which every Incident
arises, and to which every Episode
immediately relates. Thirdly, His
Manners, which Aristotle places second
in his Description of the several Parts
of Tragedy, and which he says are included
in the Action; I am at a loss
whether I should rather admire the
Exactness of his Judgment in the nice
Distinction, or the Immensity of his
Imagination in their Variety. For, as to
the former of these, how accurately is 

the sedate, injured Resentment of Achilles
distinguished from the hot insulting
Passion of Agamemnon? How
widely doth the brutal Courage of Ajax
differ from the amiable Bravery of
Diomedes; and the Wisdom of Nestor,
which is the Result of long Reflection
and Experience, from the Cunning of
Ulysses, the Effect of Art and Subtilty
only. If we consider their Variety, we
may cry out with Aristotle in his 24th
Chapter, that no Part of this divine
Poem is destitute of Manners. Indeed
I might affirm, that there is scarce a
Character in human Nature untouched
in some part or other. And as there is
no Passion which he is not able to describe,
so is there none in his Reader
which he cannot raise. If he hath
any superior Excellence to the rest, I
have been inclined to fancy it is in the
Pathetick. I am sure I never read with
dry Eyes, the two Episodes, where Andromache
is introduced, in the former
lamenting the Danger, and in the latter
the Death of Hector. The Images
are so extremely tender in these, that I
am convinced, the Poet had the worthiest
and best Heart imaginable. As
to his Sentiments and Diction, I need
say nothing; the former are particularly 

remarkable for the utmost Perfection
on that Head, namely Propriety; and
as to the latter, Aristotle, whom doubtless
you have read over and over, is very
diffuse. I shall mention but one thing
more, which that great Critic in his
Division of Tragedy calls Opsis, or
the Scenery, and which is as proper to
the Epic as to the Drama, with this
difference, that in the former it falls to
the share of the Poet, and in the latter
to that of the Painter. But did
ever Painter imagine a Scene like that
in the 13th and 14th Iliads? where the
Reader sees at one View the Prospect
of Troy, with the Army drawn up before
it; the Grecian Army, Camp, and
Fleet, Jupiter sitting on Mount Ida, with
his Head wrapt in a Cloud, and a Thunderbolt
in his Hand looking towards
Thrace; Neptune driving through the
Sea, which divides on each side to
permit his Passage, and then seating
himself on Mount Samos: The
Heavens opened, and the Deities all
seated on their Thrones. This is Sublime! 
This is Poetry!” He then rapt
out a hundred Greek Verses, 'till the
Gentleman was so far from entertaining
any further suspicion of Adams, that he now
doubted whether he had not a Bishop in 

his House. The Goodness of his Heart
began therefore to dilate without any further
Restraint. He said he had great
Compassion for the poor young Woman,
who looked pale and faint with her Journey; 
and in truth he conceived a much
higher Opinion of her Quality than it deserved. 
He said, he was sorry he could
not accommodate them all: But if they
were contented with his Fire-side, he
would sit up with the Men, and the young
Woman might, if she pleased, partake
his Wife's Bed, which he advis'd her to; 
for that they must walk upwards of a
Mile to any House of Entertainment, and
that not very good neither. Adams, who
liked his Seat, his Ale, his Tobacco and
his Company, persuaded Fanny to accept
this kind Proposal, in which Sollicitation
he was seconded by Joseph. Nor was she
very difficultly prevailed on, Love itself
being scarce able to keep her Eyes open
any longer. The Offer therefore being
kindly accepted, the good Woman produced
every thing eatable in her House
on the Table, while the Guests being
heartily invited, as heartily regaled themselves,
especially Parson Adams. As to
the other two, they were Examples of
the Truth of that physical Observation, 

that Love, like other sweet Things, is no
Whetter of the Stomach. 
Supper was no sooner ended, than
Fanny at her own Request retired, and
the good Woman bore her Company. 
The Man of the House, Adams and Joseph,
who would modestly have withdrawn,
had not the Gentleman insisted
on the contrary, drew round the Fire-side,
where Adams, (to use his own Words)
replenished his Pipe, and the Gentleman
produced a Bottle of excellent Beer, being
the best Liquor in his House. 
The modest Behaviour of Joseph, with
the Gracefulness of his Person, the Character
which Adams gave of him, and the Friendship
he seemed to entertain for him, began
to work on the Gentleman's Affections,
and raised in him a Curiosity to
know the Singularity which Adams had
mentioned in his History. This Curiosity
Adams was no sooner informed of, than
with Joseph's Consent, he agreed to gratify
it, and accordingly related all he knew,
with as much Tenderness as was possible
for the Character of Lady Booby; and concluded
with the long, faithful and mutual
Passion between him and Fanny, not concealing
the Meanness of her Birth and Education. 

These latter Circumstances entirely
cured a Jealousy which had lately risen
in the Gentleman's Mind, that Fanny
was the Daughter of some Person of
Fashion, and that Joseph had run away
with her, and Adams was concerned in
the Plot. He was now enamour'd of his
Guests, drank their Healths with great
Cheerfulness, and return'd many Thanks
to Adams, who had spent much Breath; 
for he was a circumstantial Teller of a
Story. 
ADAMS told him it was now in his power
to return that Favour; for his extraordinary
Goodness, as well as that Fund of
Literature he was Master of, which he did
not expect to find under such a Roof, had
raised in him more Curiosity than he had
ever known. Therefore, said he, if it be
not too troublesome, Sir, your History,
if you please. 
The Gentleman answered, he could
not refuse him what he had so much Right
to insist on; and after some of the common
Apologies, which are the usual Preface
to a Story, he thus began. 




In which the Gentleman relates the
History of his Life. 
Sir, I am descended of a good Family,
and was born a Gentleman. My
Education was liberal, and at a public
School, in which I proceeded so far
as to become Master of the Latin,
and to be tolerably versed in the Greek
Language. My Father died when I was
sixteen, and lest me Master of myself. 
He bequeathed me a moderate Fortune,
which he intended I should not receive
till I attained the Age of twenty-five: For
he constantly asserted that was full early
enough to give up any Man entirely to the
Guidance of his own Discretion. However,
as this Intention was so obscurely
worded in his Will, that the Lawyers
advised me to contest the Point with my
Trustees, I own I paid so little Regard
to the Inclinations of my dead Father,
which were sufficiently certain to me, that
I followed their Advice, and soon succeeded: 
For the Trustees did not contest
the Matter very obstinately on their side. 

“Sir,” said Adams, “May I crave the
Favour of your Name?” The Gentleman
answer'd, “his Name was Wilson,” 
and then proceeded. 
I stay'd a very little while at School
after his Death; for being a forward
Youth, I was extremely impatient to be
in the World: For which I thought my
Parts, Knowledge, and Manhood thoroughly
qualified me. And to this early
Introduction into Life, without a Guide,
I impute all my future Misfortunes; for
besides the obvious Mischiefs which attend
this, there is one which hath not
been so generally observed. The first
Impression which Mankind receives of
you, will be very difficult to eradicate. How
unhappy, therefore, must it be to fix your
Character in Life, before you can possibly
know its Value, or weigh the Consequences
of those Actions which are to
establish your future Reputation? 
A little under seventeen I left my
School and went to London, with no more
than six Pounds in my Pocket. A great
Sum as I then conceived; and which I
was afterwards surprized to find so soon
consumed. 

The Character I was ambitious of attaining,
was that of a fine Gentleman; the
first Requisites to which, I apprehended were
to be supplied by a Taylor, a Periwig-maker,
and some few more Tradesmen,
who deal in furnishing out the human
Body. Notwithstanding the Lowness of
my Purse, I found Credit with them
more easily than I expected, and was
soon equipped to my Wish. This I own
then agreeably surprized me; but I have
since learn'd, that it is a Maxim among
many Tradesmen at that polite End of
the Town to deal as largely as they can,
reckon as high as they can, and arrest as
soon as they can. 
The next Qualifications, namely Dancing,
Fencing, Riding the great Horse,
and Musick, came into my head; but
as they required Expence and Time, I
comforted myself, with regard to Dancing,
that I had learned a little in my
Youth, and could walk a Minuet genteelly
enough; as to Fencing, I thought my
Good-Humour would preserve me from
the Danger of a Quarrel; as to the Horse,
I hoped it would not be thought of; and
for Musick, I imagined I could easily acquire
the Reputation of it; for I had 

heard some of my School-fellows pretend
to Knowledge in Operas, without being
able to sing or play on the Fiddle. 
Knowledge of the Town seemed
another Ingredient; this I thought I
should arrive at by frequenting publick
Places. Accordingly I paid constant Attendance
to them all; by which means
I was soon Master of the fashionable
Phrases, learn'd to cry up the fashionable
Diversions, and knew the Names and
Faces of the most fashionable Men and
Women. 
Nothing now seemed to remain but
an Intrigue, which I was resolved to
have immediately; I mean the Reputation
of it; and indeed I was so successful,
that in a very short time I had half a
dozen with the finest Women in Town. 
At these Words Adams fetched a deep
Groan, and then blessing himself, cry'd
out, Good Lord! What wicked Times
these are? 
Not so wicked as you imagine, continued
the Gentleman; for I assure you,
they were all Vestal Virgins for any thing
which I knew to the contrary. The Reputation 

of Intriguing with them was all
I sought, and was what I arriv'd at: and
perhaps I only flattered myself even in
that; for very probably the Persons to
whom I shewed their Billets, knew as
well as I, that they were Counterfeits, and
that I had written them to myself. 
“WRITE Letters to yourself!” said
Adams staring! 
O sir, answered the Gentleman, It is
the Error of the Times. Half our modern
Plays have one of these Characters in
them. It is incredible the Pains I have
taken, and the absurd Methods I employed
to traduce the Character of Women
of Distinction. When another had
spoken in Raptures of any one, I have answered,
“D&wblank;n her, she! We shall have
her at H&wblank;d's very soon.” When
he hath reply'd, “he thought her virtuous,” 
I have answered, “Ay, thou
wilt always think a Woman virtuous,
till she is in the Streets, but you and
I, Jack or Tom, (turning to another in
Company) know better.” At which I
have drawn a Paper out of my Pocket,
perhaps a Taylor's Bill, and kissed it,
crying at the same time, By Gad I was
once fond of her. 

“Proceed, if you please, but do not
swear any more,” said Adams. 
Sir, said the Gentleman, I ask your
Pardon. Well, Sir, in this Course of
Life I continued full three Years,— 
“What Course of Life,” answered Adams; 
“I do not remember you have yet mentioned
any.” —Your Remark is
just, said the Gentleman smiling, I should
rather have said, in this Course of doing
nothing. I remember some time afterwards
I wrote the Journal of one Day,
which would serve, I believe, as well for
any other, during the whole Time; I will
endeavour to repeat it to you. 
In the Morning I arose, took my great
Stick, and walked out in my green Frock
with my Hair in Papers, (a Groan from
Adams) and sauntered about till ten. 
Went to the Auction; told Lady
—she had a dirty Face; laughed
heartily at something Captain—said; 
I can't remember what, for I did not
very well hear it; whispered Lord—; 
bowed to the Duke of—; and was
going to bid for a Snuff-box; but did not,
for fear I should have had it. 

From 2 to 4, drest myself.A Groan.
From 4 to 6, dined.A Groan.
From 6 to 8, Coffee-house.
From 8 to 9, Drury-Lane Play-house.
From 9 to 10, Lincoln's-Inn-Fields.
From 10 to 12, Drawing-Room.
At all which Places nothing happened
worth Remark. At which Adams
having fetched a great Groan, said with
some Vehemence, “Sir, this is below
the Life of an Animal, hardly above
Vegetation; and I am surprized what
could lead a Man of your Sense into
it.” What leads us into more Follies
than you imagine, Doctor, answered the
Gentleman; Vanity: For as contemptible
a Creature as I was, and I assure you,
yourself cannot have more Contempt for
such a Wretch than I now have, I then
admir'd myself, and should have despised
a Person of your present Appearance (you
will pardon me) with all your Learning,
and those excellent Qualities which I
have remarked in you. Adams bowed,
and begged him to proceed. After I had
continued two Years in this Course of
Life, said the Gentleman, an Accident
happened which obliged me to change the
Scene. As I was one day at St. James's
Coffee-house, making very free with the 

Character of a young Lady of Quality,
an Officer of the Guards who was present,
thought proper to give me the lye. I
answered, I might possibly be mistaken; 
but I intended to tell no more than the
Truth. To which he made no Reply,
but by a scornful Sneer. After this I observed
a strange Coldness in all my Acquaintance; 
none of them spoke to me
first, and very few returned me even the
Civility of a Bow. The Company I used
to dine with, left me out, and within a
Week I found myself in as much Solitude
at St. James's, as if I had been in a
Desart. An honest elderly Man at last
told me, he had a Compassion for my
Youth, and therefore advised me to shew
the World I was not such a Rascal as they
thought me to be. I did not at first understand
him: But he explained himself,
and ended with telling me, if I would
write a Challenge to the Captain, he
would out of pure Charity go to him
with it. “A very charitable Person
truly!” cried Adams. I desired till the
next Day, continued the Gentleman, to
consider on it, and retiring to my Lodgings,
I weighed the Consequences on both
sides as fairly as I could. On the one,
I saw the Risk of this Alternative, either
losing my own Life, or having on my 

hands the Blood of a Man with whom I was
not in the least angry. I soon determined
that the Good which appeared on the
other, was not worth this Hazard. I
therefore resolved to quit the Scene, and
presently retired to the Temple, where I
took Chambers. Here I soon got a fresh
Set of Acquaintance, who knew nothing
of what had happened to me. Indeed they
were not greatly to my Approbation; 
for the Beaus of the Temple are only the
Shadows of the others. They are the Affectation
of Affectation. The Vanity of
these is still more ridiculous, if possible,
than of the others. Here I met with
smart Fellows who drank with Lords they
did not know, and intrigued with Women
they never saw. Covent-Garden was now
the farthest Stretch of my Ambition,
where I shone forth in the Balconies at
the Play-houses, visited Whores, made
Love to Orange-Wenches, and damned
Plays. This Career was soon put a
stop to by my Surgeon, who convinced
me of the Necessity of confining myself
to my Room for a Month. At the End
of which, having had Leisure to reflect,
I resolved to quit any further Conversation
with Beaus and Smarts of all kinds, and
to avoid, if possible, any Occasion of returning
to this Place of Confinement. 

“I think,” said Adams, “the Advice
of a Month's Retirement and Reflection
was very proper; but I should rather
have expected it from a Divine than a
Surgeon.” The Gentleman smiled at
Adams's Simplicity, and without explaining
himself farther on such an odious Subject
went on thus: I was no sooner perfectly
restored to Health, than I found
my Passion for Women, which I was
afraid to satisfy as I had done, made
me very uneasy; I determined therefore
to keep a Mistress. Nor was I long before
I fixed my Choice on a young Woman,
who had before been kept by two
Gentlemen, and to whom I was recommended
by a celebrated Bawd. I took
her home to my Chambers, and made her
a Settlement, during Cohabitation. This
would perhaps have been very ill paid: 
However, she did not suffer me to be perplexed
on this account; for before Quarter-day,
I found her at my Chambers in
too familiar Conversation with a young
Fellow who was drest like an Officer, but
was indeed a City Apprentice. Instead
of excusing her Inconstancy, she rapped
out half a dozen Oaths, and snapping
her Fingers at me, swore she scorned to
confine herself to the best Man in England. 
Upon this we parted, and the 

same Bawd presently provided her another
Keeper. I was not so much concerned at
our Separation, as I found within a Day
or two I had Reason to be for our Meeting: 
For I was obliged to pay a second
Visit to my Surgeon. I was now oblig'd
to do Penance for some Weeks, during
which Time I contracted an Acquaintance
with a beautiful young Girl, the Daughter
of a Gentleman, who after having been 40
Years in the Army, and in all the Campaigns
under the Duke of Marlborough,
died a Lieutenant on Half-Pay; and had
left a Widow with this only Child, in
very distrest Circumstances: they had
only a small Pension from the Government,
with what little the Daughter could
add to it by her Work; for she had great
Excellence at her Needle. This Girl was,
at my first Acquaintance with her, sollicited
in Marriage by a young Fellow in
good Circumstances. He was Apprentice
to a Linen-draper, and had a little
Fortune sufficient to set up his Trade. 
The Mother was greatly pleased with this
Match, as indeed she had sufficient Reason. 
However, I soon prevented it. I represented
him in so low a Light to his Mistress,
and made so good an Use of Flattery,
Promises, and Presents, that, not to
dwell longer on this Subject than is necessary, 

I prevailed with the poor Girl,
and convey'd her away from her Mother! 
In a word, I debauched her. —(At which
Words, Adams started up, fetch'd three
Strides cross the Room, and then replaced
himself in his Chair.) You are not more
affected with this Part of my Story than
myself: I assure you it will never be
sufficiently repented of in my own Opinion: 
But if you already detest it, how much
more will your Indignation be raised
when you hear the fatal Consequences of
this barbarous, this villainous Action? If
you please therefore, I will here desist. 
—“By no means,” cries Adams, “Go
on, I beseech you, and Heaven grant
you may sincerely repent of this and
many other things you have related.” 
—I was now, continued the Gentleman,
as happy as the Possession of a fine young
Creature, who had a good Education,
and was endued with many agreeable
Qualities, could make me. We liv'd
some Months with vast Fondness together,
without any Company or Conversation
more than we found in one another: 
But this could not continue always; and
tho' I still preserved a great Affection
for her, I began more and more to want
the Relief of other Company, and consequently
to leave her by degrees, at last, 

whole Days to herself. She failed not to
testify some Uneasiness on these Occasions,
and complained of the melancholy Life
she led; to remedy which, I introduced her
into the Acquaintance of some other kept
Mistresses, with whom she used to play
at Cards, and frequent Plays and other
Diversions. She had not liv'd long in
this Intimacy, before I perceived a visible
Alteration in her Behaviour; all her Modesty
and Innocence vanished by degrees,
till her Mind became thoroughly tainted. 
She affected the Company of Rakes, gave
herself all manner of Airs, was never
easy but abroad, or when she had a Party
at my Chambers. She was rapacious of
Money, extravagant to Excess, loose in
her Conversation; and if ever I demurred
to any of her Demands, Oaths, Tears,
and Fits, were the immediate Consequences. 
As the first Raptures of Fondness
were long since over, this Behaviour soon
estranged my Affections from her; I began
to reflect with pleasure that she was
not my Wife, and to conceive an Intention
of parting with her, of which having
given her a Hint, she took care to prevent
me the Pains of turning her out of
doors, and accordingly departed herself,
having first broken open my Escrutore,
and taken with her all she could find, to 

the Amount of about 200 l. In the first Heat
of my Resentment, I resolved to pursue
her with all the Vengeance of the Law: 
But as she had the good Luck to escape
me during that Ferment, my Passion afterwards
cooled, and having reflected that
I had been the first Aggressor, and had
done her an Injury for which I could
make her no Reparation, by robbing her
of the Innocence of her Mind; and hearing
at the same time that the poor old
Woman her Mother had broke her Heart,
on her Daughter's Elopement from her,
I concluding myself her Murderer (“As
you very well might,” cries Adams,
with a Groan;) I was pleased that God
Almighty had taken this Method of
punishing me, and resolved quietly to
submit to the Loss. Indeed I could
wish I had never heard more of the poor
Creature, who became in the end an
abandoned Profligate; and after being
some Years a common Prostitute, at last
ended her miserable Life in Newgate. — 
Here the Gentleman fetch'd a deep Sigh,
which Mr. Adams echo'd very loudly,
and both continued silent looking on each
other for some Minutes. At last the
Gentleman proceeded thus: I had been
perfectly constant to this Girl, during the
whole Time I kept her: But she had 

scarce departed before I discovered more
Marks of her Infidelity to me, than the
Loss of my Money. In short, I was
forced to make a third Visit to my Surgeon,
out of whose hands I did not get
a hasty Discharge. 
I now forswore all future Dealings
with the Sex, complained loudly that the
Pleasure did not compensate the Pain,
and railed at the beautiful Creatures, in
as gross Language as Juvenal himself
formerly reviled them in. I looked on
all the Town-Harlots with a Detestation
not easy to be conceived, their Persons
appeared to me as painted Palaces inhabited
by Disease and Death: Nor could
their Beauty make them more desirable
Objects in my Eyes, than Gilding could
make me covet a Pill, or golden Plates a
Coffin. But tho' I was no longer the absolute
Slave, I found some Reasons to own
myself still the Subject of Love. My
Hatred for Women decreased daily; and
I am not positive but Time might have
betrayed me again to some common Harlot,
had I not been secured by a Passion
for the charming Saphira; which having
once entered upon, made a violent Progress
in my Heart. Saphira was Wife to a
Man of Fashion and Gallantry, and one 

who seemed, I own, every way worthy of
her Affections, which however he had
not the Reputation of having. She was
indeed a Coquette achevée. “Pray Sir,” 
says Adams, “What is a Coquette? I
have met with the Word in French
Authors, but never could assign any
Idea to it. I believe it is the same
with une Sotte, Anglicè a Fool.” Sir,
answer'd the Gentleman, perhaps you are
not much mistaken: but as it is a particular
kind of Folly, I will endeavour to
describe it. Were all Creatures to be
ranked in the Order of Creation, according
to their Usefulness, I know few
Animals that would not take place of a
Coquette; nor indeed hath this Creature
much Pretence to any thing beyond Instinct:
for tho' sometimes we might imagine
it was animated by the Passion of
Vanity, yet far the greater part of its
Actions fall beneath even that low Motive; 
For instance, several absurd Gestures
and Tricks, infinitely more foolish
than what can be observed in the most
ridiculous Birds and Beasts, and which
would persuade the Beholder that the silly
Wretch was aiming at our Contempt. 
Indeed its Characteristick is Affectation,
and this led and governed by Whim only:
for as Beauty, Wisdom, Wit, Good-nature, 

Politeness and Health are sometimes
affected by this Creature; so are Ugliness,
Folly, Nonsense, Ill-nature, Ill-breeding
and Sickness likewise put on by it in
their Turn. Its Life is one constant Lye,
and the only Rule by which you can form
any Judgment of them is, that they are
never what they seem. If it was possible for
a Coquette to love (as it is not, for if ever
it attains this Passion, the Coquette ceases
instantly) it would wear the Face of Indifference
if not of hatred to the beloved
Object; you may therefore be assured,
when they endeavour to persuade you of
their liking, that they are indifferent to
you at least. And indeed this was the
Case of my Saphira, who no sooner saw
me in the number of her Admirers, than
she gave me what is commonly called
Encouragement; she would often look
at me, and when she perceived me meet
her Eyes, would instantly take them off,
discovering at the same time as much
Surprize and Emotion as possible. These
Arts failed not of the Success she intended; 
and as I grew more particular to her
than the rest of her Admirers, she advanced
in proportion more directly to
me than to the others. She affected the low
Voice, Whisper, Lisp, Sigh, Start, Laugh,
and many other Indications of Passion, 

which daily deceive thousands. When I
play'd at Whisk with her, she would look
earnestly at me, and at the same time lose
Deal or revoke; then burst into a ridiculous
Laugh, and cry, I would not have
you guess what I was thinking of for the
World. To detain you no longer, after
I had gone through a sufficient Course of
Gallantry, as I thought, and was thoroughly
convinced I had raised a violent
Passion in my Mistress; I sought an Opportunity
of coming to an Eclaircissement
with her. She avoided this as much as
possible, however great Assiduity at length
presented me one. I will not describe all
the Particulars of this Interview; let it
suffice, that till she could no longer pretend
not to see my Drift, she first affected
a violent Surprize, and immediately after
as violent a Passion: She wondered
what I had seen in her Conduct, which
could induce me to affront her in this
manner: And breaking from me the first
Moment she could, told me, I had no
other way to escape the Consequence of
her Resentment, than by never seeing,
or at least speaking to her more. I was
not contented with this Answer; I still
pursued her, but to no purpose, and was
at length convinced that her Husband
had the sole Possession of her Person, and 

that neither he nor any other had made
any Impression on her Heart. I was
taken off from following this Ignis Fatuus
by some Advances which were made me
by the Wife of a Citizen, who tho neither
very young nor handsome, was yet too agreeable
to be rejected by my amorous Constitution. 
I accordingly soon satisfy'd her,
that she had not cast away her Hints on a
barren or cold Soil; on the contrary,
they instantly produced her an eager and
desiring Lover. Nor did she give me
any Reason to complain; she met the
Warmth she had raised with equal Ardour. 
I had no longer a Coquette to deal with,
but one who was wiser than to prostitute the
noble Passion of Love to the ridiculous
Lust of Vanity. We presently understood
one another; and as the Pleasures we
sought lay in a mutual Gratification, we
soon found and enjoyed them. I thought
myself at first greatly happy in the possession
of this new Mistress, whose Fondness
would have quickly surfeited a more
sickly Appetite, but it had a different
Effect on mine; she carried my Passion
higher by it than Youth or Vanity had
been able: But my Happiness could not
long continue uninterrupted. The Apprehensions
we lay under from the Jealousy
of her Husband, gave us great 

Uneasiness. “Poor Wretch! I pity him,” 
cry'd Adams. He did indeed deserve it
said the Gentleman, for he loved his
Wife with great Tenderness, and I assure
you it is a great Satisfaction to me that I
was not the Man who first seduced her
Affections from him. These Apprehensions
appeared also too well grounded; for
in the End he discovered us, and procur'd
Witnesses of our Caresses. He then prosecuted
me at Law, and recovered 3000l.
Damages, which much distressed my Fortune
to pay: and what was worse, his
Wife being divorced, came upon my
hands. I led a very uneasy Life with
her; for besides that my Passion was now
much abated, her excessive Jealousy was
very troublesome. At length Death rid
me of an Inconvenience, which the Consideration
of my having been the Author of
her Misfortunes, would never suffer me to
take any other Method of discarding. 
I now bid adieu to Love, and resolved
to pursue other less dangerous and expensive
Pleasures. I fell into the Acquaintance
of a Set of jolly Companions,
who slept all Day and drank all Night: 
Fellows who might rather be said to consume
Time than to live. Their best Conversation
was nothing but Noise: Singing,
hollowing, Wrangling, Drinking, Toasting, 

Sp&wblank;wing, Smoking, were the chief Ingredients
of our Entertainment. And
yet bad as these were, they were more
tolerable than our graver Scenes, which were
either excessive tedious Narratives of dull
common Matters of Fact, or hot Disputes
about trifling Matters, which commonly
ended in a Wager. This Way of Life
the first serious Reflection put a period to,
and I now became Member of a Club
frequented by young Men of great Abilities. 
The Bottle was now only called in
to the Assistance of our Conversation,
which rolled on the deepest Points of
Philosophy. These Gentlemen were engaged
in a Search after Truth, in the
Pursuit of which they threw aside all the
Prejudices of Education, and governed
themselves only by the infallible Guide of
Human Reason. This great Guide, after
having shewn them the Falshood of
that very antient but simple Tenet, that
there is such a Being as a Deity in the
Universe, helped them to establish in his
stead a certain Rule of Right, by adhering
to which they all arrived at the utmost
Purity of Morals. Reflection made me
as much delighted with this Society, as
it had taught me to despise and detest the
former. I began now to esteem myself
a Being of a higher Order than I had ever 

before conceived, and was the more charmed
with this Rule of Right, as I really
found in my own Nature nothing repugnant
to it. I held in utter Contempt all
Persons who wanted any other Inducement
to Virtue besides her intrinsick Beauty
and Excellence; and had so high an
Opinion of my present Companions, with
regard to their Morality, that I would
have trusted them with whatever was
nearest and dearest to me. Whilst I was
engaged in this delightful Dream, two
or three Accidents happen'd successively,
which at first much surprized me. For,
one of our greatest Philosophers, or Rule
of Right-men withdrew himself from us,
taking with him the Wife of one of his
most intimate Friends. Secondly, Another
of the same Society left the Club
without remembring to take leave of
his Bail. A third having borrowed
a Sum of Money of me, for which I
received no Security, when I asked him
to repay it, absolutely denied the Loan. 
These several Practices, so inconsistent
with our golden Rule, made me begin to
suspect its Infallibility; but when I communicated
my Thoughts to one of the Club,
he said there was nothing absolutely good
or evil in itself; that Actions were denominated
good or bad by the Circumstances 

of the Agent. That possibly the
Man who ran away with his Neighbour's
Wife might be one of very good Inclinations,
but over-prevailed on by the Violence
of an unruly Passion, and in other
Particulars might be a very worthy Member
of Society: That if the Beauty of
any Woman created in him an Uneasiness,
he had a Right from Nature to relieve
himself; with many other things, which
I then detested so much, that I took Leave
of the Society that very Evening, and
never returned to it again. Being now
reduced to a State of Solitude, which I
did not like, I became a great Frequenter
of the Play-houses, which indeed was always
my favourite Diversion, and most
Evenings past away two or three Hours
behind the Scenes, where I met with
several Poets, with whom I made Engagements
at the Taverns. Some of the
Players were likewise of our Parties. At
these Meetings we were generally entertain'd
by the Poets with reading their Performances,
and by the Players with repeating
their Parts: Upon which Occasions,
I observed the Gentleman who furnished
our Entertainment, was commonly the best
pleased of the Company; who, tho' they
were pretty civil to him to his Face, seldom
failed to take the first Opportunity 

of his Absence to ridicule him. Now
I made some Remarks, which probably
are too obvious to be worth relating. 
“Sir,” says Adams, “your Remarks if
you please.” First then, says he, I concluded
that the general Observation, that
Wits are most inclined to Vanity, is not
true. Men are equally vain of Riches,
Strength, Beauty, Honours, &c. But,
these appear of themselves to the Eyes
of the Beholders, whereas the poor Wit is
obliged to produce his Performance to shew
you his Perfection, and on his Readiness
to do this that vulgar opinion I have before
mentioned is grounded: But doth not the
Person who expends vast Sums in the
Furniture of his House, or the Ornaments
of his Person, who consumes much Time,
and employs great Pains in dressing himself,
or who thinks himself paid for Self-Denial,
Labour, or even Villany by a Title or
a Ribbon, sacrifice as much to Vanity as
the poor Wit, who is desirous to read you
his Poem or his Play? My second Remark
was, that Vanity is the worst of
Passions, and more apt to contaminate the
Mind than any other: For as Selfishness
is much more general than we please to
allow it, so it is natural to hate and envy
those who stand between us and the Good
we desire. Now in Lust and Ambition 

these are few; and even in Avarice we
find many who are no Obstacles to our
Pursuits; but the vain Man seeks Preeminence; 
and every thing which is excellent
or praise-worthy in another, renders
him the Mark of his Antipathy. 
Adams now began to fumble in his Pockets,
and soon cried out, O la! I have
it not about me—Upon this the
Gentleman asking him what he was searching
for, he said he searched after a Sermon,
which he thought his Master-piece,
against Vanity. “Fie upon it, fie upon
it,” cries he, “why do I ever leave
that Sermon out of my Pocket; I wish
it was within five Miles, I would willingly
fetch it, to read it to you.” The
Gentleman answered, that there was no
need, for he was cured of the Passion. 
“And for that very Reason,” quoth
Adams, “I would read it, for I am confident
you would admire it: Indeed, I
have never been a greater Enemy to
any Passion than that simple one of
Vanity.” The Gentleman smiled, and
proceeded—From this Society I easily
past to that of the Gamesters, where
nothing remarkable happened, but the
finishing my Fortune, which those Gentlemen
soon helped me to the End of. 
This opened Scenes of Life hitherto unknown; 

Poverty and Distress with their
horrid Train of Duns, Attorneys, Bailiffs,
haunted me Day and Night. My
Clothes grew shabby, my Credit bad, my
Friends and Acquaintance of all kinds
cold. In this Situation the strangest
Thought imaginable came into my Head; 
and what was this, but to write a Play?
for I had sufficient Leisure; Fear of Bailiffs
confined me every Day to my Room; 
and having always had a little Inclination
and something of a Genius that way,
I set myself to work, and within few
Months produced a Piece of five Acts,
which was accepted of at the Theatre. 
I remembred to have formerly taken
Tickets of other Poets for their Benefits
long before the Appearance of their Performances,
and resolving to follow a Precedent,
which was so well suited to my present
Circumstances; I immediately provided
myself with a large Number of
little Papers. Happy indeed would be
the State of Poetry, would these Tickets
pass current at the Bakehouse, the Ale-House,
and the Chandler's-Shop: But
alas! far otherwise; no Taylor will take
them in Payment for Buckram, Stays,
Stay-tape; nor no Bailiff for Civility-Money. 
They are indeed no more than
a Passport to beg with, a Certificate that 

the Owner wants five Shillings, which induces
well-disposed Christians to Charity. 
I now experienced what is worse than Poverty,
or rather what is the worst Consequence
of Poverty, I mean Attendance and
Dependance on the Great. Many a Morning
have I waited Hours in the cold
Parlours of Men of Quality, where after
seeing the lowest Rascals in Lace and Embroidery,
the Pimps and Buffoons in Fashion
admitted, I have been sometimes told
on sending in my Name, that my Lord
could not possibly see me this Morning: 
A sufficient Assurance that I should never
more get entrance into that House. Sometimes
I have been at last admitted, and
the great Man hath thought proper to excuse
himself, by telling me he was tied
up. “Tied up,” says Adams, “pray
what's that?” Sir, says the Gentleman,
the Profit which Booksellers allowed Authors
for the best Works, was so very
small, that certain Men of Birth and Fortune
some Years ago, who were the Patrons
of Wit and Learning, thought fit
to encourage them farther, by entring into
voluntary Subscriptions for their Encouragement. 
Thus Prior, Rowe, Pope,
and some other Men of Genius, received
large Sums for their Labours from
the Public. This seemed so easy a Method 

of getting Money, that many of the
lowest Scriblers of the Times ventured
to publish their Works in the same Way; 
and many had even the Assurance to
take in Subscriptions for what was never
writ nor intended. Subscriptions in this
manner growing infinite, and a kind of
Tax on the Public; some Persons finding
it not so easy a Task to discern good
from bad Authors, or to know what
Genius was worthy Encouragement, and
what was not, to prevent the Expence
of Subscribing to so many, invented
a Method to excuse themselves
from all Subscriptions whatever; and this
was to receive a small Sum of Money
in consideration of giving a large one if
ever they subscribed; which many have
done, and many more have pretended to
have done, in order to silence all Sollicitation. 
The same Method was likewise
taken with Play-house Tickets, which
were no less a public Grievance; and this
is what they call being tied up from subscribing. 
“I can't say but the Term is
apt enough, and somewhat typical,
said Adams; for a Man of large Fortune,
who ties himself up, as you call
it, from the Encouragement of Men
of Merit, ought to be tied up in reality.” 
Well, Sir, says the Gentlemen, to return 

to my Story. Sometimes I have
received a Guinea from a Man of Quality,
given with as ill a Grace as Alms
are generally to the meanest Beggar, and
purchased too with as much Time
spent in Attendance, as, if it had been
spent in honest Industry, might have
brought me more Profit with infinitely
more Satisfaction. After about two
Months spent in this disagreeable way
with the utmost Mortification, when I
was pluming my Hopes on the Prospect
of a plentiful Harvest from my Play,
upon applying to the Prompter to know
when it came into Rehearsal, he informed
me he had received Orders from the
Managers to return me the Play again; 
for that they could not possibly act it that
Season; but if I would take it and revise
it against the next, they would be glad
to see it again. I snatch'd it from him
with great Indignation, and retired to
my Room, where I threw myself on the
Bed in a Fit of Despair—“You should
rather have thrown yourself on your
Knees,” says Adams; “for Despair
is sinful.” As soon, continued the
Gentleman, as I had indulged the first
Tumult of my Passion, I began to consider
coolly what Course I should take, in
a Situation without Friends, Money, 

Credit or Reputation of any kind. After
revolving many things in my Mind, I
could see no other Possibility of furnishing
myself with the miserable Necessaries
of Life than to retire to a Garret near the
Temple, and commence Hackney-writer
to the Lawyers; for which I was well
qualify'd, being an excellent Penman. 
This Purpose I resolved on, and immediately
put it in execution. I had an
Acquaintance with an Attorney who had
formerly transacted Affairs for me, and
to him I applied: But instead of furnishing
me with any Business, he laugh'd
at my Undertaking, and told me “he
was afraid I should turn his Deeds into
Plays, and he should expect to see
them on the Stage.” Not to tire you
with Instances of this kind from others,
I found that Plato himself did not
hold Poets in greater Abhorrence than these
Men of Business do. Whenever I durst
venture to a Coffee-house, which was on
Sundays only, a Whisper ran round
the Room, which was constantly attended
with a Sneer—That's Poet Wilson: for
I know not whether you have observed
it, but there is a Malignity in the Nature
of Man, which when not weeded out, or at
least covered by a good Education and
Politeness, delights in making another 

uneasy or dissatisfied with himself. This
abundantly appears in all Assemblies, except
those which are filled by People of
Fashion, and especially among the younger
People of both Sexes, whose Birth and
Fortunes place them just without the
polite Circles; I mean the lower Class of
the Gentry, and the higher of the mercantile
World, who are in reality the worst
bred part of Mankind. Well, Sir, whilst
I continued in this miserable State, with
scarce sufficient Business to keep me from
starving, the Reputation of a Poet being
my Bane, I accidentally became acquainted
with a Bookseller, who told me
“it was a Pity a Man of my Learning
and Genius should be obliged to such
a Method of getting his Livelihood; 
that he had a Compassion for me, and if
I would engage with him, he would undertake
to provide handsomely for me.” 
A Man in my Circumstances, as he very
well knew, had no Choice. I accordingly
accepted his Proposal with his Conditions,
which were none of the most favourable,
and fell to translating with all
my Might. I had no longer reason to
lament the want of Business; for he furnished
me with so much, that in half a
Year I almost writ myself blind. I likewise
contracted a Distemper by my sedentary 

Life, in which no part of my Body
was exercised but my right Arm, which
rendered me incapable of writing for a
long time. This unluckily happening to
delay the Publication of the Work, and
my last Performance not having sold well,
the Bookseller declined any further Engagement,
and aspersed me to his Brethren
as a careless, idle Fellow. I had
however, by having half-work'd and
half-starv'd myself to death during the
Time I was in his Service, amassed a few
Guineas, with which I bought a Lottery-Ticket,
resolving to throw myself into
Fortune's Lap, and try if she would
make me amends for the Injuries she
had done me at the Gaming-Table. This
Purchase being made left me almost
pennyless; when, as if I had not been
sufficiently miserable, a Bailiff in Woman's
Clothes got Admittance to my
Chamber, whither he was directed by
the Bookseller. He arrested me at my
Taylor's Suit, for thirty-five Pounds; a
Sum for which I could not procure Bail,
and was therefore conveyed to his House,
where I was locked up in an upper Chamber. 
I had now neither Health (for I was
scarce recovered from my Indisposition)
Liberty, Money, or Friends; and had
abandoned all Hopes, and even the Desire 

of Life. “But this could not last
long,” said Adams, “for doubtless the
Taylor released you the moment he
was truly acquainted with your Affairs; 
and knew that your Circumstances
would not permit you to pay
him.” Oh, Sir, answered the Gentleman,
he knew that before he arrested
me; nay, he knew that nothing but Incapacity
could prevent me paying my Debts; 
for I had been his Customer many Years,
had spent vast Sums of Money with
him, and had always paid most punctually
in my prosperous Days: But when
I reminded him of this, with Assurance
that if he would not molest my Endeavours,
I would pay him all the Money
I could, by my utmost Labour and
Industry, procure, reserving only what was
sufficient to preserve me alive. He answered,
His Patience was worn out; that
I had put him off from time to time; 
that he wanted the Money; that he had
put it into a Lawyer's hands; and if I
did not pay him immediately, or find
Security, I must lie in Goal and expect
no Mercy. “He may expect Mercy,” 
cries Adams starting from his Chair,
“where he will find none. How can
such a Wretch repeat the Lord's
Prayer, where the Word which is 

translated, I know not for what Reason,
Trespasses, is in the Original Debts? 
And as surely as we do not forgive
others their Debts when they are unable
to pay them; so surely shall we
ourselves be unforgiven, when we are
in no condition of paying.” He ceased,
and the Gentleman proceeded. While
I was in this deplorable Situation a former
Acquaintance, to whom I had communicated
my Lottery-Ticket, found me
out, and making me a Visit with great
Delight in his Countenance, shook me
heartily by the Hand, and wished me
Joy of my good Fortune: For, says he,
your Ticket is come up a Prize of 3000l.
Adams snapt his Fingers at these Words
in an Ecstasy of Joy; which however did
not continue long: For the Gentleman
thus proceeded. Alas! Sir, this was only
the Trick of Fortune to sink me
the deeper: For I had disposed of this
Lottery-Ticket two Days before to a
Relation, who refused lending me a
Shilling without it, in order to procure
myself Bread. As soon as my Friend
was acquainted with my unfortunate Sale,
he began to revile me, and remind me
of all the ill Conduct and Miscarriages
of my Life. He said, “I was one
whom Fortune could not save, if she 

would; that I was now ruined without
any Hopes of Retrieval, nor must expect
any Pity from my Friends; that it
would be extreme Weakness to compassionate
the Misfortunes of a Man
who ran headlong to his own Destruction.” 
He then painted to me in as lively
Colours as he was able, the Happiness
I should have now enjoyed, had I not
foolishly disposed of my Ticket. I urg'd
the Plea of Necessity: But he made no
Answer to that, and began again to revile
me, till I could bear it no longer, and
desired him to finish his Visit. I soon exchanged
the Bailiff's House for a Prison; 
where, as I had not Money sufficient to
procure me a separate Apartment, I was
crouded in with a great number of miserable
Wretches, in common with whom
I was destitute of every Convenience of
Life, even that which all the Brutes
enjoy, wholesome Air. In these dreadful
Circumstances I applied by Letter to several
of my old Acquaintance, and such
to whom I had formerly lent Money without
any great Prospect of its being returned,
for their Assistance; but in vain. 
An Excuse instead of a Denial was the
gentlest Answer I received. —Whilst I
languished in a Condition too horrible to
be described, and which in a Land of 

Humanity, and, what is much more
Christianity, seems a strange Punishment
for a little Inadvertency and Indiscretion. 
Whilst I was in this Condition, a Fellow
came one day into the Prison, and enquiring
me out deliver'd me the following
Letter: 

SIR,
My Father, to whom you sold your Ticket in
the last Lottery, died the same Day in which
it came up a Prize, as you have possibly
heard, and left me sole Heiress of all his
Fortune. I am so much touched with your
present Circumstances, and the Uneasiness
you must feel at having been driven to dispose
of what might have made you happy,
that I must desire your Acceptance of the
inclosed, and am 
Your humble Servant,
Harriet Hearty. 
And what do you think was inclosed? 
“I don't know,” cried Adams: “Not
less than a Guinea, I hope.” —Sir,
it was a Bank-Note for 200 l.— 
“200 l.” says Adams, in a Rapture! —No
less, I assure you, answered the Gentleman; 
a Sum I was not half so delighted
with, as with the dear Name of the generous
Girl that sent it me; and who was 

not only the best, but the handsomest
Creature in the Universe; and for whom
I had long had a Passion, which I never
durst disclose to her. I kiss'd her Name
a thousand times, my Eyes overflowing
with Tenderness and Gratitude, I
repeated—. But not to detain you
with these Raptures, I immediately acquired
my Liberty, and having paid all my
Debts, departed with upwards of fifty
Pounds in my Pocket, to thank my kind
Deliverer. She happened to be then out
of Town, a Circumstance which, upon
Reflection, pleased me; for by that
means I had an Opportunity to appear
before her in a more decent Dress. At
her Return to Town within a Day or
two, I threw myself at her Feet with the
most ardent Acknowledgments, which
she rejected with an unfeigned Greatness
of Mind, and told me, I could not oblige
her more than by never mentioning, or
if possible, thinking on a Circumstance
which must bring to my Mind an Accident
that might be grievous to me to
think on. She proceeded thus: “What
I have done is in my own eyes a
Trifle, and perhaps infinitely less than
would have become me to do. And
if you think of engaging in any Business,
where a larger Sum may be serviceable 

to you, I shall not be over-rigid,
either as to the Security or Interest.” 
I endeavoured to express all
the Gratitude in my power to this Profusion
of Goodness, tho' perhaps it was
my Enemy, and began to afflict my
Mind with more Agonies, than all the
Miseries I had underwent, than Poverty,
Distress, and Prisons united had been able
to make me feel: For, Sir, these Acts
and Professions of Kindness, which were
sufficient to have raised in a good Heart
the most violent Passion of Friendship
to one of the same, or to Age and Ugliness
in a different Sex, came to me from
a Woman, a young and beautiful Woman,
one whose Perfections I had long
known; and for whom I had long conceived
a violent Passion, tho' with a Despair,
which made me endeavour rather to curb
and conceal, than to nourish or acquaint
her with it. In short, they came upon
me united with Beauty, Softness,
and Tenderness, such bewitching Smiles. 
—O Mr. Adams, in that Moment, I
lost myself, and forgetting our different
Situations, nor considering what Return
I was making to her Goodness, by desiring
her who had given me so much, to
bestow her All, I laid gently hold on her
Hand, and conveying it to my Lips, I 

prest it with inconceivable Ardour; then
lifting up my swimming Eyes, I saw her
Face and Neck overspread with one
Blush; she offered to withdraw her
Hand, yet not so as to deliver it from
mine, tho' I held it with the gentlest
Force. We both stood trembling, her
Eyes cast on the ground, and mine stedfastly
fixed on her. Good G&wblank;, what was
then the Condition of my Soul! burning
with Love, Desire, Admiration, Gratitude,
and every tender Passion, all bent
on one charming Object. Passion at last
got the better of both Reason and Respect,
and softly letting go her Hand,
I offered madly to clasp her in my Arms; 
when a little recovering herself, she started
from me, asking me with some Shew
of Anger, “If she had any Reason to
expect this Treatment from me.” I then
fell prostrate before her, and told her,
“If I had offended, my Life was absolutely
in her power, which I would
in any manner lose for her sake. Nay,
Madam, said I, you shall not be so ready
to punish me, as I to suffer. I own
my Guilt. I detest the Reflection
that I would have sacrificed your Happiness
to mine. Believe me, I sincerely
repent my Ingratitude, yet believe
me too, it was my Passion, my 

unbounded Passion for you, which hurried
me so far; I have loved you long
and tenderly; and the Goodness you
have shewn me, hath innocently weighed
down a Wretch undone before. 
Acquit me of all mean mercenary
Views, and before I take my Leave
of you for ever, which I am resolved
instantly to do, believe me, that Fortune
could have raised me to no height
to which I could not have gladly listed
you. O curst be Fortune.” — 
“Do not,” says she, interrupting me with
the sweetest Voice, “Do not curse Fortune,
since she hath made me happy,
and if she hath put your Happiness
in my power, I have told you, you
shall ask nothing in Reason which I
will refuse.” “Madam,” said I,
you mistake me if you imagine, as
you seem, my Happiness is in the
power of Fortune now. You have
obliged me too much already; if I
have any Wish, it is for some blest
Accident, by which I may contribute
with my Life to the least Augmentation
of your Felicity. As for my
self, the only Happiness I can ever
have, will be hearing of your's; and if
Fortune will make that complete, I
will forgive her all her Wrongs to 

me.” “You may, indeed,” answered
she, smiling, “For your own must
be included in it. I have long known
your Worth; nay, I must confess,” 
said she, blushing, “I have long discovered
that Passion for me you profess,
notwithstanding those Endeavours
which I am convinced were unaffected,
to conceal it; and if all I can give with
Reason will not suffice,—take Reason
away,—and now I believe you
cannot ask me what I will deny.” — 
She uttered these Words with a Sweetness
not to be imagined. I immediately
started, my Blood which lay freezing at
my Heart, rushed tumultuously through
every Vein. I stood for a Moment silent,
then flying to her, I caught her in my
Arms, no longer resisting,—and softly
told her, she must give me then herself. — 
O Sir,—Can I describe her Look? She remained
silent and almost motionless several
Minutes. At last, recovering herself a
little, she insisted on my leaving her,
and in such a manner that I instantly
obeyed: You may imagine, however, I
soon saw her again. —But I ask pardon,
I fear I have detained you too long
in relating the Particulars of the former
Interview. “So far otherwise,” said
Adams, licking his Lips, “that I could 

willingly hear it over again.” Well,
Sir, continued the Gentleman, to be as
concise as possible, within a Week she
consented to make me the happiest of
Mankind. We were married shortly after; 
and when I came to examine the
Circumstances of my Wife's Fortune; 
(which I do assure you I was not presently
at Leisure enough to do) I found it
amounted to about six thousand Pounds,
most part of which lay in Effects; for her
Father had been a Wine-Merchant, and
she seemed willing, if I liked it, that I
should carry on the same Trade. I readily
and too inconsiderately undertook it: 
For not having been bred up to the Secrets
of the Business, and endeavouring
to deal with the utmost Honesty and Uprightness,
I soon found out Fortune in a
declining Way, and my Trade decreasing
by little and little: For my Wines which I
never adulterated after their Importation,
and were sold as neat as they came over,
were universally decried by the Vintners,
to whom I could not allow them quite as
cheap as those who gained double the
Profit by a less Price. I soon began so
despair of improving our Fortune by
these means; nor was I at all easy at the
Visits and Familiarity of many who had
been my Acquaintance in my Prosperity, 

but denied, and shunned me in my Adversity,
and now very forwardly renewed their
Acquaintance with me. In short, I had
sufficiently seen, that the Pleasures of
the World are chiefly Folly, and the Business
of it mostly Knavery; and both,
nothing better than Vanity: The Men
of Pleasure tearing one another to pieces,
from the Emulation of spending Money,
and the Men of Business from Envy in
getting it. My Happiness consisted entirely
in my Wife, whom I loved with an inexpressible
Fondness, which was perfectly
returned; and my Prospects were no
other than to provide for our growing
Family; for she was now big of her second
Child; I therefore took an Opportunity
to ask her Opinion of entering into
a retired Life, which after hearing
my Reasons, and perceiving my Affection
for it, she readily embraced. We
soon put our small Fortune, now reduced
under three thousand Pounds, into Money,
with part of which we purchased this
little Place, whither we retired soon after
her Delivery, from a World full of
Bustle, Noise, Hatred, Envy, and Ingratitude,
to Ease, Quiet, and Love. 
We have here liv'd almost twenty Years,
with little other Conversation than our
own, most of the Neighbourhood taking us 

for very strange People; the Squire of the
Parish representing me as a Madman,
and the Parson as a Presbyterian; because
I will not hunt with the one, nor drink
with the other. “Sir,” says Adams,
“Fortune hath I think paid you all her
Debts in this sweet Retirement.” Sir,
replied the Gentleman, I am thankful to
the great Author of all Things for the
Blessings I here enjoy. I have the best
of Wives, and three pretty Children, for
whom I have the true Tenderness of a
Parent; but no Blessings are pure in this
World. Within three Years of my Arrival
here I lost my eldest Son. (Here he
sighed bitterly.) “Sir,” says Adams,
“we must submit to Providence, and
consider Death is common to all.” We
must submit, indeed, answered the Gentleman; 
and if he had died, I could have
borne the Loss with Patience: But alas!
Sir, he was stolen away from my Door
by some wicked travelling People whom
they call Gipsies; nor could I ever with
the most diligent Search recover him. 
Poor Jacky! he had the sweetest Look,
the exact Picture of his Mother; at which
some Tears unwittingly dropt from his
Eyes, as did likewise from those of Adams,
who always sympathized with his Friends
on those Occasions. Thus, Sir, said the 

Gentleman, I have finished my Story,
in which if I have been too particular, I
ask your Pardon; and now, if you please,
I will fetch you another Bottle; which
Proposal the Parson thankfully accepted. 



A Description of Mr. Wilson's Way
of Living. The tragical Adventure
of the Dog, and other grave Matters. 
The Gentleman returned with the
Bottle, and Adams and he sat some
time silent, when the former started up
and cried, “No, that won't do.” The
Gentleman enquired into his Meaning; 
he answered, “He had been considering
that it was possible the late famous
King Theodore might have been that
very Son whom he lost;” but added,
“that his Age could not answer that
Imagination.” “However,” says he,
“G&wblank; disposes all things for the best,
and very probably he may be some
Great Man, or Duke, and may one
day or other revisit you in that Capacity.” 

The Gentleman answered, he
should know him amongst ten thousand,
for he had a Mark on his left Breast, of
a Strawberry, which his Mother had given
him by longing for that Fruit. 
That beautiful young Lady, the Morning,
now rose from her Bed, and with a
Countenance blooming with fresh Youth
and Sprightliness, like Miss* —,
with soft Dews hanging on her pouting
Lips, began to take her early Walk over
the eastern Hills; and presently after, that
gallant Person the Sun stole softly from
his Wife's Chamber to pay his Addresses
to her; when the Gentleman ask'd his
Guest if he would walk forth and survey
his little Garden, which he readily agreed
to, and Joseph at the same time awaking
from a Sleep in which he had been two
Hours buried, went with them. No
Parterres, no Fountains, no Statues embellished
this little Garden. Its only
Ornament was a short Walk, shaded on
each side by a Filbert Hedge, with a
small Alcove at one end, whither in hot
Weather the Gentleman and his Wife
used to retire and divert themselves with
their Children, who played in the Walk 

before them: But tho' Vanity had no
Votary in this little Spot, here was variety
of Fruit, and every thing useful for the
Kitchin, which was abundantly sufficient
to catch the Admiration of Adams, who
told the Gentleman he had certainly a
good Gardener. Sir, answered he, that
Gardener is now before you; whatever
you see here, is the Work solely of my
own Hands. Whilst I am providing
Necessaries for my Table, I likewise procure
myself an Appetite for them. In
fair Seasons I seldom pass less than six
Hours of the twenty four in this Place,
where I am not idle, and by these means
I have been able to preserve my Health
ever since my Arrival here without Assistance
from Physick. Hither I generally
repair at the Dawn, where I exercise myself
whilst my Wife dresses her Children,
and prepares our Breakfast, after which
we are seldom asunder during the residue
of the Day; for when the Weather will
not permit them to accompany me here,
I am usually within with them; for I am
neither ashamed of conversing with my
Wife, nor of playing with my Children:
to say the Truth, I do not perceive that
Inferiority of Understanding which the
Levity of Rakes, the Dulness of Men of
Business, or the Austerity of the Learned 

would persuade us of in Women. As
for my Woman, I declare I have found
none of my own Sex capable of making
juster Observations on Life, or of delivering
them more agreeably; nor do I believe
any one possessed of a faithfuller or braver
Friend. And sure as this Friendship is
sweetened with more Delicacy and Tenderness,
so is it confirmed by dearer
Pledges than can attend the closest male
Alliance: For what Union can be so fast,
as our common Interest in the Fruits of
our Embraces? Perhaps, Sir, you are
not yourself a Father; if you are not, be
assured you cannot conceive the Delight
I have in my Little-Ones. Would you
not despise me, if you saw me stretched on
the Ground, and my Children playing
round me? “I should reverence the
Sight, quoth Adams, and I myself am
now the Father of six, and have been of
eleven, and I can say I never scourged a
Child of my own, unless as his School-master,
and then have felt every Stroke
on my own Posteriors. And as to what
you say concerning Women, I have often
lamented my own Wife did not understand
Greek.” —The Gentleman smiled,
and answered, he would not be apprehended
to insinuate that his own had an Understanding
above the Care of her Family, 

on the contrary, says he, my Harriet I
assure you is a notable Housewife, and
few Gentlemen's House-keepers understand
Cookery or Confectionary better; 
but these are Arts which she hath no
great Occasion for now: however, the
Wine you commended so much last Night
at Supper, was of her own making, as
is indeed all the Liquor in my House,
except my Beer, which falls to my Province. 
We formerly kept a Maid-Servant,
but since my Girls have been
growing up, she is unwilling to indulge
them in Idleness; for as the Fortunes I
shall give them will be very small, we
intend not to breed them above the Rank
they are likely to fill hereafter, nor to
teach them to despise or ruin a plain
Husband. Indeed I could wish a Man
of my own Temper, and a retired Life,
might fall to their Lot: for I have experienced
that calm serene Happiness
which is seated in Content, is inconsistent
with the Hurry and Bustle of the World. 
He was proceeding thus, when the Little
Things, being just risen, ran eagerly towards
him, and asked him Blessing: 
They were shy to the Strangers, but the
eldest acquainted her Father that her
Mother and the young Gentlewoman
were up, and that Breakfast was ready. 

They all went in, where the Gentleman
was surprized at the Beauty of Fanny, who
had now recovered herself from her Fatigue,
and was entirely clean drest; for
the Rogues who had taken away her Purse,
had left her her Bundle. But if he was
so much amazed at the Beauty of this
young Creature, his Guests were no less
charmed at the Tenderness which appeared
in the Behaviour of Husband and
Wife to each other, and to their Children,
and the dutiful and affectionate
Behaviour of these to their Parents. These
Instances pleased the well-disposed Mind
of Adams equally with the Readiness which
they exprest to oblige their Guests, and
their Forwardness to offer them the best
of every thing in their House; and what
delighted him still more, was an Instance or
two of their Charity: for whilst they were
at Breakfast, the good Woman was called
forth to assist her sick Neighbour, which
she did with some Cordials made for the
public Use; and the good Man went into
his Garden at the same time, to supply
another with something which he wanted
thence for they had nothing which those
who wanted it were not welcome to. These
good People were in the utmost Cheerfulness,
when they heard the Report of a
Gun, and immediately afterwards a little 

Dog, the Favourite of the eldest Daughter,
came limping in all bloody, and
laid himself at his Mistress's Feet: The
poor Girl, who was about eleven Years
old, burst into Tears at the sight, and
presently one of the Neighbours came
in and informed them, that the young
Squire, the Son of the Lord of the Manor,
had shot him as he past by, swearing at
the same time he would prosecute the Master
of him for keeping a Spaniel; for
that he had given Notice he would not
suffer one in the Parish. The Dog, whom
his Mistress had taken into her Lap, died
in a few Minutes, licking her Hand. She
exprest great Agony at his Loss, and the
other Children began to cry for their Sister's
Misfortune, nor could Fanny herself
refrain. Whilst the Father and Mother
attempted to comfort her, Adams grasped
his Crab Stick, and would have sallied
out after the Squire, had not Joseph withheld
him. He could not however bridle
his Tongue—He pronounced the Word
Rascal with great Emphasis, said he deserved
to be hanged more than a Highwayman,
and wish'd he had the scourging
him. The Mother took her Child,
lamenting and carrying the dead Favourite
in her Arms out of the Room, when
the Gentleman said, this was the second 

time this Squire had endeavoured to kill
the little Wretch, and had wounded him
smartly once before, adding, he could
have no Motive but Ill-nature; for the
little thing, which was not near as big as
one's Fist, had never been twenty Yards
from the House in the six Years his Daughter
had had it. He said he had done nothing
to deserve this Usage: but his Father
had too great a Fortune to contend
with. That he was as absolute as any
Tyrant in the Universe, and had killed
all the Dogs, and taken away all the
Guns in the Neighbourhood, and not only
that, but he trampled down Hedges, and
rode over Corn and Gardens, with no
more Regard than if they were the Highway. 
“I wish I could catch him in my
Garden, said Adams; tho' I would rather
forgive him riding through my House
than such an ill-natur'd Act as this.” 
The Cheerfulness of their Conversation
being interrupted by this Accident,
in which the Guests could be of no service
to their kind Entertainer, and as the
Mother was taken up in administring
Consolation to the poor Girl, whose Disposition
was too good hastily to forget
the sudden Loss of her little Favourite,
which had been fondling with her a few 

Minutes before; and as Joseph and Fanny
were impatient to get home and begin
those previous Ceremonies to their Happiness
which Adams had insisted on, they
now offered to take their Leave. The
Gentleman importuned them much to
stay Dinner: but when he found their
Eagerness to depart, he summoned his
Wife, and accordingly having performed
all the usual Ceremonies of Bows and Curtsies,
more pleasant to be seen than to be
related, they took their Leave, the Gentleman
and his Wife heartily wishing them
a good Journey, and they as heartily
thanking them for their kind Entertainment. 
They then departed, Adams declaring
that this was the Manner in which
the People had lived in the Golden Age. 




A Disputation on Schools, held on the
Road between Mr. Abraham Adams
and Joseph; and a Discovery not
unwelcome to them both. 
Our Travellers having well refreshed
themselves at the Gentleman's
House, Joseph and Fanny with Sleep, and
Mr. Abraham Adams with Ale and Tobacco,
renewed their Journey with great
Alacrity; and, pursuing the Road in
which they were directed, travelled many
Miles before they met with any Adventure
worth relating. In this Interval,
we shall present our Readers with a very
curious Discourse, as we apprehend it,
concerning public Schools, which pass'd
between Mr. Joseph Andrews and Mr. Abraham
Adams. 
They had not gone far, before Adams
calling to Joseph, asked him if he had
attended to the Gentleman's Story; he
answered, to all the former Parts. “And
don't you think,” says he, “he was a
very unhappy Man in his Youth?” “A
very unhappy Man indeed,” answered
the other. “Joseph,” cries Adams, 

screwing up his Mouth, “I have found
it; I have discovered the Cause of all
the Misfortunes which befel him. A
public School, Joseph, was the Cause
of all the Calamities which he after
suffered. Public Schools are the Nurseries
of all Vice and Immorality. All
the wicked Fellows whom I remember
at the University were bred at them. — 
Ah Lord! I can remember as well as
if it was but yesterday, a Knot of
them; they called them King's Scholars,
I forget why—very wicked
Fellows! Joseph, you may thank the
Lord you were not bred at a public
School, you would never have preserved
your Virtue as you have. The
first Care I always take, is of a
Boy's Morals, I had rather he should
be a Blockhead than an Atheist or a
Presbyterian. What is all the Learning
of the World compared to his immortal
Soul? What shall a Man take
in exchange for his Soul? But the
Masters of great Schools trouble themselves
about no such thing. I have
known a Lad of eighteen at the University,
who hath not been able to say
his Catechism; but for my own part,
I always scourged a Lad sooner for
missing that than any other Lesson. 

Believe me, Child, all that Gentleman's
Misfortunes arose from his being
educated at a public School.” 
“It doth not become me,” answer'd
Joseph, “to dispute any thing, Sir, with
you, especially a matter of this kind; 
for to be sure you must be allowed by
all the World to be the best Teacher
of a School in all our County.” “Yes,
that,” says Adams, “I believe, is
granted me; that I may without much
Vanity pretend to—nay I believe I
may go to the next County too—but
gloriari non est meum—“However, Sir,
as you are pleased to bid me speak,” 
says Joseph, “you know, my late
Master, Sir Thomas Booby, was bred at
a public School, and he was the finest
Gentleman in all the Neigbourhood. 
And I have often heard him say, if he
had a hundred Boys he would breed
them all at the same Place. It was his Opinion,
and I have often heard him deliver
it, that a Boy taken from a public
School, and carried into the World, will
learn more in one Year there, than one
of a private Education will in five. He
used to say, the School itself initiated
him a great way, (I remember that was
his very Expression) for great Schools 

are little Societies, where a Boy of any
Observation may see in Epitome what
he will after find in the World at large.” 
“Hinc illæ lachrymæ; for that very Reason,” 
quoth Adams, “I prefer a private
School, where Boys may be kept in
Innocence and Ignorance: for, according
to that fine Passage in the Play
of Cato, the only English Tragedy I
ever read, 

“If Knowledge of the World must make Men Villains,
“May Juba ever live in Ignorance. 
“Who would not rather preserve the
Purity of his Child, than wish him to
attain the whole Circle of Arts and
Sciences; which, by the bye, he may
learn in the Classes of private School:
for I would not be vain, but I esteem
myself to be second to none, nulli
secundum, in teaching these things; so
that a Lad may have as much Learning
in a private as in a public Education.” 
“And with Submission,” answered Joseph,
“he may get as much Vice, witness
several Country Gentlemen, who were
educated within five Miles of their own
Houses, and are as wicked as if they
had known the World from their Infancy. 

I remember when I was in the
Stable, if a young Horse was vicious in
his Nature, no Correction would make
him otherwise; I take it to be equally
the same among Men: if a Boy be
of a mischievous wicked Inclination,
no School, tho' ever so private, will
ever make him good; on the contrary,
if he be of a righteous Temper,
you may trust him to London, or wherever
else you please, he will be in no
danger of being corrupted. Besides,
I have often heard my Master say,
that the Discipline practised in public
Schools was much better than that in
private”—“You talk like a Jackanapes,” 
says Adams, “and so did your Master. 
Discipline indeed! because one Man
scourges twenty or thirty Boys more in
a Morning than another, is he therefore
a better Disciplinarian? I do presume
to confer in this Point with all
who have taught from Chiron's time to
this Day; and, if I was Master of six
Boys ouly, I would preserve as good
Discipline amongst them as the Master
of the greatest School in the World. 
I say nothing, young Man; remember,
I say nothing; but if Sir Thomas
himself had been educated nearer home,
and under the Tuition of somebody, 

remember, I name nobody, it might
have been better for him—but his
Father must institute him in the Knowledge
of the World. Nemo mortalium
omnibus horis sapit.” Joseph seeing
him run on in this manner asked pardon
many times, assuring him he had no Intention
to offend. “I believe you had
not, Child,” said he, “and I am not
angry with you: but for maintaining
good Discipline in a School; for this,” 
—And then he ran on as before, named all
the Masters who are recorded in old Books,
and preferred himself to them all. Indeed
if this good Man had an Enthusiasm, or
what the Vulgar call a Blind-side, it was
this: He thought a Schoolmaster the
greatest Character in the World, and
himself the greatest of all Schoolmasters,
neither of which Points he would have
given up to Alexander the Great at the
Head of his Army. 
Adams continued his Subject till they
came to one of the beautifullest Spots of
Ground in the Universe. It was a kind
of natural Amphitheatre, formed by the
winding of a small Rivulet, which was
planted with thick Woods, whose Trees rose
gradually above each other by the natural
Ascent of the Ground they stood on; which 

Ascent, as they hid with their Boughs,
they seemed to have been disposed by
the most skillful Design of the Planter. 
The Soil was spread with a Verdure
which no Paint could imitate, and the
whole Place might have raised romantic
Ideas in elder Minds than those of Joseph
and Fanny, without the Assistance of
Love. 
Here they arrived about Noon, and
Joseph proposed to Adams that they should
rest a while in this delightful Place, and
refresh themselves with some Provisions
which the Good-nature of Mrs. Wilson
had provided them with. Adams made
no Objection to the Proposal, so down
they sat, and pulling out a cold Fowl,
and a Bottle of Wine, they made a Repast
with a Cheerfulness which might have
attracted the Envy of more splendid Tables. 
I should not omit, that they found
among their Provision a little Paper, containing
a piece of Gold, which Adams
imagining it had been put there by mistake,
would have returned back, to deliver
them; but he was at last convinced by
Joseph, that Mr. Wilson had taken this
handsome way of furnishing them with a
Supply for their Journey, on his having
related the Distress which they had been 

in, when they were relieved by the Generosity
of the Pedlar. Adams said, he was
glad to see such an Instance of Goodness,
not so much for the Conveniency which
it brought to them, but for the sake of the
Doer, whose Reward would be great in
Heaven. He likewise comforted himself
with a Reflection, that he should
shortly have an Opportunity of returning
it him; for the Gentleman was within a
Week to make a Journey into Somersetshire,
to pass through Adam's Parish,
and had faithfully promised to call on
him: A Circumstance which we thought
too immaterial to mention before; but
which those who have as great an Affection
for that Gentleman as ourselves will
rejoice at, as it may give them Hopes of
seeing him again. Then Joseph made a
Speech on Charity, which the Reader, if
he is so disposed, may see in the next
Chapter; for we scorn to betray him
into any such Reading, without first giving
him Warning. 




Moral Reflections by Joseph Andrews,
with the Hunting Adventure, and
Parson Adams's miraculous Escape. 
I have often wondered, Sir, said he,
to observe so few Instances of Charity
among Mankind; for tho' the Goodness
of a Man's Heart did not incline him to
relieve the Distresses of his Fellow-Creatures,
methinks the Desire of Honour
should move him to it. What inspires a
Man to build fine Houses, to purchase
fine Furniture, Pictures, Clothes, and
other things at a great Expence, but an
Ambition to be respected more than other
People? Now would not one great Act
of Charity, one Instance of redeeming
a poor Family from all the Miseries of
Poverty, restoring an unfortunate Tradesman
by a Sum of Money to the means of
procuring a Livelihood by his Industry,
discharging an undone Debtor from his
Debts or a Goal, or any such like Example
of Goodness, create a Man more Honour
and Respect than he could acquire by the
finest House, Furniture, Pictures or
Clothes that were ever beheld? For not
only the Object himself, who was thus 

relieved, but all who heard the Name of
such a Person must, I imagine, reverence
him infinitely more than the Possessor of
all those other things: which when we so
admire, we rather praise the Builder, the
Workman, the Painter, the Laceman, the
Taylor, and the rest, by whose Ingenuity
they are produced, than the Person who by
his Money makes them his own. For my
own part, when I have waited behind my
Lady in a Room hung with fine Pictures,
while I have been looking at them I have
never once thought of their Owner, nor
hath any one else, as I ever observed; for
when it hath been asked whose Picture
that was, it was never once answered, the
Master's of the House, but Ammyconni,
Paul Varnish, Hannibal Scarachi, or Hogarthi,
which I suppose were the Names
of the Painters: but if it was asked, who
redeemed such a one out of Prison? who
lent such a ruined Tradesman Money to
set up? who cloathed that Family of poor
little Children? it is very plain, what must
be the Answer. And besides, these great
Folks are mistaken, if they imagine they
get any Honour at all by these means; 
for I do not remember I have ever been
with my Lady at any House where she
commended the House or Furniture, but
I have heard her at her return home make 

sport and jeer at whatever she had before
commended: and I have been told by
other Gentlemen in Livery, that it is the
same in their Families: but I defy the
wisest Man in the World to turn a true
good Action into Ridicule. I defy him to do
it. He who should endeavour it, would
be laughed at himself, instead of making
others laugh. Nobody scarce doth any
Good, yet they all agree in praising those
who do. Indeed it is strange that all
Men should consent in commending
Goodness, and no Man endeavour to deserve
that Commendation; whilst, on the
contrary, all rail at Wickedness, and all
are as eager to be what they abuse. This
I know not the Reason of, but it is as
plain as Daylight to those who converse
in the World, as I have done these three
Years. “Are all the great Folks wicked
then?” says Fanny. To be sure there are
some Exceptions, answered Joseph. Some
Gentlemen of our Cloth report charitable
Actions done by their Lords and Masters,
and I have heard 'Squire Pope, the great
Poet, at my Lady's Table, tell Stories of
a Man that lived at a Place called Ross,
and another at the Bath, one Al—Al
—I forget his Name, but it is in the
Book of Verses. This Gentleman hath
built up a stately House too, which the 

'Squire likes very well; but his Charity
is seen farther than his House, tho' it stands
on a Hill, ay, and brings him more Honour. 
It was his Charity that put him
upon the Book, where the 'Squire says he
puts all those who deserve it; and to be
sure, as he lives among all the great People,
if there were any such, he would
know them. —This was all of Mr. Joseph
Andrews's Speech which I could get
him to recollect, which I have delivered
as near as was possible in his own Words,
with a very small Embellishment. But
I believe the Reader hath not been a little
surprized at the long Silence of Parson
Adams, especially as so many Occasions
offer'd themselves to exert his Curiosity
and Observation. The truth is, he was
fast asleep, and had so been from the beginning
of the preceding Narrative: and
indeed if the Reader considers that two
Nights had past since he had closed his
Eyes , he will not wonder at his Repose,
tho' even Henley himself, or as great an
Orator (if any such be) had been in his
Rostrum or Tub before him. 
JOSEPH, who, whilst he was speaking,
had continued in one Attitude, with his
Head reclining on one side, and his Eyes
cast on the Ground, no sooner perceived, 

on looking up, the Position of Adams,
who was stretched on his Back, and snored
louder than the usual braying of the Animal
with long Ears; than he turned towards
Fanny, and taking her by the
Hand, began Dalliance, which, tho' consistent
with the purest Innocence and Decency,
neither he would have attempted, nor
she permited before any Witness. Whilst
they amused themselves in this harmless and
delightful manner, they heard a Pack of
Hounds approaching in full Cry towards
them, and presently afterwards saw a
Hare pop forth from the Wood, and
crossing the Water, land within a few Yards
of them in the Meadows. The Hare was
no sooner on Shore, than it seated itself on
its hinder Legs, and listened to the Sound
of the Pursuers. Fanny was wonderfully
pleased with the little Wretch, and eagerly
longed to have it in her Arms, that
she might preserve it from the Dangers
which seemed to threaten it: but the sensible
and human part of the Creation do not
always aptly distinguish their Friends from
their Foes; what wonder then if this silly
Creature, the moment it beheld, fled
from her who would have protected it,
and traversing the Meadows again, past the
little Rivulet on the opposite side. It was
however so spent and weak, that it fell 

down twice or thrice in its way. This
affected the tender Heart of Fanny, who
exclaimed with Tears in her Eyes against
the Barbarity of worrying a poor innocent
defenceless Animal out of its Life, and
putting it to the extremest Torture for
Diversion. She had not much time to
make Reflections of this kind, for on a
sudden the Hounds rushed through the
Wood, which resounded with their
Throats, and the Throats of their Attendants
who waited on them on horseback. 
The Dogs now past the Rivulet, and pursued
the Footsteps of the Hare; five
Horsemen attempted to leap over, three
of whom succeeded, and two were in the
Attempt thrown from their Saddles into
the Water; their Companions and their
own Horses too proceeded after their
Sport, and left their Friends and Riders
to invoke the Assistance of Fortune, or
employ the more active means of Strength
and Agility for their Deliverance. Joseph
however was not so unconcerned on
this Occasion; he left Fanny for a moment
to herself, and ran to the Gentlemen, who
were immediately on their Legs, shaking
their Ears, and easily with the help of
his Hand attained the Bank; (for the Rivulet
was not at all deep) and without
staying to thank their kind Assister, ran 

dripping across the Meadow, calling to
their Brother Sportsmen to stop their
Horses: but they heard them not. 
The Hounds were now very little
behind their poor reeling, staggering
Prey, which fainting almost at every Step,
crawled through the Wood, and had almost
got round to the Place where Fanny
stood, when it was overtaken by its
Enemies; and being driven out of the
Covert was caught, and instantly tore to
pieces before Fanny's Face, who was unable
to assist it with any Aid more powerful
than Pity; nor could she prevail on
Joseph, who had been himself a Sportsman
in his Youth, to attempt any thing
contrary to the Laws of Hunting, in favour
of the Hare, which he said was
killed fairly. 
The Hare was caught within a Yard
or two of Adams, who lay asleep at some
distance from the Lovers, and the
Hounds in devouring it, and pulling it
backwards and forwards, had drawn it
so close to him, that some of them (by
Mistake perhaps for the Hare's Skin) laid
hold of the Skirts of his Cassock, others
at the same time applying their Teeth
to his Wig, which he had with a Handkerchief 

fastened to his Head, they began
to pull him about; and had not the Motion
of his Body had more effect on him
than seemed to be wrought by the
Noise, they must certainly have tasted
his Flesh, which delicious Flavour
might have been fatal to him: But being
roused by these Tuggings, he instantly
awaked, and with a Jerk delivering his
Head from his Wig, he with most admirable
Dexterity recovered his Legs,
which now seemed the only Members he
could entrust his Safety to. Having therefore
escaped likewise from at least a third
Part of his Cassock, which he willingly left
as his Exuviæ or Spoils to the Enemy, he
fled with the utmost speed he could summon
to his Assistance. Nor let this be
any Detraction from the Bravery of his
Character; let the Number of the Enemies,
and the Surprize in which he was
taken, be considered; and if there be any
Modern so outragiously brave, that he cannot
admit of Flight in any Circumstance
whatever, I say (but I whisper that
softly, and I solemnly declare, without
any Intention of giving Offence to any
brave Man in the Nation) I say, or rather I
whisper that he is an ignorant Fellow, and
hath never read Homer nor Virgil, nor
knows he any thing of Hector or Turnus; 

nay, he is unacquainted with the History
of some great Men living, who, tho' as
brave as Lions, ay, as Tigers, have run
away the Lord knows how far, and the
Lord knows why, to the Surprize of their
Friends, and the Entertainment of their
Enemies. But if Persons of such heroick
Disposition are a little offended at
the Behaviour of Adams, we assure
them they shall be as much pleased with
what we shall immediately relate of Joseph
Andrews. The Master of the Pack
was just arrived, or, as the Sportsmen call
it, Come in, when Adams set out, as we
have before mentioned. This Gentleman
was generally said to be a great Lover of
Humour; but not to mince the matter,
especially as we are upon this Subject, he
was a great Hunter of Men: indeed he
had hitherto followed the Sport only with
Dogs of his own Species; for he kept
two or three Couple of barking Curs for
that Use only. However, as he thought
he had now found a Man nimble enough,
he was willing to indulge himself with
other Sport, and accordingly crying out,
Stole away, encouraged the Hounds to
pursue Mr. Adams, swearing it was the
largest Jack Hare he ever saw; at the
same time hallooing and hooping as if a
conquered Foe was flying before him; 

in which he was imitated by these two or
three Couple of Human, or rather two-leg'd
Curs on horseback which we have
mentioned before. 
Now thou, whoever thou art, whether
a Muse, or by what other Name soever
thou chusest to be called, who presidest
over Biography, and hast inspired
all the Writers of Lives in these our
Times: Thou who didst infuse such
wonderful Humour into the Pen of immortal
Gulliver, who hast carefully guided
the Judgment, whilst thou hast exalted
the nervous manly Style of thy Mallet: 
Thou who hadst no Hand in that Dedication,
and Preface, or the Translations
which thou wouldst willingly have struck
out of the Life of Cicero: Lastly, Thou
who without the Assistance of the least
Spice of Literature, and even against his
Inclination, hast, in some Pages of his
Book, forced Colley Cibber to write English; 
do thou assist me in what I find my
self unequal to. Do thou introduce on
the Plain, the young, the gay, the brave
Joseph Andrews, whilst Men shall view
him with Admiration and Envy; tender
Virgins with Love and anxious Concern
for his Safety. 

No sooner did Joseph Andrews perceive
the Distress of his Friend, when first
the quick-scenting Dogs attacked him,
than he grasped his Cudgel in his right
Hand, a Cudgel which his Father had of
his Grandfather, to whom a mighty
strong Man of Kent had given it for a
Present in that Day, when he broke three
Heads on the Stage. It was a Cudgel of
mighty Strength and wonderful Art,
made by one of Mr. Deard's best Workmen,
whom no other Artificer can equal; 
and who hath made all those Sticks which
the Beaus have lately walked with about
the Park in a Morning: But this
was far his Master-piece; on its Head
was engraved a Nose and Chin, which
might have been mistaken for a Pair
of Nut-crackers. The Learned have
imagined it designed to represent the Gorgon:
but it was in fact copied from the
Face of a certain English Baronet of infinite
Wit, Humour, and Gravity. He did intend
to have engraved here many Histories: 
As the first Night of Captain B&wblank;'s
Play, where you would have seen Criticks
in Embroidery transplanted from the
Boxes to the Pit, whose ancient Inhabitants
were exalted to the Galleries, where
they played on Catcalls. He did intend 

to have painted an Auction-Room, where
Mr. Cock would have appeared aloft in his
Pulpit, trumpeting forth the Praises of a
China Bason; and with Astonishment
wondering that Nobody bids more for that
fine, that superb. —He did intend
to have engraved many other things,
but was forced to leave all out for want
of room. 
No sooner had Joseph grasped this
Cudgel in his Hands, than Lightning
darted from his Eyes; and the heroick
Youth, swift of Foot, ran with the utmost
speed to his Friend's assistance. He
overtook him just as Rockwood had laid
hold of the Skirt of his Cassock, which
being torn hung to the ground. Reader,
we would make a Simile on this
Occasion, but for two Reasons: The first
is, it would interrupt the Description,
which should be rapid in this Part; but
that doth not weigh much, many Precedents
occurring for such an Interruption: 
The second, and much the greater
Reason is, that we could find no Simile
adequate to our Purpose: For indeed,
what Instance could we bring to
set before our Reader's Eyes at once the
Idea of Friendship, Courage, Youth, Beauty,
Strength, and Swiftness; all which 

blazed in the Person of Joseph Andrews. 
Let those therefore that describe
Lions and Tigers, and Heroes fiercer
than both, raise their Poems or Plays with
the Simile of Joseph Andrews, who is
himself above the reach of any Simile. 
Now Rockwood had laid fast hold on
the Parson's Skirts, and stopt his Flight; 
which Joseph no sooner perceived, than
he levelled his Cudgel at his Head, and
laid him sprawling. Jowler and Ringwood
then fell on his Great-Coat, and
had undoubtedly brought him to the
Ground, had not Joseph, collecting all his
Force given Jowler such a Rap on the
Back, that quitting his Hold he ran
howling over the Plain: A harder Fate
remained for thee, O Ringwood. Ringwood
the best Hound that ever pursued
a Hare, who never threw his Tongue but
where the Scent was undoubtedly true; 
good at trailing; and sure in a Highway,
no Babler, no Over-runner, respected
by the whole Pack, who, whenever
he opened, knew the Game was at
hand. He fell by the Stroke of Joseph. 
Thunder, and Plunder, and Wonder, and
Blunder, were the next Victims of his
Wrath, and measured their Lengths on
the Ground. Then Fairmaid, a Bitch 

which Mr. John Temple had bred up in
his House, and fed at his own Table,
and lately sent the Squire fifty Miles for
a Present, ran fiercely at Joseph, and bit
him by the Leg; no Dog was ever
fiercer than she, being descended from
an Amazonian Breed, and had worried
Bulls in her own Country, but now waged
an unequal Fight; and had shared the
Fate of these we have mentioned before,
had not Diana (the Reader may believe
it or not, as he pleases) in that Instant
interposed, and in the Shape of the Huntsman
snatched her Favourite up in her
Arms. 
The Parson now faced about, and
with his Crab Stick felled many to the
Earth, and scattered others, till he was
attacked by Cæsar and pulled to the
Ground; then Joseph flew to his Rescue,
and with such Might fell on the Victor,
that, O eternal Blot to his Name! Cæsar
ran yelping away. 
The Battle now raged with the most
dreadful Violence, when lo the Huntsman,
a Man of Years and Dignity, lifted his
Voice, and called his Hounds from the
Fight; telling them, in a Language they
understood, that it was in vain to contend 

longer; for that Fate had decreed
the Victory to their Enemies. 
Thus far the Muse hath with her
usual Dignity related this prodigious
Battle, a Battle we apprehend never
equalled by any Poet, Romance or Life-writer
whatever, and having brought it
to a Conclusion she ceased; we shall
therefore proceed in our ordinary Style
with the Continuation of this History. 
The Squire and his Companions, whom
the Figure of Adams and the Gallantry
of Joseph had at first thrown into a violent
Fit of Laughter, and who had hitherto beheld
the Engagement with more Delight
than any Chace, Shooting-match, Race,
Cock-fighting, Bull or Bear-Baiting had
ever given them, began now to apprehend
the Danger of their Hounds, many
of which lay sprawling in the Fields. The
Squire therefore having first called his
Friends about him, as Guards for Safety
of his Person, rode manfully up to the
Combatants, and summoning all the
Terror he was Master of, into his Countenance,
demanded with an authoritative
Voice of Joseph, what he meant by assaulting
his Dogs in that Manner. Joseph
answered with great Intrepidity, that
they had first fallen on his Friend; and 

if they had belonged to the greatest Man
in the Kingdom, he would have treated
them in the same Way; for whilst his
Veins contained a single Drop of Blood,
he would not stand idle by, and see that
Gentleman (pointing to Adams) abused
either by Man or Beast; and having so
said, both he and Adams brandished their
wooden Weapons, and put themselves
into such a Posture, that the Squire and
his Company thought proper to preponderate,
before they offered to revenge the
Cause of their four-footed Allies. 
At this Instant Fanny, whom the Apprehension
of Joseph's Danger had alarmed
so much, that forgetting her own she
had made the utmost Expedition, came
up. The Squire and all the Horsemen
were so surprized with her Beauty, that
they immediately fixed both their Eyes and
Thoughts solely on her. Every one declared
he had never seen so charming a Creature. 
Neither Mirth nor Anger engaged
them a Moment longer; but all sat in
silent Amaze. The Huntsman only was
free from her Attraction, who was busy
in cutting the Ears of the Dogs, and endeavouring
to recover them to Life; in
which he succeeded so well, that only two
of no great Note remained slaughtered on 

the Field of Action. Upon this the
Huntsman declared, “'Twas well it was
no worse; for his part he could not
blame the Gentleman, and wondered
his Master would encourage the Dogs
to hunt Christians; that it was the
surest way to spoil them, to make them
follow Vermin instead of sticking to a
Hare.” 
The Squire being informed of the
little Mischief that had been done; and
perhaps having more Mischief of another
kind in his Head, accosted Mr. Adams
with a more favourable Aspect than before:
he told him he was sorry for what
had happened; that he had endeavoured
all he could to prevent it, the Moment he
was acquainted with his Cloth, and greatly
commended the Courage of his Servant; 
for so he imagined Joseph to be. 
He then invited Mr. Adams to Dinner,
and desired the young Woman might
come with him. Adams refused a long
while; but the Invitation was repeated
with so much Earnestness and Courtesy,
that at length he was forced to accept it. 
His Wig and Hat, and other Spoils of the
Field, being gathered together by Joseph,
(for otherwise probably they would have
been forgotten;) he put himself into the 

best Order he could; and then the Horse
and Foot moved forward in the same
Pace towards the Squire's House, which
stood at a very little distance. 
Whilst they were on the Road, the
lovely Fanny attracted the Eyes of all; 
they endeavoured to outvie one another in
Encomiums on her Beauty; which the
Reader will pardon my not relating, as
they had not any thing new or uncommon
in them: So must he likewise my not setting
down the many curious Jests which
were made on Adams, some of them declaring
that Parson-hunting was the best
Sport in the World: Others commending
his standing at Bay, which they said
he had done as well as any Badger; with
such like Merriment, which tho' it
would ill become the Dignity of this
History; afforded much Laughter and
Diversion to the Squire, and his facetious
Companions. 




A Scene of Roasting very nicely adapted
to the present Taste and
Times. 
They arrived at the Squire's House
just as his Dinner was ready. A
little Dispute arose on the account of
Fanny, whom the Squire who was a Batchelor,
was desirous to place at his own
Table; but she would not consent, nor
would Mr. Adams permit her to be parted
from Joseph: so that she was at length
with him consigned over to the Kitchin,
where the Servants were ordered to make
him drunk; a Favour which was likewise
intended for Adams: which Design
being executed, the Squire thought he
should easily accomplish, what he had,
when he first saw her, intended to perpetrate
with Fanny. 
It may not be improper, before we
proceed farther to open a little the Character
of this Gentleman, and that of his
Friends. The Master of this House then
was a Man of a very considerable Fortune; 
a Batchelor, as we have said, and 

about forty Years of Age: He had been
educated (if we may use the Expression)
in the Country, and at his own Home,
under the Care of his Mother and a Tutor,
who had Orders never to correct him
nor to compel him to learn more than he
liked, which it seems was very little, and
that only in his Childhood; for from
the Age of fifteen he addicted himself
entirely to Hunting and other rural Amusements,
for which his Mother took
care to equip him with Horses, Hounds,
and all other Necessaries: and his Tutor
endeavouring to ingratiate himself with
his young Pupil, who would, he knew,
be able handsomely to provide for him,
became his Companion, not only at these
Exercises, but likewise over a Bottle,
which the young Squire had a very early
Relish for. At the Age of twenty, his
Mother began to think she had not fulfilled
the Duty of a Parent; she therefore
resolved to persuade her Son, if
possible, to that which she imagined
would well supply all that he might have
learned at a publick School or University. 
This is what they commonly call Travelling; 
which, with the help of the Tutor
who was fixed on to attend him, she easily
succeeded in. He made in 3 Years the Tour
of Europe, as they term it, and returned 

home, well furnish'd with French Clothes,
Phrases and Servants, with a hearty Contempt
for his own Country; especially
what had any Savour of the plain Spirit
and Honesty of our Ancestors. His Mother
greatly applauded herself at his Return; 
and now being Master of his own
Fortune, he soon procured himself a Seat
in Parliament, and was in the common Opinion
one of the finest Gentlemen of his
Age: But what distinguished him chiefly,
was a strange Delight which he took in
every thing which is ridiculous, odious,
and absurd in his own Species; so that he
never chose a Companion without one
or more of these Ingredients, and those
who were marked by Nature in the most
eminent Degree with them, were most
his Favourites: if he ever found a Man
who either had not or endeavoured to
conceal these Imperfections, he took
great pleasure in inventing Methods of
forcing him into Absurdities, which were
not natural to him, or in drawing forth
and exposing those that were; for which
purpose he was always provided with a
Set of Fellows whom we have before
called Curs; and who did indeed no great
Honour to the Canine Kind: Their Business
was to hunt out and display every
thing that had any Savour of the above 

mentioned Qualities, and especially in the
gravest and best Characters: But if they failed
in their Search, they were to turn even
Virtue and Wisdom themselves into Ridicule
for the Diversion of their Master
and Feeder. The Gentlemen of Curlike
Disposition, who were now at his
House, and whom he had brought with
him from London, were an old Half-pay
Officer, a Player, a dull Poet, a Quack
Doctor, a scraping Fidler, and a lame
German Dancing-Master. 
As soon as Dinner was served, while
Mr. Adams was saying Grace, the Captain
conveyed his Chair from behind him; 
so that when he endeavoured to seat himself,
he fell down on the Ground; and thus
compleated Joke the first, to the great Entertainment
of the whole Company. The
second Joke was performed by the Poet,
who sat next him on the other side, and
took an Opportunity, while poor Adams
was respectfully drinking to the Master
of the House, to overturn a Plate of Soup
into his Breeches; which, with the many
Apologies he made, and the Parson's
gentle Answers, caused much Mirth in
the Company. Joke the third was performed
by one of the Serving-men, who 

had been ordered to convey a Quantity
of Gin into Mr. Adams's Ale, which he
declaring to be the best Liquor he ever
drank, but rather too rich of the Malt,
contributed again to their Laughter. Mr.
Adams, from whom we had most of this
Relation, could not recollect all the Jests of
this kind practised on him, which the inoffensive
Disposition of his own Heart
made him slow in discovering; and indeed,
had it not been for the Information
which we received from a Servant of the
Family, this Part of our History, which
we take to be none of the least curious,
must have been deplorably imperfect; 
tho' we must own it probable, that some
more Jokes were (as they call it) cracked
during their Dinner; but we have by
no means been able to come at the
Knowledge of them. When Dinner was
removed, the Poet began to repeat some
Verses, which he said were made extempore. 
The following is a Copy of them,
procured with the greatest difficulty. 
An extempore Poem on Parson Adams. 

Did ever Mortal such a Parson view;
His Cassock old, his Wig not over-new?

Well might the Hounds have him for Fox
mistaken,
In Smell more like to that, than rusty
Bacon  
But would it not make any Mortal stare,
To See this Parson taken for a Hare?
Could Phœbus err thus grossly, even he
For a good Player might have taken thee.
At which Words the Bard whip'd off
the Player's Wig, and received the Approbation
of the Company, rather perhaps
for the Dexterity of his Hand than
his Head. The Player, instead of retorting
the Jest on the Poet, began to display
his Talents on the same Subject. He
repeated many Scraps of Wit out of Plays,
reflecting on the whole Body of the Clergy,
which were received with great Acclamations
by all present. It was now
the Dancing-Master's Turn to exhibit
his Talents; he therefore addressing himself
to Adams in broken English, told
him, “He was a Man ver well made
for de Dance, and he suppose by his
Walk, dat he had learn of some great
Master. He said it was ver pretty
Quality in Clergyman to dance;” and 

concluded with desiring him to dance a
Minuet, telling him, “his Cassock
would serve for Petticoats; and that
he would himself be his Partner.” At
which Words, without waiting for an
Answer, he pulled out his Gloves, and
the Fiddler was preparing his Fiddle. 
The Company all offered the Dancing-Master
Wagers that the Parson outdanced
him, which he refused, saying,
“He believed so too; for he had never
seen any Man in his Life who looked
de Dance so well as de Gentleman:” 
He then stepped forwards to take Adams
by the Hand, which he hastily withdrew,
and at the same time clenching his Fist,
advised him not to carry the Jest too far,
for he would not endure being put upon. 
The Dancing master no sooner saw the
Fist than he prudently retired out of it's
reach, and stood aloof mimicking Adams,
whose Eyes were fixed on him, not
guessing what he was at, but to avoid his
laying hold on him, which he had once
attempted. In the mean while, the Captain
perceiving an Opportunity pinned a
Cracker or Devil to the Cassock, and
then lighted it with their little smoaking
Candle. Adams being a Stranger to this
Sport, and believing he had been blown
up in reality, started from his Chair, and 

jumped about the Room, to the infinite
Joy of the Beholders, who declared he
was the best Dancer in the Universe. As
soon as the Devil had done tormenting
him, and he had a little recovered his
Confusion, he returned to the Table,
and standing up in the Posture of one
who intended to make a Speech, they all
cried out, Hear him, Hear Him; and he
then spoke in the following manner: “Sir,
I am sorry to see one to whom Providence
hath been so bountiful in bestowing
his Favours, make so ill and ungrateful
a Return for them; for tho'
you have not insulted me yourself, it
is visible you have delighted in those
that do it, nor have once discouraged
the many Rudenesses which have been
shewn towards me; indeed towards
yourself, if you rightly understood
them; for I am your Guest, and by the
Laws of Hospitality entitled to your
Protection. One Gentleman hath
thought proper to produce some Poetry
upon me, of which I shall only say,
that I had rather be the Subject than
the Composer. He hath pleased to
treat me with Disrespect as a Parson; I
apprehend my Order is not the Object
of Scorn, nor that I can become so, unless
by being a Disgrace to it, which I hope 

Poverty will never be called. Another
Gentleman indeed hath repeated
some Sentences, where the Order itself
is mentioned with Contempt. He
says they are taken from Plays. I am
sure such Plays are a Scandal to the
Government which permits them, and
cursed will be the Nation where they
are represented. How others have
treated me, I need not observe; they
themselves, when they reflect, must
allow the Behaviour to be as improper
to my Years as to my Cloth. You
found me, Sir, travelling with two of
my Parishioners, (I omit your Hounds
falling on me; for I have quite forgiven
it, whether it proceeded from
the Wantonness or Negligence of the
Huntsman,) my Appearance might
very well persuade you that your Invitation
was an Act of Charity, tho'
in reality we were well provided; yes,
Sir, if we had had an hundred Miles
to travel, we had sufficient to bear our
Expences in a noble manner.” (At
which Words he produced the half Guinea
which was found in the Basket) “I
do not shew you this out of Ostentation
of Riches, but to convince you I speak
Truth. Your seating me at your Table
was an Honour which I did not 

ambitiously affect; when I was here, I
endeavoured to behave towards you
with the utmost Respect; if I have
failed, it was not with Design, nor
could I, certainly, so far be guilty as
to deserve the Insults I have suffered. 
If they were meant therefore either to
my Order or my Poverty (and you see
I am not so very poor) the Shame doth
not lie at my door, and I heartily pray,
that the Sin may be averted from
your's.” He thus finished, and received
a general Clap from the whole
Company. Then the Gentleman of the
House told him, “he was sorry for what
had happened; that he could not accuse
him of any Share in it: That the
Verses were, as himself had well observed,
so bad, that he might easily
answer them; and for the Serpent, it
was undoubtedly a very great Affront
done him by the Dancing-Master, for
which if he well thrashed him, as he
deserved, he should be very much
pleased to see it;” (in which probably
he spoke Truth.) Adams answered,
“Whoever had done it, it was not his
Profession to punish him that way; 
but for the Person whom he had accused,
I am a Witness, says he, of
his Innocence. For I had my Eye on 

him all the while. Whoever he was,
God forgive him, and bestow on him
a little more Sense as well as Humanity.” 
The Captain answer'd with a surly Look
and Accent, “That he hoped he
he did not mean to reflect on him; 
d&wblank;n him, he had as much Imanity
as another, and if any Man said he
had not, he would convince him of his
Mistake by cutting his Throat.” Adams
smiling, said, “He believed he
had spoke right by Accident.” To
which the Captain returned, “What do
you mean by my speaking right? if you
was not a Parson, I would not take
these Words; but your Gown protects
you. If any Man who wears a Sword
had said so much, I had pulled him
by the Nose before this.” Adams replied,
“If he attempted any Rudeness
to his Person, he would not find any
Protection for himself in his Gown;” 
and clenching his Fist, declared he had
threshed many a stouter Man. The Gentleman
did all he could to encourage the
warlike Disposition in Adams, and was
in hopes to have produced a Battle: But
he was disappointed; for the Captain
made no other Answer than, “It is very
well you are a Parson,” and so drinking
off a Bumper to old Mother Church, ended
the Dispute. 

Then the Doctor, who had hitherto
been silent, and who was the gravest, but
most mischievous Dog of all, in a very
pompous Speech highly applauded what
Adams had said; and as much discommended
the Behaviour to him; he proceeded
to Encomiums on the Church and
Poverty; and lastly recommended Forgiveness
of what had past to Adams, who
immediately answered, “That every
thing was forgiven;” and in the
Warmth of his Goodness he filled a
Bumper of strong Beer, (a Liquor he
preferred to Wine) and drank a Health
to the whole Company, shaking the Captain
and the Poet heartily by the Hand,
and addressing himself with great Respect
to the Doctor; who indeed had not
laughed outwardly at any thing that past,
as he had a perfect Command of his
Muscles, and could laugh inwardly without
betraying the least Symptoms in
his Countenance. The Doctor now
began a second formal Speech, in
which he declaimed against all Levity of
Conversation; and what is usually called
Mirth. He said, “There were Amusements
fitted for Persons of all Ages
and Degrees, from the Rattle to the
discussing a Point of Philosophy, and 

that Men discovered themselves in nothing
more than in the Choice of their
Amusements; for,” says he, “as it
must greatly raise our Expectation of
the future Conduct in Life of Boys,
whom in their tender Years we perceive
instead of Taw or Balls, or other
childish Play-things, to chuse, at their
Leisure-Hours, to exercise their Genius
in Contentions of Wit, Learning,
and such like; so must it inspire one
with equal Contempt of a Man, if we
should discover him playing at Taw
or other childish Play.” Adams highly
commended the Doctor's Opinion,
and said, “He had often wondered at
some Passages in ancient Authors,
where Scipio, Lælius, and other great
Men were represented to have passed
many Hours in Amusements of the
most trifling kind.” The Doctor reply'd,
“He had by him an old Greek
Manuscript where a favourite Diversion
of Socrates was recorded.” “Ay,” 
says the Parson eagerly, “I should be
most infinitely obliged to you for the
Favour of perusing it.” The Doctor
promised to send it him, and farther said,
“that he believed he could describe it. 
I think,” says he, “as near as I can
remember, it was this. There was a 

Throne erected, on one side of which
sat a King, and on the other a Queen,
with their Guards and Attendants
ranged on both sides; to them was introduced
an Ambassador, which Part
Socrates always used to perform himself; 
and when he was led up to the Footsteps
of the Throne, he addressed himself to the
Monarchs in some grave Speech, full
of Virtue and Goodness, and Morality,
and such like. After which, he was
seated between the King and Queen,
and royally entertained. This I think
was the chief part. —Perhaps I
may have forgot some Particulars; for
it is long since I read it.” Adams said,
“It was indeed a Diversion worthy the
Relaxation of so great a Man; and
thought something resembling it should
be instituted among our great Men,
instead of Cards and other idle Passtime,
in which he was informed they
trifled away too much of their Lives. 
He added, the Christian Religion was
a nobler Subject for these Speeches
than any Socrates could have invented.” 
The Gentleman of the House
approved what Mr. Adams said, and
declared, “he was resolved to perform
the Ceremony this very Evening.” 
To which the Doctor objected, 

as no one was prepared with a Speech, unless
said he, (turning to Adams with a Gravity
of Countenance which would have
deceived a more knowing Man) “you
have a Sermon about you, Doctor. — 
Sir,” says Adams, “I never travel
without one, for fear what may happen.” 
He was easily prevailed on
by his worthy Friend, as he now called
the Doctor, to undertake the Part of the
Ambassador; so that the Gentleman sent
immediate Orders to have the Throne
erected; which was performed before
they had drank two Bottles: And perhaps
the Reader will hereafter have no
great reason to admire the Nimbleness
of the Servants. Indeed, to confess the
Truth, the Throne was no more than
this; there was a great Tub of Water provided,
on each side of which were placed
two Stools raised higher than the Surface
of the Tub, and over the Whole was laid
a Blanket; on these Stools were placed
the King and Queen, namely, the Master
of the House, and the Captain. And
now the Ambassador was introduced, between
the Poet and the Doctor, who
having read his Sermon to the great Entertainment
of all present, was led up to
his Place, and being seated between
their Majesties, they immediately rose up, 

when the Blanket wanting its Supports at
either end, gave way, and soused Adams
over Head and Ears in the Water; the
Captain made his Escape, but unluckily
the Gentleman himself not being as nimble
as he ought, Adams caught hold of him
before he descended from his Throne,
and pulled him in with him, to the entire
secret Satisfaction of all the Company. 
Adams after ducking the Squire
twice or thrice leapt out of the Tub, and
looked sharp for the Doctor, whom he
would certainly have convey'd to the
same Place of Honour; but he had wisely
withdrawn: he then searched for his Crabstick,
and having found that, as well as his
Fellow-Travellers, he declared he would
not stay a moment longer in such a House. 
He then departed, without exacted leave
of his Host, whom he had taken a more
severe Revenge on, than he intended: 
For as he did not use sufficient care to dry
himself in time, he caught a Cold by the
Accident, which threw him into a Fever,
that had like to have cost him his Life. 




Which some Readers will think too
short, and others too long. 
Adams, and Joseph, who was no
less enraged than his Friend, at
the Treatment he met with, went out
with their Sticks in their Hands; and carried
off Fanny, notwithstanding the Opposition
of the Servants, who did all,
without proceeding to Violence, in their
power to detain them. They walked
as fast as they could, not so much from
any Apprehension of being pursued, as
that Mr. Adams might by Exercise prevent
any harm from the Water. The
Gentleman who had given such Orders to
his Servants concerning Fanny, that he
did not in the least fear her getting away,
no sooner heard that she was gone, than
he began to rave, and immediately dispatched
several with Orders, either to
bring her back, or never return. The
Poet, the Player, and all but the Dancing-master
and Doctor went on this Errand. 

The Night was very dark, in which our
Friends began their Journey; however they
made such Expedition, that they soon
arrived at an Inn, which was at seven
Miles Distance. Here they unanimously
consented to pass the Evening, Mr.
Adams being now as dry as he was before
he had set out on his Embassy. 
This Inn, which indeed we might
call an Ale-house, had not the Words,
The New Inn, been writ on the Sign, afforded
them no better Provision than
Bread and Cheese, and Ale; on which,
however, they made a very comfortable
Meal; for Hunger is better than a
French Cook. 
They had no sooner supped, than
Adams returning Thanks to the Almighty
for his Food, declared he had eat his
homely Commons, with much greater
Satisfaction than his splendid Dinner, and
exprest great Comtempt for the Folly of
Mankind, who sacrificed their Hopes of
Heaven to the Acquisition of vast Wealth,
since so much Comfort was to be found
in the humblest State and the lowest Provision. 
Very true, Sir, says a grave
Man who sat smoaking his Pipe by the 

Fire, and who was a Traveller as well
as himself. “I have often been as much
surprized as you are, when I consider
the Value which Mankind in general
set on Riches, since every day's Experience
shews us how little is in their
power; for what indeed truly desirable
can they bestow on us? Can they
give Beauty to the Deformed, Strength
to the Weak, or Health to the Infirm? 
Surely if they could, we should not
see so many ill-favoured Faces haunting
the Assemblies of the Great, nor
would such numbers of feeble Wretches
languish in their Coaches and Palaces. 
No, not the Wealth of a Kingdom
can purchase any Paint, to dress
pale Ugliness in the Bloom of that young
Maiden, nor any Drugs to equip Disease
with the Vigour of that young
Man. Do not Riches bring us Sollicitude
instead of Rest, Envy instead
of Affection, and Danger instead of
Safety? Can they prolong their
own Possession, or lengthen his Days
who enjoys them? So far otherwise,
that the Sloth, the Luxury, the Care
which attend them, shorten the Lives
of Millions, and bring them with Pain
and Misery, to an untimely Grave. 
Where then is their Value, if they can 

neither embellish, or strengthen our
Forms, sweeten or prolong our Lives? 
Again—Can they adorn the Mind more
than the Body? Do they not rather swell
the Heart with Vanity, puff up the
Cheeks with Pride, shut our Ears to
every Call of Virtue, and our Bowels
to every Motive of Compassion!” 
“Give me your Hand, Brother,” said
Adams in a Rapture; “for I suppose
you are a Clergyman.” “No truly,” 
answered the other, (indeed he was a
Priest of the Church of Rome; but those
who understand our Laws will not wonder
he was not over-ready to own it.) 
“Whatever you are,” cries Adams,
“you have spoken my Sentiments: I
believe I have preached every Syllable
of your Speech twenty times over: 
For it hath always appeared to me
easier for a Cable Rope (which by the
way is the true rendering of that Word
we have translated Camel) to go
through the Eye of a Needle, than for
a rich Man to get into the Kingdom
of Heaven,” “That, Sir,” said the
other, “will be easily granted you by
Divines, and is deplorably true: But
as the Prospect of our Good at a distance
doth not so forcibly affect us, it
might be of some Service to Mankind 

to be made thoroughly sensible, which
I think they might be with very little
serious Attention, that even the Blessings
of this World, are not to be
purchased with Riches. A Doctrine
in my Opinion, not only metaphysically,
but if I may so say, mathematically
demonstrable; and which I have
been always so perfectly convinced of,
that I have a Contempt for nothing so
much as for Gold.” Adams now began
a long Discourse; but as most which he
said occurs among many Authors, who
have treated this Subject, I shall omit
inserting it. During its Continuance
Joseph and Fanny retired to Rest, and
the Host likewise left the Room. When
the English Parson had concluded, the
Romish resumed the Discourse, which he
continued with great Bitterness and Invective; 
and at last ended by desiring Adams
to lend him eighteen Pence to pay his
Reckoning; promising, if he never paid
him, he might be assured of his Prayers. 
The good Man answered, that eighteen
Pence would be too little to carry him any
very long Journey; that he had half a
Guinea in his Pocket, which he would
divide with him. He then fell to searching
his Pockets, but could find no Money: 
For indeed the Company with 

whom he dined, had past one Jest upon
him which we did not then enumerate,
and had picked his Pocket of all that
Treasure which he had so ostentatiously
produced. 
“Bless me,” cry'd Adams, “I have
certainly lost it, I can never have spent
it. Sir, as I am a Christian I had a
whole half Guinea in my Pocket this
Morning, and have not now a single
Halfpenny of it left. Sure the Devil
must have taken it from me.” “Sir,” 
answered the Priest smiling, “You need
make no Excuses; if you are not willing
to lend me the Money, I am contented.” 
“Sir,” cries Adams, “if
I had the greatest Sum in the World; 
ay, if I had ten Pounds about me, I
would bestow it all to rescue any
Christian from Distress. I am more
vexed at my Loss on your account
than my own. Was ever any thing
so unlucky? because I have no Money
in my Pocket, I shall be suspected to be
no Christian.” “I am more unlucky,” 
quoth the other, “if you are as generous
as you say: For really a Crown
would have made me happy, and conveyed
me in plenty to the Place I am
going, which is not above twenty 

Miles off, and where I can arrive by
to-morrow Night. I assure you I am
not accustomed to travel Pennyless: 
But am just arrived in England, and
we were forced by a Storm in our
Passage to throw all we had overboard. 
I don't suspect but this Fellow
will take my Word for the Trifle I
owe him; but I hate to appear so
mean as to confess myself without a
Shilling to such People: For these,
and indeed too many others know little
Difference in their Estimation between
a Beggar and a Thief.” However, he
thought he should deal better with the
Host that Evening than the next Morning; 
he therefore resolved to set out immediately,
notwithstanding the Darkness; 
and accordingly as soon as the Host returned
he communicated to him the Situation
of his Affairs; upon which the
Host scratching his Head, answered,
“Why, I do not know, Master, if it be
so, and you have no Money, I must
trust I think, tho' I had rather always
have ready Money if I could; but,
marry, you look like so honest a
Gentleman, that I don't fear your paying
me, if it was twenty times as
much.” The Priest made no Reply,
taking leave of him and Adams, as fast 

as he could, not without Confusion, and
perhaps with some Distrust of Adams's
Sincerity, departed. 
He was no sooner gone than the Host
fell a shaking his Head, and declared if
he had suspected the Fellow had no Money,
he would not have drawn him a
single Drop of Drink; saying, he despaired
of ever seeing his Face again; for that
he looked like a confounded Rogue. 
“Rabbit the Fellow,” cries he, “I
thought by his talking so much about
Riches, that he had a hundred Pounds
at least in his Pocket.” Adams chid
him for his Suspicions, which he said
were not becoming a Christian; and then
without reflecting on his Loss, or considering
how he himself should depart in
the Morning, he retired to a very homely
Bed, as his Companions had before; 
however, Health and Fatigue gave them
a sweeter Repose than is often in the
power of Velvet and Down to bestow. 




Containing as surprizing and bloody
Adventures as can be found in this,
or perhaps any other authentic History. 
It was almost Morning when Joseph
Andrews, whose Eyes the Thoughts
of his dear Fanny had opened, as he lay
fondly meditating on that lovely Creature,
heard a violent knocking at the
Door over which he lay; he presently
jumped out of Bed, and opening the
Window, was asked if there were no
Travellers in the House; and presently
by another Voice, If two Men and a
young Woman had not taken up their
Lodgings there that Night. Tho' he
knew not the Voices, he began to entertain
a Suspicion of the Truth; for indeed
he had received some Information from
one of the Servants of the Squire's House,
of his Design; and answered in the Negative. 
One of the Servants who knew
the Host well, called out to him by his
Name, just as he had opened another
Window, and asked him the same Question; 
to which he answered in the Affirmative. 

O ho! said another; Have we
found you? And ordered the Host to
come down and open his Door. Fanny,
who was as wakeful as Joseph, no sooner
heard all this, than she leap'd from her
Bed, and hastily putting on her Gown
and Petticoats, ran as fast as possible to
Joseph's Room, who then was almost
drest; he immediately let her in, and
embracing her with the most passionate
Tenderness, bid her fear nothing: For
he would die in her Defence. “Is that
a Reason why I should not fear,” says
she, “when I should lose what is dearer
to me than the whole World?” Joseph
then kissing her Hand, said he could
almost thank the Occasion which had extorted
from her a Tenderness she would
never indulge him with before. He then
ran and waked his Bedfellow Adams, who
was yet fast asleep, notwithstanding many
Calls from Joseph: But was no sooner
made sensible of their Danger than he
leaped from his Bed, without considering
the Presence of Fanny, who hastily turned
her Face from him, and enjoyed a double
Benefit from the dark, which as it would
have prevented any Offence to an Innocence
less pure, or a Modesty less delicate,
so it concealed even those Blushes which
were raised in her. 

ADAMS had soon put on all his
Clothes but his Breeches, which in the
Hurry he forgot; however, they were
pretty well supplied by the length of the
rest: And now the House-Door being
opened, the Captain, the Poet, the Player,
and 3 Servants came in. The Captain told
the Host, that the 2 Fellows who were in
his House had run away with a young
Woman, and desired to know in which
Room she lay. The Host, who presently
believed the Story, directed them, and
instantly the Captain and Poet, jostling
one another, ran up. The Poet who was
the nimblest entering the Chamber, first
searched the Bed and every other part,
but to no purpose; the Bird was flown, as the
impatient Reader, who might otherwise
have been in pain for her, was before
advertised. They then enquired where
the Men lay, and were approaching the
Chamber, when Joseph roared out in
a loud Voice, that he would shoot the
first Man who offered to attack the
Door. The Captain enquired what Fire-Arms
they had; to which the Host answered,
he believed they had none; nay,
he was almost convinced of it: For he
had heard one ask the other in the Evening,
what they should have done, if they 

had been overtaken when they had no
Arms; to which the other answered,
they would have defended themselves with
their Sticks as long as they were able,
and G&wblank; would assist a just Cause. This
satisfied the Captain, but not the Poet,
who prudently retreated down Stairs, saying
it was his Business to record great
Actions, and not to do them. The Captain
was no sooner well satisfied that there
were no Fire-Arms, than bidding Defiance
to Gunpowder, and swearing he loved
the Smell of it, he ordered the Servants
to follow him, and marching boldly up,
immediately attempted to force the Door,
which the Servants soon helped him to
accomplish. When it was opened, they
discovered the Enemy drawn up three
deep; Adams in the Front, and Fanny in
the Rear. The Captain told Adams,
that if they would go all back to the
House again, they should be civilly treated:
but unless they consented, he had
Orders to carry the young Lady with
him, whom there was great Reason to
believe they had stolen from her Parents; 
for notwithstanding her Disguise, her
Air, which she could not conceal, sufficiently
discovered her Birth to be infinitely
superiour to theirs. Fanny bursting into
Tears, solemnly assured him he was mistaken; 

that she was a poor helpless Foundling,
and had no Relation in the World
which she knew of; and throwing herself
on her Knees, begged that he would not
attempt to take her from her Friends,
who she was convinced would die before
they would lose her, which Adams confirmed
with Words not far from amounting
to an Oath. The Captain swore he
had no leisure to talk, and bidding them
thank themselves for what happened, he
ordered the Servants to fall on, at the
same time endeavouring to pass by Adams
in order to lay hold on Fanny; but the
Parson interrupting him, received a Blow
from one of them, which without considering
whence it came, he returned to
the Captain, and gave him so dextrous
a Knock in that part of the Stomach which
is vulgarly called the Pit, that he staggered
some Paces backwards. The Captain,
who was not accustomed to this
kind of play, and who wisely apprehended
the Consequence of such another Blow,
two of them seeming to him equal to a
Thrust through the Body, drew forth his
Hanger, as Adams approached him, and
was levelling a Blow at his Head, which
would probably have silenced the Preacher
for ever, had not Joseph in that Instant
lifted up a certain huge Stone Pot of the 

Chamber with one Hand, which six Beaus
could not have lifted with both, and discharged
it, together with the Contents,
full in the Captain's Face. The uplifted
Hanger dropped from his Hand, and he
fell prostrate on the Floor with a lumpish
Noise, and his Halfpence rattled in his
Pocket; the red Liquour which his Veins
contained, and the white Liquor which
the Pot contained, ran in one Stream
down his Face and his Clothes. Nor had
Adams quite escaped, some of the Water
having in its Passage shed its Honours on
his Head, and began to trickle down the
Wrinkles or rather Furrows of his Cheeks,
when one of the Servants snatching a Mop
out of a Pail of Water which had already
done its Duty in washing the House, pushed
it in the Parson's Face; yet could not
he bear him; down for the Parson wresting
the Mop out of his Hands, with
the other brought his Enemy as low as
the Earth, having given him a Stroke
over that part of the Face, where, in some
Men of Pleasure, the natural and artificial
Noses are conjoined. 
Hitherto Fortune seemed to incline
the Victory on the Travellers side,
when, according to her Custom, she began
to shew the Fickleness of her Disposition: 

for now the Host entering the
Field, or rather Chamber, of Battle, flew
directly at Joseph, and darting his Head
into his Stomach (for he was a stout Fellow,
and an expert Boxer) almost staggered
him; but Joseph stepping one Leg
back, did with his left Hand so chuck
him under the Chin that he reeled. The
Youth was pursuing his Blow with his
right Hand, when he received from one
of the Servants such a Stroke with a Cudgel
on his Temples, that it instantly deprived
him of Sense, and he measured his Length
on the Ground. 
FANNY rent the Air with her
Cries, and Adams was coming to the assistance
of Joseph: but the two Serving-Men
and the Host now fell on him, and
soon subdued him, tho' he fought like a
Madman, and looked so black with the
Impressions he had received from the Mop,
that Don Quixotte would certainly have
taken him for an inchanted Moor. But
now follows the most tragical Part; for
the Captain being risen again, and seeing
Joseph on the Floor, and Adams secured,
he instantly laid hold on Fanny, and with
the Assistance of the Poet and Player,
who hearing the Battle was over, were
now come up, dragged her, crying and 

tearing her Hair, from the Sight of her
Joseph, and with a perfect Deafness to all
her Entreaties, carried her down Stairs by
Violence, and fastened her on the Player's
Horse; and the Captain mounting his own,
and leading that on which this poor miserable
Wretch was, departed without anymore
Consideration of her Cries than a Butcher
hath of those of a Lamb; for indeed his
Thoughts were only entertained with the
Degree of Favour which he promised himself
from the Squire on the Success of this
Adventure. 
The Servants who were ordered to
secure Adams and Joseph as safe as possible,
that the 'Squire might receive no Interruption
to his Design on poor Fanny, immediately
by the Poet's Advice tied Adams to
one of the Bed-posts, with his Hands behind
him, as they did Joseph on the other
side, as soon as they could bring him to
himself; and then leaving them together,
back to back, and desiring the Host not to
set them at liberty, nor go near them till
he had farther Orders, they departed towards
their Master; but happened to take
a different Road from that which the Captain
had fallen into. 




A Discourse between the Poet and Player; 
of no other Use in this History, but
to divert the Reader. 
Before we proceed any farther
in this Tragedy, we shall leave Mr.
Joseph and Mr. Adams to themselves, and
imitate the wise Conductors of the Stage; 
who in the midst of a grave Action entertain
you with some excellent piece of
Satire or Humour called a Dance. Which
Piece indeed is therefore danced, and not
spoke, as it is delivered to the Audience
by Persons whose thinking Faculty is by
most People held to lie in their Heels; 
and to whom, as well as Heroes, who
think with their Hands, Nature hath
only given Heads for the sake of Conformity,
and as they are of use in Dancing,
to hang their Hats on. 
The Poet addressing the Player, proceeded
thus: “As I was saying (for they
had been at this Discourse all the time of
the Engagement, above Stairs) “the
Reason you have no good new Plays
is evident; it is from your Discouragement
of Authors. Gentlemen will not 

write, Sir, they will not write without
the Expectation of Fame or Profit, or
perhaps both. Plays are like Trees
which will not grow without Nourishment; 
but like Mushrooms, they
shoot up spontaneously, as it were, in
a rich Soil. The Muses, like Vines,
may be pruned, but not with a Hatchet. 
The Town, like a peevish Child,
knows not what it desires, and is always
best pleased with a Rattle. A
Farce-Writer hath indeed some Chance
for Success; but they have lost all Taste
for the Sublime. Tho' I believe one
Reason of their Depravity is the
Badness of the Actors. If a Man writes
like an Angel, Sir, those Fellows
know not how to give a Sentiment Utterance.” 
“Not so fast,” says the Player,
“the modern Actors are as good at
least as their Authors, nay, they come
nearer their illustrious Predecessors,
and I expect a Booth on the Stage again,
sooner than a Shakespear or an Otway; 
and indeed I may turn your Observation
against you, and with Truth say,
that the Reason no Authors are encouraged,
is because we have no good
new Plays.” “I have not affirmed the
contrary,” said the Poet, “but I am
surprized you grow so warm; you cannot 

imagine yourself interested in this
Dispute, I hope you have a better Opinion
of my Taste, than to apprehend
I squinted at yourself. No, Sir, if
we had six such Actors as you, we should
soon rival the Bettertons and Sandfords
of former Times; for, without a Compliment
to you, I think it impossible
for any one to have excelled you in
most of your Parts. Nay, it is solemn
Truth, and I have heard many, and
all great Judges, express as much; 
and you will pardon me if I tell you,
I think every time I have seen you
lately, you have constantly acquired
some new Excellence, like a Snowball. 
You have deceived me in my Estimation
of Perfection, and have outdone
what I thought inimitable.” “You are
as little interested,” answer'd the Player,
in what I have said of other Poets; for
d&wblank;n me, if there are not manly
Strokes, ay whole Scenes, in your last
Tragedy, which at least equal Shakespear. 
There is a Delicacy of Sentiment,
a Dignity of Expression in it,
which I will own many of our Gentlemen
did not do adequate Justice to. 
To confess the Truth, they are bad
enough, and I pity an Author who is
present at the Murder of his Works 

“—Nay, it is but seldom that it can
happen,” returned the Poet, “the
Works of most modern Authors, like
dead-born Children, cannot be murdered. 
It is such wretched half-begotten,
half-writ, lifeless, spiritless, low,
groveling Stuff, that I almost pity the
Actor who is oblig'd to get it by
heart, which must be almost as difficult
to remember as Words in a Language
you don't understand.” “I am sure,” 
said the Player, “if the Sentences have
little Meaning when they are writ,
when they are spoken they have less. 
I know scarce one who ever lays an
Emphasis right, and much less adapts
his Action to his Character. I have
seen a tender Lover in an Attitude of
fighting with his Mistress, and a brave
Hero suing to his Enemy with his
Sword in his Hand—I don't care to
abuse my Profession, but rot me if in
my Heart I am not inclined to the
Poet's Side.” “It is rather generous in
you than just,” said the Poet; “and
tho' I hate to speak ill of any Person's
Production; nay I never do it, nor
will—but yet to do Justice to the Actors,
what could Booth or Betterton have
made of such horrible Stuff as Fenton's
Mariamne, Frowd's Philotas, or Mallet's 

Eurydice, or those low, dirty, last
Dying-Speeches, which a Fellow in the
City or Wapping, your Dillo or Lillo,
what was his Name, called Tragedies?” 
“—Very well, Sir,” says the Player,
and pray what do you think of such
Fellows as Quin and Delane, or that
face-making Puppy young Cibber,
that ill-looked Dog Macklin, or
that saucy Slut Mrs. Clive? What
work would they make with your
Shakespeares, Otways and Lees? How
would those harmonious Lines of the
last come from their Tongues? 

“—No more; for I disdain
“All Pomp when thou art by—far be the Noise
“Of Kings and Crowns from us, whose gentle Souls
“Our kinder Fates have steer'd another way.
“Free as the Forest Birds we'll pair together,
“Without rememb'ring who our Fathers were:
“Fly to the Arbor's Grots and flowry Meads,
“There in soft Murmurs interchange our Souls,
“Together drink the Crystal of the Stream,
“Or taste the yellow Fruit which Autumn yields.

“And when the golden Evening calls us home,
“Wing to our downy Nests and sleep till Morn.
“Or how would this Disdain of Otway,” 

Who'd be that foolish, sordid thing, call'd Man?”
“Hold, hold, hold,” said the Poet,
“Do repeat that tender Speech in the
third Act of my Play which you made
such a Figure in”—“I would willingly,
said the Player, “but I have forgot it”— 
“Ay, you was not quite perfect enough
in it when you play'd it, cries the Poet,
or you would have had such an Applause
as was never given on the Stage; an
Applause I was extremely concerned
for your losing.” —“Sure,” says the
Player, “if I remember, that was hiss'd
more than any Passage in the whole
Play”-“Ay your speaking it was hiss'd,” 
said the Poet. “My speaking it!” said
the Player. —“I mean your not speaking
it.” said the Poet. “You was
out, and then they hiss'd”-“They hiss'd,
and then I was out, if I remember,” 
answer'd the Player; “and I must say
this for myself, that the whole Audience
allowed I did your Part Justice, 

so don't lay the Damnation of your
Play to my account.” “I don't know
what you mean by Damnation,” reply'd
the Poet. “Why you know it was acted
but one Night,” cried the Player. 
“No,” said the Poet, “you and the
whole Town know I had Enemies; 
the Pit were all my Enemies, Fellows
that would cut my Throat, if the Fear
of Hanging did not restrain them. All
Taylors, Sir, all Taylors”. —“Why
should the Taylors be so angry with
you?” cries the Player. I suppose you
don't employ so many in making your
Clothes.” “I admit your Jest,” answered
the Poet, “but you remember the
Affair as well as myself; you know
there was a Party in the Pit and Upper-Gallery,
would not suffer it to be given
out again; tho' much, ay infinitely, the
Majority, all the Boxes in particular,
were desirous of it; nay, most of the
Ladies swore they never would come to
the House till it was acted again—Indeed
I must own their Policy was good,
in not letting it be given out a second
time; for the Rascals knew if it had gone
a second Night, it would have run fifty:
for if ever there was Distress in a Tragedy
—I am not fond of my own Performance; 
but if I should tell you what 

the best Judges said of it—Nor was
it entirely owing to my Enemies neither,
that it did not succeed on the Stage
as well as it hath since among the polite
Readers; for you can't say it had Justice
done it by the Performers.” —“I
think,” answer'd the Player, “the
Performers did the Distress of it Justice:
for I am sure we were in Distress
enough, who were pelted with Oranges
all the last Act; we all imagined it
would have been the last Act of our
Lives.” 
The Poet, whose Fury was now raised,
had just attempted to answer, when they
were interrupted, and an end put to their
Discourse by an Accident; which, if the
Reader is impatient to know, he must
skip over the next Chapter, which is a
sort of Counterpart to this, and contains
some of the best and gravest Matters in the
whole Book, being a Discourse between
Parson Abraham Adams and Mr. Joseph
Andrews. 




Containing the Exhortations of Parson
Adams to his Friend in Affliction; 
calculated for the Instruction and
Improvement of the Reader. 
Joseph no sooner came perfectly to
himself, than perceiving his Mistress
gone, he bewailed her Loss with Groans,
which would have pierced any Heart but
those which are possessed by some People,
and are made of a certain Composition not
unlike Flint in its Hardness and other
Properties; for you may strike Fire from
them which will dart through the Eyes,
but they can never distil one Drop of
Water the same way. His own, poor
Youth, was of a softer Composition; and
at those Words, O my dear Fanny! O
my Love! shall I never, never see thee
more? his Eyes overflowed with Tears,
which would have become any thing but
a Hero. In a word, his Despair was
more easy to be conceived than related.— 
Mr. Adams, after many Groans, sitting
with his Back to Joseph, began thus in a
sorrowful Tone: “You cannot imagine,
my good Child, that I entirely blame
these first Agonies of your Grief; for, 

when Misfortunes attack us by Surprize,
it must require infinitely more Learning
than you are master of to resist them:
but it is the Business of a Man and a Christian
to summon Reason as quickly as he
can to his Aid; and she will presently teach
him Patience and Submission. Be comforted,
therefore, Child, I say be comforted. 
It is true you have lost the prettiest,
kindest, loveliest, sweetest young
Woman: One with whom you might
have expected to have lived in Happiness,
Virtue and Innocence. By whom you
might have promised yourself many little
Darlings, who would have been the Delight
of your Youth, and the Comfort of
your Age. You have not only lost her,
but have reason to fear the utmost Violence
which Lust and Power can inflict
upon her. Now indeed you may easily
raise Ideas of Horror, which might drive
you to Despair.” —“O I shall run mad,
cries Joseph, O that I could but command
my Hands to tear my Eyes out and my
Flesh off.” —“If you would use them to
such Purposes, I am glad you can't, answer'd
Adams. I have stated your Misfortune
as strong as I possibly can; but on
the other side, you are to consider you are
a Christian, that no Accident happens to us
without the Divine Permission, and that it 

is the Duty of a Man and a Christian to submit. 
We did not make ourselves; but the
same Power which made us, rules over us,
and we are absolutely at his Disposal; he may
do with us what he pleases, nor have we
any Right to complain. A second Reason
against our Complaint is our Ignorance; 
for as we know not future Events,
so neither can we tell to what Purpose any
Accident tends; and that which at first
threatens us with Evil, may in the end
produce our Good. I should indeed have
said our Ignorance is twofold (but I have
not at present time to divide properly) for
as we know not to what purpose any Event
is ultimately directed; so neither can we
affirm from what Cause it originally
sprung. You are a Man, and consequently
a Sinner; and this may be a Punishment
to you for your Sins; indeed in this
Sense it may be esteemed as a Good, yea
as the greatest Good, which satisfies the
Anger of Heaven, and averts that Wrath
which cannot continue without our Destruction. 
Thirdly, Our Impotency of
relieving ourselves, demonstrates the Folly
and Absurdity of our Complaints: for
whom do we resist? or against whom do
we complain, but a Power from whose
Shafts no Armour can guard us, no Speed
can fly? A Power which leaves us no 

Hope, but in Submission.” —O Sir, cried
Joseph, all this is very true, and very fine; 
and I could hear you all day, if I was not so
grieved at Heart as now I am.” “Would
you take Physick, says Adams, when you
are well, and refuse it when you are sick? 
Is not Comfort to be administred to the
Afflicted, and not to those who rejoice,
or those who are at ease? —“O you
have not spoken one Word of Comfort to
me yet, returned Joseph.” “No! cries Adams,
What am I then doing? what can
I say to comfort you?” —“O tell me, cries
Joseph, that Fanny will escape back to my
Arms, that they shall again inclose that
lovely Creature, with all her Sweetness,
all her untainted Innocence about her.” — 
“Why perhaps you may, cries Adams; 
but I can't promise you what's to come. 
The Doctrine I teach you is a certain Security
—nay, it is not your Interest only, but
your Duty to abstain from immoderate
Grief; which if you indulge, you are not
worthy the Name of a Christian.” —He
spoke these last Words with an Accent a
little severer than usual; upon which Joseph
begged him not to be angry, saying he
mistook him, if he thought he denied it
was his Duty; for he had known that
long ago. “What signifies knowing your
Duty, if you do not perform it? answer'd 

Adams. Your Knowledge encreases your
Guilt—O Joseph, I never thought you had
this Stubbornness in your Mind.” Joseph
replied, he fancied he misunderstood him,
which I assure you, you do, if you imagine
I endeavour to grieve; upon my Soul
I don't. Adams rebuked him for swearing,
and then proceeded to enlarge on the Folly
of Grief, telling him, all the wise Man
and Philosophers, even among the Heathens,
had written against it, quoting several
Passages from Seneca, and the Consolation,
which tho' it was not Cicero's,
was as good almost as any of his Works,
and concluded all by saying, that immoderate
Grief in this Case might incense
that Power which alone could restore him
his Fanny. This Reason, or indeed rather
the Idea which it raised of the Restoration
of his Mistress, had more effect
than all which the Parson had said before; 
and for a moment abated his Agonies:
but when his Fears sufficiently set before
his Eyes the Danger that poor Creature
was in, his Grief returned again with repeated
Violence, nor could Adams in the
least asswage it; tho' it may be doubted in
his Behalf, whether Socrates himself could
have prevailed any better. 

They remained some time in silence; 
and Groans and Sighs issued from them
both, at length Joseph burst out into the
following Soliloquy: 

Yes, I will bear my Sorrows like a Man,
But I must also feel them as a Man.
I cannot but remember such things were,
And were most dear to me—
Adams asked him what Stuff that was
he repeated? —To which he answer'd,
they were some Lines he had gotten by
heart out of a Play—“Ay, there is nothing
but Heathenism to be learn'd from Plays,
reply'd he—I never heard of any Plays
fit for a Christian to read, but Cato and
the Conscious Lovers; and I must own in
the latter there are some things almost
solemn enough for a Sermon.” But we
shall now leave them a little, and enquire
after the Subject of their Conversation. 



More Adventures, which we hope will
as much please as surprize the Reader. 
Neither the facetious Dialogue
which pass'd between the Poet and
Player, nor the grave and truly solemn
Discourse of Mr. Adams, will, we conceive,
make the Reader sufficient Amends for
the Anxiety which he must have felt on
the account of poor Fanny, whom we
left in so deplorable a Condition. We
shall therefore now proceed to the Relation
of what happened to that beautiful
and innocent Virgin, after she fell into
the wicked Hands of the Captain. 
The Man of War having convey'd his
charming Prize out of the Inn a little before
Day, made the utmost Expedition
in his power towards the Squire's House,
where this delicate Creature was to be
offered up a Sacrifice to the Lust of a
Ravisher. He was not only deaf to all
her Bewailings and Entreaties on the
Road, but accosted her Ears with Impurities,
which, having been never before accustomed
to them, she happily for herself 

very little understood. At last he changed
this Note, and attempted to sooth and
mollify her, by setting forth the Splendor
and Luxury which would be her Fortune
with a Man who would have the Inclination,
and Power too, to give her whatever
her utmost Wishes could desire; and told
her he doubted not but she would soon
look kinder on him, as the Instrument of
her Happiness, and despise that pitiful
Fellow, whom her Ignorance only could
make her fond of. She answered, the
Riches of the World could not make her
amends for the Loss of him; nor would
she be persuaded to exchange him for the
greatest Prince upon Earth—“I warrant
ye,” cries the Captain, “we shall find
means to persuade you; and I advise
you to yield to gentle ones; for you
may be assured that it is not in your
power by any Struggles whatever to
preserve your Virginity two Hours
longer. It will be your Interest to consent; 
for the 'Squire will be much
kinder to you if he enjoys you willingly
than by force.” —At which Words
she began to call aloud for Assistance (for
it was now open Day) but finding none,
she lifted her Eyes to Heaven, and supplicated
the Divine Assistance to preserve
her Innocence. The Captain told her, 

if she persisted in her Vociferation, he
would find a means of stopping her Mouth. 
And now the poor Wretch perceiving no
Hopes of Succour, abandoned herself to Despair,
and sighing out the Name of Joseph,
Joseph! a River of Tears ran down her
lovely Cheeks, and wet the Handkerchief
which covered her Bosom. A Horseman
now appeared in the Road, upon which
the Captain threatened her violently if
she complained; however, the moment
they approached each other, she begged
him with the utmost Earnestness to relieve
a distressed Creature, who was in
the hands of a Ravisher. The Fellow
stopt at those Words; but the Captain
assured him it was his Wife, and that he
was carrying her home from her Adulterer. 
Which so satisfied the Fellow, who was
an old one, (and perhaps a married one
too) that he wished him a good Journey,
and rode on. He was no sooner past,
than the Captain abused her violently for
breaking his Commands, and threaten'd
to gagg her; when two more Horsemen,
armed with Pistols, came into the Road
just before them. She again sollicited
their Assistance; and the Captain told the
same Story as before. Upon which one
said to the other—“That's a charming
Wench! Jack; I wish I had been 

the Fellow's Place whoever he is.” But
the other, instead of answering him, cried
out eagerly, “Zounds, I know her:” 
and then turning to her said, “Sure you
are not Fanny Goodwill”—“Indeed, indeed
I am,” she cry'd—“O Thomas, I
know you now—Heaven hath sent
you to my Assistance, to deliver me
from this wicked Man, who is carrying
me away for his vile Purposes—O
for G&wblank;'s sake rescue me from him.” 
A fierce Dialogue immediately ensued between
the Captain and these two Men,
who being both armed with Pistols, and
the Chariot which they attended being
now arrived, the Captain saw both Force
and Stratagem were vain, and endeavoured
to make his Escape; in which however
he could not succeed. The Gentleman
who rode in the Chariot, ordered it to
stop, and with an Air of Authority examined
into the Merits of the Cause; of
which being advertised by Fanny, whose
Credit was confirmed by the Fellow who
knew her, he ordered the Captain, who
was all bloody from his Encounter at the
Inn, to be conveyed as a Prisoner behind
the Chariot, and very gallantly took
Fanny into it; for, to say the truth,
this Gentleman (who was no other than
Mr. Peter Pounce, and who preceded the 

Lady Booby only a few Miles, by setting
out earlier in the Morning) was a very
gallant Person, and loved a pretty Girl
better than any thing, besides his own
Money, or the Money of other People. 
The Chariot now proceeded towards
the Inn, which as Fanny was informed lay in
their way, and where it arrived at that very
time while the Poet and Player were disputing
below Stairs, and Adams and Joseph
were discoursing back to back above: just
at that Period to which we brought them
both in the two preceding Chapters, the
Chariot stopt at the Door, and in an instant
Fanny leaping from it, ran up to
her Joseph—O Reader, conceive if thou
canst, the Joy which fired the Breasts of
these Lovers on this Meeting; and, if thy
own Heart doth not sympathetically assist
thee in this Conception, I pity thee sincerely
from my own: for let the hard-hearted
Villain know this, that there is
a Pleasure in a tender Sensation beyond
any which he is capable of tasting. 
PETER being informed by Fanny of
the Presence of Adams, stopt to see him,
and receive his Homage; for, as Peter was
an Hypocrite, a sort of People whom
Mr. Adams never saw through; this paid 

that Respect to his Goodness which the
other attributed to be paid to his Riches; 
and hence Mr. Adams was so much his
Favourite, that he once lent him four
Pounds thirteen Shillings and Sixpence,
to prevent his going to Goal, on no
greater Security than a Bond and Judgment,
which probably he would have
made no use of, tho' the Money had not
been (as it was) paid exactly at the time. 
It is not perhaps easy to describe the
Figure of Adams; he had risen in such a
Hurry, that he had on neither Breeches,
Garters, nor Stockings; nor had he taken
from his Head a red spotted Handkerchief,
which by Night bound his Wig,
turned inside out, around his Head. He
had on his torn Cassock, and his Great-Coat; 
but as the remainder of his Cassock
hung down below his Great Coat; so did
a small Strip of white, or rather whitish
Linnen appear below that; to which we
may add the several Colours which appeared
on his Face, viz. a Piss-burnt
Beard, which served to retain the Liquor
of the Stone Pot, and that of a
blacker hue which distilled from the Mop. 
—This Figure, which Fanny had delivered
from his Captivity, was no sooner
spied by Peter, than it disordered the 

composed Gravity of his Muscles; however
he advised him immediately to make
himself clean, nor would accept his Homage
in that Pickle. 
The Poet and Player no sooner saw
the Captain in Captivity, than they began
to consider of their own Safety, of
which Flight presented itself as the only
means; they therefore both of them mounted
the Poet's Horse, and made the most
expeditious Retreat in their power. 
The Host, who well knew Mr. Pounce
and the Lady Booby's Livery, was not a
little surprized at this change of the Scene,
nor was his Confusion much helped by
his Wife, who was now just risen, and
having heard the Account of what had
past from him, comforted him with a
decent Number of Fools and Blockheads,
asked him why he did not consult her,
and told him he would never leave following
the nonsensical Dictates of his own
Numscull, till she and her Family were
ruined. 
JOSEPH being informed of the Captain's
Arrival, and seeing his Fanny now
in Safety, quitted her a moment, and running
down stairs, went directly to him, 

and stripping off his Coat challenged
him to fight; but the Captain refused,
saying he did not understand Boxing. 
He then grasped a Cudgel in one Hand,
and catching the Captain by the Collar
with the other, he gave him a most severe
Drubbing, and ended with telling
him, he had now had some Revenge for
what his dear Fanny had suffered. 
When Mr. Pounce had a little regaled
himself with some Provision which he
had in his Chariot, and Mr. Adams had
put on the best Appearance his Clothes
would allow him, Pounce ordered the
Captain into his Presence; for he said he
was guilty of Felony, and the next Justice
of Peace should commit him: but
the Servants (whose Appetite for Revenge
is soon satisfied) were sufficiently contented
with the Drubbing which Joseph had inflicted
on him, and which was indeed of
no very moderate kind, and had suffered
him to go off, which he did, threatening
a severe Revenge against Joseph, which
I have never heard he thought proper to
take. 
The Mistress of the House made her
voluntary Appearance before Mr. Pounce,
and with a thousand Curt'sies told him, 

she hoped his Honour would pardon
her Husband, who was a very nonsense
Man, for the sake of his poor Family; 
that indeed if he could be ruined alone,
she should be very willing of it, for
because as why, his Worship very well
knew he deserved it: but she had three
poor small Children, who were not
capable to get their own Living; and
if her Husband was sent to Goal, they
must all come to the Parish; for she
was a poor weak Woman, continually
a breeding, and had no time to work
for them. She therefore hoped his
Honour would take it into his Worship's
Consideration, and forgive her
Husband this time; for she was sure he
never intended any Harm to Man,
Woman, or Child; and if it was not
for that Block-Head of his own, the
Man in some things was well enough; 
for she had had three Children by him
in less than three Years, and was almost
ready to cry out the fourth time.” She
would have proceeded in this manner
much longer, had not Peter stopt her
Tongue, by telling her he had nothing to
say to her Husband, nor her neither. So,
as Adams and the rest had assured her of
Forgiveness, she cried and curt'sied out
of the Room. 

Mr. Pounce was desirous that Fanny
should continue her Journey with him in
the Chariot, and she absolutely refused,
being determined to ride behind Joseph,
on a Horse which one of Lady Booby's
Servants had equipped him with. (This
was indeed the same which Adams had
left behind him at the Inn, and was by
these honest Men who knew him, redeemed:)
if any means could be contrived
of conveying Mr. Adams with them; 
whose Company Pounce, when he found
he had no longer hopes of satisfying his
old Appetite with Fanny, desired in his
Vehicle. So that all matters being settled
to the Content of every one, Adams and
Pounce mounting the Chariot, and Fanny
being placed on a Pillion, which Joseph
borrowed of the Host, they all set forwards
for Booby-Hall, where they arrived
in a few Hours without any thing remarkable
happening on the Road, unless it was
a curious Dialogue between the Parson
and the Steward; which, to use the Language
of a late Apologist, a Pattern to
all Biographers, waits for the Reader in
the next Chapter. 




A curious Dialogue which passed between
Mr. Abraham Adams and Mr. Peter
Pounce, better worth reading than
all the Works of Colley Cibber and
many others. 
The Chariot had not proceeded
far, before Mr. Adams observed it
was a very fine Day. “Ay, and a very
fine Country too, answered Pounce.” “I
should think so more, returned Adams,
if I had not lately travelled over the Downs,
which I take to exceed this and all other
Prospects in the Universe.” “A fig for
Prospects, answered Pounce, one Acre
here is worth ten there; and for my own
part, I have no Delight in the Prospect
of any Land but my own. “Sir, said Adams,
you can indulge yourself with many
fine Prospects of that kind. “I thank God
I have a little, replied the other, with
which I am content, and envy no Man: 
I have a little, Mr. Adams, with which
I do as much good as I can. Adams answered,
that Riches without Charity were
nothing worth; for that they were only
a Blessing to him who made them a
Blessing to others.” “You and I, said 

Peter, have different Notions of Charity. 
I own, as it is generally used, I do not
like the Word, nor do I think it becomes
one of us Gentlemen; it is a mean
Parson-like Quality; tho' I would not infer
many Parsons have it neither. “Sir,
said Adams, my Definition of Charity
is a generous Disposition to relieve the
Distressed. There is something in that
Definition, answered Peter, which I like
well enough; it is, as you say, a Disposition
—and does not so much consist in
the Act as in the Disposition to do it; 
but alas, Mr. Adams, Who are meant
by the Distressed? Believe me, the Distresses
of Mankind are mostly imaginary,
and it would be rather Folly than Goodness
to relieve them.” “Sure, Sir, replied
Adams, Hunger and Thirst, Cold and
Nakedness, and other Distresses which
attend the Poor, can never be said to be
imaginary Evils.” “How can any Man
complain of Hunger, said Peter, in a
Country where such excellent Sallads are
to be gathered in almost every Field? or
of Thirst, where every River and Stream
produces such delicious Potations? And as
for Cold and Nakedness, they are Evils
introduced by Luxury and Custom. A
Man naturally wants Clothes no more 

than a Horse or any other Animal, and
there are whole Nations who go without
them: but these are things perhaps which
you, who do not know the World— 
“You will pardon me, Sir, returned
Adams; I have read of the Gymnosophists.” 
“A plague of your Jehosaphats, cried
Peter; the greatest Fault in our Constitution
is the Provision made for the Poor,
except that perhaps made for some others. 
Sir, I have not an Estate which doth not
contribute almost as much again to the
Poor as to the Land-Tax, and I do assure
you I expect to come myself to the Parish
in the end.” To which Adams giving a
dissenting Smile, Peter thus proceeded: 
“I fancy, Mr. Adams, you are one of
those who imagine I am a Lump of Money; 
for there are many who I fancy believe
that not only my Pockets, but my
whole Clothes, are lined with Bank-Bills; 
but I assure you, you are all mistaken: I
am not the Man the World esteems me. 
If I can hold my Head above Water, it
is all I can. I have injured myself by
purchasing. I have been too liberal of
my Money. Indeed I fear my Heir will
find my Affairs in a worse Situation than
they are reputed to be. Ah! he will
have reason to wish I had loved Money 

more, and Land less. Pray, my good
Neighbour, where should I have that
Quantity of Riches the World is so liberal
to bestow on me? Where could I possibly,
without I had stole it, acquire such
a Treasure.” “Why truly, says Adams,
I have been always of your Opinion; I
have wondered as well as yourself with
what Confidence they could report such
things of you, which have to me appeared
as mere Impossibilities; for you
know, Sir, and I have often heard you
say it, that your Wealth is your own
Acquisition, and can it be credible that
in your short time you should have amassed
such a heap of Treasure as these People
will have you worth? Indeed had you
inherited an Estate like Sir Thomas Booby,
which had descended in your Family for
many Generations, they might have had a
colour for their Assertions.” “Why, what
do they say I am worth? cries Peter with
a malicious Sneer. “Sir, answered Adams,
I have heard some aver you are not worth
less than twenty thousand Pounds. At
which Peter frowned. “Nay, Sir, said
Adams, you ask me only the Opinion of
others, for my own part I have always
denied it, nor did I ever believe you could
possibly be worth half that Sum. “However, 

Mr. Adams, said he, squeezing him
by the Hand, I would not sell them all
I am worth for double that Sum; and as
to what you believe, or they believe, I
care not a Fig, no not a Fart. I am not
poor because you think me so, nor because
you attempt to undervalue me in
the Country. I know the Envy of Mankind
very well, but I thank Heaven I am
above them. It is true my Wealth is of
my own Acquisition. I have not an Estate
like Sir Thomas Booby, that has descended
in my Family through many
Generations; but I know the Heirs of
such Estates who are forced to travel about
the Country like some People in
torn Cassocks, and might be glad to accept
of a pitiful Curacy for what I know. 
Yes, Sir, as shabby Fellows as yourself,
whom no Man of my Figure, without that
Vice of Good-nature about him, would
suffer to ride in a Chariot with him. Sir,
said Adams, I value not your Chariot of
a Rush; and if I had known you had intended
to affront me, I would have walked
to the World's End on foot ere I
would have accepted a place in it. However,
Sir, I will soon rid you of that Inconvenience,
and so saying, he opened
the Chariot-Door without calling to the 

Coachman, and leapt out into the Highway,
forgetting to take his Hat along with
him; which however Mr. Pounce threw
after him with great violence. Joseph
and Fanny stopt to bear him Company
the rest of the way, which was not
above a Mile. 