


Contains a very brief account of every material occurrence that happened in regard of our fair widow, during the space of a whole year, with some other particulars of less moment. 

Mr. Thoughtless was not at home when
the news of mr. Munden's death
arrived, but as soon as he was informed of
it, he went to his sister, and on finding
her much more deeply affected at this accident
than he could have imagined, pressed
her in the most tender terms to quit
that scene of mortality, and return to his
house:—the persuasions of a brother,
who of late had behaved with so much
kindness towards her, prevailed on her to
accept of the invitation, and having
given some necessary orders in regard to
the family, was carried away that same 

night in a chair with the curtains close
drawn. 
She saw no company however, till after
the funeral, and when that was over, lady
Loveit was the first admitted. —As mrs.
Munden was still under a great dejection
of spirits, which was visible in her countenance,
—‘If I did not know you to be
the sincerest creature in the world,
said lady Loveit, ‘I should take you to
be the greatest dissembler in it,—for
it would be very difficult for any one
less acquainted with you to believe you
could be really afflicted at the death of
a person, whose life rendered you so
unhappy.’ 
‘Mistake me not, dear lady Loveit,’ 
answered she, ‘I do not pretend to lament
the death of mr. Munden, as it
deprives me of his society, or as that of
a person with whom I could ever have
enjoyed any great share of felicity, even
though his life had made good the professions
of his last moments;—but I
lament him as one who was my husband,
whom duty forbad me to hate
while living, and whom decency requires
me to mourn when dead.’ 
‘So then,’ cried lady Loveit, ‘I find
you take as much pains to grieve for a 

bad husband, as those who have the
misfortune to lose a good one do, to
alleviate their sorrows;—but my
dear,’ continued she with a more serious
air,—‘I see no occasion for all
this:—I am well assured, that your
virtue and the sweetness of your temper
enabled you to discharge all the
duties of a wife to mr. Munden while
alive, and with that I think you
ought to be content:—he is now
dead, the covenant between you is dissolved,
heaven has released you, and I
hope forgiven him,—decency obliges
you to wear black, forbids you to appear
abroad for a whole month, and at
any public place of diversion for a
much longer time; but it does not restrain
you from being easy in yourself,
and chearful with your friends.’ 
‘Your ladyship speaks right, said mrs.
Munden, ‘but yet there is a shock in
death, which one cannot presently get
over. —I grant there is,’ replied lady
Loveit, ‘and if we thought too deeply
on it, we should feel all the agonies of
that dreadful hour before our time, and
become a burden to ourselves and to
the world.’ 
It is certain, indeed, that the surprize
and pity for mr. Munden's sudden and 

unexpected fate, had at the first overwhelmed
her soul, yet when those emotions
were a little evaporated, she rather
indulged affliction, because she thought
it her duty to do so, than endeavoured
any way to combat with it. 
It was not therefore very difficult to
reason her out of a melancholly, which
she had in a manner forced upon herself,
and was far from being natural to her,
and when once convinced, that she ought
to be easy under this stroke of providence,
became entirely so. 
The painful task she had imposed upon
her mind being over, more agreeable
ideas succeeded:—the remembrance of
mr. Trueworth,—his recovered love,— 
the knowledge he had of hers, and the
consideration that now both of them were
in a condition to avow their mutual tenderness
without a crime, could not but
transfuse a sensation more pleasing than
she had ever before been capable of experiencing. 
In the mean time, that gentleman
passed through a variety of emotions on
her account, nor will it seem strange he
should do so to any one, who casts
the least retrospect on his former behaviour; 
—he had loved her from the first 

moment he beheld her, and had continued
to love her for a long series of time
with such an excess of of passion, that
not all his reason on her ill treatment of
him, and her supposed unworthiness,
was scarce sufficient to enable him wholly
to desist:—a new amour was requisite
to divide his wishes;—the fondness and
artful blandishments of miss Flora, served
to wean his heart from the once darling
object, but there demanded no less than
the amiable person, and more amiable
temper of miss Harriot to drive thence an
idea so accustomed to preside:—all this
however, as it appeared, did not wholly
extinguish the first flame;—the innocence
of the charming miss Betsy fully
cleared, all the errors of her conduct reformed,
rekindled in him an esteem;— 
the sight of her after so many months absence,
made the seemingly dead embers
of desire begin to glow, and on the discovery
of her sentiments in his favour,
burst forth into a blaze:—he was not
master of himself in the first rush of so
joyous a surprize; he forgot that she was
married,—he approached her in the manner
the reader has been already told, and
for which he afterwards severely condemn'd
himself, as thinking he ought
to be content with knowing she loved
him, without putting her modesty to the 

blush by letting her perceive the discovery
he had made. 
As lady Loveit, without suspecting
the effect which her discourse produced,
had been often talking of the ill treatment
she received from mr. Munden, and
the necessity she had been under of quitting
his house,—the sincere veneration
he now had for her, made him simpathize
in all the disquiets he was sensible
she sustained:—but when he heard this
cruel husband was no more, and at the
same time was informed in what manner
she behaved, both in his last moments,
and after his decease, nothing, not even
his love, could equal his admiration of
her virtue and her prudence. 
What would he not now have given
to have seen her! but he knew such a
thing was utterly impracticable, and to
attempt it might lose him all the tenderness
she had for him;—his impatience
however would not suffer him to seem altogether
passive, and unconcerned at an
event of so much moment to the happiness
of them both, and he resolved to
write, but to find terms to express himself
so as not to offend either her delicacy,
by seeming too presuming, or her
tenderness, by a pretended indifference, 

cost him some pains: but at length he
dictated the following little billet. 

To Mrs. Munden.
‘Madam,
I send you no compliment of condolance,
but beg you to be assured,
that my heart is too deeply interested
in every thing that regards you, to be
capable of feeling the least satisfaction
while yours remains under any inquietude; 
—all I wish at present is, that
you would believe this truth, which if
you do, I know you have too much
justice and too much generosity to lavish
all your commiseration on the insensible
dead, but will reserve some
part for the living, who stand most in
need of it:—I dare add no more as
yet, than that I am with an esteem
perfect and inviolable, 
‘Madam,
Your most obedient,
Most devoted,
And most faithful servant,
C. Trueworth.’ 

These few lines perhaps, served more 

to raise the spirits of mrs. Munden than
all she could receive from any other
quarter;—she nevertheless persevered
in maintaining the decorum of her condition,
and as she had resolved to retire
into L&wblank;e in case of a separation
from her husband, she thought it most
proper to fix her residence in that place
in her state of widowhood, at least for the
first year of it. 
Accordingly she wrote to lady Trusty
to acquaint her with her intentions, and
received an answer such as she expected,
full of praises of her conduct in this point,
and the most pressing invitations to come
down with all the speed she could. 
What little business she had in London
was soon dispatched, and all was
ready for her quitting it within a month
after the death of mr. Munden:—places
for herself and maid were taken in the
stage coach,—all her things were packed
up, and sent to the inn;—she thought
nothing now remained but to take leave
of lady Loveit, whom she expected that
same evening being the last she was to
stay in town; but near as her departure
was, fortune in the mean time had contrived
an accident, which put all her
fortitude, and presence of mind to as 

great a trial, as she had ever yet sustained. 
Lady Loveit having got a cold, had
complained of some little disorder the day
before, and though nothing could be
more slight than her indisposition, yet as
she was pretty far advanced in her pregnancy,
the care of her physician, and
the tenderness of sir Basil, would not
permit her by any means to expose herself
to the open air. 
Mrs. Munden being informed by a
messenger from her of what had happened,
found herself under an absolute
necessity of waiting on her, as it would
have been ridiculous and preposterous, as
well as unkind, to have quitted the town
for so long a time without taking leave
of a friend such as lady Loveit. 
She could not think of going there
without reflecting at the same time how
strong a probability there was of meeting
mr. Trueworth;—she knew indeed that
he did not live at sir Basil's, having
heard he had lately taken a house for
himself, but she knew also, that his close
connection with that family made him
seldom let slip a day without seeing them; 
—she therefore prepared herself as well 

as she was able for such an interview, in
case it should so happen. 
That gentleman had dined there, and
on finding lady Loveit was forbid going
abroad, and sir Basil unwilling to leave
her alone, had consented to stay with
them the whole day:—they were at
ombre when mrs. Munden came, but on
her entrance threw aside the cards;— 
lady Loveit received her according to
the familiarity between them, and sir
Basil with little less freedom, but mr.
Trueworth saluted her with a more distant
air;—‘I had not the honour,
madam,’ said he, ‘to make you any
compliments on either of the great
changes you have undergone, but you
have always had my best wishes for
your prosperity.’ 
Mrs. Munden, who had pretty well
armed herself for this encounter, replied
with a voice and countenance tolerably
well composed,—‘Great changes indeed,
sir, have happenned to us both
in a short space of time.’ —‘There has
so, madam,’ resumed he, ‘but may the
next you meet with bring with it lasting
happiness!’ —She easily comprehended
the meaning of these words, but
made no answer, being at a loss what to
say, which might neither too much embolden, 

nor wholly discourage the
motive, which dictated them. 
After this, the conversation turned on
various subjects, but chiefly on that of
mrs. Munden's going out of town:— 
mr. Trueworth said little;—lady Loveit,
though she expressed an infinite deal
of sorrow for the loss of so amiable a
companion, could not forbear applauding
her resolution in this point, but sir
Basil would fain have been a little pleasant
on the occasion, if the grave looks
of mrs. Munden had not put his raillery
to silence. —Perceiving the day was
near shut in, she rose to take her leave; 
it was in vain that they used all imaginable
arguments to persuade her to stay
supper; she told them, that as the eoach
went out so early, it was necessary for
her to take some repose, before she entered
upon the fatigue of her journey;— 
lady Loveit on this allowed the justice of
her plea, and said no more. 
The parting of these ladies was very
moving, they embraced again and again,
promised to write frequently to each
other, and mingled tears as they exchanged
farewels. —Sir Basil, who had
really a very high esteem for her, was
greatly affected, in spite of the gayety of
his temper, on bidding her adieu, and 

happy was it for mrs. Munden, that the
concern they both were in hindered them
from perceiving that confusion, that distraction
of mind, which neither she, nor
mr. Trneworth were able to restrain totally
the marks of, as he approached to make
her those compliments, which might
have been expected on such an occasion,
even from a person the most indifferent:
his tongue, indeed, uttered no more than
words of course, but his lips trembled
while saluting her; nor could she in that
instant withhold a sigh, which seemed to
rend her very heart:—their mutual
agitations were in fine too great not to
be visible to each other, and left neither
of them any room to doubt of the extreme
force of the passion from which they
sprang. 
The motive, which had made her refuse
staying supper at sir Basil's, was to
prevent mr. Trueworth from having any
pretence to wait upon her home, not being
able to answer how far she could support
her character, if exposed to the tender
things he might possibly address her
with on such an opportunity, and she
now found by what she had felt on parting
with him, how necessary the precaution
was that she had taken. 
After a night less engrossed by sleep 

than meditation, she set out for L&wblank; 
&wblank;e, where she arrived without any
ill accident to retard her journey, and
was received by sir Ralph and lady
Trusty with all those demonstrations of
joy, which she had reason to expect from
the experienced friendship of those worthy
persons. 
As this was the place of her nativity,
and her father had always lived there in
very great estimation, the house of lady
Trusty at first was thronged with persons
of almost all conditions, who came to pay
their compliments to her fair guest; and
as no circumstance, no habit could
take from her those charms, which nature
had bestowed upon her, her beauty
and amiable qualities soon became the
theme of conversation through the whole
county. 
She was not insensible of the admiration
she attracted, but was now far from
being elated with it:—all the satisfaction
she took out of her dear lady Trusty's
company was, in reading some instructive,
or entertaining book, and in the
letters of those whom she knew to be her
sincere friends; but she had not been
much above two months in the country
before she received one from a quarter
whence she had not expected it. —It 

was from mr. Trueworth, and contained
as follows. 

To mrs. Munden.
‘Madam,
I have the inexpressible pleasure to hear,
that you are well, by those whom
you favour with your correspondence; 
but as they may not think any mention
of me might be agreeable to you, I take
the liberty myself to acquaint you that
I live, and flatter myself, that information
is sufficient to make you know,
that I only live to be, with the most
firm attachment, 
‘Madam,
Your eternally devoted servant,
C. Trueworth.’ 

These few lines assuring her of his
love, and at the same time of his respect,
by his not presuming once to mention the
passion, of which he was possessed,
charmed her to a very high degree, and
prepared her heart for another, which
in a few weeks after he found a pretence
for sending to her;—it contained these
lines. 

To mrs. Munden,
‘Madam,
I am now more unhappy than ever; 
—lady Loveit is gone out of town,
and I have no opportunity of hearing 

the only sounds can bless my longing
ears;—in pity therefore to my impatience,
vouchsafe to let me know you
are in health,—say that you are well,
it is all I ask,—one line will cost you
little pains, and be no breach of that
decorum, to which you so strictly adhere,
yet will be a sovereign specific
to restore the tranquility of him, who
is with an unspeakable regard, 
‘Madam,
Your unalterable
And devoted servant,
C. Trueworth. 

Mrs. Munden found this request so
reasonable, and withall couched in such
respectful terms, that she ought not to
refuse compliance with it, and accordingly
wrote to him in this manner. 

To Charles Trueworth, Esq;
‘Sir,
The generous concern you express
for my welfare, demands a no less
grateful return:—as to my health, it
is no way impaired since I left London,
nor can my mind labour under
any discomposure, while my friends
continue to think kindly of me. I am
with all due respect, 
‘Sir,
Yours, &c.
B. Munden’ 

Upon this obliging answer he ventured
to write again, intreating her to
allow a correspondence with him by letters
while she remained in L&wblank;e,
urging that this was a favour she could
not reasonably deny to any friend, who
desired it with the same sincerity she
must be convinced he did. 
Mrs. Munden paused a little, but
finding that neither her virtue, nor her
reputation could any way suffer by granting
this request, her heart would not
permit her to deny both him and herself
so innocent a satisfaction, and by the
next post gave him the permission he
petitioned for in these words. 

To Charles Trueworth, Esq;
‘Sir,
I should be unjust to myself, as well
as ungrateful to the friendship with
which you honour me, should I reject
any proofs of it that are consistent with
my character to receive, and to return:
—write, therefore as often as you
think proper, and be assured I shall
give your letters all the welcome you
can wish, provided they contain nothing
unsuitable to the present condition
of her, who is, as much as you
ought to expect, 
‘Sir,
Yours, &c.
B. Munden.’ 


After this an uninterrupted intercourse
of letters continued between them for the
whole remainder of the year:—mr.
Trueworth was for the most part extremely
cautious in what manner he expressed
himself, but whenever, as it would
sometimes so happen, the warmth of his
passion made him transgress the bounds
had been prescribed him, she would not
seem to understand, because she had no
mind to be offended. 
Thus equally maintaining that reserve,
which she thought the situation she
was in demanded, and at the same time
indulging the tenderness of her heart for
a man, who so well deserved it, she enjoyed
that sweet contentment, which true
love alone has the power of bestowing. 
