


Presents the reader with some occurences,
which, from the foregoing preparations, might be expected, and also
with others that may seem more surprising. 

Miss Betsy was not deceived in her
conjecture, in relation to the picture's
being designed as an offering to some lady:
—mr. Trueworth had not indeed sate for
it to please himself, but to oblige miss Harriot,
who had given some hints, that such
a present would not be unwelcome to her. 
It is a common thing with painters to
keep the pieces in their own hands as long
as they can, after they are finished, especially
if they are of persons endued by nature
with any perfections, which may do
honour to their art:—this gentleman
was like others of his profession,—he
found it to his credit to shew mr. Trueworth's 

picture to as many as came to
look over his paintings, and had detained
it for several days beyond the time in
which he had promised to send it, on
pretence, that there were still some little
touches wanting in the drapery. 
Mr. Trueworth growing a little impatient
at the delay, as miss Harriot had
asked two or three times, in a gay manner,
when she should see his resemblance,
went himself, in order to fetch it away:
—the painter was surprised at sight of
him, and much more so when he demanded
the picture;—he told him, however,
the whole truth without hesitation,
that he delivered it to a lady not above
an hour before he came, who paid him
the money for it, and said that she had
called for it on his request. 
Nothing had ever happened that seemed
more strange to him;—he made a particular
enquiry concerning the face,— 
age,—complexion,—shape,—stature,
and even dress of the lady, who had put
this trick upon him; and it was well for
miss Betsy, that she had taken all the precautions
she did, or she had infallibly
been discovered. —A thing, which, perhaps, would have given her more lasting 

confusion, than even her late unlucky adventure
with the mock baronet. 
She was, however, among all the ladies
of his acquaintance, almost the only one
who never came into his head on this occasion; 
—sometimes he thought of one,
—sometimes he thought of another; but
on recollecting all the particulars of their
behaviour towards him, could find no
reason to ascribe what had been done to
any of them:—miss Flora was the only
person he could imagine capable of such
a thing;—he found it highly probable,
that her love and invention had furnished
her with the means of committing this innocent
fraud; and though he was heartily
vexed, that he must be at the trouble of
sitting for another picture, yet he could
not be angry with the woman who had
occasioned it:—on the contrary, he
thought there was something so tender,
and so delicate withal, in this proof of
her passion, that it very much enhanced
the pity and good-will he before had for
her. 
But while his generous heart was entertaining
these too favourable and kind
sentiments of her, she was employing her
whole wicked wit, to make him appear 

the basest of mankind, and also to render
him the most unhappy. 
She had found out every thing she
wanted to know, concerning mr. Trueworth's
courtship to miss Harriot, and
flattered herself, that a lady bred in the
country, and unacquainted with the artifices
frequently practised in town, to
blacken the fairest characters, would easily
be frighted into a belief of any thing she
attempted to inspire her with. 
In the vile hope, therefore, of accomplishing
so detestable a project, she contrived
a letter in the following terms: 

To miss Harriot Loveit.
‘Madam,
Where innocence is about to suffer,
merely through its incapacity
of suspecting that ill in another it cannot
be guilty of itself, common honesty
forbids a stander-by to be silent:—you
are on the brink of a precipice, which
if you fall into, it is not in the power
of human art to save you. —Death only
can remove you from misery,—remorse,
—distraction, and woes without
a name. —Trueworth, that fly deceiver
of your sex, and most abandoned of his 

own, can only bring you a polluted
heart and prostituted vows;—he made
the most honourable professions of love
to a young lady of family and character,
—gained her affections,—I hope no
more;—but whatever was between
them, he basely quitted her, to mourn
her ill-placed love and ruined fame:— 
yet this, madam, is but his least of
crimes;—he has since practised his betraying
arts on another, superior to the
former in every female virtue and accomplishment,
—second to none in
beauty, and of a reputation spotless as
the sun, till an unhappy passion for that
worst of men obscured its brightness, at
least in the eyes of the censorious;—he
is, however, bound to her by the most
solemn engagements that words can form,
under his own hand-writing; which, if
she does not in due time produce against
him, it will be owing only to her too
great modesty. —These two, madam,
are the most conspicuous victims of his
perfidy,—pray heaven you may not
close the sad triumvirate, and that I
may never see such beauty, and such
goodness, stand among the foremost in
the rank of those many wretches he has
made. 

‘In fine, madam, he has deceived your
friends, and betrayed you into a mistaken
opinion of his honour and sincerity:
—if he marries you, you cannot but be
miserable, he being the right of another; 
—if he does not marry you, your reputation
suffers. —Happy is it for you if
the loss of reputation is all you will have
to regret;—he already boasts of having
received favours from you, which, whoever
looks in your face will find it very
difficult to think you capable of granting; 
—but yet, who knows what
strange effects too great a share of tenderness
in the composition may not
have produced? 
‘Fly then, madam, from this destructive
town, and the worst monster in it,
Trueworth:—Retire in time to those
peaceful shades from whence you came,
—and save what yet remains of you
worthy your attention to preserve. 
‘Whatever reports to your prejudice,
the vanity of your injurious deceiver
may have made him give out, among
his loose companions, I still hope your
virtue has hitherto protected you, and
that this warning will not come too late
to keep you from ever verifying them. 

‘Be assured, madam, that in giving
this account, I am instigated by no
other motive than merely my love of
virtue, and detestation of all who would
endeavour to corrupt it, and that I am, 
‘With a perfect sincerity,
Madam,
Your well-wisher,
And humble servant,
Unknown.’ 

Miss Flora, on considering what she
had wrote, began to think she had expressed
herself in somewhat too warm a
manner;—but she let it pass on this account:
—‘By the virulence,’ said she,
‘with which I have spoke of Trueworth,
his adored miss Harriot will certainly
imagine it comes from one of those unhappy
creatures I have represented in it; 
—and, if so, it will gain the more credit
with her;—if she supposes that rage
and despair has dictated some groundless
accusations against her lover, she nevertheless
will believe others to be fact, and
that at least he has been false to one.’ 

She therefore went to the person, who
was always her secretary in affairs of this
nature, and having got it copied, was
going to the post-house, in order to send
it away; for she never trusted any person
but herself with these dispatches. 
She was within three or four yards of
the post-house, when she saw mr. Trueworth
at some distance, on the other side
of the street;—her heart fluttered at this
unexpected sight of him;—she had no
power to refrain speaking to him;—she
stayed not to put her letter in, but flew
directly cross the way, and met him just
as he was turning the corner of another
street. 
‘Oh, mr. Trueworth,’ cried she, as
they drew near each other, ‘I have prayed
that I might live, once more to see
you, and heaven has granted my petition.’ 
‘I hope, madam,’ said he, ‘that heaven
will always be equally propitious to
your desires in things of greater moment.’ 
—‘There can scarce be any of
greater moment,’ answered she; ‘for
at present I have a request to make you
of the utmost importance to me, though 

no more than I am certain you would
readily grant to any one you had the
least acquaintance with;—but,’ continued
she, ‘this is no proper place for
us to discourse in,—upon the terms we
now are, it can be no breach of faith
to the mistress of your vows, to step
with me for three minutes where we
may not be exposed to the view of every
passenger.’ 
Mr. Trueworth had not been very well
pleased with the rencounter, and would
gladly have dispensed with complying
with her invitation, but thought after
what she had said, he could not refuse,
without being guilty of a rudeness unbecoming
of himself, as well as cruel to
her; yet did he comply in such a manner
as might make her see, his inclination
had little part in his consent;—he told
her, he was in very great haste, but
would snatch as much time as she mentioned
from the business he was upon. — 
Nothing more was said, and they went
together into the nearest tavern, where
being seated, and wine brought in,— 
‘Now, madam,’ said he, with a cold civility,
‘please to favour me with your
commands.’ 

‘Alas!’ replied she, ‘it belongs not
to me to command, and my request
you have already granted.’ —‘What
without knowing it,’ cried he? —‘Yes,’ 
resumed she, ‘I thought an intimacy such
as ours has been, ought not to have
been broke off without a kind farewell. 
—I blame you not for marrying;— 
yet sure I deserve not to be quite forsaken,
—utterly thrown off!—you
might at least have flattered me with
the hope, that, in spite of your matrimonial
engagement, you would still retain
some sparks of affection for your
poor Flora.’ —‘Be assured,’ said he,
I shall always think on you with tenderness.’ 
—‘And can you then resolve never
to see me more,’ rejoined she passionately? 
—‘I hoped,’ replied he, ‘that
you had acquiesced in the reasons I gave
for that resolution.’ —‘I hoped so too,’ 
said she, ‘and made use of my utmost
efforts for that purpose;—but 'tis in
vain,—I found I could not live without
you, and only wished an opportunity
to take one last embrace before I
leave the world and you for ever.’ — 
In speaking these words she threw herself
upon his neck, and burst into a flood of
tears. 

How impossible was it for a heart,
such as mr. Trueworth's, to be unmoved
at a spectacle like this;—her love,— 
her grief, and her despair shot through
his very soul;—scarce could he refrain
mingling his tears with her's:—My
dear Fora, cried he, compose yourself,— 
by heaven I cannot bear to see you thus. 
—He kissed her cheek while he was
speaking,—seated her in a chair, and
held her hand in his, with the extremest
tenderness. 
This wicked creature was not so overcome
with the emotions of her love and
grief, as not to see the pity she had raised
in him, and flattering herself, that there
was in it some mixture of a passion, she
more wished to inspire, fell a second time
upon his bosom, crying,—‘Oh, Trueworth! 
—Trueworth!—here let me
die, for death has nothing in it so terrible
as the being separated from you.’ 
Mr. Trueworth was a man of strict honour,
—great resolution, and passionately
devoted to the most deserving of her
sex;—yet he was still a man,—was of
an amorous complection, and thus tempted,
who can answer, but in this unguarded
moment he might have been guilty of 

a wrong to his dear Harriot, for which
he would afterwards have hated himself,
if an accident of more service to him,
than his own virtue, in so critical a
juncture, had not prevented him? 
He returned the embrace she gave,
and joined his lips to her's, with a
warmth which she had not for a long
time experienced from him, a sudden rush
of transport came at once upon her, with
such force, that it overwhelmed her spirits,
and she fell into a kind of fainting between
his arms;—he was frighted at the
change he observed in her, and hastily
cutting the lacings of her stays to give
her air, the letter above-mentioned dropped
from her breast upon the ground;— 
he took it up, and was going to throw it
upon the table, but in that action seeing the
name of miss Harriot on the superscription,
was struck with an astonishment
not easy to be conceived;—he no longer
thought of the condition miss Flora was
in, but tearing open the letter began to
examine the contents. 
Miss Flora in that instant recovering her
senses, and the remembrance of what had
been concealed in her bosom, flew to him,
endeavouring to snatch the paper from his
hands, but he had already seen too much 

not to be determined to see the rest. — 
‘Stand off!’ cried he, in a voice half
choaked with fury,—‘I am not yet
fully acquainted with the whole of the
favours you have bestowed upon me in
this paper.’ —Confounded as she was,
cunning did not quite forsake her,—‘I
am ignorant of what it contains,’ said
she;—‘I found it in the street. —It is
not mine,—I wrote it not.’ 
With such like vain pretences would
she have pleaded innocence, yet all the
time endeavoured, with her whole strength,
to force the proof of her guilt from him,
insomuch, that though he was very tall,
he was obliged with one hand to keep her
off, and with the other hold the paper at
arms length, while he was reading it, yet
could not forbear frequently interrupting
himself, to cast a look full of contempt
and rage, on the malicious authoress,— 
‘Vile hypocrite!’ cried he;—and then
again, as he got farther into the base invective,
—‘Thou fiend in female form!’ 
She now finding all was over, and seized
with a sudden fit of frenzy, or something
like it, ran to his sword, which he
had pulled off, and laid in the window,
and was about to plunge it in her breast; 
—he easily wrested it from her, and putting 

it by his side, ‘O thou serpent!— 
thou viper!’ cried he,—‘if thou wert
a man, thou shouldst not need to be thy
own executioner.’ —The tide of her
passion then turning another way, she
threw herself at his feet,—clung round
his legs, and in a voice rather screaming
than speaking uttered these words: ‘O!
pardon me!—pity me!—whatever I
have done my love of you occasioned it.’ 
‘—Curse on such poisonous love,’ rejoined
he:—‘hell, and its worst effects,
are in the name, when mentioned by a
mouth like thine.’ —Then finding it a
little difficult to disentangle himself from
the hold she had taken of him,—‘Thou
shame and scandal to that sex, to which
alone thou owest thy safety,’ cried he,
furiously, ‘quit me this instant, lest I
forget thou art a woman,—lest I spurn
thee from me, and use thee as the worst
of reptiles.’ 
On hearing these dreadful words, all
her strength forsook her,—the sinews of
her hands relaxed, and lost their grasp,— 
she fell a second time into a fainting fit,
but of a nature as different from what the
former had been, as were the emotions
that occasioned it:—mr. Trueworth was
now too much and too justly irritated to
be capable of relenting;—he left her in 

this condition, and only bid the people at
the bar, as he went out of the house,
send somebody up to her assistance. 
The humour he was at present in, rendering
him altogether unfit for company,
he went directly to his lodgings, where
examining the letter with more attention
than he could do before, he presently imagined,
he was not altogether unacquainted
with the hand writing;—he very well
knew it was not that of miss Flora, yet
positive that he had somewhere seen it
before; that which he had received, concerning
miss Betsy, and the child at Denham,
came fresh into his head;—he
found them, indeed, the same on comparing,
and, as the reader may suppose,
this discovery added not a little to the resentment
he was before enflamed with,
against the base inventress of these double
falshoods. 
