
Has in it some things of no small importance, though at present they may appear too insignificant to be inserted. 
Lord Huntley being gone, and miss Wingman freed from all those dangers her mother apprehended for her, there seem'd no necessity for that young lady's leaving Bath; yet, as she had received such positive commands to do so, and Landy waited to conduct her, she thought she could not well excuse herself from going: —Jenny, who was now quite weary of the place, having lost all her relish for its pleasures, said all she could to fortify her in this resolution; and between them both lady Speck was prevail'd upon to think it right. 
Accordingly both the sisters wrote to lady Wingman, giving her an exact account of all that had pass'd in relation to lord Huntley, and assuring her that they should throw themselves at her feet, as 
soon as the necessary preparations could be made for their journey. 
But before I proceed any farther on the particulars of these ladies adventures, during the short time they had now to stay at Bath, I think it highly proper that the reader should be made fully acquainted with the several dispositions their minds were in at present. 
As for lady Speck, the late behaviour of Celandine had render'd him so despicable in her eyes, that she wonder'd at herself for having been able ever to endure the conversation of such a fop, and much more to have been won to a liking of his person, the graces of which she now plainly saw were chiefly owing to his milliner and taylor: —Mr. Lovegrove, on the contrary, had shewn so much of the man of honour and of the respectful lover in what he had done, that she hesitated not a moment if she should give him the preference of all others who made their addresses to her; and if she could not as yet entirely overcome her aversion to entering a second time into the bands of marriage, she however resolved not to change her condition except in favour of him. 
Miss Wingman was in a situation very different from that of her sister;—this young lady was of a humour extremely gay and volatile;—she had never been at the pains of examining into the emotions of her own heart; but she now found out a secret there which had hitherto been conceal'd as much from herself as from the world;—those alarms with which she had been agitated at first on the accusation against lord Huntley, and the pleasure she had since felt in the assurances given her by sir Robert Manley and mr. Lovegrove, that it would be easy for him to prove his innocence, equally convinced her that he was not altogether so indifferent to her as she had imagined; and this it was which perhaps, more than obedience to her mother's commands, made her so eager to return to London, where she thought she might soon be inform'd of the whole truth of this affair. 
But poor Jenny labour'd under sensations of a yet more unquiet nature,—she had the confirmation of her lover's infidelity under his own hand; and whether he was guilty to the degree she had at first believed, of courting another woman upon honourable terms, yet he 
could not but appear extremely criminal in the attempt of purchasing the favour of one he intended only for a mistress, with the contempt of those solemn engagements he was bound in to herself. 
In what other sense, indeed, was it possible for her to understand the first paragraph in that letter, which by his mistake in the superscription had fallen into her hands,—‘Here is no room for doubt, cried she, the meaning is obvious and explicit,—his heart renounces the obligation his father laid him under, and which his own perjured tongue a thousand times has sworn he wished no greater blessing than to fullfil.’ 
‘The ungrateful man, continued she, shall find no difficulty in getting rid of me,—I shall spare him the pains of seeking a pretence to break an engagement now grown so irksome to him,—nor shall I envy the woman to whom his faithless heart is next devoted;—I shall always reflect on a distich I remember to have read in the works of old Michael Drayton.’ 
He that can falsify his vows to one, Will be sincerely just and true to none. 
Thus in some moments did she feel a kind of satisfaction in this early discovery of the inconstancy of his temper;—others again presenting her with the idea of what she once believed him, all that was just, generous, virtuous, and sincere, threw her into the most melancholly musings;—every innocent endearment that had passed between them from their tenderest infancy till this great period, came fresh into her memory, and made her deeply regret the finding him so much unworthy either of her love or friendship. 
It is certain, that besides the vivacity and flow of spirits which are generally the companions of youth and affluence of fortune, and keep affliction from seizing too forcibly the vitals, she stood in need of all the good understanding she was endued with to enable her to sustain the shock of Jemmy's infidelity with that chearfulness she wish'd to do:—in spite of all her endeavours, she would sometimes fall into resveries which demanded other helps than those she received from within herself, to rouse her from entirely. 
Though the natural sprightliness of lady Speck and her sister was very much 
abated, in the one by the secret remorse she felt for the encouragement she had given to Celandine, and in the other by her suspence on account of lord Huntley yet neither of them were so taken up with their own cogitations as to neglect any thing in their power to dissipate the langour they observed in their fair friend. 
But as it was Jemmy who had been the sole cause of her disquiet, so it was to him alone she was now indebted for her relief,—the night before their departure she received a letter from him containing these lines: 
To miss Jessamy at Bath.
My dear, dear Jenny,
“I am so happy as just to snatch an opportunity of acquainting you that the wedding is over,—I wish to heaven that the revels for it were so too, that I might be at liberty to get away; for, besides the impatience I am in to see you, I am quite sick of the incessant noisy mirth of those who come to testify their joy on this occasion;—I do not doubt but they take me for the most dull, stupid fellow in the universe;—and indeed how should it be otherwise? —In the midst of dancing, 
—drinking,—laughing,—romping, I am absent;—my heart is with you at Bath, and representing to me the more true felicities I might enjoy in your dear conversation:—they tell me, this hurry is to continue no longer than six days; but I think that an age, and nothing but my gratitude to my old friend, for the care he has taken of my affairs, should keep me a prisoner here for half that time:—be assured that as soon as I can get free, I shall do little more than pass through London in my way towards you;—so that if I am deprived of participating with you in the pleasures of the place you are in, I shall at least have that of conducting you home,—till when, I hope, I need say nothing to convince you, that I am 
“Inviolably, and for ever,
My dear Jenny's,
Most affectionate
And devoted
J. Jessamy. 
Ham-Hall, 
“P. S. When we meet, you may expect a particular detail of what passes 
here, and some description of the bride, who has indeed a fine outside, but I am afraid wants a little of my dear Jenny's understanding;—Harry, however, finds no defect in her as yet, and I heartily wish, for both their sakes, he never may;—every man's lot is not so happy as mine. —Once more, my dear Jenny, adieu for a short time.” 

This letter was a kind of clue to guide Jenny through the labyrinth of perplexity she had been involved in;—she knew very well that one of the gentlemen, appointed by the last will and testament of Jemmy's father for his executor and trustee, had a seat call'd Ham-Hall in Bedfordshire;—she had also heard that his son was about being married to a young lady of that county with a considerable fortune;—she therefore easily conceived that the engagement mention'd by Jemmy in that former epistle, and which she imagined he had meant with herself, was in reality no other than being obliged to go down into the country on account of this wedding. 
She immediately imparted to her two friends the letter she had received, and also gave them at the same time an explanation of the mystery which had given 
her so much pain;—both of them sincerely congratulated her on the occasion, especially miss Wingman, who took her in her arms crying out,—‘Did not I tell you, my dear, that mr. Jessamy was not so guilty as you imagined?’ —‘Aye, replied Jenny,—but for all that he is not quite innocent, nor will he find me very easy to give him absolution.’ 
‘If criminal in no greater matters than a transient amour, rejoin'd lady Speck, I think you might forgive him, without putting him to the penance even of a blush by your reproaches. —In good truth we women have nothing to do with the men's affairs in this point before marriage;—and as I now begin to believe, in spite of all I have heard to the contrary, that he addresses no other woman than yourself upon honourable terms, these are but venial transgressions, which you ought to overlook till you have made him your own.’ 
They were discoursing in this pleasant manner when mr. Lovegrove enter'd;—he came to pass the evening with them, knowing their things being all pack'd up for their journey, they would not go abroad any more while they staid at Bath. 
Talking of the hour in which they intended to set out, he said that he was extremely glad to know it, because he would give orders for a post-chaise to be ready exactly at the same time, that he might not have the mortification of being left behind them even for a moment. 
Though he directed these words to the ladies in general, yet lady Speck knew very well they were meant only to herself; and looking on him with the most obliging air,—‘No mr. Lovegrove, said she, since you will needs be so complaisant as to accompany us, I see no occasion for your travelling in the way you mention;—as your own coach is not here, and there is a vacant place in mine, I am very certain we shall all be pleased to have it so agreeably fill'd.’ 
He was so transported with this offer, that he could not restrain himself from catching hold of her hand and kissing it with the most passionate gestures;—‘This is a condescention, madam, said he, which I never durst have presumed to hope, much less to have requested; but it is the peculiar property of Heaven to prevent the petitions of its vassals 
by blessings the most unexpected, as well as undeserved.’ 
Miss Wingman and Jenny, finding they were likely to enter into a conversation which required no sharers, withdrew to a window as if to look at something that pass'd in the street;—how far mr. Lovegrove improved this opportunity is not material to particularize;—the reader will easily suppose, that neither that, nor lady Speck's good humour were thrown away upon him. 
