
Contains a most extraordinary, as well as unexpected turn in the lovers affairs, not fit to be read by those who have very tender hearts or watery eyes. 
The joy one feels on being forgiven an offence which one repents, and is heartily ashamed of, can be surpass'd by nothing but that most sublime satisfaction which must fill the mind of the person who forgives;—both our lovers were equally pleased with themselves and with each other, and there wanted but one thing to complete the felicity of either. 
As for Jenny, it cannot be supposed that she wished a supremer happiness than what she now enjoy'd in a full assurance of the affection and sincerity of her dear Jemmy; but we will not pretend to say that his desires were altogether so much circumscrib'd,—he thought it was now high time to fulfil the agreement made between their parents, and the more so, as it would be the only sure way of 
totally silencing the present invidious report, and of preventing all others of the like nature from being propagated hereafter. 
This last, he thought, would be a prevailing motive with her, and therefore resolved to omit neither that nor any other argument which all the love and wit he was master of could furnish him with, to gain her consent to a speedy celebration of their nuptials. 
The pleasing contemplations on Jenny's behaviour towards him the evening before,—her thousand amiable qualities, and the idea of that happiness he hoped shortly to be in full possession of, kept him in bed somewhat longer than was his custom; but he was no sooner up and dress'd, than he hasted to the apartment of that dear mistress who had been the sole object both of his dreams and waking thoughts. 
He found miss Wingman with her, but was not sorry he did so; for as he knew that lady was acquainted with the story of his imaginary falshood, by the letter which had been sent to lady Speck, he made no scruple of saying to Jenny great part of what he would have done, 
had she not been present; nor was Jenny at all displeased that this young lady should be witness how little foundation there was for the reports which had been spread. 
‘Indeed, my dear,’ said miss Wingman, on hearing him press the completion of their marriage,—‘I think you ought not to refuse compliance with mr Jessamy's desires, if it were only to make him some amends for the vexation he must have endured in the late scandal thrown upon him. 
‘First be generous yourself, before you direct others to be so, reply'd Jenny laughing; mr. Jessamy cannot have suffer'd more, or with less reason, than lord Huntley has done; and when I see you inclined to make a reparation, I may perhaps be prevailed upon to follow your example.’ 
‘I do not know how soon I may be obliged to it, resumed that lady, for sir Thomas Welby and my mamma are so ashamed and concern'd at the injury they have done my lord by their unjust suspicions, that, by way of attonement, they are for making a present of me to him, almost whether I will or not.’ 
‘Excellent, i'faith, cried Jemmy, you are caught, my dear Jenny, and have made a promise without knowing you did so;—I shall, however, be obliged to watch and pray for lord Huntley's happiness, as I find my own so much depends upon it.’ 
They went on in the same strain of pleasantry all the time miss Wingman staid; but after she was gone Jemmy began to renew his suit with more seriousness, and had the pleasure to find it was not altogether rejected, though not immediately comply'd with. 
‘It is not owing to the want of affection for you, said she with the most enchanting softness, but rather to an excess of it, that I would yet a little longer protract what you at present seem so earnestly to desire;—men are often deceived in their own hearts;—I speak not to reproach you for any amours you may have been engaged in, or that I am jealous of any you may hereafter be engaged in;—no,—my dear Jemmy, I should not think that even marriage gave me a right to censure, or to pry into your actions; it is for your own sake alone that I 
would have you forbear making a vow of constancy till you are very certain of being quite out of love with variety; but rather continue in a condition which allows you full liberty to pursue whatever pleasures you think fit, without having any occasion to condemn yourself.’ 
‘I should be ready to condemn myself to everlasting horrors, cried he, could I be capable of lavishing one tender thought on any but she who so well deserves all, and much more than I can pay. —I confess I have been guilty of some follies; but in all my amusements with your sex, my heart had never the least share;—no,—that was always,—is,—and ever must be intirely,—unchangeably,—inviolably devoted to my only dear, dear Jenny.’ 
They were in the midst of this tender conversation, when the persons with whom Jenny boarded, hearing Jemmy was above, sent to intreat he would honour them with his company at dinner that day; which invitation, for the sake of not being separated from Jenny, he willingly accepted. 
These people were well-bred, and perfectly chearful, but the lovers liking no 
company so well as that of each other, staid no longer with them than decency demanded, and Jemmy had again an opportunity of repeating his sollicitations, which he did in the most pressing and emphatic terms. 
How far he would have been able to prevail is uncertain;—Jenny's servant came into the room, and told her that a young lady, who called herself miss Chit, was in a chair at the door, and desired leave to wait on her. 
On hearing the name of miss Chit, Jemmy and Jenny look'd upon each other with the utmost astonishment. —‘Are you acquainted with her, cried he?’ —‘Not in the least, answer'd she, nor can imagine what should bring her here;—but go, said she to the man, and shew her up.’ 
They had no time to form any conjectures, the lady immediately came in, and Jenny rose to receive her with her accustom'd politeness, but mixt with a certain reserve, which she neither could nor endeavour'd to throw off. 
‘You are doubtless surprised, madam, said miss Chit, at receiving a visit 
from one so much a stranger to you, but you will pardon the liberty I have taken when you know the necessity that obliged me to it.’ —‘I cannot suppose, madam, reply'd Jenny, that you would have given yourself this trouble without being induced by some extraordinary motive.’ —‘An extraordinary one, indeed, madam, resumed the other; and I am very glad to meet you here, mr. Jessamy, continued she, addressing herself to Jemmy,—as what I have to say to this lady concerns you also.’ —‘You are certainly in the right, madam, added he very gravely; for whatever relates to this lady must infallibly concern me too.’ 
‘I never believed the contrary, sir, said miss Chit, nor doubted of the sincerity of your attachment to one so deserving of it;—and it was, in some measure, to do justice to you, that brought me hither, as well as to vindicate myself from the most cruel aspersion that ever was laid on any one of my sex.’ 
No reply being made to these words, she went on,—‘It is scarce possible, said she, that either of you can have escaped the hearing a report, which, absurd as it is, has been strangely propagated about 
town, concerning the intended marriage between you being broke off; but you perhaps may be ignorant that your pretended friend Belpine was the sole author of this invention.’ 
‘Belpine, cried they both out at the same time,—Sure, madam, you mistake.’ —‘Yes,—Belpine, rejoined she, for what base ends I know not, would fain have had me so weak as to believe mr. Jessamy was not only false to his first vows, but also false on my account: 
—I pretend not to be free from the follies my sex are charged with, yet was never vain enough to believe a man in love with me till he had told me so himself; and therefore gave no credit to all he said and swore upon that subject:—his artifices, however, wrought so far upon my father, and all those of my friends with whom he had any acquaintance, that wherever I went I was entertain'd with no other discourse than my imaginary conquest;—I was very much amazed at all this; but other thoughts kept it from dwelling much upon my mind, till this morning I was grosly affronted by being told that I myself had spread about this foolish story, as having flatter'd myself that the few visits mr. Jessamy had favoured me with 
were made on the account of his having a passion for me. 
‘It is no matter, madam, cried Jemmy, by whom or in what manner this ridiculous story has been propagated;—but tell me, was it from Belpine that you were first informed of this pretended villainy? 
‘Yes, sir, answered she, it was by him—and him alone, that your character has been traduced, Miss Jessamy without doubt disquieted, and myself attempted to be deceived, as you will presently be convinced if you have patience to listen to the monstrous detail I can give you of his behaviour.’ 
She then went on, and gave a succinct account of all the particulars she knew of Belpine's conduct in this affair, which, as the reader is already perfectly acquainted with, need not be here repeated. 
Jenny opened not her lips, but listened with the greatest attention to all she said;—but Jemmy could not keep himself from interrupting her almost at every sentence by some vehement exclamation, and when he spoke not, discovered by his gestures all the marks of an overboiling rage. 
‘Well, madam, cried he, perceiving she had done,—I see that Belpine has been the Boutefeu;—for what reason he has been so, it belongs to me to penetrate:’—he said no more, but snatching up his hat, which lay on a table near him, flew down stairs without taking any other leave. 
Jenny, having observed the agitations he had been in, was extremely frighted at this last action;—she ran and opened the door, which he had flung after him as he went, and called as loud as she could to him, to come back; but he either heard not, or would not at that time obey her summons. 
She then stamp'd with both her feet, and rung the bell for her footman with such violence as snapp'd the wire by which it hung;—‘Run, cry'd she, overtake mr. Jessamy, who is just gone out of the house;—tell him I must needs speak with him, and desire he will return this instant.’ 
It is not to be doubted but that the fellow did his best; but notwithstanding all the speed he made, the person he pursued was gone quite out of sight:—this 
increasing the ferment on Jenny's spirits,—‘I wish, madam, said she to miss Chit, you had reserved the story you have been telling till you had found me alone;—it is dangerous to let one gentleman know too much of the injuries he has sustained from another.’ 
‘I should be sorry, madam, reply'd that young lady, that what I meant well should prove the contrary; but I flatter myself the event will give me no cause for repentance;—mr. Jessamy, I hope, will only examine Belpine on this affair;—he is not worthy of his sword;—nor, as base men are generally cowards, will scarcely be provoked to meet it.’ 
Jenny making no answer, and continuing to walk about the room in a disordered motion, the other easily perceived her company was not desired, so took her leave without much ceremony on either side. 
Impossible is it to describe the apprehensions, the alarms, which shook the tender heart of Jenny for what might be the consequences of the discovery miss Chit had made;—she figured to herself all that was terrible on the occasion, and 
could scarce bear up under the ideas of her own formation. 
But if she suffer'd so much through the fears of what might, or might not happen, what must the cruel certainty inflict, when in about three hours after she saw Jemmy enter the room with a countenance pale and confused, and his cloaths sprinkled in many places with blood! —‘Oh Heavens! cry'd she, what have you been doing?’ —‘An act of justice, reply'd he, which I can repent of for no other reason than as it compels me to be once more separated from you. I know not but I have kill'd the villain Belpine, and prudence requires that I should be out of the way for a short time.’ —‘But whither will you go? demanded she in a voice scarce articulate,—Where can you be safe?’ —I have already taken care of that, answered he, all is prepared for my departure, and I but stay to snatch one dear embrace.’ 
‘Go then,—Oh go! cry'd she, and hazard not your safety by a moment's delay.’ 
—Tho' she spoke this with all the courage she could assume, yet she could not so well conceal the trembling of her whole frame, while he held her in 
his arms, but that he found, and was pierced with them to the soul;—I cannot go, said he, and leave you thus.’ —‘You must,—you must, rejoin'd she,—your presence, while this danger threatens you, is much more terrible to me than your absence can be.’ 
He then told her, that a boat waited to carry him that night to Greenwich,—that he should take a post-chaise from thence to Dover, and hoped to be in Calais before that time the next day:—on hearing this, she in a manner forced him from her arms, and never was there a more tender, tho' hasty parting, than between those two so equally loving and beloved. 
