


Contains an account of some transactions,
which, though they may not be very
pleasing in the repetition, nor are of
any great consequence to miss Betsy,
would render this history extremely deficient,
if omitted. 

As lady Mellasin has made so considerable
a figure in the former parts of
this history, the reader may perhaps now
begin to think she has been too long neglected,
it is therefore proper to proceed
directly to some account, how that guilty
and unfortunate woman behaved, after
being driven in the manner already related
from the house of her much-injured
husband. —Mr. Goodman was advised by
his lawyer to be extremely private in the
prosecution he was going to commence
against her, and by no means to let her
know the secret of her criminal conversation
with Marplus had been discovered
to him:—this seemed a caution necessary
to be observed, in order to prevent her
from taking any measures, either to invalidate
the evidence of the witnesses, or 

prevail upon them to abscond, when the
proof of what they had sworn against her
should be expected:—the whole detection
of her guilt was designed to come
at once upon her like a thunderclap, and
thereby all the little efforts of artifice and
chicanry, to which she, doubtless, would
otherwise have had recourse, be rendered
of no use, nor give the least impediment
to justice. 
Accordingly, this zealous assertor of his
client's cause went to visit her, as of his
own good will;—flattered her with the
hope, that her husband would soon be
prevailed upon to take her home again,
and lent her several small sums of money
to supply her necessities, saying, at the
same time, that when matters were made
up between them, and all was over, he
very well knew mr. Goodman would return
it to him with thanks. 
This stratagem had the effect it was intended
for;—it not only kept her from
attempting any thing of the nature above-mentioned,
but also from running mr.
Goodman into debt, which certainly she
might have done, on some pretence or
other, in spite of all the care and means
that could have been taken to destroy her
credit. 
It must be acknowledged, indeed, that
acting in this manner was a prodigious
piece of dissimulation; but, at the same
time, it must be acknowledged also, that it
was abundantly justified by the cause, and
practised for the most laudable end, to
serve an honest, worthy gentleman, his
friend and client, against a woman, who
had wronged him in the tenderest point,
and who was capable of making use of
the vilest methods to elude the punishment
her crimes deserved; and as a great
author tells us, 

‘It is a kind of stupid honesty,
‘Among known knaves, to play upon the square.’

Lady Mellasin, however, was lulled
into so perfect a security by her dependance
on the good-nature of her husband,
and the tender affection he had always
shewn to her, as well as by the high character
she had always heard of the lawyer's
veracity, that she was more easy than
could have been expected, in a woman of
her situation, even though it had been as
she was made to believe. 
She received, and returned, with her
usual politeness and gaiety, the visits that 

were made her by all those who thought
proper to continue an acquaintance with
her;—she pretended that it was only a
little family contest, that had separated
her from mr. Goodman for a short time; 
and always mentioned him with so much
kindness and respect, as made every one
believe, there was nothing between them,
but what would be easily made up. 
This was indeed the most prudent method
she could take, not only to preserve
her own reputation to the world, but also
to give mr. Goodman a high idea of her
conduct, if what she said should happen
to be repeated to him. 
She was every day in expectation, that
through her own good management, and
the intercession of the lawyer, whom she
now took to be her staunch friend, all
would be over, and she should be recalled
home, when a citation to appear before
the doctors of the civil law was delivered
to her, by an officer belonging to that
court. 
It is more easy to conceive than describe
her distraction, at so unlooked-for
a turn;—she now found, that her intrigue
with Marplus was discovered, and
that all she had to dread, was like to fall 

upon her by that event;—her perplexity
was also greatly increased, by her not being
able to find out by whom, or by what
means she had been betrayed;—she sent
immediately in search of Marplus, whom,
since his arresting mr. Goodman, she had
never once seen, nor heard any thing of; 
but all the information she could get of
him, was, that he had been thrown in prison
by mr. Goodman, and after confinement
of a few days, had been released, and was
gone nobody knew where, but as it was
supposed out of England;—that his
wife had likewise removed from her lodgings,
but whether with an intention to
follow him, or not, no certain intelligence
could be given. 
As this unhappy woman, therefore,
neither knew on what foundation the accusation
against her was built, nor what
evidences could be produced to prove it,
she might very well be bewildered in her
thoughts, and not know what course to
take; yet amidst all these matters of astonishment,
—oppressed with grief, and
struck with horror at the near prospect of
approaching infamy, she had courage, and
presence enough of mind, to enable her
to do every thing that was necessary for
her defence in so bad a cause. 

Mr. Goodman's indisposition putting a
stop to the process, she had time to consult
with those whom she found most
most qualified for the purpose;—her
chief agent was a pettyfogger, or under-strapper
in the law, one who knew all
those quirks and evasions, which are called
the knavish part of it, and as the extreme
indigence of his circumstances made
him ready to undertake any thing, though
never so desperate, provided it afforded a
prospect of advantage, so he had impudence
and cunning enough to go through
with it, even to the hazard of his ears. 
This man kept up her spirits, by assuring
her, he would find ways and means
so to puzzle the cause, that nothing should
be clearly proved against her; but there
was no opportunity for him to exercise
his abilities this way, for mr. Goodman's
death soon after furnished him with another. 
—Lady Mellasin was no sooner informed,
by spies she kept continually
about mr. Goodman's house, that his life
was despaired of, than they set about
making his will;—the first article of
which, after the prelude usual in such
writings, was this. 

‘Imprimis, I give and bequeath to
my dear and well-beloved wife Margaret,
lady Mellasin Goodman, the full
sum of thirty thousand pounds of lawful
money of Great-Britain, over and
above what otherwise she might lay
claim to as my widow, in consideration
of the great wrong I have done her,
through the insinuations of malicious
and evil-minded persons, which I now
heartily repent me of, and hope, that
God and she will forgive me for it.’ 
Then followed some other legacies to
several of his kindred, and those of his
friends, whom he had been known to
have been the most intimate with; but
the sums to each were very trifling, and
did not amount in the whole to above
seven or eight hundred pounds. —As
every one, who had the least acquaintance
with mr. Goodman, was very well convinced,
that he had always intended his
nephew for his heir, the pretended will
went on in this manner: 
‘Item, I give and bequeath to my
dear nephew, Edward Goodman, the
son of Nathaniel Goodman, and of Catherine
his wife, late of Bengal, in the
East-Indies, the whole residue of my 

effects, whatsoever and wheresoever they
shall be found at my demise;—provided,
that he, the said Edward Goodman,
shall take to be his lawful wife,
Flora Mellasin, only daughter, and remaining
issue of sir Timon Mellasin,
bart, and of the above-mentioned Margaret
his wife; but in case that either
party shall refuse to enter into such marriage,
then, that he, the said Edward
Goodman, shall be obliged to pay to
the said Flora Mellasin, the full sum of
five thousand pounds of lawful money
of Great-Britain, in consideration of the
misfortunes she has suffered, by the injury
I have done her mother.’ 
This impudent piece of forgery was
signed Samuel Goodman,—in a character
so like that gentleman's, that when
compared with other papers of his own
hand-writing, the difference could not be
distinguished by those who was best acquainted
with it:—two persons also of
the lawyer's procuring, set their names as
witnesses. 
Notwithstanding the flagrancy of this attempt,
lady Mellasin flattered herself with
the hopes of its success, and on mr. Goodman's
death threw in a caveat against the
real will, and set up this pretended one. 
On the other hand, though one would
imagine there needed but little skill for
the detection of so gross an imposition,
yet mr. Goodman's lawyer thought proper
to get all the helps he could to corroborate
the truth. —The piece of forgery
was dated about ten days before mr.
Goodman died;—he knew, that the
elder mr. Thoughtless came every day to
visit him, during the whole time of his
sickness, and that miss Betsy, at the time
this will was supposed to be made, actually
lived in the house, and that neither
of these two could be totally ignorant of
such a transaction, in case any such had
been. 
It was therefore on the lawyer's request,
that miss Betsy was sent for to her brother's
house;—she answered with a great
deal of readiness, to all the questions he
put to her, according to the best of her
knowledge, particularly, as to that concerning
the making the will, she said,
that she had never heard the least mention
of any lawyer but himself coming to
mr. Goodman's, during the whole time
of his sickness, and that she verily believed,
no will, but that drawn up by
him, and which all the family knew of,
could possibly be made by mr. Goodman's 

orders, or in his house; and as to the article
in the pretended will, relating to
miss Flora, nothing could be a more palpable
forgery, because mr. Goodman had
offered five hundred pounds with her in
marriage to a linnen-draper, not above
six weeks before his parting with lady
Mellasin, ‘which,’ added she, ‘is a very
plain proof, that he never intended her
for his nephew.’ 
All the time miss Betsy stayed, the
whole discourse was on this affair, and she
had no opportunity, as the lawyer was
present, to acquaint her brothers with any
thing concerning sir Frederick Fineer, as
otherwise it was her full intention to have
done, after the surprising injunction he
had laid upon her of secrecy, in regard of
his passion, and every thing relating to
him. 
