
Contains, among sundry interesting and entertaining particulars, a certain proposal, agreement, and resolution,—sudden,—unexpected,—highly important to one of the parties concerned, and no less pleasing to the others. 
Jenny, being shew'd up into lady Wingman's great drawing-room, found lady Speck,—miss Wingman,—lord Huntley,—mr. Lovegrove, and sir Thomas Welby, with her ladyship; the highest gaiety appear'd in all their countenances, except in those of miss Wingman and mr. Lovegrove, who both look'd extremely serious, tho' for very different reasons. 
This had, indeed, been a pretty extraordinary day,—lady Wingman having consented to give her daughter to lord Huntley, and sir Thomas Welby highly approving of that union between them, the marriage articles were that morning signed; and it was either that the intended bride thought it became her to look grave on this occasion, or that the thoughts of being so near entering into a new scene of life made her really so, which caused an unusual sedateness in her behaviour. 
As to mr. Lovegrove,—the encouragement he had lately received from lady Speck, and the knowledge that she had discarded all her lovers except himself, had given him courage that day to press her in more strong terms than ever he had done before, for the completion of his wishes; at which she had seem'd very much offended, and told him that the man who had not love and patience enough to wait till she discover'd an inclination to change her condition, should find that she never would do so in his favour. 
This cruel rebuff, from a mistress he had courted for so long a time, did not 
however hinder him from waiting on her to lady Wingman's, having before received an invitation from her ladyship to come there; but it cast, notwithstanding, such a dejection on his spirits, as was not in his power to conceal, though he attempted it as much as possible. 
But Jenny had not presently an opportunity to observe this change in him, or to make her compliments to any of the company;—she had scarce returned the first salutations of lady Wingman, before lord Huntley catching fast hold of both her hands,—‘Dear miss Jessamy, cried he, you were so good to take part in my distresses at Bath, and I flatter myself will no less do so in the assurance I now have of being shortly the happiest man in the world.’ 
‘Shortly, my lord, reply'd she, you surprise me;—I imagin'd by the billet I just now received that the ceremony was over, and that your lordship was already a bridegroom.’ 
On this sir Thomas Welby took up the word,—‘No, madam, said he, I have not yet given up my fair charge; but have promised to put her entirely into his lordship's possession on Tuesday 
next,—according to the institution,—till death do them part;—and it was to engage you to be witness of this form, that your company was desired.’ 
‘That is not all, sir Thomas, cried lady Speck, we have something more than being present at the wedding to require of miss Jessamy.’ —‘Yes, rejoined miss Wingman,—something that I fancy will be much more agreeable to herself.’ 
‘There is hardly a possibility, answer'd Jenny, for either of you to require any thing of me that will not be agreeable;—but I am very much at a loss to guess what can be more so than to behold an union which affords so fair a prospect of lasting happiness, to persons for whom I have the greatest honour and esteem.’ 
Lord Huntley was just opening his mouth in order to make some return to this compliment, but was prevented by lady Speck, who briskly cried out,—‘You must know, miss Jessamy, that we have all taken it into our heads to go to Paris,—and are resolved to have you with us.’ 
‘To Paris, madam! demanded Jenny strangely amazed;—Pray what does your ladyship mean?’ —‘We all mean alike, said miss Wingman smiling,—and are determined to take no denial;—you must needs go with us and fetch home mr. Jessamy.’ 
All the presence of mind Jenny was usually mistress of, could not now enable her to recover herself enough from the astonishment she was in to desire an explanation of all this; nor even to ask whether what they had said to her was meant in earnest or in jest. —The ladies laugh'd heartily; but lord Huntley, pitying her confusion, took upon himself to unfold the mystery. 
He told her that his dear miss Wingman, having an utter aversion to those formal visits of congratulation, always made to persons of condition on their marriage, and believing she should be no less troubled with them in the country than in town, had testified a desire of going to France;—that lady Speck, approving of the motion, had promised to accompany them;—and, in fine, that it was agreed among them to set out for Dover, in order to embark for Calais, 
immediately after the ceremony was perform'd. 
Lady Wingman confirmed what lord Huntley had said; and added, that as her daughters so earnestly desir'd miss Jessamy would accompany them, she joined her entreaties they might not be refused this satisfaction. 
That flutter which had seiz'd on Jenny's heart at the first mention of this tour to Paris was not quite gone off, yet she answer'd, with her accustom'd sprightliness,—that since the ladies did her the honour to invite her, she should not be so much an enemy to herself as to refuse making one in so agreeable a party. 
Then turning to mr. Lovegrove, who had not spoke all this while,—‘I suppose, sir, said she, you are to be one of the company.’ —‘Yes, madam,’ reply'd he, casting at the same time a kind of reproachful look on lady Speck,—lord Huntley and miss Wingman have been so good to insist on my being so, and I should obey their commands with an infinity of pleasure, if I could flatter myself that my presence was no less acceptable to every one that goes.’ 
‘I understand you, sir, cried lady Speck, and so I believe do all here;—this is because I did not ask you to go:—indeed I thought—the knowledge I went was sufficient to engage you, by whomsoever the invitation was given.’ —‘You thought right, madam, return'd he;—yet I should have been glad to have attended you by your own permission.’ 
‘Well,—well, said she, since you are so particular, and oblige me to be so too, I will give you your humour for once, and tell you, that without you I should lose half the satisfaction I propose to myself in this excursion.’ 
‘This is an assurance, madam, answer'd he in a transported accent, as much beyond my expectations as my power of ever deserving it, and demands all the acknowledgments of my future life.’ —‘I expect no more, return'd she with a smile, than that you will not presume too far upon it.’ 
Had they been alone, he doubtless would have thrown himself at her feet, and said a thousand fine things to her on the occasion; but the presence of so many 
witnesses obliged him to defer his raptures till a more convenient opportunity allowed him to indulge them. 
To prevent him, however, from saying any thing more than she wish'd him to do at that time, she went on,—‘I fancy, cry'd she, that to see the behaviour of mr. Jessamy on so unexpected a meeting with his mistress will afford a good deal of pleasantry to us all.’ 
‘I had the honour, madam, said lord Huntley, to have just the same thought with your ladyship; it must needs be an admirable scene, if we can prevail with miss Jessamy not to apprize her lover of her coming.’ —Jenny, who was willing to give her friends this satisfaction, and besides was herself extremely delighted with the conceit, laughed heartily, and protested she would observe as much secrecy in this point as his lordship could desire. 
After this they fell into some discourse concerning their intended journey,—in what manner they should set out,—what rout they were to take,—by what number of servants it would be necessary they should be attended,—and such like particulars; which having settled, so as to be 
most for the ease and convenience of the ladies, lord Huntley, who knew Paris perfectly well, farther added,—that it would be highly proper a large Hotel should be hired for their reception on their arrival;—and that as sir Robert Manley was luckily there, he would write to him and beg that favour of him. 
This proposal seemed too commodious to be rejected, only lady Speck said, that she fear'd it would destroy their design of surprising mr. Jessamy; for as Jenny had told of the intimacy that was now grown between him and sir Robert, it could scarce be doubted, but that the latter would inform his new friend what company he might soon expect to see. 
‘Not if I request him to the contary, madam, reply'd lord Huntley, which I shall do in the strongest terms I am able, as you shall all be witness of, continued he, if lady Wingman will favour me with her standish, and forgive the liberty I take of writing in her presence.’ 
He had no sooner spoke than miss Wingman ran herself into the next room, and fetched all the necessary utensils wanting for him to do as he had said, and he then 
sat down to a side-table, and wrote in the following manner: 

To sir Robert Manley.
“Dear sir Robert,
What so much testifies the excess of any passion as the being unable to express it! —It is utterly impossible for me to describe the present transport of my soul; but you will easily conceive it, when I tell you that my so-long-adored miss Wingman has at last consented to be mine. 
“Next Tuesday is fixed upon to make me the happiest of mankind, and it is also agreed upon, that, for the sake of avoiding those troublesome formalities usual on such occasions, we shall that same day set out on our way for France, where, it is no compliment to assure you, my felicity will receive no inconsiderable addition by your being a witness of it. 
“We shall come to Paris accompanied by lady Speck, mr. Lovegrove, and a third person, whose name I am not at liberty to mention; but if you chance to guess at, must insist upon it your not acquainting mr. Jessamy 
with any part of your conjectures on that head; and, upon second thoughts, it will be still better, if, to prevent all suspicion in him, you keep him in an entire ignorance that any of us are expected. 
“You will, perhaps, laugh at this injunction, but I make it at the request of the ladies, whose desires I know you always take a pleasure in complying with:—I write this in their presence;—they all send their compliments, and, as well as mr. Lovegrove, join with me in intreating a favour of a more serious nature;—which is,—that you will be so good as to employ some person, who knows the town, to hire a handsome hotel, with all other proper accommodations for us, against our arrival, that the fair travellers may meet with no more embarrassments at the end of the journey, than they would do in stepping into their own country seat. 
“I shall not pretend to direct your choice in the situation of a place,—I am convinced you will fix on such a one as you shall find most agreeable;—neither will I attempt any apology for the trouble I give you,— 
I am too well acquainted with your heart to think I stand in need of any, and hope you are enough so with mine to assure yourself that I am, 
“With the greatest friendship and esteem,
Dear sir Robert,
Your most obedient,
And most humble servant,
Huntley. 
P. S. “I beg leave to recommend as much expedition in this affair as possible; for tho' we propose travelling at our ease, we shall certainly, barring accidents, be with you in twelve days at farthest, from the date hereof.” 

After having read this to the company, and received their approbation of it, he sealed it up, in order to have it carried to the post; but Jenny, finding they should not reach Paris in less than twelve days, desired that errand might be deferred for a few minutes:—she considered, that before the expiration of the time his lordship mentioned, Jemmy would certainly, not only write to her, 
but also expect an answer from her; and thinking herself under an obligation to prevent him from entertaining any uneasy apprehensions on that disappointment, begged leave to take up the pen lord Huntley had laid down, and write a few lines to him. 
‘Ah, madam, cry'd lord Huntley, how are we sure you will not undo all I have been doing, and apprize mr. Jessamy of our plot upon him.’ —No, upon my honour, replied she laughing;—but if you will not take my word, miss Wingman and lady Speck, if her ladyship will give herself that trouble, shall read what I write to him.’ 
She said no more, but sat down to the table,—whence she returned in a very small space of time, and, according to her promise, submitted to miss Wingman's perusal, what she had been writing:—this little epistle was as follows: 

To James Jessamy, Esq;
“Dear Jemmy,
You will wonder at receiving two letters from me by one post, but I cannot suffer that any pains you 
take on my account should be thrown away:—I have engaged myself to see my charming friend, miss Wingman, give her hand to lord Huntley, and also to accompany the happy pair in an excursion they propose to make immediately after their marriage:—according to the manner in which they have regulated the route we are to take, it will be ten or twelve days before we stay at any one place scarce longer than merely for necessary refreshment; so that it will be absolutely impossible for me to give you any exact directions where to send to me during that time. 
“I beg, therefore, that you will not think of writing till you hear from me again, which, you may be certain, will be as soon as I shall find myself in a situation to hope an answer from you; till when content yourself with the assurance, that, wherever I am, I shall always be, 
“With the greatest tenderness,
My dear Jemmy,
Your most affectionate,
And most faithful
J. Jessamy. 

Miss Wingman, on reading this, declared to her sister and the whole company, that Jenny had betray'd no part of their design; but, on the contrary, had wrote in such a manner as would rather prevent, than raise any suspicion in mr. Jessamy of the truth;—and, in fine, that she had done no more than what love,—friendship,—politeness,—and even good-nature, demanded from a person in her circumstances. 
The remainder of the evening was chiefly taken up with conversation on their intended journey, which afforded an ample field for wit and pleasantry;—they separated not till it was very late, and even lady Wingman and sir Thomas Welby seemed to have forgot their age and gravity, to participate, in some measure, in the good-humour and sprightliness of those who were fired with more gay and sanguine expectations. 
