


Will not tire the reader. 

Miss Betsy having her heart and head
full of the obligation she had to mr.
Trueworth, and on the first recovery of
her senses, thinking he was still near her,
cried out,—‘Oh! mr. Trueworth, how
shall I thank the goodness you have
shewn me! —I have no words to do
it,—it is from my brothers you must
receive those demonstrations of gratitude,
which are not in my power to
give.’ 
The brothers looked sometimes on her,
and sometimes on each other, with a good
deal of surprise all the time she was speaking,
'till perceiving she had done,— 
‘To whom are you talking, sister?’ said
mr. Francis, ‘here is nobody but my
brother and myself.’ 
‘Bless me!’ cried she, looking round
the room, ‘how wild my head is!’ — 
‘I knew not where I was,—I thought
myself still in the house of that wicked
woman that betrayed me, and saw my 

generous deliverer chastising the monster
that attempted my destruction.’ 
‘Who was that monster?’ demanded
the elder mr. Thoughtless, hastily. — 
‘A villain without a name,’ said she,
‘for that of sir Frederick Fineer was but
assumed, to hide a common cheat!— 
a robber!’ —‘And who, say you,’ rejoined
mr. Francis, ‘was your deliverer?’ 
‘Who, but that best of men!’ answered
she, ‘mr. Trueworth! —O, brothers,
if you have any regard for me, or for
the honour of our family, you can never
too much revere, or love the honour,
and the virtue of that worthy
man.’ 
‘You see, Frank, how greatly you
have been to blame,’ said the elder mr.
Thoughtless, ‘and how much more so
you might have been, if I had not disswaded
you from following that gentleman,
who, I now perceive, was the faviour,
not the invader of our sister's innocence.’ 
—‘I blush,’ replied mr.
Francis, ‘at the remembrance of my
rashness,—I ought, indeed, to have
known Trueworth better.’ 
There passed no more between them on
this subject, but on finding miss Betsy 

grew more composed, and able to continue
a conversation, they obliged her to
repeat the particulars of what had happened
to her, which she accordingly did,
with the greatest veracity imaginable,
omitting nothing of moment in the shocking
narrative. 
The calling to mind a circumstance so
detestable to her natural delicacy, threw
her, however, into such agonies, which
made them think it their province, rather
to console her under the affliction she
had sustained, than to chide her for the
inadvertency that had brought it on her. 
They stayed supper with her, which,
to save her the trouble of ordering, mr.
Thoughtless went to an adjacent tavern,
and gave directions for it himself,— 
made her drink several glasses of wine,
and both of them did every thing in their
power to chear and restore her spirits to
their former tone, after which they retired
and left her to enjoy what repose the present
anxieties of her mind would permit
her to take. 
Though the condition miss Betsy was
in, made these gentlemen treat her with
the abovementioned tenderness, yet both
of them were highly incensed against her, 

for so unadvisedly encouraging the pretensions
of a man, whose character she
knew nothing of, but from the mouth of
a little mantua-maker;—her consenting
to sup with him at the house of that woman,
and afterwards running with her
into his very bed-chamber, were actions,
which to them seemed to have no excuse. 
Mr. Francis, as of the two having the
most tender affection for her, had the
most deep concern in whatever related to
her:—‘If she were either a fool,’ said
he, stamping with extremity of vexation,
‘or of a vicious inclination, her
conduct would leave no room for wonder; 
—but for a girl, who wants neither
wit nor virtue, to expose herself
in this manner, has something in it inconsistent!
—unnatural!—monstrous!’ 
‘I doubt not,’ cried he again, ‘if the
truth could be known, that it was some
such ridiculous adventure as this, that
lost her the affection of mr. Trueworth,
though her pride and his honour joined
to conceal it.’ 
The elder mr. Thoughtless was entirely
of his brother's opinion in all these points,
and both of them now were more confirmed 

than ever, that marriage was the
only sure guard for the reputation of a
young woman of their sister's temper. — 
Mr. Munden had been there the day before,
and, as he had told miss Betsy he
would do, declared himself to them; so
it was resolved between them, that if, on
proper enquiry, his circumstances should
be found such as he said they were, to
clap up the wedding with all imaginable
expedition. 
But no business, how important or perplexing
soever it may be, can render gratitude
and good-manners forgotten, or
neglected, by persons of understanding
and politeness; these gentlemen thought
a visit to mr. Trueworth neither could
nor ought to be dispensed with, in order
to make him those acknowledgments the
service he had done their sister demanded
from them. 
Accordingly, the next morning mr.
Thoughtless, accompanied by his brother,
went in his own coach, which he made
be got ready, as well in respect to himself,
as to the person he was going to
visit. 
They found mr. Trueworth at home,
who, doubtless, was not without some 

expectation of their coming;—on their
sending up their names, he received them
at the top of the stair-case with so graceful
an affability, and sweetness in his air,
as convinced the elder mr. Thoughtless,
that the high character his brother Frank
had given of that gentleman, was far from
exceeding the bounds of truth. 
It is certain, indeed, that mr. Trueworth,
since the eclaircissement of the
Denham affair, had felt the severest remorse
within himself, for having given
credit to that wicked aspersion cast upon
miss Betsy, and the reflection, that fortune
had now put it in his power to attone
for the wrong he had been guilty of
to that lady, by the late service he had
done her, gave a secret satisfaction to his
mind, that diffused itself through all his
air, and gave a double sprightliness to
those eyes, which, by the report of all
whoever saw him, stood in need of no
addition to their lustre. 
The elder mr. Thoughtless having
made his compliments on the occasion,
which had brought him thither, the
younger advanced, though with a look
somewhat more downcast than ordinary:
—‘I know not, sir,’ said he, ‘whether
any testimonies of the gratitude I owe 

you will be acceptable, after the folly
into which a mistaken rage transported
me last night.’ —‘Dear Frank,’ cried
mr. Trueworth, smiling, and giving him
his hand, in token of a perfect reconciliation,
‘none of these formal speeches,— 
we know each other,—you are by nature
warm, and the little philosophy I
am master of, makes me think whatever
is born with us pleads its own excuse; 
—besides, to see me with your
sister in the condition she then was, entirely
justifies your mistake.’ —‘Dear
Trueworth,’ replied the other, embracing
him, ‘you are born every way
to overcome.’ 
Mr. Thoughtless returning to some expressions
of his sense of the obligation he
had conferred upon their whole family:
—‘Sir, I have done no more,’ said mr.
Trueworth, ‘than what every man of
honour would think himself bound to
do for any woman in the like distress,
much more for a lady so deserving as
miss Betsy Thoughtless. —I happened
almost miraculously to be in the same
house with her, when she stood in need
of assistance, and I shall always place
the day in which my good stars conducted
me to the rescue of her innocence 

among the most fortunate ones of my
whole life.’ 
In the course of their conversation, the
brothers satisfied mr. Trueworth's curiosity,
by acquainting him with the means by
which their sister had been seduced into
the danger he had so happily delivered
her from, and mr. Trueworth in his turn
informed them of the accident that had
so seasonably brought him to her relief; 
which latter, as the reader is yet ignorant
of, 'tis proper should be related. 
‘Having sent,’ said he, ‘for my
steward to come to town, on account
of some leases I am to sign, the poor
man had the misfortune to break his
leg as he was stepping out of the stage
coach, and was carried directly to mrs.
Modely's, where, it seems, he has formerly
lodged;—this casualty obliged
me to go to him:—as a maid servant
was shewing me to his room, which is
up two pair of stairs, I heard the rusting
of silks behind me, and casting my
eyes over the bannister, I saw miss Betsy,
and a woman with her, who I since
found was mrs. Modely, pass hastily
into a room on the first floor.’ 

‘A curiosity,’ contined he, ‘which I
cannot very well account for, induced
me to ask the nurse, who attends my
steward, what lodgers there were below?’ 
—To which she replied, that
they said he was a baronet, but that she
believed nothing of it, for the two fellows
that passed for his servants were always
with him, and she believed eat at
the same table, for they never dined in
the kitchen:—‘besides,’ said she, ‘I
have seen two or three shaby, ill-looked
men, that have more the appearance of
pick-pockets, than companions for a
gentleman, come after him, and, indeed,
I believe he is no better than a
rogue himself.’ 
‘Though I was extremely sorry,’ pursued
mr. Trueworth, ‘to find miss Betsy
should be the guest of such a person,
yet I could not forbear laughing at the
description this woman gave of him; 
which, however, proved to be a very
just one. —I had not been there above
half an hour, before I heard the shrieks
of a woman, and fancied, the voice of
miss Betsy, though I had never heard
it made use of in that manner;—I
went however to the top of the stair-case,
where hearing the cries redoubled, 

I drew my sword, and ran down; the
door of the chamber was locked, but
setting my foot against it, I easily burst
it open, and believe entered but just
in time to save the lady from violation.’ 
‘On seeing the face,’ added he, ‘of
this pretended baronet, I immediately
knew him to be a fellow that waited on
a gentleman I was intimate with at
Paris. —What his real name is I either
never heard or have forgot; for his
master never called him by any other,
than that of Quaint, on account of the
romantic and affected fashion in which
he always spoke:—the rascal has a
little smattering of Latin, and I believe
has dipped into a good many of the
ancient authors;—he seemed indeed to
have more of the fop than the knave
in him, but he soon discovered himself
to be no less the one than the other, for
he ran away from his master, and robbed
him of things to a considerable value:
—he was pursued and taken, but
the gentleman permitted him to make
his escape, without delivering him into
the hands of justice.’ 
After this mutual recapitulation, the
two brothers began to consider what was 

to be done for the chastisement of the villain,
as the prosecuting him by law would
expose their sister's folly, and prove the
most mortal stab that could be given to
her reputation:—the one was for cutting
off his ears,—the other for pinning him
against the wall of the very chamber
where he had offered the insult; to which
mr. Trueworth replied, ‘I must confess
his crime deserves much more than
your keenest resentments can inflict, but
these are punishments which are only
the prerogative of law, to which, as you
rightly judge, it would be improper to
have recourse:—I am afraid therefore
you must content yourselves with barely
caning him;—that is,’ continued he,
‘if he is yet in the way for it, but I
shrewdly suspect he has before now
made off, as well as his confederates,
the parson, and the surgeon;—however
I think it would be right to go to
the house of this Modely, and see what
is to be done.’ 
To this they both readily agreed, and
they all went together; but as they were
going,—‘O! what eternal plagues,’ said
mr. Francis, ‘has the vanity of this girl
brought upon all her friends?’ —‘You
will still be making too hasty reflections;’ 

cried mr. Trueworth;—‘I hope to see
miss Betsy one day as much out-shine
the greatest part of her sex in prudence,
as she has always done in beauty.’ 
By this time they were at mrs. Modely's
door; but the maid, whom she had
tutored for the purpose, told them, that
sir Frederick Fineer was gone;—that he
would not pay her mistress for the lodgings,
because she had suffered him to be
interrupted in them;—and that she was
sick in bed with the fright of what had
happened, and could not be spoke to. 
On this mr. Trueworth ran up to his
steward's chamber, not doubting but he
should there be certainly informed whether
the mock baronet was gone or not; 
—the two mr. Thoughtlesses waited in
the parlour till his return, which was immediately,
with intelligence, that the
wretch had left the house soon after himself
had conducted miss Betsy thence. 
They had now no longer any business
here; but the elder mr. Thoughtless
could not take leave of mr. Trueworth
without entreating the favour of seeing
him at his house: to which he replyed,
that he believed he should not stay long
in town, and while he did so, had business 

that very much engrossed his time
but at his return should rejoice in an opportunity
of cultivating a friendship with
him. —With this, and some other compliments
they separated;—the two brothers
went home, and mr. Trueworth
went where his inclinations led him. 
