


Miss Betsy's innocence, as to the Denham
affair, fully cleared up to mr.
Trueworth, by a very extraordinary
accident. 

Mr. Trueworth had made so great a
progress in his courtship, that the
sincerity of miss Harriot got the better of
her bashfulness, even so far as to confess
to him, it was with pleasure she yielded
to the persuasions of her friends, in favour
of his love, and that he had infinitely the
preference of all mankind in her esteem; 
in fine, her behaviour was such, as left 

nothing wanting but the ceremony to assure
him of his happiness. 
Sir Bazil also having concluded every
thing with the father of his mistress,
brought that young lady acquainted with
his sisters, who, highly approving their
brother's choice, soon treated her, and
were treated by her, with the same
affection and familiarity as if already
united. 
There were few hours, excepting those
allotted by nature and custom for repose,
which this amiable company did not pass
together; the old gentleman, who was
extremely good humoured, when nothing
relating to the parting with his money
came on the carpet, would frequently
make one among them, and being one
day more than ordinarily chearful, told
mr. Trueworth, that as he found the
two weddings were to be solemnized in
one day, and he should give his daughter's
hand to sir Bazil, desired he might
also have the honour of bestowing miss
Harriot's upon him;—to which mr.
Trueworth replied, that he should joyfully
receive her from any hands, but
more particularly from his;—and that
he took the offer he made him as a very
great favour:—on this, the other grew 

very gay, and said abundance of merry
things, to the no small expence of blushes,
both in his daughter and miss Harriot. 
It is impossible for any lovers, while
waiting for the consummation of their
wishes, to enjoy a more uninterrupted felicity,
than did sir Bazil and mr. Trueworth; 
—continually blest with the society
of their dear mistresses, and receiving
from them all the marks, that a virtuous
affection could bestow, yet both of
them found it requisite to contrive every
day some new party of pleasure or other,
in order to beguile the necessary, though
to them tedious, time it took up in drawing
of writings, and other preparations
for the so much longed-for nuptials,
which mrs. Wellair did not fail to do all
on her part to hasten, being impatient to
return to her family, whence she had
been absent longer than she had intended. 
Sir Bazil and mr. Trueworth having
been taking a little walk in the park one
morning, the former finding himself so
near the habitation of miss Mabel, could
not forbear calling on her, though she
was to dine that day at his house, and
mr. Trueworth readily accompanied him; 
—that lady was then at her toilet, but
made no scruple of admitting them into 

her dressing-room, where they had scarce
seated themselves, when her woman, who
was waiting, was called out by a footman
to speak to some people, who, he
said, were very importunate to see miss
Mabel, and would take no answer from
him. 
‘Rude guests, indeed,’ cried miss Mabel,
‘that will not take an answer from a
servant: —Who are they?’ —‘I never
saw them before, madam,’ replied the
footman; ‘but the one is a woman of a
very mean appearance, and the other,
I believe, is a soldier: —I told them
your ladyship had company, and could
not be seen; but the man said, he only
begged one word with you,—that he
was just come from abroad, and wanted
to know where he might see his child,
and a deal of such stuff:—the woman
is almost as impertinent as the man,
and I cannot get them from the door.’ 
‘I will lay my life upon it, madam,’ 
said the waiting-maid, ‘that this is the
father of the child, that you and miss
Betsy Thoughtless have been so good
to keep, ever since the mother's death.’ 
—‘I verily believe thou hast hit upon
the right,’ cried miss Mabel;—‘prithee
go down, and if it be as thou 

imaginest, bid them come up,—I will
see them.’ 
The maid went as she was ordered,
and immediately returned with two persons,
such as the footman had described:
—the woman was the first that advanced,
and after dropping two or three curtsies
to each of the company, addressed herself
to miss Mabel in these words: —‘I do
not know, madam,’ said she, ‘whether
your ladyship may remember me, but
I nursed poor mrs. Jinks, your ladyship's
sempstress and clear-starcher, all
the time of her lying-in, when your
ladyship, and madam Betsy Thoughtless,
were so good as to stand godmothers,
and afterwards took the child,
that it might not go to the parish.’ 
‘I remember you very well,’ replied
miss Mabel; ‘but pray what is your
business with me now?’ —‘Why, madam,’ 
said she, ‘your ladyship must
know, that mrs. Jinks's husband has
seen his folly at last,—has left the
army, and is resolved to take up and
settle in the world;—so, madam, if
your ladyship pleases, he would willingly
have his child.’ 

‘O! doubtless, he may have his child,’ 
rejoined miss Mabel;—‘but hearkye,
friend,’ continued she, turning to the
man, ‘are you able to keep your child?’ 
‘—Yes, madam,’ answered he, coming
forward, ‘thank God, and good friends; 
—I had an uncle down in Northamptonshire,
who died a while ago, and left
me a pretty little farm there;—and
so, as my neighbour here was telling
you, I would not have my child a burthen
to any body.’ —‘If we had
thought it a burthen,’ said miss Mabel,
‘we should not have taken it upon us; 
—however, I am glad you are in circumstances
to maintain it yourself;— 
your wife was a very honest, industrious
woman, and suffered a great deal
through your neglect, but I hope you
will make it up in the care of the child
she has left behind.’ 
‘Aye, madam,’ replied he, wiping
his eyes, ‘I have nothing else to remember
her;—I did not use her so well as
she deserved, that's certain, but I have
sowed all my wild oats, as the saying
is, and I wish she were alive to have
the benefit of it’ 

‘That cannot be,’ interrupted the woman,
‘so don't trouble good madam with
your sorrowful stories;—if her ladyship
will be so good only to give us
directions where to find the child, for
we have been to madam Betsy's, and
her ladyship was not at home, so we
made bold to come here.’ —‘Yes,
madam,’ cried he, ‘for my colonel
comes to town in a day or two, and I
shall get my discharge, and have no
more to do with the service, so would
willingly have my child to take down
with me to the farm.’ 
Miss Mabel made no other answer to
this, than saying, it was very well, and
immediately gave them the direction they
requested, to Goody Bushman's, at Denham. 
—‘I cannot tell you exactly where
the house is,’ said she; ‘but you will
easily find her, the husband is a gardener,
and she has been a nurse for many
years?’ 
The fellow seemed extremely pleased,
thanked her as well as he could in his
homely fashion, and desired she would be
so kind to give his duty to the other
lady, and thank her also, for her part of
the favours both his wife and child had 

received, nor had he forgot his manners
so far, as not to accompany these testimonies
of his gratitude with a great
many low scrapes, till he got quite out
of the room. 
After this sir Bazil began to grow a
little pleasant with miss Mabel, concerning
the motherly part she had been acting:
—‘You do me more honour than
I deserve,’ said she, laughing; ‘for it
was but half a child I had to take care
of, so consequently I could be but half
a mother. —I am glad, however,’ continued
she, more seriously, ‘that my little
goddaughter has found a father.’ 
While they were talking in this manner,
the old gentleman happening to come
in, and hearing sir Bazil was above with
his daughter, sent to desire to speak with
him in his closet. 
Miss Mabel being now alone with mr.
Trueworth, thought she saw something in
his countenance, which very much surprised
her,—‘You are pensive, sir,’ 
said she;—‘I hope the mention we
have been making of miss Betsy has
given you no alarm.’ —‘A very great
one,’ answered he; ‘but not on the
account you may perhaps imagine:—I 

have wronged that lady in the most
cruel manner;—and though the injury
I have done her went no farther than
my own heart, yet I never can forgive
myself for harbouring sentiments, which
I now find were so groundless and unjust.’ 
As it was not possible for miss Mabel
to comprehend the meaning of these
words, she intreated him, somewhat hastily,
to explain the mystery they seemed to
contain: on which he made no scruple
of repeating to her the substance of the
letter he had received;—his going down
to Denham, in order to convince himself
more fully, and the many circumstances,
which, according to all appearances, corroberated
the truth of that infamous scandal. 
Never was astonishment equal to that
miss Mabel was in, on hearing the narrative
of so monstrous a piece of villainy:
—‘Good God!’ cried she, ‘I know
miss Betsy has many enemies, who set
all her actions in the worst light, and
construe every thing she says and does
into meanings she is ignorant of herself; 
but this is so impudent,—so unparalelled
a slander, as I could not have 

thought the malice of either men or devils
could have invented.’ 
‘Indeed, madam,’ said mr. Trueworth,
‘should fortune ever discover to me the
author of this execrable falshood, I
know no revenge I could take, that
would be sufficient, both for traducing
the innocence of that lady, and the imposition
practised upon myself.’ —Miss
Mabel agreed with him, that no punishment
could be too bad for the inventors
of such cruel aspersions, and having a
little vented her indignation on all who
were capable of the like practices;—‘I
suppose then,’ said she, ‘that it was
owing to this wicked story that you desisted
your visits to miss Betsy.’ 
‘Not altogether, madam,’ answered
he;—‘I had long before seen it was
not in my power to inspire that lady
with any sentiments of the kind, that
would make me happy in a married
state. —I loved her, but my reason
combated with my passion, and got the
better.’ 
‘I understand you, sir,’ replied she,
and though I hope, nay believe in my
soul, that poor miss Betsy is innocent
as a vestal, yet I cannot but own, that 

the too great gaiety of her temper, and
the pride of attracting as many admirers
as have eyes to behold her, hurries her
into errors, which, if persevered in, cannot
but be fatal, both to the peace and
reputation of a husband;—where you
now are fixed you doubtless have a
much better prospect of being truly
happy. —It is however a great pity,
methinks,’ continued this amiable lady,
‘that so many rare and excellent qualities,
as miss Betsy is possessed of,
should all be swallowed up and lost in the
nonsensical vanity of being too generally
admired.’ 
They had time for no more,—sir Bazil
returned;—he had only been sent for
to examine the soul copy of the marriage
articles, which the old gentleman had just
brought from his lawyers, on purpose to
shew it to him some time that day, and
they now took their leave, that the lady
might have time to dress;—sir Bazil
looking on his watch, said, it was then
a quarter past two, and they should dine
at three, so begged she would not waste
too much time in consulting her glass; 
‘For,’ added he, ‘you know you have
always charms for me.’ —‘And I am
not ashamed then,’ replied she, with a
smile, ‘even before mr. Trueworth, to 

confess, that I desire to have none for
any other.’ 
He kissed her hand on this obliging
speech, and ran hastily down stairs, followed
by mr. Trueworth, whose temper
had not yet quite recovered its accustomed
vivacity. 
