

King Corny sat for some minutes
after Sir Ulick's departure, perfectly still
and silent, leaning both hands and his
chin on his crutch. Then, looking up at
Harry, he exclaimed—
“What a dupe you are! but I like
you the better for it.”
“I am glad you like me the better, at
all events,” said Harry; “but I don't
think I am a dupe.”
“No—if you did you would not be
one: so you don't see that it was, and is
Sir Ulick, and not her ladyship that
wanted, and wants to get rid of you?”
No, Harry did not see this, and would
not be persuaded of it. He defended his

guardian most warmly; he was certain
of Sir Ulick's affection; he was sure Sir
Ulick was incapable of acting with such
duplicity.
King Corny repeated, at every pause,
“you are a dupe; but I like you the
better for it.” And, added he, “you
don't, blind buzzard! as your want of
conceit makes you—for which I like you
the better too—you don't see the reason
why he banished you Castle Hermitage— 
you don't see that he is jealous
of your rivalling that puppy Marcus his
son.”
“Rivalling Marcus in what, or how?” 
“With whom? boy, is the question
you should ask, and in that case the
answer is—Dunce, can't you guess now?— 
Miss Annaly.”
“Miss Annaly!” repeated Harry with
genuine surprise, and with a quick sense
of inferiority and humiliation. “Oh,
Sir! you would not be so illnatured as
to make a jest of me?—I know how

ignorant, how unformed, what a raw
boy I am. Marcus has been educated
like a gentleman.”
“More shame for his father that
couldn't do the same by you when he
was about it.”
“But Marcus, Sir—there ought to
be a difference—Marcus is heir to a large
fortune—I have nothing—Marcus may
hope to marry whoever he pleases.”
“Aye, whoever he pleases, and who
will that be, if women are of my mind,” 
muttered Corny. “I'll engage if you
had a mind to rival him.”
“Rival him! the thought of rivalling
my friend never entered my head.”
“But is he your friend?” said Cornelius.
“As to that—I don't know—he was
my friend, and I loved him sincerely— 
warmly—he has cast me off—I shall
never complain—never blame him directly
or indirectly—but don't let me be
accused or suspected unjustly—I never

for one instant had the treachery, presumption,
folly, or madness, to think of
Miss Annaly.”
“Nor she of you? I suppose you'll
swear.”
“Nor she of me! assuredly not, Sir,” 
said Harry, with surprise at the idea.
“Do you consider what I am—and what
she is?”
“Well, I am glad they are gone to
England out of the way!” said Cornelius.
“I am very sorry for that,” said Harry,
“for I have lost a kind friend in Lady
Annaly—one who at least I might have
hoped would have become my friend, if
I had deserved it.”
“Might have hoped—Would have become— 
that's a friend in the air, who may
never be found on earth. If you deserved
it!—Murder!—who knows how that
might turn out—if—I don't like that
kind of subjunctive mood tenure of a
friend. Give me the good imparative

mood, which I understand—be my friend— 
at once—or not at all—that's my
mood. None of your if friends for me,
setting out with a provisoe and an excuse
to be off; and may be when you'd
call upon 'em at your utmost need—Oh!
I said if you deserve it—Lie there like a
dog. Now, what kind of a friend is
that? If Lady Annaly is that sort, no
need to regret her. My compliments to
her, and a good journey to England— 
Ireland well rid of her! and so are you
too, my boy!”
“But, dear Sir, how you have worked
yourself up into a passion against Lady
Annaly for nothing.”
“It's not for nothing—I've good reason
to dislike the woman—what business
had she, because she's an old woman and
you a young man, to set up preaching to
you about your faults. I hate prachers,
feminine gender especially.”
“She is no preacher, I assure you,
Sir.”

“How dare you tell me that—was not
her letter very edifying? Sir Ulick said.”
“No, Sir; it was very kind—will you
read it?”
“No, Sir, I won't; I never read an
edifying letter in my life with my eyes
open, nor never will—quite enough for
me that impertinent list of your faults
she inclosed you.”
“That list was my own, not hers, Sir:
I dropped it under a tree.”
“Well, drop it into the fire now, and
no more about it. Pray, after all,
Harry, for curiosity's sake, what faults
have you?”
“Dear Sir, I thought you told me
you knew them by heart.”
“I always forget what I learn by
heart; put me in mind, and may be I'll
recollect as you go on.”
“Well, Sir, in the first place I am
terribly passionate.”
“Passionate! true; that is Moriarty
you are thinking of, and I grant you,

that had like to have been a sad job— 
you had a squeak for your life there,
and I pitied you as if it had been myself,
for I know what it is after one of them
blind rages is over, and one opens one's
eyes on the wrong one has done—and
then such a cursed feel to be penitent in
vain—for that sets no bones. You were
blind drunk that night, and that was my
fault; but your late vow has prevented
the future, and Moriarty's better in the
world than ever he was.”
“Thanks to your goodness, Sir.”
“Oh! I wasn't thinking of my goodness— 
little enough that same; but to
ease your conscience, it was certainly the
luckiest turn ever happened him the shot
he got, and so he says himself. Never
think of that more in the way of penitence.”
“In the way of reformation though,
I hope, I shall all my life,” said Harry.
“One comfort! I have never been in a
passion since.”

“But then—a rasonable passion's allowable— 
I wouldn't give a farthing for
a man that could'nt be in a passion on a
proper occasion. I'm passionate myself,
rasonably passionate, and I like myself
the better for it.”
“I thought you said just now, you
often repented.”
“Oh! never mind what I said just
now—mind what I'm saying now—Isn't
a red heat that you can see, and that
warms you, better than a white heat that
blinds you. I'd rather a man would
knock me down than stand smiling at
me, as cousin Ulick did just now, when
I know he could have kilt me; he is not
passionate—he has the command of himself— 
every feature under the courtier's
regimen of hypocrisy. Harry Ormond,
don't set about to cure yourself of your
natural passions—why, this is rank methodism!
all—”
“Methodism, Sir.”
“Methodism, Sir!—don't contradict

or repeat me—methodism that the woman
has brought you to the brink of, and
I warn you from it! I did not know
till now that your Lady Annaly was such
a methodist—No methodist shall ever
darken my doors, or lighten them either,
with their new lights. New lights! bad!
and nonsense!—for man, woman, or
beast. But enough of this, and too much,
Harry. Prince Harry, pull that bell a
dozen times for me this minute, till they
bring out my old horse.”
Before it was possible that any one
could have come up stairs, the impatient
monarch, pointing with his crutch, added,
“Run to the head of the stairs, prince
Harry dear, and call, screech to them to
make no delay; and I want you out with
me, so get your horse, Harry.”
“But, Sir—is it possible—are you
able—”
“I am able, Sir, possible or no,” cried
king Corny, starting up on his crutches.
“Don't stand talking to me of possibilities,

when 'tis a friend I am going to
serve, and that friend as dear as yourself.
Aren't you at the head of the stairs yet?
Must I go and fall down them myself?”
To prevent this catastrophe, our young
hero ran immediately and ordered the
horses; king Corny mounted, or rather
was mounted upon it, and they proceeded
to one of the prettiest farms in the Black
Islands. As they drove to it, he seemed
pleased by Harry's admiring, as he
could, with perfect truth, the beauty of
the situation.
“And the land—which you are no
judge of yet, but you will—is as good as
it is pretty,” said king Corny, “which
I am glad of for your sake, prince Harry; 
I won't have you, like that donny English
prince or king, they nick-named Lackland.— 
No: you sha'n't lack land while I have
it to let or give.—I called you prince— 
prince of the Black Islands—and here's
your principality.—Call out my prime
minister, Pat Moore.—I sent him across

the bog to meet us at Moriarty's.—Here he
is, and Moriarty along with him to welcome
you.—Patrick, give prince Harry
possession—with sod and twig.—Here's
the key from my own hand, and I give
you joy.—Nay, don't deny me the pleasure— 
I've a right to it.—No wrong to
my daughter, if that's what you are
thinking of,—a clear improvement of my
own,—and she will have enough without
it.—Besides, her betrothed White Connal
is a fat grazier, who will make her
as rich as a Jew;—and any way she is as
generous as a princess herself.—But if it
pains you so, and weighs you down, as I
see it does, to be under any obligation— 
you shall be under none in life.—You
shall pay me rent for it, and you shall
give it up whenever you please.—Well!
we'll settle that between ourselves,” said
king Corny, “only take possession, that's
all I ask. But I hope,” added he, “before
we've lived a year, or whatever time it is
till you arrive at years of discretion,

you'll know me well enough, and love me
well enough, not to be so stiff about a
trifle, that's nothing between friend and
friend—let alone the joke of king and
prince, dear Harry.”
The gift of this principality proved a
most pernicious, nearly a fatal gift to
the young prince. The generosity, the
delicacy, with which it was made, a
delicacy worthy of the most polished,
and little to have been expected from
the barbarian mock-monarch, so touched
our young hero's heart, so subjected
his grateful spirit to his benefactor,
that he thenceforth not only felt bound
to king Corny for life but prone to deem
every thing he did or thought wisest,
fittest, best.—Besides this sentiment of
gratitude, there arose, in consequence
of this gift, a number of other feelings,— 
observe he was still a creature guided
by feeling—not governed by reason.
When he was invested with his petty
principality, it was expected of him to

give a dinner and a dance to the island,— 
so he gave a dinner and a dance, and
everybody said he was a fine fellow, and
had the spirit of a prince.—King Corny,
God bless him, couldn't go astray in his
choice of a favourite—long life to him
and prince Harry,—and no doubt there'd
be fine hunting, and shooting, and coursing
continually.—Well, was not it a
happy thing for the islands, when Harry
Ormond first set foot on them?—From a
boy 'twas asy to see what a man he
would be.—Long may he live to reign
over us.
The taste for vulgar praise grew by
that it fed upon.—Harry was in great
danger of forgetting, that he was too
fond of flattery,—and too fond of company— 
not the best.—He excused himself
to himself, by saying that companions
of some kind or other he must have, and
he was in a situation where good company
was not to be had.—Then Moriarty
Carroll was gamekeeper, and Moriarty

Carroll was always out hunting or shooting
with him, and he was led by kind
and good feelings, to be more familiar
and free with this man, than he would
have been with any other in the same
rank of life. The poor fellow was
ardently attached to him, and repeated,
with delight, all the praises he heard
of Master Harry, through the Islands.
The love of popularity seized him— 
popularity on the lowest scale!—To
be popular among the unknown, unheard
of inhabitants of the Black Islands,
could this be an object to any man of common
sense, any one who had lived in civilized
society, and who had had any thing
like the education of a gentleman? The
fact—argue about it as you will—the fact
was as is here stated, and let those who
hear it with a disdainful smile, recollect,
that whether in Paris, London, or the
Black Islands, the mob are, in all essential
points, pretty nearly the same.
It happened about this time, that

Betty Dunshauglin was rummaging in
her young lady's work-basket for some
ribbon, “which she knew she might
take,” to dress a cap that was to be
hung upon a pole as a prize, to be danced
for at the pattern,  to be given next
Monday at Ormond Vale, by prince
Harry. Prince Harry was now standing
by, giving some instructions about the
ordering of the entertainment; Betty, the
while, pursued her own object of the
ribbon, and as she emptied the basket in
haste, threw out a book, which Harry,
though not much at this time addicted to
reading, snatched impatiently, eager to
know what book it was: it was one he
had often heard of—often intended to
read some time or other, but somehow or
other he had never had time: and now
he was in the greatest possible hurry, for

the hounds were all out. But when once
he had opened the book, he could not
shut it again; he turned over page after
page, peeped at the end, the beginning,
and the middle, then back to the beginning:
was diverted by the humour— 
every Irishman loves humour,—delighted
with the wit—What Irishman is not?— 
And his curiosity was so much raised by
the story; his interest and sympathy so
excited for the hero, that he read on,
standing for a quarter of an hour, fixed in
one and the same position, while Betty
held forth unheard, about cap, supper, and
pattern. At last he carried off the book
to his own room, that he might finish it in
peace, nor did he ever stop till he came
to the end of the volume. The story not
finishing there, and breaking off in a most
interesting part, he went in search of the
next volume, but that was not to be
found.—His impatience was ravenous.
“Mercy, Master Harry,” cried Mrs.
Betty, “don't eat one up! I know nothing

at all—at all about the book, and
I'm very sorry I tumbled it out of the
basket. That's all there is of it—to be
had high or low,—so don't be tormenting
me any more out of my life, for nothing.”
But having seized upon her, he refused
to let her go, and protested, that
he would continue to be the torment of
her life, till she should find the odd volume.— 
Betty, when her memory was thus
racked, put her hand to her forehead,
and recollected that in the apple-room,
there was a heap of old books. Harry
possessed himself of the key of the apple-room,
tossed over the heap of tattered
mouldy books, and at last found
the precious volume. He devoured it eagerly— 
nor was it forgotten as soon as
finished. As the chief part of the entertainment
depended on the characters,
it did not fade from his imagination. He
believed the story to be true, for it was
constructed with unparallelled ingenuity,

and developed with consummate art.
The character which particularly interested
him was that of the hero, the
more peculiarly, because he saw, or
fancied that he found a resemblance to
his own, with some differences to be
sure,—but young readers readily assimilate
and identify themselves with any
character, the leading points of which
resemble their own, and in whose general
feelings they sympathise.—In some
instances, Harry, as he read on, said to
himself—“I would not—I could not
have done so and so.”—But upon the
whole, he was charmed by the character— 
that of a warm hearted, generous, imprudent
young man, with little education,
no literature, governed more by feeling
than by principle, never upon any occasion
reasoning, but keeping right by happy
moral instincts; or when going wrong,
very wrong, forgiven easily by the
reader and by his mistress, and rewarded
at the last with all that love and fortune

can bestow, in consideration of his being— 
a very fine fellow.”
Closing the book, Harry Ormond
resolved to be what he admired—and if
possible to shine forth an Irish Tom
Jones.—For this purpose he was not at
all bound to be a moral gentleman, nor,
as he conceived, to be a gentleman at all— 
not at least in the commencement of his
career; he might become accomplished
at any convenient period of his life, and
become moral at the end of it, but he
might begin by being an accomplished— 
blackguard. Blackguard is a harsh
word;—but what other will express the
idea?—Unluckily the easiest points to
be imitated in any character are not always
the best, and where any latitude
is given to conscience, and if any precedents
be allowed to the grosser passions
for their justification, these are the
points which are afterwards remembered
and applied in practice, when the
moral salvo sentences are forgotten, or

are at best but of feeble countervailing
effect.
At six o'clock on Monday evening,
the cap,—the prize cap, flaming with
red ribbons, from the top of the pole,
streamed to the summer air, and delighted
the upturned eyes of assembled
crowds upon the green below.—The
dance began, and our popular hero, the
delight of all the nymphs, and the envy
of all the swains, danced away with
one of the prettiest, “smartest,” “most
likely looking” “lasses,” that ever appeared
at any former patron. She was
a degree more refined in manner, and
polished in appearance, than the fair of the
Black Islands, for she came from the
continent of Ireland—she had the advantage
of having been sometimes at the
big house at Castle Hermitage—she was
the gardener's daughter—Peggy Sheridan— 
distinguished among her fellows
by a nosegay, such as no other could have
procured—distinguished more by her

figure and her face, than by her nosegay
and more by her air and motions, than
even by her figure or her face—she stepped
well, and stepped out—she danced an
Irish jig to admiration, and she was not
averse from admiration; village prudes,
perhaps, might call her a village coquet; 
but let not this suggest a thought derogatory
to the reputation of the lively Peggy.
She was a well behaved, well meaning,
innocent, industrious girl—a good daughter,
a good sister, and more than one
in the neighbourhood thought she would
make a good wife. She had not only
admirers, but suitors in abundance.
Harry Ormond could not think of her
as a wife, but he was evidently—more
evidently this day than ever before, one
of Peggy's admirers. His heart or his
fancy was always warmly susceptible to
the charms of beauty; and, never well
guarded by prudence, he was now, with
his head full of Tom Jones, prone to
run into danger himself, and rashly

ready to hurry on an innocent girl to
her destruction.—He was not without
hopes of pleasing—what young man of
nineteen or twenty is?—He was not
without chance of success, as it is called,
with Peggy—what woman can be pronounced
safe, who ventures to extend to a
young lover the encouragement of coquettish
smiles—Peggy said, “innocent smiles
sure”—“meaning nothing”—but they
were interpreted to mean something— 
less would in his present dispositions
have excited the hero, who imitated
Tom Jones, to enterprise. Report says,
that about this time, Harry Ormond was
seen disguised in a slouched hat and
trusty, wandering about the grounds at
Castle Hermitage. Some swear they
saw him pretending to dig in the garden,
and under the gardener's windows,
seeming to be nailing up jessamine.
Some, would not swear, but if they
might trust their own eyes, they might
verily believe, and could, only that they

would not, take their oath to having seen
him once cross the lake alone by moon-light.— 
But without believing above
half what the world says, candour
obliges us to acknowledge, that there
was some truth in these scandalous reports.— 
He certainly pursued, most imprudently
“pursued the chace of youth
and beauty;” nor would he, we fear,
have dropped the chace till Peggy was
his prey, but that fortunately, in the full
headlong career of passion, he was suddenly
startled and stopped by coming
in view of an obstacle, that he could
not overleap—a greater wrong than he
had foreseen, at least a different wrong,
and in a form that made his heart tremble.
He reined in his passion, and stood
appalled.
In the first hurry of that passion he had
seen nothing, heard nothing, understood
nothing, but that Peggy was pretty, and
that he was in love. It happened one day,
one evening, that he, with a rose yet unfaded

in his hand—a rose which he had
snatched from Peggy Sheridan, took the
path toward Moriarty Carroll's cottage.
Moriarty, seeing him from afar, came out
to greet him, but when he came within
sight of the rose, Moriarty's pace slackened,
and turning aside, he stepped
out of the path, as if to let Mr. Ormond
pass.
“How now, Moriarty?” said Harry.
But looking in his face, he saw the poor
fellow pale as death.
“What ails you Moriarty?”
“A pain I just took about my heart!” 
said Moriarty, pressing both hands to his
heart.
“My poor fellow!—Wait!—you'll
be better just now, I hope,” said Ormond,
laying his hand on Moriarty's
shoulder.
“I'll never be better of it, I fear,” 
said Moriarty, withdrawing his shoulder,
and giving a jealous glance at the rose,
he turned his head away again.

“I'll thank your honour to go on,
and leave me—I'll be better by myself.
It is not to your honour above all, that
I can open my heart.”
A suspicion of the truth now flashed
across Ormond's mind, he was determined
to know, whether it was the truth
or not.
“I'll not leave you, till I know what's
the matter?” said he.
“Then none will know that till I die,” 
said Moriarty, adding, after a little
pause, “There's no knowing what's
wrong within side of a man, till he is
opened.”
“But alive, Moriarty, if the heart is
in the case only,” said Ormond, “a
man can open himself to a friend.”
“Aye, if he had a friend,” said Moriarty,
“I'll beg your honour to let me
pass—I am able for it now—I am quite
stout again.”
“Then if you are quite stout again,
I'll want you to row me across the lake.”

“I am not able for that, Sir,” replied
Moriarty, pushing past him.
“But,” said Ormond, catching hold of
his arm, “aren't you able or willing to
carry a note for me?” As he spoke,
Ormond produced the note, and let him
see the direction—to Peggy Sheridan.
“Sooner stab me to the heart again,” 
cried Moriarty, breaking from him.
“Sooner stab myself to the heart
then!” cried Ormond, tearing the note
to bits. “Look Moriarty! Upon my
honour, till this instant, I did not know
you loved the girl—from this instant
I'll think of her no more—never more
will I see her, hear of her, till she be
your wife.”
“Wife!” repeated Moriarty, joy illuminating— 
but fear as instantly darkening
his countenance. “How will
that be now?”
“It will be—it shall be—as happily as
honourably. Listen to me, Moriarty, as
honourably now as ever. Can you think

me so wicked, so base, as to say wife, if— 
No: passion might hurry me to a rash,
but of a base action I'm incapable.— 
Upon my soul, upon the sacred honour
of a gentleman.”
Moriarty sighed.
“Look!” continued Ormond, taking
the rose from his breast, “this is the
utmost that ever passed between us, and
that was my fault: I snatched it, and
thus—thus”—cried he, tearing the rose
to pieces, “I scatter it to the winds of
heaven, and thus may all trace of past
fancy and folly be blown from remembrance.”
“Amen!” said Moriarty, watching
the rose leaves for an instant, as they
flew and were scattered out of sight; 
then, as Ormond broke the stalk to
pieces, and flung it from him, he asked,
with a smile,
“Is the pain about your heart gone
now, Moriarty?”
“No: plase your honour, not gone;

—but a quite different—better—but
worse.—So strange with me—I can't
speak rightly—for the pleasure has
seized me stronger than the pain.”
“Lean against me, poor fellow.—Oh,
if I had broke such a heart!”
“Then how wrong I was when I said
that word I did,” said Moriarty. “I ask
your honour—your dear honour's pardon
on my knees.”
“For what?—For what?—You have
done no wrong.”
“No:—but I said wrong—very wrong— 
when I said stab me to the heart again.— 
Oh, that word again.—It was very
ungenerous.”
“Noble fellow!” said Ormond.
“Boys, to your supper, and a good
night to your honour, kindly,” said Moriarty.
“How happy am I now,” said our
young hero to himself, as he walked
home, “which I never should have been
if I had done this wrong.”

A fortunate escape!—yes: but when
the escape is owing to good fortune, not
to prudence; to good feeling, not to principle; 
there is no security for the future.
Ormond was steady to his promise
toward Moriarty: to do him justice he
was more than this, he was generous,
actively, perseveringly generous in his
conduct to him. With open heart, open
purse, public overture, and private negociation
with the parents of Peggy Sheridan,
he at last succeeded in accomplishing
Moriarty's marriage.
Ormond's biographer may well be
allowed to make the most of his persevering
generosity on this occasion, because
no other scrap of good can be
found to make any thing of in his favour,
for several months to come. Whether
Tom Jones was still too much, and Lady
Annaly too little in his head, whether it
was that king Corny's example and precepts
were not always edifying—whether

this young man had been prepared by
previous errors of example and education— 
or whether he fell into mischief, because
he had nothing else to do in these
Black Islands, certain it is, that from the
operation of some or all of these causes
conjointly, he deteriorated sadly.—He
took to “vagrant courses,” in which the
muse forbears to follow him.