

Godfrey Percy went in the morning to
inquire after the health of his fair partner.
—This was only a common civility.
—On his way thither, he overtook
and joined a party of gentlemen, who
were also going to Clermont-Park. They
entered into conversation and talked of
the preceding night—one of the gentlemen,
an elderly man, who had not been
at the ball, happened to be acquainted
with Miss Hauton, and with her family.
Godfrey heard from him all the particulars
respecting Lady Anne Hauton, and
was thrown into a melancholy reverie by
learning, that Miss Hauton had been
educated by this mother, and had always
lived with her till her Ladyship's
death, which happened about two years
before this time.—After receiving this

intelligence, Godfrey heard little more
of the conversation that passed till he
reached Clermont-Park.—A number of
young people were assembled in the
music room practising for a concert.— 
Miss Hauton was at the piano-forte,
when he entered the room; she was
sitting with her back to the door, surrounded
by a crowd of amateurs. She
did not see him, he stood behind listening
to her singing. Her voice was delightful,
but he was surprised, and not
pleased, by the choice of her songs. She
was singing, with some other high-bred
young ladies, songs, which to use the
gentlest expression were rather too anacreontic.
Songs, which though sanctioned
by fashion, were not such as a young
lady of taste would prefer, or such as a
man of delicacy would like to hear from
his sister or his wife. They were nevertheless
highly applauded by all the audience,
except by Godfrey, who remained
silent behind the young lady. In the
fluctuation of the crowd he was pressed

nearer and nearer to her chair. As she
finished singing a fashionable air, she
heard a sigh from the person behind
her.
“That's your favorite, I think?” 
said she, turning round, and looking up.
... “Mr. Percy! ... I ... I
thought it was Mr. Falconer,”—Face— 
neck—hands, suddenly blushed; she
stooped for a music-book, and searched
for some time in that attitude for she
knew not what, whilst all the gentlemen
officiously offered their services, and
begged only to know for which book she
was looking.—
“Come, come, Maria,” cried Colonel
Hauton, “What the d&wblank;are you
about ... can't you give us another
of these. You can't be better.—Come,
you're keeping Miss Drakelow.”
“Go on, Miss Drakelow, if you please
without me.”—
“Impossible.—Come, come, Maria,
what the deuse are you at.”
Miss Hauton, afraid to refuse her brother—afraid

to provoke the comments of
the company, began to sing, or rather
to attempt to sing ... her voice faltered
... she cleared her throat and began
again ... worse still, she was out of
tune. ... She affected to laugh.—Then
pushing back her chair, she rose, drew
her veil over her face, and said, “I have
sung till I have no voice left. ... Does
nobody walk this morning?”—
“No, no,” said Colonel Hauton, “who
the deuse would be bored, with being
broiled at this time of day.—Miss Drakelow.
 ... Miss Chatterton, give us some
more music I beseech you, for I like
music better in a morning than at night.
 ... The mornings, when one can't
go out, are so confoundedly long and
heavy.”
The young ladies played, and Miss
Hauton seated herself apart from the
group of musicians, upon a bergère,
leaning on her hand, in a melancholy
attitude. Buckhurst Falconer followed
and sat down beside her, endeavoring

to entertain her with some witty ancedote.—
She smiled with effort, listened with
painful attention, and the moment the
anecdote was ended, her eyes wandered
out of the window. Buckhurst rose— 
vacated his seat, and before any of the
other gentlemen who had gathered round
could avail themselves of that envied
place; Miss Hauton, complaining of the
intolerable heat, removed nearer to the
window, to an ottoman, one half of
which was already so fully occupied by
a large dog of her brother's, that she was
in no danger from any other intruder.
Some of the gentlemen, who were not
blessed with much sagacity, followed, to
talk to her of the beauty of the dog
which she was stroking, but to an eulogium
upon it's long ears, and even to a
quotation from Shakspeare about dewlaps,
she listened with so vacant an air, that
her followers gave up the point, and
successively retired, leaving her to her
meditations. Godfrey, who had kept

aloof, had in the mean time been looking
at some books, that lay on a reading
table.—Maria Hauton was written in
the first page of several of them.—All
were novels—some French, and some
German, of a sort which he did not
like.
“What have you there, Mr. Percy?” 
said Miss Hauton.—“Nothing worth
your notice, I am afraid—I dare say you
do not like novels.”
“Pardon me, I like some novels very
much.”—
“Which?” said Miss Hauton, rising
and approaching the table.
“All that are just representations of
life and manners, or of the human
heart,” said Godfrey, “provided they
are. ...”
“Ah! the human heart!” interrupted
Miss Hauton—“The heart only can
understand the heart—who, in modern
times can describe the human heart?”
“Not to speak of foreigners—Miss

Burney—Mrs. Opie—Mrs. Inchbald”— 
said Godfrey.
“True—and yet I. ... and yet ...” 
said Miss Hauton, pausing, and sighing.—
“And yet that was not what I was
thinking of”—she should have said,
had she finished her sentence with the
truth; but this not being convenient, she
left it unfinished, and began a new one,
with—“Some of these novels are sad
trash—I hope Mr. Godfrey Percy will
not judge of my taste by them. That
would be condemning me for the crimes
of my bookseller, who will send us down
every thing new that comes out.”
Godfrey disclaimed the idea of condemning,
or blaming Miss Hauton's taste
—“he could not,” he said, “be so
presumptuous, so impertinent.”—
“So then,” said she, “Mr. Godfrey
Percy is like all the rest of his sex, and
I must not expect to hear the truth from
him.”—She paused—and looked at a

print which he was examining.—“I
would, however, rather have him speak
severely, than think hardly of me.”
“He has no right to speak, and certainly
no inclination to think hardly of
Miss Hauton,” replied Godfrey gravely,
but with an emotion, which he in vain
endeavored to suppress. To change
the conversation, he asked her opinion
about a figure in the print. She took
out her glass, and stooped to look quite
closely at it.—“Before you utterly condemn
me,” continued she, speaking in
a low voice,—“consider how fashion silences
one's better taste and feelings,
and how difficult it is when all around
one ...
Miss Chatterton, Miss Drakelow, and
some officers of their suite came up at this
instant; a deputation they said, to bring
Miss Hauton back, to favor them with
another song, as she must now have recovered
her voice.—
“No—no—excuse me,” said she,
smiling languidly, I beg not to be pressed

any more.—I am really not well, I
absolutely cannot sing any more this
morning.—I have already sung so much
 ... too much”—added she, when the deputation
had retired, so that the last
words could be heard only by him, for
whom they were intended.
Though Miss Hauton's apologizing
thus for her conduct, and making a
young gentleman, with whom she was
but just acquainted, the judge of her
actions, might be deemed a still further
proof of her indiscretion, yet the condescension
was so flattering, and it appeared
such an instance of an ingenuous
disposition, that Godfrey was sensibly
touched by it. He followed the fair
Maria to her ottoman, from which she
banished Pompey the great, to make
room for him. The recollection of his
father's warning words, however, came
across Godfrey's mind; he bowed an
answer to a motion, that invited him to
the dangerous seat, and continued standing
with an air of safe respect.

“I hope you will have the goodness,
to express to Mrs. Percy, how much I
felt her kindness to me last night ...
when ... when I wanted it so much.— 
There is something so soothing, so
gentle, so indulgent about Mrs. Percy,
so loveable!”
“She is very good, very indulgent,
indeed,” said Godfrey, in a tone of
strong affection,—“very loveable ...
that is the exact word.”
“I fear it is not English,”—said Miss
Hauton.
“Il mérite bien de l'être,”—said Godfrey.
A profound silence ensued.—Colonel
Hauton came up to this pair, while they
were still silent, and with their eyes fixed
upon the ground.
“D&wblank;d agreeable you two seem,” 
cried the Colonel.—Buckhurst, you have
always so much to say for yourself, do
help your cousin here,—I'm sure I know
how to pity him, for many a time, the
morning after a ball, I've been with my

partner in just as bad a quandary—without
a word to throw to a dog—”
“Impossible, surely Colonel, when
you had such a fine animal as this,” 
said Godfrey, caressing Pompey, who
lay at his feet.—“Where did you get
this handsome dog?”—
The Colonel then entered into the history
of Pompey the great. “I was
speaking,” said Miss Hauton, “to Mr.
Godfrey Percy, of his family ... relations
of yours, Mr. Falconer, are not
they? ... He has another sister, I think,
some one told me, a beautiful sister Caroline,
who was not at the ball last
night?”
“Yes,”—said Buckhurst, “who looked
at this instant also to the dog for assistance,
—“Pompey!—Pompey!—poor
fellow!—
“Is Miss Caroline Percy like her
mother?”—
“No.”—
“Like her father—or her brother?”—
“Not particularly—Will you honor

me with any commands for town?— 
Colonel, have you any?—I'm just going
off with Major Clay,”—said Buckhurst.
“Not you, indeed,”—cried the Colonel,
“your father has made you over to
me, and I won't give you leave of absence,
my good fellow.—You're under
orders for Cheltenham to morrow, my
boy—no reply, Sir—no arguing with
your commanding-officer.—You've no
more to do, but to tell Clay to go without
you”—
“And now,” continued the Colonel,
returning to Godfrey Percy, after Buckhurst
had left the room, “what hinders
you from making one of our party—you
can't do better. There's Maria and
Lady Oldborough were both wishing it
at breakfast—Maria, can't you say
something?”
Maria's eyes said more than the Colonel
could have said, if he had spoken
for ever.—
“But, perhaps, Mr. Godfrey Percy
may have other engagements,” said she,

with a timid persuasive tone, which Godfrey
found it extremely difficult to resist.—
“Bellamy! where the d&wblank;l do you
come from? ... Very glad to see you,
faith ...” cried the Colonel, going forward
to shake hands with a very handsome
man, who just then entered the
room.—“Maria,” said Col. Hauton,
turning to his sister, “don't you know
Bellamy? ... Bellamy!” repeated he, coming
close to her, whilst the gentleman
was paying his compliments to Lady
Oldborough, “Captain Bellamy, with
whom you used to waltz every night,
you know, at ... what's the name of
the woman's&wblank;”
“I never waltzed with him but once
... or twice, that I remember,” said
Miss Hauton,—“and then because you
insisted upon it.”
“I!—Well, I did very right if I did,
because you were keeping all the world
waiting, and I knew you intended to do
it at last—so I thought you might as well

do it at first.—But I don't know what's
the matter with you this morning—we
must drive a little spirit into you at
Cheltenham.”—
Captain Bellamy came up to pay his
respects, or rather his compliments, to
Miss Hauton,—there was no respect in
his manner, but the confidence of one
who had been accustomed to be well
received.
“She has not been well—fainted last
night at a ball—is hipped this morning— 
but we'll get her spirits up again when
we have her at Cheltenham.—We shall
be a famous dashing party ... I have
been beating up for recruits all day ...
here's one,” said Colonel Hauton, turning
to Godfrey Percy.—
“Excuse me,” said Godfrey, “I am
engaged—I am obliged to join my regiment
immediately.”—He bowed gravely
to Miss Hauton—wished her a good
morning, and, without trusting himself
to another look, retreated saying to himself:
“Sir she's your's—You have brushed from the grape it's soft blue;
From the rose-bud you've shaken it's tremendous dew;
What you've touched you may take—Pretty Waltzer, adieu.”
From this moment he mentioned Miss

Hauton's name no more in his own family.
His whole mind now seemed,
and not only seemed, but was full of
military thoughts. So quickly in youth
do different and opposite trains of ideas
and emotions succeed to each other; and
so easy it is, by a timely exercise of
reason and self-command, to prevent a
fancy from becoming a passion. Perhaps,
if his own happiness alone had
been in question, Godfrey might not
have shown precisely the same prudence.
But on this occasion, his generosity and
honor assisted his discretion. He plainly
saw, that Miss Hauton was not exactly
a woman whom he could wish to make
his wife—and he was too honorable to
trifle with her affections. He was not
such a coxcomb as to imagine that, in
the course of so slight an acquaintance,
he could have made any serious impression
on this young lady's heart: yet he
could not but perceive that she had distinguished
him from the first hour he
was introduced to her; and he was aware,

that with her extreme sensibility, and an
unoccupied imagination, she might rapidly
form for him an attachment, that
might lead to mutual misery.
Mr. Percy rejoiced in his son's honorable
conduct, and he was particularly
pleased by Godfrey's determining to join
his regiment immediately. Mr. Percy
thought it advantageous for the eldest
son of a man of fortune to be absent for
some years from his home, from his father's
estate, tenants and dependants, to
see something of the world, to learn to
estimate himself and others, and thus to
have means of becoming a really respectable,
enlightened, and useful country gentleman
—not one of those booby squires,
born only to consume the fruits of the
earth, who spend their lives in coursing,
shooting, hunting, carousing,  “who
eat, drink, sleep, die, and rot in oblivion.” 
He thought it in these times

the duty of every young heir to serve a
few years, that he might be as able, as
willing, to join in the defence of his
country, if necessary Godfrey went,
perhaps, beyond his father's ideas upon
this subject, for he had an ardent desire
to go into the army as a profession, and
almost regretted, that his being an eldest
son might induce him to forego it after
a few campaigns.
Godfrey did not enter into the army
from the puerile vanity of wearing a red
coat and an epaulette; nor to save himself
the trouble of pursuing his studies; 
nor because he thought the army a good
lounge, or a happy escape from parental
control; nor yet did he consider the military
profession as a mercenary speculation,
in which he was to calculate the
chance of getting into the shoes, or over
the head, of Lieutenant A&wblank;or Captain
B&wblank;. He had higher objects; 
he had a noble ambition to distinguish
himself. Not in mere technical phrase,
or to grace a bumper toast, but in truth,

and as a governing principle of action,
he felt zeal for the interests of the service.
—Yet Godfrey was not without faults; 
and of these his parents, fond as they
were of him, were well aware.
Mrs. Percy, in particular, felt much
anxiety, when the moment fixed for his
departure approached; when she considered
that he was now to mix with companions
very different from those with
whom he had hitherto associated, and
to be placed in a situation where calmness
of temper and prudence would be
more requisite than military courage, or
generosity of disposition.—
“Well, my dear mother,” cried Godfrey,
when he came to take leave. “Fare
you well—if I live, I hope I shall distinguish
myself; and if I fall— 
“How sleep the brave, who sink to rest?” ...
“God bless you, my dear son!” said
his mother. She seemed to have much
more to say, but, unable at that moment

to express it, she turned to her husband,
who knew all she thought and felt.
“God bless you, my boy!” said Mr.
Percy, “remember always, that your
mother and I have great hopes of you,
and some fears.”
“Fears!” exclaimed Godfrey,—“who
talks of fear to a soldier?”
“Stay, my young soldier,” answered
his father, “you do not understand the
nature of my fears.—I fear that you
will be too jealous of honor, too apt to
take offence.”
“Oh no, Sir, I despise bullying, quarrelsome
soldiers.”
“On the other hand, I fear that your
sociable confiding temper should make
you the dupe of worthless companions.”
“Oh no, Sir, I shall never have any
worthless companions, I promise you.”
“I fear,” continued his father, “that
the same enthusiasm which makes you
think your own country the best country
upon Earth, your own family the best
family in that country, and your own

regiment the best regiment in the service— 
all which is becoming a good patriot,
a good son, and a good soldier,— 
should go a step ... a dangerous step
farther, and should degenerate into party-spirit,
or what the French call esprit-de-corps”—
“The French!” cried Godfrey,—“Oh!
hang the French!—never mind what the
French call it, Sir!”— 
“and degenerating into party-spirit,
or what is called esprit-de-corps,” resumed
Mr. Percy, smiling,—“should, in
spite of your more enlarged views of the
military art and science, and your knowledge
of all that Alexander and Cæsar,
and Marshal Saxe and Turenne, and the
Duke of Marlborough and Lord Peterborough,
ever said or did, persuade you
to believe, that your brother officers, whoever
they may be, are the greatest men
that ever existed, and that their opinions
should rule the world, or at least, should
govern you.”—
“More than all the rest, I fear, my

dear Godfrey,” interposed Mrs. Percy,
“that, when you do not find the world
so good as you imagine it to be, you
will, by quarrelling with it directly,
make it worse to you than it really is.
If you discover that merit is not always
immediately rewarded or promoted, your
indignation, and, ... shall I say it,
impatience of spirit will excite you to
offend your superiors in station, and, by
these means, retard your own advancement.”
“And, surely, if I should be treated
with injustice, you would not have me
bear it patiently?” cried Godfrey, turning
quickly.
“In the first place, stay till it happens
before you take fire,” said his father; 
“and, in the next place, remember that
patience, and deference to his superiors,
form an indispensable part of a young
soldier's merit.”
“Ah! my dear,” said Mrs. Percy,
looking up at her son anxiously, “if
even at this instant, even with us, even

at the bare imagination of injustice, you
take offence, I fear ... I very much
fear ...” said she, laying her hand
upon his arm.—
“My dearest mother,” said Godfrey,
in a softened tone, taking his mother's
hand in the most respectful and tender
manner, “fear nothing for me. I will
be as patient as a lamb, rather than be a
source of anxiety to you.”—
“And now, my good friends, fare ye
well,” said Godfrey, turning to take leave
of his sisters.
“No tears, no tragedy,” said Mr.
Percy.—“There, he has kissed you all
now, let him go.
So the young soldier departed. His
last words, as he got upon his horse,
were to Caroline.
“Caroline, you will be married before
I return.”—
But to descend to the common affairs
of life. Whilst all these visits and balls,
coquettings and separations, had been

going on, the Dutch carpenters had
been repairing the wreck; and, from
time to time, complaints had been made
of them by Mr. Percy's old steward.
The careful steward's indignation was
first excited by their forgetting every
night to lock a certain gate, with the
key of which they had been intrusted.
Then they had wasted his master's timber,
and various tools were missing— 
they had been twice as long as they
ought to have been in finishing their
work, and now, when the wind was fair,
—the whole ship's crew impatient to sail,
and not above half a day's work wanting,
the carpenters were smoking and drinking,
instead of putting their hands to the
business. The Dutch carpenter, who
was at this moment more than half intoxicated,
answered the steward's just
reproaches with much insolence. Mr.
Percy, feeling that his hospitality and
good nature were encroached upon and
abused, declared that he would no longer

permit the Dutchmen to have the use of
his house, and ordered his steward to see
that they quitted it immediately.—
The Dutch carpenters, and all belonging
to them, consequently left the place
in a few hours; whatever remained to be
done to the vessel was finished that evening,
and she sailed, to the great joy of
her whole crew, and of Mr. Percy's
steward, who, when he brought the news
of this event to his master, protested
that he was as glad as if any body had
given him twenty golden guineas, that
he had at last got safely rid of these ill-mannered
drunken fellows, who, after all
his master had done for them, never so
much as said “thank you,” and who
had wasted and spoiled more by their
carelessness than their heads were worth.
Alas! he little knew at that moment
how much more his master was to lose
by their carelessness, and he rejoiced too
soon at having got rid of them.
In the middle of the night the family
were alarmed by the cry of Fire!—A

fire had broken out in the out-house,
which had been lent to the Dutchmen; 
before it was discovered, the roof was
in a blaze; the wind unfortunately blew
towards a hay-rick, which was soon in
flames, and the burning hay spread the
fire to a considerable distance, till it
caught the veranda at the east wing of
the dwelling-house. One of the servants,
who slept in that part of the house, was
awakened by the light from the burning
veranda, but by the time the alarm was
given, and before the family could get
out of their rooms, the flames had reached
Mr. Percy's study, which contained
his most valuable papers. Mr. Percy,
whose voice all his family, in the midst
of their terror and confusion, obeyed, directed
with great presence of mind what
should be done by each. He sent one
to open a cistern of water at the top of
the house, and to let it flow over the
roof, another to tear down the trellice
next the part that was on fire; others
he despatched for barrows-full of wet

mortar from a heap which was in a
back yard near the house; others he stationed
in readiness to throw the mortar
where it was most needful to extinguish
the flames, or to prevent their communicating
with the rest of the building. He
went himself to the place where the fire
raged with the greatest violence, whilst
his wife and daughters were giving out
from the study the valuable papers,
which, as he directed, were thrown in
one heap in the lawn, at a sufficient distance
from the house to prevent any
danger of their being burnt—most of
them were in tin cases that were easily
removed—the loose papers and books
were put into baskets, and covered with
wet blankets, so that the pieces of the
burning trellice, which fell upon them
as they were carried out, did them no
injury. It was wonderful with what
silence, order, and despatch, this went
on, whilst three females, instead of
shrieking and fainting, combined to do
what was useful and prudent. In spite

of all Mr. Percy's exertions, however,
the flames burst in from the burning
trellice through one of the windows of
the study, before the men could tear
down the shutters and architrave from
the window, as he had ordered. The
fire caught the wood-work, and ran
along the book-shelves on one side of
the wall with terrible rapidity—so that
the whole room was, in a few minutes,
in a blaze ... They were forced to leave
it before they had carried out many of
the books, and whilst there were still
some old papers remaining in the presses,
supposed to be duplicates, and of no
consequence. This whole wing of the
house they were obliged to abandon to
the flames, but the fire was stopped in
it's progress at last, and the principal
part of the mansion was preserved by
wet mortar, according to Mr. Percy's
judicious order, by the prompt obedience,
and by the unanimity, of all who
assisted.
The next morning, the family saw the

melancholy spectacle of a heap of ruins
in the place of that library which they
all loved so much. However, it was
their disposition to make the best of misfortunes; 
instead of deploring what they
had lost, they rejoiced in having suffered
so little and saved so much. They particularly
rejoiced that no lives had been
lost;—Mr. Percy declared, that for his
own part, he would willingly undergo
much greater pecuniary loss, to have had
the satisfaction of seeing in all his family
so much presence of mind, and so much
freedom from selfishness, as they had
shown upon this occasion.
When he said something of this sort,
before his servants, who were all assembled,
it was observed that one of
them, a very old nurse, looked immediately
at Caroline, then lifted up her
hands and eyes to Heaven, in silent
gratitude. Upon inquiry it appeared,
that in the confusion and terror, when
the alarm had first been raised, the nurse
had been forgotten, or it had been taken

for granted, that she had gone home to
her own cottage the preceding evening.
Caroline, however, recollected her, and
ran to her room, which was in the attic
story over the library.
When Caroline opened the door, she
could scarcely see the bed.—She made
her way to it, however, got old Martha
out of the room, and with great difficulty
brought the bewildered, decrepit
creature, safely down a small stair-case,
which the flames had not then reached.
—Nothing could exceed her gratitude; 
with eyes streaming with tears, and a
head shaking with strong emotion, she
delighted in relating all these circumstances,
and declared, that none but Miss
Caroline could have persuaded her to go
down that staircase, when she saw all
below in flames.
Mr. Percy's first care was to look over
his papers, to see whether any were
missing.—To his consternation, one valuable
deed, a deed by which he held
the whole Percy estate, was no where to

be found. Mr. Percy had particular
reason for being alarmed by the loss of
this paper.—The heir at law to this
estate had long been lying in wait to
make an attack upon him.—Aware of
this, Mr. Percy took all prudent means
to conceal the loss of this paper, and he
cautioned his whole family never to mention
it.
It happened about this time, that a
poor old man, to whom Buckhurst Falconer
had given that puppy which his
brother John had so bitterly regretted,
came to Mr. Percy to complain, that
“the dog had brought him into great
trouble.” The puppy had grown into a
dog, and of this the old man had forgotten
to give notice to the tax-gatherer; 
Mr. Percy perceiving clearly that the
man had no design to defraud, and pitying
him for having thus by his ignorance
or carelessness subjected himself to the
heavy penalty of ten pounds, which,
without selling his only cow, he was unable
to pay, advised him to state the

simple fact in a petition, and Mr. Percy
promised to transmit this petition to government,
with a memorial against the
tax-gatherer, who had been accused, in
many instances, of oppressive and corrupt
conduct. He had hitherto defied all
complainants, because he was armed
strong in law by an attorney who was
his near relation,—an attorney of the
name of Sharpe, whose cunning and skill
in the doubles and mazes of his profession,
and whose active and vindictive
temper had rendered him the terror of
the neighborhood.—Not only the poor
but the rich feared him, for he never
failed to devise means of revenging himself
wherever he was offended.—He,
one morning, waited on Mr. Percy, to
speak to him about the memorial, which
“he understood Mr. Percy was drawing
up against Mr. Bates, the tax-gatherer.”
“Perhaps, Mr. Percy,” said he, “you
don't know, that Mr. Bates is my near
relation.”
Mr. Percy replied, “that he had not

known it; but that now he did, he could
not perceive how that altered the business; 
as he interfered, not from any private
motive, but from a sense of public justice,
which made him desire to remove
a person from a situation, for which he
had shown himself utterly unfit.”
Mr. Sharpe smiled, a malicious smile,
and declared, “that for his part, he did
not pretend to be a reformer of abuses; 
he thought in the present times, that
gentlemen, who wished well to their
King, and the peace of the country,
ought not to be forward to lend their
names to popular discontents, and should
not embarrass government with petty complaints.
—Gentlemen could never foresee
where such things would end, and therefore,
in the existing circumstances, they
ought surely to endeavor to strengthen,
instead of weakening the hands of government.”
To this common place cant, by which
all sorts of corruption, and all public delinquents
might be screened, and by

which selfishness and fraud hope to pass
for loyalty and love of the peace of the
country, Mr. Percy did not attempt, or
rather did not deign, any reply.
Mr. Sharpe then insinuated, that Lord
Oldborough, who had put Bates into his
present situation, would be displeased
by a complaint against him. Mr. Sharpe
observed, “that Lord Oldborough was
remarkable for standing steadily by all
the persons whom he appointed, and
that, if Mr. Percy, persisted in this attack,
he would probably not find himself
thanked by his own relations, the Falconers.”
This hint produced no effect, so at
last Mr. Sharpe concluded, by saying,
with an air of prodigious legal assurance,
that “for his own part he was quite at
ease about the result of the affair, for he
was confident, that, when the matter
came to be properly inquired into, and
the witnesses to be cross-examined, no
malepractices could be brought home to
his relation.”

“Then,” Mr. Percy observed, “that
a memorial, praying to have the circumstances
inquired into, could be no
disadvantage to Mr. Bates, but the contrary,
as it would tend to prove his innocence
publicly, and to remove the prejudice
which now subsisted against him.” 
—Mr. Percy, who had the memorial at
this time in his hand, deliberately folded
it up, and directed it.
“Then, Sir,” cried Mr. Sharpe, put
off his guard by anger,—“since you are
determined to throw away the scabbard,
you cannot be surprised if I do the
same.”
Mr. Percy, smiling, said “that he
feared no sword, but the sword of justice,
which could not fall on his head,
while he was doing what was just—” 
As he spoke, he prepared to seal the
memorial.
Mr. Sharpe's habitual caution recurring
in the space of a second or two, he
begged pardon if zeal for his relation
had hurried him into any unbecoming

warmth of expression, and stretching out
his hand eagerly to stop Mr. Percy, as
he was going to press down the seal.
“Give me leave, Sir,” said he, “give me
leave to run my eye over that memorial,
—may I beg, before you seal it.”
“And welcome,” said Mr. Percy,
putting the paper into his hand—“ All
that I do shall be done openly and
fairly.”
The attorney took possession of the
memorial, and began to con it over.
As he was reading it, he happened to
stand in a recessed window, so that he
could not easily be seen by any person
who entered the room,—at this moment
Rosamond came in suddenly, exclaiming,
as she held up a huge unfolded
parchment,
“I've found it!—I've found it!—My
dear father!—I do believe this is Sir John
Percy's deed that was lost!—I always
said it was not burned ... What's the
matter?—What do you mean? ...
Nobody can hear me; the outer door is

shut ... Perhaps this is only a copy.
—It is not signed or sealed, but I suppose ...
Here she stopped short, for she saw
Mr. Sharpe—She looked so much astounded,
that even if he had not heard
all she had said, her countenance would
have excited his curiosity. The attorney
had heard every syllable she had uttered,
and he knew enough of Mr. Percy's affairs,
to comprehend the full extent of
the advantage, that might be made of
this discovery. He coolly returned the
memorial, acknowledging, that it was
drawn up with much moderation and
ability, but regretting, that Mr. Percy
should think it necessary to send it, and
concluding with a few general expressions
of the regard he had always felt for
the family, he took his leave.
“All is safe!”—cried Rosamond, as
soon as she heard the house door shut
after he was gone. “All is safe, thank
Heaven?—for that man's head was luckily

so full of this memorial, that he never
heard one word I said.”
Mr. Percy was of a different opinion:
he was persuaded, that the attorney would
not neglect so fine an opportunity of revenge.
Sharpe had formerly been employed
in suits of Sir Robert Percy.
Here was now the promise of a law-suit,
that would at all events put a great deal
of money into the pockets of the lawyers,
and a considerable gratuity would be ensured
to the person, who should first inform
Sir Robert of the loss of the important
conveyance.
Mr. Percy's opinion of the revengeful
nature of Sharpe, and his perception that
he was in the solicitor's power, did not,
however, make any change in his resolution
about the memorial.—It was sent,
and Bates was turned out of his office.
For some time nothing more was heard
of Mr. Sharpe.—Mr. Percy, for many
months afterward, was busied in rebuilding
that part of his house, which had

been destroyed by the fire, and as he was
naturally of a sanguine temper, little inclined
to occupy himself with cabals
and quarrels, the transaction concerning
Bates, and even the attorney's threat of
throwing away the scabbard, passed from
his mind. The family pursued the happy
tenor of their lives, without remembering
that there was such a being as Mr. solicitor
Sharpe.