

“I've found it!—I've found it!— 
mamma!” cried little Charles Percival,
running eagerly into the room with
a plant in his hand. “Will you send this
in your letter to Helena Delacour, and
tell her that it is the thing that gold fishes
are so fond of?—And tell her that it is
called lemna, and that it may be found
in any ditch or pool.”
“But how can she find ditches and
pools in Grosvenor square, my dear?”
“O, I forgot that.—Then, will you
tell her, mamma, that I will send her a
great quantity?”

“How, my dear?”
“I don't know, mamma, yet—but I
will find out some way.”
“Would it not be as well, my dear,” 
said his mother, smiling, “to consider
how you can perform your promises before
you make them?”
“A gentleman,” said Mr. Vincent,
“never makes a promise that he cannot
perform.”
“I know that very well,” said the boy
proudly. “Miss Portman, who is very
good natured, will, I am sure, be so good,
when she goes back to lady Delacour, as
to carry food for the gold fishes to Helena
—You see that I have found out a way
to keep my promise.”
“No, I am afraid not,” said Belinda; 
“for I am not going back to lady Delacour's.”
“Then I am very glad of it!” said the
boy, dropping the weed and clapping
his hands joyfully—“for then I hope you
will always stay here.—Don't you,
mamma?—Don't you, Mr. Vincent?—

Oh, you do, I am sure, for I heard you
say so to papa the other day!—But
what makes you grow so red?”
His mother took him by the hand as
he was going to repeat the question, and,
leading him out of the room, desired
him to show her the place where he found
the food for gold fishes.
Belinda, to Mr. Vincent's great relief,
seemed not to take any notice of the
child's question, nor to have any sympathy
in his curiosity; she was intently
copying Westal's sketch of lady Anne
Percival and her family; and she had
been roused, by the first mention of Helena
Delacour's name, to many painful
and some pleasing recollections.—“What
a charming woman! and what a charming
family!” said Mr. Vincent as he looked
at the drawing, “and how much more
interesting is this picture of domestic
happiness, than all the pictures of shepherds
and shepherdesses, and gods and
goddesses that ever were drawn!”
“Yes,” said Belinda, “and how much

more interesting this picture is to us,
from our knowing that it is not a fancy-piece; 
that the happiness is real, not
imaginary; that this is the natural expression
of affection in the countenance
of the mother; and that these children,
who crowd round her, are what they
seem to be, the pride and pleasure of her
life!”
“There cannot,” exclaimed Mr. Vincent
with enthusiasm, “be a more delightful
picture! O, miss Portman! is it
possible that you should not feel what
you can paint so well?”
“Is it possible, sir,” said Belinda, “that
you should suspect me of such wretched
hypocrisy, as to affect to admire what I
am incapable of feeling?”
“You misunderstand—you totally
misunderstand me.—Hypocrisy!—No; 
there is not a woman upon earth whom
I believe to be so far above all hypocrisy,
all affectation.—But I imagined—I
feared—”
As he spoke these last words he was

in some confusion, and hastily turned
over the prints in a portfolio which lay
upon the table. Belinda's eye was
caught by an engraving of lady Delacour
in the character of the comic muse. Mr.
Vincent did not know the intimacy that
had subsisted between her ladyship and
miss Portman—She sighed from the recollection
of Clarence Hervey, and of all
that had passed at the masquerade.
“What a contrast!”—said Mr. Vincent,
placing the print of lady Delacour
beside the picture of lady Anne Percival.
“What a contrast!—Compare their
pictures:—compare their characters:— 
compare—”
“Excuse me,” interrupted Belinda; 
“lady Delacour was once my friend, and
I do not like to make a comparison so
much to her disadvantage. I have never
seen any woman who would not suffer
by a comparison with lady Anne Percival.”
“I have been more fortunate, I have

seen one—one equally worthy of esteem
—admiration—love.”
Mr. Vincent's voice faltered in pronouncing
the word love; yet Belinda,
prepossessed by the idea that he was attached
to some creole lady, simply answered,
without looking up from her
drawing, “You are indeed very fortunate,
peculiarly fortunate. Are the West-Indian
ladies—”
“West-Indian ladies!” interrupted
Mr. Vincent. “Surely, miss Portman
cannot imagine that I am at this instant
thinking of any West-Indian lady!” Belinda
looked up with an air of surprise.
—“Charming miss Portman!” continued
he, “I have learnt to admire European
beauty, European excellence—I have acquired
new ideas of the female character— 
ideas—feelings that must henceforward
render me exquisitely happy, or exquisitely
miserable.”
Miss Portman had been too often called
“charming,” to be much startled or delighted

by the sound; the word would
have passed by unnoticed, but there was
something so impassioned in Mr. Vincent's
manner, that she could no longer
mistake it for common gallantry, and she
was in evident confusion.—Now for the
first time the idea of Mr. Vincent as a
lover came into her mind. The next
instant she accused herself of vanity, and
dreaded that he should read her thoughts.
“Exquisitely miserable!” said she in
a tone of raillery. “I should not suppose,
from what I have seen of Mr. Vincent,
that any thing could make him exquisitely
miserable.”
“Then you do not know my character
—you do not know my heart.—It is in
your power to make me exquisitely miserable.— 
Mine is not the cold hackneyed
phrase of gallantry, but the fervid language
of passion,” cried he, seizing her
hand.
At this instant one of the children
came in with some flowers for Belinda; 
and glad of the interruption, she hastily

put up her drawings and left the room,
observing that she should scarcely have
time to dress before dinner.—However,
as soon as she found herself alone, she
forgot how late it was; and though she
sat down before the glass to dress, she
made no progress in the business, but
continued for some time motionless, endeavouring
to recollect and to understand
all that had passed. The result of
her reflections was the conviction, that
her partiality for Clarence Hervey was
greater, than she had ever till this moment
suspected.—I have told my aunt Stanhope,
thought she, that the idea of Mr.
Hervey had no influence in my refusal of
sir Philip Baddely. I have said that my
affections are entirely at my own command.
Then why do I feel this alarm at
the discovery of Mr. Vincent's views?
Why do I compare him with one whom
I thought I had forgotten?—And yet,
how are we to judge of character? How
can we form any estimate of what is
amiable, of what will make us happy

or miserable, but by comparison?—Am
I to blame for preceiving superiority?— 
Am I to blame if one person be more
agreeable, or seem to be more agreeable,
than another?—Am I to blame if I cannot
love Mr. Vincent?”
Before Belinda had answered these
questions to her satisfaction, the dinnerbell
rang. There happened to dine this
day at Mr. Percival's a gentleman who
had just arrived from Lisbon, and the
conversation turned upon the sailors'
practice of stilling the waves over the
bar of Lisbon by throwing oil upon
the water. Charles Percival's curiosity
was excited by this conversation, and he
wished to see the experiment. In the
evening his father indulged his wishes.
The children were delighted at the sight,
and little Charles insisted upon Belinda's
following him to a particular spot, where
he was well convinced that she could see
better than any where else in the world.
“Take care,” cried lady Anne, “or you
will lead your friend into the river,

Charles.” The boy paused, and soon
afterward asked his father several questions
about swimming and drowning,
and bringing people to life after they
had been drowned. “Don't you remember,
papa,” said he, “that Mr. Hervey,
who was almost drowned in the Serpentine
river in London?”—Belinda coloured
at hearing unexpectedly the name of the
person of whom she was at that instant
thinking, and the child continued—
“I liked that Mr. Hervey very much
—I liked him from the first day I saw
him. What a number of entertaining
things he told us at dinner! We used to
call him the good natured gentleman.—I
like him very much—I wish he was here
this minute. Did you ever see him, miss
Portman?—O yes, you must have seen
him; for it was he who carried Helena's
gold fishes to her mother, and he used
often to be at lady Delacour's—was not
he?”
“Yes, my dear, often.”
“And did not you like him very

much?”—This simple question threw Belinda
into inexpressible confusion; but
fortunately the crimson on her face was
seen only by lady Anne Percival. To
her great satisfaction, Mr. Vincent forbore
this evening any attempt to renew
the conversation of the morning: he endeavoured
to mix with his usual animation
and gayety in the family society; and
her embarrassment was much lessened,
when she heard the next day at breakfast
that he was gone to Harrowgate. Lady
Anne Percival took notice that she was
this morning unusually sprightly.
After breakfast, as they were passing
through the hall to take a walk in the
park, one of the little boys stopped to
look at a musical instrument which hung
up against the wall.
“What is this, mamma?—It is not a
guitar, is it?”
“No, my dear, it is called a banjore; 
it is an African instrument, of which the
negroes are particularly fond—Mr. Vincent
mentioned it the other day to miss

Portman, and I believe she expressed
some curiosity to see one. Juba went
to work immediately to make a banjore
I find.—Poor fellow, I dare say that he
was very sorry to go to Harrowgate, and
to leave his African guitar half finished; 
especially as it was intended for an offering
to miss Portman. He is the most
grateful, affectionate creature I ever
saw.”
“But why, mamma,” said Charles
Percival, “is Mr. Vincent gone away?
I am sorry he is gone. I hope he
will soon come back.—In the mean time
I must run and water my carnations.”
“His sorrow for his friend Mr. Vincent's
departure does not seem to affect
his spirits much,” said lady Anne. “People
who expect sentiment from children
of six years old will be disappointed, and
will probably teach them affectation.
Surely it is much better to let their natural
affections have time to expand. If
we tear the rose-bud open, we spoil the
flower for ever.” Belinda smiled at this

parable of the rose-bud, which, she said,
might be applied to men and women, as
well as to children; that the growth of the
affections must be spontaneous.
“And yet upon reflection,” said lady
Anne, “the heart has nothing in common
with a rose-bud. Nonsensical allusions
pass off very prettily in conversation.—I
mean, when we converse with partial
friends: but we should reason ill, and
conduct ourselves worse, if we were to
trust implicitly to poetical analogies. Our
affections,” continued lady Anne, “arise
from circumstances totally independent of
our will.”
“That is the very thing I meant to
say,” interrupted Belinda eagerly.
“They are excited by the agreeable
or useful qualities that we discover in
things or in persons.”
“Undoubtedly,” said Belinda.
“Or by those which our fancies discover,” 
said lady Anne.
Belinda was silent; but after a pause
she said, “That it was certainly very

dangerous, especially for women, to trust
to fancy in bestowing their affections,
And yet,” continued she, “it is a danger
to which they are much exposed in
society. Men have it in their power to
assume the appearance of every thing
that is amiable and estimable, and women
have scarcely any opportunities of
detecting the counterfeit. Without
Ithuriel's spear, how can they distinguish
the good from the evil?” said Belinda.
“This is a common-place complaint, I
know; the ready excuse that we silly
young women plead, when we make
mistakes for which our friends reproach
us, and for which we too often reproach
ourselves.”
“The complaint is common place precisely
because it is general and just,” replied
lady Anne. “In the slight and frivolous
intercourse, which fashionable belles
usually have with those fashionable
beaux who call themselves their lovers,
it is surprising that they can discover
any thing of each other's real character.

Indeed they seldom do; and this probably
is the cause why there are so many
unsuitable and unhappy marriages. A
woman who has an opportunity of seeing
her lover in private society, in domestic
life, has infinite advantages; for, if she
has any sense, and he has any sincerity,
the real character of both may be developed.”
“True,” said Belinda (who now suspected
that lady Anne alluded to Mr. Vincent):
“and in such a situation a woman would
readily be able to decide, whether the
man who addressed her would suit her
taste or not; so she would be inexcusable
if, either from vanity or coquetry, she disguised
her real sentiments.”
“And will miss Portman, who cannot
by any one to whom she is known be
suspected of vanity or coquetry, permit
me to speak to her with the freedom of a
friend?”
Belinda, who was much touched by
the kindness of lady Anne's manner,
pressed her hand, and exclaimed, “Yes,

dear lady Anne, speak to me with freedom,
you cannot do me a greater favour.
No thought of my mind, no secret feeling
of my heart, shall be concealed from
you.”
“Do not imagine that I wish to encroach
upon the generous openness of
your temper,” said lady Anne; “tell me
when I go too far, and I will be silent.
One who, like miss Portman, has lived in
the world, has seen a variety of characters,
and probably has had a variety of
admirers, must have formed some determinate
idea of the sort of companion, that
would make her happy, if she were to
marry—unless,” said lady Anne, “she
has formed a resolution against marriage.”
“I have formed no such resolution,” 
said Belinda. “Indeed, since I have
seen the happiness which you and Mr.
Percival enjoy in your own family, I have
been much more disposed to think that a
union with—that a union such as yours
would increase my happiness. At the

same time, my aversion to the idea of
marrying from interest, or convenience,
or from any motives but esteem and love,
is increased almost to horrour. O, lady
Anne! there is nothing that I would not
do to please the friends to whom I am
under obligations, except sacrificing my
peace of mind, or my integrity, the happiness
of my life, by—”
Lady Anne, in a gentle tone, assured
her, that she was the last person in the
world, who would press her to any union
which would make her unhappy. “You
perceive that Mr. Vincent has spoken to
me of what passed between you yesterday.
You perceive that I am his friend,
but do not forget that I am also yours.
If you fear undue influence from any of
your relations in favour of Mr. Vincent's
large fortune, &c., let his proposal
remain a secret between ourselves, till
you can decide, from further acquaintance
with him, whether it will be in your power
to return his affection.”
“I fear, my dear lady Anne,” cried

Belinda, “that it is not in my power to
return his affection.”
“And may I ask your objections?”
“Is not it a sufficient objection, that I
am persuaded I cannot love him.”
“No; for you may be mistaken in
that persuasion. Remember what we said
a little while ago about fancy and spontaneous
affections. Does Mr. Vincent
appear to you defective in any of the
qualities, which you think essential to
happiness? Mr. Percival has known
him from the time he was a man, and
can answer for his integrity and his good
temper. Are not these the first points
you would consider? They ought to be,
I am sure, and I believe they are. Of
his understanding I shall say nothing, because
you have had full opportunities
of judging of it from his conversation.”
“Mr. Vincent appears to have an excellent
understanding,” said Belinda.
“Then to what do you object?—Is there

any thing disgusting to you in his person
or manners?”
“He is remarkably handsome, he is
well bred, and his manners are perfectly
unaffected,” said Belinda, “but—do not
accuse me of caprice—altogether he
does not suit my taste; and I cannot think
it sufficient not to feel disgust for a husband
—though I believe this is the fashionable
doctrine.”
“It is not mine, I assure you,” said
lady Anne. “I am not one of those
who think it ‘safest to begin with a little
aversion;’ but since you acknowledge,
that Mr. Vincent possesses the essential
good qualities that entitle him to your
esteem, I am satisfied. In a mind as
well regulated as yours, esteem may
certainly in time be improved into love.
I will tell him so, my dear.”
“No, my dear lady Anne! No; you
must not, indeed you must not. You
have too good an opinion of me—my
mind is not so well regulated—I am
much weaker, much sillier, than you

imagine—than you can conceive,” said
Belinda.
Lady Anne soothed her with the most
affectionate expressions, and concluded
with saying: “Mr. Vincent has promised
not to return from Harrowgate, to torment
you with his addresses, if you be absolutely
determined against him. He is of
too generous, and perhaps too proud a
temper, to persecute you with vain solicitations; 
and however Mr. Percival and I
may wish that he could obtain such a
wife, we shall have the common, or
uncommon, sense and good nature to
allow our friends to be happy their own
way.”
“You are very good; too good. But
am I then to be the cause of banishing
Mr. Vincent from all his friends—from
Oakly-park?”
“Will he not do what is most prudent
to avoid the charming miss Portman,” 
said lady Anne smiling, “if he must not
love her? This was at least the advice I
gave him, when he consulted us yesterday

evening. But I will not sign his
writ of banishment lightly. Nothing but
the assurance that the heart is engaged
can be a sufficient cause for despair; nothing
else could, in my eyes, justify you, my
dear Belinda, from the charge of caprice.”
“I can give you no such assurance, I
hope—I believe,” said Belinda in great
confusion; “and yet I would not for the
world deceive you; you have a right to
my sincerity.” She paused; and lady
Anne said with a smile, “Perhaps I can
spare you the trouble of telling me in
words what a blush told me, or at least
made me suspect, yesterday evening, when
we were standing by the river-side, when
little Charles asked you—”
“Yes. I remember—I saw you look
at me.”
“Undesignedly, believe me.”
“Undesignedly, I am sure; but I was
afraid you would think—”
“The truth.”
“No, but more than the truth. The
truth you shall hear; and the rest I will

leave to your judgment and your kindness.”
Belinda gave a full account of her
acquaintance with Clarence Hervey; of
the variations in his manner towards
her; of his excellent conduct with respect
to lady Delacour (of this, by the by,
she spoke at large). But she was more
concise when she touched upon the state
of her own heart; and her voice almost
failed when she came to the history of
the lock of beautiful hair, the Windsor
incognita, and the picture of Virginia.
She concluded by expressing her conviction
of the propriety of forgetting a man,
who was in all probability attached to
another, and she declared it to be her
resolution, to banish him from her
thoughts. Lady Anne said, “that
nothing could be more prudent, or
praiseworthy, than forming such a resolution
—except keeping it.” Lady Anne
had a high opinion of Mr. Hervey; but
she had no doubt, from Belinda's account,
and from her own observations on Mr.

Hervey, and from slight circumstances
which had accidentally come to Mr.
Percival's knowledge, that he was, as
Belinda suspected, attached to Virginia
St. Pierre. She wished, therefore, to
confirm miss Portman in this belief, and
to turn her thoughts towards one who,
beside being deserving of her esteem
and love, felt for her the most sincere
affection. She did not, however, press
the subject farther at this time, but contented
herself with requesting, that Belinda
would take three days (the usual
time given for deliberation in fairy tales)
before she should decide against Mr.
Vincent.
The next day they went to look at a
porter's lodge, which Mr. Percival had
just built; it was inhabited by an old
man and woman, who had for many
years been industrious tenants, but who,
in their old age, had been reduced to
poverty, not by imprudence, but by misfortune.
Lady Anne was pleased to see
them comfortably settled in their new

habitation; and whilst she and Belinda
were talking to the old couple, their
grandaughter, a pretty-looking girl of
about eighteen, came in with a basket of
eggs in her hand. “Well, Lucy,” said
lady Anne, “have you overcome your
fear of poor Juba's black face?” The
girl reddened, smiled, and looked at her
grandmother, who answered for her in
an arch tone, “O, yes, my lady! We
are not afraid of Juba's black face now; 
we are grown very great friends. This
pretty cane chair for my good man was
his handiwork, and these baskets he
made for me. Indeed, he's a most industrious,
ingenious, good natured youth; 
and our Lucy takes no offence at his
black face now, my lady, I can assure
you. That necklace,” added she in a
half-whisper, pointing to a necklace of
Angola pease which the girl wore—“that
necklace is a present of his, which is
never off her neck now, my lady. So I
tell him he need not be discouraged,
though so be she did not take to him at

the first; for she's a good girl, and a
sensible girl, I say it, though she's my
own: and the eyes are used to a face
after a time, and then it's nothing. They
say, Fancy's all in all in love. Now, in my
judgment, fancy's little or nothing with
girls that have sense. But I beg pardon
for prating at this rate, more especially
when I am so old as to have forgot
all the little I ever knew about such
things.”
“But you have the best right in the
world to speak about such things, and
your grandaughter has the best reason
in the world to listen to you,” said lady
Anne, “because, in spite of all the crosses
of fortune, you have been an excellent
and happy wife, at least ever since I can
remember.”
“And ever since I can remember,
that's more; no offence to your ladyship,” 
said the old man, striking his crutch
against the ground. “Ever since I can remember,
she has made me the happiest man
in the whole world, in the whole parish, as

every body knows, and I best of all!” 
cried he with a degree of enthusiasm,
that lighted up his aged countenance, and
animated his feeble voice.
“And yet,” said the honest dame, “if
I had followed my fancy, and taken up
with my first love, it would not ha' been
with he, Lucy. I had a sort of a fancy
(since my lady's so good as to let me
speak), I had a sort of a fancy for an idle
young man; but he, very luckily for me,
took it into his head to fall in love with
another young woman, and then I had leisure
enough left me to think of your grandfather,
who was not so much to my taste
like at first. But when I found out his
goodness and cleverness, and, joined to
all, his great tenderness for me, I thought
better of it, Lucy (as who knows but you
may do, though there shall not be a word
said on my part to press you, for poor
Juba?); and my thinking better is the
cause why I have been so happy ever
since, and am so still in my old age. Ah,
Lucy, dear! what a many years that same

old age lasts, after all! But young folks,
for the most part, never think what's to
come after thirty or forty at furthest. But
I don't say this for you, Lucy; for you
are a good girl, and a sensible girl,
though my own, as I said before; and
therefore won't be run away with by
fancy, which is soon past and gone—but
make a prudent choice, that you won't
never have cause to repent of. But I'll
not say a word more; I'll leave it all to
yourself and poor Juba, who, I hope,
won't be long away at Harrowgate, my
lady.”
“I hope not,” said lady Anne; “but
that depends neither on you nor me.
Good morning to you! Farewel, Lucy!
That's a pretty necklace, and is very becoming
to you—fare ye well!”
And she hurried out of the cottage
with Belinda, apprehensive that the talkative
old dame might weaken the effect
of her good sense and experience by a
further profusion of words.
“One would think,” said Belinda

with an ingenuous smile, “that this
lesson upon the dangers of fancy was
intended for me: at any rate, I may turn
it to my own advantage.”
“Happy those who can turn all
the experience of others to their own advantage!” 
said lady Anne. “This would
be a more valuable privilege, than the
power of turning every thing that is
touched to gold.”
They walked on in silence for a few
minutes; and then miss Portman, pursuing
the train of her own thoughts, and
unconscious that she had not explained
them to lady Anne, abruptly exclaimed,
“But if I should be entangled, so as not to
be able to retract!—and if it should not
be in my power to love him at last, he
will think me a coquette, a jilt perhaps; 
he will have reason to complain of me, if
I waste his time, and trifle with his affections.
Then is it not better that I should
avoid, by a decided refusal, all possibility
of injury to Mr. Vincent, and of blame to
myself?”

“There is no danger of Mr. Vincent's
misunderstanding or misrepresenting
you. The risk that he runs is by his
voluntary choice; and I am sure that, if
after further acquaintance with him you
find it impossible to return his affection,
he will not consider himself as ill-used by
your refusal.”
“But after a certain time—after the
world suspects that two people are engaged
to each other, it is scarcely possible
for the woman to recede: when they
come within a certain distance, they are
pressed to unite, by the irresistible force
of external circumstances. A woman
is too often reduced to this dilemma— 
Either she must marry a man she does not
love, or she must be blamed by the world
—either she must sacrifice a portion of
her reputation, or the whole of her happiness.”
“The world is indeed often too curious,
and too rash in these affairs,” said
lady Anne. “A young woman is not
in this respect allowed sufficient time

for freedom of deliberation. She sees,
as Mr. Percival once said, 'the drawn
sword of tyrant custom suspended over
her head by a single hair.”
“And yet, notwithstanding you are
so well aware of the danger, your ladyship
would expose me to it,” said
Belinda.
“Yes. For I think the chance of
happiness, in this instance, overbalances
the risk,” said lady Anne. “As we
cannot alter the common law of custom,
and as we cannot render the world less
gossiping, or less censorious, we must not
expect always to avoid censure; all we
can do is, never to deserve it—and it would
be absurd to enslave ourselves to the
opinion of the idle and ignorant. To a
certain point, respect for the opinion of the
world is prudence; beyond that point, it
is weakness. You should also consider
that the world at Oakly-park and in London
are two different worlds. In London
if you and Mr. Vincent were seen often in
each other's company, it would be immediately

buzzed about, that miss Portman
and Mr. Vincent were going to be
married; and if the match did not take
place, a thousand foolish stories might be
told to account for it's being broken off.
But here you are not surrounded by busy
eyes and busy tongues. The butchers,
bakers, ploughmen, and spinsters, who
compose our world, have all affairs of
their own to mind. Besides, their comments
can have no very extensive circulation; 
they are used to see Mr. Vincent
continually here; and his staying
with us the remainder of the autumn will
not appear to them any thing wonderful,
or portentous.”
Lady Anne's arguments and raillery
had such an effect upon miss Portman,
that no writ of banishment was issued
against Mr. Vincent. He returned to
Oakly-park—but upon the express condition,
that he should not make his attachment
public by any particular attentions,
and that he should draw no conclusions
in his favour from Belinda's consenting

to converse with him freely upon every
common subject. To this treaty of amity
lady Anne Percival was guarantee.