

Both from a sense of justice to the
poor people concerned, and from a
desire to save Sir Ulick O'Shane's memory
as far as it was in his power
from reproach, Ormond determined to
pay all the small debts that were due to
his servants, workmen, and immediate
dependants. For this purpose, when the
funeral was over, he had them all assembled
at Castle Hermitage. All just
demands of this sort were paid,—all
were satisfied, even the bare-footed kitchen
maid, the drudge of this great
house, who, in despair, had looked at her
poor one guinea note of Sir Ulick's, had
that note paid in gold, and went away

blessing Master Harry. Happy for all
that he is come home to us, was the
general feeling. But there was one man,
a groom of Sir Ulick's, who did not
join in any of these blessings or praises; 
he stood silent and motionless, with his
eyes on the money, which Mr. Ormond
had put into his hand.
“Is your money right?” said Ormond.
“It is, Sir, but I had something to tell
you.”
When all the other servants had left
the room, the man said— 
“I am the groom, Sir, that was sent,
just before you went to France, with a
letter to Annaly; there was an answer
to that letter, Sir, though you never got
it.”
“There was an answer!” cried Ormond,
anger flashing, but an instant
afterwards, joy sparkling in his eyes.
“There was a letter!—From whom?— 
I'll forgive you all, if you will tell me
the whole truth.”

“I will—and not a word of lie, and
I beg your honour's pardon, if—” 
“Go on—straight to the fact, this instant,
or you shall never have my pardon.”
“Why then I stopped to take a glass
coming home; and, not knowing how it
was, I had the misfortune to lose the
bit of a note, and I thought no more
about it till, please your honour, after
you was gone, it was found.”
“Found!” cried Ormond, stepping
hastily up to him, “Where is it?”
“I have it safe here,” said the man,
opening a sort of pocket-book, “here I
have kept it safe till your honour came
back.”
Ormond saw, and seized upon a letter,
in Lady Annaly's hand, directed to him.
Tore it open—two notes—one from Florence.
“I forgive you!” said he to the man,
and made a sign to him to leave the room.

When Ormond had read, or without
reading, had taken in by one glance of
the eye, the sense of the letters—he rang
the bell instantly.
“Inquire at the post-office,” said he
to his servant, “whether Lady Annaly
is in England or Ireland?—if in England
where?—if in Ireland, whether at
Annaly or at Herbert's Town?—Quick— 
an answer.”
An answer was quickly brought— 
“In England—in Devonshire, Sir,— 
here is the exact direction to the place,
Sir,—I shall pack up—I suppose, Sir.”
“Certainly—directly.”
Leaving a few lines of explanation
and affection for Dr. Cambray, our young
hero was off again, to the surprise and
regret of all who saw him driving
away as fast as horses could carry him.— 
His servant, from the box, however,
spread, as he went, for the comfort of the
deploring village, the assurance that
“Master and he would soon be back

again—please Heaven!—and—happier
than ever.”
And now, that he is safe in the carriage,
what was in that note of Miss
Annaly's which has produced such a
sensation. No talismanic charm ever
operated with more magical celerity than
this note. What were the words of the
charm?— 
That is a secret, which shall never be
known to the world.
The only point which it much imports
the public to know, is probably already
guessed—that the letter did not contain
a refusal, nor any absolute discouragement
of Ormond's hopes. But Lady
Annaly and Florence had both distinctly
told him, that they could not receive
him at Annaly till after a particular day,
on which they said that they should be
particularly engaged. They told him
that Colonel Albemarle was at Annaly— 
that he would leave it at such a time— 
and that they requested that Mr. Ormond

would postpone his visit till after
that time.
Not receiving this notice, Ormond had
unfortunately gone upon the day that
was specially prohibited.
Now that the kneeling figure appeared
to him as a rival in despair, not in triumph,
Ormond asked himself how he
could ever have been such an ideot
as to doubt Florence Annaly.
“Why did I set off in such haste for
Paris?—Could not I have waited a day?— 
Could not I have written again?— 
Could not I have cross-questioned the
drunken servant when he was sober?— 
Could not I have done any thing, in short,
but what I did!”
Clearly as a man, when his anger is
dissipated, sees what he ought to have
done or to have left undone, while the
fury lasted; vividly as a man in a different
kind of passion sees the folly of all he
did, said, or thought, when he was possessed
by the past madness; so clearly,

so vividly, did Ormond now see and feel— 
and vehemently execrate his jealous
folly, and mad precipitation.—And then
he came to the question— 
“Could his folly be repaired?—Would
his madness ever be forgiven?” Ormond,
in love affairs, never had any presumption— 
any tinge of the Connal coxcombry in
his nature; he was not apt to flatter
himself, that he had made a deep impression; 
and now he was, perhaps from his
sense of the superior value of the object,
more than usually diffident. With every
changing view of the subject, he discovered
fresh cause to fear that he might
lose, or that he might have already forfeited,
the prize. Though Miss Annaly is
still unmarried, she might have resolved
irrevocably against him.—Though she
was not a girl to act in the high-flown
heroine style; and, in a fit of pride or
revenge, to punish the man she liked, by
marrying his rival, whom she did not
like; yet Florence Annaly, as Ormond

well knew, inherited some of her mother's
strength of character; and, in circumstances
that deeply touched her heart,
might be capable of all her mother's
warmth of indignation. It was in her
character decidedly to refuse to connect
herself with any man, however her heart
might incline towards him, if he had any
essential defect of temper; or, if she
thought that his attachment to her was
not steady and strong; in short, such as
she deserved it should be, and such as
her sensibility and all her hopes of domestic
happiness required in a husband.
And then there was Lady Annaly to be
considered—how indignant she would be
at his conduct.
While Ormond was travelling alone,
he had full leisure to torment himself
with these thoughts. Pressed forward
alternately by hope and fear, each urging
expedition, he hastened on—reached
Dublin—crossed the water—and travelling
day and night, neither stinted nor

stayed till he was at the feet of his fair
mistress.
To those who like to know the how— 
the when—and the where, it should be
told that it was evening when he arrived— 
Florence Annaly was walking with
her mother by the sea-side, in one of the
most beautiful and retired parts of the
coast of Devonshire, when they were told
by a servant, that a gentleman from Ireland
had just arrived at their house, and
wished to see them. A minute afterwards
they saw— 
“Could it be?” Lady Annaly said,
turning in doubt to her daughter, but the
cheek of Florence instantly convinced
the mother, that it could be none but Mr.
Ormond himself.
“Mr. Ormond!” said Lady Annaly,
advancing kindly, yet with some mixture
of dignified reserve in her manner, “Mr.
Ormond, after his long absence, is welcome
to his old friend.”
There was in Ormond's look and manner,

as he approached, something that
much inclined the daughter to hope that
he might prove not utterly unworthy of
her mother's forgiveness; and, when he
spoke to the daughter, there was, in his
voice and look, something that softened
the mother's heart; irresistibly inclined
her to wish, that he might be able to give
a satisfactory explanation of his strange
conduct. Where the parties are thus
happily disposed both to hear reason— 
to excuse passion—and to pardon the
errors to which passion, even in the most
reasonable minds, is liable; explanations
are seldom tedious, or difficult to be comprehended.
The moment Ormond produced
the cover, the soiled cover of the
letters, a glimpse of the truth struck
Florence Annaly; and before he had got
further in his sentence than these words:
“I did not receive your ladyship's
letter till within these few days.”
All the reserve of Lady Annaly's manner
was dispelled: her smiles relieved

his apprehensions, and encouraged him
to proceed in his story with happy
fluency. The carelessness of the drunken
servant, who had occasioned so much
mischief, was talked of for a few minutes
with great satisfaction.
Ormond took his own share of the
blame so frankly, and with so good a
grace, and described, with such truth,
the agony he had been thrown into by
the sight of the kneeling figure in regimentals,
that Lady Annaly could not
help comforting him by the assurance
that Florence had, at the same moment,
been sufficiently alarmed by the rearing
of his horse at the sight of the flapping
window blind.
“The kneeling gentleman,” said Lady
Annaly, “whom you thought at the
height of joy and glory, was at that
moment in the depths of despair. So ill
do the passions see what is even before
their eyes!”
If Lady Annaly had had a mind to

moralise at this moment, she might have
done so to any length, without fear of interruption
from either of her auditors,
and with the most perfect certainty of
unqualified submission and dignified humility
on the part of our hero, who was
too happy at this moment not to be ready
to acknowledge himself to have been
wrong and absurd; and worthy of any
quantity of reprehension or indignation,
that could have been bestowed upon
him.
Her ladyship went, however, as far
from morality as possible—to Paris.— 
She spoke of the success Mr. Ormond had
had in Parisian society,—she spoke of
M. and Madame de Connal, and various
persons with whom he had been intimate,
among others, of the abbé Morellet.
Ormond rejoiced to find that Lady
Annaly knew he had been in the Abbé 
Morellet's distinguished society. The
happiest hopes for the future rose in his
mind, from perceiving that her ladyship,

by whatever means, knew all that he
had been doing in Paris. It seems that
they had had accounts of him from
several English travellers, who had met
him at Paris, and had heard him spoken
of in different companies.
Ormond took care—give him credit
for it all who have ever been in love— 
even in these first moments, with the object
of his present affection, Ormond took
care to do justice to the absent Dora,
whom he now never expected to see
again.—He seized, dexterously, an opportunity,
in reply to something Lady
Annaly said about the Connals, to observe,
that Madame de Connal was not
only much admired for her beauty at
Paris, but that she did honour to Ireland
by having preserved her reputation; 
young, and without a guide, as she was,
in dissipated French society, with few
examples of conjugal virtues to preserve
in her mind the precepts and habits of
her British education.

Ormond was glad of this opportunity
to give, as he now did with all the
energy of truth, the result of his feelings
and reflections on what he had seen of
French modes of living; their superior
pleasures of society; and their want of
our domestic happiness.
While Ormond was speaking, both the
mother and daughter could not help admiring,
in the midst of his moralizing,
the great improvement which had been
made in his appearance and manners.
With all his own characteristic frankness,
he acknowledged the impression
which French gaiety, and the brilliancy
of Parisian society, had, at first, made
upon him:—he was glad, however, that
he had now seen all that the imagination
often paints as far more delightful than
it really is.—He had, thank Heaven,
passed through this course of dissipation,
without losing his taste for better and
happier modes of life. The last few
months, though they might seem but a

splendid or feverish dream in his existence,
had in reality been, he believed,
of essential service in confirming his principles,
settling his character, and deciding
for ever his taste and judgment,
after full opportunity of comparison, in
favour of his own country—and especially
of his own country women.
Lady Annaly smiled benignantly; and
after observing, that this seemingly unlucky
excursion, which had begun in
anger, had ended advantageously to Mr.
Ormond; and after having congratulated
him upon having saved his fortune, and
established his character solidly, she left
him to plead his own cause with her
daughter—in her heart cordially wishing
him success.
What he said, or what Florence
answered, we do not know; but we are
perfectly sure that if we did, the repetition
of it would tire the reader. Lady Annaly
and tea waited for them with great
patience to an unusually late, which

they conceived to be an unusually early
hour. The result of this conversation
was, that Ormond remained with them
in this beautiful retirement in Devonshire,
the next day, and the next, and— 
how many days are not precisely recorded; 
a blank was left for the number,
which the editor of these memoirs does
not dare to fill up at random, lest some
Mrs. M'Crule should exclaim—“Scandalously
too long to keep the young man
there!—or scandalously too short a courtship
after all!”
It is humbly requested, that every
young lady of delicacy and feeling will
put herself in the place of Florence Annaly— 
then, imagining the man she most
approves to be in the place of Mr.
Ormond, she will be pleased to fill up
the blank with what number of days
she may think proper.
When the happy day was named, it
was agreed they should return to Ireland,
to Annaly; and that their kind

friend, Dr. Cambray, should be the person
to complete that union, which he
had so long foreseen, and so anxiously
desired.
Those who wish to hear something
of estates, as well as of weddings, should
be told, that about the same time
Ormond received letters from Marcus
O'Shane, and from M. de Connal.— 
Marcus informing him, that the estate
of Castle Hermitage was to be sold by
the commissioners of bankrupts, and beseeching
him to bid for it, that it might
not be sold under value.—M. de Connal
also besought his dear friend, Mr. Ormond,
to take the Black Islands off his
hands, for they incumbered him terribly.
No wonder, living, as he did, at Paris,
with his head at Versailles, and his heart
in a faro bank. Ormond could not
oblige both the gentlemen, though they
had each pressing reasons for getting
rid speedily of their property; and were
assured, that he would be the most

agreeable purchaser. Castle Hermitage
was the finest estate, and by far the
best bargain.—But other considerations
weighed with our hero. While Sir
Ulick O'Shane's son and natural representative
was living, banished by debts
from his native country, Ormond could
not bear to take possession of Castle
Hermitage. For the Black Islands he
had a fondness—they were associated
with all the tender recollections of his
generous benefactor.—He should hurt
no one's feelings by this purchase—and
he might do a great deal of good, by
carrying on his old friend's improvements,
and by further civilizing the
people of the Islands, all of whom were
warmly attached to him. They considered
prince Harry as the lawful representative
of their dear king Corny,
and actually offered up prayers for his
coming again to reign over them.
To those who think that the mind is
a kingdom of yet more consequence than

even that of the Black Islands, it may
be agreeable to hear, that Ormond continued
to enjoy the empire which he
had gained over himself, and to maintain
that high character, which in spite
of his neglected education, and of all
the adverse circumstances to which he
was early exposed, he had formed for
himself by resolute energy.
Lady Annaly, with the pride of affection,
gloried in the full accomplishment
of her prophecies, and was rewarded
in the best manner for that
benevolent interest she had early taken
in our hero's improvement, by seeing
the perfect felicity which subsisted between
her daughter and Ormond.