



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday Afternoon, April 13. 
I am infinitely concerned, my ever-dear and ever-kind
friend, that I am the sad occasion of the displeasure
between your Mother and you. —How many
persons have I made unhappy! 
Had I not to console myself, that my error is not
owing to wicked precipitation, I should be the most
miserable of all creatures. As it is, I am enough
punished in the loss of my character, more valuable to
me than my life; and in the cruel doubts and perplexities
which, conflicting with my hopes, and each getting
the victory by turns, harrow up my soul between them. 
I think, however, that you should obey your Mother,
and decline a correspondence with me; at least
for the present. Take care how you fall into my
error; for That began with carrying on a prohibited
correspondence; a correspondence which I thought it in
my power to discontinue at pleasure. My talent is
scribbling; and I the readier fell into this freedom, as
I found delight in writing; having motives too, which
I thought laudable; and, at one time, the permission
of all my friends, to write to him (a) . 
Yet as to this correspondence, what hurt could arise
from it, if your Mother could be prevailed upon to
permit it to be continued? —So much prudence and discretion
as you have; and you, in writing to me, lying
under no temptation of following so bad an example, 

as I have set—My Letters too occasionally filled with
self-accusation. 
I thank you, my dear, most cordially I thank you,
for your kind offers. You may be assured, that I will
sooner be beholden to you, than to any-body living. 
To Mr. Lovelace the last. Do not therefore think,
that by declining your favours I have an intention to
lay myself under obligation to him. 
I am willing to hope (notwithstanding what you
write) that my friends will send me my little money,
together with my cloaths. They are too considerate,
some of them, at least, to permit that I should be put
to such low difficulties. Perhaps, they will not be in
haste to oblige me. But if not, I cannot yet want. 
I believe you think, I must not dispute with Mr.
Lovelace the expences of the road and lodgings, till I
can get to a fixed abode. But I hope soon to put an
end even to those sort of obligations. 
Small hopes indeed of a Reconciliation from your
account of my Uncle's visit to your Mother, in order
to set her against an almost-friendless creature whom
once he loved! But is it not my duty to try for it? 
Ought I to widen my error by obstinacy and resentment,
because of their resentment; which must appear
reasonable to them, as they suppose my flight premeditated; 
and as they are made to believe, that I am
capable of triumphing in it, and over them, with the
man they hate? When I have done all in my power to
restore myself to their favour, I shall have the less to
reproach myself with. 
These considerations make me waver about following
your advice, in relation to Marriage; and the rather,
as he is so full of complaisance with regard to my
former conditions, which he calls my Injunctions. Nor
can I now, that my friends, as you inform me, have
so strenuously declared against accepting of the mediation
of the Ladies of Mr. Lovelace's family, put myself into
their protection, unless I am resolved to give up all
hopes of a Reconciliation with my own. 

Yet if any happy introduction could be thought of
to effect this desirable purpose, how shall terms be proposed
to my Father, while this man is with me, or
near me? On the other hand, should they in his absence
get me back by force (and this, you are of opinion,
they would attempt to do, but in fear of him) how
will their severest acts of compulsion be justified by my
flight from them! —Mean while, to what censures, as
you remind me, do I expose myself, while he and I
are together, and unmarried! —Yet [Can I with patience
ask the question?] is it in my power? —O my
dear Miss Howe! And am I so reduced, as that, to
save the poor remains of my reputation in the world's
eye, I must watch the gracious motion from this man's
lips? 
Were my Cousin Morden in England, all might
still perhaps be determined happily. 
If no other mediation than his can be procured to
set on foot the wished-for Reconciliation, and if my
situation with Mr. Lovelace alter not in the interim, I
must endeavour to keep myself in a state of independence
till he arrive, that I may be at liberty to govern
myself by his advice and direction. 
I will acquaint you, as you desire, with all that
passes between Mr. Lovelace and me. Hitherto I
have not discovered any-thing in his behaviour that is
very exceptionable. Yet I cannot say, that I think the
respect he shews me, an easy, unrestrained, and natural
respect, altho' I can hardly tell where the fault is. 
But he has doubtless an arrogant and encroaching
spirit. Nor is he so polite as his Education, and other
advantages, might have made one expect him to be. 
He seems, in short, to be one, who has always had
too much of his own will to study to accommodate
himself to that of others. 
As to the placing of some confidence in him, I shall
be as ready to take your advice in this particular, as in
all others, and as he will be to deserve it. But tricked 

away as I was by him, not only against my judgment,
but my inclination, can he, or any-body, expect, that I
should immediately treat him with complaisance, as if
I acknowleged obligation to him for carrying me away? 
—If I did, must he not either think me a vile dissembler
before he gained that point, or afterwards? 
Indeed, indeed, my dear, I could tear my hair, on
reconsidering what you write (as to the probability
that the dreaded Wednesday was more dreaded than it
needed to be) to think, that I should be thus tricked
by this man; and that, in all likelihood, thro' his vile
agent Joseph Leman. So premeditated and elaborate a
wickedness as it must be! —Must I not, with such a
man, be wanting to myself, if I were not jealous and
vigilant? —Yet what a life to live for a spirit so open,
and naturally so unsuspicious, as mine? 
I am obliged to Mr. Hickman for the assistance he is
so kindly ready to give to our correspondence. He is so
little likely to make to himself an additional merit with
the Daughter upon it, that I shall be very sorry, if he
risk any-thing with the Mother by it. 
I am now in a state of obligation: So must rest satisfied
with whatever I cannot help. Whom have I
the power, once so precious to me, of obliging? — 
What I mean, my dear, is, that I ought perhaps, to
expect, that my influences over you are weakened by
my indiscretion. Nevertheless I will not, if I can help
it, desert myself, nor give up the privilege you used to
allow me, of telling you what I think of such parts of
your conduct as I may not approve. 
You must permit me therefore, severe as your Mother
is against an undesigning offender, to say, that I
think your liveliness to her inexcuseable—To pass over,
for this time, what nevertheless concerns me not a
little, the free treatment you almost indiscriminately
give to my relations. 
If you will not, for your duty's sake, forbear your
tauntings and impatience, let me beseech you, that 

you will for mine: —Since otherwise, your Mother
may apprehend, that my example, like a leaven, is
working itself into the mind of her beloved Daughter. 
And may not such an apprehension give her an irreconcileable
displeasure against me? 
I inclose the copy of my Letter to my Sister, which
you are desirous to see. You will observe, that altho'
I have not demanded my Estate in form, and of my
Trustees, yet that I have hinted at leave to retire to it. 
How joyfully would I keep my word, if they would
accept of the offer I renew? —It was not proper, I
believe you will think, on many accounts, to own that
I was carried off against my inclination. I am, my
dearest friend, 
Your ever-obliged and affectionate
Cl. Harlowe. 