



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Frid. Night, or rather Sat. Morn. 1 o'Clock. 
I thought I should not have had either time or inclination
to write another line before I got to M.
Hall. But have the first; must find the last; since
I can neither sleep, nor do any thing but write, if I
can do that. I am most confoundedly out of humour. 
The reason let it follow; if it will follow—No preparation
for it, from me. 
I tried by gentleness and love to soften—What?— 
Marble. A heart incapable either of love or gentleness. 
Her past injuries for ever in her head. Ready
to receive a favour; the permission to go to Hamstead; 

but neither to deserve it, nor return any. 
So my scheme of the gentle kind, was soon given
over. 
I then wanted her to provoke me: Like a coward
boy, who waits for the first blow, before he can
persuade himself to fight, I half challeng'd her to
challenge or defy me: She seemed aware of her
danger; and would not directly brave my resentment: 
But kept such a middle course, that I neither could
find a pretence to offend, nor reason to hope; yet
she believed my tale, that her uncle would come to
Kentish Town; and seemed not to apprehend, that
Tomlinson was an impostor. 
She was very uneasy, upon the whole, in my
company: Wanted often to break from me: Yet so
held me to my promise of permitting her to go
to Hamstead, that I knew not how to get off of it; 
altho' it was impossible, in my precarious situation
with her, to think of performing it. 
In this situation; the women ready to assist; and,
if I proceeded not, as ready to ridicule me; what
had I left me, but to pursue the concerted scheme,
and seek a pretence to quarrel with her, in order to
revoke my promised permission; and to convince
her, that I would not be upbraided as the most brutal
of ravishers for nothing? 
I had agreed with the women, that if I could not
find a pretence in her presence to begin my operations,
the note should lie in my way, and I was
to pick it up, soon after her retiring from me. But
I began to doubt at near ten o'clock (so earnest was
she to leave me, suspecting my over-warm behaviour
to her, and eager grasping of her hand two or three
times, with eye-strings, as I felt, on the strain, while
her eyes shewed uneasiness and apprehension), that
if she actually retired for the night, it might be a
chance, whether it would be easy to come at her
again. Loth therefore to run such a risque, I stept 

out at a little after ten, with intent to alter the pre-concerted
disposition a little; saying I would attend
her again instantly. But as I returned, I met her at
the door, intending to withdraw for the night. I
could not persuade her to go back: Nor had I presence
of mind (so full of complaisancy as I was to
her just before) to stay her by force: So she slid
thro' my hands into her own apartment. I had nothing
to do, therefore, but to let my former concert
take place. 
I should have premised (but care not for order
of time, connexion, or any thing else) that, between
eight and nine o'clock in the evening, another servant
of Lord M.'s, on horseback, came, to desire me to
carry down with me Dr. S. my uncle having been
once (in extremis, as they judge he is now) relieved
and reprieved by him. I sent, and engaged the
Doctor to accompany me down; and am to call
upon him by four this morning: Or the devil should
have uncle and doctor, if I'd stir, till I got all
made up. 
Poke thy damn'd nose forward into the event, if
thou wilt—Curse me, if thou shalt have it, till its
proper time and place—And too soon then. 
She had hardly got into her chamber, but I found
a little paper, as I was going into mine; which I
took up; and, opening it (for it was carefully pinn'd
in another paper), what should it be, but a promisory
note, given as a bribe, with a further promise
of a diamond ring, to induce Dorcas to favour
her mistress's escape? 
How my temper chang'd in a moment! —Ring,
ring, ring, ring, my bell, with a violence enough
to break the string, and as if the house were on fire. 
Every devil frighted into active life: The whole
house in an uproar: Up runs Will.—Sir—Sir—Sir! 
—Eyes goggling, mouth distended—Bid the damn'd 

toad Dorcas come hither (as I stood at the stair-head),
in a horrible rage, and out of breath, cry'd I. 
In sight came the trembling devil—but standing
aloof, from the report made her by Will. of the
passion I was in, as well as from what she heard. 
Flash came out my sword immediately; for I had
it ready on—Curs'd, confounded, villainous, bribery
and corruption!— 
Up runs she to her lady's door, screaming out for
safety and protection. 
Good your honour, interposed Will. for God's
sake—O Lord, O Lord!—receiving a good cuff.— 
Take that, varlet, for saving the ingrateful wretch
from my vengeance!— 
Wretch! I intended to say; but if it were some
other word of like ending, passion must be my
excuse. 
Up ran two or three of the sisterhood, What's the
matter! What's the matter! 
The matter! (for still my beloved opened not
her door; on the contrary, drew another bolt) This
abominable Dorcas! —(Call her aunt up! —Let her
see what a traitress she has placed about me! —And
let her bring the toad to answer for herself)—has
taken a bribe, a provision for life, to betray her trust; 
by that means to perpetuate a quarrel between a man
and his wife, and frustrate for ever all hopes of reconciliation
between us! 
Let me perish, Belford, if I have patience to proceed
with the farce! 
* *
Up came the aunt puffing and blowing! —As she
hoped for mercy, she was not privy to it! —She
never knew such a plotting perverse lady in her life! 
—Well might servants be at the pass they were, when
such ladies as Mrs. Lovelace made no conscience of
corrupting them. For her part, she desired no mercy 

for the wretch: No niece of hers, if she were not
faithful to her trust! —But what was the proof?— 
She was shewn the paper— 
But too evident! —Cursed, cursed Toad, Devil,
Jade, passed from each mouth: —And the vileness
of the corrupted, and the unworthiness of the corruptress,
were inveighed against. 
Up we all went, passing the lady's door into the
dining-room, to proceed to tryal— 
Stamp, stamp, stamp up, each on her heels; Rave,
rave, rave, every tongue!— 
Bring up the creature before us all, this instant!— 
And would she have got out of the house, say
you!— 
These the noises, and the speeches, as we clatter'd
by the door of the fair briberess.— 
Up was brought Dorcas (whimpering) between
two, both bawling out—You must go! You shall
go! —'Tis fit you should answer for yourself! — 
You are a discredit to all worthy servants!—as they
pulled and pushed her up stairs. —She whining, I
cannot see his honour! —I cannot look so good and
so generous a gentleman in the face! —O how shall
I bear my aunt's ravings!— 
Come up, and be d&wblank;n'd—Bring her forward,
her imperial judge! —What a plague, it is the detection,
not the crime, that confounds you. You
could be quiet enough for days together, as I see
by the date, under the villainy. Tell me, ingrateful
devil, tell me, who made the first advances. 
Ay, disgrace to my family and blood, cry'd the
old one! —Tell his Honour! Tell the truth;—Who
made the first advances!— 
Ay, cursed creature, cry'd Sally, Who made the
first advances? 
I have betrayed one trust already! —O let me not
betray another! —My lady is a good lady! —O let
not her suffer!— 
Tell all you know. Tell the whole truth, Dorcas, 

cry'd Polly Horton—His Honour loves his lady too
well, to make her suffer much; little as she requites
his love!— 
Every-body sees that, cry'd Sally—Too well
indeed, for his Honour, I was going to say. 
Till now, I thought she deserved my love! But
to bribe a servant thus, whom she supposed had orders
to watch her steps, for fear of another elopement; 
and to impute that precaution to me as a crime! — 
Yet I must love her! —Ladies, forgive my weakness!— 
Curse upon my grimaces! —If I have patience to
repeat them! —But thou shalt have them all—Thou
canst not despise me more than I despise myself!— 
* *
But suppose, Sir, said Sally, you have my lady
and the wench face to face? You see she cares not
to confess. 
O my carelessness! cry'd Dorcas—Don't let my
poor lady suffer! —Indeed if you all knew what I
know, you would say, Her ladyship has been cruelly
treated— 
See! —See! —See! —See!—repeatedly, every one
at once—Only sorry for the detection, as your Honour
said—Not the fault— 
Cursed creature, and devilish creature, from every
mouth. 
Your lady won't, she dare not come out to save
you, cry'd Sally, tho' it is more his Honour's mercy,
than your desert, if he does not cut your vile throat,
this instant. 
Say, repeated Polly, was it your lady, that made
the first advances, or was it you, you creature?— 
If the lady has so much honour, bawl'd the mother,
excuse me, So—Excuse me, Sir—[Confound
the old wretch! she had like to have said Son!] — 
If the lady has so much honour, as we have supposed,
she will appear to vindicate a poor servant,
misled, as she has been, by such large promises! — 

But I hope, Sir, you will do them both justice: I
hope you will! —Good lack! Good lack! clapping
her hands together, to grant her every thing she
could ask: To indulge her in her unworthy hatred
to my poor innocent house! To let her go to
Hamstead, tho' your Honour told us, you could get
no condescension from her; no, not the least! — 
O Sir—O Sir—I hope—I hope—If your
lady will not come out—I hope, you will find a way
to hear this cause in her presence. I value not my
doors, on such an occasion as this. Justice I ever
loved. I desire you will come at the bottom of it,
in clearance to me! —I'll be sworn I had no privity
in this black corruption. 
Just then, we heard the lady's door unbar, unlock,
unbolt— 
Now, Sir! 
Now, Mr. Lovelace. 
Now, Sir! from every encouraging mouth!— 
But, O Jack! Jack! Jack! I can write no more! 
* *
If you must have it all, you must! 
Now, Belford, see us all sitting in judgment, resolved
to punish the fair briberess—I, and the mother,
the hitherto dreaded mother, the nieces Sally, Polly,
the traitress Dorcas, and Mabell, a guard, as it were,
over her, that she might not run away, and hide
herself: —All pre-determined, and of necessity pre-determined,
from the journey I was going to take, and
my precarious situation with her: —And hear her
unbolt, unlock, unbar, the door; then, as it proved
afterwards, put the key into the lock on the outside,
lock the door, and put it in her pocket; Will. I
knew, below, who would give me notice, if, while
we were all above, she should mistake her way, and
go down stairs, instead of coming into the dining-room; 
the street-doors also doubly secured, and every 

shutter to the windows round the house fastened,
that no noise or screaming should be heard [Such
was the brutal preparation]—And then hear her step
towards us, and instantly see her enter among us,
confiding in her own innocence; and with a majesty
in her person and manner, that is natural to her; 
but which then shone out in all its glory! —Every
tongue silent, every eye awed, every heart quaking,
mine, in a particular manner, sunk, throbless, and
twice below its usual region, to once at my throat: 
—A shameful recreant! —She silent too, looking
round her, first on me; then on the mother, as no
longer fearing her; then on Sally, Polly; and the
culprit Dorcas! —Such the glorious power of innocence
exerted at that awful moment! 
She would have spoken, but could not, looking
down my guilt into confusion: A mouse might have
been heard passing over the floor, her own light feet
and rustling silks could not have prevented it; for
she seemed to tread air, and to be all soul–––She
passed to the door, and back towards me, two or
three times, before speech could get the better of
indignation, and at last, after twice or thrice hemming,
to recover her articulate voice–––O thou contemptible
and abandoned Lovelace, thinkest thou
that I see not thro' this poor villainous plot of
thine, and of these thy wicked accomplices? 
Thou woman, looking at the mother, once my
terror! always my dislike! but now my detestation!
shouldest once more (for thine perhaps was the preparation)
have provided for me intoxicating potions,
to rob me of my senses––– 
And then, turning to me, Thou, wretch, mightest
more securely have depended upon such a low contrivance
as this!––– 
And ye, vile women, who perhaps have been the
ruin, body and soul, of hundreds of innocents (you
shew me how, in full assembly), know, that I am 

not married,–––ruined as I am, by your helps, I bless
God, I am not married, to this miscreant–––And I
have friends that will demand my honour at your
hands! –––And to whose authority I will apply; for
none has this man over me. Look to it then, what
further insults you offer me, or incite him to offer
me. I am a person, tho' thus vilely betrayed, of
rank and fortune. I never will be his; and, to your
utter ruin, will find friends to pursue you: And
now I have this full proof of your detestable wickedness,
and have heard your base incitements, will
have no mercy upon you!––– 
They could not laugh at the poor figure I made. 
–––Lord! how every devil, conscience-shaken, trembled!––– 
What a dejection must ever fall to the lot of guilt,
were it given to innocence always thus to exert
itself!––– 
And as for thee, thou vile Dorcas! –––Thou double
deceiver!–––whining out thy pretended love for
me! –––Begone, wretch! –––Nobody will hurt thee! 
–––Begone, I say! –––Thou hast too well acted thy
part to be blamed by any here but myself–––Thou
art safe: Thy guilt is thy security in such a house as
this! –––Thy shameful, thy poor part, thou hast as
well acted, as the low farce could give thee to act! 
–––As well as they each of them (thy superiors, tho'
not thy betters), thou seest, can act theirs. –––Steal
away into darkness! No inquiry after this will be
made, whose the first advances, thine or mine. 
And, as I hope to live, the wench, confoundedly
frightened, slunk away; so did her centinel Mabell; 
tho' I, endeavouring to rally, cried out for Dorcas
to stay: But I believe the devil could not have stopt
her, when an angel bid her begone. 
Madam, said I, let me tell you; and was advancing
towards her, with a fierce aspect, most cursedly
vexed and ashamed too––– 

But she turned to me; Stop where thou art, O
vilest and most abandoned of men! –––Stop where
thou art! –––Nor, with that determined face, offer to
touch me, if thou wouldest not that I should be a
corpse at thy feet! 
To my astonishment, she held forth a penknife in
her hand, the point to her own bosom, grasping resolutely
the whole handle, so, that there was no offering
to take it from her. 
I offer not mischief to any-body but myself. You,
Sir, and ye women, are safe from every violence of
mine. The Law shall be all my resource: The
LAW, and she spoke the word with emphasis, that
to such people carries natural terror with it, and now
struck a panic into them. 
No wonder, since those who will damn themselves
to procure ease and plenty in this world, will tremble
at every thing that seems to threaten their methods
of obtaining that ease and plenty.––– 
The LAW only shall be my refuge!––– 
The infamous mother whispered me, that it were
better to make terms with this strange lady, and let
her go. 
Sally, notwithstanding all her impudent bravery at
other times, said, If Mr. Lovelace had told them
what was not true of her being his wife––– 
And Polly Horton: That she must needs say, the
lady, if she were not my wife, had been very much
injured; that was all. 
That is not now a matter to be disputed, cried I: 
You and I know. Madam––– 
We do so, said she; and I thank God, I am not
thine: –––Once more, I thank God for it! I have no
doubt of the further baseness that thou hadst intended
me, by this vile and low trick: But I have my
Senses, Lovelace: And from my heart I despise
thee, thou very poor Lovelace! How canst thou
stand in my presence! –––Thou, that––– 

Madam, Madam, Madam—These are insults
not to be borne–––And was approaching her. She
withdrew to the door, and set her back against it,
holding the pointed knife to her heaving bosom; 
while the women held me, beseeching me not to
provoke the violent lady—For their house sake,
and be curs'd to them, they besought me–––and all
three hung upon me–––While the truly heroic lady
braved me, at that distance: 
Approach me, Lovelace, with resentment, if thou
wilt. I dare die. It is in defence of my honour. 
God will be merciful to my poor soul! –––I expect
no mercy from thee! I have gained this distance,
and two steps nearer me, and thou shalt see what I
dare do!––– 
Leave me, women, to myself, and to my angel! 
–––They retired at a distance–––O my beloved creature,
how you terrify me! –––Holding out my arms,
and kneeling on one knee–––Not a step, not a step
further, except to receive the death myself at that
injured hand that threatens its own. —I am a villain!
the blackest of villains! –––Say you will sheath your
knife in the injurer's, not the injured's, heart; and
then will I indeed approach you, but not else. 
The mother twang'd her damn'd nose; and Sally
and Polly pulled out their handkerchiefs, and turned
from us. They never in their lives, they told me
afterwards, beheld such a scene— 
Innocence so triumphant: Villainy so debased,
they must mean! 
Unawares to myself, I had moved onward to my
angel–––And dost thou, dost thou, still disclaiming,
still advancing–––Dost thou, dost thou, still insidiously
move towards me; and her hand was extended
–––I dare–––I dare–––Not rashly neither–––My heart
from principle abhors the act, which thou makest
necessary! –––God, in thy mercy! –––Lifting up her
eyes, and hands–––God, in thy mercy!––– 

I threw myself to the further end of the room. 
An ejaculation, a silent ejaculation, employing her
thoughts that moment; Polly says the whites of her
lovely eyes were only visible: And, in the instant that
she extended her hand, assuredly to strike the fatal
blow [How the very recital tumults me!], she cast
her eye towards me, and saw me at the utmost
distance the room would allow, and heard my broken
voice [My voice was utterly broken; nor knew
I what I said, or whether to the purpose or not]: 
And her charming cheeks, that were all in a glow
before, turned pale, as if terrified at her own purpose; 
and lifting up her eyes—Thank God! —Thank
God! said the angel—Deliver'd for the present; 
for the present deliver'd from myself. —Keep, Sir,
keep that distance (looking down towards me, who
was prostrate on the floor, my heart pierced, as with
an hundred daggers!): That distance has saved a life; 
to what reserved, the Almighty only knows!— 
To be happy, Madam; and to make happy! — 
And O let me but hope for your favour for to-morrow
—I will put off my journey till then—And may
God— 
Swear not, Sir! —With an awful and piercing
aspect—You have too-too often sworn! —God's
eye is upon us! —His more immediate eye; and
looked wildly. —But the women looked up to the
ceiling, and trembled, as if afraid of God's eye. 
And well they might; and I too, who so very lately
had each of us the devil in our hearts. 
If not to-morrow, Madam, say but next Thursday,
your uncle's birth-day; say but next Thursday!— 
This I say, of This you may assure yourself, I
never, never will be yours. —And let me hope, that
I may be intitled to the performance of your promise,
to permit me to leave this innocent house, as one called 

it (but long have my ears been accustomed to such
inversions of words), as soon as the day breaks. 
Did my perdition depend upon it, that you cannot,
Madam, but upon terms. And I hope you will not
terrify me—Still dreading the accursed knife. 
Nothing less than an attempt upon my honour
shall make me desperate. —I have no view, but to defend
my honour: With such a view only I entered
into treaty with your infamous agent below. The
resolution you have seen, I trust, God will give me
again upon the same occasion. But for a less, I wish
not for it. Only take notice, women, that I am no
wife of this man: Basely as he has used me, I am not
his wife. He has no authority over me. If he go
away by-and-by, and you act by his authority to
detain me, look to it. 
Then, taking one of the lights, she turned from
us; and away she went, unmolested. –––Not a soul
was able to molest her. 
Mabell saw her, tremblingly, and in a hurry,
take the key of her chamber-door out of her pocket,
and unlock it; and, as soon as she entered, heard
her, double lock, bar, and bolt it. 
By her taking out her key, when she came out of
her chamber to us, she no doubt suspected my design: 
Which was, to have carried her in my arms
thither, if she made such force necessary, after I had
intimidated her, and to have been her companion for
that night. 
She was to have had several bedchamber-women
to assist to undress her upon occasion: But, from the
moment she entered the dining-room with so much
intrepidity, it was absolutely impossible to think of
prosecuting my villainous designs against her. 
* *
This, This, Belford, was the hand I made of a 

contrivance I expected so much from! –––And now
am I ten times worse off than before! 
Thou never sawest people in thy life look so like
fools upon one another, as the mother, her partners,
and I, did for a few minutes. And at last, the two
devilish nymphs broke out into insulting ridicule upon
me; while the old wretch was concerned for her
house, the reputation of her house. I cursed them
all together; and, retiring to my chamber, locked
myself in. 
And now it is time to set out: All I have gained,
detection, disgrace, fresh guilt by repeated perjuries,
and to be despised by her I doat upon; and, what is
still worse to a proud heart, by myself. 
Success, success in projects, is every thing. What
an admirable fellow did I think myself till now! 
Even for this scheme among the rest! But how
pitifully foolish does it appear to me now! — 
Scratch out, erase, never to be read, every part of
my preceding letters, where I have boastingly mentioned
it. —And never presume to railly me upon the
cursed subject: For I cannot bear it. 
But for the lady, by my soul I love her, I admire
her, more than ever! —I must have her. I will have
her still. –––With honour, or without, as I have often
vowed. –––My cursed fright at her accidental bloody
nose, so lately, put her upon improving upon me
thus: Had she threatened ME, I should soon have
been mistress of one arm, and in both! –––But for
so sincere a virtue to threaten herself, and not offer
to intimidate any other, and with so much presence
of mind, as to distinguish, in the very passionate intention,
the necessity of the act in defence of her
honour, and so fairly to disavow lesser occasions; 
shewed such a deliberation, such a choice, such a
principle; and then keeping me so watchfull at a
distance, that I could not seize her hand, so soon
as she could have given the fatal blow; how impossible 

not to be subdued by so true and so discreet
a magnanimity! 
But she is not gone; shall not go. I will press
her with letters for the Thursday—She shall yet be
mine, legally mine. For, as to cohabitation, there
is now no such thing to be thought of. 
The Captain shall give her away, as proxy for her
uncle. My Lord will die. My fortune will help my
will, and set me above every-thing and every-body. 
But here is the curse: —She despises me, Jack! — 
What man, as I have heretofore said, can bear to be
despised—especially by his wife? —O Lord! O Lord!
What a hand, what a cursed hand, have I made of
this plot! —And here ends 
The history of the Lady and the Penknife!!! — 
The devil take the penknife! —It goes against me to
say, God bless the Lady. 
Near 5, Sat. Morn. 