


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Grandison-hall, Thursday, Jan. 25. 
Mr. Lowther arrived here last night. Sir Charles
gave him a most welcome reception. He presented
him to all our guests, with expressions of the
warmest friendship; and then retired with him to his
Study. He soon led him back to company, and seating
him, drew a chair between my aunt and me— 
You must have curiosity, my dearest Love, said he. 

Behold the sister-excellence of Lady Clementina,
Mr. Lowther! Not a person of her family is more
concerned for the happiness of that Lady, than this
dearest and most generous of women. Every one of
my friends present (looking round him) is an admirer
of her—We cannot my dear (applying to me) know
for certainty, the destiny of that excellent Lady from
Mr. Lowther. He passed a week at Lyons, a fortnight
at Paris, on his return to England. But my
Jeronymo is in a fine way, thank God, and resolves
to visit us in the spring. 
I hope, Sir, said my aunt, to Mr. Lowther, you
lest Lady Clementina well and happy in her mind. 
She was at Florence, answered he, when I left
Italy. She has been pretty much indisposed there. 
The General, the Bishop, and Father Marescotti, had
been with her. She was expected at Bologna very
soon. By this time I have no doubt, she is Countess
of Belvedere. 
By her own consent, I hope then, Mr. Lowther?
said I eagerly. 
He shook his head—As to that, said he, she has
the most indulgent of parents— 
They cannot be so, Mr. Lowther, if they would
compel her to marry any man to whom she has an indifference. 
They will not compel her, madam— 
Persuasion, Sir, in the circumstances this excellent
Lady is in, is compulsion. 
I think it may be justly called so, said Sir Charles. 
Mr. Lowther, they should not have been so precipitating. 
So you have always told them, Sir Charles. Signor
Jeronymo is entirely of your opinion: Yet is earnest
in the Count of Belvedere's favour. The Count
adores her. 
Adores her, Sir! said I. Adores himself! for so it
should be said (pardon me, Sir!) of a man who prefers 

not the happiness of the object beloved, to his
own. I felt my face glow. 
Generous warmth! said Sir Charles—laying his
hand on mine. 
For my part, replied Mr. Lowther, I am only
afraid of the return of her malady. If it do not return,
and she can be prevailed on, her piety will reconcile
her to a duty— 
A duty, Mr. Lowther, interrupted I—So imposed! 
—A duty!— 
I knew not what I said. I thought, at that instant,
I did not like Mr. Lowther. 
My uncle, aunt, and the rest of us, thought Sir
Charles and Mr. Lowther would be glad to be left
alone; and retired early. 
My aunt, my Lucy, and I, had a good deal of
discourse upon this interesting subject; Emily present. 
We all foresaw, that the situation of this admirable
Lady would overcloud a little (we hoped but a little)
the happiest days that ever mortals knew. The sincere
value, said my aunt, that you have for so deserving
a woman, and your native generosity, will
be your security for happiness, my dear; and will fix
on a durable base your mutual Love: But this Lady's
trials will, however, be trials to you. God give her
peace of mind! it is all we can hope for in her favour; 
To you, the continuance of your present happiness:
greater, cannot fall to the lot of mortal. 
She lest me, I retired to my pen. 
* *
Thus far have I written. 'Tis late. Sir Charles
is coming up—And I am here at my pen. I will compliment
him with a place in my closet, while I retire. 
—Good-night, my dearest grandmamma. Pray for
your Harriet, and pray for Clementina. 
Friday morning. 
Sir Charles would have withdrawn to his Study, 

when he found me at my pen. I besought him to
sit down in my closet. 
Remove your papers then, my dear. 
No need, Sir. These (putting what I had been just
writing, and those I had written the day before, on
one side of my desk) I would not, Sir, except you have
a curiosity, wish you to see at present: These, Sir,
you may, if you please, amuse yourself with. 
I will take down one of your books, my Love. I
will not look into any of your written papers. 
Dear, generous Sir, look into them all—Look into
both parcels. Something about Lucy; something of
what Mr. Lowther has talked of, in that parcel— 
Read any of the written papers before you. 
A generous mind, my Love, will not take all that
is offered by a generous mind. Hasten, my Harriet:
It is late. My mind is a little disturbed: Yours, I
am afraid, is generously uneasy. In your faithful
bosom, will I repose all my cares. 
I pressed his hand between both mine, and would
have pressed it with my lips: But, kissing my hands,
first one, then the other—Condescending goodness!
said he. God continue to me my Harriet's Love,
and make Clementina not unhappy, and what can
befal me, that will not add thankfulness to thankfulness? 
With what soothing tenderness did he afterwards
open his generous heart to his Harriet! He was indeed
disturbed: For Mr. Lowther had told him, that
the General (I don't love him) was quite cruel—At
one time he threatened the excellent creature: He
called her ungenerous, ungrateful, undutiful! —She
fell down at his feet, in a fainting fit: He left her
in anger—Staid not to recover or sooth her—Yet returned
in about two hours (his conscience stinging him)
and on his knees besought her pardon—Received it— 
The dear saint forgave the soldierly man—Yet he
persisted, and turn'd his threatenings into worse, if
possible, than threatenings, into persuasion. 

If I have an enemy, said the dear creature to her
brothers, who has conceived a mortal antipathy to
me, let him insinuate himself into the favour of those
most dear to me, and prevail upon them to attack
me with all the powers of persuading Love, in order
to induce me to do the thing, whatever it be, most
contrary to my heart: And then will the instigator
wreak upon me his whole vengeance, and make me
think death itself an eligible refuge. 
Sir Charles sighed at repeating this. I wept. How
happy, thought I, more than once, are you, best of
men, in your own reflexions, that a woman so excellent,
who cannot be happy with any other man,
herself refused you, and persisted in her refusal; 
though you sought all ways, and used all arguments,
to bring her to a change of determination! What
otherwise would have been your regret! And how
unhappy should I have been in the consciousness of being
in her place; and of having dispossessed her of a
heart to which she had so much better pretensions! 
Now has he no room for remorse; but for friendly
pity only, and for wishes to relieve her afflicted heart. 
Of what a blessing is that man possessed, who, when
calamity assails him, can acquit himself, his intentions
at least; and say, “This I have not brought
upon myself: It is an inevitable evil: A dispensation
of Providence, I will call it, and submit to
it, as such!” 
Methinks, madam, I could spare this excellent
woman some of my happiness. Have I not more than
mortal ever knew before? 
Sir Charles mentioned to me, that Lady Olivia,
in her last Letter to him, intimated her desire to
come over once more to England: But he hoped
what he had written to dissuade her from it, would
have weight with her. I told him, I wished that
Lady the wife of some worthy man, whose gratitude
and affection she, by her great fortune, might engage. 

But, Sir, said I, I cannot, cannot wish (be
the Count of Belvedere ever so good a man) that Lady
Clementina were married. 
What would my Harriet wish for Lady Clementina,
circumstanced as she is? 
I don't know. But the woman who has loved Sir
Charles Grandison, with a heart so pure, can never
be happy with any other man. 
You are ever-obliging, my Love. You judge of
Clementina as she deserves to be judged of, as to the
purity of her heart. But—He stopt. 
But what, my dear Sir? —Alas! she says that you
have strengthened the hands of her friends: Am I
forgiven before I go any further? 
Not, my Harriet, if you think it necessary to ask
such a question. Blame me always, when you think
me wrong: I shall doubt your Love, if you give me
reason to question your freedom. 
Dear Sir! —But answer me: Would you have Clementina,
circumstanced as she is, marry? 
What answer can I return to my Harriet's question; 
when sometimes I am ready to favour the parents
pleas; at others, the daughter's? I would not have
her either compeiled, or over-earnestly persuaded. 
The family plead, “That their happiness, her health
and peace, depend on her marriage: They cannot
bear to think of rewarding Laurana for her cruelty,
with an estate that never was designed for her; 
and to the cutting it off, as it may happen, from
their Gracomo and his descendants for ever, in case
Clementina assumes the veil. The healths of the
father and mother are declining: They wish but to
live to see the alliance with the Count of Belvedere
take place. The noble Lady gave reasons that could be
answered. She had, by her own magnanimity, got
over a greater difficulty, if I may presume to say so,
than they had required her to struggle with; how
could I avoid advising her to yield to the supplications 

of parents, of brothers, of an uncle, who,
however mistaken in the means by which they
seek to obtain their wishes, love not their own
souls, better than they love their Clementina? 
“It was, besides, a measure by which only at the
time, I could demonstrate (and the General, I
know, considered it as a test) that I really gave up
all hopes of her myself. —And when I had owned,
that there was a woman, with whom I had no
doubt of being happy, could I engage her to accept
of me, they all besought me, for their sakes,
for Clementina's, to court that acceptance, having
hopes, that tho' she could not set me an example,
she would follow mine.” 
This, my dearest Life, was the occasion, as I told
your friends, of accelerating my declaration to you. 
I could not else, either for the sake of your delicacy
or my own, so soon have made proposals, not even
to Mrs. Shirley; for, situated as I was, I could not
think of applying to you till I had strengthened myself,
as I hoped to do, by her interest. Your generous
acceptance, signified to me by that good Lady, has
for ever obliged me. I regarded it, my Harriet, circumstanced
as I had been, and shall ever regard it,
as a condescension, which, as I told that Lady, at the
time, laid me under an obligation that I never, by
my utmost gratitude, shall be able to repay. 
O Sir, well have you shewn that you meant what
you said. How poor a return, hiding my face in his
generous bosom, is my Love for so much goodness,
and kind consideration! 
He clasped me to the faithfullest of human hearts. 
But, dear Sir, I find, I find, on the whole, that
you think Lady Clementina has not so much reason
on her side, as her parents have on theirs. 
My tenderness for her, my dear, because of her
unhappy malady, and my apprehension of a return
of it, together with my admiration of her noble 

qualities, prejudice me strongly in her favour. If she
could be convinced by their motives, I should be ready
to own my convictions in favour of these. But if she
cannot, neither can I; so partial am I in the cause
of a Lady I so sincerely admire, and who has been
so much afflicted. But what, in the situation they
and she were in, remained for me to do, but to advise
the family to proceed with tenderness and patience; 
that their Clementina might have time to
weigh, to consider, their reasons, their indulgence? 
You, my dear, shall see in the copies of the Letters
I have written since I have been in England, my
remonstrances to them on their precipitating her. But
they were in a train: They presumed on the characteristic
duty of their Clementina: They flattered
themselves, that sometimes she seemed to relent:
They conceived hopes from the expressions of compassion
for the Count of Belvedere, which sometimes
she let fall. The General, who, though a generous
man, can do nothing moderately, would not be satisfied
with cold measures, as he called them; and, not
doubting his sister's acquiescence with her duty, if
once she could be prevailed upon to think her compliance
such, they were resolved to pursue the train
they were in: But in order to avoid their importunities,
how has the dear Clementina shifted the scene
from Bologna to Florence, from Florence to Bologna,
and once, for that purpose, wanted to go to
Urbino, once to Naples, and even, as you have seen,
to come to England! —But now, by this time, most
probably, they have succeeded. God give happiness
to the dear Clementina! 
Most cordially did I join in the prayer. 
The next Letters from Italy must acquaint us with
the unwished-for success of the family; and the poor
Lady's thraldom. Can, my dear grandmamma, the
Count of Belvedere really be a good, a generous
man, to solicit the favour of a hand, that he knows 

will not be accompanied by a heart? Can the man
be said to know what true Love is, who prefers not
the happiness of the beloved object to his own; who
can, in short, think he can be happy, tho' the person
he professes to love, shall be unhappy? 
Thank God, this dreadful Lot has not been drawn
by 
Your Harriet Grandison. 
I am glad, my dear Lady G. that you are returned
to Grosvenor-square. Be easy, be patient,
my Charlotte. We shall have, I hope, many
happy days together at Grandison-hall, at Grosvenor-square; 
at every place where we shall be. 
You are a dear fretful creature! —But not half
so petulant, I hope, in behaviour, as on paper to
me. Let us think of nothing grievous, my
Charlotte; but of the unhappy situation of poor
Lady Clementina: And let us join to pray for
her happiness. 

