


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Tuesday, Mar. 28. 
Let me now give you a brief account of what
we are doing here. Sir Charles so much rejoiced
the heart of Lord G. who waited on him the
moment he knew he was in town, that he could not
defer his attendance on Miss Grandison, till she left
Colnebrooke; and got hither by our breakfast-time,
this morning. 
He met with a very kind reception from Lord and
Lady L. and a civil one from Miss Grandison; but
she is already beginning to play her tricks with him. 

O Lucy, where is the sense of parading it with a
worthy man, of whose affection we have no reason to
doubt, and whose visits we allow? 
Silly men in Love, or pretending to be in Love,
generally say hyperbolical things, all, in short, that
could be said to a creature of superior order (to an
angel), because they know not how to say polite,
proper, or sensible things. In like manner, from the
same defects in understanding, some of us women act
as if we thought coyness and modesty the same thing; 
and others, as if they were sensible, that if they were
not insolent, they must drop into the arms of a Lover
upon his first question. 
But Miss Grandison, in her behaviour to Lord G.
is governed by motives of archness, and, I may say,
downright roguery of temper. Courtship is play to
her. She has a talent for raillery, and in no instance
is so successful, yet so improper, as on that subject. 
She could not spare her brother upon it, tho' she suffered
by it. 
Yet had she a respect for Lord G. she could not
treat him ludicrously. Cannot a witty woman find
her own consequence, but by putting a fool's coat on
the back of a friend? —Sterling wit, I imagine, requires
not a foil to set it off. 
She is indeed good-natured; and this is all Lord G.
has to depend upon—Saving a little reliance that he
may make upon the influence her brother has over
her. I told her, just now, that were I Lord G. I
would not wish to have her mine, on any consideration. 
She called me silly creature, and asked me, If
it were not one of the truest signs of Love, when men
were most fond of the women who were least fit for
them, and used them worst? These men, my dear,
said she, are very sorry creatures, and know no medium. 
They will either, spaniel-like, fawn at your
feet, or be ready to leap into your lap. 
She has charming spirits: I wish I could borrow 

some of them. But I tell her, that I would not have
a single drachm of those over-lively ones which I see
she will play off upon Lord G. Yet he will be pleased,
at present, with any treatment from her; tho' he
wants not feeling, as I can see already—Don't, Charlotte,
said I to her, within this half-hour, let him find
his own weight in your levity. He admires your wit; 
but don't let it wound him. 
But perhaps she is the sprightlier, in order to give
me, and Lord and Lady L. spirits. They are very
good to me, and greatly apprehensive of the story,
which takes up, in a manner, my whole attention:
So is Miss Grandison: And my sweet Emily, as often
as she may, comes up to me when I am alone, and
hangs upon my arm, my shoulder, and watches, with
looks of Love, every turn of my eyes. 
I have opened my whole heart to her, for the better
guarding of hers; and this history of Clementina
affords an excellent lesson for the good girl. She
blesses me for the lectures I read her on this subject,
and says, that she sees Love is a very subtile thing, and,
like water, will work its way into the banks that are
set up to confine it, if it be not watched, and dammed
out in time. 
She pities Clementina; and prettily asked my leave
to do so. I think, said she, my heart loves her; but
not so well as it does you. I long to know what my
guardian will do about her. How good is it in her
father and mother to love her so dearly! Her two
elder brothers one cannot dislike; but Jeronymo is
my favourite. He is a man worth saving; i'n't he,
madam? But I pity her father and mother, as well as
Clementina. 
Charming young creature! What an excellent
heart she has! 
Sir Charles is to dine with Sir Hargrave and his
friends to-morrow, on the forest, in his way to Grandison-hall. 
The doctor says, he expects to hear from 

him, when there. What! will he go by this house,
and not call in? —With all my heart—We are only
sisters! Miss Grandison says, she'll be hanged (that is
her word) if he is not afraid of me. Afraid of me! 
A sign, if he is, he knows not what a poor forward
creature I am. But as he seems to be pre engaged— 
Well, but I shall soon know every-thing, as to that. 
But sure he might call in, as he went by. 
The doctor says, he longs to know how he approves
of the decorations of his church, and of the
alterations that are made and making, by his direction,
at the Hall. It is a wonder, methinks, that he takes
not Dr. Bartlett with him: Upon my word, I think
he is a little unaccountable, such sisters as he has. 
Should you like it, Lucy, were he your brother? I
really think his sisters are too acquiescent. 
He has a great taste, the doctor tells us, yet not an
expensive one; for he studies situation and convenience; 
and pretends not to level hills, or to force and
distort nature; but to help it, as he finds it, without
letting art be seen in his works, where he can possibly
avoid it. For he says, He would rather let a stranger
be pleased with what he sees, as if it were always so; 
than to obtain comparative praise by informing him
what it was in its former situation. 
As he is to be a suitor for Lord W. before he returns,
he will not, perhaps, be with us, while I am
here. He may court for others: He has had very
little trouble of that sort for himself, I find. 
A very disturbing thought is just come into my
head: Sir Charles being himself in suspense, as to the
catastrophe of this knotty affair; did not intend to let
us know it till all was over—As sure as you are alive,
Lucy, he had seen my regard for him thro' the thin
veil that covered it; and began to be apprehensive
(generously apprehensive) for the heart of the poor
fool; and so has suffered Dr. Bartlett to transcribe
the particulars of the story, that they may serve for a
check to the over-forward passion of your Harriet. 

This thought excites my pride; and that my contempt
of myself: Near borderers, Lucy! What a
little creature does it make me, in my own eyes! —O
Dr. Bartlett, your kindly-intended transcripts shall
cure me: Indeed they shall. 
But now this subject is got uppermost again. What,
Lucy, can I do with it? 
Miss Grandison says, that I shall be with her every
day when I go to town: I can have no exception, she
says, when her brother is absent—Nor when he is
present, I begin now to think. 
Lord help me, my dear; I must be so very careful
of my punctilio! —No, thought I, in the true spirit
of prudery, I will not go to Sir Charles's house for
the world: And why? Because he is a single man; 
and because I think of something—that he perhaps has
no notion of. But now I may go and visit his sister
without scruple, may I not? For he perhaps thinks
only of his Clementina—And is not this a charming
difficulty got over, Lucy? —But, as I said, I will
soon be with you. 
I told Miss Grandison that I would, just now— 
Lovers, said she, are the weakest people in the world; 
and people of punctilio the most un punctilious—You
have not talked till now of going in such an hurry. 
Would you have it thought that you stayed in town
for a particular reason? and, when that ceased, valued
nobody else? She held up her finger—Consider!
said she! 
There is something in this, Lucy. Yet what can I
do? 
But Dr. Bartlett says, he shall soon give me another
Letter. 
Farewel, my Dear. 

