



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

My Mother, on her return, which was as soon
as she had dined, was pleased to inform me,
that she told my Father, on his questioning her about
my chearful compliance (for it seems, the chearful
was all that was doubted) that she was willing, on so
material a point, to give a child whom she had so
much reason to love (as she condescended to acknowlege
were her words) liberty to say all that was in her
heart to say, that her compliance might be the freer: 
Letting him know, that when he came up, she was
attending to my pleas; for that she found I had rather
not marry at all. 
She told me, that to this my Father angrily said,
Let her take care—Let her take care—that she give
me not ground to suspect her of a preference somewhere
else. But, if it be to ease her heart, and not
to dispute my will, you may hear her out. 
So, Clary, said my Mother, I am returned in a
temper accordingly: And I hope you will not again,
by your peremptoriness, shew me, how I ought to
treat you. 
Indeed, Madam, you did me justice, to say, I have
no inclination to marry at all. I have not, I hope,
made myself so very unuseful in my Papa's family, as— 
No more of your merits, Clary! You have been
a good child. You have eased me of all the family-cares: 
But do not now give more than ever you relieved
me from. You have been amply repaid in
the reputation your skill and management have given
you: But now there is soon to be a period to all 

those assistances from you. If you marry, there will
be a natural, and, if to please us, a desirable period; 
because your own family will employ all your talents
in that way: If you do not, there will be a period
likewise, but not a natural one—You understand me,
child. 
I wept. 
I have made enquiry already after a housekeeper. 
I would have had your good Norton; but I suppose
you will yourself wish to have the worthy woman
with you. If you desire it, that shall be agreed upon
for you. 
But, why, dearest Madam, why am I, the youngest,
to be precipitated into a State, that I am very far
from wishing to enter into with any-body? 
You are going to question me, I suppose, why
your Sister is not thought of for Mr. Solmes? 
I hope, Madam, it will not displease you, if I
were? 
I might refer you for an answer to your Father. — 
Mr. Solmes has reasons for preferring you— 
And I have reasons, Madam, for disliking him. 
And why am I— 
This quickness upon me, interrupted my Mother,
is not to be borne! I am gone, and your Father
comes, if I can do no good with you. 
O Madam, I would rather die, than— 
She put her hand to my mouth. —No peremptoriness,
Clary Harlowe: Once you declare yourself inflexible,
I have done. 
I wept for vexation. This is all, all, my Brother's
doings—His grasping views— 
No reflections upon your Brother: He has entirely
the honour of the family at heart. 
I would no more dishonour my family, Madam,
than my Brother would. 
I believe it: But I hope you will allow your Father,
and Me, and your Uncles, to judge what will
do it honour, what dishonour. 

I then offered to live single; never to marry at all; 
or never but with their full approbation. 
If you mean to shew your duty, and your obedience,
Clary, you must shew it in our way, not in
your own. 
I hope, Madam, that I have not so behaved hitherto,
as to render such a trial of my obedience necessary. 
Yes, Clary, I cannot but say that you have hitherto
behaved extremely well: But you have had no trials
till now: And I hope, that now you are called to one,
you will not fail in it. Parents, proceeded she, when
children are young, are pleased with every-thing they
do. You have been a good child upon the whole: 
But we have hitherto rather complied with you, than
you with us. Now that you are grown up to marriageable
years, is the test; especially as your Grandfather
has made you independent, as we may say, in
preference to those who had prior expectations upon
that Estate. 
Madam, my Grandfather knew, and expresly mentions
in his Will his desire, that my Father will more
than make it up to my Sister. I did nothing but what
I thought my duty to procure his favour. It was rather
a mark of his affection, than any advantage to
me: For, do I either seek or wish to be independent? 
Were I to be Queen of the Universe, that dignity
should not absolve me from my Duty to You and to
my Father. I would kneel for your blessings, were
it in the presence of millions—So that— 
I am loth to interrupt you, Clary; tho' you could
more than once break in upon me. You are young
and unbroken: But, with all this ostentation of your
duty, I desire you to shew a little more deference to
me when I am speaking. 
I beg your pardon, dear Madam, and your patience
with me on such an occasion as this. If I did not speak
with earnestness upon it, I should be supposed to have 

only maidenly objections against a man I never can
endure. 
Clary Harlowe!— 
Dearest, dearest Madam, permit me to speak what
I have to say, this once—It is hard, it is very hard,
to be forbidden to enter into the cause of all these
misunderstandings, because I must not speak disrespectfully
of one who supposes me in the way of his
ambition, and treats me like a slave— 
Whither, whither, Clary— 
My dearest Mamma! —My duty will not permit
me so far to suppose my Father arbitrary, as to make
a plea of that arbitrariness to you— 
How now, Clary!—O girl!— 
Your patience, my dearest Mamma: —You were
pleased to say, you would hear me with patience. — 
Person in a man is nothing, because I am supposed
to be prudent: So my eye is to be disgusted, and my
reason not convinced— 
Girl, girl! 
Thus are my imputed good qualities to be made my
punishment; and I am to be wedded to a monster— 
[Astonishing! —Can this, Clarissa, be from you? 
The man, Madam, person and mind, is a monster
in my eye.] —And that I may be induced to bear this
treatment, I am to be complimented with being indifferent
to all men: Yet, at other times, and to serve
other purposes, be thought prepossessed in favour of a
man against whose moral character lie just objections. 
—Confined, as if, like the giddiest of creatures, I
would run away with this man, and disgrace my whole
family! —O my dearest Mamma! who can be patient
under such treatment? 
Now, Clary, I suppose you will allow me to speak. 
I think I have had patience indeed with you. —Could I
have thought—But I will put all upon a short issue. 
Your Mother, Clarissa, shall shew you an example of
that patience you so boldly claim from her, without
having any yourself. 

O my dear, how my Mother's condescension distressed
me at the time! —Infinitely more distressed me,
than rigour could have done. But she knew, she was
to be sure aware, that she was put upon a harsh, upon
an unreasonable service, let me say, or she would not,
she could not, have had so much patience with me. 
Let me tell you then, proceeded she, that all lies in
a small compass, as your Father said. —You have
been hitherto, as you are pretty ready to plead, a dutiful
child. You have indeed had no cause to be
otherwise. No child was ever more favoured. Whether
you will discredit all your past behaviour; whether,
at a time and upon an occasion, that the highest
instance of duty is expected from you (an instance
that is to crown all); and when you declare that your
heart is free—you will give that instance; or whether,
having a view to the independence you may claim (for
so, Clary, whatever be your motive, it will be judged)
and which any man you favour, can assert for you
against us all; or rather for himself in spite of us— 
Whether, I say, you will break with us all; and stand
in defiance of a jealous Father, needlesly jealous, I
will venture to say, of the prerogatives of his Sex, as
to me, and still ten times more jealous of the authority
of a Father;—This is now the point with us. 
You know your Father has made it a point; and did
he ever give up one he thought he had a right to
carry? 
Too true, thought I to myself! And now my Brother
has engaged my Father, his fine scheme will walk
alone, without needing his leading-strings; and it is
become my Father's will that I oppose; not my Brother's
grasping views. 
I was silent. To say the truth, I was just then
sullenly silent. My heart was too big. I thought it
was hard to be thus given up by my Mother; and
that she should make a will so uncontroulable as my
Brother's, her will. —My Mother, my dear, tho' I 

must not say so, was not obliged to marry against her
liking. My Mother loved my Father. 
My silence availed me still less. 
I see, my dear, said she, that you are convinced. 
Now, my good child, Now, my Clary, do I love you! 
It shall not be known, that you have argued with me
at all. All shall be imputed to that modesty which
has ever so much distinguished you. You shall have
the full merit of your resignation. 
I wept. 
She tenderly wiped the tears from my eyes, and
kissed my cheek—Your Father expects you down with
a chearful countenance—But I will excuse your going. 
All your scruples, you see, have met with an indulgence
truly maternal from me. I rejoice in the hope
that you are convinced. This indeed seems to be a
proof of the truth of your agreeable declaration, That
your heart is free. 
Did not this seem to border upon cruelty, my dear,
in so indulgent a Mother? —It would be wicked
[Would it not!] to suppose my Mother capable of Art
—But she is put upon it; and obliged to take methods
to which her heart is naturally above stooping; and all
intended for my good, because she sees that no arguing
will be admitted any-where else! 
I will go down, proceeded she, and excuse your
attendance at afternoon-tea, as I did to dinner: For I
know you will have some little reluctances to subdue. 
I will allow you those; and also some little natural
shynesses—And so you shall not come down, if you
chuse not to come down—Only, my dear, do not disgrace
my report when you come to supper. And be
sure behave as you used to do to your Brother and
Sister; for your behaviour to them will be one test of
your chearful obedience to us. I advise as a Friend,
you see, rather than command as a Mother—So adieu,
my Love. And again she kissed me; and was going. 
O my dear Mamma, said I, forgive me! —But surely 

you cannot believe, I can ever think of having that
man! 
She was very angry, and seemed to be greatly disappointed. 
She threatened to turn me over to my
Father and my Uncles: —She however bid me (generously
bid me) consider, what a handle I gave to my
Brother and Sister, if I thought they had views to serve
by making my Uncles dissatisfied with me. 
I, said she, in a milder accent, have early said all
that I thought could be said against the present proposal,
on a supposition, that you, who have refused
several others (whom I own to be preferable as to person)
would not approve of it; and could I have succeeded,
you, Clary, had never heard of it. But if I
could not, how can you expect to prevail? My great
ends, in the task I have undertaken, are the preservation
of the family-peace so likely to be overturned; to
reinstate you in the affections of your Father and Uncles; 
and to preserve you from a man of violence. — 
Your Father, you must needs think, will flame out,
upon your refusal to comply: Your Uncles are so
thoroughly convinced of the consistency of the measure
with their favourite views of aggrandizing the
family, that they are as much determined as your
Father—Your Aunt Hervey and your Uncle Hervey
are of the same party. And it is hard, if a Father
and Mother, and Uncles, and Aunt, all conjoined,
cannot be allowed to direct your choice—Surely, my
dear girl, proceeded she [for I was silent all this time]
it cannot be, that you are the more averse, because the
family views will be promoted by the match—This,
I assure you, is what every-body must think, if you
comply not. Nor, while the man so obnoxious to us
all, remains unmarried, and buzzes about you, will
the strongest asseverations you can make of your resolution
and wishes to live single, be in the least regarded. 
And well you know, that were Mr. Lovelace an angel,
and your Father had made it a point that you 

should not have him, it would be in vain to dispute
his will. As to the prohibition laid upon you (much
as I will own against my liking) that is owing to the
belief that you corresponded by Miss Howe's means
with that man; nor do I doubt that you did so. 
I answered to every article, in such a manner, as I
am sure would have satisfied her, could she have been
permitted to judge for herself; and I then inveighed
with bitterness against the disgraceful prohibitions laid
upon me. 
They would serve to shew me, she was pleased to
say, how much in earnest my Father was. They might
be taken off, whenever I thought fit, and no harm
done, nor disgrace received. But if I were to be
contumacious, I might thank myself for all that would
follow. 
I sighed. I wept. I was silent. 
Shall I, Clary, said she, shall I tell your Father
that these prohibitions are as unnecessary as I hoped
they would be? That you know your duty, and will
not offer to controvert his will? —What say you, my
Love? 
O Madam, what can I say to questions so indulgently
put? —I do indeed know my duty: No creature
in the world is more willing to practise it: But,
pardon me, dearest Madam, if I say, That I must bear
these prohibitions, if I am to pay so dear to have them
taken off. 
Determined and perverse, my dear Mamma called
me: And after walking twice or thrice in anger about
the room, she turned to me;—Your heart free, Clarissa! 
How can you tell me your heart is free? Such
extraordinary antipathies to a particular person must
be owing to extraordinary prepossessions in another's
favour! —Tell me, Clary; and tell me truly—Do
you not continue to correspond with Mr. Lovelace? 
Dearest Madam, replied I, you know my motives: 
To prevent mischief, I answered his Letters. 

The reasons for our apprehensions of this sort are not
over. 
I own to you, Clary (altho' now I would not have
it known) that I once thought a little qualifying among
such violent spirits was not amiss. I did not know
but all things would come round again by the mediation
of Lord M. and his two Sisters: But as they all
three think proper to resent for their Nephew; and
as their Nephew thinks fit to defy us all; and as terms
are offered on the other hand, that could not be asked,
which will very probably prevent your Grandfather's
Estate going out of the family, and may be a means
to bring a still greater into it; I see not, that the continuance
of your correspondence with him either can
or ought to be permitted. I therefore now forbid it
to you, as you value my favour. 
Be pleased, Madam, only to advise me how to
break it off with safety to my Brother and Uncles; 
and it is all I wish for. Would to Heaven, the man
so hated had not the pretence to make of having been
too violently treated, when he meant peace and reconciliation! 
It would always have been in my own power
to have broke with him. His reputed immoralities
would have given me a just pretence at any time to do
so—But, Madam, as my Uncles and my Brother will
keep no measures; as he has heard what the view is; 
and as I have reason to think, that he is only restrained
by his regard for me from resenting their violent treatment
of him and his family; what can I do? Would
you have me, Madam, make him desperate? 
The Law will protect us, child! Offended magistracy
will assert itself— 
But, Madam, may not some dreadful mischief first
happen? —The Law asserts not itself, till it is offended. 
You have made offers, Clary, if you might be
obliged in the point in question—Are you really in
earnest, were you to be complied with, to break off
all correspondence with Mr. Lovelace? —Let me
know this. 

Indeed, I am; and I will. You, Madam, shall see
all the Letters that have passed between us. You shall
see I have given him no encouragement independent of
my duty. And when you have seen them, you will be
better able to direct me how, on the condition I have
offered, to break entirely with him. 
I take you at your word, Clarissa—Give me his
Letters; and the Copies of yours. 
I am sure, Madam, you will keep the knowlege
that I write, and what I write— 
No conditions with your Mother—Surely my prudence
may be trusted to. 
I begged her pardon; and besought her to take the
key of the private drawer in my escritoire, where they
lay, that she herself might see, that I had no reserves
to my Mother. 
She did; and took all his Letters, and the Copies of
mine. —Unconditioned with, she was pleased to say,
they shall be yours again, unseen by any-body else. 
I thanked her; and she withdrew to read them; 
saying, She would return them, when she had. 
You, my dear, have seen all the Letters that passed
between Mr. Lovelace and me, till my last return from
you. You have acknowleged, that he has nothing to
boast of from them. Three others I have received
since, by the private conveyance I told you of: The
last I have not yet answered. 
In these three, as in those you have seen, after having
besought my favour, and, in the most earnest manner,
professed the ardour of his passion for me; and
set forth the indignities done him; the defiances my
Brother throws out against him in all companies; the
menaces, and hostile appearance of my Uncles where-ever
they go; and the methods they take to defame
him; he declares, ‘That neither his own honour, nor
the honour of his family (involved as that is in the
undistinguishing reflections cast upon him for an unhappy 

affair which he would have shunned, but could
not) permit him to bear these confirmed indignities: 
That as my inclinations, if not favourable to him,
cannot be, nor are, to such a man as the newly-introduced
Solmes, he is interested the more to resent
my Brother's behaviour; who to every-body avows
his rancour and malice; and glories in the probability
he has, thro' the address of this Solmes, of mortifying
me, and avenging himself on him: That it is
impossible, he should not think himself concerned to
frustrate a measure so directly levelled at him, had he
not a still higher motive for hoping to frustrate it: 
That I must forgive him, if he enter into conference
with Solmes upon it. He earnestly insists (upon
what he has so often proposed) That I will give him
leave, in company with Lord M. to wait upon my
Uncles, and even upon my Father—And he promises
patience, if new provocations, absolutely beneath a
man to bear, be not given:’ Which by the way I am
far from being able to engage for. 
In my Answer, I absolutely declare, as I tell him I
have often done, ‘That he is to expect no favour
from me against the approbation of my friends: 
That I am sure their consents for his visiting any of
them will never be obtained: That I will not be
either so undutiful, or so indiscreet, as to suffer my
interests to be separated from the interests of my
family, for any man upon earth: That I do not
think myself obliged to him for the forbearance I
desire one flaming spirit to have with others: That
in this desire I require nothing of him, but what
Prudence, Justice, and the Laws of his Country require: 
That if he has any expectations of favour
from me, on that account, he deceives himself: 
That I have no inclination, as I have often told
him, to change my condition: That I cannot allow
myself to correspond with him any longer in
this clandestine manner: It is mean, low, undutiful, 

I tell him; and has a giddy appearance, which
cannot be excused: That therefore he is not to expect
that I will continue it.’ 
To this, in his last, among other things, he replies,
‘That if I am actually determined to break off all
correspondence with him, he must conclude, that
it is with a view to become the Wise of a man whom
no woman of honour and fortune can think tolerable. 
And in that case, I must excuse him for saying,
that he shall neither be able to bear the thoughts
of losing for ever a person in whom all his present
and all his future hopes are centred; nor support
himself with patience under the insolent triumphs of
my Brother upon it. But that nevertheless he will
not threaten either his own life, or that of any other
man. He must take his resolutions as such a dreaded
event shall impel him, at the time. If he shall know
that it will have my consent, he must endeavour to
resign to his destiny: But if it be brought about by
compulsion, he shall not be able to answer for the
consequence.’ 
I will send you these Letters for your perusal in a
few days. I would inclose them; but that it is possible
something may happen, which may make my
Mother require to re peruse them. —When you see
them, you will observe how he endeavours to hold
me to this correspondence. 
* *
In about an hour my Mother returned. Take your
Letters, Clary: I have nothing, she was pleased to say,
to tax your discretion with, as to the wording of yours
to him: You have even kept up a proper dignity, as
well as observed all the rules of decorum; and you
have resented, as you ought to resent, his menacing
invectives. In a word, I see not, that he can form
the least expectations from what you have written,
that you will encourage the passion he avows for you. 
But does he not avow his passion? Have you the least 

doubt about what must be the issue of this correspondence,
if continued? And do you yourself think, when
you know the avowed hatred of one side, and the declared
defiances of the other, that this can be, that it
ought to be a match? 
By no means it can, Madam; you will be pleased
to observe, that I have said as much to him. But now,
Madam, that the whole correspondence is before you,
I beg your commands what to do in a situation so very
disagreeable. 
One thing I will tell you, Clary—But I charge
you, as you would not have me question the generosity
of your spirit, to take no advantage of it, either
mentally or verbally; that I am so much pleased with
the offer of your keys to me, made in so chearful and
unreserved a manner, and in the prudence you have
shewn in your Letters, that were it practicable to
bring every one, or your Father only, into my opinion,
I should readily leave all the rest to your discretion,
reserving only to myself the direction or approbation
of your future Letters; and to see, that you
broke off the correspondence so soon as possible. But
as it is not, and as I know your Father would have
no patience with you, should it be acknowleged that
you correspond with Mr. Lovelace, or that you have
corresponded with him since the time he prohibited
you so to do; I forbid you to continue such a liberty— 
Yet, as the case is difficult, let me ask you, What
you yourself can propose? Your heart, you say, is
free: You own, that you cannot think, as matters are
circumstanced, that a match with a man so obnoxious
as he now is to us all, is proper to be thought of: 
What do you propose to do? —What, Clary, are
your own thoughts of the matter? 
Without hesitation thus I answered—What I humbly
propose is this: —‘That I will write to Mr.
Lovelace (for I have not answered his last) that he
has nothing to do between my Father and Me: 

That I neither ask his advice, nor need it: But that
since he thinks he has some pretence for interfering,
because of my Brother's avowal of the interest of
Mr. Solmes in displeasure to him, I will assure him
(without giving him any reason to impute the assurance
to be in the least favourable to himself) that I
never will be that man's.’ And if, proceeded I, I
may be permitted to give him this assurance; and Mr.
Solmes, in consequence of it, be discouraged from
prosecuting his address; let Mr. Lovelace be satisfied
or dissatisfied, I will go no farther; nor write another
line to him; nor ever see him more, if I can avoid it: 
And I shall have a good excuse for it, without bringing
in any of my family. 
Ah! my Love! —But what shall we do about the
Terms Mr. Solmes offers? Those are the inducements
with every-body. He has even given hopes to your
Brother that he will make exchanges of Estates; or at
least, that he will purchase the Northern one; for
you know it must be entirely consistent with the family-views,
that we encrease our interest in this
County. Your Brother, in short, has given in a plan
that captivates us all: And a family so rich in all its
branches, and that has its views to honour, must be
pleased to see a very great probability of taking rank
one day among the principal in the kingdom. 
And for the sake of these views, for the sake of this
plan of my Brother's, am I, Madam, to be given in
Marriage to a man I never can endure! —O my dear
Mamma, save me, save me, if you can, from this
heavy evil! —I had rather be buried alive, indeed I had,
than have that man! 
She chid me for my vehemence; but was so good as
to tell me, That she would sound my Uncle Harlowe,
who was then below; and if he encouraged her (or
would engage to second her) she would venture to talk
to my Father herself; and I should hear further in the
morning. 

She went down to Tea, and kindly undertook to
excuse my attendance at supper. 
But is it not a sad thing, I repeat, to be obliged to
stand in opposition to the will of such a Mother? Why,
as I often say to myself, was such a man as this Solmes
fixed upon? The only man in the world, surely, that
could offer so much, and deserve so little! 
Little indeed does he deserve! —Why, my dear,
the man has the most indifferent of characters. Every
mouth is opened against him for his sordid ways—A
foolish man, to be so base-minded! —When the difference
between the obtaining of a fame for generosity,
and incurring the censure of being a miser, will not,
prudently managed, cost Fifty pounds a year. 
What a name have You got, at a less expence? 
And what an opportunity had he of obtaining credit
at a very small one, succeeding such a wretched creature
as Sir Oliver, in fortunes so vast? —Yet has he so
behaved, that the common phrase is applied to him,
That Sir Oliver will never be dead while Mr. Solmes
lives. 
The world, as I have often thought, ill-natured as
it is said to be, is generally more just in characters
(speaking by what it feels) than is usually apprehended: 
And those who complain most of its censoriousness,
perhaps should look inwardly for the occasion
oftener than they do. 
My heart is a little at ease, on the hopes that my
Mother will be able to procure favour for me, and a
deliverance from this man; and so I have leisure to
moralize. But if I had not, I should not forbear to
intermingle occasionally these sort of remarks, because
you command me never to omit them when they occur
to my mind: And not to be able to make them,
even in a more affecting situation, when one sits down
to write, would shew one's self more engaged to self,
and to one's own concerns, than attentive to the wishes
of a friend. If it be said, that it is natural so to be, 

what makes that nature, on occasions where a friend
may be obliged, or reminded of a piece of instruction,
which (writing down) one's self may be the better for,
but a fault; which it would set a person above nature
to subdue? 