


Mrs. Reeves, To Miss Byron. 


Tuesday, Sept. 5.
O My dear cousin! I am now sure you will be the
happiest of women! Sir Charles Grandison
made us a visit this very day. —How Mr. Reeves and
I rejoiced to see him! We had but just before been
called upon by a line from Lady G. to rejoice with
her on her brother's happy arrival. He said, he was
under obligation to go to Windsor and Hampshire,
upon extraordinary occasions; but he could not go,
till he had paid his respects to us, as well for our own
sakes, as to enquire after your health. He had received, 

he said, some disagreeable intimations in relation
to it. We told him, you were not well; but
we hoped not dangerously ill. He said so many kind,
tender, yet respectful things of you—O my Harriet! 
I am sure, and so is Mr. Reeves, he loves you dearly. 
Yet we both wondered that he did not talk of paying
you a visit. But he may have great matters in hand. — 
But what matters can be so great as not to be postponed,
if he loves you?—and that he certainly does. 
I should not have known how to contain my joy before
him, had he declared himself your Lover. 
He condescendingly asked to see my little boy— 
Was not that very good of him? He would have won
my heart by this condescension, had he not had a
great share of it before—For your sake, my cousin. 
You know I cannot mean otherwise: And you know,
that, except Mr. Reeves and my little boy, I love my
Harriet better than any-body in the world. No-body
in Northamptonshire, I am sure, will take exceptions
at this. 
I thought I would write to you of this kind visit. 
Be well, now, my dear: All things, I am sure, will
come about for good: God grant they may! —I dare
say, he will visit you in Northamptonshire: And if he
does, what can be his motive? Not mere friendship:
Sir Charles Grandison is no trifler! 
I know you will be sorry to hear that Lady Betty
Williams is in great affliction. Miss Williams has
run away with an ensign, who is not worth a shilling:
He is, on the contrary, over head and ears, as the saying
is, in debt. Such a mere girl! —But what shall
we say? 
Miss Cantillon has made as foolish a step. Lord
bless me! I think girls, in these days, are bewitched. 
A nominal captain too! Her mother vows, they shall
both starve, for her: And they have no other dependence. 
She can't live without her pleasures: Neither
can he without his. A Ranelagh sop. Poor wretches! 

What will become of them? For every-thing is in
her mother's power, as to fortune. —She has been met
by Miss Allestree; and looked so shy! so silly! so
slatternly! Unhappy coquettish thing! 
Well, but God bless you, my dear! —My nursery
calls upon me: The dear little soul is so fond of me! 
Adieu. Compliments to every-body I have so much
reason to love: Mr. Reeves's too. Once more,
Adieu. 
Eliza Reeves. 

