



Miss Howe, To Miss Arabella Harlowe. 

Sat. July 22. 
It may be the misfortune of some people to engage
every-body's notice: Others may be the happier,
tho' they may be the more envious, for nobody's
thinking them worthy of any. But one would 

be glad people had the sense to be thankful for that
want of consequence, which subjected them not to
hazards they would hardly have been able to manage
under. 
I own to you, that had it not been for the prudent
advice of that admirable Somebody (whose principal
fault is the superiority of her talents, and whose misfortune
to be brother'd and sister'd by a couple of
creatures, who are not able to comprehend her excellencies)
I might at one time have been plunged into
difficulties. But, pert as the superlatively pert may
think me, I thought not myself wiser, because I was
older; nor for that poor reason qualified to prescribe
to, much less to maltreat, a genius so superior. 
I repeat it with gratitude, that the dear creature's
advice was of very great service to me—And this
before my Mother's watchfulness became necessary. 
But how it would have fared with me, I cannot say,
had I had a Brother or Sister, who had deemed it
their interest, as well as a gratification of their sordid
envy, to misrepresent me. 
Your admirable Sister, in effect, saved you, Miss,
as well as me—With this difference—You, against
your will—Me, with mine: —And but for your own
Brother, and his own Sister, would not have been
lost herself. 
Would to Heaven both Sisters had been obliged
with their own wills! —The most admirable of her
Sex would never then have been out of her Father's
house! —You, Miss—I don't know what had become
of you. —But, let what would have happened, you
would have met with the humanity you have not
shewn, whether you had deserved it or not: —Nor,
at worst, lost either a kind Sister, or a pitying Friend,
in the most excellent of Sisters. 
But why run I into length to such a poor thing? 
—Why push I so weak an adversary; whose first
Letter is all low malice, and whose next is made up 

of falshood and inconsistence, as well as spite and ill-manners? 
Yet I was willing to give you a part of
my mind. Call for more of it; it shall be at your
service: From one, who, tho' she thanks God she
is not your Sister, is not your Enemy: But that she
is not the latter, is with-held but by two considerations; 
one, that you bear, tho' unworthily, a relation
to a Sister so excellent; the other, that you are
not of consequence enough to engage any-thing but
the pity and contempt of 
A. H. 