



My dear Lady,
Now I will proceed with my former Subject; 
and with the greater Pleasure, as what follows
makes still more in Favour of the Countess's
Character, than what went before, altho' that set
it in a better Light, than it had once appeared to
me in. I began, as follows: 
Will you be pleased, Sir, to favour me with
the Continuation of our last Subject? I will, my
Dear. You lest off, Sir, with acquitting me (as
knowing what I knew) for breaking out into that 

Flood of Tears, which occasion'd your abrupt Departure. 
But, dear Sir, will you be pleased to satisfy
me about that affecting Information, of your
Intention and my Lady's, to live at Tunbridge together? 
'Tis absolutely Malice and Falshood. Our Intimacy
had not proceeded so far; and, thoughtless as
my Sister's Letters suppose the Lady, she would
have spurn'd at such a Proposal, I dare say. 
Well, but then, Sir, as to the Expression to
her Uncle, that she had rather have been a certain
Gentleman's second Wife— 
I believe, she might, in a Passion, say something
like it to him: He had been teizing her
(from the time that I held an Argument in Favour
of that foolish Topick Polygamy, in his Company,
and his Niece's, and in that of her Sister, and the
Viscount) with Cautions against conversing with a
Man, who, having, as he was pleased to say behind
my Back, marry'd beneath him, wanted to engage
the Affections of a Lady of Birth, in order to recover,
by doubling the Fault upon her, the Reputation
he had lost. 
She despis'd his Insinuation enough to answer
him, That she thought my Arguments in Behalf of
Polygamy were convincing. This set him a raving,
and he threw some coarse Reflections upon her,
which could not be repeated, if one may guess at
them, by her being unable to tell me what they
were; and then, to vex him more, and to revenge
herself, she said something like what was reported:
And this was Handle enough for her Uncle, who
took care to propagate it with an Indiscretion peculiar
to himself; for I heard of it in Three different 

Companies, before I know any thing of it from
herself; and when I did, it was so repeated, as you,
my Dear, would hardly have censur'd her for it,
the Provocation consider'd. 
Well, but then, dear Sir, there is nothing
at all amiss, at this Rate, in the Correspondence
between my Lady and you? 
Not on her Side, I dare say, if her Ladyship
can be excused to Punctilio, and for having a
greater Esteem for a marry'd Man, than he can deserve,
or than may be strictly defended to a Person
of your Purity and Niceness. 
Well, Sir, this is very noble in you. I love to
hear the Gentlemen generous in Points where the
Honour of our Sex is concern'd. But, pray, Sir,
what then was there on your Side, in that Matter,
that made you give me so patient and so kind a
Hearing? 
Now, my Dear, you come to the Point: At
first it was, as I have said before, nothing in me but
Vanity, Pride, and Love of Intrigue, to try my
Strength, where I had met with some Encouragement,
as I thought, at the Masquerade; where the
Lady went farther too than she would have done,
had she not thought I was a single Man. For, by
what I have told you, Pamela, you will observe, that
she endeavour'd to satisfy herself on that Head, as
soon as she well could. Mrs. Nelthorpe acquainted
me afterwards, when we were better known to each
other, That her Lady was so partial in my Favour,
(Who can always govern their Fancies, my Dear?)
as to think, so early as at the Masquerade, that if
every thing answer'd Appearances, and that I were
a single Man, she, who has a noble and independent 

Fortune, might possibly be induc'd to make me
happy in her Choice. 
Supposing then, that I was unmarry'd, she
lest a Signal for me in her Handkerchief. I visited
her; had the Honour, after the customary first Shyness,
of being well receiv'd by her; and continued
my Visits, till, perhaps, she would have been glad
I had not been marry'd: But, when she found I
was, she avolded me, as I have told you, till the
Accident I mention'd, threw us again upon each
other; which renew'd our Intimacy upon Terms,
which you would think too inconsiderate on one
Side, and too designing on the other. 
For myself, what can I say? Only that you gave
me great Disgusts (without Cause, as I thought) by
your unwonted Reception of me: Ever in Tears
and Grief; the Countess ever chearful and lively: 
And apprehending, that your Temper was intirely
changing, I believ'd I had no bad Excuse to endeavour
to make myself easy and chearful abroad, since
my Home became more irksome to me, than ever
I believ'd it could be. Then, as we naturally love
those who love us, I had Vanity, and some Reason
for my Vanity, (indeed all vain Men believe they
have) to think the Countess had more than an Indifference
for me. She was so exasperated by the
wrong Methods taken with an independent Lady
of her generous Spirit, to break off the Acquaintance
with me, that, in Revenge, she deny'd me
less than ever Opportunities of her Company. 
The Pleasure we took in each other's Conversation,
was reciprocal. The World's Reports had united
us in one common Cause; and you, as I said, had
made Home less delightful to me, than it us'd to be: 

What might not then have been apprehended from
so many Circumstances concurring with the Lady's
Beauty, and my Frailty? 
I waited on her to Tunbridge. She took a
House there. Where Peoples Tongues will take
so much Liberty, when they have no Foundation
for it at all, and where the utmost Circumspection
is us'd, what will they not say, where so little of
the latter is observ'd? No wonder then, that Terms
were said to be agreed upon between us: From her
Uncle's Story of Polygamy propos'd by me, and
seemingly agreed to by her, no wonder that all
your Thomasine Fuller's Information was surmised. 
And thus stood the Matter, when I was determin'd
to give your Cause for Uneasiness a Hearing,
and to take my Measures according to what should
result from that Hearing. 
From this Account, dear Sir, said I, it will not
be so difficult, as I was afraid it would be, to end
this Affair even to her Ladyship's Satisfaction. 
I hope not, my Dear. 
But, if, now, Sir, the Countess should still be
desirous not to break with you; from so charming
a Lady, who knows what may happen! 
Very true, Pamela: But, to make you still
easier, I will tell you, that her Ladyship has a first
Cousin marry'd to a Person going with a publick
Character to several of the Italian Courts; and had it
not been for my Persuasions, she would have accepted
of their earnest Invitations, and pass'd a Year or two in
Italy, where she once resided for Three Years together,
which makes her so perfect a Mistress of Italian. 
Now I will let her know, additionally to what
I have written to her, the Uneasiness I have given 

you, and, so far as it is proper, what is come to
your Ears, and your generous Account of her, and
the Charms of her Person, of which she will not
be a little proud; for she has really noble and generous
Sentiments, and thinks well (tho' her Sister,
in Pleasantry, will have it, a little enviously) of
you: And when I shall endeavour to persuade her
to go, for the sake of her own Character, to a
Place and Country of which she was always fond,
I am apt to think she will come into it; for she has
a greater Opinion of my Judgment, than it deserves:
And I know a young Lord, who may be easily persuaded
to follow her thither, and bring her back
his Lady, if he can obtain her Consent: And
what say you, Pamela, to this? 
O, Sir! I believe I shall begin to love the Lady
dearly, and this is what I never thought I should.
I hope this will be brought about. 
But I see, give me Leave to say, Sir, how dangerously
you might have gone on, both You and the
Lady, under the Notion of this Platonick Love, till
two precious Souls might have been lost: And this
shews one, as well in Spirituals as Temporals, from
what slight Beginnings the greatest Mischiefs sometimes
spring; and how easily at first a Breach may
be stopp'd, that, when neglected, the Waves of
Passion will widen, till they bear down all before
them. 
Your Observation, my Dear, is just, reply'd
Mr. B. and tho' I was confident the Lady was more
in Earnest than myself in the Notion of Platonick
Love, yet am I convinc'd, and always was, That
Platonick Love is Platonick Nonsense: 'Tis the
Fly buzzing about the Blaze, till its Wings are 

scorch'd: Or, to speak still stronger, It is a Bait of
the Devil to catch the Unexperienc'd and Thought-less:
Not ought such Notions to be pretended to, till
the Parties are Five or Ten Years on the other Side
of their grand Climacterick: For Age, Old-age, and
nothing else, must establish the Barriers to Platoniok
Love. But, continu'd he, this was my comparative
Consolation, tho' a very bad one, that had I swerv'd,
I should not have given the only Instance, where Persons
more scrupulous than I pretend to be, have begun
Friendships even with spiritual Views, and ended
them as grosly as I could have done, were the Lady
to have been as frail as her Temprer. 
Here, Madam, Mr. B. finished his Narrative. 
He is now set out for Tunbridge with all my Papers. 
I have no Doubt in his Honour, and kind Assureances,
and hope my next will be a joyful Letter; 
and that I shall inform you in it, that the Affair
which went so near my Heart, is absolutely concluded
to my Satisfaction, to Mr. B.'s, and to the
Countess's; for if it be so to all Three, my Happiness,
I doubt not, will be founded on a permanent Basis. 
Mean time I am, my dear good Lady, 
Your most affectionate and
obliged Sister and Servant,
P. B. 

