



From the same. 


My dearest Mrs. B.
I Am all over Joy and Rapture. My good Papa
has given me Leave to tell you, that he will put
his Polly under your Protection, when you go to
London. If you have but a Tenth Part of the Pleasure
I have on this Occasion, I am sure I shall be as
welcome as I wish. But he will insist upon it, he
says, that Mr. B. signs some Acknowlegement,
which I am to carry along with me, that I am intrusted
to his Honour and yours, and to be returned
to him Heart-whole, and Dutiful, and with a Reputation
as unsully'd as he receives me. 
But do, dearest Mrs. B. continue your Journals
till then; for I have promis'd to take them up where
you leave off, to divert our Friends in these Parts. 
There will be Presumption! But yet I will write
nothing but what I will shew you, and have your
Consent to send: For I was taught early not to tell
Tales out of School; and a School, the best I ever
went to, will be your charming Conversation. 
We have been greatly diverted with the Trick
put upon that Barbarian Sir Jacob. His Obstinacy,
Repentance, and Amendment, follow'd so irresistibly
in one Half-hour, from the happy Thought of
the excellent Lady Countess, that I think no Plot
was ever more fortunate. It was like springing a
lucky Mine in a Siege, that blew up twenty times
more than was expected from it, and answer'd all
the Besieger's Ends at once. 

Mr. B.'s Defence of his own Conduct towards
you, is quite noble; and he judges with his
usual Generosity and good Sense, when, by adding
to your Honour, he knows he inhances his own. 
Mr. Pitt's fine Diamond met with a world of
Admirers; but all turn'd upon this Reflection, What
a happy Man is Mr. Pitt, who can call such a Jewel
his own! —How greatly do you excel this Diamond; 
and how much does Mr. B. outdo Mr. Pitt! ––– 
Who has contributed to give so rich a Jewel a
Polish so admirable; and then has set it in so noble
a Light, as makes its Beauty conspicuous to every
Eye! 
You bid me skim over your Writings lightly; 
but 'tis impossible. I will not flatter you, my
dear Mrs. B. nor will I be suspected to do so; and
yet I cannot find Words to praise, so much as I
think you deserve: So I will only say, that your
good Parents, for whose Pleasure you write as well
as for mine, cannot receive or read them with more
Delight than I do–––Even my Sister Nancy, judge
of their Effect by this! will at any time leave Murray,
and forget to frown or be ill-natur'd, while
she can hear read what you write——And, angry
as she makes me sometimes, I cannot deny her
this Pleasure because possibly, among the innumerable
improving Reflections they abound with, some
one may possibly dart in upon her, and illuminate
her, as your Conversation and Behaviour did Sir
Jacob. 
But your Application in P. S. to my Papa
pleased him, and confirmed his Resolution to let
me go–––He snatched the Sheet that contained this; 
That's to me! said he: –––I must read this myself; 
He did–––and said–––I'faith, she's a sweet one! — 
Do. dear good Sir Simon, repeated he aloud, let
Miss Polly add to our Delights! –––So she shall then; 

–––If that will do it! –––And yet this same Mrs. B.
has so many Delights already, that I should think
she might be contented. –––But, Dame Darnford, I
think I'll let her go. These Sisters then, you'll see,
how they'll love at a Distance, tho' always quarrelling
when together. He read on––– The new Affair
will divert you ––– Lady Darnford has consented –––
Miss is willing; and her Sister can spare her ––– Very
prettily put, faith––– And don't you be so cross––– Very
sweet! ––– to deny me! 
Why, dear Mrs. B. I won't be so cross, then; 
indeed I won't! –––And so, Polly, let 'em send Word
when they set out for London, and you shall join
'em there, with all my Heart: But I'll have a Letter
every Post, remember that, Girl. 
Any thing, any thing, dear Papa, said I; so I
can but go! He called for a Kiss, for his Compliance. 
I gave it most willingly, you may believe. 
Nancy looked envious, altho' Mr. Murray came
in just then–––She look'd almost like a great Glutton,
whom I remember, one Sir Jonathan Smith,
who killed himself by eating: He us'd, while
he was heaping up his Plate from one Dish, to
watch the others, and follow the Knife of every
Body else, with such a greedy Eye, as if he could
swear a Robbery against any one who presumed
to eat as well as he. This is a gross Simile; but
all greedy and envious Folks look alike about the
Eyes; and, thinking of Nancy on this Occasion,
(who envied a Happiness she knew I preferred to
that she has in Prospect). I could not but call to
mind Sir Jonathan at the same time. 
Well, let's know when you set out, and you
shan't have been a Week in London, if I can help
it, but you shall be told by my Tongue, as now by
my Pen, how much I am 
Your obliged Admirer and Friend,
Polly Darnford. 

P. S. Remember the Verses I wrote about, if
proper*  –––You hint too at some other Verses§  Don't let us lose any thing. 

