


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 
[Inclosed in the preceding.] 


March 18. 
I Have had a visit, my dear and reverend friend,
from Emily's mother. She will very probably
make one also at Colnebrooke, before I can be so
happy as to get thither. I dispatch this therefore, to
apprise you and Lord L. of such a probability; 
which is the greater, as she knows Emily to be there,
thro' the inadvertence of Saunders, and finds me to be
in town. I will give you the particulars of what passed
between us, for your better information, if she goes
to Colnebrooke. 
I was preparing to attend Lord W. as by appointment,
when she sent in her name to me. 
I received her civilly. She had the assurance to
make up to me with a full expectation that I would
salute her; but I took, or rather received, her ready
hand, and led her to a chair by the fire-side. You
have never seen her. She thinks herself still handsome; 
and, did not her vices make her odious, and her whole
aspect shew her heart, she would not be much mistaken. 
How does Emily, Sir? galanting her fan: Is the
girl here? Bid her come to me. I will see her. 
She is not here, madam. 
Where is she then? She has not been at Mrs.
Lane's for some time. 

She is in the best protection: She is with my two
sisters. 
And pray, Sir Charles Grandison, What do you
intend to do with her? The girl begins to be womanly. 
She laughed; and her heart spoke out at her eyes. 
Tell me what you propose to do with her? You
know, added she, affecting a serious air, that she is my
child. 
If, madam, you deserve to be thought her mother,
you will be satisfied with the hands she is in. 
Pish! —I never loved you good men: Where a fine
girl comes in their way, I know what I know— 
She looked wantonly, and laughed again. 
I am not to talk seriously with you, Mrs. Jervois:
But what have you to say to my ward? 
Say! —Why, you know, Sir, I am her mother:
And I have a mind to have the care of her person myself. 
You must (so her father directed) have the care
of her fortune: But I have a mind, for her reputation-sake,
to take the girl out of the hands of so young a
guardian. I hope you will not oppose me. 
If this be all your business, madam, I must be excused. 
I am preparing, as you see, to dress. 
Where is Emily? I will see the girl. 
If your motive be motherly love, little, madam,
as you have acted the mother by her, you shall see
her when she is in town. But her person, and reputation,
as well as fortune, must be my care. 
I am married, Sir: And my husband is a man of
honour. 
Your marriage, madam, gives a new reason why
Emily must not be in your care. 
Let me tell you, Sir, that my husband is a man of
honour, and as brave a man as yourself; and he will
see me righted. 
Be he who he will, he can have no business with
Emily. Did you come to tell me you are married,
madam? 

I did, Sir. Don't you wish me joy?— 
Joy, madam! I wish you to deserve joy, and you
will then perhaps have it. You'll excuse me—I shall
make my friends wait. 
I could not restrain my indignation. This woman
marries, as she calls it, twice or thrice a year. 
Well, Sir, then you will find time, perhaps, to talk
with Major O-Hara. He is of one of the best families
in Ireland. And he will not let me be robbed
of my daughter. 
Major O-Hara, madam, has nothing to do with
the daughter of my late unhappy friend. Nor have I
any-thing to say to him. Emily is in my protection; 
and I am sorry to say, that she never had been so,
were not the woman who calls herself her mother,
the person least fit to be intrusted with her daughter. 
Permit me the favour of leading you to your chair. 
She then broke out into the language in which she
always concludes these visits. She threatened me
with the resentments of Major O-Hara; and told me,
He had been a conqueror in half a dozen duels. 
I offered my hand. She refused it not. I led her
to her chair. 
I will call again to-morrow afternoon, said she
(threatening with her head), perhaps with the major,
Sir. And I expect you will produce the little harlotry— 
I withdrew in silent contempt. Vile woman! 
But let nothing of this escape you to my Emily. I
think she should not see her but in my presence. The
poor girl will be terrified into fits, as she was the last
time she saw her, if she comes, and I am not there. 
But possibly I may hear no more of this wicked woman
for a month or two. Having a power to make her
annuity either one or two hundred pounds, according
to her behaviour, at my own discretion, the man she
has married, who could have no inducement, but the
annuity, if he has married her, will not suffer her to 

incur such a reduction of it; for, you know, I have
always hitherto paid her two hundred pounds a year. 
Her threatening to see me to-morrow may be to amuse
me while she goes. The woman is a foolish woman; 
but, being accustomed to intrigue, she aims at cunning
and contrivance. 
I am now hastening to Lord W. I hope his woman
will not be admitted to his table, as she generally is,
let who will be present; yet, it seems, knows not
how to be silent, whatever be the subject. I have
never chosen either to dine or sup with my Lord,
that I might not be under a necessity of objecting to
her company: And were I not to object to it, as I am a
near kinsman to my Lord, and know the situation she
is in with him, my complaisance might be imputed to
motives altogether unworthy of a man of spirit. 
Yours of this morning was brought me, just as I was
concluding. There is one paragraph in it, that greatly
interests me. 
You hint to me, that my sisters, tho' my absences
are short, would be glad to receive now-and-then a
letter from me. You, my dear friend, have engaged
me into a kind of habit, which makes me write to
you with ease and pleasure. —To you, and to our Beauchamp,
methinks, I can write any-thing. Use, it is
true, would make it equally agreeable to me to write
to my sisters. I would not have them think that there
is a brother in the world, that better loves his sisters
than I do mine: And now, you know, I have three. 
But why have they not signified as much to me? 
Could I give pleasure to any whom I love, without
giving great pain to myself, it would be unpardonable
not to do it. 
I could easily carry on a correspondence with my
sisters, were they to be very earnest about it: But
then it must be a correspondence: The writing must
not be all of one side. Do they think I should not be
equally pleased to hear what they are about, from time 

to time; and what, occasionally, their sentiments are,
upon persons and things? If it fall in your way, and
you think it not a mere temporary wish (for young
Ladies often wish, and think no more of the matter); 
then propose the condition. —But caution them, that
the moment I discover, that they are less frank, and
more reserved, than I am, there will be an end of the
correspondence. My three sisters are most amiably
frank, for women—But, thus challenged, dare they
enter the lists, upon honour, with a man, a brother,
upon equal terms? —O no! They dare not. It is not
in woman to be unreserved in some points; and (to be
impartial) perhaps they should not: Yet, surely, there
is now-and-then a man, a brother, to be met with,
who would be the more grateful for the confidence
reposed in him. 
Were this proposal to be accepted, I could write
to them many of the things that I communicate to
you. I have but few secrets. I only wish to keep
from relations so dear to me, things that could not
possibly yield them pleasure. I am sure I could trust
to your judgment, the passages that might be read to
them from my letters to you. 
Sometimes, indeed, I love to divert myself with
Charlotte's humorous curiosity; for she seems, as I
told her lately, to love to suppose secrets, where there
are none, for a compliment to her-own sagacity,
when she thinks she has found them out; and I love
at such times to see her puzzled, and at a fault, as a
punishment for her declining to speak out. 
You have told me heretofore, in excuse for the distance,
which my two elder sisters observe to their
brother, when I have complained of it to you, that
it proceeded from awe, from reverence for him. But
why should there be that awe, that reverence? 
Surely, my dear friend, if this is spontaneous, and
invincible, in them, there must be some fault in my
behaviour, some seeming want of freedom in my 

manner, with which you will not acquaint me: It is
otherwise impossible, that between brothers and sisters,
where the love is not doubted on either side, such a
distance should subsist. You must consult them upon
it, and get them to explain themselves on this subject
to you; and when they have done so, tell me of my
fault, and I will endeavour to render myself more agreeable
(more familiar, shall I say?) to them. But I will not
by any means excuse them, if they give me cause to
think, that the distance is owing to the will and the
power I have been blessed with to do my duty by
them. What would this be, but indirectly to declare,
that once they expected not justice from their brother? 
But no more of this subject at present. I am impatient
to be with you all at Colnebrooke; you cannot
think how impatient. Self-denial is a very hard
doctrine to be learned, my good Dr. Bartlett. So, in
some cases, is it found to be, by 
Your Charles Grandison. 

