


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Wedn. morn. March 14. 
Mr. and Mrs. Reeves were so kind as to breakfast,
and intend to dine, with me. 
They brought with them, as agreed upon overnight,
the Count of Belvedere, who has assumed the
name of Signor Marsigli. After breakfast, Mr. Reeves,
dropping my cousin at Lady G's, carried the two
noblemen thro' several of the great streets and squares
of this vash town: To westminster-hall; the houses
of parliament, &c. 
I went in my chair, mean time, to pay my sincerest
compliments to Lady Clementina: I assured her, that
she was, and should be, the subject of our choicest cares. 
Poor Lady! She is full of apprehensions. I owned to 

her the arrival of Signor Sebastiano, and his prayers
for her safety and health; and told her what I had
answered to his enquiries after her. 
She was for removing to some distance from town,
where she thought she could be more private. Lord
and Lady L. both assured her, it was impossible she
could be any-where so private as in this great town; 
nor so happily situated (should she think fit, on a
reconciliation, to own where she had been) as in the
protection, and at the house, of Sir Charles Grandison's
brother and sister. 
God be praised for the happy meeting you all have
had. Lucy is very good to be so particular about my
Emily (a) ! Dear girl! She is an example to all young
Ladies! Let Clementina be made easy, and who will
be so happy as your Harriet? 
Thursday, March 15. 
Sir Charles has been so good as to let me know,
that he and Mr. Lowther arrived yesterday morning
at Dover. He found the Marchioness, Signor Jeronymo,
and the good Camilla, as he calls her, very
much indisposed from the fatigues they had undergone
both in mind and body. The whole noble family
received him with inexpressible joy. Jeronymo
told him, that his arrival, and Mr. Lowther's with
him, had given them all spirits; and health must follow
to those who were indisposed. 
Sir Charles supposes, that they will be obliged to
continue at Dover all this day. To-morrow if the
Marchioness is able to bear the journey, they propose
to set out, and proceed as far on their way to London
as her health will permit; and to get to town as
early on Saturday as possible. 
The dear man thought his Harriet would be uneasy,
if he had not written to her, as he shall be two
days longer out than he had hoped. To be sure she 

should. If he had not thought so justly of her, as
she knows no other method of valuing herself than
by his value of her, she must have been extremely
sunk in her own opinion. 
He bids me assure Lady Clementina that she will
find every one of her friends determined to do all in
their power to make her happy. Resentment, he
says, has no place in their bosoms: They breathe
nothing but Reconciliation and Love. 
I will not, my dear grandmamma, dispatch this Letter
to you, till I can inform you that this worthy family
are settled with us, and at Grosvenor-Square. 
Sat. Evening, March 17. 
I have just received the following billet from Sir
Charles. 

Grosvenor Square, Sat. 4 o'clock. 
My dearest Love will rejoice to know by this, that
our friends are all arrived here in safety. The
Marchioness bore the journey better than we expected. 
My Jeronymo is in fine spirits. I thought it
would give my Harriet as well as them less fatigue,
if I put them into immediate possession of this house,
than if I brought them to pay their compliments to
her, as they were very desirous to do, at St. James's
Square. Mrs. Beaumont has allotted to them their respective
apartments. There is room enough, and
they are pleased to say, handsome room. Signor Juliano
will attend my Love with me. What an admirable
forecast in my dearest life! A repast so elegant,
prepared (as your Murray insorms me) by your
personal direction, to attend their hour. She tells me
you have borrowed a female servant of each of our
sisters, and one of Mrs. Reeves, to join with two of
your own, in the service of this house. In everything,
on every occasion, you delight by your goodness
and greatness of mind 
Your ever-devoted Ch. Grandison. 

I shall stay supper with them. But shall break
away as soon as I can, to attend the joy of my
heart. 

Am I not a happy ereature, my dear grandmamma? 
By what little offices, if done with tolerable grace,
may one make a great and noble spirit think itself under
obligation to one! —But had I known they would
not have called first in St. James's Square, I would
not have contented myself, as I did, with a visit to the
other house in the middle of the day, to see everything
was in order, against they came: They should
have sound me there to receive and welcome them. 
Signor Sebastiano is flown to them. I should have
told you, that the Count, at my request, dined and
supped with me and Signor Sebastiano (they choosing
to comply with our English customs) every day of
this week from that of his arrival. They are really
good young men. They improve upon me every
hour. How do they admire Lady Clementina! The
Count yesterday complimented me, that for piety,
reading, understanding, sweetness of manners, frankness
of heart, she could only be equalled in England. 
Italy knew not, he said, nor had known of modern
times, her mother excepted, such another woman. 
If I knew Lady Clementina, he added, I would not
wonder at his perseverance, he having besides the honour
of all her family's good opinion. 
How I long to see every individual of this noble family! 
—I know how sincerely I love them all, by this
one instance—I have not now, for near a week that
my dearest friend has been absent from me, in their
service, wished once for his company; tho' had he
not written to me on Thursday, I should have been
anxious for his health and theirs. 
May they be indulgently, and not ungraciously, forgiving! 
—Then will I dearly love them. —Poor Lady
Clementina! How full of apprehensions has she been 

all this week! She has not stirred out of her chamber
since Wednesday morning, nor designs it for a week
or two to come. 
Sunday. 
My dearest Friend, my Lover, my Husband, every
tender word in one, left his noble guests for their
sakes early last night; and he was pleased to tell me,
for his own sake, longing to see, to thank, to applaud
his Harriet. He brought with him the two
young noblemen, who are our own immediate
guests. 
He gave me, last night and this morning, an account
of what passed between the family and himself,
from his arrival at Dover, to their coming to town
last night. 
They confessed the highest obligations to him for
attending them in person; and for bringing Mr. Lowther
with him. But when, on their eager questions to
him after their Clementina, he told them, that he
had heard from her, and that she had owned herself
to be in honourable and tender hands, the Marquis
lifted up his eyes in thankful rapture: The Marchioness,
with clasped hands, seemed to praise God; but
her lips only moved: All the rest expressed their joy
in words dictated by truly affectionate hearts. 
Sir Charles found them all most cordially disposed
to forgive the dear fugitive, as the Bishop called her:
But depend upon it, added the Prelate, nothing will
secure her head, but our yielding to her in her long
wished-for hope of the convent, or on prevailing on
her to marry: And if you, Grandison, join with us,
I question not, but the latter may be effected. 
Sir Charles blamed them for having precipitated her
as they had done. 
That, said the Bishop, was partly the fault of our
well-meaning Giacomo; and partly her own; for
more than once she gave us hope that she would comply
with our wishes. 

I besought Sir Charles, that he would not be prevailed
upon to take part with them, if she continued
averse to a change of condition. 
I waved the subject, my dearest Life, replied he,
at the time. I have continued to do so ever since. 
I want only to see them settled, and Lady Clementina
composed, and then I shall know what can be
done. Till then, arguments on either side, will rather
strengthen than remove difficulties. 
The Bishop, with great concern, told Sir Charles,
that when the first news of Clementina's flight was
brought to Bologna, her poor mother was for two
days as unhappy in her mind, as ever her daughter
had been; and when it was found likely that Clementina
was gone to England, she insisted so vehemently
on following her, that they had no other way to pacify
her, but by promising that they would out of
hand pay to Sir Charles the visit they intended, and
some of them had engaged, to make him. Nor would
she, when she grew better on their promise, acquit
them of it. This determined them to this winter
excursion, sorely against the will of some of them:
And it was in compassion to this unhappy state of the
poor mother's mind, that Mrs. Beaumont consented
to accompany her. 
Sir Charles is gone to attend Lady Clementina. 
He then proposes to welcome the Count of Belvedere
into England; and afterwards to wait on the noble
family, and know when I shall be permitted to pay
my devoirs to them. 
Sunday, Two o'clock. 
Sir Charles has found it very difficult to quiet the
apprehensions of Lady Clementina. He is grieved
for her. God grant, he prays, that she keep in her
right mind. Lady L. thinks the poor Lady is already
disturbed. 
Sir Charles was joyfully received by Signor Marsigli. 
He owned to that Lord, that he knew where to 

send Letters to Lady Clementina. He is to introduce
me by-and-by to his guests at Grosvenor-Square. 
Sunday night. 
Sir Charles presented me to this expecting family. 
I admire them all. 
The Marquis and Marchioness are a fine couple. 
There is dignity in their aspects and behaviour. A
fixed kind of melancholy sits upon the features of
each. The Bishop has the man of quality in his appearance; 
but he has something more solemn in his
countenance than even Father Marescotti; who, at a
glance, is not unlike our Dr. Bartlett: The more
like, as goodness and humility both shine in his countenance. 
But Signor Jeronymo is an amiable young man:
I could, almost at first sight (and his winning grace
confirmed me) have called him Brother. With signal
kindness did my Sir Charles present me to this his
dear friend; and with equal kindness did Signor Jeronymo
receive me, and congratulate Sir Charles
They all joined in the congratulation. 
The amiable Mrs. Beaumont! —She embraced me! 
She felicitated me with such a grace, as made her
manner surpass even her words. 
The good Camilla was presented to me. She has
the look of a gentlewoman. How many scenes did
the sight of this good woman revive in my memory! 
Some of them painful ones! 
Signor Marsigli, as he is called, and the two young
Lords, dined with them. This being a first visit on
my part, we made it a short one. We went from
them to Lady G's, and drank tea with her and her
Lord. Sir Charles could not bear, he said, to go immediately
from the sighing parents to the sorrowing
daughter; they not knowing, nor being at present to
know, she was so near them. 
Lady G. was so petulant, so whimsical, when her 

brother's back was turned, that I could not forbear
blaming her: But I let her go her own way: She
stopt my mouth—“So you think you shall behave
more patiently, more thankfully, in the same circumstance! 
—Look to it, Harriet!” 
Here, my dearest grandmamma, I will conclude
this Letter. Pray for the poor Clementina; for a
happy reconciliation; and that the result may be
tranquillity of mind restored to this whole noble
family; so necessary to that of your dear Sir Charles,
and 
His and Your Harriet Grandison. 

