



From the same. Inclosed in the above. 

Thursday, April 27. 
I have been making inquiry, as I told you I
would, whether your relations had really (before
you left them) resolved upon that change of measures
which your aunt mentions in her letter: —And by
laying together several pieces of intelligence, some
drawn from my mamma, by your uncle Antony's
communications; some from Miss Lloyd, by your
sister's; and some by a third way, that I shall not tell
you of; I have reason to think the following a true
state of the case. 
That there was no intention of a change of measures, 

till within two or three days of your going
away. On the contrary, your brother and sister,
tho' they had no hope of prevailing with you in
Solmes's favour, were resolved never to give over
their persecutions, till they had push'd you upon taking
some step, which, by help of their good offices,
should be deemed inexcusable by the half-witted souls
they had to play upon. 
But that at last your mamma (tired with and perhaps
ashamed of the passive part she had acted)
thought fit to declare to Miss Bell, that she was determined
to try to put an end to the family-feuds; and
to get your uncle Harlowe to second her endeavours. 
This alarmed your brother and sister; and then a
change of measures was resolved upon. Solmes's offers
were however too advantageous to be given up; 
and your father's condescension was now to be their
sole dependence, and (as they give out) your last
trial. 
And, indeed, my dear, this must have succeeded,
I verily think, with such a daughter as they had to
deal with, could that father, who never, I dare say,
kneeled in his life, but to God, have so far condescended,
as your aunt writes he would. 
But then, my dear, what would this have done? — 
Perhaps you would have given Lovelace the meeting,
in hopes to pacify him, and prevent mischief; supposing
that they had given you time, and not hurried
you directly into the state. But if you had not met
him, you see, that he was resolved to visit them, and
well attended too: And what must have been the consequence? 
So that, upon the whole, we know not but matters
may be best as they are, however undesirable that best
is. 
I hope your considerate and thoughtful mind will
make a good use of this hint. Who would not with
patience sustain even a great evil, if she could persuade 

herself, that it was kindly dispensed, in order
to prevent a still greater? —Especially, if she
could sit down, as you can, and acquit her own
heart? 
Permit me one further observation—Do we not see,
from the above state of the matter, what might have
been done before, by the worthy person of your family,
had she exerted the mother, in behalf of a child
so meritorious, yet so much oppressed? 
Adieu, my dear. I will be ever yours. 
Anna Howe. 
Miss Harlowe, in her answer 'to the first of the two
last letters, chides her friend for giving so little
weight to her advice, in relation to her behaviour
to her mother: —It may be proper to insert here
the following extracts from that answer; tho' a
little before their time. 
‘I will not repeat, says she, what I have before
written in Mr. Hickman's behalf. I will only remind
you of an observation I have made to you
more than once, that you have outlived your first
passion; and had the second man been an angel, he
would not have been more than indifferent to you. 
‘My motives for suspending, proceeds she, were
not merely ceremonious ones. I was really very
ill. I could not hold up my head. The contents
of my sister's letters had pierced my heart. And
was I, my dear, to be as ready to accept his offer,
as if I were afraid, he never would repeat it?’ 
To the second letter, among other things, she says: 
‘So, my dear, you seem to think, that there was a
fate in my error. The cordial, the considering
friend, is seen in the observation you make on this
occasion. Yet since things have happen'd as they
have, would to heaven I could hear, that all the
world acquitted my father, or, at least, my mother; 

for her character, before these family-feuds
broke out, was every-one's admiration. Don't
let any-body say from you, so that it may come to
her ear, that she might, by a timely exertion of her
fine talents, have saved her unhappy child. You'll
observe, my dear, that in her own good time, when
she saw that there was not likely to be an end to
my brother's persecutions, she was resolved to exert
herself. But the pragmatical daughter, by the fatal
meeting, precipitated all, and frustrated her indulgent
designs. O my dear, I am now convinced,
by dear experience, that while children are so happy
as to have parents or guardians, whom they may
consult, they should not presume (no, not with the
best and purest intentions) to follow their own conceits,
in material cases. 
‘A ray of hope of future reconciliation, adds she,
darts in upon my mind, from the intention you tell
me my mother had to exert herself in my favour,
had I not gone away. And my hope is the stronger,
as this communication points out to me, that my
uncle Harlowe's interest is likely, in my mother's
opinion, to be of weight, if it could be engaged. It
will behove me, perhaps, to apply to that dear uncle,
if a proper occasion offer.’ 