


Sir Charles Grandison. In Continuation. 


At my entrance into the palace of Porretta, I was
desired to walk into the garden to the Bishop. I
found with him Father Marescotti. 
Dear Grandison, said the Bishop, meeting me, and
taking my hand, you must decide a point between the
Father and me, that we are afraid has made us a little
accountable to you. 
I was silent. He proceeded. 
Clementina is very sedate. She sent for me and the
Father soon after you left us. She asked us several
questions in relation to you; and insisted on our advice,
as religious men, and as we would answer for it
to our own consciences. Her first was, Whether we
thought there were any hopes of your conversion? — 
I answered negatively. 
I don't expect, said she, that he would be induced
to change his religion for a wife, nor even for a crown,
were he not convinced of the falshood of his own, and
the truth of ours: But again I ask, Cannot you and
Father Marescotti convince his judgment? I should
think it would not be so hard a task, learned and good
men, as you both are: Good man, and modest, and
patient, and unpresuming, as he is; who has been so
long among Catholics; who came from England so
young; has been left so much to his own direction; 

and who must see the difference of the two religions
to the advantage of ours, were he but to judge by the
efficacy of each on the lives and manners of the people
professing each; for, surely, the men of name and
family, who are sent among us by their parents, from
the heretic countries, in order to observe our manners,
and to improve their own, are not the worst of the
people of those countries. 
I told her, proceeded the Bishop, that, to be impartial,
there were bad and good of all nations; that
she was not likely to be approached by any of her own
but who were good; that you, Chevalier, and Mrs.
Beaumont, might convince us that there were good
people among the Protestants; and that now-and-then
a young man of that profession, did actually appear
among us, who was not a discredit to his country. 
But, continued I, I have heretofore debated the subject
with the Chevalier Grandison. You know I was in
a manner called upon to do it: And have found him
a Protestant upon principle; and that he has a great
deal to say for himself. You, Father, would not
allow me this; but you never entered into close argument
with him on the subject, as I have done. 
My sister then asked, proceeded the Bishop, if I
thought that her own religious principles would be endangered,
if she became yours, and went with you
to England? 
We both referred her to certain passages in the
paper she gave you. 
My heart, said she, could never be proof against a
generous and kind treatment. The condescending
compliances with my weakness, which my father, mother,
brothers, and uncle, have made, have effected
what opposition and cruelty, as you see, could not. 
So compassionate, so humane a man, as I think the
Chevalier Grandison, and so steady as he is in his principles,
so much, as you own, as he has to say for himself,
joined with the sense I always had, from my 

mother's example, of the duties of a good wife, will
too probably stagger me in my faith: And if so, I
shall be unhappy: I shall make my confessor so. I
am determined, added she (as you, brother, have seen)
in my own mind: But I ask your opinion, and yours,
Father Marescotti. The Chevalier now is a favourite
with you both. Religion only can now be the
question—Is it not too probable that I shall be staggered
in my own faith, were I to be his? 
We gave her, continued the Bishop, our opinions
freely, as religious men. Could we, Chevalier, do
otherwise? And yet we are both ready to accuse ourselves
of infringing conditions with you. Tell us, if
in your opinion we have? 
I cannot, my Lord, judge from this general account. 
If you did more than answer her questions; 
if you expatiated argumentatively on the subject; I
must think you have: And your own doubts help to
convince me, that you have; tho' I cannot but respect
you greatly for the frankness of your application to
me on this subject. 
We were earnest, Chevalier; we were warm in
what we said— 
Well, my Lord, called upon as you both were, it
would not have become your characters to be cool— 
For my own part, I have been recollecting the behaviour
of your admirable sister throughout every stage
of her delirium, respecting myself: And I have not
been able to call to mind one instance in it of an attachment
merely personal. I need not tell you, Father,
nor you, my Lord, what a zealous Catholic she is. 
She early wished me to be one: And had I not thought
myself obliged in honour, because of the confidence
placed in me by the whole family, to decline the subject,
our particular conversations, when she favoured
me with the name of tutor, would have generally
taken that turn. Her unhappy illness was owing to
her zeal for religion, and to her concealing her struggles 

on that account. She never hinted at marriage
in her resveries. She was still solicitous for the Soul
of the man she wished to proselyte; and declared herself
ready to lay down her life, could she have effected
that favourite wish of her heart. At other times, she
supposed my marriage with some other woman; and
was only generously solicitous, that it should not be
with one who might discredit the regard she herself
professed for me. At another time she wished to be
acquainted with my sisters, and hoped they would
come to Italy: She proposed to perfect them in the
Italian tongue, as they should her in the English:
But as to me, only bespoke a visit from me now-and-then,
when they came. I have the vanity to think,
that I stand high in her favour. But religion, it is
evident, as it ought, stands higher. From all these
recollections and observations, I have endeavoured to
account for the noble behaviour of your sister; and
am the less surprised at it, now she is come to her memory. 
It is all great; all uniform; and most probably
we should have been in a very different situation
than what we have been long in, had she had her
way given her at the time she was so earnest—For
what? Only to be allowed a second interview, a farewel
visit, when she had shewn a little before, on a
first, that marriage seemed not to be in her thoughts. 
And had she not been entrusted to the management
of the cruel Laurana, said the Bishop— 
From which, thank God, said the Father, I was
the instrument of freeing her. 
By all this, proceeded I, I mean not recrimination; 
but only to observe the consistency of the noble Lady's
mind, when she was able to reflect. And what now
remains for me to do, but to reconcile myself, if possible,
to a conduct that I must ever admire, however
I may, in its consequences, as to my own particular,
regret it? —Your Lordship, I am afraid, thinks, that
she adheres to the contents of the paper she put into
my hands. 

Unless you, Chevalier— 
That, my Lord, is out of the question. Let it,
however, be remembred, that I have not prescribed
to her that hard condition, which is made an indispensable
one to me. Yet is Lady Clementina the
only woman on earth that I would have wished to call
mine, on the terms on which I should have been proud
to receive her hand: For it is easy to foresee, that, generally,
great inconveniencies must attend a marriage
between persons of a different religion, one of them
zealous, the other not indifferent. 
But, Chevalier, you acquit Father Marescotti and
me. 
I do, my Lord. Be you your own judges. The
condition was not proposed by me. I consented to it,
for the sake of those who prescribed it, and for your
sister's sake. I could not wish to prosecute my humble
suit, notwithstanding her declared favour for me,
against the pleas of conscience which she so earnestly
urged. How could I, while religion, and the generosity
of her friends to her, required, as she thought,
that she should get above all regards for me? I was
therefore willing to comply with the proposal, and to
wait the issue of her spontaneous determination, and
to be governed by it. But now that your Lordship
and Father Marescotti have dispensed with the condition,
I presume that I am not bound by it. 
What means my Grandison? 
Only this: I could not be thought to bear a Love
so fervent to the admirable Clementina, as the man
ought to bear who aspires to the honour of calling her
his, if I made not one effort to convince her, that she
may be happy with me as to the article she is so solicitous
about—From female delicacy, she may, perhaps,
expect to be argued with, and to be persuaded. 
Allow me to give her assurances of my inviolable honour
in that point. It becomes me, as a man, and 

as her admirer, to remove her scruples, if I can, before
I yield up my Love to the force of them. 
Would you argue with her on the merits of the two
persuasions? 
I would not. I never did. I would only assure her
of my firm resolution never to attempt to bring her
over to mine, nor to traverse the endeavours of her
confessor, to keep her steady in hers. But were we
to consider only her future ease of mind [You see, my
Lord, that she herself has a view to that, in the proposal
made me, as from herself] in which the happiness
of all your family is included, it is right to see if she
builds on a foundation that cannot be shaken; that
she may not hereafter regret the steps she has taken,
which might possibly— 
I understand you, Chevalier—It is prudently, it is
kindly, put, as well for her sake, as ours. 
I shall be glad, my Lord, that you should be within
hearing of every word that shall pass between us on
this occasion. One effort I ought to make. If she
is determined, I will not urge her further. For all
the world, and the dear Clementina in it, I would
not have her act against her conscience: Nor will I
take advantage of the declaration she has repeatedly
made, that it is in my power to hold her fast, or to
set her free. I will not so much as urge it to her, lest,
if she should alter her purpose, it should be from the
conscience of a kind of promise implied in that declaration,
and not from her heart. No, my Lord, she
shall be wholly free. I will not, excellent as she is,
accept of her hand against her conscience: Neither
my conscience, nor, let me say, my pride, will permit
me to do so. But the world, as well as my own
heart, would blame me if I made not one effort. If
it fail, I shall be easier in my own mind; and so will
she in hers. Be you, my Lord, within hearing of
our next conversation. 
I would not, Dr. Bartlett, propose to Father Marescotti, 

that he should, for fear of making him uneasy,
on his listening to what passed between the Lady
and me. 
I can absolutely depend upon your honour, Chevalier,
replied the Bishop. We have brought ourselves
to be sincere favourers of this alliance with you. But
I own to you, that both Father Marescotti and myself,
on the unexpected turn my sister has voluntarily
taken, are of opinion, that you will both be happier,
if it take not place. The difference in religion; her
malady— 
No more, my Lord, of this subject. If I cannot
succeed, I must endeavour to draw consolation to myself
from reason and reflexion. Mean time, all I ask
is, that you will both acquit me of any supposed breach
of condition, as well in your own minds, as to the rest
of the family, if I make this one effort: After which,
if it succeed not, I will, whatever I suffer, divest myself
of Self, and join with you, and Father Marescotti,
to secure the ground gained in the restoration of the
noblest of female minds. 
They looked upon each other, as if they were
afraid of the event. The Father whispered the Bishop. 
I believe, by a word or two that I could not
but hear, it was to induce him to place himself so as
to hear (as I had proposed) the conversation that was
next to pass between the Lady and me. 
Turning round on their whispering, Don't I see
Camilla, my Lord, said I, at distance, watching our
motions, as if she wanted an opportunity to speak to
one of us? 
She has been walking for some time within sight,
said Father Marescotti. 
The Bishop made signs to her to advance. She
did. And told me, that her young Lady was desirous
to see me. 
I followed her. Clementina was alone. Camilla
introduced me to her, and withdrew. 

She was in great confusion on my approach. Her
complexion frequently varied. She looked at me often,
and as often turned away her eyes; and sighed. 
Two or three times she hemm'd, as if she would
have cleared her voice; but could not find words to
express her labouring mind. It was easy to see, that
her perplexity was not favourable to me. I thought
it would be cruel, not to break the way for her to
speak. 
Let not my dear Clementina forbear to say all that
is in her heart, to the man who greatly prefers her
peace of mind to his own. 
I had, I had, said she, a great deal to say, before
I saw you: But now you are present—She stopt. 
Take time to recollect yourself, madam—I have
been talking in the garden to my Lord the Bishop,
and to Father Marescotti. I greatly revere them both. 
You have consulted them on the contents of the paper
you were pleased to put into my hands. I have hopes
from thence, that you may be made easy in your mind. 
I will never, dearest madam, urge you on the article
of Religion. You shall be absolute mistress of
your own will. You shall prescribe to me what conditions
you please, with regard to your way of life,
your pleasures, your gratuities to your servants, and
others. Father Marescotti and your Camilla with
you, you will be as safe from innovation, as you can
be in your father's house. 
Ah Chevalier! 
We may, perhaps, prevail upon your father and
mother to honour us with their company, in your first
journey to England. They have not been of late so
well as it were to be wished: We have baths there
of sovereign efficacy, in many disorders. By using
them, and change of climate, they will very probably
receive benefit in their healths. Jeronymo— 
Ah, Chevalier! —She arose from her seat, and reseated
herself several times, with great emotion. I
proceeded. 

Jeronymo, our dear Jeronymo, I hope will accompany
us, and his skilful Lowther. Those baths are
restorative. 
O Chevalier! what a man you are?— 
She stopt, with an air of attention, as if she wished
me to proceed. 
—And when your honoured and beloved friends
shall see their Clementina happy, as I am determined
she shall be, if all the tenderness of affection I am able
to shew, can make her so, how happy will they all
be! —Your chapel, madam! Your confessor! Your
own servants!— 
Ah, Sir! Sir! —Ought I to listen to such temptations,
after what I have given you, upon deliberation,
in writing? Good Heaven! and the whole heavenly
host! direct me!— 
She had recourse to her beads; and her lips, as a
word now-and-then half-pronounced informed me,
moved to a Pater-noster. Again she assumed an attentive
air. 
My sisters, madam, will revere you. You will have
pleasure in calling them yours. Their Lords are
men of the first figure in their country. I ask not for
fortune. I ask only for you, and you I ask of yourself. 
My estate is considerable, and improving. The pride
I take in being independent, and in the power of
obliging, suffers me not to be imprudent with regard
to oeconomy. My capital mansion (I value it for
not being a house of yesterday) tho' not so magnificent
as your palace in Bologna, is genteel, spacious,
convenient. The paper you gave me, shews me that
the grandeur of your soul is equal to that of your birth. 
I revere you for the pious and noble sentiments contained
in it. What obligations will you lay me under
to your goodness, if you can prevail upon yourself to
rely upon my assurances, that I will never seek to make
you unhappy on a religious account; and if you can
be satisfied with the enjoyment of your own religion, 

and leave to me the exercise of mine! Dear madam,
why may not this be? Why will you not leave me as
free as I am ready to leave you? Justice, generosity,
are my pleas to a Lady, who surely cannot but be
just and generous. Think, madam; dear Lady Clementina,
think; if you cannot, by making me happy,
be yourself so. 
I took her unresisting hand, and kissed it. She
sighed. She wept. She was silent. 
With what pleasure, proceeded I, will you every
other year visit and revisit England, and your native
country! How dear will you be to your old friends,
and to your new, in turn! Never revisiting England
without some of your relations to accompany you; 
now one, now another; and who will be of our family. 
Your Grandison, madam, allow me to say your
Grandison, has not, he presumes to aver, a narrow
heart. You see, how well he can live with the most
zealous of your religion, yet not be an hypocrite; 
but, when called upon, fears not to avow his own— 
My dearest Clementina! [Again I pressed her hand
with my lips] say, you think you can be happy, and
yet bless me with your Love. 
O Sir! God is my witness—But leave me, leave
me, for a few moments. I dare not trust myself with
myself. 
Command me not to leave you, madam, till you
resolve in my favour—Say, cannot you be happy in
the free exercise of your own religion? —Father Marescotti,
Camilla, with you—In England but one year at
a time—In Italy, under the re-assuring eye of your
father, mother, brothers, the next. 
Ah, Sir! you must retire—Indeed you must. You
leave me not at liberty—You must let me consider— 
On this crisis of time, as far as I know, depends an
eternity of happiness or misery. 
Command me not from you: Bid me not leave
you. Obey the tender impulse that, I flatter myself, 

I discover in my favour. I seek your happiness, in
pursuing my own. Your eternal welfare cannot be endangered. 
My conscience will oblige me to strengthen
yours, when I see it is yours—Bid me not leave you— 
Excellent Clementina, bid me not leave you! 
You must, you must—How can I trust myself
against a voice, that is the voice of Love; and claims
my kindness, my justice, my generosity—Was I ever
ungenerous, unjust, unkind? —And if thus staggered
now, what, were I to be yours, would the superadded
sense of my duty do! —O leave me, Sir, a few moments,
leave me. 
Be propitious, madam, be propitious, to my humble
hope; that is all I will at present say; and now
I obey you—Profoundly bowing, I withdrew into the
next apartment. She to her closet. 
I went out slowly; and heard the hasty motion of
somebody going out of the apartment, as I entered
it. It was, it seems, the Bishop, who had placed
himself within hearing of what passed between his sister
and me, as I had desired he would. 
It was a full quarter of an hour before I heard her
move; and then it was to seek for me. 
I was sitting in a pensive mood, revolving the embarrasments
I had met with from some of the best of
women; and, as you, my dear Dr. Bartlett, know,
in different countries; and particularly the unexpected
turn which this excellent creature had taken. She approached
me with an air of majesty, yet mixed with
tenderness. I met her, and, with a bent knee, taking
her hand—My fate hangs upon those lips, said I; and
was proceeding; when interrupting me—O Sir! I
hear not, it is not safe for me to hear, that voice, accompanying
this manner—Let me bend to you—I
have been craving the divine direction. An irresistible
impulse (surely it is that direction) bids me say—Yet
what can I say? —If I attempt to argue, I am lost! — 
Does not this shew me, that were I to be yours, I 

must be all you wish me to be? And then my everlasting
peace, my everlasting happiness! —O Sir! I
doubt not your justice, your generosity—But I fear myself! 
—Seek not, let me repeat, and looked a little
wildly, seek not, kindest of men, to entangle me with
your Love. 
She bent her knee, and I was afraid would have
fainted. I clasped my supporting arms about her. 
Let me, let me cut short all I intended to say, said
she, by referring to my paper. The contents of that
are not, cannot be, answered to my satisfaction. Be
my advocate to yourself, to your own heart, and seek
not to entangle me with your Love. 
Whatever it cost me, taking both her hands in
mine, and bowing upon them, I will yield to your
pleasure. I never will urge you again on this subject,
unless your brother the Bishop give me hope of your
welcome change of mind. 
Best of men, said she, withdrawing her hands, and
clasping them together! —But this is not enough— 
You must promise me your future friendship. You must
let me call you Brother: You must be my Tutor, I your
Pupil, once more—Happy days were those! The happiest
of my life! And encourage and confirm in me
the resolution I have taken, or I shall not be happy! 
Look upon me, madam, as your brother, as your
friend: But this latter task requires more magnanimity
than I am master of. To your brother the Bishop,
and to Father Marescotti, I must leave that task. 
They will be in earnest in it. I cannot; because I
am convinced, in my own mind, that we might have
been happy—Could you—But I forbear, tho' with
difficulty—I have promised not to urge you further. 
Indeed I have consulted them both, resumed she; 
but not before I had given you my written determination:
Had they given their opinions different from
what they did, I never could have got over the apprehensions
I have of your strength, and my own 

weakness. I only consulted them, in hopes they
would (as they could, or they had not been good Catholics)
confirm and strengthen my mind. And why, why,
should I punish the man, I must for ever esteem as
my best friend, with a wife, that her unhappy malady
has made unworthy of him? Dear Chevalier, I
find myself at times not recovered. I may never be
quite well. You and yours deserve not to be punished,
but rewarded. Believe me, Sir, this has been a second
consideration with me. God enable me to adhere to
my resolution! for his sake, for your sake, and for the
sake of my own peace of mind! 
Must it not be difficult, my dear Dr. Bartlett, more
difficult than when I came over to Bologna, to give
up all hopes of so exalted a woman? 
But say, Chevalier, you are not angry with me. 
Say, that you do not, that you will not, think me ungrateful. 
To obviate such a charge as that of ingratitude,
to a man who has laid us all under such obligations
—What is it that I would not do? 
I cannot be displeased with you, madam. You cannot
be ungrateful. I must not speak: Yet hardly
know how to be silent. I will take a walk in the
garden. I have a new lesson to learn. 
With profound reverence I withdrew. She rang. 
Camilla came in— 
I hastened into the garden, greatly dissatisfied with
myself, yet hardly knowing why. I thought I wanted
somebody to accuse, somebody to blame—Yet how
could it be Clementina? But the words Narrow zeal! 
—Sweet Enthusiast!—as if I would find fault with her
religion, involuntarily slipt from me to myself. 
It is difficult, my dear Dr. Bartlett, at the instant in
which the heart finds itself disappointed of some darling
hope, to avoid reflexions that, however, can only
be justified by self-partiality. What must I be, if,
led as I have been, by all her friends to hope, I had
not been earnest in my hope! 

The Bishop joined me in the garden—Excuse me,
Grandison, said he, for breaking in upon your contemplations:
But I was desirous to apologize to you,
for taking the liberty, tho' you allowed it to me, of
attending to what passed between you and my sister. 
I should, my Lord, have said every-thing I did say
to your sister, the occasion the same, before your
whole assembled family. Your Lordship has therefore
no apologies to make to me. Heard you all that
passed? 
I believe I did. Those apartments were always the
womens. Camilla placed me in a closet that I knew
not of, where I heard every word you both said of the
last part of your conversation. I must ask you, Chevalier
—Is not Clementina— 
Clementina, my Lord, is all that is great and good
in woman. You will imagine, that it would have
been much more easy for me to support myself under
the resolution she has taken, had I not had such testimonies
of her magnanimity. Permit me, my Lord,
to say, that I have one good quality: I can admire
goodness or greatness where-ever I meet with it; and
that whether it makes for me, or against me. Clementina
has all my reverence. 
He made me compliments, and withdrew. 
The Marquis, the Count, and the Marchioness, afterwards
joined me in the garden. The Bishop and
Father Marescotti not coming with them, or presently
after them, I doubted not but they went to Clementina,
in order to applaud her for, and confirm her in,
a resolution, which must be agreeable to them. I was
right in my conjecture. 
The Marquis and Count each took my hand, and
first expressed their surprize at the young Lady's adherence
to her resolution; and next their high value
of me. The Marchioness observed, “that her daughter,
with all her excellencies, was ever difficult of
persuasion, when she had deliberately resolved upon
any point.” 

It was easy, I said, to see, that they all now were
of one opinion; which was, that Lady Clementina
was not to be moved from her present purpose. 
They owned they were: But said, that if it were
not mine, they thought themselves bound in honour
to consent, that I should try, by generous means (and
they were sure I would not think of any other) to prevail
upon her in my favour. 
I presume, said I, that the Bishop has already acquainted
you with the substance of what passed just
now, between Lady Clementina and me. 
They were silent. 
Has not your Ladyship seen Lady Clementina since? 
I have: And she is extremely uneasy. She wishes
you could be of our religion. Could it have been
so, I, for my part, should rather have called the Chevalier
Grandison my son, than any man in the world. 
Clementina told me, added she (I cannot but say
with more composure than I could have expected,
tho' not without tears) that you promised to urge her
no more on this subject. She owns, that more than
once, as you talked to her, she could hardly forbear
giving you her hand, on your own terms. But she
says, that you were the most generous of men, when
you saw she made a point of conscience of her adherence
to her newly-taken resolution. And now, Chevalier,
having made my Lord and the Count acquainted
with all these things, we are come to advise with
you what is to be done. 
Dear Grandison, said the Marquis, advise us. We
want an opportunity to shew you, in more than words,
our gratitude for all your goodness to us: We want
to appease our Jeronymo; who is ready to suspect,
that his Brother and Father Marescotti have contributed
to this turn in our daughter's mind: And we
want you to declare freely your own sentiments, with
regard to Clementina; and whether you would advise
us, as well for her own sake, as for yours, to endeavour 

to prevail on her to change her mind. Dear
creature! a relapse would now be fatal to her, and
to her mother and me. 
I have no difficulty, my Lord, to answer to these
points. As to the first, I am greatly rewarded by the
pleasure I have, in the more than could be hoped-for
happy effects of Mr. Lowther's skill; and in the prospects
that open to us of Lady Clementina's restored
health of mind. On this subject I have but one request
to make: It is that you will not mortify me so
much, as to suppose, that I am not sufficiently rewarded. 
As to appeasing the generous mind of Signor Jeronymo,
let that task be Lady Clementina's. She can
plead conscience with more force for herself, than any
second person can do for her; and if she does, it will
be a demonstration to us all, of her being likely to be
happy in her perseverance! —More happy than I shall
be! The admirable Lady who has silenced, on this
head, a man so deeply interested to contest this point
with her, will certainly be able to appease a brother
by the same pleas; and the sooner, as, being of the
same religion with the lovely pleader, her arguments
will have greater force with him, than they could be
supposed to have on me. For, let me say, my Lord,
that I could not so much as seem to give way to them,
had I not been accustomed, when I was to judge of
another's actions, to suppose myself that very person:
Hence have I often thought myself obliged to give
judgment against my own wishes; though, on resuming
myself, I have not found reason to disapprove of
my first expectation. 
As to the third point, what can I say? —And yet,
as your Lordship has put it, does it not call upon me,
as I may say, to give a proof of the disinterestedness I
have mentioned? I answer then, as supposing myself
in your situation—I cannot expect that you will urge
an interest, which I, by having put myself into that 

of Lady Clementina, have promised not to urge, unless
she change her mind. What plea can a parent
make use of, but that of filial duty? And where
the child can plead conscience in answer, ought it to be
insisted on? 
And now, resuming myself, let me presume to
advise you to give the dear Lady full time to consider
and re-consider the case. Her imagination may be
heated: In other words, her malady may have a share
in the heroism she has so nobly exerted: And yet I
am afraid she will persevere. Permit me, my Lords,
to say afraid. I cannot wholly divest myself of Self,
in this very affecting case. We will not therefore take
her at her word: I will absent myself for some
time from Bologna; but (as she has the goodness to
acknowlege an esteem for me) with her leave. I
will return at my time. I will repeat my absences, if
we have the least shadow of doubt. But if she hold
her purpose, and shall not be visibly worse in her
health or mind, we may conclude her resolution unalterable. 
In this case, I shall have one or two requests
to make you; and, if granted, will endeavour
to make myself as happy as a man in such a situation
can be. 
They applauded my advice. They declared themselves
unwilling to think of giving up the pleasure they
had brought themselves to have, in considering me as
one of their family; and assured me, that it would
have been impossible, that any the least difficulty should
have arisen from them, after they had brought themselves
to dispense with the most material one. 
They were earnest with me to pass the evening with
them. But I excused myself. I wanted to be at my
own lodgings, in order to revolve all that had passed. 
But having not taken leave of Lady Clementina, I
imagined she might think I went away in ill humour,
if I forbore it. My whole study, I told them, should be
to make Lady Clementina easy: And if the Marchioness 

would be so good as to permit me to take leave of
her for the evening, in her presence, I would depart; 
only making my compliments to Signor Jeronymo, by
Mr. Lowther; knowing that he would be grieved for
my disappointment; and my mind not being at present
easy enough, to contend with his concern for me. 
The Marchioness said, she would see the way her
Clementina was then in; and acquaint me, by Camilla,
with her wishes; and then withdrew; leaving
the Marquis, the Count, and me together. 
Before we could renew our discourse, the Bishop
and Father Marescotti joined us; both in high spirits. 
They were excessively complaisant to me. It
was easy to guess at the occasion of their good humour. 
I could not be greatly delighted with it. But
when the Count told them what had passed, before
they joined us, the Bishop embraced me; the Father
unawares snatched my hand, and kissed it. 
I was glad to be relieved from their compliments,
by the expected message from the Marchioness and
Clementina. 
The young Lady met me, as I entered at the door
of her apartment. She held out her hand to me. I
respectfully took it. I saw she had been in tears: But
she looked with a serenity, that I was glad to see, tho'
I doubted not but it was partly owing to the conversation
she had had since I left her, with her brother
and her confessor, as well as to what might have passed
between her mother and her. 
She led me to a chair between them both. She
withdrew not her hand; and aimed at a more chearful
countenance than I had a heart. I congratulated
her on her serenity. It is in your power, Sir, said
she, to make me still more serene—Can you, of a
truth, and from your heart, approve of my present
way of thinking? Can you, Chevalier?— 
I can admire you for it, madam! You have exalted
yourself, in my opinion. But I must regret it— 

Because—But I have promised not to urge you. Your
conscience, madam, is concerned—To endeavour but
to persuade against conscience, if you have no doubt
of your motive, is not warranted, even in a parent. 
I am, I think I am, returned she, absolutely sure
of my motive. But, my dear mamma, be pleased to
put the questions I wished you to put to the Chevalier. 
She still suffered me to with-hold her hand; and
with the other took out her handkerchief; not to wipe
away her tears, but to hide her blushes. She wept
not: Her bosom heaved with the grandeur of her sentiments. 
The question, my dear Grandison, said the Marchioness,
is this—We have all of us told my Clementina,
that you are invincible on the article of religion. 
She believes us: She doubts it not from your behaviour
and words: But as she would not omit any means to
convince you of her high regard for you, she is desirous
to hear from your own lips, that you are not to
be convinced: She is not afraid, the article so important,
to hear you declare, that you will not be a Catholic. 
It will make her more easy upon reflexion,
to be told, by you yourself, that you cannot comply,
even were she to consent to be yours, at a very short
day, if you could— 
The exalted Lady stood up, still not withdrawing
her hand—False shame, I despise thee, said she: Yet,
covered with blushes, she turned her face from me. 
—That hand, as this heart, putting her other hand
to her throbbing bosom, is yours, on that one condition
—I am convinced of your affection for me—But
fear not to tell me (it is for my own future peace of
mind, that I ask it) that you cannot accept it on the
terms. She then withdrew her hand, and would have
gone from me: But again I snatched it with both
mine. 
Do you, most excellent of human beings, let me 

ask you; do you consider the inequality in the case between
us, as you are pleased to put it? I presume not
to require a change of principles in you. You are only
afraid of your perseverance, tho' you are to be left
to your freedom; and your confessor to strengthen
and confirm you. Of me, is not an actual change
required against conviction? —Dearest Lady Clementina! 
Can you, can you (your mind great and generous
in every other case) insist upon a condition so
unequal? —Be great throughout; and I kneeled to
her—Be uniformly noble—Withdraw not your hand
—She struggled it, however, from me; and, hastening
to her closet—Once more, Chevalier, said she, read
my paper. 
I left her, and approaching the Marchioness, who
was in tears, Judge me, madam, said I, as I, in your
opinion, deserve—What shall I say? —I can urge my
hopes no farther: My promise is against me: Clementina
is despotic—Forgive me! —But indeed Clementina
is not impartial— 
Dear Chevalier, said the Marchioness, giving me
her hand, what can I say? —I admire you! I glory
in my child! I could not, myself in her place, have
withstood your plea. When her imagination is cool,
I still question if she will hold her purpose—Propose to
her, if you can engage her to descend from these
heights, your intended absences—You must calm her. 
You only can. Her soul is wrought up to too high a
pitch. 
O madam! But I must first try to quiet my own. 
I withdrew into the room adjoining; and, in two or
three minutes, returning, found the lovely daughter
incircled by the arms of the indulgent mother, both in
tears. Clementina was speaking. These were the
words I heard her say: 
Indeed, my dearest mamma, I am not angry with
the Chevalier. Why should I? But he can allow for 

me. I cannot be so great as he. Don't I say, that
I should be undone by his goodness. 
She turned her head, and seeing me, disengaged herself
from her mother's arms, and met me. Allow for
me, Sir, I beseech you, said she. I may be partial. 
I believe I am. But you can forgive me. I will hope
you can—Read my paper, said I, and went from you:
But it was not in anger. Read it, I again say. I can
give no other answer. I never can be happy with a
man whom I think a heretic; and the moment I
should, in tenderness, in duty, think him not one, I
shall cease myself to be a Catholic. A husband, Sir, allied
to perdition, what wife can bear the reflexion? 
The Chevalier, my dear, urges you not. He adheres
to his promise. You were willing to put a question
to him yourself. I consented that he should answer
it in your presence, for the sake of your future
peace of mind. He has spoken to it like himself:
He has shewn you, how much he admires you, at the
same time that he signifies his inviolable adherence
to his own religion. My dearest Love, he has conceded
to terms in our favour, that we have not conceded
to in his. Glorious and unexceptionable is his
adherence, were it to a right religion. He believes it
is. He might urge much to his own advantage from
your adherence to yours: But he has only hinted at
that to us, not to you. He is willing to wait the event
of your own will. He will leave us, as he did more
than once before, and return; and if you persevere,
he will endeavour to make himself easy— 
And leave us; and return to England, I suppose? 
No doubt of it, my dear— 
While the Florentine is there— 
I never, madam, can be any-thing but a well-wisher
to the Florentine— 
God give you, Sir, and me too, ease of mind. But
I find my head overstrained. It is bound round as
with a cord, I think, putting her hands to each side 

of it, for a moment—You must leave me, Sir. But
if you will see me to-morrow morning, and tell me
whither you intend to go, and what you intend to do,
I shall be obliged to you. Cannot we talk together,
Sir, as brother and sister? Or as tutor and pupil? — 
Those were happy days! Let us try to recover them. 
She put her hand to her forehead, as apprehensive
of disorder; and looked discomposed. I bowed to
both Ladies, in silence; retired; and, without endeavouring
to see any-body else, went to my lodgings. 

