


Mr. Selby, To Miss Byron. 


Selby-House, Jan. 30. 
Well! and now there wants but a London
Lover or two to enter upon the stage, and Vanity-Fair
will be proclaimed, and directly open'd. Greville
every-where magnifying you in order to justify his flame
for you: Fenwick exalting you above all women:
Orme adoring you, and by his humble silence saying
more than any of them: Proposals besides from this
man: Letters from that! What scenes of flattery
and nonsense have I been witness to for these past
three years and half, that young Mr. Elford began
the dance? Single! Well may you have remained
single till this your twentieth year, when you have
such choice of admirers, that you don't know which
to have. So in a mercer's shop, the tradesman has
a fine time with you women; when variety of his
rich wares distract you; and fifty to one at last, but 

as well in men as silks, you choose the worst, especially
if the best is offer'd at first, and refused. For women
know better how to be sorry, than to amend. 
“It is true, say you, that we young women are
apt to be pleased with admiration—” O ho! Are
you so? And so I have gain'd one point with you at
last; have I? 
“But I have always endeavoured” [And I, Harriet,
wish you had succeeded in your endeavours] “to keep
down any foolish pride”—Then you own that pride
you have? —Another point gained! Conscience,
honest conscience, will now-and-then make you women
speak out. But now I think of it, here is vanity
in the very humility. Well say you endeavour'd,
when female pride, like Love, tho' hid under a barrel,
will flame out at the bung. 
Well, said I, to your Aunt Selby, to your Grandmamma,
and to your Cousin Lucy, when we all met
to sit in judgment upon your letters, now I hope
you'll never dispute with me more on this flagrant
love of admiration which I have so often observ'd
swallows up the hearts and souls of you all; since
your Harriet is not exempt from it; and since with
all her speciousness, with all her prudence, with all
her caution, she (taken with a qualm of conscience)
owns it. 
But, no, truly! All is right that you say: All is
right that you do! —Your very confessions are brought
as so many demonstrations of your diffidence, of your
ingenuousness, and I cannot tell what. 
Why, I must own, that no Father ever loved his
Daughter as I love my Niece. But yet, girl, your
faults, your vanities, I do not love. It is my glory,
that I think myself able to judge of my friends as they
deserve; not as being my friends. Why, the best beloved
of my heart, your Aunt herself—you know, I
value her now more, now less, as she deserves. But
with all those I have named, and with all your relations, 

indeed, their Harriet cannot be in fault. And why? 
Because you are related to them; and because they
attribute to themselves some merit from the relation
they stand in to you. Supererogatorians all of them
(I will make words whenever I please) with their attributions
to you; and because you are of their sex,
forsooth; and because I accuse you in a point in which
you are all concern'd, and so make a common cause
of it. 
Here one exalts you for your good sense; because
you have a knack, by help of an happy memory, of
making every thing you read, and every thing that
is told you, that you like, your own (your Grandfather's
precepts particularly); and because, I think,
you pass upon us as your own what you have borrowed,
if not stolen. 
Another praises you for your good-nature—The
duce is in it, if a girl who has crouds of admirers
after her, and a new Lover where-ever she shews
her bewitching face; who is blest with health
and spirits, and has every-body for her friend, let her
deserve it or not; can be ill-natured. Who can such
a one have to quarrel with, trow? 
Another extols you for your chearful wit, even
when display'd, bold girl as you are, upon your Uncle; 
in which indeed you are upheld by the wife of
my bosom, whenever I take upon me to tell you
what ye all, even the best of ye, are. 
Yet sometimes they praise your modesty: And why
your modesty? —Because you have a skin in a manner
transparent; and because you can blush—I was going
to say, whenever you please. 
At other times, they will find out, that you have
features equally delicate and regular; when I think,
and I have examin'd them jointly and separately, that
all your takingness is owing to that open and chearful
countenance, which gives them a gloss (or what shall
I call it?) that we men are apt to be pleased with at first 

sight. A gloss that takes one, as it were, by surprize. 
But give me the beauty that grows upon us every time
we see it; that leaves room for something to be found
out to its advantage, as we are more and more acquainted
with it. 
“Your correcting Uncle,” you call me. And so
I will be. But what hope have I of your amendment,
when every living soul, man, woman, and child,
that knows you, puffs you up? There goes Mr. Selby,
I have heard strangers say—And who is Mr. Selby,
another stranger has ask'd? —Why, Mr. Selby is Uncle
to the celebrated Miss Byron. —Yet I, who have
lived fifty years in this county, should think I might
be known on my own account; and not as the Uncle
of a girl of twenty. 
“Am I not a saucy creature?” in another place
you ask. And you answer, “I know I am.” I am
glad you do. Now may I call you so by your own
authority, I hope. But with your Aunt, it is only
the effect of your agree-able vivacity. What abominable
partiality! E'en do what you will, Harriet,
you'll never be in fault. I could almost wish—But I
won't tell you what I wish neither. But something
must betide you, that you little think of; depend
upon that. All your days cannot be halcyon ones. 
I would give a thousand pounds with all my soul, to
see you heartily in love: Ay, up to the very ears,
and unable to help yourself! You are not thirty yet,
child. And, indeed, you seem to think the time of
danger is not over. I am glad of your consciousness,
my dear. Shall I tell Greville of your doubts, and of
your difficulties, Harriet? As to the ten coming years,
I mean? And shall I tell him of your prayer to pass
them safely? —But is not this wish of yours, that ten
years of bloom were over-past, and that you were arrived
at the thirtieth year of your age, a very singular
one? —A flight! A mere flight! Ask ninety-nine of
your Sex out of an hundred, if they would adopt it. 

In another Letter you ask Lucy, “If Mr. Greyille
has not said, that flattery is dearer to a woman than
her food.” Well, Niece, and what would you be
at? Is it not so? I do averr, that Mr. Greville is a
sensible man; and makes good observations. 
“Mens chief strength, you say, lies in the weakness
of women.” Why so it does, Where else
should it lie? And this from their immeasurable love
of admiration and flattery, as here you seem to acknowlege
of your own accord, tho' it has been so often
perversly disputed with me. Give you women but
rope enough, you'll do your own business. 
However, in many places you have pleased me. But
no-where more than when you recollect my averrment
(without contradicting it; which is a rarity!)
“that a woman out of wedlock is half useless to the
end of her being.” Good girl! That was an assertion
of mine, and I will abide by it. Lucy simper'd
when we came to this place, and look'd at me. She
expected, I saw, my notice upon it; so did your
Aunt: But the confession was so frank, that I was
generous, and only said, True as the gospel. 
I have written a long letter: Yet have not said one
quarter of what I intended to say when I began. You
will allow that you have given your correcting Uncle,
ample subject. But you fare something the better for
saying, “you unbespeak not your monitor.” 
You own, that you have some vanity. Be more free
in your acknowlegements of this nature (you may;
for are you not a woman?) and you'll fare something
the better for your ingenuousness; and the rather,
as your acknowlegement will help me up with
your Aunt and Lucy, and your Grandmamma, in an
argument I will not give up. 
I have had fresh applications made to me—But I
will not say from whom: Since we have agreed long
ago, not to prescribe to so discreet a girl, as, in the
main, we all think you, in the articles of Love and
Marriage. 

With all your faults I must love you. I am half
ashamed to say how much I miss you already. We are
all naturally chearful folks: Yet, I don't know how
it is; your absence has made a strange chasm at our
table. Let us hear from you every post: That will
be something. Your doting Aunt tells the hours on
the day she expects a letter. Your Grandmother is
at present with us, and in heart I am sure regrets your
absence: But as your tenderness to her has kept you
from going to London for so many years, she thinks
she ought to be easy. Her example goes a great way
with us all, you know, and particularly with 
Your truly affectionate
(tho' correcting) Uncle,
Geo. Selby. 

