


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Thursday evening, March 29. 
Lady G. has sent for me in all haste. She is
taken ill. God give her a happy hour! 
O my grandmamma! there are solemn, there are
awful, circumstances in the happiest marriages. She
begs to see her brother as well as me. I wait for him. 
The Count of Belvedere is with him. —They have
parted—I am gone. 
Thursday night. 
Just returned. All happily over! A fine girl! — 
Yet tho' a fine one, how are the Earl and Lady Gertrude 

disappointed! —Poor mortals! how hard to be
pleased! 
The brave are always humane. Sir Charles's tender
and polite behaviour on this occasion—How does
every occurrence endear him to every-body! 
How dearly does Lord G. love his Charlotte! Till
all was over, he was in agonies for her safety. His
prayers then, his thankfulness now, how ought they
to endear him to his Charlotte! And so they must,
when she is told of his anxiety, and of his honest
joy, or I will not own her for my Sister. But in her
heart, I am sure, she loves him. Her past idle behaviour
to him was but play. She will be matronized
now. The mother must make her a wife. She
will doubly disgrace herself, if she loves her child,
and can make a jest of her husband. 
I have just now asked Sir Charles, whether, if he
could prevail on Lady Clementina, while they were
all with us, to give her hand to the Count of Belvedere,
he would? By no means, said he, and that for
both their sakes. Lady Clementina has, on many
occasions, shewn that she may be prevailed upon by
generous and patient treatment: Let the Count have
patience. If she recover her mind, a train of chearful
ideas may take place of those melancholy ones,
which make her desirous of quitting society. She will
find herself, by the articles agreed to, in a situation
to do more good, than it is possible she could do,
were her inclination to take the veil to be gratified. 
The good she will do, will open and enlarge a mind
which is naturally noble; and she will be grateful for
the indulgence given her which will be the means of
so happy a change: But if the poor Lady's mind be
not curable (which God forbid!) who will pity the
Count for not being able to obtain her hand? —I
think, my dear, I have made him, tho' not happy,
easy; and I hope he will be able to see her without
violent emotions. 

Friday morn 
Signors Sebastiano and Juliano are come back, rejoicing
that they have been introduced to, and kindly
received by, Lady Clementina. 
Sir Edward Beauchamp has just left me. How
happy does the account he gives of my Emily's chearfulness
make me! I knew you would all love her. 
Sincerely do I rejoice in the news which my Nancy
confirms, that Lucy has absolutely rejected the addresses
of Mr. Greville. She startled me once, I can
tell her: A naughty girl! what could she mean by
it? 
Won't she give me the particulars under her own
hand? I shall be afraid of her till she does; so much
was I impressed by her warmth in the argument she
once held with me, in his favour, as I thought. Yet
I cordially wish Mr. Greville well; but my Lucy
better. Pray, madam, let me privately know, if the
proposals from the young Irish peer (a) , whom Nancy
praises so much for his sobriety, modesty, learning,
and other good qualities, were made before or
after the rejecting of Mr. Greville? I half-mistrust
the girls who have been disappointed of a first Love. 
Yet Lucy's victory over herself was a noble one. 
She is in the way, I hope, to be rewarded for it. God
grant it! —Think you, my dear grandmamma, I can
be solicitous (as I am from the bottom of my heart)
for the happiness of a new-adopted Sister, and not be
inexpressibly anxious for that of my Lucy, the faithful,
the affectionate friend of my earlier years? 
Our guests are entering—May the same gracious
Providence, which has more than answered every wish
of your Harriet's heart in her own situation, shower
down its blessings on Lucy, on you, and all the revered,
the beloved circle! prays, my dear grandmamma, 
Your and their ever dutiful and affectionate
Harriet Grandison. 

