



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq. 

Friday, July 28. 
I have three letters of thine to take notice of (a) : But
I am divided in my mind, whether to quarrel with thee,
in thy unmerciful reflections; or to thank thee, for thy
acceptable particularity and diligence. But several of my
sweet dears have I, indeed, in my time made to cry and
laugh in a breath; nay, one side of their pretty faces laugh,
before the cry could go off the other: Why may I not,
therefore, curse and applaud thee in the same moment? 
To take both in one: And what follows, as it shall rise
from my pen. 
How often have I ingenuously confessed my sins against
this excellent creature? —Yet thou never sparest me, altho'
as bad a man as myself. Since then, I get so little by my
confessions, I had a good mind to try to defend myself; 
and that not only from antient and modern story, but from 

common practice; and yet avoid repeating any-thing I
have suggested before in my own behalf. 
I am in a humour to play the fool with my pen: Briefly
then, from antient story first: —Dost thou not think, that
I am as much intitled to forgiveness on Miss Harlowe's
account, as Virgil's hero was on Queen Dido's? For what
an ingrateful varlet was that vagabond to the hospitable
princess, who had willingly conferred upon him the last
favour? —Stealing away (whence, I suppose, the ironical
phrase of Trusty Trojan to this day) like a thief; pretendedly
indeed at the command of the gods; but could that
be, when the errand he went upon was to rob other princes,
not only of their dominions, but of their lives? —Yet this
fellow is, at every word, the pius Æneas, with the immortal
bard who celebrates him. 
Should Miss Harlowe even break her heart (which Heaven
forbid!) for the usage she has received (to say nothing
of her disappointed pride, to which her death would be
attributable, more than to reason) what comparison will
her fate hold to Queen Dido's? And have I half the obligation
to her, that Æneas had to the Queen of Carthage. 
The latter placing a confidence, the former none, in her
man? —Then, whom else have I robbed? Whom else
have I injured? Her brother's worthless life I gave him,
instead of taking any man's, as the Trojan vagabond
did the lives of thousands. Why then should it not be
the pius Lovelace, as well as the pius Æneas? For, doth
thou think, had a conflagration happened, and had it been
in my power, that I would not have saved my old Anchises
(as he did his from the Ilion bonfire) even at the expence
of my Creüsa, had I had a wife of that name? 
But for a more modern instance in my favour—Have I
used Miss Harlowe, as our famous Maiden-Queen, as she
was called, used one of her own blood, a Sister-Queen; 
who threw herself into her protection from her rebel-subjects; 
and whom she detained prisoner eighteen years, and
at last cut off her head? Yet (credited by worse and weaker
reigns, a succession four deep) do not honest Protestants
pronounce her pious too? —And call her particularly their
Queen? 
As to common practice—Who, let me ask, that has it in 

his power to gratify a predominant passion, be it what it
will, denies himself the gratification? —Leaving it to cooler
deliberation; and, if he be a great man, to his flatterers; 
to find a reason for it afterwards? 
Then, as to the worst part of my treatment of this lady— 
How many men are there, who, as well as I, have sought,
by intoxicating liquors, first to inebriate, then to subdue? 
What signifies what the potations were, when the same end
was in view? 
Let me tell thee, upon the whole, that neither the Queen
of Carthage, nor the Queen of Scots, would have thought
they had any reason to complain of cruelty, had they been
used no worse than I have used the Queen of my heart: 
And then do I not aspire with my whole soul to repair by
marriage? Would the pius Æneas, thinkest thou, have
done such a piece of justice by Dido, had she lived? 
Come, come, Belford, let people run away with notions
as they will, I am comparatively a very innocent
man. And if by these, and other like reasonings, I have
quieted my own conscience, a great end is answered. What
have I to do with the world? 
And now I sit me peaceably down to consider thy letters. 
I hope thy pleas in my favour (a) , when she gave thee
(so generously gave thee), for me, my letters, were urged
with an honest energy. But I suspect thee much for being
too ready to give up thy client. Then thou hast such
a misgiving aspect; an aspect, rather inviting rejection,
than carrying persuasion with it; and art such an hesitating,
such an humming and hawing caitiff; that I shall attribute
my failure, if I do fail, rather to the inability and
ill looks of my advocate, than to my cause. Again, Thou
art deprived of the force men of our cast give to arguments; 
for she won't let thee swear! —Art moreover a
very heavy, thoughtless fellow; tolerable only at a second
rebound; a horrid dunce at the impromptu. These, encountering
with such a lady, are great disadvantages. 
—And still a greater is thy balancing (as thou dost at present)
between old Rakery and new Reformation: Since this puts
thee into the same situation with her, as they told me at
Leipsick Martin Luther was in, at the first public dispute 

which he held, in defence of his supposed new doctrines,
with Eckius. For Martin was then but a linsey-wolsey
reformer. He retained some dogma, which, by natural
consequence, made others that he held untenable. So
that Eckius, in some points, had the better of him. But,
from that time, he made clear work, renouncing all that
stood in his way: And then his doctrines ran upon all
fours. He was never puzzled afterwards; and could boldly
declare, that he would defend them in the face of angels
and men; and to his friends, who would have dissuaded
him from venturing to appear before the emperor Charles
the Fifth at Spires, That, were there as many devils at Spires,
as tiles upon the houses, he would go. An answer that is
admired by every Protestant Saxon to this day. 
Since then thy unhappy aukwardness destroys the force
of thy arguments, I think thou hadst better (for the present, however) forbear to urge her on the subject of accepting
the reparation I offer; lest the continual teazing of
her to forgive me should but strengthen her in her denials
of forgiveness; till, for consistency sake, she'll be forced to
adhere to a resolution so often avowed: Whereas, if left
to herself, a little time, and better health, which will bring
on better spirits, will give her quicker resentments; those
quicker resentments will lead her into vehemence; that
vehemence will subside, and turn into expostulation and
parley: My friends will then interpose, and guaranty for
me: And all our trouble on both sides will be over. 
Such is the natural course of things. 
I cannot endure thee for thy hopelesness in the lady's
recovery (a) ; and that in contradiction to the Doctor and
Apothecary. 
Time, in the words of Congreve, thou sayst, will give
increase to her afflictions. But why so? Knowest thou not,
that those words (so contrary to common experience) were
applied to the case of a person, while passion was in its
full vigour? —At such a time, every-one in a heavy grief
thinks the same: But as Enthusiasts do by Scripture, so dost
thou by the poets thou hast read: Any-thing that carries
the most distant allusion from either, to the case in hand,
is put down by both for gospel, however incongruous to 

the general scope of either, and to that case. So once, in
a pulpit, I heard one of the former very vehemently declare
himself to be a dead dog; when every man, woman,
and child, were convinced to the contrary by his howling. 
I can tell thee, that, if nothing else will do, I am determined,
in spite of thy buskin-airs, and of thy engagements
for me to the contrary, to see her myself. 
Face to face have I known many a quarrel made up,
which distance would have kept alive, and widened. Thou
wilt be a madder Jack than him in the Tale of a Tub, if
thou givest an active opposition to this interview. 
In short, I cannot bear the thought, that a lady, whom
once I had bound to me in the silken cords of love, should
slip through my fingers, and be able, while my heart flames
out with a violent passion for her, to despise me, and to
set both love and me at defiance. Thou canst not imagine
how much I envy thee, and her Doctor, and her Apothecary,
and every-one whom I hear of being admitted to
her presence and conversation; and wish to be the one or
the other in turn. 
Wherefore, if nothing else will do, I will see her. I'll
tell thee of an admirable expedient, just come cross me, to
save thy promise, and my own. 
Mrs. Lovick, you say, is a good woman: If the lady
be worse, she shall advise her to send for a parson to pray
by her: Unknown to her, unknown to the lady, unknown
to thee (for so it may pass), I will contrive to be the man,
petticoated out, and vested in a gown and cassock. I once,
for a certain purpose, did assume the canonicals; and I
was thought to make a fine sleek appearance, my broad
rose-bound beaver became me mightily, and I was much
admired upon the whole, by all who saw me. 
Methinks it must be charmingly apropos to see me kneeling
down by her bed-side (I am sure I shall pray heartily),
beginning out of the Common-prayer book the Sick Office
for the restoration of the languishing lady, and concluding
with an exhortation to charity and forgiveness for myself. 
I will consider of this matter. But, in whatever shape
I shall choose to appear, of this thou mayst assure thyself,
I will apprise thee before-hand of my determined-upon
visit, that thou mayest contrive to be out of the way, 

and to know nothing of the matter. This will save thy
word; and, as to mine, can she think worse of me than
she does at present? 
An indispensable of true love and profound respect, in
thy wise opinion (a) , is absurdity or aukwardness. —'Tis
surprising, that thou shouldst be one of those partial mortals,
who take their measures of right and wrong from
what they find themselves to be, and cannot help being! — 
So aukwardness is a perfection in the aukward! —At this
rate, no man ever can be in the wrong. But I insist upon
it, that an aukward fellow will do every-thing aukwardly: 
And if he be like thee, will rack his unmeaning brain
for excuses as aukward as his first fault. Respectful Love
is an inspirer of actions worthy of itself; and he who cannot
shew it, where he most means it, manifests, that he is
an unpolite rough creature, a perfect Belford, and has it
not in him. 
But here thou'lt throw out that notable witticism, that
my outside is the best of me, thine the worst of thee; and
that, if I set about mending my mind, thou wilt mend
thy appearance. 
But, pr'ythee, Jack, don't stay for that; but set about
thy amendment in dress, when thou leavest off thy mourning; 
for why shouldst thou prepossess in thy disfavour all
those who never saw thee before? —It is hard to remove
early-taken prejudices, whether of liking or distaste: People
will hunt, as I may say, for reasons to confirm first impressions,
in compliment to their own sagacity: Nor is it
every mind that has the ingenuity to confess itself mistaken,
when it finds itself to be wrong. Thou thyself art
an adept in the pretended science of reading of men; and,
whenever thou art out, wilt study to find some reasons
why it was more probable that thou shouldst have been
right; and wilt watch every motion and action, and every
word and sentiment, in the person thou hast once censured,
for proofs, in order to help thee to revive and maintain
thy first opinion. And, indeed, as thou seldom errest on
the favourable side, human nature is so vile a thing, that
thou art likely to be right five times in six, on the other: 
And perhaps it is but guessing of others, by what thou 

findest in thy own heart, to have reason to compliment
thyself on thy penetration. 
Here is preachment for thy preachment: And, I hope, if thou likest thy own, thou wilt thank me for mine; the
rather, as thou may'st be the better for it, if thou wilt: 
Since it is calculated for thy own meridian. 
Well, but the lady refers my destiny to the letter she has
written, actually written, to Miss Howe; to whom, it seems,
she has given her reasons, why she will not have me. I
long to know the contents of this letter: But am in great
hopes, that she has so expressed her denials, as shall give
room to think, she only wants to be persuaded to the contrary,
in order to reconcile herself to herself. 
I could make some pretty observations upon one or two
places of the lady's meditation: But, wicked as I am thought
to be, I never was so abandoned, as to turn into ridicule,
or even to treat with levity, things sacred. I think it the
highest degree of ill manners, to jest upon those subjects,
which the world in general look upon with veneration,
and call divine. I would not even treat the mythology of
the Heathen, to a Heathen, with the ridicule that perhaps
would fairly lie from some of the absurdities that strike
every common observer. Nor, when at Rome, and in
other popish countries, did I ever behave shockingly at
those ceremonies which I thought very extraordinary: For
I saw some people affected, and seemingly edified, by
them; and I contented myself to think, tho' they were beyond
my comprehension, that, if they answered any good
end to the many, there was religion enough in them, or
civil policy at least, to exempt them from the ridicule
of even a bad man, who had common sense, and good
manners. 
For the like reason, I have never given noisy or tumultuous
instances of dislike to a new Play, if I thought it
ever so indifferent: For, I concluded first, that every one
was intitled to see quietly what he paid for: And, next,
as the Theatre (the epitome of the world) consisted of Pit,
Boxes, and Gallery, it was hard, I thought, if there could
be such a performance exhibited, as would not please somebody
in that mixed multitude: And, if it did, those somebodies 

had as much right to enjoy their own judgments undisturbedly,
as I had to enjoy mine. 
This was my way of shewing my disapprobation; I never
went again. And as a man is at his option, whether
he will go to a Play, or not, he has not the same excuse
for expressing his dislike clamorously, as if he were compelled
to see it. 
I have ever, thou knowest, declared against those shallow
libertines, who could not make out their pretensions
to wit, but on two subjects, to which every man of true
wit will scorn to be beholden: Profaneness and Obscenity,
I mean; which must shock the ears of every man
or woman of sense, without answering any end, but of
shewing a very low and abandoned nature. And, till I
came acquainted with the brutal Mowbray (no great praise
to myself from such a tutor), I was far from making so
free, as I now do, with oaths and curses; for then I was
forced to outswear him sometimes, to keep him in his allegiance
to me his general: Nay, I often check myself to
myself, for this empty, unprofitable liberty of speech; in
which we are outdone by the sons of the common sewer. 
All my vice is women, and the love of plots and intrigues; 
and I cannot but wonder, how I fell into those
shocking freedoms of speech; since, generally-speaking
they are far from helping forward my main end: Only,
now-and-then, indeed, a little novice rises to one's notice,
who seems to think dress, and oaths, and curses, the diagnostics
of the rakish spirit she is inclined to favour: And, indeed,
they are the only qualifications, that some, who are
called Rakes, and Pretty fellows, have to boast of. But
what must the women be, who can be attracted by such
empty-soul'd profligates? —Since wickedness with wit is
hardly excusable; but, without it, is equally shocking and
contemptible. 
There again is preachment for thy preachment; and
thou wilt be apt to think, that I am reforming too: But
no such matter. If this were new light darting in upon
me, as thy morality seems to be to thee, something of this
kind might be apprehended: But this was always my way
of thinking; and I defy thee, or any of thy brethren, to
name a time, when I have either ridiculed Religion, or 

talked obscenely. On the contrary, thou knowest how
often I have checked that Bear in love-matters, Mowbray,
and the finical Tourville, and thyself too, for what ye
have called the double-entendre. In love, as in points
that required a manly resentment, it has always been my
maxim, to act, rather than talk; and I do assure thee, as
to the first, the ladies themselves will excuse the one sooner
than the other. 
As to the admiration thou expressest for the books of
Scripture, thou art certainly right in it. But 'tis strange
to me, that thou wert ignorant of their beauty, and noble
simplicity, till now. Their antiquity always made me
reverence them: And how was it possible that thou couldst
not, for that reason, if for no other, give them a perusal? 
I'll tell thee a short story, which I had from my tutor,
admonishing me against exposing myself by ignorant wonder,
when I should quit college, go to town, or travel. 
‘The first time Dryden's Alexander's Feast fell into
his hands, he told me, he was prodigiously charmed
with it: And, having never heard any-body speak of it
before, thought, as thou dost of the Bible, that he had
made a new discovery. 
‘He hastened to an appointment which he had with several
wits (for he was then in town), one of whom was
a noted Critic, who, according to him, had more merit
than good fortune; for all the little nibblers in wit, whose
writings would not stand the test of criticism, made it,
he said, a common cause to run him down, as men
would a mad dog. 
The young gentleman (for young he then was) set
forth magnificently in the praises of that inimitable performance; 
and gave himself airs of second-hand merit,
for finding out its beauties. 
‘The old Bard heard him out with a smile, which the
collegian took for approbation, till he spoke; and then
it was in these mortifying words: 'Sdeath, Sir, where
have you lived till now, or with what sort of company
have you conversed, young as you are, that you have
never before heard of the finest piece in the English language?’ 
This story had such an effect upon me, who had ever a 

proud heart, and wanted to be thought a clever fellow,
that, in order to avoid the like disgrace, I laid down two
rules to myself. The first, whenever I went into company
where there were strangers, to hear every-one of them
speak, before I gave myself liberty to prate: The other, if
I found any of them above my match, to give up all title
to new discoveries, contenting myself to praise what they
praised, as beauties familiar to me, tho' I had never heard
of them before. And so, by degrees, I got the reputation
of a wit myself: And when I threw off all restraint,
and books, and learned conversation, and fell in with some
of our brethren who are now wandering in Erebus, and
with such others as Belton, Mowbray, Tourville, and thyself,
I set up on my own stock; and, like what we have
been told of Sir Richard, in his latter days, valued myself
on being the emperor of the company; for, having fathomed
the depth of them all, and afraid of no rival but
thee, whom also I had got a little under (by my gaiety
and promptitude at least), I proudly, like Addison's Cato,
delighted to give laws to my little senate. 
Proceed with thee by-and-by. 