


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 


Bologna, Monday, May 15–26. 
Last night arrived Lady Clementina, the General,
his Lady, the Count, and Signor Sebastiano. 

I had left Jeronymo about an hour. He had had
in the morning the intended opening made by Mr.
Lowther. He would have me present. 
The operation was happily performed: But, thro'
weakness of body, he was several times in the day
troubled with faintings. 
I left him tolerably chearful in the evening; and
rejoicing in expectation of his sister's arrival; and, as
the Bishop had assured him of the General's grateful
disposition, he longed, he said, to see that affectionate
brother and his Lady once more. He had never but
once seen her before, and then was so ill, that he could
hardly compliment her on the honour she had done
their family. 
The Bishop sent to tell me that his sister was arrived; 
but that being fatigued and unhappy, Camilla
should acquaint me in the morning with the way
in which she should then be. 
I slept not half an hour the whole night. You,
my dear friend, will easily account for my restlesness. 
I sent, as usual, early in the morning, to know
how Jeronymo rested. The answer was favourable; 
returned by Mr. Lowther, who sat up with him that
night, at his own motion: He knew not but something
critical might happen. 
Camilla came. The good woman was so full of
her own joy to see me once more in Italy, that I could
not presently get a word from her, of what my heart
throbbed with impatience to know. 
At last, You will, said she, have the General and
the Bishop with you. Ah, Sir! my poor young
Lady! What has she suffered since you left us! You
will not know her. We are not sure she will know
you. Who shall be able to bear the first interview? 
She has now but few intervals. It is all one gloomy
confusion with her. She cares not to speak to anybody. 
Every stranger she sees, terrifies her. O the
vile, thrice vile Lady Laurana!— 

In this manner ran on Camilla: Nor would she
enter into any other particulars than the unhappy ones
she left me to collect from the broken hints and exclamations
thus thrown out. Alas! thought I, the
calamities of Clementina have affected the head of
the poor Camilla! She hurried away, lest she should
be wanted, and lest the General should find her with
me. 
The two brothers came soon after. The General
took my hand, with a kind of forced politeness: We
are all obliged to you, Sir, said he, for your Mr.
Lowther. Are the surgeons of England so famous? 
But the people of your nation have been accustomed
to give wounds: They should therefore furnish operators
to heal them. We are obliged to you also, for
the trouble you have given yourself in coming over to
us in person. Jeronymo has found a revival of spirits
upon it: God grant they may not subside! But,
alas! our sister! —Poor Clementina! —She is lost! 
Would to God, said the Bishop, we had left her to
the care of Mrs. Beaumont. 
The General himself, having taken her from Florence,
would not join in this wish. There was a
middle course, he said, that ought to have been taken. 
But Laurana is a daughter of the devil, said he; 
and Lady Sforza ought to be detested for upholding
her. 
The General expressed himself with coldness on my
coming over; but said, that now I was on the spot,
and as his sister had been formerly desirous of seeing
me, an interview might be permitted, in order to satisfy
those of the family who had given me the invitation,
which it was very good of me to accept; 
especially as I had the Lady Olivia in England attending
my motions: But otherwise he had no opinion— 
There he stopt. 
I looked upon him with indignation, mingled with
contempt: And directing myself to the Bishop, You 

remember, my Lord, said I, the story of Naaman
the Syrian (a) . 
What is that, my Lord? said he to the Bishop. 
Far be it from me, continued I, still directing myself
to the Bishop, to presume upon my own consequence
in the application of the story: But your
Lordship will judge how far the comparison will hold. 
Would to God it might throughout! 
A happy allusion, said the Bishop. I say, Amen. 
I know not who this Naaman is, said the General,
nor what is meant by your allusion, Chevalier: But by
your looks I should imagine, that you mean me contempt. 
My looks, my Lord, generally indicate my heart. 
You may make light of my intention; and so will I
of the trouble I have been at, if your Lordship make
not light of me. But were I, my Lord, in your own
palace at Naples, I would tell you, that you seem
not to know, in my case, what graciousness is. Yet
I ask not for favour from you, but as much for your
own sake, as mine. 
Dear Grandison, said the Bishop—My Lord, to his
brother—Did you not promise me—Why did you
mention Olivia to the Chevalier? 
Does that disturb you, Sir? said the General to me. 
I cannot make light of a man of your consequence; 
especially with Ladies, Sir—in a scornful manner. 
The General, you see, my Lord, said I, turning
to the Bishop, has an insuperable ill-will to me. I
found, when I attended him at Naples, that he had
harboured surmises that were as injurious to his sister,
as to me. I was in hopes that I had obviated them; 
but a rooted malevolence will recur. However, satisfied
as I am with my own innocence, he shall, for
many sakes, find it very difficult to provoke me. 
For my own sake, among the rest, Chevalier? with
an air of drollery. 

You are at liberty, returned I, to make your own
constructions. Allow me, my Lords, to attend you
to Signor Jeronymo. 
Not till you are cordial friends, said the Bishop— 
Brother, give me your hand, offering to take it— 
Chevalier, yours— 
Dispose of mine as you please, my Lord, said I,
holding it out. 
He took it, and the General's at the same time, and
would have joined them. 
Come, my Lord, said I, to the General, and
snatched his reluctant hand, accept of a friendly offer,
from a heart as friendly. Let me honour you, from
my own knowlege, for those great qualities which the
world gives you. I demand your favour, from a consciousness
that I deserve it; and that I could not, were
I to submit to be treated with indignity by any man. I
should be sorry to look little in your eyes; but I will
not in my own. 
Who can bear the superiority this man assumes,
brother? 
You oblige me, my Lord, to assert myself. 
The Chevalier speaks nobly, my Lord. His character
is well known. Let me lead you both friends
to our Jeronymo. But say, Brother—Say, Chevalier,
that you are so. 
I cannot bear, said the General, that the Chevalier
Grandison should imagine himself of so much consequence
to my sister, as some of you seem to think
him. 
You know me not, my Lord. I have at present
no wish but for the recovery of your sister, and Signor
Jeronymo. Were I able to be of service to them,
that service would be my reward. But, my Lord, if
it will make you easy, and induce you to treat me,
as my own heart tells me I ought to be treated; I
will give you my honour, and let me say, that it never
yet was forfeited, that whatever turn your sister's 

malady may take, I will not accept of the highest favour
that can be done me, but with the joint consent
of the three brothers, as well as of your father and
mother. Permit me to add, that I will not enter into
any family that shall think meanly of me; nor subject
the woman I love to the contempt of her own relations. 
This indeed is nobly said, replied the General,
Give me your hand upon it, and I am your friend for
ever. 
Proud man! He could not bear to think, that a
simple English gentleman, as he looks upon me to
be, should ally with their family; improbable as it is,
in his own opinion, that the unhappy Lady should
ever recover her reason: But he greatly loves the
Count of Belvedere; and all the family was fond of
an alliance with that deserving nobleman. 
The Bishop rejoiced to find us at last in a better
way of understanding each other, than we had hitherto
been in; and it was easier for me to allow for this
haughty man, as Mrs. Beaumont had let me know
what the behaviour was that I had to expect from
him: And indeed, his father, mother, and two bro
thers, were very apprehensive of it: It will therefore
be a pleasure to them, that I have so easily overcome
his prejudices. 
They both advised me to suspend my visit to their
brother till the afternoon, that they might have the
more time to consult with one another, and to prepare
and dispose their sister to see me. 
At taking leave, the General snatched my hand,
and, with an air of pleasantry, said, I have a wife,
Grandison. I wished him joy. You need not, said
he; for I have it: One of the best of women. She
longs to see you. I think I need not be apprehensive,
because she is generous, and I ever must be grateful:
But take care, take care, Grandison! I shall watch
every turn of your eye. Admire her, if you will: 

You will not be able to help it. But I am glad she
saw you not before she was mine. 
I rejoice, said the Bishop, that a meeting, which,
notwithstanding your promises, brother, gave me apprehensions
as we came, is followed by so pleasant a
parting: Henceforth we are four Brothers again. 
Ay, and remember, Chevalier, that my Sister has
also four Brothers. 
May the number Four not be lessened by the death
of my Jeronymo; and may Clementina be restored; 
and Providence dispose as it pleases of me! I am now
going to the palace of Porretta; with what agitations
of mind, you, Dr. Bartlett, can better imagine, than
I describe. 

