



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Tuesday, Three o' Clock, March 28. 
I have mention'd several times the pertness of
Mrs. Betty to me; and now, having a little time
upon my hands, I will give you a short dialogue that
passed just now between us: It may, perhaps, be a
little relief to you from the dull subjects with which I
am perpetually teazing you. 
As she attended me at dinner, she took notice, That
Nature is satisfy'd with a very little nourishment: And
thus she complimentally proved it: —For, Miss, said
she, you eat nothing; yet never looked more charmingly
in your life. 
As to the former part of your speech, Betty, said
I, you observe well; and I have often thought, when 

I have seen how healthy the children of the labouring
poor look, and are, with empty stomachs, and
hardly a good meal in a week, that Providence is very
kind to its creatures, in this respect, as well as in all
others, in making Much not necessary to the support
of life; when three parts in four of its creatures, if it
were, would not know how to obtain it. It puts me
in mind of two proverbial sentences, which are full
of admirable meaning. 
What, pray, Miss, are they? I love to hear you
talk, when you are so sedate as you seem now to be. 
The one is to the purpose we are speaking of; 
Poverty is the mother of health: And let me tell you,
Betty, if I had a better appetite, and were to encourage
it, with so little rest, and so much distress
and persecution, I don't think I should be able to preserve
my reason. 
There's no inconvenience but has its convenience, said
Betty, giving me proverb for proverb. But what is
the other, Madam? 
That the pleasures of the mighty are obtain'd by the
tears of the poor: It is but reasonable therefore, methinks,
that the plenty of the one should be followed by
distempers; and that the indigence of the other should
be attended with that health, which makes all its
other discomforts light on the comparison. And
hence a third proverb, Betty, since you are an admirer
of proverbs; Better a bare foot, than none at all; 
that is to say, than not to be able to walk. 
She was mightily taken with what I said: See,
said she, what a fine thing scholarship is! —I, said she,
had always, from a girl, a taste for reading, tho' it
were but in Mother Goose, and concerning the Fairies
[And then she took genteelly a pinch of snuff]: 
Could but my parents have let go as fast as I pulled,
I should have been a very happy creature. 
Very likely, you would have made great improvements,
Betty: But as it is, I cannot say, but since I 

have had the favour of your attendance in this intimate
manner, I have heard smarter things from you, than
I have heard at table from some of my brother's fellow-collegians. 
Your servant, dear Miss; dropping me one of her
best courtesies: So fine a judge as you are! —It is
enough to make one very proud. Then, with another
pinch—I cannot indeed but say, bridling upon
it, that I have heard famous scholars often and often
say very silly things: Things I should be ashamed
myself to say—But I thought they did it out of humility,
and in condescension to those who had not their
learning. 
That she might not be too proud, I told her, I
would observe, that the liveliness and quickness she
so happily discovered in herself, was not so much an
honour to her, as what she owed to her Sex; which,
as I had observed in many instances, had great advantages
over the other, in all the powers that related
to imagination: And hence, Mrs. Betty, you'll take
notice, as I have of late had opportunity to do, that
your own talent at repartee and smartness, when it
has something to work upon, displays itself to more advantage,
than could well be expected from one whose
friends, to speak in your own phrase, could not let
go so fast as you pulled. 
The wench gave me a proof of the truth of my
observation, in a manner still more alert than I had
expected: If, said she, our sex have so much advantage
in smartness, it is the less to be wondered at,
that you, Miss, who have had such an education,
should outdo all the men and women too, that come
near you. 
Bless me, Betty, said I, what a proof do you give
me of your wit and your courage at the same time! 
This is outdoing yourself. It would make young
Ladies less proud, and more apprehensive, were they
generally attended by such smart servants, and their 

mouths permitted to be unlocked upon them, as
yours has lately been upon me! —But, take away,
Mrs. Betty. 
Why, Miss, you have eat nothing at all: —I hope
you are not displeased with your dinner for any thing
I have said. 
No, Mrs. Betty, I am pretty well used to your
freedoms, now, you know. —I am not displeased in
the main, to observe, that, were the succession of
modern fine Ladies to be extinct, it might be supplied
from those whom they place in the next rank to themselves,
their chambermaids and confidants. Your young
mistress has contributed a great deal to this quickness
of yours. She always preferred your company to
mine. As you pulled, she let go; and so, Mrs. Betty,
you have gained by her conversation what I have
lost. 
Why, Miss, if you come to that, no-body says
better things than Miss Harlowe. I could tell you
one, if I pleased, upon my observing to her, that
you lived of late upon air, and had no stomach to
any thing, yet looked as charmingly as ever.— 
I dare say, it was a very good-natured one, Mrs.
Betty! —Do you then please that I shall hear it? 
Only this, Miss, That your stomachfulness had
swallowed up your stomach; and, That obstinacy was
meat, drink, and cloth to you. 
Ay, Mrs. Betty; and did she say This? —I hope
she laughed when she said it, as she does at all her
good things, as she calls them. It was very smart,
and very witty. I wish my mind were so much at
ease, as to aim at being witty too. But if you admire
such sententious sayings, I'll help you to another; 
and that is, Encouragement and Approbation
make people shew talents they were never suspected to
have; and This will do both for mistress and maid: 
And another I'll furnish you with, the contrary of the
former, that will do only for me; That Persecution 

and Discouragement depress ingenuous minds, and blunt
the edge of lively imaginations. —And hence may my
sister's Brilliancy and my Stupidity be both accounted
for. Ingenuous, you must know, Mrs. Betty, and
ingenious, are two things; and I would not arrogate
the latter to myself. 
Lord, Miss, said the Foolish, you know a great
deal for your years. —You are a very learned young
Lady! —What pity— 
None of your pities, Mrs. Betty. I know what you'd
say. But tell me, if you can, Is it resolved that I
shall be carry'd to my uncle Antony's on Thursday? 
I was willing to reward myself for the patience she
had made me exercise, by getting at what intelligence
I could from her. 
Why, Miss, seating herself at a little distance (excuse
my sitting down), with the snuff-box tapp'd very
smartly, the lid opened, and a pinch taken with a
dainty finger and thumb, the other three fingers distendedly
bent, and with a fine flourish—I cannot but
say, that it is my opinion, you will certainly go on
Thursday; and this noless foless, as I have heard my
young Lady say in French. 
Whether I am willing or not willing, you mean, I
suppose, Mrs. Betty? 
You have it, Miss. 
Well but, Betty, I have no mind to be turned out
of doors so suddenly. Do you think I could not be
permitted to tarry one week longer? 
How can I tell, Miss? 
O Mrs. Betty, you can tell a great deal, if you
please. But here I am forbid writing to any one of
my family; none of it now will come near me; 
nor will any of it permit me to see them: How shall
I do to make my request known, to tarry here a
week or fortnight longer! 
Why, Miss, I fansy, if you were to shew a compliable 

temper, your friends would shew a compliable
one too. But would you expect favours, and grant
none? 
Smartly put, Betty! But who knows what may
be the result of my being carried to my uncle Antony's? 
Who knows, Miss! —Why any-body will guess
what may be the result. 
As how, Betty? 
As how! repeated the pert wench, Why, Miss,
you will stand in your own light, as you have hitherto
done: And your parents, as such good parents ought,
will be obeyed. 
If, Mrs. Betty, I had not been used to your oughts,
and to have my duty laid down to me, by your oraculous
wisdom, I should be apt to stare at the liberty
of your speech. 
You seem angry, Miss. I hope I take no unbecoming
liberty. 
If thou really think'st thou dost not, thy ignorance
is more to be pitied, than thy pertness resented. I
wish thou'd'st leave me to myself. 
When young Ladies fall out with their own duty,
it is not much to be wondered at, that they are angry
at any-body who do theirs. 
That's a very pretty saying, Mrs. Betty! —I see
plainly what thy duty is in thy notion, and am obliged
to those who taught it thee. 
Every-body takes notice, Miss, that you can say
very cutting words in a cool manner, and yet not call
names, as I have known some gentlefolks, as well as
others, do, when in a passion. But I wish you had
permitted 'Squire Solmes to see you; he would have
told you such stories of 'Squire Lovelace, as would
have turned your heart against him for ever. 
And know you any of the particulars of those sad
stories? 

Indeed, I don't; but you'll hear all at your uncle
Antony's, I suppose; and a great deal more, perhaps,
than you will like to hear. 
Let me hear what I will, I am determined against
Mr. Solmes, were it to cost me my life. 
If you are, Miss, the Lord have mercy on you! 
For what with this letter of yours to 'Squire Solmes,
whom they so much value, and what with their antipathy
to 'Squire Lovelace, whom they hate, they will
have no patience with you. 
What will they do, Betty? They won't kill me? 
What will they do? 
Kill you! No! —But you will not be suffered to
stir from thence, till you have complied with your
duty. And no pen and ink will be allowed you, as
here; where they are of opinion you make no good
use of it: Nor would it be allowed here, only as they
intend so soon to send you away to your uncle's. Nobody
will be permitted to see you, or to correspond
with you. What farther will be done, I can't say; 
and, if I could, it may not be proper. But you may
prevent it all, by One word: And I wish you would,
Miss. All then would be easy and happy. And, if
I may speak my mind, I see not why one man is not
as good as another: Why, especially, a sober man is
not as good as a rake. 
Well, Betty, said I, sighing, all thy impertinence
goes for nothing. But I see I am destined to be a
very unhappy creature. Yet will I venture upon
one request more to them. 
And so, quite sick of the pert creature, and of myself,
I retired to my closet, and wrote a few lines to
my uncle Harlowe, notwithstanding his prohibition; 
in order to get a reprieve, from being carried away
so soon as Thursday next, if I must go. And This,
that I might, if comply'd with, suspend the appointment
I have made with Mr. Lovelace; for my heart
misgives me, as to meeting him; and that more and 

more, I know not why. Under the superscription
of the letter, I wrote these words: ‘Pray, dear Sir,
be pleased to give This a reading.’ 
This is the copy of what I wrote: 

Tuesday Afternoon. 
Honoured Sir,
Let me this once be heard with patience, and
have my petition granted. It is only, that I may
not be hurried away so soon as next Thursday. 
Why should the poor girl be turned out of doors
so suddenly, so disgracefully? Procure for me, Sir,
one fortnight's respite. In that space of time, I hope
you will all relent. My mamma shall not need to
shut her door, in apprehension of seeing her disgraced
child. I will not presume to think of entering her
presence, or my papa's, without leave. One fortnight's
respite is but a small favour for them to grant, except
I am to be refused every-thing I ask: But it is of
the highest import to my peace of mind. Procure it
for me, therefore, dear Sir, and you will exceedingly
oblige 
Your dutiful, tho' greatly afflicted, Niece,
Cl. Harlowe. 

I sent this down: My uncle was not gone: And
he now stays to know the result of the question put
to me in the inclosed answer, which he has given
to mine: 

Your going to your uncle's was absolutely concluded
upon for next Thursday. Nevertheless,
your mamma, seconded by Mr. Solmes, pleaded so
strongly to indulge you, that your request for a delay
will be comply'd with, upon one condition; and
whether for a fortnight, or a shorter time, that will
depend upon yourself. If you refuse this condition,
your mamma declares, she will give over all further
intercession for you. —Nor do you deserve 

this favour, as you put it upon our relenting, not your
own. 
This condition is, That you admit of a visit from
Mr. Solmes, for one hour, in company of your brother,
your sister, or your uncle Antony, choose which
you will. 
If you comply not, you go next Thursday to a
house which is become so strangely odious to you of
late, whether you get ready to go, or not. Answer
therefore directly to the point. No evasion. Name
your day and hour. Mr. Solmes will neither eat you,
nor drink you. Let us see, whether we are to be
comply'd with in any thing, or not. 
John Harlowe. 

After a very little deliberation, I resolved to consent
to this condition. All I fear is, that Mr. Lovelace's
intelligencer may inform him of it; and that his apprehensions
upon it may make him take some desperate
resolution: Especially as now (having more time
give me, here) I think to write to him to suspend
the interview he is possibly so sure of. I sent down
the following to my uncle: 

Honoured Sir,
Altho' I see not what end the proposed condition
can answer, I comply with it. I wish I could
with every thing expected of me. If I must name
one, in whose company I am to see the gentleman,
and that one not my mamma, whose presence I could
wish to be honoured by on the occasion, let my uncle,
if he pleases, be the person. If I must name the
day (a long day, I doubt, will not be permitted me),
let it be next Tuesday. The hour, four in the afternoon. 
Then place, either the ivy-summer-house,
or in the little parlour I used to be permitted to call
mine. 
Be pleased, Sir, nevertheless, to prevail upon my 

mamma to vouchsafe me her presence on the occasion. 
I am, Sir, 
Your ever-dutiful
Cl. Harlowe. 

A reply is just sent me. I thought it became my
averseness to this meeting, to name a distant day: 
But I did not expect they would have comply'd with
it. So here is one week gain'd! —This is it: 

You have done well to comply. We are willing
to think the best of every slight instance of
your duty. Yet have you seem'd to consider the
day as an evil day, and so put it far off. This nevertheless
is granted you, as no time need to be lost,
if you are as generous after the day, as we are condescending
before it. Let me advise you, not to harden
your mind; nor take up your resolution beforehand. 
Mr. Solmes has more awe, and even terror,
at the thoughts of seeing you, than you can have at
the thoughts of seeing him. His motive is Love; let
not yours be Hatred. My brother Antony will be
present, in hopes you will deserve well of him, by
behaving well to the friend of the family. See you
use him as such. Your mamma had permission to be
there, if she thought fit: But says, she would not, for
a thousand pounds, unless you would encourage her
beforehand, as she wishes to be encouraged. One hint I
am to give you, mean time. It is this: To make a discreet
use of your pen and ink. Methinks a young
creature of niceness should be less ready to write to
one man, when she is designed to be another's. 
This compliance, I hope, will produce greater; 
and then the peace of the family will be restored: 
Which is what is heartily wished by 
Your loving Uncle,
John Harlowe. 
Unless it be to the purpose our hearts are set upon,
you need not write again. 


This man have more terror at seeing me, than I can
have at seeing him! —How can that be? If he had
half as much, he would not wish to see me! —His
motive Love! —Yes indeed! Love of himself! —He
knows no other! —For Love, that deserves the name,
seeks the satisfaction of the beloved object, more than
its own! —Weighed in this scale, what a profanation
is this man guilty of! 
Not to take up my resolution beforehand! —That
advice comes too late! 
But I must make a discreet use of my pen. That,
I doubt, as they have managed it, in the sense they
mean it, is as much out of my power, as the other. 
But to write to one man, when I am designed for
another! What a shocking expression is That! 
Repenting of my appointment with Mr. Lovelace,
before I had this favour granted me, you may believe
I hesitated not a moment about revoking it now, that
I had gained such a respite. Accordingly, I wrote,
‘That I found it inconvenient to meet him, as I had
intended: That the risque I should run of a discovery,
and the mischiefs that might flow from it,
could not be justified by any end that such a meeting
could answer: That I found one certain servant
more in my way, when I took my morning
and evening airings, than any other: That he knew
not but that the person who might betray the secrets
of a family to him, might be equally watchful to oblige
those whom he ought to oblige; and so, if opportunity
were given him, might betray me, or him,
to them: That I had not been used to a conduct so
faulty, as to lay myself at the mercy of servants: 
And was sorry he had measures to pursue, that made
steps necessary in his own opinion, which, in mine,
were very culpable, and which no end could justify: 
That things drawing towards a crisis between me
and my friends, an interview could avail nothing; 
especially as the method by which this correspondence 

was carried on, was not suspected, and he
could write all that was in his mind to write: That
I expected to be at liberty to judge of what was
proper and fit upon this occasion: Especially as he
might be assured, that I would sooner choose death,
than Mr. Solmes.’ 
Tuesday Night. 
I have deposited my letter to Mr. Lovelace. 
Threatening as things look against me, I am much
better pleased with myself, than I was before. I
reckon he will be a little out of humour upon it,
however. But as I reserved to myself the liberty of
changing my mind; and as it is easy for him to imagine
there may be reasons for it within-doors, which
he cannot judge of without; and I have suggested to
him some of them; I should think it strange, if he
acquiesces not, on this occasion, with a chearfulness,
which may shew me, that his last letter is the genuine
product of his heart: For if he be really so much
concerned at his past faults, as he pretends, and has
for some time pretended, must he not, of course, have
corrected, in some degree, the impetuosity of his temper? 
The first step to reformation, as I conceive, is
to subdue sudden gusts of passion, from which frequently
the greatest evils arise, and to learn to bear
disappointments. If the irascible passions cannot be
overcome, what opinion shall one have of the person's
power over those to which bad habit, joined to greater
temptation, gives stronger force? 
Pray, my dear, be so kind, as to make inquiry by
some safe hand, after the disguises Mr. Lovelace assumes
at the inn he puts up at in the poor village of
Neale, he calls it. If it be the same I take it to be,
I never knew it was considerable enough to have a
name; nor that it has an inn in it. 
As he must be much there, to be so constantly near
us, I would be glad to have some account of his behaviour; 

and what the people think of him. In such
a length of time, he must give scandal, or hope of
reformation. Pray, my dear, humour me, in this
inquiry: I have reasons for it, which you shall be acquainted
with another time, if the result of the inquiry
discover them not. 
