



Dear Pamela,
I am very glad thy honest Man has let thee
into the Affair of Sally Godfrey. But,
pr'ythee, Pamela, give us an Account of the
Manner in which he did it, and of thy Thoughts
upon it; for that is a critical Case; and according
as he has represented it, so shall I know
what to say of it before you and him: For I
would not make Mischief between you for the
World. 

This, let me tell you, will be a trying Part
of your Conduct. For he loves the Child; 
and will judge of you by your Conduct to wards
it. He dearly lov'd her Mother'; and, notwithstanding
her Fault, she well deserv'd it: For she
was a sensible, ay, and a modest Lady, and of
an ancient and genteel Family. But he was
Heir to a noble Estate, was of a bold and enterprising
Spirit, fond of Intrigue—Don't let
this concern you—You'll have the greater
Happiness and Merit too, if you can hold him:
And 'tis my Opinion, if any body can, you
will. —Then he did not like the young Lady's
Mother, who sought artfully to intrap him. 
So that the poor Girl, divided between her
Inclination for him, and her Duty to her designing
Mother, gave into the Plot upon him; 
and he thought himself,—vile Wretch as he
was, for all that!—at Liberty to set up Plot
against Plot; and the poor Lady's Honour was
the Sacrifice. 
I hope you spoke well of her to him. I
hope you receiv'd the Child kindly. —I hope
you had Presence of Mind to do this. —For
it was a nice Part to act; and all his Observations
were up, I dare say, on the Occasion. 
—Do, let me hear how it was. There's my
good Pamela, do. And write, I charge you,
freely, and without Restraint; for altho' I am
not your Mother, yet am I his elder Sister, you
know—and, as such—come, I will say so,
in hopes you'll oblige me—your Sister, and
so intitled to expect a Compliance with my 

Request: For is there not a Duty, in degree,
to elder Sisters from younger? 
As to our Remarks upon your Behaviour,
they have been much to your Credit, I can tell
you that: But, nevertheless, I will, to encourage
you to enter into this requested Correspondence
with me, consult Lady Betty, and
will go over your Papers again, and try to find
fault with your Conduct; and if we can see
any thing censurable, will freely let you know
our Minds. 
But, before-hand, I can tell you, we shall
be agreed in one Opinion; and that is, that we
know not who would have acted as you have
done, upon the Whole. 
So, Pamela, you see I put myself upon the
same Foot of Correspondence with you.— 
Not that I will promise to answer every Letter:
No, you must not expect that. —Your Part
will be a kind of Narrative purposely designed
to entertain us here; and I hope to receive Six,
Seven, Eight, or Ten Letters, as it may happen,
before I return One: But such a Part I will bear
in it, as shall let you know out Opinion of
your Proceedings, and Relations of Things. 
And as you wish to be found fault with, as
you say, you shall freely have it, (tho' not in a
splenetick or ill-natur'd way) as often as you
give Occasion. Now, you must know, Pamela,
I have Two Views in this: One is, to see
how a Man of my Brother's Spirit, who has
not deny'd himself any genteel Liberties, (for
it must be own'd, he never was a common 

Town Rake, and had always Dignity in his
Roguery) will behave himself to you, and in
Wedlock, which used to be freely sneer'd by
him: The next, that I may love you more and
more, which it will be enough to make me do,
I dare say, as by your Letters I shall be more
and more acquainted with you, as well as by
Conversation; so that you can't be off, if you
would. 
I know, however, you will have one
Objection to this; and that is, that your Family
Affairs will require your Attention, and not
give you the Time you used to have for this
Imployment. But consider, Child, the Station
you are raised to, does not require you to be
quite a domestick Animal. You are lifted up to
the Rank of a Lady, and you must act up to
it, and not think of setting such an Example,
as will derive upon you the Ill-will and Censure
of other Ladies. —For will any of our
Sex visit one who is continually imploying
herself in such Works as either must be
a Reproach to herself, or to them? —You'll
have nothing to do but to give Orders. You
will consider yourself as the Task-mistress, and
the common Herd of Female Servants as so
many Negroes directing themselves by your
Nod; or yourself as the Master-wheel, in some
beautiful Piece of Mechanism, whose dignify'd
grave Motion is to set a going all the Under-wheels,
with a Velocity suitable to their respective
Parts. —Let your Servants, under your
Direction, do all that relates to Houshold 

Management: They cannot write to entertain
and instruct as you can. So what will you
have to do? —I'll answer my own Question:
In the first Place, Endeavour to please your
Sovereign Lord and Master; and, let me tell
you, any other Woman in England, be her
Quality ever so high, would have found enough
to do to succeed in that. Secondly, To receive
and pay Visits, in order, for his Credit as well
as your own, to make your fashionable Neighbours
fond of you. Then, thirdly, You will
have Time upon your Hands (as your Monarch
himself rises early, and is tolerably regular for
such a Brazen-face as he has been) to write to
me, in the manner I have mentioned, and
expect; and I see plainly, by your Style, that
nothing can be easier for you, than to do this. 
And thus, and with Reading, may your
Time be filled up with Reputation to yourself,
and Delight to others, till a Fourth Imployment
puts itself upon you; and that is, (Shall I tell
you in one Word, without mincing the Matter?)
a Succession of brave Boys, to perpetuate
a Family that has for many Hundred Years been
esteem'd worthy and eminent, and which,
being now reduced, in the direct Line, to him
and me, expects it from you; or else, let me
tell you, (nor will I balk it) my Brother, by
descending to the wholsome Cot—Excuse
me, Pamela—will want one Apology for
his Conduct, be as excellent as you may. 
I say this, Child, not to reflect upon you,
since the thing is done; for I love you dearly, 

and will love you more and more—but to
let you know what is expected from you, and
to encourage you in the Prospect that is already
opening to you both, and to me, who have
the Welfare of the Family I sprung from so
much at Heart, although I know this will be
attended with some Anxieties to a Mind so
thoughtful and apprehensive as yours seems to
be. 
O but this puts me in mind of your Solicitude
for fear the Gentlemen should have seen
every thing contain'd in your Letters. —But
this I will particularly speak to in a Third Letter,
having fill'd my Paper on all Sides: And
am, till then, 
Yours, &c.
B. Davers. 
You see, and I hope will take it as a Favour,
that I break the Ice, and begin first in the
indispensably expected Correspondence
between us. 

