



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Friday Noon, July 21. 
This morning I was admitted, as soon as I sent
up my name, into the presence of the divine Lady. 
Such I may call her; as what I have to relate
will fully prove. 
She had had a tolerable night, and was much better
in spirits; though weak in person; and visibly declining
in looks. 
Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith were with her; and
accused her, in a gentle manner, of having applied
herself too assiduously to her pen for her strength,
having been up ever since Five. She said, she had
rested better than she had done for many nights: She
had found her spirits free, and her mind tolerably
easy: And having, as she had reason to think, but a
short time, and much to do in it, she must be a good
housewife of her hours. 
She had been writing, she said, a Letter to her
Sister: But had not pleased herself in it; tho' she
had made two or three essays: But that the last must
go. 
By hints I had dropt from time to time, she had
reason, she said, to think that I knew every-thing
that concerned her and her family; and, if so, must
be acquainted with the heavy Curse her Father had
laid upon her; which had been dreadfully fulfilled in
one part, as to her prospects in this life, and that in a 

very short time; which gave her great apprehensions
of the other part. She had been applying herself to
her Sister, to obtain a revocation of it. I hope my
Father will revoke it, said she, or I shall be very miserable. 
—Yet [and she gasped as she spoke, with apprehension]
—I am ready to tremble at what the Answer
may be; for my Sister is hard-hearted. 
I said something reflecting upon her friends; as to
what they would deserve to be thought of, if the unmerited
imprecation were not withdrawn—Upon which
she took me up, and talked in such a dutiful manner
of her parents, as must doubly condemn them (if they
remain implacable) for their inhuman treatment of
such a daughter. 
She said, I must not blame her parents: It was her
dear Miss Howe's fault to do so. But what an enormity
was there in her crime, which could set the best
of parents (as they had been to her, till she disobliged
them) in a bad light, for resenting the rashness of a
child, from whose education they had reason to expect
better fruits! There were some hard circumstances
in her case, it was true: But my friend could tell me,
that no one person, throughout the whole fatal transaction,
had acted out of character, but herself. She
submitted therefore to the penalty she had incurred. 
If they had any fault, it was only, that they would
not inform themselves of some circumstances, which
would alleviate a little her misdeed; and that, supposing
her a more guilty creature than she was, they
punished her without a hearing. 
Lord!—I was going to curse thee, Lovelace! How
every instance of excellence, in this all excelling creature,
condemns thee! —Thou wilt have reason to think thyself
of all men most accursed, if she die! 
I then besought her, while she was capable of such
glorious instances of generosity and forgiveness, to
extend her goodness to a man whose heart bled in
every vein of it for the injuries he had done her; and 

who would make it the study of his whole life to repair
them. 
The women would have withdrawn when the subject
became so particular. But she would not permit
them to go. She told me, that if after this time I was
for entering with so much earnestness into a subject so
very disagreeable to her, my visits must not be repeated. 
Nor was there occasion, she said, for my
friendly offices in your favour; since she had begun to
write her whole mind upon that subject to Miss Howe,
in answer to Letters from her, in which Miss Howe
urged the same arguments, in compliment to the
wishes of your noble and worthy relations. 
Mean time, you may let him know, said she, That
I reject him with my whole heart: —Yet that, altho'
I say this with such a determination as shall leave no
room for doubt, I say it not however with passion. 
On the contrary, tell him, that I am trying to bring
my mind into such a frame as to be able to pity him
[Poor perjured wretch! what has he not to answer
for!]; and that I shall not think myself qualified for
the State I am aspiring to, if, after a few struggles
more, I cannot forgive him too: And I hope, clasping
her hands together, uplifted as were her eyes, my
dear earthly Father will set me the example my Heavenly
one has already set us all; and, by forgiving his
fallen Daughter, teach her to forgive the man, who
then, I hope, will not have destroyed my eternal prospects,
as he has my temporal! 
Stop her, thou wretch! —But I need not bid thee! 
—For I can go no farther! 