



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday, July 13. 
I am extremely concerned, my dear Miss Howe,
for being primarily the occasion of the apprehensions
you have of this wicked man's vindictive attempts. 
What a wide-spreading error is mine!— 

If I find, that he sets on foot any machination against
you, or against Mr. Hickman, I do assure you I will
consent to prosecute him, altho' I were sure I should
not survive my first appearance at the Bar he should
be arraigned at. 
I own the justice of your Mother's arguments on
that subject; but must say, that I think there are circumstances
in my particular case, which will excuse
me, altho' on a slighter occasion than that you are apprehensive
of I should decline to appear against him. 
I have said, that I may one day enter more particularly
into this argument. 
Your messenger has now indeed seen me. I talked
with him on the cheat put upon him at Hamstead: 
And am sorry to have reason to say, that had not the
poor young man been very simple, and very self-sufficient,
he had not been so grosly deluded. Mrs. Bevis
has the same plea to make for herself. A good-natured,
thoughtless woman; not used to converse with
so vile and so specious a deceiver as him who made his
advantage of both these shallow creatures. 
I think I cannot be more private, than where I am. 
I hope I am safe. All the risque I run, is in going
out, and returning from morning-prayers; which I
have two or three times ventured to do; once at Lincolns-Inn
chapel, at Eleven; once at St. Dunstan's
Fleet-street, at Seven in the morning (a) , in a chair
both times; and twice at Six in the morning, at the
neighbouring Church in Covent-garden. The wicked
wretches I have escaped from, will not I hope come
to Church to look for me; especially at so early prayers; 
and I have fixed upon the privatest pew in the
latter Church to hide myself in; and perhaps I may lay
out a little matter in an ordinary gown, by way of
disguise; my face half hid by my mob. —I am very 

careless, my dear, of my appearance now. Neat and
clean, takes up the whole of my attention. 
The man's name at whose house I lodge, is Smith — 
A glove-maker, as well as seller. His wife is the shop-keeper. 
A dealer also in stockens, ribbands, snuff,
and perfumes. A matron-like woman, plain-hearted,
and prudent. The husband an honest, industrious
man. And they live in good understanding with each
other: A proof with me, that their hearts are right; 
for where a married couple live together upon ill
terms, it is a sign, I think, that each knows something
amiss of the other, either with regard to temper
or morals, which if the world knew as well as themselves,
it would perhaps as little like them, as such
people like each other. Happy the Marriage, where
neither man nor wife has any wilful or premeditated
evil in their general conduct to reproach the other
with! —For even persons who have bad hearts will
have a veneration for those who have good ones. 
Two neat rooms, with plain, but clean furniture,
on the first floor, are mine; one they call the dining-room. 
There is, up another pair of stairs, a very worthy
widow-lodger, Mrs. Lovick by name; who, altho'
of low fortunes, is much respected, as Mrs. Smith
assures me, by people of condition of her acquaintance,
for her piety, prudence, and understanding. With
her I propose to be well acquainted. 
I thank you, my dear, for your kind, your seasonable
advice and consolation. I hope I shall have more
Grace given me, than to despond, in the religious
sense of the word: Especially, as I can apply to myself
the comfort you give me, that neither my will,
nor my inconsiderateness, has contributed to my calamity. 
But, nevertheless, the Irreconcileableness of
my Relations, whom I love with an unabated reverence; 
my apprehensions of fresh Violences [This wicked
man, I doubt, will not yet let me rest]; my being 

destitute of Protection; my Youth, my Sex, my
Unacquaintedness with the World, subjecting me to
insults; my Reflections on the Scandal I have given,
added to the Sense of the Indignities I have received
from a man, of whom I deserved not ill; all together
will undoubtedly bring on the effect, that cannot be
undesirable to me. —The flower, however, perhaps
from my natural good constitution; and, as I presume
to imagine, from Principles which I hope will, in due
time, and by due reflection, set me above the sense of
all worldly disappointments. 
At present, my head is much disordered. I have
not indeed enjoyed it with any degree of clearness,
since the violence done to that, and to my heart too,
by the wicked Arts of the abandoned creatures I was
cast among. 
I must have more conflicts. At times I find myself
not subdued enough to my condition. I will welcome
those conflicts as they come, as probationary
ones—But yet my Father's malediction—&dotup;the temporary
part so strangely and so literally completed! — 
I cannot, however, think, when my mind is strongest
—But what is the story of Isaac, and Jacob, and
Esau, and of Rebekah's cheating the latter of the
Blessing designed for him (in favour of Jacob) given
us for in the 27th Chapter of Genesis? My Father
used, I remember, to enforce the Doctrine deducible
from it, on his children, by many arguments. 
At least therefore, He must believe there is great
weight in the curse he has announced; and shall I
not be solicitous to get it revoked, that he may not
hereafter be grieved, for my sake, that he did not
revoke it?’&dotup; 
All I will at present add, are my thanks to your
Mother for her Indulgence to us. Due Compliments
to Mr. Hickman; and my Request, that you will believe
me to be, to my last hour, and beyond it, if 

possible, my beloved friend, and my dearer Self (for
what is now my Self?) 
Your obliged and affectionate
Clarissa Harlowe. 