


Yesterday we set out, attended by
John, Abraham, Benjamin and Isaac, in
fine new Liveries, in the best Chariot, which
had been new clean'd, and lin'd, and new
harness'd; so that it look'd like a quite new
one: But I had no Arms to quarter with my
dear Spouse's; tho' he jocularly, upon my
taking notice of my Obscurity, said, that he
had a good Mind to have the Olive-branch,
which would allude to his Hopes, quarter'd for
mine. I was dress'd in the Suit I mention'd,
of White flower'd with Gold, and a rich Headdress,
and the Diamond Necklace, Ear-rings,
&c. I also mention'd before: And my dear
Sir, in a fine laced silk Waistcoat, of blue Paduasoy,
and his Coat a pearl-colour'd fine
Cloth, with gold Buttons and Button-holes,
and lined with white Silk; and he looked
charmingly indeed. I said, I was too fine, and
would have laid aside some of the Jewels; but
he said, It would be thought a Slight to me
from him, as his Wife; and tho', as I apprehended,
it might be, that People would talk as
it was, yet he had rather they should say any
thing, than that I was not put upon an equal
Foot, as his Wife, with any Lady he might
have marry'd. 
It seems, the neighbouring Gentry had expected
us; and there was a great Congregation; 
for (against my Wish) we were a little of the
latest; so that, as we walk'd up the Church, to
his Seat, we had abundance of Gazers and 

Whisperers: But my dear Master behav'd with
so intrepid an Air, and was so chearful and
complaisant to me, that he did Credit to his
kind Choice, instead of shewing as if he was
asham'd of it; and as I was resolved to busy
my Mind intirely with the Duties of the Day,
my Intentness on that Occasion, and my Thankfulness
to God, for his unspeakable Mercies to me,
so took up my Thoughts, that I was much less
concern'd, than I should otherwise have been,
at the Gazings and Whisperings of the Ladies and
Gentlemen, as well as of the rest of the Congregation; 
whose Eyes were all turn'd to our Seat. 
When the Sermon was ended, we staid the
longer, because the Church should be pretty
empty; but we found great Numbers at the
Church Doors, and in the Church Porch; and
I had the Pleasure of hearing many Commendations,
as well of my Person, as my Dress and
Behaviour, and not one Reflection, or Mark of
Disrespect. Mr. Martin, who is single, Mr.
Chambers, Mr. Arthur, and Mr. Brooks, with
their Families, were all there: And the Four
Gentlemen came up to us, before we went into
the Chariot, and, in a very kind and respectful
manner, complimented us both; and Mrs.
Arrhur, and Mrs. Brooks, were so kind as to
wish me Joy; and Mrs. Brooks said, You sent
my Spouse, Madam, home, t'other Day, quite
charm'd with that easy and sweet Manner,
which you have convinc'd a Thousand Persons,
this Day, is so natural to you. 
You do me great Honour, Madam, reply'd
I. Such a good Lady's Approbation must make 

me too sensible of my Happiness. My dear
Master handed me into the Chariot, and stood
talking with Sir Thomas Atkyns, at the Door
of it, (who was making him abundance of
Compliments, being a very ceremonious Gentleman,
a little to Extreme in that way) and I
believe, to familiarize me to the Gazers, which
concern'd me a little; for I was dash'd to hear
the Praises of the Country People, and to see
how they crouded about the Chariot. Several
poor People begg'd my Charity, and I beckon'd
John with my Fan, and said, Divide, in the
further Church Porch, that Money to the Poor,
and let them come to-morrow Morning to me,
and I will give them something more, if they
don't importune me now. —So I gave them
all the Silver I had, which happen'd to be betwen
Twenty and Thirty Shillings; and this
drew away from me their clamorous Prayers for
Charity. 
Mr. Martin came up to me on the other
Side of the Chariot, and lean'd on the Door,
while my Master was talking to Sir Thomas,
from whom he could not get away; and said,
By all that's good! you have charm'd the whole
Congregation. Not a Soul but is full of your
Praises. My Neighbour knew, better than
any body could tell him, how to chuse for
himself. Why, said he, the Dean himself
look'd more upon you, than upon his Book. 
O Sir, said I, you are very encouraging to
a weak Mind! —I vow, said he, I say no more
than is Truth: I'd marry To-morrow, if I was
sure of meeting with a Person of but one half 

of the Merit you have. You are, continued
he, and 'tis not my way to praise too much, an
Ornament to your Sex, an Honour to your
Spouse, and a Credit to Religion. —Every
body is saying so, added he; for you have, by
your Piety, edified the whole Church. 
As he had done speaking, the Dean himself
complimented me, that the Behaviour of so
sweet a Bride would be very edifying to his
Congregation, and encouraging to himself. 
Sir, said I, you are very kind: I hope I shall
not behave unworthy of the good Instructions
I shall have the Pleasure to receive from so worthy
a Divine. He bow'd, and went on. 
Sir Thomas then apply'd to me, my Master
stepping into the Chariot, and said, I beg Pardon,
Madam, for detaining your good Spouse
from you: But I have been saying, he is the
happiest Man in the World. I bow'd to him; 
but I could have wish'd him further, to make
me sit so in the Notice of every one; which,
for all I could do, dash'd me not a little. 
Mr. Martin said to my Master, If you'll
come to Church every Sunday, with your
charming Lady, I will never absent myself, and
she'll give a good Example to all the Neighbourhood. 
O my dear Sir, said I to my Master,
you know not how much I am obliged to good
Mr. Martin. He has, by his kind Expressions,
made me dare to look up with as much Pleasure
as Gratitude. 
Said my Master, My dear Love, I am very
much obliged, as well as you, to my good
Friend Mr. Martin. And he said to him, We 

will constantly go to Church, and to every
other Place, where we can have the Pleasure of
seeing Mr. Martin. 
Mr. Martin said, Gad, Sir, you are a happy
Man! and I think your Lady's Example has
made you more polite and handsome too, than
I ever knew you before, tho' we never thought
you unpolite neither. And so he bow'd, and
went to his own Chariot; and as we drove
away, the People kindly bless'd us, and call'd
us a charming Pair. 
As I have no other Pride, I hope, in repeating
these things, than in the Countenance
the general Approbation gives to my dear Master
for his stooping so low, you will excuse
me for it, I know. 
In the Afternoon, we went again to Church,
and a little early, at my Request; but the
Church was quite full, and, soon after, even
crouded; so much does Novelty (the more's
the Pity!) attract the Eyes of Mankind. Mr.
Martin came in, after us, and made up to our
Seat; and said, If you please, my dear Friend,
I will take my Seat with you this Afternoon. 
With all my Heart, said my Master. I was
sorry for it; but was resolv'd my Duty should
not be made second to Bashfulness, or any
other Consideration; and when Divine Service
began, I withdrew to the further End of the
Pew, and left the Gentlemen in the Front; and
they behav'd quite suitably, both of them, to the
Occasion. I mention this the rather, because
Mr. Martin was not very noted for coming to
Church, or Attention when there, before. 

The Dean preached again, which he was
not used to do, out of Compliment to us; and
an excellent Sermon he made on the relative
Duties of Christianity: And it took my peculiar
Attention; for he made many fine Observations
on the Subject. Mr. Martin address'd
himself twice or thrice to me, during the Sermon; 
but he saw me so wholly ingross'd with
hearkening to the good Preacher, that he forbore
interrupting me; yet I took care, according
to the Lesson formerly given me, to observe to
him a chearful and obliging Behaviour, as one
of Mr. B.'s Friends and Intimates. My Master
ask'd him to give him his Company to Supper; 
and he said, I am so taken with your Lady, that
you must not give me too much Encouragement; 
for I shall be always with you, if you do. He
was pleased to say, You cannot favour us with
too much of your Company; and as I have
left you in the Lurch, in your single State, I
think you will do well to oblige us as much as
you can; and who knows but my Happiness
may reform another Rake? Who knows? — 
said Mr. Martin—Why, I know! —for I
am more than half reform'd already. 
At the Chariot-door, Mrs. Arthur, Mrs.
Brooks, Mrs. Chambers, were brought to me,
by their respective Spouses; and presently, the
witty Lady Towers, who banter'd me before,
(as I once told you) join'd them; and Mrs.
Arthur said, She wish'd me Joy: And that all
the good Ladies, my Neighbours, would collect
themselves together, and make me a Visit. 
This, said I, will be an Honour, Madam, that 

I can never enough acknowlege. It will be
very kind so to countenance a Person, who
will always study to deserve your Favour, by
the most respectful Behaviour. 
Lady Towers said, My dear Neighbour,
you want no Countenance; your own Merit is
sufficient. I had a slight Cold, that kept me
at home in the Morning; but I heard you so
much talk'd of, that I resolv'd not to stay away
in the Afternoon: And I join in the Joy every
one gives you. She turn'd to my Master, and
said, You are a sly Thief, as I always thought
you. Where have you stol'n this Lady? And
now, how barbarous is it, thus, unawares, in a
manner, to bring her here upon us, to mortify
and eclipse us all! —You are very kind, Madam,
said he, that you, and all my worthy
Neighbours, see with my Eyes. But had I not
known she had so much Excellency of Mind
and Behaviour, as would strike every body in
her Favour at first Sight, I should not have dar'd
to class her with such of my worthy Neighbours,
as now so kindly congratulate us both. 
I own, said she, softly, I was one of your
Censurers; but I never liked you so well in my
Life, as for this Action, now I see how capable
your Bride is of giving Distinction to any Condition. 
—And coming to me, My dear Neighbour,
said she, excuse me for having but in
any Thought, the Remembrance that I have
seen you formerly, when, by your sweet Air,
and easy Deportment, you so much surpass
us all, and give Credit to your present happy
Condition. 

Dear good Madam, said I, how shall I
suitably return my Acknowlegements! But it
will never be a Pain to me to look back upon
my former Days, now I have the kind Allowance
and Example of so many worthy Ladies to
support me in the Honours to which the most
generous of Men has rais'd me. 
Sweetly said! she was pleased to say. If
I was in another Place, I would kiss you for
that Answer. Oh! happy, happy Mr. B. said
she to my Master; what Reputation have you
not brought upon your Judgment! —I won't
be long before I see you, added she, I'll assure
you, if I come by myself. That shall be your
own Fault, Madam, said Mrs. Brooks, if you
do. 
And so they took Leave: and I gave my
Hand to my dear Master, and said, How happy
have you made me, generous Sir! —And the
Dean, who was just come up, heard me, and
said, And how happy you have made your
Spouse, I'll venture to pronounce, is hard to
say, from what I observe of you both. I court'sy'd,
and blush'd, not thinking any body heard
me. And my Master telling him, He should
be glad of the Honour of a Visit from him,
he said, He would pay his Respects to us the
first Opportunity, and would bring his Wife
and Daughter to attend me. I said, That was
doubly kind; and I should be very proud of
cultivating so worthy an Acquaintance. I
thank'd him for his fine Discourse; and he
thank'd me for my Attention, which he called
Exemplary: And so my dear Master handed me 

into the Chariot; and we were carried home,
both happy, and both pleas'd, thank God! 
Mr. Martin came in the Evening, with
another Gentleman, his Friend, one Mr. Dormer;
and he entertain'd us with the favourable
Opinion, he said, every one had of me, and
of the Choice my good Benefactor had made. 
This Morning the Poor came, according to
my Invitation; and I sent them away with glad
Hearts to the Number of Twenty-five. They
were not above Twelve or Fourteen, on Sunday,
that John divided the Silver among them,
which I gave him for that purpose; but others
got hold of the Matter, and made up to the
above Number. 
