



A new Misfortune, my dear Lady! —But this is
of God Almighty's sending; so must bear it
patiently. My dear Baby is taken with the Smallpox! 
To how many Troubles are the happiest of us
subjected, in this Life! One need not multiply
them by one's own wilful Mismanagements! —I am
able to mind nothing else! 
I had so much Joy (as I told your Ladyship in
the Beginning of my last Letter but one) to see,
on our Arrival at the Farm-house, my dearest Mr. B. 

my beloved Baby, and my good Father and Mother,
all upon one happy Spot together, that I fear I was
too proud. —Yet I was truly thankful—I am sure I
was! —But I had, notwithstanding, too much Pride
and too much Pleasure, on this happy Occasion. 
I told your Ladyship, in my last, that your dear
Brother set out on Tuesday Morning for Tunbridge
with my Papers: And I was longing to know the
Result, hoping that every thing would be concluded
to the Satisfaction of all Three: For, thought I,
if this be so, my Happiness must be permanent. But,
alas! alas! There is nothing permanent in this Life. 
I feel it by Experience now! —I knew it before by
Theory! But that was not so near and so interesting
by half! 
For in the Midst of all my Pleasures and Hopes; 
in the Midst of my dear Parents Joy and Congratulations
on our Arrival, and on what had passed so
happily since we were last here together, (in the
Birth of the dear Child, and my Safety, for which
they had been so apprehensive) the dear Baby was
taken ill. It was on that very Tuesday Afternoon,
his Papa set out for Tunbridge: But we knew not
it would be the Small-pox till Thursday! Oh! Madam!
how are all the Pleasures I had form'd to myself,
sicken'd now upon me! for my Billy is very
bad. 
They talk of a kind Sort; but, alas! they talk
at random: for they come not out at all! How then
can they say they are kind? —I fear the Nurse's
Constitution is too hale and too rich for the dear
Baby! —Had I been permitted—But, hush! all my
repining Ifs! —Except one If; and that,—If it be
got happily over, it will be best he had it so young,
and while at the Breast! 

Oh! Madam, Madam! The small Appearance
that there was, is gone in again: And my Child,
my dear Baby, will die! —The Doctors seem to
think so. 
They want to send for Mr. B. to keep me from
him! —But I forbid it! —For what signifies Life or
any thing, if I cannot see my Baby, while he is so
dangerously ill? 
My Father and Mother are, for the first time,
quite cruel to me; they have forbid me, and I never
was so desirous of disobeying them before, to attend
the Darling of my Heart: And why? —For,
fear of this poor Face! —For fear I should get it myself! 
—But I am living low, very low, and have
taken proper Precautions by Bleeding, and the like,
to lessen the Distemper's Fury, if I should have it: 
And the rest I leave to Providence. And if Mr. B.'s
Value is confin'd so much to this poor transitory
Sightliness, he must not break with his Countess, I
think; and if I am ever so deform'd in Person, my
poor Intellects, I hope, will not be impair'd, and I
shall, if God spare my Billy, be useful in his first
Education, and be helpful to dear Miss Goodwin— 
or to any Babies—with all my Heart—he may make
me an humble Nurse to! —How peevish, sinfully
so, I doubt, does this Accident, and their affectionate
Contradiction, make one! 
I have this Moment received the following from
Mr. B. 

Maidstone. 
My dearest Love,
I am greatly touched with the dear Boy's
Malady, which I have this Moment heard of. 
I desire you instantly to come to me hither, in the
Chariot, with the Bearer, Mr. Colbrand. I
know what your Grief must be: But as you can 

do the Child no Good, I beg you'll oblige me. 
Every thing is in a happy Train; but I can
think of nobody but you, and (for your sake
principally, but not a little for my own) my Boy. 
I will set out to meet you; for I chuse not to
come myself, lest you should endeavour to persuade
me to permit your tarrying about him; 
and I should be sorry to deny you any thing. I
have taken here handsome Apartments for you,
till the Event, which I pray God may be happy,
shall better determine me what to do. I will be
ever 
“Your most affectionate and faithful.” 

Maidstone indeed is not so very far off, but one
may hear every Day once or twice, by a Man and
Horse; so I will go, to shew my Obedience, since
Mr. B. is so intent upon it. –––But I cannot live, if I
am not permitted to come back. –––Oh! let me be
enabled, gracious Father! to close this Letter more
happily than I have begun it! 
I have been so dreadfully uneasy at Maidstone,
that Mr. B. has been so good as to return with me
hither; and I find my Baby's Case not yet quite
desperate! –––I am easier now I see him, in Presence
of his beloved Papa–––who lets me have all my Way,
and approves of my preparative Method for myself; 
and he tells me, that, since I will have it so, he will
indulge me in my Attendance on the Child, and
endeavour to imitate my Reliance on God–––that is
his kind Expression, and leave the Issue to Him. 
And on my telling him, that I feared nothing in the
Distemper, but the Loss of his Love, he said, in
Presence of the Doctors, and my Father and Mother,
pressing my Hand to his Lips, My dearest 

Life, make yourself easy under this Affliction, and
apprehend nothing for yourself: I love you more for
your Mind than your Face. That and your Person
will be the same; and were that sweet Face to be
cover'd with Seams and Scars, I will value you the
more for the Misfortune: And glad I am, that I
had your Picture so well drawn in Town, to satisfy
those who have heard of your Loveliness, what you
were, and hitherto are. For myself, my Admiration
lies deeper; and, drawing me to the other End of
the Room, whisperingly he said, The last Uneasiness
between us was, now I begin to think, necessary,
because it has turned all my Delight in you, more
than ever, to the Perfections of your Mind; and so
God preserves to me the Life of my Pamela, I
care not, for my own Part, what Ravages the
Distemper makes here; and tapp'd my Cheek. 
How generous, how noble, how comforting was
this! –––I will make this Use of it; I will now be
resigned more and more to this Dispensation, and
prepare myself for the worst; for it is the Dispensation
of that God, who gave me my Baby, and
all I have! 
When I retir'd, the Reflections which I made,
on supposing the worst, gave Birth to the following
serious Lines, (for I cannot live without Pen and
Ink in my Hand) written, as by a third Person,
suppose a good Minister. Your Ladyship will be
pleased to give them your favourable Allowances. 

Tell me, fond, weeping Parent, why
Thou fearst so much thy Child should die?
'Tis true, tho' human Frailty may,
Yet Reason can't, have much to say.
What is it thou thyself hast found
In this dull, heavy, tiresome Round

Of Life–––to make thee wish thy Son
Should thro' the like dark Mazes run?
 Suppose the worst!–––'Twill end thy Fears,
And free thee from a world of Cares.
For, Oh! what anxious Thoughts arise
From hopefull'st Youths, to damp our Joys?
Who, from the Morning's brightest Ray,
Can promise, what will be the Day?

When I went from my Apartment, to go to my
Child, my dear Mr. B. met me at the Nursery
Door, and led me back again. You must not go in
again, my Dearest. They have just been giving the
Child other Things to try to drive out the Malady; 
and some Pustules seem to promise on his Breast. I
made no Doubt, my Baby was then in Extremity; 
and I would have given the World to have shed a
few Tears; but I could not. 
With the most soothing Goodness he led me to
my Desk, and withdrew to attend the dear Baby
himself;–––to see his last Gaspings, poor little Lamb,
I make no doubt! 
This Suspense, and my own strange Hardness of
Heart, that would not give up one Tear, (for the
Passage from that to my Eyes seem'd quite choak'd
up, which used to be so open and ready on other
Occasions, affecting ones too) produced these
Lines: 

 Why does my full-swoln Heart deny
The Tear, relief-ful, to my Eye?
If all my Joys are pass'd away,
And thou, dear Boy, to Parent Clay
Art hasting, the last Debt to pay;
Resign me to thy Will, my God:
Let me, with Patience, bear this Rod.

However heavy be the Stroke,
If thou wilt not his Doom revoke,
Let me all sinful Anguish shun,
And say, resign'd, Thy Will be done!

Two Days have pass'd, dreadful Days of Suspense!
and now, blessed be God! who has given
me Hope, that our Prayers are heard, the Pustules
come kindly out, very thick in his Breast, and on
his Face; but of a good Sort, they tell me. –––They
won't let me see him, indeed they won't! –––What
cruel Kindness is this! One must believe all they
tell one! 
But, my dear Lady, my Spirits are so weak,
and I have such a violent Head-ach, and have such
a strange shivering Disorder all running down my
Back, and I was so hot just now, and am so cold
at this present–––Aguishly inclin'd–––I don't know
how!–––that I must leave off, the Post going away,
with the Assurance, that I am, and will be to the
last Hour of my Life, 
Your Ladyship's grateful and
obliged Sister and Servant,
P. B. 

