


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


London, Friday Morning, Mar. 31. 
Here, my Lucy, once more I am. We arrived
yesterday in the afternoon. 
Lady Betty Williams and Miss Clements have been
already to welcome me on my return. My cousin 

says, they are inseparable. I am glad of it, for Lady
Betty's sake. 
Dr. Bartlett is extremely obliging. One would
think, that he and his kinsman give up all their time
in transcribing for us. I send you now his seventh,
eighth, and ninth Letters. In reading the two latter,
we were struck (for the two sisters and my Lord were
with us) with the nobleness of Clementina. Her
motive, thro' her whole delirium, is so apparently owing
to her concern for the Soul of the man she loved (entirely
regardless of any interest of her own) that we
all forgot what had been so long our wishes, and joined
in giving a preference to her. 

Dr. Bartlett's seventh Letter.
I had another visit paid me, proceeds Mr. Grandison,
two hours after the General left me, by
the kind-hearted Camilla, disguised as before. 
I come now, Chevalier, said she, with the Marchioness's
connivance, and I may say, by her command; 
and at the same time, by the command of
Signor Jeronymo, who knows of my last attendance
upon you, tho' no one else does, not even the Marchioness. 
He gave me this Letter for you. 
But how does the noblest young Lady in Italy, Camilla? 
How does Lady Clementina? 
More composed than we could have hoped for from
the height of her delirium. It was high; for she has
but a very faint idea of having seen you this morning. 
The Marchioness had bid her say, that altho' I had
now given her despair instead of hope, yet that she
owed it to my merit, and to the sense she had of the
benefits they had actually received at my hands, to let
me know, that it was but too likely that resentments
might be carried to an unhappy length; and that
therefore she wished I would leave Bologna for the
present. If happier prospects presented, she would be
the first to congratulate me upon them. 

I opened the Letter of my kind Jeronymo. These
were the contents: 

I am infinitely concerned, my dear Grandison, to
find a man equally generous and brave as my brother
is, hurried away by passion. You may have
acted with your usual magnanimity in preferring your
Religion to your Love, and to your Glory. I, for
my part, think you to be a distressed man. If you
are not, you must be very insensible to the merits of
an excellent woman, and very ungrateful to the distinction
she honours you with. I must write in this
stile, and think she does honour by it even to my
Grandison. But should the consequences of this affair
be unhappy for either of you; if, in particular, for my
brother; What cause of regret would our family have,
that a younger brother was saved by the hand which
deprived them of a more worthy elder? If for you,
how deplorable would be the reflexion, that you saved
one brother, and perished by the hand of another! 
Would to God that his passion, and your spirit, were
more moderate! But let me request this favour of
you; That you retire to Florence, for a few days, at
least. 
How unhappy am I, that I am disabled from taking
part in a more active mediation! —Yet the General
admires you. But how can we blame in him a zeal
for the honour of his family, in which he would be
glad at his soul to include a zeal for yours? 
For God's sake quit Bologna for a few days only. 
Clementina is more sedate. I have carried it, that
her confessor shall not at present visit her; yet he is
an honest and a pious man. 
What a fatality! Every one to mean well, yet
every one to be miserable! And can Religion be
the cause of so much unhappiness? I cannot act. 
I can only reflect. My dear friend, let me know
by a line, that you will depart from Bologna tomorrow; 

and you will then a little lighten the heart
of your 
Jeronymo. 

I sent my grateful compliments to the Marchioness
by Camilla. I besought her to believe, that my conduct
on this occasion should be such as should merit
her approbation. I expressed my grief for the apprehended
resentments. I was sure that a man so noble,
so generous, so brave, as was the man from whom
the resentments might be supposed to arise, would
better consider of every thing: But it was impossible
for me, I bid Camilla say, to be far distant from Bologna; 
because I still presumed to hope for a happy
turn in my favour. 
I wrote to Signor Jeronymo to the same effect. I
assured him of my high regard for his gallant brother:
I deplored the occasion which had subjected me to the
General's displeasure; bid him depend upon my moderation. 
I referred to my known resolution of long
standing, to avoid a meditated rencounter with any
man; urging, that he might, for that reason, the more
securely rely upon my care to shun any acts of offence
either to or from a son of the Marquis della Porretta; 
a brother of my dear friend Jeronymo, and of the
most excellent and beloved of sisters! 
Neither the Marchioness nor Jeronymo were satisfied
with the answers I returned: But what could I
do? I had promised the General that I would not
leave Bologna till I had apprized him of my intention
to do so; and I still was willing, as I bid Camilla tell
the Marchioness, to indulge my hopes of some happy
turn. 
The Marquis, the Bishop, and General, went to Urbino; 
and there, as I learnt from my Jeronymo, it was
determined, in full assembly, that Grandison, as well
from difference in religion, as from inferiority in degree
and fortune, was unworthy of their alliance: And it was 

hinted to the General, that he was equally unworthy
of his resentment. 
While the father and two brothers were at Urbino,
Lady Clementina gave hopes of a sedate mind. She
desired her mother to allow her to see me: But the
Marchioness believing there were no hopes of my
complying with their terms, and being afraid of the
consequences, and of incurring blame from the rest of
her family, now especially, that they were absent,
and consulting together on what was proper to be
done; desired she would not think of it. 
This refusal made Clementina the more earnest
for an interview. Signor Jeronymo gave his advice
in favour of it. The misfortune he had met with,
had added to his weight with the family. It is a family
of harmony and love. They were hardly more
particularly fond of Clementina than they were of
one another, throughout the several branches of it:
This harmony among them added greatly to the family-consequence,
as well in public as private. Till
the attempt that was made upon their Jeronymo,
they had not known calamity. 
But the confessor strengthening the Marchioness's
apprehensions of what the consequence of indulging
the young Lady might be, all Jeronymo's weight
would have failed to carry this point, had it not
been for an enterprize of Clementina, which extremely
alarmed them, and made them give into her
wishes. 
Camilla has enabled me to give the following melancholy
account of it, to the only man on earth to
whom I could communicate particulars, the very recollection
of which, tears my heart in pieces. 
The young Lady's malady, after some favourable
symptoms which went off, returned in another shape; 
her talkativeness continued; but the hurry with which
she spoke and acted, gave place to a sedateness that she
seemed very fond of. They did not suffer her to go 

out of her chamber; which she took not well: But
Camilla being absent about an hour; on her return
missed her, and alarmed the whole house upon it. 
Every part of it, and of the garden, was searched. 
From an apprehension that they dared not so much as
whisper to one another, they dreaded to find her
whom they so carefully sought after. 
At last, Camilla seeing, as she supposed, one of
the maid-servants coming down-stairs with remarkable
tranquillity, as she thought, in her air and manner; 
Wretch! said she, how composed do you seem to be
in a storm that agitates every body else! 
Don't be angry with me, Camilla, returned the
supposed servant. 
O my Lady! my very Lady Clementina, in Laura's
cloaths! Whither are you going, madam? —But let
the Marchioness know, said she, to one of the women-servants
who then appeared in sight, that we have
found my young Lady—What, dear madam, is the
meaning of this? —Go, Martina, to another woman-servant,
go this instant to my Lady! —Dear Lady
Clementina, what concern have you given us! 
And thus she went on, asking questions of her
young Lady, and giving orders, almost in the same
breath, till the Marchioness came to them in a joyful
hurry, from one of the pavilions in the garden, into
which she had thrown herself; tortured by her fears,
and dreading the approach of every servant, with fatal
tidings. 
The young Lady stood still, but with great composure. 
I will go, Camilla, said she; indeed I will. 
You disturb me by your frantic ways, Camilla. I
wish you would be as sedate and calm as I am: What's
the matter with the woman? 
Her mother folding her arms about her—O my
sweet girl! said she, How could you terrify us thus? 
What's the meaning of this disguise? Whither were
you going? 

Why, madam, I was going on God's errand; not
on my own. —What is come to Camilla? The poor
creature is beside herself! 
O my dear! said her mother, taking her hand, and
leading her into her own apartment, (Camilla following,
weeping with joy for having found her) Tell
me, said she, tell me, has Laura furnished you with
this dress? 
Why no, madam: I'll tell you the whole truth. I
went and hid myself in Laura's room, while she
changed her cloaths: I saw where she put those she
took off; and when she had left her room, I put them
on. 
And for what? For what, my dear? Tell me what
you designed? 
I am neither afraid nor ashamed to tell. It was
God's errand I was going upon. 
What was the errand? 
Don't weep then, my dear mamma, and I'll tell
you. Do, let me kiss away these tears. —And she
tenderly embraced her mother. 
Why, I have a great mind to talk to the Chevalier
Grandison. I had many fine thoughts upon my pillow; 
and I believed I could say a great deal to the
purpose to him; and you told me I must not see him:
So I thought I would not. But then I had other notions
came into my head; and I believed, if I could
talk freely to him, I should convince him of his errors. 
Now, thought I, I know he will mind what I
say to him, more than perhaps he will my brother the
Bishop, or Father Marescotti. I am a simple girl,
and can have no interest in his conversion; for he has
refused me, you know: So there is an end of all
matters between him and me. I never was refused
before: Was I, my mamma? I never will be twice
refused. Yet I owe him no ill-will. And if one can
save a soul, you know, madam, there is no harm in
that. So it is God's errand I go upon, and not my 

own. And shall I not go? Yes, I shall. I know
you will give me leave. —She courtesied. Silence is
permission! Thank you, madam. —And seemed to be
going. 
Well might her mother be silent. She could not
speak; but rising, went after her to the door, and
taking her hand, sobbed over it her denial (as Camilla
described it), and brought her back, and motioned to
her to sit down— 
She whispered Camilla, What ails my mamma? 
Can you tell? —But see how calm, how composed I
am! This world, Camilla! what a vain thing is this
world! and she looked up. And so I shall tell the
Chevalier. I shall tell him not to refuse heaven, tho'
he has refused a simple girl, that was no enemy to
him, and might have been a faithful guide to him
thither, for what he knew. Now all these things I
wanted to say to him, and a vast deal more; and when
I have told him my mind, I shall be easy. 
Will my precious girl be easy, broke out into
speech her weeping mother, when you have told the
Chevalier your mind? You shall tell him your mind,
my dear; and God restore my child to peace, and to
me! 
Well now, my mamma, this is a good sign—For
if I have moved you to oblige me, Why may I not
move him to oblige himself? —That's all I have in
view. He has been my tutor, and I want, methinks,
to return the favour, and be his tutress; and so you
will let me go—Won't you? 
No, my dear, we will send for him. 
Well, that may do as well, provided you will let us
be alone together: For these proud men may be
ashamed, before company, to own themselves convinced
by a simple girl. 
But, my dearest Love, Whither would you have
gone? Do you know where the Chevalier's lodgings
are? 

She paused. —She does not, surely, Camilla! 
Camilla repeated the question, that the young Lady
might herself answer it. 
She looked as if considering—Then, Why no,
truly, said she; I did not think of that: But everybody
in Bologna knows where the Chevalier Grandison
lives—Don't you think so? —But when shall he
come? That will be better; much better. 
You shall go, Camilla, disguised as before. Probably
he has not quitted Bologna yet. And let him
know, to a tittle, all that has passed, on this attempt
of the dear soul—If he can bring his mind to comply
with our terms, it may not yet be too late: Tho'
it will be so after my Lord and my two sons return
from Urbino. But small are my hopes from him. If
the interview makes my poor child easy, that will be
a blessed event: We shall all rejoice in that. Mean
time, come with me, my dear—But first resume your
own dress—And then we will tell Jeronymo what we
have determined upon. He will be pleased with it, I
know. 
You tell me, my good Miss Byron, that I cannot
be too particular; yet the melancholy tale, I see,
affects you too sensibly: As it also does my Lord and
Lady L. and Miss Grandison. No wonder! when the
transcribing of them has the same effect upon me, as
the reading had at my first being favoured with the
Letters that give the moving particulars. 


Dr. Bartlett's eighth Letter.
I proceed now to give an account of Mr. Grandison's
interview with Lady Clementina. 
He had no sooner heard the preceding particulars,
than he hastened to her, tho' with a tortured heart. 
He was introduced to the Marchioness and Signor
Jeronymo, in the apartment of the latter. 
I suppose, said the Marchioness, after first civilities, 

Camilla has told you the way we are now in. The
dear creature has a great desire to talk with you. 
Who knows, but she may be easier after she has been
humoured? —She is more composed than she was,
since she knows she may expect to see you. Poor
thing! she has hopes of converting you. 
Would to heaven, said Jeronymo, that compassion
for her disordered mind, may have that effect upon my
Grandison, which argument has not had! —Poor
Grandison! I can pity you at my heart. These are
hard trials to your humanity! Your distress is written
in your countenance! 
It is deeper written in my heart, said I. 
Indeed, Dr. Bartlett, it was. 
The Marchioness rang. Camilla came in. See,
said she, if Clementina is disposed now to admit of
the Chevalier's visit; and ask her, If she will have
her mamma introduce him to her. 
By all means, was the answer returned. 
Clementina at our entrance was sitting at the window,
a book in her hand. She stood up. A great,
but solemn composure appeared in her air and aspect. 
The Marchioness went to the window, holding her
handkerchief at her eyes. I approached with profound
respect her Clementina; but my heart was too
full to speak first—She could speak. She did, without
hesitation— 
You are nothing to me now, Chevalier: You have
refused me, you know; and I thank you: You are
in the right, I believe. I am a very proud creature. 
And you saw what trouble I gave to the best of parents,
and friends. You are certainly in the right. 
She that can give so much concern to them, must
make any man afraid of her. But Religion, it seems,
is your pretence. Now I am sorry that you are an
obstinate man. You know better, Chevalier. I
think you should know better. But you have been
my tutor. Shall I be yours? 

I shall attend to every instruction that you will honour
me with. 
But let me, Sir, comfort my mamma. 
She went to her, and kneeled: Why weeps my
mamma? taking a hand in each of hers, and kissing
first one, then the other. Be comforted, my mamma. 
You see, I am quite well. You see I am sedate. — 
Bless your Clementina! 
God bless my child! 
She arose from her knees; and stepping towards
me—You are very silent, Sir; and very sad—But I
don't want you to be sad. —Silent I will allow you to
be; because the tutored should be all ear. So I used
to be to you. 
She then turned her face from me, putting her hand
to her forehead—I had a great deal to say to you; but
I have forgot it all—Why do you look so melancholy,
Chevalier? You know your own mind; and
you did what you thought just and fit—Did you not? 
Tell me, Sir. 
Then turning to her weeping mother—The poor
Chevalier cannot speak, madam—Yet had nobody
to bid him do this, or bid him do that—He is sorry,
to be sure! —Well, but, Sir, turning to me, Don't be
sorry. —And yet the man who once refused me—Ah,
Chevalier! I thought that was very cruel of you:
But I soon got over it. You see how sedate I am
now. Cannot you be as sedate as I am? 
What could I say? I could not sooth her; she
boasted of her sedateness. I could not argue with her. 
Could I have been hers, could my compromise have
been allowed of, I could have been unreserved in my
declarations: Was ever man so unhappily circumstanced? 
—Why did not the family forbid me to come
near them? Why did not my Jeronymo renounce
friendship with me? Why did this excellent mother
bind me to her, by the sweet ties of kindness and
esteem; engaging all my reverence and gratitude? 

But let me ask you, Chevalier, How could you be
so unreasonable as to expect, that I should change my
religion, when you were so very tenacious of yours? 
Were you not very unreasonable to expect this? — 
Upon my word, I believe, you men think, it is no
matter for us women to have any consciences, so as
we do but study your wills, and do our duty by you. 
Men look upon themselves as gods of the earth, and
on us women but as their ministring servants! —But
I did not expect that you would be so unreasonable. 
You used to speak highly of our Sex. Good women,
you used to say, were angels. And many a time have
you made me proud that I was a woman. How could
you, Chevalier, be so unreasonable? 
May I, madam, to her mother, acquaint her with
the proposals I made? —She seems to think, that I
insisted upon her change of religion. 
It was not designed she should think so: But I
remember now, that she would not let me tell all I
had to say, when I was making my report to her of
what had passed between the Bishop and you. It was
enough, she said, that she had been refused; she besought
me to spare the rest: And since that, she has
not been in such a way that we could talk to her on
that part of the subject. We took it for granted,
that she knew it all, because we did. Could we have
yielded to your proposals, we should have enforced
them upon her. —If you acquaint her with what you
had proposed, it may make her think she has not been
despised, as she calls it; the notion of which changed
her temper, from over-thoughtful to over-lively. 
No need of speaking low to each other, said the
young Lady. After your slight, Sir, you may let me
hear any-thing. —Madam! you see how sedate I am. 
I have quite overcome myself. Don't be afraid of
saying any-thing before me. 
Slight, my dearest Lady Clementina! Heaven is
my witness, your honoured mamma is my witness, 

that I have not slighted you! —The conditions I had
proposed, could they have been complied with, would
have made me the happiest of men! 
Yes, and me the unhappiest of women. Why
you refused me, did you not? And putting both her
hands spread before her face; Don't let it be told
abroad, that a daughter of that best of mothers was
refused by any man less than a Prince! —Fie upon
that daughter! To be able to stand before the proud
refuser! [She walked from me.] I am ashamed of myself! 
—O Mrs. Beaumont! But for you! —My Secret
had been buried here, putting one hand on her bosom,
holding still the other before her face. —But Sir, Sir,
coming towards me, don't speak! Let me have all
my talk out—And then—everlasting silence be my
portion! 
How her mother wept! How was I affected! 
I had a great deal to say to you, I thought: I
wanted to convince you of your errors. I wanted no
favour of you, Sir: Mine was a pure, disinterested
esteem. A voice from heaven, I thought, bid me
convert you. I was setting out to convert you: I
should have been enabled to do it, I doubt not; Out
of the mouth of babes and sucklings; Do you remember
that text, Sir? —Could I have gone, when I would
have gone—I had it all in my head then—But now I
have lost it—O that impertinent Camilla! —She must
question me—The woman addressed me in a quite
frantic way. She was vexed to see me so sedate. 
I was going to speak—Hush, hush, when I bid
you! and she put her hand before my mouth. With
both my hands I held it there for a moment, and
kissed it. 
Ah, Chevalier! said she, not withdrawing it, I believe
you are a flattering man! How can you, to a
poor despised girl— 
Let me now speak, madam—Use not a word that I
cannot repeat after you. Let me beg of you to hear
the proposals I made— 

I mentioned them; and added, Heaven only knows
the anguish of my soul—Hush, said she, interrupting,
and turning to her mother—I know nothing of these
men, madam! Do you think, my mamma, I may
believe him? —He looks as if one might! —Do you
think I may believe him? 
Her mother was silent, through grief. 
Ah, Sir! My mamma, tho' she is not your enemy,
cannot vouch for you! —But I will have you bound
by your own hand. She stept to her closet in a hurry,
and brought out pen, ink, and paper. —Come, Sir,
you must not play tricks with me. Give me under
your hand, what you have now said—But I will write
it, and you shall sign it. 
She wrote, in an instant, as follows: 
The Chevalier Grandison solemnly declares,
That he did, in the most earnest manner, of
his own accord, propose, that he would allow
a certain young creature, if she might be allowed
to be his wife, the free use of her religion; 
and to have a discreet man, at her
choice, for her confessor: And that he would
never oblige her to go to England with him:
And that he would live in Italy with her every
other year. 
Will you sign this, Sir? —Most willingly. —Do
then. —I did. 
And you did propose this? —Did he, madam? 
My dear, he did. And I would have told you so; 
but that you were affected at his supposed refusal. 
Why, to be sure, madam, interrupted she, it was a
shocking thing to be refused. 
Would you have wished us, my dear, to comply
with these terms? Would you have chosen to marry
a Protestant? A daughter of the house of Porretta,
and of the house I sprung from, to marry an English
Protestant? 
Clementina took her mother aside, but spoke loud
enough to be heard. 

To be sure, madam, that would have been wrong:
But I am glad I was not refused with contempt: That
my tutor, and the preserver of my Jeronymo, did not
despise me. To say truth, I was afraid he liked Olivia; 
and so made a pretence. 
Don't you think, my dear, that you would have
run too great a hazard of your own faith, had you
complied with the Chevalier's proposals? 
Why no, surely, madam! —Might I not have had
as great a chance of converting him, as he could have
had of perverting me? I glory in my Religion,
madam. 
So does he, my love, in his. 
That is his fault, madam. Chevalier, stepping
towards me, I think you a very obstinate man. I hope
you have not heard our discourse. 
Yes, my dear, he has: And I desire not but he
should. 
Would to God, madam, said I to the Marchioness,
that I had yours and my Lord's interest! From what
the dear Lady Clementina has hinted, I might presume— 
But, Sir, you are mistaken, perhaps, said the young
Lady. Tho' I answer for answering's sake, and to
shew that I have no doubt of my stedfastness in an
article in which my soul is concerned; yet that is no
proof of my attachment to an obstinate—I know
what! —Heretic was, no doubt, in her head. 
I took her mother aside: For God's sake, madam,
encourage my presumptuous hopes. Do you not observe
already, an alteration in the dear Lady's mind? 
Is she not more unaffectedly sedate than she was before? 
Is not her mind quieter, now she knows that
every thing was yielded up that honour and conscience
would permit to be yielded up? See that sweet
serenity almost restored to those eyes, that within
these few moments had a wilder turn! 
Ah, Chevalier! this depends not on me. And if it 

did, I cannot allow of my daughter's marrying a man
so bigotted to his errors. Excuse me, Sir! But if
you were more indifferent in your religion, I should
have more hopes of you, and less objection. 
If, madam, I could be indifferent in my religion,
the temptation would have been too great to be resisted. 
Lady Clementina, and an alliance with such a
family— 
Ah Chevalier! I can give you no hope. 
Look at the sweet Lady, madam! Behold her, as
now, perhaps, balancing in my favour! Think of
what she was, the joy of every heart; and what she
may be! Which, whatever becomes of me, Heaven
avert! —And shall not the noble Clementina have
her mother for her advocate? God is my witness, that
your Clementina's happiness is, more than my own,
the object of my vows. Once more, for your Clementina's
sake (What, alas! is my sake to that) on
my knee, let me request your interest: That, joined
to my Jeronymo's, and if the dear Lady recede not,
if she blast not these budding hopes, will, I doubt not,
succeed. 
The young Lady ran to me, and offering to help
me up with both her hands, Rise, Chevalier: Shall I
raise the Chevalier, madam? —I don't love to see him
kneel. Poor Chevalier! —See his tears! —What is
the matter with every-body? Why do you weep? — 
My mamma weeps too! —What ails every-body? 
Rise, Chevalier, said the Marchioness. O this
sweet prattler! She will burst my heart asunder! — 
You cannot, Sir, prevail (I cannot wish that you
should) but upon our own terms. And will not this
sweet soul move you? —Hard-hearted Grandison! 
What a fate is mine! rising: With a soul penetrated
by the disorder of this most excellent of women,
and by the distress given by it to a family,
every single person of which I both love and reverence,
to be called hard-hearted! What is it I desire, 

but that I may not renounce a religion in which my
conscience is satisfied, and be obliged to embrace for
it one, that tho' I can love and honour every worthy
member of it, I have scruples, more than scruples,
about, that my heart can justify, and my reason defend! 
You have not, madam, yourself, with a heart all
mother and friend, a deeper affliction than mine. 
Clementina, all this time, looked with great earnestness,
now on me, now on her weeping mother— 
And at last, breaking silence [Her mother could not
speak], and taking her hand, and kissing it, I don't,
said she, comprehend the reason of all this. This
house is not the house it was: Who, but I, is the
same person in it? My father is not the same: My
brothers neither: My mamma never has a dry eye, I
think: But I don't weep. I am to be the comforter
of you all! And I will. —Don't weep! Why now
you weep the more for my comfortings! —O my
mamma! What would you say to your girl, if she
refused comfort? Then kneeling down, and kissing
her hand with eagerness, I beseech you, my dear
mamma, I beseech you, be comforted; or lend me
some of your tears—What ails me that I cannot weep
for you! —But, turning to me, See, the Chevalier
weeps too! —Then rising, and coming to me, her
hand pressing my arm—Don't weep, Chevalier, my
tutor, my friend, my brother's preserver! What ails
you? —Be comforted! —Then taking her handkerchief
out of her pocket with one hand, still pressing
my arm with the other, and putting it to her eyes,
and looking upon it—No! —I thought I could have
wept for you! —But why is all this! —You see what
an example I, a silly girl, can set you—Affecting a still
sedater countenance. 
O Chevalier! said the weeping mother, and do
you say your heart is penetrated? —Sweet creature!
wrapping her arms about her; my own Clementina!
would to Heaven it were given me to restore 

my child! —O Chevalier! if complying with your
terms would do it—But you are immoveable! 
How can that be said, madam, when I have made
concessions, that a princely family should not, on a
beginning address, have brought me to make? May I
repeat, before Lady Clementina— 
What would he repeat to me? interrupted she. Do,
madam, let him say all he has a mind to say. If it
will make his poor heart easy, why let him say all he
would say—Chevalier; speak. Can I be any comfort
to you? I would make you all happy, if I could. 
This, madam, said I to her mother, is too much! 
Excellent young Lady! —Who can bear such transcendent
goodness of heart, shining through intellects
so disturbed! And think you, madam, that on earth
there can be a man more unhappily circumstanced
than I am? 
O my Clementina! said her mother, dear child of
my heart! And could you consent to be the wife of
a man of a contrary religion to your own? A man of
another country? You see, Chevalier, I will put
your questions to her. A man that is an enemy to
the faith of his own ancestors, as well as to your
faith? 
Why, no, madam! —I hope he does not expect that
I would. 
May I presume, madam, to put the question in
my own way? —But yet I think it may distress the
dear Lady, and not answer the desirable end, if I may
not have hope of your interest in my favour; and of
the acquiescence of the Marquis and your sons with
my proposals. 
They will never comply. 
Let me then be made to appear insolent, unreasonable,
and even ungrateful, in the eyes of your
Clementina, if her mind can be made the easier by
such a representation. If I have no hopes of your favour,
madam, I must indeed despair. 

Had I any hope of carrying your cause, I know
not what might be done: But I must not separate myself
from my family, in this great article. —My dear!
to Clementina, you said you should be easier in your
mind, if you were to talk to the Chevalier alone. 
This is the only time you can have for it. Your father
and brothers will be here to-morrow—And then,
Chevalier, all will be over. 
Why, madam, I did think I had a great deal to
say to him. And, as I thought I had no interest in what
I had to say— 
Would you wish, my dear, to be left alone with
the Chevalier? Can you recollect any thing that you
had intended to say to him, had you made him the
visit you had designed to make him? 
I don't know. 
Then I will withdraw. Shall I, my dear? 
Ought I, Sir (You have been my tutor, and many
excellent lessons have you taught me—tho' I don't
know what is become of them! —Ought I) to wish my
mamma to withdraw? Ought I to have any-thing to
say to you, that I could not say before her? —I think
not. 
The Marchioness was retiring. I beg of you,
madam, said I, to slip unobserved into that closet. 
You must hear all that passes. The occasion may be
critical. Let me have the opportunity of being either
approved or censured, as I shall appear to deserve, in
the conversation that may pass between the dear Lady
and me, if you do withdraw. 
O Chevalier! you are equally prudent and generous! 
Why won't you be one of us? Why won't
you be a Catholic? 
She went out at the door. Clementina courtesied to
her. I led her eye from the door, and the Marchioness
re-entered, and slipt into the closet. 
I conducted the young Lady to a chair, which I
placed with its back to the closet-door, that her mother 

might hear all that passed. —She sat down, and bid me
sit by her. 
I was willing she should lead the subject, that the
Marchioness might observe I intended not to prepossess
her. 
We were silent for a few moments. She seemed
perplexed; looked up, looked down; then on one
side, then on the other—At last, O Chevalier! said
she, they were happy times when I was your pupil,
and you were teaching me English! 
They were indeed happy times, madam. 
Mrs. Beaumont was too hard for me, Chevalier! — 
Do you know Mrs. Beaumont? 
I do. She is one of the best of women. 
Why so I think. But she turned and winded me
about most strangely. I think I was in a great fault. 
How so, madam? —How so! Why to let her
get out of me a secret that I had kept from my mother. 
And yet there never was a more indulgent
mother. —Now you look, Chevalier: But I sha'n't
tell you what the secret was. 
I do not ask you, madam. 
If you did, I would not tell you. —Well, but I had
a great deal to say to you, I thought. I wish that
frantic Camilla had not stopt me when I was going to
you. I had a great deal to say to you. 
Cannot you recollect, madam, any part of it? 
Let me consider—Why, in the first place, I thought
you despised me, I was not sorry for that, I do assure
you: That did me good. At first it vexed me—You
can't think how much. I have a great deal of pride,
Sir—But, well, I got over that; and I grew sedate— 
You see how sedate I am. Yet this poor man,
thought I, whether he thinks so or not (I will tell
you all my thoughts, Sir) But don't be grieved. —You
see how sedate I am. Yet I am a silly girl; you are
thought to be a wise man: Don't disgrace your wisdom. 
Fie! a wise man to be weaker than a simple
girl! —Don't let it be said—What was I saying?— 

Yet this poor man, whether he thinks so, or not, you
said, madam. 
True!—has a Soul to be saved. He has taken
great pains with me, to teach me the language of
England: Shall I not take some with him, to teach
him the language of Heaven! —No heretic can learn
that, Sir! —And I had collected abundance of fine
thoughts in my mind, and many pertinent things from
the Fathers; and they were all in my head—But that
impertinent Camilla—And so they are all gone—But
this one thing I have to say—I designed to say something
like it, at the conclusion of my discourse with
you—So it is premeditated, you will say; and so it is. 
But let me whisper it—No I won't neither—But turn
your face another way—I find my blushes come already— 
But (and she put her spread hand before her
face, as if to hide her blushes) Don't look at me, I
tell you—Look at the window [I did]. Why, Chevalier,
I did intend to say—But stay—I have wrote it
down somewhere [She pulled out her pocket-book]
Here it is. Look another way, when I bid you—She
read—‘Let me beseech you, Sir (I was very earnest,
you see) to hate, to despise, to detest (Now don't
look this way) the unhappy Clementina, with all
my heart; but, for the sake of your immortal Soul,
let me conjure you to be reconciled to our Holy
Mother Church!—’ Will you, Sir?—following
my indeed averted face with her sweet face; for I
could not look towards her. Say you will. I heard
you once called an Angel of a man; And is it not
better to be an Angel in Heaven? —Tender-hearted
man! I always thought you had sensibility—Say you
will—Not for my sake—I told you, that I would
content myself to be still despised. It shall not be
said, that you did this for a wife! —No, Sir, your
conscience shall have all the merit of it! —And I'll
tell you what; I will lay me down in peace—She
stood up with a dignity that was augmented by her 

piety; And I will say, ‘Now do thou, O beckoning
Angel’ (for an Angel will be on the other side of the
river—The river shall be death, Sir! —Now do thou)
‘reach out thy Divine hand, O Minister of Peace! 
I will wade through these separating waters; and I
will bespeak a place for the man, who, many, many
years hence, may fill it! —And I will sit next you for
ever and ever!’ —And this, Sir, shall satisfy the poor
Clementina; who will then be richer than the richest! 
So you see, Sir, as I told my mother, I was setting
out on God's errand; not on my own! 
For hours might the dear Lady have talked on,
without interruption from me! —My dear Dr. Bartlett!
what did I not suffer? 
The Marchioness was too near for herself: She
could not bear this speech of her pious, generous,
noble daughter. She sobbed; she groaned. 
Clementina started—She looked at me. She looked
round her. Whence came these groans? Did you
groan, Sir? —You are not a hard-hearted man, tho'
they say you are. But will you be a Catholic, Sir? 
Say you will. I won't be denied. And I will tell you
what—If I don't resign to my destiny in a few, a very
few weeks, why then I will go into a nunnery; and
then I shall be God's child, you know, even in this
life. 
What could I say to the dear Lady? Her mind
was raised above an earthly Love. Circumstanced
as we were, how could I express the tenderness for
her which overflowed my heart? Compassion is a
motive that a woman of spirit will reject: And how
could Love be here pleaded, when the parties believed
it to be in my own power to exert it? Could I endeavour
to replace myself in her affection, when I
refused to comply with their terms, and they with
mine? To have argued against her religion, and in
defence of my own, her mind so disturbed, could not
be done: And ought I, in generosity, in justice to 

her family, to have attempted to unsettle her in a faith
in which she, and all her family, were so well satisfied? 
I could only, when I could speak, applaud her
piety, and pronounce her an Angel of a woman, an
ornament of her sex, and an honour to her religion; 
and endeavour to wave the subject. 
Ah, Chevalier! said she, after a silence of some
minutes! —You are an obstinate man! Indeed you
are—Yet, I think, you do not despise me. —But what
says your paper? 
She took it out of her bosom, and read it. She
seemed affected by it, as if she had not before considered
it: And you really proposed these terms, Sir? 
And would you have allowed me the full exercise of
my religion? And should I have had my confessor? 
And would you have allowed me to convert you, if I
could? And would you have treated my confessor
kindly? And would you have been dutiful to my papa
and mamma? And would you have loved my two
other brothers as well as you do Jeronymo? —And
would you have let me live at Bologna? —You don't
say, Yes. —But do you say, No? 
To these terms, madam, most willingly would I
have subscribed: And if, my dearest Lady, they could
have had the wished-for effect, how happy had I
been! 
Well! —She then paused; and resuming, What
shall we say to all these things? 
I thought her mother would take it well, to have an
opportunity given her to quit the closet, now her
Clementina had changed her subject to one so concerning
to the whole family. I favoured her doing so. 
She slipt out, her face bathed in tears, and soon after
came in at the drawing-room door. 
Ah, madam! said Clementina, paying obeisance
to her, I have been arguing and pleading with the
Chevalier. 

Then, speaking low, I believe he may, in time,
be convinced: He has a tender heart. But hush,
putting her finger to her mouth, and then speaking
louder. I have been reading this paper again— 
She was going on too favourably for me, as it was
evident the Marchioness apprehended (the first time
that I had reason to think she was disinclined to the
alliance): For she stopt her: My Love, said she, you
and I will talk of this matter by ourselves. 
She rang. Camilla came in. She made a motion
for Camilla to attend her daughter, and withdrew,
inviting me out with her. 
When we were in another room, Ah, Chevalier!
said she, How was it possible that you could withstand
such an heavenly pleader? You cannot love her
as she deserves to be loved: You cannot but act
nobly, generously; but indeed you are an invincible
man. 
Not love her, madam! Your Ladyship adds distress
to my very great distress! —Am I, in your opinion,
an ungrateful man! —But must I lose your favour,
your interest? On that, and on my dear Jeronymo's,
did I build my hopes, and all my hopes. 
I know your terms can never be accepted, Chevalier:
And I have now no hopes of you. After this
last conversation between you and the dear girl, I can
have no hopes of you. Poor soul! She began to
waver. O how she loves you! I see you are not to
be united: It is impossible. And I did not care to
permit a daughter of mine farther to expose herself, as
it must have been to no manner of purpose. —You
are concerned. —I should pity you, Sir, if you had it
not in your power to make yourself happy, and us,
and ours too. 
Little did I expect such a turn, in my disfavour,
from the Marchioness! 
May I, madam, be permitted to take leave of the
dear Lady, to whose piety and admirable heart I am so
much indebted? 

I believe it may as well be deferred, Chevalier. 
Deferred, madam! —The Marquis and the General
come; and my heart tells me, that I may never
be allowed to see her again. 
At this time it had better be deferred, Sir. 
If it must, I submit—God for ever bless you, madam,
for all your goodness! God restore to you your
Clementina! May you all be happy! —Time may do
much for me! Time, and my own not disapproving
conscience, may—But a more unhappy man never
passed your gates! 
I took the liberty to kiss her hand, and withdrew,
with great emotion. 
Camilla hastened after me. Chevalier, says she,
my Lady asks, If you will not visit Signor Jeronymo? 
Blessings attend my ever-valued friend! I cannot
see him. I shall complain to him. My heart will burst
before him. Commend me to that true friend. 
Blessings attend every one of this excellent family. 
Camilla, obliging Camilla, adieu! 
O Dr. Bartlett! —But the mother was right. She
was to account for her conduct in the absence of her
Lord. She knew the determination of the family; 
and her Clementina was on the point of shewing more
favour to me, than, as things were circumstanced, it
was proper she should shew me: Yet they had found
out that Clementina, in the way she was in, was not
easily diverted from any thing she took strongly into
her head; and they never had accustomed her to contradiction. 

Well, Lucy, now you have read this Letter, do
you not own, that this man, and this woman, can
only deserve each other? —Your Harriet, my dear,
is not worthy to be the handmaid of either. This is
not an affectation of humility. You will be all of
the same opinion, I am sure: And this Letter will 

convince you, that more than his Compassion, that
his Love for Clementina, was engaged. And so it
ought. And what is the inference but this—That
your Harriet, were this great difficulty to be vincible,
could pretend to hope but for half a heart? There
cannot be that fervor, my dear, in a second Love,
that was in a first. Do you think there can? 


Dr. Bartlett's ninth Letter.
The young Lady, proceeds Mr. Grandison,
after I had left her, went to her brother Jeronymo. 
There I should have found her, had I, as
her mother motioned by Camilla, visited my friend:
But when I found he was likely to stand alone in his
favour to me; when the Marchioness had so unexpectedly
declared herself against the compromise; I
was afraid of disturbing his worthy heart, by the grief
which at the instant overwhelmed mine. 
The following particulars Jeronymo sent me, within
three hours after I left their palace. 
His sister, making Camilla retire, shewed him the
paper which she had written, and made me sign, and
asked him what he knew of the contents. 
He knew not what had passed between his mother
and me; nor did Clementina. 
He told her, that I had actually made those proposals. 
He assured her, that I loved her above all
women. He acquainted her with my distress. 
She pitied me. She thought, she said, that I had
not made any overtures, any concessions; that I despised
her; and sensibly asked, Why the Chevalier
was sent for from Vienna? We all knew his mind, as
to religion, said she. 
Then, after a pause, He never could have perverted
me, proceeded she: He would have allowed
me a confessor, would he not? 
He would, answered Jeronymo. —And he would
have left me among my friends in Italy? —He would, 

replied he. —Well, brother, and I should have
been glad perhaps to have seen England once; and
he would perhaps have brought over his sisters and his
father to visit us: And he praises them highly, you
know. And if I were their sister, I could have gone
over with them, you know. Do you think, if I had
loved them, they would not have loved me? I am not
an ill-natured creature, you know; and they must be
courteous: Are they not his sisters? And don't you
think his father would love me? I should have brought
no dishonour into his family, you know. —Well, but
I'll tell you what, Jeronymo: He is really a tender-hearted
man. I talked to him of his Soul; and, upon
my honour, I believe I could have prevailed, in time. 
Father Marescotti is a severe man, you know; and he
has been always so much consulted, and don't love
the Chevalier, I believe: So that I fansy, if I were to
have a venerable sweet-tempered man for my confessor,
between my Love, and my confessor's Prudence,
we should gain a Soul. —Don't you think so,
Jeronymo? —And that would cover a great many sins. 
And all his family might be converted too, you know! 
He encouraged her in this way of thinking. She
believed, she said, that I was not yet gone. He is so
tender-hearted, brother! that is my dependence: And
you say, he loves me. Are you sure of that? —But
I have reason to think he does. He shed tears, as I
talked to him, more than once; while my eyes were
as dry as they are now. I did not shed one tear. 
Well, I'll go to him, and talk with him. 
She went to the door; but came back on tiptoe; 
and in a whispering accent—My mamma is coming; 
Hush, Jeronymo! let Hush be the word!— 
The door opened—Here, madam, is your girl! — 
But it is not my mamma: The impertinent Camilla. 
She follows me as my shadow! 
My Lady desires to see you, Lady Clementina, in
her dressing-room. 

I obey. But where is the Chevalier? 
Gone, madam. Gone some time. 
Ah, brother! said she, and her countenance fell. 
What, gone! said Jeronymo, without seeing me! 
Unkind Grandison! He did not use to be so unkind. 
This was the substance of the advices sent me by
my friend Jeronymo. 
I acquainted him in return, by pen and ink, with
all that had passed between the Marchioness and me,
that he might not, by his friendship for me, involve
himself in difficulties. 
In the morning I had a visit from Camilla, by her
Lady's command; with excuses for refusing to allow
me to take leave of Clementina. She hoped I was
not displeased with her on that account. It was the
effect of prudence, and not disrespect. She should
ever regard me, even in a tender manner, as if the
desired relation could have taken place. Her Lord,
and his brother the Conte della Porretta (as he is
called) with the General and the Bishop, arrived the
night before, accompanied by the Count's eldest son,
Signor Sebastiano. She had been much blamed for
permitting the interview; but regretted it the less, as
her beloved daughter was more composed than before,
and gave sedate answers to all the questions put to her. 
But, nevertheless, she wished that I would retire from
Bologna, for Clementina's sake, as well as for my
own. 
Camilla added from Signor Jeronymo, that he
wished to hear from me from the Trentine, or Venice:
And as from herself, and in confidence, that her
young Lady was greatly concerned, that I did not
wait on her again before I went away: That she fell
into a silent fit upon it; and that her mamma, on
her not answering to her questions, for the first time,
chid her: That this gave her great distress, but produced
what they had so much wished for, a flood of 

tears; and that now she frequently wept, and lamented
to her, What should she do? Her mamma
did not love her; and her mamma talked against the
Chevalier. She wished to be allowed to see him. 
Nobody now would love her but the Chevalier and
Jeronymo! It would be better for her to be in England,
or any-where, than to be in the sweetest country
in the world, and hated. 
Camilla told me, that the Marquis, the Count his
brother, and the General, had indeed blamed the
Marchioness for permitting the interview; but were
pleased that I was refused taking leave of the young
Lady, when she seemed disposed to dwell on the contents
of the note she had made me sign: They seemed
now all of a mind, she said; That were I to comply
with their terms, the alliance would not, by any
means, be a proper one. Their rank, their degree,
their alliances, were dwelt upon: I found that their
advantages, in all these respects, were heightened; 
my degree, my consequence, lowered, in order to
make the difference greater, and the difficulties insuperable. 
Clementina's uncle, and his eldest son, both men
of sense and honour, who used to be high in her
esteem, had talked to her, but could get nothing from
her but No, and Yes. Her father had talked to her
alone; but they melted each other, and nothing resulted
of comfort to either. Her mother joined him,
but she threw herself at her mother's feet, besought
her to forgive her, and not to chide her again. They
had intended to discourage her from thinking of me
upon any terms. The General and the Bishop were
to talk to her that morning. They had expressed displeasure
at Signor Jeronymo, for his continued warmth
in my favour. Father Marescotti was now consulted
as an oracle: And I found, that, by an indelicacy of
thinking, he imagined, that the husband would set all
right; and was for encouraging the Count of Belvedere,
and getting me at distance. 

Camilla obligingly offered to acquaint me, from
time to time, with what occurred; but I thought it
was not right to accept of a servant's intelligence out
of the family she belonged to, unless some one of it
authorized her to give it me. Yet, you must believe,
I wanted not anxious curiosity on a subject so interesting. 
I thanked her; but said, that it might, if
discovered, lay her under inconveniencies which
would grieve me for her sake. She had the good
sense to approve of my declining her offer. 
In the morning of the same day, I had a visit made
me which I little expected: It was from Father
Marescotti. It is a common thing to load an enemy,
especially if he be in Holy Orders, and comes to us
in the guise of friendship, with the charge of hypocrisy:
But partiality may be at the bottom of the accusation. 
Father Marescotti is a zealous Roman Catholic:
I could not hope either for his interest, or affection:
He could not but wish to frustrate my hopes. 
As a man in earnest in his own principles, and who
knew how stedfast I was in mine, it was his duty to
oppose this alliance. He is, perhaps, the honester man
for knowing but little of human nature, and of the
tender passions. As to that of Love, he seemed to
have drawn his conclusions from general observations:
He knew not how to allow for particular constitutions,
nor to account for the delicacy of such a heart
as Clementina's. He thought that Love was always
a poor blind boy, led in a string, either by Folly, or
Fancy; and that once the impetus got over, and the
Lady settled into the common offices of life, she would
domesticate herself, and be as happy with a Count of
Belvedere, especially as he is a very worthy man, as
if she had married the man once most favoured. On
this presumption, it was a condescension, in such a man,
to come to me, and to declare himself my friend; 
and advise me what to do for promoting the peace of
a family which I professed to venerate; and you will 

hear that his condescension was owing to a real greatness
of mind. 
I was, from the moment of his entrance, very
open, very frank; more so than he expected, as he
owned. He told me, that he was afraid I had conceived
prejudices against him. The kinder then in
him, I said, that he condescended to make me so
friendly a visit. I assured him, that I regarded him
as a good man. I had indeed sometimes thought him
severe; but that convinced me that he was very much
in earnest in his religion. I was sensible, I said, that
we ought always to look to the intention: To put
ourselves in the situation of the persons of whose
actions we presumed to judge; and even to think
well of austerities, which had their foundation in virtue,
in whatever manner they affected us. 
He applauded me; and said, That I wanted so
little to be a Catholic, that it was a thousand pities I
was not one: And he was persuaded, that I should
one day be a proselyte. 
This Father's business was, to convince me of the
unfitness of an alliance between families so very opposite
in their religious sentiments. He went into history
upon it. You may believe, that the unhappy
consequences which followed the marriage between
our Charles I. and the Princess Henrietta of France,
were not forgotten. He expatiated upon them; but
I observed to him, That the Monarch was the sufferer,
by the zeal of the Queen for her religion, and not
the Queen, any otherwise than as she was involved in
the consequences of those sufferings which she had
brought upon him. In short, Father, said I, We
Protestants, some of us, have zeal; but let us alone,
and it is not a persecuting one. Your doctrine of merits
makes the zeal of your devotees altogether active,
and perhaps the more flaming, in proportion as the
person is more honest and worthy. 
I lamented, that I was sent for from Vienna, upon 

hopes, tho' my principles were well known, that otherwise
I had never presumed to entertain. 
He owned that that was a wrong step, and valued
himself that he had not been consulted upon it: And
that when he knew it had been taken, he inveighed
against it. 
And I am afraid, Father, said I— 
He interrupted me—Why, I believe so! —You
have made such generous distinctions in favour of the
duty of a man acting in my function, that, I must
own, I have not been an idle observer on this occasion. 
He advised me to quit Bologna. He was profuse in
his offers of service in any other affair; and, I dare
say, was in earnest. 
I told him, That I chose not to leave it precipitately,
and as if I had done something blame-worthy. 
I had some hopes of being recalled to my father's
arms. I should set out, when I left Bologna, directly
for Paris, to be in the way of such a long-wished for
call; and then, said I, Adieu to travelling! Adieu to
Italy, for ever! I should have been happy, had I never
seen it, but in the way for which I have been accustomed
to censure the generality of my countrymen. 
His behaviour at parting was such, as will make
me for ever revere him; and will enlarge a charity
for all good men of his religion; which yet, before,
was not a narrow one. For, begging my excuse, he
kneeled down at the door of my antechamber, and
offered up, in a very fervent manner, a prayer for my
conversion. He could not have given me, any other
way, so high an opinion of him: No, not, had he
offered me his interest with Clementina, and her family. 
I embraced him, as he did me: Tears were
in his eyes. I thanked him for the favour of this
visit; and, recommending myself to his frequent prayers,
told him, That he might be assured of all the respectful
services he should put it in my power to 

render him. I longed, Dr. Bartlett, to make him a
present worthy of his acceptance, had I known what
would have been acceptable, and had I not been afraid
of affronting him. I accompanied him to the outward
door. I never, said he, saw a Protestant that I loved,
before. Your mind is still more amiable than your
person. Lady Clementina, I see, might have been
happy with you: But it was not fit, on our side. He
snatched my hand, before I was aware, and honoured
it with his lips, and hastened from me, leaving me
at a loss, and looking after him, and for him, when
he was out of sight; my mind labouring as under a
high sense of obligation to his goodness. 
Religion and Love, Dr. Bartlett, which heighten
our relish for the things of both worlds, What pity is
it, that they should ever run the human heart either
into enthusiasm, or superstition; and thereby debase the
minds they are both so well fitted to exalt! 
I am equally surprised and affected by the contents
of the following Letter, directed to me. It was put
within the door; nobody saw by whom. The daughter
of the Lady at whose house I lodge, found it, and gave
it to one of my servants for me. 

Don't be surprised, Chevalier: don't think
amiss of me for my forwardness. I heard some
words drop (so did Camilla, but she can't go out to
tell you of them) as if somebody's life was in danger. 
This distracts me. I am not treated as I was accustomed
to be treated. They don't love me now— 
They don't love their poor Clementina! Very true,
Chevalier! You, who were always telling me how
dearly they all loved me, will hardly believe it, I
suppose. Nothing now is said, but You shall, Clementina
—from those who used to call me Sister, and
dear Sister, at every word. 
They said, I was well, and quite well, and ought
to be treated with a high hand—I know from whom 

they have that. From myself. I said so to Mrs.
Beaumont; but she need not to have told them. I
won't go to her again, for that. They say I shall. 
God help me, I don't know where to go for a quiet
mind. A high hand won't do, Chevalier: I wish I
knew what would; I would tell it to them. I once
thought it would; else I had not said it to Mrs.
Beaumont: But let them go on with their high hands,
with all my heart: That heart will not hold always. 
It had been gone before now, had not Mrs. Beaumont
got out of me—Something—I won't tell you
what—And then they sent for Somebody—And Somebody
came—And what then? —They need not
threaten me so—Somebody is not so much to blame
as they will have it he is: And that Somebody did
make proposals—Did you not, Chevalier? —I had
like to have betrayed myself—I stopt just in time. 
But, Chevalier, I'll tell you a secret—Don't speak
of it to any body—May I depend upon you? —I
know I may. Why, Camilla tells me, that the Count
of Belvedere is to come again—Are you not sorry
for your poor pupil? But I'll tell you another secret— 
And that is, what I intend to say to him—‘Look you
here, my Lord, you are a very good sort of man; 
and you have great estates: You are very rich:
You are, in short, a very good sort of man; but
there is, however, a man in the world with whom I
had rather live in the poorest hermitage in a wilderness,
than with you in the richest palace in the
world.’ After this, if he be not the creeping mean
man you said he was not, he will be answered— 
Every-thing you said to me in former happy times, I
remember. You always said things to me, that were
fit to be remembered. Yet I don't tell you who my
hermit is, that I had rather live with. Perhaps there
is no such man. But this, you know, will be a sufficient
answer to the Count of Belvedere. Don't you
think so? 

Here I have been tormented again! —Would you
think it? I have been pleading for somebody, boldly,
confidently. I said I could depend upon his honour! 
Ah, Chevalier! Don't you think I might? —I am to
be locked up, and I can't tell what! —They won't
let me see Somebody—They won't let me see my
poor Jeronymo! —You and I, and Jeronymo, are all
put together! —I don't care, as I tell Camilla: I
don't care. They will quite harden me. 
But just now my mamma, O she is the best of
mothers! —My mamma tells me, She will not persuade
me, if I will be patient, if I will be good. My dear
mamma, as I told her, I will be patient, and good:
But don't let them inveigh against the Chevalier, then. 
What harm has he done? —Was he not—Ah! Sir,
now I blush! —Was he not sent for? —And did he
not weep over me? —Yet none of your bold men,
who look as proudly as if they were sure of your approbation! 
—Well, but what do you think my
mamma said—Ah, Clementina! said she, would to
God the Chevalier for his own sake (yes, she said for
his own sake; and that made a great impression upon
me; it was so good, you know, of my mamma)
that the Chevalier was in England, or a thousand
miles off. So, Sir, this is my advice—Pray take it; 
for I and Camilla heard some words, and Camilla, as
well as I, is much troubled about them—Get away
to England as soon as you can—Besure do! —And
some months hence, bring your two sisters over with
you; and by that time all our feuds will be over, you
know: And you shall take a house, and then I can
go and visit your sisters, you know, and your sisters
will visit us. You will come sometimes with them; 
Won't you? Well, and I'll tell you how we will
pass part of our time: They shall perfect me in my
English: I will perfect them in Italian. They know
as much of that, I suppose, at least, as I do of English:
And we will visit every court, and every city. 

So, God bless you, Sir, and get away, as soon as you
can. I put no name; for fear this should miscarry,
and I should be found out—Ah, Sir! they are very
severe with me! Pity me: But I know you will; 
for you have a tender heart. It is all for You! 

These last five words were intended to be scratched
out; and are but just legible. 
How the contents of this Letter afflict me! Words
cannot express what I feel! I see, evidently, that they
are taking wrong measures with the tenderest heart in
the world; a heart that never once has swerved from
its duty; and which is filled with reverence and love
for all that boast a relation to it. Harsh treatment,
and which is besides new to it, is not the method to
be taken with such a heart. Shall I, thought I, when
I had perused it, ask for an audience of a mother so
indulgent, and give her my disinterested advice upon
it? Once I could have done so; and even, in confidence,
have shewn her this very Letter: But now
she is one with the angry part of her family, and I
dare not do it, for Clementina's sake. Talk of locking
her up! Talk of bringing a Lover to her! — 
Threatening her with going to Mrs. Beaumont, when
they should court her to go thither. Not suffer her
to see her beloved Jeronymo! —He in disgrace too! — 
How hard, how wrong, is all this conduct! I could
have written to Jeronymo, thought I and advised
gentle measures, were he not out of their consultations— 
As to the threatened resentments, they are as
nothing to me. Clementina's sufferings are everything! 
My soul disdains the thought of fastening myself
upon a proud family, that now looks upon me in
a mean light. A proud heart undervalued, will swell. 
It will be put upon over-valuing itself. You know,
Dr. Bartlett, that I have a very proud heart: But
when I am trampled upon, or despised, then is it most
proud. I would call myself a Man, to a Prince, who 

should unjustly hold me in contempt; and let him
know that I looked upon him to be no more. My
pride is raised: Yet against whom? Not Clementina! 
She has all my pity! She has seen, and I have found,
that her unhappy delirium, tho' not caused by me (I
bless God for that!) has made me tender as a chidden
infant. And can I think of quitting Bologna, and
not see if it be possible for me to gratify myself, and
serve them in her restoration? Setting quite out of the
question the General's causeless resentments, and the
engagement I have laid myself under not to leave it,
without apprizing him of my intention. 
Upon the whole, I resolved to wait the issue of the
new measures they have fallen upon. The dear Lady
has declared herself in my favour. Such a frank declaration
must soon be followed by important consequences. 
* *
The third day after the arrival of her father and
brothers from Urbino, I received the following Billet
from the Marquis himself: 

Chevalier Grandison,
We are in the utmost distress. We cannot take
upon us to forbid your stay at Bologna; but
shall be obliged to you, if you will enable us to acquaint
our daughter, that you are gone to England,
or some far distant part. Wishing you happy, I am,
Sir, 
Your most obedient humble servant. 

To this I wrote as follows: 

My Lord,
I am excessively grieved for your distress. I make
no hesitation to obey you. But as I am not conscious
of having, in word or deed, offended you, or
any one of a family to whom I owe infinite obligations; 

let me hope, that I may be allowed a farewel
visit to your Lordship, to your Lady, and to your
three sons; that my departure may not appear like
that of a criminal, instead of the parting that, from
the knowlege I have of my own heart, as well as of
your experienced goodness, may be claimed by your
Lordship's 
Ever obliged, and
affectionate humble Servant,
Grandison. 

This request, I understood, occasioned warm debates. 
It was said to be a very bold one: But my
dear Jeronymo insisted, that it was worthy of his
Friend, his Deliverer, as he called me; and of an innocent
man. 
The result was, that I should be invited in form,
to visit and take leave of the family: And two days
were taken, that some others of the Urbino family
might be present, to see a man, for the last time (and
some of them for the first), who was thought, by his
request, to have shewn a very extraordinary degree of
intrepidity; and who, tho' a Protestant, was honoured
with so great an interest in the heart of their Clementina. 
The day before I was to make this formal visit (for
such it was to be) I received the following Letter
from my friend Jeronymo: 

My dearest Grandison,
Take the particulars of the situation we are in
here, that you may know what to expect, and
how to act and comport yourself, to-morrow evening. 
Your reception will be, I am afraid, cold; but
civil. 
You will be looked upon by the Urbino family,
who have heard more of you than they have seen, as
a curiosity; but with more wonder than affection. 

Of them will be present, the Count my father's
brother, and his sons Sebastiano and Juliano, my aunt
Signora Juliana de Sforza, a widow Lady, as you
know, and her daughter Signora Laurana, a young
woman of my sister's age, between whom and my
sister used to be, as you have heard, the strictest friendship
and correspondence; and who insisted on being
present on this occasion. They are all good-natured
people; but love not either your country or religion. 
Father Marescotti will be present. He is become
your very great admirer. 
My father thinks to make you his compliments; 
but if he withdraws the moment he has made them,
you must not be surprised. 
My mother says, that as it is the last time that she
may ever see you, and as she really greatly respects
you, she shall not be able to leave you while you
stay. 
The General, I hope, will behave with politeness. 
The Bishop loves you; but will not however, perhaps,
be in high good humour with you. 
Your Jeronymo will be wheeled into the same
room. If he be more silent than usual on the solemn
occasion, you will not do him injustice, perhaps, if
you attribute it to his prudence; but much more to
his grief. 
And now let me tell you, as briefly as I can, the
situation of the dear creature who must not appear,
but who is more interested in the occasion of the congress
than any person who will be present at it. 
What passed between you and her at the last interview,
has greatly impressed her in your favour. The
Bishop, the General, and my Father, soon after their
return from Urbino, made her a visit in her dressing-room. 
They talked to her of the excellency of her
own Religion, and of the errors of the pretended Reformed,
which they called, and I suppose are, damnable. 
They found her steady in her abhorrence of 

the one, and adherence to the other. They were delighted
with her rational answers, and composed behaviour:
They all three retired in raptures, to congratulate
each other upon it; and returned with pleasure,
to enter into farther talk with her: But when
they mentioned you to her, she, led by their affectionate
behaviour to her on their return, said, It had given
her great pleasure, and ease of mind, to find that she
was not despised by a man whom every one of the family
regarded for his merit and great qualities. The
General had hardly patience; he walked to the farther
end of the room: My Father was in tears: The
Bishop soothed her, in order to induce her to speak her
whole mind. 
He praised you. She seemed pleased. He led her
to believe, that the whole family were willing to
oblige her, if she would declare herself; and asked her
questions, the answers to which must either be an
avowal or a denial of her Love; and then she owned,
That she preferred the Chevalier Grandison to all the
men in the world; she would not, against the opinion
of her friends, wish to be his; but never would be
the wife of any other man. 
What, said the General, tho' he continue an Heretic? 
He might be converted, she said. And he was a
sweet-tempered and compassionate man: And a man
of sense, as he was, must see his errors. 
Would she run the risque of her own salvation? 
She was sure she should never give up her faith. 
It was tempting God to abandon her to her own
perverseness. 
Her reliance on his goodness to enable her to be
stedfast, was humble, and not presumptuous, and with
a pious view to gain a proselyte; and God would not
forsake a person so well intending. Was she not to
be allowed her confessor? Her confessor should be appointed
by themselves. She did not doubt but the
Chevalier would consent to that. 

The Bishop, you know, can be cool when he
pleases. He bore to talk farther with her. 
My father was still in tears. 
The General had no farther patience. He withdrew,
and came to me, and vented on me his displeasure. 
It is true, Grandison, when it was proposed
to send for you from Vienna, I, sanguine in my
hopes, had expressed myself as void of all doubt but
you would become a Catholic—Your love, your compassion,
your honour, as I thought, engaged by such
a step taken on our side—I had no notion that on
such a surprize, with such motives to urge your compliance,
a young man like myself, and with a heart
so sensible, could have been so firm: But these
thoughts are all over—This, however, exposes me to
the more reproaches. 
We were high; and my mother and uncle came in
to mediate between us. 
I would not, I could not, renounce my friend; 
the friend of my soul, as in our first acquaintance; 
and the preserver of my life. —Miserable as that has
been, the preserver of it, at a time when I was engaged
in an unlawful pursuit, in which had I perished,
what might I have now been, and where? 
I ventured to give my opinion in favour of my
sister's marriage with you, as the only method that
could be taken to restore her; who, I said, loved you
because you were a virtuous man; and that her Love
was not only founded in virtue, but was Virtue itself. 
My brother told me, that I was as much beside myself
with my notions of gratitude, as my sister was
with a passion less excusable. 
I bid him forbear wounding a wounded man. 
Thus high ran words between us. 
The Bishop, mean time, went on with a true
Church subtlety, to get out of the innocent girl her
whole mind. 
He boasted afterwards of his art. But what was 

there in it to boast of? A mind so pure and so simple
as Clementina's ever was, and which only the
pride of her Sex, and motives of Religion, had perhaps
hindered her from declaring to all the world. 
He asked her, If she was willing to leave her father,
mother, brothers, and country, to go to a strange
land; to live among a hated people? 
No, she said; you would not wish her to go out of
Italy. You would live nine months out of twelve in
Italy. 
He told her, That she must, when married, do as
her husband would have her. 
She could trust to your honour. 
Would she consent that her children should be
trained up Heretics? 
She was silent to this question. He repeated it. 
Well, my Lord, if I must not be allowed to
choose for myself; only let me not hear the Chevalier
spoken of disrespectfully: He does not deserve it. 
He has acted by me with as much honour, as he did
by my brother. He is an uniformly good man, and
as generous as good—And don't let me have other
proposals made me; and I will be contented. I had
never so much distinguished him, if every-body had
not as well as I. 
He was pleased to find her answers so rational:
He pronounced her quite well; and gave it as his
opinion, that you should be desired to quit Bologna:
And your absence, and a little time, he was sure,
would secure her health of mind. 
But when her aunt Sforza and her cousin Laurana
talked with her next morning, they found her, on
putting questions about you, absolutely determined in
your favour. 
She answered the objections they made against you,
with equal warmth and clearness. She seemed sensible
of the unhappy way she had been in, and would
have it, that the last interview she had with you, had 

helped to calm and restore her: And she hoped that
she should be better every day. She praised your behaviour
to her: She expatiated upon, and pitied, your
distress of mind. 
They let her run on till they too had obtained from
her a confirmation of all that the Bishop had reported; 
and, upon repeating the conversation, would have it,
upon experience, that soothing such a passion was not
the way to be taken; but that a high hand was to be
used, and that she was to be shamed out of a Love so
improper, so irreligious, so scandalous, to be encouraged
in a daughter of their house with an Heretic; 
and who had shewn himself to be a determined one. 
They accordingly entered upon their new measures. 
They forbad her to think of you: They told her,
That she should not upon any terms be yours; not
now, even if you would change your religion for her. 
They depreciated your family, your fortune, and
even your understanding; and brought to prove what
they said against the latter, your obstinate adherence
to your mushroom religion, so they called it; a religion
that was founded in the wickedness of your VIIIth
Henry; in the superstition of a child his successor; 
and in the arts of a vile woman who had martyred a
Sister Queen, a better woman than herself. They
insisted upon her encouraging the Count of Belvedere's
addresses, as a mark of her obedience. 
They condemned, in terms wounding to her modesty,
her passion for a foreigner, an enemy to her
faith; and on her earnest request to see her father, he
was prevailed upon to refuse her that favour. 
Lady Juliana Sforza and her daughter Laurana, the
companion of her better hours, never see her, but
they inveigh against you as an artful, an interested
man. 
Her uncle treats her with authority; Signor Sebastiano
with a pity bordering on contempt. 
My mother shuns her; and indeed avoids me: But 

as she has been blamed for permitting the interview,
which they suppose the wrongest step that could have
been taken; she declares herself neutral, and resigns
to whatever shall be done by her Lord, by his brother,
her two sons, and Lady Juliana de Sforza: But I am
sure, in her heart, that she approves not of the new
measures; and which are also, as I have reminded the
Bishop, so contrary to the advice of the worthy Mrs.
Beaumont; to whom they begin to think of once
more sending my sister, or of prevailing on her to
come hither: But Clementina seems not to be desirous
of going again to her; we know not why; since she
used to speak of her with the highest respect. 
The dear soul rushed in to me yesterday. Ah, my
Jeronymo! said she, they will drive me into despair. 
They hate me, Jeronymo: But I have written to
Somebody! —Hush! for your life, hush. 
She was immediately followed in by her aunt
Sforza and her cousin Laurana, and the General; 
who, however, heard not what she said, but insisted
on her returning to her own apartment. 
What! said she, Must I not speak to Jeronymo? 
Ah, Jeronymo! —I had a great deal to say to you! 
I raved; but they hurried her out, and have forbid
her to visit me: They, however, have had the civility
to desire my excuse. They are sure, they say, they
are in the right way: And if I will have patience
with them for a week, they will change their measures,
if they find these new ones ineffectual. But
my sister will be lost, irrecoverably lost; I foresee
that. 
Ah Grandison! And can you still—But now they
will not accept of your change of religion. Poor
Clementina! Unhappy Jeronymo! Unhappy Grandison! 
I will say. If you are not so, you cannot deserve
the affection of a Clementina! 
But are you the Somebody to whom she has
written? Has she written to you? Perhaps you will 

find some opportunity to-morrow to let me know
whether she has, or not. Camilla is forbidden to stir
out of the house, or to write. 
The General told me, just now, that my gratitude
to you, shewed neither more nor less, than the high
value I put upon my own life. 
I answered; That his observation convinced me,
that he put a much less upon mine, than I, in the same
case, should have put upon his. 
He reconciled himself to me by an endearment. 
He embraced me. Don't say convinced, Jeronymo. 
I love not myself better than I love my Jeronymo. 
What can one do with such a man? He does love
me. 
* *
My mother, as I said, is resolved to be neutral:
But, it seems, she is always in tears. 
* *
My mother stept in just now—To my question
after my sister's health; Ah, Jeronymo! said she,
All is wrong! The dear creature has been bad ever
since yesterday. They are all wrong! —But patience
and silence, child! You and I have nothing to answer
for. —Yet my Clementina, said she—Oh!—and
left me. 
I have no heart to write on. You will see, from
the above, the way we are in. O my Grandison! 
What will you do among us? —I wish you would not
come. Yet what hope, if you do not, shall I ever
have of seeing again my beloved friend, who has behaved
so unexceptionably in a case so critical? 
You must not think of the dear creature: Her head
is ruined. For your own sake, you must not. We are
all unworthy of you. Yet, not all. All, however,
but Clementina, and (if true friendship will justify my
claim to another exception) 
Your afflicted
Jeronymo. 


