




Dear Father and Mother,
I have great Trouble, and some Comfort,
to acquaint you with. The Trouble is, that
my good Lady died of the Illness I mention'd
to you, and left us all much griev'd for the
Loss of her; for she was a dear good Lady, and
kind to all us her Servants. Much I fear'd, that
as I was taken by her Ladyship to wait upon her
Person, I should be quite destitute again, and
forc'd to return to you and my poor Mother,
who have enough to do to maintain yourselves; 
and, as my Lady's Goodness had put me to
write and cast Accompts, and made me a little 

expert at my Needle, and otherwise qualify'd
above my Degree, it was not every Family
that could have found a Place, that your poor
Pamela was fit for: But God, whose Graciousness
to us we have so often experienc'd at a
Pinch, put it into my good Lady's Heart, on
her Death-bed, just an Hour before she expir'd,
to recommend to my young Master all her Servants,
one by one; and when it came to my
Turn to be recommended, (for I was sobbing
and crying at her Pillow) she could only say,
My dear Son!—and so broke off a little; and
then recovering—Remember my poor Pamela! 
—And these were some of her last
Words! O how my Eyes run! —Don't wonder
to see the Paper so blotted! 
Well, but God's Will must be done!— 
and so comes the Comfort, that I shall not be
oblig'd to return back to be a Clog upon my
dear Parents! For my Master said, I will take
care of you all, my good Maidens; and for you,
Pamela, (and took me by the Hand; yes, he
took my Hand before them all) for my dear Mother's
sake, I will be a Friend to you, and you
shall take care of my Linen. God bless him! and
pray with me, my dear Father and Mother, for a
Blessing upon him: For he has given Mourning
and a Year's Wages to all my Lady's Servants; and
I having no Wages as yet, my Lady having said
she would do for me as I deserv'd, order'd the
House-keeper to give me Mourning with the rest,
and gave me with his own Hand Four golden
Guineas, and some Silver, which were in my 

old Lady's Pocket when she dy'd; and said, If
I was a good Girl, and faithful and diligent,
he would be a Friend to me, for his Mother's
sake. And so I send you these Four Guineas
for your Comfort; for Providence will not let
me want: And so you may pay some old Debt
with Part; and keep the other Part to comfort
you both. If I get more, I am sure it is my
Duty, and it shall be my Care, to love and cherish
you both; for you have lov'd and cherish'd
me, when I could do nothing for myself. I
send them by John our Footman, who goes
your Way; but he does not know what he carries; 
because I seal them up in one of the little
Pill-boxes, which my Lady had, wrapp'd close
in Paper, that they mayn't chink; and be sure
don't open it before him. 
I know, dear Father and Mother, I must
give you both Grief and Pleasure; and so I will
only say, Pray for your Pamela; who will
ever be 
Your most dutiful Daughter. 
I have been scared out of my Senses; for
just now, as I was folding up this Letter,
in my late Lady's Dressing-room, in comes
my young Master! Good Sirs! how was I
frighten'd! I went to hide the Letter in my
Bosom, and he, seeing me tremble, said,
smiling, To whom have you been writing,
Pamela? —I said, in my Confusion,
Pray your Honour forgive me! —Only
to my Father and Mother. He said, Well 

then, let me see how you are come on in
your Writing! O how asham'd I was! — 
He took it, without saying more, and read
it quite thro', and then gave it me again; 
—and I said, Pray your Honour forgive
me! —Yet I know not for what: For he
was always dutiful to his Parents; and why
should he be angry, that I was so to mine! 
And indeed he was not angry; for he took
me by the Hand, and said, You are a good
Girl, Pamela, to be kind to your aged Father
and Mother. I am not angry with you
for writing such innocent Matters as these; 
tho' you ought to be wary what Tales you
send out of a Family. —Be faithful and
diligent; and do as you should do, and
I like you the better for this. And then
he said, Why, Pamela, you write a very
pretty Hand, and spell tolerably too. I
see my good Mother's Care in your Learning
has not been thrown away upon you. 
She used to say, you lov'd Reading; you
may look into any of her Books to improve
yourself, so you take care of them. To
be sure I did nothing but curt'sy and cry,
and was all in Confusion, at his Goodness. 
Indeed, he is the best of Gentlemen, I
think! But I am making another long Letter: 
So will only add to it, that I shall
ever be, 
Your dutiful Daughter,
Pamela Andrews. 



