


Miss Byron, To Lady G. 


Thursday, Nov. 2.
I Have laid before you, my dear Lady G. your brother's
and Signor Jeronymo's Letters; as also my
answer to your brother's: My spirits never were so
unequal. All joy at one time; apprehension at another; 
that something will still happen. —Greville is
reported to be so gloomy! so silent! He hates me, he
says. —And here, unexpectedly, is poor Mr. Orme
returned. Amended in his health a little, those who
have seen him say, and he thinks so—I am glad of it. 
And here are we sitting in judgment, my aunt Lady-president,
on the patterns you have sent: My uncle
too will have his opinion be taken—And Mr. Deane,
who threatened he would not come to Selby-house till
the settlements were to be signed, or read, I cannot
tell what—will be here on Saturday. 
* *
Mr. Orme has desired leave to visit me to-morrow. 
My uncle so hurries my spirits; not with his raillery,
as he used to do—but with his joy. He talks of nothing
but the coming down of your brother, and the
limited three days after; and numbers the days, nay,
the hours, as they fly: For he supposes Sir Charles
will be here on Monday, at furthest; and calls that a
delay of particular grace and favour. For has he not
said, says he, that nothing after Friday can, on his
part, detain him from us? 
But, Lady G. will he not write, before he comes,
to my last? Say my uncle what he pleases, your 

brother can't be down before Saturday se'nnight, at
soonest. 
Your fancy and Lady L's determine us. My aunt
has undertaken this province: She therefore will write
to you what she thinks fit. Is there not too much
glare in the flowered silver, as you describe it? Don't,
my dear, let me be a bride in a masquerade habit. 
Humility becomes persons of some degree. We want
not glare: We are known to be able to afford rich
dresses; need them not, therefore, to give us consequence:
Simplicity only can be elegance. Let me
not be gaudy: Let not fancy, or art, or study, be
seen in my dresses. Something must be done, I grant,
on our appearance; for an appearance we must not
dispense with here in the country, whatever you women
of quality may do in town. But let me not, I
beseech you, or as little as possible, be marked out for
a lustre; and be so good as to throw in a hint to this
purpose to the dear busy girls here, as from yourselves; 
for they are exercising their fancies, as if I
were to be a Queen of the May. Your authorities
will support me, if they give me cause to differ in opinion
from them. 
* *
Miss Orme has just been with me. She confirms
her brother's amendment. She is sorry that his impatience
has brought him over, when the climate was
so favourable to him. She says, I shall find him sincerely
disposed to congratulate me on my happy prospect; 
of which she has given him ample particulars. 
He could not, she says, but express himself pleased,
that neither Fenwick nor Greville, but that one of so
superior a character, is to be the man. 
What greater felicity can a young creature propose
to herself, in the days of courtship, than to find every
one in her family, and out of it, applauding her
choice? Could I, a few weeks ago, have thought— 
But hushed be vanity! Pride, withdraw! Meek-eyed 

Humility, stand forth! —Am I indeed to be the happiest
of women? Will nothing happen—O no, no! 
Heaven will protect your brother—Yet this Greville
is a trouble to me. Not because of my horrid dream; 
I am not so superstitious as to let that disturb me: But
from a hint he gave Miss Orme. 
She met him this morning at a neighbouring Lady's. 
He thus accosted her: I understand, madam, that
your brother is returned. He is a happy man. Just
in time, to see Miss Byron married. Fenwick, a dog!
is gone to howl at Carlisle, on the occasion. Your
brother and I have nothing to do but howl in recitative
to each other, here. 
My brother, Mr. Greville, said Miss Orme, I am
sure, will behave like a man on the occasion: Nor
can you have reason to howl, as you call it. Sir
Charles Grandison is your particular friend, you
know. 
True, Miss Orme, affecting to laugh off this hit,
I thought I could have braved it out; but now the
matter comes near, it sticks here, just here, pointing
to his throat: I cannot get it through my gizzard. 
Plaguy hard of digestion! making faces, in his light
way. 
But will your brother, proceeded he, be contented
to stay within the noise of the bells, which will (in a
few days perhaps) be set a ringing, for ten miles
round? Sir Charles drives on at a d—nable rate, I
hear. ‘But he must let me die decently, I can tell
him: We will not part for ever with the flower of
our county, without conditions.’ Shall you see the
Siren, madam? If you do, tell her, that I have no
chance for peace, but in hating her heartily. But
(whispering Miss Orme) bid her Not to be too
secure. 
I was strangely struck with these words; for my
spirits were not high before. I repeated them; I
dwelt upon them, and wept. —Fool that I was! But 

I soon recollected myself; and desired Miss Orme not
to take notice of my tender folly. 
Friday.
I have had a visit from Mr. Orme. He has given
me some pleasure. I added not to his melancholy. 
He asked me several interesting questions, which I
would not have answered any other man, as I told
him. I shall always value Mr. Orme. Your brother
is the most generous of men: But were he not so very
generous, he ought to allow for my civility to this
worthy man; since I can applaud him with my whole
heart, for loving the noble Clementina. What a narrow-hearted
creature must I be, if I did not? But as
a woman's honour is of a more delicate nature, I believe,
than a man's, with regard to personal love; so
perhaps (if this be allowed me) a man may be as jealous
of a woman's civility (in general cases, I mean)
as a woman may be of a man's Love to another object. 
This may sound strange, at first hearing, Lady
G. but I know what I mean. Nobody else does,
Harriet, perhaps you will say. But they would, I reply,
if I were to explain myself; which, at present, if
you apprehend me not, I have no inclination to do. 
How did this worthy man praise Sir Charles Grandison! 
He must see that my pride, no, not pride, my
gratitude, was raised by it, as well to the praiser as
praised. He concluded with a blessing on us both,
which he uttered in a different manner from what that
Balaam-Greville uttered his: It was followed with
tears, good man! and he left me almost unable to
speak. How grateful in our ears are the praises bestowed
on those whom we fondly love! 
Lucy thinks I had best go to my grandmamma's
before he comes down; and that he should visit me
there from Selby-house. Neither my aunt nor I am
of this opinion; but that he should himself go to
Shirley-manor, and visit us from thence. For is not
Selby-house my usual place of residence? My grandmamma 

will be delighted with his company, and conversation. 
But as he cannot think of coming down
before the latter end of next week, at the soonest, it
is time enough to consider of these things. Yet can
a young creature, the awful solemnity so near, and
with a man whom she prefers to all others, find room
in her head for any other topic? 
I have a Letter from my good Mrs. Reeves. She
and my cousin are so full of this happy subject, that
they invite themselves down to us; and hope we will
excuse them for their earnestness on this occasion. 
They are prodigiously earnest. I wonder my cousin
can think of leaving her little boy! My aunt says,
there is no denying them. How so? —Surely one
may excuse one's self to friends one so dearly loves! 
Your presence, my Charlotte, I own, would be a high
satisfaction to me: Yet you would be a little unmanageable,
I doubt. There can be no hope of Lady
L's: But if there were, neither she, nor any-body
else, could keep you orderly. —Poor dear Emily! —My
aunt wishes, that we could have had her with us: But,
for her own sake, it must not be. How often do I
revolve that reflexion of your brother's; that, in our
happiest prospects, the sighing heart will confess imperfection! 
But I will not add another word, after I have
assured you, my dearest Ladies, that I am, and ever
will be, 
Your grateful and most affectionate humble Servant,
Harriet Byron. 

