



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Friday Morn. Sept. 1. 
It is surprising, that I, a Man, should be so much
affected as I was, at such an object as is the subject
of my former Letter; who also, in my late
Uncle's case, and poor Belton's, had the like before
me, and the directing of it: When she, a Woman,
of so weak and tender a frame, who was to fill it (so
soon perhaps to fill it!) could give orders about it,
and draw out the devices upon it, and explain them
with so little concern as the women tell me she did to
them last night after I was gone. 
I really was ill, and restless all night. Thou wert
the subject of my execration, as she of my admiration,
all the time I was quite awake: And, when I
dozed, I dreamt of nothing but of flying Hour-glasses,
Deaths-heads, Spades, Mattocks, and Eternity; the
hint of her devices (as given me by Mrs. Smith) running
in my head. 
However, not being able to keep away from
Smith's, I went thither about Seven. The Lady
was just gone out: She had slept better, I found,
than I, tho' her solemn repository was under her
window not far from her bed-side. 
I was prevailed upon by Mrs. Smith and her Nurse
Shelburne (Mrs. Lovick being abroad with her) to go
up and look at the devices. Mrs. Lovick has since
shewn me a copy of the draught by which all was
ordered. And I will give thee a sketch of the symbols. 
The principal device, neatly etched on a plate of
white metal, is a crowned Serpent, with its tail in
its mouth, forming a ring, the emblem of Eternity: 
And in the circle made by it is this inscription: 

CLARISSA HARLOWE.
APRIL X.
[Then the year]
Ætat. xix.
For ornaments: At top, an Hour-glass winged. 
At bottom, an Urn. 
Under the Hour-glass, on another plate, this inscription: 
Here the wicked cease from troubling: And
HERE the weary be at rest. Job iii. 17. 
Over the urn, near the bottom: 
Turn again unto thy rest, O my soul! For the
Lord hath rewarded thee: And why? Thou
hast delivered my soul from death; mine eyes
from tears; and my feet from falling. Ps. cxvi.
7, 8. 
Over this text is the head of a white Lily snapt
short off, and just falling from the stalk; and this
inscription over that, between the principal plate and
the lily: 
The days of man are but as grass. For he flourisheth
as a flower of the field: For, as soon as
the wind goeth over it, it is gone; and the
place thereof shall know it no more. Ps. ciii.
15, 16. 
She excused herself to the women, on the score of
her youth, and being used to draw for her needleworks,
for having shewn more fancy than would perhaps be
thought suitable on so solemn an occasion. 
The date, April 10. she accounted for, as not
being able to tell what her closing-day would be; and
as That was the fatal day of her leaving her Father's
house. 
She discharged the Undertaker's Bill after I went
away, with as much chearfulness as she could ever 

have paid for the cloaths she sold to purchase this her
palace: For such she called it; reflecting upon herself
for the expensiveness of it, saying, That they
might observe in her, that pride left not poor mortals
to the last: But indeed she did not know but her
Father would permit it, when furnished, to be carried
down to be deposited with her Ancestors; and, in
that case, she ought not to discredit those Ancestors
in her appearance amongst them. 
It is covered with fine black cloth, and lined with
white satten; soon, she said, to be tarnished by viler
earth than any it could be covered by. 
The burial-dress was brought home with it. The
women had curiosity enough, I suppose, to see her
open That, if she did open it. —And, perhaps, thou
wouldst have been glad to have been present, to have
admired it too!— 
Mrs. Lovick said, she took the liberty to blame
her; and wished the removal of such an object— 
from her bedchamber, at least: And was so affected
with the noble answer she made upon it, that she
entered it down the moment she left her. 
‘To persons in health, said she, this sight may
be shocking; and the preparation, and my unconcernedness
in it, may appear affected: But to me,
who have had so gradual a weaning-time from the
world, and so much reason not to love it, I must
say, I dwell on, I indulge (and, strictly speaking,
I enjoy) the thoughts of death. For, believe me’ 
[looking stedfastly at the awful receptacle]; ‘Believe
what at this instant I feel to be most true,
That there is such a vast superiority of weight and
importance in the thought of death, and its hoped-for
happy consequences, that it in a manner annihilates
all other considerations and concerns. Believe
me, my good friends, it does what nothing
else can do: It teaches me, by strengthening in me
the force of the Divinest Example, to forgive the 

injuries I have received; and shuts out the remembrance
of past evils from my soul.’ 
And now let me ask thee, Lovelace, Dost thou
think, that, when the time shall come that thou
shalt be obliged to launch into the boundless Ocean of
Eternity, thou wilt be able (any more than poor Belton)
to act thy part with such true Heroism, as this
sweet and tender blossom of a woman has manifested,
and continues to manifest! 
O no! it cannot be! —And why cannot it be? — 
The reason is evident: She has no wilful errors to
look back upon with self-reproach—and her mind is
strengthened by the consolations which flow from
that religious rectitude which has been the guide of all
her actions; and which has taught her rather to chuse
to be a Sufferer, than an Aggressor! 
This was the support of the divine Socrates, as
thou hast read. When led to execution, his wife lamenting
that he should suffer being innocent, Thou
fool, said he, wouldst thou wish me to be guilty? 