



From Mrs. B. to Miss Darnford. In Answer
to Letters XXXV. and XXXVI. 


My dear Miss Darnford,
I skip over the little Transactions of several
Days, to let you know how much you rejoice
me, in telling me*  Sir Simon has been so kind
as to comply with my Wishes. Both your charming
Letters came to my Hand together, and I
thank you a hundred times for them; and I thank 

your dear Mamma, and Sir Simon too, for the Pleasure
they have given me in this obliging Permission. 
How happy shall we be together! —But
how long will you be permitted to stay, tho'? 
All the Winter, I hope:—And then, when
that is over, let us set out together, if God shall
spare us, directly for Lincolnshire, and so pass
most of the Summer likewise in each other's
Company. What a sweet Thought is this! — 
Let me indulge it a little while. 
Mr. B. read your Letters, and says, You are
a charming young Lady, and surpass yourself in
every Letter. I told him, that he was more interested
in the Pleasure I took in this Favour of
Sir Simon's, than he imagin'd. As how, my
Dear? said he. A plain Case, Sir, reply'd I:
For, endeavouring to improve myself by Miss
Darnford's Conversation and Behaviour, I shall
every Day be more worthy of your Favour. He
kindly would have it, that nobody, no, not Miss
Darnford herself, excell'd me. 
'Tis right, you know, Miss, that Mr. B. should
think so; tho' I must know nothing at all, if I
was not sensible how inferior I am to my dear
Miss Darnford: And yet, when I look abroad
now-and-then, I could be a proud Slut, if I would,
and not yield the Palm to many others. —But
don't let every body know how vain I am. Yet
they may, too, if they take in, at the same time,
the Grounds of my Vanity; for they must then
allow, that I have no small Reason to be proud,
in having so happily won the Favour of Two such 

Judges, as Mr. B. and Miss Darnford, and have
the good Fortune, likewise, to rejoice in that of
Lady Davers, and the Countess of C. 
Well, my dear Miss, 




Is past and gone, as happily as the last; the
Two Ladies, and, at their earnest Request,
Sir Jacob, bearing us Company, in the Evening
Part. My Polly was there, Morning and Evening,
with her Heart broken almost, poor Girl! ––– 
I put her in a Corner of my Closet, because her
Concern should not be minded. Mrs. Jervis
gives me great Hopes of her:—And she seems
to abhor the Thoughts of Mr. H. —But as there
proves to be so little of real Love in her Heart,
(tho', even if there had, she would have been without
Excuse) is she not the wickeder by half for
that, Miss? To consent, and take Earnest, as I
may say, to live with a Man, who did not pretend
to marry her! —How inexcusable this! — 
What a Frailty! —Yet, so honestly descended,
so modest in Appearance, and an Example so
much better—forgive me to say—before
her! —Dear, dear! how could it be? 
Sir Jacob was much pleased with our Family
Order, and said, 'Twas no Wonder I kept so
good myself, that was his Word, and made others
so; and he was of Opinion, that the Four Rakes
(for he run on, how much they admir'd me)
would be converted, if they saw how well I
pass'd my Time, and how chearful and easy every 

one, as well as myself, was under it. He said,
When he came home, he thought he must take
such a Method himself in his Family; for, he
believ'd, it would make not only better Masters
and Mistresses, but better Children, and better
Servants too. But, poor Gentleman! he has, I
doubt, a great deal to mend in himself, before
he can begin such a Practice with Efficacy in his
Family. 




In the Afternoon, Sir Jacob took his Leave of
us, highly satisfy'd with us both, and particularly
—so he said—with me; and promis'd,
that my Two Cousins, as he call'd his Daughters,
and his Sister, an old Maiden Lady, if they went
to Town this Winter, should visit me, and be
improved by me; that was his Word. Mr. B.
accompany'd him some Miles on his Journey, attended
by Mr. Colbrand and Abraham; and the
Two Ladies, and Lord Davers, and I, took an
Airing in the Coach. 
Mr. B. was so kind as to tell me, when he
came home, with a Whisper, that Miss Goodwin
presented her Duty to me. 
I have got a Multitude of fine Things for the
dear little Creature, and Mr. B. promises to give
me a Dairy-house Breakfast, when our Guests are
gone. 
I inclose the History of this little Charmer*  ,
by Mr. B.'s Consent, since you are to do us the 

Honour, as he (as well as I) pleases himself, to
be one of our Family—But keep it to yourself,
whatever you do. I am Guaranty, that you will; 
and have put it in a separate Paper, that you may
burn it as soon as you have read it. —For I shall
want your Advice, it may be, on this Subject,
having a great Desire to get this Child into my
Possession; and yet Lady Davers has given me
a*  Hint, that dwells a little with me. When I
have the Pleasure I hope for, I will lay all before
you, and be determined, and proceed, as far as
I have Power, by you. You, my good Father
and Mother, have seen the Story in my former
Papers. 




You must know, I pass over the Days thus
swiftly, not that I could not fill them up
with Writing, as ample as I have done the former:
But intending only to give you a general
Idea of our Way of Life and Conversation, and
having gone thro' a whole Week and more, you
will be able, from what I have recited, to form
a Judgment how it is with us, one Day with another. 
As for Example, Now-and-then neighbourly
Visits received and paid. Needle-work
between whiles. Musick. Cards sometimes, tho'
I don't love them—One more benevolent
Round—Improving Conversations with my dear
Mr. B. and my Two good Ladies—A Lesson 

from him, when alone, 'either in French, or
Latin. —A new Pauper Case or two—A
Visit from the good Dean—Mr. Williams's
Departure, in order to put the new-projected Alteration
in Force, which is to deprive me of my
Chaplain—(By the way, the Dean is highly
pleased with this Affair, and the Motives to it,
Mr. Adams being a Favourite of his, and a distant
Relation of his Lady) Mr. H.'s and Polly's
mutual Endeavour to avoid one another—My
Lessons to the poor Girl, and Cautions, as if she
were my Sister. 
These, my dear Miss, and my honoured Father
and Mother, are the pleasant Imployments
of our Time; so far as we Females are concern'd:
For the Gentlemen hunt, ride out, and divert
themselves in their way, and bring us home the
News and Occurrences they meet with abroad,
and now-and-then a straggling Gentleman they
pick up in their Diversions. And so I shall not
inlarge upon these Articles, after the tedious Specimens
I have already given. Yet the Particulars
of One Conversation, possibly, I may give you
another time, when I have least to do; because
Three young Ladies, Relations of Mrs. Towers,
and Mrs. Arthur, were brought to visit me, for
the Benefit of my Instructions; for that was the
kind Compliment of those Ladies to me. 




Could you ever have thought, Miss, that
Husbands have a Dispensing Power over their
Wives, which Kings are not allowed over the 

Laws? I have this Day had a smart Debate with
Mr. B. and I fear it will not be the only one upon
this Subject. Can you believe, that if a Wife
thinks a Thing her Duty to do, and her Husband
does not approve of her doing it, he can dispense
with her performing it, and no Sin shall lie at
her Door? Mr. B. maintains this Point. I have
great Doubts about it; particularly One; That if
a Matter be my Duty, and he dispenses with my
Performance of it, whether, even altho' that were
to clear me of the Sin, it will not fall upon himself? 
And to be sure, Miss, a good Wife would
be as much concern'd at this, as if it was to remain
upon her. Yet he seems set upon it. What
can one do? —Did you ever hear of such a Notion
before, Miss? Of such a Prerogative in a
Husband? Would you care to subscribe to it? 
This is one of Mr. B.'s Particularities. He
has several of them, the Effects, as I take it, of
his former free Life. Polygamy, as I have mention'd
heretofore, is another. That is a bad one
indeed. Yet he is not so determin'd on this, as
he seems to be on the other, in a certain Case,
that is too nice for me, at present, to explain to
you; and so I might as well have taken no Notice
of it, as yet—Only the Argument was so present
to my Mind: Held within this Hour, and I
write a Journal, you know, of what passes. 
But I will, some time hence, submit it, at
least to your Judgments, my Father and Mother. 
You are well read in the Scriptures, and have
gone thro' the Occasion often; and both Mr. B.
and I build our Arguments on Scripture, tho' we 

are so different in our Opinions. He says, My
Ladies are of his Opinion. I'm afraid they are,
and so will not ask them. But perhaps, I mayn't
live, and other things may happen; and so I'll
say no more of it at present*  . 




Mr. H. and my Lord and Lady Davers, and
the excellent Countess of C. having left us
this Day, a good deal to my Regret, and, as it
seemed, to their own, the former put the following
Letter into my Hands, with an Air of
Respect, and even Reverence. You will observe
in it, that he says, He spells most lamentably; 
and this obliges me to give it you literally: 

‘Deare good Madam,
I cannott contente myselfe with common
Thankes, on leaving youres and Mr. B.'s hospitabel
House, because of thatt there Affaire,
which I neede nott mention; and truly am
ashamed to mention, as I have been to looke
you in the Face, ever since itt happen'd. I don't
knowe how itt came aboute; butt I thought
butt att first of Joking a little, or soe; and seeing
Polley heard me with more Atentiveness then I
expected, I was encouraged to proceede; and
soe, now I recollecte, itt came aboute. 
‘But shee is innosent for mee; and I don't
knowe how thatt came aboute neither; for wee 

were oute one Moone-lighte Nighte together,
in the Gardin, walking aboute; and afterwardes
tooke a Napp of two Houres, as I beleefe, in
the Summer-house in the littel Gardin, beeing
overpowred with Sleepe; for I woulde make
her lay her Head uppon my Breste, till, before
wee were awar, wee felle asleepe together. 
Butt before thatt, wee hadd agreed on whatt
you discover'd. 
‘Thiss is the whole Truthe, and all the Intimasies
wee ever hadd, to speake off. Butt I
beleefe wee shoulde have been better acquaintid,
hadd you nott, luckily for mee! prevented itt,
by beeing att home, when wee thought you
abroad. For I was to come to her, when shee
hemm'd two or three times; for, having made
a Contract, you knowe, Madam, it was naturall
enough to take the first Occasion to putt
itt in Force. 
‘She coulde not keepe her owne Secritt, and
may have tolde you more, perhapps, then is
true: So whatt I write is to cleare myselfe;
and to tell you, how sorry I am, in such a good
House as youres, and where their is so much
true Godliness, that I shoulde ever be drawne
away to have a Thoughte to dishonour itt. Butt
I will take care of being over-famillier for the
future with Underlinges; for, see how a Man
may bee taken in! —If shee hadd resented itt
att first, when I begun to kisse her, or soe, (for,
you knowe, wee younge Fellows will take Liberties
sometimes, where they don't become
us, to our owne Disparadgements chiefly, that's 

true) I should have hadd an Awe uppon mee; 
or iff shee had tolde you; or butt said shee
woulde; I shoulde have flowne, as soone as had
any Thoughtes further aboute the matter. — 
But whatt hadd one of oure Sexe to do, you
knowe, Madam, when they finde littell Resistence,
and thatt shee woulde stande quietly, and
telle no Tales, and make no greate Struggell,
and not keepe out of one's Way neither, butt
to dilly-dally on, till one broughte itt to more
then one att first intended? 
‘Poor Polley! I pity her too. Don't think
the worse of her, deare Madam, so as too turn
her away, because it may bee her Ruin. I don't
desier too see her. I mought have been drawne
in to do strange foolish thinges, and been ruin'd
at the long Run; for who knows where this
thing mought have ended? My Unkell woulde
have never seene me. My Father too (his Lordshipp,
you have hearde, Madam, is a very crosse
Man, and never lov'd mee much) mought have
cut off the Intaile. My Aunte woulde have
dispis'd mee, and scorn'd mee. I should have
been her foolishe Fellowe in Earneste, nott in
Jeste, as now. You woulde have resented itt,
and Mr. B. who knows mought have call'd
me to Account, (for he is bloody passionate,
I saw thatt att the Hall, and has foughte Two or
Three Duells, as I have hearde) for abusing the
Freedome of his House, and breakeing the Lawes
of Hospitallity, as you tolde mee; and so, it is
nott unlikely, I mighte have dy'd like a Dogge
in a Ditche; and there would have been an 

Ende of a noble Familly, that have been Peeres
of the Realme Time out of Minde. What a
sadd thing woulde this have been! A publicke
as well as private Losse: For you know, Madam,
whatt my Lady Countess said, and nobody
says better thinges, or knowes more of the
Matter, then her Ladyshipp, That every Peere
of the Realme is a Jewell in the Crowne. A
fine Saying! God grante, I may keep itt in
Minde, when my Time comes, and my Father
shall happen too die! 
‘Well, butt, good Madam, cann you forgive
mee? You see how happy I am in my Disapointment. 
But I must take another Sheete
of Paper. —I did nott think too write so
much;—for I don't love itt: Butt on this
Occasion, knowe nott how too leave off. —I
hope you cann reade my Letter: I knowe I write
a clumsy Hand, and spelle moste lamentabelly; for
I never had a Tallent for these thinges. I was
readier by halfe to admire the Orcherd-robbing
Picture in Lillie's Grammer, then any other
Parte of the Book. Excuse my Nonsense, Madam:
Butt many a time have I help'd to fill a
Sachil; and always supposed thatt Picture was
putt there on purpose to tell Boyes whatt Diversions
are alowed them, and are propper for
them. Severall of my Schoole-fellows tooke it
for granted, as well as I, and wee coulde never
reconsile itt to oure Reason, why wee shoulde
bee punished for practissing a Lesson taughte
us by our Grammers. 

‘Butt, hey, whither am I running! I never
writt to you before, and never may againe, unlesse
you, or Mr. B. commande itt, for youre
Servise. So pray excuse me, Madam. 
‘I knowe I neede give no Advise to Polley,
to take care of first Incouragements. Poore
Girl! she mought have suffer'd sadly, as welle as
I. —For iff my Father, and my Unkell and
Aunte, had requir'd mee to turne her off,
you knowe itt woulde have been undutifull
to have refus'd them, notwithstandinge our
Bargaine. And Want of Duty to them, woulde
have been to have added Faulte too Faulte: As
you once observed, I remember, that One Faulte
never comes alone, but drawes after itt generally
Five or Six, to hide or vindicate itt, and
they every one perhapps as many more eache. 
‘I shall never forgett severall of youre wise
Sayinges. I have been vex'd, may I be hang'd
if I have nott, many a time, thatt I coulde nott
make such Observations as you make; who am
so much older too, and a Man besides, and a
Peere's Son, and a Peere's Neffew! But my
Tallents lie another way; and by thatt time
my Father dies, I hope to improve myselfe, in
order to cutt such a Figgure, as may make mee
no Disgrase to my Name or Countrey; for
I shall have one Benefitt over many younge
Lordes; thatt I shall be more fond of making
Observasions then Speeches, and so shall improve
of course, you knowe. 
‘Well, butt whatt is all this to the Purpose? 
—I will keepe close to my Texte; and 

thatt is, to thank you, good Madam, for all the
Favours I have received in youre House; to
thank you for disapointing mee, and for convinsing
mee, in so kinde, yet so shameing a
manner, how wrong I was in the Matter of
that there Polley; and for not exposing my
Folly to any boddy but myselfe (for I shoulde
have been ready to hang myselfe, if you hadd); 
and to begg youre Pardon for itt, and to assuer
you, thatt I will never offerr the like as long as
I breathe. I am, Madam, with the greatest
Respecte, 
‘Youre moste obliged, moste faithfull, and
moste obedient humbell Servante,
‘J. H. 
‘Pray excuse Blotts and Blurrs.’ 

Well, Miss Darnford, what shall we say to
this fine Letter? –––You'll allow it to be an Original,
I hope. Yet, may-be not. For how does one
know, but it may be as well written, and as sensible
a Letter, as this Class of People generally
write? —But what then shall we be able to say
for such poor Creatures of our Sex, as are taken
in, as Mr. H. calls it, by such Pretty Fellows as
this; who, if they may happen to write better,
hardly think better, or design to act better, and
are not so soon brought to Repentance, and Promises
of Amendment? 
Mr. H. dresses well, is not a contemptible
Figure of a Man, laughs, talks, where he can
be heard, and his Aunt is not present;—and
cuts, to use his own Word, a considerable Figure 

in a Country Town—But see—Yet I will not
say what I might—He is Lord Davers's Nephew; 
and if he makes his Observations, and
forbears his Speeches, (I mean, can be silent, and
only laugh when he sees somebody of more Sense
laugh, and never approve or condemn but in
Leading-strings) he may, possibly, pass in a Croud
of Gentlemen.–––– But poor, poor Polly Barlow! 
What can I say for Polly Barlow? 
I have a Time in View, when, possibly, my
Papers may fall under the Inspection of a dear
Gentleman, to whom, next to God, I am accountable
for all my Actions and Correspondencies; 
so I will either write an Account of the
Matter, and seal it up, separately, for Mr. B. or,
at a proper Opportunity, will break it to him, and
let him know (under Secrecy, if I can engage
him to promise it) the Steps I took in it; for
fear something should arise hereafter, when I cannot
answer for myself, to render any thing dark
or questionable in it. A Method, I believe, very
proper to be taken by every marry'd Lady; and I
presume the rather to say so, having had a good
Example for it: For I have often thought of a little
seal'd up Parcel of Papers, my Lady made me
burn in her Presence about a Month before she
dy'd. —They are, Pamela, said she, such as I
have no Reason to be concern'd about, let who
will see them, could they know the Springs and
Causes of them: But, for want of a Clue, my
Son might be at a Loss what to think of several of
those Letters, were he to find them, in looking
over my other Papers, when I am no more. 

Let me add, that nothing could be more
endearing than our Parting with our noble Guests. 
My Lady repeated her Commands for what she
often engaged me to promise, that is to say, to
renew the Correspondence begun between us,
so much (as she was pleased to say) to her Satisfaction. 
I could not help shewing her Ladyship, who
was always inquiring after my Writing Imployment,
most of what pass'd between you and me,
Miss; and she admires you much, and wish'd
Mr. H. had more Wit, that was her Word: She
should, in that Case, she said, be very glad to set
on Foot a Treaty between you and him. 
But that, I fansy, can never be tolerable to
you; and I only mention it en passant. — 
There's a French Woman for you! 
The Countess was full of her kind Wishes
for my Happiness; and my Lady Davers told
me, That if I could give her timely Notice, she
would be present on a certain Occasion. 
But, my dear Miss, what could I say? —I
know nothing of the Matter! —Only, that I
am a sad Coward, and have a thousand Anxieties,
which I cannot mention to any body. 
But, if I have such in the honourable Estate
of Matrimony, what must those poor Souls have,
who have been seduced, and have all manner of
Reason to apprehend, that the Crime shall be
followed by a Punishment so natural to it? A
Punishment in kind, as I may say which, if it
only ends in Forfeiture of Life, following the
Forfeiture of Fame, must be thought merciful 

and happy beyond Expectation; for how shall
they lay Claim to the Hope that is given to Persons
in their Circumstance, that they shall be saved
in Child-bearing, since the Condition is, if they
Continue in Faith, and Charity, and Holiness
with Sobriety? 
Now, my honoured Mother, and my dear
Miss, since I am upon this affecting Subject, does
not this Text seem to give a comfortable Hope
to a virtuous Woman, who shall die in this Circumstance,
that she shall be happy in the Divine
Mercies? For the Apostle, in the Context, says,
That he suffers not a Woman to teach, not to
usurp Authority over the Man, but to be in Silence. 
—And what is the Reason he gives? Why,
a Reason that is a natural Consequence of the
Curse, on the first Disobedience, that she shall
be in Subjection to her Husband. —For, says he
Adam was Not deceived; but the Woman, being
deceived, was in the Transgression. 
As much as to say, “Had it not been for the Woman,
Adam had kept his Integrity; and therefore
her Punishment shall be, as it is said, I will
greatly multiply thy Sorrow in thy Conception:
In Sorrow shalt thou bring forth
Children,—and thy Husband shall rule over
thee. But nevertheless, if thou shalt not survive
the Sharpness of thy Sorrow, thy Death
shall be deemed to be such an Alleviation of
thy Part of the intailed Transgression, that thou
shalt be saved, if thou hast continued in
Faith, and Charity, and Holiness with
Sobriety.” 

This, my honoured Parents, and my dear
Friend, is my Paraphrase; and I reap no small
Comfort from it, when I meditate upon it. 
But I shall make you as serious as myself; 
and, my dear Miss, perhaps, frighten you from
entering into a State, in which our poor Sex suffer
so much, from the Bridal Morning, let it rise
as gayly as it will upon a thoughtful Mind, to
that affecting Circumstance, (throughout its whole
Progression) for which, nothing but a tender, a
generous, and a worthy Husband, can make them
any Part of Amends. —And when one is so
bless'd, one has so many Fears added to one's
Sorrows; and so much Apprehension, thro' human
Frailty, of being separated from so beloved
a Partner, that a body had need of the greatest
Fortitude to support one's self. But it may be I
am the weakest and most apprehensive of my
Sex—It may be I am! —And when one sees
how common the Case is, and yet how few die
in it; how uneasy many Ladies are, not to be in
this Circumstance, (my good Lady Davers particularly,
at times) and Rachel and Hannah in
Holy Writ; and then how a childless Estate might
lessen one in the Esteem of one's Husband, one
ought to bring these Considerations in Balance,
and to banish needless Fears. And so I will, if I
can. 
But a Word or two more, as to the parting
with our honoured Guests. I was a little indispos'd,
and my Ladies would excuse me, against
my Will, from attending them in the Coach some
Miles, which their dear Brother did. Both Ladies 

most tenderly saluted me, twice and thrice apiece,
folding their kind Arms about me, and wishing
my Safety and Health, and charging me to think
little, and hope much; for they saw me thoughtful
at times, tho' I endeavour'd to hide it from
them. 
My Lord Davers was pleased to say, with a
Goodness of Temper that is peculiar to him, My
dearest, dear Sister,—May God preserve you!— 
and multiply your Comforts! I shall pray for you
more than ever I did for myself, tho' I have so
much more need of it! —I must leave you—But
I leave a Lady whom I love and honour next to
Lady Davers, and ever shall. 
Mr. H. looked consciously silly. —I can say
nothing, Madam—but (saluting me) that I shall
never forget your Goodness to me. —Adding,
in his frothy Way, and with as foppish an Air,
Now can I say, I have saluted an Angel, if ever
there was an Angel on Earth. 
I had before, in Mrs. Jervis's Parlour, taken
leave of Mrs. Worden and Mrs. Lesley, my Ladies
Women: They each, stole, as it were, at
the same time, a Hand of mine, and kissed it,
begging Pardon, as they said, for the Freedom. 
But I answer'd, taking each by her Hand, and
kissing her, I shall always think of you with Pleasure,
my good Friends; for you have encouraged
me constantly by your Presence in my private Duties. 
And may God bless you, and the worthy
Families you so laudably serve, as well for your
sakes, as their own! 

They turned away with Tears, and Mrs. Worden
would have said something to me, but could
not,—Only both taking Mrs. Jervis by her
Hand, Happy, happy, Mrs. Jervis! said they almost
in a Breath. —And happy, happy I, too,
repeated I, in my Mrs. Jervis, and in such kind
and worthy Well-wishers as Mrs. Worden and
Mrs. Lesley. Wear this, Mrs. Worden; wear
this, Mrs. Lesley, for my sake;—and I gave
each of them a Ring, with a Crystal and Brilliants
set about it, which Mr. B. had bought a Week
before, for this very Purpose; for he has a great
Opinion of both the good Folks, and often praised
their Prudence, and their quiet and respectful
Behaviour to every body, so different from the
Impertinence, that was his Word, of most Ladies
Women, who are Favourites. 
Mrs. Jervis said, I have enjoyed many happy
Hours in your Conversation, Mrs. Worden and
Mrs. Lesley: I shall miss you very much. 
I Must endeavour, said I, taking her Hand,
to make it up to you, my good Friend, as well as
I can. And of late we have not had so many
Opportunities together as I should have wished,
had I not been so agreeably engaged as you
know. —So we must each try to comfort the
other, when we have lost, I such noble, and you
such worthy Guests. 
Mrs. Jervis's honest Heart, before touched by
the Parting, shew'd itself at her Eyes—Wonder
not, my good Friends, said I, to the Two Gentlewomen,
wiping with my Handkerchief her
venerable Cheeks, that I always endeavour thus 

to dry up all my good Mrs. Jervis's Tears; and
then I kissed her, thinking of you, my dear Mother; 
and I was forced to withdraw a little abruptly, lest
I should be too much moved myself, because I
was going up to our noble Guests, who, had they
inquired into the Occasion, would perhaps have
thought it derogatory (tho' I should not) to my
present Station, and too much retrospecting to
my former. 
I could not, in Conversation between Mr. B.
and myself, when I was gratefully expatiating upon
the amiable Characters of our noble Guests,
and of their Behaviour and Kindness to me, help
observing, that I had little expected, from some
*   Hints which formerly dropt from Mr. B. to
find my good Lord Davers so polite and so sensible
a Nobleman. 
He is a very good-natur'd Man, reply'd Mr. B.
I believe I might once or twice drop some disrespectful
Words of him. But it was the Effect of
Passion, at the Time, and with a View to two or
three Points of his Conduct in publick Life; for
which I took the Liberty to find fault with him,
and received very unsatisfactory Excuses. One of
these, I remember particularly, was in a Conference
between a Committee of each House of
Parliament, in which he behaved in a way I
could not wish from a Gentleman so nearly ally'd
to me by Marriage; for all he could talk of,
was the Dignity of their House, when the Reason 

of the Thing was strong with the other; and
it fell to my Lot to answer what he said, which I
did with some Asperity; and this occasioned a
Coolness between us for some Time. 
But no Man makes a better Figure in private
Life than Lord Davers; especially now, that my
Sister's good Sense has got the better of her Passions,
and she can behave with tolerable Decency
towards him. For, formerly, Pamela, it was not
so; the Violence of her Spirit making him appear
in a Light too little advantageous either to his
Quality or Merit. But now his Lordship improves
upon me every time I see him. 
You know not, my Dear, continued Mr. B.
what a Disgrace a haughty and passionate Woman
brings upon her Husband, and upon herself too,
in the Eye of her own Sex, as well as ours. Nay,
even those Ladies, who would be as glad of Dominion
as she, if they might be permitted to exercise
it, despise others who do, and the Man
most, who suffers it. 
And let me tell you, my Pamela, said the
dear Gentleman, with an Air that shew'd he was
satisfy'd with his own Conduct in this Particular,
that you cannot imagine how much a Lady owes
to her Husband, as well with regard to her own
Peace of Mind, as to both their Reputations,
(however it may go against the Grain with her
sometimes) if he be a Man who has Discretion to
keep her incroaching Passions under a genteel
and reasonable Controul! 
How do you like this Doctrine, Miss? —I'll
warrant you believe, that I could do no less, 

than drop Mr. B. one of my best Court'sies, in
Acknowlegement of my Obligation to him, for
so considerately preserving to me my Peace of
Mind, and my Reputation, as well as his own, in
this Case. 
But, after all, when one duly weighs the
Matter, I can't tell but what he says may be right
in the main; for I have not been able to contradict
him, partial as I am to my Sex, when he has
pointed out to me Instances, in the Behaviour of
certain Ladies, who, like Children, the more
they have been humour'd, the more humoursome
they have grown; which must have occasion'd
as great Uneasiness to themselves, as to their
Husbands. Will you excuse me, Miss? —This
is between ourselves; for I did not own so much
to Mr. B.—For one should not give up one's Sex,
you know, if one can help it; for the Men will
be as apt to impose, as Ladies to incroach, I
doubt. 

Well, but here, my honoured Father and Mother,
and my dear Miss Darnford, at last, I end
my Journal-wise Letters, as I may call them; our
noble Guests being gone, and our Time and Imployments
rolling on in much the same manner,
as in the past Days, of which I have given an Account. 
If any thing new or uncommon, or more particularly
affecting to me than usual, occurs, I shall
not fail to trouble you with it, as I have Opportunity. 
But I have now my Correspondence
with Lady Davers to resume; and how shall I
do about that! —Oh! I can easily tell: It is but 

trespassing a little on your indulgent Allowance
for me, my ever-honoured Parents—And you,
my dear Miss, will find it a Relief, instead of an
Occasion for Regret, to be eased of a great many
Impertinencies, which I write to you in my
Heart's Confidence, and in the Familiarity of
Friendship—Besides, I shall have the Happiness
of changing our Paper Correspondence into personal
Conversation with you, when at London–––– 
And what a sweet Change for me will that be! –––– 
I will end with the joyful Thought; and with the
Assurance, that I am, 
My dearest Father and Mother,
and best-beloved Miss,
Your dutiful and affectionate
P. B. 
