



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sunday Afternoon. 
I Am in great apprehensions. Yet cannot help repeating
my humble thanks to your mamma, and
you, for your last favour. I hope her kind end is
answer'd by the contents of my last. Yet I must
not think it enough to acknowlege her goodness to
me, with a pencil only, on the cover of a letter
sealed up. A few lines give me leave to write with 

regard to my anonymous letter to Lady Drayton— 
If I did not at that time tell you, as I believe I did,
that my excellent Mrs. Norton gave me her assistance
in that letter; I now aknowlege that she did. 
Pray let your mamma know this, for two reasons: 
One, that I may not be thought to arrogate to myself
a discretion which does not belong to me; the
other, that I may not suffer by the severe, but just
inference she was pleased to draw; doubling my faults
upon me, if I myself should act unworthy of the advice
I was supposed to give. 
Before I come to what most nearly affects me,
I must chide you, once more, for the severe, the
very severe things, you mention of our family, to
the disparagement of their morals, as I may say: 
Indeed, my dear, I wonder at you! —A slighter occasion
might have passed me, after I have written to
you so often to so little purpose, on this topic. But,
affecting as my own circumstances are, I cannot,
without a breach of duty, let slip the reflection I need
not repeat in words. 
There is not a worthier person in England than
my mamma. Nor is my papa that man you sometimes
make him. Excepting in one point, I know
not any family which lives up more to their duty,
than the principals of ours. A little too uncommunicative
for their great circumstances—that is
all. —Why, then, have they not reason to insist upon
unexceptionable morals in a man whose relationship
to them, by a marriage in their family, they
have certainly a right to allow of, or disapprove? 
Another line or two, before I am ingross'd by my
own concerns: —Upon your treatment of Mr. Hickman. 
—Is it, do you think, generous, to revenge
upon an innocent person, the displeasure you receive
from another quarter, where I doubt you are a trespasser
too? —But one thing I can tell him; and you
had not best provoke me to it; That no woman uses 

a man ill whom she does not absolutely reject, but she
has it in her heart to make him amends, when her
tyranny has had its run, and he has completed the
measure of his services and patience. But my mind
is not enough at ease, to push this matter further. 
I will now give you the occasion of my present
apprehensions. 
I had reason to fear, as I mention'd in mine of this
morning, that a storm was brewing. Mr. Solmes
came home this afternoon, from church, with my
brother. Soon after, Betty brought me up a letter,
without saying from whom. It was in a cover, and
directed by a hand I never saw before; as if it was
supposed, I would not have received and open'd it, had
I known it came from him. These are the contents. 

To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
Sunday, Mar. 26. 
Dearest Madam,
I Think myself a most unhappy man, in that I have
never yet been able to pay my respects to you with
youre consent, for one halfe hour. I have something
to communicate to you that concernes you much, if
you be pleased to admitt me to youre speech. Youre
honour is concerned in itt, and the honour of all youre
familly. Itt relates to the designes of one whom you
are sed to valew more then he deserves; and to some
of his reprobat actions; which I am reddie to give
you convincing proofes of the truth of. I may appear
to be interested in itt: But neverthelesse, I am
reddy to make oathe, that every tittle is true: And
you will see what a man you are sed to favour. But
I hope not so, for youre owne honour. 
Pray, Madam, vouchsafe me a hearing, as you valew
your honour and family: Which will oblidge,
dearest Miss, 
Youre most humble and most faithfull Servant,
Roger Solmes. 
I waite below for the hope of admittance. 


I have no manner of doubt, that this is a poor device,
to get this man into my company. I would
have sent down a verbal answer; but Betty refused to
carry any message, which should prohibit his visiting
me. So I was obliged either to see him, or to write
to him. I wrote, therefore, an answer, of which I
shall send you the rough draught. And now my
heart akes for what may follow from it; for I hear
a great hurry below. 

To Roger Solmes, Esq;
Sir,
Whatever you have to communicate to me, which
concerns my honour, may as well be done by
writing, as by word of mouth. If Mr. Lovelace is
any of my concern, I know not that, therefore, he
ought to be yours: For the usage I receive on your
account (I must think it so!) is so harsh, that were
there not such a man in the world as Mr. Lovelace, I
would not wish to see Mr. Solmes, no, not for one
half-hour, in the way he is pleased to be desirous to
see me. I never can be in any danger from Mr.
Lovelace; and, of consequence, cannot be affected by
any of your discoveries, if the proposal I made be
accepted. You have been acquainted with it, no
doubt. If not, be pleased to let my friends know,
that if they will rid me of my apprehensions of one
gentleman, I will rid them of theirs of another: And
then, of what consequence to them, or to me, will it
be, whether Mr. Lovelace be a good man, or a bad? 
And, if to neither of us, I see not how it can be of
any to you. But if you do, I have nothing to say to
That; and it will be a Christian part, if you will expostulate
with him upon the errors you have discover'd,
and endeavour to make him as good a man, as, no
doubt, you are yourself, or you would not be so
ready to detect and expose him. 
Excuse me, Sir: —But after my former letter to 

you, and your ungenerous perseverance; and after
this attempt to avail yourself at the expence of another
man's character, rather than by your own proper
merit, I see not that you can blame any asperity in
Her, whom you have so largely contributed to make
unhappy. 
Cl. Harlowe. 

Sunday night. 
My father was for coming up to me, in great
wrath, it seems; but was persuaded to the contrary. 
My aunt Hervey was permitted to send me This that
follows. —Quick work, my dear! 

To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
Niece,
Every-body is now convinc'd, that nothing is to
be done with you by way of gentleness or persuasion. 
Your mamma will not let you stay in the
house; for your papa is so incensed by your strange
letter to his friend, that she knows not what will be
the consequence, if you do. So, you are commanded
to get ready to go to your uncle Antony's, out of
hand. 
Your uncle thinks he has not deserv'd of you this
unwillingness to go to his house. 
You don't know the wickedness of the man you
think it worth while to quarrel with all your friends
for. 
You must not answer me. There will be no end
of That. 
You know not the affliction you give to everybody; 
but to none more than to 
Your affectionate Aunt,
Dorothy Hervey. 

Forbid to write to my aunt, I took a bolder liberty. 
I wrote a few lines to my mamma; imploring 

her to procure me leave to throw myself at my father's
feet, and hers, if I must go (no-body else present),
to beg pardon for the trouble I had given them
both, and their blessings; and to receive their commands,
as to my removal, and the when, from their
own lips. 
‘What new boldness This! —Take it back; and
bid her learn to obey,’ was my mamma's angry answer,
with my letter return'd, unopen'd. 
But that I might omit nothing that was in my
power, or heart, to do, that had an appearance of
duty, I wrote a few lines to my papa himself, to the
same purpose; begging he would not turn me out of
his house, without his blessing. But This, torn in
two pieces, and unopen'd, was brought me up again
by Betty, with an air, one hand held up, the other
extended, the torn letter in her open palm; and a See
here! —What a sad thing is This! —Nothing will do
but duty, Miss! —Your papa said, Let her tell me
of deeds! —I'll receive no words from her: And so
he tore the letter, and flung the pieces at my head. 
So desperate my case, I was resolved not to stop
even at this repulse. I took my pen, and addressed
myself to my uncle Harlowe, inclosing that which
my mamma had return'd unopen'd, and the torn
unopen'd one sent to my papa; having first scratch'd
thro' a transcript for you. 
My uncle was going home, and it was deliver'd
to him just as he stepped into his chariot. What
may be the fate of it, therefore, I cannot know till
to-morrow. 
The following is a copy of it. 

To John Harlowe, Esq;.
My dear and ever-honoured Uncle,
I have no-body now but you, to whom I can apply,
with hope, so much as to have my humble addresses 

open'd and read. My aunt Hervey has given
me commands which I want to have explain'd; but
she has forbid me writing to her. Hereupon I took
the liberty to write to my papa and mamma: You
will see, Sir, by the torn one, and by both being return'd
un-open'd, what has been the result. This,
Sir, perhaps you know: But, as you know not the
contents of the disgraced letters, I beseech you to read
them both, that you may be a witness for me, that
they are not filled with complaints, with expostulations,
nor contain any thing undutiful. Give me
leave to say, Sir, That if deaf-ear'd anger will neither
grant me a hearing, nor what I write a perusal,
some time hence the hard-heartedness may be regretted. 
I beseech you, dear, good Sir, to let me know
what is meant by sending me to my uncle Antony's,
rather than to your house, or to my aunt's, or elsewhere? 
If it be for what I apprehend it to be, life
will not be supportable upon the terms: I beg also to
know, WHEN I am to be turned out of doors! —My
heart strongly gives me, that once I am compelled to
leave this house, I never shall see it more. 
It becomes me, however, to declare, that I write
not This thro' perverseness, or in resentment; God
knows my heart, I do not! —But the treatment I apprehend
I shall meet with, if carried to my other
uncle's, will, in all probability, give the finishing
stroke to the distresses, the undeserved distresses I will
be bold to call them, of 
Your once highly favour'd,
But now most unhappy, Kinswoman,
Cl. Harlowe. 
