


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Selby-house, Tuesday Morning, Oct. 24.
Mr. Deane would not go back with us. He laid a
strict charge upon me, at parting, not to be
punctilious. 
I am not, my dear Lady G. Do you think I am? 
The men are their own enemies, if they wish us to 

be open-hearted and sincere, and are not so themselves. 
Let them enable us to depend on their candour, as
much as we may on that of Sir. Charles Grandison,
and the women will be inexcusable, who shall play
either the prude or the coquet with them. You will
say, I am very cunning, perhaps, to form at the same
time a rule from, and an excuse for, my own conduct
to this excellent man: But be that as it will, it is
truth. 
We sent our duty last night to Shirley-manor; and
expect every moment the dear parent there with us. 
She is come. I will go down; and if I get her by
myself, or only with my aunt and Lucy, I will tell
her a thousand thousand agreeable things, which have
passed since last I had her tender blessing. 
* *
We have had this Greville and this Fenwick here. 
I could very well have spared them. Miss Orme
came hither also, uninvited, to breakfast; a favour
she often does us. I knew not, at first, how to behave
to Sir Charles before her: She looked so jealous
of him! so cold! Under her bent brow she looked at
him: Yes, and No, were all her answers, with an air
so stiff! —But this reserve lasted not above a quarter of
an hour. Sir Charles addressed himself to me, with so
much respect; to her, with so polite a freedom; that
she could not hold her shyness. 
Her brow cleared up; her eyes looked larger, and
more free: Her buttoned-up pretty mouth opened to a
smile: She answered, she asked, questions; gave her
required opinion on more topics than one, and was
again all Miss Orme. 
Every-body took great notice of Sir Charles's fine
address to her, and were charmed with him; for we
all esteem Mr. Orme, and love his sister. How pleasant
it was to see the sunshine break out in her amiable
countenance, and the gloom vanishing, by degrees! 

She took me out into the lesser parlour—What a
strange variable creature am I! said she: How I hated
this Sir Charles Grandison, before I saw him! I was
vexed to find him, at first sight, answer what I had
heard of him; for I was resolved to dislike him, tho'
he had been an Angel! But, ah, my poor brother! — 
I am afraid, I myself shall be ready to give up his interest! 
—No wonder, my dear Miss Byron, that nobody
else would do, when you had seen this man! — 
But still, let me bespeak your pity for my brother! — 
Would to Heaven you had not gone to London! — 
What went you thither for? 
Sir Charles kindly enquired of her after Mr. Orme's
health; praised him for his character; wished his recovery; 
and to be allowed to cultivate the friendship
of so worthy a man: And all this with an air so sincere! 
—But good men must love one another. 
* *
Sir Charles has just now declared to my aunt, that
he thinks of going up to town, or to Grandison-hall,
I forget if they told me which, to-morrow or next
day: Perhaps he knows not to which himself. I was
surprised. Perhaps he is tired with us. Let me recollect
—Thursday was Se'nnight; Why indeed he has
been down with us twelve days! —No less! 
But he has no doubts, no suspenses, from us, to
keep Love awake: His path is plain and smooth before
him. He has demanded his day: We think we
cannot immediately, and after so short a time past since
his declaring himself, give it him—And why should he
lose his precious time among us? I suppose he will be
so good as to hold himself in readiness to obey our summons
—He expects a summons from us, perhaps!— 
O my dear Lady G! am I not perverse? I believe
I am. Yet where there is room, from past circumstances,
to dread a slight, tho' none may be intended,
and truly as I honour and revere Lady Clementina, my
mind is not always great enough (perhaps from consciousness 

of demerit) to carry itself above apprehension
and petulance, noble as is the man. 
My uncle is a little down upon it; and why? Because,
truly, my grandmamma has told him, that it
is really too early yet to fix the day; and he reverences,
as every-body does, her judgment. 
But why, he asks, cannot there be preparation
making? Why may not something be seen going forward? 
What! before the day is named? my aunt asks— 
As Harriet had desired to have his next Letters arrive
before she directly answered his question, she could not
recede. 
He went from them both greatly dissatisfied, and
exclaiming against womens love of power, and never
knowing how to make a right use of it. 
A message from Sir Charles. He desires to attend
me. I believe I shall be a little sullen: I know my
heart: It is all his own; and I am loth to disoblige
him—But he was far, far more attendant on Lady
Clementina's motions: Don't you think so, Lady G? 
But she was all excellence—Well—But hush! —I say
no more!— 
* *
I will give you an account of our conversation. 
I verily believe, that, had he not touched the poor snail
with too hasty a finger, which made her shrink again
into her shell, I might have been brought to name the
week, tho' not the day. 
But I will not anticipate. 
He entered with a very polite and affectionate air. 
He enquired after my health, and said, I looked not
well—Only vexed, thought I! 
It is impossible, I believe, to hold displeasure in the
presence of a beloved object, with whom we are not
mortally offended. My dearest Miss Byron, said he,
taking my passive hand, I am come to ask your advice
on twenty subjects. In the first place, here is a Letter 

from Lady G. recommending to me a house near her
own [He gave it to me. I read it]. Should you, madam,
approve of Grosvenor Square? 
I was silent: You will guess how my captious folly
appeared to him, by what he said to me. He respectfully
took my hand—Why so solemn, dear madam? 
Why so silent? Has any-thing disturbed you? Some
little displeasure seems to hang upon that open countenance. 
Not at me, I hope? 
Yes it is, thought I! But I did not intend you
should see it. —I cleared up; and, without answering
his question, said, It is in the neighbourhood of Lady
L. I hope? 
Thank you, madam, for that hope—It is. Nor far
from your cousin Reeves's. 
I can have no objection, Sir. 
I will refer myself, on this subject, if you please, to
my sisters, and Lord G. He values himself on his
taste in houses and furniture, and will be delighted to
be put into commission with my sisters on this occasion:
Or shall I stay till the happy day is over, and
leave the choice wholly to yourself? 
Lady G. Sir, seems pleased with the house. She
writes, that there is somebody else about it. It may
not, then, be to be had. 
Shall I, then, commission her to take it directly? 
What you please, Sir. 
He bowed to me, and said, Then that matter is
settled. And now, madam, let me own all my arts. 
You would penetrate into them, if I did not. You
see, that the great question is never out of my view— 
I cannot but hope and believe, that you are above regarding
mere punctilio. —Have you, my dearest Miss
Byron, thought, can you think, of some early week,
in which to fix my happy day? —Some preparation on
your part, I presume, will be thought necessary: As
to mine, were you to bless me with your hand next
week, I should be aforehand in that particular. 

I was silent. I was considering how to find some
middle way that should make non-compliance appear
neither disobliging, nor affected. 
He looked up at me with Love and Tenderness in
his aspect; but, having no answer, proceeded: 
Your uncle, madam, and Mr. Deane, will inform
you, that the settlements are such as cannot be disapproved
of. I expect every day some slight tokens of
my affection for my dear Miss Byron, which will be
adorned by the lovely wearer: I have not been so extravagant
in them, as shall make her think I build on
toys for her approbation. She will allow me to give
her my notions on this subject. In the article of personal
appearance, I think that propriety and degree
should be consulted, as well as fortune. Our degree,
our fortune, madam, is not mean; but I, who always
wished for the revival of Sumptuary Laws, have not
sought, in this article, to emulate Princes. In my
own dress, I am generally a conformist to the fashion. 
Singularity is usually the indication of something wrong
in judgment. I rather perhaps dress too shewy, tho' a
young man, for one who builds nothing on outward
appearance: But my father loved to be dressed. In
matters which regard not morals, I chose to appear to
his friends and tenants, as not doing discredit to his
magnificent spirit(a) . I could not think it becoming,
as those perhaps do, who have the direction of the
royal stamp on the coin, to set my face the contrary
way to that of my predecessor. In a word, all my
father's steps, in which I could tread, I did; and have
chosen rather to build upon, than demolish, his foundations. 
—But how does my vanity mislead me! I have
vanity, madam; I have pride, and some consequential
failings, which I cannot always get above: But, 

anxious as I ever shall be for your approbation, my
whole heart shall be open to you; and every motive,
every spring of action, so far as I can trace it, be it to
my advantage or not, shall be made known to you. 
Happy the day that I became acquainted with Dr.
Bartlett! He will tell you, madam, that I am corrigible. 
You must perfect, by your sweet conversation,
un-coupled with fear, what Dr. Bartlett has so happily
begun; and I shall then be more worthy of you
than at present I am. 
O, Sir, you do me too much honour! You must
be my monitor. As to the ornaments you speak of, I
hope I shall always look upon simplicity of manners a
grateful return to the man I shall vow to honour, and
a worthy behaviour to all around me, as my principal
ornaments! 
His eyes glistened. He bowed his face upon my
hand, to hide, as I thought, his emotion. Excellent
Miss Byron! said he: Then, after a pause, Now let me
say, that I have the happiness to find my humble application
to you acceptable to every one of your
friends. The only woman on earth, whom, besides
yourself, I ever could have wished to call mine, and
all her ever-to-be respected family (pleading their own
sakes) join their wishes in my favour; and, were you
to desire it, would, I am sure, signify as much to you
under their own hands. I know not whether I could
so far have overcome my own scruples in behalf of
your delicacy (placing myself, as persons always ought
when they hope for favour, in the granter's place) as
to supplicate you so soon as I have done, but at the
earnest request of a family, and for the sake of a Lady,
I must ever hold dear. The world about you expects
a speedy celebration. I have not, I own, been backward
to encourage the expectation: It was impossible
to conceal from it the motive of my coming down, as
my abode was at an inn. I came with an equipage,
because my pride (How great is my pride!) permitted 

me not to own that I doubted. Have you, madam, a
material objection to an early day? Be so good to inform
me, if you have. I wish to remove every shadow
of doubt from your heart. 
I was silent. He proceeded: 
Let me not pain you, madam!—lifting my hand
to his lips—I would not pain you for the world. You
have seen the unhappy Olivia! You have perhaps
heard her story from herself. What must be the cause
upon which self-partiality cannot put a gloss? Because
I knew not how (It was shocking to my nature) to
repulse a Lady, she took my pity for encouragement. 
Pity from a Lady of a man, is noble—The declaration
of pity from a man for a woman, may be thought
a vanity bordering upon insult. Of such a nature is
not mine—She has some noble qualities—From my
heart, for her character's sake, I pity Olivia! and the
more, for that violence of temper which she never was
taught to restrain. If, madam, you have any scruples
on her account, own them: I will, for I honestly
can, remove them. 
O Sir! None! None! —Not the least, on that unhappy
Lady's account— 
Let me say, proceeded he, that Olivia reveres you,
and wishes you (I hope cordially, for she is afraid still
of your sister-excellence) to be mine. Give me leave
to boast (It is my boast), that tho' I have had pain
from individuals of your Sex, I can look back on my
past life, and bless God that I never, from childhood to
manhood, wilfully gave pain either to the Motherly
or Sisterly heart(a) ; nor from manhood
to the present hour, to any other woman. 
O Sir! Sir! —What is it you call pain, if at this
instant (and I said it with tears) that which your goodness
makes me feel, is not so? —The dear, the excellent
Clementina! What a perverseness is in her fate! 
She, and she only, could have deserved you! 

He bent his knee to the greatly-honoured Harriet— 
I acknowlege with transport, said he, the joy you give
me by your magnanimity; such a more than sisterly
magnanimity to that of Clementina. How nobly do
you authorize my regard for her! —In you, madam,
shall I have all her excellencies, without the abatements
which must have been allowed, had she been
mine, from considerations of Religion and Country. 
Believe me, madam, that my Love of her, if I know
my heart, is of such a nature, as never can abate the
fervor of that I vow to you. To both of you, my
principal attachment was to Mind: Yet let me say,
that the personal union, to which you discourage me
not to aspire, and the duties of that most intimate of
all connexions, will preserve to you the due preference; 
as (allow me to say) it would have done to her, had she
accepted of my vows. 
O Sir! believe me incapable of affectation, of petulance,
of disguise! My heart (Why should I not
speak freely to Sir Charles Grandison?) is wholly
yours! —It never knew another Lord! I will flatter
myself, that, had you never known Lady Clementina,
and had she not been a prior Love, you never would
have had a divided heart! —What pain must you have
had in the conflict! My regard for you, bids me acknowlege
my own vanity, in my pity for you! 
I gushed into tears—You must leave me, Sir—I
cannot bear the exaltation you have given me! 
I turned away my face: I thought I should have
fainted. 
He clasped me to his bosom: He put his cheek to
mine: For a moment we neither of us could speak. 
He broke the short silence. I dread the effects on
your tender health, of the pain I, or rather your own
greatness of mind, give you. Beloved of my heart!
kissing my cheek, wet at that moment with the tears
of both, forgive me! —And be assured, that Reverence
will always accompany my Love. Will it be too 

much, just now, to re-urge the day that shall answer
the wishes of Clementina, of her noble brothers, of
all our own friends, and make you wholly mine? 
His air was so noble; his eyes shewed so much
awe, yet such manly dignity, that my heart gave way
to its natural impulse—Why, Sir, should I not declare
my reliance on your candour? My honour, in
the world's eye, I entrust to you: But bid me not do
an improper thing, lest my desire of obliging you should
make me forget myself. 
Was not this a generous resignation? Did it not
deserve a generous return? But he, even Sir Charles
Grandison, endeavoured to make his advantage of it. 
Letters from Italy unreceived! as if he thought my
reference to those a punctilio also. 
What a deposit! —Your honour, madam, is safely
entrusted. Can punctilio be honour? —It is but the
shadow of it. What but that stands against your
grant of an early day? —Do not think me misled by
my impatience to call you mine, to take an undue advantage
of your condescension. Is it not the happiness
of both that I wish to confirm? And shall I suffer
false delicacy, false gratitude, to take place of the
true? —Allow me, madam—But you seem uneasy—I
will prolong the time I had intended to beg you would
permit me to limit you to. Let me request from you
the choice of some one happy day, before the expiration
of the next fourteen— 
Consider, Sir!— 
Nothing, madam, happening in my behaviour to
cause you to revoke the generous trust: From abroad
there cannot. 
He looked to be in earnest in his request: Was it
not almost an ungenerous return to my confidence in
him? Twelve days only had elapsed since his personal
declaration; the Letters from Italy which he had allowed
me to wait for, unreceived; Lady D. one of
the most delicate-minded of women, knowing too my 

preferable regard for your brother: And must not the
hurry have the worse appearance for that? No preparation
yet thought of: My aunt thinking his former
urgency, greatly as she honours him, rather too precipitating
—My spirits, hurried before, were really affected. 
Do not call me a silly girl, dearest Lady G:
I endeavoured to speak; but, at the instant, could not
distinctly. 
I am sorry, madam, that what I have said has so
much disturbed you. Surely, some one day in the
fourteen— 
Indeed, indeed, Sir, interrupted I, you have surprised
me: I did not think you could have wished so
to limit me—I did not expect— 
What, loveliest of women! will you allow me to
expect? The day is still at your own choice. Revoke
not, however, the generous concession, till Mrs. Shirley,
Mrs. Selby, and our Lucy, are consulted. Will
you, dearest madam, be determined by them? 
Say not, Sir, to any of them, after such an instance
of my confidence in you—for the honour of your accustomed
generosity, say it not—that you could so limit
me; and I will endeavour to forget it. 
Consider, my dearest Miss Byron— 
I believe my grandmamma is come, said I— 
They are all goodness: They will indulge me. I
will tell you, madam, taking my hand, and seating
me, what is my intention, if you approve of it. All
the country suppose that my application for your favour
meets with encouragement: They expect, as I
have told you, a speedy solemnization. I took my
lodgings at some little distance from you, at a place
of public entertainment; perhaps (pardon me, madam,
for the sake of my ingenuousness) with some
view, that the general talk [See, Lady G! it is well
he is a good man!] would help to accelerate my
happy day: But, madam, to continue my daily visits
from thence, when my happiness is supposed to be 

near, will not perhaps look so well [We are to be
studious of looks, it seems]—Indeed I would not be
thought to despise the world's opinion: The world,
when it will have patience to stay till it is master of
facts, is not always wrong: It can judge of others,
better than it can act itself—The change of my lodgings
to others in this house, or in Shirley-manor, will
not perhaps be allowed till I am blessed with the hand
of the dearest relation of both: I therefore think of
going up to town, declaredly (Why not?) to prepare
for our nuptials; and to return near the time agreed
upon for the happy celebration. Then will either
this house, or Shirley-manor, be allowed to receive the
happiest of men. 
He stopt: I was silent. He proceeded, looking
tenderly, yet smilingly, in my downcast face, still
holding my hand:—And now, dearer to me than life,
let me ask you—Can you think it an unpardonable intrusion
on your condescending goodness, that I make
the time of my return to my Miss Byron not over-tedious? 
—Fourteen days, were you to go to the extent
of them, would be an age to me, who have been
for so many days past the happiest man that a person
in expectation can be. I do assure you, madam, that
I had not the insolence to suppose I was making you a
request that was rather expected to be forgiven, than
complied with. I thought myself not ungenerous to
the confidence you reposed in me, that I gave you so
much time. I thought of a week, and began apologizing,
lest you should think it too short; but, when
I saw you disturbed, I concluded with the mention of a
fortnight. My dearest creature, think me not unreasonable
in my expectations of your compliance— 
What, Sir! in a fortnight?— 
As to preparations, madam, you know the pleasure
my sisters will have in executing any commissions you
will favour them with on so joyful an occasion. Charlotte
had not so much time for preparation. But were 

not every-thing to be in readiness by the chosen day,
there will be time enough for all you wish, before you
would perhaps choose to see company—Consider,
my dearest life, that if you regard punctilio merely; 
punctilio has no determinate end: Punctilio begets
punctilio. You may not half a year hence imagine
that to be sufficiently gratified. Again I say, Do you,
madam, consider: Let me adhere to the fourteen days,
and within them crown the hope you gave me. 
Within them! —Sir! I did not expect— 
You tell me, my beloved Miss Byron, interrupted
he, what you did not expect—Tell me, I beseech
you, mistress as you are of one of the noblest of female
hearts, what you did expect, when you condescended
to make me the compliment, that, were it
to be carried into effect, would engage my utmost
gratitude. 
I had not thought of any particular time: But I
could not have made you that compliment, had I
thought of a day so very early. 
You have, madam, you ought to have, the option:
Yet I own, that your declared generous confidence in
me had elated me. The temptation was too great
for me, not to wish to make use of the power you
had, as I thought, put into my hands: And allow me
to say, that I cannot give up my hope till your grandmamma
and aunt decide that I ought. 
How, Sir! —And can you thus adhere? —But I
will allow of your reference— 
And be determined by their advice, madam? 
But I will not trust you, Sir, with pleading your
own cause. 
Are you not arbitrary, madam? 
In this point, if I am, ought I not to be so? 
Yes, if you will resume a power you had so generously
resigned. 
May I not, Sir, when I think it over-strained in the
hands of the person to whom, in better hopes, it was
delegated? 

That, dear Lady, is the point to be tried. You
consent to refer the merits of it to your grandmamma
and aunt? 
If I do, Sir, you ought not to call me arbitrary. 
It is gracious, bowing, in my sovereign Lady, to
submit her absolute will and pleasure to arbitration. 
Very well, Sir! —But will you not submit to my own
award? 
Tell me, dear Miss Byron, tell me, if I do, how
generous will you be? 
I was far from intending— 
Was, madam—I hope I may dwell upon that word,
and repeat my question? 
Am, Sir. I am far from intending— 
No more, dear madam. I appeal to another tribunal. 
Well, Sir, I will endeavour to recollect the substance
of this conversation, and lay it, in writing, before
the judges you have named. Lucy shall be one. 
You will permit me, madam, to see your state of
the case, before you lay it before the judges? 
No, Sir! None but they must see it, till it makes
part of a Letter to Lady G. who then shall shew it
only to Lady L. 
It is the harder to be thus prescribed to, my dear
Miss Byron, because— 
What, Sir, in my day?— 
That was what I was going to urge, because mine
will never come. Every day, to the end of my life,
will be yours [Dear man!] —Only, Sir, as I deserve
your kindness, I wish not for it on other terms. And
you shall be then sole judge of my deserts. I will not
appeal to any other tribunal. 
He gracefully bowed. I think, said he, smiling, I
must withdraw my intended appeal: I am half-afraid
of my judges; and perhaps ought to rely wholly on
your goodness. 

No, no, Sir! Your intention is your act. In that
sense you have appealed to Cæsar(a) . 
I never before was in Love with despotism. You
mention writing to my sisters: You correspond with
them, I presume, as you formerly did with our Lucy. 
Let me tell you, madam, that you had not been Miss
Byron, Fourteen days after I was favoured with the
fight of those Letters, had I been at liberty to offer
you my heart, and could I have prevailed on you to
accept it. Your distress, your noble frankness of
heart— 
And let me own, Sir, as an instance of the frankness
you are pleased to encourage, that gratitude for
the deliverance you so nobly gave me, had as much
power over my heart, as the openness of mine, and my
distress, could have over yours. 
Sweet excellence! —Complete your generous goodness
to a grateful heart; it is a grateful one; and
shorten the days of your single power, in order to
enlarge it! 
Lucy appeared; but seeing us engaged in conversation,
was about to retire: But he, stepping to her,
and taking both her hands—Our Lucy, obligingly,
said he, you must come in—You are to be one judge
of three in a certain cause, that will come before you— 
And I hope— 
No prejudgings, Sir Charles, said I—You are not
to plead at all— 
Yet deeply interested in the event, Miss Selby! said
he. 
A bad sign, cousin Byron! said Lucy. I begin already
to doubt the justice of your cause. 
When you hear it, Lucy, make, as you usually do,
the golden rule yours, and I have nothing to fear. 
I tell you, before-hand, I am inclined to favour Sir
Charles. No three judges can be found, but will believe,
from his character, that be cannot be wrong. 

But from mine, that I may! O my Lucy! I did
not expect this from my cousin. You must not, I
think, be one of my judges. 
* *
To this place, I have shewn my three judges. The
following is their determination, drawn up by the dear
Lady president, my grandmamma: 


We, the underwritten, do find, upon the case laid
before us by the said Harriet, That, in the
whole conversation between the said Sir Charles and
her, she has behaved herself with that true virgin delicacy,
yet with that laudable unreservedness, that
might be expected from her character, and his merits. 
We think, the gentleman has the advantage of the
Lady in the arguments for the early day contended
for; and, if she had defended herself by little artifices
and disguises, we should have had no scruple to decide
against her: But as she has shewn, throughout the
conversation, noble instances of generosity, trust reposed,
and even acknowleged affection; we recommend
to them both a compromise. 
We allow, therefore, Sir Charles Grandison to pursue
his intentions of going up to town, declaredly to
prepare for the happy day; and recommend it to Harriet,
in consideration of the merits of the requester
(who lays his whole heart open before her, in a manner
too generous not to meet with a like return) to fix
as early a day as in prudence she can. 
For the rest, May the Almighty shower down his
blessings on both! May all their contentions, like
this, be those of Love, and true Delicacy! May
they live together many, very many, happy years,
an example of conjugal felicity! And may their 

exemplary virtues meet with an everlasting reward! — 
So prays! so subscribes! 
Henrietta Shirley. 
Marianne Selby. 
Lucy Selby. 

To-morrow morning, when Sir Charles comes to
breakfast, this paper will be presented to him by my
grandmamma. 
I wonder whether Sir Charles writes to Dr. Bartlett
an account of what passes here. If he does, what
would I give to see his Letters! and, particularly,
what he thinks of the little delays he meets with! 
But do, dear Lady G. acquit me of affectation and
parade. Indeed it is not that. I hope he himself
acquits me, and censures himself; for, upon my word,
he is unreasonably hasty. 
I could not but express a little curiosity about his
hint of Lady Olivia's favourable opinion of me, tho'
not at the time; and he was so good as to shew me,
and my grandmamma and aunt, a most extraordinary
character which she gave me in a long Letter. I saw
it was a long Letter (I was very Evenish, my dear). 
Lucy said afterwards, that I did so leer at it: An ugly
word, importing sliness! and, after I was angry at
myself for giving her the idea that put her upon applying
it, I chid her for using it. 
Lady Olivia writes such high things, my dear! I
blushed—I did not, could not, deserve them. I always
pitied her, you know; but now you cannot
imagine how much more than ever I pitied her. Do
all of us, indeed, as the men say, love flattery? —I
did not think I did—I shall find out all the obliquities
of my heart, in time. I was supposed once to be so
good a creature—as if none other were half so good! — 
Ah, my partial friends! you studied your Harriet in
the dark; but here comes the sun darting into all the 

crooked and obscure corners of my heart; and I
shrink from his dazling eye; and, compared to Him
(and Clementina, let me add) appear to myself such a
Nothing— 
Nay, I have had the mortification, once or twice,
to think myself less than the very Olivia, upon whom,
but lately, secure of my mind's superiority to her
mind, I looked down with a kind of proud compassion:
And whence this exaltation of Olivia, and self-humiliation? 
—Why, from her magnifying beyond
measure the poor Harriet, and yielding up her own
hopes, entreating him, as she does, to address me; 
and that with such honourable distinction, as if my
acceptance of him were doubtful, and a condescension. 
I wish I could procure you a copy of what your
brother read to me—Ah, my dear! it is very soothing
to my pride! —But what is the foundation of that
pride? Is it not my ambition to be thought worthily
of by the best of men? And does not praise stimulate
me to resolve to deserve praise? I will endeavour to
deserve it. But, my dear, this Olivia, a fine figure
herself, and loving in spite of discouragement, can
praise, to the object of her Love, the person, and still
more, the mind, of her rival! —Is not that great in
Olivia? Could I be so great, if I thought myself in
danger from her? 

