



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Sunday, May 21. 
I am too much disturbed in my mind, to think of
any think but revenge; or I had intended to give
thee an account of Miss Harlowe's curious observations
on the play. Miss Harlowe's, I say. Thou knowest
that I hate the name of Harlowe; and I am exceedingly
out of humour with her, and with her saucy
friend. 
What's the matter now, thou'lt ask? —Matter
enough; for while we were at the play, Dorcas, who
had her orders, and a key to her lady's chamber, as
well as a master-key to her drawers and mahogany
chest, closet-key and all, found means to come at some
of Miss Howe's last-written letters. The vigilant
wench was directed to them by seeing her lady take a
letter out of her stays, and put it to the others, before
she went out with me—Afraid, as the women upbraidingly
tell me, that I should find it there. 

Dorcas no sooner found them, than she assembled
three ready writers of the non-apparents, and Sally,
and she and they employed themselves with the utmost
diligence, in making extracts, according to former
directions, from these cursed letters, for my use. Cursed,
I may well call them—Such abuses, such virulence! 
O this little fury Miss Howe! —Well might her saucy
friend (who has been equally free with me, or the
occasion could not have been given) be so violent as
she lately was, at my endeavouring to come at one of
these letters. 
I was sure, that this fair-one, at so early an age,
with a constitution so firm, health so blooming, eyes
so sparkling, could not be absolutely, and from her
own vigilance, so guarded and so apprehensive, as I
have found her to be. —Sparkling eyes, Jack, when
the poetical tribe have said all they can for them, are
an infallible sign of a rogue, or room for a rogue, in
the heart. 
Thou may'st go on with thy preachments, and
Lord M. with his Wisdom of nations, I am now more
assured of her than ever. And now my revenge is
up, and join'd with my love, all resistance must fall
before it. And most solemnly do I swear, that Miss
Howe shall come in for her snack. 
And here, just now, is another letter brought from
the same little virulent devil. —I hope to procure transcripts
from that too, very speedily, if it be put to the
rest; for the saucy lady is resolved to go to church
this morning; not so much from a spirit of devotion,
I have reason to think, as to try whether she can go
out without check or controul, or my attendance. 
* *
I have been denied breakfasting with her. Indeed
she was a little displeased with me last night; 
because, on our return from the play, I obliged her to
pass the rest of the night with the women and me,
in their parlour, and to stay till near One. She told 

me at parting, that she expected to have the whole
next day to herself. —I had not read the extracts
then; so was all affectionate respect, awe, and distance; 
for I had resolved to begin a new course, and,
if possible, to banish all jealousy and suspicion from
her heart: And yet I had no reason to be much
troubled at her past suspicions; since, if a woman
will continue with a man whom she suspects, when
she can get from him, or thinks she can, I am sure it
is a very hopeful sign. 
* *
She is gone. Slipt down before I was aware. She
had ordered a chair, on purpose to exclude my personal
attendance. But I had taken proper precautions. 
Will. attended her by consent; Peter, the
house-servant, was within Will.'s call. 
I had, by Dorcas, represented her danger from Singleton,
in order to dissuade her from going at all, unless
she allowed me to attend her; but I was answer'd,
That if there was no cause of fear at the playhouse,
when there were but two playhouses, surely there was
less at church, when there were so many churches. 
The chairmen were ordered to carry her to St. James's
church. 
But she would not be so careless of obliging me, if
she knew what I have already come at, and how the
women urge me on; for they are continually complaining
of the restraint they lie under; in their behaviour; 
in their attendance; neglecting all their concerns
in the front-house; and keeping this elegant
back one intirely free from company, that she may
have no suspicion of them. They doubt not my
generosity, they say: But why for my own sake, in
Lord M.'s style, should I make so long a harvest of so
little corn? —Women, ye reason well. I think I
will begin my operations the moment she comes in. 

* *
I have come at the letter brought her from Miss
Howe to-day. —Plot, conjuration, sorcery, witchcraft,
all going forward! —I shall not be able to see
this Miss Harlowe with patience. As the nymphs below
say, Why is night necessary? —And Sally and
Polly upbraidingly remind me of my first attempts
upon themselves. —Yet force answers not my end— 
And yet it may, if there be truth in that part of the
libertines creed, That once subdued, is always subdued! 
And what woman answers affirmatively to the question? 
* *
She is returned—But refuses to admit me. Desires
to have the day to herself. Dorcas tells me, that she
believes her denial is from motives of piety—Oons,
Jack, is there impiety in seeing me! —Would it not
be the highest act of piety, to reclaim me? And is
this to be done by her refusing to see me, when she is
in a devouter frame than usual? But I hate her, hate
her heartily! —She is old, ugly, and deformed. —But
O the blasphemy! —Yet she is an Harlowe—And I
hate her for that. 
But since I must not see her [She will be mistress
of her own will, and of her time truly!], let me fill
up mine, by telling thee what I have come at. 
The first letter the women met with, is dated
April 27 (a) . Where can she have put the preceding
ones? It mentions Mr. Hickman as a busy fellow between
them. Hickman had best take care of himself. 
She says in it, I hope you have no cause to repent
returning my Norris—It is forthcoming on demand. 
Now, what the devil can this mean! —Her Norris
forthcoming on demand! —The devil take me, if I
am out-Norris'd! —If such innocents can allow themselves
to plot, to Norris, well may I. 

She is sorry, that her Hannah can't be with her. — 
And what if she could? —What could Hannah do
for her in such a house as this? 
The women in the house are to be found out in one
breakfasting. The women are enraged at both the
correspondents for this; and more than ever make a
point of conquering her. I had a good mind to give
them Miss Howe in full property. Say but the word,
Jack, and it shall be done. 
She is glad that Miss Harlowe had thoughts of taking
me at my word. She wondered I did not offer
again. Advises her, if I don't soon, not to stay with
me. Cautions her to keep me at distance; not to permit
the least familiarity—See, Jack—See Belford— 
Exactly as I thought! —Her vigilance all owing to a
cool friend; who can sit down quietly, and give that
advice, which, in her own case, she could not take. — 
She tells her, it is my interest to be honest—Interest,
fools! —I thought these girls knew, that my interest
was ever subservient to my pleasure. 
What would I give to come at the copies of the letters
to which those of Miss Howe are answers! 
The next letter is dated May 3 (a) . In this the
little termagant expresses her astonishment, that her
mother should write to Miss Harlowe, to forbid her to
correspond with her daughter. Mr. Hickman, she
says, is of opinion, that she ought not to obey her mother. 
How the creeping fellow trims between both! I am
afraid, that I must punish him, as well as this virago; 
and I have a scheme rumbling in my head, that wants
but half an hour's musing to bring into form, that
will do my business upon both. I cannot bear, that
the parental authority should be thus despised, thus
trampled under-foot—But observe the vixen, 'Tis well
he is of her opinion; for her mother having set her up,
she must have somebody to quarrel with. —Could a Lovelace
have allowed himself a greater licence? This 

girl's a devilish rake in her heart. Had she been a
man, and one of us, she'd have outdone us all in enterprize
and spirit. 
She wants but very little farther provocation, she says,
to fly privately to London. And if she does, she will not
leave her till she sees her either honourably married, or
quit of the wretch. Here, Jack, the transcriber Sally
has added a prayer—‘For the Lord's sake, dear Mr.
Lovelace, get this fury to London!’ —Her fate, I
can tell thee, Jack, if we had her among us, should
not be so long deciding as her friend's. What a gantlope
would she run, when I had done with her,
among a dozen of her own pityless Sex, whom my
charmer shall never see! —But more of this anon. 
I find by this letter, that my saucy captive had been
drawing the characters of every varlet of ye. Not
am I spared in it more than you. The man's a fool,
to be sure, my dear. Let me die, if they either of
them find me one. A silly fellow, at least. Cursed
contemptible! —I see not but they are a set of infernals
—There's for thee, Belford—and he the Beelzebub. 
There's for thee, Lovelace! —And yet she would have
her friend marry a Beelzebub. —And what have any
of us done, to the knowlege of Miss Harlowe, that
she should give such an account of us, as should warrant
so much abuse from Miss Howe? —But that's
to come! 
She blames her, for not admitting Miss Partington
to her bed—Watchful as you are, what could have happen'd? 
—If violence were intended, he would not stay
for the night. Sally writes upon this hint—‘See, Sir,
what is expected from you. An hundred and an
hundred times have we told you of this.’ —And so
they have. But, to be sure, the advice from them
was not of half the efficacy as it will be from Miss
Howe. —You might have sat up after her, or not gone
to bed. But can there be such apprehensions between
them, yet the one advise her to stay, and the others 

resolve to wait my imperial motion for marriage? I
am glad I know that. 
She approves of my proposal about Mrs. Fretchville's
house. She puts her upon expecting settlements; 
upon naming a day: And concludes, with
insisting upon her writing, notwithstanding her mother's
prohibition; or bids her take the consequence. 
Undutiful wretches! 
Thou wilt say to thyself, by this time, And can
this proud and insolent girl be the same Miss Howe,
who sighed for honest Sir George Colmar; and who,
but for this her beloved friend, would have followed
him in all his broken fortunes, when he was obliged
to quit the kingdom? 
Yes, she is the very same. And I always found
in others, as well as in myself, that a first passion
thoroughly subdued, made the conqueror of it a rover; 
the conqueress a tyrant. 
Well, but now, comes mincing in a letter from
one who has the honour of dear Miss Howe's commands
(a) , to acquaint Miss Harlowe, that Miss Howe is
excessively concerned for the concern she has given her. 
I have great temptations, on this occasion, says the
prim Gothamite, to express my own resentments upon
your present state. 
My own resentments! —And why did he not fall into
this temptation? —Why, truly, because he knew
not what that state was, which gave him so tempting
a subject—Only by conjecture, and so forth. 
He then dances in his style, as he does in his gaite! 
To be sure, to be sure, he must have made the grand
tour, and come home by the way of Tipperary. 
And being moreover forbid, says the prancer, to enter
into the cruel subject—This prohibition was a mercy
to thee, friend Hickman! —But why cruel subject, if
thou knowest not what it is, but conjecturest only
from the disturbance it gives to a girl, that is her 

mother's disturbance, will be thy disturbance, and
the disturbance, in turn, of every-body with whom
she is intimately acquainted, unless I have the humbling
of her? 
In another letter (a) , She approves of her design to
leave me, if she can be received by her friends. 
Has heard some strange stories of me, that shew me
to be the worst of men. Had I a dozen lives, I might
have forfeited them all twenty crimes ago. —An odd way
or reckoning, Jack! 
Miss Betterton, Miss Lockyer, are named—The
man (so she irreverently calls me!), she says, is a villain. 
Let me perish if I am called a villain for nothing! 
—She will have her uncle (as Miss Harlowe
desires) sounded about receiving her. Dorcas is to be
attach'd to her interest: My letters are to be come at
by surprize or trick—See, Jack! 
She is alarmed at my attempt to come at a letter of
hers. 
Were I to come at the knowlege of her freedoms with
my character, she says, she should be afraid to stir out
without a guard. —I would advise the vixen to get
her guard ready. 
I am at the head of a gang of wretches [Thee, Jack,
and thy brother varlets, she owns she means], who
join together to betray innocent creatures, and to support
one another in their villainies. —What sayest thou to
this, Belford? 
She wonders not at her melancholy reflections for
meeting me, for being forced upon me, and tricked by
me. —I hope, Jack, thou'lt have done preaching after
this! 
But she comforts her, that she will be both a warning
and example to all her Sex. —I hope the Sex will
thank me for this. 
The nymphs had not time, they say, to transcribe
all that was worthy of my resentment in this letter— 

So I must find an opportunity to come at it myself. 
Noble rant, they say, it contains. —But I am a seducer,
and a hundred vile fellows, in it—And the devil,
it seems, took possession of my heart, and of the hearts of
all her friends, in the same dark hour, in order to provoke
her to meet me. Again, There is a fate in her
error, she says—Why then should she grieve? —Adversity
is her shining-time, and I cannot tell what— 
Yet never to thank the man to whom she owes the
shine! 
In the next (a) , Wicked as I am, she fears I must
be her lord and master. —I hope so. 
She retracts what she said against me in her last. — 
My behaviour to my Rosebud; Miss Harlowe to take
possession of Mrs. Fretchville's house; I to stay at
Mrs. Sinclair's; the stake I have in my country; my
reversions; my oeconomy; my person; my address; 
all are brought in my favour, to induce her now not
to leave me. How do I love to puzzle these long-sighted
girls! 
Yet my teazing ways, it seems, are intolerable. — 
Are women only to teaze, I trow? —The Sex may
thank themselves for learning me to out-teaze them. 
So the headstrong Charles XII. of Sweden learned
the Czar Peter to beat him, by continuing a war with
the Muscovites against the antient maxims of his kingdom. 
May eternal vengeance PURSUE the villain [Thank
heaven, she does not say overtake], if he give room to
doubt his honour! —Women can't swear, Jack— 
Sweet souls! they can only curse. 
I am said, to doubt her love. —Have I not reason? 
And she, to doubt my ardor? —Ardor, Jack! —Why,
'tis very right—Women, as Miss Howe says, and as
every Rake knows, love ardors! 
She apprizes her of the ill success of the application
made to her uncle. —By Hickman, no doubt! —I must 

have this fellow's ears in my pocket, very quickly,
believe. 
She says, She is equally shocked and enraged against
all her family: Mrs. Norton's weight has been try'd
upon Mrs. Harlowe, as well as Mr. Hickman's upon
the uncle: But never were there, says the vixen, such
determin'd brutes in the world. Her uncle concludes
her ruin'd already. —Is not that a call upon me, as
well as a reproach? —They all expected applications
from her when in distress—but were resolved not to stir
an inch to save her life. She was accused of premeditation
and contrivance. Miss Howe is concerned, she
tells her, for the revenge my pride may put me upon
taking for the distance she has kept me at. —And well
she may. —She has now but one choice [for her cousin
Morden, it seems, is set against her too], and that's to
be mine. —An act of necessity, of convenience. —Thy
friend, Jack, to be already made a woman's convenience! 
—Is this to be borne by a Lovelace? 
I shall make great use of this letter. From Miss
Howe's hints of what passed between her uncle Harlowe
and Hickman [It must be Hickman], I can
give room for my invention to play; for she tells her,
that she will not reveal all. I must endeavour to come
at this letter myself; I must have the very words; 
extracts will not do. This letter, when I have it,
must be my compass to steer by. 
The fire of friendship then blazes out and crackles. 
I never before imagin'd, that so fervent a friendship
could subsist between two sister-beauties, both toasts. 
But even here it may be inflamed by opposition, and
by that contradiction which gives spirit to female spirits
of a warm and romantic turn. 
She raves about coming up, if by so doing she could
prevent so noble a creature from stooping too low, or save
her from ruin—One reed to support another! These
girls are frenzical in their friendship. They know
not what a steady fire is. 

How comes it to pass, that I cannot help being
pleased with this virago's spirit, tho' I suffer by it? 
Had I her but here, I'd engage in a week's time, to
teach her submission without reserve. What pleasure
should I have in breaking such a spirit! I should wish
for her but for one month, in all, I think. She would be
too tame and spiritless for me after that. How sweetly
pretty to see the two lovely friends, when humbled
and tame, both sitting in the darkest corner of a room,
arm in arm, weeping and sobbing for each other! — 
And I their emperor, their then acknowleged emperor,
reclined on a sophee, in the same room, Grand Signor
like, uncertain to which I should first throw out my
handkerchief? 
Mind the girl: She is enraged at the Harlowes: She
is angry at her own mother; she is exasperated against her
foolish and low-vanity'd Lovelace. —Foolish, a little
toad! [God forgive me for calling a virtuous girl a
toad!] Let us stoop to lift the wretch out of his dirt, tho'
we soil our fingers in doing it! He has not been guilty of
direct indecency to you. —It seems extraordinary to Miss
Howe that I have not. —Nor dare he—She should be
sure of that. If women have such things in their
heads, why should not I in my heart? —Not so much
of a devil as that comes to neither. Such villainous intentions
would have shewn themselves before now, if I
had them. —Lord help them!— 
She then puts her friend upon urging for settlements,
licence, and so forth. —No room for delicacy now, she
says. —And tells her what she shall say, to bring all
forward from me. —Dost think, Jack, that I should
not have carried my point long ago, but for this
vixen? —She reproaches her for having MODESTY'D-away,
as she calls it, more than one opportunity, that
she ought not to have slipt. —Thus thou seest, that the
noblest of the Sex mean nothing in the world by their
shyness and distance, but to pound a poor fellow,
whom they dislike not, when he comes into their purlieus. 

Annexed to this letter is a paper the most saucy
that ever was wrote of a mother by a daughter. There
are in it such free reflections upon widows and batchelors,
that I cannot but wonder how Miss Howe came
by her learning. Sir George Colmar, I can tell thee,
was a greater fool than thy friend, if she had it all for
nothing. 
The contents of this paper acquaints Miss Harlowe,
that her uncle Antony has been making proposals
of marriage to her mother. The old fellow's
heart ought to be a tough one, if he succeed, or she
who broke that of a much worthier man, the late
Mr. Howe, will soon get rid of him. But be this as
it may, the stupid family is more irreconcileable than
ever to their goddess-daughter, for old Antony's
thoughts of marrying: So I am more secure of her
than ever; since, as Miss Howe says, she can have
but one choice now. Though this disgusts my pride,
yet I believe, at last, my tender heart will be moved
in her favour. For I did not wish, that she should
have nothing but persecution and distress. —But why
loves she the brutes, as Miss Howe justly calls them,
so much; me so little? —But I have still more unpardonable
transcripts from other letters. 