



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

No admittance yet to my Charmer! She is very ill
—in a violent fever, Dorcas thinks. Yet will
have no advice. 
Dorcas tells her how much I am concerned at it. 
But again let me ask, Does this Lady do right to
make herself ill, when she is not ill? For my own part,
Libertine as people think me, when I had occasion to be
sick, I took a dose of Ipecacuanha, that I might not be
guilty of a falshood; and most heartily sick was I; as 

she, who then pitied me, full well knew. But here
to pretend to be very ill, only to get an opportunity to
run away, in order to avoid forgiving a man who has
offended her, how unchristian! —If good folks allow
themselves in these breaches of a known duty, and in
these presumptuous contrivances to deceive, who, Belford,
shall blame us? 
I have a strange notion, that the matronly Lady will
be certainly at the Grocer's shop at the hour of Nine tomorrow
morning: For Dorcas heard me tell Mrs.
Sinclair, that I shall go out at Eight precisely; and
then she is to try for a coach: And if the dowager's
chariot should happen to be there, how lucky will it be
for my Charmer! How strangely will my dream be
made out! 
* *
I have just received a Letter from Captain Tomlinson. 
Is it not wonderful? For that was part of my dream. 
I shall always have a prodigious regard to dreams
henceforward. I know not but I may write a book
upon that subject; for my own experience will furnish
out a great part of it. Glanville of Witches, and Baxter's
History of Spirits and Apparitions, and the Royal
Pedant's Demonology, will be nothing at all to Lovelace's
Resveries. 
The Letter is just what I dreamed it to be. I am
only concerned, that Uncle John's Anniversary did not
happen three or four days sooner; for should any new
misfortune befall my Charmer, she may not be able to
support her spirits so long as till Thursday in the next
week. Yet it will give me the more time for new expedients,
should my present contrivance fail; which I
cannot however suppose. 

To Robert Lovelace, Esq;
Monday, June 19. 
Dear Sir,
I can now return you joy, for the joy you have given
me, as well as my dear friend Mr. Harlowe, in the
ews of his beloved Niece's happy recovery; for he is 

determined to comply with her wishes and yours, and
to give her to you with his own hand. 
As the Ceremony has been necessarily delayed by reason
of her illness, and as Mr. Harlowe's Birth-day is on
Thursday the 29th of this instant June, when he enters
into the Seventy-fourth year of his age; and as time
may be wanted to complete the dear Lady's recovery; 
he is very desirous that the Marriage shall be solemnized
upon it; that he may afterwards have double joy on
that day to the end of his life. 
For this purpose he intends to set out privately, so
as to be at Kentish-town on Wednesday se'nnight in the
evening. 
All the family used, he says, to meet to celebrate it
with him; but as they are at present in too unhappy a
situation for that, he will give out, that, not being
able to bear the day at home, he has resolved to be absent
for two or three days. 
He will set out on horseback, attended only with one
trusty servant, for the greater privacy. He will be at
the most creditable-looking public house there, expecting
you both next morning, if he hear nothing from
me to prevent him. And he will go to town with you
after the Ceremony is performed, in the coach he supposes
you will come in. 
He is very desirous, that I should be present on the
occasion. But this I have promised him, at his request,
that I will be up before the day, in order to see the Settlements
executed, and every thing properly prepared. 
He is very glad that you have the Licence ready. 
He speaks very kindly of you, Mr. Lovelace; and
says, that, if any of the family stand out after he has
seen the Ceremony performed, he will separate from
them, and unite himself to his dear Niece and her interests. 
I owned to you, when in town last, that I took slight
notice to my dear friend of the misunderstanding between
You and his Niece; and that I did this, for fear the 

Lady should have shewn any little discontent in his presence,
had I been able to prevail upon him to go up in
person, as then was doubtful. But I hope nothing of
that discontent remains now. 
My absence, when your messenger came, must excuse
me for not writing by him. 
Be pleased to make my most respectful compliments
acceptable to the admirable Lady, and believe me to be 
Your most faithful and obedient Servant,
Antony Tomlinson. 
This Letter I sealed, and broke open. It was brought,
thou mayst suppose, by a particular messenger; the
Seal such a one as the writer need not be ashamed of. I
took care to enquire after the Captain's health, in my
Beloved's hearing; and it is now ready to be produced,
as a pacifier, according as she shall take on, or resent, if
the two metamorphoses happen pursuant to my wonderful
dream; as, having great faith in dreams, I dare
say they will. —I think it will not be amiss, in changing
my cloaths, to have this Letter of the worthy Captain
lie in my Beloved's way. 