



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Thursday Night. 
Confoundedly out of humour with this perverse
woman! —Nor wilt thou blame me, if thou art
my friend. She regards the concession she made, as a 

concession extorted from her: And we are but just
where we were before she made it. 
With great difficulty I prevailed upon her to favour
me with her company for one half-hour this evening. 
The necessity I was under to go down to M. Hall, was
the subject I wanted to talk upon. 
I told her, that as she had been so good as to promise,
that she would endeavour to make herself easy till
she saw the Thursday in next week over, I hoped, that
she would not scruple to oblige me with her word, that
I should find her here at my return from M. Hall. 
Indeed she would make me no such promise. Nothing
of this house was mentioned to me, said she: You
know it was not. And do you think that I would have
given my consent to my imprisonment in it? 
I was plaguily nettled, and disappointed too. If I go
not down to M. Hall, Madam, you'll have no scruple
to stay here, I suppose, till Thursday is over? 
If I cannot help myself, I must. —But I insist upon
being permitted to go out of this house whether you
lead it or not. 
Well, Madam, then I will comply with your commands. 
And I will go out this very evening in quest
of lodgings that you shall have no objection to. 
I will have no lodgings of your providing, Sir—I
will go to Mrs. Moore's at Hamstead. 
Mrs. Moore's, Madam? —I have no objection to
Mrs. Moore's. —But will you give me your promise,
to admit me there to your presence? 
As I do here—When I cannot help it. 
Very well, Madam—Will you be so good, as to let
me know, what you intended by your promise to make
yourself easy— 
To endeavour, Sir, to make myself easy—were the
words— 
—Till you saw what next Thursday would produce? 
Ask me no questions that may ensure me. I am too
sincere for the company I am in. 

Let me ask you, Madam, what meant you, when
you said, “that, were it not a sin, you would die before
you gave me that assurance?” 
She was indignantly silent. 
You thought, Madam, you had given me room to
hope your pardon by it? 
When I think I ought to answer you with patience,
I will speak. 
Do you think yourself in my power, Madam? 
If I were not—And there she stopt— 
Dearest creature, speak out—I beseech you, dearest
creature, speak out.— 
She was silent; her charming face all in a glow. 
Have you, Madam, any reliance upon my honour? 
Still silent. 
You hate me, Madam! You despise me more than
you do the most odious of God's creatures! 
You ought to despise me, if I did not. 
You say, Madam, you are in a bad house. You have
no reliance upon my honour—You believe you cannot
avoid me— 
She arose. I beseech you, let me withdraw. 
I snatched her hand, rising, and pressed it first to my
lips, and then to my heart, in wild disorder. She might
have felt the bounding mischief ready to burst its bars— 
You shall go—To your own apartment, if you please
—But, by the great God of Heaven, I will accompany
you thither. 
She trembled—Pray, pray, Mr. Lovelace, don't
terrify me so! 
Be seated, Madam! I beseech you be seated!— 
I will sit down— 
Do then, Madam—Do then—All my soul in my
eyes, and my heart's blood throbbing at my fingers ends. 
I will—I will—You hurt me—Pray, Mr. Lovelace,
don't—don't frighten me so—And down she sat,
trembling; my hand still grasping hers. 

I hung over her throbbing bosom, and putting my
other arm round her waist—And you say, you hate
me, Madam—And you say, you despise me—And you
say, you promised me nothing— 
Yes, yes, I did promise you—Let me not be held
down thus—You see I sat down when you bid me— 
Why [struggling] need you hold me down thus? —I did
promise to endeavour to be easy till Thursday was over! 
But you won't let me! —How can I be easy? —Pray,
let me not be thus terrified. 
And what, Madam, meant you by your promise? 
Did you mean any-thing in my favour? —You designed
that I should, at the time, think you did. Did you
mean any-thing in my favour, Madam? —Did you intend,
that I should think you did? 
Let go my hand, Sir—Take away your arm from
about me [struggling, yet trembling]—Why do you gaze
upon me so? 
Answer me, Madam—Did you mean any-thing in
my favour by your promise? 
Let me not be thus constrained to answer. 
Then pausing, and gaining more spirit, Let me go,
said she: I am but a woman—but a weak woman— 
But my life is in my own power, tho' my person is not
—I will not be thus constrained. 
You shall not, Madam, quitting her hand, bowing,
but my heart at my mouth, and hoping farther provocation. 
She arose, and was hurrying away. 
I pursue you not, Madam—I will try your generosity. 
—Stop—Return—This moment stop, return, if,
Madam, you would not make me desperate. 
She stopt at the door; burst into tears—O Lovelace! 
—How, how, have I deserved— 
Be pleased, dearest angel, to return. 
She came back—But with declared reluctance; and
imputing her compliance to terror. 

Terror, Jack, as I have heretofore found out, tho'
I have so little benefited by the discovery, must be my
resort, if she make it necessary—Nothing else will do
with the inflexible Charmer. 
She seated herself over-against me; extremely discomposed. 
—But indignation had a visible predominance
in her features. 
I was going towards her, with a countenance intendedly
changed to love and softness: Sweetest, dearest
Angel, were my words, in the tenderest accent: —But,
rising up, she insisted upon my being seated at distance
from her. 
I obeyed—and begged her hand over the table, to
my extended hand; to see, as I said, if in any-thing
she would oblige me—But nothing gentle, soft, or affectionate,
would do. She refused me her hand! —Was
she wise, Jack, to confirm to me, that nothing but
Terror would do? 
Let me only know, Madam, if your promise to endeavour
to wait with patience the event of next Thursday,
meant me favour? 
Do you expect any voluntary favour from one to
whom you give not a free choice? 
Do you intend, Madam, to honour me with your
hand, in your Uncle's presence, or do you not? 
My heart and my hand shall never be separated. 
Why, think you, did I stand in opposition to the will
of my best, my natural friends? 
I know what you mean, Madam—Am I then as
hateful to you as the vile Solmes? 
Ask me not such a question, Mr. Lovelace. 
I must be answered. Am I as hateful to you as the
vile Solmes? 
Why do you call Mr. Solmes vile? 
Don't you think him so, Madam? 
Why should I? Did Mr. Solmes ever do vilely by me? 
Dearest creature! don't distract me by hateful comparisons! 
And perhaps by a more hateful preference. 

Don't you, Sir, put questions to me, that you know
I will answer truly, tho' my answer were ever so much
to enrage you. 
My heart, Madam, my soul is all yours at present. 
But you must give me hope, that your promise, in your
own construction, binds you, no new cause to the contrary,
to be mine on Thursday. How else can I leave
you? 
Let me go to Hamstead; and trust to my favour. 
May I trust to it? —Say, only, May I trust to it? 
How will you trust to it, if you extort an answer to
this question? 
Say only, dearest creature, say only, may I trust to
your favour, if you go to Hamstead? 
How dare you, Sir, if I must speak out, expect a
promise of favour from me? —What a mean creature
must you think me, after your ungrateful baseness to me,
were I to give you such a promise? 
Then standing up, Thou hast made me, O vilest of
men! [her hands clasped, and a face crimsoned over
with indignation] an inmate of the vilest of houses— 
Nevertheless, while I am in it, I shall have a heart incapable
of any-thing but abhorrence of that and of thee! 
And round her looked the Angel, and upon me, with
fear in her sweet aspect of the consequence of her free
declaration. —But what a Devil must I have been, I,
who love Bravery in a Man, had I not been more
struck with admiration of her fortitude at the instant,
than stimulated by revenge? 
Noblest of creature! —And do you think I can leave
you, and my interest in such an excellence, precarious? 
No promise! —No hope! —If you make me not desperate,
may lightning blast me, if I do you not all the
justice 'tis in my power to do you! 
If you have any intention to oblige me, leave me at
my own liberty, and let me not be detained in this abominable
house. To be constrained as I have been constrained! 
To be stopt by your vile agents! To be brought 

up by force, and to be bruised in my own defence against
such illegal violence! —I dare to die, Lovelace—And
she who fears not death is not to be intimidated into a
meanness unworthy of her heart and principles! 
Wonderful creature! But why, Madam, did you
lead me to hope for something favourable for next Thursday? 
—Once more, make me not desperate—With all
your magnanimity, glorious creature! [I was more
than half frantic, Belford] You may, you may—But
do not, do not make me brutally threaten you! —Do
not, do not make me desperate! 
My aspect, I believe, threatened still more than my
words. I was rising—She arose—Mr. Lovelace, be
pacified—You are even more dreadful than the Lovelace
I have long dreaded—Let me retire—I ask your
leave to retire—You really frighten me—Yet I give
you no hope—From my heart I ab— 
Say not, Madam, you abhor me. You must, for
your own sake, conceal your hatred—At least not avow
it. I seized her hand. 
Let me retire—Let me retire, said she—in a manner
out of breath. 
I will only say, Madam, that I refer myself to your
generosity. My heart is not to be trusted at this instant. 
As a mark of my submission to your will, you shall, if
you please, withdraw. —But I will not go to M. Hall— 
Live or die my Lord M. I will not go to M. Hall— 
But will attend the effect of your promise. Remember,
Madam, you have promised to endeavour to make yourself
easy, till you see the event of next Thursday—Next
Thursday, remember, your Uncle comes up, to see us
married—That's the event—You think ill of your Lovelace
—Do not, Madam, suffer your own morals to be
degraded by the infection, as you called it, of his example. 
Away flew the Charmer, with this half-permission— 
And no doubt thought, that she had an escape—nor
without reason. 

I knew not for half an hour what to do with myself. 
Vexed at the heart; nevertheless (now she was from
me, and when I reflected upon her hatred of me, and
her defiances) that I suffered myself to be so over-awed,
checked, restrained— 
And now I have written thus far (having of course
recollected the whole of our conversation) I am more
and more incensed against myself. 
But I will go down to these women—and perhaps
suffer myself to be laughed at by them. 
Devil fetch them, they pretend to know their own
Sex. Sally was a woman well educated—Polly also— 
Both have read—Both have sense—Of parentage not
mean—Once modest both—Still they say had been modest,
but for me—Not entirely indelicate now; tho'
too little nice for my personal intimacy, loth as they
both are to have me think so. —The old one, too, a
woman of family, tho' thus (from bad inclination, as
well as at first from low circumstances) miserably sunk: 
—And hence they all pretend to remember what once
they were; and vouch for the inclinations and hypocrisy
of the whole Sex; and wish for nothing so ardently,
as that I will leave the perverse Lady to their management,
while I am gone to Berkshire; undertaking absolutely
for her humility and passiveness on my return; 
and continually boasting of the many perverse creatures
whom they have obliged to draw in their traces. 
* *
&dotup;I am just come from these Sorceresses. 
&dotup;I was forced to take the Mother down; for she
began with her Hoh, Sirs! with me; and to catechise
and upbraid me, with as much insolence as if I
owed her money. 
&dotup;I made her fly the Pit, at last. Strange wishes
wished we against each other, at her quitting it— 
What were they? —I'll tell thee—She wished me married,
and to be jealous of my Wife; and my Heir-Apparent
the child of another man. I was even with 

her with a vengeance. And yet thou wilt think that
could not well be. —As how? —As how, Jack! — 
Why, I wished her Conscience come to life! —And
I know by the gripes mine gives me every half-hour,
that she would then have a cursed time of it. 
&dotup;Sally and Polly gave themselves high airs too. 
Their first favours were thrown at me [Women to
boast of those favours which they were as willing to
impart, first forms all the difficulty with them! as I
to receive!]: I was upbraided with ingratitude, Dastardice,
and all my difficulties with my angel charged
upon myself, for want of following my blows; and
for leaving the proud Lady mistress of her own will,
and nothing to reproach herself with. And all agreed,
that the arts used against her on a certain occasion,
had too high an operation for them or me to judge
what her will would have been in the arduous trial. 
And then they blamed one another; as I cursed them all. 
&dotup;They concluded that I should certainly marry, and
be a lost man. And Sally, on this occasion, with an
affected and malicious laugh, snapt her fingers at me,
and pointing two of each hand forkedly at me, bid
me remember the lines I, once shewed her, of my
favourite Jack Dryden, as she always familiarly calls
that celebrated Poet: 

&dotup;We women to new joys unseen may move:
&dotup;There are no prints left in the paths of Love.
&dotup;All goods besides by public marks are known:
&dotup;But those men most desire to keep, have none.&dotup;
This infernal Implement had the confidence further
to hint, that when a Wife, some other man would not
find half the difficulty with my Angel, that I had found. 
Confidence indeed! —But yet I must say, that this dear
creature is the only woman in the world of whom I
should not be jealous. And yet, if a man gives himself
up to the company of these devils, they never let him
rest, till he either suspect or hate his wife. 

But a word or two of other matters, if possible. 
Methinks, I long to know how causes go at M. Hall. 
I have another private intimation, that the old Peer is
in the greatest danger. 
I must go down. Yet what to do with this Lady
the mean while! —These cursed women are full of
cruelty and enterprize. She will never be easy with
them in my absence. They will have provocation and
pretence therefore. But woe be to them, if— 
Yet what will vengeance do, after an insult committed? 
The two Nymphs will have jealous rage to
goad them on—And what will with-hold a jealous and
already-ruined woman? 
To let her go elsewhere; that cannot be done. I am
still resolved to be honest, if she'll give me hope: If
yet she'll let me be honest—But I'll see how she'll be,
after the contention she will certainly have between her
resentment, and the terror she had reason for from our
last conversation. —So let this subject rest till the morning. 
And to the old Peer once more. 
I shall have a good deal of trouble, I reckon, tho'
no sordid man, to be decent on the expected occasion. 
Then how to act (I who am no hypocrite) in the days
of condolement! What farces have I to go through; 
and to be a principal actor in them! I'll try to think of
my own latter end; a grey beard, and a graceless heir; 
in order to make me serious. 
Thou, Belford, knowest a good deal of this sort of
grimace; and canst help a gay heart to a little of the
dismal. But then every feature of thy face is cut out
for it. My heart may be touched, perhaps, sooner
than thine; for, believe me, or not, I have a very
tender one—But then, no man looking in my face, be
the occasion for grief ever so great, will believe that
heart to be deeply distressed. 
All is placid, easy, serene, in my countenance. Sorrow
cannot sit half an hour together upon it. Nay, I
believe, that Lord M's recovery, should it happen, 

would not affect me above a quarter of an hour. Only
the new scenery (and the pleasure of aping an Heraclitus
to the family, while I am a Democritus among my
private friends) or I want nothing that the old Peer can
leave me. Wherefore then should grief sadden and distort
such blythe, such jocund features as mine? 
But as for thine, were there murder committed in
the street, and thou wert but passing by, the murderer
even in sight, the pursuers would quit him, and lay hold
of thee: And thy very looks would hang, as well as
apprehend, thee. 
But one word to business, Jack. Whom dealtest
thou with for thy blacks? —Wert thou well used? —I
shall want a plaguy parcel of them. For I intend to
make every soul of the family mourn—Outside, if not
In. 