



Mrs. Norton, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Monday July 31. 
My dearest young Lady,
I must indeed own, that I took the liberty to write
to your Mother, offering to inclose to her, if she
gave me leave, yours of the 24th: By which I
thought she would see what was the state of your
mind; what the nature of your last troubles was,
from the wicked Arrest; what the people are where
you lodge; what proposals were made you from Lord
M's family; also your sincere penitence; and how
much Miss Howe's writing to them, in the terms she
wrote in, disturbed you—But, as you have taken the
matter into your own hands, and forbid me, in your
last, to act in this nice affair unknown to you, I am
glad the Letter was not required of me—And indeed
it may be better that the matter lie wholly between
you and them; since my affection for you is thought
to proceed from partiality. 
They would chuse, no doubt, that you should owe
to themselves, and not to my humble mediation, the
favour for which you so earnestly sue, and of which
I would not have you despair: For I will venture to
assure you, that your Mother is ready to take the first
opportunity to shew her maternal tenderness: And
this I gather from several hints I am not at liberty to
explain myself upon. 

I long to be with you, now I am better, and now
my Son is in a fine way of recovery. But is it not
hard, to have it signified to me, that at present it
will not be taken well, if I go? —I suppose, while
the Reconciliation, which I hope will take place, is
negotiating by means of the correspondence so newly
opened between You and your Sister. But if you
would have me come, I will rely on my good intentions,
and risque every one's displeasure. 
Mr. Brand has business in town; to solicit for a
Benefice which it is expected the incumbent will be
obliged to quit for a better preferment: And when
there, he is to enquire privately after your way of
life, and of your health. 
He is a very officious young man; and, but that
your Uncle Harlowe (who has chosen him for this errand)
regards him as an oracle, your Mother had rather
any-body else had been sent. 
He is one of those puzzling, over-doing gentlemen,
who think they see farther into matters than
any-body else, and are fond of discovering mysteries
where there are none, in order to be thought shrewd
men. 
I can't say I like him, either in the pulpit, or out
of it: I who had a Father one of the soundest divines
and finest scholars in the kingdom; who never made
an ostentation of what he knew; but loved and venerated
the Gospel he taught, preferring it to all
other learning; to be obliged to hear a young man
depart from his Text as soon as he has named it (so
contrary, too, to the example set him by his learned
and worthy principal (a) , when his health permits
him to preach); and throwing about, to a Christian
and Country audience, scraps of Latin and Greek
from the Pagan Classics; and not always brought in
with great propriety neither (if I am to judge by the
only way given me to judge of them, by the English 

he puts them into); is an indication of something
wrong, either in his head, or his heart, or both; 
for, otherwise, his Education at the University must
have taught him better. You know, my dear Miss
Clary, the honour I have for the Cloth: It is owing
to that, that I say what I do. 
I know not the day he is to set out; and as his enquiries
are to be private, be pleased to take no notice
of this intelligence. I have no doubt, that your life
and conversation are such, as may defy the scrutinies
of the most officious enquirer. 
I am just now told, that you have written a second
Letter to your Sister: But am afraid they will wait
for Mr. Brand's report, before further favour will be
obtained from them; for they will not yet believe
you are so ill as I fear you are. 
But you would soon find, that you have an indulgent
Mother, were she at liberty to act according to
her own inclination. And this gives me great hopes,
that all will end well at last: For I verily think you
are in the right way to a Reconciliation. God give a
blessing to it, and restore your health, and you to all
your friends, prays 
Your ever-affectionate
Judith Norton. 
Your good Mother has privately sent me five
guineas: She is pleased to say, to help us in the
illness we have been afflicted with; but, more
likely, that I might send them to you, as from
myself. I hope, therefore, I may send them
up, with ten more I have still left. 
I will send you word of Mr. Morden's arrival, the
moment I know it. 
If agreeable, I should be glad to know all that passes
between your relations and you. 