


Miss Byron, To Mrs. Selby. 


London, Feb. 28. 
Indeed, my dear and ever-indulgent aunt Selby,
you have given me pain; and yet I am very ungrateful,
I believe, to say so: But if I feel the pain
(tho' perhaps I ought not) should I not own it? 
What circumstances, what situation, am I in, madam,
that I cannot be mistress of myself? That shall
turn my uncle's half-feared, tho' always agreeable,
raillery into pity for me? 
“Over head and ears in the passion”—“I to be
on the hoping side; the gentleman on the triumphant” 
—“It is impossible for you my friends to be
aforehand with my inclinations”—“A beginning 

love to be mentioned, in which one is willing to
conceal one's self from one's self!” Fires, Flames,
Blazes to follow! —Gratitude and Love to be spoken
of as synonymous terms—Ah! my dear aunt, how
could you let my uncle write such a letter, and then
copy it, and send it to me as yours? 
And yet some very tender strokes are in it, that no
man, that hardly any-body but you among women,
could write. 
But what do you do, madam, when you tell your
Harriet of your own prepossessions in favour of a man,
who, as you thought, had before in my eye too many
advantages? Indeed you should have taken care not to
let me know that his great qualities had impressed you
all so deeply: And my grandmamma to be so very
apprehensive too for the entangled girl. 
Hopeless passion, said she? Entangled in an hopeless
passion! O let me die before this shall be deserved to
be said of your Harriet! 
Then again rises to your pen, smothering and escaped
sparks; and I am desired to hurry myself to get cold
water to quench the flame —Dear, dear madam, what
images are here? And applied—To whom? —And by
whom? —Have I written any-thing so very blazing! — 
Surely I have not. But you should not say you will
all forgive me, if this be my sad situation. You should
not say, How much you are your selves, all of you, in
love with this excellent man; and talk of Mr. Dawson,
and of what he says of him: But you should have
told me, that if I suffer my gratitude to grow into
love, you will never forgive me; then should I have
had a call of duty to check or controul a passion, that
you were afraid could not be gratified. 
Well, and there is no way left me, it seems, but
to fly for it! To hurry away to Northamptonshire,
and either to begin a new treaty with Lord D. or to
give hope to an old lover. Poor Harriet Byron! And
is it indeed so bad with thee? And does thy aunt Selby
think it is? 

But is there no hope, that the man will take pity
of thee? When he sees thee so sadly entangled, will
he not vouchsafe to lend an extricating hand? 
Oh no! —Too much obliged, as thou already art,
how canst thou expect to be farther obliged? Obliged
in the highest degree? 
But let me try if I cannot play round this bright,
this beamy taper, without sindging my wings! I fansy
it is not yet quite so bad with me! At least, let me
stand this one visit of to-morrow: And then if I find
reason to think I cannot stand it, I may take the kind
advice, and fly for it; rather than add another hopeless
girl to the half-score that perhaps have been long
sighing for this best of men. 
But even then, my aunt, that is to say, were I to
fly and take shelter under your protecting wings, I
shall not, I hope, think it absolutely necessary, to light
up one flame, in order to extinguish another. I shall
always value Mr. Orme as a friend; but indeed I am
less than ever inclined to think of him in a nearer
light. 
As to Lady D's proposal, it admits not with me of
half a thought. You know, my dearest aunt, that I
am not yet rejected by one with whom you are all in
love—But this seriously I will own (and yet I hope
nothing but my gratitude is engaged, and that indeed
is a very powerful tie) that since I have seen and known
Sir Charles Grandison, I have not only (as before) an
indifference, but a dislike, to all other men. And I
think, if I know my own heart, I had rather converse
but an hour in a week with him, and with Miss
Grandison, than be the wife of any man I have ever
seen or known. 
If this should end at last in love, and if I should be
entangled in an hopeless passion, the object of it would
be Sir Charles Grandison: He could not insult me; 
and mean, as the word pity in some cases sounds, I
had rather have his pity, than the love of any other
man. 

You will, upon the strength of what I have said,
be so good, dear madam, as to let the Countess of D.
know, that I think myself highly obliged to her, for
her favourable opinion of me: That she has by it interested
all my good wishes in her son's happiness; 
and that I was always of opinion, that equality of
fortune and degree, tho' not absolutely necessary to
matrimonial felicity, was however a circumstance not
to be slighted: But you, madam, can put my meaning
in better, in fitter words, when you are assured,
that it is my meaning to give an absolute, tho' grateful,
negative to this proposal. And I do assure you that
such is my meaning; and that I should despise myself,
were I capable of keeping one man in suspense, even
had I hope of your hope, while I was balancing in
favour of another. 
I believe, madam, I have been a little petulant,
and very saucy in what I have written: But my heart
is not at ease: And I am vexed with these men, one
after another, when Sir Hargrave has given me a surfeit
of them; and only that the bad has brought me into
the knowlege of the best, or I could resolve never
more to hear a man talk to me, no not for one moment,
upon a subject, that is become so justly painful
to one who never took pleasure in their airy adulation. 
I know you will, with your usual goodness, and so
will my grandmamma, and so will my uncle Selby,
pardon all the imperfections of, dearest madam, 
Your and Their ever dutiful
Harriet Byron. 

