



My dear Lady,
I gave you in my last, my bold Remarks upon
a Tragedy—The Distress'd Mother. 
I will now give you my shallow Notions of a
Comedy—The Tender Husband. 
I liked this Part of the Title; tho' I can't say
I was pleas'd at all with the other, explanatory of
it; Or—The Accomplish'd Fools. But when I
was told it was written by Sir Richard Steele, and
that Mr. Addison had given some Hints towards it,
if not some Characters, O dear Sir, said I, give us
your Company to this Play; for the Authors of the
Spectators cannot possibly produce a faulty Scene. 
Mr. B. indeed smil'd; for I had not then read
the Play: And the Earl of F. his Countess, Miss
Darnford; Mr. B. and myself, agreed to meet
with a Niece of my Lord in the Stage Box, which
was taken on purpose. 

There seems to me, my dear Lady, to be a
great deal of Wit and Satire in the Play: But,
upon my Word, I was grievously disappointed as
to the Morality of it: Nor, in some Places, is
Probability preserv'd; and there are divers Speeches
so very free, that I could not have expected to
meet with such, from the Names I mention'd. 
I should be afraid of being censur'd for my
Presumption, were I to write to any body less
indulgent to me than your Ladyship: But I will
make no Apologies to you, Madam. —Let me
see, then, can I give you the brief History of this
Comedy, as I did of the Tragedy? —I profess, I
hardly know, whether I can or not; at least,
whether I should or not. —But I'll try. 
The Tender Husband, Mr. Clerimont,
has for his Wife a Lady who has travelled, and is
far gone in all the French Fashions: ‘She brought
me,’ says he, ‘a noble Fortune; and I thought
she had a Right to share it; therefore carry'd her
to see the World, forsooth, and make the Tour
of France and Italy, where she learn'd to lose
her Money gracefully, to admire every Vanity in
our Sex, and contemn every Virtue in her own;
which, with Ten thousand other Perfections, are
the ordinary Improvements of a travell'd Lady.’ 
Tender as the Husband was to be suppos'd to
the Wife, (which, by the way, is not extremely
apparent, in proper or right Instances of Tenderness)
I presume to think, he shews no great Politeness
to the Sex in general in this Speech; and
the Poet will be the less excusable for it, if he has
not drawn a general Character of travell'd Ladies; 
and much less still, if it shall appear, that that of 

Mrs. Clerimont, on which this general Reflection
is founded, is carry'd beyond Nature, and Probability
too. 
But what is the Method the Tender Husband
takes to reclaim the Lady? —Why this: He sets
a former Mistress of his own to work, in Man's
Cloaths, to insnare her: And thus he declares himself
—‘Now I can neither mortify her Vanity,
that I may live at Ease with her, nor quite discard
her, till I have catch'd her a little inlarging
her innocent Freedoms, as she calls them. For
this End I am content to be a French Husband,
tho', now-and-then, with the secret Pangs of an
Italian one; and therefore, Sir, or Madam,’ (to
his Mistress Lucy, under the Name of Mr. Fainlove,
in the Dress of a young Coxcomb) ‘you
are thus equipp'd to attend and accost her Ladyship.’ 
A Speech unnecessary to Fainlove, who
was dress'd before for that Purpose, and had actually
won Money, in that Character, of Mrs. Clerimont. 
But the Poet had no other way to let
the Audience know it, as it should seem—‘It
concerns you,’ continues he, ‘to be diligent: If
we (i. e. Himself and his Lady) wholly part— 
I need say no more: If we do not—I'll see thee
well provided for.’ 
Here's a fine moral Scene open'd, my Lady,
with regard to Mr. Clerimont, his Lady, and his
kept Mistress! Mr. Fainlove, alias Mrs. Lucy, undertakes
the Task, in Hopes to live with Mr. Clerimont,
in case of a Divorce from his Wife; or
to be provided for, in case the Plot does not succeed:
Which makes it apparent, that, to say
nothing of his Morality, poor Lucy had not met 

with a generous Man in Mr. Clerimont, since, after
the Forfeiture of her Honour, she was still to do
a more infamous Jobb, if possible, to procure for
herself a Provision from him. 
Then Mr. Clerimont proceeds to instruct the
new-made Man, how to behave like a Coxcomb,
in order to engage his Lady's Attention, and to
join in all her Foibles, till she can furnish him with
an Opportunity to detect them in such a way, as
shall give a Pretence for a Divorce (a Hint that has
been scandalously improved, and made more fashionable,
since this Play was written); and this he
does in such free Language and Action, as must
disgust any modest Person of either Sex. 
Then the Poet causes this faithful Mistress, in
order to make her Character shine above that of
the Wife, and indeed above his own likewise, to
present her Imployer with Bills for 500l. which
she tells him she won of his Wife the preceding
Night; and makes up 2000l. which Mr. Clerimont
says, this unprovided-for Mistress of his has
won from his Lady, and honestly given him; or
else, he could not, he owns, have supply'd her
Gaming Losses. And Lucy declares, she will gain
him for ever from his Lady, if she can: Yet, you
will see, by-and-by, that it is not Love to his particular
Person, more than any other, that is Lucy's
Inducement: Of course then, it must be Wickedness
for Wickedness sake! 
The next Character is Captain Clerimont,
Brother to the other Gentleman, a Man
of Fashion and of the World, who being a younger
Brother, has his Fortune to make; and we shall
see presently, how he proposes to make it. 

The next is Pounce, an infamous Jobber or
Broker of Stocks, Marriages, or any thing— 
whose Character be pleas'd to take in his own
Words: ‘Now 'tis my Profession to assist a freehearted
young Fellow against an unnatural longliv'd
Father—to disincumber Men of Pleasure
of the Vexation of unwieldy Estates; to support
a feeble Title to an Inheritance!’ —One that
Mr. Clerimont says, by way of Praise, he has seen
prompting a stammering Witness in Westminsterhall,
that wanted Instruction; and could venture
his Ears with great Bravery for his Friend. 
A worse Character than this, can there be? 
Yet is it not produced to be punished, neither. 
The next Person introduced is Hezekiah
Tipkin, a Banker in Lombard-street, a Man of
an infamous and sordid Character, and a vile
Usurer: Who has a beautiful Niece, Miss Bridget
Tipkin, over-run with Affectation and Romance; 
with a great Fortune in Money, which so attracts
the Captain, that he supposes, in a sordid, but
witty manner enough, all imaginable Perfections
in her Person, before he has a Sight of it. This
young Lady, by a Treaty between her Uncle Tipkin
and Sir Harry Gubbin, a tyrannical, positive,
hot headed Country Gentleman, is design'd
to be marry'd to Humphrey, the Son of Sir Harry,
a Creature so savage, so rough, and so stupid, that
there cannot be drawn a stronger Contraste between
his Character and that of Miss Bridget. 
Mr. Pounce, who is imploy'd as a Broker in
their Match, is, for a Reward of 1000l. to cheat
them and poor Humphrey, and to procure this
young Lady for Captain Clerimont. Admirable 

Justice and Morality, all round! you'll say, my
Lady. —For this Purpose, it was necessary, that
Mr. Pounce should find Mr. Humphrey so great a
Fool, that, tho' he never saw him before, he very
easily sets him against his Father, and against his
Cousin Bridget; and all this on the Weddingday,
in order to induce him to make Court to a
Person he tells him of, but never saw: And who
should this Person be, as he tells him, but the
Sister of Fainlove, Clerimont's Man-dress'd Mistress; 
which Sister, however, was to be Fainlove,
or Lucy herself, with a worthy Intent to impose
upon poor Humphrey, as a Wife, this cast-off Mistress
of Clerimont? A just, a generous, an exemplary
Plot this! 
The next Character is an old Maiden Gentlewoman,
Aunt to Miss Bridget, an antiquated
Virgin, who, as Pounce says, has a mighty Affectation
for Youth, and is a great Lover of Men
and Money—and she is set over her Niece as a
Promoter of the Match with Humphrey—Over
this Lady Mr. Pounce has a great Ascendant, half
for sordid Reasons, and half for amorous ones; 
and she makes a thorough ridiculous and improbable
Character. Pounce introduces Captain Clerimont
into the Company of this Aunt and her
Niece; and entertains the former, while the Captain
engages the latter on the Subject of her beloved
Romance. These, with Mrs. Clerimont's Maid
Jenny, are the principal Characters. 
Ineed not, my Lady, take up much of your
Time, or my own, to tell you how they proceed. 
Mr. Clerimont, then, after bearing from his
Wife, what hardly any Gentleman could bear, 

surprises Fainlove as a Man (and a very wicked
Scene it is, in every Part) taking shocking Freedoms
with her: And falling into a feigned Rage,
threatens to kill Fainlove: The Lady at first menaces,
and is haughty and arrogant; but finding
by her Husband's Behaviour to Lucy, whom he
then addresses with Fondness before her Face, that
she is trick'd by a Woman in Man's Habit, in her
Turn would kill the Impostor as Lucy, whom as
Fainlove she try'd to save; and a Scene on this
Occasion occurs, to my thinking, very ridiculous. 
Mr. Clerimont then upbraids her with her Guilt; 
and, what was hardly ever known in Nature, she
reforms instantly on the Spot, and expresses all the
Signs of Contrition imaginable. He forgives and
receives her, guilty as she is in her Intention, her
Person only untainted, and an Adultress in her
Mind, as she would have been in Fact, had Fainlove
been a Man: And a moving Scene, had it
been from proper Motives, follows. Yet, (still
more preposterous, excuse me, Madam) afterwards
she resumes all her travell'd and nonsensical Airs,
all her improbable Follies, to help to support the
Plot in favour of Captain Clerimont, upon Miss
Bridget, and the infamous one of Pounce's and
Mr. Clerimont's against poor Humphrey, the only
innocent Character in the Play, and the only suffering
one; and this latter, as well as the former
Plot, being brought about, a Laughing Scene is
produced, by Sir Harry's soundly cudgelling his
stupid Son, for permitting himself to be so foolishly
drawn in. 
Now, my good Lady, can you see one Character,
and, I think, I have given them justly, fit to 

be set up for an Example in this celebrated Play of
an Author so celebrated? I must own, as I said
before, I was greatly disappointed in my Expectations
of it. There is, indeed, a great deal of
sprightly Wit, and Knowlege of the wicked Part
of the World, display'd in it, as it seems to me,
by what I have heard Mr. B. talk sometimes; but
there is not one Character in it, but what is shockingly
immoral, and, at the same time, either
above or below Nature; so that the Ridicule which
is intended in it, on the bad Characters, cannot, in
my poor Opinion, be just or efficacious. 
For, first, there never, I believe, could be a
Gentleman, so foolishly tender, yet so plottingly
cruel, to his Lady, as Mr. Clerimont. 
There never could be such a very fantastical
Lady, as Mrs. Clerimont. And there is such an
Improbability in the intimate Access, which Lucy
in Man's Cloaths has to her; in that Creature's
lewd Views, yet faithful and generous Conduct in
giving back to Clerimont, who had not provided
for her, 2000l. won of the fantastical Lady; and
yet in her being so little delicate in her Love to
Clerimont, which one would expect should be her
Motive, as to join to trick and marry one of the
greatest Fools in the World; that it was surprising
to me, that it could pass either Author or Audience. 
Then Tipkin's Character is unnaturally, stupidly,
yet knavishly bad. 
Sir Harry Gubbin is a Father, who never could
have his Fellow; and after furiously beating his
Son, is reconciled to his Marriage, as instantly as
Mrs. Clerimont is converted; and that to an unknown 

Person, who appears to him in Man's
Cloaths, for the sake of 3000l. Fortune only, altho'
he had been quarrelling with Tipkin, about
1000l. which he would not give up, out of 10,000l.
which his Son was to have had with Bridget. 
Numps, his Son, is a Character, take it all
together, quite out of Nature and Probability:
'Tis hardly possible, that a Savage, brought up in
a Wood, who never convers'd with Man or Woman,
could be so stupid; and easily might a Poet
form a Plot for a Play, if such a Character could
be admitted, as Numps's. 
The Aunt is credulous and affected beyond Probability
also. 
Miss Bridget delicately indelicate in many
Places, and improbably fantastick in all. 
Pounce shamelessly glorying, and succeeding
in his Villainy, and deeming the Imputation of
the worst of Rogueries to him, as a Panegyrick:
And such Immoralities, mingled with Obscenities,
all thro', that I was glad when the Play was over. 
But yet, to say Truth, there are very pretty
Descriptions, and a great deal of Wit and Humour
in it. The Dialogue is lively; the Painter's
Scene entertaining; and that between Sir Harry
and Tipkin, diverting, tho' low; which, together
with the fantastick Airs of Mrs. Clerimont, and
Miss Bridget, and the farcical Humours of Numps,
make it the less Wonder, that such as did not
attend to Nature, Probability, and Morality, were
struck with the Life and Spirit of the Performance:
And especially as Mr. Wilks, who acted Captain
Clerimont, and Mrs. Oldfield, who acted Miss
Bridget, so incomparably perform'd their Parts, as 

must have sav'd a Play even of a worse Tendency
than the Accomplish'd Fools. 
The Moral I will transcribe, altho', I doubt, it
is a very inapplicable one to the Characters; and
so is far from making Amends for a long Performance,
that in such a Variety of Characters has not
one moral one in it; nor, indeed, is there so much
as one just or generous Design pursued throughout
the Play: 

You've seen th' Extremes of the domestick Life,
A Son too much confin'd—too free a Wife.
By gen'rous Bonds you either should restrain,
And only on their Inclinations gain.

This I call inapplicable, because it was needless
Advice to such Husbands as Mr. Clerimont,
for whom it seems design'd; for he was generous
to Excess, carrying her abroad to Italy and France,
and paying all her Debts of Honour implicitly:
Whence the Name of the Play, The Tender Husband. 

 Wives, to obey, must love—

Clerimont did every thing to make a grateful
Woman love him, before his strange Plot to
reclaim her. 

 —Children revere,
While only Slaves are govern'd by their Fear.

Mrs. Clerimont was not treated like a Slave,
yet is reclaim'd only by Fear. So that the Moral
seems to be calculated for the Numps's (the Fools
and Idiots) and the Sir Harries; Two Characters, 

that, as I humbly apprehend, never were in Nature,
any more, it is to be hoped, than are the rest. 
It looks to me, in short, as if the Author had
forgot the Moral all the way; and being put in
mind of it by some kind Friend, (Mr. Addison,
perhaps) was at a Loss to draw one from such
Characters and Plots as he had produced; and so
put down what came uppermost, for the sake of
Custom, without much Regard to Propriety. And
truly, I should imagine likewise, that the Play was
begun with a Design to draw more amiable Characters,
answering to the Title of The Tender
Husband; but that the Author, being carried
away by the Luxuriancy of a Genius, which he
had not the Heart to prune, on a general Survey
of the Whole, distrusting the Propriety of that
Title, added the under one: With an—OR,
The Accomplish'd Fools, in Justice to his Piece,
and Compliment to his Audience. And, pardon
me, Madam, had he call'd it The Accomplish'd
Knaves, I would not have been angry at him,
because there would have been more Propriety in
the Title. 
I wish I could, for the sake of the Authors,
have praised every Scene of this Play: I hoped to
have Reason for it. Judge then, my dear Lady,
what a Mortification it was to me, not to be able
to say I liked above one, the Painter's Scene,
which too was out of Time, being on the Wedding-day; 
and am forced to disapprove of every Character
in it, and the Views of every one. I am,
dearest Madam, 
Your most obliged Sister and Servant,
P. B. 

