



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Friday, June 2. 
Notwithstanding my studied-for politeness and
complaisance for some days past; and though I
have wanted courage to throw the mask quite aside; 
yet I have made the dear creature more than once
look about her, by the warm, tho' decent expressions
of my passion. I have brought her to own, that I am 

more than indifferent to her: But as to Love, which
I pressed her to acknowlege, What need of acknowlegements
of that sort, when a woman consents to marry? — 
And once repulsing me with displeasure. The proof of
the true love I was vowing for her, was respect, not
freedom. And offering to defend myself, she told me,
that all the conception she had been able to form of a
faulty passion, was, that it must demonstrate itself as
mine sought to do. 
I endeavoured to justify my passion, by laying over-delicacy
at her door. That was not, she said, my
fault, if it were hers. She must plainly tell me, that
I appeared to her incapable of distinguishing what were
the requisites of a pure mind. Perhaps, had the libertine
presumption to imagine, that there was no difference
in heart, nor any but what proceeded from education
and custom, between the pure and the impure— 
And yet custom alone, as she observed, would make
a second nature, as well in good as in bad habits. 
* *
I have just now been called to account for some
innocent liberties which I thought myself intitled to
take before the women; as they suppose us married,
and now within view of consummation. 
I took the lecture very hardly; and with impatience
wish'd for the happy day and hour, when I might
call her all my own, and meet with no check from a
niceness that had no example. 
She looked at me with a bashful kind of contempt. 
I thought it contempt, and required the reason for it; 
not being conscious of offence, as I told her. 
This is not the first time, Mr. Lovelace, said she,
that I have had cause to be displeased with you, when
you, perhaps, have not thought yourself exceptionable. 
—But, Sir, let me tell you, that the married
state, in my eye, is a state of purity, and (I think she
told me) not of licentiousness; so at least, I understood
her. 

Marriage purity, Jack! —Very comical, 'faith— 
Yet sweet dears, half the female world ready to run
away with a rake, because he is a rake; and for no
other reason; nay, every other reason against their
choice. 
But have not you and I, Belford, seen young wives,
who would be thought modest; and when maids,
were fantastically shy; permit freedoms in public from
their lambent husbands, which have shewn, that they
have forgot what belongs either to prudence or decency? 
While every modest eye has sunk under the
shameless effrontery, and every modest face been covered
with blushes for those who could not blush. 
I once, upon such an occasion, proposed to a circle
of a dozen, thus scandalized, to withdraw; since they
must needs see that as well the lady, as the gentleman,
wanted to be in private. This motion had its effect
upon the amorous pair; and I was applauded for the
check given to their licentiousness. 
But, upon another occasion of this sort, I acted a
little more in character. —For I ventured to make an
attempt upon a bride, which I should not have had
the courage to make, had not the unblushing passiveness
with which she received her fond husband's public
toyings (looking round her with triumph rather than
with shame, upon every lady present), incited my
curiosity to know if the same complacency might not
be shewn to a private friend. 'Tis true, I was in honour
obliged to keep the secret. But I never saw the
turtles bill afterwards, but I thought of Number Two
to the same female; and in my heart thanked the
fond husband for the lesson he had taught his wife. 
From what I have said, thou wilt see, that I approve
of my beloved's exception to public loves. That,
I hope, is all the charming Isicle means by marriage-purity. 
From the whole of the above, thou wilt gather,
that I have not been a mere dangler, a Hickman, in 

the passed days, though not absolutely active, and a
Lovelace. 
The dear creature now considers herself as my wife-elect. 
The unsadden'd heart, no longer prudish, will
not now, I hope, give the fable turn to every action
of the man she dislikes not. And yet she must keep
up so much reserve, as will justify past inflexibilities. 
Many an many a pretty soul would yield, were she
not afraid that the man she favoured would think the
worse of her for it. This is also a part of the Rake's
Creed. But should she resent ever so strongly, she
cannot now break with me; since, if she does, there
will be an end of the family reconciliation; and that
in a way highly discreditable to herself. 
Sat. June 3. 
Just returned from Doctors-Commons. I have
been endeavouring to get a licence. Very true, Jack. 
I have the mortification to find a difficulty in obtaining
this all-fettering instrument, as the Lady is of
rank and fortune, and as there is no consent of father
or next friend. 
I made report of this difficulty. It is very right,
she says, that such difficulties should be made. But
not to a man of my known fortune, surely, Jack, tho'
the woman were the daughter of a duke. 
I asked, If she approved of the settlements? She
said, She had compared them with my mother's, and
had no objection. She had written to Miss Howe
upon the subject, she owned; and to inform her of
our present situation (a) . 
* *
Just now, in high good humour, my beloved returned
me the draughts of the settlements; a copy of
which I had sent to Captain Tomlinson. She complimented
me, that she never had any doubt of my 

honour in cases of this nature. —In matters between
man and man nobody ever had, thou knowest. I had
need, thou'lt say, to have some good qualities. 
Great faults and great virtues are often found in the
same person. In nothing very bad, but as to women: 
And did not one of them begin with me (a) ? 
We have held, that women have no souls: I am a
very Jew in this point, and willing to believe they
have not. And if so, to whom shall I be accountable
for what I do to them? Nay, if souls they have,
as there is no sex in Ethereals, nor need of any, what
plea can a lady hold of injuries done her in her lady-state,
when there is an end of her lady-ship? 