


Lady Grandison, To Mrs. Shirley. 


Tuesday morning, Eleven, March 13. 
About two hours ago, Sir Charles received a
Letter from Signor Jeronymo. The man had
rode all night. They are all at Dover. 
Sir Charles is already set out; gone, with four
coaches and six, of our own and friends, for them,
and their attendants; Mr. Lowther with him. Richard
Saunders is left to attend the Count of Belvedere to
the lodgings taken for him. 
The house in Grosvenor-square is ready for the reception
of the rest of the illustrious guests. 
As soon as I can get quieter spirits, I will attend
Lady Clementina, in order to re-assure her, if I find
she has presence of mind enough to hear the news. 
Sir Charles has already induced her to wish the crisis
over. It is a crisis. I am almost as much affected
for her, as she can be for herself. Yet she has not
cruel friends to meet. May the dear Lady keep in
her right mind! 
In what a hurry of spirits I write! You will not
wonder. I have not my grandmamma's steadiness of
mind. Never, never, shall I be like my grandmamma. 
Tuesday, two o'clock. 
In Lady L's closet.] I have, as gently as I could,
broken the news of their safe arrival at Dover, to
Lady Clementina. She began the subject; and said,
She had been praying for the safety of her friends. 
What will become of me, said she, should mishap
befal any one of them? Should the fatigue be 

too much for either my father or mother, their healths
so precarious; or for my Jeronymo, so lately ill? 
After proper prefacings, I hoped, I said, her cares
on that subject would soon be over. Sir Charles had
some intimation of the likelihood of their arrival at a
particular port; and was actually set out with coaches,
in hopes of accommodating them, when they did arrive,
and to bring them to the house which had been
(as she knew before) got ready for their reception. 
She looked by turns on me, and on Lady L. in
speechless terror: At last, Then I am sure, said she,
you know they are come. Tell me, tell me, are
they indeed arrived? And are they all well? 
I owned they were, and at Dover; and waited
there to refresh themselves, and to be informed of her
health and safety before they would proceed further. 
She wept, even to sobbing; inveighed against herself:
Her tears were tears of duty and tenderness. 
She comforted herself, that Sir Charles would be able
to soften their resentments against her; and she was
sure he would make the best conditions for her, that
could be obtained. 
Lord L. is all goodness, all compassion, to her. 
He greatly admires her. But we observe, that there
are some little traces of wildness now-and-then in her
talk, which carries her into high language and exclamation. 
May her mind be quieted! May her intellects
be preserved entire, in the affecting scenes before
her! —I am sent for home in haste. 
Tuesday night. 
Methinks I am half afraid of telling even you,
my grandmamma, at this distance, to whom I was
sent for. It was to the Count of Belvedere. Signor
Sebastiano was with him. Lord G. happened to call
in at St. James's Square, when they arrived; and
sending for me, entertained them till I came. 
I asked Lord G. half out of breath with fear, at 

my first alighting, If he had said any-thing of the
Lady? Not a syllable, said he: I avoided answering
questions. The gentlemen were full of impatience
to know something about her: And this made
me send for you: For, tho' cautioned, I was afraid
of blundering. —Honest, modest, worthy Lord G! — 
I prevailed on them to stay supper with me. Lord G.
was so obliging, as to send home to excuse himself to
his Lady, at my request. 
They are both fine young gentlemen; extremely
polite. We have been told, that the Count is a
handsome man. Indeed he is. Any Lady, with
such a character as be has, if she were not prepossessed,
might like him. He is certainly a gentle-dispositioned
and good-natured man. He looks the man
of quality. He seems not to be above five or six-and-twenty:
Has a foreign aspect, and a complexion
a sallowish brown; yet has a healthy look. His
eyes, however, as I knew his case, appeared to me
to have a cast like those of a man whose mind is
disturbed. 
I behaved to them with the greatest frankness I
could shew. I told them, that Sir Charles set out
in the morning, on the receipt of a Letter from Dover,
for that port, and with what equipages. They gave
but a poor account of the health of the Marchioness:
But if she could but hear good tidings, he said, and
stopt— 
Sir Charles, I answered, would do his utmost to
set their hearts at ease. 
May I not ask a question, madam? said the Count. 
I find your Ladyship knows every-thing of us, and
our affairs. We heard in Italy, that you were all
goodness; and find you to be an angel. I make no
complinent, said he, laying his spread hand on his
heart. 
Lord G. with kind officiousness, said, that was
the universal voice. 

I answered in French, the language in which he
spoke to me—That I had the pleasure of informing
him, that Letters had passed between Lady Clementina
and Sir Charles. The account she gives of herself,
said I, makes us not quite unhappy. 
Makes Us! said the Count to Signor Sebastiano,
in Italian, his hands lifted up: Heavenly goodness! 
I imagined that he thought I understood not that
tongue; and that I might not mislead them into undue
compliments, I said, in my broken-accented
Italian, We all here, Signors, are as much interested
in the health and happiness of Lady Clementina, as
any of her friends in Italy can be. 
They applauded all of us, who were, as they said,
so generously interested in the happiness of one of the
most excellent of women. 
I told the Count, that Sir Charles had, as desired,
provided lodgings for him. I hoped he would find
them convenient, tho' Sir Charles thought them not
befitting his quality. He had, before he set out this
morning (hearing that their Lordships were then probably
on their journey from Dover to London) ordered
his gentleman to attend him to them: You, Signor,
said I, are, if you please, with Signor Juliano,
to be Sir Charles's own guests. We have another
house which will be honoured with the residence of the
Marquis and Marchioness, their Sons, the good Father
Marescotti, and their other friends. 
Good Father Marescotti! repeated the Count—Excellent
Lady Grandison! —But you say well: Father
Marescotti is indeed a good man. 
I have by heart, my Lord, said I, the characters of
all my dear Sir Charles's Italian friends. 
Again the two Lords looked upon each other, as
admiring me. 
Pity, my dear grandmamma, that different nations
of the world, tho' of different persuasions, did
not, more than they do, consider themselves as the 

creatures of one God, the Sovereign of a thousand
worlds! 
The Count expressed great impatience to know
some particulars of Lady Clementina. I took this
opportunity to say, that as I had been informed of
the transcendent piety of the Lady, and of her great
earnestness, from her earliest youth, to take the veil,
I presumed it would forward the good understanding
hoped for, if it were not at present known, that his
Lordship was arrived; and the rather, as several tender
scenes might be expected to pass between her and her
other friends, which perhaps her present (easily to be
supposed) weak spirits, and turn of mind, might with
difficulty enable her to support. 
The Count sighed: But, bowing, said, He came
with a very small retinue, because he would be as
private as possible. He had been for many months
determined to visit England: The family della Porretta,
Signor Jeronymo, in particular, had promised
to visit Sir Charles in it likewise: They should indeed
have chosen a better season for it, had not their care
and concern for one of the most excellent of women
induced them to anticipate their intentions. He was
entirely of my opinion, he added, that his arrival
in England should not at present be known by Lady
Clementina. 
He then, in a very gallant, but modest manner,
owned to my Lord G. and me his passion for her; 
and said, that on the issue of this adventure of the
dear Lady hung his destiny. 
I told him, I had been the more free in giving my
humble advice, as to the keeping secret his Lordship's
arrival, as, but for that reason, I could assure
him Sir Charles would not have permitted his Lordship,
or any of his train, to go into lodgings: And
I mentioned the high regard which I knew Sir Charles
had for the Count of Belvedere. 
I ordered supper to be got early, as I supposed the 

two Lords would be glad to retire soon, after the fatigue
of their journey; for they had set out early in
the morning. I sent a note begging the favour of my
cousin Reeves's company to supper; apologizing, by
the occasion, for the short notice. They were so
kind as to come. They admire the two young noblemen; 
for Signor Sebastiano, as well as the Count, is
a sensible modest young man. Mr. Reeves and they
entered into free conversation in French, which we
all understood, on their country, voyage, and journey
by land. Both gentlemen spoke of Sir Charles,
and his behaviour in Italy, in raptures. 
My cousin Reeves, attended by Saunders, was so
good as to conduct the Count to his lodgings, in his
coach; Sir Charles having all our equipages with him. 
You will soon have another Letter, my dearest
grandmamma, from 
Your ever-dutiful
Harriet Grandison. 

