


Lett.
I.Lovelace, To Belford. In ecstasy on the success of his contrivances.
Well as he loves Clarissa, he would shew her no mercy, if he
thought she preferred any man living to him. Will religiously
observe the Injunctions she laid upon him previous to their
meeting.
II.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. A recriminating conversation between
her and Lovelace. He reminds her of her Injunctions; and, instead of
beseeching her to dispense with them, promises a sacred regard to them.
It is not therefore in her power, she tells Miss Howe, to take her
advice as to speedy Marriage. [A Note on the place, justifying her
conduct, p. 14.] Chuses not to go to any of his Relations. And why.
Is attended by Mrs. Greme, Lord M's housekeeper at the Lawn, who
waits on her to her Sister Sorlings, with whom she consents to lodge.
His looks offend her. Has written to her Sister for her cloaths.
III.Lovelace, To Belford Gives briefly the particulars of his success.
Describes her person and dress on her first meeting him. Extravagant
exultation. Makes Belford question him on the honour of his designs
by her: And answers doubtfully.
IV.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Her sentiments on her narrative. Her
Mother, at the instigation of Antony Harlowe, forbids their correspondence.
Mr. Hickman's zeal to serve them in it. What her
family now pretend, if she had not left them. How they took her
supposed projected flight. Offers her money and cloaths. Would
have her seem to place some little confidence in Lovelace. Her Brother
and Sister will not permit her Father and Uncles to cool.
V. VI.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Advises her to obey her Mother,
who prohibits their correspondence. Declines to accept of her offers
of money: And why. Mr. Lovelace not a polite man. She will be
as ready to place a confidence in him, as he will be to deserve it.
Yet, tricked away by him as she was, cannot immediately treat him
with great complaisance. Blames her for her liveliness to her Mother.
—Incloses the copy of her Letter to her Sister.
VII.Lovelace, To Belford. Prides himself in his arts in the conversations
between them. Is alarmed at the superiority of her talents. Considers
opposition and resistance as a challenge to do his worst. His
artful proceedings with Joseph Leman.
VIII.From the same. Men need only be known to be Rakes, he says,
to recommend themselves to the favour of the Sex. Wishes Miss
Howe were not so well acquainted with Clarissa: And why.
IX.From the same. Intends to set old Antony at Mrs. Howe, to
prevent the correspondence between the young Ladies. Girl, not
Gold, his predominant passion. Raillies Belford on his person and appearance.

Takes humorous notice of the two Daughters of the
Widow-Sorlings.
X.Lovelace, To Belford. Further triumph over the Harlowes. Similitude
of the Spider and Fly. Is for having separate Churches as well
as separate Boarding-schools for the Sexes. The women ought to love
him, he says: And why. Prides himself that they do.
XI.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Particulars of an angry conference
with Lovelace. Seeing her sincerely displeased, he begs the Ceremony
may immediately pass. He construes her bashful silence into anger,
and revows a sacred regard to her injunctions.
XII. XIII. XIV.Lovelace, To Belford. The pleasures of a difficult
chace. Triumphs in the distress and perplexity he gave her by his
artful and parading offer of Marriage.––––His reasonings for and against
doing her justice. Resolves to try her to the utmost. The honour
of the whole Sex concerned in the issue of her trial. Matrimony,
he sees, is in his power, now she is.
XV.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Will not obey her Mother in her prohibition
of their correspondence: And why. Is charmed with her
spirit.
XVI.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Knows not what she can do with
Lovelace. He may thank himself for the trouble he has had on
her account. Did she ever, she asks, make him any promises? Did
she ever receive him as a Lover?
XVII. XVIII.From the same. She calls upon Lovelace to give her a
faithful account of the noises and voices she heard at the garden-door,
which frighted her away with him. His confession and daring hints
in relation to Solmes, and her Brother, and Betty Barnes. She is
terrified.
XIX.Lovelace, To Belford. Rejoices in the stupidity of the Harlowes.
Exults in his capacity for mischief. The condescensions to which he
intends to bring the Lady. Libertine observations to the disadvantage
of women; which may serve as Cautions to the Sex.
XX.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. A conversation with Mr. Lovelace
wholly agreeable. His promises of Reformation. She remembers
to his advantage his generosity to his Rosebud and his Tenants.
Writes to her Aunt Hervey.
XXI. XXII.Lovelace, To Belford. His acknowleged vanity. Accounts
for his plausible behaviour, and specious promises and proposals.
Apprehensive of the correspondence between Miss Howe and Clarissa.
Loves to plague him with out-of-the-way words and phrases.
XXIII.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. How to judge of Lovelace's specious
proposals and promises. Hickman devoted to their service. Yet she
treats him with ridicule.
XXIV.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Lovelace complains, she hears, to
Mrs. Greme, of her adhering to her Injunctions. What means he by
it, she asks, yet forego such opportunities as he has had? She is
punished for her vanity in hoping to be an Example. Blames Miss
Howe for her behaviour to Hickman.
XXV.From the same. Warm dialogues with Lovelace. She is displeased

with him for his affectedly bashful hints of Matrimony. Mutual
recriminations. He looks upon her as his, she says, by a strange
sort of obligation, for having run away with her against her will. Yet
but touches on the edges of Matrimony neither. She is sick of herself.
XXVI.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Mr. Lovelace a perfect Proteus. He
now applauds her for that treatment of him, which before he had
resented; and communicates to her two Letters, one from Lady Betty
Lawrance, the other from Miss Montague. She wonders that he did
not produce those Letters before, as he must know they would be
highly acceptable to her.
XXVII. XXVIII. XXIX. XXX.From the same. The contents of
the Letters from Lady Betty and Miss Montague put Clarissa in good
humour with Mr. Lovelace. He hints at Marriage; but pretends to
be afraid of pursuing the hint. She is earnest with him to leave her:
And why. He applauds her reasonings. Her serious questions, and
his ludicrous answers.—He makes different proposals.—He offers
to bring Mrs. Norton to her. She is ready to blame herself for her
doubts of him: But gives reasons for her caution.—He writes by
her consent to his friend Doleman, to procure lodgings for her in town.
XXXI.Lovelace, To Belford. Glories in his contrivances. Gives
an advantageous description of Clarissa's behaviour. Exults on her
mentioning London. None but impudent girls, he says, should run
away with a man. His further views, plots, and designs.
XXXII.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Humorously touches on her reproofs
in relation to Hickman. Observations on smooth Love. Lord
M's family greatly admire her. Approves of her spirited treatment
of Lovelace, and of her going to London. Hints at the narrowness
of her own Mother. Advises her to keep fair with Lovelace.
XXXIII. XXXIV.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Wonders not that her
Brother has weight to make her Father irreconcileable.—Copy
of Mr. Doleman's Answer about London lodgings. Her caution in
her choice of them. Lovelace has given her five guineas for Hannah.
Other instances of his considerateness. Not displeased with her present
prospects.
XXXV.Lovelace, To Belford. Explains what is meant by Doleman's
Answer about the lodgings. Makes Belford object to his
scheme, that he may answer the objections. Exults. Swells.
Despises every-body. Importance of the Minutiæ. More of his arts,
views, and contrivances.
XXXVI.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Acquaints her with a scheme
formed by her Brother and Captain Singleton, to carry her off. Hickman's
silent charities. She despises all his Sex, as well as him. Ill terms
on which her own Father and Mother lived. Extols Clarissa for her
domestic good qualities. Particulars of a great contest with her Mother,
on their correspondence. Has been slapt by her. Observations on
managing Wives.
XXXVII. XXXVIII. XXXIX.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. A strong remonstrance
on her behaviour to her Mother: In which she lays
down the duty of Children. Accuses her of want of generosity to
Hickman. Further excuses herself on declining to accept of her

money-offers. Proposes a condition on which Mrs. Howe may see all
they write.
XL.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Her Mother rejects the proposed condition. Miss Howe takes thankfully her reprehensions: But will
continue the correspondence. Some excuses for herself. Humorous
story of game-chickens.
XLI.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Lovelace communicates her Brother's
and Singleton's project; but treats it with seeming contempt.
She asks his advice what to do upon it. This brings on an offer of
Marriage from him. How it went off.
XLII.Lovelace, To Belford. He confesses his artful intentions in the
offer of Marriage: Yet had like, he says, to have been caught in
his own snares.
XLIII.Joseph Leman, To Mr. Lovelace. With intelligence of a design
formed against him by the Harlowes. Joseph's vile hypocrisy, and
selfishness.
XLIV.Lovelace. In Answer. Story of Miss Betterton. Boasts of his
treatment of his mistresses. The artful use he makes of Joseph's
intelligence.
XLV.Clarissa, To her Aunt Hervey. Complains of her silence.
Hints at her not having designed to go away with Lovelace. She will
open her whole heart to her, if she encourage her so to do, by the
hopes of a reconciliation.
XLVI.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Observations on Lovelace's Meanness,
Pride, and Revenge. Politeness not to be expected from him.
She raves at him for the artful manner in which he urges Clarissa
to marry him. Advises her how to act in her present situation.
XLVII.Belford, To Lovelace. Becomes a warm advocate for the Lady.
Gives many instructive reasons to enforce his arguments in her favour.
XLVIII.Mrs. Hervey, To Clarissa. A severe and cruel Letter in answer
to hers, No xlv. It was not designed, she says, absolutely to force
her to marry to her dislike.
XLIX.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Her deep regret, on this intelligence, for
having met Lovelace. The finer sensibilities make not happy. Her
fate too visibly in his power. He is unpolite, cruel, insolent, unwise,
a trifler with his own happiness. Her reasons why she less likes him
than ever. Her soul his soul's superior. Her fortitude. Her prayer.
L. LI.From the same. Now indeed is her heart broken, she says. A
solemn curse laid upon her by her Father.—Her Sister's barbarous
Letters on the occasion.
LII.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. A Letter full of generous consolation
and advice. Her friendly vow. Sends her fifty guineas in the leaves
of a Norris's Miscellanies.
LIII.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. A faithful friend the medicine of life.
She is just setting out for London. Lovelace has offered Marriage to
her in so unreserved a manner, that she wishes she had never written
with diffidence of him. Is sorry it was not in her power to comply
with his earnest solicitations. Returns her Norris. And why.

LIV. LV.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Sorry she has returned her
Norris. Wishes she had accepted of Lovelace's unreserved offer of
Marriage. Believes herself to have a sneaking kindness for Hickman:
And why.—She blames Mrs. Harlowe: And why.
In Answer to No. liv. Clarissa states the difference in the characters of
Mr. Lovelace and Mr. Hickman; and tells her, that her motives
for suspending Marriage were not merely ceremonious ones. Regrets
Mrs. Howe's forbidding the correspondence between them. Her dutiful
apology for her own Mother. Lesson to Children.
LVI.Lovelace, To Belford. Thinks he shall be inevitably manacled
at last. The Lady's extreme illness. Her filial piety gives her dreadful
faith in a Father's curses. She lets not Miss Howe know how very
ill she was. His vows of Marriage bring her back to life. Absolutely
in earnest in those vows. [The only time he was so.] He can
now talk of Love and Marriage without check. Descants upon Belford's
Letter, No. xlvii.
LVII.Lovelace, To Belford. Is setting out for London. A struggle with
his heart. Owns it to be a villain of a heart. A fit of strong but
transitory remorse. If he do marry, he doubts he shall have a vapourish
Wife. Thinks it would be better for both not to marry. His Libertine
reasons. Lessons to the Sex.
LVIII.From the same. They arrive at Mrs. Sinclair's. Sally Martin
and Polly Horton set upon him. He wavers in his good purposes.
Dorcas Wykes proposed, and reluctantly accepted for a servant, till
Hannah can come. Dorcas's character. He has two great points to
carry. What they are.
LIX.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Likes her lodgings; but not greatly
the Widow. Chides Miss Howe for her rash tho' friendly vow.
Catalogue of good books she finds in her closet. Utterly dissatisfied
with him for giving out to the women below, that they were privately
married. Has a strong debate with him on this subject. He offers
Matrimony to her, but in such a manner, that she could not close with
his offer. Her caution as to doors, windows, and seals of Letters.
LX.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Her expedient to correspond with each
other every day. Is glad she had thoughts of marrying him had he
repeated his offer. Wonders he did not.
LXI.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Breakfasts with him and the Widow,
and her two Nieces. Observations upon their behaviour and looks.
He makes a merit of leaving her, and hopes, on his Return,
that she will name his happy day. She is willing to make the best
constructions in his favour.
In his next Letter (Extracts from which are only given) he triumphs on
the points he has carried. Stimulated by the women, he resumes his
resolution to try her to the utmost.
LXII.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Lovelace returns the next day. She
thinks herself meanly treated, and is angry. He again urges Marriage; 
but before she can return an answer, makes another proposal:
Yet she suspects not that he means a studied delay. He is in treaty
for Mrs. Fretchville's house. Description of it. An inviting opportunity
offers for him to propose Matrimony to her. She wonders he
let it slip. He is very urgent for her company at a collation he is to

give to four of his select friends, and Miss Partington. He gives an
account who Miss Partington is.
In Mr. Lovelace's next Letter he invites Belford, Mowbray, Belton, and
Tourville, to his collation. His humorous instructions for their behaviour
before the Lady. Has two views in getting her into their
company.
LXIII.Lovelace, To Belford. Has been at church with Clarissa. The
Sabbath a charming institution. The Text startles him. Nathan
the prophet he calls a good ingenious fellow. She likes the women
better than she did at first. She reluctantly consents to honour his
collation with her presence. Longs to have their opinions of his fair
prize. Describes her to great advantage.
LXIV.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. She praises his good behaviour at St.
Paul's. Is prevailed on to dine with Mrs. Sinclair and her Nieces.
Is better pleased with them than she thought she should be. Blames
herself for her readiness to censure, where reputation is concerned.
Her charitable allowances on this head. This day an agreeable day.
Interprets every-thing she can fairly interpret in Mr. Lovelace's favour.
She could prefer him to all the men she ever knew, if he would
always be what he had been that day. Is determined, however, to be
governed in her affections, as much as possible, by true merit, and by
deeds. Dates again, and is offended at Miss Partington's being introduced
to her, and at his making her yield to be present at his intended
collation.
LXV.From the same. Disgusted with her Evening. Characterizes his
four companions. Likes not Miss Partington's behaviour.
LXVI.From the same. An attempt to induce her to admit Miss Partington
to a share in her bed for that night. She refuses. Her
reasons. Is highly dissatisfied.
LXVII.From the same. Has received an angry Letter from Mrs.
Howe, forbidding her to correspond with her Daughter. She advises
compliance, tho' against herself; and, to induce her to it, makes the
best of her present prospects.
LXVIII.Miss Howe. In Answer. Flames out upon this step of her
Mother. Insists upon continuing the correspondence. Her menaces
if Clarissa write not. Raves against Lovelace. But blames her for
not obliging Miss Partington: And why. Advises her to think of
Settlements. Likes Lovelace's proposal of Mrs. Fretchville's house.
LXIX.Clarissa. In Reply. Terrified at her menaces, she promises to
continue writing. Beseeches her to learn to subdue her passions. Has
just received her cloaths.
LXX.Mr. Hickman, To Clarissa. Miss Howe, he tells her, is uneasy
for the vexation she has given her. If she will write on as
before, Miss Howe will not think of doing what she is so apprehensive
of. He offers her his most faithful Services.