



Miss Cl. Harlowe, To the Rev. Dr. Lewen. 

Sat. Aug. 19. 
Reverend and Dear Sir,
I thought, till I received your affectionate and welcome
letter, that I had neither father, uncle, brother left; 
nor hardly a friend among my former favourers of your
sex. Yet, knowing you so well, and having no reason to
upbraid myself with a faulty will, I was to blame (even
although I had doubted the continuance of your good opinion)
to decline the tryal whether I had forfeited it or
not; and if I had, whether I could not, honourably, re-instate
myself in it. 
But, Sir, it was owing to different causes that I did not; 
partly to shame, to think how high, in my happier days, I
stood in your esteem, and how much I must be sunk in it,
since those so much nearer in relation to me, gave me up; 
partly to deep distress, which makes the humbled heart
diffident; and made mine afraid to claim the kindred mind
in yours, which would have supplied to me, in some measure,
all the dear and lost relations I have named. 
Then, So loth, as I sometimes was, to be thought to
want to make a party against those whom both duty and
inclination bid me reverence: So long trailed on between
hope and doubt: So little mine own mistress at one time; 
so fearful of making or causing mischief, at another; and
not being encouraged to hope, by your kind notice, that my
application to you would be acceptable;—apprehending,
that my relations had engaged your silence at least (a) . 
These—But why these unavailing retrospections
now? I was to be unhappy—in order to be happy; that
is my hope: —Resigning, therefore, to That hope, I will,
without any further preamble, write a few lines (if writing 

to you, I can write but a few) in answer to the subject of
your kind letter. 
Permit me, then, to say, That I believe your arguments
would have been unanswerable in almost every other case
of This nature, but in That of the unhappy Clarissa
Harlowe. 
It is certain, that creatures who cannot stand the shock
of public shame, should be doubly careful how they expose
themselves to the danger of incurring private guilt, which
may possibly bring them to it: But as to myself, suppose
there were no objections from the declining way I am in
as to my health; and supposing I could have prevailed upon
myself to appear against This man, was there not room to
apprehend, that the end so much wished for by my friends,
(to wit, his condign punishment) would not have been obtained,
when it came to be seen, that I had consented to
give him a clandestine meeting; and, in consequence of
that, had been weakly tricked out of myself; and further
still, had not been able to avoid living under one roof with
him for several weeks; which I did, not only without complaint,
but without cause of complaint. 
Little advantage in a court (perhaps, bandied about, and
jested profligately with) would some of those pleas in my
favour have been, which out of court, and to a private and
serious audience, would have carried the greatest weight
against him—Such, particularly, as the infamous methods
to which he had recourse. 
It would, no doubt, have been a ready retort from
every mouth, that I ought not to have thrown myself into
the power of such a man, and that I ought to take for my
pains what had befallen me. 
But had the prosecution been carried on to effect, and
had he even been sentenced to death, can it be thought,
that his family would not have had interest enough to obtain
his pardon for a crime thought too lightly of, though
one of the greatest that can be committed against a creature
valuing her honour above her life? —While I had
been censured as pursuing with sanguinary views a man
who offered me early all the reparation in his power to
make? 

And had he been pardoned, would he not then have been
at liberty to do as much mischief as ever? 
I dare say, Sir, such is the assurance of the man upon
whom my unhappy destiny threw me; and such his inveteracy
to my family (which would then have appeared to
be justified by their known inveteracy to him, and by their
earnest endeavours to take away his life) that he would
not have been sorry to have had an opportunity to confront
me and my father, uncles, and brother, at the Bar of a
court of justice, on such an occasion. In which case,
would not, on his acquittal, or pardon, resentments have
been reciprocally heightened? And then would my brother,
or my cousin Morden, have been more secure than
now? 
How do these considerations aggravate my fault? My
motives, at first, were not indeed blameable: But I had
forgotten the excellent caution, which yet I was not ignorant
of, That we ought not to do evil that good may come
of it. 
In full conviction of the purity of my heart, and of the
firmness of my principles (Why may I not, thus called
upon, say what I am conscious of, and yet, without faulty
pride; since all is but a duty, and I should be utterly inexcusable,
could I not justly say what I do?) In this full conviction,
he has offered me marriage. He has avowed his
penitence: A sincere penitence I have reason to think it,
tho' perhaps not a Christian one. And his noble relations,
(kinder to the poor sufferer than her own) on the same
conviction, and his own not ungenerous acknowlegements,
have joined to intercede with me to forgive and
accept of him. Altho' I cannot comply with the latter part
of their intercession, have not you, Sir, from the best rules,
and from the divinest example, taught me to forgive injuries? 
The injury I have received from him is indeed of the
highest nature, and it was attended with circumstances of
unmanly baseness, and premeditation; yet, I bless God,
it has not tainted my mind; it has not hurt my morals. 
No thanks, indeed, to the wicked man, that it has not. No
vile courses have followed it. My will is unviolated. The 

evil (respecting myself, and not my friends) is merely personal. 
No credulity, no weakness, no want of vigilance,
have I to reproach myself with. I have, thro' grace,
triumphed over the deepest machinations. I have escaped
from him. I have renounced him. The man whom once
I could have loved, I have been enabled to despise: And
shall not charity complete my triumph? And shall I not
enjoy it? —And where would be my triumph, if he deserved
my forgiveness? —Poor man! He has had a loss in losing
me! I have the pride to think so, because I think I know
my own heart. I have had none in losing him! 
But I have another plea to make, which alone would
have been enough (as I presume) to answer the contents
of your very kind and friendly letter. 
I know, my dear and reverend friend, the spiritual guide
and director of my happier days! I know, that you will allow
of my endeavour to bring myself to this charitable disposition,
when I tell you how near I think myself to that
great and awful moment, in which, and even in the ardent
preparation to which, every sense of indignity or injury, that
concerns not the immortal soul, ought to be absorbed in
higher and more important contemplations. 
Thus much for myself. 
And for the satisfaction of my friends and favourers,
Miss Howe is sollicitous to have all those letters and materials
preserved, which will set my whole story in a true
light. The good Dr. Lewen is one of the principal of those
friends and favourers. 
The warning that may be given from those papers to
all such young creatures as may have known or heard of
me, may be more efficacious, as I humbly presume to think,
to the end wished for, than my appearance could have
been in a court of justice, pursuing a doubtful event, under
the disadvantages I have mentioned. And if, my dear and
good Sir, you are now, on considering every thing, of this
opinion, and I could know it, I should consider it as a particular
felicity; being as sollicitous as ever to be justified
in what I may, in your eyes. 
I am sorry, Sir, that your indisposition has reduced you
to the necessity of writing upon your pillow. But how
much am I obliged to that kind and generous concern for 

me, which has impelled you, as I may say, to write a letter,
containing so many paternal lines, with such inconvenience
to yourself! 
May the Almighty bless you, dear and reverend Sir, for
all your goodness to me, both of now, and of long standing! 
Continue to esteem me to the last, as I do, and will,
venerate you! And let me bespeak your prayers; the continuance,
I should say, of your prayers; for I doubt not
that I have always had them: And to them, perhaps, has
in part been owing, (as well as to your pious precepts thro'
my earlier youth) that I have been able to make the stand
I have made; altho' every thing that you prayed for has
not been granted to me, by that Divine Wisdom, which
knows what is best for its poor creatures. 
My prayers for you are, That it will please God to restore
you to your affectionate flock; and after as many
years of life as shall be for His service, and to your own
comfort, give us a happy meeting in those regions of blessedness,
which you have taught me, as well by example, as
by precept, to aspire to! 
Clarissa Harlowe. 