



From Mr. B. In Answer to the preceding. 


Dear Sir Simon,
You cannot but believe, that I was much
surprised at your Letter, complaining of
the Behaviour of my Wife. I could no more
have expected such a Complaint from such a 

Gentleman, than I could, that she would have deserved
it: And I am very sorry on both Accounts. 
I have talked to her in such a Manner, that, I dare
say, she will never give you like Cause to appeal to
me. 
It happened, that the Criminal herself received your
Letter from her Servant, and brought it to me in my
Closet, and, making her Honours, (for I can't say but
she is very obliging to me, tho' she takes such saucy
Freedoms with my Friends) away she tripp'd; and I,
inquiring for her, when, with Surprize, as you may
believe, I had read your Charge, found she was gone
to visit a poor sick Neighbour, of which indeed she
had before appris'd me, because she took the Chariot; 
but I had forgot it in my Wrath. 
'Twas well for her, that she was not in the Way; 
perhaps I should have taken more severe Methods
with her in my first Emotions; and I long'd for her
Return: And there is another Well-for-her too in her
Case; for one would be loth to spoil a Son and Heir,
you know, Sir Simon, before we see whether the
little Varlet may deserve one's Consideration. 
I mention these Things, that you may observe, it
was not owing to any Regard for the Offender herself,
that I did not punish her as much as injur'd
Friendship requir'd at my Hands. 
At last, in she came, with that sweet Composure in
her Face which results from a Consciousness of doing
generally just and generous Things; altho' in this Instance
she has so egregiously err'd, that it behoves me
(as well in Justice to my Friend, as Policy to myself; 
for who knows whither first Faults may lead, if not
checked in time?) to nip such Boldness in the Bud. 
And indeed the Moment I beheld the Charmer of
my Heart, (for I do love her too well, that's certain)
all my Anger was disarm'd; and had the Offence regarded
myself, I must have forgiven her, in spite of 

all my meditated Wrath. But it behov'd me in a
Friend's Case not to be soon subdu'd by a too partial
Fondness: I resumed therefore that Sternness and
Displeasure which her Entrance had almost dissipated. 
I took her Hand: Her charming Eye (you know
what an Eye she has, Sir Simon) quivered at my
over-clouded Aspect, and her Lips, half-drawn to a
Smile, trembled with Apprehension of a Countenance
so changed from what she left it. 
And then, all stiff and stately as I could look, did
I accost her: Come along with me, Pamela, to my
Closet. I want to talk with you. 
Dear Sir! good Sir! what's the Matter? what
have I done? 
We entered. I sat down, still holding her unsteady
Hand, and her Pulse fluttering under my Finger, like
a dying Bird. 
'Tis well, said I, 'tis well, your present Condition
pleads for you; and I must not carry what I have to
say too far, for Considerations less in your Favour,
than for one unseen: But I have great Complaints
against you. 
Against me, Sir! —What have I done? Let me
know, dear good Sir! looking round, with her half-affrighted
Eyes, this way and that, on the Books, and
Pictures, and on me, by Turns. 
You shall know soon, said I, the Crime you have
been guilty of. 
Pray let me, Sir! –––This Closet, I hoped, would
not be a second Time Witness to the Flutter you put
me in. 
There hangs a Tale, Sir Simon, that I am not very
fond of relating, since it gave Beginning to the
Triumphs of this*  little Sorceress. 

I still held one Hand, and she stood before me, as
Criminals ought to do before their Judge; but said,
I see, Sir, sure I do, or what will else become of
me! less Severity in your Eyes than you affect to put
on in your Countenance. Dear Sir, let me know
my Fault! I will repent, acknowlege and amend:
Let me but know it. 
You must have great Presence of Mind, Pamela,
reply'd I, such is the Nature of your Fault, if you
can look me in the Face, when I tell it you. 
Then let me, said the irresistible Charmer, hiding
her Face in my Bosom, and putting her other Arm
about my Neck; let me thus, my Mr. B. hide this
guilty Face, while I hear my Fault told; and I will
not seek to extenuate it, but by my Tears, and my
Penitence. 
I could hardly hold out. What insatuating Creatures
are these Women, when they can think it thus
worth their while to sooth and calm the Tumults of
an angry Heart! When, instead of scornful Looks
darted in Return for angry ones, Words of Defiance
for Words of Peevishness, persisting to defend one
Error by another, and returning vehement Wrath for
slight Indignation, and all the hostile Provocations of
the Marriage Warfare; they can thus hide their
dear Faces in our Bosoms, and wish but to know
their Faults, to amend them! 
I could hardly, I say, resist the sweet Girl's Behaviour; 
nay, I believe I did, unawares to myself, and in
Defiance of my resolv'd Displeasure, press her Fore-head
with my Lips, as the rest of her Face was hid
on my Breast: But, considering it was the Cause of
my Friend that I was to assert, my injured Friend,
wounded and insulted, in so various a Manner, by
the fair Offender, thus haughtily spoke I to the trembling
Mischief, in a Pomp of Style theatrically tragick: 

I will not, too inadvertent and undistinguishing
Pamela, keep you long in Suspense, for the sake of
a Circumstance, that, on this Occasion, ought to
give you as much Joy, as it has, till now, given
me—Since it becomes an Advocate in your Favour,
when otherwise you might expect a very
severe Treatment. Know then, that the Letter you
gave me before you went out, is a Letter from a
Friend, a Neighbour, a worthy Neighbour, complaining
of your Behaviour to him; —no other than
Sir Simon Darnford, (for I would not amuse her too
much) a Gentleman I must always respect, and whom,
as my Friend, I expected you should: Since by the
Value a Wife expresses for one esteemed by her
Husband, whether she thinks so well of him herself,
or not, a Man ought always to judge of the Sincerity
of her Regards to himself. 
She raised her Head at once on this: Thank
Heav'n! said she, it is no worse! —I was at my Wits
End almost, in Apprehension: But I know how this
must be. —Dear Sir, How could you frighten me
so. —I know how all this is I—I can now look you
in the Face, and hear all that Sir Simon can charge
me with: For I am sure, I have not so affronted
him, as to make him angry indeed. And truly, (ran
she on, secure of Pardon, as she seem'd to think)
I should respect Sir Simon, not only as your Friend,
but on his own Account, if he was not so sad a
Rake at a Time of Life— 
Then I interrupted her, you must needs think,
Sir Simon; for how could I bear to hear my worthy
Friend so freely treated? —How now, Pamela!
said I; and is it thus, by repeating your Fault, that
you atone for it? Do you think I can bear to hear
my Friend so freely treated? 
Indeed, said she, I do respect Sir Simon very
much, as your Friend, permit me to repeat; but 

cannot for his wilful Failings. Would it not be, in
some measure, to approve of faulty Conversation, if
one can hear it, and not discourage it, when the Occasion
comes in so pat? —And, indeed, I was glad of
an Opportunity, continued she, to give him a little
Rub; I must needs own it: But if it displeases you,
or has made him angry in Earnest, I am sorry for it,
and will be less bold for the future. 
Read then, said I, the heavy Charge, and I'll return
instantly to hear your Answer to it. So I went
from her, for a few Minutes. 
But, would you believe it, Sir Simon? she seem'd,
on my Return, very little concerned at your just
Complaints. —What self-justifying Minds have the
meekest of these Women! —Instead of finding her in
repentant Tears, as one might have expected, she
took your angry Letter for a jocular one, and I had
great Difficulty to convince her of the Heinousness
of her Fault, or the Reality of your Anger. Upon
which, being determin'd to have Justice done to my
Friend, and a due Sense of her own great Error impress'd
upon her, I began thus: 
Pamela, Pamela, take heed, that you do not suffer
the Purity of your own Mind, in Breach of your Charity,
to make you too rigorous a Censurer of other
Peoples Actions: Don't be so puff'd up with your
own Perfections, as to imagine, that, because other
Persons allow themselves Liberties you cannot take,
therefore they must be wicked. Sir Simon is a Gentleman
who indulges himself in a pleasant Vein, and,
I believe, as well as you, has been a great Rake and
Libertine (you'll excuse me, Sir Simon, because I
am taking your Part): But what then? You see it
is all over with him now: You see, he says himself,
that he must, and therefore he will, be virtuous: And
is a Man for ever to hear of the Faults of his Youth,
when he himself is so willing to forget them? 

Ah! but, Sir, Sir, said the bold Slut, can you say
he is willing to forget them? —Does he not repine
here in this very Letter, that he must forsake them; 
and does he not plainly cherish the Inclination, when
he owns—She hesitated—Owns what? —You know
what I mean, Sir; and I need not speak it: And can
there well be a more censurable Character? —Then,
dear Sir, before his Maiden Daughters! before his
virtuous Lady! before Any-body!––– What a sad thing
is this, at a Time of Life, which should afford a
better Example! 
But, dear Sir, continu'd the bold Prattler, (taking
Advantage of a Silence that was more owing to Displeasure
than Approbation) let me, for I would not
be censorious, (No, not she! In the very Act of
Censoriousness to say this! let me) offer but one thing:
Don't you think, Sir Simon himself would be loth to
be thought a reform'd Gentleman? Don't you see
the Delight he takes, when he speaks of his former
Pranks, as if he was sorry he could not play them
over again? See but how he simpers, and injoys, as
one may say, the Relations of his own rakish Actions,
when he tells a bad Story!––– And have you not seen
how often he has been forced to take his Handker-chief
to wipe the Outside of his Mouth, tho' the
Inside wanted it most, when he has wounded a Lady's
Ears, and turn'd, as it were, his own faulty Heart
inside out? —Indeed, Sir, I am afraid, so bad in this
way is your worthy Neighbour, that he would account
it a Disgrace to him to be thought reform'd:
And how then can I abuse the Gentleman, by representing
him in a Light in which he loves to be considered? 
But, said I, were this the Case, (for I profess, Sir
Simon, I was at a grievous Loss to defend you) for
you to write all these free things against a Father to
his Daughter, is that right, Pamela? 

O Sir! the good Gentleman himself has taken
care, that such a Character as I presum'd to draw to
Miss of her Papa, was no strange one to her. You have
seen yourself, Mr. B. whenever his arch Leers, and
the humourous Attitude in which he puts himself on
those Occasions, have taught us to expect some
shocking Story, how his Lady and Daughters (us'd
to him, as they are) have suffer'd in their Apprehensions
of what he would say, before he spoke it: How,
particularly, dear Miss Darnford has look'd at me
with Concern, desirous, as it were, if possible, to
save her Papa from the Censure, which his faulty
Expressions must naturally bring upon him. And,
dear Sir, is it not a sad thing for a young Lady, who
loves and honours her Papa, to observe that he is
discrediting himself, and wants the Example he
ought to give? And, pardon me, Sir, for smiling
on so serious an Occasion, continu'd she; but is it
not a fine Sight, do you think, to see a Gentleman,
as we have more than once seen Sir Simon, when he
has thought proper to read a Passage or so, in some
bad Book, pulling off his Spectacles, to talk filthily? 
Methinks, I see him now, added the bold Slut,
splitting his arch Face, with a broad Laugh, shewing
a Mouth, with hardly a Tooth in it, while he is
making obscene Remarks upon what he has read.––– 
And then the dear Saucyface laugh'd out, to bear
me Company; for I could not, for the Soul of me,
avoid laughing heartily at the Figure she brought to
my Mind, which I have seen my old Friend make,
on two or three Occasions of this sort, with his dismounted
Spectacles, his arch Mouth, and Gums of
shining Jet, succeeding those of polish'd Ivory, of
which he often boasts, as one Ornament of his
youthful Days. —And I the rather in my Heart, Sir
Simon, gave you up, because, when I was a sad Fellow,
it was always a Maxim with me, to endeavour 

to touch a Lady's Heart without wounding her Ears. 
And, indeed, I found my Account sometimes in observing
it. 
But, resuming my Gravity, Hussy, said I, do you
think I will have my old Friend thus made the Subject
of your Ridicule? –––Suppose a Challenge should
have ensu'd between us on your Account—What
might have been the Issue of it? To see an old Gentleman,
stumping, as he says, on Crutches, to sight
a Duel in Defence of his wounded Honour! A
pretty Sight this would have afforded, would it not? 
And what (had any one met him on the Way) could
he have said he was going to do? Don't you consider,
that a Man is answerable for the Faults of his
Wife? And, if my Fondness for you would have
made me deny doing Justice to my Friend, and, on
the contrary, to resolve in your behalf to give him
a Meeting, and he had flung his Crutch at my Head,
as he did the Book at his Daughter's, what might
have been the Consequence, think you? 
Very bad, Sir, said she, to be sure; I see that,
and am sorry for it: For had you carry'd off Sir
Simon's Crutch as a Trophy, the poor Gentleman
must have lain sighing and groaning, like a wounded
Soldier in the Field of Battle, till another had been
brought him, to have stump'd home with. 
But, dear Sir Simon, I have brought this Matter
to an Issue, that will, I hope, make all easy: And
that is this ––– Miss Polly, and my Pamela, shall both
be punish'd as they deserve, if it be not your own
Fault. I am told, that the Sins of your Youth don't
sit so heavily upon your Limbs, as they do in
your Imagination; and I believe Change of Air, and
the Gratification of your Revenge, a fine Help to
such lively Spirits as yours! will set you up. You
shall then take Coach, and bring your pretty Criminal
to mine; and when we have them together, they 

shall humble themselves before us, and it shall be in
your Power to absolve or punish them, as you shall
see proper. For I cannot bear to have my worthy
Friend insulted in so heinous a manner by a couple
of saucy Girls, who, if not taken down in time,
may proceed from Fault to Fault, till there will be
no Living with them. 
If (to be still more serious) your Lady and you
will lend Miss Darnford to my Pamela's Wishes,
whose Heart is set upon the Hope of her wintering
with us in Town, you will lay an Obligation upon us
both; which will be acknowleged with great Gratitude,
by, Dear Sir, 
Your affectionate and humble Servant. 

