


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Monday, February 6. 
And so my Uncle Selby, you tell me, is making
observations in writing, on my letters; and waits
for nothing more to begin with me than my conclusion
of the conversations that offered at Lady Betty's. 
And is it expected that I should go on furnishing
weapons against myself? —It is. 
Well; with all my heart. As long as I can contribute
to his amusement; as long as I know that he
rather sometimes delights to say what may be said, than
what he really thinks; as long as I have my good
Aunt Selby for my advocate; as long as my Grandmamma
is pleased and diverted with what I write; 
as well as with his pleasantries on her girl; and as
long as you, my Lucy, stand up for your Harriet; 
I will proceed; and when my measure is full, and
runs over, in his opinion, then let him ascribe vanity
and what he pleases to me. I am but a woman: And
he knows that I must love him the better for his
stripes. Only let him take care, that, when he lays
at my door faults of which I think I can acquit myself,
he increases not in me the vanity he is so ready to
attribute to me. 
Well, but will you not, my Harriet, methinks you
ask, write with less openness, with more reserve, in
apprehension of the rod which you know hangs over
your head? 

Indeed I will not. It is my glory, that I have not
a thought in my heart which I would conceal from
any one whom it imported to know it, and who would
be gratified by the revealing of it. And yet I am
a little chagrin'd at the wager which you tell me
my Uncle has actually laid with my Grandmamma,
that I shall not return from London with a sound
heart. 
And does he teaze you, my Lucy, on this subject,
with reminding you of your young partiality for Captain
Duncan, in order to make good his assertion of
the susceptibility of us all? 
Why so let him. And why should you deny, that
you were susceptible of a natural passion? You must
not be prudish, Lucy. If you are not, all his raillery
will lose its force. What better assurance can I give
to my Uncle, and to all my friends, that if I were
caught, I would own it, than by advising you not to
be ashamed to confess a sensibility which is no disgrace,
when duty and prudence are our guides, and the
object worthy? 
Your man indeed was not worthy, as it proved; 
but he was a very specious creature; and you knew
not his bad character, when you suffered liking to grow
into love. But when the Love-fever was at the height,
did you make any-body uneasy at your passion? Did
you run to woods and groves, to record it on the
barks of trees? —No! —You sighed in silence indeed:
But it was but for a little while. I got your secret
from you; not, however, till it betray'd itself in your
pined countenance; and then the man's discover'd unworthiness,
and your own discretion, enabled you to
conquer a passion to which you had given way, supposing
it unconquerable, because you thought it would
cost you pains to contend with it. 
As to myself, you know I have hitherto been on my
guard. I have been careful ever to shut the door of
my heart against the blind deity, the moment I could 

imagine him setting his incroaching foot on the threshhold,
which I think liking may be called. Had he once
gained entrance, perhaps I might have come off but
simply. 
But I hope I am in the less danger of falling in love
with any man, as I can be civil and courteous to all. 
When a stream is sluiced off into several chanels, there
is the less fear that it will overflow its banks. I
really think I never shall be in love with any-body,
till duty adds force to the lambent flame. 
Excuse me, Lucy. I do now-and-then, you know,
get into a boasting humour. But then my punishment,
as in most other cases, follows my fault: My
Uncle pulls me down, and shews me, that I am not
half so good as the rest of my friends think me. 
You tell me, that Mr. Greville will be in London
in a very few days. I can't help it. He pretends
business, you say; and (since that calls him up) intends
to give himself a month's pleasure in town, and to
take his share of the public entertainments. Well,
so let him. But I hope that I am not to be either his
business or entertainment. After a civil neighbourly
visit, or so, I hope, I shall not be tormented with
him. 
What happened once betwixt Mr. Fenwick and
him gave me pain enough; exposed me enough, surely! 
A young woman, tho' without her own fault, made
the occasion of a rencounter between two men of fortune,
must be talked of too much for her own liking,
or she must be a strange creature. What numbers
of people has the unhappy rashness of those two
men brought to stare at me? And with what difficulty
did my Uncle and Mr. Deane bring them into so odd
a compromise, as they at last came into, to torment
me by joint consent, notwithstanding all I could say to
them; which was the only probable way, shocking
creatures! to prevent murder? —And may I not be apprehensive
of what may happen, should Sir Hargrave 

persist in his present way of thinking? —Mr. Greville
is a rash creature; and Sir John Allestree says, Sir
Hargrave wants no resolution. 
I suppose Mr. Fenwick will come up, if the other
does. But pray, my Lucy, let them know—Yet
should you tell them that I am greatly averse to seeing
them, and I will not see them if I can help it; that
will be giving them consequence in their own opinion; 
and as the one pleads business, it will be, in the interpretation
of so bold a man as Mr. Greville, making
myself a part of it; and denying his visit before it is
offered: They must, in short, do as they will; if
they are resolved to haunt me at the public places to
which I am to go, I am not so fond of shew and glitter,
but I can forbear going often to them. 
But to have done with these men—What an odd
thing is it in my Uncle, to take hold of what I said
in one of my letters, that I had a good mind to give
you a sketch of what I might suppose the company at
Lady Betty's would say of your Harriet, were each to
write her character to their confidents or correspondents
as she has done theirs to you! 
I am apprehensive that his command on this occasion
is owing to his hope to find room from what I
write, to charge me the heavier. But be this as it
may, I will endeavour to obey him; and the more
readily, as the task will be an exercise to my fancy. 
—Which of you, my dear friends, was it, that once
called me a fanciful girl? 
To begin—Lady Betty, who owns she thinks favourably
of me, I will suppose would write to her
Lucy, in such terms as these: But shall I suppose every
one to be so happy, as to have her Lucy? 
‘Miss Byron, of whom you have heard Mr. Reeves
talk so much, discredits not, in the main, the character
he has given her. We must allow a little,
you know, for the fondness of relationship. 

‘The girl has had a good education, and owes all
her advantages to it. But it is a country and bookish
one: And that won't do every thing for one of our
sex, if any thing. Poor thing! She never was in
town before! —But she seems docile, and, for a country
girl, is tolerably genteel: I think, therefore, I shall
receive no discredit by introducing her into the Beau
Monde.’ 
Miss Clements, perhaps, agreeable to the goodness
of her kind heart, would have written thus: 
‘Miss Byron is an agreeable girl. She has invited
me to visit her; and I hope I shall like her better
and better. She has, one may see, kept worthy
persons company; and I dare say, will preserve the
improvement she has gained by it. She is lively and
obliging: She is young; not more than twenty; yet
looks rather younger, by reason of a country bloom,
which, however, misbecomes her not; and gives
a modesty to her first appearance, that possesses one
in her favour. She is a great observer; yet I think
not censorious. What a castaway would Miss Byron
be, if knowing so well, as she seems to know, what
the duty of others is, she should forget her own!’ 
Miss Cantillon would perhaps thus write: 
‘There was Miss Harriet Byron of Northamptonshire; 
a young woman in whose favour report has
been very lavish. I can't say that I think her so
very extraordinary: Yet she is well enough for a
country girl. But tho' I do not impute to her a
very pert look, yet if she had not been set up for
something beyond what she is, by all her friends,
who, it seems, are excessively fond of her, she might
have had a more humble opinion of herself than she
seems to have when she is set a talking. She may,
indeed, make a figure in a country assembly; but
in the London world she must be not a little aukward,
having never been here before. 

‘I take her to have a great deal of art. But to do
her justice, she has no bad complexion: That you
know is a striking advantage: Nor are her features,
taking them either in whole or part, much amiss. 
But to me she has a babyish look, especially when
she smiles; yet I suppose she has been told that her
smiles become her; for she is always smiling—So
like a simpleton, I was going to say! 
‘Upon the whole, I see nothing so engaging in her
as to have made her the idol she is with every-body
—And what little beauty she has, it cannot last. 
For my part, were I a man, the clear Brunette—But
you will think I am praising myself.’ 
Miss Barnevelt would perhaps thus write to her
Lucy—To her Lucy! —Upon my word I will not let
her have a Lucy—She shall have a brother man to
write to, not a woman, and he shall have a fierce
name. We will suppose that she also had been describing
the rest of the company: 
‘Well but, my dear Bombardino, I am now to give
you a description of Miss Byron. 'Tis the softest,
gentlest, smiling rogue of a girl—I protest, I could
five or six times have kissed her, for what she said,
and for the manner she spoke in—For she has been
used to prate; a favour'd child in her own family,
one may easily see that. Yet so prettily loth to speak
till spoken to! —Such a blushing little rogue! —'Tis
a dear girl, and I wish'd twenty times as I sat by
her, that I had been a man for her sake. Upon my
honour, Bombardino, I believe if I had, I should
have caught her up, popt her under one of my arms,
and run away with her.’ 
Something like this, my Lucy, did Miss Barnevelt
once say. 
Having now dismissed the women, I come to Mr.
Singleton, Mr. Walden, and Sir Hargrave. 
Mr. Walden (himself a Pasquin) would thus perhaps
have written to his Marforio: 

‘The first Lady, whom, as the greatest stranger,
I shall take upon me to describe, is Miss Harriet
Byron of Northamptonshire. In her person she is
not disagreeable; and most people think her pretty. 
But, what is prettiness? Why, nevertheless, in a
woman, prettiness is—pretty: what other word can
I so fitly use of a person who, tho' a little sightly,
cannot be called a beauty? I will allow, that we
men are not wrong in admiring modest women for
the graces of their persons: But let them be modest; 
let them return the compliment, and revere Us for
our capaciousness of mind: And so they will, if they
are brought up to know their own weakness, and
that they are but domestic animals of a superior
order. Even ignorance, let me tell you, my Marforio,
is pretty in a woman. Humility is one of their
principal graces. Women hardly ever set themselves
to acquire the knowlege that is proper to men,
but they neglect for it, what more indispensably belongs
to women. To have them come to their
husbands, to their brothers, and even to their lovers,
when they have a mind to know any-thing out of
their way, and beg to be instructed and informed,
inspireth them with the becoming humility which I
have touched upon, and giveth us importance with
them. 
‘Indeed, my Marforio, there are very few topics
that arise in conversation among men, upon which
women ought to open their lips. Silence becomes
them. Let them therefore hear, wonder, and improve,
in silence. They are naturally disputatious,
and lovers of contradiction’ [Something like this
Mr. Walden once threw out: And you know who,
my Lucy, has said as much] ‘and shall we qualify them
to be disputants against ourselves? 
‘These reflections, Marforio, are not foreign to
my subject. This girl, this Harriet Byron, is applauded
for a young woman of reading and observation. 

But there was another lady present, Miss
Clements, who (if there be any merit to a woman
in it) appeareth to me to excel her in the compass of
her reading; and that upon the strength of her own
diligence and abilities; for this Miss Harriet hath
had some pains taken with her by her late Grandfather,
a man of erudition, who had his education
among us. This old gentleman, I am told, took
it into his head, having no Grandson, to give this
girl a bookish turn; but he wisely stopt at her mother-tongue!
only giving her a smattering in French and
Italian. 
‘As I saw that the eyes of every one were upon her,
I was willing to hear what she had to say for herself. 
Poor girl! She will suffer, I doubt, for her speciousness. 
Yet I cannot say, all things considered, that
she was very malapert: That quality is yet to come. 
She is young. 
‘I therefore trifled a little with her. And went
farther than I generally choose to go with the reading
species of women, in order to divert an inundation
of nonsense and foppery, breaking in from one
of the company; Sir Hargrave Pollexfen: Of whom
more anon. You know, Marforio, that a man, when
he is provok'd to fight with an overgrown boy, hath
every-body against him: So hath a scholar who engageth
on learned topics with a woman. The sex
must be flatter'd at the expence of truth. Many
things are thought to be pretty from the mouth of a
woman, which would be egregiously weak and silly
proceeding from that of a man. His very eminence
in learning, on such a contention, would tend only
to exalt her, and depreciate himself. As the girl
was every-body's favourite, and as the Baronet
seemed to eye her with particular favour, I spared
her. A man would not, you know, spoil a girl's
fortune.’ 

But how shall I be able to tell you what I imagine
Sir Hargrave would have written? Can I do it, if I
place him in the light of a lover, and not either underdo
his character as such, or incur the censure of vanity
and conceit? 
Well, but are you sure, Harriet, methinks my
Uncle asks, that the Baronet is really and truly so egregiously
smitten with you, as he pretended he was? 
Why, ay! That's the thing, Sir! 
You girls are so apt to take in earnest the compliments
made you by men! 
And so we are. But our credulity, my dear Sir, is
a greater proof of our innocence, than mens professions
are of their sincerity. So, let losers speak, and winners
laugh. 
But let him be in jest, if he will. In jest or in
earnest, Sir Hargrave must be extravagant, I ween,
in love-speeches. And that I may not be thought
wholly to decline this part of my task, I will suppose
him professing with Hudibras, after he has praised
me beyond measure, for graces of his own creation; 

The sun shall now no more dispense
His own, but Harriet's influence.
Where-e'er she treads, her feet shall set
The primrose, and the violet:
All spices, perfumes, and sweet powders,
Shall borrow from her breath their odours:
Worlds shall depend upon her eye,
And when she frowns upon them, die.

And what if I make him address me, by way of
apostrophe, shall I say? (writing to his friend) in the following
strain? 

My faith [my friend] is adamantine,
As chains of destiny, I'll maintain;
True, as Apollo ever spoke,
Or oracle from heart of oak:

Then shine upon me but benignly,
With that one, and that other pigsnye;
The sun and day shall sooner part,
Than love or you shake off my heart.

Well, but what, my Harriet, would honest Mr.
Singleton have written, methinks you ask, had he
written about you? 
Why thus, perhaps, my Lucy. And to his Grandmother; 
for she is living: 
‘We had rare fun, at dinner, and after dinner, my
Grandmother. There was one Miss Barnevelt, a fine
tall portly young lady. There was Miss Clements, not
handsome, but very learned, and who, as was easy
to perceive, could hold a good argument, on occasion. 
There was Miss Cantillon; as pretty a young
lady as one should wish to behold in a Summer's day. 
And there was one Miss Byron, a Northamptonshire
lady, whom I never saw before in my born days. 
There was Mr. Walden, a famous scholar. I thought
him very entertaining; for he talk'd of learning, and
such-like things; which I know not so much of as
I wish I did; because my want of knowing a little
Latin and Greek has made my understanding look
less than other mens. O my Grandmother! what
a wise man would the being able to talk Latin and
Greek have made me! —And yet I thought that now-and-then
Mr. Walden made too great a fuss about
his. But there was a rich and noble Baronet; richer
than me, as they say, a great deal; Sir Hargrove
Pollexsen, if I spell his name right. A charming
man; and charmingly dress'd. And so many fine
things he said, and was so merry, and so facetious,
that he did nothing but laugh, as a man may say. 
And I was as merry as him to the full. Why not? 
—O my Grandmother! What with the talk of the
young country lady, that same Miss Byron; for they
put her upon talking a great deal; what with the
famous scholar; who, however, being a learned 

man, could not be so merry as us; what with Sir
Hargrave (I could live and die with Sir Hargrave:
You never knew, my Grandmother, such a bright
man as Sir Hargrave), and what with one thing, and
what with another, we box'd it about, and had
rare fun, as I told you—So that when I got home,
and went to bed, I did nothing but dream of being
in the same company, and three or four times wak'd
myself with laughing.’ 
There, Lucy! —Will this do for Mr. Singleton? 
It is not much out of character, I assure you. 
Monday Afternoon. 
This Knight, this Sir Rowland Meredith! —He is
below, it seems; his Nephew in his hand; Sir Rowland,
my Sally tells me, in his gold button and button-hole
coat, and full-buckled wig; Mr. Fowler as
spruce as a bridegroom! —What shall I do with Sir
Rowland? 
What, my Lucy, can there be in the addresses of
these men; that even those who are indifferent to us,
can put one's spirits in an hurry? But, my dear, it is
painful to be obliged to deny the earnest suits of those
who declare a love for us! 
Expect another letter next post: And so you will
if I did not bid you; for have I missed one yet? 
Adieu, my Lucy,
H. B. 

