



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Monday Afternoon, March 27. 
I have deposited my Narrative down to this day
noon; but I hope soon to follow it with another
Letter, that I may keep you as little a while as possible 

in that suspense which I am so much affected by at
this moment: For my heart is disturbed at every foot
I hear stir; and at every door below that I hear open
or shut. 
They have been all assembled some time, and are
in close debate I believe: But can there be room for
long debate upon a proposal, which, if accepted,
will so effectually answer all their views? —Can they
insist a moment longer upon my having Mr. Solmes,
when they see what sacrifices I am ready to make, to
be freed from his addresses? —O but I suppose the
struggle is, first, with Bella's nicety, to persuade her
to accept of the Estate, and of the Husband; and
next, with her pride, to take her Sister's refusals, as
she once phrased it! —Or, it may be, my Brother
is insisting upon Equivalents for his reversion in the
Estate: And these sort of things take up but too
much the attention of some of our family. To these,
no doubt, one or both, it must be owing, that my
proposal admits of so much consideration. 
I want, methinks, to see, what Mr. Lovelace, in
his Letter, says. But I will deny myself this piece of
curiosity till that which is raised by my present suspense
is answered. —Excuse me, my dear, that I
thus trouble you with my uncertainties: But I have
no employment, nor heart, if I had, to pursue any
other but what my pen affords me. 
Monday Evening. 
Would you believe it? —Betty, by anticipation,
tells me, that I am to be refused. I am ‘a vile, artful
creature. Every-body is too good to me. My
Uncle Harlowe has been taken-in, that's the phrase. 
They knew how it would be, if he either wrote
to me, or saw me. He has, however, been made
ashamed to be so wrought upon. A pretty thing
truly in the eye of the world would it be, were they
to take me at my word! It would look as if they 

had treated me thus hardly, as I think it, for this
very purpose. My peculiars, particularly Miss
Howe, would give it that turn; and I myself could
mean nothing by it, but to see if it would be accepted
in order to strengthen my own arguments
against Mr. Solmes. It was amazing, that it could
admit of a moment's deliberation: That any-thing
could be supposed to be done in it. It was equally
against Law and Equity: And a fine security Miss
Bella would have, or Mr. Solmes, when I could resume
it when I would! —My Brother and She my
heirs! O the artful creature! —I to resolve to live
single, when Lovelace is so sure of me—and everywhere
declares as much!—and can whenever he
pleases, if my Husband, claim under the Will! — 
Then the insolence—the confidence—[as Betty
mincingly told me, that one said; you may easily
guess who] that she, who was so justly in disgrace
for downright rebellion, should pretend to prescribe
to the whole family!—should name a Husband for
her elder Sister! —What a triumph would her obstinacy
go away with, to delegate her commands,
not as from a Prison, as she called it, but as from
her Throne, to her Elders and Betters; and to
her Father and Mother too! —Amazing, perfectly
amazing, that any-body could argue upon such a
proposal as this! It was a master-stroke of finesse— 
It was ME in perfection—Surely my Uncle Harlowe
will never again be so taken-in!’ 
All this was the readier told me, because it was
against me, and would teaze and vex me. But as
some of this fine recapitulation implied, that somebody
spoke up for me, I was curious to know who
it was: But Betty would not tell me, for fear I
should have the consolation to find that all were not
against me. 
But do you not see, my dear, what a sad creature
she is whom you honour with your friendship? —You 

could not doubt your influence over me: Why did
you not let me know myself a little better? —Why
did you not take the friendly liberty I have always
taken with you, and tell me my faults, and what a
specious hypocrite I am? For if my Brother and Sister
could make such discoveries, how is it possible, that
faults so enormous [You could see others, you thought,
of a more secret nature!] could escape your penetrating
eye? 
Well, but now, it seems, they are debating how
and by whom to answer me: For they know not,
nor are they to know, that Mrs. Betty has told me
all these fine things. One desires to be excused, it
seems: Another chuses not to have any thing to say
to me: Another has enough of me: And of writing
to so ready a scribbler, there will be no end. 
Thus are those imputed qualifications, which used
so lately to gain me applause, now become my crimes: 
So much do disgust and anger alter the property of
things. 
The result of their debate, I suppose, will somehow
or other be communicated to me by-and-by. 
But let me tell you, my dear, that I am made so desperate,
that I am afraid to open Mr. Lovelace's Letter,
lest, in the humour I am in, I should do something
(if I find it not exceptionable) that may give
me repentance as long as I live. 
Monday Night. 
This moment the following Letter is brought me
by Betty. 

Monday, 5 o'Clock. 
Miss Cunning-ones,
Your fine new proposal is thought unworthy of
a particular Answer. Your Uncle Harlowe
is ashamed to be so taken-in. Have you no new
fetch for your Uncle Antony? Go round with us,
child, now your hand's in. But I was bid to write 

only one line, that you might not complain, as you
did of your worthy Sister, for the freedoms you provoked: 
It is This;—Prepare yourself. To-morrow
you go to my Uncle Antony's. That's all, child. 
James Harlowe. 
I was vexed to the heart at this: And immediately,
in the warmth of resentment, wrote the inclosed to
my Uncle Harlowe; who it seems stays here this
night. 

To John Harlowe, Esq;
Monday Night. 
Honoured Sir,
I find I am a very sad creature, and did not know
it. I wrote not to my Brother. To you, Sir, I
wrote. From you I hope the honour of an Answer. 
No one reveres her Uncles more than I do. Nevertheless,
I will be bold to say, that the distance, great
as it is, between Uncle and Niece, excludes not such
a hope: And I think I have not made a proposal that
deserves to be treated with scorn. 
Forgive me, Sir—My heart is full. Perhaps one
day you may think you have been prevailed upon (for
that is plainly the case!) to join to treat me—as I do
not deserve to be treated. If you are ashamed, as my
Brother hints, of having expressed any returning
tenderness to me, God help me! I see I have no
mercy to expect from any-body! But, Sir, from
your pen let me have an Answer; I humbly implore
it of you. —Till my Brother can recollect what belongs
to a Sister, I will take from him no Answer to
the Letter I wrote to you, nor any commands whatever. 
I move every-body! —This, Sir, is what you are
pleased to mention: —But whom have I moved? — 
One person in the family has more moving ways than
I have, or he could never so undeservedly have made 

every-body ashamed to shew tenderness to a poor distressed
child of the same family. 
Return me not this with contempt, or torn, or
unanswered, I beseech you. My Father has a title
to do that, or any-thing, by his child: But from no
other person in the world of your Sex, Sir, ought a
young creature of mine (while she preserves a supplicating
spirit) to be so treated. 
When what I have before written in the humblest
strain has met with such strange constructions, I am
afraid that this unguarded scrawl will be very ill received. 
But I beg, Sir, you will oblige me with one
line, be it ever so harsh, in answer to my proposal. 
I still think it ought to be attended to. I will enter
into the most solemn engagements to make it valid by
a perpetual Single Life. In a word, any thing I can
do, I will do, to be restored to all your favours. 
More I cannot say, but that I am, very undeservedly 
A most unhappy Creature. 
Betty scrupled again to carry this Letter; and said,
she should have anger; and I should but have it returned
in scraps and bits. 
I must take That chance, said I: I only desire
you will deliver it as directed. 
Sad doings! very sad! she said, that young Ladies
should so violently set themselves against their duty. 
I told her, she should have the liberty to say what
she pleased, so she would but be my messenger that
one time—And down she went with it. 
I bid her, if she could, slide it into my Uncle's
hand, unseen; at least, unseen by my Brother or
Sister, for fear it should meet, thro' their good offices,
with the fate she had bespoken for it. 
She would not undertake for That, she said. 
I am now in expectation of the result. But having
so little ground to hope for either favour or mercy,
I opened Mr. Lovelace's Letter. 

I would send it to you, my dear (as well as those I
shall inclose) by this conveyance; but not being able
at present to determine in what manner I shall answer
it, I will give myself the trouble of abstracting it
here, while I am waiting for what may offer from the
Letter just carried down. 
‘He laments, as usual, my ill opinion of him, and
readiness to believe every-thing to his disadvantage. 
He puts into plain English, as I supposed he would,
my hint, that I might be happier, if, by any rashness
he might be guilty of to Solmes, he should
come to an untimely end himself.’ 
He is concerned, he says, ‘That the violence he
had expressed on his extreme apprehensiveness of
losing me, should have made him guilty of anything
I had so much reason to resent.’ 
He owns, ‘That he is passionate: All good-natured
men, he says, are so; and a sincere man cannot
hide it.’ But appeals to me, ‘Whether, if
any occasion in the world could excuse the rashness
of his expressions, it would not be his present dreadful
situation, thro' my indifference, and the malice
of his enemies.’ 
He says, ‘He has more reason than ever, from
the contents of my last, to apprehend, that I shall
be prevailed upon by force, if not by fair means,
to fall in with my Brother's measures; and sees but
too plainly, that I am preparing him to expect it. 
‘Upon this presumption, he supplicates, with the
utmost earnestness, that I will not give way to the
malice of his enemies. 
‘Solemn vows of reformation, and everlasting
truth and obligingness, he makes; all in the style
of desponding humility: Yet calls it a cruel turn
upon him, to impute his protestations to a consciousness
of the necessity there is for making them
from his bad character. 
‘He despises himself, he solemnly protests, for 

his past follies: He thanks God he has seen his
error; and nothing but my more particular instructions,
is wanting to perfect his reformation. 
‘He promises, that he will do every-thing that I
shall think he can do with honour, to bring about
a Reconciliation with my Father; and even will, if
I insist upon it, make the first overtures to my Brother,
and treat him as his own Brother, because he
is mine, if he will not by new affronts revive the
remembrance of the past. 
‘He begs, in the most earnest and humble manner,
for one half-hour's interview; undertaking by
a key, which he owns he has to the garden-door,
leading into the Coppice, as we call it (if I will but
unbolt the door) to come into the garden at night,
and wait till I have an opportunity to come to him,
that he may re-assure me of the truth of all he
writes, and of the affection, and, if needful, protection,
of all his family. 
‘He presumes not, he says, to write by way of
menace to me; but, if I refuse him this favour, he
knows not (so desperate have some strokes in my
Letter made him) what his despair may make him
do.’ 
He asks me, ‘Determined, as my friends are, and
far as they have already gone, and declare they will
go, what I can propose to do, to avoid having Mr.
Solmes, if I am carried to my Uncle Antony's; 
unless I resolve to accept of the protection he has
offered to procure me; or except I will escape to
London, or elsewhere, while I can escape?’ 
He advises me, ‘To sue to your Mother, for her
private reception of me; only till I can obtain possession
of my own Estate, and procure my friends
to be reconciled to me; which he is sure they will
be desirous to be, the moment I am out of their
power.’ 
He apprises me [It is still my wonder, how he 

comes by his intelligence!] ‘That my friends have
written to my Cousin Morden to represent matters
to him in their own partial way; nor doubt they
to influence him on their side of the question. 
‘That all this shews I have but one way; if none
of my own friends or intimates will receive me. 
‘If I will transport him with the honour of my
choice of this one way, Settlements shall be drawn,
with proper blanks, which I shall fill up as I please. 
Let him but have my commands from my own
mouth; all my doubts and scruples from my own
lips; and only a repetition, that I will not, on any
consideration, be Solmes's Wife; and he shall be
easy. But, after such a Letter as I have written,
nothing but an Interview can make him so.’ He
beseeches me therefore, ‘To unbolt the door, as that
very night; or, if I receive not this time enough,
this night;—and he will in a disguise that shall not
give a suspicion who he is, if he should be seen,
come to the garden door, in hopes to open it with
his key; nor will he have any other lodging than in
the Coppice both nights; watching every wakeful
hour for the propitious unbolting, unless he has a
Letter with my orders to the contrary, or to make
some other appointment.’ 
This Letter was dated yesterday: So he was there
last night, I suppose; and will be there this night; 
and I have not written a line to him: And now it is
too late, were I determined what to write. 
I hope he will not go to Mr. Solmes. —I hope he
will not come hither. —If he do either, I will break
with him for ever. 
What have I to do with such headstrong spirits? 
I wish I had never—But what signifies wishing? — 
I am strangely perplexed—But I need not have told
you this, after such a representation of my situation. 