



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Wednesday Night, March 22. 
Angry!—What should I be angry for? 
—I am mightily pleased with your freedom,
as you call it. I only wonder at
your patience with me; that's all. I am
sorry I gave you the trouble of so long
a Letter upon the occasion (a) ; notwithstanding the
pleasure I received in reading it. 
I believe you did not intend reserves to me: For
two reasons I believe you did not: First, because you
say you did not: Next, because you have not as yet
been able to convince yourself how it is to be with
you; and persecuted as you are, how so to separate 

the effects that spring from the two causes [Persecution
and Love] as to give to each its particular due. But
this I believe I hinted to you once before; and so
will say no more upon that subject at present. 
Robin says, you had but just deposited your last
parcel when he took it: For he was there but half an
hour before, and found nothing. He had seen my
impatience, and loitered about, being willing to bring
me something from you, if possible. 
My Cousin Jenny Fynnett is here, and desires to
be my bedfellow to-night. So I shall not have an
opportunity to sit down with that seriousness and attention
which the subjects of yours require. For the
is all prate, you know, and loves to set me a prating; 
Yet comes upon a very grave occasion—To procure
my Mother to go with her to her Grandmother Larkin,
who has been long bed-ridden; and at last has
taken it into her head that she is mortal, and therefore
will make her Will; a work she was till now
extremely averse to; but it must be upon condition
that my Mother, who is her distant relation, will go
to her, and advise her as to the particulars of it: For
she has an high opinion, as every one else has, of my
Mother's judgment in all matters relating to Wills,
Settlements, and such-like notable affairs. 
Mrs. Larkin lives about seventeen miles off; and
as my Mother cannot endure to lie out of her own
house, she proposes to set out early in the morning,
that she may be able to get back again at night. So,
to-morrow I shall be at your Devotion from day-light
to day-light; nor will I be at home to any-body. 
As to the impertinent man, I have put him upon
escorting the two Ladies, in order to attend my
Mother home at night. Such expeditions as these,
and to give us women a little air of vanity and
assuredness at public places, is all that I know these
dangling fellows are good for, 
I have hinted before, that I could almost wish my 

Mother and Mr. Hickman would make a match of
it: And I here repeat my wishes. What signifies a
difference of Fifteen or Twenty years; especially
when the Lady has spirits that will make her young a
long time, and the Lover is a mighty sober man? — 
I think verily, I could like him better for a Papa, than
for a nearer relation: And they are strange admirers
of one another. 
But allow me a perhaps still better (and, as to years,
more suitable and happier) disposal; for the man at
least—What think you, my dear, of compromising
with your friends, by rejecting both your men, and
encouraging my parader? —If your liking of one of
the two go no farther than conditional, I believe it
will do. A rich thought, if it obtain your approbation! 
In this light, I should have a prodigious respect
for Mr. Hickman; more by half than I can have in
the other. The vein is opened—Shall I let it flow? 
How difficult to withstand constitutional foibles! 
Hickman is certainly a man more in your taste than
any of those who have hitherto been brought to address
you. He is mighty sober, mighty grave, and
all that. Then you have told me, that he is your
favourite. But that is because he is my Mother's
perhaps. The man would certainly rejoice at the
transfer; or he must be a greater fool than I take him
to be. 
O but your fierce Lover would knock him o' the
head—I forgot that! —What makes me incapable of
seriousness when I write about this Hickman? —Yet
the man so good a sort of man in the main? —But
who is perfect? This is one of my foibles. And it is
something for you to chide me for. 
You believe me to be very happy in my prospects
in relation to him: Because you are so very unhappy
in the foolish usage you meet with, you are apt (as I
suspect) to think that tolerable which otherwise would
be far from being so. I dare say, you would not, 

with all your grave airs, like him for yourself; 
except, being addressed by Solmes and him, you were
obliged to have one of them. —I have given you a
test. Let me see what you'll say to it. 
For my own part, I confess to you, that I have
great exceptions to Hickman. He and Wedlock never
yet once entered into my head at one time. Shall I
give you my free thoughts of him? —Of his best and
his worst; and that as if I were writing to one who
knows him not? —I think I will. Yet it is impossible
I should do it gravely. The subject won't bear to be
so treated, in my opinion. We are not come so far
as that yet, in my opinion. We are not come so far
as that yet, if ever we shall: And to do it in another
strain, ill becomes my present real concern for you. 
* *
Here I was interrupted on the honest man's account. 
He has been here these two hours—courting
the Mother for the Daughter, I suppose—Yet she
wants no courting neither: 'Tis well one of us does; 
else the man would have nothing but halcyon; and
be remiss, and saucy of course. 
He was going. His horses at the door. My
Mother sent for me down, pretending to want to say
something to me. 
Something she said when I came that signified nothing
—Evidently, for no reason called me, but to
give me an opportunity to see what a fine bow her
man could make; and that he might wish me a good-night. 
She knows I am not over-ready to oblige him
with my company, if I happen to be otherwise engaged. 
I could not help an air a little upon the fretful,
when I found she had nothing of moment to say
to me, and when I saw her intention. 
She smiled off the visible fretfulness, that the man
might go away in good humour with himself. 
He bowed to the ground, and would have taken
my hand, his whip in the other. I did not like to be
so companioned: I withdrew my hand, but touched 

his elbow with a motion, as if from his low bow I
had supposed him falling, and would have helped him
up—A sad slip, it might have been, said I! 
A mad girl! smiled it off my Mother. 
He was put quite out; took his horse-bridle,
stumped back, back, back, bowing, till he run against
his servant. I laughed. He mounted his horse. I
mounted up stairs, after a little lecture. —And my
head is so filled with him, that I must resume my intention; 
in hopes to divert you for a few moments. 
Take it then—His best, and his worst, as I said
before. 
Hickman is a sort of fiddling, busy, yet, to borrow
a word from you, unbusy man: Has a great deal to
do, and seems to me to dispatch nothing. Irresolute
and changeable in every-thing, but in teazing me
with his nonsense; which yet, it is evident, he must
continue upon my Mother's interest more than upon
his own hopes; for none have I given him. 
Then I have a quarrel against his face, though in
his person, for a well-thriven man, tolerably genteel
—Not to his features so much neither; for what, as
you have often observed, are features in a man? — 
But Hickman, with strong lines, and big cheek and
chin bones, has not the manliness in his aspect, which
Lovelace has with the most regular and agreeable
features. 
Then what a set and formal mortal is he in some
things! —I have not been able yet to laugh him out
of his long Bib and Beads. Indeed, that is, because
my Mother thinks they become him; and I would
not be so free with him, as to own I should chuse to
have him leave it off. If he did, so particular is the
man, he would certainly, if left to himself, fall into
a King-William's-Cravat, or some such antique chin-cushion,
as by the pictures of that Prince one sees
was then the fashion. 
As to his dress in general, he cannot indeed be 

called a sloven, but sometimes he is too gaudy, at
other times too plain, to be uniformly elegant. And
for his manners, he makes such a bustle with them,
and about them, as would induce one to suspect that
they are more strangers than familiars to him. You,
I know, lay this to his fearfulness of disobliging or
offending. Indeed your Over-doers generally give the
offence they endeavour to avoid. 
The man however is honest: Is of family: Has a
clear and good estate; and may one day be a Baronet,
an't please you. He is humane and benevolent, tolerably
generous, as people say; and as I might say
too, if I would accept of his bribes; which he offers
in hopes of having them all back again, and the
bribed into the bargain. A method taken by all corrupters,
from old Satan, to the lowest of his servants. 
Yet, to speak in the language of a person I am bound
to honour, he is deemed a prudent man; that is to
say, a good manager. 
Then I cannot but confess, that now I like not
any-body better, whatever I did once. 
He is no fox hunter: He keeps a pack indeed; 
but prefers not his hounds to his fellow-creatures. 
No bad sign for a Wife, I own. He loves his horse; 
but dislikes Racing in a gaming way, as well as all
sorts of gaming. Then he is sober; modest; They
say, virtuous; in short, has qualities that Mothers
would be fond of in a Husband for their Daughters; 
and for which perhaps their Daughters would be the
happier could they judge as well for themselves, as
experience possibly may teach them to judge for their
future Daughters. 
Nevertheless, to own the truth, I cannot say I
love the man; nor, I believe, ever shall. 
Strange! that these sober fellows cannot have a
decent sprightliness, a modest assurance with them! 
Something debonnaire; which need not be separated
from that awe and reverence, when they address a 

woman, which should shew the ardor of their passion,
rather than the sheepishness of their nature; for who
knows not that Love delights in taming the Lion-hearted? 
That those of the Sex, who are most conscious
of their own defect in point of courage, naturally
require, and therefore as naturally prefer, the
man who has most of it, as the most able to give
them the requisite protection? That the greater their
own cowardice, as it would be called in a man, the
greater is their delight in subjects of heroism? As may
be observed in their reading; which turns upon difficulties
encountered, battles fought, and enemies
overcome, four or five hundred by the prowess of
one single Hero, the more improbable the better: 
In short, that their man should be a hero to every
one living but themselves; and to them know no
bound to his humility. A woman has some glory in
subduing a heart no man living can appall; and
hence too often the Bravo, assuming the Hero, and
making himself pass for one, succeeds as only a Hero
should. 
But as for honest Hickman, the good man is so
generally meek, as I imagine, that I know not whether
I have any preference paid me in his obsequiousness. 
And then, when I rate him, he seems to be so
naturally fitted for rebuke, and so much expects it,
that I know not how to disappoint him, whether he
just then deserve it, or not. I am sure, he has
puzzled me many a time when I have seen him look
penitent for faults he has not committed, whether to
pity or laugh at him. 
You and I have often retrospected the faces and
minds of grown people; that is to say, have formed
images from their present appearances, outside and in,
(as far as the manners of the persons would justify us
in the latter) what sort of figures they made when
boys and girls. And I'll tell you the lights in which
Hickman, Solmes, and Lovelace, our three 

Heroes, have appeared to me, supposing them boys
at school. 
Solmes I have imagined to be a little sordid pilfering
rogue, who would purloin from every-body, and beg
every boy's bread and butter from him; while, as I
have heard a reptile brag, he would in a winter-morning
spit upon his thumbs, and spread his own
with it, that he might keep it all to himself. 
Hickman, a great overgrown, lank-haired, chubby
boy, who would be hunched and punched by every-body; 
and go home with his finger in his eye, and
tell his Mother. 
While Lovelace I have supposed a curl-pated villain,
full of fire, fancy, and mischief; an orchard-robber,
a wall-climber, a horse-rider without saddle or bridle,
neck or nothing: A sturdy rogue, in short, who
would kick and cuff, and do no right, and take no
wrong of any-body; would get his head broke, then
a plaister for it, or let it heal of itself; while he went
on to do more mischief, and if not to get, to deserve,
broken bones. And the same dispositions have grown
up with them, and distinguish them as men, with no
very material alteration. 
Only, that all men are Monkeys more or less, or
else that you and I should have such Baboons as these
to chuse out of, is a mortifying thing, my dear. 
I am sensible, that I am not a little out of season in
treating thus ludicrously the subject I am upon, while
you are so unhappy; and if my manner does not divert
you, as my flightinesses used to do, I am inexcusable
both to you, and to my own heart: Which,
I do assure you, notwithstanding my seeming levity,
is wholly in your case. 
As this Letter is entirely whimsical, I will not send
it until I can accompany it with something more solid
and better suited to your unhappy circumstances; that
is to say, to the present subject of our correspondence. 
To-morrow, as I told you, will be wholly my own,
and of consequence yours. Adieu, therefore, till then. 