



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Curse upon my Stars! —Disappointed again! 
It was about Eight when I arrived at Smith's. 
—The woman was in the shop. 
So, old acquaintance, how do you now? I know
my Love is above. —Let her be acquainted that I am
here, waiting for admission to her presence, and can
take no denial. Tell her, that I will approach her
with the most respectful duty, and in whose company
she pleases; and I will not touch the hem of her
garment, without her leave. 
Indeed, Sir, you are mistaken. The Lady is not
is this house, nor near it. 
I'll see that. Will! beckoning him to me, and
whispering, See if thou canst any way find out (without
losing sight of the door, lest she should be below-stairs)
if she be in the neighborhood, if not within. 
Will, bowed, and went off. Up went I, without
further ceremony; attended now only by the good
woman. 
I went into each apartment, except that which
was locked before, and was now also locked: And
I called to my Clarissa in the voice of Love; but by
the still silence was convinced she was not there. 
Yet, on the strength of my intelligence, I doubted
not but she was in the house. 
I then went up two pair of stairs, and looked round
the first room: But no Miss Harlowe. 
And who, pray, is in this room? stopping at the
door of another. 
A widow gentlewoman, Sir. —Mrs. Lovick. 
O my dear Mrs. Lovick! said I. I am intimately
acquainted with Mrs. Lovick's character, from my
Cousin John Belford. I must see Mrs. Lovick by all
means. Good Mrs. Lovick, open the door. 

She did. 
Your servant, Madam. Be so good as to excuse
me. —You have heard my Story. You are an admirer
of the most excellent woman in the world. 
Dear Mrs. Lovick, tell me what is become of her? 
The poor Lady, Sir, went out yesterday, on
purpose to avoid you. 
How so? She knew not that I would be here. 
She was afraid you would come, when she heard
you were recovered from your illness. Ah! Sir,
what pity it is that so fine a gentleman should make
such ill returns for God's goodness to him! 
You are an excellent woman, Mrs. Lovick: I
know that, by my Cousin John Belford's account of
you: And Miss Clarissa Harlowe is an angel. 
Miss Harlowe is indeed an angel, replied she; and
soon will be company for angels. 
No jesting with such a woman as this, Jack. 
Tell me of a truth, good Mrs. Lovick, where I
may see this dear Lady. Upon my Soul, I will
neither fright nor offend her. I will only beg of her
to hear me speak for one half-quarter of an hour; and,
if she will have it so, I will never trouble her more. 
Sir, said the widow, it would be death for her to
see you. She was at home last night; I'll tell you
truth: But fitter to be in bed all day. She came
home, she said, to die; and, if she could not avoid
your visit, she was unable to fly from you; and believed
she should die in your presence. 
And yet go out again this morning early? How
can that be, Widow? 
Why, Sir, she rested not two hours, for fear of
you. Her fear gave her strength, which she'll suffer
for, when that fear is over. And finding herself, the
more she thought of your visit, the less able to stay
to receive it, she took chair, and is gone nobody
knows whither. But, I believe, she intended to be
carried to the water-side, in order to take boat; for 

she cannot bear a coach. It extremely incommoded
her yesterday. 
But before we talk any further, said I, if she be
gone abroad, you can have no objection to my looking
into every apartment above and below; because
I am told she is actually in the house. 
Indeed, Sir, she is not. You may satisfy yourself,
if you please: But Mrs. Smith and I waited on her
to her chair. We were forced to support her, she
was so weak. She said, Whither can I go, Mrs.
Lovick? Whither can I go, Mrs. Smith? —Cruel,
cruel man! —Tell him I called him so, if he come
again! —God give him that peace which he denies me! 
Sweet creature! cried I, and looked down, and
took out my handkerchief. 
The widow wept. I wish, said she, I had never
known so excellent a Lady, and so great a Sufferer! 
I love her as my own child! 
Mrs. Smith wept. 
I then gave over the hope of seeing her for this
time. I was extremely chagrined at my disappointment,
and at the account they gave of her ill health. 
Would to Heaven, said I, she would put it in my
power to repair her wrongs! I have been an ungrateful
wretch to her. I need not tell you, Mrs. Lovick,
how much I have injured her, nor how much she
suffers by her relations implacableness. 'Tis That,
Mrs. Lovick, 'tis That implacableness, Mrs. Smith,
that cuts her to the heart. Her family is the most
implacable family on earth; and the dear creature,
in refusing to see me, and to be reconciled to me,
shews her relation to them a little too plainly. 
O Sir, said the widow, not one syllable of what
you say belongs to this Lady. I never saw so sweet
a creature! so edifying a piety! and one of so forgiving
a temper! She is always accusing herself, and
excusing her relations. And, as to you, Sir, she forgives
you: She wishes you well; and happier than 

you will let her be. Why will you not, Sir, why
will you not, let her die in peace? 'Tis all she wishes
for. You don't look like a hard-hearted gentleman! 
—How can you thus hunt and persecute a poor Lady,
whom none of her relations will look upon? It makes
my heart bleed for her. 
And then she wept again. Mrs. Smith wept also. 
My seat grew uneasy to me. I shifted to another
several times; and what Mrs. Lovick farther said,
and shewed me, made me still more uneasy. 
Bad as the poor Lady was last night, said she, she
transcribed into her book a Meditation on your persecuting
her thus. I have a copy of it. If I thought
it would have any effect, I would read it to you. 
Let me read it myself, Mrs. Lovick. 
She gave it to me. It has an Harlowe-spirited
title: And from a forgiving spirit, intolerable. I desired
to take it with me. She consented, on condition
that I shewed it to 'Squire Belford. So here, Mr.
'Squire Belford, thou may'st read it, if thou wilt. 
On being hunted after by the Enemy of my Soul.
Monday, Aug. 21. 
Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man. 
Preserve me from the violent man. 
Who imagines mischief in his heart. 
He hath sharpened his tongue like a serpent. Adders
poisons is under his lips. 
Keep me, O Lord from the hands of the wicked. 
Preserve me from the violent man, who hath purposed
to overthrow my goings. 
He hath hid a snare for me. He hath spread a net
by the way-side. He hath set gins for me in the way
wherein I walked. 
Keep me from the snares which he hath laid for me,
and the gins of this worker of iniquity. 
The enemy hath persecuted my soul. He hath smitten 

my life down to the ground. He hath made me
dwell in darkness, as those that have been long dead. 
There is my spirit overwhelmed within me. My
heart within me is desolate. 
Hide not thy face from me in the day when I am in
trouble. 
For my days are consumed like smoke: and my bones
are burnt as the hearth. 
My heart is smitten and withered like grass: so
that I forget to eat my bread. 
By reason of the voice of my groaning, my bones
cleave to my skin. 
I am like a pelican of the wilderness. I am like an
owl of the desart. 
I watch; and am as a sparrow alone upon the house-top. 
I have eaten ashes like bread; and mingled my drink
with weeping: 
Because of thine indignation, and thy wrath: for
thou hast lifted me up, and cast me down. 
My days are like a shadow that declineth, and I am
withered like grass. 
Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked: further
not his devices, lest he exalt himself. 
Why now, Mrs. Lovick, said I, when I had read
this Meditation, as she called it, I think I am very
severely treated by the Lady, if she mean me in all
this. For how is it that I am the Enemy of her Soul,
when I love her both Soul and Body? 
She says, that I am a violent man, and a wicked
man. —That I have been so, I own: But I repent,
and only wish to have it in my power to repair the
injuries I have done her. 
The Gin, the Snare, the Net, mean matrimony, I
suppose—But is it a crime in me to wish to marry
her? Would any other woman think it so? and chuse
to become a Pelican in the wilderness, or a lonely Sparrow 

on the house-top, rather than to have a mate that
would chirp about her all day and all night? 
She says, she has eaten ashes like bread—A sad
mistake to be sure!—and mingled her drink with
weeping—Sweet maudlin Soul! should I say of anybody
confessing this, but Miss Harlowe. 
She concludes with praying, that the desires of the
wicked (meaning poor me, I doubt) may not be
granted; that my devices may not be furthered, lest I
exalt myself. I should undoubtedly exalt myself, and
with reason, could I have the honour and the blessing
of such a Wife. And if my desires have so honourable
an end, I know not why I should be called wicked, and
why I should not be allowed to hope, that my honest
devices may be furthered, that I MAY exalt myself. 
But here, Mrs. Lovick, let me ask, as something
is undoubtedly meant by the lonely Sparrow on the
house-top, Is not the dear creature at this very instant
(tell me truly) concealed in Mrs. Smith's Cockloft? 
—What say you, Mrs. Lovick? What say you,
Mrs. Smith, to this? 
They assured me to the contrary; and that she was
actually abroad, and they knew not where. 
Thou seest, Jack, that I would fain have diverted
the chagrin given me not only by the womens talk,
but by this collection of Scripture-texts drawn up in
array against me. Several other whimsical and light
things I said [All I had for it!] with the same view: 
But the Widow would not let me come off so. She
stuck to me; and gave me, as I told thee, a good
deal of uneasiness, by her sensible and serious expostulations. 
Mrs. Smith put in now and then; and
the two Jack-pudden fellows, John and Joseph, not
being present, I had no provocation to turn the conversation
into a farce; and, at last, they both joined
warmly to endeavour to prevail upon me to give up
all thoughts of seeing the Lady. But I could not
hear of that. On the contrary, I besought Mrs. Smith 

to let me have one of her rooms but till I could see
her; and were it but for one, two, or three days,
I would pay a year's rent for it; and quit it the moment
the Interview was over. But they desired to
be excused; and were sure the Lady would not come
to the house till I was gone, were it for a month. 
This pleased me; for I found they did not think
her so very ill as they would have me believe her
to be; but I took no notice of the slip, because I
would not guard them against more of the like. 
In short, I told them, I must and would see her: But
that it should be with all the respect and veneration that
heart could pay to excellence like hers: And that I
would go round to all the Churches in London and
Westminster, where there were Prayers or Service,
from Sun-rise to Sun-set, and haunt their house like
a ghost, till I had the opportunity my soul panted after. 
This I bid them tell her. And thus ended our
serious conversation. 
I took leave of them; and went down; and,
stepping into my chair, caused myself to be carried
to Lincoln's-Inn; and walked in the gardens till
Chapel was opened; and then I went in, and stayed
prayers, in hopes of seeing the dear creature enter: 
But to no purpose; and yet I prayed most devoutly
that she might be conducted thither, either by my
good angel, or her own. And indeed I burn more
than ever with impatience to be once more permitted
to kneel at the feet of this adorable woman. And had
I met her, or espied her in the Chapel, it is my firm
belief, that I should not have been able (tho' it had
been in the midst of the Sacred Office, and in the
presence of thousands) to have forborn prostration to
her, and even clamorous supplication for her forgiveness: 
A Christian act; the exercise of it therefore
worthy of the place. 
After Service was over, I stept into my chair again,
and once more was carried to Smith's, in hopes I might 

have surprised her there: But no such happiness for
thy friend. I staid in the back-shop an hour and an
half, by my watch; and again underwent a good deal
of preachment from the women. John was mainly
civil to me now; won over a little by my serious
talk, and the honour I professed for the Lady. They
all three wished matters could be made up between
us: But still insisted, that she could never get over
her illness; and that her heart was broken. A cue,
I suppose, they had from you. 
While I was there, a Letter was brought by a particular
hand. They seemed very solicitous to hide it
from me; which made me suspect it was for her. I
desired to be suffered to cast an eye upon the Seal, and
the Superscription; promising to give it back to them
unopened. 
Looking upon it, I told them, I knew the Hand
and Seal. It was from her Sister (a) . And I hoped
it would bring her news that she would be pleased
with. 
They joined most heartily in the same hope: And
giving the Letter to them again, I civilly took my
leave, and went away. 
But I will be there again presently; for I fansy my
courteous behaviour to these women, will, on their
report of it, procure me the favour I so earnestly
covet. And so I will leave my Letter unsealed, to
tell thee the event of my next visit at Smith's. 
* *
Thy servant just calling, I send thee this: And
will soon follow it by another. Mean time, I long
to hear how poor Belton is: To whom my best
wishes. 