


The commodore detects the machinations of the conspirators,
and hires a tutor for Peregrine, whom
he settles at Winchester school. 
This was not the last affliction he suffered
from the unwearied endeavours and inexhausted
invention of his tormentors, who harrassed
him with such a variety of mischievous
pranks, that he began to think all the devils in
hell had conspired against his peace; and accordingly
became very serious and contemplative on
the subject. 
In the course of his meditations, when he recollected
and compared the circumstances of
every mortification to which he had been lately
exposed, he could not help suspecting that some
of them must have been contrived to vex him; 
and as he was not ignorant of his lieutenant's disposition,
nor unacquainted with the talents of
Peregrine, he resolved to observe them both for
the future with the utmost care and circumspection. 
This resolution, aided by the incautious
conduct of the conspirators, whom, by this
time, success had rendered heedless and indiscreet,
was attended with the desired effect. He in a little
time detected Perry in a new plot, and by dint of
a little chastisement, and a great many threats,
extorted from him a consession of all the contrivances
in which he had been concerned. The
commodore was thunderstruck at the discovery,
and so much incensed against Hatchway for the
part he had acted in the whole, that he deliberated
with himself, whether he should demand satisfaction 

with sword and pistol, or dismiss him from
the garison, and renounce all friendship with
him at once. But he had been so long accustomed
to Jack's company, that he could not live without
him; and upon more cool reflection, perceiving
that what he had done was rather the
effect of wantonness than malice, which he himself
would have laughed to see take place upon
any other person, he determined to devour his
chagrin, and extend his forgiveness even to Pipes,
whom in the first sally of his passion he had
looked upon in a more criminal light than that
of a simple mutineer. This determination was
seconded by another, which he thought absolutely
necessary for his own repose, and in which
his own interest and that of his nephew concurred. 
Peregrine, who was now turned of twelve,
had made such advances under the instruction of
Jennings, that he often disputed upon grammar,
and was sometimes thought to have the better
in his contests with the parish-priest, who, notwithstanding
this acknowledged superiority of his
antagonist, did great justice to his genius, which
he assured Mr. Trunnion would be lost for want
of cultivation, if the boy was not immediately
sent to prosecute his studies at some proper seminary
of learning. 
This maxim had more than once been inculcated
upon the commodore by Mrs. Trunnion, who, over
and above the deference she paid to the parson's
opinion, had a reason of her own for wishing to see
the house clear of Peregrine, at whose prying disposition
she began to be very uneasy. Induced by
these motive, which were joined by the sollicitation
of the youth himself, who ardently longed 

to see a little more of the world, his uncle determined
to send him forthwith to Winchester, under
the immediate care and inspection of a governor,
to whom he allowed a very handsome appointment
for that purpose. This gentleman, whose name
was Mr. Jacob Jolter, had been schoolfellow
with the parson of the parish, who recommended
him to Mrs. Trunnion as a person of great
worth and learning, in every respect qualified for
the office of a tutor. He likewise added, by
way of eulogium, that he was a man of exemplary
piety, and particularly zealous for the honour
of the church of which he was a member,
having been many years in holy orders, tho' he
did not then exercise any function of the priesthood. 
Indeed, Mr. Jolter's zeal was so exceedingly
fervent, as, on some occasions, to get the
better of his discretion: for, being an high-churchman,
and of consequence a malecontent,
his resentment was habituated into an insurmountable
prejudice against the present disposition
of affairs, which, by confounding the nation
with the ministry, sometimes led him into
erroneous, not to say absurd calculations; otherwise,
a man of good morals, well versed in mathematicks
and school-divinity, studies which had
not at all contributed to sweeten and unbend the
natural sourness and severity of his complexion. 
This gentleman being destined to the charge
of superintending Perry's education, every thing
was prepared for their departure; and Tom
Pipes, in consequence of his own petition, put
into livery, and appointed footman to the young
squire. But, before they set out, the commodore
paid the compliment of communicating his
design to Mr. Pickle, who approved of the plan, 

tho' he durst not venture to see the boy; so
much was he intimidated by the remonstrances
of his wife, whose aversion to her first-born became
every day more inveterate and unaccountable. 
This unnatural caprice seemed to be supported
by a consideration which (one would imagine)
might have rather vanquished her disgust. 
Her second son Gam, who was now in the fourth
year of his age, had been ricketty from the
cradle, and as remarkably unpromising in appearance
as Perry was agreeable in his person. 
As the deformity increased, the mother's fondness
was augmented, and the virulence of her
hate against the other son seemed to prevail in
the same proportion. 
Far from allowing Perry to enjoy the common
privileges of a child, she would not suffer
him to approach his father's house, expressed uneasiness
whenever his name happened to be mentioned,
sickened at his praise, and in all respects
behaved like a most rancorous step-mother. Tho'
she no longer retained that ridiculous notion of
his being an impostor, she still continued to abhor
him, as if she really believed him to be
such; and when any person desired to know the
cause of her surprising dislike, she always lost
her temper, and peevishly replied, that she had
reasons of her own, which she was not obliged
to declare: nay, so much was she infected by
this vicious partiality, that she broke off all commerce
with her sister-in-law and the commodore,
because they favoured the poor child with their
countenance and protection. 
Her malice, however, was frustrated by the
love and generosity of Trunnion, who having
adopted him as his own son, equipped him accordingly, 

and carried him and his governor in
his own coach to the place of destination, where
they were settled on a very genteel footing, and
every thing regulated according to their desires. 
Mrs. Trunnion behaved with great decency at
the departure of her nephew, to whom, with a
great many pious advices, and injunctions to behave
with submission and reverence towards his
tutor, she presented a diamond ring of small value,
and a gold medal, as tokens of her affection
and esteem. As for the lieutenant, he accompanied
them in the coach; and such was the
friendship he had contracted for Perry, that when
the commodore proposed to return, after having
accomplished the intent of his journey, Jack absolutely
refused to attend him, and signified his
resolution to stay where he was. 
Trunnion was the more startled at this declaration,
as Hatchway was become so necessary
to him in almost all the purposes of his life, that
he foresaw he should not be able to exist without
his company. Not a little affected with this
consideration, he turned his eye ruefully upon
the lieutenant, saying in a piteous tone, “What!
leave me at last, Jack, after we have weathered
so many hard gales together? D&wblank;n my limbs! 
I thought you had been more of an honest heart: 
I looked upon you as my foremast, and Tom
Pipes as my mizzen; now he is carried away,
if so be as you go too, my standing rigging being
decayed, d'ye see, the first squall will bring
me by the board. D&wblank;n ye, if in case I have
given offence, can't ye speak above-board? and
I shall make you amends.” 
Jack being ashamed to own the true situation
of his thoughts, after some hesitation, answered 

with perplexity and incoherence, “No, damme!
that an't the case neither: to be sure you always
used me in an officer-like manner, that I must
own, to give the devil his due, as the saying is; 
but for all that, this here is the case, I have some
thoughts of going to school myself to learn your
Latin lingo; for, as the saying is, Better late
mend than never do well: and I am informed as
how one can get more for the money here than
any where else.” 
In vain did Trunnion endeavour to convince
him of the folly of going to school at his years,
by representing that the boys would make game
of him, and that he would become a laughing-stock
to all the world; he persisted in his resolution
to stay, and the commodore was fain to
have recourse to the mediation of Pipes and Perry,
who employed their influence with Jack, and at
last prevailed upon him to return to the garison,
after Trunnion had promised he should be
at liberty to visit them once a month. This stipulation
being settled, he and his friend took
leave of the pupil, governor and attendant, and
next morning set out for their habitation, which
they reached in safety that same night. 
Such was Hatchway's reluctance to leave Peregrine,
that he is said, for the first time in his
life, to have looked misty at parting: certain I
am, that on the road homewards, after a long
pause of silence, which the commodore never
dreamt of interrupting, he exclaimed all of a
sudden, “I'll be damned if the dog han't given
me some stuff to make me love him.” Indeed
there was something congenial in the disposition
of these two friends, which never failed to manifest 

itself in the sequel, howsoever different
their education, circumstances and connexions
happened to be. 