


We visit Strap's friend—a description of
him—his advice—we go to Mr.
Cringer's house—are denied admittance
—an accident befals Strap—his behaviour
thereupon—an extraordinary
adventure occurs, in the course of which I
lose all my money. 
In the afternoon, my companion proposed to
to call at his friend's house, which, we were
informed, was in the neighbourhood, whither we
accordingly went, and were so lucky as to find
him at home. This gentleman, who had come
from Scotland three or four years ago, kept a
school in town, where he taught the Latin,
French and Italian languages; but what he chiefly
professed was the pronounciation of the English
tongue, after a method more speedy and uncommon
than any practised heretofore; and indeed if
his scholars spoke like their master, the latter part of
his undertaking was certainly performed to a tittle; 
for although I could easily understand every word
of what I had heard hitherto since I entered England,
three parts in four of his dialect were as unintelligible
to me, as if he had spoke in Arabick
or Irish. —He was a middle-sized man, and
stooped very much, though not above the age of
forty; his face was very much pitted with the
small-pox, his eyes blear'd, and his mouth extended
from ear to ear. —He was dressed in a 

night-gown of plaid, fastened about his middle
with a serjeant's old sash, and a tie-perriwig
with a fore-top three inches high, in the fashion
of king Charles the second's reign. —After he
had received Strap (who was related to him) very
courteously, he enquired of him, who I was:
and being informed, took me by the hand,
telling me, he was at school with my father. — 
When he understood my situation, he assured
me that he would do me all the service in his
power, both by his advice and otherwise; and
while he spoke these words, he eyed me with
great attention, walking round me several times,
and muttering, “O Ch&wblank;st! O Ch&wblank;st! fat a
saight is here?” —I soon guessed the reason of
of his ejaculation, and said, “I suppose, sir,
you are not pleased with my dress.” —“Dress,
(answered he) you may caal it fat you please,
in your country, but I vaw to Gad, 'tis a
masquerade here. —No christian will admit
such a figure into his hawse. —Upon my conscience! 
I wonder the dogs did not hunt you. 
—Did you pass through St. James's market? 
—God bless my eye-saight! you look like a
cousin-german of Ouran Outang.” —I began
to be a little serious at this discourse, and asked
him, if he thought I should obtain entrance tomorrow
at the house Mr. Cringer, on whom I
chiefly depended, for an introduction into business. 
—“Mr. Cringer, Mr. Cringer (replied he,
scratching his cheek) may be a very honest
gentleman—I know nothing to the contrary; 
but is your sole dependance upon him? —Who
recommended you to him?” —I pulled out
Mr. Crab's letter, and told him the foundation of
my hopes; at which he stared at me, and repeated, 

“O Ch&wblank;st!” —I began to conceive bad
omens from this behaviour of his, and begged he
would assist me with his advice; which he promised
to do very frankly; and as a specimen, directed
us to a perriwig ware-house, in the neighbourhood,
in order to be accommodated; laying
strong injunctions on me not to appear before
Mr. Cringer, till I had parted with these carroty
locks, which (he said) were sufficient to beget an
antipathy against me, in all mankind. —And as
we were going to pursue this advice, he called
me back, and bid me be sure to deliver my letter
into Mr. Cringer's own hand. —As we walked
along, Strap triumphed greatly in our reception
with his friend, who (it seems) had assured him,
he would in a day or two provide for him, with
some good master; and “now (says he) you
shall see how I will fit you with a wig— 
There's ne'er a barber in London (and that's
a bold word) can palm a rotten caul, or a
penny-weight of dead hair upon me.” —And
indeed this zealous adherent did wrangle so long
with the merchant, that he was desired twenty
times to leave the shop, and see if he could get
one cheaper elsewhere. At length I made choice
of a good handsome bob, for which I paid fifteen
shillings; and returned to our lodging, where
Strap, in a moment, rid me of that hair which
had given the school-master so much offence. 
We got up next day betimes, having been
informed that Mr. Cringer gave audience by
candle-light to all his dependants, he himself being
obliged to attend the levee of my lord Terrier,
at break of day; because his lordship made
one at the minister's between eight and nine a-clock. 
—When we came to Mr. Cringer's door, 

Strap, to give me an instance of his politeness,
run to the knocker, which he employed so loud
and so long, that he alarmed the whole street; 
and a window opening up two pair of stairs in
the next house, a chamber-pot was discharged
upon him so successfully, that the poor barber was
wet to the skin, while I, being luckily at some
distance, escaped the unsavoury deluge. —In the
mean time, a footman opening the door, and seein
no body in the street but us, asked with a
stern countenance, if it was I who made such a
damned noise, and what I wanted. —I told him
I had business with his master, whom I desired
to see. —Upon which, he clapt the door in my
face, telling me, I must learn better manners before
I could have access to his master. Vexed
at this disappointment, I turned my resentment
against Strap, whom I sharply reprimanded for
his presumption; but he not in the least regarding
what I said, wrung the urine out of his perriwig,
and lifting up a large stone, flung it with
such force against the street-door of that house
from whence he had been bedewed, that the
lock giving way, it flew wide open, and he took
to his heels, leaving me to follow him as I could. 
—Indeed there was no time for deliberation; I
therefore pursued him with all the speed I could
exert, until we found ourselves, about the dawn,
in a street we did not know. Here as we wandered
along, gaping about, a very decent sort of
a man, passing by me, stopped of a sudden, and
took up something, which having examined, he
turned, and presented it to me with these words,
“Sir, you have dropt half a crown.” —I was
not a little surprized at this instance of honesty,
and told him, it did not belong to me; but he 

bid me recollect and see if all my money was safe,
upon which I pulled out my purse (for I had
bought one since I came to town) and reckoning
my money in my hand, which was now reduced
to five guineas, seven shillings and two pence,
I assured him I had lost nothing. —“Well then,
(says he) so much the better,—this is God-send
—and as you two were present when I
picked it up, you are entitled to equal shares
with me.” —I was astonished at these words,
and looked upon this person to be a prodigy of
integrity, but absolutely refused any part of the
sum. —“Come, gentlemen, (said he) you are
too modest—I see you are strangers—but
you shall give me leave to treat you with a
whet this cold raw morning.” —I would have
declined this invitation, but Strap whispered to
me, that the gentleman would be affronted, and
I complied. —“Where shall we go? (said the
stranger) I am quite ignorant of this part of the
town.” —I informed him that we were in the
same situation: Upon which he proposed to go
into the first public house we should find open. 
As we walked together, he began in this manner: 
—“I find by your tongues you are come from
Scotland, gentlemen. —My grandmother by
the father's side was of your country, which
has prepossessed me so much in its favour, that
I never meet a Scotchman but my heart
warms. —The Scots are a very brave people. 
—There is scarce a great family in the kingdom,
that cannot boast of some exploits performed
by its ancestors many hundred years
ago. —There's your Douglasses, Gordons,
Campbels, Hamiltons. —We have no such ancient
families here in England. —Then you 

are all very well educated. —I have known a
pedlar talk in Greek and Hebrew, as well as
if they had been his mother tongue—And for
honesty—I once had a servant, his name was
Gregory Macgregor, I would have trusted
him with untold gold.” —This eulogium on
my native country, gained my affection so strongly,
that I believe I could have gone to death to
serve the author; and Strap's eyes swam in tears. 
At length, as we passed through a dark narrow
lane, we perceived a public house, which we entered; 
and found a man sitting by the fire,
smoaking a pipe with a pint of purl before him. 
—Our new acquaintance asked us, if ever we
had drank egg flip; to which we answering in
the negative, he assured us of a regale, and ordered
a quart to be prepared, calling for pipes and
tobacco at the same time. We found this composition
very palatable, and drank heartily; the
conversation (which was introduced by the gentleman)
turning upon the snares that young
unexperienced people are exposed to in this metropolis. 
—He described a thousand cheats that are
daily practised upon the ignorant and unwary; 
and warned us of them with so much good-nature
and concern, that we blessed the opportunity
which threw us into his way. —After we had put
the cann about for some time, our new friend began
to yawn, telling us he had been up all night
with a sick person; and proposed we should have
recourse to some diversion to keep him awake. 
—“Suppose (said he) we should take a hand at
whist for pastime—But let me see, that won't
do, there's only three of us; and I cannot
play at any other game—The truth is, I seldom
or never play, but out of complaisance, 

or at such a time as this, when I am in danger
of falling asleep.” —Although I had no
great inclination for gaming, I felt no aversion to
pass an hour or two at cards with a friend; and
knowing that Strap understood as much of the
matter as I, made no scruple of saying, “I wish
we could find a fourth hand.” —While we
were in this perplexity, the person whom we
found at our entrance, overhearing our discourse,
took the pipe from his mouth very gravely, and
accosted us thus: “Gentlemen, my pipe
is out, you see, (shaking the ashes into the fire)
and rather than you should be baulked, I don't
care if I take a hand with you, for a trifle,— 
but remember I won't play for any thing of
consequence.” —We accepted his profer with
pleasure; and having cut for partners, it fell to
my lot to play with him, against our friend and
Strap, for three pence a game. —We were so
successful, that in a short time I was half a crown
gainer; when the gentleman whom we had met
in the street observing he had no luck to-day,
proposed to leave off, or change partners. —By
this time I was inflamed with my good fortune,
and the expectation of improving it, as I perceived
the two strangers plaid but indifferently: therefore
I voted for giving him his revenge, with
which he complied after some intreaty, and cutting
again, Strap and I (to our mutual satisfaction)
happened to be partners. —My good fortune
attended me still, and in less than an hour,
we had got thirty shillings of their money; for
as they lost, they grew the keener and doubled
stakes every time. At last the inconstant goddess
began to veer about, and we were very soon
stript of all our gains, and about forty shillings 

of our own money. This mortified me extremely,
and had a visible effect on the muscles of
Strap's face, which lengthened apace; but our
antagonists perceiving our condition, kindly permitted
us to retrieve our loss, and console ourselves
with a new acquisition. —Then my companion
wisely suggested it was time to begone; 
upon which, the person who had joined us in
the house began to curse the cards; and muttered
that we were indebted to fortune only for what
we had got, no part of our success being owing
to our good play. —This insinuation nettled me
so much, that I challenged him to continue the
game for a crown; and he was with difficulty
persuaded to accept the invitation. —This contest
ended in less than an hour, to my inexpressible
affliction, who lost every shilling of my own
money, Strap absolutely refusing to supply me
with a six-pence. —The gentleman, at whose request
we had come in, perceiving by my disconsolate
looks the situation of my heart, which well
nigh bursted with grief and resentment, when
the other stranger got up, and went away with
my money; began in this manner: “I am truly
afflicted at your bad luck, and would willingly
repair it, was it in my power. —But what in
the name of goodness could provoke you to
tempt your fate so long? It is always a maxim
with gamesters to pursue success as far as it
will go, and to stop whenever fortune shifts
about. —You are a young man, and your passions
too impetuous; you must learn to govern
them better: —However, there is no
experience like that which is bought; you
will be the better for this the longest day you
have to live. —As for the fellow who has got 

your money, I don't half like him—Did not
you observe me tip you the wink, to leave off
in time?” —I answered, No. “No, (continued
he) you was too eager to mind any
thing but the game. —But, harkee, (said he,
in a whisper) are you satisfied of that young
man's honesty? his looks are a little suspicious; 
—but I may be mistaken;—he made a great
many grimaces while he stood behind you;— 
this is a very wicked town.” —I told him I
was very well convinced of my comrade's integrity,
and that the grimaces he mentioned were
doubtless owing to his anxiety at my loss. — 
“O ho! if that be the case, I ask his pardon. 
—Landlord, see what's to pay.” —The reckoning
came to eighteen pence, which having
discharged, the gentleman shook us both by the
hand, and saying he should be very glad to see
us again, departed. 