


DEAR WAT,
THE farce is finished, and another piece of a
graver cast brought upon the stage. —Our aunt
made a desperate attack upon Barton, who had no
other way of saving himself, but by leaving her in
possession of the field, and avowing his pretensions
to Liddy, by whom he has been rejected in his turn. 
Lady Griskin acted as his advocate and agent on
this occasion, with such zeal as embroiled her with
Mrs. Tabitha, and a high scene of altercation passed
betwixt these two religionists, which might have
come to action, had not my uncle interposed. 
They are, however, reconciled, in consequence of
an event which hath involved us all in trouble and
disquiet. You must know, the poor preacher,
Humphry Clinker, is now exercising his ministry
among the felons in Clerkenwell prison. —A postillion
having sworn a robbery against him, no bail
could be taken, and he was committed to goal, notwithstanding
all the remonstrances and interest my
uncle could make in his behalf. 

All things considered, the poor fellow cannot
possibly be guilty, and yet, I believe, he runs some
risque of being hanged. —Upon his examination,
he answered with such hesitation and reserve, as
persuaded most of the people, who crowded the
place, that he was really a knave, and the justice's
remarks confirmed their opinion. Exclusive of my
uncle and myself, there was only one person who
seemed inclined to favour the culprit. —He was a
young man, well dressed, and from the manner in
which he cross-examined the evidence, we took it
for granted, that he was a student in one of the
inns of courts—He freely checked the justice for
some uncharitable inferences he made to the prejudice
of the prisoners, and even ventured to dispute
with his worship on certain points of law. 
My uncle, provoked at the unconnected and dubious
answers of Clinker, who seemed in danger of
falling a sacrifice to his own simplicity, exclaimed,
“In the Name of God, if you are innocent, say
so.” “No (cried he) God forbid that I should
call myself innocent, while my conscience is burdened
with sin.” “What then, you did commit
this robbery?” resumed his master,” “No,
sure (said he) blessed be the Lord, I'm free of
that guilt.” 
Here the justice interposed, observing, that the
man seemed inclined to make a discovery by turning
king's evidence, and desired the clerk to take
his confession; upon which Humphry declared,
that he looked upon confession to be a popish fraud,
invented by the whore of Babylon. The Templar,
affirmed, that the poor fellow was non compos; and
exhorted the justice to discharge him as a lunatic. 
“You know very well (added he) that the robbery
in question was not committed by the prisoner.” 

The thief-takers grinned at one another; and
Mr. Justice Buzzard replied with great emotion,
“Mr. Martin, I desire you will mind your own
business; I shall convince you one of these days
that I understand mine.” In short, there was
no remedy; the mittimus was made out, and poor
Clinker sent to prison in a hackney-coach, guarded
by the constable, and accompanied by your
humble servant. By the way, I was not a little
surprised to hear this retainer to justice bid the
prisoner to keep up his spirits, for that he did not
at all doubt, but that he would get off for a few
weeks confinement. —He said, his worship knew
very well that Clinker was innocent of the fact,
and that the real highwayman, who robbed the
chaise, was no other than that very individual Mr.
Martin, who had pleaded so strenuously for honest
Humphry. 
Confounded at this information, I asked,
“Why then is he suffered to go about at his liberty,
and this poor innocent fellow treated as a
malefactor?” “We have exact intelligence of
all Mr. Martin's transactions; (said he) but as
yet there is no evidence sufficient for his conviction; 
and as for this young man, the justice
could do no less than commit him, as the postillion
swore point-blank to his identity.” “So
if this rascally postillion should persist in the falsity
to which he is sworn, (said I) this innocent
lad may be brought to the gallows.” 
The constable observed, that he would have
time enough to prepare for his trial, and might
prove an alibi; or perhaps, Martin might be
apprehended and convicted for another fact; in
which case, he might be prevailed upon to take
this affair upon himself; or finally, if these
chances should fail, and the evidence stand good
against Clinker, the jury might recommend him 

to mercy, in consideration of his youth, especially
if this should appear to be the first fact of which
he had been guilty. 
Humphry owned he could not pretend to recollect
where he had been on the day when the
robbery was committed, much less prove a circumstance
of that kind so far back as six months,
though he knew he had been sick of the fever
and ague, which, however, did not prevent him
from going about—then, turning up his eyes, he
ejaculated, “The Lord's will be done! if it be
my fate to suffer, I hope I shall not disgrace
the faith, of which, though unworthy, I make
profession.” 
When I expressed my surprize, that the accuser
should persist in charging Clinker, without taking
the least notice of the real robber, who stood before
him, and to whom, indeed, Humphry bore
not the smallest resemblance; the constable (who
was himself a thief-taker) gave me to understand,
that Mr. Martin was the best qualified for
business of all the gentlemen on the road he had
ever known; that he always acted on his own
bottom, without partner or correspondent, and
never went to work, but when he was cool and
sober; that his courage and presence of mind
never failed him; that his address was genteel,
and his behaviour void of all cruelty and insolence; 
that he never encumbered himself with watches
or trinkets, nor even with bank-notes, but always
dealt for ready money, and that in the current
coin of the kingdom; and that he could disguise
himself and his horse in such a manner, that, after
the action, it was impossible to recognize either
the one or the other—“This great man (said he)
has reigned paramount in all the roads within
fifty miles of London above fifteen months, and
has done more business in that time, than all 

the rest of the profession put together; for
those who pass through his hands, are so delicately
dealt with, that they have no desire to give
him the least disturbance; but for all that, his
race is almost run—he is now fluttering about
justice, like a moth about a candle—there are
so many lime-twigs laid in his way, that I'll
bet a cool hundred, he swings before Christmas.” 
Shall I own to you, that this portrait, drawn
by a ruffian, heightened by what I myself had observed
in his deportment, has interested me warmly
in the fate of poor Martin, whom nature seems
to have intended for a useful and honourable member
of that community upon which he now preys
for subsistence? It seems he lived some time as
a clerk to a tember merchant, whose daughter
Martin having privately married, was discarded,
and his wife turned out of doors. She did not
long survive her marriage; and Martin, turning
fortune-hunter, could not supply his occasions any
other way, than by taking to the road, in which
he has travelled hitherto with uncommon success. 
—He pays his respects regularly to Mr. Justice
Buzzard, the thief-catcher-general of this metropolis,
and sometimes they smoke a pipe together
very lovingly, when the conversation generally
turns upon the nature of evidence. —The justice
has giving him fair warning to take care of himself,
and he has received his caution in good part. 
—Hitherto he has baffled all the vigilance, art,
and activity of Buzzard and his emissaries, with
such conduct as would have done honour to the
genius of a Cæsar or a Turenne; but he has one
weakness which has proved fatal to all the heroes
of his tribe, namely, an indiscreet devotion to
the fair sex, and in all probability, he will be attacked
on this defenceless quarter. 

Be that as it may, I saw the body of poor
Clinker consigned to the gaoler of Clerkenwell,
to whose indulgence I recommended him so effectually,
that he received him in the most hospitable
manner, though there was a necessity for equipping
him with a suit of irons, in which he made a very
rueful appearance. The poor creature seemed as
much affected by my uncle's kindness, as by his
own misfortune. When I assured him, that nothing
should be left undone for procuring his enlargment,
and making his confinement easy in
the mean time, he fell down on his knees, and
kissing my hand, which he bathed with his tears,
“O 'squire! (cried he, sobbing) what shall I say? 
—I can't—no—, I can't speak—my poor heart
is bursting with gratitude to you and my dear
—dear—generous—noble benefactor.” 
I protest, the scene became so pathetic, that I
was fain to force myself away, and returned to
my uncle, who sent me in the afternoon with a
compliment to one Mr. Mead, the person who had
been robbed on Black-heath. As I did not find
him at home, I left a message, in consequence of
which he called at our lodgings this morning, and
very humanely agreed to visit the prisoner. By
this time, lady Criskin had come to make her
formal compliments of condolance to Mrs. Tabitha,
on this domestic calamity; and that prudent
maiden, whose passion was now cooled, thought
proper to receive her ladyship so civilly, that a
reconciliation immediately ensued. These two
ladies resolved to comfort the poor prisoner in their
own persons, and Mr. Mead and I 'squired them
to Clerkenwell, my uncle being detained at home
by some slight complaints in his stomach and
bowels. 

The turnkey, who received us at Clerkenwell,
looked remarkably sullen; and when we enquired
for Clinker, “I don't care if the devil had him; 
(said he) here has been nothing but canting and
praying since the fellow entered the place. — 
Rabbit him! the tap will be ruined—we han't
sold a cask of beer, nor a dozen of wine, since
he paid his garnish—the gentlemen get drunk
with nothing but your damned religion. —For
my part, I believe as how your man deals with
the devil. —Two or three as bold hearts as ever
took the air upon Hounslow, have been blubbering
all night; and if the fellow an't speedily
removed by Habeas Corpus, or otherwise, I'll
be damn'd if there's a grain of true spirit left
within these walls—we shan't have a soul to do
credit to the place, or make his exit like a true-born
Englishman—damn my eyes! there will
be nothing but snivelling in the cart—we shall
all die like so many psalm singing weavers.” 
In short, we found that Humphry was, at that
very instant, haranguing the felons in the chapel; 
and that the gaoler's wife and daughter, together
with my aunt's woman, Win. Jenkins, and our
house-maid, were among the audience, which we
immediately joined. I never saw any thing so
strongly picturesque as this congregation of felons
clanking their chains, in the midst of whom stood
orator Clinker, expatiating, in a transport of
fervour, on the torments of hell, denounced in
scripture against evil-doers, comprehending murderers,
robbers, thieves, and whoremongers. The
variety of attention exhibited in the faces of those
ragamuffins, formed a groupe that would not have
disgraced the pencil of a Raphael. In one it denoted
admiration; in another, doubt; in a third,
disdain; in a fourth, contempt; in a fifth terror; 

in a sixth, derision; and in a seventh, indignation. 
—As for Mrs. Winifred Jenkins, she was in tears,
overwhelmed with sorrow; but whether for her
own sins, or the misfortune of Clinker, I cannot
pretend to say. The other females seemed to
listen with a mixture of wonder and devotion. 
The gaoler's wife declared he was a saint in trouble,
saying, she wished from her heart, there was
such another good soul, like him, in every gaol in
England. 
Mr. Mead, having earnestly surveyed the preacher,
declared his appearance was so different from
that of the person who robbed him on Black-heath,
that he could freely make oath he was not the
man: But Humphry himself was by this time
pretty well rid of all apprehensions of being hanged; 
for he had been the night before solemnly
tried and acquitted by his fellow prisoners, some
of whom he had already converted to methodism. 
He now made proper acknowledgments for the
honour of our visit, and was permitted to kiss the
hands of the ladies, who assured him, he might
depend upon their friendship and protection. Lady
Griskin, in her great zeal, exhorted his fellow-prisoners
to profit by the precious opportunity of
having such a saint in bonds among them, and turn
over a new leaf for the benefit of their poor souls; 
and, that her admonition might have the greater
effect, she reinforced it with her bounty. 
While she and Mrs. Tabby returned in the
coach with the two maid-servants, I waited on Mr.
Mead to the house of justice Buzzard, who, having
heard his declaration, said his oath could be
of no use at present, but that he would be a material
evidence for the prisoner at his trial; so that
there seems to be no remedy but patience for poor
Clinker; and, indeed, the same virtue, or medicine,
will be necessary for us all, the 'squire in 

particular, who had set his heart upon his excursion
to the northward. 
While we were visiting honest Humphry in
Clerkenwell prison, my uncle received a much
more extraordinary visit at his own lodgings. Mr.
Martin, of whom I have made such honourable
mention, desired permission to pay him his respects,
and was admitted accordingly. He told
him, that having observed him, at Mr. Buzzard's,
a good deal disturbed by what had happened to his
servant, he had come to assure him he had nothing
to apprehend for Clinker's life; for if it was possible
that any jury could find him guilty upon such
evidence, he, Martin himself, would produce in
court a person, whose deposition would bring him
off clear as the sun at noon. —Sure, the fellow
would not be so romantic as to take the robbery
upon himself! —He said, the postillion was an infamous
fellow, who had been a dabbler in the same
profession, and saved his life at the Old Bailey by
impeaching his companions; that being now reduced
to great poverty, he had made this desperate
push, to swear away the life of an innocent man,
in hopes of having the reward upon his conviction; 
but that he would find himself miserably disappointed,
for the justice and his myrmidons were
determined to admit of no interloper in this branch
of business; and that he did not at all doubt but
that they would find matter enough to shop the
evidence himself before the next gaol delivery. He
affirmed, that all these circumstances were well
known to the justice; and that his severity to
Clinker was no other than a hint to his master to
make him a present in private, as an acknowledgment
of his candour and humanity. 
This hint, however, was so unpalatable to Mr.
Bramble, that he declared, with great warmth
he would rather confine himself for life to London' 

which he detested, than be at liberty to leave it
to-morrow, in consequence of encouraging corruption
in a magistrate. Hearing, however, how
favourable Mr. Mead's report had been for the
prisoner, he is resolved to take the advice of counsel
in what manner to proceed for his immediate
enlargement. I make no doubt, but that in a day
or two this troublesome business may be discussed; 
and in this hope we are preparing for our journey. 
If our endeavours do not miscarry; we shall have
taken the field before you hear again from 
Yours,
J. Melford. 
London, June 11. 