

The mystery unfolded. Another recognition,
which, it is to be hoped, the reader could not
foresee. 
The French lady then explained the whole
mystery of Monimia's death, as a stratagem
she had concerted with the clergyman
and doctor, in order to defeat the pernicious
designs of Fathom, who seemed determined
to support his false pretensions, by dint of
perjury and fraud, which they would have
found it very difficult to elude. She observed,
that the physician had actually dispaired of
Monimia's life, and it was not till after she
herself was made acquainted with the prognostick,
that she wrote the letter to Renaldo,
which she committed to the care of madame
Clement, with an earnest intreaty, that it
should not be sent till after her decease:
but that lady believing the count had been certainly
abused by his treacherous confident,
dispatched the billet without the knowledge of
Monimia, whose health was restored by the
indefatigable care of the physician, and the
sage exhortations of the clergyman, by which
she was reconciled to life. In a word, the
villainy of Fathom had inspired her with some
faint hope that Renaldo might still be innocent; 
and that notion contributed not a little
to her cure. 
The letter having so effectually answered
their warmest hopes, in bringing back Renaldo
such a pattern of constancy and love; the confederates,
in consequence of his enthusiastic 

sorrow, had planned this meeting, as the most
interesting way of restoring two virtuous lovers
to the arms of each other; for which purpose
the good clergyman had pitched upon his own
church, and indulged them with the use of the
vestry, in which they now were presented with
a small but elegant collation. 
Melvile heard this succinct detail with equal
joy and admiration: he poured forth the dictates
of his gratitude to the preservers of his happiness: 
“This church, said he, shall henceforth
possess a double share of my veneration; 
this holy man will, I hope, finish the charitable
work he has begun, by tying those bands of
our happiness, which nought but death shall
have power to unbind.” Then turning to that
object which was the star of his regard, “Do
I not over-rate, said he, my interest with the
fair Monimia?” She made no verbal reply; 
but answered by an emphatic glance, more eloquent
than all the power of rhetorick and
speech. This language, which is universal in
the world of love, he perfectly well understood,
and in token of that faculty, sealed the assent
which she had smiled, with a kiss imprinted on
her polished forehead. 
In order to dissipate those interesting ideas,
which, by being too long indulged, might
have endangered his reason, madame Clement
intreated him to entertain the company with
a detail of what had happened to him in his
last journey to the empire, and Monimia expressed
a desire of knowing, in particular, the
issue of his contest with count Trebasi, who,
she knew, had usurped the succession of his
father. 
Thus sollicited, he could not refuse to gratify 

their curiosity and concern: he explained
his obligations to the benevolent Jew; related
the steps he had taken at Vienna for the recovery
of his inheritance; informed them of
his happy rencounter with his father-in-law; 
of his sister's deliverance and marriage; of the
danger into which his life had been precipitated
by the news of Monimia's death; and lastly,
of his adventure with the banditti, in favour of
a gentleman, who (he afterwards understood)
had been robbed in the most base and barbarous
manner by Fathom. He likewise, to the
astonishment of all present, and of his mistress
in particular, communicated some circumstances,
which shall appear in due season. 
Monimia's tender frame being quite fatigued
with the scene she had acted, and her mind
overwhelmed with the prosperous tidings she
had heard, after having joined the congratulations
of the company, on the good fortune of
her Renaldo, begged leave to retire, that she
might by repose recruit her exhausted spirits; and
the night being pretty far spent, she was conducted
by her lover to madame Clement's coach, that
stood in waiting, in which also the rest of the
company made shift to embark, and were carried
to the house of that good lady, where after
they were invited to dine, and Melvile intreated
to bring don Diego and the Jew along with
them, they took leave of one another, and retired
to their respective lodgings in a transport
of joy and satisfaction. 
As for Renaldo, his rapture was still mixed
with apprehension, that all he had seen and
heard was no more than an unsubstantial vision,
raised by some gay delirum of a disorderd imagination. 
While his breast underwent those 

violent, though blissful emotions of joy and
admiration, his friend the Castilian spent the
night in ruminating over his own calamities,
and in a serious and severe review of his own
conduct. He compared his own behaviour
with that of the young Hungarian, and found
himself so light in the scale, that he smote his
breast with violence, exclaiming in an agony
of remorse, 
“Count Melvile has reason to grieve: Don
Diego to despair: his misfortunes flow from
the villainy of mankind; mine are the fruit of
my own madness: he laments the loss of a
mistress, who fell a sacrifice to the perfidious
arts of a crafty traitor: she was beautiful, virtuous,
accomplished, and affectionate; he was
fraught with sensibility and love: doubtless,
his heart must have deeply suffered; his behaviour
denotes the keenness of his woe; his eyes
are ever-flowing fountains of tears; his bosom
the habitation of sighs; five hundred leagues
hath he measured in a pilgrimage to her tomb; 
nightly he visits the dreary vault where she now
lies at rest; her solitary grave is his couch; he
converses with darkness and the dead, until
each lonely isle re-echoes his distress. What
would be his penance, had he my cause! were
he conscious of having murthered a beloved
wife and darling daughter! ah wretch! ah
cruel homicide! what had those dear victims
done to merit such a fate? Were they not ever
gentle and obedient, ever aiming to give thee
satisfaction and delight! Say, that Serafina
was enamoured of a peasant; say, that she
had degenerated from the honour of her race:
the inclinations are involuntary; perhaps that
stranger was her equal in pedigree and worth. 

Had they been fairly questioned, they might
have justified, at least excused that conduct
which appeared so criminal; or had they owned
the offence, and supplicated pardon—Ah
barbarous monster that I am! was all the husband,
was all the father extinguished in my
heart? how shall my own errors be forgiven,
if I refused to pardon the frailties of my own
blood; of those who are most dear to my affection! 
Yet nature pleaded strongly in their
behalf! my heart was bursting while I dismissed
them to the shades of death: I was maddened
with revenge! I was guided by that savage
principle which falsely we call honour:
accursed phantom! that assumes the specious
title, and misleads our wretched nation! is it
then honourable to sculk like an assassin, and
plunge the secret dagger in the heart of some
unhappy man, who hath incurred my groundless
jealousy or suspscion, without indulging
him with that opportunity which the worst
criminal enjoys? or is it honourable to poison
two defenceless women, a tender wife, an amiable
daughter, whom even a frown would
almost have destroyed! O! this is cowardice,
brutality, hell-born fury and revenge! heaven
hath not mercy to forgive such execrable guilt. 
Who gave thee power, abandoned ruffian!
o'er the lives of those whom God hath stationed
as thy fellows of probation; o'er those
whom he had sent to comfort and assist thee; 
to sweeten all thy cares, and smooth the rough
uneven paths of life? O! I am doomed to
never-ceasing horror and remorse! if misery
can attone for such enormous guilt, I have
felt it in the extreme: like an undying vulture
it preys upon my heart; to sorrow I am wedded; 

I hug that teeming consort to my soul; 
never, ah never shall we part: for soon as my
fame shall shine unclouded by the charge of
treason that now hangs over it, I will devote
myself to penitence and woe: a cold damp
pavement shall be my bed; my raiment shall
be sackloth; the fields shall furnish herbage
for my food; the stream shall quench my
thirst; the minutes shall be numbered by my
groans; the night be privy to my strains of sorrow,
till heaven, in pity to my sufferings, release
me from the penance I endure. Perhaps the
saints whom I have murdered, will intercede
for my remission.” 
Such was the exercise of grief, in which
the hapless Castilian consumed the night; he
had not yet consigned himself to rest, when Renaldo
entering his chamber, displayed such a
gleam of wildness and rapture in his countenance,
as overwhelmed him with amazment: for
till that moment, he had never seen his visage
unobscured with woe. “Pardon this abrupt
intrusion, my friend, cried Melvile, I could no
longer with-hold from your participation, the
great, the unexpected turn, which hath this
night dispelled all my sorrows, and restored me
to the fruition of ineffable joy. Monimia lives; 
the fair, the tender, the virtuous Monimia lives,
and smiles upon my vows! This night I retrieved
her from the grave: I held her in these
arms; I pressed her warm, delicious lips to
mine! O! I am giddy with intolerable pleasure!” 
Don Diego was confounded at this declaration,
which he considered as the effect of a disordered
brain: he never doubted that Renaldo's, 

grief had at length overpowered his reason,
and that his words were the effect of mere
frenzy. While he mused on this melancholy
subject, the count composed his features, and,
in a succinct and well-connected detail, explained
the whole mystery of his happiness, to
the inexpressible astonishment of the Spaniard,
who shed tears of satisfaction, and straining
the Hungarian to his breast, “O my son! said
he, you see what recompence heaven hath in
store for those who pursue the paths of real
virtue; those paths from which I myself have
been fatally misled by a faithful vapour, which
hath seduced my steps, and left me darkling
in the abyss of wretchedness. Such as you
describe this happy fair, was once my Serafina,
rich in every grace of mind and body,
which nature could bestow. Had it pleased
heaven to bless her with a lover like Renaldo!
but no more, the irrevocable shaft is fled: I
will not taint your enjoyment with my unavailing
sighs!” 
Melvile assured this disconsolate father, that
no pleasure, no avocation should ever so entirely
ingross his mind, but that he should
still find an hour for sympathy and friendship:
he communicated the invitation of madame
Clement, and insisted upon his compliance,
that he might have an opportunity of seeing
and approving the object of his passion. “I
can refuse nothing to the request of count de
Melvile, replied the Spaniard, and it were ungrateful
in me to decline the honour you propose. 
I own myself inflamed with a desire of
beholding a young lady, whose perfections I
have seen reflected in your sorrow; my curiosity 

is, moreover, interested on account of
that humane gentlewoman, whose uncommon
generosity sheltered such virtue in distress; 
but my disposition is infectious, and will, I am
afraid, hang like a damp upon the general
festivity of your friends.” 
Melvile would take no denial, and having
obtained his consent, repaired to the house of
Joshua, whose countenance seemed to unbend
gradually, into a total expression of joy and
surprize, as he learned the circumstances of
this amazing event: he faithfully promised to
attend the count at the appointed hour, and
in the mean time earnestly exhorted him to
take some repose, in order to quiet the agitation
of his spirits, which must must have been
violently hurried on this occasion. The advice
was salutary, and Renaldo resolved to follow
it. 
He returned to his lodgings, and laid himself
down; but, notwithstanding the fatigue
he had undergone, sleep refused to visit his
eye-lids, all his faculties being kept in motion
by the ideas that crowded so fast upon his
imagination: nevertheless, though his mind
continued in agitation, his body was refreshed,
and he arose in the forenoon with more
serenity and vigour than he had enjoyed for
many months: every moment his heart throbbed
with new rapture, when he found himself
on the brink of possessing all that his soul held
dear and amiable; he put on his gayest looks
and apparel; insisted upon the Castilian's doing
the same honour to the occasion; and the
alteration of dress produced such an advantageous
change in the appearance of don Diego,
that when Joshua arrived at the appointed 

hour, he could scarce recognize his features,
and complimented him very politely on the
improvement of his looks. 
True it is, the Spaniard was a personage of
a very prepossessing mein, and noble deportment; 
and had not grief, by increasing his
native gravity, in some measure discomposed
the symmetry of his countenance, he would
have passed for a man of a very amiable and
engaging physiognomy. They set out in the
Jew's coach for the house of madame Clement,
and were ushered into an apartment,
where they found the clergyman and physician
with that lady, to whom don Diego and
the Hebrew were by Melvile introduced. 
Before they had seated themselves, Renaldo
enquired about the health of Monimia, and
was directed to the next room by madame
Clement, who permitted him to go thither
and conduct her to the company. He was
not slow in availing himself of this permission:
he disappeared in an instant, and during his
short absence, don Diego was strangely disturbed:
the blood flushed, and forsook his
cheeks by turns; a cold vapour seemed to
shiver through his nerves: and at his breast
he felt uncommon palpitation. Madame Clement
observed his discomposure, and kindly
enquired into the cause; when he replied,
“I have such an interest in what concerns the
count de Melvile, and my imagination is so
much prepossessed with the perfections of Monimia,
that I am, as it were, agonized with
expection; yet never did my curiosity before
raise such tumults as those that now agitate my
form!” 
He had scarce pronounced these words, 

when the door re-opening, Renaldo led in
this mirror of elegance and beauty, at sight of
whom the Israelite's countenance was distorted
into a stare of admiration. But if such was
the astonishment of Joshua, what were the
emotions of the Castilian, when, in the beauteous
orphan, he beheld the individual features
of his long lost Serafina! 
His feelings are not to be described; the
fond parent, whose affection shoots even to a
sense of pain, feels not half such transport,
when he unexpectedly retrieves a darling child
from the engulphing billows or devouring
flame. The hope of Zelos had been totally
extinguished; his heart had been incessantly
torn with anguish and remorse, upbraiding
him as the murtherer of Serafina. His therefore
were the additional transports of a father
disburthened of the guilt of such enormous
homicide. His nerves were too much overpowered
by this sudden recognition, to manifest
the sensation of his soul by external signs. 
He started not, nor did he lift an hand in token
of surprize; he moved not from the spot
on which he stood, but, rivetting his eyes to
those of the lovely phantome, remained without
motion, until she, approaching with her
lover, fell at his feet, and clasping his knees,
exclaimed, “May I yet call you father?” 
This powerful shock arrouzed the faculties; 
a cold sweat bedewed his forehead; his knees
began to totter; he dropped upon the floor,
and throwing his arms around her, cried,
“O nature! O Serafina! merciful providence,
thy ways are past finding out.” So saying,
he fell upon her neck, and wept aloud:
the tears of sympathetic joy trickled down her 

snowy bosom, that heaved with rapture inexpressible. 
Renaldo's eyes poured forth the
briny stream: the cheecks of madame Clement
were not dry in this conjuncture: she
kneeled by Serafina, kissed her with all the
eagerness of maternal affection, and with uplifted
hands adored the power that pre-ordained
this blessed event: the clergyman and
doctor intimately shared the general transport; 
and as for Joshua, the drops of true benevolence
flowed from his eyes, like the oil on
Aaron's beard, while he skipped about the
room in an aukward extacy, and in a voice
resembling the hoarse notes of the long-eared
tribe, cried, “O father Abraham! such a
moving scene hath not been acted since Joseph
disclosed himself unto his brethren in
Egypt!” 
Don Diego having found utterance to his
passion, proceeded in this strain, “O! my
dear child! to find thee thus again, after our
last unhappy parting, is wonderful! miraculous! 
Blessed be the all-good, almighty power,
that saved thee for this hour of joy! Yet
while my heart yearns towards thee; while I
pant with inconceivable affection, and thus
review these living features, which were so
long my study and delight, I dare not ask, by
what mysterious means this meeting is effected; 
least, in the fond enquiry, I find my present
bliss unreal, and awake to misery again!” 
“O ever honoured father! she replied, if
to see your Serafina at your feet, melting
with filial love and veneration, can impart a
gleam of satisfaction to your breast, enjoy that
pleasure, and behold her now restored to your
protection and paternal will, which she never 

more will disobey. Alas! had heaven thought
proper to reserve another parent for this interview,
our joys had been compleat; but she
hath already paid her debt to nature, and from
the seat of bliss looks down well pleased on
this interesting scene.” 
“Ah, my Antonia! cried the father, interrupting
her, she is then at rest. Peace be to
her unspotted soul; to have found her here,
had been too much: how my Serafina hath survived
my blindfold rage, I know not; but sure
the guilt of fair Antonia's death, still hangs
upon my soul.” 
“Dismiss that fatal thought, said Serafina,
my mother quietly bad adieu to life in England; 
she peaceably expired within these arms,
and with her latest breath prayed for her hapless
husband.” “Her mind was ever godlike,” 
he resumed, “she was a saint in virtue, ill bestowed
on such a wretch as me; yet thy words
have raised a dreadful burthen from my conscience; 
I am not then the dire assassin, who
sacrificed his wife and daughter to an infernal
motive, falsely titled honour? tho' I am more
and more involved in a mystery, which I long
to hear explained.” 
“That shall be my task, cried Renaldo, but
first permit me to implore your sanction to my
passion for the incomparable Serafina. You
already know our mutual sentiment; and
though I own the possession of such inestimable
worth and beauty, would be a recompence that
infinitely transcends the merit I can plead, yet
as it hath been my good fortune to inspire her
with a mutual flame, I hope to reap from your
indulgence, what I could not expect from my
own desert; and here we present ourselves, 

in hope of your paternal assent and benediction.” 
“Were she more fair, and good, and gentle
than she is, answered the Castilian, (and to my
partial observation, nought e'er appeared on
earth, more beauteous and engaging) I would
approve your title to her heart, and recommend
you to her smiles, with all a father's influence
and power: yes, my daughter; my joy on this
occasion is infinitely augmented by the knowledge
of those tender ties of love that bind thee
to this amiable youth; a youth! to whose uncommon
courage and generosity I owe my life
and my subsistance, together with the inexpressible
delight that now revels in my bosom. 
Enjoy, my children, the happy fruits of your
reciprocal attachment. May heaven, which
hath graciously conducted you through a labyrinth
of perplexity and woe, to this transporting
view of blisful days, indulge you with that uninterrupted
stream of your felicity, which is the
hope, and ought to be the boon of virtue, such
as yours.” 
So saying, he joined their hands, and embraced
them with the most cordial love and satisfaction,
which diffused itself to every individual
of the company, who fervently invoked
the Almighty Power, in behalf of this inraptured
pair. The tumult of these emotions
having a little subsided, and the Castilian being
seated betwixt Renaldo and his beauteous bride,
he politely bespoke the indulgence of madame
Clement, begging she would permit him to
demand the performance of the count's promise,
that he might be forwith made acquainted
with those circumstances of his own fate,
which he was so impatient to learn. 

The lady having assured him, that she and
all the company would take pleasure in hearing
the recapitulation, the Spaniard, addressing himself
to Melvile, “In the name of heaven! said
he, how could you supplant that rival, who
fell a sacrifice to my resentment, after he had
bewitched the heart of Serafina? for, sure, the
affection he had kindled in her breast, must
have long survived his death.” “That rival,
replied the count, who incurred your displeasure,
was no other than Renaldo.” With these
words, he applied to one eye a patch of black
silk provided for the purpose, and turning his
face towards don Diego, that gentleman started
with astonishment, crying, “Good heaven!
the very countenance of Orlando, whom I slew!
this is still more amazing!” 