


DEAR PHILLIPS,
THE moment I received your letter, I began
to execute your commission—With the assistance
of mine host at the Bull and Gate, I discovered
the place to which your fugitive valet had retreated,
and taxed him with his dishonesty—The 

fellow was in manifest confusion at sight of me,
but he denied the charge with great confidence,
till I told him, that if he would give up the watch
which was a family piece, he might keep the
money and the clothes, and go to the devil his
own way, at his leisure; but if he rejected this
proposal, I would deliver him forthwith to the
constable, whom I had provided for that purpose,
and he would carry him before the justice without
further delay. After some hesitation, he desired
to speak with me in the next room, where he produced
the watch, with all its appendages, and I
have delivered it to our landlord, to be sent you
by the first safe conveyance—So much for business. 
I shall grow vain, upon your saying you find
entertainment in my letters; barren, as they
certainly late, of incident and importance, because
your amusement must arise, not from the matter,
but from the manner, which you know is all my
own—Animated, therefore, by the approbation of a
person, whose nice taste and consummate judgment I
can no longer doubt, I will chearfully proceed with
our memoirs—As it is determined we shall set out
next week for Yorkshire, I went to-day in the
forenoon with my uncle to see a carriage, belonging
to a coachmaker in our neighbourhood—Turning
down a narrow lane, behind Long-acre, we
perceived a crowd of people standing at a door; 
which, it seems, opened into a kind of a methodist
meeting, and were informed, that a footman
was then holding forth to the congregation within. 
Curious to see this phenomenon, we squeezed into
the place with much difficulty; and who should
this preacher be, but the identical Humphry
Clinker. He had finished his sermon, and given
out a psalm, the first stave of which he sung with
peculiar graces—But if we were astonished 

to see Clinker in the pulpit, we were altogether
confounded at finding all the females of
our family among the audience—There was lady
Griskin, Mrs. Tabitha Bramble, Mrs. Winifred
Jenkins, my sister Liddy, and Mr. Barton, and all
of them joined in the psalmody, with strong marks
of devotion. 
I could hardly keep my gravity on this ludicrous
occasion; but old Square-toes was differently affected
—The first thing that struck him, was the
presumption of his lacquey, whom he commanded
to come down, with such an air of authority as
Humphry did not think proper to disregard. He
descended immediately, and all the people were in
commotion. Barton looked exceedingly sheepish,
lady Griskin flirted her fan, Mrs. Tabby groaned
in spirit, Liddy changed countenance, and Mrs. Jenkins
sobbed as if her heart was breaking—My uncle,
with a sneer, asked pardon of the ladies, for having
interrupted their devotion, saying, he had particular
business with the preacher, whom he ordered
to call a hackney-coach. This being immediately
brought up to the end of the lane, he handed
Liddy into it, and my aunt and I following him,
we drove home, without taking any further notice
of the rest of the company, who still remained in
silent astonishment. 
Mr. Bramble, perceiving Liddy in great trepidation,
assumed a milder aspect, bidding her be
under no concern, for he was not at all displeased
at any thing she had done—“I have no objection
(said he) to your being religiously inclined; but
I don't think my servant is a proper ghostly
director, for a devotee of your sex and character
—if, in fact, (as I rather believe) your aunt
is not the sole conductress of this machine—” 
Mrs. Tabitha made no answer, but threw up the
whites of her eyes, as if in the act of ejaculation— 

Poor Liddy said she had no right to the title of a
devotee; that she thought there was no harm in
hearing a pious discourse, even if it came from a
footman, especially as her aunt was present; but
that if she had erred from ignorance, she hoped
he would excuse it, as she could not bear the
thoughts of living under his displeasure. The old
gentleman, pressing her hand with a tender smile,
said she was a good girl, and that he did not believe
her capable of doing any thing that could
give him the least umbrage or disgust. 
When we arrived at our lodgings, he commanded
Mr. Clinker to attend him up stairs, and spoke
to him in these words—“Since you are called
upon by the spirit to preach and to teach, it is
high time to lay aside the livery of an earthly
master; and, for my part, I am unworthy to
have an apostle in my service—” “I hope
(said Humphry) I have not failed in my duty to
your honour—I should be a vile wretch if I did,
considering the misery from which your charity
and compassion relieved me—but having an inward
admonition of the spirit—” “An admonition
of the devil—(cried the 'squire, in a passion)
What admonition, you blockhead? —What
right has such a fellow as you to set up for
a reformer?” “Begging your honour's pardon,
(replied Clinker) may not the new light of
God's grace shine upon the poor and the ignorant
in their humility, as well as upon the wealthy,
and the philosopher in all his pride of human
learning?” “What you imagine to be
the new light of grace, (said his master) I take
to be a deceitful vapour, glimmering through a
crack in your upper story—In a word, Mr. Clinker,
I will have no light in my family but what
pays the king's taxes, unless it be the light of
reason, which you don't pretend to follow.” 

“Ah, sir! (cried Humphry) the light of reason
is no more, in comparison to the light I mean,
than a farthing candle to the sun at noon.” — 
Very true, (said my uncle) the one will serve to
shew you your way, and the other to dazzle
and confound your weak brain—Hark-ye, Clinker,
you are either an hypocritical knave, or a
wrong-headed enthusiast; and, in either case,
unfit for my service—If you are a quack in
sanctity and devotion, you will find it an easy
matter to impose upon silly women, and others
of crazed understanding, who will contribute
lavishly for your support—if you are really seduced
by the reveries of a disturbed imagination,
the sooner you lose your senses entirely,
the better for yourself and the community. In
that case, some charitable person might provide
you with a dark room and clean straw in Bedlam,
where it would not be in your power to
infect others with your fanaticism; whereas, if
you have just reflection enough left to maintain
the character of a chosen vessel in the meetings
of the godly, you and your hearers will be
misled by a Will-i'the-wisp, from one error
into another, till you are plunged into religious
frenzy; and then, perhaps, you will hang yourself
in despair—” “Which the lord of his infinite
mercy forbid! (exclaimed the affrighted
Clinker.) It is very possible I may be under the
temptation of the devil, who wants to wreck
me on the rocks of spiritual pride—Your honour
says, I am either a knave or a madman; 
now, as I'll assure your honour I am no knave,
it follows that I must be mad; therefore, I beseech
your honour, upon my knees, to take my
case into consideration, that means my be used
for my recovery—” 

The 'squire could not help smiling at the poor
fellow's simplicity, and promised to take care of
him, provided he would mind the business of his
place, without running after the new light of Methodism:
but Mrs. Tabitha took offence at his humility,
which she interpreted into poorness of spirit
and worldly mindedness. —She upbraided him with
the want of courage to suffer for conscience sake; 
she observed, that if he should lose his place for
bearing testimony to the truth, Providence would
not fail to find him another, perhaps more advantageous; 
and, declaring that it could not be very
agreeable to live in a family where an inquisition
was established, retired to another room in great
agitation. 
My uncle followed her with a significant look; 
then, turning to the preacher, “You hear what
my sister says. —If you cannot live with me upon
such terms as I have prescribed, the vineyard of
Methodism lies before you, and she seems very
well disposed to reward your labour.” —“I
would not willingly give offence to any soul upon
earth (answered Humphry); her ladyship has
been very good to me, ever since we came to
London; and surely she has a heart turned for
religious exercises, and both she and lady Griskin
sing psalms and hymns like two cherubims: but,
at the same time, I'm bound to love and obey
your honour. —It becometh not such a poor ignorant
fellow as me to hold dispute with gentlemen
of rank and learning. —As for the matter
of knowledge, I am no more than a beast in
comparison of your honour; therefore I submit,
and, with God's grace, I will follow you to
the world's end, if you don't think me too far
gone to be out of confinement.” 
His master promised to keep him for some time
longer on trial; then desired to know in what 

manner lady Griskin and Mr. Barton came to join
their religious society. He told him, that her ladyship
was the person who first carried my aunt and
sister to the tabernacle, whither he attended them,
and had his devotion kindled by Mr. W&wblank;'s
preaching: that he was confirmed in this new way
by the preacher's sermons, which he had bought
and studied with great attention: that his discourse
and prayers had brought over Mrs. Jenkins and the
house-maid to the same way of thinking; but as
for Mr. Barton, he had never seen him at service
before this day, when he came in company with
lady Griskin—Humphry moreover owned, that he
had been encouraged to mount the rostrum by the
example and success of a weaver, who was much
followed as a powerful minister: that on his first
trial, he found himself under such strong impulsions,
as made him believe he was certainly moved
by the Spirit; and that he had assisted in lady
Griskin's, and several private houses, at exercises
of devotion. 
Mr. Bramble was no sooner informed that her ladyship
had acted as the primum mobile of this confederacy,
than he concluded she had only made use
of Clinker as a tool, subservient to the execution
of some design, to the true secret of which he was
an utter stranger—He observed, that her ladyship's
brain was a perfect mill for projects; and that she
and Tabby had certainly engaged in some secret
treaty, the nature of which he could not comprehend. 
I told him, I thought it was no difficult matter
to perceive the drift of Mrs. Tabitha, which was
to ensnare the heart of Barton, and that in all likelihood
my lady Griskin acted as her auxiliary: that
this supposition would account for their endeavours
to convert him to Methodism; an event which
would occasion a connexion of souls that might be
easily improved into a matrimonial union. 

My uncle seemed to be much diverted by the
thoughts of this scheme's succeeding; but I gave
him to understand that Barton was pre-engaged:
that he had the day before made a present of an
etuis to Liddy, which her aunt had obliged her to
receive, with a view, no doubt, to countenance
her own accepting of a snuff-box at the same time:
that my sister having made me acquainted with
this incident, I had desired an explanation of Mr.
Barton, who declared his intentions were honourable,
and expressed his hope that I would have no
objections to his alliance: that I had thanked him for
the honour he intended our family; but told him,
it would be necessary to consult her uncle and aunt,
who were her guardians, and their approbation
being obtained, I could have no objection to his
proposal; though I was persuaded that no violence
would be offered to my sister's inclinations,
in a transaction that so nearly interested the happiness
of her future life: that he had assured me, he
should never think of availing himself of a guardian's
authority, unless he could render his addresses
agreeable to the young lady herself; and that he
would immediately demand permission of Mr. and
Miss Bramble to make Liddy a tender of his hand
and fortune. 
The 'squire was not insensible to the advantages
of such a match, and declared he would promote it
with all his influence; but when I took notice that
there seemed to be an aversion on the side of Liddy,
he said he would found her on the subject; 
and if her reluctance was such as would not be
easily overcome, he would civilly decline the proposal
of Mr. Barton: for he thought that, in the
choice of a husband, a young woman ought not to
sacrifice the feelings of her heart for any considerations
upon earth—“Liddy is not so desperate
(said he) as to worship fortune at such an expence.” 

I take it for granted this whole affair
will end in smoke; though there seems to be a
storm brewing in the quarter of Mrs. Tabby, who
sat with all the sullen dignity of silence at dinner,
seemingly pregnant with complaint and expostulation. 
As she hath certainly marked Barton for her
own prey, she cannot possibly favour his suit to
Liddy, and therefore I expect something extraordinary
will attend his declaring himself my sister's
admirer. This declaration will certainly be made
in form, as soon as the lover can pick up resolution
enough to stand the brunt of Mrs. Tabby's disappointment; 
for he is, without doubt, aware of her
designs upon his person. —The particulars of the
denouement you shall know in due season: mean
while I am 
always, Your's
J. Melford. 
London, June 10. 