


Peregrine commits himself to the publick, and is
admitted member of a college of authors. 
The bitterness of this explanation being
passed, our young gentleman began to revolve
within himself schemes for making up the
deficiencies of his yearly income, which was now
so grievously reduced, and determined to profit,
in some shape or other, by those talents which he
owed to nature and education. He had, in his
affluence, heard of several authors, who, without
any pretensions to genius, or human literature,
earned a very genteel subsistence, by undertaking
work for booksellers, in which reputation
was not at all concerned. One (for example)
professed all manner of translation, at so
much per sheet, and actually kept five or six
amanuenses continually employed, like so many 

clerks in a compting-house; by which means,
he was enabled to live at his ease, and enjoy his
friend and his bottle, ambitious of no other character
than that of an honest man, and a good
neighbour. Another projected a variety of plans
for new dictionaries, which were executed under
his eye by day-labourers; and the province of a
third was history and voyages, collected or abridged
by understrappers of the same class. 
Mr. Pickle, in his comparisons, paid such deference
to his own capacity, as banished all
doubts of his being able to excel any of those undertakers,
in their different branches of profession,
if ever he should be driven to that experiment:
but his ambition prompted him to make
his interest and glory coincide, by attempting
some performance which should do him honour
with the publick, and at the same time establish
his importance among the copy-purchasers in
town. With this view, he worshipped the muse; 
and, conscious of the little regard which is, in
this age, paid to every species of poetic composition,
in which neither satire nor obscenity occurs,
he produced an imitation of Juvenal, and
lashed some conspicuous characters, with equal
truth, spirit, and severity. Though his name
did not appear in the title-page of this production,
he managed matters so, as that the work
was universally imputed to the true author, who
was not altogether disappointed in his expectations
of success; for the impression was immediately
sold off, and the piece became the subject
of conversation in all assemblies of taste. 
This happy exordium not only attracted the
addresses of the booksellers, who made interest
for his acquaintance, but also roused the notice 

of a society of authors, who stiled themselves
the college, from which he was honoured with a
deputation, offering to enroll him a member, by
unanimous consent. The person employed for
this purpose being a bard who had formerly tasted
of our hero's bounty, used all his eloquence to
persuade him to comply with the advances of
their fraternity, which he described in such a
manner, as inflamed the curiosity of Pickle, who
dismissed the embassador, with an acknowledgement
of the great honour they conferred upon
him, and a faithful promise of endeavouring to
merit the continuance of their approbation. 
He was afterwards, by the same minister, instructed
in the ceremonies of the college; and,
in consequence of his information, composed an
ode, to be publickly recited on the evening of his
introduction. He understood, that this constitution
was no other than a body of authors, incorporated
by mutual consent, for their joint advantage
and satisfaction, opposed to another assembly
of the same kind, their avowed enemies
and detractors. No wonder then, that they
sought to strengthen themselves with such a valuable
acquisition as our hero was like to prove. 
The college consisted of authors only, and these
of all degrees in point of reputation, from the
fabricator of a song set to music, and sung at
Marybone, to the dramatic bard who had appeared
in buskins upon the stage: nay, one of
the members had actually finished eight books of
an epic poem, for the publication of which, he
was, at that time, soliciting subscriptions. 
It cannot be supposed that such a congregation
of the sons of Apollo would sit a whole evening
with order and decorum, unless they were under 

the check of some established authority: and this
inconvenience having been foreseen, they had
elected a president, vested with full power to silence
any member or members, that should attempt
to disturb the harmony and subordination
of the whole. The sage, who at this time possessed
the chair, was a person in years, whose
countenance was a lively portraiture of that rancorous
discontent which follows repeated damnation. 
He had been extremely unfortunate in
his theatrical productions, and was (to use the
words of a prophane wag, who assisted at the
condemnation of his last play) by this time damn'd
beyond redemption. Nevertheless, he still tarried
about the skirts of Parnassus, translating some of
the classics, and writing miscellanies; and, by
dint of an invincible assurance, insolence untamed,
the most undaunted virulence of tongue, and
some knowledge of life, he made shift to acquire
and maintain the character of a man of
learning and wit, in the opinion of people who
had neither; that is, thirty-nine in forty of those
with whom he associated himself. He was even
looked upon in this light by some few of the college; 
though the major part of those who favoured
his election, were such as dreaded his malice,
respected his experience and seniority, or
hated his competitor, who was the epic poet. 
The chief end of this society (as I have already
hinted) was to assist and support each other
in their productions, which they mutually recommended
to sale, with all their art and influence,
not only in private conversation, but also in occasional
epigrams, criticisms, and advertisements
inserted in the public papers. This science,
which is known by the vulgar appellation of 

puffing, they carried to such a pitch of finesse,
that an author very often wrote an abusive answer
to his own performance, in order to inflame
the curiosity of the town, by which it had been
overlook'd. Notwithstanding this general unanimity
in the college, a private animosity had long
subsisted between the two rivals I have mentioned,
on account of precedence, to which both
laid claim, though, by a majority of votes, it
had been decided in favour of the present chairman. 
The grudge indeed never proceeded to
any degree of outrage or defiance, but manifested
itself at every meeting, in attempts to eclipse each
other in smart sayings and pregnant repartee; so
that there was always a delicate mess of this kind
of wit served up in the front of the evening, for
the entertainment and example of the junior
members, who never failed to divide upon this
occasion, declaring themselves for one or other of
the combatants, whom they encouraged by their
looks, gestures, and applause, according to the
circumstances of the dispute. 
This honourable consistory was held in the
best room of an ale-house, which afforded wine,
punch, or beer, suitable to the purse or inclination
of every individual, who separately paid for
his own choice: and here was our hero introduced,
in the midst of twenty strangers, who, by
their looks and equipage, formed a very picturesque
variety. He was received with a most
gracious solemnity, and placed upon the right
hand of the president, who having commanded
silence, recited aloud his introductory ode, which
met with universal approbation. Then was
tendered to him the customary oath, obliging
him to consult the honour and advantage of the 

society, as far as it should lie in his power, in
every station of life: and this being taken, his
temples were bound with a wreath of laurel,
which was kept sacred for such inauguration. 
When these rites were performed with all due
ceremony, the new member cast his eyes around
the place, and took a more accurate survey of his
brethren; among whom he observed a strange
collection of periwigs, with regard to the colour,
fashion, and dimensions, which were such
as he had never seen before. Those who sat on
each side, nearest the president, were generally
distinguished by venerable tyes, the foretops of
which exhibited a surprising diversity; some of
them rose slanting backwards, like the glacis of
a fortification; some were elevated in two distinct
eminences, like the hills Helicon and Parnassus; 
and others were curled and reflected, as
the horns of Jupiter Ammon. Next to these,
the majors took place, many of which were mere
succedanea, made by the application of an occasional
rose to the tail of a lank bob; and in the
lower form appeared masses of hair, which would
admit of no description. 
Their cloaths were tolerably well suited to
the furniture of their heads, the apparel of the
upper bench being decent and clean, while that
of the second class was thread-bare and soiled; 
and at the lower end of the room, he perceived
divers efforts made to conceal rent breeches and
dirty linen: nay, he could distinguish by their
countenances, the different kinds of poetry in
which they exercised the muse; he saw Tragedy
conspicuous in a grave solemnity of regard, Satire
louring in a frown of envy and discontent, Elegy
whining in a funeral aspect, Pastoral dozing in 

a most insipid languor of face, Ode-writing delineated
in a distracted stare, and Epigram squinting
with a pert sneer. Perhaps our hero refined
too much in his penetration, when he affirmed,
that over and above these discoveries, he could
plainly perceive the state of every one's finances,
and would have undertaken to have guessed each
particular sum, without varying three farthings
from the truth. 
The conversation, instead of becoming general,
began to fall into parties; and the epic
poet had actually attracted the attention of a private
committee, when the chairman interposed,
calling aloud, “No cabals, no conspiracies, gentleman.” 
His rival, thinking it incumbent upon
him to make some reply to this rebuke, answered,
“We have no secrets; he that hath ears,
let him hear.” This was spoke as an intimation
to the company, whose looks were instantly
whetted with the expectation of their ordinary
meal: but the president seemed to decline the
contest; for, without putting on his fighting face,
he calmly replied, that he had seen Mr. Metaphor
tip the wink, and whisper to one of his confederates; 
and thence judged, that there was
something mysterious on the carpet. 
The epic poet, believing his antagonist crestfallen,
resolved to take the advantage of his dejection,
that he might inhance his own character
in the opinion of the stranger; and with that
view asked, with an air of exultation, if a man
might not be allowed to have a convulsion in his
eye, without being suspected of a conspiracy. 
The president, perceiving his drift, and piqued
at his presumption, “To be sure (said he) a
man of a weak head may be very well supposed 

to have convulsions in his eyes.” This repartee
produced a laugh of triumph among the chairman's
adherents; one of whom observed, that
his rival had got a smart rap on the pate. “Yes,
(replied the bard) in that respect Mr. Chairman
has the advantage of me. Had my head been
fortified with a horn-work, I should not have
been so sensible of the stroke.” This retort,
which carried a severe allusion to the president's
wife, lighted up the countenances of the aggressor's
friends, which had begun to be a little obumbrated; 
and had a contrary effect upon the
other faction, till their chief, collecting all his
capacity, returned the salute, by observing, that
there was no occasion for an horn-work, when
the covered way was not worth defending. 
Such a reprizal upon Mr. Metaphor's yokefellow,
who was by no means remarkable for her
beauty, could not fail to operate upon the hearers; 
and as for the bard himself, he was evidently
ruffled by the reflection; to which, however, he,
without hesitation, replied, “Egad! 'tis my opinion,
that if your covered way was laid open,
few people would venture to give the assault.” 
“Not unless their batteries were more effectual
than the fire of your wit,” (said the president.) 
“As for that matter, (cried the other with precipitation)
they would have no occasion to batter
in breach; they would find the angle of the la
pucelle bastion demolished to their hands: he he!” 
“But I believe it would surpass your understanding,
(resumed the chairman) to fill up the
fossè.” “That, I own, is impracticable, (replied
the bard) there I should meet with an hiatus
maxime deflendus!” 

The president, exasperated at this insinuation,
in presence of the new member, exclaimed with
indignation in his looks, “And yet, if a body
of pioneers were set at work upon your skull,
they would find rubbish enough to choak up all
the common sewers in town.” Here a groan
was uttered by the admirers of the epic poet,
who taking a pinch of snuff with great composure,
“When a man grows scurrilous, (said he)
I take it for an undoubted proof of his overthrow.” 
“If that be the case, (cried the other)
you yourself must be the vanquished party; for
you was the first that was driven to personal
abuse.” “I appeal (answered the bard) to
those who can distinguish. Gentlemen, your
judgment?” 
This reference produced an universal clamour,
and the whole college was involved in confusion. 
Every man entered into dispute with his neighbour,
on the merits of this cause. The chairman
interposed his authority in vain; the noise
grew louder and louder; the disputants waxed
warm; the epithets of blockhead, fool, and scoundrel
were bandied about. Peregrine enjoyed the uproar,
and leaping upon the table, sounded the
charge to battle, which was immediately commenced
in ten different duels; in consequence of
which, the lights were extinguished; the combatants
threshed one another without distinction; 
the mischievous Pickle distributed sundry random
blows in the dark; and the people below, being
alarmed with the sound of application, the overturning
of chairs, and the outcries of those who
were engaged, came up stairs in a body, with
lights, to reconnoitre, and, if possible, quell this
hideous tumult. 

Objects were no sooner rendered visible, than
the field of battle exhibited strange groupes of
the standing and the fallen. Each of Mr. Metaphor's
eyes was surrounded with a circle of a
livid hue; and the president's nose distilled a
quantity of clotted blood. One of the tragic
authors, finding himself assaulted in the dark,
had, by way of poinard, employed upon his adversary's
throat a knife which lay upon the table,
for the convenience of cutting cheese; but, by
the blessing of God, the edge of it was not keen
enough to enter the skin, which it had only
scratched in divers places. A satirist had almost
bit off the ear of a lyric bard. Shirts and neckcloaths
were torn to rags; and there was such a
woeful wreck of periwigs on the floor, that no
examination could adjust the property of the owners,
the greatest part of whom were obliged to
use handkerchiefs, by way of night-cap. 
The fray, however, ceased at the approach of
those who interposed; part of the combatants
being tired of an exercise, in which they had received
nothing but hard blows; part of them being
intimidated by the remonstrances of the landlord
and his company, who threatened to call
the watch; and a very few being ashamed of the
scandalous dispute in which they were detected. 
But though the battle was ended, it was impossible,
for that evening, to restore harmony and
good order to the society, which broke up, after
the president had pronounced a short and confused
apology to our adventurer, for the indecent
uproar which had unfortunately happened on the
first night of his admission. 
Indeed, Peregrine deliberated with himself,
whether or not his reputation would allow him 

to appear again among this venerable fraternity:
but, as he knew some of them to be men of real
genius, how ridiculous soever their carriage might
be modified, and was of that laughing disposition,
which is always seeking food for mirth, as Horace
observes of Philippus, 

Risus undique quærit;
he resolved to frequent the college, notwithstanding
this accident, which happened at his inauguration; 
being thereto, moreover, induced by his
desire of knowing the private history of the stage,
with which he supposed some of the members
perfectly well acquainted. He was also visited,
before the next meeting, by his introductor, who
assured him, that such a tumult had never happened
since the institution of the assembly, till
that very night; and promised, that for the future,
he should have no cause to be scandalized
at their behaviour. 
Persuaded by these motives and assurances, he
trusted himself once more in the midst of their
community, and every thing proceeded with great
decorum; all dispute and altercation was avoided,
and the college applied itself seriously to the purposes
of its meeting; namely, to hear the grievances
of individuals, and assist them with salutary
advice. The first person that craved redress,
was a noisy North Briton, who complained (in a
strange dialect) that he had, in the beginning of
the season, presented a comedy to the manager
of a certain theatre, who, after it had lain six
weeks in his hands, returned it to the author, affirming
there was neither sense nor English in the
performance. 

The president, (who, by the bye) had revised
the piece) thinking his own reputation concerned,
declared, in presence of the whole society,
that with regard to sense, he would not undertake
to vindicate the production; but, in point
of language, no fault could be justly laid to its
charge: “The case, however, is very plain,
(said he) the manager never gave himself the
trouble to peruse the play, but formed a judgment
of it from the conversation of the author, never
dreaming that it had undergone the revisal of an
English writer: be that as it will, you are infinitely
obliged to him, for having dispatched you
so soon, and I shall have the better opinion of him
for it so long as I live; for I have know other-guess
authors than you (that is, in point of interest
and fame) kept in continual attendance
and dependance during the best part of their lives,
and after all, disappointed in the expectation of
seeing their performances exhibited on the stage. 
There are only two methods, by which you have
any chance of introducing your play upon the
theatre; one is compulsive, by the interposition
of the great, whom a patentee dares not
disoblige; the other, insinuation, by ingratiating
yourself with the manager: you must be recommended
to his notice; you must cultivate his
good graces with all the humility of adulation; 
write poems in his praise; if he be an actor, support
his performance against all censure, though
it should be founded upon demonstration; and in
public coffee-houses, as well as in private parties,
magnify the virtues of his heart, in despite of
truth and illustration. This, indeed, is the most
effectual expedient, and what I advise you to
practise, after you shall have been introduced to 

his acquaintance, by some person of weight; and
if, by these means, and dint of perseverance,
you can, in three or four years, see your comedy
in rehearsal, you may think yourself extremely
fortunate in your application: for a man, without
interest or pretension, may present a petition
to the captain-general of his majesty's forces,
demanding a commission for the first company
that shall become vacant, and be as likely to
meet with success, as an unsupported author that
offers a performance to the stage. Though a
patentee had no friends of his own to oblige,
why the devil should he put himself to the expence
and trouble attending the representation of
a new play, and part with three benefit-nights,
to please the vanity and fill the pockets of a
stranger?” 
The northern bard began to argue with great
vehemence and vociferation, against the advice
and observations of the chairman, undertaking to
prove from reason, as well as from experience,
that one poet is of greater dignity and importance
to the commonwealth, than all the patentees or
players that ever existed. But he was over-ruled
and silenced in the beginning of his harangue, by
a decree of the council, which was unanimously
of opinion, that the advice he had received was
equally judicious and expedient, and that it would
be his own fault, if he did not profit by the admonition. 