



Mildendo, the Metropolis of Lilliput, described,
together with the Emperor's Palace. A Conversation
between the Author and a principal
Secretary, concerning the Affairs of that Empire:
The Author's Offers to serve the Emperor in his
Wars. 

The first Request I made after I had
obtained my Liberty, was, that I might
have Licence to see Mildendo, the
Metropolis; which the Emperor easily
granted me, but with a special
Charge to do no Hurt, either to the Inhabitants,
or their Houses. The People had Notice by Proclamation 
of my Design to visit the Town. The
Wall which encompassed it, is two Foot and an
half high, and at least eleven Inches broad, so that
a Coach and Horses may be driven very safely round
it; and it is flanked with strong Towers at ten Foot
Distance. I stept over the great Western Gate,
and passed very gently, and sideling through the
two principal Streets, only in my short Waistcoat,
for fear of damaging the Roofs and Eves of the
Houses with the Skirts of my Coat. I walked with
the utmost Circumspection, to avoid treading on
any Stragglers, who might remain in the Streets, 

although the Orders were very strict, that all People
should keep in their Houses, at their own Peril. 
The Garret Windows and Tops of Houses were
so crowded with Spectators, that I thought in all
my Travels I had not seen a more populous Place. 
The City is an exact Square, each Side of the Wall
being five Hundred Foot long. The two great
Streets which run cross and divide it into four
Quarters, are five Foot wide. The Lanes and Alleys
which I could not enter, but only viewed them
as I passed, are from Twelve to Eighteen lnches. 
The Town is capable of holding five Hundred
Thousand Souls. The Houses are from three to
five Stories. The Shops and Markets well provided. 
The Emperor's Palace is in the Center of the
City, where the two great Streets meet. It is inclosed
by a Wall of two Foot high, and Twenty
Foot distant from the Buildings. I had his Majesty's 
Permission to step over this Wall; and the
Space being so wide between that and the Palace, I
could easily view it on every Side. The outward
Court is a Square of Forty Foot, and includes two
other Courts: In the inmost are the Royal Apartments,
which I was very desirous to see, but found
it extremely difficult; for the great Gates, from one
Square into another, were but Eighteen Inches
high, and seven Inches wide. Now the Buildings
of the outer Court were at least five Foot high; 
and it was impossible for me to stride over them,
without infinite Damage to the Pile, although the
Walls were strongly built of hewn Stone, and four
Inches thick. At the same time, the Emperor had 

a great Desire that I should see the Magnificence of
his Palace: But this I was not able to do till three
Days after, which I spent in cutting down with my
Knife some of the largest Trees in the Royal Park,
about an Hundred Yards distant from the City. Of
these Trees I made two Stools, each about three
Foot high, and strong enough to bear my Weight. 
The People having received Notice a second time,
I went again through the City to the Palace, with
my two Stools in my Hands. When I came to the
Side of the other Court, I stood upon one Stool,
and took the other in my Hand: This I lifted over
the Roof, and gently set it down on the Space between
the first and second Court, which was eight
Foot wide. I then stept over the Buildings very
conveniently from one Stool to the other, and drew
up the first after me with a hooked Stick. By this
Contrivance I got into the inmost Court; and lying
down upon my Side, I applied my Face to the
Windows of the middle Stories, which were left
open on Purpose, and discovered the most splendid
Apartments that can be imagined. There I saw
the Empress, and the young Princes in their several
Lodgings, with their chief Attendants about
them. Her Imperial Majesty was pleased to smile
very graciously upon me, and gave me out of the
Window her Hand to kiss. 
But I shall not anticipate the Reader with farther
Descriptions of this Kind, because I reserve
them for a greater Work, which is now almost
ready for the Press; containing a general Description
of this Empire, from its first Erection,
through a long Series of Princes, with a particular
Account of their Wars and Politicks, Laws, 

Learning, and Religion; their Plants and Animals,
their peculiar Manners and Customs, with other
Matters very curious and useful; my chief Design
at present being only to relate such Events
and Transactions as happened to the Publick, or
to my self, during a Residence of about nine
Months in that Empire. 
One Morning, about a Fortnight after I had
obtained my Liberty; Reldresal, Principal Secretary
(as they style him) of private Affairs, came
to my House, attended only by one Servant. He
ordered his Coach to wait at a Distance, and desired 
I would give him an Hour's Audience; which
I readily consented to, on Account of his Quality, 
and Personal Merits, as well as of the many
good Offices he had done me during my Sollicitations 
at Court. I offered to lie down, that he
might the more conveniently reach my Ear; but
he chose rather to let me hold him in my Hand
during our Conversation. He began with Compliments 
on my Liberty; said, he might pretend
to some Merit in it; but, however, added, that if
it had not been for the present Situation of things
at Court, perhaps I might not have obtained it 
so soon. For, said he, as flourishing a Condition
as we appear to be in to Foreigners, we labour
under two mighty Evils; a violent Faction at
home, and the Danger of an Invasion by a most potent 
Enemy from abroad. As to the first, you
are to understand, that for above seventy Moons
past, there have been two struggling Parties in
this Empire, under the Names of Tramecksan, and
Slamecksan, from the high and low Heels on
their Shoes, by which they distinguish themselves. 

It is alledged indeed, that the high Heels are
most agreeable to our ancient Constitution: But
however this be, his Majesty hath determined to
make use of only low Heels in the Administration
of the Government, and all Offices in the
Gift of the Crown; as you cannot but observe; 
and particularly, that his Majesty's Imperial Heels
are lower at least by a Drurr than any of his Court; 
(Drurr is a Measure about the fourteenth Part of
an Inch.) The Animosities between these two
Parties run so high, that they will neither eat
nor drink, nor talk with each other. We compute 
the Tramecksan, or High-Heels, to exceed us
in Number; but the Power is wholly on our Side. 
We apprehend his Imperial Highness, the Heir to
the Crown, to have some Tendency towards the
High-Heels; at least we can plainly discover one of
his Heels higher than the other; which gives him
a Hobble in his Gait. Now, in the midst of these
intestine Disquiets, we are threatened with an Invasion
from the Island of Blefuscu, which is the
other great Empire of the Universe, almost as large
and powerful as this of his Majesty. For as to
what we have heard you affirm, that there are
other Kingdoms and States in the World, inhabited 
by human Creatures as large as your self,
our Philosophers are in much Doubt; and would
rather conjecture that you dropt from the Moon,
or one of the Stars; because it is certain, that an
hundred Mortals of your Bulk, would, in a short
Time, destroy all the Fruits and Cattle of his Majesty's
Dominions. Besides, our Histories of six
Thousand Moons make no Mention of any other
Regions, than the two great Empires of Lilliput 

and Blefuscu. Which two mighty Powers have, as
I was going to tell you, been engaged in a most
obstinate War for six and thirty Moons past. It began
upon the following Occasion. It is allowed
on all Hands, that the primitive Way of breaking
Eggs before we eat them, was upon the larger
End: But his present Majesty's Grand-father, while
he was a Boy, going to eat an Egg, and breaking it
according to the ancient Practice, happened to cut
one of his Fingers. Whereupon the Emperor his
Father, published an Edict, commanding all his
Subjects, upon great Penalties, to break the smaller
End of their Eggs. The People so highly resented
this Law, that our Histories tell us, there have
been six Rebellions raised on that Account; wherein
one Emperor lost his Life, and another his
Crown. These civil Commotions were constantly
fomented by the Monarchs of Blefuscu; and when
they were quelled, the Exiles always fled for Refuge
to that Empire. It is computed, that eleven
Thousand Persons have, at seveaal Times, suffered
Death, rather than submit to break their Eggs at
the smaller End. Many hundred large Volumes
have been published upon this Controversy: But
the Books of the Big-Endians have been long
forbidden, and the whole Party rendred incapable
by Law of holding Employments. During the
Course of these Troubles, the Emperors of Blefuscu
did frequently expostulate by their Ambassadors,
accusing us of making a Schism in Religion, by
offending against a fundamental Doctrine of our
great Prophet Lustrog, in the fifty-fourth Chapter
of the Brundrecal, (which is their Alcoran.) This,
however, is thought to be a meer Strain upon the 

Text: For the Words are these; That all true Believers
shall break their Eggs at the convenient
End: and which is the convenient End, seems,
in my humble Opinion, to be left to every Man's
Conscience, or at least in the Power of the chief
Magistrate to determine. Now the Big-Endian
Exiles have found so much Credit in the Emperor
of Blefuscu's Court; and so much private Assistance
and Encouragement from their Party here at home,
that a bloody War hath been carried on between the
two Empires for six and thirty Moons with various
Success; during which Time we have lost Forty
Capital Ships, and a much greater Number of smaller
Vessels, together with thirty thousand of our best
Seamen and Soldiers; and the Damage received by
the Enemy is reckoned to be somewhat greater
than ours. However, they have now equipped a
numerous Fleet, and are just preparing to make a
Descent upon us: And his Imperial Majesty, placing
great Confidence in your Valour and Strength,
hath commanded me to lay this Account of his Affairs
before you. 
I desired the Secretary to present my humble
Duty to the Emperor, and to let him know, that
I thought it would not become me, who was a Foreigner,
to interfere with Parties; but I was ready,
with the Hazard of my Life, to defend his Person
and State against all Invaders. 
