



The Author leaves Luggnagg and sails to Japan. 
From thence be returns in a Dutch Ship to Amsterdam,
and from Amsterdam to England. 

I Thought this Account of the
Struldbruggs might be some Entertainment
to the Reader, because it
seems to be a little out of the common
Way; at least, I do not remember
to have met the like in any
Book of Travels that hath come to my Hands:
And if I am deceived, my Excuse must be, that
it is necessary for Travellers, who describe the
same Country, very often to agree in dwelling on
the same Particulars, without deserving the Censure
of having borrowed or transcribed from those who
wrote before them. 
There is indeed a perpetual Commerce between
this Kingdom and the great Empire of Japan; and
it is very probable that the Japanese Authors may
have given some Account of the Struldbruggs; but
my Stay in Japan was so short, and I was so entirely
a Stranger to the Language, that I was not qualified 

to make any Enquiries. But I hope the Dutch
upon this Notice will be curious and able enough
to supply my Defects. 
His Majesty having often pressed me to accept
some Employment in his Court, and finding
me absolutely determined to return to my Native
Country; was pleased to give me his Licence to depart; 
and honoured me with a Letter of Recommendation
under his own Hand to the Emperor of
Japan. He likewise presented me with four Hundred
forty four large Pieces of Gold (this Nation
delighting in even Numbers) and a red Diamond
which I sold in England for Eleven Hundred
Pounds. 
On the 6th Day of May, 1709, I took a solemn
Leave of his Majesty, and all my Friends. This
Prince was so gracious as to order a Guard to conduct
me to Glanguenstald, which is a Royal Port
to the South West Part of the Island. In six Days
I found a Vessel ready to carry me to Japan; and
spent fifteen Days in the Voyage. We landed at a
small Port-Town called Xamoschi, situated on the
South-East Part of Japan. The Town lies on the
Western Part, where there is a narrow Streight, leading
Northward into a long Arm of the Sea, upon
the North West Part of which Yedo the Metropolis
stands. At landing I shewed the Custom-House
Officers my Letter from the King of Luggnagg to
his Imperial Majesty: They knew the Seal perfectly
well; it was as broad as the Palm of my Hand. 
The Impression was, A King lifting up a lame Beggar
from the Earth. The Magistrates of the Town
hearing of my Letter, received me as a publick Minister; 
they provided me with Carriages and Servants, 

and bore my Charges to Yedo, where I was
admitted to an Audience, and delivered my Letter; 
which was opened with great Ceremony, and explained
to the Emperor by an Interpreter, who gave
me Notice of his Majesty's Order, that I should
signify my Request; and whatever it were, it should
be granted for the sake of his Royal Brother of Luggnagg. 
This Interpreter was a Person employed to
transact Affairs with the Hollanders: He soon conjectured
by my Countenance that I was an European,
and therefore repeated his Majesty's Commands in
Low-Dutch, which he spoke perfectly well. I answered,
(as I had before determined) that I was a
Dutch Merchant, shipwrecked in a very remote
Country, from whence I travelled by Sea and Land
to Luggnagg, and then took Shipping for Japan,
where I knew my Countrymen often traded, and
with some of these I hoped to get an Opportunity
of returning into Europe: I therefore most humbly
entreated his Royal Favour to give Order, that I
should be conducted in Safety to Nangasac. To
this I added another Petition, that for the sake of
my Patron the King of Luggnagg, his Majesty
would condescend to excuse my performing the Ceremony
imposed on my Countrymen, of trampling
upon the Crucifix; because I had been thrown into
his Kingdom by my Misfortunes, without any Intention
of trading. When this latter Petition was
interpreted to the Emperor, he seemed a little surprised; 
and said, he believed I was the first of my
Countrymen who ever made any Scruple in this
Point; and that he began to doubt whether I were a
real Hollander or no; but rather suspected I must
be a Christian. However, for the Reasons I 

had offered, but chiefly to gratify the King of Luggnagg,
by an uncommon Mark of his Favour, he
would comply with the singularity of my Humour; 
but the Affair must be managed with Dexterity,
and his Officers should be commanded to let me
pass as it were by Forgetfulness. For he assured me,
that if the Secret should be discovered by my Countrymen,
the Dutch, they would cut my Throat in
the Voyage. I returned my Thanks by the Interpreter
for so unusual a Favour; and some Troops
being at that Time on their March to Nangasac,
the Commanding Officer had Orders to convey me
safe thither, with particular Instructons about the
Business of the Crucifix. 
On the 9th Day of June, 1709, I arrived at
Nangasac, after a very long and troublesome Journey. 
I soon fell into Company of some Dutch
Sailors belonging to the Amboyna of Amsterdam,
a stout Ship of 450 Tuns. I had lived long in
Holland, pursuing my Studies at Leyden, and I spoke
Dutch well: The Seamen soon knew from whence
I came last; they were curious to enquire into my
Voyages and Course of Life. I made up a Story
as short and probable as I could, but concealed the
greatest Part. I knew many Persons in Holland;
I was able to invent Names for my Parents, whom
I pretended to be obscure People in the Province of
Guelderland. I would have given the Captain (one
Theodorus Vangrult) what he pleased to ask for my
Voyage to Holland; but, understanding I was a
Surgeon, he was contented to take half the usual
Rate, on Condition that I would serve him in the
Way of my Calling. Before we took Shipping, I
was often asked by some of the Crew, whether I 

had performed the Ceremony abovementioned? I
evaded the Question by general Answers, that I
had satisfied the Emperor and Court in all Particulars. 
However, a malicious Rogue of a Skipper
went to an Officer, and pointing to me, told him,
I had not yet trampled on the Crucifix: But the
other, who had received Instructions to let me pass,
gave the Rascal twenty Strokes on the Shoulders
with a Bamboo; after which I was no more troubled
with such Questions. 
Nothing happened worth mentioning in this
Voyage. We sailed with a fair Wind to the Cape
of Good Hope, where we staid only to take in fresh
Water. On the 16th of April we arrived safe at
Amsterdam, having lost only three Men by Sickness
in the Voyage, and a fourth who fell from the
Fore-mast into the Sea, not far from the Coast of
Guinea. From Amsterdam I soon after set sail for
England in a small Vessel belonging to that City. 
On the 10th of April, 1710, we put in at the
Downs. I landed the next Morning, and saw once
more my Native Country after an Absence of five
Years and six Months compleat. I went strait to
Redriff, whither I arrived the same Day at two in
the Afternoon, and found my Wife and Family in
good Health. 
