


To Mr. Henry Colden.
New York, October 22.
Sir.

I ADDRESS myself to you as the mother of
an unhappy girl, who has put herself into your
power, But I write not to upbraid you or indulge
my own indignation, but merely to beseech





your compassion for her whom you profess to
love.
I cannot apologize for the manner in which I
have acted in regard to your connection with Jane
Talbot. In that respect, I must take to myself
all the blame you may chuse to impute to
me.
I call not into question the disinterestedness
of your intentions in proposing marriage to this
woman, nor, if the information which I am going
to give you, should possess any influence,
shall I ascribe that influence to any thing but a
commendable attention to your true interest
and a generous regard to the welfare of my
daughter.
Be it known to you, then, sir, that Mrs. Talbot
possesses no fortune in her own right. Her
present dwelling, and her chief means of subsistence,
are derived from me; she holds them
at my option, and they will be instantly and entirely
withdrawn, on her marriage with you.
You cannot be unacquainted with the habits
and views in which my daughter has been educated.
Her life has passed at ease and in luxury
and you cannot but perceive the effect of any
material change in her way of life.
It would be a wretched artifice to pretend any
particular esteem for you, or to attempt to persuade
you that any part of this letter is dictated
by any regard to your interest, except as that
is subservient to the interest of one, whom I can
never cease to love.
Yet I ardently hope that this circumstance
may not hinder you from accepting bills upon
London to the amount of three hundred pounds




sterling. They shall be put into your hands the
moment I am properly assured that you have
engaged your passage to Europe, and are determined
to be nothing more than a distant wellwisher
to my daughter.
I am anxious that you should draw from the
terms of this offer, proof of that confidence in
your word, which you might not perhaps have
expected from my conduct towards you in other
respects. Indeed, my conscience acquits me of
any design to injure you. On the contrary, it
would give me sincere pleasure to hear of your
success in every laudable pursuit.
I know your talents and the direction which
they have hitherto received. I know that London
is a theatre best adapted to the lucrative display
of these talents, and that the sum I offer
you will be an ample fund, till your own exertions
may be turned to account.
If this offer be accepted, I shall not only
hold myself everlastingly obliged to you, but I
shall grant you an higher place in my esteem.
Yet, through deference to scruples, which you
may possibly possess, I most cheerfully plight
to you my honor, that this transaction shall be
concealed from Mrs. Talbot, and from all the
world.
Though property is necessary to our happiness,
and my daughter's habits render the continuance
of former indulgences, necessary to
her content, I will not be so unjust to her, as
to imagine that this is all which she regards.
Respect from the world and the attachment of
her ancient friends are, also, of some value in
her eyes. Reflect, sir, I beseech you, whether




you are qualified to compensate her for the loss
of property; of good name—my own justification,
in case she marries you, will require me
to be nothing more than just to her—and of all
her ancient friends, who will abhor in her, the
faithless wife and the ungrateful child. I need
not inform you that your family will never receive
into their bosom one whom her own kindred
have rejected.

I am, &c.
H. Fielder.

