


The Behaviour of a very fond Wife on the Sickness
of her Husband, with her Letter to a
dear Friend on that Subject. 
Mr. Orgueil was very subject to the
Stone, and was now seized with so
violent a Fit of it, that it was even thought
he could not recover: but in the Intermission
of his Pains, when his Body would
give his Mind leave to exert his Reason
(for this God whilst cloathed in Flesh, must
ask that Leave) he called for all his Books
of Philosophy, and supported himself by the
Sayings of the Ancients; and when he read
that Saying, “That a great Man in Distress
was a Sight worthy of the Gods' Delight;” 
he laid down the Book with
Rapture, and put on a Smile of Self-approbation. 
And his Intrepidity was so great
in facing Death, that it never once entered
into his Thoughts. For although he fancied
himself constant of Mind, and admired
his own Firmness, yet the Truth was, that
instead of thinking on Death, he was diverting 

himself with being the Admiration of
the Gods; and in the Warmth of his Enthusiasm,
he could fix his Mind on no other
Image but that of his Self-adoration: it was
amazing with what dextrous Art Orgueil
mixed the Bible with the Sentiments of the
ancient Heathens, till he proved that this
World was made for Man; then dropped
the Idea, that it was the Gift of God, and
his Imagination strutted, as it were, in his
own World. 
The Heathens who made their own Gods,
and generally from Flattery composed them
of the Vices of their Heroes, might very well
think that a Man loaded with all the Weight
of human Infirmities, pretending, from his
own Strength, to cast out every Glimpse of
Fear, and then worshiping himself for that
Pretence, was a Sight very capable of giving
Pleasure to such Gods; for, no doubt, a
Love of Ridicule was one of their principal
Characteristics: and if they are possessed
of all the Attributes generally given to
them, it is very possible they might all be
very merry over so absurd a Picture. 
Mr. Orgueil, during his Illness, often desired
David's Company, in Hopes of having
an additional Admirer of his Magnanimity 

and intrepid Behaviour. David had
too much Humanity to refuse his Request,
as to bearing him Company; but could not
comply with his Desire of admiring all those
Fallacies he imposed on his own Understanding. 
Mr. Orgueil was above being pitied
himself, but was rather advising David
how to bear the Loss of his Camilla. He
would have thought it very absurd, if, in
the midst of his Tortures, he had been told
that he must not feel them, because he could
not help himself; or because others also have
been afflicted with the Stone. And yet
these were the kind of Comforts he bestowed
on David, for the Loss of such a Companion
as Camilla, in whom he enjoyed every
Picture his Heart had ever formed of
Happiness; for she was the Friend he had
long vainly sought, and at last with Difficulty
obtained. Mr. Orgueil also constantly
entertained him with a Discourse on the
Beauty of human Reason, and the Infallibility
of the Rule of Rectitude, to support a
Man through all Misfortunes: adding, that
it was below the Dignity of human Nature,
and a Shame for a Man to be conquered by
any Affliction whatever. But David told
him, that if he had no other Comfort in his
Heart, but what could arise from the admiring
the Beauties of human Reason, exulting 

in the Dignity of his Nature, and
worshipping the Strength of his own Wisdom,
he would weep at the Grave of his
Camilla, till, like Niobe, he was dissolved
into Tears. 
Almost their whole Conversation consisted
in an Endeavour on David's Side to prove
that human Wisdom can soar no higher than
the Knowledge of our Dependance on God,
and acting in Conformity to that Knowledge; 
whilst Mr. Orgueil laboured hard
to prove his own Self-dependance, and
the Justness of worshipping his Idol, human
Reason. He indeed admired Christ's Sermon
on the Mount, for the Beauty of its
Morality; then thought himself a Christian,
and could be highly offended at any
one making a Doubt of it; although the
Drift of every Word he uttered, plainly
proved that his every Notion of Religion
was confined to Self-adoration. 
Mr. Orgueil and David, whenever they used
to meet, had something besides Conversation
in both their Minds; David, in the Timidity
of his Heart, fixed his Thoughts on considering
by what Means he could prevail on
Orgueil to exert any Kindness towards his
Camilla; and he, on the other hand, was 

employed in giving such Advice, or Commands,
as have been before mentioned. But
now the Scene was altered; Mr. Orgueil
thinking himself near his End, was chusing
a proper Behaviour for a uniform Conclusion
of his Life: and David, his Camilla being
past the Reach of any farther Sufferings,
was again restored to his natural Firmness of
Mind; and the Irresolution which had been
for some time his Torment, now (the Cause
being removed) no longer remained. And
when Mr. Orgueil expected to see him most
distressed and dejected, he was astonished to
find with what Steadiness and Constancy he
behaved. But when he perceived he could
not convert him, and make him a Proselyte
to the Sect of Self-worshippers, he grew
angry, and at different Times introduced
the Words, an Enthusiast, a Methodist, a
mad Man; and at last, as an unconquerable
Argument, told him, that he held Principles
which were fit for nothing but old Women. 
But David Simple was not to be terrified
by such paultry Ridicule, nor were his
Principles to be baffled by calling of opprobrious
Names. 
But I cannot quit the Subject of Mr. Orgueil's
Illness, without acquainting my
Reader with Mrs. Orgueil's Behaviour on 

that Account. She frequently brought
Henrietta into her Husband's Room, and
studied every Expression her Invention could
supply her with, to raise tender Grief in his
Mind; that he was to be separated from her
and his Child. It happened, indeed, that
such Attempts were fruitless; for Mr.
Orgueil was too much attached to the
Thoughts of his own Dignity, and too full
of Self-admiration, to pay much Regard to
any other Attachment whatever; but when
she found her Words had little or no Effect,
and could not penetrate the Marble of
his Heart, Miss Henrietta, on one Side, and
Mrs. Orgueil, on the other, made such loud
Lamentations, that David, who happened
to be there at that Time, half by Intreaties
and half by Force, had them conveyed out
of the Chamber: and as soon as Mrs. Orgueil
was alone, she sat down, and wrote
the following Letter to the Countess of
&wblank;, her most intimate Friend and Acquaintance. 

“Dear Madam,
“HOW shall I express my Grief, or
what Words can I find to give your Ladyship
a complete Idea of it! O wretched,
wretched Woman that I am! That I should 

live to see this fatal Day! By the Time
this Epistle reaches your Hands, the distracted
Expressions of which your Ladyship,
when you know the Cause, will excuse,
you must consider your poor Friend
as a disconsolate Widow, and her tender
Babe as a poor helpless Orphan. The
Physicians have declared their Despair of
my dear, my ever to be lamented Mr.
Orgueil's Life: and I have been forced,
raving, screaming, fainting, from his
Bed-side: and I verily believe my Heart
would at this Instant burst, did not I give
this Vent to my Sorrows; for true is that
beautiful Line, 
“Griefs when told soon disappear.”
“The Thought that I shall enjoy a large
Jointure, or that my dear Child will have
an ample Fortune, are no Alleviations to
my Woes. Your Ladyship must be sensible
that only moderate or vulgar Grief
can be assuaged by such Considerations. 
The real Distraction of my Soul admits
no Consolations: and I snatch, as it were
by Force, this short Respite from Misery,
to impart my Torments to my dearest
Friend, and beg your Ladyship will
immediately honour me with your Company, 

to comfort, if possible, my afflicted
Heart. I say, I snatch this short Respite,
in order to write to your Ladyship; 
for as soon as I hear the dreadful Sound,
Your Husband is no more! I know I shall
be incapable of any Thought or Reflection. 
No Tongue can express my Distractions. 
I am as mad as Alicia in Jane
Shore; could rave like Œdipus, and wish
all the Stars would lose their Light; for
so great are my present Torments, that
universal Nature seems in one Confusion
hurled. 
“I am, dear Madam,
Your Ladyship's despairing,
afflicted, most obedient,
most humble Servant,
H. Orgueil.” 
Mrs. Orgueil was just going to fold this
Letter, when Betty Dunster entered the
Room: she had before given Orders, that
no one should directly tell her of her Husband's
Death; for, she said, she could not
bear the Sound, but that some Invention 

should be found to let her know it, without
uttering the fatal Words; and therefore
as soon as Betty had opened the Door,
and said, “Now, Madam, I bring you
News, that” Mrs. Orgueil took her Husband's
Death for granted, and, interrupting
her, fell a raving like an Inhabitant of Bedlam,
and for some time would not give the
Girl Liberty to explain herself: but at last
Betty Dunster found an Opportunity of informing
her that she had no Cause for this
Violence of Grief, for that her Husband
was greatly revived, and the Physicians said
that this unexpected Turn in his Favour
gave them Hopes of his Recovery. Mrs.
Orgueil's Joy now appeared as violent as her
Sorrow had before, and she began to repeat
all the Poetry she could remember, that
imported Joy and Rapture. But instead of
having an Inclination to send her Friend a
Letter of the good News, she had a great
Mind to send her that already writ, as
thinking it was great Pity she should have
taken so much Pains for nothing. 
But Mrs. Orgueil's Joy lasted not long,
for although her Husband continued to
mend, insomuch that he recovered a little
longer to contemplate his own Wisdom, yet
a most fatal Catastrophe befel her; and this 

Catastrophe was no other than the Loss of
a little Lap-dog, which had reigned long in
her Favour, for it bit and snarled at every
one it came near, except herself and her
poor little Thing, and on them it was as
remarkable for fawning: nay, it was reported
that Cynthia once attempting to
play with it, met with the Reward of having
her Hand bit; and this Lap-dog Mrs.
Orgueil lamented in full as pathetic Terms
as she had before done the imagined Death
of her Husband. 