


Julian enters into the Person of a
King. 
‘I Was now born at Oviedo in Spain. 
My Father's Name was Veremond, and
I was adopted by my Uncle, King Alphonso
the Chaste. I don't recollect in all the Pilgrimages 

I have made on Earth, that I ever
past a more miserable Infancy than now; 
being under the utmost Confinement and
Restraint, and surrounded with Physicians,
who were ever dosing me; and Tutors, who
were continually plaguing me with their
Instructions; even those Hours of Leisure,
which my Inclination would have spent in
Play, were allotted to tedious Pomp and
Ceremony, which at an Age wherein I had
no Ambition to enjoy the Servility of Courtiers,
enslaved me more than it could the meanest
of them. However, as I advanced towards
Manhood, my Condition made me some
Amends: for the most beautiful Women
of their own accord threw out Lures for
me, and I had the Happiness, which no
Man in an inferiour Degree can arrive at,
of enjoying the most delicious Creatures,
without the previous and tiresome Ceremonies
of Courtship, unless with the most simple,
young and unexperienced. As for the
Court Ladies, they regarded me rather as Men
do the most lovely of the other Sex; and
tho' they outwardly retained some Appearance
of Modesty, they in reality rather 

considered themselves as receiving than conferring
Favours. 
‘Another Happiness I enjoyed, was in
conferring Favours of another sort; for as
I was extremely good-natured and generous,
so I had daily Opportunities of satisfying
those Passions. Besides my own princely
Allowance, which was very bountiful, and
with which I did many liberal and good Actions,
I recommended numberless Persons of
Merit in Distress to the King's Notice,
most of whom were provided for. 
‘Indeed, had I sufficiently known my
blest Situation at this time, I should have
grieved at nothing more than the Death of
Alphonso, by which the Burden of Government
devolved upon me: but so blindly
fond is Ambition, and such Charms doth it
fancy in the Power, and Pomp, and Splendor
of a Crown, that tho' I vehemently loved
that King, and had the greatest Obligations
to him, the Thoughts of succeeding him
obliterated my Regret at his Loss, and the
Wish for my approaching Coronation dryed
my Eyes at his Funeral. 

‘But my Fondness for the Name of
King, did not make me forgetful of those,
over whom I was to reign. I considered
them in the Light in which a tender Father
regards his Children, as Persons whose
Well-being God had intrusted to my Care; 
and again, in that in which a prudent Lord
respects his Tenants, as those on whose
Wealth and Grandeur he is to build his own. 
Both these Considerations inspired me with
the greatest Care for their Welfare, and their
Good was my first and ultimate Concern. 
‘The Usurper Mauregas had impiously
obliged himself, and his Successors, to pay
to the Moors every Year an infamous Tribute
of a hundred young Virgins: from this
cruel and scandalous Imposition, I resolved to
relieve my Country. Accordingly, when their
Emperor Abderames the Second had the
Audaciousness to make this Demand of me,
instead of complying with it, I ordered his
Ambassadors to be driven away with all
imaginable Ignominy, and would have condemned
them to Death, could I have done 

it without a manifest Violation of the Law
of Nations. 
‘I Now raised an immense Army. At
the levying of which, I made a Speech from
my Throne, acquainting my Subjects with
the Necessity, and the Reasons of the War
in which I was going to engage: which I
convinced them I had undertaken for their
Ease and Safety, and not for satisfying any
wanton Ambition, or revenging any private
Pique of my own. They all declared unanimously,
that they would venture their
Lives, and every thing dear to them in my
Defence, and in the Support of the Honour
of my Crown. Accordingly my Levies
were instantly complete, sufficient Numbers
being only left to till the Land; Churchmen,
even Bishops themselves, enlisting
themselves under my Banners. 
‘The Armies met at Alvelda, where we
were discomfited with immense Loss, and
nothing but the lucky Intervention of the
Night could have saved our whole Army. 

‘I Retreated to the Summit of a Hill,
where I abandoned myself to the highest
Agonies of Grief, not so much for the Danger
in which I then saw my Crown, as for
the Loss of those miserable Wretches, who
had exposed their Lives at my Command. 
I could not then avoid this Reflection; That
if the Deaths of these People in a War,
undertaken absolutely for their Protection,
could give me such Concern; what Horrour
must I have felt, if, like Princes greedy of
Dominion, I had sacrificed such Numbers
to my own Pride, Vanity, and ridiculous
Lust of Power. 
‘After having vented my Sorrows for
some time in this manner, I began to consider
by what means I might possibly endeavour
to retrieve this Misfortune; when
reflecting on the great number of Priests I
had in my Army, and on the prodigious
Force of Superstition, a Thought luckily
suggested itself to me, to counterfeit that
St. James had appeared to me in a Vision,
and had promised me the Victory. While
I was ruminating on this, the Bishop of 

Najara came opportunely to me. As I did
not intend to communicate the Secret to
him, I took another Method, and instead of
answering any thing the Bishop said to me,
I pretended to talk to St. James, as if he
had been really present; till at length, after
having spoke those things, which I thought
sufficient, and thanked the Saint aloud for
his Promise of the Victory, I turned about
to the Bishop, and embracing him with a
pleased Countenance, protested I did not
know he was present; and then informing
him of this supposed Vision, I asked him,
if he had not himself seen the Saint? He answered
me, he had; and afterwards proceeded
to assure me, that this Appearance of St.
James was entirely owing to his Prayers; 
for that he was his tutelar Saint. He added,
he had a Vision of him a few hours before,
when he promised him a Victory over the
Infidels, and acquainted him at the same
time of the Vacancy of the See of Toledo. 
Now this News being really true, tho' it had
happened so lately, that I had not heard of it,
(nor, indeed, was it well possible I should,
considering the great Distance of the Way)
when I was afterwards acquainted with it, a 

little staggered me, tho' far from being
superstitious; till being informed, that the
Bishop had lost three Horses on a late Expedition,
I was satisfied. 
‘The next Morning, the Bishop, at my
Desire, mounted the Rostrum, and trumpeted
forth this Vision so effectually, which he said
he had that Evening twice seen with his own
Eyes, that a Spirit began to be infused
through the whole Army, which rendered
them superiour to almost any Force: the
Bishop insisted, that the least Doubt of Success
was giving the lye to the Saint, and a
damnable Sin, and he took upon him in his
Name to promise them Victory. 
‘The Army being drawn out, I soon experienced
the Effect of Enthusiasm, for
having contrived another *  Stratagem to
strengthen what the Bishop had said, the
Soldiers fought more like Furies than Men. 
My Stratagem was this: I had about me a
dextrous Fellow, who had been formerly a
Pimp in my Amours. Him I drest up in a 

strange antick Dress, with a Pair of white
Colours in his right Hand, a red Cross
in his left, and having disguised him so, that
no one could know him, I placed him on a
white Horse, and ordered him to ride to the
Head of the Army, and cry out, Follow St.
James. These Words were reiterated by all
the Troops, who attacked the Enemy with
such Intrepidity, that notwithstanding our
Inferiority of Numbers, we soon obtained a
complete Victory. 
‘The Bishop was come up by the time
that the Enemy was routed, and acquainting
us, that he had met St. James by the
way, and that he had informed him of
what had past, he added, that he had express
Orders from the Saint, to receive a
considerable Sum for his Use, and that a
certain Tax on Corn and Wine should be
settled on his Church for ever; and lastly,
that a Horseman's Pay should be allowed
for the future to the Saint himself, of which
he and his Successors were appointed Receivers. 
The Army received these Demands
with such Acclamations, that I was obliged
to comply with them, as I could by no 

means discover the Imposition, nor do I believe
I should have gained any Credit if I
had. 
‘I Had now done with the Saint, but
the Bishop had not; for about a Week afterwards,
Lights were seen in a Wood near
where the Battle was fought; and in a short
time afterwards, they discovered his Tomb
at the same Place. Upon this, the Bishop
made me a Visit, and forced me to go thither
to build a Church to him, and largely endow
it. In a word, the good Man so
plagued me with Miracle after Miracle, that
I was forced to make interest with the
Pope to convey him to Toledo, to get rid
of him. 
‘But to proceed to other Matters. — 
There was an inferiour Officer, who had
behaved very bravely in the Battle against the
Moors, and had received several Wounds,
who solicited me for Preferment; which I
was about to confer on him, when one of
my Ministers came to me in a Fright, and
told me, that he had promised the Post I
designed for this Man to the Son of Count 

Alderedo; and that the Count, who was a
powerful Person, would be greatly disobliged
at the Refusal, as he had sent for his
Son from School to take possession of it. I
was obliged to agree with my Minister's Reasons,
and at the same time recommended
the wounded Soldier to be preferred by him,
which he faithfully promised he would: but
I met the poor Wretch since in Elysium,
who informed me he was afterwards starved
to death. 
‘None, who hath not been himself a
Prince, nor any Prince, till his Death, can
conceive the Impositions daily put on them
by their Favourites and Ministers; so that
Princes are often blamed for the Faults of
others. The Count of Saldagne, had been
long confined in Prison, when his Son
D. Bernard del Carpio, who had performed
the greatest Actions against the Moors, entreated
me as a Reward for his Service, to
grant him his Father's Liberty. The old
Man's Punishment had been so tedious, and
the Services of the young one so singularly
eminent, that I was very inclinable to grant
the Request: but my Ministers strongly opposed 

it. They told me, My Glory demanded
Revenge for the Dishonour offered to
my Family; that so positive a Demand carried
with it rather the Air of Menace than
Entreaty. That the vain Detail of his Services,
and the Recompence due to them, was
an injurious Reproach. That to grant what
had been so haughtily demanded, would argue
in the Monarch both Weakness and Timidity; 
in a word, that to remit the Punishment
inflicted by my Predecessors, would
be to condemn their Judgment. Lastly, one
told me in a Whisper, his whole Family are
Enemies to your House. By these means the
Ministers prevailed. The young Lord
took the Refusal so-ill, that he retired from
Court, and abandoned himself to Despair,
whilst the old one languished in Prison. By
which means, as I have since discovered, I
lost the Use of two of my best Subjects. 
‘To confess the Truth, I had by means of
my Ministers conceived a very unjust Opinion
of my whole People, whom I fancied
to be daily conspiring against me, and to entertain
the most disloyal Thoughts; when in
reality (as I have known since my death) 

they held me in universal Respect and Esteem. 
This is a Trick, I believe, too often
played with Sovereigns, who by such Means
are prevented from that open Intercourse
with their Subjects, which as it would greatly
endear the Person of the Prince to the
People, so might it often prove dangerous to
a Minister, who was consulting his own Interest
only at the expence of both. I believe
I have now recounted to you the most material
Passages of my Life; for I assure you,
there are some Incidents in the Lives of
Kings not extremely worth relating. Every
thing which passes in their Minds and Families,
is not attended with the Splendor which
surrounds their Throne: indeed, there are
some Hours wherein the naked King and the
naked Cobler can scarce be distinguished
from each other. 
‘Had it not been, however, for my Ingratitude
to Bernard del Carpio, I believe
this would have been my last Pilgrimage
on Earth: for as to the Story of St. James,
I thought Minos would have burst his Sides
at it: but he was so displeased with me on
the other account, that with a Frown, he 

cried out, Get thee back again, King. Nor
would he suffer me to say another Word.’ 