


The last in the Book. 
Cynthia enquired of David's Physician,
whether there was any immediate
Danger; and being answered in the Negative,
she was up with the Sun the next
Morning, and set out on foot from home. 
She told little Camilla, that if David asked
for her, she should be at home in the
Evening; and walked toward the great Bath
Road: not that she supposed she could
walk to the Bath, but she knew of two
Stage Coaches that went by very early, and
in one of them she doubted not but she
should find Room. She remembered (for
indeed it had made a deep Impression on her
Mind) the uncommon Treatment she had
met with from a Family not far distant from
that City; and she was resolved to set before
the Master of it David's Condition and
the Situation of her Niece. Cynthia was the 

farthest in the World from being of a bold
or intruding Disposition; and nothing but
the Necessity of her Friends could have
urged her on to take a Step which she feared
she had not Acquaintance enough with
that Gentleman to entitle her to. 
When Valentine died, it was reported that
Cynthia also was dead, and therefore on her
Arrival at his Seat, when she sent in her
Name, they were greatly surprized to hear
it. But the Reception she met with from
all the Family, would have paid her for the
Passage of Death itself. 
It was indeed rising again to Felicity from
those bitter Sensations to which she had been
long accustomed It inspired her with a Joy
that she could hardly contain, without venting
it in Acknowledgments that might give
Offence. The Words of Kindness are more
healing to a drooping Heart, than Balm or
Honey: and if ever Gratitude fully possessed
the human Breast, it might at that Instant
be said to possess the Breast of Cynthia. 
The Result of Cynthia's Journey was a
kind Promise, that she and her Niece Camilla
should be taken Care of. She was 

likewise supplied bountifully for the present
with what was necessary for David; and
was sent in a Coach to the Bath, where a
Post Chaise was ordered to convey her as
fast as possible, with the comfortable News
which the Gentleman had put it in her
Power to carry to David. 
Cynthia's Imaginations, on her Journey
back, were pleasing beyond Expression. 
The grateful Veneration which filled her
Heart for the Person she had left, was one
of those Sensations most capable of giving
her Pleasure. The Looks of Welcome and
the Words of Kindness she had met with,
dwelt on her Fancy, and fixed there the most
agreeable Pictures. Innumerable were the
Times, on this Journey, that she in Fancy
entered David's Room, and told him his
Daughter was now indeed under safe and
able Protection. Nay, sometimes she flattered
herself that this would make a Turn
in David's Mind, that might yet restore to
her her Friend. She employed not her
Thoughts in making elaborate Speeches on
what she had done; she knew, that, with
an Intent to give Pleasure, the Words for
that Purpose would flow fast enough; and
now safely and joyfully did she arrive at
Farmer Dunster's. She embraced little Camilla, 

who met her on the Stairs, and eager
to impart good News, told her she could
now revive her Father, and provide for
her. When she entered David's Room, he
happened at that Time to be tolerably easy,
and being always pleased with seeing her, gave
her a Reception that again delighted her
Heart. She first told him the principal Circumstance,
namely, that his Daughter Camilla,
as well as herself, should be under the
kind Protection of one whose Power assisted
his Inclination to confer the highest Benefits. 
Then she related the Manner and the Kindness
with which she was received, and the Joy
with which it inspired her, till she made his
Pleasure and Gratitude equal with her own. 
When she was retired from David's Room,
she again recounted the pleasing Narrative to
her amiable Niece; and little Camilla received
too all the Comfort her present Situation
could admit. She was ready to fall
on her Knees to express her grateful Thanks
to her kind Benefactor. She uttered also
the Words best adapted to shew the Pleasure
she felt on the sudden Transition from the
Dread of falling into the Hands of Mrs.
Orgueil, to the joyful Hopes of living with
Cynthia, if her Father—but that IF she could not utter. 

David, though for some Days a little revived,
by knowing that the Wish nearest
his Heart would be accomplished, was too
far gone for Cynthia to be able to flatter her
self with any Hope of his Recovery. But
still were her Intentions, in some Measure,
answered, by seeing that Chearfulness with
which the Prospect of his Daughter and
Friend's being provided for, inspired him. 
In his Conversations with Cynthia, or his
inward Reflections on his approaching Fate,
he did not, like Orgueil, admire himself, or
call for Admiration from others. But I will
present my Reader with most of David's
own Thoughts, not delivered by him in a
long-continued Harangue, but what, at various
Times, passed in his Mind, and some
part of which fell from his Lips, and is here
collected together, in order to give as perfect
an Image of the Disposition with which
he left this World, as I have attempted to
give of his living in it. 
“When I revolve in my Thoughts all
my past Life, the Errors of my Mind
strike me strongly. The same natural
Desire for Happiness actuated me with
the rest of Mankind: But there was
something peculiar in my Frame; for 

the Seeds of Ambition or Avarice, if they
were in me at all, were so small they
were imperceptible. Friendship and Love
were the only Images that struck my
Imagination with Pleasure; there therefore
I fixed my Pursuit, and in these I
felt the Sharpness of every Disappointment
—when first I found Daniel did not
deserve my Love, I thought (Fool that I
was) my Misery at the Height. And
yet when I lay at that little Alehouse the
first Night I left my Brother, as I was
the only Sufferer, and was careless what
became of me, my Mind was in a State
of Happiness and Freedom, compared
to the Thraldom I have since indured. 
When Miss Johnson discovered a mercenary
Spirit, and would not longer suffer
me to love her, I then thought my Misfortunes
at the Height; and little did I
imagine, that the greatest Misery, and
sharpest Sting of my Life, was to arise
from a Woman's permitting me to love
and esteem her. Had any one then attempted
to persuade me, how little could
I have believed, that the attaining a faithful
and tender Friend, that strong Pursuit
of my Life, and which I thought
the Height of Happiness, should lead to
its very contrary, and by that Means 

shew me the Short sightedness of all human
Wisdom: Yet I found, by Experience,
that there are some Pleasures with
which Friendship pays her Votaries, that
nothing in this World can equal. But
the same Experience has also convinced
me, that when Fortune turns against us,
she can point her Arrows with so much
the sharpest Stings in her Quiver, that,
when placed in the Ballance, more than
weighs down all her highest Enjoyments. 
When I obtained my Camilla's Love, I
exulted in the perfecting my own Scheme,
and saw not what awaited me behind. 
My Camilla endeared herself daily more
and more to my Heart—she brought
me five fine Children, and joined with
me in educating them my own Way. 
My Valentine, my Cynthia too, daily
proved themselves more worthy of my
Friendship. I thought myself at home
in this World, and attached my Heart to
the Enjoyment of it, as strongly, though
in a different Way, as does the Miser or
Ambitious—but I found, even in my
Days of Happiness, that, in obtaining
my Wishes, I had multiplied my Cares; 
for, in the Persons of my Friends, I felt,
at once, several Head-achs, and every
other Infirmity of Body, and Affliction 

of Mind, to which human Nature is incident: 
Yet, as I felt, too, all their Pleasures,
whilst they were checquered, I was
well pleased; but when Poverty broke in
upon us, I found, that to bear the Poverty
of many, was almost insupportable. 
—Then, indeed, my Mind began to be
seized with Fear—I was no longer my
former Self—Pictures of the Distress of
my Family began to succeed each other
in my Mind, and Terror and Timidity
conquered my better Judgment. The
Necessity I found for a Friend, made me
admit, as such, Persons more properly
called Persecutors; and my staggering
Mind catched hold of every rotten Plank,
in Hopes of a Support. Thus my fancied
Friends became my Plagues, and
my real ones, by their Sufferings, tore up
my Heart by the Roots, and frightened
me into the bearing the insolent Persecutions
of the others—I found my Mind
in such Chains as are much worse than
any Slavery of the Body—Still, whilst
my Camilla was spared to me, I struggled
for Chearfulness; I hid my Sorrows within
my own Breast, and she rewarded and
deserved all my Care. But when, in the
two last Months of her Life, I was a
Witness of her Sufferings, I then experienced 

all the Horrors of Friendship— 
my Eyes were forced wide open, to discover
the Fallacy of fancying any real or
lasting Happiness can arise from an Attachment
to Objects subject to Infirmities,
Diseases, and to certain Death; and
I would not, for any Thing this World
can give, lead over again the last Twelve-month
of my Life—I fancied I had some
Constancy of Mind, because I could bear
my own Sufferings, but found, through
the Sufferings of others, I could be
weakened like a Child. —All the Books
of Philosophy I ever read, afforded me
no Relief—I cannot comfort myself by
contemplating my own Wisdom, nor imploy
my Thoughts how to set off my Behaviour
to others, neither pretend that I
could stedfastly look Death in the Face,
could I have no Prospect beyond it. To
be all Uncertainty, all Gloom and Doubt,
and yet to fit with Firmness, and expect
the Stroke, to me seems to favour more
of the Want of Apprehension belonging
to an Idiot, than of the well grounded
Satisfaction belonging to a Man of Sense. 
—But, with a strong and lively Hope in
the Revelation God has been pleased to
send us, and with a Heart swelling with
Gratitude for that Revelation, I can carry 

my Prospect beyond the Grave; and,
painful as my Distemper is, I can now
sit in my Bed with a calm Resignation,
to which my conquered Mind has been
long a Stranger. —That I have lost Camilla
is my Pleasure,—that she has gained
by that Loss, softens every Pain. — 
God bless that benevolent Heart, who
has given me the inexpressible Satisfaction
to know, that I shall leave my innocent
Daughter, and my faithful Friend,
under safe and good Protection. —Cynthia,
who has stood the Death of Valentine,
will easily find Comfort from my
Death, and will teach my young Camilla
to consider it as my Deliverance; and
'tis with Joy I perceive my own Sorrows
are near having an End.” 
These Things did David speak at various
Times, and with such Chearfulness, that Cynthia
said, the last Hour she spent with him,
in seeing his Hopes and Resignation, was a
Scene of real Pleasure. 
But now will I draw the Veil, and if any
of my Readers chuse to drag David Simple
from the Grave, to struggle again in this
World, and to reflect, every Day, on the
Vanity of its utmost Enjoyments, they may 

use their own Imaginations, and fancy David
Simple still bustling about on this Earth. 
But I chuse to think he is escaped from the
Possibility of falling into any future Afflictions,
and that neither the Malice of his
pretended Friends, nor the Sufferings of his
real ones, can ever again rend and torment
his honest Heart. 