


A friendly Visit, in order to comfort the Afflicted. 
Mrs. Orgueil fancied, at first, she was
very sorry for this Misfortune of the
Fire, and that she greatly pitied poor Camilla; 
and therefore went herself, attended
by Miss Cassy, to comfort her. 
Camilla received her with chearful Civility,
at which she was greatly disappointed; for
she expected to have found her overwhelmed
with Tears. However, she pursued her Intention
of comforting her, by painting her
Misfortunes in their worst Colours, at the
same time seeming to pity them. Still she
was disappointed; for Camilla answered,
“That, dreadful as her Misfortunes were,
she had Cause to be thankful to God
that her Children had escaped the Fire.” 
Mrs. Orgueil then began to repeat all the
fancied Misfortunes of her own Life, and to
lament over them in such a Manner, that
if any Strangers had entered the Room, 

they would have imagined Camilla in the
Height of Prosperity, and would have
pitied poor Mrs. Orgueil, as supposing some
terrible Accident had befallen her. Camilla
knew not what to say, for in Truth she was
in a perfect Amazement; at last she mustered
up some general Observations, such
as, “That every one had their Share of
Sorrow in this Life:” and, “That no
Station was exempt from human Evils:” 
when Mrs. Orgueil began to feel herself extremely
angry, and begged Camilla, with
all her natural Good Sense, not to learn of
that affected, insipid Thing, Cynthia, to
pretend to be without feeling. Camilla
said, “Poor Cynthia!” and was going to
add, “she has enough to feel at present:” 
but the latter Part was stifled by the raising
of Mrs. Orgueil's Voice, who eloquently
set forth the Falsehood of every Thing
she fancied Cynthia could say or think; and
reiterated her Desire that Camilla would not
learn of her. But when she found that Camilla
did not join in abusing Cynthia (calling
her poor little Thing from the other
Room, where she had been playing with
David's Children) she took her Leave, tossing
her Head, and flouncing her Hoop; 
her constant Custom when she was angry,
but fancied she despised any one. For this 

imaginary Contempt, when once it has
seized the Mind, generally breaks out in
such Convulsions of the Person, as seems to
carry with it its own Proof, that this Indifference
is nothing but Pretence. 
Mrs. Orgueil returned home, accusing
herself of having too much Good-nature,
in that she had at first pitied Camilla. She
was sorry she had been so extravagant of
her Pity, as to throw it away on such a
senseless, unfeeling Creature; spoilt by the
affected Nonsense she had picked up from
Cynthia. 
As soon as Mrs. Orgueil left Camilla, honest
Mrs. Dunster came to her, and really
talked the Words of Comfort. Her Language
was, indeed, somewhat odd, and her
Expressions savoured of Rusticity; but as
her Meaning was good, she failed not of
giving more Comfort to Camilla than could
all the Flowers of Rhetoric, hiding beneath
them the lurking Snake of Ill-design. 