


Shewing the Consequences which attended
Heartfree's Adventures with
Wild; all natural, and common
enough to little Wretches who deal
with great Men; together with
some Precedents of Letters, being
the different Methods of answering
a Dun. 
Let us now return to Heartfree, to
whom the Note of four thousand five
hundred Pound which he had paid away,
was returned, with an Account that the
Acceptor was not to be found, and that on
enquiring after him, they had heard he was
run away, and consequently the Money was
now demanded of the Endorser. The Apprehension
of such a Loss would have affected
any Man of Business, but much more one
whose unavoidable Ruin it must prove. He
expressed so much Concern and Confusion
on this Occasion, that the Proprietor of the 

Note was frightned, and resolved to lose
no Time in securing what he could. So
that in the Afternoon of the same Day,
Mr. Snap was commissioned to pay Heartfree
a Visit, which he did with his usual
Formality, and conveyed him to his own
House. 
Mrs. Heartfree was no sooner informed
of what had happened to her Husband,
than she raved like one distracted; but after
she had vented the first Agonies of her
Passion in Tears and Lamentations, she
applied herself to all possible Means to procure
her Husband's Liberty. She hastened
to beg her Neighbours to secure Bail for
him. But as the News had arrived at their
Houses before her, she found none of them
at home, except an honest Quaker, whose
Servants durst not tell a Lie. However,
she succeeded no better with him, for unluckily
he had made an Affirmation the
Day before, that he would never be Bail
for any Man. After many fruitless Efforts
of this Kind, she repaired to her Husband
to comfort him, at least with her Presence. 
She found him sealing the last of several 

Letters, which he had dispatched to his
Friends and Creditors. The Moment he
saw her, a sudden Joy sparkled in his Eyes,
which, however, had a very short Duration; 
for Despair soon clouded them again; 
nor could he help bursting into some passionate
Expressions of Concern for her and
the little Family; which she, on her Part,
did her utmost to lessen, by endeavouring to
mitigate the Loss, and raise in him Hopes
from the Count, who might, she said, be
possibly, only gone into the Country. She
comforted him likewise, with the Expectation
of Favour from his Acquaintance,
especially those whom he had in a particular
Manner obliged and served. Lastly,
she conjured him, by all the Value and Esteem
he professed for her, not to endanger
his Health, on which alone depended
her Happiness, by too great an Indulgence
of Grief; assuring him that no State of
Life could appear unhappy to her with
him, unless his own Sorrow or Discontent
made it so. 
In this Manner did this weak, poor-spirited
Woman attempt to relieve her 

Husband's Pains, which it would have rather
become her to aggravate, by not only
painting out his Misery in the liveliest
Colours imaginable, but by upbraiding
him with that Folly and Confidence which
had occasioned it, and by lamenting her own
hard Fate, in being obliged to share his
Sufferings. 
Heartfree returned this Goodness (as
it is called) of his Wife, with the warmest
Gratitude, and they past an Hour in a
Scene of Tenderness, too low and contemptible
to be recounted to our GREAT Readers. 
We shall therefore omit all such Relations,
as they tend only to make human
Nature low and ridiculous. 
Those Messengers who had obtained any
Answers to his Letters now returned. We
shall here copy a few of them, as they
may serve for Precedents to others who
have an Occasion, which happens commonly
enough in genteel Life, to answer
the Impertinence of a Dun. 


LETTER I.
Mr. Heartfree,
My Lord commands me to tell you,
he is very much surprized at your
Assurance in asking for Money, which you
know hath been so little while due; however,
as he intends to deal no longer at your
Shop, he hath ordered me to pay you as
soon as I shall have Cash in Hand, which,
considering many Disbursements for Bills
long due, &c. can't possibly promise any
Time, &c. at present. And am 
your humble Servant,
Roger Morecraft. 

LETTER II.
Dear Sir,
The Money, as you truly say, hath
been three Years due, but upon my
Soul I am at present incapable of paying
a Farthing; but as I doubt not, very shortly,
not only to content that small Bill, but 

likewise to lay out very considerable further
Sums at your House, hope you will meet
with no Inconvenience by this short Delay
in, dear Sir, 
Your most sincere
humble Servant
Cha. Courtly. 

LETTER III.
Mr. Heartfree,
I beg you would not aquaint my Husband
of the trifling Debt between us; 
for as I know you to be a very good natured
Man, I will trust you with a Secret; 
he gave me the Money long since, to
discharge it, which I had the ill Luck to
lose at play. You may be assured I will
satisfy you the first Opportunity, and am,
Sir, 
Your very humble Servant
Cath. Rubbers. 
Please to present my Service to Mrs. Heartfree. 


LETTER IV.
Mr. Thomas Heartfree, Sir,
Your's received; but as to Sum
mentioned therein, does not suit at
present 
Your humble Servant
Peter Pounce. 

LETTER V.
Sir,
I am sincerely sorry it does not at present
suit me to comply with your Request,
especially after so many Obligations received
on my Side, of which I shall always
entertain the most grateful Memory. I am
very greatly concerned at your Misfortunes,
and would have waited upon you in Person,
but am not at present very well, and besides,
am obliged to go this Evening to
Vaux-hall. I am, Sir, 
Your most obliged humble Servant
Cha. Easy. 

There were more Letters to much
the same Purpose; but we proposed
giving our Reader a Taste only. Of all
these, the last was infinitely the most grating
to poor Heartfree, as it came from
one to whom, when in Distress, he had himself
lent a considerable Sum, and of whose
present flourishing Circumstances he was
well assured. 