


Is only the prelude to greater matters. 

It might justly be reckoned a piece of
impertinence to take up the reader's
time with a repetition of the bill of fare
of the entertainment made on the above-mentioned 
occasion; it will be sufficient
to say, that every thing was extremely
elegant; that it was composed of the
best chosen dishes, which were all served
up in the greatest order; and that there
was as great a variety of them as consisted
with the table of a private gentleman,
without incurring the censure of
profuseness. 
Such as it was, however, the noble
lord seemed highly delighted with it; he
praised every thing that came before him
almost to a degree of flattery, and took
all opportunities of being yet more lavish
in his encomiums on the beauty, wit, and
elegance of the fair provider. 
Mr. Munden was transported within
himself at the satisfaction his patron expressed,
and his wife also felt a secret joy 

on hearing the fine things said of her,
which sparkled in her eyes, and gave an
additional lustre to all her charms, 
This nobleman, though past what is
called the prime of life, was far from
having arrived at those years, which bring
on decay;—he was besides of a sanguine
vigorous complection—had a very graceful
person—a fine address—a great affluence
of wit, and something so soft and
engaging in his manner of behaviour to
the ladies, as rendered him still a prodigious
favourite with them. 
He was too good a judge of what is
amiable in womankind, not to discover
immediately the many perfections mrs.
Munden was mistress of;—he felt the
whole force of her charms, and as he
loved beauty more for his own sake than
for that of the possessor, and never liked
without desiring to enjoy, his eyes told
her at every glance, that he languished
for an opportunity of declaring in a different
manner the sentiments he had for
her. 
Mrs. Munden perfectly understood the
language in which she found herself addressed; 
but had she been less learned in
it, an explanation soon presented itself. 

Her husband stepping to the head of the
stair-case to give some orders to a servant,
the peer took hold of one of her hands,
and kissing it with the utmost raptures,
‘Divine creature,’ cried he, ‘how unjust is
fortune, that a face and person so formed
for universal adoration is not placed in a
higher, and more conspicuous sphere of
life!’ 
She had not time to make any reply,— 
mr. Munden returned that moment;—nor
had the noble lord the least opportunity
while he stayed of speaking one word to
her, that was improper for a husband to
be witness of. 
He prolonged the time of his departure
to a greater length than could have been
expected from a person, whose high office
in the state permitted him much fewer
hours of leisure, than those in middling
stations of life are happy enough to enjoy:
—when he went away he assured both the
husband and the wife, that he quitted
them with the utmost reluctance, and
that he had never past a day more agreeably
in his whole life. 
Mr. Munden was now in such high
good humour, that he no sooner found
himself alone with his fair wife, than he 

took her in his arms, and kissed her very
heartily:—a favour not common with
him since the first week of their marriage. 
—He told her moreover she had behaved
that day like an angel,—that nothing
could be more elegant than the dinner she
had prepared, and that he could not have
expected such a variety of covers; and so
fine a desert for the money he gave her
for that purpose. 
‘I think myself very happy,’ answered
she, ‘that you approve so well of my
management, but I fancy’, continued she,
with a smile, ‘you will have some better
opinion of my oeconomy, when I shall
tell you, that it cost less than you imagine.’ 
‘Is it possible!’ cryed he, in a pleasing
surprise: ‘I rather thought you had
been kind enough to have added somewhat
out of your own pocket, to render
the entertainment so perfectly compléat.’ 
‘No, I assure you,’ resumed she,
‘there remains no less than these three
guineas of the sum you allowed me for
this day's expence.’ —With these words,
she laid the pieces she had mentioned on
the table; which he was so ungenerous as to 

take immediately up, and put into his own
pocket. 
‘Nay, mr. Munden,’ said she, while he
was putting up the money,—‘this is not
dealing altogether so fairly by me, as I
have done by you:—I expected, that
the trouble I have been at, deserved at
least to be rewarded with what I have
saved by my frugality.’ 
‘Take care, my dear,’ replied he
laughing, ‘how you lessen the merit of
what you have done,—I am willing to
take it as an obligation to me, and sure
you value an obligation to me at a
much higher rate than three pieces.’ 
Though all this passed on both sides in a
jocose way, yet as it served to shew the
niggardliness of mr. Munden's temper,
cannot be supposed to have increased either
the love, or respect his wife had for him. 
She made however no other answer to
what he had last said, than to tell him
that she found he was fashionable enough
to suffer virtue to be its own reward, and
than turned the conversation, and continued
in the same chearful humour as before
any mention had been made of the
three guineas:—Mr. Munden did not
go abroad the whole evening, but whether
he chose to sup at home, for the 

pleasure of enjoying his wife's company,
or for the sake of re-partaking the remainder
of those dainties, which had been
so highly praised at dinner, is a point,
which perhaps might admit of some dispute. 
It is certain, indeed, the yet unsubdued
vanity of this young lady, made
her feel so much innate satisfaction in the
admiration their noble visiter had expressed
of her person and accomplishments, as
gave a double sprightliness to her conversation
that whole evening, and might
perhaps render her more than ordinarily
lovely in the eyes of her husband. 
It is very far from being an improbability,
that some people may be apt to imagine
she built a little too much on the
veracity of the praises bestowed upon her
by that nobleman; but those, who think
this way, will be convinced of their error,
when they will presently find how
far her conjectures were justified in this
point. 
She was sitting the next morning in a
careless posture at one of the windows
that looked into the street, ruminating
sometimes on one thing, and sometimes
on another; when she could not help observing
a fellow on the other side of the 

way, who kept walking backwards and
forwards before the house, which though
he frequently past thirty or forty paces,
yet he took care never to lose sight of. 
This seemed a little odd to her, as she
sat there a considerable time, and the
man still continued on his post:—she
doubted not but that he wanted to speak
with some one or other of her family,
but had not the least notion his business
was with herself. 
Being told breakfast waited for her, she
went into her dressing-room, where she
usually took it, and thought no further of
the man, till mr. Munden was dressed and
gone out, but in less than a minute after
he was so, she received intelligence from
her footman, that there was a person had a
letter for her, and said he would deliver
it into no hands but her own. 
On this she ran immediately down
stairs, and found to her great surprise,
that he was no other than the fellow, that
she had seen loitering so long about the
house. —‘I am ordered, madam,’ said
he, ‘to give you this,’ and at the same
time presented her with a letter:—‘From
whom does it come?’ demanded she: ‘I
am ignorant,’ answered he, ‘both of the 

person who sent it, and the business it
contains:—my orders were only to deliver
it into your own hands;’ and with
these words went away with all the speed
he could. 
It must be confessed a married woman
ought not to have received a letter
brought her in this manner, and without
knowing whence it came, but curiosity
prevailed above discretion, and she hastily
opening it, found it contained these lines. 

To mrs. Munden,
“Loveliest of your Sex.
As not to adore you would be
the greatest proof of insensibility,
so not to wish, and even attempt
every thing consistent with the character
of a man of honour, for the
obtaining some reward for that adoration,
would be the most stupid piece
of self-denial, becoming only of a
stoick, or one no less dead to all the
joys of life,—The force of your
charms has made the conquest of a
heart, which only waits a favourable
opportunity of throwing itself at your
feet, not altogether without hope,
spite of the circumstance you are in,
of being in some measure acceptable 

to you,—at least it should be so, if
the most ardent and perfect passion that
ever was, joined with the power and
will of rendering you all manner of
services can give it merit in your
eyes. 
“A very short time, I flatter myself,
will explain to you what at present
may seem a mistery:—benignant love
will furnish the most faithful of his
votaries with the means of declaring
himself at full, and the flame with
which he is inspired, instruct him also
to give you such testimonies of his
everlasting attachment, as the good
understanding you are mistress of, will
not permit you to reject: Till when,
I only beseech you to think with some
share of tenderness on, 
“Your concealed adorer.” 

Utterly impossible is it to describe the
situation of mrs. Munden's mind, after
having several times read over this epistle,
and well examined the purport of it:— 
she doubted not one moment, but that it
was dictated by the noble lord she had
seen the day before, and whose behaviour
to her had in some degree corresponded
with the sentiments contained in it. —If
her vanity was delighted with the conquest 

she had made; her pride was shocked at
that assurance, which the daring lover
seemed to flatter himself with of gaining
her, and her virtue much more allarmed
at the attempts, which his rank
and fortune might embolden him to make
for that end. 
At first she was resolved to shew the
letter to her husband the moment he came
home, and acquaint him with her sentiments
on the matter, that he might take
proper precautions to prevent her from
being exposed to any future attacks from
this dangerous nobleman. 
But on more mature deliberation, her
mind changed:—mr. Munden was at
present in tolerable good humour with
her;—she was willing if possible to preserve
it in him, and as she could not but
think an information of this kind would
give him a great deal of uneasiness, so
she had also reason to apprehend the effects
of it might in some measure, innocent
as she was, fall upon herself. 
He had never yet discovered the least
emotions of jealousy, and she knew not
what suspicions her having received such
a letter from one person might raise in 

him, in relation to others. —‘He may
possibly’,—said she to herself, ‘look upon
every man that visits me, as an invader
of his right, and consequently I
should be debarred from all conversation
with the sex.’ 
‘Besides,’ continued she, ‘I am not
certain, that this letter was sent me by
the noble lord, or that he has in reality
entertained any designs to the prejudice
of my virtue;—there is indeed
a strong probability of it, even by his
behaviour towards me yesterday; yet
it may not be so,—appearances often
deceive us; and I might take that for
the effects of love, which proceeded only
from complaisance; but whatever his
intentions are, it would certainly be
the extremest folly and madness in me
to enflame mr. Munden against a
person on whom his interest so much
depends.’ 
‘It is no matter therefore’, went she
still on, ‘whether it be the noble lord in
question, or any other person who presumes
to think so meanly of me, as to
address me in this audacious manner; 
it is doubtless in my power to keep out
of the way of receiving any farther insults
from him; and I am sufficiently 

capable myself of being the guardian of
my own honour without disturbing a
husband's peace about it.’ 
Thus ended the debate she had within
herself on this occasion:—she committed
the letter to the flames; and resolved,
that if ever the author was hardy enough
to discover himself, to treat him with
all the contempt due to him from affronted
virtue. 
