


Contains what every reader of an ordinary
capacity, by this time may easily
guess at. 

Some of my readers will doubtless
think mrs. Munden entirely justified
in making a secret of the above-mentioned
letter to her husband, as she did so in regard
to his peace; but others again who
maintain that there ought to be no reserve
between persons so closely united,
will condemn her for it;—for my part,
I shall forbear to give my vote upon the
matter; and only say, that if she had not
acted with less prudence soon after, she
might have saved herself a very great
shock, and her husband much vexation. 

It was no more than three days after the
great man had dined there, that mr.
Munden received a billet from him, which
contained as follows. 

To George Munden, Esq;
“Dear Munden,
I have so few days that I can call my
own, that I am willing to make
those few as happy as I can, and on
that motive desire your's, and your
amiable wife's company to dinner with
me to-morrow;—I leave you to make
both my request and compliments acceptable
to her, and am, 
“With all sincerity,
Dear Munden,
Your's, &c, &c.
****.” 
“P. S. I shall have a female relation
with me, who will rejoice in an
opportunity of becoming acquainted
with mrs. Munden.” 

Mr. Munden desired the servant, who
brought this, to give his own and wife's 

most humble duty to his lord, and assure
his lordship, they would not fail to attend
his commands. 
Some friends being with him, when
this invitation was brought, hindered
him from saying any thing of it at that
time to his wife, but they were no sooner
gone, than with an air and voice elated
even to an excess, he told her of the high
favour conferred upon them by his right
honourable patron. 
Mrs. Munden was now more than ever
convinced of the base designs lord **** 
had upon her, and that the letter she had
received was sent by him:—she therefore
immediately determined within herself
to let him see, by her not complying
with this invitation, that she was neither
ignorant what his intentions were, nor
would do any thing that might give him
the least encouragement to prosecute
them. 
But as she still judged it was wholly
improper to acquaint mr. Munden with
any thing of the affair, she could form
no other contrivance to avoid accompanying
him in this visit, than by pretending
herself seized with a sudden indisposition,
which she resolved to do some few hours 

before the arrival of that wherein they
should set out. 
If she had persisted in this mind, it
would have been highly laudable indeed; 
—but alas, the next morning inspired
her with very different sentiments;— 
vanity, that sly subverter of our best
resolutions, suggested to her, that there
was no necessity for her behaving in the
manner she had designed. 
‘What should I fear?’ said she to herself,
‘what danger threatens either my
virtue, or my reputation. —A wife
may certainly go any where with her
husband,—besides, a lady will be there,
—a relation of his lordship's,—he
can communicate nothing to me in
their presence, that I should blush to
hear, and it would be rather ridiculous
prudery than discretion in me, to deny
myself the satisfaction of such good
company.’ 
It must be acknowledged, for it but
too plainly appears from every circumstance
of this lady's conduct both before
and after marriage, that the unhappy
propensity in her nature, for attracting
universal admiration, rendered her little
regardful either of the guilt, or the disquiets 

to which her beauty was accessory:
—if she was admired and loved, she
cared not to what end;—in fine, it made
her perfectly uncorrupt and pure, as her
own inclinations were, rather triumph in
than regret the power she had of inspiring
the most inordinate and vicious ones in
others. 
Thus, more delighted than alarmed,
she equip'd herself with all the arts and
labour'd industry of female pride, for securing
the conquest she had gained;— 
safe as she imagined herself from all the
encroachments of presumptuous love, she
pleased herself with the thoughts of being
looked upon by the adoring peer, as
Adam did upon the forbidden fruit;— 
longing, wishing, but not daring to approach. 
She had but just finished her embellishments,
and was looking in the great
glass to see if all was right, when mr.
Munden sent up stairs to know if she
was ready, and to tell her his noble patron
had sent his own chariot to fetch
them:—on hearing this, she immediately
tript down stairs, singing as she
went this part of an old song, 


 With an air and a face,
 And a shape and a grace,
Let me charm like Beauty's goddess.

Oh, how will the prudent, reserved part
of the sex lament, that a young lady,
endued with so many perfections, so
many amiable qualities, should thus persevere
in a vanity, of which she had already
experienced such vexatious consequences. 
Lord **** received them in a fashion,
which fully gratified the ambition of mr.
Munden, and the yet less warrantable expectations
of his wife:—the lady mentioned
in the letter, was already with
him, who, on his lordship's presenting
mrs. Munden to her, saluted her with
abundance of sweetness and good breeding:
—she was a person of about thirty
years of age; had been extremely handsome,
and still retained the remains of
charms, which must have been very
powerful in their bloom;—nor was
her conversation less agreeable than her
person;—she said little indeed, but what
she said was extremely to the purpose,
and very entertaining:—there was notwithstanding
a certain air of melancholy
about her, which she in vain attempted
to conceal, tho' it was easy to perceive 

she made use of her utmost efforts for
that purpose. 
His lordship was extremely gay and
spirituous, as indeed were all the company,
during the whole time at dinner; 
but it was no sooner over than he said to
mr. Munden,—‘dear Munden I have
a business to communicate to you,
which these ladies must forgive me if I
make a secret of to them;’—with these
words he took mr. Munden into another
room, and spoke to him in the
following manner. 
‘A person,’ said he, ‘has been guilty
of an action in regard to me, which it
is neither consistent with my honour,
or my humour to put up with;—I
will shew you,’ continued he giving
him an unsealed letter, ‘what I have
wrote to him upon the occasion, and
that will instruct you how I intend to
proceed, and at the same time convince
you of the confidence I repose in your
friendship for me.’ 
Mr. Munden took the letter out of his
lordship's hands, and found the contents
as follow. 


To William W&wblank;, Esq;
Sir,
Though the affront you have offered
me deserves the severest treatment,
yet in consideration of our former
intimacy, I shall wave my peerage,
and require no other satisfaction
from you than what any private gentleman
has a right to demand of another,
in a case of the like nature. 
“I shall be in the green park to-morrow
about eight in the morning, where
I believe you have honour enough to
meet me;—bring with you any one
person you think fit:—the gentleman,
who puts this into your hands, will
accompany me. 
“Not that I mean our friends should
be engaged in the quarrel, but think it
proper, that there should be some witnesses,
that no foul play is attempted
on either side—I am, 
“Expecting your ready compliance,
Sir,
Yours, &c,
****.” 


‘You see, Munden,’ said he, perceiving
he had done reading, ‘the assurance
I build on the sincerity of your
attachment to me.’ ‘Your lordship does
me an infinity of honour,’ replied the
other with a low bow, ‘and I have nothing
to regret, but that my sword
must lie idle while your lordship's is
employed.’ 
‘As for that,’—resumed the peer,
‘I always thought it the utmost folly
and injustice to set two people on cutting
one another's throats, meerly in
compliment to their friends:—but
my dear Munden,’—pursued he, looking
on his watch; ‘I would have you
go immediately;—I believe you will
find him at the cocoa-tree; he is generally
there about this hour,—but if
not, they will direct you where to find
him.’ 
He sealed the letter while he was speaking,
which being again delivered to mr.
Munden, they both returned into the
room where the ladies were. —Mr.
Munden stayed no longer than while his
footman called a hackney coach to the
door; as he was going out, the nobleman
said to him, I doubt not but you will be
back as soon as possible, in the mean 

time we three will amuse ourselves with a
game at ombre. 
Mrs. Munden was a good deal surprised
at her husband's departure, but had much
more reason to be so, as well as alarmed,
in a moment or two after. 
Cards were but just laid upon the table,
when a servant came hastily, and told the
lady a messenger had brought word that
her mother was suddenly seized with an
apoplectic fit;—that it was not yet
known whether the old lady would recover,
and that she must come home that
instant. 
On this she started up, seemed in a
most terrible fright, and took her leave
with a precipitation natural enough to
the occasion, in a daughter possessed of
any share of duty or affection. 
This part of the history must be very
unintelligible indeed, if the reader has
not by this time seen, that all this was
but a feint contrived by the amorous
nobleman, in order to get an opportunity
of employing the whole battery of his
rhetoric against the virtue he was impatient
to triumph over. 

This pretended kinswoman was in fact,
no more than a cast-off mistress of his lordship's,
but having her dependance entirely
upon him, was obliged to submit in every
thing to his will, and become an assistant
to those pleasures with others, which she
no longer could afford him in her own
person. 
She was brought to his house that day
for two reasons,—first,—as he knew
not what fears, and what apprehensions
the beauty of mrs. Munden might raise
in her husband, and render him suspicious
of the true motive of his being sent
away, had no other company been
there;—and secondly to prevent that fair
intended victim of his unwarrantable
flame, from being too suddenly alarmed
at finding herself alone with him. 
Mrs. Munden however had no time
to examine into the meaning of what she
saw, and all she could recollect in that
instant was, that she was in the house,
and wholly in the power of a person,
who had designs upon her, to which neither
her honour, nor her inclinations
would permit her to aquiesce, and trembled
for the event, but concealing the
disorders of her mind as much as posble:
—‘Well my lord,’—said she, taking 

up the cards, and beginning to shuffle
them, ‘since we are deprived of a
third person by this melancholly accident,
what think your lordship of a
game at picquet.’ 
‘I think,’ answered he, looking upon
her with eyes, which redoubled all her
terrors;—‘that to waste the precious
time in cards, and throw away the
golden opportunity of telling you how
much my soul adores you, would be a
stupidity, which neither love, nor fortune
could forgive me for.’ 
In speaking these words he snatched
one of her hands, and in spite of her endeavours
to withdraw it, pressed it to his
mouth with an eagerness, which would
have convinced her, if she had not been
so before, of the vehemence of those desires
with which he was enflamed. 
‘Fie my lord,’ cried she, with an air as
haughty and reserved as it was in the
power of any woman to assume, ‘this is
not language with which the wife of
him you are pleased to call your friend,
could expect to be entertained.’ 
‘Unreasonably urged,’ cried he: ‘Ought
my friendship to the husband render 

me insensible of the beauties of the
wife? Or would your generous consenting
to reward my passion dissolve the
union between us?—no, on the contrary,
it would rather be cemented;—I
should then love him not only for his
own, but for your sake also, and should
think myself bound to stretch my power
to its extremest limits to do him service:
—be assured, my angel, that in
blessing me you fix the happiness of
your husband, and establish his future
fortune in the world.’ 
These words, joined to mr. Munden's
being gone away she knew not on what
errand, made her shudder with the apprehensions,
that he might have been tempted
by the hopes of interest to become yielding
to the dishonourable intentions of his
patron;—but willing to be more confirmed; 
‘I hope my lord,’ answered she,
‘that you cannot think mr. Munden
has so mean a soul as to accept of an
establishment on such conditions.’ 
‘I could name some husbands, and
those of the first rank too' said he,
who to oblige a friend, and for particular
reasons, have consented to the
complaisance of their wives in this
point, but I desire no such sacrifice
from mr. Munden; there is no necessity 

for it, I have now sent him on a
pretence too plausible for him to suspect
the real motive of my wanting to get
rid of him:—I had a lady here also
for no other end than to prevent him
feeling any disquiet on leaving us altogether; 
—I shall always take the
same precautions,—all our interviews
shall be as private as your own wishes,
and my happiness be an eternal secret
to the whole world as well as to your
husband. 
‘Come then my charmer,’ added he,
attempting to take her in his arms;— 
‘we have no time to lose,—away then
with all idle scruples;—yield to my
embraces;—assist my raptures, and be
assured that my whole soul,—my fortune,
and all my power can give, shall
be at your disposal.’ 
It was the discomposure of mrs. Munden's
mind, which alone hindered her
from interrupting him during the former
part of his speech; but the close of it!
joined with the action, which accompanied
it, obliged her to collect all her
scattered spirits, and flying to the other
end of the room, in order to avoid his
grasp;—‘forbear my lord,’ said she,— 
‘know I despise your offers; and set my 

virtue at a much higher rate, than all
the advantage you, or the whole
world would give in exchange.’ 
Lord **** finding he had to do with a
mistress of uncommon spirit, thought
best to alter the manner of his addresses
to her, and approaching her with
an air much more humble and submissive
than he had hitherto dòne;—‘How I
adore,’ cried he, ‘this noble disinterestedness
in you;—you will grant nothing
but to love alone,—be it so;— 
your beauty is indeed above all other
price. —Let your husband reap all the
advantages, and let it be yours to have
the pleasure, like heaven to save from
despair the man who cannot live without
you.’ 
Perceiving, or at least imagining he
perceived some abatement in the fierceness
of her eyes, on the change of his deportment,
he persisted in it,—he even threw
himself on his knees before her;— 
took hold of her hands;—bathed them
alternately with tears, then dried them
with his kisses;—in fine, he omitted nothing
that the most passionate love, resolute
to accomplish its gratification, could
suggest to soften her into compliance. 

At another time, how would the vanity
of this lady have been elated to see a
person of such high consideration in the
world, thus prostrate at her feet; but at
this, the reflection how much she was in
his power, and the uncertainty how far
he might exert that power, put to silence
all the dictates of her pride, and rendered
her, in reality, much more in awe of him
than he affected to be of her:—she turned
her eyes continually towards the door,
in hopes of seeing mr. Munden enter; 
and never had she wished for his presence
with the impatience she now did. 
The noble lord equally dreaded his return,
and finding the replies she made
to his pressures somewhat more moderate
than they had been on the first opening
his suit, flattered himself that a very
little compulsion would complete the
work:—he therefore resolved to dally
no longer, and having usher'd in his design
with a prelude of some warm kisses
and embraces, was about to draw her into
another room. 
She struggled with all her might, but
her efforts that way being in vain, she
shrieked and call'd aloud for help. — 
This a little shocked him,—he let her go:
‘What do you mean madam?’ said he: — 

‘Would you expose yourself and me to
the ridicule of my servants? —I will
expose myself to any thing’, answered
she, ‘rather than to the ruin and everlasting
infamy your lordship is preparing
for me.’ 
‘Call not by so harsh a name’, cried
he, ‘the effects of the most tender
passion that ever was:—by heavens I
love you more than life, nay, life without
you is not worth the keeping.’ — 
Speaking these words he was about to
lay hold of her again, and her cries having
brought no body to her assistance, she
must infallibly have been lost, if her better
angel had not in that instant directed
her eyes to a bell, which hung in the pannel
of the wainscot just behind the door
of the room into which he was forcing
her,—she snatched the handle, and rung
it with such vehemence that it resounded
through the house. 
This action made him release her with
a kind of an indignant fling, and a servant
immediately coming up,—‘I believe’,
said she to him, ‘my servant is below,
—pray order him to call me a chair
this moment.’ —The peer, not often
accustomed to such rebuffs, was so much
confounded at the strength of her resolution, 

that he had not power to utter one
word, and she fearing another assault,
ran to the door, which the footman hastily
shut after him, and having opened it,
‘—Your lordship’, said she, ‘has used
me in a manner neither worthy of yourself
nor me,—I leave you to blush at
the remembrance.’ 
She waited not to hear what reply he
would have made, but flew down stairs
into the hall, where a chair being presently
brought, she threw herself into it,
extremely disconcerted in her dress as well
as mind. 
