

Concludes miss Forward's narrative, and
relates some further particulars of miss
Betsy's behaviour, on hearing a detail
she so little expected. 
How sweet are the consolations of a
sincere friend!—how greatly do they
alleviate the severest of misfortunes!— 
miss Forward soon dried up her tears, on
a soft commiseration she saw they excited
in miss Betsy; and stifling, as well as she
could, the rising sighs with which her bosom
heaved, at the remembrance of what
she was going to relate, resumed her
mournful story in these terms: 
‘You may very well suppose,’ said she,
‘that the garden-door was not a proper
place to entertain my lover in:—goodmanners
forbad me to use him in so
coarse a manner:—besides, late as it
was, some passenger might happen to
come that way; I therefore led him into 
the arbour, at the end of the terrass,
where we sat down together, on that
broad bench under the arch, where you
so often used to loll, and call it your
throne of state. Never was there a finer
night:—the moon, and her attendant
stars, shone with uncommon brightness,
the air was all serene, the boisterous winds
were all locked in their caverns, and only
gentle zephirs, with their fanning wings,
wafted a thousand odours from the neigh-bouring
plants, perfuming all around. — 
'Twas an enchanting scene: nature herself
seemed to conspire my ruin, and contributed
all in her power to lull my
mind into a soft forgetfulness of what
I owed myself,—my fame,—my fortune,
—and my family. 
‘I was beginning to tell him, how sensible
I was, that to admit him in this
manner, was against all the rules of decency
and decorum, and that I hoped
he would not abuse the good opinion I
had of him, nor entertain the worse of
me for my so readily complying with
his request, and such like stuff: to which
he gave little ear, and only answered
me with protestations of the most violent
passion that ever was;—swore that I
had more charms than my whole sex besides
could boast of;—that I was an 
angel!—a goddess!—that I was nature's
whole perfection in one piece:
then looking on me with the most tender
languishments, he repeated these
lines in a kind of extasy: 

‘In forming thee, heav'n took unusual care;
‘Like its own beauty it designed thee fair,
‘And copied from the best-lov'd angel there.

‘The answers I made to these romantic
encomiums were silly enough, I believe,
and such as encouraged him to think I
was too well pleased to be much offended
at any thing he did. He kissed,—he
clasped me to his bosom, still silencing
my rebukes, by telling me how handsome
I was, and how much he loved
me; and that as opportunities of speaking
to me were so difficult to be obtained,
I must not think him too presuming
if he made the most of this. 
‘What could I do?—how resist his
pressures? The maid having put me to
bed that night, as usual, I had no time
to dress myself again after I got up, so
was in the most loose dishabille that can
be imagined. His strength was far superior
to mine;—there was no creature 
to come to my assistance;—the
time,—the place,—all joined to aid
his wishes;—and, with the bitterest regret
and shame I now confess it, my
own fond heart too much consented. 
‘In a word, my dear miss Betsy, from
one liberty he proceeded to another, till
at last there was nothing left for him to
ask, or me to grant.’ 
These last words were accompanied with
a second flood of tears, which streamed in
such abundance down her cheeks, that
miss Betsy was extremely moved: her
good-nature made her pity the distress,
tho' her virtue and understanding taught
her to detest and despise the ill conduct
which occasioned it: she wept, and sighed,
in concert with her afflicted friend, and
omitted nothing that she thought might
contribute to asswage her sorrows. 
Miss Forward was charmed with this
generosity in miss Betsy, and composed
herself as much as possible, to make those
acknowlegments it merited from her; and
then proceeded to gratify her curiosity with
that part of her adventures which yet remained
untold. 
‘Whenever I recollect,’ resumed she,
how strangely,—how suddenly,—how
almost unsollicited, I yielded up my honour,
some lines, which I remember to
have read somewhere, come into my
mind, and seem, methinks, perfectly
adapted to my circumstances. —They
are these, 

‘Pleas'd with destruction, proud to be undone,
‘With open arms I to my ruin run,
‘And sought the mischiefs I was bid to shun:
‘Tempted that shame a virgin ought to dread,
‘And had not the excuse of being betray'd.

‘Alas! I see my folly now,—my
madness,—but was blind to it too long. 
I upbraided not my undoer: —I remonstrated
not to him any of the ill
consequences might possibly attend this
transaction; nor mentioned one word
concerning how incumbent it was on
him, to repair the injury he had done
me by marriage:—sure never was there
so infatuated a wretch! Morning began
to break in upon us, and the pangs
of being obliged to part, and the means 
of meeting again, now took up all my
thoughts. Letting him in at midnight
was very dangerous, as old nurse Winter,
who you know is very vapourish,
often fancies she hears noises in the house,
and rises to see if all the doors and
windows are fast: besides mr. Wildly
told me, it was highly inconvenient for
him, being obliged to make a friend of
my lord ***'s porter, to sit up for
him. 
‘I was almost at my wit's end, 'till he
recovered me by saying, he believed
there might be a more easy way for our
intercourse, than this nocturnal rendezvous. 
‘Oh! what is that?’ cried I,
earnestly. ‘The French-woman,’ replied
he, ‘that lives here, is good-natured,
and of a very amorous complexion; 
at least sir John Shuffle, who
toyed with her in my lord's park, tells
me she is so; but,’ continued he, ‘I
dare take his word; he knows your sex
perfectly, and, I dare answer, if you
will get her to go abroad with you,
the consequence will be agreeable to us
all.’ 
“What,’ said I, ‘would you have me
make her my confidante?’ ‘Not altogether
so,’ said he; ‘at least not till 
you are upon even terms with her; I
mean, till you have secret for secret.’ 
“How can that be?’ demanded I.
‘leave that to me,’ said he, ‘do you only
get her out to-morrow a walking; 
let me know what time you think you
can best do it, and sir John and I will
meet you as if by chance.’ I told him,
I would undertake to do it if the weather
were fair, and that they might
meet us going towards the town,
but it must be past five, after she had
given her French lesson to the ladies. 
This being agreed upon, we parted,
though not without the extremest reluctance; 
at least, I am sure on my side it
was sincerely so. I then went back with
the same precaution I had gone out,
locked all the doors softly, and got into
my chamber before any of the family
were stirring. 
‘I was more than ordinarily civil to
mademoiselle all the next day: I said
every thing I could think on to flatter
her, and having got an opportunity of
speaking to her alone, ‘Dear mademoiselle,’ 
said I, in a wheedling tone, ‘I
have a great favour to beg of you.’ 
What is that, miss?’ replied she, ‘any
thing in my power you may command.’ 
I then told her, I had got a whim in
my head for a new tippet, and that I
wanted her fancy in the choice of the
colours. ‘With all my heart,’ said she,
‘and when we go out a walking this
evening, we can call at the milliner's,
and buy the ribbonds.’ ‘That will not
do,’ cried I, ‘I would not have any
of the ladies know any thing of the
matter, 'till I have made it and got it
on; so no-body must go with us.’ 
‘Well, well,’ answered she, ‘it shall be
so; but I must tell the governess. 
—I know she will not be against humouring
you in such a little fancy, and
will send the other tutoress, or nurfe
Winter, to wait upon the other ladies.’ 
‘I told her she was very good, but enjoined
her to beg the governess to keep
it a secret; for my tippet would be
mighty pretty, and I wanted to surprise
them with the sight of it.’ 
‘The governess, however, was so kind
as to let us go somewhat before the time
we expected, in order to prevent any
one from offering to accompany us; 
but early as it was, the two gentlemen
were on the road. They accosted us
with a great deal of complaisance: 
‘What! my Diana of the forrest!’ said
sir John, to mademoiselle, ‘am I so 
fortunate to see you once again?’ What
reply she made I do not know, being
speaking to Wildly at the same time; 
but he also, by my instigations; made
his chief court to mademoiselle, and both
of them joined to intreat she would permit
them to lead her to some house of
entertainment: her refusals were very
faint, and perceiving, by my looks, that
I was not very averse, ‘What shall we
do, miss?’ said she to me, ‘there is no
getting rid of these men. Shall we venture
to go with them? —'Tis but a frolic.’ 
‘I am under your direction, madamoiselle; 
but I see no harm in it, as
to be sure,’ replied I, ‘they are gentlemen
of honour.’ 
‘In fine, we went into the first house
that had the prospect of affording us an
agreeable reception. It is not to be doubted
but we were treated with the best the
place we were in could supply: sir John
declared the most flaming passion for mademoiselle,
and engrossed her so much
to himself, that Wildly had the liberty
of addressing me, without letting her
see his choice gave me the preference. 
‘Sir John after using mademoiselle
with some freedoms, which I could perceive
she did not greatly resent, told 
her, there was an exceeding fine picture
in the next room, and asked her to go
and look upon it. ‘Oh! yes,’ replied
she, ‘I am extravagantly fond of painting. 
Are not you, miss?’ continued she
to me, with a careless air. ‘No,’ said
I, ‘I had rather stay here, and look
out of the window; but I would not
hinder this gentleman,’ meaning mr.
Wildly: who replied, ‘I have seen it
already, so will stay and keep you company.’ 
‘I believe, indeed, we might have
spared ourselves the trouble of these last
speeches; for our companions seemed as
little to expect as to desire we should
follow them, but ran laughing, jumping,
and skipping out of the room,
utterly regardless of those they left behind. 
‘Thus you see, my dear miss Betsy,
continued she, Wildly had, a second
time, the opportunity of triumphing
over the weakness of your unhappy
friend. Oh! had it been the last, perhaps
I had not been the wretch I am; 
but, alas! my folly ceased not here: I
loved,—and every interview made him
still dearer to me. 
‘On mademoiselle's return, we began
to talk of going home: ‘Bless me,
cried I, ‘'tis now too late to go into
town. What excuse shall we make to
the governess, for not having bought
the ribbonds?’ ‘I have already contrived
that,’ replied she, ‘I will tell
her, that the woman had none but ugly
old fashioned things, and expects a fresh
parcel from London in two or three
days.’ ‘O that is rare,’ cried I, ‘that
will be a charming pretence for our
coming out again.’ ‘And a charming
opportunity for our meeting you again,’ 
said sir John Shuffle. ‘If you have any
inclination to lay hold of it,’ rejoined
mademoiselle. ‘And you have courage
to venture,’ cried he. ‘You see we
are no cowards,’ answered she briskly. 
Well, then, name your day,’ said
Wildly, ‘if sir John accepts the challenge,
I will be his second; but I am
afraid it cannot be 'till after Thursday,
because my lord talks of going to ***,
and we cannot be back in less than
three days.’ 
‘Friday therefore was the day agreed
upon, and we all four were punctual to
the appointment. I shall not trouble
you with the particulars of our conversation 
in this or any other of the meetings
we had together, only tell you, that
by the contrivance of one or other of
us, we found means of coming together
once or twice every week, during the
whole time these gentlemen stayed in
the country, which was upwards of two
months. 
‘On taking leave, I pressed Wildly to
write to me under cover to mademoiselle
Grenouille, which he promised to do, and
I was silly enough to expect. Many
posts arriving without bringing any
letter, I was sadly disappointed, and
could not forbear expressing my concern
to mademoiselle, who only laughed at
me, and told me, I as yet knew nothing
of the world, nor the temper of
mankind;—that a transient acquaintance,
such as ours had been with these
gentlemen, ought to be forgot as soon
as over;—that there was no great probability
we should ever see one another
again, and it would be only a folly to
keep up a correspondence by letters;— 
and added, that by this time they were,
doubtless, entered into other engagements; 
and so might we too, said she,
if the place and fashion we live in did
not prevent us. 
‘I found by this, and some other
speeches of the like nature, that it was
the sex, not the person, she regarded. 
I could not, however, be of her way
of thinking. I really loved mr. Wildly,
and would have given the world, had I
been mistress of it, to have seen him
again; but, as she said, indeed, there
was no probability for my doing so; and
therefore I attempted, through her persuasions,
to make a virtue of necessity,
and forget both him and all had pass'd
between us. I should in the end, perhaps,
have accomplished this point; but
oh! I had a remembrancer within,
which I did not presently know of. In
fine, I had but too much reason to believe
I was pregnant. —A thing, which
though a natural consequence of the folly
I had been guilty of, never once entered
into my head. 
‘Madamoiselle Grenouille seemed now
terribly alarmed, on my communicating
to her my suspicions on this score: she
cried, 'twas’ very unlucky!—then
paused, and asked what I would do, if
it should really be as I feared? I replied,
that I knew not what course to
take, for if my father should know it
I was utterly undone: I added, that he 
was a very austere man; and, besides,
I had a mother-in-law, who would not
fail to say every thing she could to incense
him against me. 
“I see no recourse you have then,’ 
said she, ‘but by taking physic to cause
an abortion. You must pretend you
are a little disordered, and send for an
apothecary. The sooner the better, for
if it should become visible, all would
infallibly be known, and we should both
be ruined.’ 
‘I was not so weak as not to see, that
if any discovery were made, her share
in the intrigue must come out, and she
would be directly turned out of doors; 
and that whatever concern she pretended
for me, it was chiefly on her own account:
however, as I saw no other remedy,
was resolved to take her advice. 
‘Thus by having been guilty of one
crime I was ensnared to commit another,
of a yet fouler kind: one was the error
of nature, this an offence against nature. 
The black design, however, succeeded
not; I took potion after potion, yet still
retained the token of my shame, which
at length became too perspicuous for 
me to hope it would not be taken notice
of by all who saw me. 
‘I was almost distracted, and madamoiselle
Grenouille little less so: I was one
day alone in my chamber, pondering on
my wretched state, and venting some
part of the anguish of my mind in tears,
when she came in: ‘What avails all
this whimpering, said she, ‘you but
hasten what you would wish to avoid. 
The governess already perceives you
are strangely altered; she thinks you
are either in a bad state of health, or
some way disordered in your mind, and
talks of writing to your father to send
for you home.’ 
“O heavens!’ cried I,—‘Home did
you say? —No; I will never go home. 
The grave is not so hateful to me, nor
death so terrible as my father's presence.’ 
‘I pity you from my soul,’ said she,
‘but what can you do? There will be
no staying for you here, after your condition
is once known, and it cannot be
concealed much longer.’ These words,
the truth of which I was very well convinced
of, drove me into the last dispair: 
I raved,—I tore my hair,— 
I swore to poison, drown, or stab myself,
rather than live to have my shame 
exposed to the severity of my father,
and reproaches of my kindred. 
“Come, come,’ resumed she, ‘there
is no need of such desperate remedies,
you had better go to London, and
have recourse to Wildly; who knows,
as you are a gentleman's daughter, and
will have a fortune, but you may perswade
him to marry you? if not, you
can oblige him to take care of you
in your lying-in, and to keep the child:
and when you are once got rid of your
burthen, some excuse or other may be
found for your elopement.’ 
“But how shall I get to London?’ resumed
I, ‘how find out my undoer in
a place I know nothing of, nor ever
have been at? Of whom shall I enquire? 
I am ignorant of what family
he is, or even where he lives.’ ‘As to
that,’ replied she, ‘I will undertake to
inform myself of every thing necessary
for you to know, and if you resolve to
go I will set about it directly.’ I then
told her, I would do any thing, rather
than be exposed; on which she bid
me assume as chearful a countenance as
I could, and depend on her bringing
me some intelligence of Wildly before I
slept. 
‘The method she took to make good
her promise, was, it seems, to send a
person whom she could confide in to the
seat of lord ***, to enquire among the
servants where mr. Wildly, who had
lately been a guest there, might be found. 
She told me, that the answer they gave
the man was, that they knew not where
he lodged, but that he might be heard
of at any of the coffee-houses about St.
James's. As I was altogether a stranger
in London, this information gave me
but little satisfaction; but madamoiselle
Grenouille, whose interest it was to hurry
me away, assured me that she knew that
part of the town perfectly well, having
lived there several months on her first
arrival in England;—that there were
several great coffee-houses there, frequented
by all the gentlemen of fashion,
and that nothing would be more easy
than to find mr. Wildly at one or other
of them. My heart, however, shuddered
at the thoughts of this enterprize, yet
her perswasions, joined to the terrors I
was in of being exposed, and the certainty
that a discovery of my condition
was inevitable, made me resolve to undertake
it. 
‘Nothing now remained but the means
how I should get away, so as to avoid
the pursuit might, doubtless, be made
after me; which after some consultation
was thus contrived, and executed. 
‘A flying coach sets out from H&wblank; 
every Monday at two o'clock in the
morning; madamoiselle Grenouille engaged
the same man, who had enquired
at lord ***'s for mr. Wildly, to secure
a place for me in it. The Sunday before
I was to go I pretended indisposition
to avoid going to church: I passed
that time in packing up the best of my
things in a large bundle; for I had no
opportunity of taking a box or trunk
with me. My greatest difficulty was
how to get out of bed from miss Bab,
who still lay with me. I thought, however,
that if she happened to awake
while I was rising, I would tell her I
was not very well, and was only going
into the next room, to open the window
for a little air; but I stood in no need
of this precaution, she was in a sound
sleep, and I left my bed, put on the
cloaths I was to travel in, took up my
bundle, and stole out of the room, without
her perceiving any thing of the matter. 
I went out by the same way by 
which I had fulfilled my first fatal appointment
with mr. Wildly; at a little
distance from the garden-door, I found
the friend of madamoiselle Grenouille,
who waited for me with a horse and pillion; 
he took my bundle before, and me
behind him, and then we made the best
of our way towards H&wblank;, where we
arrived time enough for the coach. I
alighted at the door of the inn, and he
rode off directly to avoid being seen by
any body, who might describe him, in
case an enquiry should be made. 
‘I will not trouble you with the particulars
of my journey, nor how I was
amazed on entering this great metropolis. 
I shall only tell you, that it
being dark when we came in, I lay that
night at the inn, and the next morning,
following the directions madamoiselle
Grenouille had given me, took a hackney
coach, and ordered the man to drive
into any of the streets about St. James's,
and stop at the first house where he
should see a bill upon the door for ready
furnished lodgings. It happened to be
in Rider-street; the woman at first seemed
a little scruplous of taking me, as I
was a stranger, and had no recommendation; 
but, on my telling her I would 
pay her a fortnight beforehand, we agreed
at the rate of twelve shillings a week. 
‘The first thing I did was to send a
porter to the coffee-houses, where he
easily heard of him, but brought me
the vexatious intelligence that he was
gone to Tunbridge, and it was not
known when he would return. This
was a very great misfortune to me, and
the more so as I had very little money: 
I thought it best, however, to follow
him thither, which I did the same
week. 
‘But, oh! my dear miss Betsy, how
unlucky every thing happened? he had
left that place the very morning before
I arrived, and was gone for London. 
I had nothing now to do but return; 
but was so disordered with the fatigues
I had undergone, that I was obliged to
stay four days to compose myself. 
When I came back I sent immediately
to the coffee-house; but how shall I express
the distraction I was in, when I
was told he had lain but one night in
town, and was gone to Bath. 
‘This second disappointment was terrible
indeed: I had but half-a-crown
remaining of the little stock I brought 
from the boarding-school, and had no
way to procure a supply, but by selling
my watch; which I did to a gold-smith
in the neighbourhood, for what he
was pleased to give me, and then set
out for Bath by the first coach. 
‘Here I had the good fortune to meet
him; he was strangely surprised at the
sight of me in that place, but much
more so when I told him, what had
brought me there: he seemed extremely
concerned at the accident. But when I
mentioned marriage, he plainly told
me, I must not think of such a thing:
that he was not in circumstances to support
a family;—that having lost the
small fortune, left him by his friends,
at play, he was obliged to have recourse,
for his present subsistence, to the very
means by which he had been undone: 
In short, that he was a gamester. The
name startled me: treated, as I had always
heard it, with the utmost contempt,
I could not reconcile how such a one
came to be the guest and companion of
a lord, though I have since heard, that
men of that profession frequently receive
those favours from the nobility, which
are denied to persons of more unblemished
character. 
‘Wildly, however, it is certain, has
some notions of honour and good-nature; 
he assured me he would do all in
his power to protect me; but added,
that he had been very unfortunate of
late, and that I must wait for a lucky
chance, before he could afford me any
supply. 
‘I stayed at Bath all the time he was
there: he visited me every day, but I
lived on my own money, 'till we came
to town, when my time being very near,
he brought me to the place you find
me in, having, it seems, agreed with
the woman of the house for a certain
sum of money to support me during
my lying-in, and keep the child as long
as it should live. The miseries I have
sustained during my abode with this old
hag, would be too tedious to repeat. 
The only joy I have is, that the wretched
infant died in three days after its birth,
so has escaped the woes, which children
thus exposed are doomed to bear. Wildly
has taken his last leave of me, and I
have wrote to an aunt, entreating her to
endeavour to obtain my father's forgiveness. 
I pretended to her, that I left
L&wblank;e for no other reason than
because I had an ardent desire to see 
London; and, as I think, no-body can
reveal to him the true cause, have some
hopes of not being utterly abandoned by
him.’ 
Here this unfortunate creature finished
her long narrative, and miss Betsy saw
her in too much affliction, to express any
thing that might encrease it: she only
thanked her for reposing a confidence in
her, “Which,” said she, “may be of
great service to me some time or
other.” 
Before they parted miss Forward said,
she had gone in debt to mrs. Nightshade,
for some few things she wanted, over and
above what is generally allowed in such
cases, and had been affronted by her for
not being able to discharge it, therefore
entreated miss Betsy to lend her twenty
shillings; on which the generous, and
sweet tempered young lady immediately
drew her purse, and after giving her the
sum she demanded, put two guineas more
into her hand: “Be pleased to accept
this” said she, “you may possibly want
something after having paid your debt.” 
The other thanked her, and told her, she
doubted not but her aunt would send her
something, and she would then repay it. 
“I shall give myself no pain about that,” 
said miss Betsy, and then took her leave,
desiring she would let her know by a letter
what success she had with her friends. 
Miss Forward told her, she might depend
not only on hearing from her, but seeing
her again, as soon as she had any thing to
acquaint her with. 