
Is a digression of no consequence to the history, and may therefore either be read or omitted at discretion. 
The sun had made but a very short progress in his diurnal course, when lady Speck, miss Wingman, and the amiable Jenny, accompanied by mr. Lovegrove, set out on their journey for London, escorted by Landy and all their men-servants on horseback. 
Our fair travellers soon found the advantage they had gain'd by the invitation 
given to mr. Lovegrove;—the innate satisfaction that gentleman felt on lady Speck's obliging behaviour towards him, diffused itself through all his air and features, and added a double vivacity to his conversation;—he was all life,—all gaiety,—all spirits;—he told a thousand diverting stories, and sung as many pretty songs; so that if they had been more inclined to seriousness than they really were, it would have been impossible for them to have indulged any melancholy reflections in his company. 
The day was near pass'd over in this agreeable manner, when a sudden stop was put to all their pleasantry;—one of the hindmost wheels of the coach flew off its axis, and but for the coachman's uncommon presence of mind, in restraining the horses that same instant, some mischief might probably have ensued;—all the servants immediately alighted endeavouring to repair the damage, but in vain;—part of the ironwork was broke, and two spokes of the wheel had started with the shock:—this accident happened about five miles from the town where they had design'd to lie that night; but as there was a small village pretty near, it was judged proper to walk thither, as the only expedient in this exigence; which 
they did with a great deal of alacrity and chearfulness, while the dismember'd machine, though with some difficulty, was dragged after them. 
The accommodation they found here was indifferent enough; but what deficiencies are there in nature or in fortune which good humour cannot supply?—the ladies laugh'd heartily at their little pilgrimage, and mr. Lovegrove made them all scamper about the room by attempting to wipe the dust off their shoes with his handkerchief. 
In fine;—their supper,—their lodging, all that to persons of less wit and more affectation would have been matters of the utmost mortification, to them serv'd only as subjects of diversion, and occasions a fresh pleasantry. 
They arose next morning in the same chearful temper with which they had lain down; nor did it abate on being told that the workmen who had been sent for to mend the coach could not pretend to make it fit to take the road for several hours:—as the place they were in afforded no other convenience to prosecute their journey, they resolved to make a virtue of necessity, and content 
themselves with what was without a remedy. —Mr. Lovegrove, however, took upon himself the office of caterer, and was so fortunate as to provide an entertainment somewhat less inelegant than they had been obliged to content themselves with the night before. 
But while dinner was getting ready an accident happen'd which contributed to make the time of their abode there seem shorter, by presenting them with a new theme of conversation. 
The woman who kept the house, after having gently open'd the door of the room where they were, came in making a curtsy at every step she took, and approach'd the ladies with an,—‘I beg pardon,—I hope no offence,—but I have a poor guest below that would have me come up;—I am very tender hearted,—though God knows what she is, or who she is,—for my part I never saw her before last night in my whole life,—so I have nothing to answer for on that account;—and if she be bad it is the worst for herself,—that is all I have to say.’ 
‘If you have nothing more to say, mistress, cried mr. Lovegrove laughing, 
I think you are very much to blame to lose your time in telling us so.’ —‘I hope your lordship's worship and all their ladyships will excuse me;—I am but a plain woman;—but God knows my heart I mean no harm;—but as I was saying, a poor young woman, finding I had quality in my house, has been baiting me this two hours I am sure to shew you a snuffbox she had got to sell;—how she came by it I can't tell; but this I must say, that she does not look like a thief; though there are such sad doings in the world that one does not know who to trust.’ 
‘Let us see it, however, said lady Speck.’ —‘Aye,—aye, rejoin'd the others, let us see it by all means;’—on this the woman produced the box, tho' not without repeating several times over her former apologies. 
The box was a most curious English pebble, set in gold, with a hinge and lining of the same metal;—they handed it from one to the other, and concluded that as it was a toy too genteel for the possession of a person in very abject circumstances, it must either be stolen, or the real owner be reduced by some uncommon 
distress to the necessity of parting with it. 
The bare supposition that this latter might possibly be the case, inspiring them with a good deal of curiosity to know something farther of the matter, they told the woman they would buy the box, but should be glad to see the owner and bargain for it with herself,—on which she went out of the room, but return'd immediately, bringing with her the person in question. 
‘This, said she, is the young woman,—she says she come very honestly by the box,—as I told your honours before, I know nothing of the matter,—she is quite a stranger to me, but I shall leave her with you, and if your honour and ladyships worships will be pleased to examine her you may-hap will be better judges than I am;—for my part I have a great deal of business to do and cannot be spared any longer from my bar and my kitchen;—indeed there is nobody but myself to take care of any thing in this house, though I have a husband and a daughter at woman's estate, as I may say, for she is past fourteen, yet all lies upon me, so I hope your honours will excuse me.’ 
It may be easily imagined that all the company were very glad to get rid of her impertinent babble, so readily dismiss'd her; mr. Lovegrove telling her at the same time, with an ironical complaisance, that he was extremely troubled she had wasted so many of her important minutes on so trivial an occasion. 
After this prating woman was gone, the young person she had left behind, and who had enter'd no farther than just within the door, on being desir'd to come forward advanced with a slow and timid air, yet which had nothing in it of the appearance of a conscious guilt;—notwithstanding the disguise of an old fashion'd long ridinghood, which cover'd her whole body, and even hid some part of her lovely face, there was still enough to be seen to prepossess any beholder in her favour. 
Her extreme youth, for she seem'd not to have exceeded fifteen or sixteen years at farthest, the delicacy of her complexion, and of those features which she suffer'd to be exposed to view, excited a kind of respectful compassion in the hearts of all those she was at present with. 
Mr. Lovegrove, who had undertaken to be the speaker, began with asking her, if she was the owner of the box before them; to which she answering in the affirmative,—‘I am very sorry then, said he, and I am certain that all here are so, that any exigence should oblige you to dispose of it.’ 
‘The vicisitudes of fortune, sir, reply'd she with a becoming assurance, are too frequently experienced in the affairs of life to raise much wonder, or to know much pity, except from the hearts of a generous few.’ 
‘That is true, resumed mr. Lovegrove; but you are too young to have been subjected to them by any of those ways the fickle goddess ordinarily takes to shew her power over the world;—the distress you labour under must therefore proceed from some uncommon source, which if you thought proper to communicate, I dare answer you are now among persons who would not only wish, but also make it their endeavour to lessen the weight of your affliction.’ 
She was about to make some reply but was prevented by lady Speck, who immediately subjoining to what mr. Lovegrove had said, —‘There is nothing wanting, cried she, but the knowledge of your affairs to make me shew my readiness to serve you.’ —The other two ladies spoke much to the same purpose, especially Jenny, who had taken a more than ordinary fancy to this fair one. 
After having thank'd them in the politest terms for their goodness to one so altogether a stranger to them; —‘The accidents of my life, said she, are little worthy the attention of this company; but since I am commanded to repeat them I shall make no scruple to obey, on condition I may be permitted to conceal the names of all the persons concern'd in them.’ 
They then assured her that they should content themselves with such things as she thought proper to impart, and, making her sit down, desired she would not delay one moment the satisfaction she had promised, which request she comply'd with, as will be seen in the succeeding chapter. 
