

Contains a continuation of mrs. M&wblank;'s adventures. 
The unfortunate mrs. M&wblank;, having once more regain'd the power and utterance, made a handsome apology for that interruption which grief and shame had occasion'd in her recital, and then prosecuted it in the following manner: 
‘It may seem strange, perhaps, said she, that with my innocence I should lose all discretion too; yet so it was, fond even to madness of my undoer, and self satisfied with my crime, I thought of nothing, regarded nothing, studied nothing, but how to gain fresh opportunities of repeating it: whenever my husband was abroad, as of late he had but too often been so, I sent over half the town in search of Celandine; if he was not found, the ill humour I was in sufficiently testified to all about me my impatience for the disappointment; and whenever he was with me, we were constantly lock'd up together, and all who came to visit me were deny'd access. 
‘All this, as may easily be supposed, could be no secret; some of my acquaintance contented themselves with shunning my conversation; others still kept me company, but it was only to have the more opportunity of seeing and exposing my folly: I became the derision even of my own servants, as I easily have perceived by the little obedience they paid to my commands and the pert answers they gave, which were also accompanied with fleering countenances and malicious grins, whenever I went about to exert my authority over them as a mistress. Oh, how great was my infatuation! I can now, with astonish'd eyes, behold all these things distinctly; but at that time was blind to all that conduced not to the gratification of my love; or, as I then flatter'd myself, rewarding that of the man whom I consider'd as the most faithful, as well as the most charming of his sex.’ 
Here the tears began again to flow, but she soon dry'd them up; and pursued the thread of her discourse. 
‘My husband, I believe, continued she, was the last person sensible of the dishonour I had brought upon him; but he could not long escape the hearing of what, had he not been blinded by his too good opinion either of myself or Celandine, he needed not to have been told. I am apt to think however, that he gave not an entire credit to the story, for if he had he would not have taken the pains he did to be convinced. 
‘He left Celandine with me one day, pretending that some very extraordinary business call'd him abroad; but, instead of going out, went and conceal'd himself in a closet within our bed-chamber, into which, thinking ourselves perfectly secure, we retir'd soon after his supposed departure: we had not been there many minutes before he rush'd out, and surprised us in a manner as could admit no doubt of the crime we were guilty of; Celandine snatch'd up his sword which lay in the window, and immediatly drew it, expecting he should have occasion to use it; but my husband in the same moment eased his apprehensions on that score, by saying, with a voice which had more of grief than anger in it,’ “—Put up, sir, I have not forgot the obligations I have to your family, and am only sorry to find you have taken this method to acquit me of them; all I desire is, that you will leave my house directly, and that from hence-forward we may be utter strangers.” ‘—Celandine was in too much confusion to make any answer, and went away with all the speed he could. 
‘As for my wretched self,—fear, which one would think should rather have given wings to my feet, and made me fly the presence of an injured husband, riveted me to the bedside on which I was sitting; my blood was all congeal'd, my spirits ceas'd to operate; he upbraided my ingratitude and perfidiousness in terms which I must confess they merited; I heard all he said, but had it not in my power to make the least reply, or to excuse, or defend my crime, had it been in words to do either; but at that time I was indeed bereft of speech as well as motion. Having vented some part of his indignation in revilings, he flung out of the room, and left me in the condition I have described. 
‘No stupidity sure ever equalled mine; a death like numbness had seiz'd all my faculties; what little sense I had was bewildered and confused; I could not even reflect on the misfortune to which my folly had reduced me, much less contrive any means to render them more supportable. 
‘How long I remain'd, or how much longer I should have remain'd in this lethargy of mind I know not; but it was almost dark when I was rous'd out of it by the sudden appearance of an elderly woman, a relation of my husband's, who with a stern voice and countenance told me, that she was sent by him to take care of his family; and that I must immediately go out of the house. 
‘This message, and the manner in which it was deliver'd, stung me to the very soul; rage and disdain now quickened every nerve, I was all on fire, and raved against mr. M&wblank;in terms which would have made any one who heard me think, that it was myself, not he, who was the injured person. 
‘To this she coolly answer'd, that it was not her business to argue with me on these points; that she had discharged her commission in signifying my husband's pleasure to me; which, since I did not think fit to comply with, he must come himself and put an end to the dispute; adding, that he was not far off, and she would send directly for him. 
‘All my courage again forsook me, the sight of my husband at this time was more dreadful to me than any thing I could suffer in being banish'd from him; besides, my reason now convinced me, that after so full a detection of my crime, I could not hope to live under the same roof with him; at least not till a long series of penitence and submissions should give me a title to his forgiveness; I therefore called the woman back, perceiving she was going to do as she had said, and told her, that since it was my husband's will I should depart, I would not provoke him by my disobedience. 
‘In speaking these words I started up, went to the drawers, put a night-mob in my pocket, hurried on my capuchin, order'd a coach to be call'd, and seem'd in as much haste to be gone as my husband was to get rid of me; while I was doing this his kinswoman desired I would take the keys with me, saying, that if I sent them in the morning she had orders to let me have every thing belonging to me. 
“Very well, reply'd I carelessly, I shall know in the morning what I have to do.” The coach being at the door I stept hastily into it, and made the fellow drive me to a milliner's in Convent-Garden, whose customer I had been for a considerable time. 
‘I chose this woman's house for an asylum in my present distress, not daring to apply to any one of my relations; nor did I think it proper as yet to trust her with the whole secret of my guilt and my misfortunes; I only told her, that I had a quarrel with my husband and had swore not to sleep with him that night; so desired she would be hospitable enough to afford me a bed, as I knew she had one to spare. 
‘The former part of that night I past in the most cruel agitations, but towards the latter grew somewhat more composed; the vivacity of my temper represented to me, that I was not the first woman who had liv'd in a state of separation from her husband; that the discourse of these things was soon over; that I had a lover who would always supply me with the necessaries of life; and that the loss of reputation would be attoned for by the endearments of so worthy a man: thus, alass! was my judgment misguided by my fond passion for that ungrateful wretch. 
‘I dispatch'd a messenger to him next morning, he came immediately, desired I would provide a handsome lodging for myself; and assured me, with a thousand protestations, that his purse and his person should always be at my devotion: notwithstanding this I wrote to my husband, excusing my transgression as well as I was able; he sent me all the things I had left behind; but return'd for answer to my letter, that he was determined never to see my face again; and that all he would do for me was to pay for my board, on condition I would retire to a farm-house an hundred and fifty miles from London, and never come back. 
‘Gladly therefore I accepted of Celandine's offer,—hired an apartment, and thought myself as happy as a woman in my circumstances could be. —I was, indeed, but too well satisfied with my condition;—I wanted for nothing that I desired, and had more than I could have expected of the company of the man I priz'd above the world:—but alass! these golden days were of a short continuance,—too soon I found, by sad experience, that a lover, as well as a husband, could grow cool on a sure possession.’ 
‘I cannot, however, accuse him of being a niggard to me in his allowance for my support; but loving him to that excess I did, it was an adequate return of love which alone could make me truly blest.’ 
‘At last he talk'd of going to Bath; I testify'd an extreme desire of accompanying him; but he endeavour'd to put me off, by pretences which seem'd to me very trifling, till I insisting upon his taking me with him, he plainly told me that I must not think of it, for he was to go with persons by whom it was wholly improper I should be seen. I wept, but he was not softened by my tears, only laying ten guineas on the table bid be console myself with that till his return, and then took his leave with the same careless air as he could have done of the most slight acquaintance.’ 
‘Judge how severe a stab this must give both to my love and pride;—I saw, by the manner of his refusing, that there was something more at the bottom than he made shew of, and resolved to fathom it whatever should be the event;—accordingly, as he left London one day in a post-chaise I follow'd the next in the stage-coach.’ 
Here the reflection on those wild lengths, to which the folly of her passion had transported her, made her again unable to proceed, and the company were obliged to give a truce to their curiosity till she recover'd herself enough to go on with her narrative, in the manner which will be seen in the succeeding chapter. 
