

The next morning Mr. Hervey called
on Dr. X&wblank;, and begged that he would
accompany him to lady Delacour's.
“To be introduced to your tragic
muse?” said the doctor.
“Yes,” said Hervey, “I must have
your opinion of her before I devote myself.”
“My opinion! but of whom?—Of
lady Delacour?”
“No; but of a young lady whom you
will see with her.”
“Is she handsome?”
“Beautiful!”

“And young?”
“And young.”
“And graceful?”
“The most graceful person you ever
beheld.”
“Young, beautiful, graceful; then
the deuce take me,” said Dr. X&wblank;, “if I
give you my opinion of her; for the odds
are, that she has a thousand faults, at
least, to balance these perfections.”
“A thousand faults! a charitable allowance,” 
said Clarence, smiling.
“There now,” said Dr. X&wblank; 
‘Touch him, and no minister's so sore.’
To punish you for wincing at my first setting
out, I promise you, that if the lady
have a million of faults, each of them as
high as huge Olympus, I will see them
with the eye of a flatterer—not of a
friend.”
“I defy you to be so good, or so bad
as your word, Dr.” said Hervey.—“You
have too much wit to make a good flatterer.”

“And perhaps you think too much to
make a good friend,” said Dr. X&wblank;.
“Not so,” said Clarence, “I would at any
time rather be cut by a sharp knife than by
a blunt one.—But, my dear doctor, I hope
you will not be prejudiced against Belinda,
merely because she is with lady
Delacour; for, to my certain knowledge,
she is not under her ladyship's influence.
—She judges and acts for herself, of which
I have had an instance.”
“Very possibly,” interrupted Dr. X&wblank;,
“but before we go any farther, will
you please to tell me of what Belinda you
are talking?”
“Belinda Portman.—I forgot that I
had not told you.”
“Miss Portman, a niece of Mrs. Stanhope's?”
“Yes, but do not be prejudiced against
her on that account,” said Clarence,
eagerly, “though I was at first myself.”
“Then you will excuse my following
your example instead of your precepts.”
“No,” said Clarence, “for my precepts
are far better than my example.”

Lady Delacour received Dr. X&wblank; 
most courteously, and thanked Mr. Hervey
for introducing to her a gentleman
with whom she had long desired to converse.
—Dr. X&wblank;had a great literary
reputation, and she saw that he was a
perfectly well-bred man; consequently
she was ambitious of winning his admiration.
—She perceived also, that he had
considerable influence with Clarence Hervey,
and this was a sufficient reason to
make her wish for his good opinion.—Belinda
was particularly pleased with his
manners and conversation; she saw that
he paid her much attention, and she was
desirous that he should think favourably
of her; but she had the good sense and
good taste to avoid a display of her abilities
and accomplishments.—A sensible man,
who has any knowledge of the world, and
talents for conversation, can easily draw
out the knowledge of those with whom
he converses.—Dr. X&wblank;possessed this
power in a superiour degree.

“Well,” cried Clarence, when their
visit was over, “what is your opinion of
lady Delacour?”
“I am ‘blasted with excess of light,” 
said the doctor.
“Her ladyship is certainly very brilliant,” 
said Clarence, “but I hope that
miss Portman did not overpower you.”
“No—I turned my eyes from lady Delacour
upon miss Portman, as a painter
turns his eyes upon mild green, to rest
them, when they have been dazzled by
glaring colours.
‘She yields her charms of mind with sweet delay.’
“I was afraid,” said Hervey, “that
you might think her manners too reserved
and cold—they are certainly become more
so than they used to be.—But so
much the better; by and by we shall find
beautiful flowers spring up from béneath
the snow.”
“A very poetical hope,” said Dr.
X&wblank;; “but in judging of the human
character, we must not entirely trust to

analogies and allusions taken from the
vegetable creation.”
“What!” cried Clarence Hervey, looking
eagerly in the doctor's eyes—“What do
you mean?—I am afraid you do not approve
of Belinda.”
“Your fears are almost as precipitate
as your hopes, my good sir—but to put
you out of pain, I will tell you, that I
approve of all I have seen of this young
lady, but that it is absolutely out of my
power, to form a decisive judgment of a
woman's temper and character in the
course of a single morning visit.—Women,
you know, as well as men, often speak
with one species of enthusiasm, and act
with another.—I must see your Belinda
act—I must study her, before I
can give you my final judgment.—Lady
Delacour has honoured me with her commands
to go to her as often as possible.— 
For your sake, my dear Hervey, I shall
obey her ladyship most punctually, that I
may have frequent opportunities of seeing
your miss Portman.”

Clarence expressed his gratitude with
much energy, for this instance of the
doctor's friendship.—Belinda, who had
been entertained by Dr. X&wblank;'s conversation
during this first visit, was more and
more delighted with his company, as she
became more acquainted with his understanding
and character. She felt that he
unfolded her powers, and that with the
greatest politeness and address he raised
her confidence in herself, without ever
descending to flattery.—By degrees,
she learned to look upon him as her
friend; she imparted to him with great
ingenuousness her opinions on various
subjects, and she was both amused and
instructed by his observations on the characters
and manners of the company, who
frequented lady Delacour's assemblies.— 
She did not judge of the doctor's sincerity
merely by the kindness he showed
her, but by his conduct towards others.
One night, at a select party at lady
Delacour's, a Spanish gentleman was
amusing the company with some anecdotes,

to prove the extraordinary passion
which some of his countrymen formerly
showed for the game of chess.— 
He mentioned families, in which unfinished
games, bequeathed by will, had
descended from father to son, and where
victory was doubtful for upwards of a
century.
Mr. Hervey observed, that gaining a
battle was, at that time, so common to the
court of Spain, that a victory at chess
seemed to confer more eclat; for that an
abbè, by losing adroitly a game at chess
to the Spanish minister, obtained a cardinal's hat.
The foreigner was flattered by the manner
in which Hervey introduced this slight
circumstance, and he directed to him his
conversation, speaking in French and
Italian successfully; he was sufficiently
skilled in both languages, but Clarence
spoke them better. Till he appeared,
the foreigner was the principal object of
attention, but he was soon eclipsed by
Mr. Hervey.—Nothing amusing or instructive

that could be said upon the
game of chess escaped him, and the literary
ground, which the slow don would
have taken some hours to go regularly
over, our hero traversed in a few minutes.
—From Twiss to Vida, from Irwin to sir
William Jones, from Spain to India, he
passed with admirable celerity, and seized
all that could adorn his course from Indian
antiquities or Asiatic researches.
By this display of knowledge he surprised
even his friend Dr. X&wblank;. The
ladies admired his taste as a poet, the
gentlemen his accuracy as a critic; lady
Delacour loudly applauded, and Belinda
silently approved.—Clarence was elated.
—The Spanish gentleman, to whom he had
just quoted a case in point from Vida's
Scacchia, asked him if he were as perfect in
the practice as in the theory of the game
of chess.—Clarence was too proud of
excelling in every thing to decline the
Spaniard's challenge.—They sat down to
chess.—Lady Delacour, as they ranged the
pieces on the board, cried—

“Whoever wins shall be my knight; 
and this silver chess-man shall be his prize.
—Was it not queen Elizabeth, who gave a
silver chess-man to one of her courtiers as
a mark of her royal favour?—I am ashamed
to imitate such a pedantic coquet—but
since I have said it, how can I retract!”
“Impossible, impossible!” cried Clarence
Hervey—“This silver chess-man be
our prize; and if I win it, like the gallant
Raleigh, I'll wear it in my cap; and
what proud Essex shall dare to challenge
it!”
The combat now began—the spectators
were silent.—Clarence made an errour in
his first move, for his attention was distracted
by seeing Belinda behind his adversary's
chair.—The Spaniard was deceived
by this mistake into a contemptuous
opinion of his opponent—Belinda
changed her place—Clarence recovered
his presence of mind, and convinced him
that he was not a man to be despised.
The combat was long doubtful, but at

length, to the surprise of all present, Clarence
Hervey was victorious.
Exulting in his success he looked round
for lady Delacour, from whom he expected
the honours of his triumph.—She had
left the room, but soon she returned,
dressed in the character of queen Elizabeth,
in which she had once appeared at
a masquerade, with a large ruff, and all
the costume of the times.
Clarence Hervey, throwing himself at
her feet, addressed her in that high flown
style, which her majesty was wont to hear
from the gallant Raleigh, or the accomplished
Essex.
Soon the coquetry of the queen entirely
conquered her prudery; and the favoured
courtier, evidently clated by his situation,
was as enthusiastic as her majesty's most
insatiable vanity could desire.—The characters
were well supported; both the
actor and actress were highly animated,
and seemed so fully possessed by their
parts, as to be insensible to the comments

that were made upon the scene.—Clarence
Hervey was first recalled to himself by
the deep blush which he saw on Belinda's
cheek, when queen Elizabeth addressed
her as one of her maids of honour, of
whom she affected to be jealous.—He was
conscious that he had been hurried by the
enthusiasm of the moment farther than he
either wished or intended. It was difficult
to recede, when her majesty seemed
disposed to advance; but sir Walter
Raleigh, with much presence of mind,
turned to the foreigner, whom he accosted
as the Spanish ambassador.
“Your Excellency sees,” said he,
“how this great queen turns the heads of
her faithful subjects, and afterward has
the art of paying them with nothing but
words.—Has the new world afforded you
any coin half so valuable?”
The Spanish ambassador's grave replies
to this playful question gave a new turn
to the conversation, and relieved Clarence
Hervey from his embarrassment. Lady

Delacour, though still in high spirits, was
easily diverted to other objects. She took
the ambassador with her to the next room,
to show him a picture of Mary, queen
of Scots. The company followed her— 
Clarence Hervey remained with Dr.
X&wblank;and Belinda, who had just asked
the doctor to teach her the moves at
chess.
“Lady Delacour has charming spirits,” 
said Clarence Hervey, “they inspire every
body with gayety.”
“Every body! They incline me more
to melancholy than mirth,” said Dr.
X&wblank;. “These high spirits do not seem
quite natural. The vivacity of youth and
of health, miss Portman, always charms
me; but this gayety of lady Delacour's
does not appear to me that of a sound
mind in a sound body.”
The doctor's penetration went so near
the truth, that Belinda, afraid of betraying
her friend's secret, never raised her
eyes from the chess-board whilst he spoke,

but went on setting up the fallen castles,
and bishops, and kings, with expeditious
diligence.
“You are putting the bishop into the
place of the knight,” said Clarence.
“Lady Delacour,” continued the doctor,
“seems to be in a perpetual fever, either
of mind or body—I cannot tell which
—and as a professional man, I really have
some curiosity to determine the question.
If I could feel her pulse, I could instantly
decide; but I have heard her say, that
she has a horrour against having her pulse
felt—and a lady's horrour is invincible—by
reason&wblank;&wblank;
“But not by address,” said Clarence,
“I can tell you a method of counting her
pulse, without her knowing it—without
her seeing you—without your seeing
her.”
“Indeed!” said Dr. X&wblank;, smiling,
“that may be a useful secret in my profession; 
pray impart it to me—you who excel
in every thing.”

“Are you in earnest, Mr. Hervey?” 
said Belinda.
“Perfectly in earnest—my secret is
quite simple.—Look though the door at
the shadow of queen Elizabeth's ruff—observe
how it vibraties; the motion as well
as the figure is magnified in the shadow.— 
Cannot you count every pulsation distinctly?”
“I can,” said Dr. X&wblank;, “and I give
you credit for making an ingenious use of
a trifling observation.”—The doctor
paused, and looked round. “Those people
cannot hear what we are saying, I
believe?”
“O, no,” said Belinda, “they are intent
upon themselves.”
Doctor X&wblank;fixed his eyes mildly
upon Clarence Hervey, and exclaimed in
an earnest friendly tone—“What a pity,
Mr. Hervey, that a young man of your
talents and acquirements, a man who
might be any thing, should—pardon the
expression—choose to be—nothing—should

waste upon petty objects powers suited
to the greatest—should lend his soul to
every contest for frivolous superiority,
when the same energy concentrated,
might ensure honourable preeminence
among the first men in his country.—Shall
he, who might not only distinguish himself
in any science or situation, who might
not only acquire personal fame, but, O,
far more noble motive!—who might be
permanently useful to his fellow creatures,
content himself with being the evanescent
amusement of a drawing-room?
—Shall one, who might be great in public,
or happy in private life, waste in this deplorable
manner the best years of his existence
—time that never can be recalled?”— 
“This is declamation!”—“No: it is truth
put into the strongest language that I have
power to use, in the hope of making
some impression: I speak from my heart,
for I have a sincere regard for you, Mr.
Hervey, and if I have been impertinent,
you must forgive me.”
“Forgive you!” cried Clarence Hervey,

taking Dr. X&wblank;by the hand, I
think you a real friend—you shall have
the best thanks, not in words, but in actions
—you have roused my ambition, and
I will pursue noble ends by noble means.
—A few years have been sacrificed—but
the lessons that they have taught me remain.
—I cannot, presumptuous as I am,
flatter myself that my exertions can be of
any material utility to my fellow creatures,
but what I can do I will—My excellent
friend! If I be hereafter either
successful in public, or happy in private
life, it is to you I shall owe it.”
Belinda was touched by the candour
and good sense with which Clarence Hervey
spoke.—His character appeared in a
new light—she was proud of her own
judgment, in having discerned his merit,
and for a moment she permitted herself
to feel “unreproved pleasure in his company.”
The next morning, sir Philip Baddely
and Mr. Rochfort called at lady Delacour's
—Mr. Hervey was present—Her ladyship

was summoned to Mrs. Franks, and Belinda
was left with these gentlemen.
“Why, damme, Clary! you have been
a lost man,” cried sir Philip, “ever since
you were drowned.—Damme, why did not
you come to dine with us that day, now I
recollect it?—We were all famously merry
—but for your comfort, Clarence, we
missed you cursedly, and were damned
sorry you ever took that damned unlucky
jump into the Serpentine river—damned
sorry—were not we Rochfort?”
“O,” said Clarence, in an ironical
tone, “you need no vouchers to convince
me of the reality of your sorrow.—You
know I can never forget your jumping so
courageously into the river, to save the
life of your friend.”
“O, pooh! damn it,” said sir Philip,
“what signifies who pulled you out, now
you are safe and sound? By the by, Clary,
did you ever quiz that doctor, as I desired
you?—No, that I'm sure you didn't; 
but I think he has made a quiz of you; 
for damme, I believe you have taken such

a fancy to the old quizical fellow; that you
can't live without him.—Miss Portman,
don't you admire Hervey's taste?”
“In this instance I certainly do admire
Mr. Hervey's taste,” said Belinda, “for
the best of all possible reasons, because it
entirely agrees with my own.”
“Very extraordinary, faith,” said sir
Philip.
“And what the devil can you find to
like in him, Clary?” continued Mr. Rochfort,
“for one wouldn't be so rude to put
that question to a lady.—Ladies you know
are never to be questioned about their
likings and dislikings.—Some have pet
dogs, some have pet cats; then why not
a pet quiz.”
“Ha! ha! ha! that's a good one,
Rochfort—a pet quiz—Ha! ha! ha!
Dr. X&wblank;shall be miss Portman's pet
quiz.—Put it about—put it about, Rochfort,” 
continued the witty baronet, and
he and his facetious companion continued
to laugh as long as they possibly could, at
this happy hit.

Belinda, without being in the least discomposed
by their insolent folly, as soon
as they had finished laughing, very coolly
observed, that she could have no objection
to give her reasons for preferring Dr.
X&wblank;'s company, but for fear they might
give offence to sir Philip and his friends.
She then defended the doctor with so
much firmness, and yet with so much
propriety, that Clarence Hervey was absolutely
enchanted with her, and with his
own penetration in having discovered her
real character, notwithstanding she was
Mrs. Stanhope's niece.
“I never argue, for my part,” cried
Mr. Rochfort, “'pon honour 'tis a deal
too much trouble.—A lady, a handsome
lady I mean, is always in the right with
me.”
“But as to you, Hervey,” said sir Philip,
“damme, do you know, my boy, that
our club has come to a determination to
black-ball you, if you keep company
with this famous doctor?”

“Your club, sir Philip, will do me
honour by such an ostracism.”
“Ostracism!” repeated sir Philip—
“In plain English, does that mean that
you choose to be black-balled by us?— 
Why damn it, Clary, you'll be nobody— 
But follow your own genius—damn me
if I take it upon me to understand your
men of genius—they are in the Serpentine
river one day,—and in the clouds the
next—so fare ye well, Clary.—I expect to
see you a doctor of physic, or a methodist
parson soon, damn me if I don't—so
fare ye well, Clary—Is black-ball your
last word? or will you think better on't,
and give up the doctor?”
“I can never give up Dr. X&wblank;'s
friendship—I would sooner be black-balled
by every club in London.—The good
lesson you give me, sir Philip, the day I
was fool enough to jump into the Serpentine
river, has made me wiser for life.— 
I know, for I have felt, the difference between
real friends and fashionable acquaintance.—

Give up Dr. X&wblank;! Never!
never!”
“Then fare ye well, Clary,” said sir
Philip, “you're no longer one of us.”
“Then, fare ye well, Clary, you're no
longer the man for me,” said Rochfort.”
“Tant pis and tant mieux,” said Clarence,
“and so they parted.
As they left the room, Clarence Hervey
involuntarily turned to Belinda, and he
thought that he read in her ingenuous,
animated countenance, full approbation of
his conduct.
“Hist! are they gone? Quite gone?” 
said lady Delacour, entering the room
from an adjoining apartment, “they have
staid an unconscionable time—how much
I am obliged to Mrs. Franks for detaining
me! I have escaped their vapid impertinence; 
and in truth, this morning, I have
such a multiplicity of business, that I
have scarcely a moment even for wit and
Clarence Hervey.—Belinda, my dear,
will you have the charity to look over some

of these letters for me, which, as Marriott
tells me, have been lying in my writing
table this week—expecting most unreasonably,
that I should have the grace to
open them.—We are always punished for
our indolence—as your friend Dr. X&wblank; 
said the other day—if we suffer business
to accumulate, it drifts with every ill wind
like snow, till at last an avalanche of it
comes down at once, and quite overwhelms
us.—Excuse me, Clarence,” continued
her ladyship, as she opened her
letters—“This is very rude—but I know
I have secured my pardon from you by
remembering your friend's wit—wisdom,
I should say—How seldom are wit and
wisdom joined!—They might have been
joined in lady Delacour, perhaps—there's
vanity!—if she had early met with such
a friend as Dr. X&wblank;but it's too late
now,” said she, with a deep sigh.
Clarence Hervey heard it, and it made
a great impression upon his benevolent
imagination.—“Why too late?” said he to

himself—“Mrs. Margaret Delacour is mistaken,
if she think this woman wants
sensibility.”
“What have you there, miss Portman?” 
said lady Delacour, taking from
Belinda's hand one of the letters which
she had begged her to look over—“Something
wondrous pathetic, I should guess,
by your countenance.—‘Helena Delacour’.
—O, read it to yourself, my dear— 
a school-girl's letter is a thing I abominate
—I make it a rule never to read Helena's
epistles.”
“Let me prevail upon your ladyship to
make an exception to the general rule
then,” said Belinda, “I can assure you
this is not a common school-girl's letter; 
miss Delacour seems to inherit her mother's
‘éloquence de billet.”
“Miss Portman seems to possess, by
inheritance, by instinct, by magic, or
otherwise, powers of persuasion, which
no one can resist.—There's compliment
for compliment, my dear.—Is there any
thing half so well turned in Helena's letter?

—Really 'tis vastly well,” continued
her ladyship, as she read the letter— 
“where did the little gipsy learn to
write so charmingly—I protest I should
like of all things to have her at home with
me this summer—the 21st of June—well,
after the birthday, I shall have time to
think about it,—But then, we shall be
going out of town, and at Harrowgate I
should not know what to do with her— 
she had better, much better go to her
humdrum aunt Margaret's, as she always
does—she is a fixture in Grosvenor square
—these stationary good people—these zoophite
friends are sometimes very convenient
—and Mrs. Margaret Delacour is the most
unexceptionable zoophite in the creation.
—She has, it is true, an antipathy to me,
because I'm of such a different nature
from herself; but then her antipathy does
not extend to my offspring—she is kind,
beyond measure, to Helena, on purpose,
I believe, to provoke me. Now I provoke
her in my turn, by never being provoked
—and she saves me a vast deal of

trouble, for which she is overpaid by the
pleasure of abusing me.—This is the way
of the world, Clarence.—Don't look so
serious—you are not come yet to daughters
and sons, and schools, and holidays,
and all the evils of domestic life.”
“Evils!” repeated Clarence Hervey,
in a tone which surprised her ladyship.
She looked immediately with a significant
smile at Belinda.—“Why do not you echo
evils, miss Portman?”
“Pray lady Delacour,” interrupted
Clarence Hervey, “when do you go to
Harrowgate?”
“What a sudden transition!” said lady
Delacour—“What association of ideas
could just at that instant take you to Harrowgate?”
“When do I go to Harrowgate? Immediately
after the birthday, I believe we
shall—I advise you to be of the party.”
“Your ladyship does me a great deal
of honour,” said Hervey, “I shall, if it
be possible, do myself the pleasure of
attending you.”

And soon after this arrangement was
made, Mr. Hervey took his leave.
“Well, my dear, are you still poring
over that letter of Helena's,” said lady
Delacour to miss Portman.
“I fancy your ladyship did not quite
finish it,” said Belinda.
“No; I saw something about the Leverian
Museum, and a swallow's nest in
a pair of garden shears; and I was afraid
I was to have a catalogue of curiosities,
for which I have litle taste, and less
time.”
“You did not see, then, what miss
Delacour says of the lady who took her to
that Museum?”
“Not I—What lady? her aunt Margaret?”
“No; Mrs. Margaret Delacour, she
says, has been so ill for some time past,
that she goes no where, but to lady Anne
Percival's.”
“Poor woman,” said lady Delacour,
“she will die soon, and then I shall have
Helena upon my hands, unless some other

kind friend takes a fancy to her.—Who is
this lady that has carried her to the Leverian
Museum?”
“Lady Anne Percival; of whom she
speaks with so much gratitude and affection,
that I quite long&wblank;”
“Lord bless me!” interrupted lady Delacour,
“lady Anne Percival! Helena
has mentioned this lady Anne Percival to
me before, I recollect, in some of her
letters.”
“Then you did read some of her
letters.”
“Half!—I never read more than half,
upon my word,” said lady Delacour,
laughing.”
“Why will you delight in making yourself
appear worse than you are, my dear
lady Delacour,” said Belinda, taking her
hand.
“Because I hate to be like other people,” 
said her ladyship, “who delight in
making themselves appear better than
what they are—but I was going to tell
you, that I do believe I did provoke Percival

by marrying lord Delacour.—I cannot
tell you how much this idea delights
me—I am sure that the man has a lively
remembrance of me, or else he would
never make his wife take so much notice
of my daughter.”
“Surely your ladyship does not think,” 
said Belinda, “that a wife is a being
whose actions are necessarily governed by
a husband.”
“Not necessarily—but accidentally.— 
When a lady accidentally sets up for being
a good wife, she must of course love, honour,
and obey. Now, you understand,
I am not in the least obliged to lady Anne
for her kindness to Helena; because it all
goes under the head obedience, in my
imagination—and her ladyship is paid for
it by an accession of character—she has
the reward of having it said—‘O, lady
Anne Percival is the best wife in the
world’—‘O, lady Anne Percival is quite a
pattern woman!’—I hate pattern women
—I hope I may never see lady Anne,
for I'm sure I should detest her beyond all

things living—Mrs. Luttridge not excepted.”
Belinda was surprised, and shocked
at the malignant vehemence with which
her ladyship uttered those words; it was
in vain, however, that she remonstrated
on the injustice of predetermining to detest
lady Anne; merely because she had
shown kindness to Helena, and because
she bore a high character.—Lady Delacour
was a woman who never listened to
reason; or listened to it only that she might
parry it by wit. Upon this occasion, her
wit had not it's usual effect upon miss
Portman; instead of entertaining, it disgusted
her.
“You have called me your friend, lady
Delacour,” said she, “I should but ill
deserve that name, if I had not the courage
to speak the truth to you—if I had
not the courage to tell you when I think
you are wrong.”
“But I have not the courage to hear
you, my dear,” said lady Delacour, stopping
her ears.—“So your conscience may

be at ease; you may suppose that you
have said every thing that is wise, and
good, and proper, and sublime, and that
you deserve to be called the best of
friends—you shall enjoy the office of
censor to lady Delacour, and welcome; 
but remember, it is a sinecure place,
though I will pay you with my love and
esteem to any extent you please.—You
sigh—for my folly.—Alas, my dear, 'tis
hardly worth while—my follies will soon
be at an end.—Of what use could even
the wisdom of Solomon be to me now?— 
If you have any humanity, you will not
force me to reflect—whilst I yet live I
must keep it up with incessant dissipation
—the tetotum keeps upright only while
it spins—so let us talk of the birthnight,
or the new play that we are to see to
night, or the ridiculous figure lady H&wblank; 
made at the concert; or let us talk of
Harrowgate, or what you will.”
Pity succeeded to disgust and displeasure
in Belinda's mind, and she could
hardly refrain from tears, whilst she saw

this unhappy creature, with forced smiles,
endeavour to hide the real anguish of her
soul—she could only say—
“But, my dear lady Delacour, do not
you think that your little Helena, who
seems to have a most affectionate disposition,
would add to your happiness at
home?”
“Her affectionate disposition can be
nothing to me,” said lady Delacour.
Belinda felt a hot tear drop upon her
hand, which lay upon lady Delacour's lap.
“Can you wonder,” continued her
ladyship, hastily wiping away the tear
which she had let fall; “can you wonder
that I should talk of detesting lady Anne
Percival?—You see she has robbed me of
the affections of my child.—Helena asks
to come home—yes—but how does she
ask it? coldly; formally; as a duty—but
look at the end of her letter—I have read
it all—every bitter word of it I have
tasted.—How differently she writes—look
even at the flowing hand—the moment

she begins to speak of lady Anne Percival
—then her soul breaks out—‘lady
Anne has offered to take her to Oakly-park
—she should be extremely happy to go,
if I please.’—Yes—let her go—let her go
as far from me as possible—let her never,
never, see her wretched mother more.— 
Write,” said lady Delacour, turning
hastily to Belinda, “write in my name,
and tell her to go Oakly-park, and to be
happy.”
“But why should you take it for
granted that she cannot be happy with
you?” said Belinda. “Let us see her— 
let us try the experiment?”
“No;” said lady Delacour, “no—it is
too late—I will never condescend in my
last moments to beg for that affection, to
which it may be thought I have forfeited
my natural claim.”
Pride, anger, and sorrow, struggled in
her countenance as she spoke.—She
turned her face from Belinda, and walked
out of the room with dignity.

Nothing remains for me to do, thought
Belinda, but to sooth this haughty spirit— 
all other hope I see is vain.
At this moment Clarence Hervey, who
had no suspicion that the gay, brilliant lady
Delacour was sinking into the grave, had
formed a design worthy of his ardent and
benevolent character.—The manner in
which her ladyship had spoken of his
friend Dr. X&wblank;, the sigh which she gave
at the reflection, that she might have been
a very different character, if she had early
had a sensible friend, made a great impression
upon Mr. Hervey. Till then,
he had merely considered her ladyship as
an object of amusement, and an introduction
to high life; but he now felt so
much interested for her, that he determined
to exert all his influence to promote
her happiness.—He knew that influence
to be considerable—not that he was
either coxcomb, or dupe enough, to imagine
that lady Delacour was in love with
him; he was perfectly sensible that her
only wish was to obtain his admiration,

and he resolved to show her, that it could
no longer be secured without deserving
his esteem.—Clarence Hervey was a thoroughly
generous young man: capable of
making the greatest sacrifices, when encouraged
by the hope of doing good, he
determined to postpone the declaration of
his attachment to Belinda, that he might
devote himself entirely to his new project.
His plan was to wean lady Delacour, by
degrees, from dissipation, by attaching
her to her daughter, and to lady Anne
Percival. He was sanguine in all his
hopes, and rapid, but not unthinking, in
all his decisions.—From lady Delacour he
went immediately to Dr. X&wblank;, to whom
he communicated his designs.
“I applaud your benevolent intentions,” 
said the doctor, “but have you really the
presumption to hope, that an ingenuous
young man of eight and twenty can reform
a veteran coquet of eight and
thirty.”
“Lady Delacour is not yet six and
thirty,” said Clarence; “but the older

she is, the better the chance of her giving
up a losing game.—She has an admirable
understanding, and she will soon
—I mean as soon as she is acquainted
with lady Ann Percival—discover that
she has mistaken the road to happiness.
—All the difficulty will be to make them
fairly acquainted with each other—for
this, my dear doctor, I must trust to
you.—Do you prepare lady Anne to tolerate
lady Delacour's faults, and I will
prepare lady Delacour to tolerate lady
Anne's virtues.”
“You have generously taken the more
difficult task of the two,” replied Dr.
X&wblank;. Well, we shall see what can
be done.—After the birthday, lady Delacour
talks of going to Harrowgate— 
you know, Oakly-park is not far from
Harrowgate, so they will have frequent
opportunities of meeting. But, take
my word for it, nothing can be done
till after the birthday; for lady Delacour's
head is at present full of crape
petticoats, and horses, and carriages,

and a certain Mrs. Luttridge, whom she
hates with a hatred passing that of
women.”