

Lady O'Shane, extremely terrified,
had scarcely power to rise. She opened
the drawer of the table, and thrust her
trembling hand down to the bottom of
the silk bag, into which the keys had
fallen. Impatient of delay, Ormond
pushed open the door, snatched the keys,
and disappeared. The whole passed in
a few seconds. The music drowned the
noise of the opening door, and of the two
chairs which Ormond had thrown down; 
those who sat near thought a servant had
pushed in and gone out; but, however
rapid the movement, the full view of the
figure had been seen by Miss Annaly,
who was sitting on the opposite side of the

room; Sir Ulick was sitting beside her,
talking earnestly. Lady Annaly had just
retired. “For Heaven's sake, what's
the matter?” cried he, stopping in the
middle of a sentence, on seeing Miss
Annaly grow suddenly pale as death.— 
Her eyes were fixed on the door of the
green-house; his followed that direction.
“Yes,” said he, “we can get out into
the air that way, lean on me,”—she did
so—he pushed his way through the crowd
at the bottom of the country dance; and,
as he passed, was met by Lady O'Shane
and Miss Black, both with faces of horror.
“Sir Ulick, did you see,” pointing to
the door—“Did you see Mr. Ormond?— 
There's blood!”
“There's mischief!—certainly,” said
Miss Black.—“A quarrel—Mr. Marcus,
perhaps.”
“Nonsense!—no such thing you'll
find,”—said Sir Ulick, pushing on, and
purposely jostling the arm of a servant

who was holding a salver of ices, overturning
them all—and whilst the surrounding
company were fully occupied
about their clothes, and their fears and
apologies, he made his way onwards to
the green-house—Lady O'Shane clinging
to one arm, Miss Annaly supported by
the other—Miss Black following, repeating
“Mischief!—Mischief! you'll see,
Sir.”
“Miss Black open the door, and not
another word.”
He edged Miss Annaly on the moment
the door opened, dragged Lady O'Shane
after him—pushed Miss Black back as
she attempted to follow, but recollecting
that she might spread the report of mischief
if he left her behind, drew her into
the green-house, locked the door, and
led Miss Annaly out into the air.
“Bring salts! water! something, Miss
Black—Follow me, Lady O'Shane.”
“When I'm hardly able—your wife!— 
Sir Ulick—you might—” said Lady

O'Shane, as she tottered on—“you might
I should have thought—”
“No time for such thoughts, my dear,” 
interrupted he—“Sit down on the steps— 
there, she is better now—now what is
all this?”
“I am not to speak,” said Miss Black.
Lady O'Shane began to say how Mr.
Ormond had burst in, covered with blood,
and seized the keys of the gates.
“The keys!”—But he had no time for
that thought—“Which way did he go.”
“I don't know, I gave him the keys of
both gates.”
The two entrances were a mile asunder— 
Sir Ulick looked for footsteps on the
grass. It was a fine moonlight night.
He saw footsteps on the path leading to
the gardener's house. “Stay here, ladies,
and I will bring you intelligence as
soon as possible.”
“This way, Sir Ulick—they are
coming—” said Miss Annaly, who had
now recovered her presence of mind.

Several persons appeared from a turn
in the shrubbery, carrying some one on
a hand-barrow—a gentleman on horseback,
and a servant, and many persons
walking. Sir Ulick hastened towards
them; the gentleman on horseback spurred
his horse and met him.
“Marcus!—is it you?—thank God.
But Ormond!—where is he, and what
has happened?”
The first sound of Marcus's voice, when
he attempted to answer, shewed that he
was not in a condition to give a rational
account of any thing. His servant followed,
also much intoxicated. While Sir
Ulick had been stopped by their ineffectual
attempts to explain, the people who
were carrying the man on the hand-barrow
came up. Ormond appeared from
the midst of them. “Carry him on to
the gardener's house,” cried he, pointing
the way, and coming forward to Sir
Ulick.
“If he dies, I am a murderer!” cried
he.

“Who is he?” said Sir Ulick.
“Moriarty Carroll, please your honor,” 
answered several voices at once.
“And how happened it?” said Sir
Ulick.
“The long and the short of it, Sir,” 
said Marcus, as well as he could articulate,
“the fellow was insolent, and we
cut him down—and if it was to do again,
I'd do it again with pleasure.”
“No, no! you won't say so, Marcus,
when you are yourself,” said Ormond.— 
“Oh! how dreadful to come to one's
senses all at once, as I did—the moment
after I had fired that fatal shot—the moment
I saw the poor fellow stagger and
fall—”
“It was you, the, that fired at him,” 
interrupted Sir Ulick.
“Yes, oh! yes!” said he, striking his
forehead—“I did it in the fury of passion.”
Then Ormond taking all the blame
upon himself, and stating what had passed

in the strongest light against himself,
gave this account of the matter. After
having drank too much at Mr. Cornelius
O'Shane's, they were returning from the
Black Islands, and afraid of being late,
they were gallopping hard, when at a narrow
part of the road they were stopped
by some cars. Impatient of the delay,
they abused the men who were driving
them, insisting upon their getting out of
the way faster than they could. Moriarty
Carroll made some answer, which
Marcus said was insolent; and enquiring
the man's name, and hearing it was Carroll,
said, all the Carrolls were bad people— 
rebels. Moriarty defied him to
prove that—and added some expressions
about tyranny, which enraged Ormond.
This part of the provocation Ormond did
not state—but merely said he was thrown
into a passion by some observation of Moriarty's; 
and first he lifted his whip to
give the fellow a horse-whipping. Moriarty
seized hold of the whip, and struggled

to wrest it from his hand;—Ormond
then snatched a pistol from his holster,
telling Moriarty he would shoot him, if he
did not let the whip go. Moriarty, who
was in a passion himself, struggled, still
holding the whip. Ormond cocked the
pistol, and before he was aware he had
done so, the pistol accidentally went off,
the ball entered Moriarty's breast. This
happened within a quarter of a mile of
Castle Hermitage. The poor fellow bled
profusely—and, in assisting to lift him
upon the hand-barrow, Ormond was covered
with blood, as has been already described.
“Have you sent for a surgeon,” said
Sir Ulick, coolly.
“Certainly—sent off a fellow on my
own horse directly. Sir, will you come
on to the gardener's house; I want
you to see him, to know what you'll
think. If he die, I am a murderer,” repeated
Ormond.
This horrible idea so possessed his imagination,

that he could not answer or hear
any of the further questions that were
asked by Lady O'Shane and Miss Black; 
but, after gazing upon them with unmeaning
eyes for a moment in silence,
walked rapidly on: as he was passing by
the steps of the green-house, he stopped
short at the sight of Miss Annaly, who
was still sitting there—
“What's the matter,” said he, in a
tone of great compassion, going close up
to her. Then, recollecting himself, he
hurried forward again.
“As I can be of no use—Unless I
can be of any use,” said Miss Annaly— 
“I will, now that I am well enough, return— 
My mother will wonder what has
become of me.”
“Sir Ulick, give me the key of the
conservatory, to let Miss Annaly into the
ball-room.”
“Miss Annaly does not wish to dance any
more to-night, I believe?” said Sir Ulick.
“Dance—oh no.”

“Then, without exciting observation,
you can all get in better at the back
door of the house, and Miss Annaly can
go up the back stairs to Lady Annaly's
room, without meeting any one; and you,
Lady O'Shane,” added he, in a low
voice, “order up supper, and say nothing
of what has passed. Miss Black,
you hear what I desire—no gossipping,”
To get to the back door they had to
walk round the house, and in their way
they passed the gardener's. The surgeon
had just arrived.
“Go on ladies, pray,” said Sir Ulick,
“what stops you.”
“'Tis I stop the way, Sir Ulick,” 
said Lady O'Shane, “to speak a word
to the surgeon. If you find the man in
any dangerous way, for pity's sake don't
let him die at our gardener's—indeed
the bringing him here at all I think a
very strange step and encroachment of
Mr. Ormond's. It will make the whole
thing so public—and the people hereabouts

are so revengeful—if any thing
should happen to him, it will be revenged
on our whole family—on Sir Ulick in
particular.”
“No danger—nonsense, my dear.”
But now this idea had seized Lady
O'Shane, it appeared to her a sufficient
reason for desiring to remove the man
even this night. She asked why he could
not be taken to his own home and his
own people; she repeated, that it was
very strange of Mr. Ormond to take such
liberties, as if every thing about Castle
Hermitage was quite at his disposal.
One of the men who had carried the
hand-barrow, and who was now standing
at the gardener's door, observed, that
Moriarty's people lived five mile off.
Ormond, who had gone into the house to
the wounded man, being told what
Lady O'Shane was saying, came out; 
she repeated her words as he re-appeared.
Naturally of sudden violent temper, and
being now in the highest state of suspense
and irritation, he broke out, forgetful

of all proper respect. Miss Black,
who was saying something in corroboration
of Lady O'Shane's opinion, he first
attacked, pronouncing her to be an unfeeling
canting hypocrite; then, turning
to Lady O'Shane, he said, that she might
send the dying man away if she pleased; 
but that if she did, he would go too, and
that never while he existed would he
enter her ladyship's doors again.
Ormond made this threat with the air
of a superior to an inferior, totally forgetting
his own dependent situation, and
the dreadful circumstances in which he
now stood.
“You are drunk, young man. My
dear Ormond, you don't know what you
are saying,” interposed Sir Ulick.
At his voice, and the kindness of his
tone, Ormond recollected himself. “Forgive
me,” said he, in a very gentle tone.
“My head certainly is not—Oh! may
you never feel what I have felt this last
hour.—If this man dies—Oh! consider.”
“He will not die—he will not die, I

hope—at any rate, don't talk so loud
within hearing of these people. My dear
Lady O'Shane, this foolish boy—this
Harry Ormond, is, I grant, a sad scapegrace,
but you must bear with him for
my sake. Let this poor wounded fellow
remain here—I won't have him stirred
to-night—we shall see what ought to be
done in the morning. Ormond, you forgot
yourself strangely towards Lady
O'Shane—as to this fellow—don't make
such a rout about the business—I dare
say he will do very well—We shall hear
what the surgeon says—At first I was
horribly frightened, I thought you and
Marcus had been quarrelling. Miss Annaly,
are not you afraid of staying out— 
Lady O'Shane, why do you keep Miss
Annaly—Let supper go up directly.”
“Supper! aye, every thing goes on
as usual,” said Ormond, “and I!—”
“I must follow them in, and see how
things are going on, and prevent gossipping,
for your sake, my boy,” resumed Sir

Ulick, after a moment's pause. “You
have got into an ugly scrape—I pity
you from my soul—I'm rash myself— 
Send the surgeon to me when he has
seen the fellow—Depend upon me if the
worst come to the worst—There's nothing
in the world I would not do to serve you,” 
said Sir Ulick, “so keep up your spirits,
my boy—We'll contrive to bring you
through—At the worst it will only be
manslaughter.”
Ormond wrung Sir Ulick's hand— 
thanked him for his kindness; but repeated,
“it will be murder—it will be
murder, my own conscience tells me so— 
If he dies, give me up to justice!”
“You'll think better of it before
morning,” said Sir Ulick, as he left Ormond.
The surgeon gave Ormond little comfort.
After extracting the bullet, and
examining the wound, he shook his head— 
he had but a bad opinion of the case; 
and when Ormond took him aside, and

questioned him more closely, he confessed
that he thought the man would
not live—he should not be surprised if
he died before morning. The surgeon
was obliged to leave him to attend another
patient; and Ormond, turning all
the other people out of the room, declared
he would sit up with Moriarty
himself. A terrible night it was to him.
To his alarmed and inexperienced eyes
the danger seemed even greater than it
really was, and several times he thought
his patient expiring, when he was faint
from loss of blood. The moments when
Ormond was occupied in assisting him
were the least painful. It was when he
had nothing left to do, when he had leisure
to think, that he was most miserable; 
then the agony of suspense, and the horror
of remorse, were felt, till feeling was exhausted; 
and he would sit motionless and
stupified till he was wakened again from
this suspension of thought and sensation
by some moan of the poor man, or some
delirious startings. Toward morning

the wounded man lay easier; and as Ormond
was stooping over his bed to see
whether he was asleep, Moriarty opened
his eyes, and fixing them on Ormond,
said, in broken sentences, but so as very
distinctly to be heard—
“Don't be in such trouble about the
likes of me—I'll do very well, you'll see— 
and even suppose I wouldn't—not a
frind I have shall ever prosecute—I'll
charge 'em not—so be asy—for you're a
good heart—and the pistol went off unknownst
to you—I'm sure was no malice— 
let that be your comfort—It might
happen to any man, let alone gentleman— 
Don't take on so—and think of young
Mr. Harry sitting up the night with me!— 
Oh! if you'd go now and settle yourself
yonder on the other bed, Sir—I'd be
a great dale asier, and I don't doubt but
I'd get a taste of sleep myself—while
now, wid you standing over or forenent
me, I can't close an eye for thinking of
you, Mr. Harry—”
Ormond immediately threw himself

upon the other bed, that he might relieve
Moriarty from the sight of him. The
good nature and generosity of this poor
fellow increased Ormond's keen sense of
remorse. As to sleeping, for him it was
impossible; whenever his ideas began to
fall into that sort of confusion which
precedes sleep, suddenly he felt as if his
heart was struck or twinged, and he
started with the recollection that some
dreadful thing had happened, and wakened
to the sense of guilt and all its
horrors. Moriarty, now lying perfectly
quiet and motionless, and Ormond not
hearing him breathe, he was struck with
the dread that he had breathed his last.
A cold tremor came over Ormond—he
rose in his bed, listening in acute agony,
when to his relief, he at last distinctly
heard Moriarty breathing strongly, and
soon afterwards—(no music was ever so
delightful to Ormond's ear)—heard him
begin to breathe loudly. The morning
light dawned soon afterwards, and the

crowing of a cock was heard, which Ormond
feared might waken him; but the
poor man slept soundly through all these
usual noises: the heaving of the bedclothes
over his breast went on with uninterrupted
regularity. The gardener
and his wife softly opened the door of the
room, to inquire how things were going
on; Ormond pointed to the bed, and they
nodded, and smiled, and beckoned to him
to come out, whispering that a taste of
the morning air would do him good. He
suffered them to lead him out, for he was
afraid of debating the point in the room
with the sleeping patient. The good
people of the house, who had known
Harry Ormond from a child, and who
were exceedingly fond of him, as all the
poor people in the neighbourhood were,
said every thing they could think of upon
this occasion to comfort him, and reiterated
about a hundred times their prophecies,
that Moriarty would be as sound and
good a man as ever in a fortnight's time.

“Sure, when he'd take the soft sleep he
could'nt but do well.” Then, perceiving
that Ormond listened to them only with
faint attention, the wife whispered to
her husband—“Come off to our work
Johnny, he'd like to be alone, he's not
equal to listen to our talk yet—it's the
surgeon must give him hope—and he'll
soon be here, I trust.”
They went to their work, and left
Ormond standing in the porch.—It was
a fine morning—the birds were singing,
and the smell of the honey-suckle, with
which the porch was covered, wafted by
the fresh morning air, struck Ormond's
senses, but struck him with melancholy.
“Every thing in nature is cheerful— 
except myself!—Every thing in this
world going on just the same as it was
yesterday—but all changed for me!— 
within a few short hours—by my own
folly, my own madness!”—Every animal,
thought he, as his attention was
caught by the house dog, who was licking

his hand, and, as his eye fell upon
the hen and chickens, who were feeding
before the door—every animal is happy— 
and innocent!—But if this man die— 
I shall be a murderer.
This thought, perpetually recurring,
oppressed him so, that he stood motionless
till he was roused by the voice of Sir
Ulick O'Shane.
“Well, Harry Ormond, how is it with
you, my boy.—The fellow's alive, I
hope.”
“Alive.—Thank Heaven!—Yes: and
asleep.”
“Give ye joy—it would have been an
ugly thing—not but what we could have
brought you through:—I'd go through
thick and thin, you know, for you—as if
it was for my own son.—But Lady
O'Shane,” said Sir Ulick, changing his
tone, and with a face of great concern,
“I must talk to you about her—I may
as well speak now, since it must be
said—”

“I am afraid,” said Ormond, “that I
spoke too hastily last night: I beg your
pardon—”
“Nay—nay, put me out of the question:
you may do what you please with
me—always could, from the time you
were four years old,—but, you know, the
more I love anybody, the more Lady
O'Shane hates them. The fact is,” 
continued Sir Ulick, rubbing his eyes,
“that I have had a weary night of it— 
Lady O'Shane has been crying and
whining in my ears: She says I encourage
you in being insolent, and so forth— 
in short, she cannot endure you in
the house any longer—I suspect that
sour one” (Sir Ulick, among his intimates,
always designated Miss Black
in this manner,) “puts her up to it.— 
But I will not give up my own boy— 
I will take it with a high hand.—Separations
are foolish things, as foolish as
marriages—but I'd sooner part with
Lady O'Shane at once, than let Harry

Ormond think I'd forsake him—especially
in aukward circumstances.”
“That, Sir Ulick, is what Harry Ormond
can never think of you—he would
be the basest, the most suspicious, the
most ungrateful—but I must not speak
so loud,” continued he, lowering his
voice, lest he should waken Moriarty.
Sir Ulick drew him away from the
door, for Ormond was cool enough at
this moment to have common sense.
“My dear guardian, allow me still to
call you by that name,” continued Ormond,
“believe me, your kindness is too
full—innumerable instances of your affection
now press upon me, so that—I
can't express myself, but depend upon
it—suspicion of your friendship is the
last that could enter my mind; I trust,
therefore, you will do me the same sort
of justice, and never suspect me capable
of ingratitude—though the time is come,
when we must part.”
Ormond could hardly pronounce the
word.

“Part!” repeated Sir Ulick, “no, by
all the saints and all the devils in female
form.”
“I am resolved,” said Ormond, “firmly
resolved on one point, never to be a
cause of unhappiness to one—who has
been the source of so much happiness
to me—I will no more be an object of
contention between you and Lady
O'Shane.—Give her up rather than me!
Heaven forbid!—I the cause of separation,
never—never.—I am determined— 
let what will become of me, I will no
more be an inmate at Castle Hermitage.”
Tears started into Ormond's eyes; 
Sir Ulick appeared much affected, and
in a state of great embarrassment and
indecision.
He could not bear to think of it— 
he swore it must not be,—then he gradually
sunk to hoping it was not necessary,
and proposing palliatives and half
measures.—Moriarty must be moved today

—sent to his own friends.—That point
he had, for peace sake, conceded to her
ladyship, he said, but that he should
expect, on her part, that after a proper,
a decent apology from Ormond, things
might still be accommodated and go on
smoothly, if that meddling Miss Black
would let them.
In short he managed so, that whilst
he confirmed the young man in his resolution
to quit Castle Hermitage, he
threw all the blame on Lady O'Shane; 
and Ormond never doubted the steadiness
of Sir Ulick's affection, or suspected
that he had any secret motive for
wishing to get rid of him.
“But where can you go, my dear
boy?—What will you do with yourself?— 
What will become of you?”
“Never mind—never mind what becomes
of me, my dear Sir,—I'll find
means—I have the use of head and
hands.”
“My cousin, Cornelius O'Shane, he

is as fond of you almost as I am, and he
is not cursed with a wife—and is blest
with a daughter,” said Sir Ulick, with
a sly smile.
“Oh yes,” continued he, “I see it all
now, you have ways and means—I no
longer object—I'll write—no, you'll
write better yourself to king Corny, for
you are a greater favourite with his majesty
than I am.—Fare ye well—Heaven
bless you, my boy,” said Sir Ulick, with
warm emphasis. “Remember whenever
you want supplies, Castle Hermitage is
your bank—you know I have a bank at
my back—(Sir Ulick was joined in a
banking house)—Castle Hermitage is
your bank, and here's your quarter's allowance
to begin with.”
Sir Ulick put a purse into Ormond's
hand, and left him.