

In some minds, emotions of joy are always
connected with feelings of benevolence
and generosity. Lady Delacour's
heart expanded with the sensations of
friendship and gratitude, now that she
was relieved from those fears by which
she had long been oppressed.
“My dear daughter,” said she to Helena,
“have you at this instant any wish
that I can gratify?—Ask any thing you
please, the fairy Goodwill shall contrive
to get it for you in a trice. You have

thought of a wish at this moment I know
by your eyes, by your blush. Nay, do
not hesitate. Do you doubt me because
I do not appear before you in the shape of
a little ugly old woman, like Cinderella's
godmother? or do you despise me because
you do not see a wand waving in my
hand?—‘Ah, little skilled of fairy lore!’ 
know that I am in possession of a talisman
that can command more than ever
fairy granted. Behold my talisman,” 
continued she, drawing out her purse, and
showing the gold through the net-work.
“Speak boldly, then,” cried she to Helena,
“and be obeyed.”
“Ah, mamma,” said Helena, “I was
not thinking of what fairies or gold can
give; but you can grant my wish, and if
you will let me I will whisper it to
you.”
Lady Delacour stooped to hear her
daughter's whisper.
“Your wish is granted, my own grateful
charming girl!” said her mother.
Helena's wish was, that her mother

could be reconciled to her good aunt
Margaret Delacour. Her ladyship sat
down instantly, and wrote to Mrs. Delacour.
Helena was the bearer of this
letter, and lady Delacour promised to
wait upon this excellent old lady as soon
as she should return to town.
In the mean time her ladyship's health
rapidly improved under the skilful care of
doctor X&wblank;: it had been terribly injured
by the ignorance and villany of the
wretch, to whom she had so long and so
rashly trusted. The nostrums which he
persuaded her to take, and the immoderate
use of opium to which she accustomed
herself, would have ruined her constitution,
had it not been uncommonly
strong. Doctor X&wblank;recommended it
to her ladyship to abstain gradually from
opium, and this advice she had the resolution
to follow with uninterrupted perseverance.
The change in lady Delacour's manner
of life, in the hours and the company that
she kept, contributed much to her recovery.

She was no longer in continual anxiety to
conceal the state of her health from the
world. She had no secret to keep—no
part to act; her reconciliation with her
husband and with his friends restored her
mind to ease and self-complacency. Her
little Helena was a source of daily pleasure; 
and no longer conscious of neglecting
her daughter, she no longer feared
that the affections of her child should be
alienated. Doctor X&wblank;, well aware that
the passions have a powerful influence
over the body, thought it full as necessary
in some cases to attend to the mind as to
the pulse. By conversing with lady Delacour,
and by combining hints and circumstances,
he soon discovered what had
lately been the course of her reading, and
what impression it had made on her imagination.
Mrs. Marriott, indeed, assisted
him with her opinion concerning the methodistical
books; and when he recollected
the forebodings of death which her ladyship
had felt, and the terrour with which
she had been seized on the night of Mrs.
Freke's adventure, he was convinced that

superstitious horrours hung upon his patient's
spirits, and affected her health.
To argue on religious subjects was not
his province, much less his inclination; 
but he was acquainted with a person qualified
by his profession and his character
‘to minister to a mind diseased,’ and he
resolved on the first favourable opportunity
to introduce this gentleman to her
ladyship.
One morning lady Delacour was complaining
to Belinda that the books in the
library were in dreadful confusion. “My
lord has really a very fine library,” said
she, “but I wish he had half as many
books twice as well arranged; I never
can find any thing I want. Dr. X&wblank;,
I wish to Heaven you could recommend
a librarian to my lord—Not a chaplain,
observe.”
“Why not a chaplain? may I ask your
ladyship?” said the doctor.
“O, because we had once a chaplain,
who gave me a surfeit of the whole tribe.
The meanest sycophant, yet the most

impertinent busybody—always cringing,
yet always intriguing—wanting to govern
the whole family, and at the same
time every creature's humble servant— 
fawning to my lord the bishop, insolent
to the poor curate—anathematizing all
who differed from him in opinion, yet
without dignity to enforce the respect due
to his faith or his profession—Greedy for
preferment, yet without a thought of the
duties of his profession. It was the common
practice of this man to leap from
his horse at the church door after following
a pack of hounds, huddle on his surplice,
and gabble over the service with
the most indecent mockery of religion.— 
Do I speak with acrimony? I have reason.
It was this chaplain who first led
my lord to Newmarket; it was he who
first taught my lord to drink. Then he
was a wit—an insufferable wit! His conversation
after he had drunk was such as
no woman but Harriet Freke could understand,
and such as few gentlemen
could hear. I have never, alas! been

thought a prude, but in the heyday of
my youth and gayety this man always disgusted
me. In one word, he was a buck
parson. I hope you have as great a horrour
for this species of animal as I
have?”
“Full as great,” replied doctor X&wblank;; 
“but I consider them as monsters, which,
belonging to no species, can disgrace
none.”
“They ought to be hunted by common
consent out of civilized society,” 
said lady Delacour.
“They are by public opinion banished
from all rational society; and your ladyship's
just indignation proves, that they
have no chance of being tolerated by
fashion. But would it not allow such
beings too much consequence, would it
not extend their power to do mischief, if
we perceived that one such parson could
disgust lady Delacour with the whole
race of chaplains?”
“It is uncommon,” replied her ladyship,
“to hear a physician earnest in the

defence of the clergy—and a literary philosophic
physician too! Shall we have an
eulogium upon bishops as well as chaplains?”
“We have had that already,” replied
doctor X&wblank;. “All ranks, persuasions,
and descriptions of people, including I
hope those stigmatized by the name of
philosophers, have joined in admiration of
the bishop St. Pol de Leon. The conduct
of the real martyrs to their faith amongst
the French clergy not even the most
witty or brutal sceptic could ridicule.”
“You surprise me, doctor!” said lady
Delacour; “for I assure you that you
have the character of being very liberal in
your opinions.”
“I hope I am liberal in my opinions,” 
replied the doctor, “and that I give your
ladyship a proof of it.”
“You would not then persecute a man
or woman with ridicule for believing more
than you do?” said lady Delacour.
“Those who persecute, to overturn
religion, can scarcely pretend to more

philosophy, or more liberality, than those
who persecute to support it,” said doctor
X&wblank;.
“Perhaps, doctor, you are only speaking
popularly?”
“I believe what I now say to be true,” 
said doctor X&wblank;, “and I always endeavour
to make truth popular.”
“But possibly these are only truths
for ladies. Doctor X&wblank;may be such
an ungallant philosopher, as to think that
some truths are not fit for ladies. He
may hold a different language with gentlemen.”
“I should not only be an ungallant
but a weak philosopher,” said doctor
X&wblank;, “if I thought that truth was not
the same for all the world who can
understand it. And who can doubt
lady Delacour's being of that number?”
Lady Delacour, who at the beginning
of this conversation had spoken guardedly,
from the fear of lowering the doctor's
opinion of her understanding, was put

at her ease by the manner in which he
now spoke; and, half laying aside the
tone of raillery, she said to him,
“Well, doctor! seriously, I am not so
illiberal as to condemn all chaplains for
one, odious as he was. But where to
find his contrast in these degenerate
days? Can you, who are a defender of
the faith, and so forth, assist me? Will
you recommend a chaplain to my lord?”
“Willingly,” said doctor X&wblank;; “and
that is what I would not say for a world
of fees, unless I were sure of my man.”
“What sort of a man is he?”
“Not a buck parson.”
“And I hope not a pedant, not a dogmatist,
for that would be almost as bad.
Before we domesticate another chaplain,
I wish to know all his qualities, and
to have a full and true description of
him.”
“Shall I then give you a full and
true description of him in the words of
Chaucer?”
“In any words you please. But

Chaucer's chaplain must be a little old-fashioned
by this time, I should think.”
“Pardon me. Some people, as well
as some things, never grow oldfashioned.
I should not be ashamed to produce
Chaucer's parish priest at this day to the
best company in England. I am not
ashamed to produce him to your ladyship; 
and, if I can remember twenty lines in
his favour, I hope you will give me credit
for being a sincere friend to the worthy
part of the clergy. Observe, you must
take them as I can patch them together; 
I will not promise that I can recollect
twenty lines de suite, and without missing
a word; that is what I would not
swear to do for his grace the archbishop
of Canterbury.”
“His grace would probably excuse
you from swearing, at least I will,” said
lady Delacour, “on the present occasion.
So now for your twenty lines in whatever
order you please.”
Doctor X&wblank;with sundry intervals of

recollection, which may be spared the
reader, repeated the following lines:
“Yet has his aspect nothing of severe,
But such a face as promis'd him sincere.
Nothing reserv'd or sullen was to see,
But sweet regards, and pleasing sanctity,
Mild was his accent, and his action free.
With eloquence innate his tongue was arm'd,
Though harsh the precept, yet the preacher charm'd;
For, letting down the golden chain from high,
He drew his audience upwards to the sky.
He taught the Gospel rather than the law,
And forc'd himself to drive, but lov'd to draw.
The tithes his parish freely paid, he took;
But never sued, or curs'd with bell and book.
Wide was his parish, not contracted close
In streets—but here and there a straggling house.
Yet still he was at hand, without request,
To serve the sick, and succour the distrest.
The proud he tam'd, the penitent he cheer'd,
Nor to rebuke the rich offender fear'd.
His preaching much, but more his practice wrought,
A living sermon of the truths he taught.”
Lady Delacour wished that she could
find a chaplain who in any degree resembled
this charming parish priest, and

doctor X&wblank;promised that he would the
next day introduce to her his friend Mr.
Moreton.
“Mr. Moreton!” said Belinda, “the
gentleman of whom Mr. Percival spoke,
Mrs. Freke's Mr. Moreton?”
“Yes,” said doctor X&wblank;, “the clergyman
whom Mrs. Freke hanged in effigy,
and to whom Clarence Hervey has given
a small living.”
These circumstances, even if he had
not precisely resembled Chaucer's character
of a benevolent clergyman, would
have strongly interested lady Delacour in
his favour. She found him, upon farther
acquaintance, a perfect contrast to her
former chaplain; and he gradually acquired
such salutary influence over her
mind, that he relieved her from the terrours
of methodism, and in their place
substituted the consolations of mild and
rational piety.
Her conscience was now at peace; 
her spirits were real and equable, and
never was her conversation so agreeable.

Animated with the new feelings of returning
health, and the new hopes of domestic
happiness, she seemed desirous to impart
her felicity to all around her, but chiefly
to Belinda, who had the strongest claims
upon her gratitude, and the warmest
place in her affections. Belinda never
made her friend feel the weight of any
obligation, and consequently lady Delacour's
gratitude was a voluntary pleasure
—not an expected duty. Nothing could
be more delightful to miss Portman than
thus to feel herself the object at once of
esteem, affection, and respect; to see
that she had not only been the means of
saving her friend's life, but that the influence
she had obtained over her mind
was likely to be so permanently beneficial
to her family and to herself.
Belinda did not take all the merit of
this reformation to herself: she was most
willing to share it in her own imagination
not only with doctor X&wblank;and Mr.
Moreton, but with poor Clarence Hervey.
She was pleased to observe that lady Delacour

never omitted any occasion of doing
justice to his merit, and she loved
her for that generosity, which sometimes
passed the bounds of justice in her eulogiums.
But Belinda was careful to preserve
her consistency, and to guard her
heart from the dangerous effect of these
enthusiastic praises; and as lady Delacour
was now sufficiently reestablished
in her health, she announced her intention
of returning immediately to Oaklypark,
according to her promise to lady
Anne Percival and to Mr. Vincent.
“But my dear,” said lady Delacour,
“one week more is all I ask from you— 
May not friendship ask such a sacrifice
from love?”
“You expect, I know,” said miss
Portman ingenuously, “that before the
end of that time Mr. Hervey will be
here.”
“True. And have you no friendship
for him?” said lady Delacour with an
arch smile, “or is freindship for every
man in the creation, one Augustus Vincent

always excepted, prohibited by the
statutes of Oakly-park?”
“By the statutes of Oakly-park nothing
is forbidden,” said Belinda, “but
what reason—”
“Reason! O, I have done if you go
to reason. You are invulnerable to the
light shafts of wit, I know, when you
are cased in this heavy armour of reason; 
Cupid himself may strain his bow and
exhaust his quiver upon you in vain.
But have a care—you cannot live in armour
all your life—lay it aside but for a
moment, and the little bold urchin will
make it his prize. Remember Raphael's
picture of Cupid creeping into the armour
of the conqueror of the world.”
“I am sufficiently aware,” said Belinda,
smiling, “of the power of Cupid
and of his wiles. I would not brave his
malice, but I would fly from it.”
“It is so cowardly to fly!”
“Surely, prudence, not courage, is
the virtue of our sex; and seriously, my
dear lady Delacour, I entreat you not to

use your influence over my mind, lest
you should lessen my happiness, though
you cannot alter my determination.”
Moved by the earnest manner in
which Belinda uttered these words, lady
Delacour rallied her no more, nor did she
longer oppose her resolution of returning
immediately to Oakly-park.
“May I remind you,” said miss Portman,
—“though it is seldom either politic
or polite to remind people of their promises,— 
but may I remind you of something
like a promise you made to accompany
me to Mr. Percival's?”
“And would you have me behave so
brutally to poor lord Delacour, as to run
away from him in this manner the moment
I have strength to run?”
“Lord Delacour is included in this invitation,” 
said miss Portman, putting the
last letter that she had received from lady
Anne Percival into her hands.
“When I recollect,” said lady Delacour,
as she looked over the letter, “how
well this lady Anne of yours has behaved

to me about Helena—when I recollect,
that, though you have been with her so
long, she has not supplanted me in your
affections, nor attempted to detain you
when I sent Marriott to Oakly-park— 
and when I consider how much for my
own advantage it will be to accept this
invitation, I really cannot bring myself
from pride, or folly, or any other motive,
to refuse it. So, my dear Belinda, prevail
upon lord Delacour to spend his
Christmas at Oakly-park instead of at
Studley-manor (Rantipole, thank Heaven!
is out of the question), and prevail
upon yourself to stay a few days for
me, and you shall take us all with you in
triumph.”
Belinda was convinced that, when lady
Delacour had once tasted the pleasures
of domestic life, she would not easily return
to that dissipation which she had
followed from habit, and into which she
had first been driven by a mixture of
vanity and despair. All the connexions
which she had imprudently formed with

numbers of fashionable, but extravagant
and thoughtless women, would insensibly
be broken off by this measure; for lady
Delacour, who was already weary of
their company, would be so much struck
with the difference between their insipid
conversation and the animated and interesting
society in lady Anne Percival's
family, that she would afterward think
them not only burdensome, but intolerable.
Lord Delacour's intimacy with
lord Studley was one of his chief inducements
to that intemperance, which injured
almost equally his constitution and
his understanding: for some weeks past
he had abstained from all excess, but
Belinda was well aware, that, when the
immediate motive of humanity to lady
Delacour ceased to act upon him, he
would probably return to his former
habits, if he continued to visit his former
associates. It was therefore of importance,
to break at once his connexion
with lord Studley, and to place him in a
situation where he might form new habits,

and where his dormant talents might be
roused to exertion. She was convinced, that
his understanding was not so much below
par, as she had once been taught to think
it: she perceived also, that, since their
reconciliation, lady Delacour was anxious
to make him appear to advantage:
whenever he said any thing that was
worth hearing she looked at Belinda with
triumph; and whenever he happened to
make a mistake in conversation, she
either showed involuntary signs of uneasiness,
or passed it off with that easy
wit, by which she generally knew how
to make the worse appear the better reason.
Miss Portman knew, that Mr.
Percival possessed the happy talent of
drawing out all the abilities of those
with whom he conversed, and that he
did not value men merely for their erudition,
science, or literature; he was
capable of estimating the potential, as
well as the actual range of the mind.
Of his generosity she could not doubt,
and she was persuaded that he would

take every possible means, which good
nature, joined to good sense, could suggest,
to raise lord Delacour in his lady's
esteem, and to make that union happy,
which was indissoluble. All these reflections
passed with the utmost rapidity
in Belinda's mind, and the result of them
was, that she consented to wait lady Delacour's
leisure for her journey.