

Our hero was quite convinced of the
good sense of his friend's last remark,
that it is safer to judge of people by
their conduct to others, than by their
manners towards ourselves. But as yet,
he felt scarcely any interest on the subject
of lady Dashfort or lady Isabel's
characters; however, he inquired and
listened to all the evidence he could
obtain respecting this mother and
daughter.
He heard terrible reports of the mischief
they had done in families; the
extravagance into which they had led
men; the imprudence, to say no worse,
into which they had betrayed women.
Matches broken off; reputations ruined,
husbands alienated from their wives,
and wives made jealous of their husbands.
But in some of these stories he

discovered exaggeration so flagrant as to
make him doubt the whole. In others,
it could not be positively determined
whether the mother or daughter had
been the person most to blame.
Lord Colambre always followed the
charitable rule of believing only half
what the world says, and here he thought
it fair to believe which half he pleased.
He farther observed, that though all
joined in abusing these ladies in their
absence, when present they seemed universally
admired. Though every body
cried “shame!” and “shocking!” yet
every body visited them. No parties so
crowded as lady Dashfort's; no party
deemed pleasant or fashionable where
lady Dashfort or lady Isabel was not.
The bon-mots of the mother were every
where repeated; the dress and air of the
daughter every where imitated. Yet
lord Colambre could not help being surprised
at their popularity in Dublin,
because, independently of all moral objections,
there were causes of a different

sort, sufficient, he thought, to prevent
lady Dashfort from being liked by the
Irish; indeed by any society. She in
general affected to be ill-bred and inattentive
to the feelings and opinions of
others; careless whom she offended by
her wit or by her decided tone. There
are some persons in so high a region of
fashion, that they imagine themselves
above the thunder of vulgar censure.
Lady Dashfort felt herself in this exalted
situation, and fancied she might
“hear the innocuous thunder roll below.” 
Her rank was so high, that none
could dare to call her vulgar; what
would have been gross in any one of
meaner note, in her was freedom, or originality,
or lady Dashfort's way. It was
lady Dashfort's pleasure and pride to
show her power in perverting the public
taste. She often said to those English
companions with whom she was intimate,
“Now see what follies I can
lead these fools into. Hear the nonsense
I can make them repeat as wit.”

Upon some occasion one of her friends
ventured to fear that something she had
said was too strong. “Too strong, was
it? Well, I like to be strong—wo be
to the weak.” On another occasion
she was told, that certain visitors had
seen her ladyship yawning. “Yawn,
did I?—glad of it—the yawn sent them
away, or I should have snored;—rude,
was I? they won't complain. To say, I
was rude to them, would be to say, that
I did not think it worth my while to be
otherwise. Barbarians! are not we the
civilized English, come to teach them
manners and fashions? Whoever does
not conform, and swear allegiance too,
we shall keep out of the English pale.”
Lady Dashfort forced her way, and she
set the fashion: fashion, which converts
the ugliest dress into what is
beautiful and charming, governs the
public mode in morals and in manners; 
and thus, when great talents and high
rank combine, they can debase or elevate
the public taste.

With lord Colambre she played more
artfully; she drew him out in defence
of his beloved country, and gave him
opportunities of appearing to advantage; 
this he could not help feeling, especially
when the lady Isabel was present. Lady
Dashfort had dealt long enough with
human nature to know, that to make
any man pleased with her, she should
begin by making him pleased with himself.
Insensibly the antipathy that lord Colambre
had originally felt to lady Dashfort
wore off; her faults, he began to think,
were assumed; he pardoned her defiance
of good breeding, when he observed that
she could, when she chose it, be most
engagingly polite. It was not that she
did not know what was right, but that
she did not think it always for her interest
to practise it.
The party opposed to lady Dashfort
affirmed, that her wit depended merely
on unexpectedness; a characteristic
which may be applied to any impropriety

of speech, manner, or conduct. In
some of her ladyship's repartees, however,
lord Colambre now acknowledged
there was more than unexpectedness; 
there was real wit: but it was of a sort
utterly unfit for a woman, and he was
sorry that lady Isabel should hear it. In
short, exceptionable as it was altogether,
lady Dashfort's conversation had become
entertaining to him, and though
he could never esteem or feel in the
least interested about her, he began to
allow that she could be agreeable.
“Ay, I knew how it would be,” 
said she, when some of her friends told
her this. “He began by detesting me,
and did I not tell you that if I thought
it worth my while to make him like
me, he must, sooner or later. I delight
in seeing people begin with me as
they do with olives, making all manner
of horrid faces, and silly protestations,
that they will never touch an olive again
as long as they live; but after a little
time, these very folk grow so desperately

fond of olives, that there is no desert
without them. Isabel, child, you
are in the sweet line—but sweets cloy.
You never heard of any body living
on marmalade, did ye?”—Lady Isabel
answered, by a sweet smile.—“To do
you justice, you play Lydia Languish
vastly well,” pursued the mother; 
“but Lydia, by herself, would soon
tire; somebody must keep up the spirit
and bustle, and carry on the plot of
the piece; and I am that somebody,— 
as you shall see. Is not that our hero's
voice, which I hear on the stairs?”
It was lord Colambre—His lordship
had by this time become a constant visitor
at lady Dashfort's. Not that he
had forgotten, or that he meant to disregard
his friend, sir James Brooke's parting
words. He promised himself faithfully,
that if any thing should occur to
give him reason to suspect designs, such
as those to which the warning pointed,
he would be on his guard, and would
prove his generalship by an able retreat.

But to imagine attacks where none were
attempted, to suspect ambuscades in the
open country, would be ridiculous and
cowardly.
No, thought our hero; Heaven forefend
I should be such a coxcomb, as to
fancy every woman who speaks to me
has designs upon my precious heart, or
on my more precious estate. As he
walked from his hotel to lady Dashfort's
house, ingeniously wrong, he came to
this conclusion, just as he ascended the
stairs, and just as her ladyship had
settled her future plan of operations.
After talking over the nothings of the
day, and after having given two or three
cuts at the society of Dublin, with two
or three compliments to individuals, who
she knew, were favourites with his lordship,
she suddenly turned to him,
“My lord, I think you told me, or my
own sagacity discovered, that you want
to see something of Ireland, and that
you dont intend, like most travellers, to
turn round, see nothing, and go home
content.”

Lord Colambre assured her ladyship
that she had judged him rightly, for,
that nothing would content him but seeing
all that was possible to be seen of his
native country. It was for this special
purpose he came to Ireland.
“Ah!—well—very good purpose— 
can't be better; but now, how to accomplish
it. You know the Portuguese
proverb says, ‘you go to Hell for the
good things you intend to do, and to
Heaven, for those you do.’—Now let
us see what you will do—Dublin, I
suppose, you've seen enough of by this
time—through and through—round and
round—this makes me first giddy and
then sick. Let me show you the country
—not the face of it, but the body
of it—the people.—Not Castle this, or
Newtown that, but their inhabitants.— 
I know them, I have the key, or the
picklock to their minds. An Irishman
is as different an animal on his guard,
and off his guard, as a miss in school,
from a miss out of school.—A fine

country for game I'll show you; and,
if you are a good marksman, you may
have plenty of shots at folly as it
flies.”
Lord Colambre smiled. “As to Isabel,” 
pursued her ladyship, “I shall
put her in charge of Heathcock, who
is going with us—She won't thank me
for that, but you will—Nay, no fibs
man, you know, I know, as who does
not that has seen the world, that though
a pretty woman is a mighty pretty thing,
yet she is confoundedly in one's way,
when any thing else is to be seen,
heard,—or understood.”
Every objection anticipated and removed,
and so far a prospect held out
of attaining all the information he desired,
with more than all the amusement
he could have expected, lord
Colambre seemed much tempted to
accept the invitation; but he hesitated,
because, as he said, her ladyship might
be going to pay visits where he was
not acquainted.

“Bless you!—don't let that be a
stumbling-block in the way of your
tender conscience. I am going to
Killpatrickstown, where you'll be as
welcome as light.—You know them,
they know you, at least you shall have
a proper letter of invitation from my
lord and my lady Killpatrick, and all
that. And as to the rest you know a
young man is always welcome every
where, a young nobleman kindly welcome,
—I won't say such a young man,
and such a young nobleman, for that
might put you to your bows, or your
blushes—but nobilitas by itself, nobility
is enough in all parties, in all
families, where there are girls, and of
course balls, as there are always at
Killpatrickstown.—Don't be alarmed; 
you shall not be forced to dance, or
asked to marry. I'll be your security.
You shall be at full liberty, and it is
a house where you can do just what
you will.—Indeed, I go to no others.
These Killpatricks are the best creatures

in the world; they think nothing good
or grand enough for me. If I'd let
them, they would lay down cloth of
gold over their bogs for me, to walk
upon.—Good hearted beings!” added
lady Dashfort, marking a cloud gathering
on lord Colambre's countenance.
“I laugh at them, because I love them.
I could not love any thing, I might not
laugh at—your lordship excepted.— 
So you'll come—that's settled.”
And so it was settled. Our hero
went to Killpatrickstown.
“Every thing here sumptuous and
unfinished, you see,” said lady Dashfort
to lord Colambre, the day after
their arrival. “All begun as if the
projectors thought they had the command
of the mines of Peru; and ended
as if the possessors had not sixpence; 
des arrangemens provisatoires, temporary
expedients; in plain English,
make-shifts.—Luxuries, enough for an
English prince of the blood. Comforts,

not enough for an English woman.— 
And you may be sure that great repairs
and alterations have gone on to fit this
house for our reception, and for our
English eyes!—Poor people!—English
visitors, in this point of view, are
horribly expensive to the Irish. Did
you ever hear that, in the last century,
or in the century before the last, to put
my story far enough back, so that it
shall not touch any body living; when
a certain English nobleman, lord Blank
A&wblank;, sent to let his Irish friend, lord
Blank B&wblank;, know that he and all his
train were coming over to pay him a
visit; the Irish nobleman, Blank B&wblank;,
knowing the deplorable condition of
his castle, sat down fairly to calculate,
whether it would cost him most to
put the building in good and sufficient
repair, fit to receive these English visitors,
or to burn it to the ground.— 
He found the balance to be in favour
of burning, which was wisely accomplished

next day . Perhaps Killpatrick
would have done well to follow
this example. Resolve me which is
worst, to be burnt out of house and
home, or to be eaten out of house and
home. In this house, above and below
stairs, including first and second table,
house-keeper's room, lady's maids'
room, butler's room, and gentleman's; 
one hundred and four people sit down
to dinner every day, as Petito informs
me, beside kitchen boys, and what they
call char-women; who never sit down,
but who do not eat or waste the less
for that; and retainers, and friends; 
friends to the fifth and sixth generation,
who ‘must get their bit and their
sup;’ for,—‘sure, it's only Biddy,’ 
they say;—continued lady Dashfort,
imitating their Irish brogue.—And,
‘sure, 'tis nothing at all, out of all his
honour, my lord, has.—How could he
feel it !—Long life to him!—He's not

that way: not a couple in all Ireland,
and that's saying a great dale, looks
less after their own, nor is more off-handeder,
or open-hearteder, or greater
open-house-keepers, nor  my lord and
my lady Killpatrick.—Now there's
encouragement for a lord and a lady
to ruin themselves.”
Lady Dashfort imitated the Irish
brogue in perfection; boasted that “she
was mistress of fourteen different
brogues, and had brogues for all occasions.” 
By her mixture of mimickry,
sarcasm, exaggeration, and truth, she
succeeded continually in making lord
Colambre laugh at every thing at which
she wished to make him laugh; at every
thing, but not every body; whenever
she became personal, he became serious,
or at least endeavoured to become serious; 
and if he could not instantly resume
the command of his risible muscles,
he reproached himself.

“It is shameful to laugh at these
people, indeed, lady Dashfort, in their
own house—these hospitable people,
who are entertaining us.”
“Entertaining us! true, and if we
are entertained, how can we help laughing?”
All expostulation was thus turned off
by a jest, as it was her pride to make
lord Colambre laugh in spite of his better
feelings and principles. This he
saw, and this seemed to him to be her
sole object, but there he was mistaken.
Off-handed as she pretended to be, none
dealt more in the impromptu fait à 
loisir; and mentally short-sighted as she
affected to be, none had more long animity
for their own interest.
It was her settled purpose to make
the Irish and Ireland ridiculous and
contemptible to lord Colambre; to disgust
him with his native country; to
make him abandon the wish of residing
on his own estate. To confirm him an
absentee was her object previously to

her ultimate plan of marrying him to
her daughter. Her daughter was poor,
she would therefore be glad to get an
Irish peer for her; but would be very
sorry, she said, to see Isabel banished
to Ireland; and the young widow declared
she could never bring herself to
be buried alive in Clonbrony-castle.
In addition to these considerations,
lady Dashfort received certain hints
from Mrs. Petito, which worked all to
the same point.
“Why, yes, my lady; I heard a
great deal about all that, when I was
at lady Clonbrony's,” said Petito, one
day, as she was attending at her lady's
toilette, and encouraged to begin
chattering.—“And I own I was originally
under the universal errour, that
my lord Colambre was to be married to
the great heiress, miss Broadhurst; 
but I have been converted and reformed
on that score, and am at present quite
in another way and style of thinking.”

Petito paused, in hopes that her lady
would ask, what was her present way
of thinking? But lady Dashfort, certain
that she would tell her without
being asked, did not take the trouble to
speak, particularly as she did not choose
to appear violently interested on the
subject.—“My present way of thinking,” 
resumed Petito, “is in consequence
of my having, with my own
eyes and ears, witnessed and overheard
his lordship's behaviour and words, the
morning he was coming away from
Lunnun for Ireland; when he was morally
certain nobody was up, nor overhearing,
nor overseeing him, there did
I notice him, my lady, stopping in the
antichamber, ejaculating over one of
miss Nugent's gloves, which he had
picked up.—‘Limerick!’ said he, quite
loud to himself; for it was a Limerick
glove, my lady—‘Limerick!—Dear
Ireland! she loves you as well as I do!’ 
—or words to that effect; and then a
sigh, and down stairs, and off. So,

thinks I, now the cat's out of the bag.
And I wouldn't give much myself for
miss Broadhurst's chance of that young
lord, with all her bank stock, scrip,
and omnum. Now, I see how the land
lies, and I'm sorry for it; for she's no
fortin; and she's so proud, she never
said a hint to me of the matter: but
my lord Colambre is a sweet gentleman; 
and—”
“Petito! don't run on so; you must
not meddle with what you don't understand:
the miss Kirkpatricks, to be
sure, are sweet girls, particularly the
youngest.”—Her ladyship's toilette was
finished; and she left Petito to go down
to my lady Killpatrick's woman, to tell,
as a very great secret, the schemes that
were in contemplation among the higher
powers, in favour of the youngest of the
miss Killpatricks.
“So Ireland is at the bottom of his
heart, is it!” repeated lady Dashfort to
herself—“it shall not be long so.” 
From this time forward, not a day,

scarcely an hour passed, but her ladyship
did or said something to depreciate the
country, or it's inhabitants, in our
hero's estimation. With treacherous
ability, she knew and followed all the
arts of misrepresentation; all those injurious
arts which his friend, sir James
Brooke, had, with such honest indignation,
reprobated. She knew how,
not only to seize the ridiculous points,
to make the most respectable people
ridiculous, but she knew how to select
the worst instances, the worst exceptions; 
and to produce them as examples,
as precedents, from which to
condemn whole classes, and establish
general false conclusions respecting a
nation.
In the neighbourhood of Killpatricks-town,
lady Dashfort said, there were
several squireens, or little squires; a
race of men who have succeeded to the
buckeens, described by Young and
Crumpe. Squireens are persons, who,
with good long leases, or valuable

farms, possess incomes from three to
eight hundred a year; who keep a
pack of hounds; take out a commission
of the peace, sometimes before they can
spell, (as her ladyship said) and almost
always before they know any thing of
law or justice! Busy and loud about
small matters; jobbers at assizes; combining
with one another, and trying
upon every occasion, public or private,
to push themselves forward, to the annoyance
of their superiours, and the
terrour of those below them.
In the usual course of things, these
men are not often to be found in the
society of gentry; except, perhaps,
among those gentlemen or noblemen,
who like to see hangers-on at their
tables; or who find it for their convenience
to have underling magistrates,
to protect their favourites, or to propose
and carry jobs for them on grand juries.
At election times, however, these persons
rise into sudden importance with
all who have views upon the county.

Lady Dashfort hinted to lord Killpatrick,
that her private letters from England
spoke of an approaching dissolution of
parliament: she knew that, upon this
hint, a round of invitations would be
sent to the squireens; and she was
morally certain, that they would be
more disagreeable to lord Colambre, and
give him a worse idea of the country,
than any other people who could be
produced. Day after day some of these
personages made their appearance; and
lady Dashfort took care to draw them
out upon the subjects, on which she
knew that they would show the most
self-sufficient ignorance, and the most
illiberal spirit. This succeeded beyond
her most sanguine expectations.— 
“Lord Colambre! how I pity you,
for being compelled to these permanent
sittings after dinner!” said lady Isabel
to him one night, when he came late
to the ladies from the dining-room.— 
“Lord Killpatrick insisted upon my
staying to help him to push about that

never-ending, still-beginning electioneering
bottle,” said lord Colambre.— 
“Oh! if that were all; if these gentlemen
would only drink:—but their
conversation! I don't wonder my
mother dreads returning to Clonbrony
castle, if my father must have such
company as this. But, surely, it cannot
be necessary.”
“O, indispensable! positively, indispensable!” 
cried lady Dashfort; “no
living in Ireland without it. You
know, in every country in the world,
you must live with the people of the
country, or be torn to pieces: for my
part, I should prefer being torn to
pieces.”
Lady Dashfort and lady Isabel knew
how to take advantage of the contrast
between their own conversation, and
that of the persons by whom lord Colambre
was so justly disgusted: they
happily relieved his fatigue with wit,
satire, poetry, and sentiment; so that
he every day became more exclusively

fond of their company; for lady Killpatrick
and the miss Killpatricks were
mere commonplace people. In the
mornings, he rode or walked with lady
Dashfort and lady Isabel: lady Dashfort,
by way of fulfilling her promise of
showing him the people, used frequently
to take him into the cabins, and
talk to their inhabitants. Lord and
lady Killpatrick, who had lived always
for the fashionable world, had taken
little pains to improve the condition of
their tenants: the few attempts they
had made were injudicious. They had
built ornamented, picturesque cottages
within view of their demesne; 
and favourite followers of the family,
people with half a century's habit of
indolence and dirt, were promoted to
these fine dwellings. The consequences
were such as lady Dashfort delighted
to point out. Every thing let to go to
ruin for the want of a moment's care,
or pulled to pieces for the sake of
the most trifling surreptitious profit.

The people most assisted, always appearing
proportionally wretched and discontented.
No one could, with more
ease and more knowledge of her ground,
than lady Dashfort, do the dishonour of
a country. In every cabin that she
entered, by the first glance of her eye
at the head, kerchiefed in no comely
guise, or by the drawn-down corners of
the mouth, or by the bit of a broken
pipe, which in Ireland never characterises
stout labour, or by the first sound
of the voice, the drawling accent on your
“honour,”—or, “my lady,” she could
distinguish the proper objects of her
charitable designs, that is to say, those of
the old uneducated race, whom no one
can help, because they will never help
themselves. To these she constantly
addressed herself, making them give, in
all their despairing tones, a history of
their complaints and grievances; then
asking them questions, aptly contrived
to expose their habits of self-contradiction,
their servility and flattery

one moment, and their litigious and encroaching
spirit the next: thus giving
lord Colambre the most unfavourable
idea of the disposition and character of
the lower class of the Irish people.
Lady Isabel the while standing by,
with the most amiable air of pity, with
expressions of the finest moral sensibility,
softening all her mother said, finding
ever some excuse for the poor creatures,
and following with angelic sweetness
to heal the wounds her mother inflicted.
When lady Dashfort thought she had
sufficiently worked upon lord Colambre's
mind to weaken his enthusiasm for his
native country; and when lady Isabel
had, by the appearance of every virtue,
added to a delicate preference, if not
partiality, for our hero, ingratiated herself
into his good opinion and obtained
an interest in his mind, the wily mother
ventured an attack of a more decisive
nature; and so contrived it was, that, if
it failed, it should appear to have been

made without design to injure, and in
total ignorance.
One day lady Dashfort, who in fact
was not proud of her family, though she
pretended to be so, had herself prevailed
on, though with much difficulty, by
lady Killpatrick, to do the very thing she
wanted to do, to show her genealogy,
which had been beautifully blazoned,
and which was to be produced as evidence
in the lawsuit that brought her
to Ireland. Lord Colambre stood politely
looking on and listening, while her
ladyship explained the splendid intermarriages
of her family, pointing to each
medallion that was filled gloriously with
noble, and even with royal names, till
at last she stopped short, and, covering
one medallion with her finger, she said;
“Pass over that, dear lady Killpatrick.
You are not to see that lord Colambre
—that's a little blot in our scutcheon.
You know, Isabel, we never talk of that
prudent match of great-uncle John's:
what could he expect by marrying into

that family, where you know all the men
were not sans peur, and none of the women
sans reproche.”
“O, mamma!” cried lady Isabel, “not
one exception?”
“Not one, Isabel,” persisted lady
Dashfort, “there was lady—, and
the other sister, that married the man
with the long nose;—and the daughter
again, of whom they contrived to make
an honest woman, by getting her married
in time to a blue-ribband, and who
contrived to get herself into Doctor's
Commons the very next year.”
“Well, dear mamma, that is enough,
and too much:—Oh! pray don't go
on,” cried lady Isabel, who had appeared
very much distressed during her mother's
speech. “You don't know what
you are saying:—indeed, ma'am, you
don't.”
“Very likely child, but that compliment
I can return to you on the
spot, and with interest; for you seem
to me at this instant, not to know

either what you are saying, or what you
are doing.—Come, come, explain.”
“O, no ma'am—Pray say so no more.
I will explain myself another time.”
“Nay, there you are wrong, Isabel,
in point of good breeding any thing
is better than hints and mystery.— 
Since I have been so unlucky as to
touch upon the subject, better go
through with it, and with all the
boldness of innocence ask the question,
Are you my lord Colambre, or are you
not; related or connected with any
of the St. Omars?”
“Not that I know of,” said lord
Colambre, “but I really am so bad a
genealogist, that I cannot answer positively.”
“Then I must put the substance of
my question into a new form.—Have
you, or have you not, a cousin of the
name of Nugent?”
“Miss Nugent!—Grace Nugent!— 
Yes,” said lord Colambre, with as
much firmness of voice as he could

command, and with as little change
of countenance as possible; but as
the question came upon him so unexpectedly,
it was not in his power to
anwer with an air of absolute indifference
and composure.
“And her mother was—” said lady
Dashfort.
“My aunt, by marriage;—her
maiden name was Reynolds, I think.
—But she died when I was quite
a child. I know very little about her.
I never saw her in my life; but I
am certain she was a Reynolds.”
“O, my dear lord,” continued lady
Dashfort; “I am perfectly aware, that
she did take and bear the name of Reynolds; 
but that was not her maiden name
—her maiden name was—but perhaps
it is a family secret, that has been
kept for some good reason from you,
and from the poor girl herself;—the
maiden name was St. Omar, depend
upon it.—Nay, I would not have told
this to you, my lord, if I could have

conceived that it would affect you so
violently,” pursued lady Dashfort, in a
tone of raillery; “you see you are no
worse off than we are. We have an
intermarriage with the St. Omars. I
did not think you would be so much
shocked at a discovery, which proves
that our family and yours have some
little connexion.”
Lord Colambre endeavoured to answer,
and mechanically said something
about, “happy to have the honour.” 
Lady Dashfort, truly happy to see that
her blow had hit the mark so well,
turned from his lordship without
seeming to observe how seriously he
was affected; and lady Isabel sighed,
and looked with compassion on lord
Colambre, and then, reproachfully at
her mother.—But lord Colambre heeded
not her looks, and heard not of her
sighs; he heard nothing, saw nothing,
though his eyes were intently fixed on
the genealogy, on which lady Dashfort
was still descanting to lady Killpatrick.

He took the first opportunity he could
of quitting the room, and went out to
take a solitary walk.
“There he is, departed, but not
in peace, to reflect upon what has been
said;” whispered lady Dashfort to her
daughter. “I hope it will do him a
vast deal of good.”
“None of the women, sans reproche!
None!—without one exception,” said
lord Colambre to himself; “and Grace
Nugent's mother a St. Omar!—Is it
possible? Lady Dashfort seems certain:
—She could not assert a positive
fasehood;—no motive—She does not
know that miss Nugent is the perrson
to whom I am attached—she
spoke at random.—And I have heard
it first from a stranger;—not from my
mother. Why was it kept secret from
me? Now I understand the reason,
why my mother evidently never wished
that I should think of miss Nugent.— 
Why she always spoke so vehemently
against the marriages of relations, of

cousins. Why not tell me the truth?
It would have had the strongest effect,
had she known my mind.”
Lord Colambre had the greatest dread
of marrying any woman, whose mother
had conducted herself ill. His
reason, his prejudices, his pride, his
delicacy, and even his limited experience,
were all against it. All his
hopes, his plans of future happiness,
were shaken to their very foundation; 
he felt as if he had received a blow
that stunned his mind, and from which
he could not recover his faculties.
The whole of that day he was like one
in a dream. At night the painful idea
continually recurred to him, and, whenever
he was falling asleep, the sound
of lady Dashfort's voice returned upon
his ear, saying the words, “What
could he expect when he married one
of the St. Omars? None of the women
sans reproche.”
In the morning he rose early; and
the first thing he did was to write a

letter to his mother, requesting (unless
there was some important reason for her
declining to answer the quetion) that
she would immediately relieve his mind
from a great uneasiness, (he altered the
word four times, but at last left it
uneasiness.) He stated what he had
heard, and besought his mother to tell
him the whole truth, without reserve.