

Miss Portman was awakened by the
ringing of lady Delacour's bedchamber
bell. She opened her eyes with
the confused idea that something disagreeable
had happened; and before she
had distinctly recollected herself, Marriott
came to her bedside, with a note from
lady Delacour—If was written with a
pencil.
“Delacour—my lord!!!! is to have
to-day what Garrick used to call a gander
feast—will you dine with me tête à-tête,
and I'll write an excuse, alias a lie, to lady
Singleton, in the form of a charming note.

I pique myself sur l'éloquence du billet— 
then we shall have the evening to ourselves
—I have much to say, as people usually
have when they begin to talk of themselves.
“I have taken a double dose of
opium, and am not so horridly out of spirits
as I was last night—so you need not
be afraid of another scene.
“Let me see you in my dressing-room,
dear Belinda, as soon as you have adored
‘With head uncover'd, the cosmetic powers.’
But you don't paint—no matter—you will
—you must—every body must, sooner
or later. In the mean time, whenever
you want to send a note that shall not be
opened by the bearer, put your trust neither
in wafer nor wax, but twist it as I
twist mine. You see I wish to put you in
possession of some valuable secrets before
I leave this world—this, by the by, I don't,
upon second thoughts, which are always
best, mean to do yet.—There certainly
were such people as Amazons—I hope

you admire them—for who could live
without the admiration of Belinda Portman!
—not Clarence Hervey, assuredly— 
nor yet
T. C. H. Delacour.”
Belinda obeyed the summons to her
ladyship's dressing-room: she found lady
Delacour with her face completely repaired
with paint, and her spirits with opium.
She was in high consultation with Marriott
and Mrs. Franks, the milliner, about
the crape petticoat of her birthnight
dress, which was extended over a large
hoop in full state. Mrs. Franks descanted
long and learnedly upon festoons and
loops, knots and fringes, submitting all
the time every thing to her ladyship's better
judgment.
Marriott was sulky and silent. She
opened her lips but once upon the question
of laburnum, or no laburnum flowers.
Against them she quoted the memoirs
and authority of the celebrated Mrs. Bellamy,
who has a case in point to prove,

that “straw colour must ever look like
dirty white by candlelight.” Mrs. Franks,
to compromise the matter, proposed gold
laburnums, “because nothing can look
better by candle light, or any light, than
gold;” and lady Delacour, who was
afraid that the milliner's imagination, now
that it had once touched upon gold, might
he led to the vulgar idea of ready money,
suddenly broke up the conference, by
exclaiming,
“We shall be late at Phillips's exhibition
of French china. Mrs. Franks
must let us see her again to-morrow, to
take into consideration your court dress,
my dear Belinda—“miss Portman presented
by lady Delacour”—Mrs. Franks,
let her dress, for Heaven's sake, be something
that will make a fine paragraph—I
give you four and twenty hours to think of
it.—I have done a horrid act this day,” 
continued she, after Mrs. Franks had left
the room—“absolutely written a twisted
note to Clarence Hervey, my dear—but
why did I tell you that? Now your head

will run upon the twisted note all day, instead
of upon ‘The Life and Opinions of
a Lady of a Quality, related by herself.”
After dinner, lady Delacour, having
made Belinda protest and blush, and blush
and protest, that her head was not running
upon the twisted note, began the
history of her life and opinions in the
following manner:
“I do nothing by halves, my dear—I
shall not tell you my adventures, as Gil
Blas told his to the archbishop of Grenada
—skipping over the useful passages— 
because you are not an archbishop, and
I should not have the grace to put on a
sanctified face, if you were.—I am no hypocrite,
and have nothing worse than
folly to conceal—That's bad enough—for a
woman who is known to play the fool, is
always suspected of playing the devil— 
But I begin where I ought to end, with my
moral, which I dare say you are not impatient
to anticipate—I never read or
listened to a moral at the end of a story in
my life—manners for me, and morals for

those that like them.—My dear, you will
be woefully disappointed, if in my story
you expect any thing like a novel. I once
heard a general say, that nothing was less
like a review than a battle; and I can
tell you, that nothing is more unlike a
novel than real life. Of all lives, mine has
been the least romantic. No love in it,
but a great deal of hate. I was a rich
heiress—I had, I believe, a hundred thousand
pounds, or more; and twice as many
caprices—I was handsome and witty—or,
to speak with that kind of circumlocution
which is called humility, the world, the
partial world, thought me a beauty, and a
bel-esprit.—Having told you my fortune,
need I add, that I, or it, had lovers in
abundance—of all sorts and degrees—not
to reckon those, it may be presumed, who
died of concealed passions for me. I had
sixteen declarations and proposals in form
—then what in the name of wonder, or of
common sense, which by the by is the
greatest of wonders—what in the name of
common sense made me marry lord Delacour?

—Why, my dear, you—no, not you,
but any girl who is not used to have a parcel
of admirers, would think it the easiest
thing in the world to make her choice; 
but let her judge by what she feels when a
dexterous mercer or linen-draper produces
pretty thing after pretty thing—and this is
so becoming, and this will wear for ever— 
as he swears; but then that's so fashionable
—the novice stands in a charming perplexity,
and after examining, and doubting,
and tossing over half the goods in the
shop, it's ten to one, when it begins to
get late, the young lady, in a hurry,
pitches upon the very ugliest and worst
thing that she has seen. Just so it was
with me and my lovers, and just so— 
‘Sad was the hour, and luckless was the day.’
I pitched upon viscount Delacour, for my
lord and judge. He had just at that time
lost at Newmarket more than he was
worth, in every sense of the word; and my
fortune was the most convenient thing in
the world to a man in his condition.—

Lozenges are of sovereign use in some complaints.
The heiress lozenge is a specific
in some consumptions. You are surprized
that I can laugh and jest about
such a melancholy thing as my marriage
with lord Delacour; and so am I, especially
when I recollect all the circumstances
—for though I bragged of there being
no love in my history, there was when I
was a goose or a gosling of about eighteen
—just your age, Belinda, I think— 
something very like love playing about
my heart, or my head—There was a certain
Henry Percival, a Clarence Hervey
of a man—no, he had ten times the
sense, begging your pardon, of Clarence
Hervey—his misfortune, or mine, was that
he had too much sense—he was in love
with me but not with my faults; now I,
wisely considering, that my faults were the
greatest part of me, insisted upon his being
in love with my faults.—He wouldn't or
couldn't—I said wouldn't—he said couldn't.
I had been used to see the men about me
lick the dust—for it was gold dust.—Percival

made wry faces—Lord Delacour
made none.—I pointed him out to Peroival
as an example—it was an example
he would not follow.—I was provoked,
and I married, in hopes of provoking the
man I loved.—The worst of it was, I
did not provoke him as much as I expected.
—Six months afterward, I heard of
his marriage with a very amiable woman.
—I hate those very amiable women.— 
Poor Percival!—I should have been a
very happy woman, I fancy, if I had
married you—for I believe you were the
only man who ever really loved me—but
all that is over now!—Where were
we?—O, I married my lord Delacour,
knowing him to be a fool, and believing
that, for this reason, I should find no trouble
in governing him.—But what a fatal
mistake!—a fool, of all animals in the
creation, is the most difficult to govern.— 
We set out in the fashionable world, with
a mutual desire to be as extravagant as
possible.—Strange, that with this similarity
of taste we could never agree!—

Strange, that this similarity of taste was
the cause of our perpetual quarrels!—During
the first year of our marriage, I had
always the upper hand in these disputes,
and the last word; and I was content— 
Stubborn as the brute was, I thought
I should in time break him in.—From the
specimens you have seen, you may guess
that I was even then a tolerable proficient
in the dear art of self-justification
—I had almost gained my point,
just broken my lord's heart, when one
fair morning, I unluckily told his man
Champfort, that he knew no more how
to cut hair than a sheepshearer.—Champfort,
who is conceit personified, took
mortal offence at this; and the devil, who
is always at hand to turn anger into malice,
put it into Champfort's head, to put
it into my lord's head, that the world
thought—‘My lady governed him.’—My
lord took fire—They say the torpedo, the
coldest of cold creatures, sometimes gives
out a spark—I suppose, when electrified
with anger.—The next time that innocent

I insisted upon my lord Delacour's doing,
or not doing—I forget which—the most
reasonable thing in the world, my lord
turns short round, and answers—‘My
lady Delacour, I am not a man to be governed
by a wife.’—And from that time
to this, the words ‘I am not a man to be
governed by a wife’—have been written
in his obstinate face, as all the world who
can read the human countenance may
see.—My dear, I laugh, but even in the
midst of laughter, there is sadness.—But
you don't know what it is—I hope you
never may—to have an obstinate fool for
a bosom friend.
“I at first flattered myself, that my lord's
was not an inveterate, incurable malady,
but from his obvious weakness, I
might have seen that there was no hope; 
for cases of obstinacy are always dangerous
in proportion to the weakness of the patient.
—My lord's case was desperate.— 
Kill or cure, was my humane, or prudent
maxim.—I determined to try the poison
of jealousy, by way of an alterative.—I

had long kept it in petto as my ultimate
remedy. I fixed upon a proper subject— 
a man with whom I thought that I could
coquette to all eternity, without any danger
to myself—a certain colonel Lawless
—as empty a coxcomb as you would wish
to see.—The world, said I to myself, can
never be so absurd as to suspect lady Delacour
with such a man as this, though
her lord may, and will, for nothing is too
absurd for him to believe.—Half my
theory proved just—that is saying a great
deal for any theory.—My lord swallowed
the remedy that I had prepared for him,
with an avidity, and a bonhommie, which
it did me good to behold—my remedy
operated beyond my most sanguine expectations.
—The poor man was cured of
his obstinacy, and became stark mad with
jealousy.—Then indeed I had some hopes
of him; for a madman can be managed,
a fool cannot. In a month's time, I
made him quite docile. With a face longer
than the weeping philosopher's, he came
to me one morning, and assured me, ‘he

would do every thing I pleased, provided
I would consult my own honour and his,
and give up colonel Lawless.’
“Give up!”—I could hardly forbear
laughing at the expression.—I replied,
‘that as long as my lord treated me with
becoming respect, I had never, in thought
or deed, given him just cause of complaint; 
but that I was not a woman to be
insulted, or to be kept, as I had hitherto
been, in leading-strings, by a husband.’ 
—My lord, flattered, as I meant he should
be, with the idea, that it was possible he
should be suspected of keeping a wife in
leading-strings, fell to making protestations
—‘he hoped his future conduct
would prove, &c.’—Upon this hint, I
gave the reins to my imagination, and full
drive I went into a fresh career of extravagance; 
if I were checked, it was an
insult, and I began directly to talk of
leading-strings. This ridiculous game I
played, successfully enough, for some time,
till at length, though naturally rather slow
at calculation, he actually discovered,

that if we lived at the rate of twenty thousand
a year, and had only ten thousand a
year to spend, we should, in due time,
have nothing left. This notable discovery
he communicated to me one morning,
after a long preamble. When he had
finished prosing, I agreed, that it was
demonstrably just, that he should retrench
his expenses; but that it was equally unjust
and impossible, that I could make
any reformation in my civil list.—That
economy was a word which I had never
heard of in my life, till I married his lordship; 
that, upon second recollection, it
was true, I had heard of such a thing as
national economy; and that it would be
a very pretty, though rather hackneyed
topic of declamation for a maiden speech
in the house of lords. I therefore advised
him to reserve all he had to say upon
this subject for the noble lord upon the
woolsack; nay, I very graciously added,
that upon this condition, I would go to
the house myself, to give his arguments
and eloquence a fair hearing, and that I

would do my best to keep myself awake.
—This was all mighty playful and witty; 
but it happened that my lord Delacour,
who never had any great taste for wit,
could not this unlucky morning at all
relish it. Of course I grew angry, and
reminded him, with an indelicacy which
his want of generosity justified, that
an heiress, who had brought a hundred
thousand pounds into his family, had some
right to amuse herself, and that it was not
my fault if elegant amusements were
more expensive than others.
“Then came a long criminating and recriminating
chapter.—It was ‘My lord,
your new-market blunders.’—‘My lady,
your cursed theatricals.’—‘My lord, I
have surely a right’—‘and my lady, I
have surely as good a right.’
“But my dear, Belinda, however we
might pay one another, we could not pay
all the world with words. In short, after
running through thousands, and tens of
thousands, we were actually in distress
for money.—Then came selling of lands,

and I dont know what devices, for raising
money, according to the mode of lawyers
and attorneys. It was quite indifferent
to me, how they got money, provided
that they got it for us.—By what art these
gentlemen raised money, I never troubled
myself to inquire; it might have been
the black art, for any thing I know to the
contrary. I know nothing of business.
So I signed all the papers they brought to
me; and I was mighty well pleased to
find, that by so easy an expedient as writing,
‘T. C. H. Delacour,’ I could command
money at will.—I signed, and signed,
till at last I was with all due civility
informed, that my signature was no longer
worth a farthing; and when I came to
inquire into the cause of this phenomenon,
I could nowise understand what my lord
Delacour's lawyer said to me. He was
a prig, and I had not patience either to
listen to him, or to look at him. I sent
for an old uncle of mine, who used to
manage all my money matters before I
was married: I put the uncle and the

lawyer into a room together with their
parchments, to fight the matter out, or to
come to a right understanding if they
could.—The last it seems was quite impossible.
—In the course of half an hour,
out comes my uncle in such a rage! I
never shall forget his face—all the bile in
his body had gotten into it—he had literally
no whites to his eyes. ‘My dear uncle,’ 
said I, ‘what is the matter?—Why you
are absolutely gold stick in waiting.’
“No matter what I am, child,” said the
uncle, ‘I'll tell you what you are with all
your wit—a dupe—'tis a shame for a woman
of your sense to be such a fool, and to
know nothing of business—and if you
knew nothing yourself, could not you send
for me?’
“I was too ignorant to know that I
knew nothing,” said I; ‘but I will not
trouble you with all the said Is and said
hes. I was made to understand, that if
lord Delacour were to die the next day, I
should live a beggar.—Upon this I grew
serious, as you may imagine. My uncle

assured me that I had been grossly imposed
upon by my lord and his lawyer, and
that I had been swindled out of my senses,
and out of my dower. I repeated all that
my uncle said, very faithfully, to lord
Delacour; and all that either he or his
lawyer could furbish out by way of
answer was, that ‘necessity had no law.’ 
Necessity, it must be allowed, though it
might be the mother of law, was never
with my lord the mother of invention.
Having now found out that I had a good
right to complain, I indulged myself in it
most gloriously. In short, my dear, we
had a comfortable family quarrel—love
quarrels are easily made up—but of
money quarrels these is no end.—From the
moment these money quarrels commenced,
I began to hate lord Delacour—before,
I had only despised him.—You can have
no notion to what meanness extravagance
reduces men.—I have known lord Delacour
shirk, and look so shabby, and tell so
many lies to people about a hundred
guineas—a hundred guineas! What do I

say? About twenty, ten, five!—O, my
dear, I cannot bear the thoughts of it!— 
But I was going on to tell you that my
good uncle, and all my relations, quarrelled
with me for having ruined myself, as
they said—but I said, they quarrelled with
me for fear I should ask them for some of
their ‘vile trash.’—Accordingly I
abused and ridiculed them, one and all; 
and for my pains, all my acquaintance
said that ‘lady Delacour was a woman of
a vast deal of spirit.’
“We were relieved from our money
embarrassments by the timely death of a
rich nobleman; to whose large estate my
lord Delacour was heir at law. I was intoxicated
with the idle compliments of all
my acquaintance, and I endeavoured to
console myself for misery at home, by
gayety abroad. Ambitious of pleasing
universally, I became the worst of slaves
—a slave to the world.—Not a moment of
my time was at my own disposal—not one
of my action; I may say, not one of my
thoughts, was my own—I was obliged

to find things ‘charming’ every hour,
which tired me to death; and every day
it was the same dull round of hypocrisy
and dissipation. You wonder to hear me
speak in this manner, Belinda, but one
must speak the truth sometimes; and this
is what I have been saying to Harriot
Freke continually—continually, for these
ten years past. Then why persist in the
same kind of life, you say?—Why, my
dear, because I could not stop—I was fit for
this kind of life, and for no other—I could
not be happy at home, for what sort of a
companion could I have made of lord
Delacour? By this time he was tired of
his horse Potatoes, and his horse High-flier,
and his horse Eclipse, and Goliah,
and Jenny Gray, &c. and he had
taken to hard drinking, which soon turned
him, as you see, quite into a beast.—I
forgot to tell you, that I had three children
during the first five years of my marriage.
The first was a boy; he was born dead; 
and my lord, and all his odious relations,
laid the blame upon me; because I would

not be kept prisoner half a year by an old
mother of his, a vile Cassandra, who was
always prophesying that my child would
not be born alive.—My second child was
a girl, but a poor, diminutive, sickly thing.
—It was the fashion at this time for fine
mothers to suckle their own children—so
much the worse for the poor brats.—Fine
nurses never made fine children. There
was a prodigious rout made about the
matter; a vast deal of sentiment and sympathy,
and compliments and inquiries; 
but after the novelty was over, I became
heartily sick of the business; and at the
end of about three months my poor child
was sick too—I don't much like to think
of it—it died.—If I had put it out to
nurse, I should have been thought by my
friends an unnatural mother—but I should
have saved it's life. I should have bewailed
the loss of the infant more, if lord
Delacour's relations and my own had not
made such lamentations upon the occasion,
that I was stunned.—I couldn't or
would'nt shed a tear, and I left it to the

old dowager to perform in public, as she
wished, the part of chief mourner, and
to comfort herself in private, by lifting up
her hands and eyes, and railing at me as
the most insensible of mothers. All this
time I suffered more than she did; but
that is what she shall never have the satisfaction
of knowing. I determined, that
if ever I had another child I would not have
the barbarity to nurse it myself. Accordingly,
when my third child, a girl, was born,
I sent it off immediately to the country, to
a stout, healthy, broad-faced nurse, under
whose care it grew and flourished; so that
at three years old, when it was brought
back to me, I could scarcely believe the
chubby little thing was my own child.
The same reasons which convinced me I
ought not to nurse my own child, determined
me, à plus forte raison, not to undertake
it's education. Lord Delacour
could not bear the child because it was
not a boy. The girl was put under the
care of a governess, who plagued my
heart out with her airs and tracasseries for

three or four years; at the end of which
time, as she turned out to be lord Delacour's
mistress in form, I was obliged—in
form—to beg she would leave my house,
and I put her pupil into better hands, I
hope, at a celebrated academy for young
ladies. There she will, at any rate, be
better instructed than she could be at
home.—I beg your pardon, my dear, for
this digression on nursing and schooling,
but I wanted only to explain to you why
it was, that when I was weary of the
business, I still went on in a course of
dissipation. You see I had nothing at
home, either in the shape of husband or
children, to engage my affections. I believe
it was this ‘aching void’ in my heart
which made me, after looking abroad some
time for a bosom friend, take such a prodigious
fancy to Mrs. Freke. She was
just then coming into fashion—she struck
me the first time I met her, as being
downright ugly; but there was a wild
oddity in her countenance which made
one stare at her, and she was delighted to

be stared at—especially by me—so we
were mutually agreeable to each other— 
I as starer, and she as staree. Harriot Freke
had, without comparison, more assurance
than any man or woman I ever saw. She
was downright brass—but of the finest
kind—Corinthian brass—She was one of
the first who brought what I call harum
scarum manners into fashion. I told you
that she had assurance—impudence I
should have called it, for no other word is
strong enough.—Such things as I have
heard Harriot Freke say!—You will not
believe it; but her conversation at first absolutely
made me, like an old fashioned
fool, wish I had a fan to play with. But
to my astonishment, all this took surprisingly
with a set of fashionable young
men. I found it necessary to reform my
manners. If I had not taken heart of
grace, and publicly abjured the heresies
of false delicacy, I should have been excommunicated
—Lady Delacour's sprightly
elegance—allow me to speak of myself
in the style in which the newspaper writers

talk of me—Lady Delacour's sprightly
elegance was but pale—not to say faded
pink, compared with the scarlet of Mrs.
Freke's dashing audacity. As my rival,
she would on certain ground have beaten
me hollow; it was therefore good policy
to make her my friend. We joined
forces, and nothing could stand against
us. But I have no right to give myself
credit for good policy in forming this intimacy; 
I really followed the dictates of
my heart, or my imagination. There was
a frankness in Harriot's manner, which I
mistook for artlessness of character. She
spoke with such unbounded freedom on
certain subjects, that I gave her credit for
unbounded sincerity on all subjects. She
had the talent of making the world believe
that virtue to be invulnerable by nature,
which disdained the common outworks of
art for it's defence. I, amongst others,
took it for granted, that the woman who
could make it her sport to ‘touch the
brink of all we hate,’ must have a stronger
head than other people.—I have since been

convinced, however, of my mistake.—I
am persuaded that few can touch the brink
without tumbling headlong down the precipice
—Don't apply this, my dear, literally,
to the person of whom we were
speaking. I am not base enough to betray
her secrets, however I may have been
provoked by her treachery. Of her character
and history you shall hear nothing,
but what is necessary for my own justification.
The league of amity between us
was scarcely ratified, before my lord Delacour
came with his wise remonstrating
face, to beg me ‘to consider what was
due to my own honour and his.’—Like
the cosmogony-man in the Vicar of Wakefield,
he came out over and over with
this cant phrase, which had once stood
him in stead.—‘Do you think my lord,’ 
said I, ‘that because I give up poor Lawless
to oblige you, I shall give up all common
sense, to suit myself to your taste?— 
Harriot Freke is visited by every body but
old dowagers and old maids.—I am neither
an old dowager nor an old maid—The consequence
is obvious, my lord.’—Pertness

in dialogue, my dear, often succeeds better
with my lord than wit.—I therefore
saved the sterling gold, and bestowed
upon him nothing but counters—I tell you
this to save the credit of my taste and
judgment.—But to return to my friendship
for Harriot Freke. I, of course, repeated
to her every word which had passed between
my husband and me. She out-Heroded
Herod upon the occasion; and
laughed so much at what she called my
folly in pleading guilty in the Lawless
cause, that I was downright ashamed of
myself, and purely to prove my innocence,
I determined, upon the first convenient
opportunity, to renew my intimacy with
the colonel. The opportunity which I so
ardently desired of redeeming my independence,
was not long wanting.—Lawless,
as my stars (which you know are always
more in fault than ourselves) would have
it, returned just at this time from the
continent, where he had been with his
regiment; he returned with a wound
across his forehead, and a black fillet;

which made him look something more
like a hero, and ten times more like a
coxcomb, than ever.—He was in fashion
at all events, aad amongst other ladies,
Mrs. Luttridge—odious Mrs. Luttridge!
smiled upon him.—The colonel, however,
had taste enough to know the difference
between smile and smile; he laid himself
and his laurels at my feet, and I carried
him and them about in triumph. Wherever
I went, especially to Mrs. Luttridge's, envy
and scandal joined hands to attack me,
and I heard wondering and whispering
wherever I went. I had no object in view
but to provoke my husband, therefore, conscious
of the purity of my intentions, it
was my delight to brave the opinion of the
wondering world. I gave myself no
concern about the effect my coquetry
might have upon the object of this flirtation
—poor Lawless!—heart—I took it
for granted he had none.—How should a
coxcomb come by a heart—vanity I knew
he had in abundance, but this gave me
no alarm, as I thought that if it should

ever make him forget himself—I mean,
forget what was due to me—I could, by
one flash of my wit, strike him to the
earth, or blast him for ever. One night
we had been together at Mrs. Luttridge's,
—she, amongst other good things, kept a
faro bank—and I am convinced, cheated
—Be that as it may, I lost an immensity
of money, and it was my pride to lose
with as much gayety as any body else
could win; so I was, or appeared to be,
in uncommonly high spirits, and Lawless
had his share of my good humour. We
left Mrs. Luttridge's together early; 
about half past one. As the colonel was
going to hand me to my carriage, a
smart-looking young man, as I thought,
came up close to the coach door, and
stared me full in the face: I was not a
woman to be disconcerted at such a
thing as this, but I really was startled
when the young fellow jumped into the
carriage after me: I thought he was
mad: I had only courage enough to
scream.—Lawless seized hold of the

intruder to drag him out, and out he
dragged the youth, exclaiming in a high
tone—‘What is the meaning of all this,
sir?—Who the devil are you?—My
name's Lawless:—who the devil are
you?’ The answer to this was a convulsion
of laughter. By the laugh, I knew
it to be Harriot Freke.—‘Who am I!
only a Freke!’ cried she—‘shake hands.’ 
I gave her my hand, into the carriage
she sprang, and desired the colonel to
follow her: Lawless laughed, we all
laughed, and drove away. ‘Where do
you think I've been?’ said Harriot, ‘in
the gallery of the House of Commons; 
almost squeezed to death these four
hours; but I swore I'd hear Sheridan's
speech to night, and I did—Betted fifty
guineas I would, with Mrs. Luttridge,
and have won.—Fun and Freke for ever,
huzza!’Harriot was mad with spirits,
and so noisy and unmanageable that, as
I told her, I was sure she was drunk.— 
Lawless, in his silly way, laughed incessantly,
and I was so taken up with her

oddities, that, for some time, I did not
perceive we were going the Lord knows
where; till, at last, when the 'larum of
Harriot's voice ceased for an instant, I
was struck with the strange sound of the
carriage. ‘Where are we? Not upon
the stones, I'm sure;’ said I; and putting
my head out of the window, I saw
we were beyond the turnpike.—‘The
coachman's drunk as well as you, Harriot,’ 
said I; and I was going to pull the
string to stop him, but Harriot had hold
of it.—‘The man is going very right,’ 
said she, ‘I've told him where to go.— 
Now don't fancy that Lawless and I am
going to run away with you.—All that is
unnecessary now-a-days, thank God!’— 
To this I agreed, and laughed for fear
of being ridiculous.—‘Guess where you
are going,’ said Harriot,—I guessed and
guessed, but could not guess right; and
my merry companions were infinitely diverted
with my perplexity and impatience,
more especially, as I believe, in spite of
all my efforts, I grew rather graver than

than usual. We went on to the end of
Sloane-street, and quite out of town; at
last we stopped.—It was dark, the footman's
flambeau was out, I could only just
see by the lamps, that we were at the
door of a lone, odd looking house.—The
house door opened, and an old woman
appeared with a lantern in her hand.
“Where is this farce or freak, or whatever
you call it, to end?” said I, as Harriot
pulled me into the dark passage along
with her.
“Alas! my dear Belinda,” said lady
Delacour, pausing; “I little foresaw
where or how it was to end: but I am
not come yet to the tragical part of my
story, and as long as I can laugh, I will.
—As the old woman and her miserable
blue light went on before us, I could almost
have thought of sir Bertrand, or of
some German horrifications, but I heard
Lawless, who never could help laughing
at the wrong time, bursting behind me,
with a sense of his own superiority.
“Now you will learn your destiny,

lady Delacour!” said Harriot, in a solemn
tone.
“Yes! from the celebrated Mrs. W&wblank;,
the modern dealer in art magic,” said I,
laughing, ‘for now I guess whereabouts I
am.—Colonel Lawless's laugh broke the
spell—Harriot Freke, never whilst you
live expect to succeed in the sublime.— 
Harriot swore at the colonel, for the veriest
spoil-sport she had ever seen, and she
whispered to me—‘the reason he laughs
is, because he is afraid of our suspecting
the truth of him, that he believes tout de
bon in conjuration, and the devil, and all
that.’—The old woman, whose cue I
found was to be dumb, opened a door at
the top of a narrow staircase, and pointing
to a tall figure, completely enveloped
in fur, left us to our fate. I will not
trouble you with a pompous description
of all the mummery of the scene, my
dear, as I despair of being able to frighten
you out of your wits. I should have
been downright angry with Harriot Freke
for bringing me to such a place, but that

I knew women of the first fashion had
been with Mrs. W&wblank;before us—some
in sober sadness—some by way of frolic.
—So as there was no fear of being ridiculous,
there was no shame, you know, and
my conscience was quite at ease. Harriot
had no conscience, so she was always
at ease; and never more so than in male
attire, which she had been told became
her particularly. She supported the character
of a young rake with such spirit
and truth, that I am sure no common
conjurer could have discovered any thing
feminine about her. She rattled on with
a set of nonsensical questions; and among
other things, she asked, ‘How soon will
lady Delacour marry again after her lord's
death?’
“She will never marry after her lord's
death,”answered the oracle.—‘Then
she will marry during his life time,’ said
Harriot.—‘True,’ answered the oracle.
—Colonel Lawless laughed; I was angry; 
and the colonel would have been
quiet, for he was a gentleman, but there

was no such thing as managing Mrs.
Freke, who, though she had laid aside
the modesty of her own sex, had not acquired
the decency of the other.—‘Who
is to be lady Delacour's second husband?’ 
cried she. ‘You'll not offend
any of the present company by naming
the man.’—‘Her second husband I
cannot name,’ replied the oracle, ‘but
let her beware of a Lawless lover.’ Mrs.
Freke and colonel Lawless, encouraged
by her, triumphed over me without mercy; 
I may say, without shame!—Well,
my dear, I am in a hurry to have done
with all this: though I ‘doated upon
folly,’ yet I was terrified at the thoughts
of any thing worse. The idea of a divorce,
the public brand of shameful life,
shocked me, in spite of all my real and all
my assumed levity. O that I had, at this
instant, dared to be myself! But my fear
of ridicule was greater than my fear of
vice.—‘Bless me, my dear lady Delacour,’ 
whispered Harriot, as we left this
house, ‘what can make you in such a

desperate hurry to get home?—You gape
and fidget—one would think you had
never sat up a night before in your life.— 
I verily believe you are afraid to trust
yourself with us.—Which of us are you
afraid of; Lawless, or me, or yourself?’ 
—There was a tone of contempt in the
last words, which piqued me to the
quick, and, however strange it may seem,
I was now anxious only to convince Harriot
that I was not afraid of myself.—False
shame made me act, as if I had no shame.
—You would not suspect me of knowing
any thing of false shame, but depend upon
it, my dear, many, who appear to have
as much assurance as I have, are secretly
it's slaves.—I moralize, because I am come
to a part of my story, which I should almost
be glad to omit—but I promised
you, that there should be no sins of omission.
It was light, but not broad daylight,
when we got to Knightsbridge. Lawless
encouraged, for I cannot deny it, by the
levity of my manner, as well as of Harriot's,
was in higher and more familiar
spirits than I ever saw him.—Mrs. Freke

desired me to set her down at her sister's,
who lived in Grosvenor Place.—I did so,
and I beg you to believe, that I was
in an agony to get rid of my colonel
at the same time; but you know, I
could not, before Harriot Freke, absolutely
say to him—‘Get out!’—Indeed,
to tell things as they were, it was scarcely
possible to guess by my manner, that I
was under any anxiety—I acted my part
so well, or so ill.—As Harriot Freke
jumped out of the coach, a cock crowed
in the area of her sister's house. ‘There!’ 
cried Harriot, ‘do you hear the cock
crow, lady Delacour?’—‘Now it's to be
hoped your fear of goblins is over—else I
would not be so cruel, as to leave the
pretty dear all alone’—‘All alone,’ answered
I—‘your friend the colonel is
much obliged to you for making nobody
of him.’—‘My friend the colonel,’ 
whispered Harriot, leaning with her bold
masculine arms folded upon the coach
door—‘My friend the colonel is much
obliged to me, I'm sure, for remembering

what the cunning, or the knowing woman
told us just now, that you and he are— 
or are to be—one and the same person.
So when I said I left you alone, I was not
guilty of a bull, was I?’—I had the grace
to be heartily ashamed of this speech,
and called out in utter confusion—‘to
Berkeley Square.—But where shall I set
you down, colonel?—Harriot, good
morning—don't forget you are in man's
clothes.’—I did not dare to repeat the
question of ‘where shall I set you down,
colonel?’ at this instant, because Harriot
gave me such an arch sneering look, as
much as to say—still afraid of yourself!— 
We drove on—I'm persuaded that the
confusion which, in spite of all my efforts,
broke through my affected levity, encouraged
Lawless, who was naturally a coxcomb
and a fool, to believe that I was
actually his—else he never could have
been so insolent.—In short, my dear, before
we had got through the turnpike-gate,
I was downright obliged to say to him— 
‘Get out!’—which I did with a degree

of indignation, that quite astonished him.
—He muttered something about ladies
knowing their minds—and I own, though
I went off with flying colours, I secretly
blamed myself as much as I did him, and I
blamed Harriot more than I did either.— 
I sent for her the next day as soon as I
could, to consult her. She expressed such
astonishment, and so much concern, at
this catastrophe of our night's frolic, and
blamed herself with so many oaths, and
execrated Lawless for a coxcomb so
much to the ease and satisfaction of my
conscience, that I was confirmed in my
good opinion of her, and indeed felt for
her the most lively affection and esteem— 
for observe, with me esteem ever followed
affection, instead of affection following
esteem.—Woe be to all, who in morals
preposterously put the cart before the
horse!—But to proceed with my history— 
all fashionable historians stop to make
reflections, supposing that no one else can
have the sense to make any. My esteemed
friend agreed with me, that it would be

best for all the parties concerned to hursh
up this business; that as Lawless was going
out of town in a few days, to be elected
for a borough, we should get rid of
him in the best way possible, without
‘more last words’—that he had been punished
sufficiently on the spot, and that to
punish twice for the same offence, once
in private and once in public, would be
contrary to the laws of English men and
English women, and in my case would
be contrary to the evident dictates of prudence
—because I could not complain,
without calling up lord Delacour, to call
Lawless out—This I could not do without
acknowledging that his lordship had been
in the right, in warning me about his
honour and my own, which old phrase I
dreaded to hear for the ninety-ninth time; 
besides, lord Delacour was the last man
in the world I should have chosen for my
knight—though unluckily he was my lord.
—Besides, all things considered, I thought
the whole story might not tell so well in the
world for me, tell it which way I would

—We therefore agreed, that it would be
most expedient to hold our tongues. We
took it for granted, that Lawless would
hold his, and as for my people, they knew
nothing, I thought, or if they did, I
was sure of them. How the thing got
abroad. I could not at the time conceive,
though now I am well acquainted with the
baseness and treachery of the woman I
called my friend.—The affair was known,
and talked of every where the next day,
and the story was told especially at odious
Mrs. Luttridge's, with such exaggerations
as drove me almost mad.—I was enraged,
inconceivably enraged with Lawless,
from whom I imagined the reports
originated.
“I was venting my indignation against
him in a room full of company, where I
had just made my story good, when a
gentleman, to whom I was a stranger,
came in breathless, with the news that
colonel Lawless was killed in a duel by
lord Delacour—that they were carrying

him home to his mother's, and that the
body was just going by the door.—The
company all crowded to the windows immediately,
and I was left standing alone,
till I could stand no longer.—What was
said or done after this, I do not remember— 
I only know, that when I came to
myself, the most dreadful sensation I ever
experienced was, the certainty that I had
the blood of a fellow creature to answer
for—I wonder,” said lady Delacour,
breaking off at this part of her history,
and rising suddenly—“I wonder what is
become of Marriott?—surely it is time
for me to have my drops.—Miss Portman,
have the goodness to ring, for I must have
something immediately.”—Belinda was
terrified at the wildness of her manner.— 
Lady Delacour became more composed,
or put more constraint upon herself, at
the sight of Marriott—Marriott brought
from the closet in her lady's room the
drops, which lady Delacour swallowed
with precipitation.—Then she ordered

coffee, and afterward chasse-cafè, and at
last, turning to Belinda with a forced
smile, she said—
“Now shall the princess Scheherazade
go on with her story?”