

Notwithstanding all the patronage of
fashion, which the Miss Falconers had for
some time enjoyed, notwithstanding all
their own accomplishments, and their
mother's knowledge of the world and address,
the grand object had not been obtained
—for they were not married.— 
Though every where seen, and every
where admired, no proposals had yet been
made adequate to their expectations. In
vain had one young nobleman after another,
heir apparent after heir apparent
been invited, cherished, and flattered, by
Mrs. Falconer, had been constantly at her
balls and concerts, had stood beside the
harp, and the piano forte, had danced,
or flirted with the Miss Falconers, had
been hung out at all public places as a
pendant to one or other of the sisters.

“The mother, seeing project after
project fail for the establishment of her
daughters, forced to bear, and to conceal
these disappointments, still continued to
form new schemes with indefatigable perseverance.
Yet every season the difficulty
increased; and Mrs. Falconer in the
midst of the life of pleasure, which she
seemed to lead, was a prey to perpetual
anxiety. She knew that if any thing
should happen to the Commissioner,
whose health was declining; if he should
lose Lord Oldborough's favor, which
seemed not impossible; if Lord Oldborough
should not be able to maintain himself
in power, or if he should die; she and
her daughters would lose every thing.— 
From a small estate, overwhelmed with
debt, there would be no fortune for her
daughters, they would be left utterly
destitute, and absolutely unable to do
any thing for themselves—unlikely to suit
plain country gentlemen, after the high
style of company, in which they had lived,
and still more incapable than she

would be of bearing a reverse of fortune.
The young ladies, confident of their
charms, unaccustomed to reflect, and full
of the present, thought little of these probabilities
of future evil, though they were
quite as impatient to be married as their
mother could wish. Indeed, this impatience
becoming visible, she was rather
anxious to suppress it, because it counteracted
her views.—Mrs. Falconer had still
two schemes for their establishment. Sir
Robert Percy had luckily lost his wife
within the last twelvemonth, had no children,
and had been heard to declare, that
he would marry again as soon as he decently
could, because, if he were to die
without heirs, the Percy estate might revert
to the relations whom he detested.
Mrs. Falconer had persuaded the Commissioner
to cultivate Sir Robert Percy's
acquaintance; had this winter watched
for the time when law business called
him to town; had prevailed upon him to
go to her house, instead of staying, as
he usually did, at an hotel, or spending

his day at his Solicitor's chambers. She
had in short made things so agreeable to
him, and he seemed so well pleased with
her, she had hopes that he would in time
be brought to propose for her daughter,
Arabella. To conciliate Sir Robert Percy,
it was necessary to avoid all connexion
with the other Percys, and it was for
this reason, that the Commissioner had
of late avoided Alfred and Erasmus. Mrs.
Falconer's schemes for Georgiana, her
beautiful daughter, were far more brilliant.
—Several great establishments she
had in view.—The appearance of Count
Altenberg put many old visions to flight— 
her whole fancy fixed upon him.—If she
could marry her Georgiana to Count Altenberg!
—There would be a match, high
as her most exalted ambition could desire:
and this project did not seem impossible.
The Count had been heard to say, that
he thought Miss Georgiana Falconer the
handsomest woman he had seen since he
had been in London.—He had admired
her dancing, and had listened with enthusiastic

attention to her music, and to
her charming voice; the young lady herself
was confident, that he was, would be,
or ought to be her slave. The Count was
going into the country for some weeks
with Lord Oldborough.—Mrs. Falconer,
though she had not seen Falconer-Court
for fifteen years, decided to go there immediately.
Then she should have the
Count fairly away from all the designing
mothers; and rival daughters, of her acquaintance,
and besides ... she might,
by this seasonable visit to the country,
secure Sir Robert Percy for her daughter
Arabella. The Commissioner rejoiced in
his lady's determination, because he knew
that it would afford him an opportunity
of obliging Lord Oldborough. His Lordship
had always been averse to the trouble
of entertaining company. He disliked
it still more, since the death of Lady
Oldborough, but he knew that it was
necessary to keep up his interest, and his
popularity, in the country, and he
would, therefore, be obliged by Mrs.

Falconer's giving dinners and entertainments
for him. This game had succeeded,
when it had been played—at the
time of the Marchioness of Twickenham's
marriage.—Mr. Falconer was particularly
anxious now to please Lord Oldborough,
for he was fully aware, that he
had lost ground with his patron, and that
his sons had all in different ways given
his Lordship cause of dissatisfaction.
With Buckhurst Falconer Lord Oldborough
was displeased for being the companion
and encourager of his nephew,
Colonel Hauton, in extravagance and
gaming. In paying his court to the nephew,
Buckhurst lost the uncle. Lord
Oldborough had hoped, that a man of literature
and talents, as Buckhurst had
been represented to him, would have
drawn his nephew from the turf to the
senate, and would have raised in Colonel
Hauton's mind some noble ambition.
“A clergyman! Sir,” said Lord Oldborough
to Commissioner Falconer, with
a look of austere indignation, “What

could induce such a man as Mr. Buckhurst
Falconer to become a clergyman?” 
The Commissioner, affecting to sympathize
in this indignation, declared that
he was so angry with his son, that he
would not see him.—All the time, however,
he comforted himself with the hope,
that his son would, in a few months, be
in possession of the long-expected living
of Chipping Friars, as the old incumbent
was now speechless.—Lord Oldborough
had never, after this disowning of Buckhurst,
mentioned his name to the father,
and the Commissioner thought this management
had succeeded.
Of John Falconer too there had been
complaints.—Officers returned from
abroad had spoken of his stupidity, his
neglect of duty, and, above all, of his
boasting that, let him do what he pleased,
he was sure of Lord Oldborough's favor
—certain of being a Major in one year,
a Lieutenant-Colonel in two.—At first his
boasts had been laughed at by his brother
officers, but when, at the year's end,

he actually was made a Major, his brother
officers' surprise and discontent were
great.—Lord Oldborough was blamed
for patronizing such a fellow.—All this,
in course of time, came to his Lordship's
knowledge.—He heard these complaints
in silence. It was not his habit suddenly
to express his displeasure. He heard,
and saw, without speaking or acting, till
facts and proofs had accumulated in his
mind. He seemed to pass over many
things unobserved, but they were all registered
in his memory, and he would
judge and decide at last in an instant,
and irrevocably.—Of this Commissioner
Falconer, a cunning man, who watched
parts of a character narrowly, but could
not take in the whole, was not aware.
He often blessed his good fortune for having
escaped Lord Oldborough's displeasure,
or detection, upon occasions when
his Lordship had marked all that the
Commissioner imagined he had overlooked; 
his Lordship was often most awake
to what was passing, and most displeased,

when he appeared most absent or unmoved.
For instance, many mistakes, and
much ignorance, had frequently appeared
in his Envoy Cunningham Falconer's
despatches; but except when, in the first
moment of surprise at the difference between
the ineptitude of the Envoy, and
the talents of the author of the pamphlet,
his Lordship had exclaimed,—“A slovenly
despatch,”—these mistakes, and this
ignorance, had passed without animadversion.
Some symptoms of duplicity,
some evasion of the minister's questions,
had likewise appeared, and the Commissioner
had trembled lest the suspicions of
his patron should be awakened.
Count Altenberg, without design to
injure Cunningham, had accidentally
mentioned in the presence of the Commissioner,
and of Lord Oldborough,
something of a transaction, which was to
be kept a profound secret from the minister,
a private intrigue which Cunningham
had been carrying on, to get himself

appointed Envoy to the Court of Denmark,
by the interest of the opposite
party, in case of a change of ministry.— 
At the moment when this was alluded to
by Count Altenberg, the Commissioner
was so dreadfully alarmed, that he perspired
at every pore; but perceiving that
Lord Oldborough expressed no surprise,
asked no explanation, never looked towards
him with suspicion, nor even raised
his eyes, Mr. Falconer flattered himself,
that his Lordship was so completely
engrossed in the operation of replacing a
loose glass in his spectacles, that he had
not heard or noticed one word the Count
had said. In this hope the Commissioner
was confirmed by Lord Oldborough's
speaking an instant afterwards precisely
in his usual tone, and pursuing his previous
subject of conversation, without
any apparent interruption in the train of
his ideas.—Yet, notwithstanding that the
Commissioner fancied, that he and his son
had escaped, and were secure in each
particular instance, he had a general

feeling, that Lord Oldborough was more
reserved towards him; and he was haunted
by a constant fear of losing, not his
patron's esteem, or confidence, but his
favor.—Against this danger he constantly
guarded. To flatter, to keep Lord Oldborough
in good humor, to make himself
agreeable and necessary by continual petty
submissions and services, was the sum
of his policy.
It was with this view, that the Commissioner
determined to go to the country; 
and with this view he had consented
to various expenses, which were necessary,
as Mrs. Falconer declared, to
make it practicable for her and her daughters
to accompany him. Orders were sent
to have a theatre at Falconer-Court,
which had been long disused, fitted up
in the most elegant manner.—The Miss
Falconers had been in the habit of acting
at Sir Thomas and Lady Flowerton's private
theatre at Richmond, and they were
accomplished actresses. Count Altenberg
had declared, that he was particularly

fond of theatrical amusements.—That
hint was sufficient.—Besides, what a sensation
the opening of a theatre at Falconer-Court
would create in the county!— 
Mrs. Falconer observed, that the only possible
way to make the country supportable
was to have a large party of town
friends in your house—and this was the
more necessary for her, as she was almost
a stranger in her own county.
Alfred kept his promise, and sent Rosamond
a list of the persons of whom the
party was to consist.—Opposite to several
names he wrote—commonplace
young—or, commonplace old ladies;— 
of the latter number were Lady Trant and
Lady Kew. Of the former were the Miss
G&wblank;s, and others not worth mentioning.
—Then came the two Lady Arlingtons,
nieces of the Duke of Greenwich.
“The Lady Arlingtons,” continues
Alfred, “are glad to get to Mrs. Falconer,
and Mrs. Falconer is glad to have
them, because they are related to my
Lord Duke. I have met them at Mrs.

Falconer's, at Lady Angelica Headingham's,
and often at Lady Jane Granville's.
—The style and tone of the Lady
Anne is languishing—of Lady Frances,
lively—both seem mere spoilt selfish ladies
of quality. Lady Anne's selfishness
is of the cold, chronic, inveterate nature.
—Lady Frances's, of the hot, acute, and
tormenting species.—She ‘loves every
thing by fits, and nothing long.’—Every
body is an angel, and a dear creature,
while they minister to her fancies—and
no longer.—About these fancies she is
restless and impatient to a degree, which
makes her sister look sick and scornful
beyond description.—Lady Anne neither
fancies, nor loves any thing, or any body.
—She seems to have no object upon
Earth, but to drink barley-water, and
save herself from all manner of trouble
or exertion, bodily or mental.—So much
for the Lady Arlingtons.
“Buckhurst Falconer cannot be of this
party—Colonel Hauton has him at his
regiment.—But Buckhurst's two friends,

the Clays, are earnestly pressed into the
service. Notwithstanding the fine sanctified
speech Mrs. Falconer made me,
about that sad affair of Lewis Clay with
Lady Harriot H&wblank;, she invites him; 
and I have a notion, if Count Altenberg
had not appeared, that she would like
to have had him, or his brother, for her
son-in-law. That you may judge how
much my mother would like them for
her sons-in-law, I will take the trouble
to draw you portraits of both gentlemen.
“French Clay, and English Clay, as
they have been named, are brothers,
both men of large fortune, which their
father acquired respectably by commerce,
and which they are spending in
all kinds of extravagance and profligacy,
not from inclination, but merely to purchase
admission into fine company.— 
French Clay is a travelled coxcomb,
who, à propos de bottes, begins with— 
‘When I was abroad with the Princess
Orbitella ...’ But I am afraid I cannot
speak of this man with impartiality,

for I cannot bear to see an Englishman
apeing a Frenchman.—The imitation is
always so awkward, so ridiculous, so
contemptible. French Clay talks of
tact, but without possessing any; he
delights in what he calls persiflage, but
in his persiflage, instead of the wit and
elegance of Parisian raillery, there appears
only the vulgar love and habit of
derision.—He is continually railing at
our English want of savoir vivre, yet is
himself an example of the ill-breeding
which he reprobates. His manners have
neither the cordiality of an Englishman,
nor the polish of a foreigner. To improve
us in l'esprit de société, he would
introduce the whole system of French
gallantry—the vice without the refinement.
—I heard him acknowledge it to
be ‘his principle’ to intrigue with
every married woman who would listen
to him, provided she has any one of his
four requisites, wit, fashion, beauty, or
a good table.—He says his late suit in

Doctors' Commons cost him nothing; 
for £10,000 are nothing to him.
“Public virtue, as well as private, he
thinks it a fine air to disdain,—and patriotism
and love of our country he
calls prejudices, of which a philosopher
ought to divest himself.—Some charitable
people say, that he is not so unfeeling
as he seems to be, and that above
half his vices arise from affectation, and
from a mistaken ambition to be, what
he thinks perfectly French.
“His brother, English Clay, is a cold,
reserved, proud, dull looking man, whom
art, in despite of nature, strove, and
strove in vain, to quicken into a ‘gay
deceiver.’—He is a grave man of pleasure
—his first care being to provide for
his exclusively personal gratifications.
His dinner is a serious, solemn business,
whether it be at his own table, or at a
tavern, which last he prefers—he orders
it so, that his repast shall be the very
best of it's kind that money can procure.

His next care is, that he be not
cheated in what he is to pay. Not that
he values money, but he cannot bear to
be taken in. Then his dress, his horses,
his whole appointment and establishment,
are complete, and accurately in the
fashion of the day—no expense spared.
—All that belongs to Mr. Clay, of Clay-Hall,
is the best of it's kind, or, at least,
had from the best hand in England.
Every thing about him is English; but
I don't know whether this arises from
love of his country, or contempt of his
brother. English Clay is not ostentatious
of that which is his own, but he is
disdainful of all that belongs to another.
The slightest deficiency in the appointments
of his companions he sees, and
marks by a wink to some by-stander, or
with a dry joke laughs the wretch to
scorn. In company, he delights to sit
by silent and snug, sneering inwardly at
those who are entertaining the company,
and committing themselves. He never
entertains, and is seldom entertained.

His joys are neither convivial nor intellectual; 
he is gregarious, but not companionable; 
a hard drinker, but not social.
Wine sometimes makes him noisy, but
never makes him gay; and, whatever be
his excesses, he commits them seemingly
without temptation from taste or
passion. He keeps a furiously expensive
mistress, whom he curses, and who
curses him, as Buckhurst informs me,
ten times a day; yet he prides himself
on being free and unmarried! scorning
and dreading women in general, ‘he
swears he would not marry Venus herself
unless she had £100,000 in each pocket,
and now, that no mortal Venus wears
pockets, he thanks Heaven he is safe.— 
Buckhurst, I remember, assured me, that
beneath this crust of pride there is some
good nature. Deep hid under a large
mass of selfishness, there may be some
glimmerings of affection. He shows
symptoms of feeling for his horses, and
his mother, and his coachman, and his
country. I do believe he would fight

for old England, for it is his country,
and he is English Clay.—Affection
for his coachman did I say?—He shows
admiration, if not affection, for every
whip of note in town. He is their companion
 ... no, their pupil, and, as Antoninus
Pius gratefully prided himself in
recording the names of those relations
and friends from whom he learnt his
several virtues, this man may boast to
after ages of having learnt how to cut a
fly off his near leader's ear from one
coachman, how to tuck up a duck from
another, and the true spit from a third— 
by the by, it is said, but I don't vouch
for the truth of the story, that this last
accomplishment cost him a tooth, which
he had had drawn to attain it in perfection.
—Pure slang he could not learn
from any one coachman, but from constantly
frequenting the society of all.
I recollect Buckhurst Falconer's telling
me, that he dined once with English
Clay, in company with a baronet, a viscount,
an earl, a duke, and the driver

of a mail-coach, to whom was given, by
acclamation, the seat of honor. I am
told there is a house, at which these
gentlemen and noblemen meet regularly
every week, where there are two dining-rooms
divided by glass doors.—In one
room the real coachmen dine, in the
other the amateur gentlemen, who, when
they are tired of their own conversation,
throw open the glass-doors, that they
may be entertained and edified by the
coachmen's wit and slang; in which
dialect English Clay's rapid proficiency
has, it is said, recommended him to the
best society, even more than his being
the master of the best of cooks, and of
Clay-Hall.
“I have said so much more than I intended
of both these brothers, that I have
no room for more portraits, indeed, the
other gentlemen are zeroes.
&lblank;
Yours affectionately,
Alfred Percy.”

Notwithstanding the pains which Mrs.
Falconer took to engage these Mr. Clays
to accompany her, she could obtain only
a promise, that they would wait upon
her, if possible, some time during the
recess.
Count Altenberg also, much to Mrs.
Falconer's disappointment, was detained
in town a few days longer than he had
foreseen, but he promised to follow Lord
Oldborough early in the ensuing week.
All the rest of the prodigious party arrived
at Falconer-Court, which was
within a few miles of Lord Oldborough's
seat at Clermont-Park.
The day after Lord Oldborough's arrival
in the country, his Lordship was
seized with a fit of the gout, which fixed
in his right hand. Commissioner Falconer,
when he came in the morning to
pay his respects, and to inquire after his
patron's health, found him in his study,
writing a letter with his left hand.— 
“My Lord, shall not I call Mr. Temple

—or—could I offer my services as secretary?” 
—“I thank you, Sir—no.—This
letter must be written with my own
hand.”
Who can this letter be to, that is of
so much consequence? thought the Commissioner; 
and glancing his eye at the
direction, he saw, as the letter was given
to a servant, “To L. Percy, Esq.”— 
his surprise arrested the pinch of snuff
which he was just going to take.— 
“What could be the business—the secret
—only a few lines, what could they
contain?”—
Simply thes e words:
“MY DEAR SIR,
I write to you with my
left hand, the gout having, within these
few hours, incapacitated my right.— 
Since this gout keeps me a prisoner, and
I cannot, as I had intended, go to you,
may I beg that you will do me the favor
to come to me, if it could suit your convenience,

to morrow morning, when I
shall be alone from twelve till four.
With true esteem,
Yours,
Oldborough.”
In the course of the day, the Commissioner
found out, by something Lord
Oldborough let fall, what his Lordship
had no intention to conceal, that he had
requested Mr. Percy to come to Clermont-Park
the next morning. And the
Commissioner promised himself that he
would be in the way to see his good
cousin Percy, and to satisfy his curiosity.
But his manœuvres and windings were,
whenever it was necessary, counteracted
and cut short by the unexpected directness
and peremptory plain dealing of
his patron. In the morning, towards
the hour of twelve, the Commissioner
thought he had well begun a conversation,
that would draw out into length
upon a topic, which he knew must be
interesting to his Lordship, and he held

in his hand private letters of great consequence
from his son Cunningham; 
but Lord Oldborough taking the letters,
locked them up in his desk, saying,
“To night I will read them—this
morning I have set apart for a conversation
with Mr. Percy, whom I wish to
see alone. In the mean time my interest
in the Borough—has been left too much
to the care of that attorney Sharpe, of
whom I have no great opinion. Will
you be so good to ride over, as you promised
me that you would, to the Borough,
and see what is doing there.”
The Commissioner endeavored not to
look disconcerted or discomfited, rang
the bell for his horses, and took his
leave, as Lord Oldborough had determined
that he should, before the arrival
of Mr. Percy, who came exactly at
twelve.
“I thank you for this punctuality,
Mr. Percy,” said Lord Oldborough, advancing
in his most gracious manner— 
and no two things could be more

strikingly different, than his gracious
and ungracious manner. “I thank you
for this kind punctuality. No one
knows better than I do the difference
between the visit of a friend, and all
other visits.”—
Without preface, Lord Oldborough
always went directly to the point.—“I
have requested you to come to me, Mr.
Percy, because I want from you two
things, which I cannot have so much to
my satisfaction from any other person
as from you,—assistance—and sympathy.
—But, before I go to my own affairs,
let me—and not by way of compliment,
but, plainly and truly, let me
congratulate you, my dear Sir, on the
success of your sons, on the distinction
and independence they have already acquired
in their professions.—I know the
value of independence—of that which I
shall never have,”—added his Lordship,
with a forced smile and a deep sigh.— 
“But let that be.—It was not of that

I meant to speak.—You pursue your
course, I mine.—Firmness of purpose I
take to be the great difference between
man and man. I am not one of those,
who habitually covet sympathy. It is a
sign of a mind insufficient to it's own
support, to look for sympathy on every
trivial occurrence,—and on great occasions,
it has not been my good fortune to
meet many persons, who could sympathize
with me.”
“True,” said Mr. Percy, “people
must think with you, before they can
feel with you.”
“It is extraordinary, Mr. Percy,” 
continued Lord Oldborough, “that,
knowing how widely you differ from me
in political principles, I should choose,
of all men living, to open my mind to
you.—But the fact is, that I am convinced,
however we may differ about
the means, the end we both have in
view is one and the same,—The good
and glory of the British Empire.”

“My Lord, I believe it,”—cried Mr.
Percy—With energy and warmth he repeated
—“My Lord, I believe it.”
“I thank you, Sir,”—said Lord Oldborough,
“you do me justice. I have
reason to be satisfied, when such men as
you do me justice. I have reason also
to be satisfied, that I have not to make
the common complaint of those, who
serve princes. From him whom I have
served I have not met with any ingratitude,
with any neglect. On the contrary,
I am well assured, that so firm is
his conviction of my intending the good
of his throne, and of his people, that to
preserve me his minister is the first wish
of his heart. I am confident, that without
hesitation he would dismiss from
his counsels any who should obstruct
my views, or be inimical to my interests.”
“Then, my Lord, you are happy; if
man can be happy at the summit of ambition.”—

“Pardon me. It is a dizzy height at
best.—But—were it attained, I trust
my head would be strong enough to bear
it.”
“Lord Verulam you know, my Lord,” 
said Mr. Percy, smiling, “tells us, that
people, by looking down precipices, do
put their spirits in the act of falling.”
“True, true,” said Lord Oldborough,
rather impatient at Mr. Percy's going to
Lord Verulam and philosophy.—“But
you have not yet heard the facts.—I
am encompassed with enemies, open and
secret.—Open enemies I meet and defy— 
their strength I can calculate and oppose.
—But the strength of my secret
enemies I cannot calculate, for that
strength depends on their combination,
and that combination I cannot break,
till I know of what it consists. I have
the power and the will to strike, but
know not where to aim. In the dark I
will not strike, lest I injure the innocent
or destroy a friend.—Light I cannot obtain,

though I have been in search of it
for a considerable time. Perhaps, by
your assistance it may be obtained.”
“By my assistance!” exclaimed Mr.
Percy—“ignorant, as I am, of all parties,
and of all their secret transactions,
how, my dear Lord, can I possibly afford
you any assistance?”
“Precisely by your being unconnected
with all parties—a cool stander by,
you can judge of the play—you can assist
me with your general knowledge of
human nature, and with a particular
species of knowledge, of which I should
never have guessed that you were possessed,
but for an accidental discovery
of it made to me the other day by your
son Alfred. Your knowledge of the art
of deciphering.”
Lord Oldborough then produced the
Tourville papers, related how they had
been put into his hands by Commissioner
Falconer, showed him what the Commissioner
and his son had deciphered,
pointed out where the remaining difficulty

occurred, and explained how they
were completely at a stand, from their
inability to decipher the word Gassoc,
or to decide who or what it could mean.
All the conjectures of the Commissioner,
the cassoc, and the bishop, and the
gosshawk, and the heraldic researches,
and the French misnomers, and the puns
upon the coats of arms, and the notes from
Wilkins on universal language, and an
old book on deciphering, which had been
lent to the Commissioner, and the private
and public letters, which Cunningham
had written since he went abroad, were
all laid before Mr. Percy.
“As to my Envoy, Mr. Cunningham
Falconer,” said Lord Oldborough, as he
took up the bundle of Cunningham's
letters—“I do not choose to interrupt the
main business before us, by adverting
to him or to his character, further, than
to point out to you this mark, (showing
a peculiar pencil mark, made on certain
papers).—This is my note of distrust,
observe, and this my note for mere circumlocution

—or nonsense.—And
here,” continued his Lordship, “is a
list of all those in, or connected with the
ministry, whom it is possible may be my
enemies.”—The list was the same as that
on which the Commissioner formerly
went to work, except that the name of
the Duke of Greenwich had been struck
out, and two others added in his place,
so that it stood thus,
“Dukes of Doncaster, and Stratford
—Lords Coleman, Naresby, Skreene,
Twisselton, Waltham, Wrexfield, Chelsea,
and Lancaster, Sir Thomas Cope,
Sir James Skipworth, Secretaries Arnold
and Oldfield.” This list was marked
with figures, in different colored inks,
prefixed to each name, denoting the degrees
of their supposed enmity to Lord
Oldborough, and these had been calculated
from a paper, containing notes of
the probable causes and motives of their
disaffection, drawn up by Commissioner
Falconer, but corrected, and in many
places contradicted, by notes in Lord

Oldborough's hand-writing. His Lordship
marked which was his calculation of
probabilities, and made some observations
on the character of each, as he read
over the list of names rapidly.
Doncaster, a dunce—Stratford, a miser
—Coleman, a knave—Naresby, noncompos
—Skreene, the most corrupt of
the corrupt—Twisselton, puzzle-headed
—Waltham, a mere theorist—Wrexfield,
a speechifier—Chelsea, a trimmer—Lancaster,
deep and dark—Sir Thomas Cope,
a wit, a poet, and a fool—Sir James
Skipworth, finance and finesse—Arnold,
able and active; and Oldfield, a diplomatist
in grain.
“And is this the summary of the history
of the men, with whom your Lordship
is obliged to act and live?” said
Mr. Percy.
“It is—I am—But, my dear Sir, do
not let us fly off at a tangent to morality
or philosophy.—These have nothing
to do with the present purpose.—You
have before you all the papers relative to

this transaction.—Now, will you do me
the favor, the service to look them over,
and try whether you can make out le
mot d'énigme.—I shall not disturb
you.”
Lord Oldborough sat down at a small
table by the fire, with a packet of letters
and memorials beside him, and in a few
minutes was completely absorbed in these,
for he had acquired the power of turning
his attention suddenly and entirely from
one subject to another.
Without reading the mass of Commissioner
Falconer's explanations and conjectures,
or encumbering his understanding
with all that Cunningham had collected,
as if purposely to puzzle the
cause, Mr. Percy, examined first very
carefully the original documents—then
Lord Oldborough's notes on the views
and characters of the suspected persons,
and the reasons of their several enmities,
or dissatisfaction. From the scale of
probabilities, which he found had been
with great ability calculated on these

notes, he selected the principal names, and
then tried with these, whether he could
make out an idea, that had struck him
the moment he had heard of the Gassoc.
He recollected the famous word Cabal,
in the reign of Charles the Second, and
he thought it possible, that the cabalistical
word Gassoc might be formed by
a similar combination.—But Gassoc was
no English word, was no word of any
language.—Upon close examination of
the Tourville papers, he perceived that
the Commissioner had been right in one
of his suggestions, that the G had been
written instead of a C: in some places it
had been a c turned into a g, and the
writer seemed to be in doubt whether the
word should be Gassoc or cassoc; assuming,
therefore, that it was cassock—Mr.
Percy found the initials of six persons,
who stood high in Lord Oldborough's
scale of probabilities.—Chelsea—Arnold
—Skreene—Skipworth—Oldfield— 
Coleman—and the last, k, for which
he hunted in vain a considerable time,

was supplied by Kensington, (Duke
of Greenwich) whose name had been
scratched out of the list, since his reconciliation
and connexion by marriage
with Lord Oldborough, but who had
certainly at one time been of the league
of his Lordship's enemies.—Every circumstance
and date in the Tourville
papers exactly agreed with this explanation:
the Cassock thus composed
cleared up all difficulties; and passages,
that were before dark and mysterious,
were rendered by this reading perfectly
intelligible. The interpretation, when
once given, appeared so simple, that
Lord Oldborough wondered how it was
possible, that it had not before occurred
to his mind. His satisfaction was great
—he was at this moment relieved from
all danger of mistaking friend for foe, he
felt that his enemies were in his power,
and his triumph secure.
“My dear Sir,” cried he,—“You do
not know, you cannot estimate, the extent

of the service you have done me— 
far from wishing to lessen it in your eyes,
I wish you to know at this moment it's
full importance.—By Lady Oldborough's
death ... and by circumstances, with
which I need not trouble you—I lost the
support of her connexions.—The Duke
of Greenwich, though my relation, is a
weak man, and a weak man can never
be a good friend.—I was encompassed,
undermined, the ground hollow under
me—I knew it—but I could not put my
finger upon one of the traitors.—Now I
have them all at one blow, and I thank
you for it.—I have the character, I
believe, of being, what is called, proud,
but you see that I am not too proud to
be assisted and obliged, by one who will
never allow me to oblige or assist him,
or any of his family. But why should
this be? Look over the list of these men.
—In some one of these places of trust,
give me a person in whom I can confide,
a friend to me, and to your country.—

Look over that list, now in your hand,
and put your finger upon any thing that
will suit you.”
“I thank you, my Lord,” said Mr.
Percy, “I feel the full value of your
good opinion, and true gratitude for the
warmth of your friendship, but I cannot
accept of any office under your administration.
—Our political principles differ
as much, as our private sentiments
of honor agree.—And these sentiments
will, I trust, make you approve of what
I now say—and do.”
“But there are places, there are situations
which you might accept, where
your political opinions and mine could
never clash. It is an extraordinary
thing for a minister to press a gentleman
to accept of a place, unless he expects
more in return than what he gives.— 
But come—I must have Mr. Percy one
of us.—You have never tried ambition
yet,” added Lord Oldborough, with a
smile.—“Trust me, you would find ambition
has it's pleasures, it's proud moments,

when a man feels that he has his
foot on the neck of his enemies.”
Lord Oldborough stood, as if he felt
this pride at the instant.—“You do
not know the charms of ambition, Mr.
Percy.”
“It may be delightful to feel one's
foot on the neck of one's enemies, but,
for my part, I rather prefer having no
enemies.”
“No enemies,” said Lord Oldborough
—“Every man, that has character
enough to make friends, has character
enough to make enemies—and must have
enemies—if not of his power or place,
of his talents and property—the sphere
lower, the passion's the same.—No enemies!
—What is he, who has been at law
with you, and has robbed you of your
estate?”—
“I forgot him—upon my word I forgot
him,” said Mr. Percy,—“You see,
my Lord, if he robbed me of my estate,
he did not rob me of my peace of mind.
—Does your Lordship think,” said Mr.

Percy, smiling, “that any ambitious
man, deprived of his place, could say as
much?”
“When I can tell you that from my
own experience, you shall know,” said
Lord Oldborough, replying in the same
tone; “But, thanks to your discovery,
there seems to be little chance, at present,
of my being competent to answer that
question.—But to business, we are
wasting life.”
Every word or action, that did not
tend to a political purpose, appeared
to Lord Oldborough to be a waste of
life.
“Your ultimatum? Can you be one
of us?”
“Impossible, my Lord. Pardon me
if I say, that the nearer the view your
confidence permits me to take of the
workings of your powerful mind, and of
the pains and penalties of your exalted
situation, the more clearly I feel, that
ambition is not for me, that my happiness
lies in another line.”

“Enough—I have done—The subject
is at rest between us for ever.”— 
A cloud, followed instantaneously by a
strong radiance of pleasure, passed across
Lord Oldborough's countenance, while
he pronounced, as if speaking to himself,
the words,
“Singular obstinacy!—Admirable
consistency!—And I too am consistent,
my dear Sir,” said he, sitting
down at the table,—“Now for business,
but I am deprived of my right hand.” 
He rang, and desired his Secretary, Mr.
Temple, to be sent to him.—Mr. Percy
rose to take leave, but Lord Oldborough
would not permit him to go. “I can
have no secrets for you, Mr. Percy—stay
and see the end of the Cassock.”
“Mr. Temple came in; and Lord
Oldborough, with that promptitude and
decision by which he was characterized,
dictated a letter to the King, laying before
his Majesty the whole intrigue, as
discovered by the Tourville papers,
adding a list of the members of the

Cassock—concluding, by begging his
Majesty's permission to resign, unless
the cabal, which had rendered his efforts
for the good of the country and for his
Majesty's service in some points abortive,
should be dismissed from his Majesty's
councils.—In another letter
to a private friend, who had access to
the royal ear, Lord Oldborough named
the persons, whom, if his Majesty should
do him the favor of consulting him, he
should wish to recommend in the places
of those who might be dismissed. His
Lordship further remarked, that the marriage
which had taken place between his
niece and the eldest son of the Duke of
Greenwich, and the late proofs of his
Grace's friendship, dissipated all fears
and resentment arising from his former
connexion with the Cassock.—Lord Oldborough
therefore entreated his Majesty,
to continue his Grace in the ministry.
All this was stated in the shortest and
plainest terms.
“No rounded periods, no phrases, no

fine writing, Mr. Temple, upon this occasion,
if you please; it must be felt, that
these letters are straight from my mind,
and that if they are not written by my
own hand, it is because that hand is
disabled.—As soon as the gout will let
me stir, I shall pay my duty to my
sovereign in person. These arrangements
will be completed, I trust, by the
meeting of parliament.—In the mean
time I am better here than in London,
the blow will be struck, and none will
know by whom—not but what I am
ready to avow it, if called upon.—But— 
let the coffee-house politicians decide,
and the country gentlemen prose upon
it,” said Lord Oldborough, smiling,— 
“Some will say the ministry split on
India affairs, some on Spanish, some on
French affairs.—How little they,
any of them, know what passes or what
governs behind the curtain!—Let them
talk—whilst I act.”
“The joy of this discovery so raised
Lord Oldborough's spirits, and dilated

his heart, that he threw himself open
with a freedom and hilarity, and with a
degree of humor unusual to him, and
unknown except to the few in his most
intimate confidence.—The letters
finished, Mr. Temple was immediately
despatched with them to town.
“There,” said Lord Oldborough, as
soon as Mr. Temple had left him,
“There's a secretary I can depend
upon, and there is another obligation
I owe to your family—to your son Alfred.”—
Now this business of the Tourville
papers was off his mind, Lord Oldborough,
though not much accustomed to
turn his attention to the lesser details of
domestic life, spoke of every individual
of the Percy family with whom he was
acquainted; and, in particular, of Godfrey,
to whom he was conscious that he
had been unjust.—Mr. Percy, to relieve
him from this regret, talked of the pleasure
his son had had in his friend Gascoigne's
late promotion to the Lieutenant-Colonelcy.

Whilst Mr. Percy
spoke, Lord Oldborough searched,
among a packet of letters, for one which
made honorable mention of Captain
Percy, and put it into the hands of the
happy father.
“Ah, these are pleasurable feelings
denied to me,”—said Lord Oldborough—
After a pause he added,
“That nephew of mine, Colonel Hauton,
is irretrievably profligate, selfish,
insignificant—I look to my niece, the
Marchioness of Twickenham's child,
that is to say, if the mother ...”
Another long pause, during which his
Lordship rubbed the glasses of his spectacles,
and looked through them, as if
intent that no speck should remain:
while he did this very slowly, his mind
ran rapidly from the idea of the Marchioness
of Twickenham to John Falconer,
and thence to all the causes of
distrust and discontent, which his Lordship
felt towards all the different individuals

of the Falconer family. He considered,
that now the Tourville papers
had been completely deciphered, the
necessity for engaging the secresy of the
Commissioner, and of his son Cunningham,
would soon cease.
Lord Oldborough's reverie was interrupted
by seeing, at this instant, the
Commissioner returning from his ride.
“Not a word, Mr. Percy, of what has
passed between us, to Commissioner Falconer,” 
said his Lordship—“Not a word
of the Gassoc. I put you on your guard,
because you live with those in whom you
have entire confidence,” said Lord Oldborough,— 
“but that is what a public
man, a minister, cannot do.—”
Another reason why I should not like
to be a minister, thought Mr. Percy— 
“I took it for granted, that the Commissioner
was entirely in your Lordship's
confidence.”
“I thought you were too good a philosopher,
to take any thing for granted,
Mr. Percy.—Consider, if you please,

that I am in a situation where I
must have tools, and use them, as
long as I can make them serviceable
to my purposes.—Sir, I am not a missionary,
but a minister.—I must work
with men, and upon men, such as I find
them. I am not a chemist, to analyse
and purify the gold. I make no objection
to that alloy, which I am told is
necessary, and fits it for being moulded
to my purposes.—But here comes the
ductile Commissioner.”
Lord Oldborough began to talk to
him of the borough, without any mercy
for his curiosity, and without any attempt
to evade the various dexterous pushes he
made, to discover the business which had
this morning occupied his Lordship.
Mr. Percy was surprised, in the course
of this day, to see the manner in which
the Commissioner, a gentleman wellborn,
of originally independent fortune
and station, humbled and abased himself
to a patron. Mr. Falconer had contracted
a certain cringing servility of

manner, which completely altered his
whole appearance, and which quite prevented
him even from looking like a gentleman.
It was his principle never to
contradict a great man, never to give
him any sort of pain; and his idea of the
deference due to rank, and of the danger
of losing favor by giving offence, was
carried so far, that not only his attitude
and language, but his whole mind seemed
to be new modified. He had not the
free use of his faculties. He seemed
really so to subdue and submit his powers,
that his understanding was annihilated.— 
Mr. Percy was astonished at
the change in his cousin; the Commissioner
was equally surprised, nay, actually
astonished, by Mr. Percy's freedom
and boldness.—“Good Heavens! how
can you speak in this manner?” said
Mr. Falconer, as they were going down
stairs together, after parting with Lord
Oldborough.—“And why not?—I have
nothing to fear or to hope, nothing to
gain or to lose.—Lord Oldborough can

give me nothing that I would accept,
but his esteem, and that I am sure of
never losing.”
Heigho!—If I had your favor with
my Lord, what I would make of it!
thought the Commissioner, as he stepped
into his chariot. Mr. Percy mounted
his horse, and rode back to his humble
home, glad to have done his friend Lord
Oldborough a service, still more glad
that he was not bound to the minister
by any of the chains of political independence.— 
Rejoiced to quit Tourville papers—state
intrigues—lists of enemies,—and all the
necessity for reserve and management, and
all the turmoil of ambition.