


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Friday Noon, Apr. 14. 
Not five hours in bed; not one hour's rest, for
many uneasy nights before. I was stupid till
Sir Charles came: I then was better. He enquired,
with tender looks and voice, after my health; as if he
thought I did not look well. 
We had some talk about Lord and Lady G. He
was anxious for their happiness. He complimented
me with hopes from my advice to her. Lord G. he
said, was a good-natured honest man. If he thought
his sister would make him unhappy, he should himself
be so. 

I told him, that I dared to answer for her heart. 
My Lord must bear with some innocent foibles, and
all would be well. 
We then talked of Lady Olivia. He began the
subject, by asking me my opinion of her. I said she
was a very fine woman in her person; and that she
had an air of grandeur in her mien. 
And she has good qualities, said he; but she is violent
in her passions. I am frequently grieved for her. 
She is a fine creature in danger of being lost, by being
made too soon her own mistress. 
He said not one word of his departure to-morrow
morning: I could not begin it; my heart would not
let me; my spirits were not high: And I am afraid,
if that key had been touched, I should have been too
visibly affected. My cousins forbore, upon the same
apprehension. 
He was excessively tender and soothing to me, in
his air, his voice, his manner. I thought of what
Emily said; that his voice, when he spoke of me, was
the voice of Love. Dear flattering girl! —But why
did she flatter me? 
We talked of her next. He spoke of her with the
tenderness of a father. He besought me to love her. 
He praised her heart. 
Emily, said I, venerates her guardian. She never
will do any-thing contrary to his advice. 
She is very young, replied he. She will be happy,
madam, in yours. She both loves and reverences
you. 
I greatly love the dear Emily, Sir. She and I shall
be always sisters. 
How happy am I, in your goodness to her! Permit
me, madam, to enumerate to you my own felicities in
that of my dearest friends. 
Mr. Beauchamp is now in the agreeable situation I
have long wished him to be in. His prudence and
obliging behaviour to his mother-in-law, have won 

her. His father grants him every-thing through her; 
and she, by this means, finds that power enlarged
which she was afraid would be lessened, if the son
were allowed to come over. How just is this reward
of his filial duty! 
Thus, Lucy, did he give up the merit to his Beauchamp,
which was solely due to himself. 
Lord W. he hoped, would be soon one of the happiest
men in England: And the whole Mansfield family
had now fair prospects opening before them. 
Emily [Not he, you see] had made it the interest of
her mother to be quiet. 
Lord and Lady L. gave him pleasure whenever he
saw them, or thought of them. 
Dr. Bartlett was in Heaven, while on earth. He
would retire to his beloved Grandison-hall, and employ
himself in distributing, as objects offered, at least
a thousand pounds of the three thousand bequeathed
to charitable uses by his late friend Mr. Danby. His
sister's fortune was paid. His estates in both kingdoms
were improving—See, madam, said he, how
like the friend of my Soul I claim your attention to
affairs that are of consequence to myself; and in some
of which your generosity of heart has interested you. 
I bowed. Had I spoken, I had burst into tears. I
had something arose in my throat, I know not what. 
Still, thought I, excellent man, you are not yourself
happy! —O pity! pity! Yet, Lucy, he plainly had
been enumerating all these things, to take off from my
mind that impression which I am afraid he too well
knows it is affected with, from his difficult situation. 
And now, madam, resumed he, how are all my
dear and good friends, whom you more particularly
call yours? —I hope to have the honour of a personal
knowlege of them. When heard you from our good
Mr. Deane? He is well, I hope. 
Very well, Sir. 

Your grandmamma Shirley, that ornament of advanced
years? 
I bowed: I dared not to trust my voice. 
Your excellent aunt Selby? 
I bowed again. 
Your uncle, your Lucy, your Nancy: Happy family! 
All harmony! all love! —How do they? 
I wiped my eyes. 
Is there any service in my power to do them, or any
of them? Command me, good Miss Byron, if there
be: My Lord W. and I are one. Our influence is
not small. —Make me still more happy, in the power
of serving any one favoured by you. 
You oppress me, Sir, by your goodness! —I cannot
speak my grateful sensibilities. 
Will you, my dear Mr. Reeves, Will you, madam,
(to my cousin) employ me in any way that I can be
of use to you, either abroad or at home? Your acquaintance
has given me great pleasure. To what a
family of worthies has this excellent young Lady introduced
me! 
O Sir! said Mrs. Reeves, tears running down her
cheeks, that you were not to leave people whom you
have made so happy in the knowlege of the best of
men! 
Indispensable calls must be obeyed, my dear Mrs.
Reeves. If we cannot be as happy as we wish, we will
rejoice in the happiness we can have. We must not
be our own carvers. —But I make you all serious. I
was enumerating, as I told you, my present felicities:
I was rejoicing in your friendships. I have joy; and,
I presume to say, I will have joy. There is a bright
side in every event; I will not lose sight of it: And
there is a dark one; but I will endeavour to see it only
with the eye of prudence, that I may not be involved
by it at unawares. Who that is not reproached by
his own heart, and is blessed with health, can grieve
for inevitable evils; evils that can be only evils as we 

make them so? Forgive my seriousness: My dear
friends, you make me grave. Favour me, I beseech
you, my good Miss Byron, with one lesson: We shall
be too much engaged, perhaps, by-and-by. 
He led me (I thought it was with a chearful air; 
but my cousins both say, his eyes glistened) to the harpsichord:
He sung unasked, but with a low voice; and
my mind was calmed. O Lucy! How can I part with
such a man? How can I take my leave of him? —But
perhaps he has taken his leave of me already, as to the
solemnity of it, in the manner I have recited. 

