


He sent Mrs. Jewkes, about Ten o'Clock,
to tell me to come to him. Where? said
I. I'll shew you, said she. I went down three
or four Steps, and saw her making to his Chamber,
the Door of which was open: So I said, I
cannot go thither! –––Don't be foolish said she; 
but come; no Harm will be done to you! — 
Well, said I, if I die, I cannot go thither. I
heard him say, Let her come, or it shall be
worse for her. I can't bear, said he, to speak 

to her myself! —Well, said I, I cannot come,
indeed I cannot; and so I went up again into my
Closet, expecting to be fetch'd by Force. 
But she came up soon after, and bad me
make haste to-bed: Said I, I will not go to-bed
this Night, that's certain! —Then, said she,
you shall be made to come to-bed; and Nan
and I will undress you. I knew neither Prayers
nor Tears would move this wicked Woman:
So I said, I am sure you will let my Master in,
and I shall be undone! Mighty Piece of Undone!
she said: But he was too much exasperated
against me, to be so familiar with me, she would
assure me! —Ay, said she, you'll be disposed
of another way soon, I can tell you, for your
Comfort: And I hope your Husband will have
your Obedience, tho' nobody else can have it. 
No Husband in the World, said I, shall make
me do an unjust or base thing. —She said,
That would be soon try'd; and Nan coming in,
What, said I, am I to have Two Bed-fellows
again, these warm Nights? Yes, said she, Slippery-one,
you are, till you can have One good
one instead of us. Said I, Mrs. Jewkes, don't
talk nastily to me. I see you are beginning
again; and I shall affront you, may-be; for
next to bad Actions, are bad Words; for they
could not be spoken, if they were not in the
Heart. —Come to-bed, Purity! said she. You
are a Nonsuch, I suppose. Indeed, said I, I
can't come to-bed; and it will do you no Harm
to let me sit all Night in the great Chair. Nan,
said she, undress my young Lady. If she won't 

let you, I'll help you: And if neither of us
can do it quietly, we'll call my Master to do it
for us; tho', said she, I think it an Office worthier
of Monsieur Colbrand! —You are very
wicked, said I. I know it, said she: I am a
Jezebel, and a London Prostitute, you know. 
You did great Feats, said I, to tell my Master
all this poor Stuff! But you did not tell him
how you beat me. No, Lambkin, said she, (a
Word I had not heard a good while) that I left
for you to tell; and you was going to do it, if
the Vultur had not taken the Wolf's Part, and
bid the poor innocent Lamb be silent! —Ay,
said I, no matter for your Fleers, Mrs. Jewkes; 
tho' I can have neither Justice nor Mercy here,
and cannot be heard in my Defence, yet a
Time will come, may-be, when I shall be heard,
and when your own Guilt will strike you dumb. 
—Ay! Spirit! said she; and the Vultur too! 
Must we both be dumb? Why that, Lambkin,
will be pretty! —Then, said the wicked one,
you'll have all the Talk to yourself! —Then
how will the Tongue of the pretty Lambkin
bleat out Innocence, and Virtue, and Honesty,
till the whole Trial be at an End! —You're a
wicked Woman, that's certain, said I; and if
you thought any thing of another World, could
not talk thus. But no Wonder! —It shews
what Hands I am got into! —Ay, so it does,
said she; but I beg you'll undress, and come to-bed,
or I believe your Innocence won't keep
you from still worse Hands. I will come to-bed,
said I, if you will let me have the Keys in 

my own Hand; not else, if I can help it. Yes,
said she, and then, hey for another Contrivance,
another Escape! —No, no, said I, all my
Contrivances are over, I'll assure you! Pray let
me have the Keys, and I will come to-bed. She
came to me, and took me in her huge Arms,
as if I was a Feather; said she, I do this to shew
you, what a poor Resistance you can make
against me, if I pleased to exert myself; and
so, Lambkin, don't say to your Wolf, I won't
come to bed! —And set me down, and tapp'd
me on the Neck: Ah! said she, thou art a pretty
Creature, it's true; but so obstinate! so full of
Spirit! If thy Strength was but answerable to
that, thou wouldst run away with us all, and
this great House too on thy Back! —But undress,
undress, I tell you. 
Well, said I, I see my Misfortunes make
you very merry, and very witty too: But I will
love you, if you will humour me with the Keys
of the Chamber-doors. —Are you sure you
will love me? said she:—Now speak your
Conscience! —Why, said I, you must not put
it so close; neither would you, if you thought
you had not given Reason to doubt it! –––But
I will love you as well as I can! –––I would not
tell a wilful Lye: And if I did, you would not
believe me, after your hard Usage of me. 
Well, said she, that's all fair, I own! –––But, Nan,
pray pull off my young Lady's Shoes and Stockens. 
—No, pray don't, said I, I will come to-bed
presently, since I must. 

And so I went to the Closet, and scribbled
a little about this idle Chit-chat. And she
being importunate, I was forced to go to-bed; 
but with some of my Cloaths on, as the former
Night; and she let me hold the Two Keys; 
for there are Two Locks, there being a double
Door; and so I got a little Sleep that Night,
having had none for two or three Nights before. 
I can't imagine what she means; but Nan
offer'd to talk a little once or twice; and she
snubb'd her, and said, I charge you, Wench,
don't open your Lips before me! And if you
are ask'd any Questions by Mrs. Pamela, don't
answer her one Word, while I am here! — 
But she is a lordly Woman to the Maid-servants,
and that has always been her Character. O how
unlike good Mrs. Jervis in every thing! 
