



My dear Lady Davers,
I have Three Marriages to acquaint you with, in
One Letter. In the first Place, Sir W. G. has
sent, by the particular Desire of my dear Friend,
that he was made one of the happiest Gentlemen
in England, on the 18th past; and so I have no
longer any Miss Darnford to boast of. I have a
very good Opinion of the Gentleman; but if he be
but half as good an Husband, as she will make a
Wife, they will be exceedingly happy in one another. 
Mr. Williams's Marriage to a Kinswoman of his
Noble Patron, (as you have heard was in Treaty)
is the next; and there is great Reason to believe
from the Character of both, that they will likewise
do Credit to the State. 

The third is Mr. Adams and Polly Barlow; and
I wish them, for both their Sakes, as happy as
either of the former. They are set out to his Living,
highly pleas'd with one another; and I hope will
have Reason to continue so to be. 
As to the first, I did not indeed think, the Affair
would have been so soon concluded; and Miss kept
it off so long, as I understand, that her Papa was
angry with her: And indeed, as the Gentleman's
Family, Circumstances, and Character, were such,
that there could lie no Objection against him, I
think it would have been wrong to have delay'd it. 
I should have written to your Ladyship before; 
but have been favour'd with Mr. B.'s Company into
Kent, on a Visit to my good Mother, who was indispos'd. 
We tarry'd there a Week, and left both
my dear Parents, to my thankful Satisfaction, in as
good Health as ever they were in their Lives. 
Mrs. Judy Swynford, or Miss Swynford (as she
refuses not being call'd, now-and-then) has been
with us for this Week past, and she expects her
Brother, Sir Jacob, to fetch her away about a Week
hence. 
It does not become me to write the least Word,
that may appear disrespectful of any Person, who
has the Honour to bear a Relation to your Ladyship
and Mr. B. Otherwise I should say, That the
B.'s and the S&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;s are directly the Opposites of one
another. But yet, as she says, she never saw your
Ladyship but once, you will forgive me to mention
a Word or two about this Lady, because she is a
Character, that is in a manner new to me. 
She is a Maiden Lady, as you know, Madam; 
and tho' she will not part with the green Leaf from
her Hand, one sees by the Grey goose Down on
her Brows and her Head, that she cannot be less
than Fifty-five. –––But so much Pains does she take, 

by Powder, to have never a dark Hair in her Head,
because she has one Half of them white, that I am
sorry to see, what is a Subject for Reverence, should
be deem'd, by the good Lady, Matter of Concealment. 
She is often, in Conversation, indeed, seemingly
reproaching herself, that she is an old Maid, and an
old Woman; but it is very discernible, that she expects
a Compliment, that she is not so, every time she is
so free with herself: And if nobody makes her one,
she will say something of that sort in her own
Behalf. 
She takes particular Care, that of all the publick
Transactions which happen to be talked of, her Memory
will never carry her back above Thirty Years,
and then it is, About Thirty Years ago, when I was
a Girl, or, when I was in Hanging-sleeves; and so
she makes herself, for Twenty Years of her Life, a
very useless and insignificant Person. 
If her Teeth, which, for her Time of Life, are
very good, tho' not over-white, (and which, by
the Care she takes of them, she seems to look upon
as the last Remains of her better Days) would but fail
her, I imagine it would help her to a Conviction, that
would set her Ten Years forwarder at least. But,
poor Lady! she is so young, in Spite of her Wrinkles,
that I am really concern'd for her Affectation; because
it exposes her to the Remarks and Ridicule of
the Gentlemen, and gives one Pain for her. 
Surely, these Ladies don't act prudently at all; 
since, for every Year Mrs. Judy would take from
her Age, her Censurers add two to it; and, behind
her Back, make her going on towards Seventy; 
whereas, if she would lay Claim to her Reverentials,
as I may say, and not endeavour to conceal
her Age, she would have a great many Compliments
for looking so well at her Time of Life. 

And many a young Body would hope to be the
better for her Advice and Experience, who now are
afraid of affronting her, if they suppose she has
lived much longer in the World than themselves. 
Then she laughs back to the Years she owns, when
more flippant Ladies, at the Laughing-time of Life,
delight to be frolick: She tries to sing too, altho', if
ever she had a Voice, she has outliv'd it; and her
Songs are of so antique a Date, that they would
betray her; only as she tells us, they were learnt
her by her Grandmother, who was a fine Lady at
the Restoration: She will join in a Dance; and
tho' her Limbs move not so pliantly, as might be
expected of a Lady no older than she would be
thought to be, and whose Dancing-days are not intirely
over, yet that was owing to a Fall from her Horse
some Years ago, which, she doubts, she shall never
recover, so as to be quite well; tho' she finds she
grows better and better every Year. 
Thus she loses the Respect, the Reverence, she
might receive, were it not for this miserable Affectation; 
takes Pains, by aping Youth, to make herself
unworthy of her Years, and even less valuably discreet
than she would be thought, for fear she should be
imagined older, if she appear'd wiser. 
What a sad Thing is this, Madam? –––What a
mistaken Conduct? –––We pray to live to old Age; 
and it is promised as a Blessing, and as a Reward,
for the Performance of certain Duties; and yet,
when we come to it, we had rather be thought as
foolish as Youth, than to be deemed wise, and in
Possession of it. And so we shew how little we
deserve what we have been so long coveting; and
yet covet on: For what? Why, to be more and
more asham'd, and more and more unworthy of
what we covet! 

How fantastick a Character is this! –––Well may
irreverent, unthinking Youth despise, instead of
revering, the hoary Head, which the Wearer is so
much asham'd of. 
Will you forgive me, Madam? The Lady boasts
a Relationship to you, and to Mr. B. and, I think,
I am very bold. But my Reverence for Years, and
the Disgust I have to see any Body behave unworthy
of them, makes me take the greater Liberty: Which,
however, I shall wish I had not taken, if it meets not
with that Allowance, which I have always had from
your Ladyship in what I write. 
God knows whether ever I may enjoy the Blessing
I so much revere in others. For now my heavy
Time approaches. But I was so apprehensive before,
and so troublesome to my best Friends, with my
vapourish Fears, that now (with a perfect Resignation
to the Divine Will) I will only add, That I am 
Your Ladyship's most obliged Sister and Servant,
P. B. 
My dear Billy, and Miss Goodwin, improve both
of them every Day, and are all I can desire or
expect them to be. Could Miss's poor Mamma
be here with a Wish and back again, how much
would she be delighted with one of our Afternoon
Conferences; our Sunday Imployments,
especially! –––And let me tell your Ladyship,
that I am very happy in another young Gentleman
of the Dean's recommending, instead of
Mr. Adams. 

