



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Monday, April 24. 
Fate is weaving a whimsical web for thy friend; 
and I see not but I shall be inevitably manacled. 
Here have I been at work, dig, dig, dig, like a
cunning miner, at one time, and spreading my snares,
like an artful fowler, at another, and exulting in my
contrivances to get this inimitable creature absolutely 

into my power. Every-thing made for me. Her Brother
and Uncles were but my pioneers: Her Father
stormed as I directed him to storm. Mrs. Howe was
acted by the springs I set at work: Her Daughter was
moving for me, and yet imagined herself plumb against
me: And the dear creature herself had already run her
stubborn neck into my gin, and knew not that she was
caught; for I had not drawn my sprindges close about
her—And just as all this was completed, wouldst thou
believe, that I should be my own enemy, and her
friend? —That I should be so totally diverted from all
my favourite purposes, as to propose to marry her before
I went to town, in order to put it out of my own
power to resume them? 
When thou knowest This, wilt thou not think that
my black angel plays me booty, and has taken it into
his head to urge me on to the indissoluble tie, that he
might be more sure of me (from the complex transgressions
to which he will certainly stimulate me, when
wedded) than perhaps he thought he could be from the
simple sins, in which I have so long allowed myself,
that they seem to have the plea of habit? 
Thou wilt be still the more surprised, when I tell
thee, that there seems to be a coalition going forward
between the black angels and the white ones; for here
has hers induced her in one hour, and by one retrograde
accident, to acknowlege, what the charming creature
never before acknowleged, a preferable favour for me. 
She even avows an intention to be mine: —Mine, without
reformation-conditions. —She permits me to talk of
Love to her: Of the irrevocable Ceremony: Yet, another
extraordinary! postpones that Ceremony; chuses
to set out for London; and even to go to the Widow's
in town. 
Well, but how comes all this about, methinks thou
askest? —Thou, Lovelace, dealest in wonders; yet
aimest not at the Marvellous—How did all this come
about? 

I will tell thee—I was in danger of losing my Charmer
for ever. —She was soaring upward to her native Skies. 
She was got above earth, by means, too, of the Earth-born: 
And something extraordinary was to be done to
keep her with us Sublunaries. And what so effectually
as the soothing voice of Love, and the attracting offer
of Matrimony from a man not hated, can fix the attention
of the maiden heart aking with uncertainty; 
and before impatient of the questionable question? 
This, in short, was the case—While she was refusing
all manner of obligation to me, keeping me at haughty
distance, in hopes that her Cousin Morden's arrival
would soon fix her in a full and absolute independence
of me; disgusted likewise at her adorer, for holding
himself the reins of his own passions, instead of giving
them up to her controul—She writes a Letter, urging
an Answer to a Letter before sent, for her apparel, her
jewels, and some gold, which she had left behind her; 
all which was to save her pride from obligation, and to
promote the independence her heart was set upon. And
what followed but a shocking Answer, made still more
shocking by the communication of a Father's curse upon
a Daughter deserving only blessings? —A curse upon the
curser's heart, and a double one upon the transmitter's,
the spiteful, the envious Arabella! 
Absent when it came; on my return, I found her
recovering from fits, again to fall into stronger fits; 
and no-body expecting her life; half a dozen messengers
dispatched to find me out. Nor wonder at her being
so affected; she, whose filial piety gave her dreadful
faith in a Father's curses; and the curse of this gloomy
tyrant extending (to use her own words, when she could
speak) to both worlds—O that it had turned, in the
moment of its utterance, to a mortal quinsey, and sticking
in his gullet, had choaked the old execrator, as a
warning to all such unnatural Fathers! 
What a miscreant had I been, not to have endeavoured
to bring her back, by all the endearments, by
all the vows, by all the offers, that I could make her? 

I did bring her back. More than a Father to her; 
for I have given her a life her unnatural Father had
well-nigh taken away: Shall I not cherish the fruits of
my own benefaction? I was earnest in my vows to
marry; and my ardor to urge the present time was a
real ardor. But extreme dejection, with a mingled
delicacy, that in her dying moments I doubt not she
will preserve, have caused her to refuse me the Time,
tho' not the Solemnity; for she has told me, that now
she must be wholly in my protection [being destitute of
every other!]—More indebted, still, thy friend, as thou
seest, to her cruel relations, than to herself, for her favour! 
She has written to Miss Howe an account of their
barbarity; but has not acquainted her, how very ill she
was. 
Low, very low, she remains; yet, dreading her
stupid Brother's enterprize, she wants to be in London:
Where, but for this accident, and (wouldst thou have
believed it?) for my persuasions, seeing her so very ill,
she would have been this night; and we shall actually
set out on Wednesday morning, if she be not worse. 
And now for a few words with thee, on thy heavy
preachment of Saturday last. 
Thou art apprehensive, that the Lady is now truly
in danger; and it is a miracle, thou tellest me, if she
withstand such an attempter: ‘Knowing what we
know of the Sex, thou sayest, thou shouldst dread,
wert thou me, to make farther trial, lest thou shouldst
succeed.’ And, in another place, tellest me, ‘That
thou pleadest not for the State for any favour thou
hast for it.’ 
What an advocate art thou for matrimony! —Thou
wert ever an unhappy fellow at argument. Does the
trite stuff with which the rest of thy Letter abounds,
in favour of wedlock, strike with the force that this
which I have transcribed does against it? 

Thou takest great pains to convince me, and that
from the distresses the Lady is reduced to (chiefly by
her friends persecutions and implacableness, I hope thou
wilt own, and not from me, as yet) that the proposed
trial will not be a fair trial. But let me ask thee, Is
not Calamity the test of Virtue? And wouldst thou not
have me value this charming creature upon proof of her
merits? —Do I not intend to reward her by marriage,
if she stand that proof? 
But why repeat I what I have said before? —Turn
back, thou egregious arguer, turn back to my long
Letter of the 13th (a) ; and thou wilt there find every
syllable of what thou hast written either answered or
invalidated. 
But I am not angry with thee, Jack. I love opposition. 
As gold is tried by fire, and virtue by temptation; 
so is sterling wit by opposition. Have I not,
before thou settedst out as an advocate for my Fair-one,
often brought thee in, as making objections to my proceedings,
for no other reason than to exalt myself by
proving thee a man of straw? As Homer raises up many
of his champions, and gives them terrible names, only
to have them knocked on the head by his heroes. 
However, take to thee this one piece of advice— 
Evermore be sure of being in the right, when thou presumest
to sit down to correct thy master. 
&dotup;And another, if thou wilt—Never offer to invalidate
the force which a virtuous education ought to
have in the Sex, by endeavouring to find excuses for
their frailty from the frailty of ours. For, are we
not devils to each other? They tempt us; We tempt
them. Because we men cannot resist temptation, is
that a reason that women ought not, when the whole
of their education is caution and warning against our
attempts? Do not their grandmothers give them one
easy rule? —Men are to ask—Women are to deny.&dotup; 

Well, but to return to my principal subject; let me
observe, that be my future resolutions what they will as
to this Lady, the contents of the violent Letter she has
received, have set me at least a month forward with
her. I can now, as I hinted, talk of Love and Marriage,
without controul or restriction; her Injunctions
no more my terror. 
In this sweetly familiar way shall we set out together
for London. Mrs. Sorlings's eldest daughter, at my
motion, is to attend her in the chaise; while I ride by
way of escort: For she is extremely apprehensive of the
Singleton plot; and has engaged me to be all patience,
if any-thing should happen on the road. But nothing
I am sure will happen: For, by a Letter received just
now from Joseph, I understand, that James Harlowe
has already laid aside his stupid project: And This by
the earnest desire of all those of his friends to whom he
had communicated it; who were afraid of the consequences
that might attend it. But it is not over with
me however; altho' I am not determined at present as
to the uses I may make of it. 
My Beloved tells me, she shall have her cloaths sent
her: She hopes also her jewels, and some gold, which
she left behind her. But Joseph says, cloaths only will
be sent. I will not, however, tell her that: On the
contrary, I say, there is no doubt, but they will send
all she wrote for. The greater her disappointment
from them, the greater must be her dependence on me. 
But, after all, I hope I shall be enabled to be honest
to a merit so transcendent. The devil take thee tho'
for thy opinion given so mal à-propo', that she may be
overcome. 
If thou designest to be honest, methinks thou say'st,
why should not Singleton's plot be over with thee, as it
is with her Brother? 
Because (if I must answer thee) where people are so
modestly doubtful of what they are able to do, it is good
to leave a loop-hole. And let me add, that when a 

man's heart is set upon a point, and any-thing occurs
beat him off, he will find it very difficult, when the
suspending reason ceases, to forbear resuming it. 