



Mr. Lovelace, To Joseph Leman. 

Monday, Apr. 17. 
&dotup;Honest Joseph,
You have a worse opinion of your invention
than you ought to have. I must praise it again. 
Of a plain man's head I have not known many better
than yours. How often have your forecast and discretion
answered my wishes in cases which I could
not foresee, not knowing how my general directions
would succeed, or what might happen in the execution
of them! You are too doubtful of your own
abilities, honest Joseph; that's your fault. But it
being a fault that is owing to natural modesty, you
ought rather to be pitied for it than blamed. 
&dotup;The affair of Miss Betterton was a youthful frolick. 
I love dearly to exercise my invention. I do assure
you, Joseph, that I have ever had more pleasure in
my Contrivances, than in the End of them. I am
no sensual man; but a man of spirit—One woman
is like another—You understand me, Joseph—In
Coursing all the sport is made by the winding Hare. 
A barn-door Chick is better eating. Now you take
me, Joseph. 
&dotup;Miss Betterton was but a Tradesman's daughter. 
The family indeed were grown rich, and aimed at
a new Line of Gentry; and were unreasonable
enough to expect a man of my family would marry
her. I was honest. I gave the young Lady no hope
of that; for she put it to me. She resented: Kept
up, and was kept up. A little innocent Contrivance
was necessary to get her out—But no Rape in the 

case, I assure you, Joseph—She loved me: I loved
her. Indeed, when I got her to the Inn, I asked
her no Questions. It is cruel to ask a modest woman
for her consent. It is creating difficulties to both. 
Had not her friends been officious, I had been constant
and faithful to her to this day, as far as I know
—For then I had not known my Angel. 
&dotup;I went not abroad upon her account. She loved
me too well, to have appeared against me. She refused
to sign a paper they had drawn up for her, to
found a prosecution upon: And the brutal creatures
would not permit the midwife's assistance, till her
life was in danger; and I believe to This her death
was owing. 
&dotup;I went into mourning for her, tho' abroad at the
time. A distinction I have ever paid to those worthy
creatures who died in Childbed by me.&dotup; 
I was ever nice in my loves. These were the rules
I laid down to myself on my entrance into active life: 
To set the mother above want, if her friends were
cruel, and if I could not get her an husband worthy of
her: To shun common women: A piece of justice I
owed to innocent Ladies, as well as to myself: To
marry off a former mistress, if possible, before I took to
a new one: To maintain a Lady handsomely in her
lying-in: To provide for the Little one, if it lived,
according to the degree of its mother: To go into
mourning for the mother, if she died. &dotup;And the promise
of this was a great comfort to the pretty dears,
as they grew near their times. 
&dotup;All my errors, all my expences, have been with
and upon women. So I could acquit my conscience
(acting thus honourably by them) as well as my discretion
as to point of fortune. 
&dotup;All men love women: And find me a man of more
honour in these points, if you can, Joseph. 
&dotup;No wonder the Sex love me as they do! 
&dotup;But now I am strictly virtuous. I am reformed. 

So I have been for a long, long time: Resolving to
marry, as soon as I can prevail upon the most admirable
of women to have me. I think of no-body else. 
It is impossible I should. I have spared very pretty
girls for her sake. Very true, Joseph! So set your
honest heart at rest—You see the pains I take to satisfy
your qualms. 
&dotup;But as to Miss Betterton—No Rape in the case, I
repeat: Rapes are unnatural things: And more rare
than are imagined, Joseph. —I should be loth to be
put to such a streight. I never was. Miss Betterton
was taken from me against her own will. In that
case, her friends, not I, committed the Rape. 
&dotup;I have contrived to see the Boy twice, unknown
to the Aunt, who takes care of him; loves him; 
and would not now part with him, on any consideration. 
The Boy is a fine Boy, I thank God. No
Father need be ashamed of him. He will be well
provided for. If not, I would take care of him. He
will have his Mother's fortune. They curse the
Father, ungrateful wretches! but bless the Boy—Upon
the whole, there is nothing vile in this matter on my
side; a great deal on the Bettertons. 
&dotup;Wherefore, Joseph, be not thou in pain, either
for my head, or for thy own neck; nor for the Blue
Boar; nor for thy pretty Sow.&dotup;— 
I love your jesting. Jesting better becomes a poor
man, than qualms. —I love to have you jest. All we
say, all we do, all we wish for, is a jest. He that
makes life itself not so, is a sad fellow, and has the
worst of it. 
I doubt not, Joseph, but you have had your joys, as
you say, as well as your betters. May you have more
and more, honest Joseph! —He that grudges a poor
man joy, ought to have none himself. Jest on therefore: 
Jesting, I repeat, better becomes thee than qualms. 
&dotup;I had no need to tell you of Miss Betterton:  Did
I not furnish you with stories enough without hers, 

against myself, to augment your credit with your
cunning masters? Besides, I was loth to mention
Miss Betterton, her friends being all living, and in
credit. I loved her too; for she was taken from me
by her cruel friends while our joys were young.&dotup; 
But enough of dear Miss Betterton. Dear, I say; 
for death endears. —Rest to her worthy soul! —There,
Joseph, off went a deep sigh to the memory of Miss
Betterton! 
&dotup;As to the journey of little Titus [I now recollect
the fellow by his name] Let that take its course: A
Lady dying in childbed eighteen months ago; no process
begun in her life-time; refusing herself to give
evidence against me while she lived—Pretty circumstances
to found an indictment for a Rape upon! 
&dotup;As to your young Lady, the ever-adorable Miss
Clarissa Harlowe, I always courted her for a Wife. 
Others rather expected marriage from the vanity of
their own hearts, than from my promises. For I
was always careful of what I promised.&dotup; You know,
Joseph, that I have gone beyond my promises to you. 
I do to every-body: And why? Because it is the best
way of shewing, that I have no grudging or narrow
spirit. A promise is an obligation. A just man will
keep his promise: A generous man will go beyond it. This
is my rule. 
&dotup;If you doubt my honour to your young Lady, it
is more than she does. She would not stay with me
an hour if she did. Mine is the steadiest heart in the
world. Hast thou not reason to think it so? —Why
this squeamishness then, honest Joseph? 
&dotup;But it is because thou art honest: So I forgive thee. 
Whoever loves my divine Clarissa, loves me. 
&dotup;Let James Harlowe call me what names he will: 
For his Sister's sake I will bear them. Do not be
concerned for me. Her favour will make me rich
amends. His own vilely malicious heart will make
his blood boil over at any time: And when it does, 

thinkest thou that I will let it touch my conscience! 
—And if not mine, why should it touch thine? Ah! 
Joseph, Joseph! What a foolish teazer is thy conscience! 
—Such a conscience, as gives a plain man
trouble, when he intends to do for the best, is weakness,
not conscience. 
&dotup;But say what thou wilt, write all thou knowest or
hearest of, to me: I'll have patience with every-body. 
Why should I not, when it is as much the desire of
my heart, as it is of thine, to prevent mischief? 
&dotup;So now, Joseph, having taken all this pains to
satisfy thy Conscience, and answer all thy doubts, and
to banish all thy fears; let me come to a new point. 
&dotup;Your endeavours and mine, which were designed,
by round-about ways, to reconcile all, even against
the wills of the most obstinate, have not, we see,
answered the end we hoped they would answer; but,
on the contrary, have widened the unhappy differences
between our families. But this has not been
either your fault or mine: It is owing to the black
pitch-like blood of your venomous—hearted young
Master, boiling over, as he owns, that our honest
wishes have hitherto been frustrated. 
&dotup;Yet we must proceed in the same course: We shall
tire them out in time, and they will propose terms; 
and when they do, they shall find how reasonable
mine shall be, little as they deserve from me. 
&dotup;Persevere therefore, Joseph; honest Joseph, persevere; 
and, unlikely as you may imagine the means,
our desires will be at last obtained. 
&dotup;We have nothing for it now, but to go thro' with
our work in the way we have begun. For since (as
I told you in my last) my Beloved mistrusts you, she
will blow you up, if she be not mine. If she be, I
can and will protect you; and as, if there will be
any fault, in her opinion, it will be rather mine
than yours, she must forgive you, and keep her
husband's secrets, for the sake of his reputation: Else 

she will be guilty of a great failure in her duty. So,
now you have set your hand to the Plough, Joseph,
there is no looking back. 
&dotup;And what is the consequence of all this? One labour
more, and that will be all that will fall to your
lot; at least, of consequence. 
&dotup;My Beloved is resolved not to think of Marriage
till she has tried to move her friends to a Reconciliation
with her. You know they are determined not
to be reconciled. She has it in her head, I doubt not,
to make me submit to the people I hate; and if I did,
they would rather insult me, than receive my condescension
as they ought. She even owns, that she
will renounce me, if they insist upon it, provided
they will give up Solmes. So, to all appearance, I
am still as far as ever from the happiness of calling
her mine: Indeed I am more likely than ever to
lose her (if I cannot contrive some way to avail myself
of the present critical situation); and then, Joseph,
all I have been studying, and all you have been
doing, will signify nothing. 
&dotup;At the place where we are, we cannot long be
private. The lodgings are inconvenient for us, while
both together, and while she refuses to marry. She
wants to get me at a distance from her. There are
extraordinary convenient lodgings in my eye in London,
where we could be private, and all mischief
avoided. When there (if I get her thither) she will
insist, that I shall leave her. Miss Howe is for ever
putting her upon contrivances. That, you know,
is the reason I have been obliged, by your means, to
play the family off at Harlowe-Place upon Mrs.
Howe, and Mrs. Howe upon her Daughter—Ah! 
Joseph!—Little need for your fears for my Angel: 
I only am in danger—But were I the free liver I am
reported to be, all this could I get over with a wet
finger, as the saying is. 

&dotup;But, by the help of one of your hints, I have
thought of an Expedient which will do every-thing; 
and raise your reputation, tho' already so high, higher
still. This Singleton, I hear, is a fellow who loves
enterprising: The view he has to get James Harlowe
to be his principal owner in a larger vessel which
he wants to be put into the command of, may be the
subject of their present close conversation.&dotup; But since
he is taught to have so good an opinion of you, Joseph,
cannot you (still pretending an abhorrence of me, and
of my contrivances) propose to Singleton to propose to
James Harlowe (who so much thirsts for revenge upon
me) to assist him with his whole ship's crew, upon occasion,
to carry off his Sister to Leith, where both
have houses, or elsewhere? 
You may tell them, that if this can be effected, it
will make me raving mad; and bring your young
Lady into all their measures. 
You can inform them, as from my servant, of the
distance she keeps me at, in hopes of procuring her
Father's forgiveness, by cruelly giving me up, if insisted
upon. 
You can tell them, that as the only secret my servant
has kept from you, is, the place we are in, you
make no doubt, that a two-guinea bribe will bring that
out, and also an information when I shall be at a distance
from her, that the enterprize may be conducted
with safety. 
You may tell them (still as from my servant) that
we are about removing from inconvenient lodgings to
others more convenient (which is true); and that I
must be often absent from her. 
If they listen to your proposal, you will promote
your Interest with Betty, by telling it to her as a Secret. 
Betty will tell Arabella of it. Arabella will be
overjoyed at any-thing that will help forward her revenge
upon me; and will reveal it (if her Brother do
not) to her Uncle Antony. He probably will whisper 

it to Mrs. Howe. She can keep nothing from her
Daughter, though they are always jangling. Her
Daughter will acquaint my Beloved with it. And if
it will not, or if it will, come to my ears from some
of those, you can write it to me, as in confidence, by
way of preventing mischief; which is the study of us
both. 
I can then shew it to my Beloved. Then will she
be for placing a greater confidence in me. That will
convince me of her Love, which now I am sometimes
ready to doubt. She will be for hastening to the safer
lodgings. I shall have a pretence to stay about her person,
as a guard. She will be convinced, that there is
no expectation to be had of a Reconciliation. You can
give James Harlowe and Singleton continual false
scents, as I shall direct you; so that no mischief can
possibly happen. 
And what will be the happy, happy, thrice happy
consequence? —The Lady will be mine, in an honourable
way. We shall all be friends in good time. The
two guineas will be an agreeable addition to the many
gratuities I have helped you to by like contrivances from
this stingy family. Your reputation, both for head and
heart, as I hinted before, will be heightened. The Blue
Boar will also be yours. Nor shall you have the least
difficulty about raising money to buy the stock, if it be
worth your while to have it. 
Betty will likewise then be yours. You have both
saved money. it seems. The whole Harlowe family,
whom you have so faithfully served ['Tis serving them
surely, to prevent the mischief which their violent Son
would have brought upon them] will throw you in
somewhat towards housekeeping. I will still add to
your Store. So nothing but happiness before you! 
Crow, Joseph, crow! A dunghil of thy own in
view: Servants to snub at thy pleasure: A Wife to
quarrel with, or to love, as thy humour leads thee: 
Landlord and Landlady at every word: To be paid, 

instead of paying, for thy eating and drinking. But
not thus happy only in thyself; happy in promoting
Peace and Reconciliation between two good families,
in the long run; without hurting any Christian soul. 
O Joseph, honest Joseph! what envy wilt thou raise! 
—And who would be squeamish with such prospects
before him! 
This one labour, I repeat, crowns the work. If you
can get but such a design entertained by them, whether
they prosecute it or not, it will be equally to the purpose
of 
Your loving Friend,
R. Lovelace. 