



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Montague. 

Thursday, Aug. 3. 
Dear Madam,
I am infinitely obliged to you for your kind and
condescending Letter. A Letter, however, which
heightens my regrets, as it gives me a new instance
of what a happy creature I might have been in an alliance
so much approved of by such worthy Ladies; 
and which, on their accounts, and on that of Lord
M. would have been so reputable to myself, and was
once so desirable. 
But indeed, indeed, Madam, my heart sincerely
repulses the man, who, descended from such a family,
could be guilty, first, of such premeditated
violence as he has been guilty of; and, as he knows,
further intended me, on the night previous to the
day he set out for Berkshire; and, next, pretending
to spirit, could be so mean, as to wish to lift into
that family a person he was capable of abasing into
a companionship with the most abandoned of her
Sex. 
Allow me then, dear Madam, to declare with fervour,
that I think I never could deserve to be ranked
with the Ladies of a family so splendid and so noble,
if, by vowing Love and Honour at the Altar to such
a violator, I could sanctify, as I may say, his unprecedented
and elaborate wickedness. 

Permit me, however, to make one request to my
good Lord M. and to Lady Betty and Lady Sarah,
and to your kind self, and your Sister—It is, That
you will all be pleased to join your authority and interests
to prevail upon Mr. Lovelace not to molest me
further. 
Be pleased to tell him, That, if I am designed for
Life, it will be very cruel in him to attempt to hunt
me out of it; for I am determined never to see him
more, if I can help it. The more cruel, because he
knows, that I have nobody to defend me from him: 
Nor do I wish to engage any-body to his hurt, or to
their own. 
If I am, on the other hand, destined for Death,
it will be no less cruel, if he will not permit me to
die in peace—Since a peaceable and happy end I
wish him. Indeed I do. 
Every worldly good attend you, dear Madam, and
every branch of the honourable family, is the wish
of one, whose misfortune it is, that she is obliged
to disclaim any other title, than That of, 
Dear Madam,
Your and Their obliged and faithful Servant,
Clarissa Harlowe. 