


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Grosvenor-Street, Tuesday, Jan. 24. 
We are just arrived. We had a very agreeable
journey. 
I need not tell you that Mr. Greville and Mr. Fenwick
attended us to our first baiting; and had a genteel
dinner ready provided for us: The gentlemen
will tell you this, and all particulars. 
They both renewed their menaces of following me
to London, if I stay'd above one month. They were
so good as to stretch their fortnight to a month. 
Mr. Fenwick, in very pathetic terms, as he found
an opportunity to engage me alone for a few minutes,
besought me to love him. Mr. Greville was as earnest
with me to declare that I hated him. Such a declaration,
he said, was all he at present wished for. 
It was strange he told me, that he neither could
prevail on me to encourage his Love, nor to declare
my Hatred. He is a whimsical creature. 
I raillied him with my usual freedom; and told
him, that if there were one person in the world that
I was capable of hating, I could make the less scruple
to oblige him. He thank'd me for that. 
The two gentlemen would fain have proceeded
farther: But as they are never out of their way, I
dare say, they would have gone to London; and
there have dangled on till we should not have got rid
of them, for my whole time of being in town. 
I was very gravely earnest with them to leave us,
when we stept into the coach in order to proceed. 
Fenwick, you dog, said Mr. Greville, we must return; 
Miss Byron looks grave. Gravity, and a rising
colour in the finest face in the world, indicates as
much as the frowns of other Beauties. And in the
most respectful manner they both took leave of me; 

insisting however on my hand, and that I would wish
them well. 
I gave each my hand; I wish you very well, gentlemen,
said I. And I am obliged to your civility in
seeing me so far on my journey: Especially as you
are so kind as to leave me here. 
Why, dear Madam, did you not spare your Especially,
said Mr. Greville? —Come, Fenwick, let us retire,
and lay our two loggerheads together, and live
over again the past hour, and then hang ourselves. 
Poor Mr. Orme! The coach, at our first setting
out, passed by his Park-gate, you know. There
was he—on the very ridge of the highway. I saw him
not till it was near him. He bowed to the very
ground, with such an air of disconsolateness! —Poor
Mr. Orme! —I wish'd to have said one word to him,
when we had passed him: But the coach flew— 
Why did the coach fly! —But I waved my hand, and
leaned out of the coach as far as I could, and bowed
to him. 
O Miss Byron, said Mrs. Reeves (so said Mr.
Reeves) Mr. Orme is the happy man. Did I think
as you do, said I, I should not be so desirous to have
spoken to him: But, methinks, I should have been
glad to have once said, Adieu, Mr. Orme; for Mr.
Orme is a good man. 
But, my dear, my heart was softened at parting
with my dear relations and friends; and when the
heart is softened, light impressions will go deep. 
My Cousin's house is suitable to their fortune:
Very handsome, and furnish'd in taste. Mrs. Reeves,
knowing well what a scribbler I am, and am expected
to be, has provided me with pen, ink, and paper, in
abundance. She readily allowed me to take early
possession of my apartment, that I might pay literal
obedience to the commands of all my friends on
setting out. These, you know, were, to write in the
first hour of my arrival: And it was allowed to be to 

you, my dear. But, writing thus early, what can
have occurr'd? 
My apartment is extremely elegant. A well-furnish'd
book-case, is, however, to me the most attracting
ornament in it—Pardon me, dear Pen and Ink! 
I must not prefer any thing to you, by whose means,
I hope to spend some part of every day at Selby-House; 
and even at this distance amuse with my prattle those
friends that are always so partial to it. 
And now, my dear, my revered Grandmamma, I
ask your blessing—Yours, my ever-indulgent Aunt
Selby—And yours, my honoured and equally beloved
Uncle Selby. Who knows but you will now in absence
take less delight in teazing your ever-dutiful Harriet? 
But yet I unbespeak not my monitor. 
Continue to love me, my Lucy, as I shall endeavour
to deserve your love: And let me know how our dear
Nancy does. 
My heart bleeds for her. I should have held myself
utterly inexcusable, had I accepted of your kindlyintended
dispensation, and come to town for three
whole months, without repeating to her, by word of
mouth, my love and my sympathising concern for
her. What merit does her patience add to her other
merits! How has her calamity endeared her to me! 
If ever I shall be heavily afflicted, God give me her
amiable, her almost meritorious patience in sufferings! 
To my Cousin Holles's, and all my other Relations,
Friends, Companions, make the affectionate compliments
of 
Your Harriet Byron. 

