



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Thursday, May 18. 
I Have neither time nor patience, my dear friend,
is to answer to every material article in your last letters,
just now received. Mr. Lovelace's proposals
are all I like of him. And yet (as you do) I think,
that he concludes them not with that warmth and
earnestness which we might naturally have expected
from him. Never in my life did I hear or read of so
patient a man, with such a blessing in his reach. But
wretches of his cast, between you and me, my dear,
have not, I fancy, the ardors that honest men have. 
Who knows, as your Bell once spitefully said, but he
may have half a dozen creatures to quit his hands of,
before he engages for life? —Yet I believe you must
not expect him to be honest on this side of his grand
climacteric. 
He, to suggest delay from a compliment to be
made to Lord M. and to give time for settlements! — 
He, a part of whose character it is, not to know what
complaisance to his relations is! —I have no patience
with him! —You did indeed want an interposing
friend, on the affecting occasion which you mention
in yours of yesterday morning. But, upon my
word, were I to have been that moment in your
situation, and been so treated, I would have torn his 

eyes out, and left it to his own heart, when I had
done, to furnish the reason for it. 
Would to Heaven to-morrow, without complimenting
any-body, might be his happy day! —Villain! After he
had himself suggested the compliment! —And I think
he accuses You of delaying! —Fellow, that he is! — 
How my heart is wrung— 
But, as matters now stand betwixt you, I am very
unseasonable in expressing my resentments against
him. —Yet I don't know whether I am or not, neither; 
since it is the cruellest of fates, for a woman to
be forced to have a man whom her heart despises. 
You must, at least, despise him; at times, however. 
His clenched fist offered to his forehead on your leaving
him in just displeasure; I wish it had been a poleax,
and in the hand of his worst enemy. 
I will endeavour to think of some method, of some
scheme, to get you from him, and to fix you safely
somewhere, till your cousin Morden arrives: A
scheme to lie by you, and to be pursued as occasion
may be given. You are sure, that you can go abroad
when you please; and that our correspondence is safe. 
I cannot, however, for the reasons heretofore mentioned,
respecting your own reputation, wish you to
leave him, while he gives you not cause to suspect
his honour. But your heart, I know, would be the
easier, if you were sure of some asylum, in case of necessity. 
Yet once more, I say, I can have no notion that
he can or dare to mean you dishonour. —But then the
man is a fool, my dear—that's all. 
However, since you are thrown upon a fool, marry
the fool, at the first opportunity; and tho' I doubt
that this man will be the most ungovernable of fools
as all witty and vain fools are, take him as a punishment,
since you cannot as a reward. In short, as one
given, to convince you, that there is nothing but imperfection
in this life. 

I shall be impatient till I have your next. I am,
my dearest friend, 
Your ever-affectionate and faithful
Anna Howe. 