



I Thank you, my dearest Parents, for your 
kind Letter. It was given to Mr. B. and he 
brought it to me himself, and was angry with me:  
Indeed he was; as you shall hear: 
'Tis from the good Couple, my Dear, I see. 
I hope they are of my Opinion.  But whether 
they be or not— But I will leave you; and 
do you, Pamela, step down too my Closet 
when you have perused it. 
He was pleased to withdraw; and I 
read it, and sat down, and consider'd it 
well; but, as you know I made it always 
my Maxim to do what I could not avoid to do, 
with as good a Grace as possible, 
I waited on the dear Gentleman. 
Well, Pamela, said he, a little 
seriously, what say the worthy Pair? 
O Sir! they declare for you. They say, 
it is best for me to yield up this Point. 
They are certainly in the right. —But 
were you not a dear little perverse Slut, 
to give me all this Trouble about your fancy Scruples? 
Nay, Sir, don't call them so, said I; 
little thinking he was displeased with 
me. — I still am somewhat wavering; 
tho' they advise me to acquiese: And, 
as it is your Will, and you have determined how it shall be, it is my 
Duty to yield up the Point. 
But do you yield it up chearfully, my 
Dear? 


I do, Sir; and will never more dispute it,
let what will happen. —And I beg Pardon for
having so often enter'd into this Subject with
you. —But you know, Sir, if a body's Weakness
of Mind gives one Scruples, one should
not yield implicitly, till they are satisfy'd; for
that would look as if one gave you not the
Obedience of a free Mind. 
You are very obliging, just now, my Dear: 
But I can tell you, you had made me half serious; 
yet I would not shew it, in Compliment to
your present Condition; for I did not expect,
that you would have thought any Appeal necessary,
tho' to your Father and Mother, in a Point
that I was determined upon, as you must see,
every time we talk'd of it. 
This struck me all in a Heap. I looked
down to the Ground; having no Courage to
look up to his Face, for fear I should behold his
Aspect as mortifying to me as his Words. But
he took both my Hands, and drew me kindly
to him, and saluted me—Excuse me, my
dearest Love; I am not angry with you.— 
Speak to me, my Dear. —Why drops this
precious Pearl?—and kiss'd my Cheek.— 
Speak to me, Pamela!— 
I will, Sir—I will—as soon as I can
—for this being my first Check, so seriously
given, my Heart was full. But as I knew he
would be angry, and think me obstinate, if I
did not speak; I said, full of Concern—I wish,
Sir—I wish—you had been pleased to spare 

me longer, a little longer, for the same kind,
very kind Consideration. 
But is it not better, my Dear, to tell you I
was a little out of Humour with you, than that
I am? —But you had been very earnest with
me on this Point more than once; and you put
me upon a hated, because ungenerous, Necessity
of pleading my Prerogative, as I call it: And yet
this would not do, but you would appeal against
me in the Point I was determined upon, for
Reasons altogether in your Favour; and if this
was not like my Pamela, excuse me, my dearest
Love, that I could not help being a little unlike
myself. 
Ah! thought I, this is not so very unlike
your dear Self, if I were to give the least Shadow
of an Occasion; for it is of a Piece with
your Lessons formerly* . 
I am sure, said I, I was not in the least
aware, that I had offended. —But I was too
little circumspect. I had been used to your
Goodness for so long a Time, that I expected it,
it seems; and thought I was sure of your favourable
Construction. 
Why so you may be, my Dear, in every
thing almost. But I don't love to speak† twice
my Mind on the same Subject; you know I
don't; and you have really disputed this Point
with me Five or Six times: Insomuch that I
wonder'd what was come to my Dearest. 
I thought, Sir, you would have distinguish'd
between a Command where my Conscience 

was concerned, and a common Point:
You know, Sir, I never had any Will but yours
in common Points—But indeed you make me
fearful, because my Task is render'd too difficult
for my own weak Judgment. But then,
Sir—But I shall offend again— 
And then what? Say all you would say,
Pamela. —And then what? 
Why, Sir, if I must speak—You threaten
me so at every Turn with that cruel Word
Polygamy, that it shews me, it is too much
in your Mind—But I shall make you angry
again. 
Was not the Patriarch Husbands Practice,
Pamela, a fit thing to be opposed to that of the
Patriarch Wives? But do you say, I threaten
you with that Word? Take care, my Love: 
You have been a faultless Angel hitherto. 
Don't let me find you ready to make such harsh
Constructions as a mere Woman is accustomed to
make, when she is disposed to be captious; altho'
a better Construction lies before her. 
I was silent, but by my Tears. 
Now I doubt, Pamela, your Spirit is high. 
You won't speak, because you are out of Humour
at what I say. I will have no sullen
Reserves, my Dearest. What means that heaving
Sob? I know, my dear Love, that this is a
Time with your Sex, when, sadden'd with your
Apprehensions, and indulged because of them,
by the fond Husband, it is needful, for both
their sakes, to watch over the Changes of their
Temper. For Ladies in your Way are often 

like incroaching Subjects: They are apt to extend
what they call their Privileges, on the
Indulgence shewed them; and the Husband
never again recovers the Ascendant he had before. 
You know these things better than I, Mr. B. 
But I had no Intention to invade your Province,
or to go out of my own. Yet I thought I had
a Right to a little Free-will, a very little; especially
on some greater Occasions. 
Why so you have, my Dear. But you must
not plead one Text of Scripture in Behalf of
your own Will; and refuse to another its due
Weight, when it makes for mine. 
Well, Sir, I must needs say, I have one
Advantage above others of my Sex: For if
Wives in my Circumstances are apt to grow upon
Indulgence, I am very happy, that your kind
and watchful Care will hinder me from falling
into that Error. 
He gave me a gentle Tap on the Neck: Let
me beat my beloved Sauce-box, said he: Is it
thus you railly my watchful Care over you for
your own Good? But tell me truly, Pamela,
are you not a little sullen? Look up to me, my
Dear—Are you not? 
I believe I am; but 'tis but a very little,
Sir—It will soon go off—Please to let me
withdraw, that I may take myself to Task about
it; —for at present, I know not what to do,
because I did not expect the Displeasure I have
incurr'd. 

Is it not the same thing, reply'd he, if this
our first Quarrel end here, without your withdrawing? 
—I forgive you heartily, my Pamela;
and give me one Kiss, and I will think of your
saucy Appeal against me no more. 
I will comply with your Condition, Sir; 
but I have a great Mind to be saucy. I wish you
would let me for this once. 
What would you say, my Dearest? Be saucy
then, as you call it, as saucy as you can. 
Why then, I am a little sullen at present,
that I am:—And I am not fully convinc'd,
whether it must be I that forgive you, or you
me. —For indeed, till I can recollect, I cannot
think my Fault so great in this Point, that was
a Point of Conscience to me, as (pardon me,
Sir) to stand in need of your Forgiveness. 
Well then, my Dearest, said he, we will
forgive one another; but take this with you,
That it is my Love to you, that makes me more
delicate than otherwise I should be; and you
have inur'd me so much to a faultless Conduct,
that I can hardly bear with natural Infirmities
from you—But, giving me another Tap, Get
you gone; I leave you to your Recollection; 
and let me know what Fruits it produces; for I
must not be put off with a Half-compliance; I
must have your whole Will with me, if possible. 
So I went up, and recollecting everything,
sacrific'd to my Sex, as Mr. B. call it, when he
talks of a Wife's Reluctance to give up a favourite
Point; for I shed a good many Tears, because
my Heart was set upon it; and this Patriarchal
Retort hung heavy upon my Mind. 

And so, my dear Father and Mother, Twenty
charming Ideas and Pleasures, which I had
formed to myself, had I obtained this Permission,
are vanished from me, and my Measures are
quite broken. But after my Heart was reliev'd
by my Eye, I was lighter and easier. And the
Result is, we have heard of a good sort of Body,
that is to be my poor Baby's Mother, when it
comes; and so your kindly-offered Inquiries are
needless, I believe. 
I can't tell but this sort of Rebuff might
be a little necessary, after all; for I had forgotten,
thro' Mr. B.'s past Indulgence for so long
a Time, his Injunctions and Lessons; and this
awfully-inforced Remembrance shews me, that
the Rules he formerly prescribed, were not
Words of Course, but that he intended to keep
me up to the Letter of them. —So I must be
a little more circumspect, I find that, than of
late I thought I had Occasion to be. 
But he is the best and tenderest of Husbands,
for all this; and yet I was forced to accept of
his Forgiveness, and he did not think himself
obliged to me for mine; and has carry'd his
Point all to nothing, as the Racing Gentlemen
say. But I can see one Thing, nevertheless, on
this Occasion, that the Words Command and
Obey are not quite blotted out of his Vocabulary,
as he said they should be* . 
But, truly, I did not imagine before, that
the Husband had so very extensive a Prerogative
neither. —Nor do I believe, that many Ladies
would sit down so satisfy'd with it, as I am 

forced to do. —Yet he vows, that it must
have been so, had he marry'd a Princess;— 
and that it is not because of the former Inequality
of Condition between us. 
I can't tell what to say to that: But I fansy
there would then have been some princely
Struggles between them. —It may be, if he
could not have conquer'd, he would not have
liv'd with her; or, perhaps, would have run into
his wicked Polygamy Notions. 
Mr. B. to my further great Comfort, has
just been telling me, how little a Wife of his
must expect from her Tears; and has most nicely
been distinguishing between Tears of Sullenness,
and Tears of Penitence: The one, he declares,
shall always meet with his Indulgence and Kindness,
and never pass unrewarded: But the other,
being the last Resources of the Sex, after they
are disarmed of all others, and by which they
too often, as he says, carry all their Purposes,
he will never suffer to have any Force at all upon
him. 
Very heroick, truly! —One stands a poor
Chance in a Contest with such a Husband.— 
It must be all pure unmixed Obedience and Submission. 
And I find, half the Tears a poor
Wife might shed in matrimonial Bickerings,
(so frequent with some, even of those not unhappily
marry'd, as the World thinks) would
be of no Effect, were all Men of his Mind. 
'Tis well for our Sex in general, that there
are not many Gentlemen who distinguish thus
nicely. For, I doubt, there are but very few
so well intitled to their Ladies Observances as 

Mr. B. is to mine; and who would act so generously
and so tenderly by a Wife, as he does
in every material Instance, on which the Happiness
of Life depends. 
But we are quite reconcil'd; although, as I
said, upon his own Terms: And so I can still
style myself, 
My dear honoured Parents,
Your happy, as well as dutiful Daughter,
P. B. 

