



Dear Father and Mother,
I did not send my last Letters so soon as I
hop'd, because John (whether my Master
mistrusts or no, I can't say) had been sent to
Lady Davers's, instead of Isaac, who us'd to
go; and I could not be so free with, nor so
well trust Isaac; tho' he is very civil to me too. 
So I was forc'd to stay till John return'd. 

As I may not have Opportunity to send again
soon, and yet as I know you keep my Letters,
and read them over and over, (so John told
me) when you have done Work, (so much
does your Kindness make you love all that
comes from your poor Daughter) and as it may
be some little Pleasure to me, may-hap, to read
them myself, when I am come to you, to remind
me what I have gone thro', and how
great God's Goodness has been to me (which, I
hope, will further strengthen my good Resolutions,
that I may not hereafter, from my bad
Conduct, have Reason to condemn myself from
my own Hand, as it were): For all these Reasons,
I say, I will write as I have Time, and as
Matters happen, and send the Scribble to you
as I have Opportunity; and if I don't every
time, in Form, subscribe as I ought, I am sure
you will always believe, that it is not for want
of Duty. So I will begin where I left off,
about the Talk between Mrs. Jervis and me,
for me to ask to stay. 
Unknown to Mrs. Jervis, I put a Project,
as I may call it, in Practice. I thought
with myself some Days ago, Here I shall go
home to my poor Father and Mother, and
have nothing on my Back, that will be fit for
my Condition; for how should your poor
Daughter look with a Silk Night-gown, Silken
Petticoats, Cambrick Head-cloaths, fine Holland
Linen, lac'd Shoes, that were my Lady's,
and fine Stockens! And how in a little while
must these have look'd, like old Cast-offs indeed, 

and I look'd so for wearing them! And People
would have said, (for poor Folks are envious,
as well as rich) See there Goody Andrews's
Daughter, turn'd home from her fine Place! 
What a tawdry Figure she makes! And how well
that Garb becomes her poor Parents Circumstances! 
—And how would they look upon
me, thought I to myself, when they should
come to be thread-bare and worn out? And
how should I look, even if I could purchase
home-spun Cloaths, to dwindle into them one
by one, as I got them? —May-be, an old Silk
Gown, and a Linsey-woolsey Petticoat, and the
like. So, thought I, I had better get myself at
once 'quipp'd in the Dress that will become my
Condition; and tho' it may look poor to what
I have been us'd to wear of late Days, yet it will
serve me, when I am with you, for a good Holiday
and Sunday Suit, and what, by a Blessing
on my Industry, I may, perhaps, make shift to
keep up to. 
So, as I was saying, unknown to any body,
I bought of Farmer Nichols's Wife and Daughters,
a good sad-colour'd Stuff, of their own
Spinning, enough to make me a Gown, and
two Petticoats; and I made Robings and Faceings
of a pretty Bit of printed Calico, I had by
me. 
I had a pretty good Camblet quilted Coat,
that I thought might do tolerably well; and I
bought two Flanel Under-coats; not so good
as my Swan-skin and fine Linen ones, but what
will keep me warm, if any Neighbour should 

get me to go out to help 'em to milk, now-and-then,
as sometimes I used to do formerly; for
I am resolved to do all your Neighbours what
Kindness I can; and hope to make myself as
much belov'd about you, as I am here. 
I got some pretty good Scots Cloth, and
made me, at Mornings and Nights, when nobody
saw me, Two Shifts; and I have enough
left for Two Shirts, and Two Shifts, for you,
my dear Father and Mother. When I come
home, I'll make 'em for you, and desire your
Acceptance. 
Then I bought of a Pedlar, two pretty
enough round-ear'd Caps, a little Straw-hat,
and a Pair of knit Mittens, turn'd up with
white Calico; and two Pair of ordinary blue
Worsted Hose, that make a smartish Appearance,
with white Clocks, I'll assure you! and Two
Yards of black Ribband for my Shift Sleeves,
and to serve as a Necklace; and when I had 'em
all come home, I went and look'd upon them
once in Two Hours, for Two Days together:
For, you must know, tho' I lie with
Mrs. Jervis, I keep my own little Apartment
still for my Cloaths; and nobody goes thither
but myself. You'll say, I was no bad Housewife
to have sav'd so much Money; but my dear
good Lady was always giving me something. 
I believ'd myself the more oblig'd to do
this, because, as I was turn'd away for what my
good Master thought Want of Duty; and as he
expected other Returns for his Presents, than I
intended to make him, so I thought it was but 

just to leave his Presents behind me, when I
went away; for, you know, if I would not earn
his Wages, why should I have them? 
Don't trouble yourself about the Four
Guineas, nor borrow to make them up; for they
were given me, with some Silver, as I told
you, as a Perquisite, being what my Lady had
about her when she dy'd; and, as I hope for
no Wages, I am so vain as to think I have
deserv'd all that Money in the fourteen Months,
since my Lady's Death: For she, good Soul!
overpaid me before, in Learning and other
Kindnesses. —Had she liv'd, none of these
Things might have happen'd! —But I ought
to be thankful 'tis no worse. Every thing will
turn out for the best; that's my Confidence. 
So, as I was saying, I have provided a new
and more suitable Dress, and I long to appear
in it, more than ever I did in any new Cloaths
in my Life; for then I shall be soon after with
you, and at Ease in my Mind. —But, mum! 
—Here he comes, I believe. —I am,
&c. 

