



To the Ever-honoured Mrs. Harlowe. 

Honoured Madam,
The last time I had the boldness to write to you, it
was with all the consciousness of a self-convicted
criminal, supplicating her offended judge for mercy and 

pardon. I now, by these lines, approach you with more
assurance; but nevertheless, with the highest degree of
reverence, gratitude, and duty. The reason of my assurance,
my letter to my Papa will give: And as I humbly
on my knees implored his pardon, so now, in the same
dutiful manner, do I supplicate yours, for the grief and
trouble I have given you. 
Every vein of my heart has bled for an unhappy rashness; 
which (altho' involuntary as to the act) from the
moment it was committed, carried with it its own punishment; 
and was accompanied with a true and sincere penitence. 
God, who has been a witness of my distresses, knows,
that great as they have been, the greatest of all was the
distress that I knew I must have given to you, Madam,
and to my Father, by a step that had so very ugly an appearance
in your eyes, and his; and indeed, in all my
family's: A step so unworthy of your daughter, and of
the education you had given her! 
But HE, I presume to hope, has forgiven me; and at
the instant This will reach your hands, I humbly trust, I
shall be rejoicing in the blessed fruits of His forgiveness. 
And be This your comfort, my ever-honoured Mamma,
that the principal end of your pious care for me is attained,
tho' not in the way so much hoped for. 
May the grief which my fatal error has given to you
both, be the only grief that shall ever annoy you in this
world! —May you, Madam, long live to sweeten the cares,
and heighten the comforts of my Papa! —May my Sister's
continued, and, if possible, augmented duty, happily make
up to you the loss you have sustained in me! And whenever
my Brother and she change their single state, may it
be with such satisfaction to you both, as may make you
forget my offence; and remember me only in those days,
in which you took pleasure in me: And, at last, may a
happy meeting with your forgiven penitent, in the eternal
mansions, augment the bliss of her, who, purify'd by sufferings,
already, when This salutes your hands, presumes
she shall be 
The for-ever Happy
Clarissa Harlowe. 