



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Tuesday, Aug. 29. 
My dearest Friend,
I am at length returned to this place; and had intended
to wait on you in London: But my mamma is very
ill—Alas! my dear, she is very ill indeed—And you are
likewise very ill—I see that by yours of the 25th— 
What shall I do, if I lose two such near, and dear, and
tender friends? She was taken ill yesterday at our last
stage in our return home—And has a violent surfeit and
fever, and the doctors are doubtful about her. 
If she should die, how will all my pertnesses to her fly
in my face! —Why, why, did I ever vex her? —She says
I have been all duty and obedience! —She kindly forgets
all my faults, and remembers every-thing I have been so
happy as to oblige her in. And this cuts me to the heart. 
I see, I see, my dear, you are very bad—And I cannot
bear it. Do, my beloved Miss Harlowe, if you can be 

better, do, for my sake, be better; and send me word of it. 
Let the bearer bring me a line. Besure you send me a
line. If I lose you, my more than sister, and lose my
mamma, I shall distrust my own conduct, and will not
marry. And why should I? —Creeping, cringing in courtship: 
—O my dear, these men are a vile race of Reptiles in
our day, and mere Bears in their own. See in Lovelace
all that was desirable in figure, in birth, and in fortune: 
But in his heart a devil! —See in Hickman—Indeed, my
dear, I cannot tell what any-body can see in Hickman, to
be always preaching in his favour. And is it to be expected,
that I, who could hardly bear controul from a
mother, should take it from a husband? —From one too,
who has neither more wit, nor more understanding, than
myself? Yet He to be my instructor! —So he will, I suppose; 
but more by the insolence of his will, than by the merit
of his counsel. It is in vain to think of it—I cannot be
a wife to any man breathing whom I at present know. — 
This I the rather mention now, because, on my mother's
danger, I know you will be for pressing me the sooner to
throw myself into another sort of protection, should I be
deprived of her. But no more of this subject, or indeed
of any other; for I am obliged to attend my mamma,
who cannot bear me out of her sight. 
Wednesday, Aug. 30. 
My mother, Heaven be praised! has had a fine night,
and is much better. Her fever has yielded to medicine! 
And now I can write once more with freedom and ease to
you, in hopes that you also are better. If this be granted
to my prayers, I shall again be happy. I write with still
the more alacrity, as I have an opportunity given me to
touch upon a subject in which you are nearly concerned. 
You must know then, my dear, that your cousin Morden
has been here with me. He told me of an interview
he had on Monday at Lord M's with Lovelace; and asked
me abundance of questions about you, and about that
villainous man. 
I could have raised a fine flame between them if I
would: But, observing that he is a man of very lively
passions, and believing you would be miserable if any-thing
should happen to him from a quarrel with a man who 

is known to have so many advantages at his sword, I
made not the worst of the subjects we talked of. But,
as I could not tell untruths in his favour, you must
think I said enough to make him curse the wretch. 
I don't find, well as they all used to respect Colonel
Morden, that he has influence enough upon them to bring
them to any terms of reconciliation. 
What can they mean by it! —But your brother is come
home, it seems: So, The honour of the house—The reputation
of the family, is all the cry! 
The Colonel is exceedingly out of humour with them
all. Yet has he not hitherto, it seems, seen your brutal
brother. —I told him how ill you were, and communicated
to him some of the contents of your letter. He admired
you, cursed Lovelace, and raved against all your family. — 
He declared, that they were all unworthy of you. 
At his earnest request, I permitted him to take some
brief notes of such of the contents of your letter to me,
as I thought I could read to him; and, particularly, of
your melancholy conclusion (a) . 
He says, That none of your friends think you so ill as
you are; nor will believe it. —He is sure they all love
you, and that dearly too. 
If they do, their present hardness of heart will be the
subject of everlasting remorse to them should you be
taken from us—But not it seems (barbarous wretches!)
you are to suffer within an inch of your life. 
He asked me questions about Mr. Belford: And when
he had heard what I had to say of that gentleman, and his
disinterested services to you, he raved at some villainous
surmises thrown out against you by that officious pedant,
Brand: Who, but for his gown, I find, would come off
poorly enough between your cousin and Lovelace. 
He was so uneasy about you himself, that on Thursday
the 24th he sent up an honest serious man (b) , one Alston,
a gentleman farmer, to inquire of your condition, your
visiters, &c. who brought him word, that you was very
ill, and was put to great streights to support yourself: But
as this was told him by the gentlewoman of the house
where you lodge, who it seems mingled with it some tart, 

tho' deserved, reflections upon your relations cruelty, it was
not credited by them: And I myself hope it cannot be
true; for surely you could not be so unjust, I will say, to
my friendship, as to suffer any inconveniences for want of
money. I think I could not forgive you, if it were so. 
The Colonel (as one of your trustees) is resolved to see
you put into possession of your estate: And, in the mean
time, he has actually engaged them to remit to him, for
you, the produce of it accrued since your grandfather's
death (a very considerable sum); and proposes himself
to attend you with it. But, by a hint he dropt, I find you
had disappointed some people's littleness, by not writing
to them for money and supplies; since they were determined
to distress you, and to put you at defiance. 
Like all the rest!—I hope I may say that without offence. 
Your cousin imagines, that, before a reconciliation
takes place, they will insist, that you shall make such a
will, as to that estate, as they shall approve of: But he
declares, he will not go out of England till he has seen justice
done you by every-body; and that you shall not be imposed
on either by friend or foe— 
By relation or foe, should he not have said? —For a
friend will not impose upon a friend. 
So, my dear, you are to buy your peace, if some people
were to have their wills! 
Your cousin [not I, my dear, tho' it was always my
opinion (a) ] says, that the whole family is too rich to be
either humble, considerate, or contented. And as for himself,
he has an ample fortune, he says, and thinks of leaving it
wholly to you. 
Had this villain Lovelace consulted his worldly interest
only, what a fortune would he have had in you,
even altho' your marrying him had deprived you of your
paternal share? 
I am obliged to leave off here. But having a good deal
still to write, and my mother better, I will pursue the subject
in another letter, altho' I send both together. I need
not say how much I am, and will ever be, 
Your affectionate, &c.
Anna Howe. 