



My dearest Lady,
My mind is so wholly ingross'd by Thoughts of a
very different Nature from those which the
Diversions of the Town and Theatres inspire, that I
beg to be dispens'd, for the present, from these lighter
Subjects. But yet, if it please God to spare my Life,
as your Ladyship does not disapprove of my Remarks,
I intend to make a little Book, which I will present
to your Ladyship, containing my poor Observations 

on all the Dramatick Entertainments I have seen,
and shall see, this Winter; and for this Purpose I
have made brief Notes in the Margin of the printed
Plays I have bought, as I saw them, with a Pencil; 
by referring to which, as Helps to my Memory, I
shall be able to give your Ladyship my Thoughts at
the Time of seeing them, pretty nearly with the
same Advantage as if I had written them at my
Return from each. 
I have obtained of Sir Simon, and Lady Darnford,
the very great Pleasure of their Permission to
Miss to stay with me, till it shall be seen how it
will please God to deal with me; and I owe this
Favour partly to a kind Letter written in my Behalf
to Sir Simon, by Mr. B. and partly to Miss's earnest
Request to her Papa, to oblige me; Sir Simon having
made some Difficulty to comply, as Mr. Murray
and his Bride have left them, and he says, he cannot
live long, if he has not the Company of his beloved
Daughter. 
I cannot but say, I have many more Anxieties
and Apprehensions, than perhaps I ought, on the
approaching Occasion; but I was always a sad
Coward, and too thoughtful a good deal: But I
have so much to lose; such a dear, dear Gentleman
to part with, if I must part with him; such
generous Friends and Lovers, as I may say, of both
Sexes: And then the Circumstance itself has so many
Terrors to an apprehensive Mind, attending it, that
I am out of Breath sometimes at the Thoughts of
it, and want to run away from myself, if I could. 
–––But it cannot be; and when I charge my Mind
with the Reflections that Religion inspires, and ask
myself, Who it was that gave me all these Blessings?
and, Who it is that has a Right to recall them, if
He pleases, and when, and in what way, He pleases?
and that if I leave them not now, I must be separated 

from them another Day; I endeavour to bring my
Mind to a Resignation to the Divine Will. 
But what shall I say, Madam, when I find my
Frailty is so much increased, that I cannot, with the
same Intenseness of Devotion, that I used to be blest
with, apply myself to the Throne of Grace, nor,
of Consequence, find my Invocations answer'd by
that Delight, and inward Satisfaction, with which I
used to please myself, when the present near Prospect
was more remote? 
I hope I shall not be deserted in the Hour of
Trial, and that this my Weakness of Mind will not
be punish'd with a spiritual Dereliction, for suffering
myself to be too much attach'd to those worldly
Delights and Pleasures which no Mortal ever injoy'd
in a more exalted Degree than myself. And I
beseech you, my dearest Lady, let me be always
remember'd in your Prayers–––Only for a Resignation
to the Divine Will; a chearful Resignation! I
presume not to prescribe to His gracious Providence; 
for if one has but that, one has every thing that one
need to have. Yet, my dear Lady, there is such a
natural Repugnance between Life and Death, that
Nature will shrink, when one comes to the Trial, let
one have never so much Fortitude at a Distance. 
Yet, I hope, I may be forgiven; for now-and-then I
comfort myself with the Divine Exemplar, which
prayed in bloody Sweats for the bitter Cup to be
removed; but gave us the Example of Resignation,
that I am wishing to be able to follow: However,
not mine, but thy Will be done! 
Forgive me, my dearest Lady, for being so deeply
serious. I have just now been contending with a
severe Pang, that is, for the present, gone off; what
Effect its Return may have, God only knows. And
if this is the last Line I shall ever write, it will be
the more satisfactory to me, as (with my humble 

Respects to my good Lord Davers, and the dear
Countess, and praying for the Continuance of all
your Healths and Happiness, both here and hereafter)
I am permitted to subscribe myself, 
Your Ladyship's obliged Sister, and humble Servant,
P. B. 

