


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Monday, March 5. 
Lady L. and Lady Clementina came, just as we
were preparing for breakfast. 
Lady L. had given her such an account of my
friends, that she was desirous to see them, and, as
she was pleased to say, to bespeak their favour to the
poor fugitive. After the first salutations, she addressed
my aunt Selby in French, being told that she
spoke not Italian: You are happy, madam, said she,
in a niece, who may challenge the world to shew her
equal; and still more happy in her being blessed with
such a husband. Merit is not always so well rewarded. 
—My aunt was struck with the manner as well as
with the words. 

She made a very pretty compliment to my uncle; 
who, having forgot his French, could only bow, and
seem pleased. When Lucy was presented to her, as
my uncle's niece, and my favourite correspondent,
You must not, mademoiselle, said she, be angry with
me, if I envy you. 
To Emily, Happy, happy, young Lady! said she. 
I have heard of you in Italy. Mrs. Beaumont spoke
honourably of you to me, more than once. We both
called you happy in such a guardian. 
She made polite compliments to Mr. Deane; and
bespoke all their favour to her. How does every-body
admire her! 
I hope, my dear grandmamma, you don't think I
forget my cousin Reeves's, tho' I mentioned them
not before. I have already called in upon them twice:
And they have, with the kind freedom of relations,
dropt in upon us several times. They are invited
guests at Lord G's: I won't say Lady G's, tho' everybody
else does. 
This is what I stole time to write, while Sir Charles
is engaged in discourse with the Lady; and our guests
are preparing to be gone to Lord G's, Lady G. requesting
my aunt's company early. She is the veriest
coward! These brave spirits, she has said, are but
flash. Indeed the very delicate, as well as very serious,
and even solemn, circumstances, which attend
her case, must make the liveliest woman, when the
time approaches, think! —The inclosed note of hers
to my aunt, brought late last night, is, however, in
her usual stile: 

You and Lucy must be here early To-morrow
morning. 
What wretched simpletons are we women! Daughters
of gewgaw, folly, ostentation, trifle! —First, we
shew our sorry fellow, when not disapproved, to our
friends and relations; and take all their judgments 

upon him. If he has their opinion in his favour,
every-body, be he what he will, will praise him; and
give him riches, sense, ancestry, and I cannot tell what
of qualities that perhaps we shall never find out. Then
we shew our presents, our jewels, our laces; and a
smile spreads the mouth, and a sparkle gladdens the
eye, of every maiden that hangs admiring over them. 
Ah silly maidens! if you could look three yards from
your noses, you would pity, instead of envying, the
milk-white heifer dressed in ribbands, and just ready
to be led to sacrifice. 
Well, then, what comes next? Why, the poor
soul, in a few months, by the time perhaps her gratulatory
visits are half paid her, begins to find apprehension
take place of security. Then are she and all
her virgins employed in the wretchedest trifles—If I
thought you had forgot them, I would give you a list
of them—And the poor fools, wrapping up their
jewels in cotton, with sighs that perhaps they have
worn them for the last time, and doubtful whom they
may next adorn, cover the decked-out milk-white
bed with their baby-things. See here! and, See here!
and, What is the use of this, and of that? asks the
curious, and perhaps too fearless maiden. “Why,
this is for—” and “That is for—” answer the matrons
who have passed the Rubicon. 
And to this is your Charlotte reduced! —Aunt Selby,
Lucy, come early, that I may shew you my baby-things! 
—O dear! O dear! O dear!—and that you
may be able to testify, that I had no design to overlay
the little Marmouset. Adieu till ten to-morrow
morning. 
C. G. 

* *
The moment our guests were gone, Sir Charles
came to me; and, leading me into my drawing-room,
where the Lady was, Comfort, my Love, said he,
your Sister. 

I hastened to her (poor Lady! she was in tears,
and even sobbing); and clasping my arms about her,
Be comforted, be consoled, my dearest Lady Clementina. 
O madam! my Father, my Mother, my Jeronymo,
are every day expected; who beside, I know not:
How shall I look my Father, my Mother, in the
face! 
Sir Charles withdrew. He was troubled for her. 
He sent in Lady L. 
Your dear friend, madam, said I, and my dear
friend, will protect you. Your father and mother
would not have had the thoughts of taking so long and
troublesome a voyage, had they not resolved to do
every-thing in their power to restore you to peace,
and to them. 
So the Chevalier tells me. 
At this time of the year, madam, such a voyage!
your mamma so tender in her health! Such a dislike
to the sea! Her whole motive is tenderness and love,
She prefers your health, your tranquillity, to her own. 
And is not this consideration enough to distress a
grateful spirit? —Unworthy Clementina! To every
relation, in every action, of late unworthy! What
trouble hast thou given thy parents! I cannot, cannot
bear to see them! —O my Lady Grandison, I
was ever a perverse creature! Whatever I set my
heart upon, I was uneasy, till I had compassed it. 
My pride, and my perverseness, have cost me dear. 
But of late I have been more perverse than ever. My
heart ran upon coming to England. I could think
of nothing till I came. I have tried that experiment. 
I am sick of it. I do not like England, now I see
cannot be unmolested here. But my favourite for
years, was another project. That filled my mind,
and helped me to make the sacrifice I did. —And here
I am come to almost the only country in Europe,
which could render my darling wish impracticable. 

Why went I not to France? I had with me sufficient
to have obtained my admission into any order of nuns:
And had I been once professed! —I will get away still,
I think. Befriend me, my sister! I cannot, cannot,
see my mother! 
Sir Charles came in just then. I heard what you
last said, madam, said he: Compose yourself, I beseech
you. I dreaded to acquaint you with the expected
arrival of your parents. But are they not the
most indulgent of parents? You have nothing, you
shall have nothing to sear, and you will have everything
to hope, from their presence. 
Will you engage for their allowing of a divine dedication,
Sir? Will you plead that cause for me? 
I cannot say what will, what can, be done, till I see
them. But confide in my zeal to serve you, madam. 
Lord L's house, I repeat, shall be your asylum, till
you shall consent to see them. I cannot be guilty of
a prevarication: I will own to them, that I know
where you are; but, till you give leave, you shall be
as much concealed from their knowlege, as if you
were still at your first lodgings, and I myself ignorant
of your abode. 
A man of honour, said she, her hands listed up, is
more valuable to a woman in trouble, than all the
riches of the East! But tell me now, tell me upon
your never forfeited honour, whom, besides my Father,
Mother, and your Jeronymo, do you expect? 
My Lord the Bishop, madam— 
Oh! Oh! said she, clapping her hands together,
with an inimitable grace and eagerness—I am afraid— 
But whom else? 
Father Marescotti— 
The good man! will he think it worth his while— 
But for my father and mother's sake he will—Whom
else? 
Mrs. Beaumont, madam, never intended to set her
foot on English ground again: But she has broken
thro' her resolution, to oblige your mother. 

Good Mrs. Beaumont! —But I am half afraid of
her. Well, Sir? 
Camilla, your poor Camilla, madam. 
Poor Camilla! I used her hardly: But teazing never
yet did good with me. Remember, Sir, they are
not to know where I am. Your house, madam, to
Lady L. is to be my asylum. —Then, seeing me affected,
Gentlest of human hearts, said she, what
right have I thus to pain you! Well, Sir, drying
her eyes, with looks too earnest for her health of
mind; tell me, is any-body else expected? 
Your cousins Sebastiano and Juliano, madam; but
not the General. 
Thank Heaven for that! —I love my brother Giacomo:
But he is so determined a man! —His own
Lady only can soften his heart. 
Sir Charles, by his admirable address, made her
tolerably easy by dinner-time, on the subject of her
friends expected arrival: And she once owned, that
she should be transported with joy to see her Father,
Mother, and Jeronymo, could she assure herself, that
she could see them with forgiveingness in their countenances. 
Sir Charles would only be attended at table by
Saunders, whom she had seen in Italy. She was
much pleased to have it so; but desired Laura might
be permitted to attend at the back of her own chair. 
I addressed myself to Laura three or four times,
as she stood. The Lady was pleased: And Laura
seemed proud of my notice. 
Now-and-then an involuntary tear filled the Lady's
eye, as she sat. It was easy to enter into her thoughts,
poor Lady! on her situation. She was grieved, she
said, at the trouble she gave me; and frequently sought
to suppress a sigh. Once, after a resverie of a few
minutes; And am I here? said she; In England? 
At the house of the Chevalier Grandison? Can it be? 
After dinner, Lady L. and she and I, retiring to 

my drawing-room; What a generous Lady, said she,
are you! I was afraid to see you, before I saw you:
But the moment I beheld you, I embraced a Sister. 
You will allow of my esteem of your Grandison? 
Of your Love, dear Lady Clementina, and thank
you for it. A good man has an interest in every good
person's affections. 
Such generosity, snatching my hand with both hers,
would confirm a doubtful goodness. But indeed my
esteem for him always soared above person. You
know I am a zealous Catholic. You know our
doctrine of merits. I would have laid down my life
to save his soul. But surely God will be merciful to
such a man, and no less so to such a woman, as
(putting her arms about me) I have now the honour
to embrace. 
Mercy, madam, said I, is the darling attribute of
the Almighty. He is the God of all men. 
True—But—And was going to say something further; 
but stopt on Sir Charles's entrance. 
Sir Charles, after sitting with us a little while, asked
leave of absence for an hour, to look on his friends
at Lord G's. We had a charming conversation in
the mean time. Our subjects were various. The
customs of Italian Ladies, and their surprising illiterateness
in general, were parts of it. A woman
there, it seems, who knew more than her own tongue,
was a miracle till within these few years, that the
French customs seem prevailing there. Why, madam,
the Ladies of Italy, with genius's as fine as that classic
climate ever produced, are immersed in the pleasures
of sense: Singing, dancing, and conversation-gallantry,
take up their whole time. One would imagine,
that their husbands and fathers thought them
only children of this world, and not heirs of a better
hope, by the little care taken in improving their understanding:
And were it not for the religion of the
country, which we call superstition, half the Italian 

world of women would be looked upon merely as
temporary idols for men to worship for temporary gratifications
only. Yet, in their conversation-assemblies,
men see what they are capable of. But their
country, it seems, is in the same uncultivated state,
as the minds of their women. The garden of the
world, as Italy is called, is over-run with weeds:
And, for want of cultivation, the very richness of
its soil becomes its disease. But these reflexions I
draw rather by deduction from what Lady Clementina
said, than from any direct confession of hers. She
is fond of her country in its present state: But sensible
English travellers speak of it as I have written. 
Sir Charles returned within his time. He is kind
to be every-where; for he is the life of every company,
and of every individual. 
We passed a sweet evening together, and till near
eleven o'clock. Were Lady Clementina happy, how
happy should we all be! 
Sir Charles waited on the Ladies home. Lord L.
was by that time returned from Lord G's; but was
the first of the friendly company that withdrew. Lady
G. it seems, was all alive in every part of the entertainment. 
My uncle Selby and she spared not
each other. Her Lord, I fansy, fared the better for
the presence of the Earl and Lady Gertrude, and for
her having my Uncle to shoot at. 
God preserve my grandmamma, and all my dear
friends in her neighbourhood, prays 
Her ever dutiful,
Harriet Grandison. 

