


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Thus far had the ladies proceeded in their interesting
story, when the letters of my grandmamma
and aunt were brought me by a man and
horse from London. By my answer you will see how
much I was affected by the contents. The ladies saw
my uneasiness, and were curious to know the cause. 
I told them from whence the letters came, and what
the subject was; and that my aunt was to give for
me, next Saturday, an answer to Lady D. in person. 

I then retired to write. When I had dispatched
the messenger, the ladies wished to know the resolution
I had come to. I told them I had confirmed
my negative. 
Miss Grandison, with archness, held up her hands
and eyes. I was vexed she did. Then, Charlotte,
said I, spitefully, you would not have declined accepting
this proposal. 
She looked earnestly at me, and shook her head. 
Ah, Harriet, said she, you are an unaccountable girl! 
You will tell the truth; but not the whole truth. 
I blushed, as I felt; and believe looked silly. 
Ah, Harriet! repeated she; looking as if she
would look me through. 
Dear Miss Grandison! said I. 
There is some Northamptonshire gentleman, of
whom we have not yet heard. 
I was a little easier then. But can this lady mean
any-thing particular? She cannot be so ungenerous,
surely, as to play upon a poor girl, if she thought her
entangled. All I am afraid of, is, that my temper will
be utterly ruined. I am not so happy in myself, as I
used to be. Don't you think, Lucy, that taking one
thing with another, I am in a situation that is very
teazing? —But let me find a better subject. 
* *
The ladies, at my request, pursued their Family-History. 
Lord L. and Miss Caroline went on, hoping for a
change in Sir Thomas's mind. He would, no doubt,
they said, have been overcome by the young lady's
duty, and my Lord L's generosity, had he not made it
inconvenient to himself, to part with money. 
He went to town, and carried his daughters with
him; and, it is thought, would not have been sorry,
had the lovers married without his consent; for, he
prohibited anew, on their coming to town, my Lord's
visits; so that they were obliged to their sister, as she 

pleasantly had told Lady L. for contriving to forward
their interviews. 
Mean time, my Lord's affairs growing urgent, by
reason of his two sisters' marrying, he gave way to
the offers of a common friend of his and Lord W's,
to engage that nobleman, who approved of the
match, to talk to Sir Thomas on the subject. 
Lord W. and the Baronet met. My Lord was
earnest in the cause of the lovers. Sir Thomas was
not pleased with his interfering in his family affairs. 
And indeed a more improper man could hardly have
been applied to on the occasion: For Lord W. who
is immensely rich, was always despised by Sir Thomas
for his avarice; and he as much disliked Sir
Thomas for what he called his profusion. 
High words passed between them. They parted
in passion; and Sir Thomas resenting Lord L's appeal
to Lord W. the sisters were in a worse situation
than before; for now, besides having incurred the indignation
of their father, their uncle, who was always
afraid that Sir Thomas's extravagance would reduce
the children to the necessity of hoping for his assistance,
made a pretence of their father's ill treatment
of him, to disclaim all acts of kindness and relation
to them. 
What concern'd the sisters still more, was, my
Lord's declared antipathy to their brother; and that
for no other reason, but because his father (who, he
was sure, he said, could neither love nor hate in a
right place) doted on him. 
In this sad situation were these lovers, when overtures
were made to Sir Thomas for his younger
daughter: But tho' Miss Charlotte gave him no pretence
to accuse her of beginning a love-affair unknown
to him; yet those overtures never came to her
knowlege from him, tho' they did from others: And
would you have wondered, Harriot, said she, with 

such treatment before my eyes as Caroline met with,
if I had been provoked to take some rash step? 
No provocation, reply'd I, from a father, can justify
a rash step in a child. I am glad, and so, I dare say,
are you, that your prudence was your safeguard,
when you were deprived of that which so good a
child might have expected from a father's indulgence,
especially when a mother was not in being. 
Miss Grandison coloured, and bit her lip. Why
did she colour? 
At last Sir Thomas took a resolution to look into
and regulate his affairs, preparative to the leave he intended
to give to his beloved son to come over. From
his duty, discretion, and good management, he was
sure, he said, he should be the happiest of men. But
he was at a loss what to do with Mrs. Oldham and
her two children. He doubted not, but his son had
heard of his guilty commerce with her: Yet he
cared not, that the young gentleman should find her
living in a kind of wife-like state in one of the family-seats:
And yet she had made too great a sacrifice to
him, to be unhandsomely used; and he thought he
ought to provide for his children by her. 
While he was meditating this change of measures,
that he might stand well with a son, whose character
for virtue and prudence made his father half afraid
of him, a proposal of marriage was made to him
for his son by one of the first men in the kingdom,
whose daughter, accompanying her brother and his
wife, in a tour to France and Italy, saw and fell
in love with the young gentleman at Florence: And
her brother gave way to his sister's regard for him,
for the sake of the character he bore among the people
of prime consideration in Italy. 
Sir Thomas had several meetings on this subject,
both with the brother, and the Earl his father; and
was so fond of bringing it to bear, that be had
thoughts of reserving to himself an annuity, and 

making over the whole of his estate to his son, in favour
of this match: And once he said, He should by
this means do as Victor Amadeus of Savoy did, rid
himself of many incumbrances; and, being not a
king, was sure of his son's duty to him. 
The ladies found a letter of their brother's among
Sir Thomas's loose papers, which shewed that this offer
had been actually made to him. This is a copy of it. 

Dear and ever-honoured Sir,
I Am astonished at the contents of your last favour. 
If the proposal made in it, arose from the natural
greatness of your mind, and an indulgence which I
have so often experienced, what shall I say to it? I
cannot bear it. If it proceed from proposals made to
you, God forbid that I should give your name to a
woman, how illustrious soever in her descent, and
how high soever the circumstances of her family,
whose friends could propose such conditions to my
father. 
I receive with inexpressible joy so near an hope of
the long wished-for leave to throw myself at your
feet in my native country. When I have this happiness
granted me, I will unbosom my whole heart
to my father. The credit of your name, and the
knowlege every one has of your goodness to me, will
be my recommendation whenever you shall wish me
to enlarge the family connexinos. 
Till I have this honour, I beseech you, Sir, to
discontinue the treaty already begun. 
You are pleased to ask my opinion of the Lady, and
whether I have any objection to her person. I remember,
I thought her a very agreeable woman. 
You mention, Sir, the high sense the Lady, as
well as Lord and Lady N. have of the civilities they
received from me. My long residence abroad gave
me the power of doing little offices for those of my
country, who visited France and Italy. Those services 

are too gratefully remembred by my Lord and
the Ladies. 
I am extremely concern'd that you have reason to
be displeased with any part of the conduct of my
sisters. Can the daughters of such a mother as you
had the happiness to give them, forget themselves? 
Their want of consideration shall receive no countenance
from me. I shall let them know, that my
love, my esteem, if it be of consequence with them,
is not founded on relation, but merit: And that,
where duty to a parent is wanting, all other good
qualities are to be suspected. 
You ask my opinion of Lord L. and whether he
has sought to engage me to favour his address to your
Caroline. He wrote to me on that subject: I inclose
his letter, and a copy of my answer. As to my opinion
of him, I must say, that I have not met with
any British man abroad, of whose discretion, sobriety,
and good-nature, I think more highly than I do of
Lord L's. Justice requires of me this testimony. 
But as to the affair between him and my sister, I shall
be extremely sorry, if Lord L's first impropriety of
behaviour were to you; and if my sister has suffer'd
her heart to be engaged against her duty. 
You have the goodness to say, that my return will
be a strengthening of your hands: May my own be
weaken'd; May I ever want the power to do good to
myself, or to those I love, when I forget, or depart
from, the duty owing to the most indulgent of fathers,
by 
His Charles Grandison! 

What an excellent young man is this! —But observe,
Lucy; he says he will on his return to England
unbosom his whole heart to his father; and till then,
he desires him to discontinue the begun treaty with
Lord N. —Ah, my dear! —What has any new acquaintance
to expect, were she to be intangled in a hopeless 

passion? But let us consider—Had Sir Charles
been actually married, would his being so, have
enabled a woman's reason to triumph over her passion? 
—If so, passion is surely conquerable: And did
I know any-body that wou'd allow it to be so in the
one case, and not in the other, I would bid her take
shame to herself, and, with deep humiliation, mourn
her ungovernable folly. 
The above letter came not to the hands of the
young Ladies till after their father's death, which
happen'd within a month of his receiving it, and before
he had actually given permission for the young
gentleman's return. You may suppose they were excessively
affected with the bad impressions their father
had sought to make in their brother's heart, of their
conduct; and, when he died, were the more apprehensive
of their force. 
He had suspended the treaty of marriage for his son
till the young gentleman should arrive. He had perplexed
himself about his private affairs, which, by long
neglect, became very intricate, and of consequence must
be very irksome for such a man to look into. He was resolved
therefore to leave it to each steward (having persuaded
himself, against appearances, to have a good
opinion of both) to examine the accounts of the other; 
not only as this would give the least trouble to himself,
but as they had several items to charge, which he had
no mind should be explained to his son. Nor were
those gentlemen less solicitous to obtain discharges
from him; for, being apprised of his reason for looking
into his affairs, they were afraid of the inspection
of so good a manager as their young master was
known to be. 
Mr. Filmer, the steward for the Irish estate, came
over, on this occasion, with his accounts: The two
stewards acted in concert; and on the report of each,
Sir Thomas examined totals only, and order'd releases
to de drawn for his signing. 

What a degrader even of high spirits, is vice! What
meanness was there in Sir Thomas's pride! To be
afraid of the eye of a son, of whose duty he was
always boasting! 
But who shall answer for the reformation of an
habitual libertine, when a temptation offers? Observe
what followed: 
Mr. Filmer, knowing Sir Thomas's frailty, had
brought over with him, and with a view to insnare the
unhappy man, a fine young creature, not more than
sixteen, on pretence of visiting her aunt who lived in
Pallmall, and who was a relation of his wife. She
was innocent of actual crime: But her parents had
no virtue, and had not made it a part of the young
woman's education; but had, on the contrary,
brought her up with a notion that her beauty would
make her fortune; and she knew it was all the fortune
they had to give her. 
Mr. Filmer, in his attendances on Sir Thomas, was
always praising the beauty of Miss Obrian; her genteel
descent, as well as figure, her innocence [Innocence!
the Attractive equally to the attempts of Rakes
and Devils!] But the Baronet, intent upon pursaing
his better schemes, for some time, only gave the artful
man the hearing. At last, however (for curiosity-sake)
he was prevailed upon to make the aunt a visit. 
The niece was not absent. She more than answered
all that Filmer had said in her praise, as to the beauty
of her person. Sir Thomas repeated his visits. The
girl was well tutored; behaved with prudence, with
reserve rather; and, in short, made such an impression
on his heart, that he declared to Filmer that he could
not live without her. 
Advantage was endeavoured to be taken of his infatuation. 
He offered high terms: But for some
time the aunt insisted upon his marrying her niece. 
Sir Thomas had been too long a leader in the free
world, to be so taken-in, as it is called. But at last, a 

proposal was made him, from no part of which, the
aunt declared she would recede, tho' the poor girl,
(who, it was pretended, loved him above all the men
she had ever seen) were to break her heart for him. 
A fine piece of flattery, Lucy, to a man who numbered
near three times her years; and who was still
fond of making conquests. 
The terms were: That he should settle upon the
young woman 500l. a year for her life; and on her
father and mother, if they could be brought to consent
to the (infamous) bargain, 200l. a year for
their joint and separate lives: That Miss Obrien
should live at one of Sir Thomas's seats in England; 
be allowed genteel equipages, his livery; and even
for her credit-sake, in the eye of her own relations,
who were of figure, to be connived at in
taking his name. The aunt left it to his generosity
to reward her for the part she had taken, and was to
take, to bring all this about with the parents and
girl. 
Sir Thomas thought these demands much too high:
He stood out for some time; but artifice being used on
all sides to draw him on, Love, as it is called prostituted
word!) obliged him to comply. 
His whole concern was now, how to provide for
this new expence, without robbing, as he called it, his
Son (daughters were but daughters, and no part of the
question with him); and to find excuses for continuing
the young gentleman abroad. 
Mrs. Oldham had, for some time past, been uneasy
herself, and made him so, by her compunction on
their guilty commerce; and now lately, on Sir Thomas's
communicating his intention to recal his son,
had hinted her wishes to be allowed to quit the
house in Essex, and to retire both from that and him; 
for fear of making the young gentleman as much her
enemy, as the two sisters avowedly were. 

Mrs. Oldham's proposal, now that he was acquainted
with Miss Obrien, was better relished by Sir
Thomas, than when it was first made. And before
he actually signed and sealed with the aunt, for her
niece, he thought it was best to sound that unhappy
woman, whether she in earnest desired to retire; and
if so, what were her expectations from him: Resolving,
in order to provide for both expences, to
cut down timber, that, he said, groaned for the ax; 
but which hitherto he had let stand as a resource for
his son, and to enable him to clear incumbrances that
he had himself laid upon a part of his estate. 
Accordingly, he set out for his seat in Essex. 
There, while he was planning future schemes
of living, and reckoning upon his savings in several
articles, in order the better to support an expence
so guiltily to be incurred; and had actually begun
to treat with Mrs. Oldham; who agreed, at the
first word, to retire; not knowing but his motive,
(poor man!) as well as hers, was reformation. There
was he attacked by a violent fever; which in three
days deprived him of the use of that reason which he
had so much abused. 
Mr. Bever, his English steward, posted down, on
the first news he had of his being taken ill, hoping
to get him to sign the ready-drawn up releases. 
But the eagerness he shewed to have this done, giving
cause of suspicion to Mrs. Oldham, she would not let
him see his master, tho' he arrived on the second day
of Sir Thomas's illness, which was before the fever
had seized his brain. 
Mr. Filmer had been to meet, and conduct to London,
Mrs. Obrien the mother of the girl, who came
over to see the sale of the poor victim's honour completed
[Could you have thought, Lucy, there was
such a mother in the world?]; and it was not till the
fifth day of the unhappy man's illness that he got to
him, with his releases also ready drawn up, as well 

as the articles between him and the Obriens, in hopes
to find him well enough to sign both. He was in a
visible consternation when he found his master so ill. 
He would have staid in the house to watch the event,
but Mrs. Oldham not permitting him to do so, he
put up at the next village, in hopes of a favourable
turn of the distemper. 
On the sixth day, the physicians giving no hopes of
Sir Thomas's recovery, Mrs. Oldham sent to acquaint
the two young ladies with his danger; and they instantly
set out to attend their father. 
They could not be supposed to love Mrs. Oldham; 
and, taking Mr. Grandison's advice, who accompanied
them, they let the unhappy gentlewoman know,
that there was no farther occasion for her attendance
on their father. She had prudently, before, that she
might give the less offence to the two ladies, removed
her son by her former husband, and her two children
by Sir Thomas; but insisted on continuing about
him, and in the house, as well from motives of tenderness,
as for her own security, lest she should be
charged with embezlements; for she expected not
mercy from the family, if Sir Thomas died. 
Poor woman! what a tenure was that by which
she held! 
Miss Caroline consented, and brought her sister to
consent, that she should stay; absolutely against Mr.
Grandison's advice; who, libertine as he was himself,
was very zealous to punish a poor Magdalen,
who, tho' faulty, was not so faulty as himself
Wicked people, I believe, my dear, are the severest
punishers of those wicked people, who administer not
to their own particular gratifications. Can mercy be
expected from such? Mercy is a virtue. 
It was shocking to the last degree to the worthy
daughters to hear their raving father call upon nobody
so often, as upon Miss Obrien; tho' they then knew
nothing of the girl, nor of the treaty on foot for her; 

nor could Mrs. Oldham inform them, who or what
she was. Sometimes, when the unhappy man was
quietest, he would call upon his son, in words generally
of kindness and love. Once in particular, crying
out—O save me! save me! my Grandison, by
thy presence! I shall be consumed by the fire that
is already lighted up in my boiling blood. 
On the ninth day, no hope being left, and the
physicians declaring him to be a dying man, they dispatched
a letter by a messenger to hasten over their
brother, who (having left his ward, Miss Emily Jervois,
at Florence in the protection of the worthy
Dr. Bartlett) was come to Paris, as he had written,
in expectation of receiving there his father's permission
to return to England. 
On the eleventh day of his illness, Sir Thomas
came a little to himself. He knew his daughters. He
wept over them. He wish'd he had been kinder to
them. He was sensible of his danger. Several times
he lifted up his feeble hands, and dying eyes, repeating,
God is just. I am, I have been, very wicked! 
Repentance! Repentance! how hard a task! said
he once to the minister who attended him, and whose
prayers he desired. —And Mrs. Oldham once coming
in his sight—O Mrs. Oldham! said he, what is this
world now? What wou'd I give—But repent, repent
—Put your good resolutions in practice, lest I
have more souls than my own to answer for. 
Soon after this his delirium return'd; and he expired
about eleven at night, in dreadful agonies. 
Unhappy man! —Join a tear with mine, my Lucy,
on the awful exit of Sir Thomas Grandison, tho' we
knew him not. 
Poor man! in the pursuit—Poor man! —He lived
not to see his beloved son!— 
The two daughters, and Mr. Grandison, and Mrs.
Oldham (for her own security) put their respective
seals on every place, at that house, where papers, or 

any-thing of value were supposed to be reposited:
And Mr. Grandison, assuming that part of the management; 
dismissed Mrs. Oldham from the house; 
and would not permit her to take with her more
than one suit of cloaths, besides those she had on. 
She wept bitterly, and complained of harsh treatment:
But was not pitied; and was referred by Mr.
Grandison to his absent cousin for still more rigorous
justice. 
She appealed to the ladies; but they reproach'd her
with having lived a life of shame, against better
knowlege; and said, That now she must take the
consequence. Her punishment was but beginning. 
Their brother would do her strict justice, they
doubted not: But a man of his virtue, they were
sure, would abhor her. She had mis-led their father,
they said. It was not in his temper to be cruel to his
children. She had lived upon their fortunes; and
now they had nothing but their brother's favour to
depend upon. 
Daughters so dutiful, my Lucy, did right to excuse
their father all they could: But Mrs. Oldham suffer'd
for all. 
* *
I am so much interested in this important history,
that I have not the heart to break thro'  it, to tell you
how very agreeably I pass my time with these ladies,
and Lord L. in those parts of the day, when we are
all assembled. Miss Emily has a fine mind; gentle,
delicate, innocently childish beyond her nature  and
womanly appearance; but not her years. The two
ladies are very good to her. Lord L. is an excellent
man. 
This is Friday morning: And no Sir Charles! 
Canterbury is surely a charming place. Was you
ever at Canterbury, Lucy? 
To-morrow, Lady D. is to visit my aunt. My
letter to my aunt will be in time, I hope. I long to 

know—Yet why should I? —But Lady D. is so good
a woman! I hope she will take kindly my denial,
and look upon it as an absolute one. 
I have a great deal more of the family-history to
give you: I wish I could write as fast as we can talk. 
But, Lucy, concerning the Lady, with whose father Sir
Thomas was in treaty for his son? Don't you want
to know something more about her? —But, ah, my
dear, be this as it may, there is a Lady, in whose favour
both sisters interest themselves. I have found that out. 
Nor will it be long, I suppose, before I shall be informed
who she is; and whether or not Sir Charles
encourages the proposal. 
Adieu, my Lucy! You will soon have another
letter from 
Your Harriet Byron. 

