



My dear Father and Mother,
I will continue my Writing still, because,
may-be, I shall like to read it, when I am
with you, to see what Dangers I have been
enabled to escape; and tho' I bring it along
with me. 
I told you my Resolution, my happy Resolution,
as I have Reason to think it: And just
then he came in again, with great Kindness in
his Looks; and said, I make no Doubt, Pamela,
you will stay this Fortnight to oblige me. I
knew not how to frame my Words so as to
deny, and yet not make him storm: But said
I, Forgive, Sir, your poor distressed Maiden: I
know I cannot possibly deserve any Favour at
your Hands, consistent with Virtue; and I beg
you will let me go to my poor Father. Why,
said he, thou art the veriest Fool that I ever
knew. I tell you I will see your Father; I'll 

send for him hither To-morrow, in my travelling
Chariot, if you will; and I'll let him know
what I intend to do for him and you. What,
Sir, may I ask you, can that be? Your Honour's
noble Estate may easily make him happy, and
not unuseful perhaps to you in some respect or
other. But what Price am I to pay for all this? 
—You shall be happy as you can wish, said he, I
do assure you: And here I will now give you this
Purse, in which are Fifty Guineas, which I will
allow your Father yearly, and find an Employ
suitable to his Liking, to deserve that and
more: Pamela, he shall never want, depend
upon it. I would have given you still more for
him; but that perhaps you would suspect I intended
it as a Design upon you. —O Sir! said
I, take back your Guineas; I will not touch one,
nor will my Father, I am sure, till he knows
what is to be done for them; and particularly
what is to become of me. Why then, Pamela,
said he, suppose I find a Man of Probity, and genteel
Calling, for a Husband for you, that shall
make you a Gentlewoman as long as you live? — 
I want no Husband, Sir, said I; for now I began
to see him in all his black Colours: Yet being
so much in his Power, I thought I would a
little dissemble. But, said he, you are so pretty,
that go where you will, you can never be free
from the Designs of some or other of our Sex; 
and I shall think I don't answer the Care of my
dying Mother for you, who committed you to
me, if I don't provide you a Husband to protect 

your Virtue, and your Innocence; and a worthy
one I have thought of for you. 
O black, perfidious Creature! thought I,
what an Implement art thou in the Hands of
Lucifer, to ruin the innocent Heart! —Yet
still I dissembled; for I fear'd much both him
and the Place I was in. But, whom, pray, Sir,
have you thought of? —Why, said he, young
Mr. Williams, my Chaplain, in Lincolnshire,
who will make you happy. Does he know,
Sir, said I, any thing of your Honour's Intentions? 
—No, my Girl, answer'd he, and kissed
me (much against my Will; for his very Breath
was now Poison to me); but his Dependence
upon my Favour, and your Beauty and Merit,
will make him rejoice at my Kindness to him. 
Well, Sir, said I, then it is time enough to
consider of this Matter; and it cannot hinder
me from going to my Father's: For what will
staying a fortnight longer signify to this? Your
Honour's Care and Goodness may extend to
me there as well as here; and Mr. Williams,
and all the World, shall know that I am not
ashamed of my Father's Poverty. 
He would kiss me again, and I said, If I am
to think of Mr. Williams, or any body, I beg
you'll not be so free with me: That is not pretty,
I'm sure. Well, said he, but you stay this next
Fortnight, and in that time I'll have both Williams
and your Father here; for I will have the
Match concluded in my House; and when I
have brought it on, you shall settle it as you
please together. Mean time take and send only 

these Fifty Pieces to your Father, as an Earnest
of my Favour, and I'll make you all happy. — 
Sir, said I, I beg at least Two Hours to consider
of this. I shall, said he, be gone out in one
Hour; and I would have you write to your
Father, what I propose, and John shall carry it
on purpose, and he shall take the Purse with
him for the good old Man, if you approve it. 
Sir, said I, I will then let you know, in one
Hour, my Resolution. Do so, reply'd he; 
and gave me another Kiss, and let me go. 
O how I rejoiced I had got out of his
Clutches! —So I write you this, that you may
see how Matters stand; for I am resolved to
come away, if possible. Base, wicked, treacherous
Gentleman, as he is! 
So here was a Trap laid for your poor Pamela! 
I tremble to think of it! O what a Scene
of Wickedness was here contrived for all my
wretched Life! Black-hearted Wretch! how I
hate him! —For at first, as you'll see by what
I have written, he would have made me believe
other Things; and this of Mr. Williams, I
suppose, came into his Head, after he walk'd
out from his Closet, to give himself time to
think how to delude me better: But the Covering
was now too thin, and easy to be seen
through. 
I went to my Chamber, and the first thing
I did, was to write to him; for I thought it
was best not to see him again, if I could help
it; and I put it under his Parlour-door, after
I had copy'd it, as follows: 


‘Honour'd Sir,
Your last Proposal to me convinces me,
that I ought not to stay, but to go to my
Father, if it were but to ask his Advice about
Mr. Williams. And I am so set upon it,
that I am not to be persuaded. So, honour'd
Sir, with a thousand Thanks for all Favours,
I will set out To-morrow early; and the Honour
you design'd me, as Mrs. Jervis tells
me, of your Chariot, there will be no Occasion
for; because I can hire, I believe, Farmer
Brady's Chaise. So, begging you will not
take it amiss, I shall ever be 
‘Your dutiful Servant. 
‘As to the Purse, Sir, my poor Father, to
be sure, won't forgive me, if I take it,
'till he can know how to deserve it:
Which is impossible.’ 

So he has just now sent Mrs. Jervis, to tell
me, That since I am resolv'd to go, go I may,
and the travelling Chariot shall be ready; but
it shall be worse for me; for that he will never
trouble himself about me as long as he lives. 
Well, so I get out of the House, I care not; 
only I should have been glad I could with Innocence
have made you, my dear Parents,
happy. 

I cannot imagine the Reason of it, but
John, who I thought was gone with my last,
is but now going; and he sends to know if I
have any thing else to carry. So I break off to
send you this with the former. 
I am now preparing for my Journey, and
about taking Leave of my good Fellow-servants. 
And if I have not time to write, I must tell
you the rest, when I am so happy as to be with
you. 
One Word more: I slip in a Paper of Verses,
on my going; sad poor Stuff! but as they come
from me, you'll not dislike them, may-be. I
shew'd them to Mrs. Jervis, and she liked
them, and took a Copy; and made me sing
them to her, and in the Green-room too; but
I look'd into the Closet first. I will only add,
That I am 
Your dutiful Daughter. 
Let me just say, That he has this Moment
sent me Five Guineas by Mrs. Jervis, as
a Present for my Pocket: So I shall be
very rich; for as she brought them, I
thought I might take them. He says he
won't see me; and I may go when I will
in the Morning; and Lincolnshire Robin
shall drive me: But he is so angry, he orders
that nobody shall go out at the Door
with me, not so much as into the Courtyard. 
Well! I can't help it, not I! but
does not this expose himself more than
me? 

But John waits, and I would have brought
this and the other myself; but he says, he
has put it up, among other things, and
so can take both as well as one. 
John is very good, and very honest; I am
under great Obligations to him. I'd give
him a Guinea, now I'm so rich, if I thought
he'd take it. I hear nothing of my Lady's
Cloaths, and those my Master gave me: 
For I told Mrs. Jervis, I would not take
them; but I fansy, by a Word or two that
dropp'd, they will be sent after me. Dear
Sirs! what a rich Pamela you'll have, if
they should! But as I can't wear them, if
they do, I don't desire them; and, if I
have them, will turn them into Money,
as I can have Opportunity. Well, no
more—I'm in a fearful Hurry! 

Verses on my going away.


I.
My Fellow-servants dear, attend
To these few Lines, which I have penn'd:
I'm sure they're from your hearty Friend,
 And Wisher-well, poor Pamela.


II.
I from a State of low Degree
Was plac'd in this good Family:
Too high a Fate for humble me,
 The helpless, hopeless Pamela.



III.
Yet tho' my happy Lot was so,
Joyful I, homeward, from it go,
No less content, when poor and low,
 Than here you found your Pamela.


IV.
For what indeed is Happiness
But conscious Innocence and Peace?
And that's a Treasure I possess;
 Thank Heav'n, that gave it Pamela.


V.
My future Lot I cannot know:
But this, I'm sure, where-e'er I go,
Whate'er I am, whate'er I do,
 I'll be the grateful Pamela.


VI.
No sad Regrets my Heart annoy;
I'll pray for all your Peace and Joy,
From Master high, to Scullion Boy,
 For all your Loves to Pamela.


VII.
One thing or two I've more to say:
God's holy Will be sure obey;
And for our Master always pray,
 As ever shall poor Pamela.



VIII.
For, Oh! we pity should the Great,
Instead of envying their Estate;
Temptations always on 'em wait,
 Exempt from which are such as we.


IX.
Their Riches, gay deceitful Snares!
Inlarge their Fears, increase their Cares.
Their Servants Joy surpasses Theirs;
 At least, so judges Pamela.


X.
Your Parents and Relations love:
Let them your Duty ever prove;
Aud you'll be bless'd by Heav'n above,
 As will, I hope, poor Pamela.


XI.
For if asham'd I e'er could be
Of my dear Parents low Degree,
What Lot had been too mean for me,
 Unbless'd, unvirtuous Pamela!


XII.
Thrice happy may you ever be,
Each one in his and her Degree;
And, Sirs, whene'er you think of me,
 Pray for Content to Pamela.



XIII.
Pray for her wish'd Content and Peace;
And, rest assur'd, she'll never cease
To pray for all your Joys Increase,
 While Life is lent to Pamela.


XIV.
On God all future Good depends:
Serve Him. And so my Sonnet ends,
With Thank-ye, thank-ye, honest Friends,
 For all your Loves to Pamela.


&line;
Here it is necessary the Reader should
know, that the fair Pamela's Trials were
not yet over; but the worst were to come, at a
time when she thought them at an End, and
that she was returning to her Father: For when
her Master found her Virtue was not to be subdu'd,
and he had in vain try'd to conquer his
Passion for her, being a Gentleman of Pleasure
and Intrigue, he had order'd his Lincolnshire
Coachman to bring his travelling Chariot from
thence, not caring to trust his Bedfordshire
Coachman, who, with the rest of the Servants,
so greatly lov'd and honour'd the fair Damsel; 
and having given Instructions accordingly, and
prohibited his other Servants, on Pretence of
resenting Pamela's Behaviour, from accompanying
her any Part of the Road, he drove her 

Five Miles on the Way to her Father's; and
then turning off, cross'd the Country, and carry'd
her onward towards his Lincolnshire
Estate. 
It is also to be observ'd, that the Messenger
of her Letters to her Father, who so often pretended
Business that way, was an Implement in
his Master's Hands, and employ'd by him for
that Purpose; and always gave her Letters first
to him, and his Master used to open and read
them, and then send them on; by which means
as he hints to her, (as she observes in one of her
Letters, p. 131.) he was no Stranger to what she
wrote. Thus every way was the poor Virgin
beset: And the Whole will shew the base Arts
of designing Men to gain their wicked Ends; 
and how much it behoves the Fair Sex to stand
upon their Guard against artful Contrivances,
especially when Riches and Power conspire
against Innocence and a low Estate. 
A few Words more will be necessary to
make the Sequel better understood. The intriguing
Gentleman thought fit, however, to
keep back from her Father her Three last
Letters; in which she mentions his concealing
himself to hear her partitioning out her Cloaths,
his last Effort to induce her to stay a Fortnight,
his pretended Proposal of the Chaplain, and
her Hopes of speedily seeing them, as also her
Verses; and to send himself a Letter to her Father,
which is as follows: 


Goodman Andrews,
You will wonder to receive a Letter from
me: But I think I am obliged to let you
know, that I have discovered the strange Correspondence
carried on between you and your
Daughter, so injurious to my Honour and
Reputation, and which, I think, you should
not have encouraged, till you knew there
were sufficient Grounds for those Aspersions,
which she so plentifully casts upon me. Something
possibly there might be in what she has
written from time to time; but, believe me,
with all her pretended Simplicity and Innocence,
I never knew so much romantick Invention
as she is Mistress of. In short, the
Girl's Head's turn'd by Romances, and such
idle Stuff, to which she has given herself up,
ever since her kind Lady's Death. And she
assumes Airs, as if she was a Mirror of Perfection,
and every body had a Design upon
her. 
‘Don't mistake me, however; I believe her
very honest, and very virtuous; but I have
found out also, that she is carrying on a sort
of Correspondence, or Love Affair, with a
young Clergyman, that I hope in time to
provide for; but who, at present, is destitute
of any Subsistence but my Favour: And what
would be the Consequence, can you think,
of Two young Folks, who have nothing in
the World to trust to of their own, to come 

together, with a Family multiplying upon
them, before they have Bread to eat? 
‘For my part, I have too much Kindness to
them both, not to endeavour to prevent it,
if I can: And for this Reason I have sent her
out of his way for a little while, till I can
bring them both to better Consideration; 
and I would not therefore have you be surprised
you don't see your Daughter so soon as
you might possibly expect. 
‘Yet, I do assure you, upon my Honour,
that she shall be safe and inviolate; and I hope
you don't doubt me, notwithstanding any
Airs she may have given herself, upon my
jocular Pleasantry to her, and perhaps a little
innocent Romping with her, so usual with
young Folks of the Two Sexes, when they
have been long acquainted, and grown up
together; for Pride is not my Talent. 
‘As she is a mighty Letter-writer, I hope
she has had the Duty to apprise you of her
Intrigue with the young Clergyman; and I
know not whether it meets with your Countenance:
But now she is absent for a little
while, (for I am sure he would have followed
her to your Village, if she had gone home; 
and there perhaps they would have ruined one
another, by marrying) I doubt not I shall
bring him to see his Interest, and that he
engages not before he knows how to provide
for a Wife: And when that can be done, let
them come together in God's Name, for
me. 

‘I expect not to be answered on this
Head, but by your good Opinion, and the
Confidence you may repose in my Honour; 
being 
‘Your hearty Friend to serve you. 
‘P. S. I find my Man John has been the
Manager of the Correspondence, in
which such Liberties have been taken
with me. I shall soon, in a manner that
becomes me, let the saucy Fellow
know, how much I resent his Part of the
Affair. It is a hard thing, that a Man
of my Character in the World should
be used thus freely by his own Servants.’ 

It is easy to guess at the poor old Man's Concern
upon reading this Letter, from a Gentleman
of so much Consideration. He knew not
what Course to take, and had no manner of
Doubt of his Daughter's Innocence, and that
foul Play was design'd her. Yet he sometimes
hop'd the best, and was ready to believe
the surmised Correspondence between the Clergyman
and her, having not receiv'd the Letters
she wrote, which would have clear'd up that
Affair. 
But after all, he resolved, as well to quiet
his own as her Mother's Uneasiness, to undertake
a Journey to the 'Squire's; and leaving his
poor Wife to excuse him to the Farmer who 

employ'd him, he set out that very Evening,
late as it was; and travelling all Night, found
himself, soon after Day-light, at the Gate of
the Gentleman, before the Family was up: And
there he sat down to rest himself, till he should
see somebody stirring. 
The Grooms were the first he saw, coming
out to water their Horses; and he ask'd in so
distressful a manner, what was become of Pamela,
that they thought him crazy; and said,
Why, what have you to do with Pamela, old
Fellow? Get out of the Horse's Way. —Where
is your Master? said the poor Man; pray,
Gentlemen, don't be angry: My Heart's almost
broken. —He never gives any thing at the
Door, I assure you, says one of the Grooms; 
so you'll lose your Labour. —I am not a Beggar
yet, said the poor old Man; I want nothing
of him, but my Pamela:—O my Child! my
Child! 
I'll be hang'd, says one of them, if this is not
Mrs. Pamela's Father. —Indeed, indeed, said
he, wringing his Hands, I am; and weeping,
Where is my Child? Where is my Pamela? 
—Why, Father, said one of them, we beg
your Pardon; but she is gone home to you: 
How long have you been come from home? — 
O! but last Night, said he; I have travell'd all
Night: Is the 'Squire at home, or is he not?––– 
Yes, but he is not stirring tho', said the Groom,
as yet. Thank God for that! said he; thank
God for that! Then I hope I may be permitted
to speak to him anon. They asked him to go 

in, and he stepp'd into the Stable, and sat down
on the Stairs there, wiping his Eyes, and sighing
so sadly, that it grieved the Servants to hear
him. 
The Family was soon raised, with the Report
of Pamela's Father coming to inquire after
his Daughter; and the Maids would fain have
had him go into the Kitchen. But Mrs. Jervis,
having been told of his coming, arose, and
hasten'd down to her Parlour, and took him in
with her, and there heard all his sad Story, and
read the Letter. She wept bitterly; but yet
endeavour'd before him to hide her Concern; 
and said, Well, Goodman Andrews, I cannot
help weeping at your Grief; but I hope there is
no Occasion. Let nobody see this Letter,
whatever you do. I dare say your Daughter's
safe. 
Well, but said he, I see, you, Madam,
know nothing about her:—If all was right,
so good a Gentlewoman as you are, would not
have been a Stranger to this. To be sure you
thought she was with me! 
Said she, My Master does not always inform
his Servants of his Proceedings; but you need
not doubt his Honour: You have his Hand
for it. And you may see he can have no
Design upon her, because he is not from
hence, and does not talk of going hence. 
O that is all I have to hope for! said he; 
that is all, indeed! —But, said he—and
was going on, when the Report of his
coming having reached the 'Squire, he came 



down in his Morning-gown and Slippers, into
the Parlour, where he and Mrs. Jervis were
talking. 
What's the Matter, Goodman Andrews?
said he, what's the Matter? O my Child! said
the good old Man; give me my Child! I beseech
you, Sir. —Why, I thought, says the
'Squire, that I had satisfied you about her: Sure
you have not the Letter I sent you written with
my own Hand. Yes, yes, but I have, Sir, said
he, and that brought me hither; and I have
walked all Night, Poor Man! return'd he,
with great seeming Compassion, I am sorry for
it, truly! Why your Daughter has made a
strange Racket in my Family; and if I thought
it would have disturb'd you so much, I would
have e'en let her have gone home; but what I did
was to serve her and you too. She is very safe,
I do assure you, Goodman Andrews; and you
may take my Honour for it, I would not injure
her for the World. Do you think I would,
Mrs. Jervis? No, I hope not, Sir! said she. 
—Hope not! said the poor Man, so do I
but pray, Sir, give me my Child; that is all I
desire; and I'll take care no Clergyman shall
come near her. 
Why, London is a great way off, said the
'Squire, and I can't send for her back presently. 
What, then, said he, have you sent my poor
Pamela to London? I would not have it said so,
reply'd the 'Squire; but I assure you, upon my
Honour, she is quite safe and satisfied, and will
quickly inform you of it by Letter. She is in 

a reputable Family, no less than a Bishop's; 
and is to wait on his Lady, till I get the Matter
over, that I mention'd to you. 
O how shall I know this? reply'd he— 
What! said the 'Squire, pretending Anger, am I
to be doubted? —Do you believe I can have any
View upon your Daughter? And if I had, do
you think I would take such Methods as these
to effect it? —Why, surely, Man, thou forgettest
whom thou talkest to! O Sir, said he, I
beg your Pardon; but consider, my dear Child
is in the Case: Let me know, what Bishop, and
where; and I'll travel to London on Foot to see
my Daughter, and then shall be satisfied. 
Why, Goodman Andrews, I believe thou
hast read Romances as well as thy Daughter,
and thy Head's turn'd with them. May I not
have my Word taken? Do you think, once more,
I would offer any thing dishonourable to your
Daughter? Is there any thing looks like it? — 
Pr'ythee, Man, recollect a little who I am; 
and if I am not to be believ'd, what signifies
talking? Why, Sir, said he, pray forgive
me; but there is no Harm to say, What
Bishop's, or whereabouts? What, and so you'd
go troubling his Lordship with your impertinent
Fears and Stories! Will you be satisfied, if you
have a Letter from her within a Week, it may
be less, if she be not negligent, to assure you all
is well with her? Why that, said the poor Man,
will be some Comfort. Well then, said the
Gentleman, I can't answer for her Negligence,
if she don't write: And if she should send a Letter 

to you, Mrs. Jervis, (for I desire not to see it; 
I have had Trouble enough about her already)
be sure you send it by a Man and Horse the
Moment you receive it. To be sure I will, answered
she. Thank your Honour, said the good
Man. And then I must wait with as much
Patience as I can for a Week, which will be a
Year to me. 
I tell you, said the Gentleman, it must be
her own Fault, if she don't write; for 'tis what I
insisted upon for my own Reputation; and I
shan't stir from this House, I assure you, till she
is heard from, and that to Satisfaction. God
bless your Honour, said the poor Man, as you
say and mean Truth. Amen, Amen, Goodman
Andrews, said he; you see I am not afraid
to say Amen. So, Mrs. Jervis, make the
good Man as welcome as you can; and let me
have no Uproar about the Matter. 
He then, whispering her, bid her give him
a couple of Guineas to bear his Charges home; 
telling him, he should be welcome to stay there
till the Letter came, if he would; and be a
Witness, that he intended honourably, and
not to stir from his House for one while. 
The poor old Man staid and din'd with Mrs.
Jervis, with some tolerable Ease of Mind, in
hopes to hear from his beloved Daughter in a
few Days; and then accepting the Present, return'd
for his own House, and resolv'd to be as
patient as possible. 
Mean time Mrs. Jervis, and all the Family,
were in the utmost Grief for the Trick 

put upon the poor Pamela, and she and the
Steward represented it to their Master in as
moving Terms as they durst: But were forced
to rest satisfy'd with his general Assurances of
intending her no Harm; which however Mrs.
Jervis little believ'd, from the Pretence he had
made in his Letter, of the Correspondence between
Pamela and the young Parson; which she
knew to be all mere Invention; tho' she durst
not say so. 
But the Week after, they were made a little
more easy, by the following Letter brought by
an unknown Hand, and left for Mrs. Jervis;
which how procur'd, will be shewn in the
Sequel. 

‘Dear Mrs. Jervis,
I have been vilely trick'd, and, instead
of being driven by Robin to my dear Father's,
I am carry'd off, to where I have no
Liberty to tell. However, I am at present
not used hardly, in the main; and I write to
beg of you to let my dear Father and Mother
(whose Hearts must be well-nigh broken)
know, That I am well, and that I am, and
by the Grace of God, ever will be, their honest,
as well as dutiful Daughter, and 
‘Your obliged Friend,
Pamela Andrews. 

‘I must neither send Date nor Place: But
have most solemn Assurances of honourable
Usage. This is the only Time my
low Estate has been troublesome to me,
since it has subjected me to the Frights I
have undergone. Love to your good
Self, and all my dear Fellow-servants. 
Adieu! Adieu! But pray for poor
Pamela.’ 

This, tho' it quieted not intirely their Apprehensions,
was shewn to the whole Family,
and to the Gentleman himself, who pretended
not to know how it came; and Mrs. Jervis
sent it away to the good old Folks; who at
first suspected it was forged, and not their Daughter's
Hand; but finding the contrary, they were
a little easier to hear she was alive and honest. 
And having inquir'd of all their Acquaintance,
what could be done, and no one being able to
put them in a way how to proceed, with Effect,
on so extraordinary an Occasion, against so
rich and so resolute a Gentleman; and being
afraid to make Matters worse, (tho' they saw
plainly enough, that she was in no Bishop's
Family, and so mistrusted all the rest of his
Story) they apply'd themselves to Prayers for
their poor Daughter, and for a happy Issue to
an Affair that almost distracted them. 
We shall now leave the honest old Pair,
praying for their dear Pamela; and return to
the Account she herself gives of all this; having
written it Journal-wise, to amuse and employ 

her Time, in hopes some Opportunity might
offer to send it to her Friends, and, as was her
constant View, that she might afterwards thankfully
look back upon the Dangers she had escaped,
when they should be happily overblown,
as in time she hoped they would be; and that
then she might examine, and either approve or
repent of her own Conduct in them. 

