



Mr. Lovelace, To John Bedford, Esq; 

Sunday, Aug. 13. 
I don't know what a devil ails me; but I never
was so much indisposed in my life. At first, I
thought some of my blessed relations here had got a
dose administered to me, in order to get the whole
house to themselves. But, as I am the hopes of the
family, I believe they would not be so wicked. 
I must lay down my pen. I cannot write with any
spirit at all. What a plague can be the matter with me! 
* *
Lord M. paid me just now a cursed gloomy visit,
to ask how I do after bleeding. His Sisters both
drove away yesterday, God be thanked. But they
asked not my leave; and hardly bid me good-bye. 
My Lord was more tender, and more dutiful, than
I expected. Men are less unforgiving than women. 
I have reason to say so, I am sure. For, besides implacable
Miss Harlowe, and the old Ladies, the two
Montague Apes han't been near me yet. 
* *
Neither eat, drink, nor sleep! —A piteous case,
Jack! If I should die like a fool now, people would
say Miss Harlowe had broken my heart. —That she
vexes me to the heart, is certain. 
Confounded squeamish! I would fain write it off. 
But must lay down my pen again. It won't do. 
Poor Lovelace! —What a devil ails thee? 
* *
Well, but now let's try for't—Hoy—Hoy— 
Hoy! Confound me for a gaping puppy, how I
yawn! —Where shall I begin? At thy Executorship? 
—Thou shalt have a double office of it: For I really
think thou may'st send me a coffin and a shroud. I
shall be ready for them by the time they can come
down. 

What a little fool is this Miss Harlowe! I warrant
she'll now repent that she refused me. Such a lovely
young widow—What a charming widow would she
have made! How would she have adorned the weeds! 
To be a widow in the first twelve months is one of
the greatest felicities that can befal a fine woman. 
Such pretty employment in new dismals, when she
had hardly worn round her blazing joyfuls! Such
lights, and such shades! how would they set off one
another, and be adorned by the wearer!— 
Go to the devil! —I will write! —Can I do anything
else? 
They would not have me write, Belford. —I must
be ill indeed, when I can't write.— 
* *
But thou seemest nettled, Jack! Is it because I
was stung? It is not for two friends, any more than
for man and wife, to be out of patience at one time. 
—What must be the consequence if they are? — 
I am in no fighting mood just now: But as patient
and passive as the chickens that are brought me in
broth —For I am come to that already. 
But I can tell thee, for all this, be thy own man, if
thou wilt, as to the Executorship, I will never suffer
thee to expose my Letters. They are too ingenuous
by half to be seen. And I absolutely insist upon it,
that, on receipt of this, thou burn them all. 
I will never forgive thee that impudent and unfriendly
reflection, of my cavaliering it here over half
a dozen persons of distinction: Remember, too, thy
words poor helpless Orphan—These reflections are too
serious, and thou art also too serious, for me to let
these things go off as jesting; notwithstanding the
Roman style (a)  is preserved; and, indeed, but just
preserved. By my Soul, Jack, if I had not been taken
thus egregiously cropsick, I would have been up with
thee, and the Lady too, before now. 

But write on, however: And send me copies, if
thou canst, of all that passes between our Charlotte
and Miss Harlowe. I'll take no notice of what thou
communicatest of that sort. I like not the people
here the worse for their generous offer to the Lady. 
But you see she is as proud as implacable. There's
no obliging her. She'd rather sell her cloaths, than
be beholden to any-body, altho' she would oblige by
permitting the obligation. 
Oh Lord! Oh Lord! —Mortal ill—Adieu, Jack! 
* *
I was forced to leave off, I was so ill, at this place. 
And what dost think? Why Lord M. brought the
Parson of the parish to pray by me; for his Chaplain
is at Oxford. I was lain down in my night-gown
over my waistcoat, and in a doze: And, when I
opened my eyes, who should I see, but the Parson
kneeling on one side the bed; Lord M. on the other; 
Mrs. Greme, who had been sent for to tend me, as
they call it, at the feet! God be thanked, my Lord,
said I, in an ecstasy! —Where's Miss? —For I supposed
they were going to marry me. 
They thought me delirious, at first; and prayed
louder and louder. 
This roused me: Off the bed I started; slid my
feet into my slippers; put my hand in my waistcoat
pocket, and pulled out thy Letter with my Beloved's
meditation in it: My Lord, Dr. Wright, Mrs. Greme,
you have thought me a very wicked fellow: But, see!
I can read you as good as you can read me. 
They stared at one another. I gaped, and read,
Poor mo––or––tals the cau––o––ause of their own— 
their own mis––ser––ry. 
It is as suitable to my case, as to the Lady's, as
thou'lt observe, if thou readest it again (a) . At the
passage where it is said, That when a man is chastened
for sin, his beauty consumes away, I stept to the glass: 

A poor figure, by Jupiter, cried I! —And they all
praised and admired me; lifted up their hands and
their eyes; and the Doctor said, He always thought
it impossible, that a man of my sense could be so
wild as the world said I was. My Lord chuckled
for joy; congratulated me; and, thank my dear
Miss Harlowe, I got high reputation among good,
bad, and indifferent. In short, I have established myself
for ever with all here. —But, O Belford, even
This will not do! —I must leave off again. 
* *
A visit from the Montague Sisters, led in by the
hobbling Peer, to congratulate my amendment and
reformation both in one. What a lucky event this
illness with this meditation in my pocket; for we
were all to pieces before! Thus, when a Boy, have
I joined with a croud coming out of church, and
have been thought to have been there myself. 
I am incensed at the insolence of the young Levite. 
Thou wilt highly oblige me, if thou'lt find him
out, and send me his Ears in thy next Letter. 
My Beloved mistakes me, if she thinks I proposed
her writing to me, as an alternative that should dispense
with my attendance upon her. That it shall
not do, nor did I intend it should, unless she had
pleased me better in the contents of her Letter than
she has done. Bid her read again. I gave no such
hopes. I would have been with her in spite of you
both, by to-morrow, at farthest, had I not been laid
by the heels thus, like a helpless miscreant. 
But I grow better and better every hour, I say: 
The Doctor says not: But I am sure I know best: 
And I will soon be in London, depend on't. But
say nothing of this to my dear, cruel, and implacable
Miss Harlowe. 
A—dieu—u, Ja—aack—What a gaping puppy
(Yaw—n! yaw—n! Yaw—n! )
Thy Lovelace! 