



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday, May 12. 
I must be silent, my exalted friend, under praises
that oppress my heart with a consciousness of not
deserving them; at the same time that the generous 

design of those praises raises and comforts it: For it
is a charming thing to stand high in the opinion of
those we love; and to find that there are souls that can
carry their friendships beyond accidents, beyond body,
and ties of blood. Whatever, my dearest creature,
is my shining-time, the time of a friend's adversity is
yours. And it would be almost a fault in me to regret
those afflictions, which give you an opportunity so
gloriously to exert those qualities, which not only ennoble
our Sex, but dignify human nature. 
But let me proceed to subjects less agreeable. 
I am sorry you have reason to think Singleton's
projects are not at an end. But who knows what the
sailor had to propose? —Yet had any good been intended
me, this method would hardly have been fallen
upon. 
Depend upon it, my dear, your Letters shall be
safe. 
I have made a handle of Mr. Lovelace's bold attempt
and freedom, as I told you I would, to keep
him ever since at distance, that I may have an opportunity
to see the success of the application to my
Uncle, and to be at liberty to embrace any favourable
overtures that may arise from it. Yet he has been
very importunate, and twice brought Mr. Mennell
from Mrs. Fretchville to talk about the house. —If I
should be obliged to make up with him again, I shall
think I am always doing myself a spite. 
As to what you mention of his newly-detected
crimes; and your advice to attach Dorcas to my interest; 
and to come at some of his Letters; these
things will require more or less of my attention, as I
may hope favour or not from my Uncle Harlowe. 
I am sorry that my poor Hannah continues ill. 
Pray, my dear, inform yourself, and let me know,
whether she wants any-thing that befits her case. 
I will not close this Letter till to-morrow is over; 
for I am resolved to go to church; and this as well 

for the sake of my duty, as to see, if I am at liberty
to go out when I please without being attended or accompanied. 
Sunday, May 14. 
I have not been able to avoid a short debate with
Mr. Lovelace. I had ordered a coach to the door. 
When I had notice that it was come, I went out of
my chamber to go to it; but met him dressed on the
stairs-head with a book in his hand, but without his
Hat and Sword. He asked with an air very solemn,
yet respectful, if I were going abroad. I told him I
was. He desired leave to attend me, if I were going
to church. I refused him. And then he complained
heavily of my treatment of him; and declared that
he would not live such another week as the past, for
the world. 
I owned to him very frankly, that I had made an
application to my friends; and that I was resolved to
keep myself to myself till I knew the issue of it. 
He coloured, and seemed surprised. But checking
himself in something he was going to say, he pleaded
my danger from Singleton, and again desired to attend
me. 
And then he told me, that Mrs. Fretchville had
desired to continue a fortnight longer in the house. 
She found, said he, that I was unable to determine
about entering upon it; and now who knows when
such a vapourish creature will come to a resolution? 
This, Madam, has been an unhappy week; for had
I not stood upon such bad terms with you, you might
have been now mistress of that house; and probably
had my Cousin Montague, if not Lady Betty, actually
with you. 
And so, Sir, taking all you say for granted, your
Cousin Montague cannot come to Mrs. Sinclair's? 
What, pray, is her objection to Mrs. Sinclair's? Is
this house fit for me to live in a month or two, and
not fit for any of your relations for a few days? — 

And Mrs. Fretchville has taken more time too! —Then,
pushing by him, I hurried down stairs. 
He called to Dorcas to bring him his Sword and
Hat; and following me down into the passage, placed
himself between me and the door; and again desired
leave to attend me. 
Mrs. Sinclair came out at that instant, and asked
me, if I did not chuse a dish of chocolate? 
I wish, Mrs. Sinclair, said I, you would take this man
in with you to your chocolate. I don't know whether
I am at liberty to stir out without his leave or not. 
Then turning to him, I asked, If he kept me there
his prisoner? 
Dorcas just then bringing him his Sword and Hat,
he opened the street-door, and taking my reluctant
hand, led me, in a very obsequious manner, to the
coach. People passing by, stopt, stared, and whispered
—But he is so graceful in his person and dress,
that he generally takes every eye. 
I was uneasy to be so gazed at; and he stepped in
after me, and the coachman drove to St. Paul's. 
He was very full of assiduities all the way; while I was
as reserved as possible: And when I returned, dined, as
I had done the greatest part of the week, by myself. 
He told me, upon my resolving to do so, that altho'
he would continue his passive observance till I knew
the issue of my application; yet I must expect, that
then I should not rest one moment till I had fixed
his happy day: For that his very soul was fretted with
my slights, resentments, and delays. 
A wretch! when I can say, to my infinite regret,
on a double account, that all he complains of is owing
to himself! 
O that I may have good tidings from my Uncle! 
Adieu, my dearest friend! —This shall lie ready
for an exchange (as I hope for one to-morrow from
you) that will decide, as I may say, the destiny of 
Your
Clarissa Harlowe. 