


Miss Harriet Byron, To Miss Lucy Selby. 


Sunday, Mar. 5. 
My cousins will have it, that I am far gone in a
certain passion [They speak quite out]; and
with a man that has given no encouragement—Encouragement! 

how meanly sounds that word! But I hope
they are mistaken. I cannot say, but one may prefer,
if one were to have one's choice—one man to
another—But that is a different thing from being run
away with by so vehement a folly as they are ready to
ascribe to me. 
Well, but, under this notion, they are solicitous
that I should not neglect any opportunity [What a
poor creature do they think me!] of ingratiating myself
with the sisters: And therefore I must, by all
means, accept of Miss Grandison's invitation to tea. 
I insisted, however, that they should accompany
me, as they likewise were invited: And they obliged
me—I may say themselves too; for they admire the
brother and sisters as much as I do. 
We found together Lord and Lady L. Miss Grandison,
Miss Jervois, Dr. Bartlett, and Mr. Grandison. 
Sir Charles was in his drawing-room, adjoining
to the study; a lady with him, they said. What business
had I to wish to know whether it was an elderly
or a young lady? But I must tell you all my follies. 
When we alighted, a very genteel chair made way for
our coach. 
Mr. Grandison made up to me; and, as heretofore,
said very silly things, but with an air, as if he were accustomed
to say such, and to have them received as
galant things, by those to whom he addressed them. 
How painful is it to a mind not quite at ease, to be
obliged to be civil, when the ear is invaded by contemptible
speeches, from a man who must think as
highly of himself for uttering them, as meanly of the
understanding of the person he is speaking to! 
Miss Grandison saw me a little uneasy, and came up
to us. Mr. Grandison, said she, I thought you had
known Miss Byron's character by this time. She is
something more than a pretty woman. She has a soul,
Sir: The man who makes a compliment to her on
her beauty, depreciates her understanding. 

She then led me to her seat, and sat down next me. 
Mr. Grandison was in the midst of a fine speech,
and was not well pleased. He sat down, threw one
leg over the knee of the other, hemm'd three or four
times, took out his snuff-box, tapped it, let the snuff
drop thro' his fingers, then broke the lumps, then shut
it, and twirled it round with the fore-finger of his
right-hand, as he held it between the thumb and fore-finger
of the other; and was quite like a sullen boy:
Yet, after a while, tried to recover himself, by forcing
a laugh at a slight thing or two said in company,
that was not intended to raise one. 
I think, my dear, I could have allowed a little
more for him, had not his name been Grandison. 
We soon adjusted every-thing for the little journey. 
Mr. Grandison told Miss Grandison, that if she would
make him amends for her treatment of him just now,
she should put Lord L. upon inviting him. Lord and
Lady L. joined to do so. But Miss Grandison would
not admit of his going; and I was glad of it. 
But, not to affront you, cousin, said she, Miss Byron
and I want to have a good deal of particular conversation:
So shall not be able to spare you an hour of
our company at Colnebrooke. But one thing, Sir:
My brother sets out for Canterbury to-morrow: Tell
him, that we won't be troubled with your company:
Ask him, if he will? 
Not in those words neither, cousin Charlotte: But I
will offer my attendance; and if he accepts of it, I
shall be half as happy as if I went to Colnebrooke; 
and only half, bowing to me. 
Why, now, you are a good docible kind of man! 
I want to hear what will be my brother's answer: For
we know not one syllable, nor can guess at his business
at Canterbury. 
The tea-equipage being brought in, we heard Sir
Charles's voice, complimenting a lady to her chair; 
and who pleaded engagement for declining to drink 

tea with his sister. And then he enter'd the parlour
to us. He addressed my cousins, who were next him,
with his usual politeness. He then came to me:
How does my good Miss Byron? Not discomposed, I
hope, by your yesterday's visitors. They are all of
them in love with you. But you must have been
pained—I was pained for you, when I heard they had
visited you. But extraordinary merit has some forfeitures
to pay. 
I am sure then, thought I, you must have a great
many. Every-time I see him, I think he rises upon
me in the gracefulness of his behaviour. 
I have one agreeable piece of news to tell you, madam. 
Sir Hargrave will go abroad for a twelvemonth. 
He says, he cannot be in the same kingdom with you,
and not see you. He hopes therefore to lessen the torment,
by flying from the temptation. Mr. Bagenhall
and Mr. Merceda will go with him. 
Then whispering me, he said, From an hint in the
letter of the penitent Wilson, that Mr. Bagenhall's circumstances
are not happy, and that he is too much
in the power of Sir Hargrave; I have prevailed on
the latter, in consideration of the other's accompanying
him abroad, to make him easy. And, would you
believe it? and can you forgive me? —I have brought
Sir Hargrave to give Wilson the promised 100l. To
induce him to do this, Merceda (influenced by the arguments
I urged, founded on the unhappy fellow's
confessions in that letter) offer'd 50l. more for his past
services to himself: And both, as a proof of the sincerity
of their promised reformation. Wilson shall not
have the money, but upon his marrying the girl to
whom he is contracted: And on my return from a
little excursion I am making to Canterbury, I shall put
all in a train. And now, let me ask you, once more,
Can you forgive me for rewarding, as you may think
it, a base servant? 
O Sir! how can I answer you? —You told me at 

Colnebrooke, that we were to endeavour to bring good
out of the evil from which you had deliver'd me. This
indeed is making your words true in a very extensive
sense: To make your enemies your friends; to put
wicked men into a way of reformation; and to make
it a bad man's interest to be good—Forgive you, Sir! 
—From what I remember of that poor wretch's letter,
I was obliged to him myself: Tho' vile, he was less
vile than he might have been. The young woman behaved
with tenderness to me at Paddington: Let me
therefore add 50l. to Mr. Merceda's 50l. as an earnest
that I can follow a noble example. 
You charm me, madam, said he. I am not disappointed
in my opinion of you—The fellow, if he
give hope of real penitence, shall not want the fourth
50l.—It would be too good in you, so great a sufferer
as you were by his wickedness, to give it: But it will
become a man to do it, who has not been injured by
him, and who was the occasion of his losing the favour
of his employer; and the rather, as he was an
adviser to his fellow-agents to fly, and not to fire at
my servants, who might have suffer'd from a sturdier
villain. He has promised repentance and reformation:
This small sum will give me a kind of right
to enforce the performance. —But no more of this just
now. 
Miss Jervois just then looking as if she would be
glad to speak with her guardian, he arose, and taking
her hand, led her to the window. She was in a supplicating
attitude, as if asking a favour. He seemed to
be all kindness and affection to her. —Happy girl! — 
Miss Grandison, who had heard enough of what he
said of Wilson, to be affected, whisper'd me, Did
I not tell you, Harriet, that my brother was continually
employed in doing good? He has invention,
forecast, and contrivance: But you see how those qualities
are all employed. 
O Miss Grandison! said I, I am such a nothing! 

—I cannot, as Sir Hargrave says, bear my own littleness. 
Be quiet, said she—You are an exceeding good
girl! But you have a monstrous deal of pride. Early
I saw that. You are not half so good as the famous
Greek, who losing an election for which he stood, to
be one of 300 only, thank'd the gods, that there were
in Athens (I think it was) 300 better men than himself. 
Will you not have honour enough, if it can be said,
that, next to Sir Charles Grandison, you are the best
creature in the world? 
Sir Charles led his ward to a seat, and sat down
by us. 
Cousin Charlotte, said Mr. Grandison, you remember
your treatment of me, for addressing Miss Byron
in an open, and I thought, a very polite manner:
Pray where's your impartiality? Sir Charles has been
shut up in his study with a lady who would not be seen
by any-body else. —But Sir Charles may do anything. 
I am afraid it is too late, cousin, said Miss Grandison:
Else it would be worth your while to try for a
reputation. 
Has Charlotte, Mr. Grandison, said Sir Charles,
used you ill? Ladies will do as they please with you
galant men. They look upon you as their own; 
and you wish them to do so. You must bear the inconvenience
for the sake of the convenience. 
Well, but, Sir Charles, I am refused to be of the
Colnebrooke party—Absolutely refused. Will you accept
of my company? Shall I attend you to Canterbury? 
Are you in earnest, cousin Grandison? Will you
oblige me with your company? 
With all my heart and soul, Sir Charles. 
With all mine, I accept your kind offer. 
This agreeably surprised his sisters as well as me:
But why then so secret, so reserved, to them? 

Mr. Grandison immediately went out to give orders
to his servant for the journey. 
A good-natur'd man! said Sir Charles. —Charlotte,
you are sometimes too quick upon him—Are you
not? 
Too quick upon him! —No, no! I have hopes of
him; for he can be ashamed: That was not always
the case with him. Between your gentleness and my
quickness, we shall make something of him in time. 
Mr. Grandison immediately returned; and we lost
something that Sir Charles was going to reply. But,
by some words he dropt, the purport was to blame his
sister for not sparing Mr. Grandison before company. 
I imagine, Sir Charles, that if you take Mr. Grandison
with you, one may venture to ask a question,
Whether you go to any family at Canterbury, that
we have heard of? —It is to do good, I am sure. 
Your eyes have ask'd me that question several times,
Charlotte. I aim not at making secrets of any-thing
I do. I need not on this occasion. Yet you, Charlotte,
have your secrets. 
He look'd grave. 
Have I my secrets, Sir Charles? —Pray what do you
mean? 
She colour'd, and seem'd sensibly touch'd. 
Too much emotion, Charlotte, is a kind of confession. 
Take care. Then turning it off with a
smile—See, Mr. Grandison, I am revenging your
cause. Alarming spirits love not to be alarmed. 
So, Harriet! whispering to me, I am silenced. 
Had I told you all my heart, I should half have suspected
you. How he has flutter'd me! —Lady L. this
is owing to you, whispering her behind my chair. 
I know nothing, therefore could tell nothing. Conscience,
conscience! Charlotte, re-whisper'd Lady L. 
She sat still, and was silent for a little while; Lord
and Lady L. smiling, and seeming to enjoy her agreeable
confusion. At last—But, Sir Charles, you always 

had secrets. You got out of me two or three of mine
without exchange. —You— 
Don't be uneasy, my Charlotte. I expected a
prompt, not a deliberate reply. My life is a various
life. Some things I had better not have known myself. 
See, Charlotte, if you are serious, you will make me
so. I have not any motives of action, I hope, that
are either capricious or conceited [Surely, Lucy, he
cannot have seen what I wrote to you about his reserves! 
I thought he look'd at me]—Only this one
hint, my sister: Whenever you condescend to consult
me, let me have every-thing before me, that shall be
necessary to enable me to form a judgment—But why
so grave, Charlotte? Impute all I have said, as a revenge
of Mr. Grandison's cause, in gratitude for his
obliging offer of accompanying me to Canterbury. 
Cannot you reward him, Sir Charles, but by punishing
me? 
A good question, Charlotte. But do you take what
I have said in that light? 
I have done for the present, Sir: But I hope, when
you return, we shall come to an eclaircissement. 
Needs it one? —Will not better and more interesting
subjects have taken place by that time? —And he
look'd at her with an eye of particular meaning. 
Now is he beginning to wind about me, whisper'd
she to me, as I told you at Colnebrooke. Were he
and I alone, he'd have me before I knew where I was. 
Had he been a wicked man, he would have been a
very wicked one. 
She was visibly uneasy; but was afraid to say any
more on the subject. 
Lady L. whisper'd—Ah! Charlotte, you are taken
in your own toils. You had better let me into your
secret. I would bring you off, if I could. 
Be quiet, Lady L. 
We then talk'd of the time in the morning of our
setting out for Colnebrooke. I thought I read Miss 

Emily's mind in her eyes—Shall we not have the
pleasure of Miss Jervois's company? said I. 
She bowed to me, and smiled. 
The very thing that Emily was petitioning to me
for, said Sir Charles: And I wish'd, ladies, to have
the motion come from one of you. 
Emily shall go with us, I think, said Miss Grandison. 
Thank you, madam, said she: I will take care not
to break in upon you impertinently. 
What! dost thou too think we have secrets, child? 
Consent with your usual grace, Charlotte: Are you
not too easily affected? Sir Charles spoke this smiling. 
Every-thing you say, Sir Charles, affects me. 
I ought then to be very careful of what I say. If I
have given my sister pain, I beg her to forgive me. 
I am afraid to go on, whisper'd she to me. Were he
and I only together, my heart would be in his hand in
a moment. 
I have only this to observe, Miss Grandison, whisper'd
I—When you are too hard upon me, I know
to whom to apply for revenge. 
Such another word, Harriet, and I'll blow you up! 
What could she mean by that? —Blow me up! I
have lock'd up my aunt's last letters, where so much is
said about entangling, and inclination, and so-forth. 
When any-thing occurs, that we care not to own,
I see by Miss Grandison, that it is easy for the slightest
hint to alarm us. 
But Sir Charles to say so seriously as he did, “That
his life was a various life;” and that “he had better
not have known some things himself,” affects me
not a little. What can a man of his prudence have
had to disturb him? But my favourite author says, 

Yet, with a sigh o'er all mankind, I grant,
In this our day of proof, our land of hope,
The good man has his clouds that intervene,

Clouds that obscure his sublunary day;
But never conquer. Ev'n the best must own,
Patience and resignation are the pillars
Of human peace on earth.—

[Night-thoughts. 
But so young a man! so prudent! as I said; and
so generally beloved! But that he is so, may be the
occasion. —Some lady, I doubt! —What sad people are
we women at this rate! Yet some women may have
the worst of it. What are your thoughts on all these
appearances, Lucy? 
Miss Grandison, as I said, is uneasy. These are
the words that disturb her: “Only this one hint, my
sister: Whenever you condescend to consult me,
let me have every-thing before me, that shall be
necessary to enable me to form a judgment.” —And
so they would me in her case. 
But it seems plain from Sir Charles's hint, that he
keeps to himself (as Miss Grandison once indeed said
in his favour) those intelligences which would disturb
her, and his other friends, to know. The secret which
he would have made of the wicked challenge; his
self-invited breakfasting with Sir Hargrave; are proofs,
among others, of this: And if this be his considerate
motive, what a forward, what a censorious creature
have I been, on so many occasions, to blame him for
his reserves, and particularly for his Canterbury excursions! 
I think I will be cautious for the future, how I
take upon me to censure those actions, which in such a
man I cannot account for. 
Miss Grandison, on her brother's withdrawing with
Dr. Bartlett, said, Well, now that my cousin Grandison
will accompany my brother to Canterbury, we
shall have that secret out in course. 
Lady L. It seems to be your fault, Charlotte, that
we have not had it before. 
Miss Gr. Be quiet, Lady L. 

Mr. Gr. Perhaps not. You'll find I can keep a
secret, cousin; especially if I am desired to do so. 
Miss Gr. I shall wonder at that. 
Mr. Gr. Why so? 
Miss Gr. Shall I give it you in plain English? 
Mr. Gr. You don't use to mince it. 
Miss Gr. It would be strange, cousin, if a man
should make a secret of an innocent piece of intelligence,
who has told stories of himself, and gloried in
them, that he ought, if true, to have been hanged
for. —You would have it. 
Mr. Gr. I knew I must have the plain English,
whether I ask'd for it or not. But give me leave to
say, cousin Charlotte, that you made not so superior a
figure just now. 
Miss Gr. True, Mr. Grandison. There is but
one man in the world, of whom I stand in awe. 
Mr. Gr. I believe it; and hope you never design
to marry, for that reason. 
Miss Gr. What a wretch is my cousin! Must a
woman stand in awe of her husband? Whether, Sir,
is marriage a state of servitude or of freedom to a woman? 
Mr. Gr. Of freedom, as women generally make
it—Of servitude, if they know their duty. —Pardon
me, Ladies. 
Miss Gr. Don't pardon him. I suppose, Sir, it is
owing to your consciousness, that you have only the
will, and not the spirit, to awe a woman of sense, that
you are a single man at this day. 
Lady L. Pray, my Lord, what have I done, that
you treat me with so much contempt? 
Lord L. Contempt! my best life! —How is that? 
Lady L. You seem not to think it worth your
while to over-awe me. 
Miss Gr. Lord, my dear! how you are mistaken
in applying thus to Lord L.! Lord L. is a good man,
a virtuous man: None but rakes hold these overawing 

doctrines. They know what they deserve; 
and live in continual fear of meeting with their deserts; 
and so, if they marry, having the hearts of
slaves, they become tyrants. Miss Byron— 
Mr. Gr. The devil's in it if you two Ladies want
help. I fly the pit. 
Lord L. And I think, Mr. Grandison, you have
fought a hard battle. 
Mr. Gr. By my soul, I think so too. I have held
it out better than I used to do. 
Miss Gr. I protest I think you have. We shall
brighten you up among us. I am mistaken if there
were not two or three smart things said by my cousin. 
Pray, did any-body mind them? I should be glad to
hear them again. Do you recollect them yourself,
cousin? 
Mr. Gr. You want to draw me on again, cousin
Charlotte. But the d—l fetch me, if you do. I'll
leave off while I am well. 
Miss Gr. Would you have thought it, Lady L.! 
My cousin has discretion as well as smartness. I congratulate
you, Sir: A new discovery! —But hush! 
'Tis time for both to have done. 
Sir Charles enter'd. Mr. Grandison a sufferer
again? said he. 
Mr. Gr. No, no! Pretty well off this bout! — 
Miss Byron, I have had the better end of the staff, I
believe. 
Harriet. I can't say that, Sir. But you got off,
I believe, in very good time. 
Mr. Gr. And that's a victory, to what it used to
be, I can assure you. Nobody ever could awe Miss
Grandison. 
Miss Gr. Coward! —You would now begin again,
would you? —Sir Charles loves to take me down. 
Mr. Gr. Never, madam, but when you are up:
And laugh'd heartily. 
Miss Gr. Witty too! —A man of repartee! A 

verbal wit! And that's half as good as a punster, at
any time. 
Sir Ch. Fight it out, cousin Grandison. You can
laugh on, tho' the laugh of every other person should
be against you. 
Mr. Gr. And thou, Brutus? —It is time to have
done. 
As I think these conversations characteristic, I hope
the recital of them will be excused. Yet I am sensible,
those things that go off well in conversation, do
not always read to equal advantage. 
They would fain have engaged us to stay supper:
But we excused ourselves. I promised to breakfast
with them. 
I chose not to take my maid with me. Jenny is to
be made over to me occasionally, for the time of my
stay. Dr. Bartlett had desired to be excused. So our
party is only the two Sisters, Lord L. Miss Jervois,
and I. 
Sir Charles and Mr. Grandison are to set out for
their journey early in the morning. 
Adieu, my Lucy. It is late: And sleepiness promises
to befriend 
Your Harriet. 

