


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Monday, March 26. 
Lady L. when I was set down at her house,
told me, that Lady Clementina had been in great
agitations on the contents of the proposals left with
her. She kept her chamber all day yesterday, and
this morning Lady L. had then but just left her. I
sent up my compliments to her. She desired me to
walk up. She met me on the stair-head in tears; and
led me into her dressing-room—Have you seen the
Chevalier's proposals, madam? —I owned I had. 
—Give up for ever, said she, my scheme, my
darling scheme, for the sake of which, I—There she
stopt. 
It was easy to guess what the poor Lady was going
to say. The subject was too delicate for me to help
her out. 
Dearest Lady Clementina, said I, be pleased to
consider the good it will be in your power to do to
hundreds, according to the second article, if you can
comply. How much has our dear friend consulted
your beneficent spirit! All my fear is, that your parents
will not subscribe to their part of it. If they
will, what a favourite scheme of their own will they
give up! 
She paused—Then breaking silence—And is it your
opinion, Lady Grandison? Your opinion, joined to
the Chevalier's—Let me consider— 
She took two or three turns about the room: Then,
thinking of Sir Charles's intimation of a tour to Italy
—With what soothing, what consoling hope, said
she, does the next-to-divine man almost conciliate my
mind to his measures! —And could you, would you,
madam, think of going with us to Italy? O how
flattering are these hints! 

I should rejoice in such a tour, replied I: Love
me but in your Italy, if I should be allowed to go, as
I do you in our England, and I shall be happy in so
fine a country, as I am told it is. But, dearest Lady,
what shall we do to obtain your friends compliance
with these articles? Shall I cast myself on my knees
before your father and mother to beg theirs? You in
my hand, I in yours? 
Ever good, ever noble Lady Grandison! —But how
first shall I pacify my own heart on yielding to my
part of them? 
Let it not stick there, madam. Will not Lady
Clementina meet them one fourth of the way? It is
not more. 
Well, I will consider of it. I shall hear what they
will do. Your advice, my dear Lady Grandison,
shall have all the weight with me, that a Sister's
ought. 
I attended the summons to dinner. She excused
herself. I took leave of her for the day, declaring
my intention of going home as soon as I had dined. 
Monday night. 
Sir Charles returned with a benevolent joy brightening
his countenance. He hopes to bring this affair
to an issue not unhappy. 
He was first with the Count of Belvedere, who received
him with great emotion. I apprehended, said
he, that I was to be the sacrifice. O Grandison, did
you but know the hopes, the assurances, given me by
the General, by every-body! 
Sir Charles expatiated on every argument that could
compose his mind. 
Will she promise, will she engage, that if ever she
marry, it will be the man before you, Chevalier? 
Why did you not make that a stipulation in my favour? 
I think such a stipulation would be of disadvantage 

to your Lordship: You would be kept by it in suspense,
whatever had offered, whether in Italy or Spain; in
both which countries you have considerable connexions. 
If Lady Clementina can be brought to give
up the veil, it may not be impracticable to induce her
in time (but time must be given her) to favour with
her hand a man of your Lordship's merit and consequence. 
If otherwise, your Lordship (unfettered
either by hope or obligation) will be free to make
another choice. 
Another choice, Sir! —This to a man, who has so
long adored her; and, thro' the various turns of her
unhappy malady, still preserved for her a Love that
never any other woman shared in! —But, if you please,
we will hear what her father, her mother, and other
friends, say to the articles you have drawn up. 
They went to them. After dinner the important
subject had a full and solemn consideration. 
Signor Jeronymo and Mrs. Beaumont only at first
espoused the proposed plan in all its articles; but
every-body came into it at last. God be praised! 
Now surely the dear Lady must be happy. But the
poor Count of Belvedere! He has not, in giving up
his inclination, such a noble triumph of self-conquering
duty as she had to support her in the same arduous
trial. But then he cherishes a hope, that there
remains a possibility; the Lady still unmarried. 
Noblest of women! Is Harriet a bar? —No! She
is what you generously wished her to be. 
Tuesday, Mar. 27. 
Sir Charles excused himself to Lady Clementina
by a few lines last night, for not waiting on her
yesterday; and just as he was setting out to attend
her this morning, the following note was brought
him from Signor Jeronymo; the contents designed to
strengthen his endeavours to prevail on the Lady to
accept his plan. 


Tuesday morn. 
My dearest Grandison,
You will make us all happy, if you can prevail upon
our beloved Clementina to accept, and subscribe
to, your generous plan, as we all most chearfully are
ready to do. “Restore yourself, my dearest Sister,
this day, or to-morrow at furthest, to the arms
of the most indulgent of parents, and to those of
the most affectionate of brothers, two of us, who
will answer for our third. How impatiently shall
we number the hours, till the happy one arrives,
that we all shall receive from the hand of the
dearest of friends, and best of men, a Sister so
much beloved!” —Ever, ever, my dear Grandison, 
Your grateful Jeronymo. 

O my dearest Lady Clementina! noblest of women!
let your Sister Harriet prevail upon you not to refuse
the offered olive-branch! 
Tuesday, two o'clock. 
Sir Charles has just now acquainted me, that he has
prevailed with Lady Clementina. To-morrow afternoon
she will throw herself at the feet of her father
and mother. Rejoice with me, my dear grandmamma! 
All my friends, rejoice with me! congratulate
me! —Is it not I myself that am going to be restored
to the most indulgent parents, brothers, friends! 
Let me gratefully add, from the information of his
aunt Grandison, whom he brought home with him,
that he was so good as to resist entreaty to dine at
Lord L's. And why? Because, as he was pleased
to give the reason (and was generously commended
for it, by Lady Clementina) that I was alone. Lord L.
proposed to send to request my company: He was
sure his Sister Grandison would oblige them. And I,
my Lord, said Sir Charles, am sure she would too:
But the time is so short, that it is not giving one of 

the most obliging women in the world an option— 
Tenderest of husbands! Kindest and most considerate
of men! —He will not subject a woman to the danger
of being a refusing Vashti; nor yet will give her reason
to tremble with a too-meanly mortified Esther. 
Tuesday evening. 
As Sir Charles and I were sitting at supper, sweetly
alone; the whole world, as it seemed, to each other
(for Mrs. Grandison chooses to be at present at Lord
L's, and was gone thither); the following Billet was
brought me, written in Italian; which thus I English: 

“To-morrow, my dearest Lady Grandison, as
the Chevalier has no doubt told you, the poor
fugitive is to be introduced to her parents. Pray
for her. But if I am to have the honour of being
looked upon as indeed your Sister, you must do
more than pray for me. Was you in earnest yesterday,
when you offered your cornforting hand to
sustain me, if I consented to cast myself at the feet
of my Father and Mother? Lady L. is so good as
to consent in person to acknowlege the protection
she has given me. Will you, my Sister, be my
Sister on this awful occasion? —Will you lend me
your supporting hand? —If you, as well as Lady L.
credit the run-away penitent with your appearance
in her favour, then will she, with more courage
than can otherwise fall to her share, look up to
those parents, and to those brothers, whose indulgent
bosoms she has filled with so much anguish. 
Till to-morrow is over, she dare not sign the respectable
addition to the name of 
“Clementina”.
Tuesday evening. 

Will I! repeated I, as soon as I had read it: Was
I in earnest yesterday! —Indeed I was: Indeed I will. 
Read it my, dearest Sir, and give me leave to answer
its contents, as my amiable Sister wishes. 

He had looked benignly at his servants, and at the
door; and they withdrew, as soon as the billet was
brought, on my saying, From the Lady! 
Scenes that may be expected to be tender, said he,
will not, I hope, affect too much the spirits of my
angel—But it is a request as kindly made by Clementina,
as generously complied with by you. I will tell
you, my dear, how, if the Lady please, we will order
it. After dinner you shall call upon your worthily
adopted Sister, and take her and Lady L. to Grosvenor-Square. 
I will be there to receive her, and present
her to her friends, tho' I doubt not but she will
meet with a joyful welcome. I will acquaint her with
this to-morrow morning. 
Wednesday morn. March 28. 
Lady Clementina approves of my calling upon her
and Lady L. and of Sir Charles's being at Grosvenor-Square,
ready to receive her. I am to attend her
about five in the afternoon. She is, it seems, full of
apprehensions. 
Wednesday night, Ten o'clock. 
We are just returned from Grosvenor-Square— 
Dear Sir, I obey you. Sir Charles, in tenderness to
me, insists upon my deferring writing till to-morrow. 
The first command he has laid upon me. 

