



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wednesday morning, 9 o' clock. 
My aunt Hervey lay here last night, and is but
just gone from me. She came up to me with
my sister. They would not trust my aunt without
this ill-natur'd witness. When she enter'd my chamber,
I told her, That this visit was a high favour to
a poor prisoner, in her hard confinement. I kiss'd her
hand. She, kindly saluting me, said, Why this distance
to your aunt, my dear, who loves you so well? 
She own'd, That she came to expostulate with me,
for the peace sake of the family: For that she could
not believe it possible, if I did not conceive myself unkindly
treated, that I, who had ever shewn such a
sweetness of temper, as well as manners, should be
thus resolute, in a point so very near to my father,
and all my friends. My mamma and she were both
willing to impute my resolution to the manner I had
been begun with; and to my supposing, that my brother
had originally more of a hand in the proposals
made by Mr. Solmes, than my father, or other friends. 
And fain would she have furnish'd me with an excuse
to come off of my opposition; Bella all the while
humming a tune, and opening this book and that,
without meaning; but saying nothing. After having
shewed me, that my opposition could not be of signification, 

my father's honour being engaged, she concluded
with inforcing upon me my duty, in stronger
terms than I believe she would have done, the circumstances
of the case consider'd, had not my sister been
present. It would but be repeating what I have so often
mentioned, to give you the arguments that passed on
both sides. So I will only recite what she was pleased
to say, that carried with it the face of newness. 
When she found me inflexible, as she was pleased
to call it, she said—For her part, she could not but
say, that if I were not to have either Mr. Solmes or
Mr. Lovelace, and yet, to make my friends easy, must
marry, she should not think amiss of Mr. Wyerley. 
What did I think of Mr. Wyerley? 
Ay, Clary, put in my sister, what say you to Mr.
Wyerley? 
I saw thro' this immediately. It was said on purpose,
I doubted not, to have an argument against
me of absolute prepossession in Lovelace's favour: 
Since Mr. Wyerley every-where proclaims his value,
even to veneration, for me; and is far less exceptionable,
both in person and mind, than Mr. Solmes: 
And I was willing to turn the tables, by trying how far
Solmes's terms might be dispens'd with; since the same
terms could not be expected from Mr. Wyerley? 
I therefore desired to know, Whether my answer,
if it should be in favour of Mr. Wyerley, would release
me from Mr. Solmes? —For I own'd, that I had
not the aversion to him, that I had to the other. 
Nay, she had no commission to propose such a
thing—She only knew, that my papa and mamma
would not be easy till Mr. Lovelace's hopes were intirely
defeated. 
Cunning creature! said my sister. —And this, and
her joining in the question before, confirm'd me, that
it was a designed snare for me. 
Don't You, dear Madam, said I, put questions
that can answer no end, but to support my brother's 

schemes against me. —But are there any hopes of an
end to my sufferings and disgrace, without having this
hated man imposed upon me? Will not what I have
offer'd be accepted? I am sure it ought: I will venture
to say That. 
Why, niece, if there be not any such hopes, I presume
you don't think yourself absolv'd from the duty
due from a child to her parents? 
Yes, said my sister, I do not doubt but it is Miss
Clary's aim, if she does not fly to her Lovelace, to
get her estate into her own hands, and go to live at
The Grove, in that independence upon which she
builds all her perverseness. And, dear heart! my
little love, how will you then blaze away! Your
mamma Norton your oracle, with your Poor at your
gates, mingling so proudly and so meanly with the ragged
herd! Reflecting, by your ostentation, upon all
the Ladies in the county, who do not as you do. 
This is known to be your scheme! And the Poor
without-doors, and Lovelace within, with one hand
building up a name, pulling it down with the other! — 
O what a charming scheme is this! —But let me tell
you, my pretty little fighty one, that my papa's living
Will shall controul my grandfather's dead one; and
That estate will be disposed of as my fond grandfather
would have disposed of it, had he lived to see such a
change in his favourite. In a word, Miss, it will be
kept out of your hands, till my papa sees you discreet
enough to have the management of it, or till you can
dutifully, by Law, tear it from him. 
Fie, Miss Harlowe, said my aunt, this is not pretty
to your sister. 
O Madam, let her go on. This is nothing to
what I have borne from Miss Harlowe. She is either
commissioned to treat me ill by her envy, or by an
higher authority, to which I must submit. —As to
revoking the estate, what hinders, if I pleased? I
know my power; but have not the least thought of 

exerting it. Be pleased to let my papa know, that,
whatever be the consequences to myself, were he to
turn me out of doors (which I should rather he would,
than to be confined and insulted as I am), and were I
to be reduced to indigence and want, I would seek
no resources, that should be contrary to his will. 
For that matter, child, said my aunt, were you to
marry, you must do as your husband will have you. 
If that husband be Mr. Lovelace, he will be glad of
any opportunity of embroiling the families more. And
let me tell you, niece, if he had the respect for you
he pretends to have, he would not be upon such defiances
as he is. He is known to be a very revengeful
man; and were I you, Miss Clary, I should be
afraid he would wreak upon me that vengeance, tho' I
had not offended him, which he is continually threatening
to pour upon the family. 
Mr. Lovelace's threaten'd vengeance is in return
for threaten'd vengeance. It is not every-body will
bear insult, as, of late, I have been forced to bear it. 
O how my sister's face shone with passion! 
But Mr. Lovelace, proceeded I, as I have said
twenty and twenty times, would be quite out of the
question, were I to be generously treated! 
My sister said something with great vehemence: 
But only raising my voice, to be heard, without
minding her, Pray, Madam, provokingly interrogated
I, was he not known to have been as wild a man,
when he was at first introduced into our family, as
he now is said to be? Yet then, the common phrases
of wild oats, and black oxen, and such-like, were
qualifiers; and marriage, and the wise's discretion,
were to perform wonders—But (turning to my sister)
I find I have said too much. 
O thou wicked reflecter! —And what made me abhor
him, think you, but the proof of those villainous
freedoms that ought to have had the same effect upon
you, were you but half so good a creature as you
pretend to be? 

Proof, did you say, Bella! I thought you had not
proof? —But you know best. [Was not this very spiteful,
my dear?] 
Now, Clary, would I give a thousand pounds to
know all that is in thy little rancorous and reflecting
heart, at this moment. 
I might let you know for a much less sum, and not
be afraid of being worse treated than I have been. 
Well, young Ladies, I am sorry to see things run
so high between you. You know, niece (to me),
you had not been confined thus to your apartment,
could your mamma by condescensions, or your papa
by authority, have been able to have done any thing
with you. But how can you expect, when there must
be a concession on one side, that it should be on theirs? 
If my Dolly, who has not the hundredth part of your
understanding, were thus to set herself up in absolute
contradiction to my will, in a point so material, I
should not take it well of her—Indeed I should not. 
I believe not, Madam: And if Miss Hervey had just
such a brother, and just such a sister (you may look,
Bella!)—and if both were to aggravate her parents,
as my brother and sister do mine—Then, perhaps,
you might use her as I am used: And if she hated the
man you proposed to her, and with as much reason
as I do Mr. Solmes— 
[And loved a Rake and Libertine, Miss, as you do
Lovelace, said my sister—] 
Then might she (continued I, not minding her)
beg to be excused from obeying. But yet if she did,
and would give you the most solemn assurances, and
security besides, that she never would have the man
you disliked, against your consent—I dare say, Miss
Hervey's father and mother would sit down satisfy'd,
and not endeavour to force her inclinations. 
So!—said my sister, with uplifted hands, father and
mother now come in for their share! 
But if, child, reply'd my aunt, I knew she loved 

a Rake, and suspected, that she sought only to gain
time, in order to wire-draw me into a consent— 
I beg pardon, Madam, for interrupting you; but
if Miss Hervey could obtain your consent, what further
would be to be said? 
True, child; but she never should. 
Then, Madam, it never would be. 
That I doubt, niece. 
If you do, Madam, can you think confinement and
ill usage is the way to prevent the apprehended rashness? 
My dear, this sort of intimation would make one
but too apprehensive, that there is no trusting to
yourself, when one knows your inclination. 
That apprehension, Madam, seems to have been
conceived before this intimation was made, or the least
cause for it given. Why else the disgraceful confinement
I have been laid under? —Let me venture to
say, that my sufferings are rather owing to designed
terror, knowing there were too good grounds for my
opposition, than doubt of my conduct; for, when
they were inflicted upon me first, I had given no cause
of doubt; nor should there now be room for any, if
my discretion might be trusted to. 
My aunt, after a little hesitation, said, But, consider,
my dear, what confusion will be perpetuated
in your family, if you marry this hated Lovelace? 
And, let it be considered, what misery to me, Madam,
if I marry that hated Solmes? 
Many a young creature has thought she could not
love a man, with whom she has afterwards been very
happy. Few women, child, marry their first loves. 
That may be the reason there are so few happy
marriages. 
But there are few first impressions fit to be encouraged. 
I am afraid so too, Madam. I have a very indifferent
opinion of light and first impressions. But, as I
have often said, all I wish for is, to have leave to live
single. 

Indeed you must not, Miss. Your father and mother
will be unhappy till they see you marry'd, and out
of Lovelace's reach. —I am told, that you propose to
condition with him (so far are matters gone between
you), never to have any man, if you have not him. 
I know no better way to prevent mischief on all
sides, I freely own it—And there is not, if he be out
of the question, another man in the world, I can
think favourably of. —Nevertheless, I would give all I
have in the world, that he were marry'd to some other
person—Indeed I would, Bella, for all you put on
that smile of incredulity. 
May be so, Clary: But I will smile for all that. 
If he be out of the question! repeated my aunt— 
So, Miss Clary, I see how it is. —I will go down. — 
(Miss Harlowe, shall I follow you?) —And I will
endeavour to persuade your papa to let my sister herself
come up: And a happier event may then result.— 
Depend upon it, Madam, said my sister, This will
be the case: My mamma and she will be both in tears; 
but with this different effect; My mamma will come
down soften'd, and cut to the heart; but will leave her
favourite harden'd, from the advantages she will think
she has over my mamma's tenderness. —Why, Madam,
it was for this very reason the girl is not admitted into
her presence. 
Thus she run on, as she went down-stairs. 