



&dotup;Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

&dotup;And now, that my Beloved seems secure in
my net, for my project upon the vixen Miss
Howe, and upon her Mother: In which the officious
prancer Hickman is to come in for a dash. 
&dotup;But why upon her Mother, methinks thou
askest; who, unknown to herself, has only acted,
by thy impulse, thro' thy agent Joseph Leman,
upon the folly of old Tony the Uncle? 
&dotup;No matter for that: She believes she acts upon
her own judgment; and deserves to be punished
for pretending to judgment, when she has none. — 
Every living soul, but myself, I can tell thee, shall
be punished, that treats either cruelly or disrespectfully
so adored a Lady. —What a plague! is it not
enough that she is teazed and tormented in person
by me? 
&dotup;I have already broken the matter to our three
confederates; as a supposed, not a resolved-on case
indeed. And yet they know, that with me, in a
piece of mischief, Execution, with its swiftest feet,
is seldom three paces behind Projection, which
hardly ever limps neither. 
&dotup;Mowbray is not against it. It is a scheme, he
says, worthy of us: And we have not done anything
for a good while, that has made a noise. 

&dotup;Belton indeed hesitates a little, because matters
go wrong between him and his Thomasine; 
and the poor fellow has not the courage to have his
sore place probed to the bottom. 
&dotup;Tourville has started a fresh game, and
shrugs his shoulders, and should not chuse to go
abroad at present, if I please. For I apprehend
that (from the nature of the project) there will
be a kind of necessity to travel, till all is blown
over. 
&dotup;To Me, one country is as good as another; 
and I shall soon, I suppose, chuse to quit this paltry
Island; except the mistress of my fate will consent
to cohabit at home; and so lay me under no necessity
of surprising her into foreign parts. Traveling,
thou knowest, gives the Sexes charming
opportunities of being familiar with one another. 
A very few days and nights must now decide all
matters betwixt me and my fair Inimitable. 
&dotup;Doleman, who can act in these causes only
as chamber-counsel, will inform us by pen and ink
[his right hand and right side having not yet been
struck, and the other side beginning to be sensible]
of all that shall occur in our absence. 
&dotup;As for THEE, we had rather have thy company
than not; for, altho' thou art a wretched fellow at
contrivance, yet art thou intrepid at execution. 
But as thy present engagements make thy attendance
uncertain, I am not for making thy part necessary
to our scheme; but for leaving thee to come
after us when abroad. I know thou canst not long
live without us. 
&dotup;The project, in short, is this: —Mrs. Howe has
an elder Sister in the Isle of Wight, who is lately
a widow; and I am well informed, that the Mother
and Daughter have engaged, before the latter
is married, to pay a visit to this Lady, who is rich,
and intends Miss for her heiress; and in the interim 

will make her some valuable presents on
her approaching Nuptials; which, as Mrs. Howe,
who loves money more than any-thing but herself,
told one of my acquaintance, would be worth
fetching. 
&dotup;Now, Jack, nothing more need be done, than
to hire a little trim vessel, which shall sail a pleasuring
backward and forward to Portsmouth, Spithead,
and the Isle of Wight, for a week or fortnight
before we enter upon our parts of the plot. 
And as Mrs. Howe will be for making the best
bargain she can for her passage, the master of the
vessel may have orders (as a perquisite allowed him
by his owners) to take what she will give: And
the Master's name, be it what it will, shall be
Ganmore on the occasion; for I know a rogue of
that name, who is not obliged to be of any country,
any more than we. 
&dotup;Well, then, we will imagine them on board. I
will be there in disguise. They know not any of
ye four—supposing (the scheme so inviting) that
thou canst be one. 
&dotup;'Tis plaguy hard, if we cannot find, or make, a
storm. 
&dotup;Perhaps they will be sea-sick: But whether they
be or not, no doubt they will keep their Cabin. 
&dotup;Here will be Mrs. Howe, Miss Howe, Mr. Hickman,
a Maid, and a Footman, I suppose; and thus
we will order it: 
&dotup;I know it will be hard weather: I know it will: 
And before there can be the least suspicion of the
matter, we shall be in sight of Guernsey, Jersey,
Dieppe, Cherbourg, or any-whither on the French
coast that it shall please us to agree with the winds
to blow us: And then, securing the footman, and
the women being separated, one of us, according
to lots that may be cast, shall overcome, either by
persuasion or force, the maid-servant: That will 

be no hard task; and she is a likely wench [I have
seen her often]: One, Mrs. Howe; nor can there
be much difficulty there; for she is full of health
and life, and has been long a Widow: Another
[That, says the princely Lion, must be I!] the
saucy Daughter; who will be too much frighted
to make great resistance [Violent spirits, in that Sex,
are seldom true spirits—'Tis but where they can—]: 
And after beating about the coast for three or four
days for recreation's sake, and to make sure work,
and till we see our sullen birds begin to eat and sip,
we will set them all ashore where it will be most
convenient; sell the vessel [To Mrs. Townsend's
agents, with all my heart, or to some other Smugglers]
or give it to Ganmore; and pursue our travels,
and tarry abroad till all is hushed up. 
&dotup;Now I know thou wilt make difficulties, as it is
thy way; while it is mine to conquer them. My
other vassals made theirs; and I condescended to
obviate them: As thus I will thine, first stating
them for thee according to what I know of thy
phlegm. 
&dotup;What, in the first place, wilt thou ask, shall be
done with Hickman? who will be in full parade of
dress and primness, in order to shew the old Aunt
what a devilish clever fellow of a Nephew she is to
have. 
&dotup;What! —I'll tell thee—Hickman, in good
manners, will leave the women in their Cabin— 
and, to shew his courage with his breeding, be upon
deck— 
&dotup;Well, and suppose he is? 
&dotup;Suppose he is! —Why then I hope it is easy for
Ganmore, or any-body else, myself suppose in my
pea-jacket and great watch-coat (if any other make
a scruple to do it) while he stands in the way, gaping
and staring like a novice, to stumble against
him, and push him overboard! —A rich thought! — 

Is it not, Belford? —He is certainly plaguy officious
in the Ladies correspondence; and, I am
informed, plays double between Mother and Daughter,
in fear of both. —Dost not see him, Jack? — 
I do—popping up and down, his wig and hat floating
by him; and paddling, pawing, and dashing,
like a frighted mongrel—I am afraid he never ventured
to learn to swim. 
&dotup;But thou wilt not drown the poor fellow; wilt
thou? 
&dotup;No, no! —That is not necessary to the project— 
I hate to do mischiefs supererogatory. The skiff
shall be ready to save him, while the vessel keeps
its course: He shall be set on shore with the
loss of wig and hat only, and of half of his little
wits, at the place where he embarked, or anywhere
else. 
&dotup;Well, but shall we not be in danger of being
hanged for three such enormous Rapes, altho'
Hickman should escape with only a bellyful of sea-water? 
&dotup;Yes, to be sure, when caught—But is there any
likelihood of that? —Besides, have we not been in
danger before now, for worse facts? —And what
is there in being only in danger? —If we actually
were to appear in open day in England before matters
are made up, there will be greater likelihood,
that these women will not prosecute, than that they
will. —For my own part, I should wish they may. 
Would not a brave fellow chuse to appear in court
to such an arraignment, confronting women who
would do credit to his attempt? The country is
more merciful in these cases, than in any others: 
I should therefore like to put myself upon my
country. 
&dotup;Let me indulge a few reflections upon what thou
mayst think the worst that can happen. I will suppose
that thou art one of us; and that all five are 

actually brought to tryal on this occasion: How
bravely shall we enter a court, I at the head of you,
dressed out each man, as if to his wedding-appearance! 
—You are sure of all the women, old and
young, of your side. —What brave fellows! —What
fine gentlemen! —There goes a charming handsome
man!—meaning me, to be sure! —Who
could find in their hearts to hang such a gentleman
as that! whispers one Lady, sitting perhaps, on the
right-hand of the Recorder [I suppose the scene to
be in London]: While another disbelieves that any
woman could fairly swear against me. All will
croud after me: It will be each man's happiness (if
ye shall chance to be bashful) to be neglected: I
shall be found to be the greatest criminal; and my
safety, for which the general voice will be engaged,
will be yours. 
&dotup;But then comes the triumph of triumphs, that
will make the accused look up, while the accusers
are covered with confusion. 
&dotup;Make room there! —Stand by! —Give back! — 
One receiving a rap, another an elbow, half a score
a push apiece!— 
&dotup;Enter the slow-moving, hooded-faced, down-looking
Plaintiffs.— 
&dotup;And first the Widow, with a sorrowful countenance,
tho' half-veil'd, pitying her Daughter more
than herself. The people, the women especially,
who on this occasion will be five-sixths of the
spectators, reproaching her—You'd have the conscience,
would you, to have five such brave gentlemen
as these hanged for you know not what? 
&dotup;Next comes the poor maid—who perhaps had
been ravished twenty times before; and had not
appeared now, but for company-sake; mincing,
simpering, weeping, by turns; not knowing whether
she should be sorry or glad. 

&dotup;But every eye dwells upon Miss! —See, see, the
handsome gentleman bows to her! 
&dotup;To the very ground, to be sure, I shall bow; 
and kiss my hand. 
&dotup;See her confusion! See! She turns from him! — 
Ay! that's because it is in open court, cries an
arch one! —While others admire her—Ay! that's
a girl worth venturing one's neck for! 
&dotup;Then we shall be praised—Even the Judges, and
the whole crouded Bench, will acquit us in their
hearts; and every single man wish he had been me! 
—The women, all the time, disclaiming prosecution,
were the case to be their own. To be sure,
Belford, the sufferers cannot put half so good a face
upon the matter as we. 
&dotup;Then what a noise will this matter make! —Is it
not enough, suppose us moving from the Prison to
the Sessions-house (a) , to make a noble heart thump
it away most gloriously, when such an one finds
himself attended to his tryal by a parade of guards
and officers, of miens and aspects warlike and unwarlike; 
himself their whole care, and their business!
—weapons in their hands, some bright, some
rusty, equally venerable for their antiquity and inoffensiveness!
others, of more authoritative demeanour,
strutting before with fine painted staves!
shoals of people following, with a Which is he
whom the young Lady appears against? —Then, let
us look down, look up, look round, which way
we will, we shall see all the doors, and shops, the
windows, the sign-irons and balconies (garrets,
gutters, and chimney-tops included) all white-capt,
black-hooded, and periwigg'd, or crop-ear'd up by
the Immobile Vulgus: While the floating street-swarmers, 

who have seen us pass by at one place,
run with stretched-out necks, and strained eye-balls,
a round-about way, and elbow and shoulder themselves
into places by which we have not passed, in
order to obtain another sight of us; every street
continuing to pour out its swarms of late-comers,
to add to the gathering snowball; who are content
to take descriptions of our persons, behaviour, and
countenances, from those who had the good fortune
to have been in time to see us. 
&dotup;Let me tell thee, Jack, I see not why (to judge
according to our principles and practices) we should
not be as much elated in our march, were this to
happen to us, as others may be upon any other the
most mob-attracting occasion—Suppose a Lord-Mayor
on his Gawdy; suppose a victorious General,
or Embassador, on his public Entry—Suppose
(as I began with the lowest) the grandest parade
that can be supposed, a Coronation—For, in all
these, do not the royal guard, the heroic trained-bands,
the pendent, clinging throngs of spectators,
with their waving heads rolling to-and-fro from
house-tops to house-bottoms and street-ways, as I
have above described, make the principal part of
the Raree-shew? 
&dotup;And let me ask thee, If thou dost not think, that
either the Mayor, the Embassador, or the General,
would not make very pitiful figures on their Gala's,
did not the trumpets and tabrets call together the
Canaille to gaze at them? —Nor perhaps should we
be the most guilty Heroes neither: For who knows
how the Magistrate may have obtained his gold
chain? While the General probably returns from
cutting of throats, and from murders, sanctified by
custom only. —Cæsar, we are told (a) , had won,
at the age of Fifty-six, when he was assassinated, 

fifty pitched battles, had taken by assault above a
thousand towns, and slain near 1,200,000 men; 
I suppose exclusive of those who fell on his own
side in slaying them. Are not you and I, Jack,
innocent men, and babes in swadling-cloths, compared
to Cæsar, and to his predecessor in heroism
Alexander, dubbed for murders and depredation
Magnus? 
&dotup;The principal difference that strikes me in the
comparison between us and the Mayor, the Embassador,
the General, on their Gawdies, is, that
the mob make a greater noise, a louder huzzaing,
in the one case than in the other, which is called
acclamation, and ends frequently in higher taste, by
throwing dead animals at one another, before they
disperse; in which they have as much joy, as in
the former part of the triumph: While they will
attend us with all the marks of an awful or silent
(at most only a whispering) respect; their mouths
distended, as if set open with gags, and their voices
generally lost in goggle-eyed admiration. 
&dotup;Well, but suppose, after all, we are convicted; 
what have we to do, but in time make over our
estates, that the sheriffs may not revel in our spoils? 
—There is no fear of being hanged for such a crime
as this, while we have money or friends. —And suppose
even the worst, that two or three were to die,
have we not a chance, each man of us, to escape? 
The devil's in them, if they'll hang Five for ravishing
Three! 
&dotup;I know I shall get off for one—were it but for
family sake: And being a handsome fellow, I shall
have a dozen or two of young maidens, all dressed
in white, go to Court to beg my life—And what
a pretty shew they will make, with their white
hoods, white gowns, white petticoats, white scarves,
white gloves, kneeling for me, with their white
handkerchiefs at their eyes, in two pretty rows, 

as Majesty walks thro' them, and nods my pardon
for their sakes! —And, if once pardoned, all is
over: For, Jack, in a crime of this nature there
lies no appeal, as in a murder. 
&dotup;So thou seest the worst that can happen, should
we not make the Grand Tour upon this occasion,
but stay and take our tryals. But it is most likely,
that they will not prosecute at all. If not, no
risque on our side will be run; only taking our
pleasure abroad, at the worst; leaving friends
tired of us, in order, after a time, to return to
the same friends endeared to us, as we to them, by
absence. 
&dotup;This, Jack, is my scheme, at the first running. 
I know it is capable of improvement—For example: 
I can land these Ladies in France; whip over before
they can get a passage back, or before Hickman
can have recovered his fright; and so find
means to entrap my Beloved on board—And then
all will be right; and I need not care if I were
never to return to England. 
&dotup;Memorandum, To be considered of—Whether,
in order to complete my vengeance, I cannot
contrive to kidknap away either James Harlowe
or Solmes? or both? A man, Jack,
would not go into exile for nothing.&dotup; 