



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday, May 30. 
I have a Letter from Lord M. Such an one as I
would wish for, if I intended matrimony. But
as matters are circumstanced, I cannot think of shewing
it to my Beloved. 
My Lord regrets, ‘that he is not to be the Lady's
Nuptial Father. He seems apprehensive that I
have still, specious as my reasons are, some mischief
in my head.’ 
He graciously consents, ‘that I may marry when
I please; and offers one or both of my Cousins to
assist my Bride, and to support her spirits on the
occasion; since, as he understands, she is so much
afraid to venture with me.’ 
‘Pritchard, he tells me, has his final orders to
draw up deeds for assigning over to me in perpetuity
1000l. per annum; which he will execute
the same hour that the Lady in person owns her
marriage.’ 
He consents, ‘that the jointure be made from my
own Estate.’ 
He wishes, ‘that the Lady would have accepted
of his draught; and commends me for tendering it 

to her. But reproaches me for pride in not keeping
it myself. What the right-side gives up, the
left, he says, may be the better for.’ 
The girls, the left-sided girls, he means. 
With all my heart. If I can have my Clarissa, the
devil take every-thing else. 
A good deal of other stuff writes this stupid Peer; 
scribbling in several places half a dozen lines, apparently
for no other reason, but to bring in as many
musty words in an Old Saw. 
If thou askest, ‘How I can manage, since my
Beloved will wonder, that I have not an answer
from my Lord to such a Letter as I wrote to him; 
and if I own I have one, will expect that I should
shew it to her, as I did my Letter?’ —This I answer—That I can be informed by Pritchard, that
my Lord has the gout in his right-hand; and has ordered
him to attend me in form, for my particular
orders about the transfer: And I can see Pritchard,
thou knowest, at the King's Arms, or where-ever I
please, at an hour's warning; tho' he be at M. Hall,
I in town; and he, by word of mouth, can acquaint
me with every-thing in my Lord's Letter that is necessary
for my Charmer to know. 
Whenever it suits me, I can restore the old Peer
to his right hand, and then can make him write a
much more sensible Letter than this that he has now
sent me. 
Thou knowest, that an adroitness in the Art of
Manual Imitation, was one of my earliest attainments. 
It has been said, on this occasion, that had
I been a bad man in meum and tuum matters, I should
not have been fit to live. As to the girls, we hold
it no sin to cheat them. And are we not told, that
in being well deceived consists the whole of human
happiness? 

Wednesday, May 31. 
All still happier and happier. A very high honour
done me: A Chariot, instead of a Coach, permitted,
purposely to indulge me in the Subject of
subjects. 
Our discourse in this sweet Airing turned upon our
future manner of life. The Day is bashfully promised
me. Soon was the answer to my repeated urgency. 
Our Equipage, our Servants, our Liveries, were
parts of the delightful subject. A desire that the
wretch who had given me intelligence out of the family
(honest Joseph Leman) might not be one of our
menials; and her resolution to have her faithful
Hannah, whether recovered or not; were signified; 
and both as readily assented to. 
&dotup;Her wishes, from my attentive behaviour, when
with her at St. Paul's (a) , that I would often accompany
her to the Divine Service, were gently
intimated, and as readily engaged for. I assured
her, that I ever had respected the Clergy in a body; 
and some individuals of them (her Dr. Lewen for
one) highly: And that were not going to church an
act of Religion, I thought it [as I told thee once]
(b)  a most agreeable sight to see Rich and Poor, all
of a company, as I might say, assembled once a
week in one place, and each in his or her best attire,
to worship the God that made them. Nor
could it be a hardship upon a man liberally educated,
to make one on so solemn an occasion, and
to hear the harangue of a man of Letters (tho' far
from being the principal part of the service, as it
is too generally looked upon to be) whose studies
having taken a different turn from his own, he must
always have something new to say. 
&dotup;She shook her head, and repeated the word New: 
But looked as if willing to be satisfied for the present 

with this answer. To be sure, Jack, she
means to do great despight to his Satanic Majesty
in her hopes of reforming me. No wonder therefore
if he exerts himself to prevent her, and to be
revenged—But how came this in? —I am ever of
party against myself. —One day, I fansy, I shall
hate myself on recollecting what I am about at this
instant. But I must stay till then. We must all
of us do something to repent of.&dotup; 
The Reconciliation-prospect was enlarged upon. 
If her Uncle Harlowe will but pave the way to it,
and if it can be brought about, she shall be happy. 
—Happy, with a sigh, as it is Now possible she
can be!— 
She wont' forbear, Jack! 
I told her, that I had heard from Pritchard, just
before we set out on our Airing, and expected him
in town to-morrow from Lord M. to take my directions. 
I spoke with gratitude of my Lord's kindness
to me; and with pleasure of Lady Sarah's, Lady
Betty's, and my two Cousins Montague's veneration
for her: As also of his Lordship's concern that his
gout hindered him from writing a reply with his own
hand to my last. 
She pitied my Lord. She pitied poor Mrs. Fretchville
too; for she had the goodness to enquire after
her. The dear creature pitied every-body that seemed
to want pity. Happy in her own prospects, she had
leisure to look abroad, and wishes every-body equally
happy. 
It is likely to go very hard with Mrs. Fretchville. 
Her Face, which she had valued herself upon, will
be utterly ruined. ‘This good, however, as I could
not but observe, she may reap from so great an
evil—As the greater malady generally swallows up
the less, she may have a grief on this occasion,
that may diminish the other grief, and make it
tolerable.’ 

I had a gentle reprimand for this light turn on so
heavy an evil—‘For what was the loss of Beauty to
the loss of a good Husband?’ —Excellent creature! 
Her hopes (and her pleasure upon those hopes) that
Miss Howe's Mother would be reconciled to her, were
also mentioned. Good Mrs. Howe was her word, for
a woman so covetous, and so remorsless in her covetousness,
that no one else will call her good. But this
dear creature has such an extension in her Love, as
to be capable of valuing the most insignificant animal
related to those whom she respects. Love me,
and love my dog, I have heard Lord M. say. —Who
knows, but that I may in time, in compliment to
myself, bring her to think well of thee, Jack? 
But what am I about? —Am I not all this time arraigning
my own heart? —I know I am, by the remorse
I feel in it, while my pen bears testimony to
her excellence. But yet I must add (for no selfish
consideration shall hinder me from doing justice to
this admirable creature) that in this conversation she
demonstrated so much prudent knowlege in everything
that relates to that part of the domestic management
which falls under the care of a Mistress of a
Family, that I believe she has no equal of her years
in the world. 
&dotup;But, indeed, I know not the subject on which
she does not talk with admirable distinction; insomuch
that could I but get over my prejudices against
Matrimony, and resolve to walk in the dull
beaten path of my ancestors, I should be the happiest
of men—And if I cannot, perhaps I may be
ten times more to be pitied than she.&dotup; 
My heart, my heart, Belford, is not to be trusted— 
I break off, to re-peruse some of Miss Howe's virulence. 
* *
Cursed Letters, these of Miss Howe, Jack!— 
Do thou turn back to those of mine, where I take
notice of them. —I proceed— 

Upon the whole, my Charmer was all gentleness,
all ease, all serenity, throughout this sweet excursion. 
Nor had she reason to be otherwise: For it being the
first time that I had the honour of her company alone,
I was resolved to encourage her, by my respectfulness,
to repeat the favour. 
On our return, I found the Counsellor's Clerk
waiting for me, with a draught of the Marriage-settlements. 
They are drawn, with only the necessary variations,
from those made for my Mother. The original of
which (now returned by the Counsellor) as well as the
new draughts, I have put into my Beloved's hands. 
These Settlements of my Mother made the Lawyer's
work easy; nor can she have a better precedent; 
the great Lord S. having settled them, at the request
of my Mother's relations; all the difference, my
Charmer's are 100l. per annum more than my Mother's. 
I offered to read to her the old deed, while she
looked over the draught; for she had refused her presence
at the examination with the Clerk: But this
she also declined. 
I suppose she did not care to hear of so many children,
first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and
seventh Sons, and as many Daughters, to be begotten
upon the body of the said Clarissa Harlowe. 
Charming matrimonial Recitativoes!—tho' it is always
said lawfully begotten too—As if a man could
beget children unlawfully upon the body of his own
Wife. —But thinkest thou not that these arch rogues
the Lawyers hereby intimate, that a man may have
children by his Wife before marriage? —This must be
what they mean. Why will these sly fellows put an
honest man in mind of such rogueries? —But hence,
as in numberless other instances, we see, that Law
and Gospel are two very different things. 
Dorcas, in our absence, tried to get at the wain 

scot-box in the dark closet. But it cannot be done
without violence. And to run a risque of consequence
now, for mere curiosity-sake, would be inexcuseable. 
Mrs. Sinclair and the Nymphs are all of opinion,
that I am now so much a favourite, and have such a
visible share in her confidence, and even in her affections,
that I may do what I will, and plead for excuse
violence of passion; which, they will have it,
makes violence of action pardonable with their Sex; 
as well as an allowed extenuation with the unconcerned
of both Sexes; and they all offer their helping hands. 
Why not? they say: Has she not passed for my wife
before them all? —And is she not in a fine way of
being reconciled to her friends? And was not the
want of that Reconciliation the pretence for postponing
Consummation? 
They again urge me, since it is so difficult to make
Night my friend, to an attempt in the Day. They
remind me, that the situation of their house is such,
that no noises can be heard out of it; and ridicule me
for making it necessary for a Lady to be undressed. 
It was not always so with me, poor old man! Sally
told me; saucily flinging her handkerchief in my
face. 