



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Thursday, May 25. 
Thou seest, Belford, how we now drive before
the wind. —The dear creature now comes almost
at the first word, whenever I desire the honour
of her company. I told her last night, that, apprehending
delay from Pritchard's slowness, I was determined
to leave it to my Lord to make his compliments
in his own way; and had actually that afternoon
put my writings into the hands of a very eminent
Lawyer, Counsellor Williams, with directions
for him to draw up Settlements from my own Estate,
and conformable to those of my Mother; which I
put into his hands at the same time. It had been, I
assured her, no small part of my concern, that her
frequent displeasure, and our mutual misapprehensions,
had hindered me from advising with her before
on this subject. Indeed, indeed, my dearest 

life, said I, you have hitherto afforded me but a very
thorny courtship. 
She was silent. Kindly silent. For well know I,
that she could have recriminated upon me with a vengeance. 
But I was willing to see, if she were not
loth to disoblige me now. I comforted myself, I
said, with the hopes, that all my difficulties were now
over; and that every past disobligation would be
buried in oblivion. 
Now, Belford, I have actually deposited these
writings with Counsellor Williams; and I expect the
draughts in a week at farthest. So shall be doubly
armed. For if I attempt, and fail, these will be
ready to throw in, to make her have patience with
me till I can try again. 
I have more contrivances still in embryo. I could
tell thee of an hundred, and yet hold another hundred
in petto, to pop in as I go along, to excite thy
surprize, and to keep up thy attention. Nor rave
thou at me; but, if thou art my friend, think of
Miss Howe's Letters, and of her Smuggling Scheme. 
All owing to my fair captive's informations and incitements. 
Am I not a Villain, a Fool, a Beelzebub,
with them already? —Yet no harm done by me, nor
so much as attempted? 
Every-thing of this nature, the dear creature answered
(with a downcast eye, and a blushing cheek)
she left to me. 
I proposed my Lord's Chapel for the celebration,
where we might have the presence of Lady Betty,
Lady Sarah, and my two Cousins Montague. 
She seemed not to favour a public celebration; and
waved this subject for the present. I doubted not
but she would be as willing as I, to decline a public
wedding; so I pressed not this matter farther just
then. 
But patterns I actually produced; and a Jeweller
was to bring as this day several sets of jewels for her 

choice. But the patterns she would not open. She
sighed at the mention of them; The second patterns,
she said, that had been offered to her (a) : 
And very peremptorily forbid the Jeweller's coming:
as well as declined my offer of causing my Mother's
to be new-set; at least for the present. 
I do assure thee, Belford, I was in earnest in all
this. My whole Estate is nothing to me, put in
competition with her hoped-for favour. 
She then told me, that she had put into writing
her opinion of my general proposals; and there had
expressed her mind, as to cloaths and jewels: But
on my strange behaviour to her (for no cause that she
knew of) on Sunday night, she had torn the paper
in two. 
I earnestly pressed her to let me be favoured with
a sight of this paper, torn as it was. And after
some hesitation, she withdrew, and sent it to me by
Dorcas. 
I perused it again. It was in a manner new to
me, tho' I had read it so lately: And, by my soul,
I could hardly stand it. An hundred admirable
creatures I called her to myself. But I charge thee,
write not a word to me in her favour, if thou meanest
her well; for if I spare her, it must be all ex
mero motu. 
You may easily suppose, when I was re-admitted
to her presence, that I ran over in her praises, and
in vows of Gratitude, and everlasting Love. But
here's the devil; she still receives all I say with reserve; 
or if it be not with reserve, she receives it so
much as her due, that she is not at all raised by it. 
Some women are undone by praise, by flattery. I
myself, a man, am proud of praise. Perhaps thou
wilt say, that those are most proud of it, who least
deserve it; as those are of riches and grandeur, who
are not born to either. I own, that to be superior 

to these foibles, it requires a Soul. Have I not then
a Soul? —Surely, I have. —Let me then be considered
as an Exception to the Rule. 
Now have I foundation to go upon in my terms. 
My Lord, in the exuberance of his generosity, mentions
a thousand pounds a year peny-rents. This I
know, that were I to marry this Lady, he would rather
settle upon her all he has a mind to settle, than
upon me. He has even threatened, that if I prove
not a good husband to her, he will leave all he can
at his death from me to her. Yet considers not that
a woman so perfect can never be displeased with her
husband but to his disgrace; for who will blame
her? —Another reason, why a Lovelace should
not wish to marry a Clarissa. 
But what a pretty fellow of an Uncle is this foolish
Peer, to think of making a wife independent of her
Emperor, and a Rebel of course; yet smarted himself
for an error of this kind! 
My Beloved, in her torn paper, mentions but
Two hundred pounds a year, for her separate use. I
insisted upon her naming a larger sum. She said, It
might then be Three; and I, for fear she should
suspect very large offers, named only Five; but
added the entire disposal of all Arrears in her Father's
hands, for the benefit of Mrs. Norton or whom she
pleased. 
She said, that the good woman would be uneasy if
any-thing more than a competency were done for
her. She was for suiting all her dispositions of this
kind, she said, to the usual way of life of the person. 
To go beyond it, was but to put the benefited upon
projects, or to make them aukward in a new state; 
when they might shine in that to which they were
accustomed. And to put it into so good a Mother's
power to give her Son a beginning in his business at
a proper time; yet to leave her something for herself,
to set her above want, or above the necessity of 

taking back from her child what she had been enabled
to bestow upon him; would be the height of such a
worthy parent's ambition. 
Here's prudence! Here's judgment in so young a
creature! How do I hate the Harlowes for producing
such an angel! —O why, why, did she refuse
my sincere address to tie the knot before we
came to this house! 
But yet, what mortifies my pride, is, that this exalted
creature, if I were to marry her, would not be
governed in her behaviour to me by Love, but by
Generosity merely, or by blind Duty; and had rather
live single, than be mine. 
I cannot bear this. I would have the woman
whom I honour with my name, if ever I confer this
honour upon any, forego even her superior duties for
me. I would have her look after me when I go out,
as far as she can see me, as my Rosebud after her
Johnny; and meet me at my return with rapture. 
I would be the subject of her dreams, as well as of
her waking thoughts. I would have her think every
moment lost, that is not passed with me: Sing to me,
read to me, play to me when I pleased; no joy so
great as in obeying me. When I should be inclined
to Love, overwhelm me with it; when to be serious
or solitary, if apprehensive of intrusion, retiring
at a nod; approaching me only if I smiled encouragement: 
Steal into my presence with silence; 
out of it, if not noticed, on tiptoe. Be a Lady
Easy to all my pleasures, and valuing those most who
most contributed to them; only sighing in private,
that it was not herself at the time. Thus of old did
the contending wives of the honest patriarchs; each
recommending her handmaid to her Lord, as she
thought it would oblige him, and looking upon the
genial product as her own. 
The gentle Waller says, Women are born to be controul'd. 
Gentle as he was, he knew that. A tyrant-husband 

makes a dutiful wife. And why do the Sex
love Rakes, but because they know how to direct
their uncertain wills, and manage them? 
* *
Another agreeable conversation. The Day of
days the subject. As to fixing a particular one, that
need not be done, my Charmer says, till the Settlements
are completed. As to marrying at my Lord's
Chapel, the Ladies of my family present, that would
be making a public affair of it; and the dear creature
observed with regret, that it seemed to be my
Lord's intention to make it so. 
It could not be imagined, I said, but that his
Lordship's setting out in a Litter, and coming to
town, as well as his taste for glare, and the joy he
would take to see me married at last, and to her
dear self, would give it as much the air of a public
marriage, as if the ceremony were performed at his
own Chapel, all the Ladies present. 
I cannot, said she, endure the thoughts of a public
day. It will carry with it an air of insult upon
my whole family. And, for my part, if my Lord
will not take it amiss [And perhaps he will not, as
the motion came not from himself, but from you,
Mr. Lovelace] I will very willingly dispense with
his Lordship's presence; the rather, as dress and
appearance will then be unnecessary; for I cannot
bear to think of decking my person while my parents
are in tears. 
How excellent this! Yet do not her parents richly
deserve to be in tears? 
See, Belford, with so charming a niceness, we
might have been a long time ago upon the verge of
the State, and yet found a great deal to do, before
we entered into it. 
All obedience, all resignation—No will but hers. 
I withdrew, and wrote directly to my Lord; and 

she not disapproving of it, I sent it away. The purport
as follows; for I took no copy. 
‘That I was much obliged to his Lordship for
his intended goodness to me, on an occasion the
most solemn of my life. That the admirable Lady,
whom he so justly praised, thought his Lordship's
proposals in her favour too high. That she chose
not to make a public appearance, if, without disobliging
my friends, she could avoid it, till a Reconciliation
with her own could be effected. That
altho' she expressed a grateful sense of his Lordship's
consent to give her to me with his own hand; 
yet presuming, that the motive to this kind intention
was rather to do her honour, than it otherwise
would have been his own choice (especially
as travelling would be at this time so inconvenient
to him) she thought it adviseable to save his Lordship
trouble on this occasion; and hoped he would
take as meant her declining the favour. 
‘That the Lawn will be most acceptable to us
both to retire to; and the rather, as it is so to his
Lordship. 
‘But, if he pleases, the jointure may be made
from my own Estate; leaving to his Lordship's
goodness the alternative.’ 
I conclude with telling him, ‘That I had offered
to present the Lady his Lordship's Bill; but on her
declining to accept of it (having myself no present
occasion for it) I return it inclosed, with my
thanks, &c.’ 
And is not this going a plaguy length? What a
figure should I make in Rakish Annals, if at last I
should be caught in my own gin? 
The Sex may say what they will, but a poor innocent
fellow had need to take great care of himself,
when he dances upon the edge of the matrimonial
precipice. Many a faint-hearted man, when he began
in jest, or only designed to ape gallantry, has 

been forced into earnest, by being over-prompt, and
taken at his word, not knowing how to own that he
meant less than the Lady supposed he meant. I am
the better enabled to judge that this must have been
the case of many a sneaking varlet; because I, who
know the female world as well as any man in it of
my standing, am so frequently in doubt of myself,
and know not what to make of the matter. 
Then these little sly rogues, how they lie couchant,
ready to spring upon us harmless fellows the moment
we are in their reach! —When the ice is once broken
for them, how swiftly can they make to port! — 
Mean time, the subject they can least speak to, they
most think of. Nor can you talk of the ceremony
before they have laid out in their minds how it is all
to be. —Little saucy-face designers! how first they
draw themselves in, then us! 
But be all these things as they will, Lord M. never
in his life received so handsome a Letter as this from
his Nephew 
Lovelace. 
The lady, after having given to Miss Howe the
particulars contained in Mr. Lovelace's last Letter,
thus expresses herself: 
A principal consolation arising from these favourable
appearances, is, that I, who have now but one
only friend, shall most probably, and if it be not
my own fault, have as many new ones as there are
persons in Mr. Lovelace's family; and this whether
Mr. Lovelace treat me kindly or not. And who
knows, but that by degrees, those new friends, by
their rank and merit, may have weight enough to get
me restored to the favour of my relations? Till which
can be effected, I shall not be tolerably easy. Happy
I never expect to be. Mr. Lovelace's mind and
mine are vastly different; different in essentials. 
But as matters are at present circumstanced, I pray
you, my dear friend, to keep to yourself every-thing 

that might bring discredit to him, if revealed. —Better
any-body expose a man than a wife, if I am to be
his; and what is said by you will be thought to come
from me. 
It shall be my constant prayer, that all the felicities
which this world can afford, may be yours: And
that the Almighty will never suffer you nor yours, to
the remotest posterity, to want such a friend as my
Anna Howe has been to 
Her Clarissa Harlowe. 