



Mr. Belford, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday, Sept. 28. 
Madam,
I do myself the honour to send you with This, according
to my promise (a) , copies of the posthumous
Letters written by your exalted friend. 
These will be accompanied with other Letters, particularly
a copy of one from Mr. Lovelace, begun to
be written on the 14th, and continued down to the
18th (b) . You will see by it, Madam, the dreadful
anguish that his spirits labour with, and his deep remorse. 
Mr. Lovelace sent for this Letter back. I complied; 
but I first took a copy of it. As I have not told him
that I have done so, you will be pleased to forbear communicating
of it to any-body but Mr. Hickman. That 

gentleman's perusal of it will be the same as if nobody
but yourself saw it. 
One of the Letters of Colonel Morden which I inclose,
you will observe, Madam, is only a copy (c) . 
The true reason for which, as I will ingenuously acknowlege,
is, some free, but respectful animadversions
which the Colonel has made upon your declining to
carry into execution your part of your dear friend's last
requests. I have therefore, in respect to that worthy
gentleman (having a caution from him on that head)
omitted those parts. 
Will you allow me, Madam, however, to tell you,
that I myself could not have believed that my inimitable
Testatrix's own Miss Howe would have been the
most backward in performing such a part of her dear
friend's Last Will, as is entirely in her own power to
perform—Especially, when that performance would
make one of the most deserving men in England happy; 
and whom, I presume, she proposes to honour with her
hand? 
Excuse me, Madam, I have a most sincere veneration
for you; and would not disoblige you for the
world. 
I will not presume to make remarks on the Letters I
send you; nor upon the informations I have to give
you of the dreadful end of two unhappy wretches, who
were the greatest criminals in the affair of your adorable
friend. These are the infamous Sinclair, and a
person whom you have read of, no doubt, in the Letters
of the charming innocent, by the name of Captain
Tomlinson. 
The wretched woman died in the extremest tortures
and despondency: The man from wounds got in defending
himself in carrying on a contraband trade: 
Both accusing themselves, in their last hours, for the
parts they had acted against the most excellent of women,
as of the crime that gave them the deepest remorse. 

Give me leave to say, Madam, that if your compassion
be not excited for the poor man who suffers so
greatly from his own anguish of mind, as you will observe
by his Letter he does; and for the unhappy family,
whose remorse, as you will see by Col. Morden's,
is so deep;—your terror must. And yet I shall not
wonder, if the just sense of the irreparable loss you have
sustained hardens a heart against pity, which, on a less
extraordinary occasion, would want its principal grace,
if it were not compassionate. 
I am, Madam, with the greatest respect and gratitude, 
Your most obliged and faithful humble Servant,
J. Belford. 