



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday, May 9. 
I am a very unhappy man. This Lady is said to
be one of the sweetest-tempered creatures in the
world: And so I thought her. But to me, she is one
of the most perverse. I never was supposed to be an
ill-natured mortal neither. How can it be? I imagined
for a long while, that we were born to make
each other happy: But, quite the contrary; we really
seem to be sent to plague each other. 
I will write a Comedy, I think. I have a Title
ready; and that's half the work. The Quarrelsome
Lovers. 'Twill do. There's something new and
striking in it. Yet, more or less, all Lovers quarrel. 
Old Terence has taken notice of that; and observes
upon it, That Lovers falling-out occasions Lovers
falling-in; and a better understanding of course. 'Tis
natural that it should be so. But with us, we fall-out
so often, without falling-in once; and a second
quarrel so generally happens before a first is made up; 
that it is hard to guess what event our Loves will be
attended with. &dotup;But perseverance is my glory, and
patience my handmaid, when I have in view an 

object worthy of my attempts. What is there in
an easy conquest? Hudibras questions well, 

&dotup;—What mad Lover ever dy'd
&dotup;To gain a soft and easy Bride?
&dotup;Or, for a Lady tender-hearted,
&dotup;In purling streams, or hemp, departed?&dotup;
But I will lead to the occasion of this preamble. 
I had been out. On my return, meeting Dorcas
on the stairs—Your Lady in her chamber, Dorcas? 
In the Dining-room, Sir: And if ever you hope for
an opportunity to come at a Letter, it must be now. 
For at her feet I saw one lie, which, as may be seen
by its open folds, she has been reading, with a little
parcel of others she is now busied with—All pulled
out of her pocket, as I believe: So, Sir, you'll know
where to find them another time. 
I was ready to leap for joy, and instantly resolved
to bring forward an expedient which I had held in
petto; and entering into the Dining-room, with an
air of transport, I boldly clasped my arms about her,
as she sat; she huddling up her papers in her handkerchief
all the time; the dropt paper unseen. O my
dearest life, a lucky expedient have Mr. Mennell and
I hit upon, just now. In order to hasten Mrs. Fretchville
to quit the house, I have agreed, if you approve
of it, to entertain her cook, her housemaid, and two
men-servants (about whom she was very solicitous)
till you are provided to your mind. And that no
accommodations may be wanted, I have consented to
take the houshold linen at an appraisement. 
I am to pay down five hundred pounds, and the remainder
as soon as the bills can be looked up, and the
amount of them adjusted. Thus will you have a
charming house entirely ready to receive you. Some
of the Ladies of my family will soon be with you: 
They will not permit you long to suspend my happy
day. And that nothing may be wanting to gratify 

your utmost punctilio, I will till then consent to stay
here at Mrs. Sinclair's, while you reside at your new
house; and leave the rest to your own generosity. 
O my beloved creature, will not this be agreeable to
you? I am sure it will—It must—And clasping her
closer to me, I gave her a more fervent kiss than ever
I had dared to give her before. I permitted not my
ardor to overcome my discretion however; for I took
care to set my foot upon the Letter, and scraped it
farther from her, as it were behind her chair. 
She was in a passion at the liberty I took. Bowing
low, I begged her pardon; and stooping still lower,
in the same motion, took up the Letter, and whipt it
into my bosom. 
Pox on me, for a puppy, a fool, a blockhead, a
clumsy varlet, a mere Jack Belford! —I thought myself
a much cleverer fellow than I am! —Why could
I not have been followed in by Dorcas; who might
have taken it up, while I addressed her Lady? 
For here, the Letter being unfolded, I could not
put it into my bosom, without alarming her ears, as
my sudden motion did her eyes. —Up she flew in a
moment: Traitor! Judas! her eyes flashing lightning,
and a perturbation in her eager countenance,
so charming! —What have you taken up? —And
then, what for both my ears I durst not to have done
to her, she made no scruple to seize the stolen Letter,
though in my bosom. 
What was to be done on so palpable a detection? — 
I clasped her hand, which had hold of the ravished
paper, between mine: O my beloved creature! said
I, can you think I have not some curiosity? Is it possible
you can be thus for ever employed; and I, loving
narrative Letter-writing above every other species
of writing, and admiring your talent that way, should
not (thus upon the dawn of my happiness, as I presume
to hope) burn with a desire to be admitted into
so sweet a correspondence? 

Let go my hand!—stamping with her pretty foot: 
How dare you, Sir! —At this rate, I see—Too
plainly I see—And more she could not say: But,
gasping, was ready to faint with passion and affright; 
the devil a bit of her accustomed gentleness
to be seen in her charming face, or to be heard in her
musical voice. 
Having gone thus far, loth, very loth was I to lose
my prize—Once more I got hold of the rumpled-up
Letter! —Impudent man! were her words: Stamping
again. For God's sake, then it was. I let go
my prize, lest she should faint away: But had the
pleasure first to find my hand within both hers, she
trying to open my reluctant fingers. How near was
my heart at that moment to my hand, throbbing to my
fingers ends, to be thus familiarly, although angrily,
treated by the charmer of my soul! 
When she had got it in her possession, she flew to
the door. I threw myself in her way, shut it, and,
in the humblest manner, besought her to forgive me. 
And yet do you think the Harlowe-hearted charmer
(notwithstanding the agreeable annunciation I came
in with) would forgive me? —No truly; but pushing
me rudely from the door, as if I had been nothing
[Yet do I love to try, so innocently to try, her strength
too!] she gaining that force through passion, which
I had lost thro' fear, out she shot to her own apartment
[Thank my stars she could fly no further!]; 
and as soon as she entered it, in a passion still, she
double-locked and double-bolted herself in. This my
comfort, on reflection, that, upon a greater offence,
it cannot be worse. 
I retreated to my own apartment, with my heart
full: And, my man Will. not being near me, gave
myself a plaguy knock on the forehead, with my
double fist. 
And now is my Charmer shut up from me: Refusing
to see me; refusing her meals. She resolves not 

to see me; that's more: —Never again, if she can
help it; and in the mind she is in—I hope she has
said. 
The dear creatures, whenever they quarrel with
their humble servants, should always remember this
saving clause, that they may not be forsworn. 
But thinkest thou that I will not make it the subject
of one of my first plots, to inform myself of the
reason why all this commotion was necessary on so
slight an occasion as this would have been, were not
the Letters that pass between these Ladies of a treasonable
nature? 
Wednesday Morning. 
No admission to breakfast, any more than to supper. 
I wish this Lady is not a Simpleton, after all. 
I have sent up in Capt. Mennell's name. 
A Message from Capt. Mennell, Madam. 
It won't do. She is of Baby age. She cannot
be—a Solomon, I was going to say, in every-thing. 
Solomon, Jack, was the wisest man. But didst ever
hear who was the wisest Woman? I want a comparison
for this Lady. Cunning women and witches
we read of without number. But I fansy Wisdom
never entered into the character of a woman. It is
not a requisite of the Sex. Women, indeed, make
better Sovereigns than men: But why is that? — 
Because the Women-sovereigns are governed by Men; 
the Men-sovereigns by Women. —Charming, by my
Soul! For hence we guess at the rudder by which
both are steered. 
But to put Wisdom out of the question, and to
take Cunning in; that is to say, To consider Woman
as a Woman; what shall we do, if this Lady has
something extraordinary in her head? Repeated
charges has she given to Wilson, by a particular
messenger, to send any Letter directed for her the
moment it comes. 
I must keep a good Look-out. She is not now 

afraid of her Brother's plot. I shan't be at all surprised,
if Singleton calls upon Miss Howe, as the
only person who knows, or is likely to know, where
Miss Harlowe is; pretending to have affairs of importance,
and of particular service to her, if he can
but be admitted to her speech—Of compromise, who
knows, from her Brother? 
Then will Miss Howe warn her to keep close. 
Then will my protection be again necessary. This
will do, I believe. Any-thing from Miss Howe
must. 
Joseph Leman is a vile fellow with her, and my
implement. Joseph, honest Joseph, as I call him, may
hang himself. I have played him off enough, and
have very little further use for him. No need to wear
one plot to the stumps, when I can find new ones
every hour. 
Nor blame me for the use I make of my talents. 
Who, that hath such, will let 'em be idle? 
Well then, I will find a Singleton; that's all I
have to do. 
Instantly find one! —Will!— 
Sir— 
This moment call me hither thy cousin Paul
Wheatly, just come from Sea, whom thou wert recommending
to my service, if I were to marry, and
keep a pleasure-boat. 
Presto—Will's gone—Paul will be here presently. 
Presently will he be gone to Mrs. Howe's. If Paul
be Singleton's Mate, coming from his Captain, it
will do as well as if it were Singleton himself. 
Sally, a little devil, often reproaches me with the
slowness of my proceedings. But in a play, does not
the principal entertainment lie in the first four acts? 
Is not all in a manner over when you come to the
fifth? And what a vultur of a man must he be, who
sowses upon his prey, and in the same moment trusses
and devours? 

But to own the truth, I have overplotted myself. 
To make my work secure, as I thought, I have frighted
the dear creature with the sight of my four Hottentots,
and I shall be a long time, I doubt, before I
can recover my lost ground. And then this cursed
family at Harlowe-Place have made her out of humour
with me, with herself, and with all the world,
but Miss Howe, who, no doubt, is continually adding
difficulties to my other difficulties. 
I am very unwilling to have recourse to measures
which these demons below are continually urging me
to take; because I am sure, that, at last, I shall be
brought to make her legally mine. 
One complete trial over, and I think I will do her
noble justice. 
* *
Well, Paul's gone—Gone already—Has all his
lessons. A notable fellow! —Lord W's Necessaryman
was Paul before he went to Sea. A more sensible
rogue Paul than Joseph! Not such a pretender
to piety neither, as the other. At what a price have
I bought that Joseph! I believe I must punish the
rascal at last: But must let him marry first: Then
(tho' that may be punishment enough) I shall punish
two at once in the man and his wife. And how
richly does Betty deserve punishment for her behaviour
to my goddess? 
But now I hear the rusty hinges of my Beloved's
door give me creaking invitation. My heart creaks
and throbs with respondent trepidations: Whimsical
enough tho'! For what relation has a Lover's heart
to a rusty pair of hinges? But they are the hinges
that open and shut the door of my Beloved's bed-chamber. 
Relation enough in that. 
I hear not the door shut again. I shall receive her
commands I hope anon. What signifies her keeping
me thus at distance? She must be mine, let me
do or offer what I will. Courage whenever I assume, 

all is over: For should she think of escaping from
hence, whither can she fly to avoid me? Her Parents
will not receive her. Her Uncles will not entertain
her. Her beloved Norton is in their direction, and
cannot. Miss Howe dare not. She has not one
friend in town but me—Is entirely a stranger to the
town. And what then is the matter with me, that I
should be thus unaccountably over-awed and tyrannized
over by a dear creature who wants only to
know how impossible it is that she should escape me,
in order to be as humble to me, as she is to her persecuting
relations! 
Should I even make the grand attempt, and fail,
and should she hate me for it, her hatred can be but
temporary. She has already incurred the censure of
the world. She must therefore chuse to be mine, for
the sake of soldering up her Reputation in the eye of
that impudent world. For, who that knows me,
and knows that she has been in my power, tho' but
for twenty-four hours, will think her spotless as to
fact, let her inclination be what it will? And then
human nature is such a well-known rogue, that every
man and woman judges by what each knows of him
or herself, that inclination is no more to be trusted,
where an opportunity is given, than I am; especially
where a woman young and blooming loves a man
well enough to go off with him; for such will be the
world's construction in the present case. 
She calls her maid Dorcas. No doubt, that I may
hear her harmonious voice, and to give me an opportunity
to pour out my soul at her feet; to renew all
my vows; and to receive her pardon for the past offence: 
And then, with what pleasure shall I begin
upon a new score; and afterwards wipe out that; and
begin another, and another; till the last offence passes; 
and there can be no other! And once, after that, to
be forgiven, will be to be forgiven for ever. 
* *

The door is again shut. Dorcas tells me, that
her Lady denies to admit me to dine with her; a favour
I had ordered the wench to beseech her to grant
me, the next time she saw her—Not uncivilly, however,
denies—Coming to by degrees! Nothing but
the last offence, the honest wench tells me, in the
language of her principals below, will do with her. 
The last offence is meditating. Yet this vile recreant
heart of mine plays me booty. 
But here I conclude; tho' the tyranness leaves me
nothing to do, but to read, write, and fret. 
Subscription is formal between us. Besides, I am
so totally hers, that I cannot say how much I am
thine or any other person's. 