



Mr. Lovelace. In Continuation. 

I went up to my new-taken apartment, and fell to
writing in character, as usual. I thought I had
made good my quarters. But the cruel creature, understanding 

that I intended to take up my lodgings
there, declared with so much violence against it, that
I was obliged to submit, and to accept of another
lodging, about twelve doors off, which Mrs. Moore
recommended. And all the advantage I could obtain,
was, that Will. unknown to my spouse, and
for fear of a freak, should lie in the house. 
Mrs. Moore, indeed, was unwilling to disoblige
either of us. But Miss Rawlins was of opinion,
that nothing more ought to be allow'd me: And
yet Mrs. Moore owned, that the refusal was a strange
piece of tyranny to an husband, if I were an husband. 
I had a good mind to make Miss Rawlins smart
for it. Come and see Miss Rawlins, Jack—If thou
likest her, I'll get her for thee with a wet finger, as
the saying is! 
The Widow Bevis indeed stickled hard for me
[An innocent or injur'd man will have friends everywhere]. 
She said, That to bear much with some wives,
was to be obliged to bear more: And I reflected,
with a sigh, that tame spirits must always be imposed
upon. And then, in my heart, I renew'd my vows of
revenge upon this haughty and perverse beauty. 
The second fellow came back from town about
nine o'clock, with Miss Howe's letter of Wednesday
last. ‘Collins, it seems, when he left it, had
desired, that it might be safely and speedily delivered
into Miss Lætitia Beaumont's own hands. 
But Wilson, understanding that neither she nor I
were in town [He could not know of our difference,
thou must think], resolved to take care of it till our
return, in order to give it into one of our own
hands; and now deliver'd it to her messenger.’ 
This was told her. Wilson, I doubt not, is in
her favour upon it. 

She took the letter with great eagerness, open'd it
in a hurry [I am glad she did: Yet, I believe, all
was right] before Mrs. Moore, and Mrs. Bevis (Miss
Rawlins was gone home); and said, She would not
for the world, that I should have had that letter; 
for the sake of her dear friend the writer; who had
written to her very uneasily about it. 
Her dear friend! repeated Mrs. Bevis, when she
told me this;—Such mischief-makers are always
deem'd dear friends till they are found out! 
The widow says, that I am the finest gentleman
she ever beheld. 
I have found a warm kiss now-and-then very
kindly taken. 
I might be a very wicked fellow, Jack, if I were
to do all the mischief in my power. But I am evermore
for quitting a too-easy prey to reptile-rakes. 
What but difficulty (tho' the lady is an angel), engages
me to so much perseverance here? And here,
Conquer or die, is now the determination! 
* *
I have just now parted with this honest widow. 
She called upon me at my new lodgings. I told her
that I saw, I must be further oblig'd to her in the
course of this difficult affair: She must allow me to
make her a handsome present when all was happily
over. But I desired, that she would take no notice
of what should pass between us, not even to her aunt; 
for that she, as I saw, was in the power of Miss
Rawlins: Who, being a maiden gentlewoman, knew
not the right and the fit in matrimonial matters, as
she, my dear widow, did. 
Very true: How should she? said Mrs. Bevis,
proud of knowing—nothing! But, for her part, she
desired no present. It was enough if she could contribute
to reconcile man and wife, and disappoint
mischief-makers. She doubted not, that such an envious 

creature as Miss Howe was glad that Mrs.
Lovelace had eloped—Jealousy and Love was old
Nick! 
See, Belford, how charmingly things work between
me and my new acquaintance, the widow! — 
Who knows, but that she may, after a little farther
intimacy (tho' I am banished the house on nights),
contrive a midnight visit for me to my spouse, when
all is still and fast asleep? 
Where can a woman be safe, who has once enter'd
the lists with a contriving and intrepid lover? 
But as to this letter, methinks thou sayest, of Miss
Howe? 
I knew thou wouldest be uneasy for me: But did
not I tell thee, that I had provided for every thing? 
That I always took care to keep seals intire, and to
preserve covers (a) ? Was it not easy then, thinkest
thou, to contrive a shorter letter out of a longer; 
and to copy the very words? 
I can tell thee, it was so well ordered, that, not
being suspected to have been in my hands, it was
not easy to find me out. Had it been my Beloved's
hand, there would have been no imitating it, for
such a length. Her delicate and even mind is seen
in the very cut of her letters. Miss Howe's hand is
no bad one; but is not so equal and regular. That
little devil's natural impatience hurrying on her fingers,
gave, I suppose, from the beginning, her handwriting,
as well as the rest of her, its fits and starts,
and those peculiarities, which, like strong muscular
lines in a face, neither the pen nor the pencil can
miss. 
Hast thou a mind to see what it was I permitted
Miss Howe to write to her lovely friend? Why then
read it here, as if by way of marginal observation, 

as extracted from hers of Wednesday last (a) ; 
with a few additions of my own. —The additions
underscored (* ). 

My dearest Friend,
You will perhaps think, that I have been too long silent. But I
had begun two letters at different times since my last, and written a
great deal each time; and with spirit enough, I assure you; incensed as I
was against the abominable wretch you are with, particularly on reading
yours of the 21st of the past month. 
The FIRST I intended to keep open till I could give you some accounts
of my proceedings with Mrs. Townsend. It was some days before I saw
her: And this intervenient space giving me time to reperuse what I had
written, I thought it proper to lay that aside, and to write in a style a
little less fervent; for you would have blamed me, I knew, for the
freedom of some of my expressions (execrations, if you please). And
when I had gone a good way in the SECOND, the change in your prospects,
on his communicating to you Miss Montague's letter, and his
better behaviour, occasioning a change in your mind, I laid that aside
also: And in this uncertainty thought I would wait to see the issue of
affairs between you, before I wrote again; believing that all would soon
be decided one way or other.— 
* *
Here I was forced to break off. I am too little my own mistress. — 
My mother (b)  always up and down; and watching as if I were writing
to a fellow. What need I (she asks me) lock myself in (c) , if I am
only reading past correspondencies? For that is my pretence, when
she comes poking in with her face sharpen'd to an edge, as I may say,
by a curiosity, that gives her more pain than pleasure—The Lord
forgive me; but I believe I shall huff her, next time she comes in. 
* *
Do you forgive me too, my dear. My mother ought; because she
says, I am my father's girl; and because I am sure I am hers. 
Upon my life, my dear, I am sometimes of opinion, that this vile man
was capable of meaning you dishonour. When I look back upon his past
conduct, I cannot help thinking so: What a villain, if so! —But now
I hope, and verily believe, that he has laid aside such thoughts. My
reasons for both opinions I will give you. 
For the first, to wit, that he had it once in his head to take you at
advantage if he could; I consider (d) , that pride, revenge, and a delight
to tread in unbeaten paths, are principal ingredients in the character
of this finish'd libertine. He hates all your family, yourself excepted. 
—Yet is a savage in love. His pride, and the credit which a
few plausible qualities sprinkled among his odious ones, have given him,
have secured him too good a reception from our eye-judging, our undistinguishing,
our self-flattering, our too-confiding sex, to make assiduity
and obsequiousness, and a conquest of his unruly passions, any part of
his study. 
He has some reason for his animosity to all the men, and to one
woman, of your family. He has always shewn you and his own family
too, that he prefers his pride to his interest. He is a declared marriage-hater; 
a notorious intriguer; full of his inventions, and glorying in
them. As his vanity had made him imagine, that no woman could
be proof against his love, no wonder that he struggled like a lion held in
toils (e) , against a passion that he thought not returned (f) . Hence, perhaps,
it is not difficult to believe, that it became possible for such a wretch
as this to give way to his old prejudices against marriage; and to that
revenge which had always been a first passion with him (g) . 
And hence may we account for his delays; his teazing ways; his
bringing you to bear with his lodging in the same house; his making
you pass to the people of it as his wife; his bringing you into the
company of his libertine companions; the attempt of imposing upon
you that Miss Partington for a bedfellow, &c. 
My reasons for the contrary opinion; to wit, that he is now resolved to
do you all the justice in his power to do you; are these: That he sees that
all his own family (h)  have warmly engaged themselves in your cause; 
that the horrid wretch loves you—With such a Love, however, as
Herod loved his Mariamne: That, on inquiry, I find it to be true,
that counsellor Williams (whom Mr. Hickman knows to be a man of
eminence in his profession) has actually as good as finished the settlements: 
That two draughts of them have been made; one avowedly to
be sent to this very Captain Tomlinson: And I find, that a licence has
actually been more than once endeavoured to be obtained, and that
difficulties have hitherto been made equally to Lovelace's vexation and
disappointment. My mother's proctor, who is very intimate with the
proctor apply'd to by the wretch, has come at this information, in
confidence; and hints, that as Mr. Lovelace is a man of high fortunes,
these difficulties will probably be got over. 
I had once resolved to make strict inquiry about Tomlinson; and still, if
you will, your uncle's favourite housekeeper may be sounded, at distance. 
I know that the matter is so laid (i) , that Mrs. Hodges is supposed to
know nothing of the treaty set on foot by means of Capt. Tomlinson. 
But your uncle is an old man (k) , and old men imagine themselves to be
under obligation to their paramours, if younger than themselves, and
seldom keep any thing from their knowlege. —Yet, methinks, there
can be no need; since Tomlinson, as you describe him, is so good a
man, and so much of a gentleman; the end to be answered by his being
an impostor so much more than necessary, if Lovelace has villainy
in his head. —And thus what he communicated to you of Mr.
Hickman's application to your uncle, and of Mrs. Norton's to your
mother (some of which particulars I am satisfied his vile agent Joseph
Leman could not reveal to his viler employer); his pushing on the
marriage-day, in the name of your uncle; which it could not answer
any wicked purpose for him to do; and what he writes of your uncle's
proposal, to have it thought that you were married from the time that
you had lived in one house together; and that to be made to agree with
the time of Mr. Hickman's visit to your uncle; the insisting on a
trusty person's being present at the ceremony, at that uncle's nomination
—These things make me assured that he now at last means honourably. 
But if any unexpected delays should happen on his side, acquaint me,
my dear, of the very street where Mrs. Sinclair lives; and where Mrs.
Fretchville's house is situated (which I cannot find that you have ever
mentioned in your former letters—which is a little odd); and I will
make strict inquiries of them, and of Tomlinson too; and I will (if
your heart will let you take my advice) soon procure you a refuge from him
with Mrs. Townsend. 
But why do I now, when you seem to be in so good a train, puzzle
and perplex you with my retrospections? And yet they may be of use to
you, if any delay happen on his part. 
But that I think cannot well be. What you have therefore now to do,
is, so to behave to this proud-spirited wretch, as may banish from his
mind all remembrance of past disobligations (l) , and to receive his addresses,
as those of a betrothed lover. You will incur the censure of
prudery and affectation, if you keep him at that distance, which you
have hitherto kept him at. His sudden (and as suddenly recover'd) illness
has given him an opportunity to find out that you love him [Alas,
my dear, I knew you loved him!]: He has seemed to change his nature,
and is all love and gentleness: And no more quarrels now, I beseech
you. 
I am very angry with him, nevertheless, for the freedoms which he
took with your person (m) ; and I think some guard is necessary, as he is
certainly an incroacher. But indeed all men are so; and you are such a
charming creature, and have kept him at such a distance! —But no
more of this subject. Only, my dear, be not over-nice, now you are so
near the state. You see what difficulties you laid yourself under, when
Tomlinson's letter called you again into the wretch's company. 
If you meet with no impediments, no new causes of doubt (n) , your
reputation in the eye of the world is concerned, that you should be his,
and, as your uncle rightly judges, be thought to have been his, before
now. And yet, let me tell you, I can hardly bear to think, that
these libertines should be rewarded for their villainy with the best of the
sex, when the worst of it are too good for them. 
I shall send this long letter by Collins (o) , who changes his day to
oblige me. As none of our letters by Wilson's conveyance have miscarried,
when you have been in more apparently disagreeable situations
than you are in at present, I have no doubt that this will go safe. 
Miss Lardner (p)  (whom you have seen at her cousin Biddulph's)
saw you at St. James's Church on Sunday was fortnight. She kept
you in her eye during the whole time; but could not once obtain the
notice of yours, tho' she courtesied to you twice. She thought to pay
her compliments to you when the service was over; for she doubted not
but you were married–––and for an odd reason–––because you came to
church by yourself. —Every eye, as usual, she said was upon you; 
and this seeming to give you hurry, and you being nearer the door than
she, you slid out before she could go to you. But she order'd her servant
to follow you till you were housed. This servant saw you step into a
chair which waited for you; and you ordered the men to carry you to
the place where they took you up. She describes the house as a very
genteel house, and sit to receive people of fashion: And what makes
me mention this, is, that perhaps you will have a visit from her; or
message, at least. 
So that you have Mr. Doleman's testimony to the credit of the house and
people you are with (q) ; and he is a man of fortune, and some reputation; 
formerly a rake indeed; but married to a woman of family; and,
having had a palsy-blow, one would think, a penitent. You have
also Mr. Mennell's at least passive testimony; Mr. Tomlinson's; and
now, lastly, Miss Lardner's; so that there will be the less need for inquiry: 
But you know my busy and inquisitive temper, as well as my
affection for you, and my concern for your honour. But all doubt will soon
be lost in certainty. 
Nevertheless I must add, that I would have you command me up, if
I can be of the least service or pleasure to you (r) . I value not fame; I
value not censure; nor even life itself, I verily think, as I do your
honour, and your friendship. —For is not your honour my honour? 
And is not your friendship the pride of my life? 
May heaven preserve you, my dearest creature, in honour and safety,
is the prayer, the hourly prayer, of 
Your ever faithful and affectionate
Anna Howe. 
Thursday Morn. 5. 
I have written all night. Excuse indifferent writing. My crow-quills
are worn to the stumps, and I must get a new supply. 
These Ladies always write with crow-quills, Jack. 

If thou art capable of taking in all my precautionaries
in this letter, thou wilt admire my sagacity and
contrivance, almost as much as I do myself. Thou 

seest, that Miss Lardner, Mrs. Sinclair, Tomlinson,
Mrs. Fretchville, Mennell, are all mentioned in it. 
My first liberties with her person also [Modesty, 

modesty, Belford, I doubt, is more confined to time,
place, and occasion, even by the most delicate minds,
than those minds would have it believed to be]. And
why all these taken notice of by me from the genuine 

letter, but for fear some future letter from the vixen
should escape my hands, in which she might refer to
these names? And if none of them were to have been
found in this that is to pass for hers, I might be routed
horse and foot, as Lord M. would phrase it, in a like
case. 
Devilish hard (and yet I may thank myself) to be
put to all this plague and trouble! —And for what,
dost thou ask? O Jack, for a triumph of more value
to me beforehand than an imperial crown! —Don't
ask me the value of it a month hence. But what indeed
is an imperial crown itself, when a man is used
to it? 
Miss Howe might well be anxious about the letter
she wrote. Her sweet friend, from what I have let
pass of hers, has reason to rejoice in the thought, that
it fell not into my hands. 
And now must all my contrivances be set at work,
to intercept the expected letter from Miss Howe; 
which is, as I suppose, to direct her to a place of
safety, and out of my knowlege. Mrs. Townsend
is, no doubt, in this case, to smuggle her off. I
hope the villain, as I am so frequently called between
these two girls, will be able to manage this point. 
But what, perhaps, thou askest, if the lady should
take it into her head, by the connivance of Miss Rawlins,
to quit this house privately in the night? 
I have thought of this, Jack. Does not Will. lie
in the house? And is not the Widow Bevis my fast
friend? 