



O my dearest Father and Mother,
Let me write, and bewail my miserable
hard Fate, tho' I have no Hope how what I
write can be convey'd to your Hands! —I
have now nothing to do but write, and weep,
and fear, and pray! But yet what can I hope
for, when I seem to be devoted as a Victim to
the Will of a wicked Violator of all the Laws
of God and Man! —But, gracious Heaven,
forgive me my Rashness and Despondency! O
let me not sin against thee; for thou best knowest
what is fit for thine Handmaid! —And as
thou sufferest not thy poor Creatures to be
tempted above what they can bear, I will resign
myself to thy good Pleasure. And still, I
hope, desperate as my Condition seems, that as
these Trials are not of my own seeking, nor
the Effects of my Presumption and Vanity, I
shall be enabled to overcome them, and, in
God's own good Time, be delivered from
them. 

Thus do I pray, imperfectly, as I am forc'd
by my distracting Fears and Apprehensions; and
O join with me, my dear Parents! —But,
alas! how can you know, how can I reveal to
you, the dreadful Situation of your poor Daughter! 
The unhappy Pamela may be undone,
(which God forbid, and sooner deprive me of
Life!) before you can know her hard Lot! 
O the unparallell'd Wickedness, Stratagems,
and Devices of those who call themselves Gentlemen,
yet pervert the Design of Providence,
in giving them ample Means to do Good, to
their own everlasting Perdition, and the Ruin
of poor oppressed Innocence! 
But now I will tell you what has befallen
me; and yet how shall you receive it? Here is
no honest John to carry my Letters to you! 
And, besides, I am watch'd in all my Steps; 
and no doubt shall be, till my hard Fate may
ripen his wicked Projects for my Ruin. I will
every Day, however, write my sad State; and
some way, perhaps, may be open'd to send the
melancholy Scribble to you. But, alas! when
you know it, what will it do but aggravate your
Troubles? For, O! what can the abject Poor
do against the mighty Rich, when they are determined
to oppress? 
Well, but I must proceed to write what I
had hoped to tell you in a few Hours, when I
believed I should receive your grateful Blessings,
on my Return to you from so many Hardships. 

I will begin with my Account from the
last Letter I wrote you, in which I inclosed my
poor Stuff of Verses; and continue it at times,
as I have Opportunity; tho' as I said, I know
not how it can reach you. 
The often wish'd-for Thursday Morning
came, when I was to set out. I had taken my Leave
of my Fellow-servants over-night; and a mournful
Leave it was to us all: For Men, as well as
Women-servants, wept much to part with me; 
and, for my Part, I was overwhelm'd with Tears,
and the affecting Instances of their Esteem. They
all would have made me little Presents, as Tokens
of their Love; but I would not take any
thing from the lower Servants, to be sure. But
Mr. Longman would have me accept of several
Yards of Holland, and a Silver Snuff-box, and
a Gold Ring, which he desired me to keep for
his sake; and he wept over me; but said, I am
sure, so good a Maiden God will bless; and tho'
you return to your poor Father again, and his
low Estate, yet Providence will find you out:
Remember I tell you so, and one Day, tho' I
mayn't live to see it, you will be rewarded. 
I said, O dear Mr. Longman, you make
me too rich, and too mody; and yet I must
be a Beggar before my Time: For I shall want
often to be scribbling, (little thinking it would
be my only Employment so soon) and I will beg
you, Sir, to favour me with some Paper; and
as soon as I get home, I will write you a Letter, 

to thank you for all your Kindness to me; and
a Letter to good Mrs. Jervis too. 
This was lucky; for I should have had none
else, but at Pleasure of my rough-natur'd Governess,
as I may call her; but now I can write
to ease my Mind, tho' I can't send it to you; 
and write what I please, for she knows not
how well I am provided: For good Mr. Longman
gave me above Forty Sheets of Paper, and
a dozen Pens, and a little Phyal of Ink; which
last I wrapp'd in Paper, and put in my Pocket; 
and some Wax and Wafers. 
O dear Sir, said I, you have set me up. 
How shall I requite you? He said, By a Kiss, my
fair Mistress; and I gave it very willingly; for
he is a good old Man. 
Rachel and Hannah cry'd sadly when I
took my Leave; and Jane, who sometimes
used to be a little crossish, and Cicely too, wept
sadly, and said they would pray for me: But
poor Jane, I doubt, will forget that; for she
seldom says her Prayers for herself: More's the
Pity! 
Then Arthur the Gardener, our Robin the
Coachman, and Lincolnshire Robin too, who
was to carry me, were very civil; and both
had Tears in their Eyes; which I thought
then very good-natur'd in Lincolnshire Robin,
because he knew but little of me. —But since,
I find he might well be concern'd; for he had
then his Instructions, it seems, and knew how
he was to be a Means to entrap me. 

Then our other three Footmen, Harry,
Isaac, and Benjamin, and Grooms, and Helpers,
were very much affected likewise; and the
poor little Scullion-boy, Tommy, was ready to
run over for Grief. 
They had got all together over-night, expecting
to be differently employ'd in the Morning; 
and they all begg'd to shake Hands with
me, and I kiss'd the Maidens, and pray'd to
God to bless them all; and thank'd them for
all their Love and Kindnesses to me: And
indeed I was forc'd to leave them sooner than
I would, because I could not stand it: Indeed
I could not. Harry (I could not have thought
it; for he is a little wildish, they say) cry'd till
he sobb'd again. John, poor honest John,
was not then come back from you. But as
for the Butler, Mr. Jonathan, he could not
stay in Company. 
I thought to have told you a deal about
this; but I have worse things to employ my
Thoughts. 
Mrs. Jervis, good Mrs. Jervis, cry'd all
Night long, and I comforted her all I could:
and she made me promise, that if my Master
went to London to attend Parliament, or to
Lincolnshire, I would come and stay a Week
with her. And she would have given me
Money; but I would not take it. 
Well, next Morning came, and I wonder'd I
saw nothing of poor honest John; for I waited
to take Leave of him, and thank him for all 

his Civilities to me and to you: But I suppose
he was sent further by my Master, and so could
not return; and I desired to be remember'd to
him. 
And when Mrs. Jervis told me, with a
sad Heart, the Chariot was ready, with Four
Horses to it, I was just upon sinking into the
Ground, tho' I wanted to be with you. 
My Master was above-stairs, and never ask'd
to see me. I was glad of it in the main; but
he knew, false Heart as he is! that I was not to
be out of his Reach. –––O preserve me, Heaven,
from his Power, and from his Wickedness! 
Well, they were not suffer'd to go with me
one Step, as I writ to you before; for he stood at
the Window to see me go. And in the Passage
to the Gate, out of his Sight, there they stood
all of them, in two Rows; and we could say nothing
on both Sides, but, God bless you! and God
bless you! But Harry carry'd my own Bundle,
my third Bundle, as I was us'd to call it, to the
Coach, and some Plum-cakes, and Diet-bread,
made for me over Night, and some Sweet-meats,
and Six Bottles of Canary Wine, which Mrs.
Jervis would make me take in a Basket, to
chear our Hearts now-and-then, when we got
together, as she said. And I kiss'd all the Maids
again, and shook Hands with the Men again; 
but Mr. Jonathan and Mr. Longman were not
there; and then I tripp'd down-steps to the Chariot,
Mrs. Jervis crying most sadly. 
I look'd up when I got to the Chariot,
and I saw my Master at the Window, in his 

Gown; and I court'sy'd three times to him
very low, and pray'd for him with my Hands
lifted up; for I could not speak; indeed I was
not able. And he bow'd his Head to me, which
made me then very glad he would take such
Notice of me; and in I stepp'd, and was ready
to burst with Grief; and could only, till Robin
began to drive, wave my white Handkerchief
to them, wet with my Tears. And at last away
he drove, Jehu-like, as they say, out of the
Court-yard: And I too soon found I had Cause
for greater and deeper Grief. 
Well, said I to myself, at this rate I shall
soon be with my dear Father and Mother; and
till I had got, as I suppos'd, half-way, I thought
of the good Friends I had left. And when,
on stopping for a little Bait to the Horses, Robin
told me, I was near half-way, I thought it
was high time to wipe my Eyes, and remember
to whom I was going; as then, alack for me! I
thought. So I began to ponder what a Meeting
I should have with you; how glad you'd both
be, to see me come safe and innocent to you,
after all my Dangers; and so I began to comfort
myself, and to banish the other gloomy Side
from my Mind; tho', too, it return'd now-and-then; 
for I should be ingrateful not to love
them, for their Love. 
Well, I believe I set out about Eight
o'Clock in the Morning; and I wonder'd, and
wonder'd, when it was about Two, as I saw by
a Church dial in a little Village we pass'd thro,
that I was still more and more out of my Knowledge. 

Hey-dey! thought I, to drive this
strange Pace, and to be so long a-going little
more than Twenty Miles, is very odd! But, to
be sure, thought I, Robin knows the Way. 
At last he stopp'd, and look'd about him, as
if he was at a Loss for the Road; and I said,
Mr. Robert, sure you are out of the Way! — 
I'm afraid I am, said he: But it can't be much; 
I'll ask the first Person I see. Pray do, said I; 
and he gave his Horses a Mouthful of Hay; and
I gave him some Cake, and two Glasses of Canary
Wine; and he stopp'd about half an Hour
in all. Then he drove on very fast again. 
I had so much to think of, of the Dangers
I now doubted not I had escap'd, of the loving
Friends I had left, and my best Friends I was
going to, and the many things I had to relate
to you; that I the less thought of the Way, till
I was startled out of my Meditations by the Sun
beginning to set, and still the Man driving on,
and his Horses sweating and foaming; and then
I began to be alarm'd all at once, and call'd to
him; and he said he had horrid ill Luck, for
he had come several Miles out of the Way,
but was now right, and should get in still before
it was quite dark. My Heart began then
to misgive me a little, and I was very much
fatigued; for I had no Sleep for several Nights
before, to signify; and at last I said, Pray, Mr.
Robert, there is a Town before us; what do
you call it? —If we are so much out of the
Way, we had better put up there; for the 

Night comes on apace: And, Lord protect
me! thought I, I shall have new Dangers, mayhap,
to encounter with the Man, who have
escap'd the Master––––––little thinking of the
base Contrivance of the latter. Says he, I am
just there: 'Tis but a Mile on one Side of the
Town before us—Nay, said I, I may be mistaken; 
for it is a good while since I was this
Way; but I am sure the Face of the Country
here is nothing like what I remember it. 
He pretended to be much out of Humour with
himself for mistaking the Way, and at last
stopp'd at a Farm-house, about two Miles beyond
the Village I had seen; and it was then
almost dark, and he alighted, and said, We
must make shift here; for I am quite out. 
Lord, thought I, be good to the poor
Pamela! More Trials still! —What will befal
me next? 
The Farmer's Wife, and Maid, and Daughter,
came out; and the Wife said, What brings
you this Way at this time of Night, Mr. Robert? 
And with a Lady too? —Then I began
to be frighten'd out of my Wits; and laying
Middle and both Ends together, I fell a crying,
and said, God give me Patience! I am undone
for certain! —Pray, Mistress, said I, do you
know 'Squire B. of Bedfordshire? 
The wicked Coachman would have prevented
the answering me; but the simple
Daughter said, Know his Worship! yes, surely!
why he is my Father's Landlord! —Well, said
I, then I am undone, undone for ever! —O 

wicked Wretch! what have I done to you, said
I to the Coachman, to serve me thus? —Vile
Tool of a wicked Master! –––Faith, said the Fellow,
I'm sorry this Task was put upon me: But
I could not help it. But make the best of it
now; here are very civil, reputable Folks; and
you'll be safe here, I'll assure you. —Let me
get out, said I, and I'll walk back to the Town
we came through, late as it is. —For I will
not enter here. 
Said the Farmer's Wife, You'll be very
well used here, I'll assure you, young Gentlewoman,
and have better Conveniencies than
any-where in the Village. I matter not Conveniencies,
said I: I am betray'd and undone! 
As you have a Daughter of your own, pity me,
and let me know, if your Landlord, as you call
him, be here! —No, I'll assure you, he is not,
said she. 
And then came the Farmer, a good-like sort
of Man, grave, and well-behav'd; and he
spoke to me in such sort, as made me a little
pacify'd; and seeing no Help for it, I went in; 
and the Wife immediately conducted me up-stairs
to the best Apartment, and told me, that
was mine as long as I staid; and nobody should
come near me but when I call'd. I threw myself
on the Bed in the Room, tir'd and frighten'd
to Death almost, and gave way to the
most excessive Fit of Grief that I ever had. 
The Daughter came up, and said, Mr. Robert
had given her a Letter to give me; and
there it was. I raised myself, and saw it was 

the Hand and Seal of the wicked Wretch my
Master, directed To Mrs. Pamela Andrews. ––– 
This was a little better than to have him here; 
tho', if he had, he must have been brought
thro' the Air; for I thought I was. 
The good Woman (for I began to see
Things about a little reputable, and no Guile
appearing in them, but rather a Face of Grief
for my Grief) offer'd me a Glass of some cordial
Water, which I accepted, for I was ready
to sink; and then I sat up in a Chair a little,
tho' very faintish: And they brought me two
Candles, and lighted a Brush-wood Fire; and
said, If I call'd, I should be waited upon instantly; 
and so left me to ruminate on my sad
Condition, and to read my Letter, which I
was not able to do presently. After I had
a little come to myself, I found it to contain
these Words: 

“Dear Pamela,
The Passion I have for you, and your
Obstinacy, have constrain'd me to act
by you in a manner that I know will occasion
you great Trouble and Fatigue, both of
Mind and Body. Yet, forgive me, my dear
Girl; for although I have taken this Step, I
will, by all that's good and holy! use you
honourably. Suffer not your Fears to transport
you to a Behaviour, that will be disreputable
to us both. For the Place where
you'll receive this, is a Farm that belongs to 

me; and the People civil, honest, and obliging. 
“You will by this time be far on your Way
to the Place I have allotted for your Abode
for a few Weeks, till I have manag'd some
Affairs, that will make me shew myself to
you in a much different Light, than you
may possibly apprehend from this rash Action. 
And to convince you, that I mean you no
Harm, I do assure you, that the House you
are going to, shall be so much at your Command,
that even I myself will not approach it
without Leave from you. So make yourself
easy; be discreet and prudent; and a happier
Turn shall reward these your Troubles, than
you may at present apprehend. 
“Mean time I pity the Fatigue you will
have, if this comes to your Hand in the
Place I have directed: And will write to
your Father, to satisfy him, that nothing
but what is honourable shall be offer'd to
you, by 
“Your passionate Admirer, (so I
must style myself)— 
“Don't think hardly of poor Robin: You
have so possess'd all my Servants in
your Favour, that I find they had rather
serve you than me; and 'tis reluctantly
the poor Fellow undertook this Task; 
and I was forc'd to submit to assure him
of my honourable Intentions to you,
which I am fully resolv'd to make good, 

if you compel me not to a contrary
Conduct.” 

I but too well apprehended, that this Letter
was only to pacify me for the present; but
as my Danger was not so immediate as I had
Reason to dread, and he had promised to forbear
coming to me, and to write to you, my
dear Parents, to quiet your Concern, I was a
little more easy than before: And I made shift
to eat a little Bit of boil'd Chicken they had
got for me, and drank a Glass of my Sack, and
made each of them do so too. 
But after I had so done, I was again a little
fluster'd; for in came the Coachman with the
Look of a Hangman, I thought, and Madam'd
me up strangely; telling me, he would beg me
to get ready to pursue my Journey by Five in
the Morning, or else he should be late in. I
was quite griev'd at this; for I began not to
dislike my Company, considering how Things
stood, and was in Hopes to get a Party among
them, and so to put myself into any worthy
Protection in the Neighbourhood, rather than
go forward. 
When he withdrew, I began to tamper with
the Farmer and his Wife: But, alas! they had
had a Letter deliver'd them at the same time I
had; so securely had Lucifer put it into his
Head to do his Work; and they only shook
their Heads, and seem'd to pity me; and so I
was forced to give over that Hope. 

However, the good Farmer shew'd me
his Letter; which I copy'd as follows: For it
discovers the deep Arts of this wicked Master; 
and how resolv'd he seems to be on my Ruin,
by the Pains he took to deprive me of all
Hopes of freeing myself from his Power. 

“Farmer Norton,
I send to your House, for one Night
only, a young Gentlewoman, much against
her Will, who has deeply embark'd in a
Love-affair, which will be her Ruin, as well
as the Person's to whom she wants to betroth
herself. I have, to oblige her Father, order'd
her to be carry'd to one of my Houses,
where she will be well us'd, to try, if by
Absence, and Expostulation with both, they
can be brought to know their own Interest. 
And I am sure you will use her kindly for my
sake: For, excepting this Matter, which
she will not own, she does not want Prudence
and Discretion. I will acknowledge
any Trouble you shall be at in this Matter,
the first Opportunity; and am 
“Your Friend and Servant.” 

He had said, too cunningly for me, that I
would not own this pretended Love-affair; so
that he had provided them not to believe me,
say what I would; and as they were his Tenants,
who all love him, (for he has some amiable Qualities, 

and so he had need!) I saw all my Plot
cut out, and so was forced to say the less. 
I wept bitterly, however; for I found he
was too hard for me, as well in his Contrivances
as Riches; and so had recourse again to my
only Refuge, comforting myself, that God
never fails to take the innocent Heart into his
Protection, and is alone able to baffle and confound
the Devices of the Mighty. Nay, the
Farmer was so prepossess'd with the Contents
of his Letter, that he began to praise his Care
and Concern for me, and to caution me against
entertaining Addresses without my Friends Advice
and Consent, and made me the Subject of
a Lesson for his Daughter's Improvement. So
I was glad to shut up this Discourse; for I saw
I was not likely to be believ'd. 
I sent, however, to tell my Driver, that I
was so fatigued, I could not set out so soon the
next Morning. But he insisted upon it, and
said, It would make my Day's Journey the
lighter; and I found he was a more faithful
Servant to his Master, notwithstanding what he
wrote of his Reluctance, than I could have
wish'd: So I saw still more and more, that all
was deep Dissimulation, and Contrivance
worse and worse. 
Indeed I might have shewn them his
Letter to me, as a full Confutation of his to
them; but I saw no Probability of engaging
them in my Behalf; and so thought it signify'd
little, as I was to go away so soon, to enter
more particularly into the Matter with them; 

and besides, I saw they were not inclinable to
let me stay longer for fear of disobliging him:
So I went to-bed, but had very little Rest: And
they would make their Servant-maid bear me
Company in the Chariot Five Miles, early in
the Morning, and she was to walk back. 
I had contriv'd in my Thoughts, when I
was on my Way in the Chariot, on Friday
Morning, that when we came into some Town,
to bait, as he must do for the Horses sake, I
would, at the Inn, apply myself, if I saw I any
way could, to the Mistress of the Inn, and tell
her the Case, and refuse to go farther, having
nobody but this wicked Coachman to contend
with. 
Well, I was very full of this Project, and
in great Hopes, some-how or other, to extricate
myself this way. But, oh! the artful
Wretch had provided for even this last Refuge
of mine! for when we came to put up at a
large Town on the Way, to eat a Morsel for
Dinner, and I was fully resolv'd to execute my
Design, who should be at the Inn that he put
up at, but the wicked Mrs. Jewkes, expecting
me! And her Sister-in-law was the Mistress of
it; and she had provided a little Entertainment
for me. 
And this I found, when I desir'd, as soon
as I came in, to speak with the Mistress of the
House. She came to me, and I said, I am a poor
unhappy young Body, that want your Advice
and Assistance; and you seem to be a good sort 

of Gentlewoman, that would assist an oppressed
innocent Person. Yes, Madam, said she, I
hope you guess right, and I have the Happiness
to know something of the Matter, before you
speak. Pray call my Sister Jewkes. —Jewkes!
Jewkes! thought I; I have heard of that
Name; I don't like it. 
Then the wicked Creature appear'd, whom
I had never seen but once before, and I was
terrify'd out of my Wits. No Stratagem,
thought I, not one! for a poor innocent Girl; 
but every thing to turn out against me; that is
hard indeed! 
So I began to pull in my Horns, as they say; 
for I saw I was now worse off than at the
Farmer's. 
The naughty Woman came up to me with
an Air of Confidence, and kiss'd me: See,
Sister, said she, here's a charming Creature! 
Would she not tempt the best Lord in the Land
to run away with her? O frightful! thought I; 
here's an Avowal of the Matter at once: I am
now gone, that's certain. And so was quite
silent and confounded; and seeing no Help for
it, (for she would not part with me out of her
Sight) I was forced to set out with her in the
Chariot; for she came thither on Horseback
with a Man-servant, who rode by us the rest
of the Way, leading her Horse. And now I
gave over all Thoughts of Redemption, and
was in a desponding Condition indeed. 
Well, thought I, here are strange Pains
taken to ruin a poor innocent, helpless, and 

even worthless young Body. This Plot is laid
too deep, and has been too long hatching, to
be baffled, I fear. But then, I put my Trust
in God, who I knew was able to do every thing
for me, when all other possible Means should
fail: And in Him I was resolv'd to confide. 
You may see—(Yet, oh! that kills me; 
for I know not whether ever you can see what I
now write, or no—Else you will see) what
sort of Woman this Mrs. Jewkes is, compar'd
to good Mrs. Jervis, by this— 
Every now-and-then she would be staring
in my Face, in the Chariot, and squeezing my
Hand, and saying, Why, you are very pretty,
my silent Dear! And once she offer'd to kiss
me. But I said, I don't like this sort of Carriage,
Mrs. Jewkes; it is not like two Persons
of one Sex. She fell a laughing very confidently,
and said, That's prettily said, I vow! 
Then thou hadst rather be kiss'd by the other
Sex? 'Ifackins, I commend thee for that! 
I was sadly teiz'd with her Impertinence,
and bold Way; but no Wonder; she was an
Inn-keeper's House-keeper, before she came to
my Master; and those sort of Creatures don't
want Confidence, you know. And indeed she
made nothing to talk boldly on Twenty Occasions,
and said two or three times, when she
saw the Tears every now-and-then, as we
rid, trickle down my Cheeks, I was sorely
hurt, truly, to have the handsomest and finest
young Gentleman in Five Counties in Love
with me! 

So I find I am got into the Hands of a
wicked Procuress, and if I was not safe with
good Mrs. Jervis, and where every body lov'd
me, what a dreadful Prospect have I now before
me, in the Hands of a Woman that seems to
delight in Filthiness! 
O dear Sirs! what shall I do! What shall I
do! —Surely, I shall never be equal to all
these Things! 
About Eight at Night, we enter'd the
Court-yard of this handsome, large, old, and
lonely Mansion, that looks made for Solitude
and Mischief, as I thought, by its Appearance,
with all its brown nodding Horrors of lofty
Elms and Pines about it: And here, said I to
myself, I fear, is to be the Scene of my Ruin,
unless God protect me, who is all-sufficient! 
I was very sick at entering it, partly from
Fatigue, and partly from Dejection of Spirits: 
And Mrs. Jewkes got me some mull'd Wine,
and seem'd mighty officious to welcome me
thither. And while she was absent, ordering
the Wine, the wicked Robin came in to me,
and said, I beg a Thousand Pardons for my
Part in this Affair, since I see your Grief, and
your Distress; and I do assure you, that I am
sorry it fell to my Task. 
Mighty well, Mr. Robert! said I; I never
saw an Execution but once, and then the Hangman
ask'd the poor Creature's Pardon, and
wip'd his Mouth, as you do, and pleaded his
Duty, and then calmly tuck'd up the Criminal. 

But I am no Criminal, as you all know: And
if I could have thought it my Duty to obey a
wicked Master, in his unlawful Commands, I
had sav'd you all the Merit of this vile Service. 
I am sorry, said he, you take it so. But
every body don't think alike. Well, said I,
you have done your Part, Mr. Robert, towards
my Ruin, very faithfully; and will have Cause
to be sorry, may-be, at the Long-run, when
you shall see the Mischief that comes of it— 
Your Eyes were open, and you knew I was to
be carry'd to my Father's, and that I was barbarously
trick'd and betray'd; and I can only,
once more, thank you for your Part of it. 
God forgive you! 
So he went away a little sad. What have
you said to Robin, Madam? said Mrs. Jewkes
(who came in as he went out): The poor Fellow's
ready to cry. I need not be afraid of
your following his Example, Mrs. Jewkes, said
I: I have been telling him, that he has done
his Part to my Ruin: And he now can't help
it! So his Repentance does me no Good; I wish
it may him. 
I'll assure you, Madam, said she, I should
be as ready to cry as he, if I should do you any
Harm. It is not in his Power to help it now,
said I; but your Part is to come, and you may
chuse whether you'll contribute to my Ruin or
not. —Why, look ye, look ye, Madam, said
she, I have a great Notion of doing my Duty
to my Master; and therefore you may depend 

upon it, if I can do that, and serve you, I
will: But you must think, if your Desire, and
his Will, come to clash once, I shall do as he
bids me, let it be what it will. 
Pray, Mrs. Jewkes, said I, don't Madam
me so: I am but a silly poor Girl, set up by
the Gambol of Fortune, for a May-game; and
now am to be Something, and now Nothing,
just as that thinks fit to sport with me: And
let you and me talk upon a Foot together; for
I am a Servant inferior to you, and so much the
more, as I am turn'd out of Place. 
Ay, ay, says she, I understand something
of the Matter; you have so great Power over my
Master, that you will be soon Mistress of us all; 
and so I would oblige you, if I could. And
I must and will call you Madam; for I am instructed
to shew you all Respect, I'll assure
you. 
Who instructed you to do so? said I. Who!
my Master, to be sure, said she. Why, said
I, how can that be? You have not seen him
lately. No, that's true, said she; but I have
been expecting you here some time (O the deep-laid
Wickedness! thought I); and besides, I
have a Letter of Instructions by Robin; but,
may-be, I should not have said so much. If
you would shew them to me, said I, I should
be able to judge how far I could, or could not,
expect Favour from you, consistent with your
Duty to our Master. I beg your Pardon, fair
Mistress, for that, said she; I am sufficiently
instructed, and you may depend upon it, I will 

observe my Orders; and so far as they will
let me, so far will I oblige you; and there's an
End of it. 
Well, said I, you will not, I hope, do an
unlawful or wicked thing, for any Master in
the World. Look-ye, said she, he is my Master; 
and if he bids me do a thing that I can do,
I think I ought to do it; and let him, who has
Power to command me, look to the Lawfulness
of it. Why, said I, suppose he should
bid you cut my Throat, would you do it? 
There's no Danger of that, said she; but to be
sure I would not; for then I should be hang'd; 
for that would be Murder. Well, said I, and
suppose he should resolve to ensnare a poor
young Creature, and ruin her, would you assist
him in that? For to rob a Person of her Virtue,
is worse than cutting her Throat. 
Why now, says she, how strangely you
talk! Are not the two Sexes made for one
another? And is it not natural for a Gentleman
to love a pretty Woman? And suppose he can
obtain his Desires, is that so bad as cutting her
Throat? And then the Wretch fell a laughing,
and talk'd most impertinently, and shew'd me,
that I had nothing to expect from her Virtue or
Conscience. And this gave me great Mortification; 
for I was in hopes of working upon
her by degrees. 
So we ended our Discourse here, and I bid
her shew me where I must lie. —Why, said
she, lie where you list, Madam; I can tell
you, I must lie with you for the present. For 

the present! said I, and Torture then wrung
my Heart! —But is it in your Instructions,
that you must lie with me? Yes, indeed, said
she. I am sorry for it, said I. Why, said she,
I am wholsome, and cleanly too, I'll assure you. 
Yes, said I, I don't doubt that; but I love to
lie by myself. How so? said she; was not Mrs.
Jervis your Bed-fellow at t'other House? 
Well, said I, quite sick of her, and my
Condition, you must do as you are instructed,
I think. I can't help myself; and am a most
miserable Creature. She repeated her insufferable
Nonsense, Mighty miserable indeed, to be
so well belov'd by one of the finest Gentlemen
in England! 

