



Well, but my dear Mr. B. you will, perhaps,
think, from my last rambling Letter, that I
am most inclin'd to a School Education for your
Billy, some Years hence, if it shall please God to
spare him to us. But indeed I cannot say, that I
am: I only lay several things together in my usual
indigested and roving way, to take your Opinion
upon, which, as it ought, will be always decisive
with me. And indeed I am so throughly convinc'd
by Mr. Locke's Reasons, where the Behaviour of
Servants can be so well answer'd for, as that of
yours can be, and where the Example of the Parents
will be, as I hope, rather edifying than otherwise,
that, without being sway'd, as I think, by maternal
Fondness, in this Case, I must needs give a Preference
to the Home Education; and the little Scheme
I presum'd to form in my last, was only, as you will
be pleas'd to remember, on a Supposition, that those
necessary Points could not be so well secur'd. 
In my Observations on this Head, I shall take
the Liberty, in one or two Particulars, a little to
differ from an Author, that I admire exceedingly; 
and that is the present Design of my writing these
Letters; for I shall hereafter, if God spare my Life,
in my little Book, (when you have kindly decided
upon the Points in which I presume to differ from
that Gentleman) shew you, Sir, my great Reverence
and Esteem for him; and shall then be able to
let you know all my Sentiments on this important
Subject, and that more undoubtingly, as I shall be
more improv'd by Years, and your Conversation; 

especially, Sir, if I have the Honour and Happiness
of a foreign Tour with you, of which you give
me Hope; so much are you pleas'd with the Delight
I take in these improving Excursions, which you
have now favour'd me with, at times, thro' more
than half the Kingdom. 
Well then, Sir, I will proceed to consider a
little more particularly the Subject of a Home Education,
with an Eye to those Difficulties, of which
Mr. Locke takes notice, as I mention'd in my last. 
As to the first, that of finding a qualify'd Tutor; 
we must not expect so much Perfection, I doubt,
as Mr. Locke lays down as necessary. What, therefore,
I humbly conceive is best to be done, will be
to avoid chusing a Man of bigotted and narrow
Principles, who yet shall not be tainted with sceptical
or heterodox Notions; who shall not be a
mere Scholar or Pedant; who has travell'd, and
yet preserv'd his moral Character untainted; and
whose Behaviour and Carriage is easy, unaffected,
unformal, and genteel, as well acquiredly as naturally
so, if possible; who shall not be dogmatical,
positive, overbearing, on one hand; nor too yielding,
suppliant, fawning, on the other; who shall
study the Child's natural Bent, in order to direct
his Genius to the Point, in which it is most likely
to excel. In order to preserve the Respect due to
his own Character from every one, he must not be
a Busy-body in the Family, a Whisperer, a Talebearer; 
but be a Person of a benevolent Turn of
Mind, ready to compose Differences; who shall
avoid, of all things, that Foppishness of Dress and
Appearance, which distinguishes the Petits-maitres,
and French Ushers, (that I have seen at some Boarding-schools) 

for Coxcombs, rather than Guides of
Education: For, as I have heard you, my best Tutor,
often observe, the Peculiarities of Habit, where
a Person aims at something fantastick, or out of
Character, are an undoubted Sign of a wrong Head:
For such a one is so kind, as always to hang out on
his Sign, what sort of Furniture he has in his Shop,
to save you the Trouble of asking Questions about
him; so that one may as easily know, by his outward
Appearance what he is, as one can know a
Widow by her Weeds. 
Such a Person as I have thus negatively describ'd,
may be found without very much Difficulty
perhaps, because some of these Requisites are personal,
and others are such as are obvious, at first
Sight, to a common Penetration; or, where not
so, may be found out, by Inquiry into his general
Character and Behaviour: And to the Care of such
a one, dear Sir, let me for the present suppose
your Billy is committed: And so we acquit ourselves
of the first Difficulty, as well as we can, that of the
Tutor; who, to make himself more perfect, may
form himself, as to what he wants, by Mr. Locke's
excellent Rules on that Head. 
But before I quit this Subject, will you give me
Leave, Sir, to remind you of your own Opinion
upon it, in a Conversation that pass'd between you
and Sir George Stuart, and his Nephew, in London;
in which you seem'd to prefer a Scotisb Gentleman
for a Tutor, to those of your own Nation,
and still more than to those of France? Don't you
remember it, dear Sir? And how much those Gentlemen
were pleas'd with your facetious Freedom
with their Country, and said, You made them 

Amends for that, in the Preference you gave to
their learn'd and travell'd Youth? If you have forgot
it, I will here transcribe it from my Records, as
I call my Book of Memorandums; for every time I
am pleas'd with a Conversation, and have Leisure,
before it goes out of my Memory, I enter it down
as near the very Words as I can; and now you
have made me your Correspondent, I shall sometimes
perhaps give you back some Valuables from
your own Treasure. 
Miss Darnford, and Mr. Turner, and Mr. Fanshaw,
were present, I well remember. These are
your Words, as I have written them down: 
‘Since the Union of the Two Kingdoms, we
have many Persons of Condition, who have taken
Tutors for their Sons from Scotland; which Practice,
to speak impartially, has been attended with
some advantageous Circumstances, that should
not be over-look'd. For, Sir George, it must be
confess'd, that notwithstanding your narrow and
stiff manner of Education in Scotland, a Spirit
of manly Learning, a kind of poetick Liberty,
as I may call it, has begun to exert itself in that
Part of the Island. The blustering North, forgive
me, Gentlemen, seems to have harden'd the
Foreheads of her hungry Sons; and the Keenness
with which they set out for Preferment in the
kindlier South, has taught them to know a good
deal of the World betimes. Thro' the easy Terms
on which Learning is generally attain'd there, as
it is earlier inculcated, so it may, probably, take
deeper Root: And since 'tis hardly possible, forgive
me, dear Sir George, and Mr. Stuart, they
can go to a worse Country on this Side Greenland, 

than some of the Northern Parts of Scotland;
so their Education, with a View to travel,
and to better themselves by Settlements in other
Countries, may perhaps be so many Reasons for
them to take greater Pains to qualify themselves
for this Imployment, and may make them succeed
better in it; especially when they have been able
to shake off the Fetters which are rivetted upon
them under the narrow Influences of a too tyrannical
Kirk-discipline, which you, Sir George, have
just now so freely censur'd. 
‘To these Considerations, when we add the Necessity,
which these remote Tutors lie under, of
behaving well, because, in the first place, they seldom
wish to return to their own Country; and
in the next, because that cannot prefer them, if
it would; and thirdly, because it would not, if
it could, if the Gentleman be of an inlarged Genius,
and generous way of Thinking; I say, when
we add to the Premises these Considerations, they
all make a kind of Security for their good Behaviour:
While those of our own Country have often
Friends or Acquaintance, on whose Favour they
are apt to depend, and for that Reason give less
Attention to the Duties requisite for this important
Office. 
‘Besides, as their kind Friend Æolus, who
is accustom'd to spread and strengthen the bold
Muscles of the strong-featur'd Scot, has generally
blown away that inauspicious Bashfulness, which
hangs a much longer time, commonly, on the
Faces of the Southern Students; such a one (if
he falls not too egregiously into the contrary Extreme,
so as to become insufferable) may still be 

the more eligible Person for a Tutor, as he may
teach a young Gentleman, betimes, that necessary
Presence of Mind, which those who are confin'd
to a private Education, sometimes want. 
‘But, after all, if a Gentleman of this Nation
be chosen for this Imployment, it may be necessary,
that he should be one who has had as genteel
and free an Education himself, as his Country and
Opportunities will afford; and has had, moreover,
the native Roughness of his Climate filed
off and polished by Travel and Conversation; who
has made, at least, the Tour of France and Italy,
and has a Taste for the Politeness of the former
Nation; for, from the natural Boisterousness of
a North Briton, and the fantastick Politeness of
a Frenchman, if happily blended, such a Mixture
may result, as may furnish out a more complete
Tutor, than either of the Two Nations, singly,
may be able to produce. But it ought to be remember'd,
that this Person should, by all means,
have conquer'd his native Brogue, as I may call it,
and be a Master of the English Pronunciation; 
otherwise his Conversation will be very disagreeable
to an English Ear. 
‘And permit me, Gentlemen, to add, That as
an Acquaintance with the Muses contributes not a
little to soften the Manners, and to give a graceful
and delicate Turn to the Imagination, and a
kind of Polish to severer Studies, I believe it
would not be amiss, that he should have a Taste of
Poetry; altho' perhaps it were not to be wish'd he
had such strong Inclinations that way, as to make
that lively and delectable Amusement his predominant
Passion: For we see very few Poets, whose 

warm Imaginations do not run away with their
Judgments. And yet, in order to learn the dead
Languages in their Purity, it will be necessary, as
I apprehend, to inculcate both the Love and the
Study of the antient Poets, which cannot fail of
giving the Youth a Taste for Poetry in general.’ 
Permit me, dear Sir, to ask you, Whether
you advanc'd this for Argument-sake, as sometimes
you love to amuse and entertain your Friends in an
uncommon way? For I should imagine, that our
Two Universities, which you have been so good as
to shew me, and for which I have ever since had
even a greater Reverence, than I had before, are
capable of furnishing as good Tutors as any Nation
in the World: For here the young Gentlemen
seem to me to live both in the World, and in the
University; and we saw several Gentlemen who had
not only fine Parts, but polite Behaviour, and deep
Learning, as you assur'd me; some of whom you
entertain'd, and were entertained by, in so elegant
a manner, that no travell'd Gentlemen, if I may
be allow'd to judge, could excel them: And besides,
my dear Mr. B. I know who is reckon'd one of the
politest and best-bred Gentlemen in England by
every body, and learned, as well as polite, and yet
had his Education in one of those celebrated Seats
of Learning. I wish your Billy never may fall short
of the Gentleman I mean, in all these Acquirements; 
and he will be a dear happy Creature, I am sure! 
But how I wander again from my Subject! — 
I have no other way to recover myself, when I thus
samble, but by bringing back myself to that one
delightful Point of Reflection, that I have the Honour
to be, dearest Sir, 
Your ever-dutiful and obliged
P. B. 

