



To Mr. Patrick McDonald, at his Lodgings, at
Mr. Brown's, Perukemaker, in St. Martin's lane,
Westminster. 

M. Hall, Wedn. Morning, two o'clock. 
Dear McDonald,
The Bearer of this has a Letter to carry to the
Lady (a) . I have been at the trouble of writing
a copy of it; which I inclose, that you may not mistake
your cue. 
You will judge of my reasons for ante-dating the
inclosed sealed one (b) , directed to you by the name
of Tomlinson; which you are to shew the Lady, as
in confidence. You will open it of course. 
I doubt not your dexterity and management, dear
McDonald; nor your zeal; especially as the hope of
Cohabitation must now be given up. Impossible to
be carried is that scheme. I might break her heart,
but not incline her will —Am in earnest therefore to
marry her, if she let not the day slip. 
Improve upon the hint of her Mother. That must
touch her. But John Harlowe, remember, has privately
engaged that Lady—Privately, I say; else (not
to mention the reason for her Uncle Harlowe's former
expedient) you know, she might find means to get a
Letter away to the one or the other, to know the
truth; or to Miss Howe, to engage her to enquire
into it: And if she should, the word privately will
account for the Uncle's and Mother's denying it. 
However, fail not, as from me, to charge our
Mother and her Nymphs to redouble their vigilance
both as to her Person and Letters. All's upon a
Crisis now. But she must not be treated ill neither. 
Thursday over, I shall know what to resolve upon. 
If necessary, you must assume Authority. The devil's in't, if such a girl as this shall awe a man of 

your years and experience. You are not in Love
with her as I am. Fly out, if she doubt your Honour. 
Spirits naturally soft may be beat out of their
play and borne down (tho' ever so much raised) by
higher anger. All women are cowards at bottom: 
Only violent where they may. I have often stormed
a girl out of her mistrusts, and made her yield (before
she knew where she was) to the point indignantly
mistrusted; and that to make up with me, tho' I was
the aggressor. 
If this matter succeed as I'd have it (or if not, and
do not fail by your fault) I will take you off the
necessity of pursuing your cursed Smuggling; which
otherwise may one day end fatally for you. 
We are none of us perfect, McDonald. This
sweet Lady makes me serious sometimes in spite of my
heart. But as private vices are less blameable than
public; and as I think Smuggling (as it is called) a
National Evil; I have no doubt to pronounce you a
much worse man than myself, and as such shall take
pleasure in reforming you. 
I send you inclosed Ten Guineas, as a small earnest
of further favours. Hitherto you have been a very
clever fellow. 
As to cloaths for Thursday, Monmouth-street will
afford a ready supply. Cloaths quite new would make
your condition suspected. But you may defer that
care, till you see if she can be prevailed upon. Your
Riding-dress will do for the first visit. Nor let your
Boots be over-clean. I have always told you the consequence
of attending to the minutiæ, where Art (or
Imposture, as the ill-mannered would call it) is designed 
—Your Linen rumpled and soily, when you
wait upon her —Easy terms these —Just come to
town —Remember (as formerly) to loll, to throw
out your Legs, to stroke and grasp down your Ruffles,
as if of significance enough to be careless. What tho'
the presence of a fine Lady would require a different 

behaviour, are you not of years to dispense with Politeness? 
You can have no design upon her, you
know. You are a father yourself of daughters as old
as she. Evermore is parade and obsequiousness suspectable: 
It must shew either a foolish head, or a knavish
heart. Assume airs of consequence therefore; and you
will be treated as a man of consequence. I have often
more than half ruined myself by my complaisance; 
and, being afraid of controul, have brought controul
upon myself. 
I think I have no more to say at present. I intend
to be at Slough, or on the way to it, as by mine to
the Lady. Adieu, honest McDonald. 
R. L. 