


Miss Byron, To Lady G. 


Tuesday, Oct. 3.
A Thousand thanks to you, my dear Lady G. for
the favour of your last: You have re-assured me
in it. I think I could not have been happy even in
the affection of Sir Charles Grandison, were I to have
found an abatement in the Love of his two sisters. 
Who, that knows you both, and that had been favoured
with your friendship, could have been satisfied
with the least diminution of it? 

I have a Letter from the Countess of D(a) . She
is a most generous woman. ‘She even congratulates
me, on your brother's account, from the conversation
that passed between him and her. She gives
me the particulars of that conversation. Exceedingly
flattering are they to my vanity.’ I must, my
dear, be happy, if you continue to love me; and if
I can know that Lady Clementina is not unhappy. 
This latter is a piece of intelligence, necessary, I was
going to say, for my tranquillity: For can your brother
be happy, if that Lady be otherwise, whose grievous
malady could hold in suspense his generous heart; 
when he had no prospects at the time, of ever calling
her his? 
I pity from my heart Lady Anne S. What a dreadful
thing is hopeless Love; the object so worthy, that
every mouth is full of his praises! How many women
will your brother's preference of one, be she who she
will, disappoint in their first Loves! Yet out of a
hundred women, how few are there, who, for one
reason, or other, have the man of their choice! 
I remember, you once said, It was well that Love
is not a passion absolutely invincible: But, however, I
do not, my dear, agree with you in your notions of all
Love-matches. Love merely personal, that sort of
Love which commences between the years of fifteen
and twenty; and when the extraordinary merit of the
object is not the foundation of it; may, I believe,
and perhaps generally ought to, be subdued. But Love
that is founded on a merit that every-body acknowleges
—I don't know what to say to the vincibility of
such a Love. For myself, I think it impossible that I
ever could have been the wife of any man on earth,
and given him my affection in so entire a manner, as
should, on reflexion, have acquitted my own heart— 
Tho' I hope I should not have been wanting in my
general duties—And why impossible? Because I must 

have been conscious, that there was another man
whom I would have preferred to him. Let me add,
that when prospects were darkest with regard to my
wishes, I promised my grandmamma and aunt, to
make myself easy, at least to endeavour to do so, if
they never would propose to me the Earl of D. or any
other man. They did promise me. 
Lady D. in her Letter to me, ‘is so good as to
claim the continuance of my correspondence.’ 
Most ungrateful, and equally self-denying, must I be,
if I were to decline my part of it. 
I have a Letter from Sir Rowland Meredith(a) . 
You, who have seen his former Letters to me, need
not be shewn this. The same honest heart appears in
them all; the same kind professions of paternal love. 
You love Sir Rowland; and will be pleased to hear
that his worthy nephew is likely to recover his health:
I cannot, however, be joyful that they are resolved to
make me soon one more visit. But you will see that
Mr. Fowler thinks, if he could be allowed to visit me
once more, he should, tho' hoping nothing from the
visit, be easier for the rest of his life. A strange way
of thinking! supposing Love to be his distemper: Is
it not? 
I have a Letter from Mr. Fenwick. He is arrived
at his seat near Daventry. He has made a very short
excursion abroad. He tells me in it, that he designs
me a visit on a particular subject. If it be, as I suspect,
to engage my interest with my Lucy, he shall not have
her: He is not worthy of her. 
The friendship and favour of Lady W. is one of the
great felicities which seem to offer to bless my future
lot. 
Mr. Greville is the most persevering, as well as most
audacious, of men. As other men endeavour to gain
a woman's affections by politeness; he makes pride,
ill-nature, and impetuosity, the proofs of his Love; 

and thinks himself ill used, especially since his large
acquisition of fortune, that they are not accepted as
such. He has obliged Mr. Deane to hear his pleas; 
and presumed to hope for his favour. Mr. Deane
frankly told him, that his interest lay quite another
way. He then insolently threatened with destruction,
the man, be he who he will, that shall stand in his
way. He doubts not, he says, but Sir Charles Grandison
is the man designed: But if so cool a Lover is to
be encouraged against so fervent a one as himself, he
is mistaken in all his notions of womens conduct and
judgments in Love-matters. A discreet Lover, he says,
is an unnatural character: Women, the odious wretch
says, love to be devoured (Is he not an odious wretch?); 
and if Miss Byron can content herself with another
woman's leavings, for that, he says, he is well informed
is the case, he knows what he shall think of
her spirit. And then he threw out, as usual, reflexions
on our Sex, which had malice in them. 
This man's threats disturb me. God grant that
your brother may not meet with any more embarrasments
from insolent men, on my account! 
If these men, this Greville in particular, would let
me be at peace, I should be better, I believe, in my
health: But Lady Frampton is his advocate, by Letter. 
He watches my footsteps, and, in every visit I
make, throws himself in the way: And on Sundays
he is always ready with his officious hand, as I alight
to enter the church, and to lead me back to my
uncle's coach. My uncle cannot affront him, because
he will not be affronted by him. He raillies off,
with an intrepidity that never was exceeded, all that
my aunt says to him. I repulse him with anger everywhere
but in a place so public, and so sacred. He disturbs
my devotion, with his staring eyes, always fixed
on our pew; which draw every one's after them. 
He has the assurance, when he intrudes himself into
my company, to laugh off my anger; telling me, 

that it is what he has long wished for; and that now
he is so much used to it, that he can live on my frowns,
and cannot support life without them. He plainly
tells me, that Mr. Fenwick's arrival from abroad, and
another certain person's also, are the occasion of his
resumed sedulity. 
Every-body about us, in short, is interested for or
against him. He makes me appear coy and ridiculous. 
He—But no more of this bold man. Would
to Heaven that some one of those who like such, would
relieve me from him! 
Visiters, and the post, oblige me, sooner than I
otherwise should, to conclude myself, my dear Lady
G. 
Ever Yours,
Harriet Byron. 

