


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


What a plague, said the wretch to the women,
do you come in for? I thought you knew your
own sex better than to mind a woman's squalling. 
They are always ready, said the odious fellow, to put
us in mind of the occasion we ought to give them for
crying out. I have not offered the least rudeness— 
I hope not, Sir. I hope my house—So sweet a
creature— 
Dear blessed, blessed woman (frantic with terror,
and mingled joy, to find myself in better hands than
I expected—Standing up, and then sitting down, I
believe at every sentence) Protect me! Save me! Be
my advocate! Indeed I have not deserved this treacherous
treatment. Indeed I am a good sort of body
(I scarce knew what I said): All my friends love me:
They will break their hearts, if any mishap befal me:
They are all good people: You would love them
dearly if you knew them: Sir Hargrave may have
better and richer wives than I: Pray prevail upon
him to spare me to my friends, for their sake. I will
forgive him for all he has done. 
Nay, dear lady, if Sir Hargrave will make you his
lawful and true wife, there can be no harm done,
surely. 
I will, I will, Mrs. Awberry, said he. I have
promised, and I will perform. But if she stand in
her own light—She expects nothing from my morals— 
If she stand in her own light; and look'd fiercely— 
God protect me! said I; God protect me! 
The gentleman is without, Sir, said the woman. 
O how my heart at that moment seemed to be at my
throat! What gentleman, thought I! Some one
come to save me! —O no!— 

And instantly entered the most horrible-looking
clergyman that I ever beheld. 
This, as near as I can recollect, is his description— 
A vast tall, big-boned, splay-footed man. A shabby
gown; as shabby a wig; an huge red pimply face; 
and a nose that hid half of it, when he look'd on
one side, and he seldom look'd fore-right when I saw
him. He had a dog's-ear'd common-prayer book in
his hand, which once had been gilt; open'd, horrid
sight! at the page of matrimony! 
Yet I was so intent upon making a friend, when a
man, a clergyman, appear'd, that I heeded not, at his
entrance, his frightful visage, as I did afterwards. I
push'd by Sir Hargrave, turning him half round with
my vehemence, and made Mrs. Awberry totter; and
throwing myself at the clergyman's feet, Man of God,
said I, my hands clasped, and held up; Man of God! 
Gentleman! Worthy man! —A good clergyman must
be all this! —If ever you had children! save a poor
creature! basely trick'd away from all her friends!
innocent! thinking no harm to any-body! I would
not hurt a worm! I love every-body! —Save me from
violence! Give not your aid to sanctify a base action. 
The man snuffled his answer thro' his nose. When
he opened his pouched mouth, the tobacco hung about
his great yellow teeth. He squinted upon me, and
took my clasped hands, which were buried in his huge
hand, Rise, madam! Kneel not to me! No harm is
intended you. One question, only: Who is that gentleman
before me, in the silver-laced cloaths? What
is his name?— 
He is Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, Sir: A wicked, a
very wicked man, for all he looks so! 
The vile wretch stood smiling, and enjoying my
distress. 
O madam! A very hon-our-able man! bowing,
like a sycophant, to Sir Hargrave. 

And who pray, madam, are you? What is your
name? 
Harriet Byron, Sir: A poor innocent creature,
looking at my dress, tho' I make such a vile appearance
—Good Sir, your pity! And I sunk down again
at his feet. 
Of Northamptonshire, madam? You are a single
woman! Your uncle's name— 
Is Selby, Sir. A very good man—I will reward
you, Sir, as the most grateful heart— 
All is fair: All is above-board: All is as it was
represented. I am above bribes, madam. You will
be the happiest of women before day-break—Good
people! —The three women advanced. 
Then I saw what an ugly wretch he was! 
Sir Hargrave advanced. The two horrid creatures
raised me between them. Sir Hargrave took my
struggling hand: And then I saw another ill-looking
man enter the room, who I suppose was to give me
to the hated man. 
Dearly beloved, began to read the snuffling monster— 
O my Lucy! Does not your heart ake for your
Harriet? Mine has seemed to turn over and over,
round and round, I don't know how, at the recital. — 
It was ready to choak me at the time. 
I must break off for a few minutes. 

