


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


A treasure, an invaluable treasure, my dear
grandmamma! —On the table in Sir Charles's
own closet, I took up a common-prayer book, under
which, on removing it, I saw a paper written in Sir
Charles's largest hand, the three last Lines of which
appearing to be very serious (the first side not containing
them) I had the curiosity to unfold it: It contains
Reflections, mingled and concluded with solemn
addresses to the Almighty. I asked leave to transcribe
them. On promise that a copy, as his, should not pass
into any-body's hands but yours, I obtained it. 
What a comfort is it, on reflexion, that, at his
own motion, I joined with him in the Sacramental
Office, on occasion of our happy nuptials, the first
opportunity that offered! A kind of renewal, in the
most solemn manner, of our marriage-vows; at least a
confirmation of them. No wonder that the good
man, who could draw up such reflexions, should
make such a motion. 
What credit did he do (may not one say so?) To
religion on that happy day! A man of sense, of
dignity in his person, known to be no bigot, no superstitious
man; yet not ashamed to join in the sacred
office with the meanest. It was a glorious confession
of his Christian principles. Whenever he attends
on public worship, his seriousness, his modesty, his
humility, all shew that he believes himself in the presence
of that God whose blessing he silently joins to
invoke: And when all is over, his chearsulness and
vivacity demonstrate, that his heart is at ease in the
consciousness of a duty performed. How does my
mind sometimes exult in the prospects of happiness
with the man of my choice, extending, through divine
goodness, beyond this transitory Life! 

I will conclude this Letter with the copy of these
reflexions. What is fit to come after them, that can
be written by 
Your Harriet Grandison? 



What, O my heart! overflowing with happiness!
are the sentiments that ought to spring
up in thee, when admitted either in the solemnities
of public worship, or the retiredness of private devotion,
into the more immediate presence of thy
Maker! Who does not govern, but to bless! 
Whose divine commands are sent to succour human
reason in search of happiness! 
Let thy Law, Almighty! be the rule, and thy glory
the constant end, of all I do! Let me not build virtue
on any notions of honour, but of honour to thy Name. 
Let me not sink piety in the boast of benevolence; 
my Love of God in the Love of my fellow-creatures. 
Can good be of human growth? No! It is thy
gift, Almighty, And All-good! Let not thy bounties
remove the Donor from my thought; nor the Love
of pleasures make me forsake the Fountain from which
they flow. When joys entice, let me ask their title
to my heart. When evils threaten, let me see thy
mercy shining thro' the cloud; and discern the great
hazard of having all to my wish. In an age of such
licence, let me not take comfort from an inauspicious
omen, the number of those who do amiss: An
omen rather of public ruin, than of private sasety. 
Let the joys of the multitude less allure than alarm
me; and their danger, not example, determine my
choice. What weigh public example, passion, and
the multitude, in one scale, against Reason, and the
Almighty, in the other? 
In this day of domineering pleasure, so lower my
taste, as to make me relish the comforts of Life. And
in this day of dissipation, O give me thought sufficient 

to preserve me from being so desperate, as in this perpetual
flux of things, and as perpetual swarm of accidents,
to depend on To-morrow: A dependence
that is the ruin of To-day; as that is of Eternity. Let
my whole existence be ever before me: Nor let the
terrors of the grave turn back my survey. When
temptations arise, and virtue staggers, let imagination
sound the final trumpet, and judgment lay hold on
eternal Life. In what is well begun, grant me to
persevere; and to know, that none are wise, but they
who determine to be wiser still. 
And since, O Lord! the Fear of thee is the beginning
of wisdom; and in its progress, its surest
shield; turn the world entirely out of my heart, and
place that guardian angel, thy blessed Fear, in its stead. 
Turn out a foolish world, which gives its money for
what is not bread; which hews out broken cisterns
that hold no water; a world in which even they
whose hands are mighty, have found nothing. There
is nothing, Lord God Almighty, in heaven, in earth,
but thee. I will seek thy face, bless thy name, sing
thy praises, love thy Law, do thy will, enjoy thy
peace, hope thy glory, till my final hour! Thus shall
I grasp all that can be grasped by man. This will
heighten good, and soften evil in the present life! 
And when death sommons, I shall sleep sweetly in
the dust, till his mighty Conqueror bids the trumpet
sound; and then shall I, through his merits,
awake to eternal glory. 

