



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Tuesday, March 21. 
How willingly would my dear mamma shew
kindness to me, were she permitted! None of
this persecution should I labour under, I am sure, if
that regard were paid to her prudence and fine understanding,
which they so well deserve. Whether owing
to her, or to my aunt, or to both, that a new trial
was to be made upon me, I cannot tell; but this
morning her Shorey deliver'd into my hand the following
condescending letter. 

My dear girl,
For so I must still call you; since dear you may be
to me, in every sense of the word—We have
taken into particular consideration, some hints that fell
yesterday from your good Norton, as if we had not,
at Mr. Solmes's first application, treated you with
that condescension, wherewith we have in all other
instances treated you. If it had been so, my dear, you
were not excusable to be wanting in your part, and
to set yourself to oppose your father's will in a point
he had enter'd too far into, to recede with honour. 

But all yet may be well. On your single will, my
child, depends all our present happiness!— 
Your father permits me to tell you, that if you now
at last comply with his expectations, all past disobligations
shall be bury'd in oblivion, as if they had
never been: But withal, that this is the last time that
that grace will be offer'd you. 
I hinted to you, you must remember, that patterns
of the richest silks were sent for. They are come: 
And as they are come, your papa, to shew how much
he is determin'd, will have me send them up to you. 
I could have wish'd they might not have accompany'd
this letter—But there is no great matter in that. I
must tell you, that your delicacy is not to be quite so
much regarded, as I had once thought it deserved to be. 
These are the newest, as well as richest, that we
could procure; answerable to our station in the
world; answerable to the fortune, additional to your
grandfather's estate, designed you; and to the noble
settlements agreed upon. 
Your papa intends you six suits (three of them
dress'd) at his own expence. You have an intire new
suit; and one besides, which I think you never wore
but twice. As the new suit is rich, if you chuse to
make That one of the six, your papa, will present
you with an hundred guineas in lieu. 
Mr. Solmes intends to present you with a set of
jewels. As you have your grandmother's and your
own, if you choose to have the former new-set and
to make them serve, his present will be made in
money; a very round sum—which will be given in
full property to yourself; besides a fine annual allowance
for pin-money, as it is called. So that your
objection against the spirit of a man you think worse
of than he deserves, will have no weight; but you
will be more independent than a wife of less discretion
than we attribute to you, perhaps ought to be. You
know full well, that I, who first and last brought a 

still larger fortune into the family, than you will carry
to Mr. Solmes, had not a provision made me of near
This, that we have made for you. —Where people
marry to their liking, terms are the least things stood
upon. —Yet should I be sorry if you cannot, to oblige
us all, overcome a dislike. 
Wonder not, Clary, that I write to you thus plainly
and freely upon this subject. Your behaviour hitherto
has been such, that we have had no opportunity of
entering minutely into the subject with you. Yet,
after all that has passed between you and me in conversation,
and between you and your uncles by letter,
you have no room to doubt what is to be the consequence. 
—Either, child, we must give up our authority,
or you your humour. You cannot expect
the one: We have all the reason in the world to expect
the other. You know I have told you more
than once, that you must resolve to have Mr. Solmes,
or never to be looked upon to be our child. 
The draught of the settlements you may see whenever
you will. We think there can be no room for
objection to any of the articles. There is still more
in them in our family's favour, than was stipulated at
first, when your aunt talk'd of them to you. More so,
indeed, than we could have ask'd. If, upon perusal
of them, you think any alteration necessary, it shall be
made. —Do, my dear girl, send to me within this day
or two, or rather ask me, for the perusal of them. 
As a certain person's appearance at church so lately,
and what he gives out every-where, make us extremely
uneasy, and as that uneasiness will continue
while you are single, you must not wonder that a
short day is intended. This-day-fortnight we design
it to be, if you have no objection to make, that I
shall approve of. But, if you determine as we would
have you, and signify it to us, we shall not stand with
you for a week or so. 
Your sightliness of person, may perhaps make some 

think this alliance disparaging. But I hope you won't
put such a personal value upon yourself; if you do,
it will indeed be the less wonder that person should
weigh with you, (however contemptible the consideration!)
—in another man. —Thus we parents,
in justice, ought to judge: That our two daughters
are equally dear and valuable to us: If so, why should
Clarissa think that a disparagement, which Arabella
would not (nor we for her) have thought any, had
the address been made to her? —You will know what
I mean by this, without my explaining myself further. 
Signify to us, now, therefore, your compliance
with our wishes. —And then there is an end of your
confinement: An act of oblivion, as I may call it,
shall pass upon all your former refractoriness: And
you will once more make us happy in you, and in one
another. You may, in this case, directly come down
to your papa and me, in his study; where we will
give you our opinions of the patterns, with our hearty
forgiveness and blessings. 
Come, be a good child, as you used to be, my
Clarissa. I have (notwithstanding your past behaviour,
and the hopelesness which some have express'd of your
compliance) undertaken this one time more for
you. Discredit not my hopes, my dear girl. I have
promised never more to interfere between your
father and you, if this my most earnest application
succeed not. I expect you down, Love. Your papa
expects you down. But be sure don't let him see any
thing unchearful in your compliance. If you come,
I will clasp you to my fond heart, with as much
pleasure as ever I press'd you to it in my whole life. 
You don't know what I have suffer'd within these
few weeks past; nor ever will be able to guess,
till you come to be in my situation; which is that of
a fond and indulgent mother, praying night and day,
and struggling to preserve, against the attempts of more
ungovernable spirits, the peace and union of her family. 

But, you know the terms. Come not near us, if
you resolve to be undutiful: But this, after what I
have written, I hope you cannot be. 
If you come directly, and, as I said, chearfully, as
if your heart were in your duty (and you told me it
was free, you know—) I shall then, as I said, give
you the most tender proofs, how much I am 
Your truly affectionate Mother. 
Think for me, my dearest friend, how I must be
affected by this letter; the contents of it so surprisingly
terrifying, yet so sweetly urged! —O why,
cry'd I to myself, am I obliged to undergo this severe
conflict between a command that I cannot obey, and
language so condescendingly moving! —Could I have
been sure of being struck dead at the altar before the
ceremony had given the man I hate a title to my vows,
I think I could have submitted to have been led to it. 
But to think of living with, and living for, a man
one cannot abide, what a sad thing is that!— 
And then, how could the glare of habit and ornament
be supposed any inducement to one, who has
always held, that the principal view of a good wife in
the adorning of her person, ought to be, to preserve
the affection of her husband, and to do credit to his
choice; and that she should be even fearful of attracting
the eyes of others? —In this view, must not the
very richness of the patterns add to my disgusts? — 
Great encouragement indeed, to think of adorning
one's-self to be the wife of Mr. Solmes!— 
Upon the whole, it was not possible for me to go
down upon the prescrib'd condition. Do you think
it was? —And to write, if my letter would have been
read, what could I write that would be admitted, and
after what I had written and said to so little effect? I
walked backward and forward: I threw down with
disdain the patterns: Now to my closet retir'd I; then,
quitting it, now threw I myself upon the Settee; now 

upon this chair; now upon that; and then into one
window, then into another—I knew not what to do! — 
And while I was in this suspense, having again taken
up the letter to re-peruse it, Betty came in, reminding
me, by order, That my papa and mamma waited for
me in my papa's study. 
Tell my mamma, said I, that I beg the favour of
seeing her here for one moment; or to permit me to
attend her any where by herself. 
I listen'd at the stair's-head—You see, my dear,
how it is, cry'd my father, very angrily: All your
condescension (as your indulgence heretofore) is thrown
away. You blame your son's violence, as you call it,
[I had some pleasure in hearing this] but nothing else
will do with her. You shall not see her alone. Is
my presence an exception to the bold creature? 
Tell her, said my mamma to Betty, she knows upon
what terms she may come down to us. Nor will
I see her upon any other. 
The maid brought me this answer. I had recourse
to my pen and ink; but I trembled so, that I could
not write, nor knew I what to say had I had steadier
fingers. At last Betty brought me these lines from
my papa. 

Undutiful and perverse Clarissa,
No condescension, I see, will move you. Your
mother shall not see you; nor will I. Prepare,
however to obey. You know our pleasure. Your
uncle Antony, your brother, and your sister, and
your favourite Mrs. Norton, shall see the ceremony
performed privately at your said uncle's chapel. And
when Mr. Solmes can introduce you to us, in the
temper we wish to behold you in, we may perhaps
forgive his wife, altho' we never can, in any other
character, our perverse daughter. As it will be so
privately performed, cloaths and equipage may be provided
afterwards. So prepare to go to your uncle's for 

an early day in next week. We will not see you till
all is over: And we will have it over the sooner, in
order to shorten the time of your deserved confinement,
and our own trouble, in contending with such a rebel,
as you have been of late. I'll hear no pleas. Will
receive no letter, nor expostulation. Nor shall you
hear from me any more till you have chang'd your
name to my liking. This from 
Your incensed Father. 
If this resolution be adhered to, then will my papa
never see me more! —For I will never be That
Solmes's wife—I will die first!— 
Tuesday evening. 
HE, this Solmes, came hither soon after I had received
my papa's letter. He sent up to beg leave to
wait upon me. I wonder at his assurance! 
I said to Betty, who brought me his message, Let
him restore a lost creature to her father and mother,
and then I may hear what he has to say. But, if
my friends will not see me on his account, I will not
see him upon his own. 
I hope, Miss, said Betty, that you will not send
me down with this answer. He is with your papa and
mamma. 
I am driven to despair, said I. I cannot be used
worse. I will not see him. 
Down she went with my answer. She pretended,
it seems, to be loth to repeat it: So was commanded
out of her affected reserves, and gave it in its full
force. 
O how I heard my papa storm!— 
They were all together, it seems, in his study. 
My brother was for having me turn'd out of the house
that moment, to Lovelace, and my evil destiny. My
mamma was pleased to put in a gentle word for me: 
I know not what it was: But thus she was answer'd— 

My dear, this is the provoking'st thing in the world
in a woman of your good sense! —To love a rebel,
as well as if she were dutiful. What encouragement
for duty is this? —Have I not loved her as well as
ever you did, and why am I changed? Would to the
Lord, your sex knew how to distinguish? But the
fond mother ever made a harden'd child!— 
She was pleased, however, to blame Betty, as the
wench own'd, for giving my answer its full force. But
my father praised her for it. 
The wench says, That he would have come up in
his wrath, at my refusing to see Mr. Solmes: But
my brother and sister prevailed upon him to the
contrary. 
I wish he had! —And, were it not for his own sake,
that he had killed me. 
Mr. Solmes condescended (I am mightily obliged
to him, truly!) to plead for me. 
They are all in tumults! How it will end, I know
not! —I am quite weary of my life! —So happy, till
within these few weeks! —So miserable now! 
Well, indeed, might my mamma say, That I should
have great trials!— 
P. S. The idiot (such a one am I treated like!) is
begg'd, as I may say, by my brother and sister. They
have desired, that I may be consigned over intirely
to their management. If it be granted (It is, on
my father's side, I understand, but not yet on my
mother's) what cruelty may I not expect from their
envy, jealousy, and ill-will? —I shall soon see, by
its effects, if I am to be so consigned. —This is a
written intimation privately dropt in my Wood-house-walk,
by my cousin Dolly Hervey. The dear
girl longs to see me, she tells me: But is forbidden
till she see me as Mrs. Solmes, or consenting to be
his. I will take example by their perseverance! — 
Indeed I will!— 