



Miss Arab. Harlowe, To Miss Cl. Harlowe. 
[In Answer to hers of July 29. See No xi. 

Thursday Morn. Aug. 3. 
Sister Clary,
I wish you would not trouble me with any more of
your Letters. You had always a knack at writeing; 
and depended upon making every one do what
you would when you wrote. But your Wit and your
Folly have undone you. And now, as all naughty
creatures do, when they can't help themselves, you
come begging and praying, and make others as uneasy
as yourself. 
When I wrote last to you, I expected that I should
not be at rest. 
And so you'd creep on, by little and little, till you'll
want to be received again. 
But you only hope for forgiveness, and a blessing,
you say. A Blessing for what, Sister Clary? Think
for what! —However, I re'd your Letter to my Father
and Mother. 
I won't tell you what my Father said —One who
has the true sense you boast to have of your misdeeds,
may guess, without my telling you, what a justly-incensed
Father would say on such an occasion. 
My poor Mother—O wretch! What has not your 

ungrateful folly cost my poor Mother! —Had you been
less a darling, you would not, perhaps, have been so
graceless: But I never in my life saw a cockered favourite
come to good. 
My heart is full, and I can't help writing my mind; 
for your crimes have disgraced us all; and I am
afraid and ashamed to go to any public or private
Assembly or Diversion: And why? —I need not say
why, when your actions are the subjects either of
the open talk or of the affronting whispers of both
Sexes at all such places. 
Upon the whole, I am sorry I have no more comfort
to send you: But I find nobody willing to forgive
you. 
I don't know what time may do for you; and
when it is seen that your penitence is not owing more
to disappointment than to true conviction: For it is
too probable, Miss Clary, that, had you gone on as
swimmingly as you expected, and had not your
feather-headed villain abandoned you, we should
have heard nothing of these moving supplications; 
nor of any-thing but defiances from him, and a guilt
gloried in from you. And this is every one's opinion,
as well as that of 
Your grieved Sister,
Arabella Harlowe. 
I send this by a particular hand, who undertakes
to give it you or leave it for you by to-morrow
night. 