



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

I am glad my Papers are safe in your hands. I will
make it my endeavour to deserve your good opinion, 

that I may not at once disgrace your judgment,
and my own heart. 
I have another Letter from Mr. Lovelace. He is
extremely apprehensive of the meeting I am to have
with Mr. Solmes to-morrow. He says, ‘That the
airs that wretch gives himself on the occasion, add
to his concern; and it is with infinite difficulty that
he prevails upon himself not to make him a visit to
let him know what he may expect, if compulsion be
used towards me in his favour. He assures me, That
Solmes has actually talked with tradesmen of new
equipages, and names the people in town with whom
he has treated: That he has even’ [Was there ever
such a horrid wretch!] ‘allotted This and That apartment
in his house, for a Nursery, and other offices.’ 
How shall I bear to hear such a creature talk of
Love to me? I shall be out of all patience with him. 
Besides, I thought that he did not dare to make or talk
of these impudent preparations—So inconsistent as such
are with my Brother's views—But I fly the subject. 
Upon this confidence of Solmes, you will less wonder
at that of Lovelace, ‘in pressing me in the name
of all his family, to escape from so determined a violence
as is intended to be offered to me at my Uncle's: 
That the forward contriver should propose
Lord M's chariot and Six to be at the stile that leads
up to the lonely coppice adjoining to our paddock. 
You will see how audaciously he mentions Settlements
ready drawn; horsemen ready to mount; and
one of his Cousins Montague to be in the chariot,
or at the George in the neighbouring village, waiting
to accompany me to Lord M's, or to Lady
Betty's or Lady Sarah's, or to Town, as I please; 
and upon such orders, or conditions, and under such
restrictions as to himself, as I shall prescribe.’ 
You will see how he threatens, ‘To watch and
way lay them, and to rescue me as he calls it, by an
armed force of friends and servants, if they attempt 

to carry me against my will to my Uncle's; and this,
whether I give my consent to the enterprize, or not: 
—Since he shall have no hopes if I am once there.’ 
O my dear friend! Who can think of these things,
and not be extremely miserable in her apprehensions! 
This mischievous Sex! What had I to do with any
of them; or they with me? —I had deserved This,
were it by my own seeking, by my own giddiness,
that I had brought myself into this situation—I wish
with all my heart—But how foolishly we are apt to
wish when we find ourselves unhappy, and know not
how to help ourselves! 
On your Mother's goodness, however, is my reliance. 
If I can but avoid being precipitated on either
hand, till my Cousin Morden arrives, a Reconciliation
must follow; and all will be happy. 
I have deposited a Letter for Mr. Lovelace; in
which ‘I charge him, as he would not disoblige me
for ever, to avoid any rash step, any visit to Mr.
Solmes, which may be followed by acts of violence.’ 
I re-assure him, ‘That I will sooner die than be
that man's wife. 
‘Whatever be my usage, whatever shall be the result
of the apprehended Interview, I insist upon it
that he presume not to offer violence to any of my
friends: And express myself highly displeased, that he
should presume upon such an interest in my esteem, as
to think himself entitled to dispute my Father's Authority
in my removal to my Uncle's; altho' I tell him,
that I will omit neither prayers nor contrivance, even
to the making of myself ill, to avoid going.’ 
To-morrow is Tuesday! —How soon comes upon
us the day we dread! —O that a deep sleep of twenty-four
hours would seize my faculties! —But then the
next day would be Tuesday, as to all the effects and
purposes for which I so much dread it. If this reach
you before the event of the so much apprehended Interview
can be known, pray for 
Your
Clarissa Harlowe. 