


Peregrine is celebrated as a wit and patron, and
proceeds to entertain himself at the expence of
whom it did concern. 
In the mean time, Peregrine flourished in the
gay scenes of life, and (as I have already
observed) had divers opportunities of profiting in
the way of marriage, had not his ambition been 

a little too inordinate, and his heart still biassed
by a passion, which all the levity of youth could
not balance, nor all the pride of vanity overcome. 
Nor was our hero unmarked in the world of letters
and taste: he had signalized himself in several
poetical productions, by which he had acquired
a good share of reputation; not that the
pieces were such as ought to have done much honour
to his genius; but any tolerable performance
from a person of his figure and supposed
fortune, will always be considered, by the bulk of
readers, as an instance of astonishing capacity; 
though the very same production, ushered into
the world with the name of an author in less
affluent circumstances, would be justly disregarded
and despised; so much is the opinion of most people
influenced and over-awed by ridiculous considerations. 
Be this as it will, our young gentleman was no
sooner distinguished as an author, than he was
marked out as a patron, by all the starving retainers
to poetry: he was solemnized in odes, celebrated
in epigrams, and fed with the milk of soft dedication. 
His vanity even relished this incense; and
though his reason could not help despising those
that offered it, not one of them was sent away,
unowned by his munificence. He began to think
himself, in good earnest, that superior genius
which their flattery had described; he cultivated
acquaintance with the wits of fashion, and even
composed in secret a number of bons mots, which
he uttered in company as the impromptu's of his
imagination. In this practice indeed, he imitated
some of the most renowned geniuses of the age,
who (if the truth were known) have laboured in
secret, with the sweat of their brows, for many a 

repartee which they have vended as the immediate
production of fancy and expression. He was
so successful in this exercise of his talents, that
his fame actually came in competition with that of
a great man, who had long sat at the helm of
wit; and in a dialogue that once happened between
them, on the subject of a cork-screw,
wherein the altercation was discharged (according
to Bayes) slap for slap, dash for dash, our hero
was judged to have the better of his lordship, by
some of the minor satellites, that commonly surround
and reflect the rays of such mighty luminaries. 
In a word, he dipped himself so far in these literary
amusements, that he took the management
of the pit into his direction, putting himself at
the head of those critics who call themselves the
town; and in that capacity chastised several players,
who had been rendered insolent and refractory
by unmerited success. As for the new productions
of the stage, though generally unspirited
and insipid, they always enjoyed the benefit of his
influence and protection; because he never disliked
the performance so much as he sympathized with
the poor author, who stood behind the scenes in
the most dreadful suspence, trembling, as it were,
on the very brink of damnation: yet, though he
extended his generosity and compassion to the
humble and needy, he never let slip one opportunity
of mortifying villainy and arrogance. Had
the executive power of the legislature been vested
in him, he would have doubtless devised strange
species of punishment for all offenders against humanity
and decorum; but, restricted as he was,
he employed his invention in subjecting them to
the ridicule and contempt of their fellow-subjects. 

It was with that view he set on foot the scheme
of conjuration, which was still happily carried on,
and made use of the intelligence of his friend
Cadwallader; though he sometimes converted this
advantage to the purposes of gallantry, being (as
the reader may have perceived) of a very amorous
complexion. He not only acted the reformer, or
rather the castigator, in the fashionable world, but
also exercised his talents among the inferior class
of people, who chanced to incur his displeasure. 
Being one day insulted by a couple of chairmen,
who demanded more than their fare, he
took particular notice of their number; and next
day, Pipes, being dressed in one of his old suits,
went by his direction to a coffee-house near their
stand, after he had loaded himself with an additional
weight, amounting to an hundred pounds
at least; and calling the same individual partners
who had affronted his master, he took possession
of their chair, and ordered them to carry him to
a place at the distance of two long miles. The
burthen was so extraordinary, that when they attempted
to take him up, they imagined the vehicle
was detained by some crack or crevice of the
pavement, and one of them actually went to disengage
it; but finding it clear, he began a song of
imprecations upon his fare, who he swore had got
a backside of block-tin; but, being obliged to accomplish
his undertaking, he bent his shoulders
once more to the load, bidding his comrade lift
fair and be damn'd. The task was not performed
in silence; while they staggered along, he cursed
in a strain peculiar to himself, and in vain endeavoured
to provoke the patient Pipes with opprobrious
language, hoping that he would either dismiss
them from his service, or be so incensed at 

his abuse, as to proceed to manual chastisement; 
in which case, the fellow would have an opportunity
of gratifying his choler upon the author of
his present grievance. Finding, however, that
the gentleman bore his reproaches with the most
philosophic indifference, he lost all patience; and
being restrained, by the fear of the law, from an
assault upon his fare, he turned the stream of his
indignation upon his own partner, who, he alledged,
did not bear his share of the burthen. 
This imputation created a dispute, which was
maintained on both sides with such virulence of
obloquy, as produced a quarrel, and mutual defiance
to single combat, on the spot. 
The chair was accordingly set down, without
ceremony, the antagonists stripped themselves in
a moment; and a fierce battle ensuing, Peregrine,
who followed at a distance, enjoyed the pleasure
of seeing them both beaten almost to jelly, before
the contest was determined. As for Pipes,
he sat still, and viewed the engagement with great
composure; and perceiving his carriers disabled
by their mutual prowess and perseverance, opened
the chair, and very deliberately walked home to
his master's lodging, where he disincumbered himself
of his load. 
A few days after the atchievement of this exploit,
one of our hero's friends, who lodged at
the house of an old peevish puritanical widow,
that kept an hosier's shop, was obliged to quit
his apartment at a minute's warning, because he
had scandalized the house, by treating a female
cousin at supper over-night. On this occasion, a
great deal of sharp repartee had passed between
him and his landlady, who not only subjected him
to infinite inconvenience, from such a precipitate 

removal, but had likewise given her tongue such
disagreeable liberties, at his expence, that he
vowed revenge, and now sollicited the advice and
assistance of his friend. Pickle having inquired
into the character of the delinquent, who was
hated by her neighbours, for her insolent and
fretful disposition, undertook the cause of his companion,
to whom he dictated the following advertisement,
which was immediately inserted in one
of the news-papers: “Any person possessed of a
male black cat, with white feet, and a bushy tail,
not exceeding the age of two or three years, will
find a purchaser, by carrying it to the sign of the
kid near St. James's.” 
The projector and his associate having obtained
the promise of the publisher, that this intimation
should appear next day, went early in the morning
to a public house, and occupying a room,
the windows of which fronted the hosier's door,
sat with joyful expectation to see the effect of
their scheme, which soon yielded them all the satisfaction
they could desire. The shop was no
sooner opened, than it was surrounded by a great
number of the Cannaille, who having heard the
advertisement read in ale-houses, came (each with
a cat under his arm) in hopes of making an advantageous
bargain; for though many of them
were too inconsiderable to produce such an animal
of their own property, they had made free
with the first cats they could pick up, and every
one repaired with all possible dispatch to the appointed
place, with a view of forestalling the
market; so that, in disputing the precedence, the
whole crew went to loggerheads about the door,
to the utter astonishment of the shopkeeper, who
could not conceive the meaning of such a congregation. 

Nevertheless, she began to harangue them in
her usual stile, which was not the mildest sort of
expostulation; and one of the multitude, who
found means to detach himself from the general
uproar and confusion, told her, he had brought
a cat, which, he supposed, would answer the
marks of her advertisement. “Here, (said he,
presenting the creature) look at him, mistress; 
I'll be damn'd if you ever saw a finer boar in
your life. Do but mind his tusks and his tail; 
his tail is for all the world like a squirrel's, and
yet he's no more than a kitten; I'm the son of a
bitch, if he's a day more than six months old.” 
This address, while it compleated her amazement,
kindled her rage to such a degree, that she
spit in his face, calling him a cat, and a rat, and
a rascal; and shutting the hatch, threatened the
whole assembly with Bridewell and imprisonment,
if they would not immediately disperse. Her declamation
was so shrill, as to command the attention
of the whole audience, who finding their
hopes frustrated, and hearing themselves so bitterly
reviled, put an end to their own jars, and
held a momentary conference; in consequence of
which, one of them was deputed to ask, whether
or not she had advertised for a black cat. This
question being answered in the negative, with a
string of reproachful epithets, the interrogator approaching
the door, “Why, ye bitch of Babel!
(said he) if you won't give money for my cat,
you shall have him for love.” With these words
he threw it into the shop, and retired; while his
brethren, in obedience to this signal, lifted up
their hands as one man, and like soldiers at the
word of command, discharged about forty cats at
the same instant of time, upon the confounded 

hosier, who finding herself overwhelmed by such
a number of animals, which she looked upon as
so many fiends sent to torment her, ran aghast into
the street with dismal outcries, imploring the assistance
of her neighbours, who (as well as our
confederates) enjoyed her distress; and after having
indulged their animosity, contributed their aid,
in ridding her of such a dangerous annoyance. 
The next mischievous plan that entered our
hero's imagination, was suggested by two advertisements
published in the same paper, by persons
who wanted to borrow certain sums of money,
for which they promised to give undeniable security. 
Peregrine, from the stile and manner of
both, concluded they were written by attornies,
a species of people for whom he entertained his
uncle's aversion: and in order to amuse himself,
and some of his friends, with their disappointment,
he wrote a letter signed A. B. to each advertiser,
according to the address specified in the
news-paper, importing, that if he would come
with his writings, to a certain coffee-house near
the Temple, precisely at six o'clock in the evening,
he would find a person sitting in the right-hand
box, next to the window, who would be
glad to treat with him about the subject of his advertisement,
and, should his security be liked,
would accommodate him with the sum which he
wanted to raise. Before the hour of this double
appointment, Pickle with his friend Cadwallader,
and a few more gentlemen, to whom he had
thought proper to communicate the plan, went to
the coffee-house, and seated themselves near the
place that was destined for their meeting. 
The hope of getting money had such an evident
effect upon their punctuality, that one of them 

arrived a considerable time before the hour; and
having reconnoitred the room, took his station
according to the direction he had received, fixing
his eye upon a clock that stood before him, and
asking of the bar-keeper if it was not too slow. He
had not remained in this posture many minutes,
when he was joined by a strange figure, that
waddled into the room, with a bundle of papers in
his bosom, and the sweat running over his nose. 
Seeing a man in the box to which he had been
directed, he took it for granted he was the lender; 
and as soon as he could recover his breath, which
was almost exhausted by the dispatch he had made,
“Sir, (said he) I presume you are the gentleman
I was to meet, about that loan.” —Here he
was interrupted by the other, who eagerly replied,
“A. B. Sir, I suppose.” “The same,
(cried the last comer) I was afraid I should be
too late; for I was detained beyond my expectation,
by a nobleman in the other end of the
town, that wants to mortgage a small trifle of his
estate, about a thousand a year; and my watch
happens to be in the hands of the maker, having
met with an accident a few nights ago, which set
it asleep. But howsomever, there's no time lost,
and I hope this affair will be transacted to the satisfaction
of us both. For my own part, I love
to do good offices myself, and therefore I expect
nothing but what is fair and honest of other
people.” 
His new friend was exceedingly comforted by
this declaration, which he considered as a happy
omen of his success; and the hope of fingering
the cash operated visibly in his countenance,
while he expressed his satisfaction at meeting with
a person of such candour and humanity. “The 

pleasure (said he) of dealing with an easy conscientious
man, is, in my opinion, superior to that of
touching all the money upon earth; for what joy
can be compared with what a generous mind
feels, in befriending its fellow-creatures? I was
never so happy in my life, as at one time, in
lending five hundred pounds to a worthy gentleman
in distress, without insisting upon rigid security. 
Sir, one may easily distinguish an upright man by
his countenance; for example now, I think I
could take your word for ten thousand pounds.” 
The other with great joy protested, that he was
right in his conjecture, and returned the compliment
a thousand fold: by which means, the expectation
of both was wound up to a very interesting
pitch; and both, at the same instant, began
to produce their papers, in the untying of
which, their hands shook with transports of eagerness
and impatience; while their eyes were so
intent upon their work, that they did not perceive
the occupation of each other. 
At length, one of them, having got the start
of the other, and unrolled several skins of musty
parchment, directed his view to the employment
of his friend; and seeing him fumbling at his
bundle, asked if that was a blank bond and conveyance,
which he had brought along with him. 
The other, without lifting up his eyes, or desisting
from his endeavours to loose the knot,
which by this time he had applied to his teeth,
answered this question in the negative, observing,
that the papers in his hand were the security which
he proposed to give for the money. 
This reply converted the looks of the inquirer
into a stare of infinite stolidity, accompanied with
the word, Anan! which he pronounced in a tone 

of fear and astonishment. The other, alarmed
at this note, cast his eyes towards the supposed
lender, and was in a moment infected by his aspect. 
All the exultation of hope that sparkled in
their eyes, was now succeeded by disappointment
and dismay; and while they gazed ruefully at
each other, their features were gradually elongated,
like the transient curls of a Middle-row
periwig. 
This emphatic silence was, however, broke
by the last comer, who, in a faultering accent,
desired the other to recollect the contents of his
letter. “Of your letter!” cried the first, putting
into his hand the advertisement he had received
from Pickle; which he had no sooner perused,
than he produced his own, for the satisfaction of
the other party: so that another gloomy pause
ensued, at the end of which, each uttered a profound
sigh, or rather groan, and rising up, sneak'd
off, without farther communication; he who
seemed to be the most afflicted of the two, taking
his departure, with an exclamation of “Humbugged,
egad!” 
Such were the amusements of our hero, tho'
they did not engross his whole time, some part
of which was dedicated to nocturnal riots and revels,
among a set of young noblemen, who had
denounced war against temperance, œconomy,
and common sense, and were indeed the devoted
sons of tumult, waste, and prodigality. Not
that Peregrine relished those scenes, which were
a succession of absurd extravagance, devoid of all
true spirit, taste, or enjoyment: but his vanity
prompted him to mingle with those who were
intitled the choice spirits of the age; and his disposition
was so pliable, as to adapt itself easily to 

the measures of his company, where he had not
influence enough to act in the capacity of director. 
The rendezvous was at a certain tavern, which
might be properly stiled the temple of excess,
where they left the choice of their fare to the
discretion of the landlord, that they might save
themselves the pains of exercising their own reason; 
and, in order to avoid the trouble of adjusting
the bill, ordered the waiter to declare how
much every individual must pay, without specifying
the articles of the charge; and this proportion
generally amounted to two guineas per head
for each dinner and supper, and frequently exceeded
that sum; of which the landlord durst
not abate, without running the risque of having
his nose slit for his moderation. 
But this was a puny expence, compared with
that which they often incurred, by the damage
done to the furniture and servants, in the madness
of their intoxication, as well as the loss they
sustained at hazard, an amusement to which all
of them had recourse, in the progress of their
debauches. This elegant diversion was introduced,
encouraged, and promoted by a crew of
rapacious sharpers, who had made themselves necessary
companions to this hopeful generation,
by the talents of pimping and buffoonery: and
though they were universally known, even by
those they preyed upon, to have no other means
of earning their livelihood, than the most infamous
and fraudulent practices, they were caressed
and courted by these infatuated dupes, when
a man of honour, who would not join in their
excesses, would have been treated with the utmost
indignity and contempt. 

Though Peregrine, in his heart, detested those
abandoned courses, and was a professed enemy to
the whole society of gamesters, whom he considered,
and always treated as the foes of human
kind, he was insensibly accustomed to licentious
riot, and even led imperceptibly into play by
those cormorants, who are no less dangerous in
the art of cheating, than by their consummate
skill in working upon the passions of unwary
youth. They are, for the most part, naturally
cool, phlegmatic and crafty, and by a long habit
of dissimulation, have gained an absolute dominion
over the hasty passions of the heart; so that
they engage with manifest advantage over the impatience
and impetuosity of a warm, undesigning
temper, like that of our young gentleman, who,
when he was heated with wine, misled by example,
invited on one hand, and defied on the
other, forgot all his maxims of caution and sobriety,
and plunging into the reigning folly of
the place, had frequent occasions to moralize in the
morning, upon the loss of the preceding night. 
These penitential reflections were attended with
many laudable resolutions of profiting by the expence
which he had so dearly purchased; but he
was one of those philosophers, who always put
off, till another day, the commencement of their
reformation. 