


I grew up—am hated by my relations—sent
to school—neglected by my grandfather— 
maltreated by my master—seasoned to adversity
—form cabals against the pedant— 
debarred access to my grandfather—hunted
by his heir—demolish the teeth of his
tutor. 
There were not wanting some, who
suspected my uncles of being concerned in
my father's fate, on the supposition that they
would all share in the patrimony destined for
him: and this conjecture seemed supported by
reflecting, that in all his calamities they never
discovered the least inclination to serve him; 
but, on the contrary, by all the artifices in their
power, fed his father's resentment, and strengthened
his resolution of leaving him to misery and
want. —But people of judgment treated this insinuation
as an idle chimera; because had my relations
been so wicked as to consult their interest
by committing such an attrocious crime, the fate
of my father would have extended to me too,
whose life was another obstacle to their expectation. 
—Mean while, I grew apace, and as I
strongly resembled my father, who was the
darling of the tenants, I wanted nothing
which their indigent circumstances could afford:
but their favour was a weak resource
against the jealous enmity of my cousins; 
who, the more my infancy promised, conceived 

the more implacable hatred against me; 
and before I was six years of age, had so effectually
blockaded my grandfather, that I never
saw him but by stealth; when I sometimes made
up to his chair as he sat to view his labourers in
the field: on which occasions, he would stroak
my head, bid me be a good boy, and promise
he would take care of me. —I was soon after sent
to school at a village hard by, of which he had
been dictator time out of mind: but as he neither
paid for my board, nor supplied me with clothes,
books, and other necessaries I required, my condition
was very ragged and contemptible, and the
schoolmaster, who through fear of my grandfather
taught me gratis, gave himself no concern
about the progress I made under his instruction. 
—In spite of all these difficulties and disgraces,
I became a good proficient in the Latin tongue; 
and as soon as I could write tolerably, pestered
my grandfather with letters to such a degree,
that he sent for my master, and chid him severely
for bestowing such pains on my education, telling
him, that if ever I should be brought to the
gallows for forgery, which he had taught me to
commit, my blood should lie on his head. —The
pedant, who dreaded nothing more than the
displeasure of his patron, assured his honour that
the boy's ability was more owing to his own genius
and application, than to any instruction or
encouragement he received; that, although he
could not divest him of the knowledge he had
already imbibed, unless he would impower him
to disable his fingers, he should endeavour, with
G&sblank;d's help, to prevent his future improvement. 
And indeed, he punctually performed what he
he had undertaken: for, on pretence that I had 

wrote impertinent letters to my grandfather, he
caused a board to be made with five holes in it,
through which he thrust the fingers and thumb
of my right hand, and fastened it by whip-cord
to my wrist, in such a manner, that I was effectually
debarr'd the use of my pen. But this restraint
I was freed from in a few days, by an accident
which happened in a quarrel between me
and another boy, who taking upon him to insult
my poverty, I was so incensed at this ungenerous
reproach, that with one stroke of my machine,
I cut him to the skull, to the great terror
of myself and school-fellows, who left him bleeding
on the ground, and ran to inform the master
of what had happened. I was so severely punished
for this trespass, that, were I to live to the
age of Methusalem, the impression it made on
me would not be effaced; no more than the antipathy
and horror I conceived for the merciless
tyrant who inflicted it. The contempt which
my appearance naturally produced, in all who
saw me, the continual wants I was exposed to,
and my own haughty disposition, impatient of
affronts, involved me in a thousand troublesome
adventures, by which I was at length enured
to adversity, and emboldened to undertakings far
above my years. I was often inhumanly scourged
for crimes I did not commit, because having the
character of a vagabond in the village, every
piece of mischief whose author lay unknown,
was charged upon me. —I have been found guilty
of robbing orchards I never entered, of killing
cats I never hurted, of stealing gingerbread I never
touched, and of abusing old women I never
saw. —Nay, a stammering carpenter had eloquence
enough to persuade my master, that I fired a 

pistol loaded with small shot, into his window; 
though my landlady and the whole family bore
witness, that I was a-bed fast asleep at the time
when this outrage was committed. —I was flogged
for having narrowly escaped drowning, by the
sinking of a ferry-boat in which I was passenger. 
—Another time for having recovered of a bruise
occasioned by a horse and cart running over me. 
—A third time, for being bit by a baker's dog. 
—In short, whether I was guilty or unfortunate,
the vengeance and sympathy of this arbitrary pedagogue
were the same. Far from being subdued
by this infernal usage, my indignation triumphed
over that slavish awe which had hitherto enforced
my obedience; and the more my years and
knowledge increased, the more I perceived the injustice
and barbarity of his behaviour. By the
help of an uncommon genius, and the advice and
direction of our usher, who had served my father
in his travels, I made a surprising progress in
the classicks, writing and arithmetick; so that
before I was twelve years old, I was confessedly
the best scholar in the school: This qualification,
together with a boldness of temper, and strength
of make, which had subjected almost all my
contemporaries, gave me such influence over
them, that I began to form cabals against my
persecutor; and was in hopes of being able to
bid him defiance in a very short time. —Being at
the head of a faction consisting of thirty boys,
most of them of my own age, I was determined
to put their mettal to trial, that I might know
how far they were to be depended upon, before
I put my grand scheme in execution: with this
view we attacked a body of stout apprentices, who
had taken possession of a part of the ground allotted 

to us, for the scene of our diversions; and who
were then playing at nine-pins on the spot: but
I had the mortification to see my adherents routed
in an instant, and a leg of one of them broke in
his flight by the bowl, which one of our adversaries
had detached in pursuit of us. —This discomfiture
did not hinder us from engaging them
afterwards, in frequent skirmishes which we
maintained by throwing stones at a distance,
wherein I received many wounds, the scars of
which still remain. Our enemies were so harassed
and interrupted by these alarms, that they at last
abandoned their conquest, and left us to the peaceable
enjoyment of our own territories. —It would
be endless to enumerate the exploits we performed
in the course of this confederacy, which became
the terror of the whole village; insomuch, that
when different interests divided it, one of the
parties commonly courted the assistance of Roderick
Random (by which name I was known)
to cast the balance, and keep the opposite faction
in awe. —Meanwhile, I took the advantage
of every play-day, to present myself before
my grandfather, to whom I seldom found access,
by reason of his being so closely besieged by a
numerous family of his female grandchildren,
who, though they perpetually quarrelled among
themselves, never failed to join against me, as
the common enemy of all. His heir, who was
about the age of eighteen, minded nothing but
fox-hunting, and indeed was qualified for nothing
else, notwithstanding his grandfather's indulgence,
in entertaining a tutor for him at
home; who at the same time performed the
office of parish clerk. This young Acteon,
who inherited his grandfather's antipathy to every 

thing in distress, never set eyes on me, without
uncoupling his beagles, and hunting me into
some cottage or other, whither I generally fled
for shelter. In this christian amusement, he was
encouraged by his preceptor, who, no doubt, took
such opportunities to ingratiate himself with the
rising sun, observing that the old gentleman, according
to course of nature, had not long to
live, being already on the verge of fourscore. — 
The behaviour of this rascally sycophant incensed
me so much, that one day, when I was beleagured
by him and his hounds into a farmer's
house, where I had found protection, I took aim
at him (being an excellent marksman) with a
large pebble, which struck out four of his foreteeth,
and effectually incapacitated him for doing
the office of a clerk ever after. 