


I go to Surgeon's-hall, where I meet with
Mr. Jackson—I am examined—a
fierce dispute arises between two of the examiners
—Jackson disguises himself to attract
respect—is detected—in hazard
of being sent to Bridewell—he treats us
at a tavern—carries us to a night-house
a troublesome adventure there—we are
committed to the Round house—carried
before a justice—his behaviour. 
With the assistance of this faithful adherent,
who gave me almost all the money
he earned, I preserved my half guinea entire,
till the day of examination, when I went with a
trembling heart to Surgeon's-hall, in order to
undergo that ceremony. —Among a croud of
young fellows who walked in the outward hall, I
perceived Mr. Jackson, to whom I immediately
went up, and enquiring into the state of his amour,
understood it was still undetermined by
reason of his friend's absence, and the delay of
the recal at Chatham, which put it out of his
power to bring it to a conclusion. —I then asked
what his business was in this place; to which he
replied, he was resolved to have two strings to
his bow, that in case the one failed he might use
the other; and with this view, he was to pass that
night for a higher qualification. —At that instant 

a young fellow came out from the place of examination,
with a pale countenance, his lip quivering,
and his looks as wild as if he had seen a
ghost. —He no sooner appeared, than we all
flocked about him with the utmost eagerness to
know what reception he had met with; which
(after some pause) he described, recounting all
the questions they had asked, with the answers he
made. In this manner, we obliged no less than
twelve to recapitulate, which, now the danger
was past, they did with pleasure, before it fell to
my lot: At length the beadle called my name,
with a voice that made me tremble, as much as
if it had been the last trumpet: However, there
was no remedy, I was conducted into a large
hall, where I saw about a dozen of grim faces
sitting at a long table. One of whom bid me
come forward in such an imperious tone, that I
was actually for a minute or two bereft of my
senses. —The first question he put to me was,
“Where was you born?” To which I answered,
In Scotland. —“In Scotland (said he) I know
that very well—we have scarce any other
countrymen to examine here—you Scotchmen
have overspread us of late as the locusts
did Egypt: —I ask you in what part of Scotland
was you born?” —I named the place of
my nativity, which he had never before heard of: 
He then proceeded to interrogate me about my
age, the town where I served my time, with the
term of my apprenticeship; and when I had informed
him that I served three years only, he fell
into a violent passion; swore it was a shame and
a scandal to send such raw boys into the world as
surgeons; that it was great presumption in me,
and an affront upon the English, to pretend to 

sufficient skill in my business, having served so
short a time, when every apprentice in England
was bound seven years at least;—that my friends
had done better if they had made me a weaver
or shoemaker, but their pride would have me a
gentleman (he supposed) at any rate, and their
poverty could not afford the necessary education. 
—This exordium did not at all contribute to the
recovery of my spirits, but on the contrary, reduced
me to such a situation that I was scarce
able to stand; which being perceived by a plump
gentleman, who sat opposite to me, with a skull
before him, he said Mr. Snarler was too severe
upon the young man; and turning towards me,
told me, I need not be afraid, for no body would
do me any harm; then bidding me take time to
recollect myself, he examined me touching the
operation of the trepan, and was very well satisfied
with my answers. —The next person who
questioned me was a wag, who began by asking
me if I had ever seen amputation performed; 
to which I replying in the affirmative, he shook
his head and said, “What! upon a dead subject,
I suppose? If (continued he) during an engagement
at sea, a man should be brought to
you with his head shot off, how would you
behave?” —After some hesitation, I owned,
such a case had never come under my observation; 
neither did I remember to have seen any
method of cure proposed for such an accident, in
any of the systems of surgery I had perused. 
Whether it was owing to the simplicity of my
answer, or the archness of the question, I know
not, but every member at the board deigned to
smile, except Mr. Snarler, who seemed to have
very little of the animal risibile in his constitution. 

—The facetious member, encouraged by the success
of his last joke, went on thus: “Suppose
you was called to a patient of a plethoric habit,
who had been bruised by a fall, what
would you do?” I answered, I would bleed
him immediately. “What, (said he) before
you tied up his arm?” —But this stroke of wit
not answering his expectation, he desired me to
advance to the gentleman who sat next him; and
who with a pert air, asked what method of cure
I would follow in wounds of the intestines. —I
repeated the method of cure as it is prescribed
by the best chirurgical writers; which he heard
to an end, and then said with a supercilious
smile. “So, you think with such treatment
the patient might recover?” —I told him I saw
nothing to make me think otherwise. —“That
may be (resumed he) I won't answer for your
foresight;—but did you ever know a case of
this kind succeed?” I acknowledged I did
not; and was about to tell him I had never seen a
wounded intestine; but he stopt me, by saying with
some precipitation, “Nor never will. —I affirm,
that all wounds of the intestines, whether great
or small, are mortal.” —“Pardon me, brother
(says the fat gentleman) there is very good
authority”—Here he was interrupted by
the other, with “Sir, excuse me, I despise all
authority. —Nullius in verba. —I stand upon
my own bottom.” —“But Sir, Sir, (replied
his antagonist) the reason of the thing shews” 
—“A fig for reason (cried this sufficient member)
I laugh at reason, give me ocular demonstration.” 
—The corpulent gentleman began
to wax warm, and observed that no man acquainted
with the anatomy of the parts, would 

advance such an extravagant assertion. —This
inuendo enraged the other so much, that he started
up, and in a furious tone exclaimed: “What
Sir! do you question my knowledge in anatomy?” 
—By this time, all the examiners had
espoused the opinion of one or other of the disputants,
and raised their voices all together, when
the chairman commanded silence and ordered me
to withdraw. In less than a quarter of an hour,
I was called in again, and received my qualification
sealed up, and was ordered to pay five shillings. 
—I laid down my half-guinea upon the
table, and stood some time, until one of them
bid me begone; to this I replied, I will, when I
have got my change; upon which another threw
me five shillings and six-pence, saying, I would
not be a true Scotchman if I went away without
my change. I was afterwards obliged to give
three shillings and six-pence to the beadles, and a
shilling to an old woman who swept the hall: 
This disbursement sunk my finances to thirteen
pence half-penny, with which I was sneaking off,
when Jackson perceiving it, came up to me, and
begged I would tarry for him and he would accompany
me to the other end of the town, as
soon as his examination should be over. I could
not refuse this to a person that was so much my
friend; but I was astonished at the change of his
dress, which was varied in half an hour from
what I have already described, to a very grotesque
fashion. —His head was covered with an old
smoaked tye-wig that did not boast one crooked
hair, and a sloutched hat over it, which would
have very well become a chimney-sweeper or
a dust-man;—his neck was adorned with a black
crape, the ends of which he had twisted, and 

fixed in the button-hole of a shabby great coat
that wrapped up his whole body; his white silk
stockings were converted into black worsted hose; 
and his countenance was rendered venerable by
wrinkles, and a beard of his own painting. — 
When I expressed my surprize at this metamorphosis,
he laughed, and told me, it was done by
the advice and assistance of a friend who lived
over the way, and would certainly produce something
very much to his advantage; for it gave
him the appearance of age, which never fails of
attracting respect. I applauded his sagacity, and
waited with impatience, for the effects of it. 
At length he was called in, but whether the oddness
of his appearance excited a curiosity more
than usual in the board, or his behaviour was not
suitable to his figure, I know not, he was discovered
to be an impostor, and put into the hands
of the beadle, in order to be sent to Bridewell. 
So that instead of seeing him come out with a
chearful countenance, and a surgeon's qualification
in his hand, I perceived him led through
the outward hall as a prisoner; and was very
much alarmed and anxious to know the occasion; 
when he called with a lamentable voice and piteous
aspect, to me, and some others who knew
him; “For God's sake, gentlemen, bear witness
that I am the same individual John Jackson,
who served as surgeon's second mate on
board the Elizabeth, or else I shall go to Bridewell.” 
—It would have been impossible for the
most austere hermit that ever lived, to have refrained
from laughing at his appearance and address; 
we therefore indulged ourselves a good
while at his expence, and afterwards pleaded his
cause so effectually with the beadle, who was 

gratified with half a crown, that the prisoner was
dismissed; and in a few moments resumed his
former gaiety;—swearing, since the board had
refused his money, he would spend it every shilling
before he went to bed in treating his friends; 
at the same time inviting us all to favour him
with our company. —It was now ten o'clock at
night, and as I had a great way to walk in a town
where I was a stranger, I was prevailed upon
to be of their party, in hopes he would afterwards
accompany me to my lodgings, which he faithfully
promised. —He carried us to his friend's house,
who kept a tavern over the way, where we remained
drinking punch, until the liquor mounted
up to our heads, and made us all extremely frolicksome: 
I, in particular was so much elevated,
that nothing would serve me but a wench, at
which Jackson expressed much joy, and assured
me I should have my desire before we parted. — 
Accordingly, when he had paid the reckoning
we sallied out, roaring and singing; and were
conducted by our leader to a place of nocturnal
entertainment, where I immediately attached myself
to a fair one, with whom I proposed to spend
the remaining part of the night; but she not relishing
my appearance, refused to grant my request
before I had made her an acknowledgment,
which not suiting my circumstances we broke
off our correspondence, to my no small mortification
and resentment, because I thought the
mercenary creature had not done justice to my
merit. —In the mean time, Mr. Jackson's dress
had attracted the inclinations and assiduities of
two or three nymphs, who loaded him with
caresses, in return for the arrack punch with
which he treated them; till at length, notwithstanding 

the sprightly sallies of these charmers,
sleep began to exert his power over us all: and
our conductor called, “To pay.” When the
bill was brought, which amounted to twelve
shillings, he put his hand in his pocket, but might
have saved himself the trouble, for his purse was
gone. —This accident disconcerted him a good
deal at first, but after some recollection he seized
the two Dulcineas, who sat by him, one in each
hand; and swore if they did not immediately
restore his money, he would charge a constable
with them. —The good lady at the bar seeing
what passed, whispered something to the drawer,
who went out; and then with great composure,
asked what was the matter? —Jackson told her
he was robbed, and if she refused him satisfaction,
he would have her and her whores committed
to Bridewell. —“Robbed (cried she)
robbed, in my house! gentlemen and ladies
I take you all to witness, this person has scandalized
my reputation.” —At that instant, seeing
the constable and watch enter, she went on,
“What! you must not only endeavour by your
false aspersions to ruin my character; but even
commit an assault against my family? Mr. Constable,
I charge you with this uncivil person,
who has been guilty of a riot here, I shall
take care and bring an action against him for
defamation.” —While I was reflecting on this
melancholy event, which had made me quite sober,
the lady whose favours I had solicited, being
piqued at some repartee that passed between
us, cried, “They are all concerned;” and desired
the constable to take us all into custody, which
was performed instantly, to the utter astonishment
and despair of us all, except Jackson, who 

having been often in such scrapes was very little
concerned, and charged the constable in his turn,
with the landlady and her whole bevy: Upon
which we were carried all together prisoners to the
round-house; where Jackson (after a word of
comfort to us) informed the constable of his being
robbed, to which he said he would swear
next morning before the justice. —“Ay, ay,
(says the bawd) we shall see whose oath will
most signify.” —In a little time the constable
calling Jackson into another room, spoke to him
thus: “I perceive that you and your company
are strangers, and am very sorry for your being
involved in such an ugly business as this is. 
I have known this woman a great while; she
has kept a notorious house in the neighbourhood
these many years; and although often
complained of as a nuisance, still escapes thro'
her interest with the J&wblank;t&wblank;ces, to whom she
and all of her employment, pay contribution
quarterly for protection. —As she charged me
with you first, her complaint will have the
preference, and she can procure evidence to
swear whatever she shall please to desire them. 
So that, unless you make it up before morning,
you and your companions may think yourselves
happily quit for a month's hard labour
in Bridewell. —Nay, if she should swear a robbery
or assault against you, you will be committed
to Newgate, and tried next sessions at
the Old-Baily for your life.” This last piece
of information had such an effect upon Jackson,
that he agreed to make it up, provided his money
might be rest red: The constable told him, that
instead of restoring what they had stol'n, he was
pretty certain, it would cost him some more before 

they would come to any composition. —But
however, he had compassion on him, and would,
if he pleased, sound them about a mutual release. 
—The unfortunate beau thanked him for his
friendship, and returned to us, where he acquainted
us with the substance of this dialogue; while the
constable desiring to speak in private with our adversary,
carried her into the next room, and pleaded
our cause so effectually, that she condescended to
make him umpire: He accordingly proposed an
arbitration, to which we gave our assent; and he
fined each party in three shillings to be laid out in a
bowl of punch, wherein we drowned all animosities,
to the inexpressible joy of my two late acquaintances
and me, who had been in the state of the damned
ever since Jackson mentioned Bridewell and Newgate. 
—By the time we had finished our bowl, to
which, by the by, I had contributed my last
shilling, it was morning; and I proposed to move
homeward, when the constable gave me to understand,
he could discharge no prisoners but by
order of the justice, before whom we must appear. 
—This renewed my regret, and I cursed the
hour in which I had yielded to Jackson's invitation. 
—About nine a-clock we were escorted to
the house of a certain justice not many miles
distant from Covent-Garden; who no sooner saw
the constable enter with a train of prisoners at his
heels, than he saluted him as follows: “So,
Mr. Constable, you are a diligent man—what
den of rogues have you been scouring?” Then
looking at us, who appeared with a dejected air,
he continued, “Ay, ay, thieves, I see—old
offenders—O your humble servant, Mrs. Harridan! 
I suppose these fellows have been taken
robbing your house—yes, yes, here's an old 

acquaintance of mine—you have used expedition
(said he to me) in returning from transportation; 
but we shall save you that trouble
for the future—the surgeons will fetch you
from your next transportation at their expence.” 
I assured his worship he was mistaken in me, for
he had never seen me in his life before. —To this
he replied, “How, you impudent rascal, dare
you say so to my face? Do you think I am to
be imposed upon by that northern accent
which you have assumed? but it shan't avail
you—you shall find me too far north for you. 
—Here, clerk, write this fellow's mittimus— 
His name is Patrick Gaghagan.” —Here Mr.
Jackson interposed, and told him, I was a Scotchman
lately come to town, descended of a good
family, and that my name was Random. —The
justice looked upon this declaration as an outrage
against his memory, on which he valued
himself much; and strutting up to Jackson,
with a fierce countenance, put his hands in his
sides, and said, “Who are you, Sir? —Do you
give me the lie? —Take notice, gentlemen,
here's a fellow who affronts me upon the bench
—but I'll lay you fast, sirrah, I will—for notwithstanding
your laced jacket, I believe you
are a notorious felon.” —My friend was so
much abashed at this menace, which was thundered
out with great vociferation, that he changed
colour, and remained speechless—This his worship
took for a symptom of guilt, and to compleat
the discovery continued his threats. — 
“Now, I am convinced you are a thief,—your
face discovers it—you tremble all over—your
conscience won't lie still—you will be hang'd, 

sirrah (raising his voice) you will be hanged,
and happy had it been for the world, as well
as your own miserable soul, if you had been
detected and cut off in the beginning of your
career. —Come hither, clerk, and take this
man's confession.” —I was in an agony of
consternation, when the constable going into another
room with his worship, acquainted him
with the truth of the story: upon which he returned
with a smiling countenance, and addressing
himself to us all, said, it was always his way to
terrify young people, when they came before him,
that his threats might make a strong impression
on their minds, and deterr them from engaging
in scenes of riot and debauchery which commonly
ended before the judge. —Thus having cloaked
his own want of discernment, under the disguise of
paternal care, we were dismissed, and I found
myself as much lightened as if a mountain had
been lifted from off my breast. 