


DEAR PHILLIPS,
IN my last I treated you with a high flavoured
dish, in the character of the Scotch lieutenant,
and I must present him once more for your entertainment. 
It was our fortune to feed upon him
the best part of three days; and I do not doubt
that he will start again in our way before we shall
have finished our northern excursion. The day
after our meeting with him at Durham proved so
tempestuous that we did not choose to proceed on
our journey; and my uncle persuaded him to stay
till the weather should clear up, giving him, at the
same time, a general invitation to our mess. The
man has certainly gathered a whole budget of
shrewd observations, but he brings them forth in
such an ungracious manner as would be extremely
disgusting, if it was not marked by that characteristic
oddity which never fails to attract the attention. 
—He and Mr. Bramble discoursed, and even
disputed, on different subjects in war, policy, the
belles lettres, law, and metaphysics; and sometimes
they were warmed into such altercation as
seemed to threaten an abrupt dissolution of their
society; but Mr. Bramble set a guard over his own
irascibility, the more vigilantly as the officer was
his guest; and when, in spite of all his efforts, he
began to wax warm, the other prudently cooled
in the same proportion. 
Mrs. Tabitha chancing to accost her brother by
the familiar diminutive of Matt, “Pray, sir, (said
the lieutenant) is your name Matthias?” You
must know, it is one of our uncle's foibles to be 

ashamed of his name Matthew, because it is puritanical; 
and this question chagrined him so much,
that he answered, “No, by G&wblank;d!” in a very
abrupt tone of displeasure. —The Scot took umbrage
at the manner of this reply, and bristling up,
“If I had known (said he) that you did not care
to tell your name, I should not have asked the
question —The leddy called you Matt, and I
naturally thought it was Matthias:—perhaps, it
may be Methuselah, or Metrodorus, or Metellus,
or Mathurinus, or Malthinnus, or Matamoros,
or—” “No, (cried my uncle laughing)
it is neither of those, captain:—my name is
Matthew Bramble, at your service —The truth
is, I have a foolish pique at the name of Matthew,
because it favours of those canting hypocrites,
who, in Cromwell's time, christened all
their children by names taken from the scripture.” 
—“A foolish pique, indeed, (cried Mrs.
Tabby) and even sinful, to fall out with your
name because it was taken from holy writ. — 
I would have you to know, you was called after
great-uncle Matthew ap Madoc ap Meredith,
esquire, of Llanwysthin, in Montgomeryshire,
justice of the quorum, and crusty ruttleorum, a
gentleman of great worth and property, descended
in a straight line, by the female side,
from LLewellyn, prince of Wales.” 
This genealogical anecdote seemed to make some
impression upon the North-Briton, who bowed very
low to the descendants of Llewellyn, and observed
that he himself had the honour of a scriptural nomination. 
The lady expressing a desire of knowing his
address, he said, he signed himself Lieutenant Obadiah
Lismahago; and, in order to assist her memory,
he presented her with a slip of paper inscribed
with these three words, which she repeated with great
emphasis, declaring, it was one of the most noble 

and sonorous names she had ever heard. He observed,
that Obadiah was an adventitious appellation,
derived from his great grand-father, who had
been one of the original covenanters; but Lismahago
was the family surname, taken from a place in
Scotland so called. He likewise dropped some hints
about the antiquity of his pedigree, adding, with
a smile of self-denial, Sed genus et proavos, et quæ 
non fecimas ipsi, vix ea nostra voco, which quotation
he explained in difference to the ladies; and
Mrs. Tabitha did not fail to compliment him on
his modesty in waving the merit of his ancestry,
adding that it was the less necessary to him, as
he had such a considerable fund of his own. She
now began to glew herself to his favour with the
grossest adulation. —She expatiated upon the antiquity
and virtues of the Scotish nation, upon their
valour, probity, learning, and politeness. —She even
descended to encomiums on his own personal address,
his gallantry, good sense, and erudition. —She appealed
to her brother, whether the captain was not
the very image of our cousin governor Griffith. — 
She discovered a surprizing eagerness to know the
particulars of his life, and asked a thousand questions
concerning his atchievements in war; all which
Mr. Lismahago answered with a sort of jesuitical
reserve, affecting a reluctance to satisfy her curiosity
on a subject that concerned his own exploits. 
By dint of her interrogations, however, we
learned, that he and ensign Murphy had made
their escape from the French hospital at Montreal,
and taken to the woods, in hope of reaching some
English settlement; but mistaking their route, they
fell in with a party of Miamis, who carried them
away in captivity. The intention of these Indians
was to give one of them as an adopted son to a venerable
sachem, who had lost his own in the course
of the war, and to sacrifice the other according to 

the custom of the country. Murphy, as being the
younger and handsomer of the two, was designed
to fill the place of the deceased, not only as the
son of the sachem, but as the spouse of a beautiful
squaw, to whom his predecessor had been betrothed; 
but in passing through the different whigwhams
or villages of the Miamis, poor Murphy was so
mangled by the women and children, who have
the privilege of torturing all prisoners in their passage,
that, by the time they arrived at the place
of the sachem's residence, he was rendered altogether
unfit for the purposes of marriage: it was
determined therefore, in the assembly of the warriors
that ensign Murphy should be brought to the
stake, and that the lady should be given to lieutenant
Lismahago, who had likewise received his
share of torments, though they had not produced
emasculation. —A joint of one finger had been cut,
or rather sawed off with a rusty knife; one of his
great toes was crushed into a mass betwixt two
stones; some of his teeth were drawn, or dug
out with a crooked nail; splintered reeds had been
thrust up his nostrils and other tender parts; and
the calves of his legs had been blown up with
mines of gunpowder dug in the flesh with the sharp
point of a tomahawk. 
The Indians themselves allowed that Murphy
died with great heroism, singing, as his death song,
the drimmendoo, in concert with Mr. Lismahago,
who was present at the solemnity. After the warriors
and the matrons had made a hearty meal upon
the muscular flesh which they pared from the
victim, and had applied a great variety of tortures,
which he bore without flinching, an old lady, with
a sharp knife, scooped out one of his eyes, and put
a burning coal in the socket. The pain of this
operation was so exquisite that he could not help
bellowing, upon which the audience raised a shout 

of exultation, and one of the warriors stealing behind
him, gave him the coup de grace with a hatchet. 
Lismahago's bride, the squaw Squinkinacoosta,
distinguished herself on this occasion. —She shewed
a great superiority of genius in the tortures which
she contrived and executed with her own hands. — 
She vied with the stoutest warrior in eating the flesh
of the sacrifice; and after all the other females
were fuddled with dram-drinking, she was not so
intoxicated but that she was able to play the game
of the platter with the conjuring sachem, and afterwards
go through the ceremony of her own
wedding, which was consummated that same evening. 
The captain had lived very happily with this
accomplished squaw for two years, during which
she bore him a son, who is now the representative
of his mother's tribe; but, at length, to his unspeakable
grief, she had died of a fever, occasioned
by eating too much raw bear, which they had
killed in a hunting excursion. 
By this time, Mr. Lismahago was elected sachem,
acknowledged first warrior of the Badger
tribe, and dignified with the name or epithet of
Occacanastaogarora, which signifies nimble as a
weasel; but all these advantages and honours he
was obliged to resign, in consequence of being exchanged
for the orator of the community, who had
been taken prisoner by the Indians that were in alliance
with the English. At the peace, he had
sold out upon half-pay, and was returned to Britain,
with a view to pass the rest of his life in his
own country, where he hoped to find some retreat
where his slender finances would afford him
a decent subsistence. Such are the out-lines of Mr.
Lismahago's history, to which Tabitha did seriously
incline her ear;—indeed, she seemed to be taken
with the same charms that captivated the heart of
desdemona, who loved the Moor for the dangers
he had passed. 

The description of poor Murphy's sufferings,
which threw my sister Liddy into a swoon, extracted
some sighs from the breast of Mrs. Tabby:
when she understood he had been rendered unfit for
marriage, she began to spit, and ejaculated, “Jesus,
what cruel barbarians!” and she made wry
faces at the lady's nuptial repast; but she was eagerly
curious to know the particulars of her marriage-dress; 
whether she wore high breasted stays
or boddice, a robe of silk or velvet, and laces of
Mechlin or minionette—she supposed, as the were
connected with the French, she used rouge, and
had her hair dressed in the Parisian fashion. The
captain would have declined giving a categorical
explanation of all these particulars, observing, in
general, that the Indians were too tenacious of
their own customs to adopt the modes of any nation
whatsoever: he said, moreover, that neither
the simplicity of their manners, nor the commerce
of their country, would admit of those articles of
luxury which are deemed magnificence in Europe; 
and that they were too virtuous and sensible to
encourage the introduction of any fashion which
might help to render them corrupt and effeminate. 
These observations served only to inflame her desire
of knowing the particulars about which she had
enquired; and, with all his evasion, he could not
help discovering the following circumstances—that
his princess had neither shoes, stockings, shift, nor
any kind of linen—that her bridal dress consisted
of a petticoat of red bays, and a fringed blanket,
fastened about her shoulders with a copper skewer; 
but of ornaments she had great plenty. —Her hair
was curiously plaited, and interwoven with bobbins
of human bone—one eylid was painted green,
and the other yellow; the cheeks were blue, the
lips white, the teeth red, and there was a black
list drawn down the middle of the forehead as far as 

the tip of the nose—a couple of gaudy parrot's
feathers were stuck through the division of the
nostrils—there was a blue stone set in the chin— 
her ear-rings consisted of two pieces of hickery, of
the size and shape of drumsticks—her arms and
legs were adorned with bracelets of wampum—her
breast glittered with numerous strings of glass beads
—she were a curious pouch, or pocket, of woven
grass, elegantly painted with various colours— 
about her neck was hung the fresh scalp of a Mohawk
warrior, whom her deceased lover had lately
slain in battle—and finally, she was anointed from
head to foot with bear's grease, which sent forth
a most agreable odour. 
One would imagine that these paraphernalia
would not have been much admired by a modern
fine lady; but Mrs. Tabitha was resolved to approve
of all the captain's connections. —She wished,
indeed, the squaw had been better provided with
linen; but she owned there was much taste and fancy
in her ornaments; she made no doubt, therefore,
that madam Squinkinacoosta was a young
lady of good sense and rare accomplishments, and
a good christian at bottom. Then she asked whether
his consort had been high-church or low-church,
presbyterian or anabaptist, or had been favoured
with any glimmering of the new light of
the gospel! When he confessed that she and her
whole nation were utter strangers to the christian
faith, she gazed at him with signs of astonishment,
and Humphry Clinker, who chanced to be in the
room uttered a hollow groan. 
After some pause, “In the name of God, captain
Lismahago, (cried she) what religion do
they profess?” “As to religion, madam, (answered
the lieutenant) it is among those Indians
a matter of great simplicity—they never heard
of any Alliance between Church and State. —They 

in general, worship two contending principles; 
one the fountain of all Good, the other the source
of evil. —The common people there, as in other
countries, run into the absurdities of superstition; 
but sensible men pay adoration to a Supreme
Being, who created and sustains the universe.” 
“O! what pity, (exclaimed the pious
Tabby) that some holy man has not been inspired
to go and convert these poor heathens!” 
The lieutenant told her, that while he resided
among them, two French missionaries arrived, in
order to convert them to the catholic religion; but
when they talked of mysteries and revelations,
which they could neither explain nor authenticate,
and called in the evidence of miracles which they
believed upon hearsay: when they taught, that the
Supreme Creator of Heaven and Earth had allowed
his only son, his own equal in power and glory
to enter the bowels of a woman, to be born as
a human creature, to be insulted, flagellated, and
even executed as a malefactor; when they pretended
to create God himself, to swallow, digest,
revive, and multiply him ad infinitum, by the help
of a little flour and water, the Indians were shocked
at the impiety of their presumption. —They
were examined by the assembly of the sachems,
who desired them to prove the divinity of their
mission by some miracle. —They answered, that
it was not in their power. —“If you were really
sent by Heaven for our conversion, (said one of
the sachems) you would certainly have some supernatural
endowments, at least you would have
the gift of tongues, in order to explain your doctrine; 
to the different nations among which you
are employed; but you are so ignorant of our
language that you cannot express yourselves
even on the most trifling subjects.” 
In a word, the assembly were convinced of their 

being cheats, and even suspected them of being
spies: —They ordered them a bag of Indian corn
a-piece, and apointed a guide to conduct them to
the frontiers; but the millionaires having more zeal
than discretion, refused to quit the vineyard. — 
They persisted in saying mass, in preaching, baptizing,
and squabbling with the conjurers, or priests
of the country, till they had thrown the whole
community into confusion. —Then the assembly
proceeded to try them as impious impostors, who
represented the Almighty as a trifling, weak, capricious
being, and pretended to make, unmake,
and reproduce him at pleasure: they were, therefore,
convicted of blasphemy and sedition, and
condemned to the stake, where they died singing
salve regina, in a rapture of joy, for the crown of
martyrdom which they had thus obtained. 
In the course of this conversation, lieutenant
Lismahago dropt some hints by which it appeared
he himself was a free-thinker. Our aunt seemed
to be startled at certain sarcasms he threw out against
the creed of saint Athanasius. —He dwelt much
upon the words, reason, philosophy, and contradiction
in terms—he bid defiance to the eternity of hell-fire; 
and even threw such squibs at the immortality
of the soul, as singed a little the whiskers of Mrs.
Tabitha's faith; for, by this time, she began to
look upon Lismahago as a prodigy of learning and
sagacity. —In short, he could be no longer insensible
to the advances she made towards his affection; 
and although there was something repulsive in his
nature, he overcame it so far as to make some return
to her civilities. —Perhaps, he thought it
would be no bad scheme, in a superannuated lieutenant
on half-pay, to effect a conjunction with an
old maid, who, in all probability, had fortune
enough to keep him easy and comfortable in the
fag-end of his days. —An ogling correspondence 

forthwith commenced between this amiable pair
of originals. —He began to sweeten the natural
accidity of his discourse with the treacle of compliment
and commendation. —He from time to
time offered her snuff, of which he himself took
great quantities, and even made her a present of
a purse of silk grass, woven by the hands of the
amiable Squinkinacoosta, who had used it as a
shot-pouch in her hunting-expeditions. 
From Doncaster northwards, all the windows of all
the inns are scrawled with doggrel rhimes, in abuse
of the Scotch nation; and what surprised me very
much, I did not perceive one line written in the
way of recrimination —Curious to hear what Lismahago
would say on this subject, I pointed out
to him a very scurrilous epigram against his countrymen,
which was engraved on one of the windows
of the parlour where we sat. —He read it
with the most starched composure; and when I
asked his opinion of the poetry, “It is vara terse
and vara poignant (he said); but with the help
of a wat dish-clout it might be rendered more
clear and parspicous. —I marvel much that
some modern wit has not published a collection
of these essays under the title of the Glazier's
Triumph over Sawney the Scot —I'm persuaded it
would be a vara agreeable offering to the patriots
of London and Westminster.” When I expressed
some surprize that the natives of Scotland,
who travel this way, had not broke all the windows
upon the road, “With submission, (replied
the lieutenant) that were but shallow Policy— 
it would only serve to make the satire more cutting
and severe; and, I think, it is much better
to let it stand in the window, than have it
presented in the reckoning.” 
My uncle's jaws began to quiver with indignation. 
—He said, the scribblers of such infamous 

stuff deserved to be scourged at the cart's tail for
disgracing their country with such monuments of
malice and stupidity. —“These vermin (said
he) do not consider, that they are affording
their fellow-subjects, whom they abuse, continual
matter of self-gratulation, as well as the
means of executing the most manly vengeance
that can be taken for such low, illiberal attacks. 
For my part, I admire the philosophic forbearance
of the Scots, as much as I despise the insolence
of those wretched libellers, which is
a kin to the arrogance of the village cock, who
never crows but upon his own dunghill.” The
captain, with an affectation of candour, observed,
that men of illeberal minds were produced in every
soil; that in supposing those were the sentiments of
the English in general, he should pay too great a
compliment to his own country, which was not of
consequence enough to attract the envy of such a
flourishing and powerful people. 
Mrs. Tabby broke forth again in praise of his
moderation, and declared that Scotland was the
soil which produced every virtue under heaven. — 
When Lismahago took his leave for the night, she
asked her brother if the captain was not the prettiest
gentleman he had ever seen; and whether
there was not something wonderfully engaging in
his aspect? —Mr. Bramble having eyed her some
time in silence, “Sister, (said he) the lieutenant
is, for aught I know, an honest man, and a
good officer—he has a considerable share of understanding,
and a title to more encouragement
than he seems to have met with in life; but I cannot,
with a safe conscience, affirm, that he is the
prettiest gentleman I ever saw; neither can I
discern any engaging charm in his countenance,
which, I vow to Gad, is, on the contrary, very
hard favoured and forbidding.” 

I have endeavoured to ingratiate myself with this
North-Briton, who is really a curiosity; but he
has been very shy of my conversation ever since I
laughed at his asserting that the English tongue was
spoke with more propriety at Edinburgh than at
London. Looking at me with a double squeeze
of souring in his aspect, “If the old definition be
true, (said he) that risibility is the distinguishing
characteristic of a rational creature, the English
are the most distinguished for rationality of any
people I ever knew.” I owned that the English
were easily struck with any thing that appeared
ludicrous, and apt to laugh accordingly; but it did
not follow, that, because they were more given to
laughter, they had more rationality than their
neighbours: I said, such an inference would be an
injury to the Scots, who were by no means defective
in rationality, though generally supposed little
subject to the impressions of humour. 
The captain answered, that this supposition must
have been deduced either from their conversation
or their compositions, of which the English could
not possibly judge with precision, as they did not
understand the dialect used by the Scots in common
discourse, as well as in their works of humour. 
When I desired to know that those works of humour
were, he mentioned a considerable number
of pieces, which he insisted were equal in point of
humour to any thing extant in any language dead
or living. —He, in particular, recommended a
collection of detached poems, in two small volumes,
intituled, The Ever-green, and the works
of Allan Ramsay, which I intend to provide myself
with at Edinburgh. —He observed, that a
North-Briton is seen to a disadvantage in an English
company, because he speaks in a dialect that
they can't relish, and in a phraseology which they
don't understand. —He therefore finds himself under 

a restraint, which is a great enemy to wit and
humour. —These are faculties which never appear
in full lustre, but when the mind is perfectly at
ease, and, as an excellent writer says, enjoys her
elbow-room. 
He proceeded to explain his assertion that the
English language was spoken with greater propriety
at Edinburgh than in London. —He said, what
we generally called the Scottish dialect was, in fact,
true, genuine old English, with a mixture of some
French terms and idioms, adopted in a long intercourse
betwixt the French and Scotch nations; that
the modern English, from affectation and false refinement,
had weakened, and even corrupted their
language, by throwing out the guttural sounds, altering
the pronounciation and the quantity, and
disusing many words and terms of great significance. 
In consequence of these innovations, the works of
our best poets, such as Chaucer, Spenser, and even
Shakespeare, were become, in many parts, unintelligible
to the natives of South-Britain, whereas
the Scots, who retain the ancient language, understand
them without the help of a glossary. “For
instance, (said he) how have your commentators
been puzzled by the following expression in the
Tempest—He's gentle and not fearful; as if it
was a paralogism to say, that being gentle, he must
of course be courageous: but the truth is, one of
the original meanings if not the sole meaning,
of that word was, noble, high-minded; and to
this day a Scotch woman, in the situation of
the young lady in the Tempest, would express
herself nearly in the same terms—Don't provoke
him; for being gentle, that is high spirited, he
won't tamely bear an insult. Spenser, in the
very first stanza of his Fairy Queen, says,” 

“A gentle knight was pricking on the plain;”

“which knight, far from being tame and fearful,
was so stout that” 

“Nothing did he dread, but ever was ydrad.”
To prove that we had impaired the energy of
our language by false refinement, he mentioned the
following words, which, though widely different
in signification, are pronounced exactly in the same
manner—wright, write, right, rite; but among
the Scots, these words are as different in pronunciation,
as they are in meaning and orthography; 
and this is the case with many others which he
mentioned by way of illustration. —He, moreover,
took notice that we had (for what reason he could
never learn) altered the sound of our vowels from
that which is retained by all the nations in Europe; 
an alteration which rendered the language extremely
difficult to foreigners, and made it almost
impractible to lay down general rules for orthography
and pronunciation. Besides, the vowels
were no longer simple sounds in the mouth of an
Englishman, who pronounced both i and u as diphthongs. 
(Finally, he affirmed, that we mumbled
our speech with our lips and teeth, and ran the
words together without pause or distinction, in such
a manner that a foreigner, though he understood
English tolerably well, was often obliged to have
recourse to a Scotchman to explain what a native
of England had said in his own language. 
The truth of this remark was confirmed by Mr.
Bramble from his own experience; but he accounted
for it on another principle. —He said, the
same observation would hold in all languages; that
a Swiss talking French was more easily understood
than a Parisian, by a foreigner who had not made
himself master of the language; because every language
had its peculiar recitative, and it would always
require more pains, attention, and practice,
to acquire both the words and the music, than to 

learn the words only; and yet no body would deny,
that the one was imperfect without the other! he
therefore apprehend, that the Scotchman and the
Swiss were better understood by learners, because
they spoke the words only, without the music,
which they could not rehearse. One would imagine
this check might have damped the North-Briton; 
but it served only to agitate his humour for
disputation. —He said, if every nation had its
own recitative or music, the Scots had theirs, and
the Scotchman who had not yet acquired the cadence
of the English, would naturally use his own
in speaking their language; therefore, if he was
better understood than the native, his recitative
must be more intelligible than that of the English; 
of consequence the dialect of the Scots had an advantage
over that of their fellow-subjects, and this
was another strong presumption that the modern
English had corrupted their language in the article
of pronunciation. 
The lieutenant was, by this time, become so
polemical, that every time he opened his mouth
out flew a paradox, which he maintained with all
the enthusiasm of altercation; but all his paradoxes
favoured strong of a partiality for his own country. 
He undertook to prove that poverty was a blessing
to a nation; that oatmeal was preferable to wheat-flour; 
and that the worship of Cloacina, in temples
which admitted both sexes, and every rank
of votaries promiscuously, was a filthy species of
idolatry that outraged every idea of delicacy and
decorum. I did not so much wonder at his
broaching these doctrines, as at the arguments,
equally whimsical and ingenious, which he adduced
in support of them. 
In fine, lieutenant Lismahago is a curiosity which
I have not yet sufficiently perused; and therefore I
shall be sorry when we lose his company, though, 

God knows, there is nothing very amiable in his
manner or disposition. —As he goes directly to the
south-west division of Scotland, and we proceed in
the road to Berwick, we shall part to-morrow at
a place called Felton-bridge; and, I dare say, this
separation will be very grievous to our aunt Mrs.
Tabitha, unless she has received some flattering assurance
of his meeting her again. If I fail in my
purpose of entertaining you with these unimportant
occurrences, they will at least serve as exercises of
patience, for which you are indebted to, 
Yours always,
J. Melford. 
Morpeth, July 13. 