


His messenger meets with a misfortune, to which he
applies a very extraordinary expedient that is attended
with strange consequences. 
As a stage coach passed within two miles of
the village where she lived, Tom bargained
with the driver for a seat on the box, and
accordingly departed on this message, though he
was but indifferently qualified for commissions of
such a nature: having received particular injunctions
about the letter, he resolved to make that
the chief object of his care, and very sagaciously
conveyed it between his stocking and the sole of
his foot, where he thought it would be perfectly
secure from all injury and accident. Here it remained
until he arrived at the inn where he had
formerly lodged, when after having refreshed himself
with a draught of beer, he pulled off his stocking,
and found the poor billet sullied with dust,
and torn into a thousand tatters by the motion of
his foot in walking the last two miles of his journey. 
Thunderstruck at this phænomenon, he
uttered a long and loud whew! which was succeeded
by an exclamation of “Damn my old
shoes! a bite by G&wblank;!” then he rested his elbows 

on the table, and his forehead upon his two fists,
and in that attitude deliberated with himself upon
the means of remedying this misfortune. 
As he was not distracted by a vast number of
ideas, he soon concluded that his best expedient
would be to employ the clerk of the parish, who
he knew was a great scholar, to write another
epistle according to the directions he should give
him; and never dreaming that the mangled original
would in the least facilitate this scheme, he
very wisely committed it to the flames, that it
might never rise up in judgment against him. 
Having taken this wise step, he went in quest
of his scribe, to whom he communicated his business,
and promised a full-pot by way of gratification. 
The clerk, who was also school-master,
proud of an opportunity to distinguish his talents,
readily undertook the task; and repairing with
his employer to the inn, in less than a quarter of
an hour produced a morsel of eloquence so much
to the satisfaction of Pipes, that he squeezed his
hand by way of acknowledgment, and doubled
his allowance of beer, which being discussed, our
courier betook himself to the house of Mrs. Gauntlet
with the haunch of venison and this succedaneous
letter, and delivered his message to the mother,
who received it with great respect, and
many kind inquiries about the health and welfare
of his master, attempting to tip the messenger
a crown, which he absolutely refused to accept,
in consequence of Mr. Pickle's repeated caution. 
While the old gentlewoman turned to a servant,
in order to give directions about the disposal of
this present, Pipes looked upon this as a favourable
occasion to transact his business with Emilia,
and therefore, shutting one eye, with a jirk of his 

thumb towards his left shoulder, and a most significant
twist of his countenance, he beckoned
the young lady into another room, as if he had
been fraught with something of consequence, which
he wanted to impart. She understood the hint
howsoever strangely communicated, and by steping
to one side of the room, gave him an opportunity
of slipping the epistle into her hand,
which he gently squeezed at the same time in
token of regard; then throwing a side-glance at
the mother, whose back was turned, clapped his
finger to one side of his nose, thereby recommending
secrecy and discretion. 
Emilia conveying the letter into her bosom,
could not help smiling at Tom's politeness and
dexterity; but lest her mamma should detect him
in the execution of his pantomime, she broke off
this intercourse of signs, by asking aloud when he
proposed to set out on his return to Winchester; 
and when he answered “To-morrow morning,” 
Mrs. Gauntlet recommended him to the hospitality
of her own footman, desiring him to make
much of Mr. Pipes below, where he was kept to
supper, and very cordially entertained. Our
young heroine, impatient to read her lover's billet,
which made her heart throb with rapturous expectation,
retired to her chamber as soon as possible,
with a view of perusing the contents, which
were these. 

Divine empress of my soul!
If the refulgent flames of your beauty had not
evaporated the particles of my transported
brain, and scorched my intellects into a cinder
of stolidity, perhaps the resplendency of my passion
might shine illustrious through the sable curtain 

of my ink, and in sublimity transcend the
galaxy itself, though wasted on the pinions of a
grey goose quill! But ah! celestial enchantress!
the negromancy of thy tyrannical charms hath
fettered my faculties with adamantine chains,
which unless thy compassion shall melt, I must
eternally remain in the tartarean gulph of dismal
despair. Vouchsafe therefore, O thou brightest
luminary of this terrestrial sphere! to warm as
well as shine; and let the genial rays of thy benevolence
melt the icy emanations of thy disdain,
which hath frozen up the spirits of, angelic preheminence!
thy most egregious admirer and superlative
slave 
Peregrine Pickle. 
Never was astonishment more perplexing than
that of Emilia, when she read this curious composition,
which she repeated verbatim three times
before she would credit the evidence of her own
senses. She began to fear in good earnest that
love had produced a disorder in her lover's understanding; 
but after a thousand conjectures by
which she attempted to account for this extraordinary
fustian of stile, she concluded that it was
the effect of mere levity, calculated to ridicule
the passion he had formerly professed. Irritated
by this supposition, she resolved to baulk his triumph
with affected indifference, and in the mean
time endeavour to expel him from that place
which he possessed within her heart. And indeed,
such a victory over her inclinations might have
been obtained without great difficulty; for she
enjoyed an easiness of temper that could accommodate
itself to the emergencies of her fate; and
her vivacity by amusing her imagination, preserved 

her from the keener sensations of sorrow. 
Thus determined and disposed, she did not send
any sort of answer, or the least token of remembrance
by Pipes, who was suffered to depart with
a general compliment from the mother, and
arrived at Winchester the next day. 
Peregrine's eyes sparkled when he saw his messenger
come in, and he stretched out his hand in
full confidence of receiving some particular mark
of his Emilia's affection; but how was he confounded,
when he felt his hope so cruelly disappointed! 
In an instant his countenance fell. He
stood for some time silent and abashed, then thrice
repeated the interrogation of “What! not one
word from Emilia?” And dubious of his courier's
discretion, inquired minutely into all the particulars
of his reception. He asked if he had seen the
young lady, if she was in good health, if he had
found an opportunity of delivering his letter, and
how she looked when he put it into her hand?
Pipes answered, that he had never seen her in
better health or higher spirits; that he had managed
matters so as not only to present the billet
unperceived, but also to ask her commands in
private before he took his leave, when she told
him that the letter required no reply. This last
circumstance he considered as a manifest mark of
disrespect, and gnawed his lips with resentment. 
Upon further reflexion, however, he supposed
that she could not conveniently write by the messenger,
and would undoubtedly favour him by
the post. This consideration consoled him for
the present, and he waited impatiently for the
fruits of his hope; but after he had seen eight
days elapsed without reaping the satisfaction with
which he had flattered himself, his temper forsook 

him, he raved against the whole sex, and was
seized with a fit of sullen chagrin; but his pride
in a little time came to his assistance, and rescued
him from the horrors of the melancholy fiend. 
He resolved to retort her own neglect upon his
ungrateful mistress, his countenance gradually resumed
its former serenity; and though by this
time he was pretty well cured of his foppery, he
appeared again at public diversions with an air of
gaiety and unconcern, that Emilia might have a
chance of hearing how much, in all likelihood, he
disregarded her disdain. 
There are never wanting certain officious persons,
who take pleasure in promoting intelligence
of this sort. His behaviour soon reached the ears
of Miss Gauntlet, and confirmed her in the opinion
she had conceived from his letter; so that
she fortified herself in her former sentiments, and
bore his indifference with great philosophy. Thus
a correspondence which had commenced with all
the tenderness and sincerity of love, and every
promise of duration, was interrupted in its infancy
by a misunderstanding occasioned by the simplicity
of Pipes, who never once reflected upon the
consequences of his deceit. 
Though their mutual passion was by these
means suppressed for the present, it was not altogether
extinguished, but glowed in secret, though
even to themselves unknown, until an occasion
which afterwards offered, blew up the latent flame,
and love resumed his empire in their breasts. 
While they moved, as it were, without the
sphere of each other's attraction, the commodore
fearing that Perry was in danger of involving
himself in some pernicious engagement, resolved
by advice of Mr. Jolter and his friend the parish 

priest, to recal him from the place where he had
contracted such imprudent connexions, and send
him to the university, where his education might
be compleated, and his fancy weaned from all
puerile amusements. 
This plan had been proposed to his own father,
who, as hath been already observed, stood
always neuter in every thing that concerned his
eldest son; and as for Mrs. Pickle, she had never
heard his name mentioned since his departure
with any degree of temper or tranquillity, except
when her husband informed her that he was in a
fair way of being ruined by this indiscreet amour. 
It was then she began to applaud her own foresight,
which had discerned the mark of reprobation in
that vicious boy, and launched out in comparisons
between him and Gammy, who, she observed,
was a child of uncommon parts and solidity,
and with the blessing of God, would be a
comfort to his parents, and an ornament to the
family. 
Should I affirm that this favourite whom she
commended so much, was in every respect the
reverse of what she described; that he was a boy
of mean capacity, and though remarkably distorted
in his body, much more crooked in his disposition; 
and that she had persuaded her husband to
espouse her opinion, though it was contrary to
common sense, as well as to his own perception; 
I am afraid the reader will think I represent a
monster that never existed in nature, and be apt
to condemn the œconomy of my invention; nevertheless,
there is nothing more true than every
circumstance of what I have advanced; and I
wish the picture, singular as it is, may not be
thought to resemble more than one original. 