


I am assaulted and dangerously wounded— 
I suspect Odonnell, and am confirmed in my
opinion—I concert a scheme of revenge, and
put it in execution—Odonnell robs his own
servant, and disappears—I make my addresses
to a lady, and am miraculously deliver'd
from her snare. 
One night about twelve a clock, as I return'd
from visiting a patient at Chelsea, I receiv'd
a blow on my head from an unseen hand, that
stretch'd me senseless on the ground; and was
left for dead, with three stabs of a sword in my
body. —The groans I utter'd when I recover'd
the use of my reason, alarm'd the people of a
solitary ale-house, that stood near the spot where
I lay, and they were humane enough to take me 

in, and send for a surgeon who dressed my wounds,
and assur'd me they were not mortal. One of
them penetrated through the skin and muscles of
one side of my belly, in such a manner, that
(doubtless) the assassin imagin'd he had run me
through the entrails. —The second slanted along
one of my ribs, and the last, which was intended
for the Coup de Grace, being directed to my heart,
the sword snapt upon my breast bone, and the
point remain'd sticking in the skin. —When I reflected
upon this event, I could not persuade myself,
that I had been assaulted by a common footpad; 
because it is not usual for such people to
murder those they rob, especially when they
meet with no resistance; and I found my money
and everything else about me (but my carcase) safe. 
I concluded therefore, that I must either have been
mistaken for another, or oblig'd to the private resentment
of some secret enemy for what had happened; 
and as I could remember no-body who
had the least cause of complaint against me, except
captain Odonnell and my master's daughter,
my suspicion settled upon them, though I took
care to conceal it, that I might the sooner arrive
at confirmation. —With this view, I went
home in a chair about ten a clock in the morning; 
and as the chairmen supported me into the house,
met the captain in the passage; who no sooner
saw me, than he started back, and gave evident
signs of guilty confusion, which he would have
accounted for from the surprize occasion'd by
seeing me in such a condition. —My master having
heard my story, condoled me with a good
deal of sympathy, and when he understood my
wounds were not dangerous, order'd me to be
carried up stairs to bed; though not without some 

opposition from his wife, who was of opinion, it
would be better for me to go to an hospital, where
I should be more carefully attended. —My meditation
was employ'd in concerting with myself
some method of revenge against 'Squire Odonnell
and his enamorata, whom I looked upon as the
authors of my misfortune; when miss (who was
not at home at my arrival) entered my chamber; 
and saying, she was sorry for the accident that
had befallen me, asked me if I suspected any body
to be the assassin: Upon which I fixed my eyes
stedfastly upon her, and answer'd, “Yes.” — 
She discover'd no symptom of confusion; but replied
hastily, “If that be the case, why don't
you take out a warrant to have him apprehended? 
—It will cost but a trifle—if you have
no money, I'll lend you.” —This frankness not
only cur'd me of my suspicion with respect to
her; but even stagger'd my belief in regard to
the captain, of whose guilt I resolv'd to have
farther proofs, before I enterpriz'd any thing in
the way of revenge. —I thanked her kindly for
her generous offer; which however I had no occasion
to accept, being determin'd to do nothing
rashly: For though I could plainly perceive the
person who attacked me, to be a soldier whose
face I thought was familiar to me, I could not
swear with a safe conscience to any particular
man; and granting I could, my prosecution of
him would not much avail. —This I pretended,
lest the captain hearing from her, that I knew
the person who wounded me, might think proper
to withdraw before I could be in a condition
to requite him. —In two days I was up, and able
to do a little business, so that Mr. Lavement made
shift to carry on his practice, without hiring another 

journeyman in my room. —The first thing
I attempted towards a certain discovery of my
secret enemy, was to get into Odonnell's apartment,
while he was abroad in an undress, and
examine his sword, the point of which being
broke off, I applied the fragment that was found
sticking in my body; and found it answer'd the
fractur'd part exactly. —There was now no room
left for doubt; and all that remain'd, was to fix
upon a scheme of revenge, which almost solely
engrossed my thoughts during the space of eight
nights and days. —Sometimes I was tempted to
fall upon him in the same manner as he had practised
upon me, and kill him outright. —But this
my honour oppos'd, as a piece of barbarous cowardice,
in which he was not to be imitated. — 
At other times, I entertain'd thoughts of demanding
satisfaction in an honourable way; but
was diverted from this undertaking, by considering
the uncertainty of the event, and the nature of the
injury he had done me, which did not intitle him
to such easy terms. —At last I determin'd to pursue
a middle course; and actually put my design in
execution after this manner. —Having secured the
assistance of Strap and two of his acquaintance
whom he could depend upon; we provided ourselves
in disguises, and I caused the following letter
to be deliver'd to him by one of our associates
in livery, one Sunday evening. 

SIR,
“If I may be allowed to judge from appearance,
it will not be disagreeable to you, to hear
that my husband is sent for to Bagshot to visit
a patient, and will not return till to-morrow 

night; so that if you have any thing to propose
to me (as your behaviour on many occasions
has seemed to insinuate) you will do
well to embrace the present opportunity of
seeing 
“Yours, &c.” 
This letter was signed with the name of an
apothecary's wife, who lived in Chelsea, of
whom I had heard Odonnell was an admirer. — 
Every thing succeeded to our wish. —The amorous
hero hastened towards the place of assignation; 
and was encountered by us in the very
place where he had assaulted me. —We rushed
upon him all at once, secured his sword, stript
off his cloaths even to the skin, which we scourged
with nettles till he was blistered from head to
foot, notwithstanding all the eloquence of his
tears and supplications. When I was satisfied
with the stripes I had bestowed, we carried off
his cloaths, which we hid in a hedge near the
place, and left him stark naked, to find his way
home in the best manner he could, while I took
care to be there before him. —I afterwards understood
that in his way to the lodgings of a
friend, who lived in the skirts of the town, he
was picked up by the watch, who carried him
to the Round-house, from whence he sent for
cloaths to his lodgings; and next morning arrived
at the door in a chair, wrapt up in a blanket he
had borrowed; for his body was so sore and
swelled that he could not bear to be confined in
his wearing apparel. —He was treated with the
utmost tenderness by my mistress and her daughter, 

who vied one with the other in their care
and attendance of him; but Lavement himself
could not forbear expressing his joy, by several
malicious grins, while he ordered me to prepare
an unguent to anoint him with. —As to myself,
no body can doubt my gratification, when I had
every day an opportunity of seeing my revenge
protracted on the body of my adversary, by the
sores and ulcers I had been the cause of; and
indeed I not only enjoyed the satisfaction of having
flead him alive, but another also which I
had not foreseen. —The story of his being attacked
and stript in such a place, having been inserted
in the news, gave information to those who
found his cloaths next day, whither to bring them; 
and accordingly he retrieved every thing he had
lost, except a few letters, among which was
that which I had wrote to him in the name of
the apothecary's wife. —This and the others,
which (it seems) were all on the subject of love,
(for this Hibernian hero was one of those people
who are called fortune-hunters) fell into the
hands of a certain female author, famous for the
scandal she has published; who, after having embellished
them with some ornaments of her own
invention, gave them to the town in print. — 
I was very much shocked on reflecting, that I
might possibly be the occasion of a whole family's
unhappiness, on account of the letter I had written; 
but was eased of that apprehension, when I
understood that the Chelsea apothecary had commenced
a law-suit against the printer for defamation; 
and looked upon the whole as a piece of forgery,
committed by the author, who had disappeared. 
—But whatever might be his opinion of
the matter, our two ladies seemed to entertain a 

different idea of it; for, as soon as the pamphlet
appeared, I could perceive their care of their patient
considerably diminish, until at last it ended in
total neglect. —It was impossible for him to be
ignorant of this change, any more than of the
occasion of it; but as he was conscious to himself
of having deserved worse than contempt at
their hands, he was glad to come off so cheaply,
and contented himself with muttering curses
and threats against the apothecary, who (as he
imagined) having got an inkling of the appointment
with his wife, had taken revenge of him in
the manner described. —By that time he had got
a new scarf skin, his character was become so
notorious, that he thought it high time for him
to decamp; which he performed one night without
beat of drum, after having robbed his own
servant of every thing that belonged to him except
the cloaths he had on his back. —A few
days after he disappeared, Mr. Lavement, for his
own security, took into custody a large old trunk
which he had left; and as it was very heavy,
made no question of the contents being sufficient
to indemnify him for what Odonnel owed in
lodging. —But a month being elapsed without
hearing any tidings of this adventurer; and my
master being impatient to know what the trunk
contained; he ordered me to break it open in his
presence, which I performed with the pestle of
our great mortar, and discovered, to his inexpressible
astonishment and mortification, a heap of
stones. 
About this time, my friend Strap informed me
of an offer he had to go abroad with a gentleman
in quality of valet de chambre, and at the same
time assured me, that whatever advantage he 

might propose to himself from this prospect, he
could not bear the thoughts of parting from me; 
so much was he attached to my fortune. —In
spite of all the obligations I owed this poor
honest fellow, ingratitude is so natural to the
heart of man, that I began to be tired of his acquaintance; 
and now, that I had contracted other
friendships which appeared more creditable, I
was even ashamed to see a journeyman barber
enquiring after me with the familiarity of a companion. 
—I therefore, on pretence of consulting his
welfare, insisted upon his accepting the proposal,
which he at last determined to embrace, with
great reluctance, and in a few days took his
leave of me, shedding a flood of tears, which I
could not behold without emotion. —I now began
to look upon myself as a gentleman in reality; 
learned to dance of a Frenchman whom I had
cured of a fashionable distemper; frequented plays
during the holidays; became the oracle of an ale-house,
where every dispute was referred to my
decision; and at length contracted an acquaintance
with a young lady, who found means to
make a conquest of my heart, and upon whom
I prevailed, after much attendance and solicitation,
to give me a promise of marriage. —As this beautiful
creature passed for a rich heiress, I blessed
my good fortune, and was actually on the point
of crowning all my wishes, by matrimony; when
one morning, I went to her lodgings, and her
maid being abroad, took the privilege of a
bridegroom to enter her chamber, where to
my utter confusion I found her in bed with a
man. —Heaven gave me patience and presence of
mind enough to withdraw immediately; and I
thanked my stars a thousand times for the happy 

discovery, by which I resolved to profit so much,
as to abandon all thoughts of marriage for the
future. 