


MRS. GWILLIM,
IT has pleased Providence to bring us safe back
to England, and partake us in many pearls by
land and water, in particular the Devil's Harse
a pike, and Hoyden's Hole, which hath got no
bottom; and, as we ware drawing huomwards, it
may be proper to uprise you, that Brambleton-hall
may be in a condition to receive us, after this
long gurney to the islands of Scotland. By the 

first of next month you may begin to make constant
fires in my brother's chamber and mine; and
burn a fagget every day in the yellow damask
room: have the tester and curtains dusted, and
the fatherbed and matrosses well haired, because
perhaps, with the blissing of heaven, they may be
yoosed on some occasion. Let the ould hogsheads
be well skewred and seasoned for bear, as Mat is
resolved to have his seller choak fool. 
If the house was mine, I would turn over a
new leaf —I don't see why the sarvants of Wales
shouldn't drink fair water, and eat hot cakes and
barley cale, as they do in Scotland, without troubling
the botcher above once a quarter —I hope you
keep account of Roger's purseeding in reverence to
the butter-milk. I expect my dew when I come
huom, without baiting an ass, I'll assure you. — 
As you must have layed a great many more eggs
than would be eaten, I do suppose there is a power
of turks, chickings, and guzzlings about the
house; and a brave kergo of cheese ready for market; 
and that the owl has been sent to Crickhowel,
saving what the maids spun in the family. 
Pray let the whole house and furniture have a
thorough cleaning from top to bottom, for the
honour of Wales; and let Roger search into, and
make a general clearance of the slit holes which
the maids have in secret; for I know they are
much given to sloath and uncleanness. I hope you
have worked a reformation among them, as I exhorted
you in my last, and set their hearts upon
better things than they can find in junkitting and
caterwauling with the fellows of the country. 
As for Win. Jenkins, she has undergone a perfect
metamurphysis, and is become a new creeter
from the ammunition of Humphry Clinker, our
new footman, a pious young man, who has laboured
exceedingly, that she may bring forth fruits 

of repentance. I make no doubt but he will tak
the same pains with that pert hussy Mary Jones,
and all of you; and that he may have power given
to penetrate and instill his goodness, even into
your most inward parts, is the fervent prayer of, 
your friend in the spirit,
Tab. Bramble. 
Sept. 18. 