


Peregrine arrives at the garison, where he receives
the last admonitions of Commodore Trunnion,
who next day resigns his breath, and is
buried according to his own directions. Some
gentlemen in the country make a fruitless attempt
to accommodate matters betwixt Mr. Gamaliel
Pickle and his eldest son. 
About four o'clock in the morning our
hero arrived at the garison, where he
found his generous uncle in extremity,
supported in bed, by Julia on one side, and lieutenant
Hatchway on the other; while Mr. Jolter
administered spiritual consolation to his soul, and 

between whiles comforted Mrs. Trunnion, who,
with her maid, sat by the fire, weeping with
great decorum; the physician having just taken
his last fee, and retired, after pronouncing the
fatal prognostic, in which he anxiously wished
he might not be mistaken. 
Though the commodore's speech was interrupted
by a violent hiccup, he still retained the
use of his senses; and when Peregrine approached,
stretched out his hand with manifest signs of
satisfaction. The young gentleman, whose heart
overflowed with gratitude and affection, could
not behold such a spectacle, unmoved. He endeavoured
to conceal his tenderness, which in
the wildness of his youth, and in the pride of
his disposition, he considered as a derogation from
his manhood; but, in spite of all his endeavours,
the tears gushed from his eyes, while he kissed
the old man's hand; and he was so utterly disconcerted
by his grief, that when he attempted
to speak, his tongue denied its office: so that
the commodore, perceiving his disorder, made a
last effort of strength, and consoled him in these
words: “Swab the spray from your bowsprit,
my good lad, and coil up your spirits. You must
not let the top-lifts of your heart give way, because
you see me ready to go down at these years; 
many a better man has foundered before he has
made half my way; thof I trust, by the mercy
of God, I shall be sure in port in a very few
glasses, and fast moored in a most blessed riding:
for my good friend Jolter hath overhauled
the journal of my sins; and by the observation
he hath taken of the state of my soul, I hope I
shall happily conclude my voyage, and be brought
up in the latitude of heaven. Here has been a 

doctor that wanted to stow me chock-full of physic; 
but, when a man's hour is come, what signifies
his taking his departure with a 'pothecary's
shop in his hold? Those fellows come along
side of dying men, like the messengers of the admiralty
with sailing orders: but, I told him as
how I could slip my cable without his direction
or assistance, and so he hauled off in dudgeon. 
This cursed hiccup (damnation seize it) makes
such a rippling in the current of my speech, that
mayhap you don't understand what I say. Now,
while the sucker of my wind pump will go, I
would willingly mention a few things, which I
hope you will set down in the log-book of your
remembrance, when I am stiff, d'ye see. There's
your aunt sitting whimpering by the fire, I desire
you will keep her tight, warm, and easy in her
old age; she's an honest heart in her own way,
and thof she goes a little crank and humoursome,
by being often over-stowed with Nantz and religion,
she has been a faithful ship-mate to me,
and I dare say never turned in with another man,
since we first embarked in the same bottom. 
Jack Hatchway, you know the trim of her as
well as e'er a man in England, and I believe she
has a kindness for you; whereby, if you two
will grapple in the way of matrimony, when I
am gone, I do suppose, that my godson, for love
of me, will allow you to live in the garison all
the days of your life.” 
Peregrine assured him, he would with pleasure
comply with any request he should make, in
behalf of two persons whom he esteemed so
much; and the lieutenant, with a waggish sneer,
which even the gravity of the situation could not
prevent, thanked them both for their good will, 

telling the commodore, he was obliged to him
for his friendship, in seeking to promote him to
the command of a vessel which he himself had
wore out in the service: that notwithstanding,
he should be content to take charge of her, tho'
he could not help being shy of coming after such
an able navigator. 
Trunnion, exhausted as he was, smiled at this
sally, and after some pause, resumed his admonitions
in this manner: “I need not talk of
Pipes, because I know you will do for him, without
my recommendation; the fellow has sailed with
me in many a hard gale, and I'll warrant him as
stout a seaman as ever set face to the weather:
but I hope you will take care of the rest of my
crew, and not disrate them after I am dead, in
favour of new followers. As for that young woman,
Ned Gauntlet's daughter, I am informed
as how she is an excellent wench, and has a respect
for you; whereby, if you run her on board
in an unlawful way, I leave my curse upon you,
and trust you will never prosper in the voyage of
life: but, I believe you are more of an honest
man, than to behave so much like a pirate. I
beg of all love, you wool take care of your constitution,
and beware of running foul of harlots,
who are no better than so many mermaids, that
sit upon rocks in the sea, and hang out a fair
face for the destruction of passengers; thof I must
say, for my own part, I never met with any of
those sweet singers, and yet I have gone to sea
for the space of thirty years. But, howsomever,
steer your course clear of all such brimstone
bitches; shun going to law as you would shun
the devil, and look upon all attornies as devouring
sharks, or ravenous fish of prey. As soon 

as the breath is out of my body, let minute guns
be fired, till I am safe under ground: I would
also be buried in the red jacket I had on, when
I boarded and took the Renummy. Let my pistols,
cutlass, and pocket-compass be laid in the
coffin along with me. Let me be carried to the
grave by my own men, dressed in the black caps
and white shirts which my barge's crew were
wont to wear; and they must keep a good lookout,
that none of your pilfering rapscallions may
come and heave me up again, for the lucre of
what they can get, until my carcase is belayed by
a tomb-stone. As for the motto, or what you
call it, I leave that to you and Mr. Jolter, who
are scholars; but I do desire, that it may not be
ingraved in the Greek or Latin lingos, and much
less in the French, which I abominate, but in
plain English, that when the angel comes to pipe
all hands at the great day, he may know that I
am a British man, and speak to me in my mother
tongue. And now I have no more to say, but
God in heaven have mercy upon my soul, and
send you all fair weather, wheresoever you are
bound.” So saying, he regarded every individual
around him with a look of complacency,
and closing his eye, composed himself to rest,
while the whole audience (Pipes himself not excepted)
were melted with sorrow; and Mrs.
Trunnion consented to quit the room, that she
might not be exposed to the unspeakable anguish
of seeing him expire. 
His last moments, however, were not so near
as they imagined; he began to dose, and enjoyed
small intervals of ease, till next day in the afternoon; 
during which remissions, he was heard
to pour forth many pious ejaculations, expressing 

his hope, that, for all the heavy cargo of his sins,
he should be able to surmount the foothook-shrouds
of despair, and get aloft to the cross-trees
of God's good favour. At last, his voice sunk
so low, as not to be distinguished; and having
lain about an hour, almost without any perceptible
signs of life, he gave up the ghost, with a
groan which anounced his decease. 
Julia was no sooner certified of this melancholy
event, than she ran to her aunt's chamber,
weeping aloud; and immediately a very decent
concert was performed by the good widow and
her attendants. Peregrine and Hatchway retired
till the corpse should be laid out; and Pipes
having surveyed the body, with a face of rueful
attention, “Well fare thy soul! old Hawser
Trunnion, (said he) man and boy I have known
thee these five and thirty years, and sure a truer
heart never broke biscuit. Many a hard gale
hast thou weathered; but now thy spells are all
over, and thy hull fairly laid up. A better commander
I'd never desire to serve; and who knows
but I may help to set up thy standing rigging in another
world?” 
All the servants of the house were affected with
the loss of their old master, and the poor people
in the neighbourhood assembled at the gate, and
by repeated howlings expressed their sorrow for
the death of their charitable benefactor. Peregrine,
though he felt every thing which love and
gratitude could inspire on this occasion, was not
so much overwhelmed with affliction, as to be
incapable of taking the management of the family
into his own hands. He gave directions
about the funeral with great discretion, after
having paid the compliments of condolance to 

his aunt, whom he consoled with the assurance
of his inviolable esteem and affection. He ordered
suits of mourning to be made for every
person in the garison, and invited all the neighbouring
gentlemen to the burial, not even excepting
his father and brother Gam, who did not,
however, honour the ceremony with their presence; 
nor was his mother humane enough to
visit her sister-in-law in her distress. 
In the method of interment, the commodore's
injunctions were obeyed to a tittle; and at the
same time our hero made a donation of fifty
pounds to the poor of the parish, as a benefaction
which his uncle had forgot to bequeath. 
Having performed these obsequies with the most
pious punctuality, he examined the will, to
which there was no addition since it had been first
executed, adjusted the payment of all the legacies,
and being sole executor, took an account of the
estate to which he had succeeded, and which,
after all deductions, amounted to thirty thousand
pounds. The possession of such a fortune, of
which he was absolute master, did not at all contribute
to the humiliation of his spirit, but inspired
him with new ideas of grandeur and magnificence,
and elevated his hope to the highest
pinnacle of expectation. 
His domestic affairs being settled, he was visited
by almost all the gentlemen of the county,
who came to pay their compliments of congratulation,
on his accession to the estate; and some
of them offered their good offices towards a reconciliation
betwixt his father and him, induced
by the general detestation which was entertained
for his brother Gam, who was by this time
looked upon by his neighbours as a prodigy of 

insolence and malice. Our young squire thanked
them for their kind proposal, which he accepted; 
and old Gamaliel, at their intreaties, seemed
very well disposed to an accommodation: but,
as he would not venture to declare himself, before
he had consulted his wife, that favourable disposition
was rendered altogether ineffectual, by the
instigations of that implacable woman; and our
hero resigned all expectation of being reunited
to his father's house. His brother, as usual, took
all opportunities of injuring his character, by
false aspersions and stories misrepresented, in order
to prejudice his reputation: nor was his sister
Julia suffered to enjoy her good fortune in peace. 
Had he undergone such persecution from an alien
to his blood, the world would have heard of his
revenge; but, notwithstanding his indignation,
he was too much tinctured by the prejudices of
consanguinity, to lift his arm in judgment against
the son of his own parents; and this consideration
abridged the term of his residence at the garison,
where he had proposed to stay for some
months. 