


Peregrine commences minister's dependent; meets
by accident with Mrs. Gauntlet; and descends
gradually, in the condition of life. 
This reception, favourable as it was, did
not please Peregrine, who had too much
discernment to be cajoled with general promises,
at a time when he thought himself intitled to the
most particular assurance. He accordingly signified
his disgust to his introductor, giving him to
understand, that he had laid his account with being
chosen representative of one of those boroughs
for which he had been sacrificed. His lordship
agreed to the reasonableness of his expectation,
observing, however, that he could not suppose
the minister would enter upon business with him,
on his first visit; and that it would be time
enough, at his next audience, to communicate
his demand. 
Notwithstanding this remonstrance, our hero
continued to indulge his suspicion and chagrin,
and even made a point of it with his patron, that
his lordship should next day make application in
his behalf, lest the two seats should be filled up,
on pretence of his inclination's being unknown. 
Thus importuned, my lord went to his principal,
and returned with an answer, importing that his
honour was extremely sorry that Mr. Pickle had
not signified his request before the boroughs in
question were promised to two gentlemen whom
he could not now disappoint, with any regard to
his own credit or interest; but as several persons 

who would be chosen were, to his certain knowledge,
very aged and infirm, he did not doubt
that there would be plenty of vacant seats in a
very short time; and then the young gentleman
might depend upon his friendship. 
Peregrine was so much irritated at this intimation,
that in the first transports of his anger he
forgot the respect he owed to his friend, and in
his presence inveighed against the minister, as a
person devoid of gratitude and candour, protesting,
that if ever an opportunity should offer itself,
he would spend the whole remains of his
fortune in opposing his measures. The nobleman
having given him time to exhaust the impetuosity
of his passion, rebuked him very calmly for his
disrespectful expressions, which were equally injurious
and indiscreet; assured him that his project
of revenge, if ever put in execution, would
redound to his own prejudice and confusion; and
advised him to cultivate and improve, with patience
and assiduity, the footing he had already
obtained in the minister's good graces. 
Our hero convinced of the truth, tho' not satisfied
with the occasion of his admonitions, took
his leave in a fit of sullen discontent, and began
to ruminate upon the shattered posture of his affairs. 
All that now remained of the ample fortune
he had inherited, was the sum he had deposited
in his lordship's hands, together with fifteen
hundred pounds he had ventured on bottomry,
and the garison, which he had left for the use and
accommodation of the lieutenant; and on the
per contra side of his account he was debtor for
the supply he had received from the receiver-general,
and the money for which he was bound in 

behalf of his friend; so that he found himself,
for the first time of his life, very much embarassed
in his circumstances: for, of the first half
year's interest of his ten thousand, which was
punctually paid, he had but fourscore pounds in
bank, without any prospect of a farther supply,
till the other term, which was at the distance of
four long months. He seriously reflected upon
the uncertainty of human affairs; the ship with
his fifteen hundred pounds might be lost, the
gentleman for whom he was security, might
miscarry in this, as well as in his former projects,
and the minister might one day, through policy
or displeasure, expose him to the mercy of his
dependant, who was in possession of his notes. 
These suggestions did not at all contribute to
the ease of our adventurer's mind, already ruffled
by his disappointment. He cursed his own folly
and extravagance, by which he was reduced to
such an uncomfortable situation. He compared
his own conduct with that of some young gentlemen
of his acquaintance, who, while he was
squandering away the best part of his inheritance,
had improved their fortunes, strengthened their
interest, and increased their reputation. He was
abandoned by his gayety and good humour, his
countenance gradually contracted itself into a representation
of severity and care, he dropped all
his amusements and the companions of his pleasure,
and turned his whole attention to the minister,
at whose levee he never failed to appear. 
While he thus laboured in the wheel of dependance,
with all that mortification which a
youth of his pride and sensibility may be supposed
to feel from such a disagreeable necessity, he one
day heard himself called by name, as he crossed 

the Park; and turning, perceived the wife of
captain Gauntlet, with another lady. He no
sooner recognized the kind Sophy, than he accosted
her with his wonted civility of friendship; 
but his former sprightly air was metamorphosed
into such an austerity, or rather dejection of feature,
that she could scarce believe her own eyes; 
and in her astonishment “Is it possible (said she)
that the gay Mr. Pickle should be so much altered
in such a short space of time!” He made no
other reply to this exclamation, but by a languid
smile; and asked how long she had been in town; 
observing, that he would have paid his compliments
to her at her own lodgings, had he been
favoured with the least intimation of her arrival. 
After having thanked him for his politeness, she
told him, it was not owing to any abatement of
her friendship and esteem for him, that she had
omitted to give him that notice; but his abrupt
departure from Windsor, and the manner in
which he quitted Mr. Gauntlet, had given her
just grounds to believe, that they had incurred
his displeasure; which suspicion was reinforced
by his long silence and neglect from that period,
to the present time; when she observed, it was
still farther confirmed, by his forbearing to inquire
for Emilia and her brother: “Judge then,
(said she) if I had any reason to believe that you
would be pleased to hear that I was in town. 
However, I will not detain you at present, because
you seem to be engaged about some particular
business; but, if you will favour me with
your company at breakfast to-morrow, I shall be
much pleased, and honoured to boot, by the
visit.” 
So saying, she gave him a direction to
her lodgings; and he took his leave, with a 

faithful promise of seeing her at the appointed
time. 
He was very much affected with this advance
of Sophy, which he considered as an instance of
her uncommon sweetness of temper; he felt strange
longings of returning friendship towards Godfrey; 
and the remembrance of Emilia melted his heart,
already softened with grief and mortification. 
Next day, he did not neglect his engagement,
and had the pleasure of enjoying a long conversation
with this sensible young lady, who gave
him to understand, that her husband was with
his regiment; and presented to him a fine boy,
the first fruits of their love, whom they had
christened by the name of Peregrine, in memory
of the friendship which had subsisted between
Godfrey and our youth. 
This proof of their regard, notwithstanding
the interruption in their correspondence, made a
deep impression upon the mind of our adventurer,
who having made the warmest acknowledgements
for this undeserved mark of respect, took the
child in his arms, and almost devoured him with
kisses, protesting before God, that he should always
consider him with the tenderness of a parent. 
This was the highest compliment he could
pay to the gentle Sophy, who again kindly chid
him for his disdainful and precipitate retreat, immediately
after her marriage; and expressed an
earnest desire of seeing him and the captain reconciled. 
He assured her, nothing could give
him greater satisfaction than such an event, to
which he would contribute all that lay in his
power, though he could not help looking upon
himself as injured by captain Gauntlet's behaviour,
which denoted a suspicion of his honour, 

as well as contempt for his understanding. The
lady undertook for the concession of her husband,
who (she told him) had been extremely sorry for
his own heat, after Mr. Pickle's departure, and
would have followed him to the garison, in order
to solicit his forgiveness, had not he been restrained
by certain punctilio's, occasioned by some
acrimonious expressions that dropt from Peregrine
at the inn. 
After having cleared up this misunderstanding,
she proceeded to give an account of Emilia,
whose behaviour, at that juncture, plainly indicated
a continuance of affection for her first lover; 
and desired, that he would give her full
powers to bring that matter also to an accommodation: 
“For I am not more certain of my
own existence (said she) than that you are still in
possession of my sister's heart.” At this declaration,
the tear started in his eye, while he shook
his head, and declined her good offices, wishing
that the young lady might be much more happy
than ever he should be able to make her. 
Mrs. Gauntlet, confounded at these expressions,
and moved by the despondent manner in
which they were delivered, begg'd to know if
any new obstacle was raised, by some late change
in his sentiments or situation: and he, in order
to avoid a painful explanation, told her, that he
had long despaired of being able to vanquish Emilia's
resentment, and for that reason quitted the
pursuit, which he would never renew, howsoever
his heart might suffer by that resolution; 
though he took heaven to witness, that his love,
esteem, and admiration of her were not in the
least impaired: but the true motive of his laying
aside this design, was the consciousness of his 

decayed fortune, which, by adding to the sensibility
of his pride, increased the horror of another
repulse. She expressed her concern for this
determination, both on his own account, and in
behalf of Emilia, whose happiness (in her opinion)
depended upon his constancy and affection; 
and she would have questioned him more
minutely about the state of his affairs, had not he
discouraged the inquiry, by seeking to introduce
another subject of conversation. 
After mutual protestations of friendship and regard,
he promised to visit her often, during her
residence in town; and took his leave in a strange
perplexity of mind, occasioned by the images of
love, intruding upon the remonstrances of carking
care. He had some time ago forsaken those extravagant
companions with whom he had rioted
in the heyday of his fortune, and began to consort
with a grave and more sober species of acquaintance:
but he now found himself disabled
from cultivating the society of these also, who
were men of ample estates and liberal dispositions; 
in consequence of which, their parties were too
expensive for the consumptive state of his finances; 
so that he was obliged to descend another
degree, and mingle with a set of old batchelors
and younger brothers, who subsisted on slender
annuities, or what is called a bare competency in
the public funds. This association was composed
of second-hand politicians and minor critics, who
in the forenoon saunter in the Mall, or lounge at
shews of pictures, appear in the drawing-room
once or twice a week, dine at an ordinary, decide
disputes in a coffee-house, with an air of superior
intelligence, frequent the pit of the playhouse,
and once in a month spend an evening 

with some noted actor, whose remarkable sayings
they repeat for the entertainment of their
ordinary friends. 
After all, he found something comfortable
enough in the company of these gentlemen, who
never interested his passions to any violence of
transport, nor teazed him with impertinent curiosity
about his private affairs: for though many
of them had maintained a very long, close, and
friendly correspondence with each other, they
never dreamt of inquiring into particular concerns; 
and if one of the two who were most
intimately connected, had been asked how the
other made shift to live, he would have answered,
with great truth, “Really, that is more than I
know.” Notwithstanding this phlegmatic indifference,
which is of the true English production,
they were all inoffensive, good-natured people,
who loved a joke and a song, delighted in telling
a merry story, and prided themselves in the art of
catering, especially in the articles of fresh venison
and wild fowl. 
Our young gentleman was not received among
them on the footing of a common member, who
makes interest for his admission; he was courted
as a person of superior genius and importance,
and his compliance looked upon as an honour to
their society. This their idea of his preheminence
was supported by his conversation, which,
while it was more liberal and learned than that
to which they had been accustomed, was tinctured
with an assuming air, so agreeably diffused,
that instead of producing aversion, it commanded
respect. They not only appealed to him, in all
doubts relating to foreign parts, to which one
and all of them were strangers, but also consulted 

his knowledge in history and divinity, which
were frequently the topics of their debates; and
in poetry of all kinds, he decided with such magisterial
authority, as even weighed against the
opinions of the players themselves. The variety
of characters he had seen and observed, and the
high spheres of life in which he had so lately
moved, furnished him with a thousand entertaining
anecdotes; and when he became a little familiarized
to his disappointments, so that his natural
vivacity began to revive, he flashed among
them in such a number of bright sallies, as struck
them with admiration, and constituted himself a
classic in wit: insomuch that they began to retail
his remnants, and even invited some particular
friends to come and hear him hold forth. One
of the players, who had for many years strutted
about the taverns in the neighbourhood of Covent-garden,
as the Grand Turk of wit and humour,
began to find his admirers melt away; 
and a certain petulant physician, who had shone
at almost all the Port-clubs in that end of the
town, was actually obliged to import his talents
into the city, where he has now happily taken
root. 
Nor was this success to be wondered at, if we
consider that, over and above his natural genius
and education, our adventurer still had the opportunity
of knowing every thing which happened
among the great, by means of his friend
Cadwallader, with whom he still maintained his
former intimacy, though it was now checquered
with many occasional tists, owing to the sarcastic
remonstrances of the Misanthrope, who disapproved
of those schemes which miscarried with
Peregrine, and now took unseasonable methods 

of valuing himself upon his own foresight: nay,
he was between whiles like a raven croaking presages
of more ill luck from the deceit of the minister,
the dissimulation of his patron, the folly
of the projector for whom he was bound, the
uncertainty of the seas, and the villainy of those
with whom he had entrusted his cash: for Crabtree
saw and considered every thing through a
perspective of spleen, that always reflected the
worst side of human nature. 
For these reasons, our young gentleman began
to be disgusted, at certain intervals, with the
character of this old man, whom he now thought
a morose cynic, not so much incensed against the
follies and vices of mankind, as delighted with
the distress of his fellow creatures. Thus he put
the most unfavourable construction on the principles
of his friend, because he found himself
justly fallen under the lash of his animadversion. 
This self-accusation very often dissolves the closest
friendship: a man, conscious of his own indiscretion,
is implacably offended at the rectitude of
his companion's conduct, which he considers as
an insult upon his failings, never to be forgiven,
even though he has not tasted the bitterness of
reproof, which no sinner can commodiously digest. 
The friendship, therefore, subsisting between
Crabtree and Pickle, had of late suffered
several symptomatic shocks that seemed to prognosticate
a total dissolution; a great deal of
smart dialogue had passed in their private conversations,
and the senior began to repent of having
placed his confidence in such an imprudent, headstrong,
ungovernable youth. 
It was in such paroxysms of displeasure, that
he prophesied misfortune to Peregrine, and even 

told him one morning, that he had dream'd of
the shipwreck of the two East-Indiamen on board
of which he had hazarded his money. But this
was no other than a false vision; for, in a few
weeks, one of them arrived at her moorings in
the river, and he received a thousand, in lieu of
eight hundred pounds which he had lent upon
bond to one of the mates. At the same time he
was informed, that the other ship, in which he
was concerned, had, in all probability, lost her
passage for the season, by being unable to weather
the Cape. He was not at all concerned at
that piece of news, knowing, that the longer he
should lie out of his money, he would have the
more interest to receive; and finding his present
difficulties removed by this supply, his heart began
to dilate, and his countenance to resume its
former alacrity. 
This state of exultation, however, was soon
interrupted by a small accident, which he could
not foresee: he was visited one morning by the
person who had lent his friend a thousand pounds
on his security, and given to understand, that the
borrower had absconded, in consequence of a disappointment,
by which he had lost the whole
sum, and all hopes of retrieving it; so that our
hero was now liable for the debt, which he besought
him to discharge according to the bond,
that he (the lender) might not suffer by his humanity. 
It may be easily conceived, that Peregrine
did not receive this intelligence in cold blood. 
He cursed his own imprudence in contracting such
engagements with an adventurer, whom he did
not sufficiently know, exclaimed against the
treachery of the projector; and having for some
time indulged his resentment in threats and imprecations, 

inquired into the nature of the scheme
which had miscarried. 
The lender, who had informed himself of the
whole affair, gratified his curiosity in this particular,
by telling him that the fugitive had been
cajoled by a certain knight of the post, who undertook
to manage the thousand pounds in such
a manner, as would, in a very little time, make
him perfectly independent; and thus he delineated
the plan: “One half of the sum (said
he) shall be laid out in jewels, which I will
pawn to certain persons of credit and fortune,
who lend money upon such pledges at an exorbitant
interest. The other shall be kept for relieving
them, so that they may be again deposited
with a second set of those honourable usurers; 
and when they shall have been circulated in this
manner through a variety of hands, we will extort
money from each of the pawn-brokers, by
threatening them with a public prosecution, for
exacting illegal interest; and I know that they
will bleed freely, rather than be exposed to the
infamy attending such an accusation.” The
scheme was feasible, and though not very honourable,
made such an impression upon the
needy borrower, that he assented to the proposal; 
and, by our hero's credit, the money was raised. 
The jewels were accordingly purchased, pawned,
relieved, and re-pledged by the agent, who undertook
to manage the whole affair; and so judiciously
was the project executed, that he could
have easily proved each lender guilty of the
charge. Having thus far successfully transacted
the business, this faithful agent visited them severally
on his own account, to give them intimation,
that his employer intended to sue them on 

the statute of usury; upon which, every one,
for himself, bribed the informer to withdraw his
evidence, by which alone he could be convicted; 
and having received these gratifications, he had
thought proper to retreat into France, with the
whole booty, including the original thousand that
put them in motion. In consequence of this
decampment, the borrower had withdrawn himself; 
so that the lender was obliged to have recourse
to his security. 
This was a very mortifying account to our
young gentleman, who in vain reminded the
narrator of his promise, importing, that he would
not demand the money, until he should be called
to an account by his ward; and observed, that
long before that period, the fugitive might appear
and discharge the debt. But the other was
deaf to these remonstrances; alledging, that his
promise was provisional, on the supposition that
the borrower would deal candidly and fairly; 
that he had forfeited all title to his friendship and
trust, by the scandalous scheme in which he had
embarked; and that his treacherous flight from
his security was no proof of his honesty and intended
return; but on the contrary, a warning,
by which he (the lender) was taught to take
care of himself. He therefore insisted upon his
being indemnified immediately, on pain of letting
the law take its course; and Peregrine was actually
obliged to part with the whole sum he had
so lately received. But this payment was not
made without extreme reluctance, indignation,
and denunciation of eternal war against the absconder,
and the rigid creditor, betwixt whom
he suspected some collusion. 