


Mr. Sackbut and his pupil conspire against Peregrine,
who being apprized of their design by his
sister, takes measures for counterworking their
scheme, which is executed by mistake upon Mr.
Gauntlet. This young soldier meeets with a
cordial reception from the commodore, who generously
decoys him into his own interest. 
When he considered the circumstances
of the ambuscade, he could not persuade
himself that he had been assaulted by a common
thief, because it was not to be supposed that
a robber would have amused himself in pummeling
rather than in rifling his prey; he therefore
ascribed his misfortune to the secret enmity
of some person who had a design upon his life; 
and upon mature deliberation, fixed his suspicion
upon Peregrine, who was the only man on earth
from whom he thought he deserved such treatment. 
He communicated this conjecture to his
pupil, who readily adopted his opinion, and advised
him strenuously to revenge the wrong by
a like contrivance, without seeking to make a
narrower inquiry, lest his enemy should be thereby
put upon his guard. 

This proposal being relished, they in concert
revolved the means of retorting the ambush with
interest, and actually laid such a villainous plan
for attacking our hero in the dark, that, had it
been executed according to their intention, the
young gentleman's scheme of travelling would
have been effectually marred. But their machinations
were overheard by Miss Pickle, who was
now in the seventeenth year of her age, and, in
spite of the prejudice of education, entertained
in secret a most sisterly affection for her brother
Perry, though she had never spoke to him, and
was deterred by the precepts, vigilance and menaces
of her mother, from attempting any means
of meeting him in private. She was not, however,
insensible to his praise, which was loudly
sounded forth in the neighbourhood, and never
failed of going to church, and every other place,
where she thought she might have an opportunity
of seeing this amiable brother. With these sentiments
it cannot be supposed that she would hear
the conspiracy without emotion. She was shocked
at the treacherous barbarity of Gam, and shuddered
at the prospect of the danger to which Peregrine
would be exposed from their malice. She
durst not communicate this plot to her mother,
because she was afraid that lady's unaccountable
aversion for her first-born would hinder her from
interposing in his behalf, and consequently render
her a sort of accomplice in the guilt of his assassins. 
She therefore resolved to warn Peregrine
of the conspiracy, an account of which she transmitted
to him in an affectionate letter, by means
of a young gentleman in that neighbourhood,
who made his addresses to her at that time, and 

who, at her request, offered his service to our
hero, in defeating the projects of his adversaries. 
Peregrine was startled when he read the particulars
of their scheme, which was no other than
an intention to sally upon him when he should
be altogether unprovided against such an attack,
cut off his ears, and otherwise mutilate him in
such a manner, that he should have no cause to
be vain of his person for the future. 
Incensed as he was against the brutal disposition
of his own father's son, he could not help
being moved at the integrity and tenderness of
his sister, of whose inclinations towards him he
had been hitherto kept in ignorance. He thanked
the gentleman for his honourable dealing, and
expressed a desire of being better acquainted with
his virtues; told him, that now he was cautioned,
he hoped there would be no necessity for giving
him any further trouble, and wrote by him a
letter of acknolwedgment to his sister, for whom
he expressed the utmost love and regard, beseeching
her to favour him with an interview before
his departure, that he might indulge his fraternal
fondness, and be blessed with the company
and countenance of one at least belonging to his
own family. 
Having imparted this discovery to his friend
Hatchway, they came to a resolution of countermining
the plan of their enemies; and as they
did not choose to expose themselves to the insinuations
of slander, which would have exerted
itself at their expence, had they, even in defending
themselves, employed any harsh means of
retaliation, they invented a method of disappointing
and disgracing their foes, and immediately 

set Pipes at work to forward the preparations. 
Miss Pickle having described the spot which
the assassins had pitched upon for the scene of
their vengeance, our triumvirate intended to
have placed a centinel among the corn, who
should come and give them intelligence when the
ambuscade was laid; and in consequence of that
information, they would steal softly towards the
place, attended by three or four of the domesticks,
and draw a large net over the conspirators,
who being intangled in the toil, should
be disarmed, fettered, heartily scourged, and suspended
between two trees in the snare, as a spectacle
to all passengers that should chance to travel
that way. 
The plan being thus digested, and the commodore
made acquainted with the whole affair,
the spy was sent upon duty, and every body
within doors prepared to go forth upon the first
notice. One whole evening did they spend in the
most impatient expectation, but on the second
their scout crept into the garison, and assured
them that he had perceived three men skulking
behind the hedge, on the road that led to
the publick house from which Peregrine and the
lieutenant used every night to return about that
hour. Upon this intelligence the confederates
set out immediately with all their implements,
and approaching the scene with as little noise as
possible, they heard the sound of blows; and
though the night was dark, perceived a sort of
tumultuous conflict on the very spot which the
conspirators had possessed. Surprised at this occurrence,
the meaning of which he could not
comprehend, Peregrine ordered his myrmidons 

to halt and reconnoitre; and immediately his ears
were saluted with an exclamation of “You
shan't scape me, rascal.” The voice being quite
familiar to him, he all at once divined the cause
of that confusion which they had observed; and
running up to the assistance of the exclaimer,
found a fellow on his knees begging his life of
Mr. Gauntlet, who stood over him with a naked
hanger in his hand. 
Pickle instantly made himself known to his
friend, who told him, that having left his horse
at Tunley's, he was in his way to the garison set
upon by three ruffians, one of whom, being the
very individual person now in his power, had
come behind him, and struck with a bludgeon at
his head, which however he missed, and the instrument
descended on his left shoulder; that upon
drawing his hanger, and laying abut him in
the dark, the other two fled, leaving their companion,
whom he had disabled, in the lurch. 
Peregrine congratulated him upon his safety,
and having ordered Pipes to secure the prisoner,
conducted Mr. Gauntlet to the garison, where he
met with a very hearty reception from the commodore,
to whom he was introduced as his nephew's
intimate friend; not but that, in all likelihood,
he would have abated somewhat of his
hospitality, had he known that he was the brother
of Perry's mistress; but her name the old
gentleman had never thought of asking, when
he inquired into the particulars of his godson's
amour. 
The captive being examined, in presence of
Trunnion and all his adherents, touching the ambuscade,
owned, that being in the service of
Gam Pickle, he had been prevailed upon by the 

sollicitations of his master and the curate, to accompany
them in their expedition, and undertake
the part which he had acted against the
stranger, whom he and his employers mistook
for Peregrine. In consideration of this frank acknowledgment,
and a severe wound he had received
in his right arm, they resolved to inflict
no other punishment on this malefactor, than to
detain him all night in the garison, and next
morning carry him before a justice of the peace,
to whom he repeated all that he had said overnight,
and with his own hand subscribed his confession,
copies of which were handed about the
neighbourhood, to the unspeakable confusion and
disgrace of the curate and his promising pupil. 
Mean while, Trunnion treated the young soldier
with uncommon marks of respect, being prepossessed
in his favour by this adventure, which
he had so gallantly atchieved, as well as by the
encomiums that Peregrine bestowed upon his valour
and generosity. He liked his countenance,
which was bold and hardy, admired his Herculean
limbs, and delighted in asking questions concerning
the service he had seen. 
The day after his arrival, while the conversation
turned on this last subject, the commodore,
taking the pipe out of his mouth, “I'll tell you
what, brother, (said he) five and forty years ago,
when I was third lieutenant of the Warwick
man of war, there was a very stout young fellow
on board, a subaltern officer of marines; 
his name was not unlike your own, d'ye see,
being Guntlet, with a G. I remember he and
I could not abide one another at first, because,
d'ye see, I was a sailor and he a land-man, till
we fell in with a Frenchman, whom we engaged 

for eight glasses, and at length boarded and
took. I was the first man that stood on the
enemy's deck, and should have come scurvily
off, d'ye see, if Guntlet had not jumped to my
assistance; but we soon cleared ship, and drove
them to close quarters, so that they were obliged
to strike; and from that day Guntlet and I were
sworn brothers as long as he remained on board. 
He was exchanged into a marching regiment,
and what became of him afterwards, Lord in
heaven knows; but this I'll say of him, whether
he be dead or alive, he feared no man that ever
wore a head, and was, moreover, a very hearty
messmate.” 
The stranger's breast glowed at this eulogium,
which was no sooner pronounced, than he eagerly
asked, if the French ship was not the Diligence? 
The commodore replied with a stare,
“The very same, my lad.” “Then (said
Gauntlet) the person of whom you are pleased
to make such honourable mention was my own
father.” “The devil he was! (cried Trunnion,
shaking him by the hand) I am rejoiced
to see a son of Ned Gauntlet in my house.” 
This discovery introduced a thousand questions,
in the course of which, the old gentleman learnt
the situation of his friend's family, and discharged
innumerable execrations upon the ingratitude and
injustice of the ministry, which had failed to provide
for the son of such a brave soldier. Nor
was his friendship confined to such ineffectual expressions; 
he that same evening signified to Peregrine
a desire of doing something for his friend; 
and this inclination was so much praised, encouraged
and promoted by his godson, and even
supported by his counsellor Hatchway, that our 

hero was empowered to present him with a sum
of money sufficient to purchase a commission. 
Though nothing could be more agreeable to
Pickle than this permission, he was afraid that
Godfrey's scrupulous disposition would hinder
him from subjecting himself to any such obligation; 
and therefore proposed that he should be
decoyed into his own interest by a feigned story,
in consequence of which he would be prevailed
upon to accept of the money, as a debt which
the commodore had contracted of his father at
sea. Trunnion made wry faces at this expedient,
the necessity of which he could not conceive,
without calling in question the common sense of
Gauntlet, as he took it for granted, that such
offers as those were not to be rejected on any
consideration whatever. Besides, he could not
digest an artifice, by which he himself must own
that he had lived so many years, without manifesting
the least intention of doing justice to his
creditor. All these objections, however, were
removed by the zeal and rhetoric of Peregrine,
who represented that it would be impossible to
befriend him on any other terms; that his silence
hitherto would be imputed to his want of information
touching the circumstances and condition
of his friend; and that his remembring and insisting
upon discharging the obligation, after such
an interval of time, when the whole affair was
in oblivion, would be the greatest compliment
he could pay to his own honour and integrity. 
Thus persuaded, he took an opportunity of
Gauntlet's being alone with him to broach the
affair, telling the young man, that his father had
advanced a sum of money for him, when they
sailed together, on account of the mess, as well 

as to stop the mouth of a clamorous creditor at
Portsmouth; and that the said sum, with interest,
amounted to about four hundred pounds,
which he would now, with great thankfulness,
repay. 
Godfrey was amazed at this declaration, and
after a considerable pause replied, that he had
never heard his parents mention any such debt; 
that no memorandum or voucher of it was found
among his father's papers; and that, in all probability,
it must have been discharged long ago, although
the commodore, in such a long course of
time and hurry of occupation, might have forgot
the repayment: he therefore desired to be excused
from accepting what in his own conscience he believed
was not his due; and complimented the
old gentleman upon his being so scrupulously just
and honourable. 
The soldier's refusal, which was matter of
astonishment to Trunnion, increased his inclination
to assist him; and, on pretence of acquitting
his own character, he urged his beneficence with
such obstinacy, that Gauntlet, afraid of disobliging
him, was in a manner compelled to receive a
draught for the money, for which he subscribed
an ample discharge, and immediately transmitted
the order to his mother, whom at the same time
he informed of the circumstances by which they
had so unexpectedly gained this accession of fortune. 
Such a piece of news could not fail of being
agreeable to Mrs. Gauntlet, who by the first post wrote
a polite letter of acknowledgment to the
commodore, another to her own son, importing,
that she had already sent the draught to a friend
in London, with directions to deposit it in the 

hands of a certain banker, for the purchase of
the first ensigncy to be sold; and she took the
liberty of sending a third to Peregrine, couched
in very affectionate terms, with a kind postscript,
signed by Miss Sophy and his charming Emily. 
This affair being transacted to the satisfaction
of all concerned, preparations were set on foot
for the departure of our hero, on whom his uncle
settled an annuity of eight hundred pounds, being
little less than one half of his whole income. 
By this time indeed the old gentleman could
easily afford to alienate such a part of his fortune,
because he entertained little or no company, kept
few servants, was remarkably plain and frugal in
his house-keeping; and Mrs. Trunnion being
now some years on the wrong side of fifty, her
infirmities began to increase; and tho' her pride
had suffered no diminution, her vanity was altogether
subdued by her avarice. 
A Swiss valet de chambre, who had already
made the tour of Europe, was hired for the care
of Peregrine's own person; and Pipes being ignorant
of the French language, as well as otherwise
unfit for the office of a fashionable attendant,
it was resolved that he should remain in garison,
and his place was immediately supplied by a Parisian
lacquey engaged at London for that purpose. 
Pipes did not seem to relish this disposition of
things; and though he made no verbal objections
to it, looked remarkably sour at his successor upon
his first arrival; but this sullen fit seemed gradually
to wear off; and long before his master's
departure, he had recovered his natural tranquility
and unconcern. 