



A grand Debate at the General Assembly of the Houyhnhnms; and how it was determined. The Learning of the  Houyhnhnms. Their Buildings. Their Manner of Burials. The Defectiveness of their Language. 

One of these Grand Assemblies was
held in my time, about three
Months before my Departure, whither
my Master went as the Representative
of our District. In
this Council was resumed their
old Debate, and indeed, the only Debate that ever
happened in their Country; whereof my Master
after his Return gave me a very particular Account. 
The Question to be debated, was, Whether the
Yahoos should be exterminated from the Face of
the Earth. One of the Members for the Affirmative
offered several Arguments of great Strength
and Weight; alledging, That, as the Yahoos were
the most filthy, noisome, and deformed Animal 

which Nature ever produced, so they were the most
restive and indocible, mischievous and malicious:
They would privately suck the Teats of the
Houyhnhnms Cows; kill and devour their Cats,
trample down their Oats and Grass, if they were
not continually watched; and commit a Thousand
other Extravagancies. He took Notice of a general
Tradition, that Yahoos had not been always in
their Country: But, that many Ages ago, two of
these Brutes appeared together upon a Mountain; 
whether produced by the Heat of the Sun upon
corrupted Mud and Slime, or from the Ooze and
Froth of the Sea, was never known. That these
Yahoos engendered, and their Brood in a short
time grew so numerous as to over-run and infest
the whole Nation. That the Houyhnhnms to get
rid of this Evil, made a general Hunting, and at
last inclosed the whole Herd; and destroying the
Older, every Houyhnhnm kept two young Ones in
a Kennel, and brought them to such a Degree of
Tameness, as an Animal so savage by Nature can
be capable of acquiring; using them for Draught
and Carriage. That, there seemed to be much
Truth in this Tradition, and that those Creatures
could not be Ylnhniamshy (or Aborigines of the
Land) because of the violent Hatred the Houyhnhnms
as well as all other Animals, bore them; which although
their evil Disposition sufficiently deserved,
could never have arrived at so high a Degree, if
they had been Aborigines, or else they would have
long since been rooted out. That, the Inhabitants
taking a Fancy to use the Service of the Yahoos,
had very imprudently neglected to cultivate the
Breed of Asses, which were a comely Animal, easily 

kept, more tame and orderly, without any offensive
Smell, strong enough for Labour, although
they yield to the other in Agility of Body; and if
their Braying be no agreeable Sound, it is far preferable
to the horrible Howlings of the Yahoos. 
Several others declared their Sentiments to the
same Purpose; when my Master proposed an Expedient
to the Assembly, whereof he had indeed
borrowed the Hint from me. He approved of the
Tradition, mentioned by the Honourable Member,
who spoke before; and affirmed, that the two Yahoos
said to be first seen among them, had been
driven thither over the Sea; that coming to Land,
and being forsaken by their Companions, they retired
to the Mountains, and degenerating by Degrees,
became in Process of Time, much more
savage than those of their own Species in the Country
from whence these two Originals came. The
Reason of his Assertion was, that he had now in
his Possession, a certain wonderful Yahoo, (meaning
myself) which most of them had heard of,
and many of them had seen. He then related to
them, how he first found me; that, my Body was
all covered with an artificial Composure of the
Skins and Hairs of other Animals: That, I spoke
in a Language of my own, and had thoroughly
learned theirs: That, I had related to him the Accidents
which brought me thither: That, when he
saw me without my Covering, I was an exact Yahoo
in every Part, only of a whiter Colour, less
hairy, and with shorter Claws. He added, how I
had endeavoured to persuade him, that in my own
and other Countries the Yahoos acted as the governing,
rational Animal, and held the Houyhnhnms in 

Servitude: That, he observed in me all the Qualities
of a Yahoo, only a little more civilized by
some Tincture of Reason; which however was in
a Degree as far inferior to the Houyhnhnm Race, as
the Yahoos of their Country were to me: That,
among other things, I mentioned a Custom we had
of castrating Houyhnhnms when they were young,
in order to render them tame; that the Operation
was easy and safe; that it was no Shame to learn
Wisdom from Brutes, as Industry is taught by the
Ant, and Building by the Swallow. (For so I
translate the Word Lyhannh, although it be a much
larger Fowl) That, this Invention might be practiced
upon the younger Yahoos here, which, besides
rendering them tractable and fitter for Use,
would in an Age put an End to the whole Species
without destroying Life. That, in the mean time
the Houyhnhnms should be exhorted to cultivate
the Breed of Asses, which, as they are in all respects
more valuable Brutes; so they have this Advantage,
to be fit for Service at five Years old,
which the others are not till Twelve. 
This was all my Master thought fit to tell me
at that Time, of what passed in the Grand Council. 
But he was pleased to conceal one Particular, which
related personally to myself, whereof I soon felt
the unhappy Effect, as the Reader will know in its
proper Place, and from whence I date all the succeeding
Misfortunes of my Life. 
The Houyhnhnms have no Letters, and consequently,
their Knowledge is all traditional. But
there happening few Events of any Moment among
a People so well united, naturally disposed to every
Virtue, wholly governed by Reason, and cut off 

from all Commerce with other Nations; the historical
Part is easily preserved without burthening
their Memories. I have already observed, that
they are subject to no Diseases, and therefore can
have no Need of Physicians. However, they have
excellent Medicines composed of Herbs, to cure
accidental Bruises and Cuts in the Pastern or Frog of
the Foot by sharp Stones, as well as other Maims
and Hurts in the several Parts of the Body. 
They calculate the Year by the Revolution of
the Sun and the Moon, but use no Subdivisions into
Weeks. They are well enough acquainted with
the Motions of those two Luminaries, and understand
the Nature of Eclipses; and this is the utmost
Progress of their Astronomy. 
In Poetry they must be allowed to excel all other
Mortals; wherein the Justness of their Similes, and
the Minuteness, as well as Exactness of their Descriptions,
are indeed inimitable. Their Verses
abound very much in both of these; and usually
contain either some exalted Notions of Friendship
and Benevolence, or the Praises of those who were
Victors in Races, and other bodily Exercises. 
Their Buildings, although very rude and simple,
are not inconvenient, but well contrived to defend
them from all Injuries of Cold and Heat. They
have a Kind of Tree, which at Forty Years old
loosens in the Root, and falls with the first Storm; 
it grows very strait, and being pointed like Stakes
with a sharp Stone, (for the Houyhnhnms know
not the Use of Iron) they stick them erect in the
Ground about ten Inches asunder, and then weave
in Oat-straw, or sometimes Wattles betwixt them. 

The Roof is made after the same Manner, and so
are the Doors. 
The Houyhnhnms use the hollow Part between
the Pastern and the Hoof of their Fore-feet, as we
do our Hands, and this with greater Dexterity, than
I could at first imagine. I have seen a white Mare
of our Family thread a Needle (which I lent her
on Purpose) with that Joynt. They milk their
Cows, reap their Oats, and do all the Work which
requires Hands, in the same Manner. They have
a Kind of hard Flints, which by grinding against
other Stones, they form into Instruments, that serve
instead of Wedges, Axes, and Hammers. With
Tools made of these Flints, they likewise cut their
Hay, and reap their Oats, which there groweth
naturally in several Fields: The Yahoos draw home
the Sheaves in Carriages, and the Servants tread
them in certain covered Hutts, to get out the Grain,
which is kept in Stores. They make a rude Kind
of earthen and wooden Vessels, and bake the former
in the Sun. 
If they can avoid Casualties, they die only of
old Age, and are buried in the obscurest Places
that can be found, their Friends and Relations expressing
neither Joy nor Grief at their Departure; 
nor does the dying Person discover the least Regret
that he is leaving the World, any more than if he
were upon returning home from a Visit to one of
his Neighbours: I remember, my Master having
once made an Appointment with a Friend and his
Family to come to his House upon some Affair of
Importance; on the Day fixed, the Mistress and
her two Children came very late; she made two
Excuses, first for her Husband, who, as she said, 

happened that very Morning to Lhnuwnh. The
Word is strongly expressive in their Language, but
not easily rendered into English; it signifies, to retire
to his first Mother. Her Excuse for not coming
sooner, was, that her Husband dying late in
the Morning, she was a good while consulting her
Servants about a convenient Place where his Body
should be laid; and I observed she behaved herself
at our House, as chearfully as the rest: She died
about three Months after. 
They live generally to Seventy or Seventy-five
Years, very seldom to Fourscore: Some Weeks before
their Death they feel a gradual Decay, but
without Pain. During this time they are much
visited by their Friends, because they cannot go
abroad with their usual Ease and Satisfaction. 
However, about ten Days before their Death, which
they seldom fail in computing, they return the
Visits that have been made them by those who are
nearest in the Neighbourhood, being carried in a
convenient Sledge drawn by Yahoos; which Vehicle
they use, not only upon this Occasion, but
when they grow old, upon long Journeys, or when
they are lamed by any Accident. And therefore
when the dying Houyhnhnms return those Visits,
they take a solemn Leave of their Friends, as if
they were going to some remote Part of the Country,
where they designed to pass the rest of their
Lives. 
I know not whether it may be worth observing,
that the Houyhnhnms have no Word in their Language
to express any thing that is evil, except what
they borrow from the Deformities or ill Qualities of
the Yahoos. Thus they denote the Folly of a Servant, 

an Omission of a Child, a Stone that cuts
their Feet, a Continuance of foul or unseasonable
Weather, and the like, by adding to each the
Epithet of Yahoo. For Instance, Hhnm Yahoo,
Whnaholm Yahoo, Ynlhmnawihlma Yahoo, and an
ill contrived House, Ynholmhnmrohlnw Yahoo. 
I could with great Pleasure enlarge farther upon
the Manners and Virtues of this excellent People; 
but intending in a short time to publish a Volume
by itself expressly upon that Subject, I refer the
Reader thither. And in the mean time, proceed
to relate my own sad Catastrophe. 
