



The Author's dangerous Voyage. He arrives at New Holland, hoping to settle there. Is wounded with an Arrow by one of the Natives. Is seized and carried by Force into a Portugueze Ship. The great Civilities of the Captain. The Author arrives at England. 

I Began this desperate Voyage on
February 15, 171&frac45;, at 9 o'Clock
in the Morning. The Wind was
very favourable; however, I made
use at first only of my Paddles; but
considering I should soon be weary,
and that the Wind might probably chop about, I
ventured to set up my little Sail; and thus, with
the Help of the Tide, I went at the Rate of a
League and a Half an Hour, as near as I could guess. 
My Master and his Friends continued on the Shoar,
till I was almost out of Sight; and I often heard the
Sorrel Nag (who always loved me) crying out,
Hnuy illa nyha maiah Yahoo, Take Care of thy
self, gentle Yahoo. 
My Design was, if possible, to discover some
small Island uninhabited, yet sufficient by my Labour 

to furnish me with Necessaries of Life, which
I would have thought a greater Happiness than to
be first Minister in the politest Court of Europe;
so horrible was the Idea I conceived of returning
to live in the Society and under the Government of
Yahoos. For in such a Solitude as I desired, I
could at least enjoy my own Thoughts, and reflect
with Delight on the Virtues of those inimitable
Houyhnhnms, without any Opportunity of degenerating
into the Vices and Corruptions of my own
Species. 
The Reader may remember what I related when
my Crew conspired against me, and confined me
to my Cabbin. How I continued there several
Weeks, without knowing what Course we took; 
and when I was put ashore in the Long-boat, how
the Sailors told me with Oaths, whether true or
false, that they knew not in what Part of the
World we were. However, I did then believe us
to be about ten Degrees Southward of the Cape of
Good Hope, or about 45 Degrees Southern Latitude,
as I gathered from some general Words I overheard
among them, being I supposed to the South-East
in their intended Voyage to Madagascar. And
although this were but little better than Conjecture,
yet I resolved to steer my Course Eastward, hoping
to reach the South-West Coast of New-Holland,
and perhaps some such Island as I desired, lying
Westward of it. The Wind was full West, and by
six in the Evening I computed I had gone Eastward
at least eighteen Leagues; when I spied a very
small Island about half a League off, which I soon
reached. It was nothing but a Rock with one
Creek, naturally arched by the Force of Tempests. 

Here I put in my Canoo, and climbing a Part of
the Rock, I could plainly discover Land to the
East, extending from South to North. I lay all
Night in my Canoo; and repeating my Voyage
early in the Morning, I arrived in seven Hours to
the South-East Point of New-Holland. This confirmed
me in the Opinion I have long entertained,
that the Maps and Charts place this Country at
least three Degrees more to the East than it really
is; which Thought I communicated many Years
ago to my worthy Friend Mr. Herman Moll, and
gave him my Reasons for it, although he hath rather
chosen to follow other Authors. 
I saw no Inhabitants in the Place where I
landed; and being unarmed, I was afraid of venturing
far into the Country. I found some Shell-Fish
on the Shore, and eat them raw, not daring
to kindle a Fire, for fear of being discovered by the
Natives. I continued three Days feeding on Oysters
and Limpits, to save my own Provisions; and
I fortunately found a Brook of excellent Water,
which gave me great Relief. 
On the fourth Day, venturing out early a little
too far, I saw twenty or thirty Natives upon a
Height, not above five hundred Yards from me. 
They were stark naked, Men, Women and Children
round a Fire, as I could discover by the Smoke. 
One of them spied me, and gave Notice to the
rest; five of them advanced towards me, leaving
the Women and Children at the Fire. I made
what haste I could to the Shore, and getting into
my Canoo, shoved off: The Savages observing me
retreat, ran after me; and before I could get far
enough into the Sea, discharged an Arrow, which 

wounded me deeply on the Inside of my left Knee
(I shall carry the Mark to my Grave.) I apprehended
the Arrow might be poisoned; and paddling
out of the Reach of their Darts (being a calm Day)
I made a shift to suck the Wound, and dress it as
well as I could. 
I was at a Loss what to do, for I durst not return
to the same Landing-place, but stood to the
North, and was forced to paddle; for the Wind,
although very gentle, was against me, blowing
North-West. As I was looking about for a secure
Landing-place, I saw a Sail to the North North-East,
which appearing every Minute more visible,
I was in some Doubt, whether I should wait for
them or no; but at last my Detestation of the Yahoo
Race prevailed; and turning my Canoo, I sailed
and paddled together to the South, and got into the
same Creek from whence I set out in the Morning; 
choosing rather to trust my self among these
Barbarians, than live with European Yahoos. I
drew up my Canoo as close as I could to the Shore,
and hid my self behind a Stone by the little Brook,
which, as I have already said, was excellent Water. 
The Ship came within half a League of this
Creek, and sent out her Long-Boat with Vessels to
take in fresh Water (for the Place it seems was very
well known) but I did not observe it until the Boat
was almost on Shore; and it was too late to seek
another Hiding-Place. The Seamen at their landing
observed my Canoo, and rummaging it all over,
easily conjectured that the Owner could not be
far off. Four of them well armed searched every
Cranny and Lurking-hole, till at last they found me
flat on my Face behind the Stone. They gazed a 

while in Admiration at my strange uncouth Dress; 
my Coat made of Skins, my wooden-soaled Shoes,
and my furred Stockings; from whence, however,
they concluded I was not a Native of the Place,
who all go naked. One of the Seamen in Portugueze
bid me rise, and asked who I was. I understood
that Language very well, and getting upon
my Feet, said, I was a poor Yahoo, banished from
the Houyhnhums, and desired they would please to
let me depart. They admired to hear me answer
them in their own Tongue, and saw by my Complection
I must be an European; but were at a Loss
to know what I meant by Yahoos and Houyhnhnms,
and at the same Time fell a laughing at my strange
Tone in speaking, which resembled the Neighing
of a Horse. I trembled all the while betwixt
Fear and Hatred: I again desired Leave to depart,
and was gently moving to my Canoo; but they laid
hold on me, desiring to know what Country I was
of? whence I came? with many other Questions. 
I told them, I was born in England, from whence
I came about five Years ago, and then their Country
and ours was at Peace. I therefore hoped they
would not treat me as an Enemy, since I meant
them no Harm, but was a poor Yahoo, seeking
some desolate Place where to pass the Remainder of
his unfortunate Life. 
When they began to talk, I thought I never
heard or saw any thing so unnatural; for it appeared
to me as monstrous as if a Dog or a Cow should
speak in England, or a Yahoo in Houyhnhnm-Land. 
The honest Portugueze were equally amazed at my
strange Dress, and the odd Manner of delivering
my Words, which however they understood very 

well. They spoke to me with great Humanity,
and said they were sure their Captain would carry
me gratis to Lisbon, from whence I might return
to my own Country; that two of the Seamen
would go back to the Ship, to inform the Captain
of what they had seen, and receive his Orders; 
in the mean Time, unless I would give my solemn
Oath not to fly, they would secure me by Force. 
I thought it best to comply with their Proposal. 
They were very curious to know my Story, but I
gave them very little Satisfaction; and they all conjectured,
that my Misfortunes had impaired my
Reason. In two Hours the Boat, which went
loaden with Vessels of Water, returned with the
Captain's Commands to fetch me on Board, I fell
on my Knees to preserve my Liberty; but all was
in vain, and the Men having tied me with Cords,
heaved me into the Boat, from whence I was taken
into the Ship, and from thence into the Captain's
Cabbin. 
His Name was Pedro de Mendez; he was a very
courteous and generous Person; he entreated me
to give some Account of my self, and desired to
know what I would eat or drink; said, I should
be used as well as himself, and spoke so many
obliging Things, that I wondered to find such Civilities
from a Yahoo. However, I remained silent
and sullen; I was ready to faint at the very Smell
of him and his Men. At last I desired something
to eat out of my own Canoo; but he ordered
me a Chicken and some excellent Wine,
and then directed that I should be put to Bed in
a very clean Cabbin. I would not undress my
self, but lay on the Bed-cloaths; and in half an 

Hour stole out, when I thought the Crew was at
Dinner; and getting to the Side of the Ship, was
going to leap into the Sea, and swim for my Life,
rather than continue among Yahoos. But one of
the Seamen prevented me, and having informed the
Captain, I was chained to my Cabbin. 
After Dinner Don Pedro came to me, and
desired to know my Reason for so desperate an Attempt; 
assured me he only meant to do me all the
Service he was able; and spoke so very movingly,
that at last I descended to treat him like an Animal
which had some little Portion of Reason. I gave
him a very short Relation of my Voyage; of the
Conspiracy against me by my own Men; of the
Country where they set me on Shore, and of my
five Years Residence there. All which he looked
upon as if it were a Dream or a Vision; whereat I
took great Offence: For I had quite forgot the Faculty
of Lying, so peculiar to Yahoos in all Countries
where they preside, and consequently the
Disposition of suspecting Truth in others of their
own Species. I asked him, Whether it were the
Custom of his Country to say the Thing that was
not? I assured him I had almost forgot what he
meant by Falshood; and if I had lived a thousand
Years in Houyhnhnmland, I should never have heard
a Lie from the meanest Servant. That I was altogether
indifferent whether he believed me or no; but
however, in return for his Favours, I would give
so much Allowance to the Corruption of his Nature,
as to answer any Objection he would please
to make; and he might easily discover the Truth. 
The Captain, a wise Man, after many Endeavours
to catch me tripping in some Part of my 

Story, at last began to have a better Opinion of my
Veracity. But he added, that since I professed so
inviolable an Attachment to Truth, I must give
him my Word of Honour to bear him Company in
this Voyage without attempting any thing against
my Life; or else he would continue me a Prisoner
till we arrived at Lisbon. I gave him the Promise
he required; but at the same time protested that I
would suffer the greatest Hardships rather than return
to live among Yahoos. 
Our Voyage passed without any considerable
Accident. In Gratitude to the Captain I sometimes
sate with him at his earnest Request, and strove to
conceal my Antipathy against human Kind, although
it often broke out; which he suffered to
pass without Observation. But the greatest Part of
the Day, I confined myself to my Cabbin, to avoid
seeing any of the Crew. The Captain had often
intreated me to strip myself of my savage Dress,
and offered to lend me the best Suit of Cloaths he
had. This I would not be prevailed on to accept,
abhorring to cover myself with any thing that had
been on the Back of a Yahoo. I only desired he
would lend me two clean Shirts, which having been
washed since he wore them, I believed would not
so much defile me. These I changed every second
Day, and washed them myself. 
We arrived at Lisbon, Nov. 5, 1715. At our
landing, the Captain forced me to cover myself with
his Cloak, to prevent the Rabble from crouding
about me. I was conveyed to his own House; and
at my earnest Request, he led me up to the highest
Room backwards. I conjured him to conceal
from all Persons what I had told him of the Houyhnhnms; 

because the least Hint of such a Story
would not only draw Numbers of People to see me,
but probably put me in Danger of being imprisoned,
or burnt by the Inquisition. The Captain persuaded
me to accept a Suit of Cloaths newly made; 
but I would not suffer the Taylor to take my Measure; 
however, Don Pedro being almost of my
Size, they fitted me well enough. He accoutred
me with other Necessaries all new, which I aired
for Twenty-four Hours before I would use them. 
The Captain had no Wife, nor above three
Servants, none of which were suffered to attend at
Meals; and his whole Deportment was so obliging,
added to very good human Understanding, that I
really began to tolerate his Company. He gained
so far upon me, that I ventured to look out of the
back Window. By Degrees I was brought into
another Room, from whence I peeped into the
Street, but drew my Head back in a Fright. In a
Week's Time he seduced me down to the Door. 
I found my Terror gradually lessened, but my Hatred
and Contempt seemed to increase. I was at
last bold enough to walk the Street in his Company,
but kept my Nose well stopped with Rue, or
sometimes with Tobacco. 
In ten Days, Don Pedro, to whom I had given
some Account of my domestick Affairs, put it upon
me as a Point of Honour and Conscience, that I
ought to return to my native Country, and live at
home with my Wife and Children. He told me,
there was an English Ship in the Port just ready to
sail, and he would furnish me with all things necessary. 
It would be tedious to repeat his Arguments,
and my Contradictions. He said, it was altogether 

impossible to find such a solitary Island as I
had desired to live in; but I might command in
my own House, and pass my time in a Manner as
recluse as I pleased. 
I complied at last, finding I could not do better. 
I left Lisbon the 24th Day of November, in
an English Merchant-man, but who was the Master
I never inquired. Don Pedro accompanied me to
the Ship, and lent me Twenty Pounds. He took
kind Leave of me, and embraced me at parting; 
which I bore as well as I could. During this last
Voyage I had no Commerce with the Master, or
any of his Men; but pretending I was sick kept
close in my Cabbin. On the Fifth of December,
1715, we cast Anchor in the Downs about Nine
in the Morning, and at Three in the Afternoon I
got safe to my House at Redriff. 
My Wife and Family received me with great
Surprize and Joy, because they concluded me certainly
dead; but I must freely confess, the Sight of
them filled me only with Hatred, Disgust and Contempt; 
and the more, by reflecting on the near
Alliance I had to them. For, although since my
unfortunate Exile from the Houyhnhnm Country, I
had compelled myself to tolerate the Sight of Yahoos,
and to converse with Don Pedro de Mendez;
yet my Memory and Imaginations were perpetually
filled with the Virtues and Ideas of those exalted
Houyhnhnms. And when I began to consider, that
by copulating with one of the Yahoo-Species, I had
become a Parent of more; it struck me with the
utmost Shame, Confusion and Horror. 
As soon as I entered the House, my Wife took
me in her Arms, and kissed me; at which, having 

not been used to the Touch of that odious Animal
for so many Years, I fell in a Swoon for almost an
Hour. At the Time I am writing, it is five Years
since my last Return to England: During the first
Year I could not endure my Wife or Children in
my Presence, the very Smell of them was intolerable; 
much less could I suffer them to eat in the
same Room. To this Hour they dare not presume
to touch my Bread, or drink out of the same Cup; 
neither was I ever able to let one of them take me
by the Hand. The first Money I laid out was to
buy two young Stone-Horses, which I keep in a
good Stable, and next to them the Groom is my
greatest Favourite; for I feel my Spirits revived by
the Smell he contracts in the Stable. My Horses
understand me tolerably well; I converse with
them at least four Hours every Day. They are
Strangers to Bridle or Saddle; they live in great
Amity with me, and Friendship to each other. 
