


Contains a most shocking instance of infidelity and ingratitude. 

Mademoiselle de Roquelair, on finding
how far the good nature of mrs.
Munden had made her interest herself in
her behalf, expressed the transports of
her gratitude in terms, which gave some
pain to the modesty of that lady to receive. 
—‘What I have done,’ said she,
‘is to promote the cause of virtue, and I
hope my endeavours that way, will not
be lost on your account.’ —‘You are
all goodness,’ replied the other, ‘but I
blush to think, that being already indebted
for so many favours, I must still 

become your petitioner for more;— 
though I have lived fifteen months in
this town, I am a perfect stranger to
the greatest part of it,—quite unacquainted
with its customs, and know
not where, and in what manner to address
myself for lodgings;—in the
midst of my distractions, I found shelter
under your hospitable roof;—may I
presume to flatter myself with the continuance
of that charitable protection,
till I receive an answer from mr.
Thoughtless.’ 
Mrs. Munden paused a little at this
request, but thinking it would be cruel
in this distress to have recourse to strangers,
and to whom she could communicate
nothing of her mind, made this reply,
—‘Though it would be highly inconvenient,
madam,’ said she, ‘for you to
remain in my house for any length of
time, yet as, in all probability, your
affairs will be determined in a few
days, I would not have you think of
leaving me, till you are prepared to
leave the kingdom;—please therefore,’ 
continued she, ‘to make an inventory of
what things you have at my brother's,
and I will give orders for their being
brought directly hither.’ 

Mademoiselle de Roquelair was beginning
to give some fresh testimonies of the
sense she had of this last obligation, but
mrs. Munden would not suffer her to
proceed, and pointing to a standish that
stood on the table, desired her to write
the memorandum she had mentioned;— 
‘Obedience, madam, is better than sacrifice,’ 
said the other, and immediately
did as she was directed;—after which,
mrs. Munden went down to give the
orders she had promised. 
She sent this inventory by her own
man, and instructed him to procure persons
for bringing thither every thing belonging
to mademoiselle de Roquelair; 
but as this could not be done, and that
lady dress'd, before the hour of dining,
which was just at hand, she judg'd it
improper she should appear at table, till
she could do so with greater decency;— 
she therefore bid one of the maids prepare
something apart, and serve it up to her in
her own chamber. 
She then began to consider what she
should say to mr. Munden in relation to
this affair;—she knew not but he might
already be apprized of what had passed,
or if even he were not so, she thought it 

would be impossible to keep her in the
house without his privity,—so resolved
to be quite open in the affair. 
She was right in her conjecture,— 
mademoiselle de Roquelair had happen'd
to ring the bell for something she wanted; 
—mr. Munden hearing it, and
knowing his wife was abroad, asked who
was above, and this question occasioned
the man, who was then dressing him, to
give him an account, as far as was in his
power to do, of the last night's accident. 
This a little surprized him, yet not
enough to keep him from the park, where
he constantly walked every day an hour
or two before dinner; but on his return,
he immediately interrogated his wife, concerning
her new guest: on which she
told him, without the least reserve, every
circumstance of this transaction:—he
listened attentively to what she said, but
testified neither any dislike, or approbation
of her conduct in this respect:— 
he said no more to her after she had done
speaking, but behaved with the same sullen
silence he had always done since her
adventure with Lord ****, and as soon
as dinner was over, went out to pass the
remainder of the day, and best part of
the night, according to custom. 

Mrs. Munden's good nature would not
suffer her to go abroad the whole afternoon,
—she passed all the hours till bedtime,
with mademoiselle de Roquelair,
and did every thing in her power, both
to comfort her in the affliction she was
under, and to fortify her in the good resolution
she seemed to have taken:— 
the next morning she received, as she expected,
the following billet from her
brother. 

To mrs. Munden.
“Dear Sister.
In compliance with your desires, and
to be certain of getting eternally
rid of the sight of a woman who has so
much abused the kindness I had for
her, I consent to grant her request of
being enabled to go into a monastery:
a friend of mine has great dealings with
a merchant at Boulogne,—I will see
him this afternoon, and pay into his
hands the sum which I am told is sufficient
for that purpose:—if you give
yourself the trouble to call on me tomorrow
morning, I will give you his
order for her receiving it on her arrival. 
—I cannot think of entering 

your house, while she is in it, but am
always, 
“Dear sister,
Your affectionate brother,
T. Thoughtless.” 

Mrs. Munden having imparted the
contents of this epistle to mademoiselle de
Roquelair, she seemed as much content,
as a person in her circumstances could
be; she dined below that day, and mr.
Munden treated her with the same politeness
and complaisance he always used
towards persons, over whom he had no
power. 
The next morning did not fail of carrying
his fair wife to her brother's, about
the hour, in which she imagined he would
expect her, but on the moment of her
entrance, she had the mortification of
being accosted by him in these terms,
‘My dear sister, said he,’ ‘I was just going
to send to you, to prevent your giving
yourself this needless trouble. — 
The gentleman I went to is out of town,
and will not return these two days; so
nothing can be done in this woman's
affair till he comes back.’ —She told
him she was extremely sorry, ‘because’ said 

she, ‘delays are sometimes dangerous:
but I hope, my dear brother, no second
considerations will make you frustrate
the good intentions of this unhappy penitent.’ 
—‘No, no,’ cried he, ‘I wish
she may persevere in them, as stedfastly
as I shall to the promise I have
made.’ Satisfied with this assurance,
she took her leave, little suspecting, while
she was labouring with all her might in
this good office, that cruel and ungenerous
return, which was about to be made
for her compassion. 
Mr. Munden had seen mademoiselle
de Roquelair no more than once, but that
once was sufficient to make him become
enamoured;—her beauty fired him,— 
the known wantonness of her inclinations
encouraged him,—he scarce doubted of
success, but in case of failure, and if she
should even acquaint his wife with his attempt,
her character furnished him with
the pretence of having made it only to
try how far her conversion was sincere. 
He therefore hesitated not a moment
if he should endeavour the accomplishments
of his desires, and for the doing
so, no time was to be lost, as she was so
suddenly to depart, Mrs. Munden was
no sooner gone out, than he went softly 

up stairs to the chamber of this too lovely
and less more virtuous stranger; she was
sitting in a pensive posture, leaning her
head upon her hand, when he came in,
but rose to receive him with that respect,
which she thought due from her to the
husband of her protectress. 
After the salutations of the morning
were over, ‘Is it possible,’ cried he, taking
one of her hands, and looking earnestly
on her face, ‘that such youth, such
beauty, charms in such profusion, should
be condemned to a cloyster!—no, it
can never be,—all the powers of love
and pleasure, forbid you to make so unnatural
a choice.’ —Transported and
amazed at hearing him speak in this
manner, she could not forbear telling him
with her eyes, that her thoughts corresponded
with his words, but willing her
tongue should preserve the decency of
the character she had assumed, at least
till he should make a farther declaration
of his sentiments;—‘If I were indeed,’ 
answered she, ‘all that can be described
of beautiful, I could not sure be an offering
too amiable for heaven.’ 
‘Heaven never gave you these perfections,’ 
resumed he, ‘to be concealed
in a dark, lonesome cell;—those melting 

lips of yours were never formed to
kiss the feet of a cold lifeless image, or
pour forth oraisons to unhearing saints,
but to make blest some warm—some
happy he, who knows, and has the
power of returning the raptures they
bestow.’ —These last words were attended
with such vehement and repeated
pressures of the lips he praised, as left her
no room to doubt the aim of his desires,
as did the manner of receiving them, also
convince him of his success. 
‘But are you in earnest resolved to be a
nun?’ replied he: ‘Since fate will have
it so,’ replied she, with a deep sigh,
and a look so languishing, and so sweet,
as pierced his very soul:—‘Make me
your fate then,’ cried he impatiently,— 
‘be mine, and not all the saints in the
kalender shall snatch you from me;’— 
‘You are then, you must be my fate,’ 
said she, returning his embrace with
equal eagerness,—‘you have the power
of fate, and are no less resistless,— 
henceforth I'll seek no other heaven,
but your love, your breast my altar,
and your arms my cell.’ 
It will be easily supposed, that after
this, she refused no liberties he thought
fit to take:—nothing but the last favour 

was wanting to compleat his wishes,
and to that he would not venture to proceed,
for fear of an interruption, but they
agreed to meet at the Portuguese ambassador's
chapel at six o'clock that same
evening. Mutual kisses and embraces
having sealed the covenant, he went down
to dress, and left her to compose her
countenance against mrs. Munden's return. 
This very wicked woman, who had
never any real thoughts of going into a
monastery, and only intended to appropriate
the money she expected from mr.
Thoughtless, to such uses as might induce
some man of fortune to make choice
of her for a mistress, now gave herself
little pain, whether he granted her request
or not, imagining she had found in mr.
Munden all she wished for, or could hope
in a gallant. 
She affected, however, to mrs. Munden,
to be under some concern for this
delay of her intended journey, but said,
she would employ the time she staid, in
such acts of devotion, as should best prepare
her to become a member of that sacred
society, which she soon hoped to be
among: ‘I have not been,’ added she,
‘for a long time at confession, but I 

will go this afternoon, and ease my
conscience of its load of guilt.’ 
Thus impiously did she prophane the
name of religion, by making it the veil
to cover the most shameful depravities of
nature. —On the arrival of the appointed
hour, with looks of sanctity, and a
heart full of impurity, she hasted to the
place of rendezvous; the punctual mr.
Munden waited for her at the chapel
door, and conducted her where they had
all the freedom they could wish of indulging
their vicious inclinations. 
They broke off this first amorous intercourse
much sooner than either of them
desired; mademoiselle de Roquelair not
being able to find a plausible excuse to
make to mrs. Munden for staying beyond
the time, which her pretended devotions
might be reasonably supposed to take up; 
but to attone for this misfortune, a stratagem
was contrived between them, not
only for their meeting next day, but also
for their continuing together a much
longer time,—it was this. 
She told mrs Munden, that the reverend
father, to whom she had confessed,
informed her, that a young lady of a very
worthy family in England, having passed 

her year of probation at a monastery at
Bologne, and returned hither only to take
an eternal leave of her friends, and of the
world, was now just ready to go back,
in order to be initiated:—‘To this family,’ 
added she, ‘the good father has
offered to introduce me tomorrow, and
if the young lady approves of my being
the companion of her voyage, as he assures
me she certainly will, how happy
shall I think myself.’ 
The truth of all this not being suspected
by mrs. Munden, she congratulated
her upon it; it is easy to deceive
the innocent,—but it must be owned,
this wicked woman had subtilty enough
to have imposed on a person more skilled
in the artifices of the world, than was
the amiable lady on whom she practised
it. 
But not to detain the reader's attention
on so ungrateful a subject, I shall only
say, that one assignation was still productive
of another, and the credulity of
the injured wife served only as a matter
of mirth to the transgressing husband, and
his guilty partner. 
But now the time was come when these
subterfuges must necessarily be at an end, 

or become too gross not to be seen thro'. 
Mr. Thoughtless had seen his friend,— 
had paid the money into his hands, and
received a bill from him on the merchant
at Bologne; when he delivered it
to mrs. Munden,—‘Sister,’ said he.
‘this paper will entitle your guest to the
receipt of three hundred louis-d'ors, on
her arrival at Bologne, but I expect you
will oblige her to depart immediately,
for it is neither consistent with your reputation
to keep her in your house,
nor with my peace of mind, that she
should continue in the kingdom.’ To
which she replied with a smile, ‘That
there was nothing more certain than that
his commands in this point would be
punctually obeyed.’ 
This lady was rejoiced at having accomplished
what she thought so good a
work; but having perceived in mademoiselle
de Roquelair some abatement of
her first eagerness for a religious life, she
thought proper on giving her the bill to
repeat to her the words her brother had
said on that account; to which the other
cooly answered, ‘Your brother, madam,
need be under no apprehensions of my
offending him in this point, or giving
you any farther trouble.’ 

This, though no more than what the
lovers expected, was yet a dreadful shock
to them both: great part of the time they
were together that evening, was taken up
in talking of it; mademoiselle de Roquelair
protested, that death was less cruel
than being torn from her dear Munden
thus early,—thus in the infancy of their
happiness; and gave some hints, that she
wished he would hire private lodgings
for her; but she knew little of the temper
of the man she had to deal with:— 
he loved her as a mistress, but hated the
expence of keeping her as a mistress, he
therefore evaded all discourse on that
head, and told her that he fancied that
by pretences, such as already had been
made, she might still continue in the
house,—‘means at least,’ said he, ‘may
be found out to protract our mutual
misfortune, and give us more time to
consider what we have to do.’ 
She agreed, however, to make the experiment,
and poor mrs. Munden was
imposed upon by some new invention
from one day to another, for upwards of
a week, but at last beginning to fear there
was something more at the bottom of
these delays than was pretended, and her
brother having sent twice in that time, to 

know if his desires had been complied
with, she resolved at once to put a period
to inconveniences, which she thought
she could so easily get rid of. 
Mademoiselle de Roquelair having
stayed abroad extremely late one night,
she took the opportunity of her having
done so, of speaking more plainly to her
than her good-nature and complaisance
had hitherto permitted her to do;—she
went up to her chamber next morning,
and with an air which had something of
severity in it,—‘You keep odd hours,
madam,’ said she, ‘for a person who
affects to be so great a penitent; but I
suppose you are now prepared to ease
me of all concern on your account:— 
I shall trouble you no longer,’ cried the
other, ‘till the young lady I told you
of is ready to depart.’ —‘You will do
well,’ resumed mrs. Munden, ‘to remain
with her till she is so, for, madam,
I must insist on your removal
hence this day.’ —‘You will not turn
me out of doors?’ cried mademoiselle
de Roquelair. —‘I hope you will not
oblige me to an act, so contrary to
my nature,’ replied mrs. Munden. — 
‘Say rather contrary to your power,’ returned
that audacious woman, and coming
up to her with the most unparelelled 

assurance, ‘This house, which you forbid
me,’ pursued she, ‘I think mr.
Munden is the master of, and I shall
therefore continue in it till my convenience
call me from it, or he shall tell
me I am no longer welcome.’ 
Impossible is it to describe, and difficult
even to conceive mrs. Munden's
astonishment at these words:—to hear a
woman thus doubly loaded with guilt
and obligations,—a woman, who but a few
days past had been prostrate at her feet,
imploring pity and protection, now all
at once ungratefully contemning the benefits
she had received, and insolently
defying the authority to which she had
flown for shelter;—all this must certainly
give a shock almost beyond the
strength of human reason to sustain. — 
‘Mr. Munden,’ cried the injured fair
one, with a voice hardly intelligible,
‘Mr. Munden!’ she could utter no
more, but flew down stairs with such rapidity
that her feet scarce touched the
steps. 
Mr. Munden was not quite ready to
go out,—she found him in his dressingroom,
and throwing herself into a chair,
half suffocated with passion, related to
him, as well as she was able, the manner 

in which she had been treated; to which
he replied, with a good deal of peevishness,
‘Prithee do not trouble me with
these idle stories,—Mademoiselle de
Roquelair is your guest,—I have no
concern in your little quarrels.’ —‘I
hope,’ said she, ‘you will do me that
justice which every wife has a right to
expect, and convince that French hypocrite,
that I am too much the mistress
of this house for any one to remain
in it without my permission.’ — 
‘So you would make me the dupe of
your resentment,’ resumed he scornfully,
‘but positively I shall not do a
rude thing to oblige you, or any body
else.’ —In speaking these words, having
now adjusted his dress, he flung out
of the room, without giving her time to
add any thing farther on a subject he was
wholly unprepared to answer. 
What perplexing whirl of wild imaginations
must such a behaviour from a
husband excite in a wife, conscious of having
done nothing to provoke it:— 
happy was it for her that love had the
least share in her resentment;—all her
indifference could not enable her to support,
with any degree of patience, so
palpable a contempt;—she returned directly 

to her own chamber, where
shutting herself up, she gave a loose to
agitations too violent for words to represent. 
