

If there were a Possibility that the
Warmth and Vigour of Youth cou'd
be temper'd with a due Consideration,
and the Power of judging
rightly, how easy were it to avoid
the Ills which most of us endure? 
How few would be unhappy? With
what Serenity might the Noon of Life glide on, could
we account with Reason for our Morning Actions! 
We hear, indeed, daily Complaints of the Cruelty of
Fate; but if we examine the Source, we shall find
almost all the Woes we languish under are self-caus'd; 
and that either to pursue the Gratification of some
unruly Passion, or shun the Performance of an incumbent
Duty, those Misfortunes which so fill the World
derive their Being, and would more justly merit Condemnation
than Compassion, were not the Fault too universal. 

Don Bernardo de Bellsache, a Nobleman of Venice,
had a Daughter whom he esteem'd the Blessing of his
Age; and had her Conduct been such as might have
been expected from the Elegance of her Genius, and
the Improvements of Education, which his Fondness
had indulg'd her in, she had indeed been the Wonder
of her Sex. Imagination cannot form a Face more
exquisitely lovely; such Majesty, such Sweetness, such
a Regularity in all her Features, accompany'd with
an Air at once so soft, so striking, that while she commanded
she allur'd, and forc'd what she entreated. 
Nor was her Shape and Mien less worthy Admiration; 
it was impossible for any Thing to be more
exactly proportion'd than the former; and for the latter,
it had a Grace peculiar to itself: The least and most
careless Motion of her Head or Hand, was sufficient
to captivate a Heart. In fine, her Charms were so
infinitely above Description, that it was necessary to
see her, to have any just Notion of her. ––––But,
alas! to what End serv'd all this Beauty, these uncommon
Qualifications, but to make her more remarkably
unhappy? She had a Wit, which gain'd her
no fewer Adorers than her other Perfections; yet
not enough to defend her from the Assaults of almost
every Passion human Nature is liable to fall into. 
The Greatness of her Spirit (which from her Childhood
had been untameable, or was render'd so thro'
the too-great Indulgence of her doating Parents)
made her unable to endure Controul, disdainful of
Advice, obstinate, and peremptory in following her
own Will to what Extremes soever it led her: The
Consequence of such a Disposition could not be expected
to be very fortunate, but it brought on her
such dreadful Inconveniencies, as all who find in themselves
the least Propensity to be of such a Humour,
ought to tremble at the Repetition of, and exert their
utmost Reason to extirpate. 
IDALIA (for that was the Name of this lovely
Inconsiderate) had no sooner arriv'd at her fourteenth
Year, than she attracted the Eyes of all the 

young Noblemen of Venice; scarce a Heart but sigh'd
for her: The Shrine of our Blessed Lady of Loretto
was never throng'd with greater Numbers of Religious
Devotees than Don Bernardo's House was by
those of the Young and Gay; and happy did they
think themselves, whose Birth or Fortune gave them
any just Cause to hope the Pretensions they brought
would be an Offering worth Acceptance. There
were some too, (as no Climate is barren of Fops)
who had the Vanity, without either of these Advantages,
to promise themselves Success; of this last
Number was Florez, one, who, if he had not been
possess'd with more Assurance than is ordinarily to
be found even among the most Tenacious, would
not have presumed, tho' his Passion had been really
as violent as he endeavour'd to make it appear, to
have declared it. He was descended from a Family,
in which there never had been one whose Actions had
entitled him to bear Arms; the Height of his Parent's
Ambition had been to prefer him, when a Child, to
be Page to Don Ferdinand, Nephew to the Doge. 
With this young Nobleman he had travell'd; and all
the Education he was Master of was owing to this
Advantage, as was the Post he possess'd in the
Army, to his Favour: For being naturally of a designing
sordid Disposition, by falling in with all his Humours,
promoting his Pleasures, and flattering his
Vices, he had wound himself so much into the good
Will of his Lord, that he refused him nothing. The
Intimacy with which he was treated by so great a
Man, and the sudden Elevation of his Fortune, join'd
to some fulsome Praises of his Beauty, and fine Wit,
which those Women, who are paid for their Favours,
generally lavish on the Person who makes Choice of
them, gave him so good an Opinion of his own Merit,
that he thought it an Impossibility for any Woman
to be insensible of it; and look'd on the Attainment of
Idalia, notwithstanding the Multitude of her Admirers,
and the vast Possessions she was likely to be
Mistress of, as a Thing not at all difficult. 

But whatever he imagin'd to himself, Bernardo
had Sentiments quite different from these: He no
sooner discover'd his Design, than he forbad him his
House in Terms which sufficiently told him he was
in Earnest, and chid his Daughter for entertaining a
Proposal so unsuitable to her Birth, with more Sharpness
than the Manner in which he had ever behaved
to her, could give her Leave to think was in his Nature:
But as the Vanity and unthinking Pride which
sway'd the Actions of this young Lady had shew'd
itself in the encouraging all who pretended to admire
her, of what Degree soever they were, so now the
Obstinacy of her Humour began to appear, in the
Uneasiness she felt at her Father's Commands, never
to see Florez more. Amidst the Multiplicity of her
Adorers, she thought herself undone to miss the Addresses
of a single Votary, and could not bear to lose
the Conversation of a Man whose Eyes and Tongue
were perfectly skill'd in the Art of Flattery and Dissimulation,
and had given her so many Informations
of her Power. And wholly leaving herself to the
Dictates of her Impatience, grew almost distracted
to think she was debarr'd the Enjoyment of any
Thing she found a Pleasure in. She began immediately
to lessen her Regard for her too-long indulgent
Father, which by degrees ripen'd to a Contempt
of him, and ended in a Resolution to act in
every Thing according to her Inclinations, without
giving herself any Pain how far it would be consonant
to his. 
In this ruinous Disposition it came into her Head
to write to Florez; not that she was really in love
with him, or had yet any Notion of that Passion; 
but Vanity, that reigning Faculty of her Soul, prompted
her to use her utmost Efforts for the retrieving a Heart
she began to fear was estranged. And indeed, this
Conjecture was not in the least unreasonable; for
had he, in Sincerity, been so entirely devoted to her
as he had once endeavour'd to perswade her he was,
Love, always fruitful in Invention, would have furnish'd 

him with some Stratagem, either to have seen her,
or convey'd a Letter to her; for some Weeks had
pass'd between the Time of his being forbid his Visits,
and that in which she writ. She did not fail to upbraid
him with his Coldness; but withal let him
know she had good Nature enough to pardon it; desired
an Answer; and that for the future, if she was
really happy enough to retain any Place in his Remembrance,
he would let no Day escape without
giving her some Assurances of it. In short, no Woman,
who felt the severest Pangs of desperate dying
Love, could write more passionately, or express a
greater Concern at being abandon'd by the Man her
Soul was fond of, than what the Spirit of Coquetry
taught the Pen of the inconsiderate Idalia. She concluded
her Epistle with a hearty Wish, Grant Heaven!
(said she to herself,) that I may once more have him
in my Power to use him as I please, let the Consequence
be what it will. She bribed a Servant to deliver it,
and bring an Answer back: But the Uneasiness she
was in till the Return of her Messenger was such,
as whoever had been witness of, could not have imagin'd
to have sprung from any other Source than
Love. But to such a Degree does the immoderate
Love of Praise transport some People, that to lose
any Opportunity of receiving it, is a Torment equal
to that which others feel in a Disappointment of the
most essential Blessings. 
The Return of her Emissary brought but little
Ease to the Suspence she had endur'd while he was
gone: Florez, indeed, had sent by him; but his Letter
appear'd so different from those she had formerly receiv'd
from him, that the Hand was all that shew'd
'em writ by the same Person. A Penetration like
her's could easily discern the Alteration; she found the
Style was forc'd, formal, and affected; and where he
said he still continu'd to adore her, and should never
cease to do so, it was in such a Manner as plainly
shew'd his Heart had no Part in dictating such Expressions. 
And, in truth, never Woman was more 

disappointed in her Aim, than was this Lady: In
spite of the Attractions she was Mistress of, Florez
had either an Insensibility of them, or had Resolution
enough to withstand the Emotions of his Tenderness,
whenever he found 'em contrary to his Interest. 
'Tis probable, by what after ensu'd, that a Daughter
of Don Bernardo's, tho' never so disagreeable, would
have had Charms sufficient to have retain'd his Adorations; 
but Idalia, all lovely as she was, without the
Addition of that Fortune her Father's Consent must
give, had no longer any Charms to hold him. 
'Tis easy to imagine it was no small Shock to
her Pride, to find the Advances she had made were
receiv'd with no more Warmth: But suffering all
Consideration to be wholly drown'd in the o'erflowing
Folly which at present possess'd her, she continued
daily by Letters to give him Occasion to believe
there was nothing on Earth so desirable as his
Conversation; and that it was not impossible she might
be prevail'd on to become his Wife, tho' by it she
should lose a Father But there was not the least Pressure
in any of his Answers, which testified he wish'd
she should run so great a Risque. This so nettled her,
that at last, 'tis probable, she would have look'd upon
him, as indeed he was, a Conquest far unworthy of
the Pains she had taken. She was just beginning to
give over all Thoughts of him, when her ill Fate,
taking the Advantage of the Baseness of his Nature,
and the unaccountable Fantastickness of her's, gave a
sudden Turn to this Adventure, which was to terminate
in her utter Undoing. 
If there can be any Thing to be alledg'd in the
Defence of Vanity, the fair Idalia, on the Account of
her Youth, her beauty, Birth, and Fortune, had certainly
more to plead in her Behalf, than where there
were none of these Advantages: Florez, who had
nothing distinguishably valuable either in his Person
or Accomplishments, and was of a Sex in which that
Foible is far less excusable than in the weaker, had
yet as large a Share: He could not imagine himself 

belov'd by a Woman so admired by all the World,
without communicating the Secret. To those Insensibles
all the Pleasure of an Amour consists in the Reputation
of it: To be accounted well in the Esteem of
a Person of ordinary Qualifications, yields them infinitely
more Satisfaction than the real Enjoyment of
one of the most Excellent could do. It is not therefore
to be wonder'd at, that a Man, who had neither
Love nor Honour to restrain him, triumph'd in an
Affair like this: He could not hear the Charms. of
Idalia mention'd, without letting the Company know
how much it was in his Power to become Master of
them; and to prove the Truth of what he said, expos'd
her Letters, those fatal and undisputable Testimonials
of her Folly. Few that had any Acquaintance
with him, were Strangers to his Happiness; 
but none more envy'd his good Fortune than his Patron
Don Ferdinand. This young Lord was of a
Disposition exceeding amorous: He long had view'd
Idalia with those Desires which it was common for
her to inspire; but finding in himself not the least Propensity
to Marriage, and believing it impossible to obtain
her by any other Means, had endeavour'd to stifle
the hopeless Passion by other Amusements; till hearing
the Condescensions she had made to one whom he
had so much Power over, he immediately had it in
his Thoughts to make use of it for the Gratification
of his Wishes. There needed but little Ceremony in
the communicating his Design to a Person so much
his Creature; nor durst Florez, if he had had an Inclination,
oppose what he required; but on the contrary,
he was glad of an Opportunity of serving him
in a Manner which would so considerably advance his
Interest with him. It was presently agreed between
them, that he, the favour'd Lover, should write to
Idalia in the most passionate and moving strain imaginable,
assuring her, That nothing was so insupportable
as the Pangs of Absence; that he died to see her; 
and intreat her to grant him that Favour at the House
of a particular Friend, whom he mention'd in the 

Letter, and gave her Directions how to find it. This
Epistle being dictated by the impatient Wishes of the amorous
Ferdinand, had infinitely more Force of Perswasion 
in it, than any Thing the Insensible Florez
could have said without his Assistance; and they both
promised themselves it would succeed as they would
have it, to engage her to come to the Place appointed
for the Assignation; which was a House where
they had frequently rioted in those dissolute Enjoyments
Youth is too prone to be fond of, and the
People who liv'd in it entirely at the Devotion of
Don Ferdinand. 
By this cursed Contrivance was the rash unthinking
Idalia betray'd: She receiv'd the fraudulent Mandate,
swallow'd the well-dress'd artful Flattery it contain'd
with a prodigious deal of Pleasure, and return'd
an Answer of Consent. Not that she was
without a Thought at the Liberty he took in naming
a Place of Assignation, since it had been much more
agreeable to the Venetian Address, to have watch'd
her coming out, follow'd her to Church, or any
other publick Place, and at an humble Distance gaz'd
upon her: But she imputed his Boldness to the Violence
of his Passion; and having no other Design than to
make him the Slave of her Beauty, resolv'd to see
him, the better to secure her Conquest, and punish
him hereafter by her Contempt and Coldness, for his
present Presumption. 
Adorn'd, and every Charm illustrated with all
the Aids of Art, assur'd of Victory, and already exulting
with a prideful Scorn for the Triumphs of her
Eyes, she set out, under the Pretence of going to
Vespers, attended only by one Servant; whom she sent
back immediately to fetch her Beads, which she told
him she had forgot; and as soon as she saw herself
at Liberty, turn'd another way, and went directly to
the Place appointed. 'Twas easy for her to find the
House, the good Woman of it waited at the Door for
her Approach, and conducted her in: But 'tis hard to
say whether her Astonishment or Fear was most 

predominant, when, instead of Florez she found herself
accosted by Don Ferdinand. Glad would she have
been to have had it in her Power to have gone back; 
and pretending to have come in only through Mistake,
would fain have struggled to the Door. No, lovely
Creature, cry'd the o'er-joy'd Ferdinand, (who guessing
what her Intent wou'd be, had taken care to hold
fast both her Hands,) to what good Star soever I am indebted
for this Blessing, I should prove myself strangely
unworthy of it, could I so easily be brought to quit it. –––– 
I long have languish'd with a Passion great as your own
unequal'd Charms, and for an Opportunity to tell you
so, wou'd have hazarded more than my Life. ––––Hear
it then now with Patience, nor hate the Man who aims
at no higher Happiness from your Favour, than to be
pitied, and forgiven. These last Words dissipated great
Part of the Terror she had been in; and reassuming
that Air of Haughtiness which her Disorders had a
a little abated, I know not, my Lord, answer'd she,
whether I should consider what you have said to me as
the Effects of Gaiety, or Sincerity: If to the former, I
ought not to resent it, because few Men but would have
behav'd in the same manner to a Woman whom Chance
had so unexpectedly thrown in their way: But if to the
latter, when future Services shall testify it, I owe more
to the Quality and Merits of Don Ferdinand, than not
to acknowledge myself oblig'd to his Regard. You are
divinely good, resum'd the other, and I hope, since I
am but too sensible, whatever Accident occasion'd me
this Happiness, it was not Chance, but the Design of
meeting a more favour'd Lover brought you here, you
will permit me to entertain you with the History of my
Passion, at least till his Approach shall cut me off. 
That Serenity which had so lately return'd to
the Soul of Idalia, at hearing this, again forsook her; 
she had no room to doubt the Secret of her Correspondence
with Florez was discover'd: And, in a
Moment, had a thousand various Conjectures by what
means, but had too great an Opinion of her own
Power, and his Passion, to hit upon the right. She 

was silent for some time, not knowing whether it
was best to confess, or deny the Truth of what he
alledg'd; at last, reflecting on the Confidence with
which Don Ferdinand had spoke, was an Evidence
he was assured of it; and that the coming of Florez,
whom she expected every Moment, would render all
she could say ineffectual, concluded on acknowledging
the Reality; but withal told him, as she very
well. might, that it was not to gratify any other
Passion than the Love of a little unmeaning Gallantry
in her Humour, which had moved her to consent to
such a Meeting. This Declaration seem'd to transport
the Soul of him 'twas made to; and he continued
to address her with so much elegant Tenderness,
and lively Assurances of the Influence of her Charms,
that the Conversation would have afforded her an Infinity
of Satisfaction, had it been at any other Time
and Place; but the Disrespect she imagin'd herself
treated with by the Delay of Florez, poison'd the Felicity
which else the gaining a new Adorer of Don
Ferdinand's Rank would have given her: She sat for
a considerable Time divided between Pain and Pleasure,
till it growing late, and not knowing what Excuse
to make for being so long miss'd at home, she
rose to take her leave: But, alas! she was now in a
Place whence it was not usual for one of her Sex to
return as they came in, and in the Power of one who
was not of a Humour to put a Constraint on his Inclinations. 
She soon perceiv'd the fatal Truth, and now
condemn'd the indiscreet Hazard she had run, resolv'd
in her Mind never to be guilty of the like, and
begg'd of Heaven to protect her Honour, and inspire
her with some Artifice with which she might elude
the Danger which so imminently threaten'd her. 
But what Miseries sometimes does one rash Action
bring on the whole Series of Life? Repentance,
and a sudden Abhorrence of that Vanity which had
led her into this Snare, were now in vain: Her evil
Genius watch'd this Point of Time, when every
friendly Planet was oppress'd, and only raging Influences 

govern'd, to ruin her, at once, for ever. At
first, with Sighs, with Tears, with humble Adorations,
the amorous Ferdinand sought to melt her into
Kindness; but they failing, the burning Passion threw
off all Restraint, his every Action spoke his Resolution,
and told her he would not be denied. ––––Plainly
she read it in his fiery Eyes, and felt it in his eager
Graspings. ––––The Reader's Imagination here can
only form an Idea of that Confusion, that mingled
Rage and Horror, which, at this dreadful Exigence,
fill'd the Soul of the unhappy Idalia! 'Tis not in Words
to represent it! ––––Sometimes, disdainful of the injurious
Attempt, her stormy Anger vented itself in
Curses; but then remembering how little she had the
Power of resisting whatever his wild Desires might
prompt him to commit, she sunk to milder Treatment,
wept, begg'd him to desist:––––Prayers,–––– 
Threat'nings,––––Entreaties, and Revilings, alternately
succeeded, as the different Agitations rose in her
Breast, till at last she had no Breath to utter either. 
Her Spirits, fatigued with this unusual Hurry, and all
her Limbs tir'd in the Struggle with such unequal
Strength, she fainted as he held her in his Arms. As
much bent as he was on making himself Master of
his Wishes, he could not resolve to indulge them
so far as to take any immodest Advantage of this
Opportunity; but endeavouring by gentle Means to
bring her to herself, and expressing the most tender
Concern imaginable for the Disorder he had occasion'd
her, she began, at the Return of Thought, to hope
his Sentiments were chang'd; and falling on her
Knees the Moment she recover'd, O my Lord, said
she, if Honour, Love, or Pity, have any Influence over
your Soul, by that I wou'd conjure you to forbear to
fright a wretched Maid, whom Inadvertency has thrown
into your Power. Permit me to depart uninjur'd, unpolluted,
and here I swear by every Thing that's sacred, of
all your Sex you shall be dearest to me. ––––O moving
Words, interrupted Ferdinand! What Wonders may they
not inforce? Is it then possible that you do not hate me?––– 

But, continued he with a Sigh, how full of Vanity
must I be to credit them? ––––No, Madam, no, the Artifice
is plain; you fear my Power, and would delude
my Wishes by a false Hope; but know I love too well,
too violently, to leave ought to hereafter, which this
Moment may bestow. –––If you would have me think
you mean my Happiness, give me an instant Proof:–––– 
Now make me blest, and I shall feed Imagination with
Hope of future Favours. ––––In speaking this, he
mingled some Freedoms, which left but little Room
to hope that any Thing could save her; yet, thinking
still to sooth him would be the most effectual Way,
O Heavens! resum'd she, (struggling with all her
Force,) will you not then allow something to my Sex's
Modesty? Time and Assiduity may make me yours, and
spare you the Guilt of Force. ––––He would not suffer
her to proceed, but renewing his Pressures, To wait
a slow Consent, said he, would little suit the Violence
of a Passion, such as I profess. The God of Love disdains
all dull Delays:––––Swiftly the zealous Votary
rushes on his Wish, and baffles Opposition; cuts off, at
once, Sighs, Tears, Entreaties, all the Repulses that
stubborn Virtue or Affectation inspire in the relentless
Fair, and proves the Deity indeed, Almighty. ––––Believe
me, lovely Maid, the whining Wretch who sues at
slavish Distance, dies at your Feet, nor dares aspire to
seize what Passion aims at, is but in Shew a Lover, the
Flame he boasts enervate, weak, and spiritless, like his
Attacks; but I by Deeds shall testify how much–––– 
How much thou art a Villian, (cried Idalia, transported,
at once, with Horror, Shame, and Rage,) thou Monster!
thou brutal Ravisher! But since thou hast lost all
Regard due to thy own Honour, and my Birth and
Fame, die, (continued she, snatching a Dagger, which,
his upper Garment flying open in the Struggle, just
then discover'd itself,) die by her Hand whom thou so
basely dost attempt to wrong. It was as much as he
could do, by leaping lightly from her, to ward the
Blow her Indignation had design'd. It would have
been easy for him to have wrested it from her afterwards; 

but she perceiving his Intent, turn'd the Point
to her own Breast, and invoking all the Saints and
Angels to be Witnesses of her Vow, swore she would
strike it thro' her Heart the Moment he attempted to
disarm her. No, barbarous Man, (pursu'd she,) whatever
mistaken Notions the Levity and fond Belief of
some of our weak Sex may have inspired thee with,
thou now shalt find there's one among us who dares
meet Death to fly Dishonour. ––––Since deaf to all the
Considerations of my noble Family, and Bernado's Power,
behold and tremble at my Virtue's Bravery:––––Blest
now with Means to escape thy vile Design, I can no
longer fear thee, nor need debase my just Disdain so far
as to entreat thee. The Fire which now darted from
her Eyes, the assured Accent of her Voice, and the
resolute Air of all her Motions, sufficiently declared
she would make no scruple of fulfilling the Protestation
she had made. Don Ferdinand was too sensibly
alarm'd at it, to put it to the Venture, but immediately
form'd a Stratagem which seem'd more likely
to succeed: Making use, therefore, of that Dissimulation
which those who study the undoing Art are
so well vers'd in, he dress'd his Eyes and Face in
Looks far different from those they lately wore; 
an humble Admiration now seem'd to take up
all his Thoughts, and aw'd Desire seem'd fearful to
appear: He prostrated himself before her, acknowledged
the Temerity of his Attempt, conjured her
either to forgive him, or plunge the Dagger where
she first design'd it, swore he would not live in her
Displeasure; and accompanied all he said with so many
Sighs, and such well-counterfeited Contrition, that
either her Vanity, (which often inclines Women too
readily to pardon those Faults which they imagine
caused by the Force of their own Charms, and the
Violence of the Lover's Passion,) her good Nature,
or perhaps a secret Liking of his Person, made it impossible
for her to deny what he so earnestly entreated. 
The Grant, however, was not without Limitation; 
she forgave all he had done, but on Condition 

he never should repeat it, and that he would
not oppose her immediate Return to her Father's
House. Far be it from my Thoughts, replied the artful
Ferdinand; this Moment would I deny my fond
gazing Eyes the Joy of looking on you, had I not yet
one Request to make, which, if refused, I have no more
to do but die. What is it? said Idalia. After having
obtain'd a Pardon for your injurious Design upon my
Honour, it must be something beyond what I can comprehend
that I should think difficult to grant. Love
ever is accompanied with Fears, resum'd he; and that it
is something relating to that, the Terrors I am in to ask
it, may inform you. Let me conjure you, then, by all that
heavenly Softness in your Disposition, to tell me, and
tell me truly, (for fain would I flatter my ambitious
Wishes with a Hope my Services, in time, might move
you,) if I can gain your noble Father's Leave to make
my humble Application, will you consent to hear me? 
Is not there something in my Form or Manner, which
will repel the soft Efforts of Love? ––––O speak! (continued
he, perceiving she was silent,) I dread the
Certainty, yet am unable to endure the Tortures of
Suspence. ––––I know not, answer'd she, blushing, if it
be consistent with a Virgin's Modesty, to answer a Demand
like this, but something sure must be allow'd to
the Quality and Merits of Don Ferdinand; nor will
my Sex condemn my easy Nature, when to such exalted
Accomplishments I throw off Affectation, and confess I
shall, with Pride and Pleasure, listen to the Vows my
Father shall command me to receive from you. 
Tho' nothing could be more distant from the Soul
of Don Ferdinand than the Design of solliciting Bernardo
on any such Account, yet the feigning it was
of infinite Service to gain Time, which was all he
wanted. Examining the Hours, they found the
Night was so far spent, that Idalia was at her Wit's
End to think what Excuse she should make for her
long Absence. Ferdinand taking the Advantage of
her Fear, Madam, said he, tho' I much doubt all I
can say, after the Presumption I have been guilty of, 

will be suspected, I would advise you not to go home
till Morning: You will have Time enough by then to
think of something plausible to allay your Father's
Concern;––––or you may go early to some Lady
of your Acquaintance, and engage her to pretend you
have been with her all Night. ––––Till then, this House
is at your Devotion; you shall be serv'd in all you command; 
and, to prevent your Fears of my relapsing into
my late Error, I will myself go out of it. What cannot
an artful Dissimulation engage one to? Idalia
believed him now so entirely her Convert, that what
he counsell'd did not in the least alarm her; and the
good Opinion she now had of him, and the Uncertainty
in what Manner she could excuse herself at
home, made her willing to accept it. She had a
little Shock, however, at lying at a House, which,
by the Liberties Don Ferdinand had taken in it, she
could not imagine to be held by People of Honour; 
but the seeming penitent Lover removing that Scruple
by assuring her that they were so much at his
Devotion, that as soon as they saw there was an Alteration
in his Humour, theirs would immediately
acquiesce, she at last consented to remain there till
Morning; but told him, she expected the Performance
of his Promise of going away himself. Madam,
(answered he,) not all the Reluctance I feel in myself
at quitting the Roof where all my Hopes are treasur'd,
shall oblige me to disobey you. I go this Moment; and
that no needless Fears may disturb the Repose I wish
you, I entreat you will see me from the Door, and take
with you the Key, which alone could be the Passport to
admit me here again. Idalia was so well pleas'd with
the Care he express'd of her Quiet, that she again, at
his Entreaty, confirm'd the Pardon she had already
granted, and took leave of him, with a Countenance
which testified her Words were in no way contradictory
to her Heart. 
After his Departure, having taken the Key, as he
desired her to do, into her Possession, she suffer'd herself
to be conducted by the People of the House into 

a Chamber, and was not long before she went to
Bed: But it was impossible for Sleep to have any
Power over her; Imagination was too busy to suffer
the dull God's Approach; the Pleasure she took in
being admir'd was too much rooted in her Nature,
for the late Danger it had brought her into, to eraze; 
and the Joy of having an Adorer, such as Don Ferdinand,
made full Amends for the Frights some Part of
his Behaviour had put her in. From this Contemplation,
which afforded her only Delight, she fell into one
altogether as vexatious, which was the Neglect that Florez
had treated her with, in not coming to the Place he
had appointed her to be at; and if she could have believed
it possible for any Man, who had seen her, to
resign her to a Rival, she would not have been a
Stranger to the Truth; for she, as well as all who had
Acquaintance with him, was sensible of the Obligations
he had to Ferdinand. But this was the last
Reason she could form; it was not without the greatest
Difficulty in the World she could bring herself to any
Notion of it, and perhaps should have found out
some other Motive for his Behaviour, less disagreeble
to her to believe, if her Cogitations had not
met with an Interruption she was far from thinking
of. 
She had look'd on herself as safe where she now
was, as in her Father's House, thro' the double Security
of her Lover's Conversion, and having the
Key of the Door: But, alas! she too soon discover'd
her Mistake. She had not been an Hour in Bed, before
she felt the Clothes thrown off, and something
catch fast hold of her. The Voice and Actions of the
Person told her it was no other than Don Ferdinand,
as did his own Behaviour and Confession afterward,
that the Story of his Repentance was but forg'd, the
easier to betray her, and the Delivery of the Key only
an Artifice to engage her Trust, there being a Back-Door
to the House, by which he immediately enter'd,
and came into the Chamber thro' a Closet,
which had a Passage into another Room. 

What was now the Distraction of this unhappy
Lady, waked from her Dream of Vanity to certain
Ruin! unavoidable Destruction! She rav'd, she tore,
did all that Woman could; but all in vain! –––In the
midst of Shrieks and Tremblings, Cries, Curses,
Swoonings, the impatient Ferdinand perpetrated his
Intent, and finish'd her Undoing. 
In the mean time, the careful Father had been in
all the Anxiety imaginable: He had sent to every Place
where he had Hope to find her, in search of his darling
Daughter; till at last, all his Endeavours being
vain, and the Lateness of the Night not bringing her,
assured him she could not be detained by any Occasion
which could merit his Approbation, he flew to
her Chamber, broke open her Cabinet, believing
there might be a Probability of some Discovery; and
finding there the Letters she had received from Florez,
and, amongst the rest, that last fatal one which
mention'd the Place of Assignation, he concluded
her lost; that either she had disposed of herself to
some unworthy Match, or had been deluded into
a much worse Inconvenience. He could do nothing
till Morning, either for his Satisfaction or Revenge; 
and all who have known the Grief of a beloved
Child's Undoing, will easily guess at his. At Break
of Day he sent to the Officers of Justice for a Mission
to search that House, and produced the Paper
which had occasion'd his requiring it. It was immediately
granted; and he had soon been inform'd of the
whole Transaction, had not the strangest Accident
that ever was was, skreened the injurious Contrivers
of it for some Time from the Punishments their
Crime was worthy of. 
Don Ferdinand was endeavouring, by all the Perswasions
he was Master of, to bring the ruin'd Fair
to an Opinion she was not so unhappy as she thought
herself; but all that he could say was ineffectual to
give a Moment's Cessation to the Tempest of her
Fury: Had any Means of Death been in her Power,
she would certainly not have out-lived the Loss of 

Honour; but as he had taken care of that, all she
cou'd do, was to lament it. As they were thus employed,
a loud Knocking at the Chamber-Door
obliged the surpris'd Lover to quit his Bed, and see
what had occasion'd it. It was Florez, who happening
to pass by Don Bernardo's Door, had seen a
great Crowd about it; and enquiring the Reason, was
told, They were going in search of the young Lady
of that House, who, 'twas thought, had been convey'd
away by a Gentleman who pretended to court
her. ––––This News was sufficient to alarm the guilty
Soul of him 'twas told to; and not doubting but
every Thing was discovered, had hasted to Ferdinand
to apprize him of it. ––––Without doubt, said he, my
Lord, the whole Secret is betray'd, and I, and the People
of this House must be inevitably ruin'd, as Abettors
of the Fact, unless your Interest with the Doge is strong
enough to protect us. My Interest with my Uncle, replied
the other, very much perplexed, I fear will be
too weak even to obtain a Pardon for myself in an Affair
like this:––––Bernardo is a Senator, and highly esteemed
both by the Court and Populace:––––I know not
what to think on it. ––––He stood for a Moment or
two after he had spoke this in a Pause; and that gave
Idalia (who, by the Coming of Florez, and the Advertisement
he brought, knew it was to his Deceit
she ow'd her Ruin) Liberty to vent some Part of
her just Rage in Curses and Reproaches. Neither
of them in that Confusion seem'd to take much Notice
of what she said; but Don Ferdinand starting
from his Musing, and catching up his Clothes, and
putting them on as fast as he could, 'Tis now no Time, said
he, to answer idle Railing, we must prepare for our
common Safety. As soon as he had spoke these Words,
he call'd for the Woman of the House, who presently
came up, frighted almost to Death with the Account
she had receiv'd from Florez, and order'd her to dress
Idalia with all the Expedition imaginable, bidding
her not to be concern'd, for he had bethought him
of a Way to retrieve all. But all that he, or she, or 

Florez could do, was not to any purpose to perswade
Idalia to rise: She seem'd, in the midst of her Anguish,
to exult with Hope of Vengeance, and swore
she would continue in the very Place and Posture she
was in; and, by proclaiming her Wrongs, and the
Authors of them, put it past the Power of all their
Artifice to escape the Punishment they feared. But,
alas! her Resolution stood her but in little stead on this
Occasion, the imminent Danger they were in made
them dispense with Ceremony, and she was taken
out of Bed by Force, and her Clothes, in what Manner
they could, huddled on. As soon as she was made
made ready, he catch'd her in his Arms, and carried
her down Stairs, bidding Florez look that nothing
was left in the Chamber which might discover who
had been there. The House that join'd to that in
which they were, belong'd to a young Gentleman
whose Name was Henriquez de Valago, an intimate
Friend and Companion of Ferdinand's: Thither did
he carry the disconsolate Idalia, entreating him to be
careful that her Despair acted nothing against her
Life; and that he would conceal her from the View
of all his Servants, and at Night convey her to Padua,
to a Seat he knew he had in that City. Henriquez
having faithfully promised to obey him in all these
Injunctions, he left him, and return'd to Florez and
the Landlady: The latter he bad be of good Comfort,
there could be no Proof against her; and all she had
to do, was to be resolute in her Denials; for which,
he told her, he would not fail to recompence her. 
Having given this necessary Order, he went away
with Florez at the Back-Door the very Moment
that Bernardo, and those he brought, were commanding
the other to be opened. The Woman, according
to Directions, immediately obey'd, and so well-counterfeited
a Surprise at the Demands they made,
that a Person less interested than Don Bernardo would
have believ'd her innocent; but the Letter was to
him an Evidence substantial; and tho' in searching
all the Rooms, examining the Servants, and taking 

all the Care usual on such Occasions, there seem'd
not the least Ground to imagine she, or any other
Persons, beside the Family, had been there, he was
obliged to go away more unsatisfy'd, because he
wanted Proof, but as much assured as before, that
this was the fatal Place which had deprived him of
his Daughter. 
FERDINAND, accompany'd by Florez, went
directly to his own Apartment; where having passed
some Time in Consultation in what Manner it was
best to proceed, at last it was concluded, that the
latter should remain there conceal'd, till they should
find out by what Means the Discovery had been made; 
and it being the Custom of the former every Morning
to attend the Doge, he new dressed him, and at the
usual Hour went to the Palace, which he found
crowded by a great Number of the Nobility and Senators,
who, he was inform'd by some of them,
were summon'd by the Doge on an Affair relating to
Don Bernardo. It is easy to believe his Thoughts
were not a little perplex'd, to find the Affair had
made so great a Noise; but veiling his Confusion as
much as possible, he mingled with the Company that
were going into the Room where his Uncle expected
to receive them. The Morning Salutations were
scarce over, when the unhappy Bernardo enter'd, and
made his Complaint with so moving an Air, that few
that heard him, but pity'd his Misfortune. The Doge
entreated him to be of Comfort, assured him, that
nothing in the Compass of his Power should be
wanting for his Redress; and that, if by any Means
the Person who had injur'd him could be detected,
the Offender, tho' found in the nearest and most
dear Relation of his own, should not be protected
from the severest Punishment the Law or his Revenge
requir'd. The mournful Father made his Compliment
for these Assurances in as handsome a Manner
as his Grief would give him leave; and having finish'd
it, proceeded to relate all the Circumstances he knew
of his Misfortune, which was the finding of the Letters, 

one of which had so punctually nominated that
House for the Place she was to come to; but that
having been search'd, and nothing of Proof to be
made that she had been there, it was not impossible
but some Person, to confound their Examination,
might have writ it on Purpose. All that remain'd
was to endeavour to discover by whom these Letters
were writ, for there was no Name to any of them,
(Idalia having forbid it, that her Correspondence with
Florez might not by any Accident be found out. )
Bernardo produced them to the View of the whole
Assembly, and the Doge earnestly adjur'd all present,
that if they could in the least guess by the Style or
Character who was the Author, they would immediately
declare it: But every one affirm'd himself entirely
ignorant; and Ferdinand now hugg'd himself in
a full Security that this first Brunt being past, nothing
could hereafter prejudice him, or Florez, on the Account
of Idalia: But the Solemnity with which he
had heard his Uncle protest to Don Bernardo, that if
the Person who had wrong'd him could by any Means
be discover'd, the strictest Severity of Justice should
be his Portion, made him extremely cautious in what
Manner he behav'd. He forbore, therefore, to visit
Idalia while she was conceal'd at the House of Don
Henriquez, nor would for some Days after he knew
she was carry'd to Padua, go there. 
But while the Success of this Adventure afforded
a good deal of satisfactory Matter of Conversation to
those who were the Contrivers of it, whenever they
were together, the miserable Bernardo pass'd his Hours
in a Condition pityable by all but those who had ocsion'd
it: He refused to eat or drink, shut himself
from all Society, and suffer'd not the Light of Heaven
to enter at his mournful Windows. In vain his
Friends, Relations, and Acquaintance, endeavour'd to
perswade him to asswage his Sorrows;––––in vain
the Religious of all Orders sent their daily Remonstrances,
how unlawful it was to give Way to such
immoderate Grief! He was not to be mov'd;–––he 

was not to be comforted;–––and it was look'd on as
almost a Miracle, that Age, so oppress'd, sunk not beneath
the Burden of an Anguish sufficient to have
weigh'd down Youth. 
But to return to Idalia:––––Never Man had a
Task more difficult, than Henriquez found in executing
the Charge Don Ferdinand had given him. 
That wretched Lady was so bent on Death, that there
requir'd the utmost Caution to prevent the Mischief
which her Fury threaten'd; a hundred Times, in that
one Day she remain'd in his House, had she attempted
on her Life; and when he had put her into a Gondula,
which he had order'd to be made ready for that purpose,
he was obliged to hold her the whole Time of
their little Voyage in his Arms, or the River Brent
had been her Grave. O cruel, barbarous Man! said
she, why will you deny me the only Relief for Miseries
like mine? –––But think not to disappoint me always:––– 
Not all the Powers of Heaven and Earth combined shall
force me long to drag this Load of Infamy and Woe! I
cannot,––––will not live! ––––With such like Speeches,
which were still accompany'd with tearing of her
Hair, her Garments, and sometimes her very Flesh,
did she express the bitter Anguish of her Soul, whenever
he attempted to divert her Desperation: But how
dangerous is it for a Heart young and amorous to
entertain Compassion for a lovely Object! what a
prevailing Force has Beauty in Distress! not all her
Distraction, nor the wild Horror which sat on her
Features, could take from them their Power of
Charming. –––The Fire of Indignation which sparkled
in her Eyes abated not the wonted Sweetness,––––the
very Confusion of her Air had something graceful in
it; and Henriquez too soon was sensible, that in the
Design of serving Ferdinand he had undertaken an Office
fatal to his own Repose. He struggled, however,
with all the Force he was able, to withstand the
first Emotions of his Passion, not only because of the
Injustice such Sentiments would make him guilty of
to a Friend who had entrusted him, but also that himself 

was under Obligations of Constancy to a Lady
who had preferr'd him to the whole World. 
But, alas! what Ties, what Obligations, what
Engagements are sufficient to bind the roving Heart
of faithless Man? Untasted Pleasures still are thought
the sweetest: Donna Lawra (for so was she call'd,
the Memory of whose Charms this new Beauty was
beginning to eraze) had already been too bounteous
of her Favours to make the almost sated Henriquez
over sollicitous of the Continuance of them: He had,
however, more Gratitude than many of his Sex can
boast, and, as I have already said, endeavour'd for
some Time very strenuously to repel the Assaults of
any new Desires to her Prejudice; and 'tis not altogether
impossible (though not exceeding probable, considering
the Charms of Idalia, and the Inconstancy
which is natural to Mankind) that his Efforts might
not have been unsuccessful, had not herself contributed
to her Undoing. 
Never Woman was of a more haughty, jealous,
and impatient Disposition, than this Lady; and having
some Time before made Henriquez a Present of a
little Moorish Page, with a Design to be a Spy on his
Actions, was by him inform'd that his Master had
order'd a Gondula to wait him about Sun-set at the
River Brent; and that he had commanded his Servants
not to discover to any Person after his Departure
which Way he was gone. This was sufficient
to alarm her with an Apprehension, that something
must have occasion'd this Secrecy; and the rather,
because she had sent twice that Day to desire to speak
with him, and he had both Times excused himself
from coming, pretending Indisposition. She immediately,
as jealous Women do, imagin'd the worst,
was certain in her own Mind that a new Mistress had
engaged him from her, and that it could be with no
other he intended to leave Venice: She presently suppos'd
it must be to Padua he was going; and not able
to linger in the Torments of Suspence, resolv'd to be
there before him; and that no Notice might be taken 

of her Design, would not command her own Gondula,
tho' she had a very fine one, to be prepared,
but got into one of those common Wherries which
generally wait to carry ordinary Passengers. She had
frequently been at the House which Don Henriquez
had at Padua, and the Servants that were in it perfectly
knew her, and were not at all surpris'd to see
her, especially when she told them that their Master
would be there next Morning. But the Confusion
with which Henriquez at his Arrival beheld her there,
may more easily be imagin'd than described; therefore
I shall only say it was such as could be surmounted
by nothing but the Indignation of Lawra,
when, by the Sight of Idalia with him, she had so
much Reason to believe her Suspicions were too just:
She flew on him with all the Reproaches that her
Rage, and the Confirmation of her Jealousy, could
suggest; to which he gave but little Answer, till
after he had conducted his lovely Charge to a Chamber,
and appointed a Servant to watch and attend her. 
At his Return to the Room where he had left Lawra,
he endeavour'd to allay the Fury she was in, by telling
her part of the Truth: He assured her that it was not
on his own Account that he had been at the Pains of
bringing that Lady thither, but conceal'd the Name
of the Person for whose sake he had done it, being
of that Opinion which most of his Sex have of the
other, that there was but little Security for their Secrecy,
and was sensible how dangerous for Ferdinand
it would be, if by her Levity it should be revealed. 
But his evading to let her into the whole Affair, render'd
her incapable of believing any Part of it; all
that he could say seem'd but so many Excuses, and
was ineffectual to alleviate her Passion. ––––She loaded
him with Curses and Upbraidings,––––swore never to
see him more. ––––Nor could all his Entreaties prevail
on her to continue a Moment longer in his
House; but taking Advantage of the Gondula which
had brought him and Idalia, left him, with a Vow
never to rest till she had meditated a Revenge suitable
to his Perfidiousness. 

When once a Woman has disposed of every Thing
in her Power to give, it must be Softness only, and
fond Compliance with her Lover's Will, that can
maintain her Empire o'er his Heart. ––––The Power
which once this Lady had, was already shock'd by
the newer and more potent Charms of the incomparable
Idalia; and the Violence of her impatient Jealousy
bringing to his Remembrance a thousand Faults
in her Humour, which in the Noon of Passion's Sun
were hid, but now, in the Wane of his Affections, appear'd
in their worst Colours, she began not only to
appear distasteful to his softer Sentiments, but also to
seem justly so to those which Reason had the greatest
Share in inspiring. –––He knew not, however, to what
Extremes her Indignation might transport her; and
to prevent what she might contrive, thought it the
best way to remove Idalia. He had a little Villa
at Vicenza, about a Day's Journey from Padua, in
the Road to Verona, one of the most pleasantly situated
Places in all Italy, having its Foundation on a Hill,
which afforded a Prospect of the whole Country
round for many Miles. The Sweetness of the Air,
and the Variety of rural Diversions she might find
there, he hop'd might have an Influence over her
Melancholy, and in time wear off the Bitterness of
those agonizing Reflections which at present she was
so full of. 
He delay'd the Execution of this Design no longer
than the next Day; and as nothing violent is ever of
any long Continuance, thro' his Perswasions, and the
Measures he made use of to effect it, the desperate
Emotions which had raged with so much Fury in
the Soul of Idalia, began by little and little to abate; 
and the wonderful Respect, and prodigious Tenderness
with which she found herself treated by this new
Adorer, by degrees entirely reconciled her to Life. 
He observ'd it with Joy; and being desirous to discover
more, one Day, as they were sitting together,
he entreated her to command him something whereby
he might testify the sincere Esteem and Admiration 

he professed to have for her. ––––He assured her
there was nothing so difficult that he would not
undertake for her sake; and to sound her Inclinations,
begg'd she would have Confidence enough in him to
acquaint him with what she would have done:–––– 
Do not, Madam, said he, consider yourself as under any
Restraint, while at Vicenza: Tho' nothing in the World
can afford me a Joy adequate to that of gazing on you,
yet if you are determined to return to your Father, myself
shall conduct you to him, and endeavour to invent
some Excuse which may shadow over the true Cause of
your Absence:––––Or if you can enough forgive the Faults
of raging Passion, to yield to the Affections of Don Ferdinand,
tho' to the eternal Ruin of my own ardent
Wishes, at Padua you shall meet him; for doubtless he
will soon be there to take you from me:–––Or if there
be any Thing in this Place so agreeable to you, as to make
you willing to bless me with your Residence in it, here
remain safe both from your Father's Power, and the
Sollicitations of all you would avoid. This Offer appeared
so generous, that Idalia was infinitely charm'd
with it; and after a little Pause, I am so much oblig'd,
reply'd she, to your Honour and good Nature,
since I have been here, that it is not without the utmost
Confusion I reflect on my Manner of treating you when
I was first put in your Power. As you had no hand in
my Undoing, I ought to have reserved my Reproaches
for those who alone are worthy of them;––––and to the
rest of your Obligations I see you are willing to add that
of pardoning what my Madness uttered: But, continued
she, with an Air wholly composed of Sweetness,
for this last Favour I know not with what Words to
thank you:–––There's something in it beyond the Reach
of Gratitude;––––and 'tis in my Acceptance only that I
can prove how truly I am touch'd with it. ––––To return
to Venice I never can consent: My Reputation blasted,
and ruin'd by my Father's hasty Zeal, in publishing this
Adventure, I shou'd become the Jest of every sawcy
Girl that envy'd me before:––––My Spirit cou'd not
bear it. ––––No, first I'd turn a wretched Wanderer 

thro' the pitiless World!––––a Grave wou'd now be preferable
to my Father's House! ––––But as to Ferdinand!
––––the Villain!––––the Monster that has undone
me! ––––Hell, Hell, is not so dreadful as the Thoughts
of seeing him again! ––––Then, Madam, cry'd the
transported Henriquez, interrupting her, I may hope
you will continue here? For some time, resum'd she; if
you grow not weary of so troublesome a Guest, I'll stay
till I have disposed of myself either in a Monastery, or
some other Place. 'Tis easy to suppose with how
much Rapture the enamour'd Henriquez heard her
speak these Words: There passed between 'em several
Protestations of Love and Adoration on the one
side, and Esteem and Gratitude on the other; and at
last entring into a Discourse what Method was most
proper to make use of for the preserving her in that
Liberty she desir'd, they both thought it best that he
should leave her there, and return to Padua before
the coming of Ferdinand; and missing him, should
discover he had carry'd her to any other Place; and
that at their first meeting, he should counterfeit the
greatest Concern imaginable for not having been able
to discharge the Trust reposed in him; and withal,
dress up a Story of her having made her escape by
Night from his House. This being concluded on,
he took Horse immediately for Padua, where had
happened a Disturbance he little expected to hear of. 
The malicious Lawra, doubly disappointed in her
Love and Pride, meditated nothing but Revenge; 
and tho' she had never seen Idalia before she met her
at Henriquez's House, nor could be certain she was
that Lady whose Elopement had made so great a
Noise at Venice, yet it came into her Head to report
it, not doubting but Don Bernardo would take such
measures to assure himself, as would infallibly expose
her Rival. She thought, that if it were really Idalia,
as there was nothing improbable but it should, the
Father's just Indignation would not only be the Ruin
of his Passion, by depriving him of her Sight for
ever, but also the eternal Destruction of his Fortune, 

and perhaps his Life; for there was not any Thing
too violent for her Rage to wish inflicted on him:
And that if it should happen to be any other Woman,
the Discovery who she was, and the Opportunity it
would give of blasting her Reputation, would be
some little Satisfaction for the Loss of Henriquez. 
With this View she took a Pen, and employ'd it to
Don Bernardo, in the Manner following: 

To Don Bernardo.
To receive an Injury, yet to be, by our Ignorance
of the Person who offers it, deprived of the Means
either of Vengeance or Redress, I look upon as a Vexation
almost equal to what the Misfortune itself occasions; 
and have too great a Sense of what a Father's
Heart must feel in a Disappointment like yours, to withhold
a Secret which may afford some sort of a Satisfaction
to you. 
THE fair Idalia, your unhappy Daughter, either too
fatally ensnared by the Insinuations of the most Vicious
and Perfidious of his Sex Don Henriquez de Velago,
or betray'd to his Power by some Artifice yet more
base, was lodg'd in his Honse, perhaps in his Bed, when
you were vainly searching for her in another Place:
But he, with reason, fearing the amorous Theft unsafe
to be long detain'd at Venice, has since carry'd her to
Padua, where he now revels in her Ruin, and triumphs
in Security. 
'TWOULD be but impertinent to instruct you
what to do; your own Wisdom and Paternal Care will
need no Admonitions with what Expedition you shou'd
haste, I will not say to save, but to revenge a Daughter; 
therefore will trouble you no farther than to entreat
your Pardon for not setting any Name to this Advertisement,
which is design'd a friendly one, from 
Your unknown Humble Servant. 


A Reader of the most ordinary Capacity will easily
imagine this Letter had the Effect on Don Bernardo
it was writ for: He forgot his Age, and the Indisposition
his late Griefs had thrown him in; he deferr'd
going to Padua no longer a Time than the Necessity
of getting those People who were to accompany him
requir'd: But this unhappy Gentleman had to his
other Calamity this added, of being twice as he believ'd
at the Point of detecting the Author of his
Misfortune, and as often finding his Expectations
disappointed; for the Servants of Henriquez were
all of them too faithful to utter the least Syllable of
what they knew; and Bernardo doubted not but he
had been a second Time abused, and presently imagin'd
the Person who had writ the other Letter to
amuse his Search, had also been the Contriver of
this. 
But tho' there was nothing of Idalia to be heard,
this Adventure was the Occasion of bringing to
light another Secret; which afterward being blaz'd
abroad, was Matter enough of Discourse for the whole
Town for a long time. Having left Henriquez's
House, with a Design never to trouble any other
without some more evident Demonstration that they
were not imposed on, as they pass'd by a Vineyard
adjoining to it, they happen'd to see a Country Fellow
pruning the Vines; it came into the Head of
some one of those who were with Bernardo, to enquire
of him if he had not seen a Lady at his Master's. 
The Rustick's Simplicity gave hopes he would
not deny the Truth, or if he did, it would be in
such a manner, as they might easily discover it; and
indeed had a Secret been in his keeping, there was
little Probability it would long continue so. He
presently told them, a Lady had been there some few
Days before; and, said he, 'tis rumour'd here at Padua,
that she is Don Henriquez's Mistress. ––––Some
say that he is to marry her, but by the Mass I believe
nothing of it; for chancing to be in the Grove
behind the House, who did I see come in but these 

two kissing and toying; they did not think I took
any Notice––––I say no more; but if ever he is her
Husband, I have lost my Aim–––that's all. ––––These
Words, which could not be imagin'd to be utter'd
with any other Design than what the Manner of
them express'd, the Pleasure some People, especially
of his Degree, take in speaking all they know, made
poor Bernardo ready to sink into the Earth: He was
now sure it was Idalia that the Fellow meant, and the
Horror which seiz'd his before half-broken Heart,
was now so great, to hear this seeming Confirmation
of the Dishonour of his Family and Ruin of his
Child, that he had neither Voice or Spirit to ask
more. But the others, being less interested in what
they heard, had Presence of Mind enough to put
many other Questions to him; among the rest, what
sort of a Woman she was who had been so familiar
with Don Henriquez; if she was tall or short, black
or fair; of what Age she appeared to be; and if he
had ever seen her before, or knew of her having
been at his Master's House any other Time than that
he spoke of in the Grotto. To most of these Interrogatories
the Fellow made such Replies as gave no
Certainty whether it was the Lady they were in
search of, or not; till to the last, that of how often
she had been there, he told them, it had been, her constant
Custom to come and tarry two or three Nights
at a Time, whenever Henriquez was at Padua, as
long as he had been employ'd in working there,
which had been above two Years. This Account
did no way agree with a Belief that it could be Idalia,
who had never been one Night absent from her
Father's House till that fatal one, in which he had
begun his Search; which some of 'em saying, and
chancing to mention her Name,–––Alas! cry'd the
Countryman, you are mistaken, Gentlemen, I do not
know any thing of the Woman you speak of: She I mean
is called Donna Lawra de Savila, Widow of Don Jaquez
de Savila: I was once a Servant of her Husband's,
and am as well acquainted with her Face as 

my own. There was not a Person in this Company
but knew this Lady; but there was one among 'em
whom these Words did more particularly influence:
He had for a long Time had a Passion for her, and
finding all the Endeavours he could make use of
were in vain to engage any other Return than Disdain,
his slighted Tenderness (as 'tis common enough,
especially among the Italians) was now converted to
as violent an Aversion; and nothing on Earth could
have been so agreeable to the Sentiments with which
he now consider'd her as this Account, which gave
him so fair an Opportunity of affronting, and exposing
her; which at their Return to Venice he took
care to do, with such a witty Inveteracy, that the
once haughty, gay, admired Lawra saw herself in a
little time the Ridicule of all who knew her; and
not able to endure the Disrespect of those Reflections
which even her very Presence did not silence,
and as little in a Capacity of revenging it, her
Charms being almost past the Bloom, and her
Wealth, by former Extravagancies very near exhausted,
out of Humour with the World, and detesting
all Mankind, she retir'd to a Relation's House which
few resorted to, who had any Knowledge of her,
and indulg'd her Discontent, that a Misfortune she
design'd another, had so justly fallen on herself. 
But this happen'd not till after she had seen one
Part of her indignant Wish fulfill'd, the Death of
Henriquez; which, tho' not brought about by any
Contrivance of her own, she look'd upon as inflicted
on him by the Justice of Providence, for his Ingratitude
and Perfidiousness to her. 
At his Return to Padua, 'tis hard to say whether
his Surprise to hear his House had been search'd, or
the Joy he conceiv'd that the Danger of it was so
well over, had the greatest Share in his Soul. But
his Contentment was only of a short Continuance:
Designing to go immediately to Venice, thinking it
the more effectual Way to take off all Apprehensions
of Don Ferdinand's ever expecting to find Idalia 

with him, to go to him with the Story he had
form'd of her Escape, than to wait his coming to
seek her at Padua. He was just preparing to set
out, when he was told that Don Ferdinand was
alighted at the Gate: He went to receive him with
the Familiarity which the long Friendship that had
been between them render'd the most obliging; but
before he had time to mention what he intended
about Idalia, the other was beginning to make him
a thousand Acknowledgments for the Care he had
taken in preserving her for him. To what an infinite
Degree, dear Friend, said he, am I oblig'd to
you for the Trouble you have had in securing for me a
Happiness I must but for your Goodness have been utterly
depriv'd of! All that I can say, will be too little
to express the Gratitude I feel;–––but be assured the
Favour shall never die in my Remembrance; each
Moment that blesses me with my lov'd Idalia's Sight,
will also remind me it is to you I am indebted for the
Rapture. ––––Alas, my Lord, (interrupted Henriquez,
a little confounded at receiving Thanks for that
which he was conscious to himself he was far from
deserving,) I wish to Heaven it had been in my Power
to have any way contributed to your Satisfaction; but
all my Endeavours were in vain––––I know what you
would say, (cry'd Ferdinand, not suffering him to
proceed,) I know the inexorable Fair has been deaf to
all the Arguments you could urge in favour of my
Passion; but no matter, Time and Assiduity may work
upon her, and my continued Tenderness engage her
yielding to that Joy the Violence of my burning Passion
has yet but by Force obtain'd. ––––But haste, pursu'd
he, my dear Henriquez! baste, and conduct me to
her;–––my throbbing Heart beats high with raging
Love;–––this tedious Absence which the Fear of being
suspected, and by that means losing her for ever, could
only have occasion'd, has made me almost wild with
fierce Impatience! –––I burn, I bleed, I die to see her! ––– 
Can it be possible resum'd Henriquez coldly, this
mighty Longing, this ardent Wishing for one whose 

Charms already you have rifled; can the Desire of
Beauty enjoy'd and known, afford such eager Transports? ––– 
'Tis strange indeed, reply'd Ferdinand; but would not
seem so, could you have any Notion how much beyond
her Sex Idalia is!–––how charming, even in the midst of
Rage and Grief! ––––Her very Frowns have more Attractions
in 'em than the most melting Softness of any
other Woman! I am sorry for it, said Henriquez, and
if Wishes could avail, would willingly lose Part of my
Blood, she seem'd less worthy your Esteem. 
The Surprise of the enamour'd Ferdinand at these
Words can hardly be represented, much less the Rage
with which he listen'd to that Story the other had
prepar'd. to deceive him into a Belief of her Flight. 
There is nothing in the World more difficult than to
conceal Love from him who is a Lover, but much
more so, when the same Object enflames them both; 
besides, there are so many little Hesitations in the telling
an Untruth, especially with those who do not
usually practise it, that a nice Observer may easily
discern the Difference. Don Ferdinand was too passionate
an Admirer of Idalia's Perfections, not to believe
it highly probable another might think of her as
he did; and, by the Force he had made use of to gratify
his Desires, one might know he was not so great
a Bigot to the Rules of Honour, as to imagine they
had Power to restrain Appetite. He forbore, however,
to interrupt the other while he was speaking; 
but as he found him silent, he broke out into all the
Exclamations the Falshood he believed himself treated
with deserved. Henriquez, willing to preserve his
Friendship, but resolute not to forego Idalia, made
a thousand Imprecations to aver the Truth of what
he said, but to no Purpose; and had it really happen'd
as Henriquez pretended, 'tis probable he would have
found it a hard Matter to have gain'd Credit from
this impatient Lover. Fierce and tempestuous in his
Nature when any Thing displeased him, he let him
know he saw through, and disdain'd the feeble Arts
with which he went about to impose on him, and 

bid him once for all bring forth Idalia, or answer
his Demand with his Sword. Henriquez would
very fain have evaded either, but finding himself
press'd past Refusal, and absolutely bent not to comply
with the former, he was obliged to do so to the
latter, or prove himself a Coward. The Place agreed
on for the Decision of this fatal Controversy, was a
Field adjoining to Henriquez's House; and Ferdinand
going there before, to avoid Suspicion of their Quarrel,
the other promised to follow him immediately. 
It was not without the greatest Concern that
Henriquez found himself involv'd in this unhappy Necessity,
either to be miserable for ever in the Loss of
Idalia, or become the Enemy of a Person whom he
had long consider'd as the most Intimate of his Friends,
and one in whose Power it was to do him many ill
Offices with the Doge, on whom he, as well as the
other, had a Dependance. But what Considerations
are of force against Love? After two or three Moments
Reflection, he sat him down, and writ a Letter,
which he gave to a trusty Servant, ordering him to
carry it with all Secrecy and Speed to his Villa at Vicenza,
and deliver it to Idalia; and then immediately
went to the Field, where the enraged Ferdinand impatiently
expected him. 
A few Words, much to the same Purpose as those
they had entertain'd each other with in the House,
having past between them, the new-made Enemies
drew their Swords, and running against each other
with greater Force than Art, each more aiming to
reach his Rival's Life than defend his own, both had
their Wish; the unfortunate Henriquez lost his at the
first Push, and his Antagonist having receiv'd his Death's
Wound, though yet ignorant of it, seeing him fall,
was about to make his Escape, when, on a sudden,
he found himself unable, and that he should soon lose
both the Triumph of having overcome his Foe, and
the Danger of the Punishment the Law inflicts on
Duellists. He surviv'd not the other above half an
Hour, as the Chirurgeons, who afterwards examin'd 

the Bodies, imagin'd; and the untimely Death of
these two unhappy Gentlemen gave Idalia the first
Proof, that her Beauty, like a fatal Comet, was destructive
to all on whom it had any Influence, and seem'd
given her in so extraordinary a Proportion, only to
make her Misfortunes more conspicuous. 
She, who little dream'd of this fatal Catastrophe,
was, in the mean time, entertaining herself with
Ideas of a far different Nature: Had she been less conscious
of her own Excellencies, she could not have
been blind to the Admiration which every Word and
Action testify'd Don Henriquez had of them. She
saw plainly that he lov'd her, and lov'd her with a
Passion which was not to be accounted less violent,
because it was more respectful than that of Don Ferdinand:
Her Pride, however, would certainly have preferr'd
the latter, because of his superior Quality,
could she have entertain'd the least Hope, that after
what had happen'd he would marry her. But young
and vain as she was, she flatter'd not herself with
such a Hope; and for that Reason, as well as for the
Violence he had used her with, he was the Object of
her extremest Detestation. But as for Henriquez, she
began to consider, that if his Designs were honourable,
as he had never given her any Cause to suspect
they were not, she might, by becoming his Wife,
take off the Odium, which, by her being gone from
her Father's House, had been cast on her Reputation. 
And this appear'd so laudable a Wish, that she thought
it would be an Indiscretion greater than any she had
yet been guilty of, should she refuse it. She thought
of nothing therefore but the Manner in which she
should consent, which she doubted not but he would
ask at his next Coming to Vicenza. 
I doubt not but the Reader will be pretty much
surpris'd to find she could so easily be brought from
one Extreme to another; and that she, who but a
few Days before, was all Despair and Rage, was
already grown so temperate and calm: But there was
a happy Instability in this Lady's Nature, which prevented 

her from regretting any Thing for a long Time
together; and it was this Disposition which carry'd
her thro' a Sea of innumerable Troubles, each of
which would have been sufficient to have overwhelm'd
another Woman. The Treachery with which her
Confidence had been abus'd by Florez, the irreparable
Injury her Virtue had received from the brutal Passion
of Ferdinand, and the Grief which she was sensible
the Loss of her was to her afflicted Father, were
now no more remember'd, or consider'd only as
Vexations which the gaining a Husband so meritorious
as Henriquez would amply compensate. 
In Contemplations therefore, not displeasing, did
she pass her Time; till about the third Day after the
Departure of Henriquez, one of the Servants whom
he had left to attend her, came running hastily into
the Room where she was, and told her, That Don
Myrtano, Brother to his Master, desir'd to speak with
her. She cou'd have no Apprehensions of the true
Reason of this Visit, and imagining only that some
Accident having detain'd Henriquez longer than he
design'd, he had commission'd him to tell her of it,
went to receive him without any Concern, or Boding
of the Miseries which this fatal Interview drew on
her. 
After the first Civilities were over, Madam,
said he, I have a Letter for you, which you ought to
have receiv'd before; but the same unhappy Accident
which delay'd the bringing it, has also been the Cause
of my breaking it open; a Rudeness, I confess, which
nothing but the Occasion could excuse. In speaking
these Words, he deliver'd a Paper to her, which was
the same that Henriquez had writ to her the Moment
before he fought with Ferdinand. The melancholy
Air of his Deportment, and the Sighs which accompany'd
his Expressions, gave her sufficient Reason to
believe there was something extraordinary to be told
her: But she suspended the lesser Curiosity, to satisfy
the greater, of knowing what this Letter contain'd; 
which opening hastily, she found in it these Lines: 


To the Incomparable Idalia.
If any Thing were wanting to make my Charmer sensible
of the Wonders of her Power, and the Effects
it has wrought on me, what I am now about to acquaint
her with, would be a Proof. 
DON Ferdinand, either suspecting the Artifice which
my Passion inspir'd me to deceive him with, or resenting
the little Care I seem'd to have of the Trust be repos'd
in me, demands my Life for the Expiation of my Crime. 
I go this Moment to answer the Call of his Revenge. 
I cannot blame him; the Man who aims at so inestimable
a Treasure as your Love, should, for that Blessing,
quit all meaner Considerations; and in that View only
it is, that I shall dare to maintain the Falsity I have
told him, tho' at the Expence of my last Drop of Blood. 
But, as I am ignorant how, in this fatal Contest, Fate
may deal with me, I snatch this Opportunity of pouring
out a Million of soft, tender Wishes, while I give you
this Assurance, that whatever is decreed for my Body,
you wholly govern my immortal Part; the Sword of
Ferdinand may pierce my Heart, but not eraze the
bright Idea that my Soul is full of: When I am Ashes,
the Passion you have inspir'd will have a Being; and
living or dying I shall still continue 
Your Adorer,
Henriquez de Velago. 

IDALIA was too much interested in the Life
of Don Henriquez, not to be impationt to hear the
Issue of this Quarrel mention'd in the Letter; which
being inform'd of by his Brother, she swoon'd away,
o'ercome with Grief and Wonder. Don Myrtano
was not idle in applying proper Means for her Recovery; 
which when he had effected, he began to entertain
her in a very different Manner than what she 

cou'd have expected from so near a Relation to the
Man who owed his Death to her malevolent Beauty:
He was all Complaisance, all Gallantry, and seem'd so
little astonish'd at what his Brother had done, that he
assur'd her he should think a Death so caus'd more
glorious than the longest Life, which gave not a
Proof of being sensible of her Charms. This was
indeed the Way to dissipate her Sorrows; but as she
wanted not Wit nor Discernment, tho' her Vanity too
often blinded her Judgment, she could not help thinking
it a little odd that he should come there to visit
her, and bring a Letter which he confessed he had
taken the Liberty to open; and letting fall some Words
which testify'd as much, he gave her to understand
his Reasons for it, in this Manner: I see, Madam,
said he, that you are not more surprised at the Contents
of this Letter, than that I am the Bearer of it; and
because I should think it a Sin unpardonable to Heaven
to oppose the Will of its most perfect Resemblance, the
Divine Idalia, I shall endeavour to satisfy her, as far
as is in my Power, of every Particular of this unfortunate
Adventure. Happening to be walking with your
Father Don Bernardo on the Parade, the very Morning
that he received a Letter from an unknown Hand, which
gave him an Account of my Brother being bless'd with
your Society, he desir'd me with the most earnest Conjurations
to inform him what I knew of the Affair; to
which I answer'd, as well I might, that I was so far
from being let into any such Secret, that I verily believ'd
it a Falsity; and when he spoke of coming to
Padua in search of you, I offer'd to accompany him; 
which I had done, if not prevented by some Business
which I could not put off. At his Return he sent for
me, and seem'd concern'd that he had been guilty of
wronging my Brother, and entreated me to make his
Apology when next I saw him; which I told him would
be in a short Time, and accordingly took Horse for Padua
immediately. I alighted there at the very Moment
that the Bodies of the two unhappy Rivals were brought
in. The Consternation I was in, to see this dreadful 

Issue of a Friendship which promis'd a far different Consequence,
can hardly be express'd: I stood for some Time
without the Power of Speech, or Motion, and perhaps
had not recover'd myself so soon, if a Servant, whom I
knew to be the most favour'd one my Brother kept, had
not rouz'd me from my Lethargy of Thought, by giving
me a Paper, which he told me was writ by his Master,
and put into his Hand, with a strict Charge to be deliver'd
to a Lady at Vicenza. I was just about to
carry it, said he, but am glad I made no greater Haste,
since the Contents may possibly inform you the Reasons of
this fatal Quarrel. In that Perplexity of Mind, I lost
Decorum, and breaking the Seal, soon found the Fellow's
Conjecture but too true,––––that it was to Love I
owed the Misfortune of my Brother's Death: Wonder
not then, adorable Idalia, (continu'd he, soft'ning his
Voice,) that I was fir'd with Impatience to behold a Beauty,
whose Charms had given such a Proof of their prodigious Influence! 
–––I come (cry'd he, growing more tender)
to satisfy a Curiosity which, I fear, will cost me dear. 
There was something so very graceful and engaging
in the Air and Address of this young Gentleman,
that it was almost impossible to see or hear him,
without confessing a Sensibility of Perfections which
very few, if any, could equal. Idalia, who had a
Soul too capable of soft Impressions, full of warm
Desires, and tender Languishments, tho' yet unfix'd,
gaz'd on him with a Pleasure which as yet she knew
not the Meaning of. ––––That Life and Gaiety which
once had made her relish the Conversation of Florez,
–––that noble Mein and elegant Behaviour which
had engag'd her Attention to the first Vows of Ferdinand,
––––and that submissive Tenderness which
pleas'd her in the Addresses of Henriquez, and a thousand
other different nameless Graces, which seem'd
united in the lovely Myrtano, inspir'd her, at the first
Sight of him, with a Passion which she had neither
Strength to repel, nor Artifice to conceal. –––She now
found in good Earnest what it was to love, and felt
in reality those Emotions, which before she fancy'd 

to have done. He, who was perfectly acquainted
with the Sex, and no Stranger to the Charms he had
for 'em, immediately read it in her Eyes, and resolv'd
to make his Advantage of it, in favour of
those Desires, which few that saw Idalia but were
possess'd with. 
He staid not long at the Villa, after having entreated
her to remain there his Guest, as she had
been his Brother's, and to command every Thing in
it with the same Freedom as she would do at Don
Bernardo's; the necessary Preparations for the Funeral
of Henriquez, whose Heir he was, obliging
him to return to Padua with all Expedition. But
the short Time he had been there, was sufficient to
inspire the unhappy Idalia with such Sentiments as
severely reveng'd the Destruction of his Brother. 
The Infancy of Love is generally the most pleasing
Part of it, when new Desires play round the
innocent Heart, and gentle Thrillings warm the
throbbing Veins, the tender Passion by swift, but
unperceiv'd Degrees stealing thro' all the Seats of
Life, affords only gay Wishes, pleasing Dreams, and
rapturous Images of Joys to come; but in another
manner did it enter the Soul of this unquiet Fair:––– 
She no sooner found herself alone, than giving way
to her impatient Passion, a thousand widely different
Thoughts, all wild and stormy as a troubled Sea, o'erwhelm'd
Reflection, and made Reason giddy:–––She
was presently sensible that she lov'd, and lov'd to
that prodigious Height, that the least Appearance of
an Obstacle to what she wish'd, was worse than
Death: Her ruin'd Honour, and her blacken'd Fame
seem'd now Misfortunes more terrible by far than
ever they had done before. Oh! 'tis impossible (cry'd
she to herself) that Myrtano, the lovely, the accomplish'd
Myrtano, can ever think the undone Idalia an
Object worthy of his serious Affections!––––No, 'twas
all Gallantry!–––all unmeaniug Flattery which dictatea
the tender Words he spoke! –––His Heart despises the Indiscretion
of my Conduct! ––––Pity is the most tender 

Sentiment he can regard me with! –––And, oh! how
distant is that from what I would inspire! A Stream
of Tears succeeded these Expressions: But this Passion
having a little vented it self, the natural Vanity
of her Disposition return'd to give her Consolation; 
and in this Humour she would say, Yet why should
I despair? –––I am perhaps the only Person that judges
with so much Severity of my Actions: Henriquez
found enough in me to counterballance all that my
Mismanagement has brought upon me, and why may
I not hope his Brother may be of his Opinion? –––My
Eyes are still the same, and every Charm which us'd
to attract, maintains its Lustre with unfading Brightness:
–––The Man to whom I ow'd my Shame, has
with his Life repair'd the Injury he did me,–––nor is
my Birth unworthy of Myrtano. With such kind of
Sentiments would she a while beguile Despair; but
then the excessive Eagerness with which she wish'd
to appear amiable in the Eyes of this Charmer of
her Soul, suggested another Difficulty which she
knew not how to get over. –––Fool that I am, (resum'd
she,) and too liable to entertain the vain Delusions
of fictitious Hope:–––'Tis not in Nature,–––'tis not
in Reason, to expect the Man whose Brother I have
kill'd, should love me. –––The noble Henriquez, but
for me, might have liv'd long and happily;–––for my
curs'd Sake he dy'd, and Myrtano is bound to hate
me;–––should he forgive it, the Ghost of that unhappy
Youth would rise to blast us in the midst of Rapture! ––– 
O Torture! Horror! Hell!–––it cannot,–––must not be,––– 
both Heaven and Earth forbid it! –––Henriquez cannot
be recall'd, and Myrtano must not love: 
In Agonies not to be express'd, not to be conceiv'd
but by the Heart that felt 'em, did this half-distracted
Lady pass the Night after the Departure
of Myrtano; but the Morning brought her a Comforter
beyond her Hopes: She was scarce risen from
the Bed, which the Confusion of her Thoughts had
made most restless, when she receiv'd a Letter,
which opening with a Mixture of Delight and Pain, 

as believing it came from him who now had the
sole Power of bestowing either, she read these
Lines: 

To the Never-enough-admir'd Idalia.
It is not the bleeding Body of my only Brother, yet
uninterr'd, it is not the Apprehensions how, at so
unfit a Season, you may condemn my rash Proceeding,
can deter me from making a Declaration as suitable
to your Beauty, as it is the contrary to my present Circumstance. 
But you were created only to work Wonders,
and in the midst of Death and Horror disclose an
opening Heaven, whose Brightness will suffer no other
Ideas but itself to appear in the Remembrance. 
THE Curiosity which Yesterday brought me to Vicenza,
has involv'd me in a Passion which must render
me either the most blest, or the most wretched of Mankind. 
Who loves Idalia can have no Medium in his
Fate; what then must be the Terrors of Suspence in
an Affair on which depends far more than Life? Ease
them, I conjure you, most adorable Idalia! and either
send me to the Grave with my unhappy Brother, or
permit me to live in the felicitous Hope of being one
Day 
Yours,
Myrtano de Velago. 
P. S. Whether you pardon or condemn the Presumption
of this, let a Line inform me: If the former,
expect me to return Thanks at your Feet, as soon as
the Obsequies of my Brother are perform'd; if the latter,
to hear I am no more. 

With what Transports of unbounded Joy she
read these Words, let those be judge who love like
her: A thousand, thousand Times she kiss'd the 

dear, the welcome Mandate; then put it to her
Heart, repeating to herself the ravishing Contents;––– 
then snatch'd it out again, as loth to lose the Sight
of what had given her so infinite a Satisfaction, that
scarce the Author of it, had he been present, could
have added to it; the Extasy so fill'd her Soul, that
she thought not of answering it, till a Servant inform'd
her the Messenger, who brought it, waited
to be dispatch'd. He shall not long, (cry'd she, starting
as it were from some delightful Dream,) and immediately
running to a Table whereon stood a Standish,
made him this Reply: 

To Don Myrtano.
In what Manner can a Person so much oblig'd receive
an Overture of Love, without appearing guilty
either of an Indecorum to herself, or Ingratitude to
you? If I accept too readily of the Heart you offer, how
shall I answer it to the Modesty of my Sex? And if I
reject it, what way is left for me to repay the many
Favours I am indebted for? Severe Necessity! that
whichsoever Path I tread, it leads to Condemnation;––– 
yet such is the Cruelty of my Fate! I therefore will
chuse neither, but remain unbyass'd till Time, and a
more perfect Acquaintance with your Humour, shall inform
me what will best become Bernado's Daughter 
Idalia. 
P. S. While I am a welcome Guest at Vicenza, I
shall expect you to tell me so, as frequently as you can. 

It was with all the Difficulty in the World she
restrain'd herself from writing with more Tenderness,
and when she read over what she was about to send,
it appeared so cold, and so far unlike the sincere Dictates
of her Wishes, that she could not forbear adding
a Postscript, for fear he should imagine her, indeed, 

altogether insensible of his Merit, and give over the
hopeless Prosecution; nor was she reconciled to what
she had done till the next Morning, much about the
same Hour she had received the former, she was
agreeably disturb'd from her Sleep by a second Billet;
the Contents of which were these: 

To the Adorable Idalia.
The Sight of your dear Hand gave me a Joy
too exquisite to be allay'd, even by the cold Reluctance
with which you seem to treat a Passion the sincerest
that ever Man profess'd, or Woman welcom'd. ––– 
Methinks there shou'd need no more to convince you of
the Power of your triumphant Charms, than two such
Victims as Ferdinand and Henriquez; and whenever
you doubt my Truth, it cannot be that you call in question
your own Beauty, but my Incapacity of distinguishing
it:––––But Time, (as you are pleased to say,) as it
will convince you, so I hope will also move you to compassionate
what is felt by 
Your most Faithful Slave,
Myrtano de Velago. 
P. S. The Body of the unfortunate Henriquez is this
Night to be reposited in the Tomb of his Ancestors, and
I hope To-morrow's Evening will bring me to Vicenza. ––– 
Prepare, if possible, to receive me with a Smile, lest I
envy the Condition of him I leave behind me, and regret
a Life made miserable by your Displeasure. 

There was not Abundance of Occasion for this
Pressure in the Postscript; the enamour'd Idalia would
have found it a difficult Task to have dress'd her
Face in Frowns whenever he appear'd, had she never so
much endeavour'd it; and she was so much an Enemy
to disguising her Sentiments, that he might easily 

read them in the Answer which she return'd. It
was in this Manner: 

To Don Myrtano.
If I were not willing to harbour a Thought so entirely
disagreeable to my own Desires, I should imagine
there was more of Raillery than Sincerity in the
Declaration your first Letter made me. I am not so
little conscious of my own Demerits, as to believe myself
capable of inspiring a Passion such as you describe;–––– 
but I shall make Allowances for that: I am sensible
you Men of Wit know how to magnify,–––and if I have
not the better Opinion of the small Share of Beauty I
am Mistress of, I shall most certainly of your Elegance,
in raising an Idea so infinitely beyond what it is in Reality. 
––––All I wish is, that in good earnest you may talk
yourself into an Imposition on your Judgment, and never
see more than now you seem to do, the Faults of 
Idalia. 
P. S. I shall impatiently expect you To-morrow at
Vicenza, and shall take care not to wear a Countenance
too melancholy, lest it should remind you (more than will
be for my Advantage) of our common Loss in the generous
Henriquez:––––Till then,––––Adieu. 

In Contemplations much the same as she had entertain'd
herself with the Night before, did she pass
this. The ensuing Day slid on insensibly, while she
was employ'd in studying Airs, and practising in her
Glass new Graces, to make the already-charm'd Myrtano
more enflamed. At length he came, and whether
the extraordinary Desire each had to please, or that
(as most People at some Times look more aimable
than at others) that Day they chanced to do so. But
the before too potent Charms of both, seem'd improv'd
at this second View: The sparkling Eyes of 

Myrtano, which before shone with Amazement at
the uncommon Beauties they beheld in Idalia's,
had now a tender Languor,––––a swimming Extacy,––– 
a soft, beseeching, nameless Loveliness, mix'd with
their Lustre, and spake without the Help of Words,
the Wishes of his Soul. The Mourning Dress he had on,
set off to vast Advantage the Delicacy of his Complection,
which was of so unmatch'd a Whiteness,
that there required all that Majesty and Loftiness of
Mien, which in his whole Deportment shew'd itself to
keep him from Effeminacy; and, indeed, never did
Nature unite such contrary Perfections with so engaging
a Harmony as in his Composition: A distant
View shew'd him all Hero, adorn'd with every manly
martial Grace, and inspired Awe in the admiring
Gazer; but his near Approach dissolv'd in softning
Languishments the Soul, and spoke him form'd for all
the Joys of Love. Thus, but far more enchanting than
Description can have Power to represent him, did he
appear to the transported Idalia; but that the Reader
may have some little Notion of his Charms, take the
Idea of 'em set down by her who best knew how to
paint them. 

The Character of Myrtano; writ by
Idalia, and found afterwards in her
Closet.

Bright, lovely, graceful, are all Words below
What to Myrtano's Character we owe:
Divinely glorious! Godlike! speaks but Part!
He yet has Charms which nearer touch the Heart!
These, awful Wonder, and our Homage claim,
But there's a Sweetness Language cannot name:
A Soul-enchanting Softness (far above
The Reach of Thought, unknowing him to prove)

Dwells in his Air, amidst his Glories plays,
And tempers, not diminishes the Blaze.
 HERE Fancy stoops to court the Aid of Sense,
Unable to conceive such Excellence!
Imagination may a Form create,
Correctly Lovely, and supremely Great;
But, Oh! how mean would that Idea be,
To what, indeed, is to be found in Thee!
Joy-mingled Wonder kindles at thy Sight,
And clothes our Admiration with Delight.
 AS Tapers languish at th' Approach of Day,
And by degrees melt slow their Shine away;
A while they glimmer with contracted Spires,
Trembling, unable to relax their Fires:
But when the Sun's broad Eye is open'd wide,
And Beams, thick flashing, shoot on every Side;
No more their emulative Force they try,
But quite o'erwhelm'd with Radiance sink, and die;
So those pale Lights, whose Glare late shar'd our Praise,
Are wholly lost in thy Almighty Blaze.
Eraz'd and blotted from the Book of Fame,
Her thousand Tongues swell with thy charmful Name:
No other Sound now strikes our ravish'd Ears,
No other Form in our glad View appears;
So fully o'er the Soul thy Influence reigns,
That not one Rebel-Thought thy Sway disdains.


Had the Lover of Idalia been as Poetically inclined,
'tis possible we might have had a better Description
of her transmitted to Posterity, than I am
able to gather from the imperfect Accounts I received
from those who gave me the History of her Life; 
but since that has not been done, every Body is at
liberty to form an Idea of what appears most pleasing
to them; for that she was one of the most lovely of
her Sex, is evident from that prodigious Power of
charming, which gain'd her almost as many Admirers,
as they had Eyes to gaze upon her. 

But to return to her Conversation with Myrtano:
––––It was such as was agreeable to their Characters; 
all Wit, all Elegance, all Tenderness, and
Love: They were equally transported with each other,
and 'tis hard to say which had the better in this Race
of Passion. Idalia, indeed, testified her's no other
Way than in list'ning with a pleas'd Attention to his
Vows; but there needed no more to make the happy
Lover consider her as half obtain'd already, and tho'
he did not immediately press for the Gratification of
his Wishes, he did not in the least despair. He made
her several Visits, in which nothing happen'd of any
greater Consequence than to increase her Admiration
of him. She never saw him without discovering
some new Perfection; and that Height of Passion
with which she at last regarded him, would be injured
by an ordinary Lover's Imagination of it: But
notwithstanding the rapturous Reflection of being beloved
by a Man who appear'd so every Way meritorious,
she had pretty near as equal a Share of Disquiet,
that he had never in all his Sollicitations mention'd the
least Word of Marriage. A thousand, and a thousand
Times he had told her, That he lived but in her
Sight:––––That he should court Death as a Blessing,
if any Accident should deprive him of her:––––That
the united Charms of her whole Sex besides, would be
ineffectual to alienate his Thoughts one Moment from
her;––––and swore as many Vows of an eternal Constancy,
as there were Saints in Heaven to witness
'em. She knew he aim'd with an unbounded Ardor
to possess her, but knew not by what Way he
wish'd to do so; and this, whenever it came cross
her Thoughts, embitter'd all the Sweetness of his
Love, and shook'd her to the Soul. She resolved at
length to summon all her Courage, to say something
to him which should oblige him to discover what his
Intentions were; and she had no sooner fix'd herself
in a Determination to do so, than she found she had
more Cause for it than before she had been sensible
of. 

There are Times when even the most Prudent
are not Masters of their Actions; how then could it
be expected that the Young, Gay, Enflamed Myrtano
should have always the Power of commanding
his, in Opportunities such as he enjoy'd: As yet,
indeed, he never had transgressed the strictest Rules
of Decency; but Desire becoming, by Restraint,
more fierce, at last grew wild, and would no longer
endure to be controul'd by dull Respect. 
He never came to Vicenza, but he staid a Night
or two: A little Room adjoining to Idalia's Chamber
was that in which they generally supp'd together,
and seldom parted early. As they were entertaining
each other on the usual Theme, and mingling Kisses
with their Vows of Passion, by some Accident his
Sleeve catching hold of a Corner of a Table on which
the Lights were set, he threw it down: What Lover
is not fond of Darkness? The impatient Myrtano bless'd
the happy Chance; and thinking this the lucky Moment
ordain'd to give him all his Soul at present
long'd for, he snatch'd the trembling Fair, and easily
finding his Way into the next Room, bore her
to the Bed, and was pretty near the Accomplishment
of his Desires, before the Surprise she was in, at this
sudden Change of his Behaviour, could permit her to
make any Resistance; but when she did, it was so
strenuously, that without being guilty of the same
Violence as Ferdinand had been, it was impossible for
him to proceed. In spite of all the tender Passion
with which she had regarded him,––––in spite of the
secret Inclinations which, perhaps at this very Instant
work'd very strongly within her in his Favour,––– 
in spite of all his Tears, his Prayers, his Vows, her
Virtue got the better, and triumph'd o'er Desire. But
tho' she had gain'd with such unequal Arms a Conquest
so truly glorious, she could not assure herself of
maintaining it; nor would consent to pardon his Attempt,
but on Condition he would leave her, and
retire that Moment to his own Appartment. He,
who was not of a Humour apt to despond, and had a 

real Passion for her, thought it best to comply, not
doubting but a second Endeavour might prevail on
her to bestow what he found he could not now obtain
but by Force. 
But his Behaviour had wrought a quite different
Effect on the Mind of Idalia than he imagin'd:–––– 
She had already suffer'd too much by that unruly Passion,
which goes by the mistaken Name of Love, to
think the Man who took the same Measures had any
other Design than to ruin her; and the Racks that
she endured in endeavouring to vanquish a Tenderness
which she had so much Reason to believe an Enemy
to her Honour, were past the Reach of Thought. 
Resolving, however, to be certain of the Truth of
what she fear'd, she put in Execution the Design she
before had form'd; and as soon as she saw him come
into her Chamber the next Morning, plucking up all
the Courage she was Mistress of, she saluted him in
this Manner: The Confusion I was in last Night, said
she, took from me the Power of resenting, as I ought,
the mean Opinion your Behaviour testified you have of
my Virtue. I had too entire a Confidence in your Honour
to imagine you were capable of harbouring a Thought
to my Prejudice; but as you have shew'd me the Error
I was guilty of, I shou'd indeed deserve Contempt, cou'd
I consent to remain longer under a Roof where the Master
of it makes so ill a Use of the Power my fond Belief has
given him. ––––It was to no purpose that he endeavour'd
to qualify the Bitterness of these Reproaches,
by all the tender Expressions he was able; for perceiving
he was yet far from making that Offer which
alone could convince her he meant her fair, she grew
more sensibly enraged; and now bent to try him to
the utmost, Speak no more, Don Myrtano, resumed
she, the Man that wou'd dishonour me can never love
me. ––––'Tis brutal Passion, not sincere Affection, that
acts as you have done. Did you, indeed, believe me
worthy of the Tenderness you so well can feign, Respect
had govern'd Appetite, and fetter'd loose Desire:–––– 
All Wishes, all Inclination wou'd have been stifled till 

the Church's Sanction had made it lawful:––––But I
perceive, too late for my Repose, (continued she, bursting
into Tears,) that I am fallen too low for such a Hope. 
She spoke no more for some Time, both in Expectation
of his Answer, and to indulge a few Sighs, which
the Suppression of had made uneasy to her. But he
was too much confounded at her last Words to be
able to return an immediate Answer to 'em: He loved
her indeed with a Transcendency of Passion, but there
were many Reasons which oppos'd his marrying her; 
it being wholly improper, however, for him to tell
her so, he artfully evading the Question, turn'd the
Discourse on the unbounded Force of Love, and how
little it was in the Power of a Person possess'd with
it, to repel the most unexcusable Instigations of it. 
But Idalia perceiving, with an Infinity of Grief and
Vexation, the Deceit, would not be so put off; and
in plain Terms assured him this should be the last Moment
of his seeing her, unless he gave her some convincing
Proof he had no other Intentions than what
would be consistent with her Honour to approve of. 
Not all his Wit, not all his perswasive Eloquence,
than which never Man had more, could furnish him
with Expressions prevalent enough to occasion the
least Alteration in her Humour:–––She still insisted on
the Article of Marriage; and he was at last obliged to
confess that there were some Particulors in his Circumstances
which as yet she was ignorant of, that
made it impossible for him to answer her Demands
in the Manner she desired at present. He palliated,
however, the Bitterness of this Reply with ten thousand
Protestations of eternal Love, and giving her a
solemn Oath, that in a few Days she should be satisfy'd
in every Thing, engaged a Promise from her not
to leave Vicenza till he return'd. 
Here was now an Alteration in the Fate of this
distracted Lady: She thought herself the most wretched
of created Beings; all that can be conceived of
Shame, Despair, Grief, Rage, and Horror, is short of
what she felt in this Disappointment of her highrais'd 

Hopes:––––She lov'd, she lov'd to Madness a
Man whom she was now too sensible aim'd only at
her Dishonour; and yet she was obliged to him; was
still under his Roof; and what was worse, in the
cruel Necessity of either still remaining so, or returning
to Venice, the Thought of which was Death,
after the Noise her late Adventures had made there. ––– 
O the Severity of the Struggle, when Love and Virtue
are at Variance, and rend the divided Soul with
equal Fury! ––––Yet such was her Condition; and,
unable entirely to vanquish the Efforts of either, by
Turns took part with both; and, 'tis uncertain whether
wholly following the Emotions of her impatient
Passion, she at last had not yielded to be Myrtano's
on any Terms, or, guided by the other, had
not resolved to quit his House, and fly the Danger
which so imminently threaten'd her if she staid, if in
the midst of her Distraction she had not receiv'd a
Letter which at once determined her Resolve. It
came to her the next Day after Myrtano had taken
Leave of her; and the Contents, which were written
in an unknown Hand, were these: 

To Donna Idalia de Bellsache.
If your Willingness to believe, has not already rendered
the Caution I would give you ineffectual, this
may prevent the Ruin which is design'd for you. 
MY Intimacy with Don Myrtano has not only drawn
from him the Secret of your being lodg'd at his Villa,
but also of the Professions he has made you. As you,
perhaps, are ignorant of his Engagements with the
Niece of Count Miramont, you may with the greater
Ease be brought to credit what he says:––––But after
the Knowledge of it, it will, to the Punishment the
Crime itself will draw upon you, add that of the Contempt
of the whole World, should you persist to listen to
his Vows. ––––In time, most lovely Idalia, retire from a
Place which is design'd the Scene of your Ruin. –––The 

vain, gay, inconstant Myrtano thinks no Woman worthy
of a serious Passion:––––And as Interest is the greatest
Motive of his Marriage, so to triumph over the Weakness
of your Sex, is the only Inducement to his Endeavours
of adding to the Number of those his Protestations
have undone, the credulous Idalia. ––––I have no other
Interest in giving you this Advice, than to save you the
Shame and Misery of a too-late Repentance, and my
Friend the Sin of having occasion'd it:––––What use you
make of it, I shall be informed by him, who will not be
at the Pains of concealing any Thing he accounts so trivial
as an Amour, such as he is entring into with you. ––– 
Be kind, therefore, to yourself, fly his destructive Charms; 
and when you have escaped the Snare, shall know who
was 
Your Adviser. 

This was enclosed in another Paper, on which
was writ these Lines: 

SINCE I writ the Enclosed, I hear by Don Myrtano,
that, apprized of his ungenerous Dealing, you design
to quit his House; if it really be your Intention, you
ought to have conceal'd it, since he resolves to take effectual
Measures to secure you there, at least, till, by Force or Insinuation,
he has obtained a Gratification of his Desires,––– 
which he tells me shall be delay'd no longer than a few
Days. 

As passionately enamour'd as Idalia was, she had
a Stock of Haughtiness, which nothing could surmount; 
and her Pride receiving as severe a Shock by
this Intelligence as her Virtue, it entirely turn'd the
Scale, and weigh'd down Love. –––'s Death! said she
to herself, dare he presume to think thus meanly of
me? ––––Sollicited for a Prostitute, while in the mean
Time his serious Vows are address'd to another! –––– 
O Torture! What has the Niece of Miramont to
boast superior to the Daughter of Bernardo? –––– 
False!––––stupid!––––blind!––––ungrateful Traytor! –––– 
But I'll not endure it! ––––Daggers or Poisons shall revenge 

me! ––––I'll murder him, and then myself! In
this Manner did she rave, till almost breathless with
the swelling Passion, she'd stop, and read the fatal
Scroll again; and coming to that Part of it which
mention'd that this unknown Adviser had his Intelligence
from Myrtano himself,–––Hell and Confusion,
cry'd she out, the Villain has expos'd me too! ––––My
easy Nature, and my fond Belief is Food for the base
Mirth of all his lewd Companions! ––––Every tender
Folly,––––each unguarded Languishment betray'd and
ridicul'd! Distraction! Can I live, and suffer it! –––– 
Then contemplating further on what she had read,
––––But yet, resum'd she, this is the least of Ills, that
is already done, the Monster threatens me with more
and greater. Oh! whither shall I turn to escape? 
As she was employ'd in these perplex'd Meditations,
a Servant that us'd to attend her in her Chamber,
came in to ask if she wanted any Thing. Idalia,
who was by Nature extremely violent in all her Passions,
and had taken the least Pains to vanquish 'em,
could not contain herself before this Creature; and
Jealousy being the uppermost Emotion of her Soul,
she presently enquir'd if she knew the Niece of Count
Miramont: To which the Wench having answer'd
that she did,–––And is she handsome? cry'd the other
impatiently. To an infinite Degree, said the cunning
Creature: Heaven never made a Face more beautiful,
except your own. –––No Flattery, resum'd Idalia, I am
not in a Humour to receive it. –––But if you would
oblige, inform me of all you know concerning the intended
Marriage between that Lady and your Master. 
Ardella, so she was call'd, affected a prodigious Surprise
at these Words, and suffer'd herself to be ask'd
a hundred Times before she made any Reply; and
when she did, it was in such a Manner as gave no
Satisfaction. This Behaviour put Idalia almost beside
herself; she was perswaded that she knew more
than she was willing to reveal; and, wild with the
Uncertainty, pray'd, promis'd, threaten'd, and accompany'd
all she said with such Pressures, that the 

other appear'd mov'd by 'em, and at last confessed,
That her Master was indeed to be married to that
Lady; that every Thing was at that very Time preparing
for their Nuptials;––––and that never were two
Persons more passionately charm'd with each other
than they appear'd to be. ––––But, Madam, added she
with a well-counterfeited Fear, should you reveal the
least Syllable of what I have told you, to my Master,
I am certain he wou'd not let me live an Hour. –––– 
Trouble not yourself, cry'd Idalia, interrupting her, I
never more will see him. ––––No, continued she, raising
her Voice, and stamping, I call just Heaven, and
every Saint to witness, I never will consent to see or
hear him more:––––Too much already have I listned to
his perjur'd Vows;––––which, when I do again, may all
the Plagues of Earth and Hell fall on me:––––May I
be ruin'd, then thrown off to scorn,––––driven round the
World with no Companion but my Infamy, and not one
Friend to pity, or relieve me, till some unlook'd for, horrid
kind of Death o'ertakes me, and sinks my Soul, with
all its Load of Guilt, beyond the reach of Mercy. –––– 
A thousand such like Imprecations did she make; 
but where to go to avoid the Penalty of them, she
was for a good while undetermined. At last she
remember'd to have heard of a Monastery at Verona,
which being a Place she was utterly unknown at,
she made choice of: It was there she design'd to
fix, knowing it would be easy for her, immediately
after she was introduc'd, to write to her Father
for a Supply of Money, against the Time of
her being initiated; for she was now in the Mind to
leave the World for ever. She could not think of
quitting Myrtano's House without the Knowledge of
Ardella, and therefore communicated to her what
her Intentions were; to which she, with a seeming
Reluctance, consented, and promis'd to order Things
for her Departure, with that Secrecy, that no other
Servant in the Family should have any Suspicion
of it. 

All the necessary Preparations for her little Journey
being made, by Break of Day she left Vicenza;
but with what Heart-Akings, those who, like her,
have tore themselves from all that's dear, can best be
judge. At her Departure she gave a Letter to Ardea,
with a pressing Entreaty to deliver it to Myrtano:
It was full of Upbraidings, mix'd with Tenderness,
and express'd in so moving a Manner the
Anguish of her Soul, that it was scarce possible for a
Heart which had ever known the Force of Love, to
read it without melting; and perhaps, even in the
midst of her Indignation, was not without a Wish that
it might bring him after her to Verona. ––––She had
still Remains enough of Vanity to desire to have
him in her power, tho' she had made so solemn a
Vow never to make any other Use of it, than to
disdain and hate him. 
But what befel her in her Way to Verona, and
the vast Variety of surprising Incidents which ensu'd
each other thro' the whole Course of her unhappy
Life, I must defer till another Opportunity; 
having already spun out the Beginning of her Misfortunes
to such a Length, that the Continuance of
them would give me a just Apprehension of becoming
tiresome to those I endeavour to divert. 
