

Has very little in it, besides a collection
of letters, some of which are much to
the purpose, others less so. 
Miss Betsy, after having taken leave
of mr. Saving, went to the apartment
of her friend, where she stayed supper,
not because she was at that time capable
of being entertained, either with the
elegancies of the table, or the company,
which happened to be pretty numerous; 
but merely to amuse and recover herself
from the shock, which the late discovery
of miss Flora's infidelity had given her. 
On her coming home, she found the
family not yet gone to bed, though it
was then near one o'clock. —Mr. Goodman
was in high good humour, and said
to her, “Miss Betsy you have lost some
hours of contentment by being abroad,
—mr. Trueworth has been here, and
did us the favour to pass the whole
evening with us; but that is not all,— 
three letters have been left for you,— 
two of them came by the post, and
are, I know, by the superscription, 
from mr. Francis Thoughtless, and
lady Trusty:—the other I am informed
was left for you by a porter, but
your curiosity must wait for these,— 
I have still better news for you,—your
eldest brother, mr. Thomas Thoughtless
is coming home,—I have received
a letter from him, which tells me, he has
finished his tour, and we shall soon
have him among us. —See,” continued
he, “what he says.” 
In speaking these words, he took the
letter out of his pocket, and gave her to
read:—it contained these lines: 

To mr.Goodman.
‘Worthy sir,
I have been for upwards of a month
detained on a party of pleasure, at
the chateau of monsieur le marquis de
St. Amand, so was not so happy to receive
yours of the seventh, and twenty-second
instant, till yesterday, when I
returned to Paris. —I thank you for
the long and particular account you give
me of those affairs which are entrusted
to your care. —As to what you tell me
concerning my brother Frank's having
left the university, I am not sorry for
it, nor can at all wonder, that a young 
fellow of his mettle should be willing
to exchange the hopes of a mitre for
a truncheon. —I have not heard from
him since I left Florence, but believe it
owing to his want of knowing where to
direct to me, my stages afterwards having
been pretty uncertain; but finding
by yours that he is now with sir Ralph
Trusty, shall accompany a letter I am
obliged to send to that gentleman, with
one to him. —I forgive my sister's not
writing when you did, as you give me
some hints she is likely soon to become
a bride:—a matter, I confess, sufficient
to engross the whole thoughts of a
young lady; be pleased to assure her,
of my good wishes in this, and all other
events. —As you say she has two very
advantageous offers, I flatter myself,
through your good advice and inspection,
she will take the best. 
‘In my last, I mentioned somewhat of
a design I had, to pass a few months in
the southern parts of this kingdom; but
I have since changed my mind, and am
determined on returning to my native
country with all possible expedition:— 
I believe you may expect me in three
or four weeks at farthest. —If, sir, you
could within that time hear of a house,
agreeably situated, for my use, I should 
esteem it as a considerable addition to
the favours of our family, and myself
in particular, has received from you
since the death of our dear father. —I
should approve of St. James's Square,
if rents are not too exorbitant; for in
that case a house in any of the adjoining
streets must content me:—I would
not willingly exceed an hundred, or an
hundred and ten pounds per annum; 
but would be as near the park and palace
as possible. 
‘I kiss lady Mellasin's and her fair daughter's hands, and am,
With very great respect,
Sir,
Your most obliged,
And most obedient servant,
T. Thoughtless.’ 

Miss Betsy was very glad to find a
brother, who had now been near five
years abroad, was at last coming home,
and much more so, that he intended to
set up housekeeping in London, because,
as doubting not he would be pleased to
have her with him, she would have a fair 
pretence for quitting mr. Goodman's
house, and the society of miss Flora,
who had now rendered herself so irksome
to her. 
This did not hinder her, however, from
reproaching mr. Goodman for having
mentioned to her brother any thing in relation
to her lovers,—“You see, sir,” 
said she, “that the one of them has already
abandoned me, and you will also
see, in a short time, that the other will
be little the better for his rival's resignation.” 
To this mr. Goodman pleasantly replied,
that whatever she pretended at present,
he believed better things from her
good sense, and the merits of mr. Trueworth; 
to which miss Betsy, unwilling to
prolong the conversation, only told him,
he would find himself mistaken, and ran
hastily up stairs to examine the contents
of those letters, which, she had heard, lay
on her toilet, ready for her perusal. — 
The first she broke open was from miss
Forward, knowing it to be her's by the
hand, and eager to see the event of a
fate, which, by the history she had given
her, had appeared so doubtful. 

To missBetsy Thoughtless.
‘Dear miss Betsy,
Since I saw you I have been driven
to the last despair:—the kind supply
you left with me was quite exhausted,
and I must infallibly have perished,
through want of the common
necessaries of life, and the cruel usage
of my mercenary landlady, if my poor
aunt in the country had not sent me a
small present, which for a small space
of time afforded relief, but accompanied
with the melancholly account that my
father was inexorable to her perswasions,
—would not hear of my return to
L&wblank;e, and vowed never to see me
more, or own me for his child:—soon
was I again reduced to the lowest ebb
of misery,—had scarce sufficient to furnish
the provisions of another day, and
was even threatened to be turned out
of doors by the inhuman hag, who, I
very well remember, you said, had her
soul pictured in her countenance;— 
but, my dear friend, in the midst of
this distress, and when I thought no
human help was near, my affairs took
a most sudden and unexpected turn. — 
Fortune threw in my way a kinsman of
my mother's, whom I had never seen, 
nor even heard of before;—he compassionated
my calamitous condition,— 
removed me from that dismal place,— 
allows me a handsome maintenance, and
has promised to continue it, till nature,
and the endeavours of my good aunt,
shall work my father to a more gentle
temper. 
‘I long to see you, and would have
waited on you to return the money you
were so kind to lend me, but knew not
whether it were proper for me to do so,
as I am wholly unacquainted with the
family where you are. —A visit from
you would therefore now be doubly
agreeable, as I am lodged in a house
less unworthy to receive you, than that
wretched one to which I before took
the liberty to make you an invitation. 
‘You may now find me at mr. Screener's,
the very next door to Linko's-Head,
in Tavistock-street, in Covent-garden,
where, I flatter myself, your
good-nature will soon bring you to her,
who is impatient for that happiness, and
will always be, dear miss Betsy, 
‘Your very affectionate,
And most humble servant,
A. Forward. 
‘P.S. I had forgot to tell you that I am
every Friday engaged at my above-mentioned
good cousin's and should
never have forgiven myself, if by this
omission you had lost your labour,
and I the pleasure of your company.’ 

Miss Betsy, who little doubted the sincerity
of this epistle, was very much
touched with it, and resolved to comply
with the invitation it contained, in a short
time. —She now began to grow pretty
sleepy, and would, probably, have deferred
the perusal of the other two letters,
'till next morning, if miss Flora had not
come up to go to bed:—to avoid, therefore,
entering into any conversation with
her, she took up the first that came to
hand, and found the contents as follows: 

To missBetsy Thoughtless.
‘My dear sister,
As mr. Goodman's endeavours for
procuring me a commission have
not yet been attended with the desired
success, I have been prevailed upon by
the sollicitations of my friends, to give
them my promise of passing some part
of the hunting season in L&wblank;e, so
shall not see you so soon as my last 
might make you expect;—but I will
not dissemble, so far as to tell you,
that to give you this information is the
chief motive of my writing to you at
present;—no, my dear Betsy! it is one
of much more consequence that now
directs my pen,—it is to give you
such remonstrances, as, I fear, you
stand but in too much need of, to beware
how you disregard the smiles of
fortune, and become the enemy of your
own happiness. —I received a letter
yesterday from mr. Trueworth;—he
complains sadly of my staying in the
country, and seems to think my presence
necessary for the advancement of
his courtship to you. —I shall be always
glad to be obliged by you on any
score, but extremely sorry to find my
interests with you, as a brother, should
have more effect on you than your own
reason, and the merits of one of the
most deserving men on earth. —I have
no pretence to claim any authority over
you by the ties of blood, but may certainly
flatter myself with having some
influence over you as a friend,—enough
at least I hope to prevail on you to
consider seriously on this matter, and
am perswaded, that if you once bring
yourself to do so, mr. Trueworth will
want no other advocate to plead his 
cause, than your own understanding. — 
I am willing to believe the assurance
you gave me in your last, of your heart
being free from any impression yet endeavoured
to be made upon it; did I
think otherwise I should be entirely silent
on this occasion. —I would be far,
my dear sister, from opposing your inclinations,
I would only wish to direct
them where there is a prospect of the
most felicity:—let me conjure you,
therefore, to open your unprejudiced
eyes, nor be wilfully blind to the good
intended for you by your better stars. 
—As you can never expect proposals
of more advantage, than those the love
of mr. Trueworth has inclined him to
make you,—I may be pretty confident,
that you have not a friend in the world,
who would not highly condemn your
want of giving due attention to it. — 
Forgive the warmth with which I express
myself, as it springs from the sincerest
zeal for the establishment of your
interest and happiness, than which nothing
is more at the heart of him,
who is, 
With the most tender regard,
Dear sister,
Your very affectionate friend,
And brother,
F. Thoughtless.’ 

While miss Betsy was reading these
letters, miss Flora, who immediately followed
her into the chamber, would fain
have interrupted her by one impertinent
question or other; but receiving no answer
to any thing she said, gave over
speaking, and went directly to bed, and
miss Betsy breaking open the third and
last letter she had to peruse, found it
contained as follows: 

To missBetsy Thoughtless.
‘My dear miss Betsy,
I had wrote to you before, if I had
not been prevented by an inflammation
in my eyes, which, for some time
past, has rendered my pen of no use
to me, and I did not chuse to employ
an emanuensis in what I have to say
to you, but now take the first opportunity,
being somewhat better, of giving
you that advice, which, it may be
reasonably supposed, a person of your
years and inexperience of the world may
stand in need of; or, if not so, will be
of some service in corroborating the
good sentiments you are already inspired
with. 
‘It was with an extream concern I
heard what happened on your account
at Oxford, and hope you have so well
reflected on the danger you were in, the
consequences that attended it, and how
much worse might probably have ensued,
as to be ever since more circumspect
and careful with what company
you trust yourself. —I am far from reproaching
you with the effects of an
accident altogether unforeseen, and impossible
to be even guessed at by you,
but would beg you to keep always in
your mind, that what has been, may
some time or other be again, and that
repeated inadvertencies may make heaven
weary of continuing its protection; 
—but, my dear miss Betsy, it is not
in my apprehensions of your own conduct,
that the greatest part of my fear
for you consists;—the world, alas!
and more particularly the place you live
in, affords but too many wretches, of
both sexes, who make it their business
to entrap unwary innocence, and the
most fair pretences are often the cover
to the most foul designs:—there are
so many daily Instances of the strictest
caution not being always a sufficient
security against the snares laid for our
destruction, that I look on it as half a 
miracle, when a young woman, handsome,
and exposed as you are, escapes
unprejudiced, either in her virtue or
reputation. —Consider, my dear child,
you have no tender mother, whose precepts
and example might keep you
steady in the paths of prudence;—no
father, whose authority might awe the
daring libertine from any injurious attack; 
and are but too much mistress of
yourself. —In fine, thus environed with
temptations, I see no real defence for
you but in a good husband. —I have
ever condemned rushing too early into
marriage, and of risquing for the sake
of one convenience, the want, perhaps,
of a thousand others; but when an offer
happens to be made, equally honourable
and advantageous, and which affords
an almost assured prospect of every
thing necessary to compleat the happiness
of that state, it cannot be too soon
in life accepted. —I hear with pleasure,
that an offer, such as I have been describing,
is now presented to you, and
it would give me an adequate concern
to hear that you had rejected it. —I
need not tell you I mean mr. Trueworth; 
for though there may be many
others who make their addresses to you
on the same score, yet I am entirely ignorant
of every thing relating to them; 
but I am well assured, not only by your
brother's testimony, but by several gentlemen
of this county, that in the fortune,
person, and amiable qualities of
that gentleman are comprised all that
you either can, or ought to wish in a
husband:—trifle not then with a heart
so deserving of you;—scruple not to
become a wife, when merit, such as his,
invites, and so many reasons concur to
urge you to consent. —Believe me,
there is more true felicity in the sincere
and tender friendship of one man of
honour, than in all the flattering professions
of a thousand coxcombs. —I
have much more to say to you on this
head, but shall defer it, 'till you let
me know with what kind of sentiments
it is that you regard the gentleman I
have been speaking of, which I beg you
will do without disguise:—be satisfied
that the secret of your real inclinations
will be as safe in my keeping as your
own, and that I am, 
With the most perfect amity,
My dear miss Betsy,
Your constant friend,
And humble servant,
M. Trusty.’ 

The time of night did not permit miss
Betsy to give these letters all the attention
which the writers of them, doubtless,
desired she should do; but she locked
them carefully in her cabinet, resolving
to consider the purport of them more seriously
before she returned any answer. 