

Among other things necessary to be told,
gives an account of the success of a
plot laid by mr. Chatfree, for the discovery
of miss Betsy's real inclinations. 
Though mr. Goodman had as yet
no intimation of the accidents of that 
morning, yet was he extremely uneasy; 
—the looks, as well as words of mr.
Staple, in going out of his house the day
before, were continually in his mind, and
he could not forbear apprehending some
fatal consequence would, one time or other,
attend the levity of miss Betsy's behaviour
and conduct, in regard to her admirers:
he was also both surprized and vexed, that
mr. Bloomacre, from whom he expected
an explanation of the Westminster-abbey
adventure, had not come according to his
request. —This last motive of his disquiet
was, however, soon removed: mr. Bloomacre
was no less impatient to clear himself
of all blame concerning the transactions
of that night, had no sooner finished
his affair with lord &wblank;, and was dismissed
by the high-bailiff, than he came
directly to mr. Goodman's, and recited
to him, and all the ladies, the whole of
what had passed. 
Miss Betsy laughed prodigiously, but
mr. Goodman shook his head, on hearing
the particulars related by mr. Bloomacre,
and, after that gentleman was gone, reproved,
as he thought it his duty to do,
the inconsiderateness of her conduct: — 
he told her, that as she was alone, she
ought to have left the abbey as soon as
divine service was ended;—that for a 
person of her sex, age, and appearance,
to walk in a place where there were always
a great concourse of young sparks,
who come for no other purpose than to
make remarks upon the ladies, could not
but be looked on as very odd by all who
saw her. —“There was no rain,” said
he, “till a long time after the service
was ended, and you might then, in all
probability, have got a chair;—or, if
not, the walk over the park could not
have been a very great fatigue.” 
Miss Betsy blushed extremely, not
through a conscious shame of imagining
what she had done deserved the least rebuke,
but because her spirit, yet unbroke,
could not bear controul: —she replied,
that as she meant no ill, those who censured
her were most in fault. —“That
is very true,” answered mr. Goodman; 
“but, my dear child, you cannot but know
it is a fault which too many in the
world are guilty of. —I doubt not of
your innocence, but would have you
consider, that reputation is also of some
value;—that the honour of a young
maid like you, is a flower of so tender
and delicate a nature, that the least breath
of scandal withers and destroys it. — 
In fine, that it is not enough to be
good, without behaving in such a manner 
as shall make others acknowlege
us to be so.” 
Miss Betsy had too much understanding
not to be sensible what her guardian
said, on this occasion, was perfectly just; 
and also, that he had a right to offer his
advice, whenever her conduct rendered it
necessary, but could not help being vexed,
that any thing she did should be liable to
censure, as she thought it merited none:
—she made no further reply, however,
to what mr. Goodman said, though he
continued his remonstrances, and probably
would have gone on yet longer, if not interrupted
by the coming in of mr. Chatfree. 
—This gentleman having parted from the
two wounded rivals came directly to mr.
Goodman's, in order to see how miss
Betsy would receive the intelligence he
had to bring her. 
After paying his compliments to mr.
Goodman, and the other ladies, he came
toward miss Betsy, and looking on her
with a more than ordinary earnestness in
his countenance, “Ah, madam!” said he,
“I shall never hereafter see you without
remembring what Cowley says of a lady
who might I suppose be like you: 

“So fatal, and withal so fair,
“We're told deftroying angels are.”

Though miss Betsy was not at that
time in a humour to have any great relish
for raillery, yet she could not forbear
replying to what this old gentleman said,
in the manner in which she imagined he
spoke. —“You are, at least, past the
age of being destroyed by any weapons
I carry about me,” cried she;—“but
pray what meaning have you in this
terrible simile?” —“My meaning is
as terrible as the simile,” answered he; 
“and though I believe you to be very
much the favourite of heaven, I know
not how you will atone for the mischief
you have been the occasion of
this morning;—but it may be,” continued
he, “you think it nothing that
those murdering eyes of yours have
set two gentlemen a fighting.” 
Miss Betsy, supposing no other than
that he had heard of the quarrel between
mr. Bloomacre and lord &wblank;, replied
merrily, “Pray accuse my eyes of no such
thing,—they are very innocent I assure
you.” —“Yes,” cried mr. Goodman,
and lady Mellafin at the same time, “we
can clear miss Betsy of this accusation.” 
“What!” rejoined mr. Chatfree, hastily,
“was not mr. Staple and mr. Trueworth
rivals for her love?” —“Mr. 
Staple and mr. Trueworth,” said miss
Betsy, in a good deal of consternation,
“pray what of them!” “Oh! the most
inveterate duel,” answered he, “they
fought above half an hour, and poor
mr. Staple is dead of his wounds.” — 
“Dead!” cried miss Betsy, with a great
scream—lady, Mellasin and miss Flora
seemed very much alarmed; but mr.
Goodman was ready to sink from his
chair, 'till mr. Chatfree, unseen by miss
Betsy, winked upon him, in token that
he was not in earnest in what he said. 
The distraction in which this young
lady now appeared,—the concern she expressed
for mr. Staple, and her indignation
against mr. Trueworth, would have made
any one think the former had much the
preference in her esteem, 'till mr. Chatfree,
after having listened to her exclamations
on this score, cried out on a sudden,
“Ah, madam, what a mistake has the
confusion I was involved in made me
guilty of. —Alas! I have deceived
you, though without designing to do
so,—mr. Staple lives,—it is mr. Trueworth
who has fallen a sacrifice to his
unsuccessful passion for you.” 
“Trueworth dead!” cried miss Betsy,
“O God!—and does his murderer live 
to triumph in the fall of the best and
most accomplished man on earth? — 
Oh! may all the miseries, that heaven
and fortune can inflict, light on him! 
—Is he not secured, mr. Chatfree? — 
Will he not be hanged? 
Mr. Chatfree could hold his countenance
no longer, but bursting into a violent
fit of laughter, “Ah, miss Betsy!— 
miss Betsy!” said he, “I have caught
you?—Mr. Trueworth I find then is
the happy man.” —“What do you
mean mr. Chatfree?” cried miss Betsy
very much amazed. —“I beg your
pardon,” answered he, “for the fright
I have put you in; but be comforted,
for mr. Trueworth is not dead I assure
you, and, I doubt not, lives as much
your slave as ever.” —“I do not care
what he is, if he is not dead,” said
miss Betsy; “but pray for what end did
you invent this fine story?” —“Nay,
madam,” resumed he, “it is not altogether
my own inventing neither; 
for mr. Trueworth and mr. Staple have
had a duel this morning, and both of
them are wounded, though not so dangerously
as I pretended, meerly to try,
by the concern you would express,
which of them you were most inclined 
to favour,—and I have done it i'faith,
—mr. Trueworth is the man.” 
Lady Mellasin, who had not spoke
during all this conversation, now cried
out, “Aye, mr. Chatfree, we shall soon
have a wedding, I believe.” —“Believe,
madam,” said he, “why your
ladyship may swear it;—for my part
I will not give above a fortnight for
the conclusion,—and I will venture to
wish he fair bride joy on the occasion,
for he is a fine gentleman,—a very
fine gentleman indeed, and I think she
could not have made a better choice.” 
With these words he wiped his mouth,
and advanced to miss Betsy, in order to
salute her; but pushing him scornfully
back, “None of your flights, good mr.
Chatfree,” said she, “if I thought
you were in earnest, I would never see
the face of mr. Trueworth more.” 
This did not hinder the pleasant old
gentleman from continuing his raillery; 
—he plainly told miss Betsy that she was
in love,—that he saw the marks of it
upon her, and that it was in vain for her
to deny it. —Lady Mellasin laughed very
heartily to see the fret miss Betsy was in,
at hearing mr. Chatfree talk in this manner; 
but miss Flora, to whom one would 
imagine this scene would have been diverting
enough, never opened her lips to
utter one syllable; but made such grimaces,
as had they been taken notice of,
would have shewn how little she was
pleased with it. 
Mr. Goodman had been so much struck
with the first account given by mr. Chatfree,
that he was not to be roused by any
thing that gentleman said afterwards;— 
he reflected, that though the consequences
of the rencounter between the two rivals
had been less fatal than he had been made
to imagine, yet it might have happened,
and indeed been naturally expected; he
could not therefore forbear interrupting
his friend's mirth, by remonstrating to
miss Betsy, in the most serious terms, the
great error she was guilty of, in encouraging
a plurality of lovers at the same
time: —he told her, that gentlemen of
mr. Trueworth's and mr. Staple's character
and fortune, ought not to be trifled with,
“Suppose,” said he, “that one or both
of them had indeed been killed, how
could you have answered to yourself,
or to the world, the having been the
sad occasion?” 
“Lord, sir,” replied miss Betsy, walking
up and down the room in a good 
deal of agitation,—“what would you
have me do? —I do not want the men
to love me,—and if they will play
the fool and fight, and kill one another,
it is none of my fault.” 
In fine, between mr. Chatfree's raillery,
and mr. Goodman's admonitions, this
poor young lady was teized beyond all
patience, and finding it impossible to put
a stop to either, she flew out of the room,
ready to cry with vexation. 
She was no sooner gone, than mr.
Goodman took mr. Chatfree into his closet,
and having learned from him all the
particulars of the late duel, and consulted
with him what was proper to be done to
prevent any farther mischief of the like
sort, they went together to mr. Staple's
lodging, in order to use their utmost endeavours
to prevail on that gentleman to
desist the prosecution of his addresses to
miss Betsy. 