

Shews some part of the consequences,
produced by the foregoing occurrence. 
Though mr. Goodman very easily
perceived the wife of Marplus had
not made the discovery she had done
through any principle of conscience, or
true contrition for having been an accomplice
in the base action she had revealed,
but meerly in revenge to a husband, who
had used her ill, and was about to leave
her, yet he thought it behoved him to
draw all the advantages he could, from
the knowledge of so astonishing, and so
alarming a secret. 
He therefore wasted no time, either in
unavailing reflections on his own inconsiderateness
in marrying at his years, a
woman, such as lady Mellasin, nor in
exclamations on her ingratitude and perfidiousness,
but convinced beyond a doubt
of the wrongs he had sustained, bent his
whole mind on doing himself justice, in
as ample a manner as possible, on the aggressors. 
The lawyer, to whom he had applied
the day before, was not only a person who
had transacted all the business he had in
his way, but was also his acquaintance of
a long standing, and very good friend,
and it was no inconsiderable consolation,
under so grievous a misfortune, that he
was not at a loss whom he should consult
on an affair that required the greatest integrity,
as well as ability. 
That gentleman, luckily for mr. Goodman's
impatience, came to enquire how
he did, after his last night's shock, just
as he was preparing to wait on him, in
order to acquaint him with the more
stabbing one he had since received:— 
this injured husband rejoiced, as much as
the present unhappy situation of his mind
would permit, at the sight of his friend,
and related to him, in as brief a manner
as he could, the sum of the whole story
he had received from mrs. Marplus. 
“Good God!” said the lawyer, as soon
as mr. Goodman had given over speaking,
“I am confounded;—but pray, sir,
how have you resolved to do? —In
what way will you proceed?” — 
“That I must ask of you,” replied
mr. Goodman, hastily; “you may be 
certain I will not be passive in this
matter. —I only want to know what
course I am to steer.” —“Could you
consent,” cried the lawyer, after a
pause, “to be divorced from lady
Mellasin?” —“Consent!” said mr.
Goodman, with more warmth than before, 
“the most terrible vexation I endure,
dwells in the consideration, that
she is still my wife;—were once that
name erased, I think I should be easy.” 
—“I hope then soon to see you so,” 
said the other; “but the first thing we
have to do is to get the affidavits of
the two witnesses, and then arrest Marplus. 
—I shall order it so with his lawyer,
whom I have under my thumb, on
account of some mal-practices I have
detected him in, that he shall not dare
to procure bail for this unworthy client. 
—In fine, sir,” continued he,
“I do not doubt, the case being so plain,
but to relieve you from paying the
penalty of the bond; but, in the mean
time, what will you do with lady Mellasin? 
—It is necessary she should be
removed out of the house.” —“The
house is hell to me while she is in it,” 
said mr. Goodman. —They had some
further talk on this affair, and the manner
in which mr. Goodman was to conduct 
himself being settled, a footman was
sent to bid mrs. Prinks come down. 
That confidanté of all her lady's guilty
secrets could not, now detected, behold
the face of mr. Goodman, without the
extremest terror and confusion:—he perceived
it, as she stood trembling scarce
half within the door, not daring to approach,
—“Come near,” said he, “you
are a servant, and below the effects of
my resentment, which otherwise you
might have cause to dread. —I have a
message to send by you to your lady,
—take care you deliver it in the words
I give it.” —On which she ventured
to advance a few steps farther into the
room, and he went on, with a more authoritative
voice than she had ever heard
him assume before, in this manner: 
“Tell her,” said he, “that for many
reasons I find it wholly improper she
should remain any longer under the
same roof with me,—desire her therefore
to provide a lodging immediately,
for herself, and all belonging to her; 
—you must all depart this very night,
so it behoves her to be speedy in her
preparations.” —“Tonight, sir!” 
cried mrs. Prinks? —“I have said it,” 
rejoined he, fiercely,—“begone! it is 
not your business to reply, but to
obey.” —She spoke no more, but retired
with much greater haste than she
had entered. 
Mr. Goodman, and his lawyer, were
pursuing their discourse, on the present
melancholly occasion, when the butler
came in to lay the cloth for dinner: as
soon as he had finished, and set all the
necessary utensils on the table, mr. Goodman
ordered him to go to miss Betsy's
chamber, and desire her to come down to
dinner. 
That young lady had passed the morning
in a very disagreeable manner:— 
the want of repose the night before had
made her lie in bed till the day was
very far advanced:—when she got up,
good-manners, good-breeding, and even
common civility, obliged her to enquire
after lady Mellasin's health; and being
told, that she was still in bed, the same
motives induced her to pay her compliments
in person. —On entering the chamber,
a mournful scene presented itself
to her eyes:—lady Mellasin sat up, supported
by her pillows, with all the tokens
of despair and grief, in every feature of
her face;—miss Flora had thrown herself
on a carpet by the bed-side, her head 
leaning on the ruëlle, and her eyes half
drowned in tears;—mrs. Prinks stood
at a little distance from them, pale and
motionless as a statue. —The approach
of miss Betsy made some alteration in
their postures, and seemed to awake them
from that lethargy of silent woe;—lady
Mellasin began to exclaim on the hardness
of her fate, and the cruelty of mr.
Goodman, who, she said, seemed glad of
a pretence to throw off that affection,
which she had flattered herself would
have been as lasting as life, and bewailed
herself in terms so tender and pathetic,
that in spite of the little respect, that miss
Betsy in reality had for her, and the just
indignation she had for some time conceived
against miss Flora, her gentle,
generous heart was touched with the
strongest emotions of pity and forgiveness. 
As she was far from suspecting all the
grounds lady Mellasin had for this immoderate
sorrow, and in her soul believing
that mr. Goodman would soon be
brought to forgive both the affront and
the damage his fortune had suffered on
her account, she begged her ladyship
would not indulge the dictates of despair,
but reflect on the natural sweetness of mr.
Goodman's disposition,—the great love 
he had for her, and above all his strict
adherence to those principles of religion,
which forbid a lasting resentment;— 
and, in fine, reminded her of every thing
she could think on for her consolation. 
None of them having yet breakfasted,
she stayed and drank coffee with them,
nor would her compassionate temper have
permitted her to quit them so soon as
she did, if she had not been called away
to a milliner, who was come with some
things she had the day before ordered to
be brought, and she had but just dispatched
this little affair, and got out of
her deshabille, when she had received
the above-mentioned message from mr.
Goodman. 
On her coming into the parlour, where
dinner was that moment serving up, “I
must request the favour of you, miss
Betsy,” said mr. Goodman, “to do
the honours of my table to-day.” — 
I shall do the best I can, sir,” replied
miss Betsy, modestly, “but am very
sorry for the occasion, which obliges
me to take upon me an office I am so
little accustomed to.” —“You will be
the better able to discharge it when it
becomes your duty,” said mr. Goodman,
with a half smile, “but I believe 
this is the only time I shall put you
to it. —I have a kinswoman, who I
expect will be so good as to take care
of the affairs of my family henceforward.” 
—“O, sir,” cried miss Betsy,
with a great deal of concern, “I hope
lady Mellasin has not for ever forfeited
her place.” 
Mr. Goodman was about to make some
reply, when they heard the voice of that
lady, whom miss Betsy had just mentioned,
extremely loud upon the stairs,— 
“I will not be used in this manner,” 
cried she, “if I must go, let him tell
me so himself.” —On this mr. Goodman
grew extremely red:—“Go,” 
said he, to the footman that waited at
table, “and tell lady Mellasin I will not
be disturbed.” —“Hold,” cried the
lawyer, “permit me, sir, to moderate
this matter.” —In speaking these words,
he rose hastily, and without staying to
hear what mr. Goodman would say, ran
to prevent lady Mellasin from coming
in. —While he was gone, “Yes, miss
Betsy,” said mr. Goodman, “you will
lose your companion;—miss Flora,
with her mother, leaves my house tonight.” 
Miss Betsy, who had gone out of lady
Mellasin's chamber, before mrs. Prinks
brought her this piece of intelligence from
mr. Goodman, was prodigiously surprised
to hear him speak in this manner. —“It
is a sudden turn, indeed,” pursued he; 
“but the reasons which urge me to this
separation, will hereafter appear such
as I neither could nor ought to have
resisted.” —Miss Betsy only replying,
that he was certainly the best judge
of what he did, no farther discourse
happened on this subject, nor indeed
on any other for some moments.” 
At last, however, mr. Goodman taking
notice, that she looked more than ordinarily
serious, “Perhaps,” said he, “you
may think my house too melancholly
for you, when they are gone. —The
relation I intend to bring home, though
a perfect good woman, is pretty far
advanced in years, and I believe receives
but few visits, especially from
the younger sort;—but as the house I
have hired for mr. Thoughtless will be
ready in a day or two, I should imagine
he would be glad to have you
with him, 'till you marry;—but this,” 
continued he, “is at your own option,
—I but mention it, because I would 
have you entirely easy in this point,
and consider what it is will most contribute
to make you so.” 
Miss Betsy had only time to thank him
for his goodness, before the lawyer came
down:—that gentleman had found a
more difficult task than he had expected,
in bringing lady Mellasin to submit to
the injunctions she had received from her
husband,—not that she had the least
spark of conjugal affection for him, as
the reader may very well suppose, or
would have wished ever to see him more,
if she could have lived without him in
the same fashion she did with him; but
the thoughts of leaving her large and
richly furnished house,—her fine sideboard
of plate,—her coach,—her equipage,
and all those other ensigns of opulence
and state she now enjoyed, were insupportable
to her, and having in vain
essayed what a feigned penitence and tenderness
could do, to work him to forgiveness,
had now resolved to try the effect
of a more haughty and imperious deportment,
—“I will make him know I am
his wife,” cried she, “and whatever
he is possest of, I am an equal sharer
in:—let him not therefore think, that
wherever he is master, I shall cease to
be mistress.” 
The lawyer then remonstrated to her,
that though it were true as she said, that
she had a right to partake of his fortune,
yet it was still in the power of a husband
to oblige her to receive the benefit of
that right, in what manner, and in what
place, he should think proper:—he told
her, mr. Goodman was determined that
she should quit his house, and that all applications,
made by her to the contrary,
would be fruitless, and exasperate him
the more, and only serve to widen the
unhappy breach between them. —“If
mr. Goodman,” said he, “has no other
complaint against your ladyship, than
simply his paying the penalty of the
bond, and it may be some other
trifling debts, I cannot think he will,
for any length of time, persevere in
his present inflexibility of temper.” — 
These arguments, and some others he
made use of, enforced with all the rhetoric
and art he was master of, at last
convinced her, that it was best for her to
yield with a seeming willingness to the
fate it was not in her power to avoid and
she promised him to send Prinks directly
to hire an apartment for her, at a house
near Golden Square, with the mistress of
which she had some small acquaintance. 
The whole time this gentleman had
been with lady Mellasin, the meat was
kept upon the table, but he would not
stay to eat,—“We have not a minute
to lose,” said he to mr. Goodman;— 
“let us go, sir, and dispatch what we
have to do.” —With these words they
both went hastily out of the doors, leaving
miss Betsy in a good deal of consternation
at what they were about. 