


Is more full of business than entertainment. 

While mr. Trueworth was thus
prosecuting a suit, which every time
he saw the lovely Harriot redoubled his
impatience to accomplish, mr. Francis
Thoughtless had been twice at his lodgings
without finding him at home; but
on that gentleman's leaving his name the
second time, and saying, he would come
again the next morning, the other thought
himself under an indispensible necessity of
staying to receive his visit. 
The meeting of these two was extremely
civil and polite, but far from that cordial
familiarity which used to pass between
them, especially on the side of mr. Francis. 
—After mr. Trueworth had congratulated
him on the recovery of his health,
and coming to town, they fell into some
discourse on ordinary affairs, without the
least mention of miss Betsy, by either
party, for a considerable time, till her
brother growing a little impatient, that
the other should say nothing to him on 

an affair, in which he had made him his
confidant, and which he had taken so
much pains to forward, said to him, with
an air partly gay, and partly serious,— 
‘I was surprised on my arrival to be
told, that a passion so violent, as that
you pretended for my sister, should all
on a sudden vanish, and that a thing,
which I once thought so near being concluded,
was entirely broken off.’ 
‘Things of that nature,’ replied mr.
Trueworth, coldly, ‘are never concluded
till accomplished:—accidents sometimes
intervene to separate persons, who
have seemed most likely to be united
for ever, which, indeed, never was the
case between me and that lady.’ 
‘Yet, sir,’ rejoined the other, a little
irritated at his manner of speaking, ‘I
think, that when a gentleman has made
his addresses to a young lady of family
and character, for any length of time,
and in the public manner you did, some
cause ought to be assigned for his deserting
her.’ 
‘I am under no obligation,’ said mr.
Trueworth, very gloomily, ‘to give an
account of my behaviour to any one
whatever; but in consideration of our 

friendship, and the love I once had for
your sister, I shall make no scruple to
tell you, that a woman of her humour
would suit but ill with a man of mine; 
—as to any farther ecclaircisement of
this affair, it is from herself alone you
must receive it.’ —‘She shewed me a
letter from you, sir,’ cried mr. Francis,
hastily. —‘That might then suffice to
inform you,’ answered mr. Trueworth,
‘that in what I have done, I but obeyed
the dictates of my honour.’ —‘Honour!’ 
cried the other, fiercely, and
laying his hand upon his sword, ‘What
is it you mean, sir? Did honour oppose
your marriage with my sister?’ 
‘No menaces,’ said mr. Trueworth,
with a gravity which was pretty near disdain,
—‘you know me incapable of fear; 
—I have fought for your sister, but
will never fight against her. —I injure
not her reputation;—on the contrary,
I would defend it if unjustly attacked,
even at the hazard of my life; but as
to love or marriage, these are things
now out of the question,—we both,
perhaps, have other views, and the less
is said of what is past the better.’ 
Mr. Francis naturally took fire on the
least suspicion of an indignity offered to 

him, but when once convinced of his
mistake, was no less ready to repent and
acknowledge it;—he had seen many instances
of the honour, generosity, and
sincerity of mr. Trueworth; he had also
been witness of some of the levity and
inconsiderateness of his sister, and the reflection
of a moment served to make him
see, this change had happened merely
through her own ill conduct. 
His rage abated even while the other
was speaking, but a deep concern remained
behind, and throwing himself down in
a chair, ‘Into what vexations,’ cried he,
‘may not a whole family be plunged,
through the indiscretion of one woman?’ 
‘Judge not too rashly,’ said mr. Trueworth; 
—‘miss Betsy may one day see a
man so happy as to inspire her with
sentiments far different from those she
hitherto has entertained, and she also
may be more happy herself, with a man
who loves her with less delicacy than I
did.’ 
The brother of miss Betsy seemed not
to take any notice of these words, but
rising in some confusion;—‘Well, sir,’ 
said he, ‘I shall trouble you no more
upon this subject,—and am sorry I 

have done it now.’ —Mr. Trueworth
then told him, that though the intended
alliance between them was broke off, he
saw no occasion that their friendship
should be so too;—that he should be
glad of an opportunity to return the favours
he had received from him, in relation
to his sister, though his endeavours
on that score had not met with the desired
success; and that he hoped they should
not live as strangers while they continued
in the same town:—to all this mr. Francis
made but very short replies, either
taking what he said as words of course,
or because the disorder of his own mind
would not permit him to prolong the
conversation. 
It is likely mr. Trueworth was not
much troubled at the hasty leave this
young gentleman took; for though he
always had a very sincere regard for him,
yet the point, on which he now had
come, was tender, and could not be
touched upon without giving him some
pain;—he had no time however to make
many reflections on the conversation had
passed between them. —A letter was
brought him by a porter, who waiting
for an answer, he immediately opened it,
and found the contents as follow: 


To Charles Trueworth, Esq;
‘Sir,
Extraordinary merits seldom fail of
having as extraordinary effects;— 
you have made a conquest of a heart,
without knowing it, which not the utmost
endeavours of any other could
ever subdue. —I am commissioned to
acquaint you, that a lady of some consideration
in the world, and a large fortune
in her own hands, thinks you alone
deserve to be the master, both of that
and of herself; but as she is apprehensive
of your being already engaged,
begs you will be so generous as to confess
the truth, that if so, she may put a
timely stop to the progress of her growing
passion;—if not, you will, doubtless,
hear more from her by the hand
of, 
‘Sir,
Your unknown servant. 
‘P.S. Please to send this back, with
your answer wrote on the other side
of the paper, which you may put up
under a cover sealed up, but without
any direction. —Sincerity and secrecy
are earnestly requested.’ 


Mr. Trueworth could not avoid looking
on this adventure as a very odd one; 
yet whether the proposal was real or
feigned, the matter was wholly indifferent
to him, and he hesitated not a moment
what part he should take in it; but sate
down immediately, and wrote, as desired,
the following answer: 

To the Unknown.
‘Sir, or madam,
Though I know the honour with
which you flatter me is more the
effect of fortune than desert, it would
certainly make me vain and happy,
were I not denied the power of accepting
it. —The heart required of me by
the lady is already disposed of,—irrecoverably
disposed of, and I can only
repay her goodness by sincerely wishing
a return of her's, and with it all those
felicities she would so lavishly bestow
on, 
‘Her most obliged,
And most humble servant,
C. Trueworth. 

‘P.S. The lady may depend, that my
secrecy shall be equal to the sincerity
I have shewn in this.’ 

He had no sooner dispatched the messenger
who brought this, than a second
came and presented him with another,
and had orders also to wait for an answer; 
—he presently knew it came from miss
Flora, and expected the contents to be
such as he found them on perusing: 

To Charles Trueworth, Esq;
‘Most cruel and ungenerous Man!
Loth I am to give you epithets
like these,—my heart shudders,
and my trembling hand is scarce able
to guide my pen, in those reproaches,
which my reason tells me you deserve:
—how unkind,—how stabbing to the
soul was your behaviour at our last
meeting!—yet even then you promised
me to write,—I depended on
that promise, and hope had not quite
forsook me;—every knocking at the
door, I expected was a messenger from
you:—in vain I expected,—in vain
I looked,—in vain I listened for the
welcome mandate, and every disappointment
threw me into fresh agonies. 

—I have sent twice to the coffee-house,
—been there once in person, but could
hear nothing of you:—O! what secret
recess now hides you from me! —What
can have caused so terrible a reverse in
my so lately happy fate? —I fear to
guess; for madness is in the thought! 
—O! do not drive me to extremes! — 
Many women, with not half my love,
or my despair, have run headlong into
actions, which, in my cooler moments,
I dread to think on. —Be assured, I
cannot,—will not live without you! — 
Torture me not any longer with suspence! 
—Pronounce my doom at once! 
—But let it be from your own mouth
that I receive it, that you, at least, may
be witness of the death you inflict, and
be compelled to pity, if you cannot
love, 
‘The most unfortunate,
And most faithful of her sex,
F. Mellasin. 
‘P.S. I have charged the man, who
brings you this, to find you wheresoever
you are, and not to leave you
without an answer.’ 

Mr. Trueworth was in the utmost perplexity
of mind, on reading this distracted
epistle. —Of all the hours of his past
life he could not recollect any one, which
gave him so much cause of repentance,
as that wherein he had commenced an
amour with a woman of so violent a
temper;—he had never loved her, and
all the liking he ever had of her being
now utterly erased by a more laudable
impression, the guilty pleasures he had
enjoyed with her were now irksome to his
remembrance, and the more she endeavoured
to revive the tender folly in him,
the more she grew distasteful to him. 
It so little becomes a woman, whose
characteristic should be modesty, to use
any endeavours to enforce desire, that
those who do it are sure to convert love
into indifference, and indifference into
loathing and contempt:—even she, who,
with the greatest seeming delicacy, labours
to rekindle a flame once extinguished,
will find the truth of what Morat says in
the play: 

“To love once pass'd we cannot backward move; 
“Call yesterday again, and we may love.” 

Mr. Trueworth, however, had so much
pity for that unfortunate creature, that he
would have given, perhaps, good part of
his estate, that she no longer loved him; 
but how to turn the tide of so extravagant
a passion, he could not yet resolve,
and it being near the time, in which he
knew they would expect him at sir Bazil's,
where he now dined every day, and the
messenger who brought the letter also
growing impatient to be dispatched, he
wrote in haste these few lines: 

To miss Flora Mellasin.
Madam,
Business of the greatest consequence
now calls upon me, and I
have no time to write as I would do,
but depend upon it, that I will send to
you to-morrow morning, and either appoint
a meeting, or let you know my
real sentiments in a letter,—'till when,
I beg you will make yourself more easy,
if you desire to oblige him, who is, 
‘With the most unfeigned good wishes,
Madam,
Your most humble,
And most obedient servant,
C. Trueworth. 

‘P.S. I shall take it as a favour, madam,
that you will henceforward forbear
to make any enquiry concerning
me at the coffee-house, or elsewhere.’ 

Having given this to miss Flora's porter,
he hasted away to sir Bazil's, there
to compose his mind, after the embarrassments
it had sustained that morning. 
