

It was in this Time of his absconding, that Monsieur
Beauclair was in search of him every where,
but in the Place in which he really was; but tho' it
was highly probable he might have been heard of at
the Baroness's, yet so great was his Aversion to that
House, that he cou'd not think of going to it on
any Account whatsoever; and to send any other Person
to make an Enquiry, he knew wou'd be in vain,
since he was told the Reasons of his concealing himself. 
But notwithstanding the Impossibility he found
there was of coming to any Knowledge of the Truth
thro' his Means, he was inform'd of enough to make
him but too sensible for his Repose, that he had been
betray'd into a wrong Belief: He sometimes visited
Madamoiselle Sansfoy; and that Lady, who had not
the Gift of concealing any Thing she knew, soon
made him acquainted that it was only from Du
Lache she had been told any Thing to the Disadvantage
of Montamour's Reputation; and that as to the
Story of Galliard, she was now fully convinc'd it
was entirely false. The Pangs which at this Discourse
seiz'd the Soul of the too-late repenting Beauclair
were such, as were very near driving him to Distraction:
The Reflection how by the worst of Women, and
her cursed Agents, he had been led to injure the best;
one who lov'd him; one for whose sake, while he
believ'd her true, he wou'd have forgone all that this
World calls dear, was so dreadful a Shock to his Honour,
good Nature, every generous Principle of
Humanity, that all the Strength of Reason and Discretion
he was Master of, cou'd hardly enable him
to sustain: Cou'd his whole Fortune, nay, his very 

Life, have called back Time, and cancell'd the
Actions of a few past Months, how gladly wou'd
he have resign'd it? But such a Wish was both ridiculous
and vain; nor cou'd he hope the sincere
Remorse and Grief he felt for what he had done,
cou'd expiate his Guilt: The Person he had injur'd
was insensible of his Repentance; she was ignorant
how much he suffer'd in a Self-Conviction; or
if by any Means he could acquaint her with it, he
cou'd not assure himself she wou'd think it a sufficient
Inducement to engage her to forgive. Yet all
the Consolation his Sorrows wou'd admit, was to
make Tryal of her Goodness: Perhaps, thought he,
if I cou'd once more have the Happiness to throw
myself beneath her Feet, to confess my Fault, to implore
her Pity, she may yet have some Remains of
Tenderness, which my Complaints may waken! Ungrateful
as I seem, she still may love me, and nothing
is unpardonable to Love! With these and the like Suggestions,
which the natural Chearfulness of his Temper,
and the Experience he had of the Sweetness of
her Disposition inspir'd him with, did he repel Despair
whenever he found it attempted to assail him:
But a true Passion cannot for any long Time content
itself with an Ideal Bliss: It was not sufficient that
he imagin'd a Possibility of being forgiven, of being
bless'd as he had been in the Affections of his, now
more than ever, adorable and belov'd Montamour,
without an Assurance that he was so; and tho' Hope
is the best Cordial to preserve Desire, those who sit
down with that, and delay the Prosecution of a farther
Satisfaction, are like those who build Castles in
the Air, pleasing themselves with an imaginary Happiness,
which, whenever they gather Courage enough
to endeavour to lay hold on, flies from the Embrace,
and cheats the vain Attempter, Beauclair was for
no such unsubstantial Blessings; the Comfort he found
in entertaining an Opinion that he might one Day be
happy, hinder'd him not from an Impatience to be
so. 

Love, ever fertile in Invention, and aiding to the
Wishes of a zealous Votary, soon furnish'd him with
a Stratagem, which promis'd him Success, at least
so far as to give him once more an Opportunity of
seeing and speaking to Montamour. He was acquainted
with a Friar of the Order of St. Dominic,
one who was not the most strict of his Profession; 
one who had himself experienc'd the Force of Love,
and knew how to commiserate the Woes it very
often was the Cause of. To him did the restless
Beauclair apply for Relief: He made no Secret of the
whole History of his Passion, and the Delusions he
had been ensnar'd by, and entreated his Assistance in
the Design he had form'd. He so far prevail'd on
him, as to engage him to procure a Friar's Habit for
him; and got his Instructions in what Manner to
behave, that he might pass for such to the Abbess of
the Monastery where Montamour had enter'd herself. 
Every Thing being ready, he soon set out for the
Land of Love, not greatly despairing but that at his
Arrival he shou'd find himself not an unwelcome Guest. 
He follow'd so exactly the Directions which had
been given him by the good-natur'd Friar, that whoever
had seen him in that Garb, wou'd have suspected him
for no other than what he seem'd. 
Being come to the Monastery, the Sanctity of his
Appearance gave him an easy Admittance; and telling
the Abbess that he had taken that Journey at the Entreaty
of the Brother of Montamour, who had inform'd
him, that he was under an Apprehension that there
was more of Pique than true Devotion in her abandoning
the World, and desir'd him to discourse her
on that Affair: When he told me this, said the Counterfeit
Venerable, I thought the Duty of my Function
obliged me to search into the Truth, and use the best
of my Endeavours to prepare her, if she is not so
already, for the Happiness which a religious Life
affords. With this, and some other Expressions of the
same Nature, the Reverend Matron was wholly won
to his Purpose: She left him alone, while she went 

to acquaint Montamour of his being there, and the
Reasons which had brought him. But when she return'd
leading her in, and had presented her to him,
how impossible would it be to set forth the Confusion
he was in? The sudden Rush of painful Extasy!
the darting, throbbing, tingling Mixture of Delight
and Terror, which every Vein confess'd, and shook
the alarm'd Heart with almost mortal Tremblings! 
Not all the natural Boldness of his Sex, not all that
Presence of Mind which us'd to be his inseparable
Companion, not all the Resolutions he had form'd,
not all the Care he had taken to arm himself for
this Encounter, were sufficient to defend him,
when once the lovely injur'd Montamour appear'd! 
He thought she look'd more fair, more beautiful
than ever; and tho' her Eyes had lost nothing
of their wonted Sweetness, yet a long Habitude of
Melancholy had abated a little of the Gaiety of their
Rays, and the Austerity of the Life she was about
to embrace had given her a greater Composedness in
her Countenance. Conscious of Guilt, and too–––too
sensible of his own Unworthiness to find Mercy, she
seem'd to him such as Imagination figures a destroying
Angel, adorn'd in shining Ruin! all gloriously
Cruel! and severely Just! It was not in the least
owing to his own Conduct, that his Disorders were
not visible to the Abbess; but that good Lady, believing
that on the Account he came it was improper to
have a third Person Witness of what he had to deliver,
took her Leave, only telling him, That when
their Conference was ended, she shou'd entreat his
Company to take Part of what their Cloister afforded. 
But he neither heard nor had Power to make any
Answer to this Compliment; every Sense was absent,
and Thought dissolv'd in the vast Hurry of his
various Emotions; but when Montamour, who little
suspected the Reason of the Friar's Silence and distant
Behaviour, desir'd him to sit down, and was beginning
to enquire after her Brother, the Sound of her dear,
well-remember'd Voice, the graceful charming 

Manner in which she express'd herself, and that engaging,
undescribable, inimitable Something, which
is not to be acquir'd, and which is only to be found
in the Air and Mein of those whom Nature, and not
Art embellishes, putting him more stronger in Remembrance
of the felicitous Moments her Conversation
formerly had bless'd him with, and revolving in
an Instant ten thousand little nameless Softnesses,–––– 
the thrilling, melting, rapturous Amusements,–––– 
the Consequences of mutual Passion,––––and comparing
the present with the past, what he endur'd was
not to be conceal'd!––––a sudden Burst of wild impetuous
Passion broke thro' all Disguise, blaz'd in his
Eyes, and shew'd the burning Lover plain! Forgetful
of what his cooler Thoughts had form'd, he
threw himself on her Bosom, grasping her with a
Violence scarce supportable, and fixing close to her's
his glowing Lips, had Power no other Way to express
the Extasy he now again began to re-enjoy!––– 
a thousand fond endearing Things crowded at once
into his Soul, and press'd for Utterance! –––He wou'd
have spoke 'em all, but the tumultuous Meanings
were too great, too many, and overthrew each
other in the Throng, and all he cou'd bring forth
was Montamour! ––––Angelick Montamour! Divine,
Adorable Montamour! ––––This was indeed sufficient
to make her sensible who it was she entertain'd; and
nothing can be more amazing than that in the Surprise
of such an Interview, she acted not the least
Extravagance:–––Neither the Shock which the Remembrance
of his late ill Usage gave her Pride, vented
itself in Fury and Revilings; nor the secret Pleasure,
which in spite of her Resentment, her continued
Tenderness felt at his Repentance and Return, was
discoverable by either Word or Look; but doubtful
that she might not retain this Command of her
Temper, if she trusted herself to listen to the Charms
of his Perswasion, wou'd not put it to the Venture,
but getting loose from his Embrace, and giving a
sudden Spring to a little Bell which hung in the 

Room, rung it with such a Force, that the Abbess
and several of the Nuns came running in before this
disappointed Lover cou'd say or do any Thing to prevent
her. What this holy Man (said she, turning
to the Abbess) has to offer, may, perhaps, be very
good; but as my Resolution to become a Devotée is
fix'd, I think it needless to hear any Thing which
is design'd as an Endeavour to alter it: If my Brother
is possess'd of any Scruples, or wou'd infuse any
into you, of my Unworthiness of the Profession, he
may communicate them by Letters either to you or
me; for I am fully determin'd to enter into no Conversation
with any Stranger, till my having taken
the Orders has put a Stop to all the Arguments which
may possibly be prepar'd to hinder me. In speaking
these last Words, which she pronounc'd with the
most resolute Air, she flew out of the Room, leaving
him to make his Excuse as he cou'd to the Abbess,
and those of the Sisterhood who had accompany'd
her. The Consternation they were in at her Behaviour
was very favourable to Beauclair; for while
they were looking on one another, wondering what
it should be that had occasion'd it, he gain'd a little
Time for the Recovery of his scatter'd Spirits, but
not enough to enable him to speak of this Adventure,
as a Person so unconcern'd as that which he
represented wou'd have done. The Confusion, however,
and Hesitation of the few Words he spoke,
were look'd on only as occasion'd by his Chagrin
for the indifferent Reception he had met with; and
he left them as full of Trouble for the Disrespect they
imagin'd had been paid to a Man of his Reverence,
as they wou'd have been of Anger had they suspected
the Imposture. 
But when he was return'd to the Inn where he
had taken up Lodgings for this Affair, how infinitely
short of what he felt wou'd all Description be? For
some Hours he was utterly incapable of Reflection,
and its Return serv'd but to torture him with redoubled
Agonies! All the Horrors, all the Woes that 

can be imagined to attend disappointed Passion, work'd
up to the most elevated Degree that human Nature
can sustain, rag'd in his Soul, and tore him with
Variety of Anguish! It was the least of his Vexations
that he owed them only to himself; if Montamour
was incens'd, it was his own ill Conduct
was the Cause; and if she never shou'd be brought
to a Reconciliation, what but his own Unworthiness
cou'd be accused? In fine, he was quite Soulsick,
and mad at the Thoughts of what he had
done; and the Forgetfulness he had suffer'd himself
to fall into, in losing an Opportunity so hard to be
found, of endeavouring once to move her in his Favour. 
But as impossible as at present it seem'd of
getting any Means of seeing or speaking to her
again, he cou'd not think of returning to Paris thus
unsatisfied: Her Year of Probation was now almost
expired,––––the fatal Time drew near, in which she
was to take an eternal Farewel of the World; and
then not all his Tears, his Vows, Entreaties, or
Repentance, not even her own Desires, had Power
to make him happy. ––––Some Contrivance therefore
must be form'd, and speedily; and he resolv'd,
let the Court be never so desperate, to hazard all for
one more Interview. Invention, charg'd with the
Commands of Passion, brought forth a numerous Issue
of unjointed Projects,–––but abortive all, disown'd by
Reason, and unnerv'd for Action:–––To think of entring
the Monastery as a Friar, tho' by never so different a
Pretence from that he lately went on, was ridiculous
and vain: He had been detected in that Habit
by the Person from whom, till she was a little softened,
he found it was most his Interest to be conceal'd; 
and she being under the same Roof, would
afford him slender Consolation, if denied the Priviledge
of entertaining her. ––––Sometimes he was
thinking to disguise himself as a Cripple, pretend he
had fallen from his Horse, and being unable to travel,
implore the Charity and Assistance of the Sisterhood; 
but the Remembrance that there was a College of 

Jesuites within a Bow-Shot from the Monastery, to
which they would probably send him, as a Place
more proper and convenient, put an End to that Design. 
––––Another Stratagem was to dress himself as a
Woman, whom some unexpected ill Turn of Fortune
had driven from her Parents, and beg an Asylum
there; but this his Stature forbid. ––––It was a considerable
Time before any Thing which seem'd feasible
offer'd it self to his Fancy; but what is it that
a Lover cannot, at last, get the better of, when Resolution
is on his Side? As he was walking one Day
by the Walls which encompass'd the Nunnery Gardens,
he perceiv'd a Piece of it had lately fallen, and
was now repairing by the Workmen; he presently
bethought him of becoming a Labourer, and by that
Means having free Egress and Regress to carry Mortar,
Stone, and other Things for the Work, he might easily
hide himself among the Bushes, and watch an Opportunity
of Montamour's coming to walk. This Enterprize
was no sooner conceived than put in Execution:
His Friar's Vest was now exchanged for a ragged Coat,
his Cowl for a Linsy-Woolsey Cap, and his Beads for
a Hod: By offering himself for a low Hire, he was
immediately entertain'd by the Master. His Business
being only to fetch and carry, he was not at all
found fault with, but perform'd what he had undertaken
with more Diligence than those who had all
their Life been accustomed to it; so much more
is it for the truly well-bred to descend to the meanest
Offices, than for those born to Beggary to bear Prosperity
and an Affluence of Fortune superior to their
Hopes. Nor did his Toil in the Day make him forgetful
of what he had design'd in the Night, but as
soon as he saw they were about to leave work, he
took his Opportunity to slide down from the Wall,
and conceal him in the most remote Part of the Garden. 
The first Night of his Watching he had no
other Reward than a distant Sight of Montamour,
as she was at Prayers among the rest of the Nuns;
for the Chapel had a Window into the Garden, and 

was low enough for him to look in as he stood a
Tiptoe. The second, indeed, paid his Pains much
better: She walked above an Hour close by the Place
where he was hid; and tho' he could not speak to
her, because there were two of the Nuns with her,
yet he had the Satisfaction to observe she was extremely
pensive, and that all her Companions could
do was ineffectual to remove a Melancholy, which
he had Leave to hope was influenced by her secret
Thoughts of him. But the third gave him an Opportunity
full as his Soul could wish: It chanc'd to
be an extreme fine Evening, and the Fragancy of the
Air had drawn a great Number of the young Devotees
out to refresh themselves: Montamour was among
them; and he still found she was as thoughtful as before. 
They pass'd some Hours there; some walking; 
––––some sitting on the grassy Banks;––––some
sporting with the various colour'd Flowers which
grew on the Borders, and seem'd to court the Gatherer's
Hand;––––some cooling their Fingers in the
Fountain, and wantonly throwing the Water on
their Companions; every one diverting herself as her
innocent and undisturb'd Fancy led her. ––––But
Montamour, whose Mind was more perplexed, and
who, in the late Adventure with the lovely Friar,
had found that Self-denial was the hardest of all Virtues,
affected to walk alone: She either not observed,
or had no Relish of the little Recreations they enjoy'd,
but singling herself from the rest, he saw her
strike down an Alley which led to a fine Grotto at
the lower End of the Garden. The Place he had
that very Night fortunately made choice of for his
Concealment, was a long narrow Walk of Camomile,
the End of which came almost to the Grotto,
and was shelter'd al. the Way with a thick Row of
Palms: On this he could walk without being in the
least heard or seen by any body in the Garden; and
as soon as he saw which Way she went, he immediately
follow'd. He was at the End of the Walk
almost as soon as she was in the Grotto; but he durst 

not enter while there was Company so near, fearing
the Strength of her Resolution, and the Prejudice
she had conceiv'd against him, and which he but
too justly had deserv'd, should influence her to treat
the Labourer in the same Manner as she had done the
Friar. These Suggestions were, indeed, most consonant
to Reason, but they were presently oppos'd
by others of a very different Nature: He began to
think that if she left the Garden before the others,
he might never have so good an Opportunity as now; 
that there was scarce a Probability he shou'd ever
find her entirely alone; and that it was better to hazard
her good Nature, if she wou'd suffer him to
speak to her now, than run the Risque of not speaking
to her at all. While he was thus debating, and
irresolute what to do, he heard the Charmer who
had occasioned this Conflict in his Soul, tune her
Guittare: In Expectation of that Melody he for a
while suspended his Cogitation, and heard her sing
in a soft, low, but sweet and harmonious Accent
these Words, which, 'tis probable, were of her own
composing: 


I.
No more, fond Maid, direct thy fruitless Aims
 To Bliss thou canst but in Idea know:
A Love so pure as thine Heaven only claims,
 Nor will be rival'd by the Toys below.


II.
Fly, fly, O fly! the Sense-alluring Bait
 Of gay Deceit, in tender Raptures drest!
Remorse and Shame do on Believing wait,
 And late Repentance rends th'unwary Breast.


III.
From Damon's Air, his Shape, his flowing Wit,
 His thousand, thousand Worlds of countless Charms!
Fate weak Defence from Virtue does permit,
 Unfurnish'd by Devotion's stronger Arms.



IV.
Nor can Resentment, or thy Sex's Pride,
 For Injuries receiv'd, set free thy Mind;
Before Love's Fire those meaner Flames subside,
 And shrink away like Vapours in the Wind.


V.
In Piety, alone, a Refuge dwells,
 To shield thy Soul from Passion's pleasing Pain,
The base Efforts of faithless Man repels,
 And renders their soft Enchantments vain.


With trembling Limbs and aching Heart the repenting
Beauclair heard her sing those Lines, which
gave him so much Cause to fear all his Endeavours
to bring her to a Reconciliation would be in vain. 
What hope to conquer, when with Heaven we
contend! Yet, tho' despairing, he would not thus
give over, and was moving softly towards the
Grotto, resolving, let the Consequence be what it
would, to know his Doom at once, and end the
Tortures of Suspence: But, as he was just at the
Entrance, the late ceas'd Harmony of her melodious
Voice began a-new to charm his listening Ears, and
oblig'd him to delay the Prosecution of his Design,
that he might not lose the Pleasure of hearing her
sing; which she immediately did these Stanza's: 


I.
The Heart that once has Power to change,
 And with a second Passion burn,
 Tho' to the first it would return,
Will ever be inclin'd to range.



II.
Then charming faithless Swain give o'er;
 Nor think by Prayers or Sighs to move;
 A Rebel once to me, and love,
I may forgive, but trust no more.


III.
No more will I deluded be,
 Tho' with secret Wishes lying,
 All dissolving, melting, dying,
To Death I'll yield, but not to thee.


Tho' the Musick to which these Words were set
gave them a Air infinitely more gay than the former,
yet she could not conclude them without a
Mixture of Sighs; which occasioning a Hesitation
in her Speech, made a perceivable Variation in the
Tune, and seem'd to mitigate their rigid Meaning:
The Sense, indeed, was cruel, but the Manner of
Pronunciation was such, as renewed in the attentive
List'ner some of those Hopes with which he had
formerly been enliven'd. The Gardens were, by this
Time, wholly free from Company, no Interruption
near, every Thing favour'd his Design, and now he
thought he boldly might advance; but still the Terrors
occasion'd by a Consciousness of his Unworthiness,
and ever the Companions of Guilt, made
him enter the Grotto, but with Tremblings, and kept
him for some Moments at an awful Distance. She
was fallen into so deep a Resverie, that she discern'd
not that any Person was near, tho' the Moon,
which was then at the Heighth glitter'd thro' the
Trees, and shone directly on him. Gladly would he
have indulg'd Contemplation, and fed Reflection
with gazing on her Beauties, while thus unseen, and
uncontroul'd by the Severity of her Glances; but
the Remembrance how he had been disappointed 

by his late giving a Loose to the Ardours of his
Passion, made him resolve to proceed with Art and
Circumspection: He moved with gently-treading
Steps to the Bank on which she sat, and was close
by her before she in the least perceiv'd him; but
when, lifting up her Eyes, she saw a Man, and felt
his Touch, (for he had seiz'd fast hold of her to prevent
her stirring.) she sent forth a great Shriek, loud
enough to have alarm'd the Convent, had they had any
Notion that any belonging to it was abroad: But, to
hinder her from repeating it, and unwilling to suffer her
to continue longer in the Fright she was in, he threw
himself on his Knees, and bathing the Hand he grasp'd
with a Stream of Tears, Hold, Madam, hold, said he,
this is not the Posture of a Ruffian:–––I come not to
alarm your Breast with Fears, but to move Pity
there:––––'Tis Pity only, the adoring Beauclair ask; 
and that is what, indeed, his Miseries may claim. 
Beauclair! said she, surpris'd beyond Expression, but
perhaps not altogether so much displeas'd as afterwards
she feign'd to be. Yes, Madam, resum'd he, the despairing,
dying, but still adoring Beauclair entreats you
but to hear what vast Appearances of Reason urg'd
him to seem so careless of his Happiness, and rashly
trespass against Heaven and you;––––and, if you hear,
you will, I hope, forgive. ––––By what has already
been said of the Passion of Montamour, the Reader
may be better able to judge the Conflict she endur'd,
than I am to describe it; but resolving to keep up
her Resentment, and give no room for him to
imagine there was a Possibility of renewing in her
again those soft Emotions he once had the Power of
inspiring her with; I am sorry, Monsieur, answer'd
she, (with an Accent which had nothing in it of
Tenderness) that you should have given your self a
Trouble wholly unnecessary: Where there's no Wrong
there needs no Justification;––––I have profited too
much by your Change of Humour, to be offended at
it:–––Those Vows which your Inconstancy releas'd
me from, will soon be paid to a sublimer Object: 

What you despis'd, Heaven will, I hope, accept; and
by your Ingratitude I arrive at the only perfect Happiness
here: How ought I then to bless the early
Knowledge of your wavering Nature?––––to thank
you for your quick-discover'd Baseness, that I in
time might fly, and scorn your faithless Sex? It
was not so much the Words, as the Manner in which
they were spoke, which seiz'd the Soul of him they
were address'd to with Horrors he had never known
before: Not the past torturing Pangs of her imagin'd
Falshood, nor the ensuing Terrors of Remorse for
his own Guilt, were half so dreadful as the present
Racks. Amidst the doubtful Gloom some intermingling
Beams of Hope had still dawn'd o'er his
Wishes, chearing Expectance with Promises of a future
Day: But all was Darkness now!–––all black
Despair! The fix'd Coldness, the unmov'd Constancy
which every Word and Look, and the whole Air of
Montamour denoted, now made him but too sure she
was inevitably lost! –––Nor did the Remembrance of
the Fault he had been guilty of, permit him even
the poor Comfort of complaining of her Severity! A
while he gaz'd upon her with such inward tumultuous
Emotions, as depriv'd him of the Power of
Speech, till perceiving she was about to go out of
the Grotto, and leave him in the same Manner she
had done before, he threw himself on his Knees, by
Force retaining her, till he had recover'd himself
enough to endeavour to perswade. All that the tenderest
Love, the fiercest Wishes, the most bleeding
burning Passion, made desperate and raging, can
inflict, was to the Life demonstrated in all his
Words and Actions: His trembling Limbs, his
wild distracted Looks, his faultering Speech, his unconnected
Expressions, display'd the Deity in his full
genuine Force; unshadow'd, undisguis'd with any
of those pageant Arts of pompous Eloquence, which
oft adorn a counterfeited Flame, but are forgot and
lost amidst the Ardours of a true Affection. Oh!
would the unwary Fair, when thus address'd, but 

give her Reason scope to judge, how easily might
she judge the real Lover, from the flattering Courtier;
admire the Wit, but scorn the affected Passion of him
who comes but to seduce and ruin her. But, indeed,
there are so few of either Sex sincerely touch'd with
a noble and generous Desire, that 'tis no Wonder
they mistake it in another: Deceit meets with Deceit,
and both are unconcern'd alike. 
But Montamour was vastly different, as was her
Beauclair, from those fashionable Enamorato's: With
Truth, with Tenderness, with Zeal she lov'd; and
tho' she had all the Reason in the World for keeping
up her Resentment, and had Strength enough of Resolution
to restrain the Fondness of her Passion from
shewing it self to one who had so greatly injur'd
her, and whose Repentance she thought too small a
Recompence; yet did her Soul pity the Agonies she,
by her own, was too––––too sensible were unfeign'd,
and must her self of Consequence suffer far greater. 
Passions of all kinds find Ease in the Discovery; but
smother'd Anguish preys on the very Vitals; the
stifled Sighs recoil on the tormented Heart, and crack
the Strings of Life: Yet persisting in her Coldness,
and resolving rather to die than recede from that Indifference
she had vow'd to wear for ever in her Behaviour
to him, all that his Tears, Entreaties, agonizing
Groans could move her to, was to fit down,
and listen to all he had to say in Vindication of his
late Proceedings; which was, to relate, in as brief a
Manner as he could, the Delusion of Du Lache, and
the Artifices by which he had been brought to a Belief
of her Inconstancy. He kept back nothing of
the Truth, but that which Honour forbad him to
reveal, the Favours he had receiv'd from the Baroness. 
But Montamour, who was no Stranger to that Part
of the Story, having patiently heard the rest, and
perceiving he had done, would not omit this Opportunity
of letting him know, not the most secret
Transactions of his Guilt had been hid from her. 
You do well, Monsieur, said she, to make a Repetition 

of every Thing which may seem to excuse the
ill Treatment you have given me, artfully concealing,
while you relate the Accusations laid on me, the
Charms of my Rival, without which all the Suggestions
of a Villain, like Du Lache, had been ineffectual. 
O too severely judg'd! interrupted the Soul-tortur'd
Beauclair: Be Witness for me Heaven, and
send down instant Punishments on my devoted Head,
if I swerve in the least Tittle from the Truth!––––if
e'er my Soul conceiv'd one tender Thought, once
form'd a Wish, or knew one soft Desire, which center'd
not in Montamour!–––if still she was not, even at
the Time when most I fear'd she scorn'd me, the only
dearest Object of my Thoughts by Day, and Dreams
by Night!––––if even her Anger, killing as it is,
wears not more Charms to me, than all the endearing
Smiles of her whole Sex besides!–––if in this dreadful
Moment, this cruel Now, when all my Tears, my
Prayers, my Sorrow and Repentance, my inward
Agonies, the speechless Torments of my poor rending,
bleeding, breaking Heart, cannot obtain one pitying
Glance, one kind commiserating Word, she be
not dearer to me than Life, and all the gay Delights
this World can give!–––and if it be not greater Pleasure
here to expire before her, than live whole Ages
in a Queen's Embraces, may all the Curses due to
Perfidy fall heavy on me! He wou'd have proceeded,
but she prevented him: Hold, said she, forbear these
Imprecations: I believe you once did love me, nay,
I am of Opinion you have resum'd that Tenderness
you had for a Time thrown off; but (continu'd she,
with a Smile which had in it more of Disdain than
Satisfaction) while you imagin'd me false, it was
but reasonable you should seek some Consolation; and
where so probable to find it as in the Arms of a Woman
so every way qualified, and so desirous to please,
as the Baroness de Tortillée? The disorder'd Lover
hung down his Head, utterly unable to make any
Reply to these cutting Words: He was too open
and sincere in his Nature, to be guilty of denying that 

it was really his Desire of forgetting Montamour,
which had induc'd him to visit the Baroness; and to
confess it, he thought, would be an Aggravation of
his Crime. At last, O Madam! resum'd he, the Opinion
I was ensnar'd into of your Unkindness drove
me mad, I knew not what I did:–––But of this one
Thing I am sure, and of that alone, that I have never
ceas'd to love you;––––and whatever Appearances may
be against me, my Heart could never be but yours! 
Notwithstanding all that prodigious Presence of Mind
which Montamour was Mistress of, and the Resentment
with which she had arm'd her self, as soon as
she saw Beauclair was near her, she began to find it
now impossible much longer to preserve it in his
Presence; and looking on the secret Pleasure which,
in spite of her Indignation, she felt in entertaining
him, as a Sin to Prudence, and the Resolution she
had made of forgetting him, muster'd up all the Remains
of Anger in her Heart, to inspire her with
all Means of banishing him for ever; and taking the
Advantage of his last Words, One would, indeed,
(said she, with a Voice full of Austerity) believe that
you knew not what you did, or sure he who has so
publickly avow'd himself the Lover of the Baroness
de Tortillée, would never after that imagine his Pretensions
were capable of creating in Montamour any
other Passion than Disdain and Hatred:––––I should
have an Aversion to my self, (added she, after a little
Pause,) if I could think any Action of mine has ever
given you leave to judge so meanly of me, as to
make you hope there could be an Atonement for Injuries
like those you've offer'd me:–––No, Beauclair,
no; I am not twice to be deceiv'd! ––––Nor, had I
the most undeniable Assurances that you lov'd even
more than you would perswade me that you do,
nay, were I weak enough to feel for your Return
of Passion the same soft Emotions which heav'd my
credulous Heart when first I listen'd to your Vows,
not to preserve your Life,–––my own,–––or the eternal
Peace of both, would I forgive, or e'er consent 

to see you more. As soon as she had done speaking,
she turn'd away, resolving to give him no farther
Opportunity of Conversation; and it was but for a
very few Moments that he had Power either by Perswasion
or Force to detain her; for perceiving his
Despair made him have recourse to the latter, she
started from his Arms with an uncounterfeited Fury,
vowing that if he presum'd to hold, or follow
her, she would alarm the Convent with her Cries,
and expose him to all the Punishments of the Ecclesiastick
Justice. This last Threat would have avail'd
but little, if the Fierceness of the fair Menacer had
not disarm'd him of all that Boldness, which is in
some Cases a necessary Qualification to make a Lover
Master of his Wishes. He had not Courage to offend
her more:–––All that Vivacity of Thought,–––that
Energy of Soul, which despises Opposition, and triumphs
over the most strict Reservedness of the denying
Charmer, was now utterly extinguish'd in
him:–––He suffer'd her to depart;–––he saw her go;––– 
and while his straining Eyes pursu'd her till the exclusive
Walls depriv'd him of that Blessing, his enervate
Limbs refus'd to bear him after her! –––Senseless
and motionless he stood!–––chill Horror invaded every
Faculty, and even Desire was froze! Had he regarded
her with less Purity and Respect, he had perhaps succeeded
better; but Love has ever this Incongruity in
its Effects, That the more violent it is, the less it is
capable of serving it self. 
It must be a Pen infinitely more capable of Description
than mine, which could represent the true
State of his Condition: When left alone, all that
Despair, and Rage, and Grief, heighten'd by a Consciousness
of Guilt, and justly meriting every Thing he
suffer'd, could inflict, was his. He thought it now altogether
vain, ever to attempt her more; he gave
himself up wholly to Distraction, and Life or Death
were become Things indifferent to him. –––The Morning
found him in this wretched Circumstance:–––– 
The Sun, whose chearing Beams drive all the Mists 

and Vapours far away, dispell'd not his; odious and
hateful to himself, he curs'd the Day, and wish'd eternal
Darkness. –––In this wild Hurry of confus'd Emotions,
he neither consider'd where he was, nor
the Danger of being discover'd to have been there
all Night: He attempted not to escape, nor so much
as once thought of it; and instead of concealing
himself among the Bushes, till the Workmen coming
might give him an Opportunity of mingling with
them, as twice before he had done, he now lay flat
on his Face in an open Alley of the Garden, where
he was not only visible to his Fellow-Labourers, but
also would have been so to the whole Convent, if
by chance any of them had look'd thro' the Windows. 
It must certainly have been pleasant enough
to have seen (tho' the Repetition would afford but
little Matter of Diversion) the Astonishment and various
Conjectures these Fellows put on their finding
him in that Place and Posture: Some would have it
that he was a Thief, and had lain there with an Intent
to rob the Monastery; others, that having been
guilty of some notorious Crime, he had been order'd
to run so great a Danger by way of Penance; but
the most good-natur'd among them, observing the
Disorder of his Looks and Words, (for he was little
prepar'd for Excuses,) imagin'd he had been seiz'd
with a sudden Fit of the falling Sickness, or Apoplexy. 
The Master himself was of this Opinion; and
happening to be of a Disposition less inclining to
create Disturbances than the Generality of his Station,
who are for the most part greatly delighted with
Noise and Confusion of what kind soever, contented
himself with discharging him from his Service,
without giving any Notice of what had happen'd to
the Abbess, or any of the Nuns. One Thing in this
Passage I cannot let slip without observing; which is,
That among the many different Conjectures which
had been form'd on the Discovery that a Man had
dared to conceal himself all Night in that forbidden
Ground, there was not one who imputed it to the 

true Cause; which proves how little People of such
low Capacities are able to entertain any just Notions
of that tender Passion; and how impossible it is for
any but a Lover to conceive the Force of Love, and
to what Lengths it will transport the Votary inspir'd
with an unfeign'd Ardour. But setting aside Reflections,
which the sensible Reader need not to be put
in mind of, tho' our unfortunate Lover came off
much better from this Adventure than he could have
expected, had he consider'd it all, yet the losing his
Employ was the utter Loss of all Opportunity ever
to try his Fortune there again, if it had been possible
for him to have recover'd Courage sufficient to attempt
it. He was now oblig'd to leave her to the
Performance of her Vow; but with what a Tempest
of Mind, and how accompany'd, he return'd to
Paris, those only who have ever been acquainted
with the Furies of Despair, Remorse, and a too-late
Repentance, can imagine. 
While Affairs were in this melancholy Position
between the Lovers, those who had been the Occasion
of their Misfortunes were in a Condition much
worse, though infinitely less deserving Compassion. 
The Hour was now come in which the wicked Baroness
and her Instruments of Misch'ef were to prove,
that Crimes, like theirs, howe'er triumphant for a
while, will not always escape the Cognizance of
avenging Heaven. One Evening as she was sitting
in her Closet, accompany'd only by Du Lache, who,
for the Reasons before-mention'd was still in her
House, they heard a loud knocking at the Gate, and
immediately after, the Noise of several Persons coming
hastily up Stairs: The impatient Expectation
they both were in for the Return of Toncarr and Le
Songe, made them presently believe it was they,
whose Haste to report the joyful Tidings they had
brought, had made them stand on so little Ceremony:
But what was their Astonishment and Horror, when
Harriot, who knew pretty well her Lady's Disposition,
tho' perhaps not let into the Depth of her Designs, 

came running into the Room breathless and
frighted out of her Wits, crying, O Madam, my
Lord! ––––She had Time for no more: The Baron,
follow'd by several Gentlemen, was close behind her,
imagining by her Hurry his Wife might be there, and,
probably, not without a Thought he shou'd find some
with her whom his Presence wou'd alarm. But he
was deceiv'd in this last Conjecture; for Du Lache,
on the first Appearance of Harriot, the Terror he
saw in her Countenance, and the Words she spoke,
was apprehensive of the Truth, concluded himself betray'd,
tho' he had no Leisure to reflect by what
Means; and agitated at once with Guilt, and Shame,
and Fear, the Villain's Curse, he flew backward to the
Protection of a Screen which happen'd to be there,
behind which there was a Door that open'd to a
little Gallery, whence, in the present Confusion, he
easily escap'd without being seen, at least by any who
wou'd offer to detain him. But not the prodigious
Surprise the Baroness must be in at seeing before her
the Person she believ'd had been destroy'd; not all
the Terrors which seiz'd her guilty Soul at the Sight
of him she had so highly injur'd, and in whose Eyes
she read her Doom, had Power to deprive her of that
Artifice which had so often secured her from Discovery,
and might even now have stood her Friend,
had the Proofs against her been such as wou'd have
admitted of the smallest Scruple: With Tears of Joy
she seem'd to welcome her long absent Husband;–––– 
she flew into his Arms, hung on his Neck, and
fainted on his Breast with an admirably wll-acted Transport
of extravagant Affection;––––with such strenuous
Embraces did she press him, that it was as much
as he could do to disengage himself; but when he
had, Spare yourself, Madam, said he, turning his
Head from her, spare yourself the Pains, and me the
Shock of remembring there can be such monstrous
Dissimulation in the World! –––You see I have escap'd
the Daggers you employ'd against me; and you might, 

methinks, imagine I now know too much to be
subjected to your Arts as heretofore. What means
my Lord? interrupted she: I employ Daggers! O
Heaven! what Fiend hast thou permitted to accuse
me, and turn the once-fond Heart of my dear Lord
to such unheard, unthought of Cruelty? ––––'Tis all,––– 
'tis all in vain, resumed the disordered Baron; and
'twou'd become you better of the two to avow your
Hate, and say I was unworthy of your Bed, than
poorly thus to counterfeit a Tenderness, and deny a
Guilt which all these here (continued he, pointing to
the Gentlemen who were with him) know as well
as I:––––But to leave you no Shadow of an Excuse, I
will inform you that it is by your own Emissaries
you are betrayed;––––and when I repeat the Names
of Toncarr and Le Songe, those design'd Murderers,–––– 
those pretended Servants, sent by yourself, and recommended
by you, Shame, sure, will stop your Mouth! 
The Amazement she put on at these Words, and the
Asseverations she made use of, that she was entirely
ignorant of what he meant, and that she knew those
Men he mentioned for no other than what she sent
them for, honest and diligent Attendants, was to no
purpose to make her appear less vile; and the Disturbance
of Soul which the Baron was in, damping the
Power of expressing himself in as clear Terms as he
would have done, one of his Friends took upon him
to address the Lady in this Manner; Madam, said he,
I fear all that you can say, or do, will be ineffectual to
wipe off the Odium of an Accusation, which so many
Circumstances concur to make appear but too just:–––– 
The unhappy Delirium, which this much wrong'd
Gentleman long labour'd under, is evident, from the
Manner in which he was seiz'd; the Testimony of
the Physician who restored him, and several others
of the Learned that have been consulted in it, that
it proceeded from something that had been given him,
and not from any natural Disorder;––––then your
Behaviour, while he languish'd under that Misfortune,
has been, I'm sorry to say it, so contrary to what 

that of a Wife shou'd be, that it gives foul Suspicions
'twas by your Means he swallow'd the Occasion of
his Distemper:–––But for this last, this yet more monstrous
Contrivance, to murder him, both Toncarr and
Le Songe have confess'd it was from the Baroness they
were to receive that vast Reward Du Lache had promis'd
them. 'Tis impossible to represent the Rage
she flew into at these Words, or the Imprecations
she made that every Article of this Accusation was
false; but the Baron, now, too well convinc'd, growing
impatient at her Obstinacy, wou'd not suffer her
to speak much; and the Gentleman who had began
to discourse her on this Occasion, resum'd it in these
or the like Words: Where Proofs are plain, said
he, Denial but adds to the Crime, and justly aggravates
the Person injur'd. Your Case wou'd be infinitely
more worthy Commiseration, if touch'd with
a due Sense of the Wrongs you have done the best
of Husbands, you freely did acknowledge it, and in
that Acknowledgment make known for whose
sake, and by whose Artifices, you had been ensnared
to forget all the Ties of Virtue, Honour, and
Gratitude, that we might take Revenge on the Deceiver,
such as his generous Heart, which burns
with unextinguishable Love, can ne'er inflict on you. 
The Baroness was not more distracted at what she
had seen and heard, than perplex'd by what Means
it came about that her Designs were discover'd; she
cou'd not think that either Toncarr or Le Songe,
staunch and experienc'd Villains, shou'd, all of a
sudden, feel Remorse, much less believe that they
shou'd, from any imagin'd Interest to themselves,
betray her, since from obliging her, a thousand Advantages
were likely to accrue, which Men of their
Principles cou'd never hope for from the Baron's
Virtue; and being desirous to know the Certainty,––– 
Oh! 'tis I alone am wrong'd! said she: Those Wretches
have been set on by some secret Enemy of the Baron's,
whom to screen from Justice, they throw the
black Aspersion of his Crimes on me! ––––Unhappy 

guiltless me! No, Madam, answer'd he, they were
but too faithful to the Trust repos'd in them:–––– 
Your noble Husband escap'd the horrid Assassination
by an Accident almost miraculous, in which, thank
Heaven, 'twas my good Fortune to be instrumental. 
Chancing to ride that Way, I saw those Wretches
with detested Hands about to plunge their cruel Swords
in his defenceless Breast, I rush'd between, with
timely Aid preserv'd him from their Treachery, and
with the Assistance of my Servants, bound and pinion'd
them, having first, by Threats of instant
Death, extorted from their Mouths an Account of
what they were, and how encourag'd to this vile
Attempt. –––They now are in Paris, in Custody of the
Officers of Justice, in whose Presence they have
been oblig'd to make Oath of what before they had
declared:–––They still stick firm to what they alledg'd
at first; and I lament there is no room to hope my
Friend is less unhappy than he thinks himself in his
fair Wife's Unkindness. All the Courage which this
unexpected Turn of Fortune had left the Baroness,
forsook her at these Words: She cou'd not be assur'd
she was convicted, without being as certain she shou'd
meet with the Punishment which her Crime deserv'd:
All her Policy forsook her; she no longer had
the Power of dissembling; nor durst lift up her Eyes
to him she knew wrong'd beyond a Possibility of
Forgiveness. ––––Streams of unfeigned Tears now
trickled down her Cheeks;––––real Sighs heav'd her
disorder'd Breast; and if she felt not a true Repentance
for her Guilt, she did a severe Regret for the Condition
it had reduc'd her to. The Baron, fully acquainted
with her Unworthiness, and sensible of his own
too great good Nature, dared not trust himself to look
upon her long, lest his relenting Heart should pardon
all, and be again deluded; but turning to the Gentlemen
who had accompany'd him, Come worthy Friends,
said he, we trifle time with this ungrateful Woman; 
it yet remains to bring to Justice the chief Agent of
her Crimes:––––For her, if Conscience, by repeated 

Crimes, be not quite lost, and stifled in her Soul, 'twill
find a Voice to speak, and to upbraid, open the monstrous
Legend of her Actions, and with the black
Remora's drive her mad. He went out of the Chamber
with these Words, which were the last she ever
heard him speak; for tho' when she had a little recover'd
herself, she sent a thousand Times to beg a
Moment's Audience, he never cou'd be prevail'd upon
to grant it, or to see her more. 
After they had left her, Du Lache was sought
thro' every Room in the House; for the Baron was
presently inform'd by some of the Servants, that he
had been there conceal'd. But that Villain was, by
this Time, past their Reach; and tho' there was all
imaginable Diligence made use of to discover where
he was, yet many Days pass'd over without being
able to give the least Account of him. By this
Means the Tryals of Le Songe and Toncarr were delay'd,
the Baron thinking it necessary to have both
the Accusers impeach'd Face to Face. ––––They were
kept in close Prison however, and the Baroness confined
to her Chamber, without so much as Harriot,
or any Servant she had ever seen before, to
attend her. 
If in the Baron's Soul there was the least Spark of
Tenderness remaining for his perfidious Wife, he
soon met with what was sufficient to extinguish it,
when looking over the Accounts of his Estate, and
seeing under her own Hand to his Banker and Steward
the exorbitant Demands she had made on them, he
found that in three Years, the Term of their being
together, she had consum'd more ready Money (for
he was immensely rich) than wou'd have supported
the Retinue of the first Prince of the Blood for twice
as long: Bills, also, for Debts she had contracted,
were hourly brought him for Expences of so superfluous
and luxurious a sort, that his Amazement at
an Extravagance so unbounded, so unexampled, was
almost equal to his Chagrin at being oblig'd to discharge
them. Besides, as it is the Way of the World 

to expose in their worst Colours the Vices of a
Person in Disgrace, his Ears were continually teiz'd
with some new Account of her ill Conduct; and
tho' it was scarce possible to report her more vile
than she really was, 'tis certain there was nothing of
the Truth omitted. 
The dejected Beauclair was, perhaps, the only
Person in Town whom this Adventure had not
reach'd; his Soul was too much taken up in the
Contemplation of his own Misfortunes to listen to
those of another. As soon as he return'd to Paris,
and had got to his Lodgings, he threw himself into
Bed, from which none of his Servants (who were
entirely ignorant what it was that disorder'd him,
or where he had been) cou'd prevail on him to rise,
or to admit the Visits of any of his Acquaintance. 
A young Chevalier coming to lodge in the same
House, express'd a prodigious Concern when he was
told his Neighbour's melancholy Condition: He
sent to entreat the Liberty of visiting him, but was
refus'd; till one Day, happening to see a Servant
going in with something his Master wanted, he
took that Opportunity (which probably he had watched
for) to beg that Favour himself. It was not in
the Power of any Misfortune to make Beauclair forget
that Gentleman-like Complaisant Behaviour which
render'd his Conversation as charming to the Women,
as the Soundness of his Judgment, and almost an
universal Knowledge of every beneficial Study, made
it esteem'd and coveted by the Men, and could not
avoid doing the Civility of his Chamber, when one,
who appear'd so much a Gentleman, desir'd to be
admitted. Beside, there was something so engaging
in the Air and Mein of this young Chevalier, which,
whether he would, or no, attracted his Admiration:
He grew immediately charm'd with him without
knowing that he was so; and began to find a Pleasure
in conversing with him, such as had been a
Stranger to his Soul, since his breaking off with
Montamour. He fancy'd, indeed, he found something 

in his Features, and the Accent of his Voice,
so much resembling that Lady's, that had it seem'd
possible, he shou'd have believ'd it her: But that was
a vain and soon-rejected Thought! –––She was far
off,––––shut up within a Monastery:–––Tho' had
she been near, and at Liberty, there was little Likelihood
that she, who wou'd not by all his Entreaties
be won to grant him one Moment's willing Audience,
when he had risqu'd such imminent Dangers
to obtain it, shou'd come, of her own Accord, to
seek him, at his own Lodgings, and in a Garb so
much unsuitable to her Nicety and Reserve. Besides,
the Chevalier hard darker Hair, a far less delicate
Complexion, and a certain Boldness in his Look,
becoming enough in one of his Sex, but vastly different
from that modest Mildness he had always seen
in her's. The bare Imagination, however, that there
was a Likeness, tho' never so small a one, was sufficient
to make him valuable: He was so far from
being chagrin'd at the Intrusion, that he became a
Petitioner for the same Favour the next Day; and the
other was too well satisfied in entertaining him, not
to comply with his Request: There soon grew an
Intimacy between them, which seem'd rather the
Consequence of many Years Acquaintance, than a
few Days. 'Tis very difficult for the Tongue to forbear
speaking something of what the Soul is full of:
The despairing Beauclair, wholly taken up with his
Passion, cou'd not sit so many Hours with his new
Friend without revealing the whole History of it
to him:–––He let him into every Particular of his
Transgression, and Repentance for it; complain'd of
the uncommon Severity of Montamour, and entreated
his Advice. Nor was he, while making this Recital,
agitated with more violent Emotions than the
Hearer of it appear'd to be: The young Vrayment
(for so he call'd himself) discover'd he had a Heart
tender and susceptible of Love's soft Impression:
He cou'd not listen to some Passages, and restrain his
Tears, nor suffer a Sigh from Beauclair to pass unanswer'd 

by one of his own: But when he found he
was beginning to accuse the Cruelty and unforgiving
Temper of his Mistress, he cou'd not forbear taking
her Part: Ah, Monsieur Beauclair! said he, in spite
of the Pity due to what I see you suffer, and the
Inclination I have to be of your Side, Justice now
obliges me to engage in the Defence of one I know
not, against him whose Friendship I profess an Ambition
to become worthy of: I cannot think the
Proceedings of that Lady are in the least to be condemn'd:
Had she acted otherwise, you might indeed
have applauded the Effects of a Passion which made
you Master of your Wishes; but what must the
disinterested Part of the World have thought of her
Behaviour? Wou'd not the Meanness of her Spirit,
and her easy Fondness, have been the Subject of Ridicule? 
By what yourself has said, I find she loves
you,––––loves you with a Tenderness, at least, equal
to your own;–––and, doubtless, when she pronounc'd
the Sentence of your eternal Banishment, felt Torments
greater than she gave:––––But; there are some
Sorts of Injuries which Honour cannot pardon; among
which, I think those are she has receiv'd from you. 
Yet Heaven, cry'd the half-distracted Beauclair, forgives
the penitent Offender. Yes, resum'd the other; 
but here the Case is widely different: The heavenly
Mercy is accountable to nothing but itself; but we
poor Mortals, whose Actions are censur'd by each
other, and scarce the best can 'scape Reflection, must
be cautious, ever watchful how we tread that slippery
Road, the World's Opinion; for Reputation is
so nice a Thing, so finely wrought, so liable to
break, the least false Step disjoints the beauteous
Frame, and down we sink in endless Infamy. –––– 
Consider, added he, the Reasons why Women are,
by our Salique Law, debarr'd from reigning? Why,
in all Nations of the Earth, excluded from publick
Management? Us'd but as Toys? Little immaterial
Amusements, to trifle away an Hour of idle Time
with? Is it not because their Levity of Nature, their 

weak Irresolution, pleas'd and displeas'd oft at they
know not what, and always in Extreams, makes
them unfit for Counsel, for Secrecy, or Action? –––– 
If one among them can tow'r above the Follies of
her Sex, and awe her encroaching Passions with
superior Reason, we should admire a Virtue so uncommon. 
–––And tho' the Freedom of my Speech
shou'd lose me the Honour of your Friendship, the
Love I bear to Truth obliges me to say, that, in my
Opinion, had Montamour granted to your Inconstancy
that kind Reward its contrary had merited, she had
proved the Lover, but not the Woman of Discretion,
and had been guilty of an Injustice to herself, which
I know not how she wou'd have been able to account
for. This Manner of arguing wou'd not, perhaps,
have been very agreeable to Monsieur Beauclair, had
it come from any other Mouth; but nothing was
unpardonable from this young Favourite: He had already
gain'd so great an Ascendant over him, that
it was in his Power to perswade him almost to any
Thing: Hurry'd by the Violence of his Despair, he
had certainly had recourse to some desperate Remedy,
to ease the present Anguish, had not the other's prudent
Advice and philosophical Reasonings (which
seem'd far above his Age) intersposed to stay him:
Whenever he found him more than ordinarily sad, he
wou'd endeavour to divert his Griefs, or when he
found him (as sometimes he did) transported with
Excess of Passion, and appearing like one totally depriv'd
of Reason, he wou'd for a while give way to
the Tempest of his Despair, then gently parley with
the Fury, till by Degrees he sooth'd it to a Calm. ––– 
Never Man, overwhelm'd like him in Sorrows, met
a Comforter so kind, so industrious, and so artful in
allaying them; he look'd on him as his Guardian-Angel,
sent down from Heaven to soften his impetuous
Passions, and restore his Peace. It was seldom
they were asunder, but whenever it happen'd so,
each seem'd to want the better half of himself:–––– 
They eat together,––––drank together; and Beauclair 

wou'd very fain have perswaded him to take Part of
his Bed: But the other excus'd himself from that. 
He told him, that having been guilty of some youthful
Follies, the Church had forbad him, by way of
Mortification, the Ease of reposing in a Bed for
a certain Time: When Morning comes, said he, I
throw myself upon it, and tumble the Cloaths, to
prevent the People of the House from taking Notice; 
but for many Nights past have rested on the Floor. 
Beauclair was himself too strict an Observer of the
Orders of the Church, to press him farther; and these
were the only Hours in which they were separated. 
Neither of them had been abroad since they came to
Paris; and Beauclair, something more easy than he
had been, began to think it a Piece of Ingratitude
that he had not yet paid a Visit to the friendly Friar,
by whose Instructions he had first gain'd Admittance
to Montamour: He told Vrayment of it; and that he
wou'd that Day pass some Hours with him. The
other offer'd to accompany him, if he approv'd of it; 
which not being thought at all improper, they both
went to the Convent, where they were told, the
Person they enquir'd for was extremely ill, and unfit
for Conversation. But Beauclair, whose Intimacy
with him authoriz'd his Freedom, ran immediately
to his Cell, leaving the Chevalier to divert himself
in the Cloister-Walks, till his Return. But how
great was his Astonishment, when after having paid
his Civilities to the Friar, and turning his Eyes a
little on one Side, he saw a Person sitting on the Bed
by him, whom, in spite of the Darkness of the
Place, he presently knew to be Du Lache! All the
Rage and Violence of Passion, which by the Artifices
of his agreeable Companion were a little hush'd to
Peace, return'd at the Sight of this Villain: Scarce
cou'd he restrain himself from sacrificing him that
Moment to his Resentment. Villain! detested Monster,
cry'd he, have I found thee! ––––Comest thou
to scatter thy abhorr'd Practices among the Saints! ––– 
He took him by the Throat, with these Words, and 

dragging him from the Bed, had his Sword half
out; when the timorous Wretch, fearful to die, tho'
unable to live, fell on his Knees, and begg'd him to
forgive him; and the poor sick Friar, strangely
alarm'd at what he saw and heard, cry'd out to him
to forbear, and whatever his Injuries were, not to
prophane that holy Place with Blood. ––––This Remonstrance
a little brought Beauclair to himself, and
having begg'd his Pardon for giving him this Disturbance,
he turn'd to Du Lache, Rise, said he, thou
Unworthy of the Name of Man! ––––O Monsieur!
interrupted he, (by this Time a little more assur'd,)
for the Love of Heav'n do not quite undo me;––––I
am already as miserable as your Wish can make me,––– 
do not betray me here, and my whole future Life
shall be spent in an Endeavour to expiate the past. 
What new Deceit, resum'd Beauclair, thou execrable
Lyar, wou'dst thou now impose upon me? –––– 
Permit me but a Moment's patient hearing, answer'd
the other, and I will confess all I have done;–––you
shall be let into the whole Secret, which as yet it is
impossible you can know without me. 
Tho' there was little of Truth to be expected from
this Villain, yet Beauclair was willing to listen to
what he had to say; and perceiving he wou'd not
declare himself before the Friar, went with him out
of the Room. The Cloister-Walks were pretty full
of Company, and they walk'd together into a little
Field behind the Convent; where Du Lache, as he had
promis'd, related to Beauclair every Particular of the
Treasons he had been guilty of both to him and
Montamour. He told him also, that the Baron de
Tortillée, being perfectly recover'd of his Phrenzy was
return'd to Paris, and incens'd against his Lady had
taken Care to deprive her of all those Gallantries she
formerly had so freely indulg'd in, by confining her
to her Chamber; and that himself look'd on as a
Person instrumental in her Amours, was prosecuted
with his severest-Resentment; and that, on that Account,
and the Misfortune of some Debts, he had 

been oblig'd to obscond, and concealing his Name
in that of another, take shelter in this Convent,
where the Charity of the Fathers was all his Dependance. 
Tho' Beauclair had been before wholly
assur'd of the Innocence of Montamour, yet he cou'd
not be inform'd of the Truth of those Artifices by
which he had been ensnar'd into a contrary Opinion,
without lifting up his Eyes and Hands in Token of
Amazement; and tho' he knew nothing of the distracting
Potion which had been given to the Baron,
his intended Murder, nor a thousand other hellish
Practices, yet he stood struck dumb with Wonder
that there cou'd be three such prodigious Villains in
the World, as Du Lache, and his Confederates Toncarr
and Le Songe. But while he was thus employ'd, an
Accident happen'd, which more than ever inform'd
him, how dangerous it was for a Man of Honour to
be of the Acquaintance of such Wretches. 
Full of troubled Cogitations, the unhappy Baron
avoided as much as possible all Society: His Misfortunes
were publick, and he cou'd not imagine any
body look'd on him without pitying or despising that
Weakness which had suffer'd him to fall into them. 
Chance, or his ill Genius, led him into that Field, at
the very Hour, at the very Moment, that these two
were in Conference. He immediately knew the Villain
he so long had sought; but the Sight of Beauclair
fill'd him with more violent Agitations: Ever since
the Knowledge of his Wrongs, he had imagin'd this
Gentleman was the prime Cause of them; nor was
this Thought altogether opposite to Reason, considering
the Manner in which he once had found him
with his Wife; and now beholding him thus accompany'd,
was sufficient to confirm those Conjectures. –––– 
Now all the Injuries he had sustain'd, his violated Honour,
––––his ruin'd Fortune,––––his Madness,––––his
intended Murder, all at once presented themselves to
his Remembrance!––––and fatally transported with
Excess of Rage, he drew his Sword, and flew on the
astonish'd Beauclair, giving him no other Warning 

of the Danger which he threaten'd, than that Action. 
It was indeed sufficient to make him stand upon his
Guard; but being desirous to know on what Account,
or by whom he was so challeng'd, (for, in
his present Surprise, he saw not that it was the Baron,)
he stepp'd two or three Steps back, and was
opening his Mouth to enquire the Cause of so unexpected
a Salutation; when the other, still advancing,
cry'd out to him to stay; Recoil not, base, unworthy
Man! dishonourable Beauclair! said he; but if you
are not Coward too, as well as Villain, defend the
Wrongs you have done me with the same Boldness
as you acted them. Ha! reply'd Beauclair, equally
provok'd; and who art thou who dar'st to join such
Language with the Name of Beauclair? ––––Is it possible,
(continu'd he, looking more earnestly on him,)
that the Baron de Tortilée should so forget himself? 
'Tis thou, resum'd the impatient Baron, that hast forgot
thy Virtue,––––debased the Honour of thy noble
Family,––––and render'd thyself a Companion of Panders,
Vagabonds, and Ruffians! ––––But we trifle
Time:––––This Woman's War of Words is not for
Men, who ought to hate like us! As much addicted
to Passion as Beauclair naturally was, he would if
possible have avoided this Combat; but the other resolving
to afford no longer Parley, press'd on him so
hard, that he was oblig'd to make use of his best
Skill for his Defence. Du Lache had all this while
his Sword out too, not with a Design to prevent
them from doing each other a Mischief, but to take
Part with which ever was like to be the Conqueror. 
The Baron, whether it was that he was less expert,
or that transported by his Fury he rush'd to eagerly
on his Antagonist, is uncertain; but Beauclair had
the good Fortune to disarm him at the third Pass. 
Sufficiently satisfied with this Advantage, and rejoic'd
this Adventure had terminated in no worse a
Catastrophe, he was preparing to redeliver him his
Sword, with all complaisant and sincere Inclinations
imaginable for a thorough Reconciliation, when the 

mischievous Stander-by stab'd him in the Back with
so accurs'd a Force, that the unhappy Gentleman fell
with the Wound, and spoke, nor breath'd no more. 
Thus ended a Life, which, if not blemish'd by a too
great Affection for the most Vile of Women, might
have been long and happy. Beauclair, struck motionless
with sudden Horror at a Deed so monstrous, seem'd
like one transfix'd with Thunder; and before he cou'd
recollect himself enough for Speech, or the Murderer
cou'd determine what Way wou'd afford most Security
for his Escape, they were encompassed by a
Crowd of People which the Cries of the Chevalier
Vrayment had drawn together. That young Spark
having seen Beauclair and Du Lache (whom he very
well knew) go hastily cross the Walks, he follow'd
them into the Field, apprehensive that they were
gone thither on no friendly Purpose. He observ'd
their Behaviour at a Distance, till the Approach of the
Baron; and the Manner in which he accosted Beauclair,
made him resolve to trust nothing to Fortune,
but timely Endeavour to hinder whatever Consequences
either Rage and Treachery might attempt; 
yet fearful to leave them while he ran for Help, he
bethought him of calling to some Men whom he
saw cleaning the Way on the other Side of the Wall
which encompassed the Field he was in. They presently
resounded the Cry of Murder, which echoing
from one to the other, gather'd Numbers immediately,
which, tho' they had a good Way to come
round, were at the Heels of Vrayment when he got
to the fatal Scene. Du Lache, when they came near,
was looking wildly round, as tho' distracted with the
Horrors of his Guilt, his Sword lying on the Grass,
died to the Hilt with Blood; Beauclair with both
the Swords still in his Hand, his Head a little reclin'd,
and stooping over the dead Body, which was
fallen just at his Feet: The Sight of Vrayment, and
the Noise of those that follow'd, rous'd him from
his Lethargy, and he presently cry'd, O my Friend!
behold this dreadful Object! –––Then turn your Eyes 

on that consummate Fiend, (whom yet you know
not, but by my Description,) the curs'd Du Lache. Before
the Person to whom these Words were address'd
cou'd make any Reply, a robust Fellow bawl'd out,
A dreadful Murder indeed, my Masters! but 'tis hard
to know which of these two, or whether both, are
not guilty of it. 'Tis true, said another; therefore
let us carry them both away to the Officers of
Justice. Ay, ay, hollow'd out the whole Crowd, away
with them both. It wou'd have been but to little
purpose to have argued with the Multitude, had they
endeavour'd it: But Beauclair was willing to go, that
the murd'rous Du Lache might receive the due Reward
of all his Crimes; nor did that Wretch seem
now so timorous as might have been expected from
his cowardly Disposition; he fed himself with a secret
Hope, that he might be able by his Insinuations
to make Beauclair appear at least a Party concern'd,
if not a chief Instrument of the Baron's Death; which
if he cou'd once bring to be believ'd, the Sentence
must be the same on both; and then he doubted not
but that Gentleman had Interest enough to procure
a Pardon, which must, where the Guilt was equal,
extend to one as well as the other. The Chevalier
was not at all dissatisfied, as not doubting but the
bloody Sword of Du Lache, and his own Evidence,
who saw the Murder, wou'd be sufficient to clear
Beauclair immediately; but he found himself mistaken. 
The known Amour which he had had with
the Wife of the Deceas'd, and the Intimacy which
had been taken Notice of between him and the
Murderer, went a great way to make him appear
guilty of consenting to his Death: But nothing cou'd
be determin'd till the Tryal, which was order'd shou'd
be in a few Days; and, in the mean Time, both
were sent to Prison, neither being allow'd the Privilege
of Bail. 
Vrayment appear'd much more concern'd than
Beauclair was for himself, and omitted nothing during
the Time of his Confinement, which cou'd be 

expected from the most zealous Friendship: He went
to all his Acquaintance, to engage them to appear in
his Behalf on the Day prefix'd for the Tryal: But
tho' many did, and his Character was such, as cou'd
give no one leave to imagine he cou'd be guilty of a
Baseness, such as he was call'd in question for, yet
the Baron's Relations were so vigorous in their Prosecution,
that in spite of all Vrayment, (who saw the
whole Transaction,) cou'd say, the Court began to
think it wou'd be very difficult to acquit him. The
Baroness having, by Toncarr and Le Songe, been accused
of a Design to murder her Husband, was also summon'd
to appear; and Du Lache having found Means
to send to her while he was in Prison, let her know
the only way for their common Safety was to accuse
Beauclair. She did it, to his Face, with an Assurance
such as sure no Woman but herself cou'd ever boast; 
and to make her Evidence bear the greater Appearance
of Truth, with counterfeited Blushes, and
Streams of Tears, she confess'd her criminal Affection
for him had won her Consent to the Baron's Death,
that she might give herself wholly to him. Never
was any Soul alarm'd, confus'd, enrag'd, like Beauclair,
when he heard this monstrous Allegation; scarce
cou'd he contain himself in the Presence of the Judge,
(who happen'd to be the Brother of Montamour,) from
speaking to that bad Woman, when he denied what he
was charg'd with, in Terms such as her Impudence
deserv'd; but all that he cou'd say without being
guilty of an Indecorum to Modesty, or Irreverence to
the Presence he was in, he did. This Accusation,
however, had a very great Influence on the Judge,
who imagin'd presently that this Amour was the Occasion
of his Sister's breaking with him; and the Indignity
which he thought was offer'd to his Family,
by preferring a Woman of the Baroness's Character to
a Maid whose Reputation had ever been unblemish'd,
heighten'd his Displeasure against the Prisoner to so
great a Degree, that he was just going to pronounce
him deserving the same Fate with Du Lache; when 

Vrayment, easily guessing what his Thoughts were,
and distracted to find all he cou'd do to save him
was in vain; And is then my Evidence, my Lord,
said he, no more to be regarded? I, who was Witness
to every Part of the whole Action, and know
Beauclair as free from any Share in this Guilt, as
Heaven is from Falshood; or Hell, or these his vile
Accusers, from Truth. ––––You speak with Passion,
young Monsieur, reply'd the Judge, which, in a Case
like this, savours too much of Partiality, to be regarded:
––––You are his Friend;––––and Friendship
may be byass'd. I scorn the Thought, (interrupted
fiercely the enrag'd Vrayment:) I love Beauclair 'tis
true; but 'tis because his Virtues challenge my Esteem:
––––Did I but think he cou'd forego his Honour, and
become an Accomplice with these horrid Wretches,
I wou'd be the first shou'd urge your Justice to condemn
him: But as I know him clear,––––clear as
my own Soul,––––as yours, my Lord, or any here,
from such detested Crimes, I must, I will stand up
in his Vindication, tho' the whole World should censure
and hate me for it. While he was uttering these
Words, the Judge look'd on him with an Eye which
spoke Amazement; and not replying presently, a
Friend of the dead Baron's, one who had appear'd the
most zealous of any of them in his Revenge, took
this Opportunity to endeavour to weaken what this
young Champion had offer'd in Defence of Beauclair. 
I hope, my Lord, said he, the Testimony of one,
bold tho' he seems, so much unknown, and doubtless
bought, will be of little Weight, when Circumstances
so plain make void his Evidence. Injurious Man,
(resum'd the little Hero,) know I was bred to hate
a Lye:––––Nor shall I be unknown when he, by
whose Sentence I, in my Friend, must stand or fall,
shall see this Token. With these Words he pluck'd
a Ring off his Finger, and presented it to the Judge; 
who after he had taken it, look'd carefully on it,
then on him that gave it; and rising from his Seat, I
am enough convinc'd, said he, and here pronounce 

the Witness most substantial, and Beauclair innocent. 
––––Let the Court adjourn: To-morrow the other
Prisoners must attend their Doom. It was to little
Effect that the Friends of the Deceas'd petition'd for
a further hearing. The universal Joy which appear'd
in the Faces of all the disinterested Part of the Assembly,
and the loud Clap which they gave when Beauclair
was acquitted, hush'd the feeble Murmurs of the
contrary Party. As the Judge pass'd by the Bar where
Beauclair was standing, he took him by the Hand,
and speaking to him in a low Voice, Dine with me
to Day, said he, and be sure to bring your young Advocate
with you. The other had no Time to make
any other Answer to this obliging Invitation, than a
low Bow; but the Surprise he was in at this sudden
Change of his Affairs was such, as it wou'd be very
difficult to represent. He cou'd not, however, in this
publick Place, have Leisure for Reflection: He was
immediately surrounded by a great Number of his
Friends and Acquaintance, who came to congratulate
him on being clear'd. When the Press was a little over,
Vrayment came up to him, and with a Countenance
much more grave than he had ever seen him wear, You
are now safe, Monsieur, said he; but beware how you
hereafter enter into Engagements with Persons of the
Baroness's Humour. Beauclair, unwilling to hold any
Discourse on an Affair which he wou'd have been glad to
bury in Oblivion, answer'd these Words only with a Sigh,
and a little Shaking of his Head: But after he had
embrac'd and thank'd him for the Service he had
done him, owning it was to him (as indeed it was)
that he was indebted for his Life, he entreated him
to inform him, by what Means he came to know the
Judge, and what the Mystery of the Ring was, which
like some Enchantment, had the Power in a Moment
to unlock his Fetters, and reverse his Doom. Of that,
reply'd Vrayment, you shall be told hereafter; but you
must pardon me if I say it is a Secret, which, at present
you must not be inform'd of. I will not press it then,
resum'd Beauclair; but perhaps, at the Judge's House, 

to which he has engag'd me to bring you To-day
you will be good natur'd enough to ease my Curiosity
Tis highly possible, indeed, answer'd the Chevalier,
that there the Riddle may be solv'd. They pass'd
from this to several other Subjects of Conversation
relating to the Tryal, 'till the Hour drawing near,
in which they were to wait on the Judge, Vrayment
excus'd himself from going with him, saying
he had some Business another Way which he was
obliged to dispatch; but when that was ended, he
might expect to see him. The other entreating him
not to fail, took his Leave for a much longer Time
than he imagin'd. 
The Judge, who waited with Impatience for
their coming, receiv'd Beauclair with all imaginable
Civility and Kindness; till finding he was alone, he a
little alter'd his Countenance, and with a Voice
which express'd his Discontent, What, Monsieur,
said he, would she not come?––––or did you fear to
trust her in a Brother's House? What Means, my
Lord, cried the other, (more surpris'd, if possible,
at these Words, than at all his late Adventures.) You
counterfeit a Consternation well, resum'd the former,
tho' I know not for what Cause:––––My Meaning
needs, I think, no Explanation:––––You were not,
as I take it, the only invited Guest. ––––Most true,
my Lord, answer'd Beauclair; and could my Perswasions
have prevail'd on the Chevalier Vrayment,
to put off to another Day a Business he had appointed
on this, I had not singly waited on you. The
Judge thinking himself trifled with, began to lose great
Part of his Patience: You do ill, Monsieur, said he, to
reward the kind Intentions I had for you, in this Manner:
––––Why do you pretend to keep me in Ignorance
of what by this Time you must be sensible
I know full well? ––––Why, when I demand to see
my Sister, do you make an Excuse for the Absence
of the Chevalier Vrayment? Ha! (interrupted the transported
Lover, half wild 'twixt Extacy and Wonder,)
what said your Lordship? ––––Your Sister! ––––O bless 

my exulting Soul, and tell me all! ––––Is it possible,
(rejoin'd her Brother) that you should need be told
by any but herself, that Montamour and Vrayment
are the same? O Heavens! cried Beauclair, now quite
o'ercome with Rapture: O all ye gracious Powers,
is it possible! All that he could say was scarce sufficient
to make the Judge believe his Sister could be
in Paris, and so intimate with her Lover, and remain
unknown to him, till he recounted to him his
Progress to the Monastery, the Severity of her Usage
to him there, and the Improbability there was, that
she should have alter'd her Resolution. Neither of
them knew what to think:––––That it was she, was
evident, tho' her Hair and Complection were alter'd,
which might easily be perform'd by Art. The Features
of her Face, her Voice, were perfectly known
to her Brother; and more than all, the Ring she gave
him, which was one he had put on her Finger at
parting, left no room to doubt it was any other
than herself; but how so wonderful a Change had
happen'd, or for what Reason she had left the Monastery
so disguis'd, and come in Search of the Man
she had so industriously strove to avoid, was
what puzzled the Capacities of them both. After
some little Time of Expectation, Beauclair began to
fear that it was in vain to hope she would make
good her Promise of meeting him there, and ran
home, believing he might probably find her: But
how great was his Disappointment, when he was
told the Chevalier had discharged his Lodgings, and
had not given any Intimation where he design'd
to go! Full of a thousand perplex'd Reflections for
this second Ruin of his Hopes, he return'd to her
Brother with the melancholy Account, and found
him reading a Letter he had just receiv'd from her. 
As soon as the Brother of Montamour saw him
enter, You need not, Monsieur, said he, give yourself
the Trouble of repeating our common Misfortune; 
the Person we both, tho' prompted by different
Emotions, are so impatient to embrace, resolves we 

shall not, at least for a while, enjoy the Happiness
we aim at. See here, (continu'd he, giving him the
Letter,) the Intelligence I have just now received. 
Beauclair had no sooner cast his Eye upon it, than
he knew the Character to be Montamour's, and,
with a Mixture of Hope and Fear, as tho' about to
unravel the Mystery of his futue Fate, read o'er
these Lines: 

I Am sensible it is now too late, to entreat my dearest
Brother to keep from Monsieur Beauclair the Knowledge
who the Person was that endeavour'd to do
him Service at his Tryal: But that I did not satisfy
yours and my own Desire, in seeing you at your House,
was, because I could not bear to appear in my own
Shape before a Man who has affronted me in the Manner
you are now no Stranger to. However, my late
Behaviour may inform you I am not desirous of Revenge:
––––His Repentance since has, perhaps, been Punishment
sufficient, and I would not have you less willing
to forgive. ––––I have also a Pardon to beg for
myself, for making use of your Name to countenance my
Elopement from the Monastery, and conceal the Pity I
had for an unworthy Lover in the Pretence of Tenderness
for the best of Brathers. ––––Yes, I confess, that disturb'd
at some Testimonies I had of his Despair, I told the
Abbess that I could not profess till I had once more bid
adieu to you, and by that Means gain'd her Consent
to come to Paris. Judge not too unkindly of this Deceit,
but believe you are, and ever shall be, most
dear to the Soul of 
Your Affectionate Sister, and
Obliged Humble Servant,
Montamour. 

Beauclair had scarce finish'd the reading this, when
his Servant brought him another, which he told
him was given him by the Chevalier Vrayment, with 

a strict Charge to deliver it to his Hands. The
hearing that Name, and the Sight of this second
Mandate increas'd the Tumults of his Soul to such a
Heighth, that the Disorder he was in, was what nothing
but itself can represent: To comprehend in
any Measure what it was he felt, 'tis necessary to
be possess'd of all those burning Passions,––––those
distracting Whirls of torturing Thought, which scarce
afforded Patience till he could unfold the dear, and
at once welcome and unwelcome Paper, which contain'd
these Words: 

To Monsieur Beauclair.
Think not, because I have given you Proofs
of an unextinguish'd Tenderness, that I think
your Penitence a sufficient Expiation for your
Crimes, nor that my Pity for your Sufferings can influence
me so far as to make me forget what I owe
to my own Honour. ––––No, Beauclair! there is a Justice
to be done one's self, which if I shou'd dispense with,
you might perhaps, and indeed with much more Reason
than hitherto you have had, be perswaded to believe,
I might hereafter fail in it towards you. –––What though
you swear your Heart was ever mine,––––what though
your late Repentance and Despair induces me to think
that Protestation real, the World, the judging World,
will never be of my Opinion. ––––My easy Nature, and
my fond Belief, wou'd be the Jest of every Table. ––– 
All I can do for you, therefore, and I know not if by
the Grave and Wise that wou'd not be thought too
much, is to wish it were as much in my Power to reward
that Tenderness you now have for me, as it is
to pardon those past Actions which have made us both
unhappy. I cannot, without deviating from that Sincerity
which has been ever the Dictator of all my Words,
deny that my Love for you has ever been unshaken;––– 
that it was not even in your own Power to lessen one
Grain of that exhaustless Store of Passion you inspir'd 

me with;––––that it still blazes with a Flame so pure,
so true, so lasting, as not Time, nor Absence, nor Unkindness
can put a Damp to;––––that my whole Soul
is full of you;––––and that in putting in Execution
that cruel, but necessary Resolution of flying from your
Sight for ever, I suffer Pangs more terrible than Death
itself cou'd be: But entertain no Hope from this Confession,
nor attempt to alter a Determination which is
fix'd as Fate. ––––Write not to me, unless you can restrain
your Sentiments to such Bounds as may be fitly
read by one of that Order I am going to profess myself:
––––But above all Things, I conjure you, not to
make use of any Stratagems for the future to distract
me with the Sight of your Despair. –––The Thought of
it is more than I can bear! –––Heaven! Heaven only!
can enable me to support the coming killing Certainty,
which takes from me all Possibility of ever being 
Yours.
Montamour. 

Who that has been present when Death's Icy Hand
has on the sudden seiz'd on the Faculties of some
one in Company, may figure to themselves what
Beauclair was at reading this! Just so the Blood
flew from his Lips and Cheeks, his Eyes grew dim,
the Life and Vigour of his Air chang'd to cold
Trembling, all his Limbs enervate, and down at
once he sunk into the Chair he was sitting on. The
Brother of Montamour guessing the Cause of this Disorder,
took the Letter from his shaking Hand, and
inform'd himself at full of what he before suspected. 
Come Monsieur, said he, recall your Courage; I see
nothing in this Letter that can give you Cause of
Chagrin, but rather the contrary:–––My Sister makes
a Declaration here of Tenderness, much greater than
I cou'd have imagin'd from her Reserve;––––and
since she loves, take my Word for it, neither of you
shall Despair. The dejected Lover cou'd not recover 

himself enough to make any other Answer to these
obliging Expressions than a Sigh: But the other,
continuing to assure him, in the Manner he had begun,
that he wou'd not rest till he had procur'd his
Happiness, made a visible Alteration in his Countenance,
and by little and little, he became again the
Man he was, 
Nor was the Judge forgetful of what he had promis'd; 
but, because it was impossible to prosecute
the Design he had form'd till the Affair of the Prisoners
was dispatch'd, he commanded their Appearance
the very next Day. The Crime of Du Lache,
as being the immediate Murderer of the unhappy
Baron, was too evident for any Thing to be offer'd
in Opposition to his Sentence, which was to be
broke upon the Wheel; Toncarr and Le Songe, having
been prov'd by the Witness of the Gentleman and
the Servants who rescued the Baron, to have assassinated
and design'd his Death, receiv'd the same
Doom: But the Baroness, though the known Contriver
and Abettor of the horrid Deed, was remanded
back to Prison, till he had more Leisure to consult
in what Manner he shou'd decree her Punishment. 
This being over, he immediately set forward with
Monsieur Beauclair to the Monastery where Montamour
had resolv'd to pass the Remainder of her Life. 
They arriv'd there the very Day before that in which
she was design'd to take the Order: Her Brother
found an easy Admittance to her; but not all the
Arguments he cou'd alledge were of Force to engage
her Consent to see Beauclair, till he, who had
waited in an outer Room expecting to be call'd in,
as the Judge had made him hope, growing impatient
at this long Delay, and resolving to hear once
more from Montamour's own Mouth his Doom, ran
hastily in to them, and throwing himself at her
Feet, pleaded his own Cause with such Success, that
though she did not absolutely promise to grant all he
ask'd, yet there appear'd a sort of consenting in her 

Eyes; which her Brother observing, back'd the Intercessions
of the other with Arguments so strenuous,
that she was wholly at a Loss for Words to form
Denials, if the Relentings of her swelling Heart
wou'd have dictated them, to what her Lover and
her Brother urg'd. The Abbess, whose Company on
this extraordinary Occasion was desir'd, join'd her
Perswasions; and had Montamour been less prompted
from within, it had been hardly possible to have
held out against such united Forces. In fine, she was
at last prevail'd on to give her Hand to him, from
whom nothing cou'd estrange her Heart. They were
marry'd that Evening; and it wou'd be needless to
endeavour, as well as impossible to set forth, as it
deserv'd, the Raptures, of the o'er-joy'd Beauclair at so
unhop'd-for a Condescension. It was not many Days
between their going and coming back to Paris; yet
at their Return, they met the Tidings of an Act of
Horror which they little expected: The wicked Baroness,
impatient of her Fate, desperate, and, as some
say, struck with Remorse, and terrified in Conscience,
hopeless of Mercy here or hereafter, had swallow'd
Poison, and ended her shameful Life by as ignominious
a Death: The three Wretches, who had been
the Instruments of her vile Actions, suffer'd the Sentence
which had been given by the Judge, and with
their last Breaths allow'd the Justice of it, and confess'd
their Crimes. Thus was not only the Baron's
Death reveng'd at full, but also the Disquiet which
the Contrivers of it had brought on the innocent
Montamour and her belov'd Beauclair. The Manner
of their living together since their Marriage is such,
as might be expected from that unalterable Affection
which each felt for the other before, and full of that
sincere Tenderness which might furnish many more
Examples, were Love and Virtue the chief Inducements
to Hymen. 
