


Is less entertaining than some of the former. 

The husband of mrs. Munden being
engaged abroad till his usual hour,
she had just time to get into bed before
he came home, which she was very glad
of, as it prevented him from asking any
question concerning her sitting up so much
beyond her custom; and she was not willing
to say any thing to him of her new
guest, till she had talked farther with her,
and also examined into the truth of the
affair, which brought her thither. 
The more she reflected on the account
that lady had given of herself, the less reason
she found to give credit to some passages
in it;—she could not think that a
prince, such as the duke De M&wblank;, would
on a meer suggestion cast a woman out to
misery and beggary, whom he had so
passionately loved;—and yet less could
she believe, that her brother, a man not
fiery by nature, could have acted in the
manner she had represented, without a
much greater provocation than what she
pretended. 

Besides, the mercer bringing home
goods so late at night to a customer, and
being locked up with her, seemed so inconsistent
with innocence, that she could
not help being of opinion, that the cause
must be bad indeed, which had no better
plea for its defence. 
It also afforded her a good deal of
matter for vexation, that by expressing
in such warm terms, the great liking she
took of this lady, when they accidentally
met at the mercer's, she had encouraged
her to make choice of her house for an
asylum in her distress, and by this means,
rendered herself interested in the concerns
of a stranger, who, at the best, it did not
well become her to take part with. 
But her most alarming apprehensions
were in relation to her brother:—she
knew not but if irritated to the high degree
mademoiselle de Roquelair had described,
he might in reality have been
guilty of some rash action, which might
endanger his reputation, and even his
life. 
Her mind being thus employed, it is
easy to believe sleep had little power over
her eyes;—late as she went to bed, she
rose pretty early in the morning, and impatient 

to know something farther of the
transactions of the preceding night, she
dispatched a servant to her brother's house
under pretence of enquiring after his
health, not doubting, but by the answer
he would bring, she should be able to
form some conjecture, whether any thing
of the nature mademoiselle de Roquelair
seemed to apprehend, had really happened
or not. 
The man returning with intelligence,
that mr. Thoughtless was very well, and
not yet stirring, gave her great consolation; 
—she then went up to the chamber of
mademoiselle, and after giving her the
usual salutation of the morning, sat down
by her bedside, and began to talk to her
in this manner. 
‘Madam, said she, I have been considering
on your story, and as I sincerely
pity the misfortunes to which
you have reduced yourself, should be
glad to know, by what method you
propose to extricate yourself from them,
and what farther assistance you require
from me, or is in my power to grant,
without acting unbecoming of my character. 
‘I should be utterly unworthy,’ answered 

the other weeping, ‘of the compassion
you have shewn, and even of the
life you have preserved, should I
entreat any thing of you, that might
either injure your reputation, or prejudice
the good understanding between
you and your brother:—As to my
misfortunes, they are, alas! past remedy; 
—I neither hope, nor shall endeavour
a reconciliation with mr.
thoughtless:—I have long since been
both ashamed, and weary of the errors
of my conduct, though I wanted
strength of resolution to reform them; 
but be assured, madam, I have now
no other wish than to pass my future
life in that only retreat for wretches
like myself—a monastery.’ 
Her streaming eyes,—her moving
accents, and above all, the seeming contrition
she expressed for her faults, raised
such a flow of tenderness in the soul of
mrs. Munden, that she resolved from
that instant, to do every thing in her
power to serve her. 
‘As the religion of your country,’ 
said she, ‘and in which you were bred,
affords a great number of those safe
and sure asylums for persons who have
made an ill use of their liberty, you 

cannot, indeed, do better than to fly
to some one of them for refuge from
temptations, which you have too much
experienced the force of; and if you
persevere in this good disposition, I
will endeavour to procure the means of
rendering you able to accomplish so
laudable a desire.’ 
‘Ah, madam!’ cried mademoiselle de
Roquelair,—‘it is all I ask of heaven,
or you;—the accidents of my life have
convinced me, there can be no real
happiness without virtue, and that the
most certain defence of virtue is religion:
—if I could now flatter myself with
the means of being received within those
sacred walls, from which the fatal love
of mr. Thoughtless drew me, I should
think my guardian angel had not quite
forsook me.’ 
On this, the good-natured believing
mrs. Munden said many kind things to
her,—made her take some refreshment,
as she lay in bed, in which she advised her
to continue some time, and endeavour to
compose herself to sleep, she seeming to
stand in need of it very much:—in going
out of the chamber, she told her she
would return in a few hours, but if she
wanted any thing in the mean time, on 

her ringing a bell by her bed-side, a maid
servant would immediately attend upon her. 
She was, indeed, bent to try all possible
methods for the accomplishment of what
she promised;—‘How guilty soever
this unhappy woman is,’ said she within
herself, ‘—my brother, in common
justice, ought at least to leave her in
the same condition, in which he found
her,—she was then going to a nunnery,
and it is now his duty to send her to
one, for it cannot be expected her father
will make a second offer of that
sort.’ 
With these reflections, together with
others on the manner in which it would
be most proper to address mr. Thoughtless
on this score, was her mind taken up, till
the hour she imagined he might be stirring; 
—the disturbances, which must necessarily
have happened in his family the
night before, made her suppose he might
lie longer than usual, but she chose rather
to wait a while for his rising, than hazard
losing the opportunity of speaking to
him, by his being gone abroad. 
That gentleman had, in fact, passed the
most disagreeable night he had ever
known:—he had loved mademoiselle de 

Roquelair with such an extravagance of
fondness, that he had sometimes been even
prompted by it to marry her, but the
too great warmth of her constitution, and
the known inconstancy of her temper, as
often deterred him from it, and also made
him restrain her from many of those liberties
he would otherwise have allowed
her;—he had thought himself no less
secure of her person, than she always pretended
he was of her heart;—and now to
find all his tenderness for her abused,
all his precautions frustrated, might well
raise in him passions of the most desperate
kind. 
The inclinations of this woman were,
in reality, too vicious to be bound by any
obligations, or withheld from their gratifications,
by any of the methods taken
for that purpose:—she loved variety,— 
she longed for change, without consulting
whether the object was suitable or not;— 
the mercer had a person and address
agreeable enough;—he was of an amorous
complexion, and readily improved
the advances she made him; he frequently
came to her under the pretence of
bringing patterns, silks, or other things
in his way of trade;—and all this, as
she imagined, without raising, any suspicion
in the family;—no interruption 

happening in their repeated interviews,
she sometimes kept him with her till
near the hour, in which mr. Thoughtless
usually came home, which was seldom
till one or two o'clock. 
But on this unlucky night, it so fell
out, that a very ill run of play, and the
loss of all the money he had about him,
brought him home much sooner than
was his custom;—a servant being at the
door, prevented his knocking, so that
the lovers had not the least notice how
near he was to them;—he went directly
into his dressing-room, which was backwards
on the ground floor, and sat musing
for some time,—casting up the sums
he had lost,—cursing fortune within himself,
and protesting never to touch a card,
or throw a dice again, when on a sudden
he was alarmed with the sound of a man's
voice laughing very heartily,—he stampt
with his foot, and a servant immediately
coming up,—‘Is there any company
above?’ demanded he hastily:—‘None,
sir, but the mercer, that comes to madam
with silks,’ replied the man—‘A
mercer at this time of night,’ cried mr.
Thoughtless,—‘how long has he been
here?’ —‘I cannot tell, exactly, sir,’ 
said he, ‘but I believe, three or four
hours:’—‘A long visit, and on business 

too!’ resumed mr. Thoughtless; 
and after a little pause,—‘Go,’ continued
he, ‘bid mademoiselle de Roquelair
come down to me.’ 
If this unfaithful woman had been but
mistress of artifice enough to have made
any one of the family her friend, she
would certainly have been told, that mr.
Thoughtless was come home, and her
gallant might easily have slipt out of the
house, without his knowledge,—but on
the contrary, her imperious behaviour towards
them, set them all in general against
her;—this fellow in particular, whom
she had used worse than the rest, rejoiced
that his master was likely to find out
what he wished him to know, but never
durst acquaint him with. 
On his going up stairs, he found they
were shut in the bed-chamber, and running
to his master with this account,— 
‘Locked in the chamber,’ said mr.
Thoughtless, starting up! —‘Yes, sir,’ 
answered the servant, ‘and nobody would
answer, though I knocked two or three
times;’—which by the way, if he did
at all, it was too softly for them to hear. 
‘Confusion!’ cried mr. Thoughtless,
now worked up to the highest pitch of 

jealous rage, ‘I'll try if they will open
to me.’ —With these words, he drew
his sword, and flew up stairs, burst open
the door, and rushed into the room with
all the fury of an incensed lion:—the
astonished guilty pair had neither thought
nor means to escape;—the lover, on
the first burst of the door, jumped out of
the window into the yard;—mademoiselle
run screaming to one corner of the
room;—‘Abandoned woman,’ cried
mr. Thoughtless, ‘your punishment shall
be the second course’;—then followed by
his man with lights, ran in pursuit of the
person who had injured him. 
This unhappy woman not daring to
stand the tempest of his rage, when he
should return, took the opportunity of his
having quitted the chamber, to make
her escape,—though at the time she did
so, as she had truly told mrs. Munden,
she neither knew where, nor to whom she
should apply for refuge. 
The mercer, in the mean time, was
found by mr. Thoughtless, but in a condition
more exciting pity than revenge; 
the poor man had broke both his legs
with his fall, and was otherwise very
much hurt; but on seeing by whom, and
in what manner he was approached, the 

terror of immediate death made him exert
all the strength that was left in him,
to cry out for pardon; which word he repeated
over and over in the most lamentable
tone that could be:—mr. Thoughtless,
on this, turned hastily away, bidding
his servants raise and carry him into the
hall, where a chair being presently
brought, he was put into it, and sent
home to make the best excuse he could
to his wife for the mischief that had happened
to him. 
Every room was afterwards searched
for mademoiselle de Roquelair, but she
not being found, and a maid servant remembring,
that in the midst of the confusion,
the street-door had been left open,
the flight of that lady was not to be
doubted. 
Though these disturbances had taken
up the greatest part of the night, mr.
Thoughtless was able to enjoy little repose
after going to bed, and rose rather
sooner than usual;—he was up and
dressed, when his sister came, but was a
good deal surprized to be told of her being
there, as she had never visited him
before without a formal invitation. 
‘Good morrow, my dear sister’, said 

he, as soon as she was introduced, ‘this
is a favour quite unexpected;—pray
what brings you abroad thus early?’ — 
‘You men,’ answered she, ‘who keep
such late hours, may well think it early; 
but for us women, who live more regularly,
it is no wonder to see us
breathe the morning air:—but I assure
you, I rose somewhat sooner than ordinary
to day, on your account;’—‘On
mine!—as how pray?’ demanded he,
‘I am come,’ answered she, to sollicit in
behalf of a person who has fallen under
your displeasure,—mademoiselle de
Roquelair. 
‘Mademoiselle de Roquelair!’ cried
he hastily, interrupting her, ‘what knowledge
have you of that infamous creature?’ 
—she then ingenuously related
to him, how they had met by
accident at the mercer's,—the offer she
had then made her of her friendship, and
how, as she supposed, emboldened by
that mistaken encouragement, she had
flown to her house for shelter the preceding
night:—‘You see how dangerous
it is,’ said he, ‘to make friendship at
first sight; but sure the wretch cannot
flatter herself with the least distant hope
of a reconciliation?’ 

‘Far be it from me, sir,’ replied mrs.
Munden, very gravely, ‘to become the
negotiator of such a treaty, or even to
attempt a vindication of her behaviour,
—no, it is your own honour, for
which alone I am concerned, and that
I think requires you should send her to
a monastery, since, as she says, you deprived
her of the opportunity of entering
into one.’ 
‘All meer pretence,’ cried he;‘—'tis
true, there was some talk of such a
thing, but she has inclinations of a different
sort.’ —To which mrs. Munden
replied, ‘that inclinations, though never
so corrupt, might be reformed by reason,
adversity, and experience;—that
she hoped her penitence was sincere,
and what before was her aversion, was
now become her choice.’ —She then
urged the request she came upon, in
terms so moving and pathetic, that mr.
Thoughtless, irritated as he was, could
not withstand the energy of her words:
—he told her he would consider on what
she had said, and give his answer the
next day, but in the mean time desired
she would advise her unworthy guest to
send for her baggage immediately, saying, 

he would have nothing in his house,
that should remind him of her. 
Mrs. Munden pretty well satisfied with
having obtained thus much, took her
leave, and returned to mademoiselle de
Roquelair, with an account of what she
had done. 
