


MONDAY Morning.
Dear Mamma,
Friday pass'd over, without any thing
happening worth acquainting you with; 
tho' both Sir Thomas and his Son were at home
the greatest part of the Day; not that I believe
it owing to the Inclinations of either; 
but that the Presence of the one was a hindrance
to the other, in any Design they might
have of speaking to me. On Saturday Morning
I saw Mr. L&wblank; in my Lady's Chamber; 
as he went out, I happened to be pretty
near the Door, and he took the Opportunity
of snatching a Kiss from me behind a great
Screen, that stands to shelter that part of the
Room where my Lady sits from the Air. 
This was all the Place would give him leave
to do, but he afterwards watch'd my coming
down Stairs, and said he, that impertinent Fellow
(meaning Groves) interrupted our Conversation
the other Night, before I had told you half
what I had to say;—my Father will be
engaged for the whole Evening, and the Ladies 

are to be at the Assembly;—don't be
frighten'd if I conceal myself again in the
same Closet, nor shun the Place because you
know I shall be there. I had no Opportunity
of making any Answer, if I had been prepared
for one, which indeed I was not, he
took me so unawares; for the Moment he left
off speaking, he turned upon his Heel, fell a
singing an Italian Air, and went up Stairs. 
Indeed, Mamma, I was very uneasy at this. — 
I thought to be there would have too much
the Air of an Assignation; and not to be there
when I knew he was waiting for me, would
be an Affront, not befitting one of my Station
to one of his, and might turn the Love
he had for me into hate; so I resolv'd on the
former, but how to carry myself, so as that
my complying should not give too much Encouragement, employed my Thoughts the
whole Day: But I might have saved myself
that Trouble, if I could have guessed what
would happen. Sir Thomas went out at four
o'Clock, and the Chariot was orde'd for the
Ladies at seven; as soon as they were gone,
Mrs. Brown comes jumping into the Parlour,
where Mrs. Mary and I were talking of some
silly Stuff or another; so, said she, now we
have the House to ourselves for one while: 
Mr. L&wblank; is gone out, is he not? pursued
she, to Mrs. Mary; I believe a good while
since, answered she, for I saw him with his
Hat on presently after Sir Thomas went, and
his Man is snoring on the Dresser below. 
Well then, we'll enjoy ourselves, cry'd the
other, I'll treat you two with a Bottle of 

French and a Seville Orange, and then we'll
have a Pot of Tea: What say you, Mrs.
Syrena? I thank you, Madam, answer'd I,
 but I have so much Business to do—O you
are greatly employed, you would make one
believe, cry'd Mrs. Brown, but we'll have you
for all your Excuses. Well then, said I, I
will only put my Lady's things in Order, and
come down; with that I ran up Stairs in a
great Hurry, not doubting but my Lover was
at his Appointment; as indeed he was; for
pretending he was going out when they rose
from Table, he took his Hat and went into
his Chamber, where locking himself in till
the Ladies were gone, he slipp'd up the Back-stairs,
and so into the Closet. When I came
into the Chamber, after he had peeped thro'
the Key-hole, that he might not be mistaken
in the Person, he opened the Door, and catching
me in his Arms, dear Girl, said he, what
Pains do I take for a Moment's Pleasure, and
that too I fear you grudge me;—but with
your Leave, my Dear, I'll shut the Door for
fear of Mr. Groves, added he, with a Smile,
and immediately bolted it. O, Sir, cry'd I,
I shall be soon obliged to open it, if I make
any Stay here. I then told him of Mrs.
Brown's Invitation, and how I had promised
to go down; on which he gave her two or
three hearty Curses; he had not time to utter
much more, for Mrs. Mary came up, and
finding the Door fastened, cry'd, Hey-day!
what have you bolted yourself in;—open
the Door, Mrs. Syrena, Mrs. Brown sent me
for you. On this Mr. L&wblank; was compell'd 

to return to his Concealment, and I let in the
Intruder; —come said she, what are you
doing; I was going, answer'd I, to pin up a
Head for my Lady; —pish, return'd the
other, you know she does not go out Tomorrow
—therefore you may let it alone
till another time; —come, come, Mrs.
Brown is making the Bishop herself, and 'tis
ready by now—I'll follow you in a Moment,
said I. No, no, cry'd she, I'll have
you go with me;—come, who knows but the
young Squire may surprize us as he did over
the Coffee. If I thought so, answer'd I, you
should have none of my Company, for I never
was so much asham'd in my Life; — 
there's no Danger, said she, and pull'd me
along with her; when we came into my
Lady L&wblank;'s Dressing-Room, for it was
there Mrs. Brown made this Regale, you are
so fond of mewing yourself up in that Chamber
above, said she to me, that one would
imagine you met a Sweetheart there; —I
believe, Mamma, that in spight of all the
Lessons you gave me to the contrary, I could
not quite overcome my Confusion at these
Words; but putting on as composed a Look
as I could, if no body thought no more of
Sweethearts than I do, answered I, the Parsons
would have little Business —O! one
may have a Sweetheart, resumed she laughing,
without having any Occasion for a Parson: 
Ay, cry'd I; for my part I always thought
entertaining a Sweetheart, was in order to
make a Husband of him. That's as it falls
out, said she, for there are Sweethearts of 

different kinds. She seemed, methought, to
speak this with a sort of malicious Sneer, and
what I have since heard, convinces me I was
not mistaken. I took no Notice, however,
but laugh'd as they did, and we were very
merry over our Bishop. At last, I can't remember
for my Life how she introduced it,
but she cry'd all on a sudden, So, Mrs. Syrena,
you would have us think you never had
a Lover yet; I don't care what any Body
thinks, answer'd I, but sure if I had one, we
should see one another sometimes, and all the
House knows, that since I have been here,
I have never been once abroad, nor has any
Man or Woman either come to visit me——
yes, said Mrs. Brown, to my certain Knowledge
you have had a Visiter, I won't say a
Lover. Me! cry'd I, in some Astonishment; 
yes, you, for all your demure Looks, resumed
she, pray was not Mr. L&wblank; once with you
in your Lady's Chamber? Here, Mamma, I
had enough to do to contain myself; but I believe
I behaved pretty tolerably; Mr. L&wblank;
said I, yes, he came up one Evening for a
Stick of Wax,—but what of that? Nay,
nothing, answer'd she, but I had a Mind to
banter you a little; she said no more, but I
perceived by this that Groves had been tatling,
and also, that there was some Suspicion that
the Stick of Wax was but a Pretence. I
resolved therefore to consent to no more Concealments
in the Closet, for fear of a Discovery,
which would infallibly ruin all our
Projects. When Mrs. Mary and I were in
Bed, she told me as a great Secret, that both 

Mr. Groves and Mrs. Brown imagined Mr.
L&wblank; had a more than ordinary liking to
me; but said she, she has told my Lady nothing
of it yet, nor won't, I heard her say,
till she had found all out, and I fancy she
made the Treat on purpose to try if she could
pump you out of anything;—so, Mrs.
Syrena, as I wish you well from my Heart, I
would advice you to take care, if there be any
thing in it; for Mrs. Brown is a very good
Woman, but a little prying, and loves to
meddle—you understand me. I do, answer'd
I, and thank you for your Caution,
tho' I assure you there is no need of it, Mr.
L&wblank; never chang'd ten Words with me
in his Life. I am glad of it, said she, for
what Designs can such a Gentleman as he
have upon one of us, but to ruin us. Very
true, reply'd I; she again conjured me to
Secrecy, which I as firmly promised, and that
put an end to our Discourse; but I was so
nettled, that I did not sleep all Night. Yesterday
I did not stir out of my Lady's Chamber
the whole Day, not even to Dinner, for
she made me eat a bit of boil'd Chicken with
her: and Mrs. Mary, and one or other of the
House-Maids, brought up and carry'd down
every thing that was wanted; among other
things Mrs. Brown told me on Saturday, that
there was a talk of going out of Town this
Week: My Lady also mentioned something
of it to me herself; but on what Day, or who
of the Family are to go, I know not as yet; 
but am very sure I shall be one, whoever is
left behind, for my Lady likes nothing but 

what I do for her. If their Resolution holds
of going this Week, I shall ask to come and
take my leave of you; but I suppose you will
hear from me before that, who am, dear
Mamma, 
~Your Dutiful Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 


WEDNESDAY Afternoon.
Dear Mamma,
Sunday being fix'd for our Country Journey, I send this to acquaint you, that I
hope to be with you on Friday, for To-morrow
my Lady dresses early to go out, and on
Saturday we shall all be busy packing up; but
I mentioned Friday to my Lady, who has
promised I shall have the whole Day to myself. 
Nothing worthy of writing has happened
since my last, except that seeing Mr.
L&wblank; in the Parlour, waiting for a Chair
to go out, I ventured to run to him, and acquainted
him with what Mrs. Brown had said
to me, and the Hints given me by the
Chambermaid;—he bit his Lips all the
time I was speaking, and seemed very much
out of Humour; I know not whether at
me or the News I told him; for just as he was
about to reply, we heard somebody coming,
and he cry'd, Curse on it, there's no speaking 

in this House, and I ran as fast as I could into
the Back-Parlour, and so down Stairs; the
Person who gave us this Interruption was Sir
Thomas, as I afterwards found, for my Lady's
Bell ringing, I was obliged to return, and saw
him talking to his Son as I pass'd the Door. 
If (as they say) Difficulties encrease Inclination,
both Father and Son meet with enough in
their Designs on me, to make them grow
violent at last. But, dear Mamma, I hope
we shall have Opportunity on Friday to talk
over all our Affairs, and consult what future
Measures are proper to be taken by 
~Your most obedient Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 


SATURDAY Morning, Eight o'Clock.
Dear Mamma,
You little think by what Means I was
prevented waiting on you Yesterday, as
I intended, and how greatly your poor
Daughter stood in need of all the Admonitions
you have given her, to defend the
Hope of making her Fortune in this Family,
from being totally destroyed at once. 
—But you shall have the whole History of what
has befallen me since my last. My Lady
being abroad on Thursday, I was afraid Mr. L&wblank; 

would take the Advantage of her Absence, to
slip again into that dangerous Closet; and as
I was resolved not to venture holding any
more Discourses with him in that Place, kept
as much as I could below Stairs; but in avoiding
him, I fell into Sir Thomas's way, who
seeing me pass by the Parlour-door, boldly
called me to him, under Pretence of asking,
whether my Lady took me down into the
Country or not; tho' to be sure he knew
well enough. He ask'd me the Question loud
enough to be heard into the next Room, if
any body had been there; but then, with the
same Breath, said in a low Voice, my Charmer,
'tis an Age since I have touch'd these dear
Lips—and kiss'd me violently; —I
resisted with all my Strength; still unkind!
return'd he, but I don't wonder at it;— 
you don't yet know the Good I intend for
you; but when we get into the Country,
I shall have more time to shew—he
could say no more, for Mr. L&wblank; came
into the Room; and I could perceive by his
Countenance, was not very well pleas'd at
finding me with his Father. As I was going
away, don't forget Mrs. Syrena, said Sir Thomas,
very gravely, which I suppose was to
make Mr. L&wblank; imagine he had been
speaking to me on some Affairs of the Family: 
My Lady came home in the Evening,
and went directly into the Drawing-Room,
which was very full of Company; I kept
with Mrs. Brown the whole time, and did
not go up till I knew my Lady was near
coming to Bed. Not but I long'd to hear 

what Mr. L&wblank; had to say to me, and believed
he waited for me, but durst not run the
risque of meeting him there, after what had
been said to me —I reflected on what Sir
Thomas had hinted, that in the Country there
would be more Opportunities; and if so, did not
doubt but his Son would make his Advantage
of them, therefore was determined his Designs
upon me, whatever they were, should
stand still till then. But he was too cunning
for me; tho' as things have happened, I think
'tis better for me that he was so, now I know
his Mind. —Yesterday Morning I went
into my Lady's Chamber, to know if she had
any Commands for me before I went out, for
she had given me leave the Night before. 
She told me she had not, and I might have
the whole Day to myself. Mr. L&wblank; was
with her, and I left him there when I went
to my own Room to put on another Gown: 
He hardly looked toward me, and I found he
was angry. While I was dressing, Mrs.
Mary came up for something, and I prayed
her to send one of the Men for a Coach,
which she promised, and when I came down
I found one at the Door; so in I stepp'd, full
of Joy to think I should have so much Time
with you—but I was not two Streets beyond
the Square, when the Coach stopp'd; I
look'd out to see if any thing was in the way,
and the mean time the Door on the other side
was opened, and in comes Mr. L&wblank;;
never was Surprize equal to mine at being
serv'd this Trick —O! Sir, cry'd I, why
do you do this?—he made me to Answer, 

but call'd to the Coachman to drive to Blackheath,
and immediately drew up the Window; 
—I expected nothing less now than
to meet a second Vardine, and begg'd, and
pray'd and would have thrown myself upon
my knees to him in the Coach; —no,
Syrena, said he, I have you now, and will
not part with you, till I have told you all my
Sentiments concerning you, and know how
far yours are influenced in my Favour. — 
I waited for you in my Grandmother's Closet
three Hours Yesterday, but you took care
to avoid me, tho' I found you had not the
same Caution with Regard to Sir Thomas. I
then repeated to him the true Reason that
made me act in that manner, and also what
Sir Thomas had said to me, which put him
into a better Humour; but all I could say
would not prevail upon him to go out of the
Coach, or let me do so; —the Fears of
what might happen, and the Vexation of my
Disappointment of seeing you, made me burst
into real Tears; —He endeavoured to compose
me as much as possible, protesting he
would offer nothing I should not approve of; 
and indeed during the whole time of our little
Journey, he attempted no greater Freedoms
than a Kiss. As soon as he found I seemed
a little better satisfy'd, my dear Syrena said he,
I need not tell you that I love you; the Pains
I have taken to gain even a Moment's Sight
of you, is the greatest Proof of it that can
be given; but there are others not in my
power to give, which perhaps you would
think more convincing: I mean, continued 

he, making you the offer of a Settlement for
Life, and a handsome Provision for any Children
that might be the Consequence of our
Intimacy. —This, Sir Thomas can do for you; 
and I believe by what he said to you, is what
he intends to do for you, if you'll accept it. 
But you know, Syrena, that while he lives, I
have no Estate, and am a meer Dependant
on his pleasure, for my present Expences; indeed
my Allowance is not so scanty, but that
out of it I could support you in a Fashion,
that, with a little Love on your side, would
make you easy;—what Answer, cry'd
he, perceiving I was silent, does my dear
Syrena make? Alas, Sir! said I what Answer
can I make, that will not be displeasing
to you? I have already told you I prefer my
Honesty to every thing, and I hope shall always
be of the same Mind. Here he brought
all the Arguments, and indeed many more
than I thought the cause would bear, to prove,
that to resign oneself to a Man of Honour,
and who loved one, was no breach of Virtue,
brought a thousand Examples of Women in
past ages, and in foreign Countries, whose
Love was never imputed to them as a Crime; 
and in fine, left nothing unsaid that he imagined
might make me think as he would have
me. I did not pretend to argue with him,
only cried, as often as he gave me Opportunity
to speak, good Sir, don't talk so to a poor
simple Creature, that does not know how to
answer you—I am very unhappy that you
should think on me on this Score and such
like; but tho' I feign'd a World of Ignorance, 

I took care still to let him see I kept up to
my Resolution, and that nothing should persuade
me out of my Virtue. This Discourse
lasted till we came to Blackheath, where we
alighted at a House, which I suppose he knew
to be a proper one for the Purpose he brought
me there upon. We had a very elegant
Dinner, and fine Wine; but I remember'd
Vardine, and drank very sparingly; when
the Cloth was taken away, and the Waiters
gone, I see, Syrena, said he, the Source of my
ill Success in all I have urged to you—it
is because my Person has made no Impression
on you, that my Arguments have fail'd;— 
but believe me, continued he, taking my
Hand, and tenderly pressing it to his Heart,
that you will one Day see some happier Man,
whom to oblige, you will think nothing a
Crime. Indeed, Sir, I never shall I'm sure,
return'd I with a Sigh. How are you sure
you could refuse a Man you lov'd, cry'd he?
were you ever try'd by one you loved?— 
with these Words he look'd full in my Face: 
(I saw his Drift was to find out if I had any
liking to him, and thought that to seem as if
I had, would give him the greater Opinion of
my Virtue, in so resolutely withstanding his
Offers) so feigned to be in a great Confusion— 
trembled—set my Breasts a heaving—and in
a faultering Voice cry'd, I don't know what
you call Love, Sir,—but I am sure I
could refuse giving up my Virtue to one that
I would give my Life to oblige in any thing
else—and I would give my Life, return'd
he hastily, to be that happy Man you 

speak of, even tho' you should continue to
refuse me the Proof of it; I desire—tell
me—tell me, my little Angel, pursued
he, throwing his Arms about my Waist, am
I so blest to thought well on by you? O!
do not, Sir, cry'd I more and more confused,
endeavour to pry into the little Secrets of a
silly innocent Maid, that knows not how to
disguise, nor to confess them as she ought; 
—but if I were a great Lady, I should
not be asham'd to let you see into my very
Heart;—but don't, added I, hiding my
Face in his Bosom,—don't, Sir, talk to
me any more of Settlements and Provision. — 
Poor as I am, I scorn the Thoughts of any
Thing, but —Love, interrupted he, in a
kind of Rapture, say Love my Charmer; if I
were to be won from the Principles I have
been bred in, said I, Love, since you will have it
so, would be all that could induce me. Now,
Mamma, I fancy you'll think I carry'd the
Feint too far, and brought myself in a Snare, I
should not know how to get out of; but I
had all my Wits about me, as you'll find. 
He called me his Life, his Soul, Cherubim— 
Goddess, and I know not what. —We'll
talk of nothing then, but Love, cry'd he, do
nothing but Love—and having me in his
Arms, was about to carry me to a Settee at the
other End of the Room. —I begg'd him to
let me go, but he was deaf to all I said; till at
length I broke from him, and throwing myself
at his Feet, beseech'd him with a Flood of
Tears, not to ruin me; but this proving ineffectual, and he still persisting in his Endeavours 

to raise me from the Posture I was in; 
I counterfeited Faintings, fell dying on the
Floor, and between every pretended Agony,
lifting up my Eyes, cry'd, O! Sir, you have
kill'd me—but, I forgive you. This Piece
of Dissimulation had the Success I wish'd: He
vow'd no more to shock my Modesty— 
said a thousand tender Things, and, I believe,
was truly concern'd to see me in that Condition
—by little, and little, I seem'd to recover
my Spirits, and when I had; how
shamefully, said I, have I betray'd myself. — 
How dare I encounter the Artifices of Mankind,
with my plain simple Innocence:— 
How could I flatter myself such a Gentleman
as you, could have any Inclinations for such a
Creature as myself; but such as would demean
me more: O! infinitely more, than Fortune
has done. You wrong yourself and me, reply'd
he; you know very well I could not marry
you, without entailing Ruin on us both— 
but any Thing else. —I beg you, Sir, said
I, let us talk no more of Love or Ruin. 
—I know the Difference between us in all Respects
—I am unhappy, and I must be
so—then I began to weep again, and appear'd
so wild and discomposed, that he was
afraid my Fits would return. —He led me
into the Garden for Air, and the whole Time
we were together afterwards, which was till
quite Night, neither said, or did any Thing,
but what would become the most respectful
Lover. 

Now Mamma by this, you may see into the
bottom of his Heart. —He loves me, but
will not marry me: Nor can he make a Settlement
till his Father dies, and who knows
how his Mind may alter before then; so I
think it would be better for me to break quite
off with him, and see what Proposals, Sir Thomas
designs to make me. I send this by a
Porter, because the Penny-Post would not be
Time enough for your Answer, which pray
send directly; for I want your Advice what
to do, especially, as I shan't see you, till we
come to Town again. I am, 
Dear Mamma,
Your ever dutiful Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 

The Messenger by whom this was sent brought
an Answer to it, the Contents whereof were
as follows. 

Dear Syrena,
You have very well attoned for the Vexation
I suffer'd Yesterday, through your
not coming; by the full Account you give me
of the Cause that detain'd you: I am highly
pleas'd with every particular in your Conduct,
and, especially, that you have such just Notions
of what is your real Interest; and make
no Distinction between Youth and Age, but as 

either is most advantageous. —As Mr.
L&wblank; can settle nothing upon you, and
drawing him into Marriage, seems attended
with many Difficulties; I would have you receive
Sir Thomas's Proposals with somewhat less
Severity, than you have done; but not so
much, as to make him too secure of your
yielding neither; for as I believe, by all Circumstances,
that Mr. L&wblank; has a strong
Passion for you, there is a Possibility you may
have him at last your own Way. —Only, my
dear Child, stick to this Maxim, to make nothing
of him, if you can't make him a Husband. —I doubt not but before you come
back, you'll know what Sir Thomas intends to
do for you;—till then there is no resolving
on any thing. —I perceive neither of
them have, as yet made you any Presents,
which I much wonder at—if any should
be offer'd, accept of nothing from the Father;
but you may receive any Proof of the Son's
Affection, because it will also confirm him in
the Hope you have given him of yours; 
which is the only thing you have for bringing
him to the Point we aim at. —I wish
you a good Journey, my dear Girl, and safe
Return; write as often as any thing occurs, to 
Your Affectionate Mother,
Ann Tricksy. 

Sir Thomas and his Family went as they intended
to his Country-Seat; where they had
not been above seven Days, before Syrena had 

Matter to inform her Mother of, which she
did in these Terms. 

LETTER I.
L&wblank; Hall, 
Dear Mamma,
I won't fill up my Letter with any Particulars
of our Journey, 'tis sufficient to tell
you, we all got safe down; and that People
with Heads, not so taken up as mine is, might
find every Thing here, they could desire for
their Entertainment. I dare say you are Impatient
to know how my Love-Affairs go on. 
—As to Mr. L&wblank; he behaves to me
with an inexpressible Tenderness, mixed with
more Respect than before our Conversation at
Blackheath; but still gives me not the least
room to hope, he had any Intentions of making
me his Wife—on the contrary, he
rather seems afraid I should flatter myself so
far; for being one Day with him in an Arbour
a good Distance from the House, after he had
said a thousand passionate Things, and taken
some Liberties which I permitted with an Air,
which seem'd to tell him, I was too much lost
in Softness to know what I did, I started suddenly
from his Knee, where he had made me
sit, and cry'd, O! to what does my fond artless
Heart betray me. —Cruel! Cruel Mr.
L&wblank;, can you pretend to love me truly,
and use me in this Manner? And then fell a 

weeping in so extravagant Manner, that he
look'd quite confounded—but putting his
Face to mine, and wiping with his Cheeks my
Tears away: My dear Syrena, said he, what
can I do in the Circumstances we both are? 
—I wish to God there were less Inequality
between us. —You know I am not Master
of myself. —Sir Thomas likes you as a
Mistress, but would never forgive me for making
you his Daughter. —My Mother,
Grandmother, and all our Kindred, are full
of your Praises as as Servant; but would despise
and hate you as a Relation. —In fine, you
must be sensible, there is no coming together for
us in the way you would approve; and therefore
if you lov'd me, would not see me wretched
merely for a Ceremony, which sometimes instead
of joining Hearts more closely, serves but
to estrange them. I said nothing to all this,
but kept on weeping and sobbing, as if my
Heart would burst; but tho' he said all he
could to comfort me, I could not perceive that
he receded at all from the Declaration he had
made. —Nay did not even pretend, that
when his Father died, he would marry me— 
all he talk'd on was the Violence, and Constancy
of his Affection, for me; that when he
came to his Estate, I should vie with the
greatest Ladies in the Town, in fine Cloaths
and Equipage; and that if Duty or Convenience
ever oblig'd him to marry, I should still
be the sole Mistress of his Heart; but as I
knew better than to depend on Promises, I
had not any occasion for dissembling to
shew my Contempt for them. Company 

coming into the Garden we were oblig'd to
separate, which, indeed, I was very glad of,
as our being together had made so little for my
Purpose. —He made me promise, however,
to meet him the next Day, in a Lane on the
back of the House; I kept my Word, but that
produced no more than a Repetition of those
Arguments he had made use of in the Arbour. — 
So I doubt Mamma, that all the Advantage
I shall make by his Addresses, is a more
thorough Knowledge of the Passions of Mankind. 
As for Sir Thomas, according to your
Directions, I appear less and less reserved,
whenever Chance or his own Endeavours
throw him in my Way, which, indeed, is
very seldom; for what with Company, and
what with his Son's Watchfulness, he can hardly
get an Opportunity of speaking three Words
to me. I believe he was going to say something
very material to me Yesterday, but was
interrupted by Mr. L&wblank; coming into the
Room. So, my dear Mamma, this is all at
present from, 
Your most Obedient Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 



LETTER II.
L&wblank; Hall. 
Dear Mamma,
I was not mistaken when I told you in
my former, that I thought Sir Thomas,
had something extraordinary to say me; for
this Morning he watch'd for me, in a Part of
the House that he knew I must pass to go into
my Lady's Chamber, and as it was too public
a Place to hold any Discourse in, he only
put a Paper into my Hand and said, I hope
this will convince you, that my Designs are
such as you cannot disapprove, without being
an Enemy to your own Interest. And then
went away directly, without staying for any
Answer. I was quite impatient to see what
it contain'd, and made haste into my own
Room, and lock'd myself in, that I might not
be interrupted in reading it. I send you an
exact Copy of the Contents; because I thought
best to keep the Original in my own Hands,
for fear he should ask for it again. 

PROPOSALS offered to Mrs. Syrena
Tricksy's Consideration, by one who would
be her faithful Friend.
I.
The Person will engage himself to pay,
or order to be paid to her, the annual Sum
of One Hundred Pound, either Monthly,
Quarterly, or Yearly, as she shall
think fit, during his Natural Life.

II.
The said Person will enter into Articles,
and settle, out of what Part of his Estate
she shall chuse, upon her, during her
Natural Life, the Annual Sum of Fifty
Pounds to be paid her in like Manner, as
the former.
III.
That in case she shall have any Children,
they shall be taken care of, and
educated without any Expence to her.
IV.
This Agreement to be drawn up by a
Lawyer of her own Nomination, and
sign'd and seal'd according to Form.

I leave it to you, Mamma, to judge of these
Conditions, and will avoid Sir Thomas as much
as possible, till I have your Answer, which I desire
may be soon: Direct for me to be left at
the Post-House, in &wblank;'till call'd for; because
if it should be brought to the House, and
I not just in the way, who knows but the Curiosity
of Mrs. Brown, Groves, or even Mr.
L&wblank; himself, might tempt them to open
it; and as it is but a little Mile, I can easily
go to fetch it. 
Nothing worth acquainting you concerning
Mr. L&wblank; has happen'd since my last; nor
has he been able to get one Opportunity of
talking to me in private, tho' I can see he is very
uneasy, and and more passionate than ever,
since he thinks I love him. —If I am in
the Chamber when he comes to my Lady, he
talks, indeed, to her, but has Eyes continually 

on me; and if she does but turn her Back
one Moment, I am sure to have a Kiss, or a
Squeeze by the Hand—the same in the
Gallery, or the Stairs, or wherever we meet
—but what signifies all his Love, if he
won't make me his Wife, nor can do any
Thing handsome for me. —I take care,
however, to look upon him, and receive the
Proofs he gives of his Fondness; so as to make
him think I have as great an Affection for
him as he can have for me—Because who
knows how far one may be able to work him
up at last, when he is once convinced he can
get me on no other Terms —I had a
Stratagem come into my Head, but I know
not how you will approve of it, and that is to
pretend to him, that I could not bear to be
continually in the Sight of a Person, whom I
could not keep my self from having the tenderest
regard for, yet knew never could be
mine, but by a way I would rather die than
yield to; and that I was determined to quit
my Lady's Service, and endeavour by Absence
to lose the Memory of him. I'll try what
Effect this will have, if you think fit, Mamma;
it can be no Prejudice to me at least, and if
it comes to nothing, I can accept Sir Thomas's
Offers at last. Pray give me your Opinion in
full, on both these Affairs; for you may depend
upon it, I will do nothing for the future
without consulting you. Who am, 
Dear Mamma,
Your most dutiful Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 



LETTER III.
L&wblank; Hall. 
Dear Mamma,
Not hearing from you as I expected was
a very great Disappointment and Vexation
to me, and the more because I was
afraid you were sick or dead, or something
extraordinary had fallen out; but we are inform'd
that the Mail has been robb'd, all the
Bills taken out, and the Letters thrown away; 
so hope the want of your Advice so soon as I
could have wish'd, is all the Misfortune of it; 
and as things have happen'd, I have the less
Occasion; for I shall very shortly be in Town. 
A Man and Horse came last Night with the
News that Lady G&wblank;, Sir Thomas's Sister, is
dead, and having left him sole Executor and
Trustee for her Children, he is oblig'd to go
directly for London. He talks of setting out
To-morrow, with his Son in the Chariot,
and the Ladies in two or three Day's after; 
so you will hear no more from me till I see
you —We are all in a vast Confusion and
Hurry here, so have time for no more than to
tell you, I am, 
Dear Mamma,
Your most dutiful Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 

P. S. Since I wrote the above, Mrs. Brown
told me the Ladies were resolved to follow Sir
Thomas the next Day. 

The Family came to Town as Syrena had
wrote, and the Mother and Daughter soon
after meeting, concerted a Design the most
abominable that ever was invented, and which
in a short time they carry'd into Execution in
the following manner. 
Sir Thomas, either through Grief for the
Loss of a Sister whom he had tenderly loved,
or the Hurry of Affairs her Death had involved
him in, had no Leisure immediately to prosecute
his Amour with Syrena; but the young
Gentleman, less affected, omitted no Opportunity
of testifying the regard he had for her,
and she, by a thousand different Artifices, every
Day improved it, till his Passion for her arrived
at that height, that for the Gratification
of it, he would probably have given her
the Proof she aim'd at, and become her Husband,
had not the Fear of being disinherited,
and rendering her as unhappy as himself, prevented
him. —Her Mother having told
her, she approved of her pretending to quit the
House, she terrify'd him with that, and one
Day, when he was saying all the tender things
that Love could suggest, in order to prevail on
her to quit that cruel Resolution, as he call'd
it—O! said she, could you, Sir, be sensible
how much I shall suffer when separated
from you, you would acknowledge, I was 

much more cruel to my self than you. And
gave him, while she was speaking this, a Look,
which made him think it might still be in his
power to prevail on her. On which he began
to reiterate all the Promises he before had made
her; adding, that if she would be his, he
would use her in all things like a Wife, the
Name excepted: She feign'd to listen with
less Aversion than before to his Offers; but he
fearing to be interrupted, for they were then
in the Parlour, begg'd she would give him a
meeting in some Place, where it would be less
dangerous to converse in; but she would by
no means be perswaded to see him abroad; 
pretending, that since the Adventure of Blackheath
she had made a Vow —And, said
she, I should think breaking a Vow, tho' made
only to my self, the wickedest thing I could
do—but, added she blushing, Sir, if you
desire to take leave of me, or have any thing
to say that I ought not to be ashamed to hear,
I'll tell you how we might pass an Hour, at
least, together without Suspicion: Where, my
Angel? cry'd he impatiently. You know, Sir,
answer'd she, that Sir Thomas, your Mamma, and
my Lady, go all to Church next Sunday, and it
being the first of their appearing since the Death
of Lady G&wblank;, Mrs. Brown, Mrs. Mary, Mr.
Groves, and my self are order'd to attend them,
to shew our Mourning, and the Men, you
know, will be all with them: Now, Sir, I
can say, I have got a violent Head-ach to excuse
going; and if you could find any Pretence
for staying at Home, I will once more indulge
my self in the dangerous Satisfaction of hearing 

you talk. He was quite transported with this
Contrivance, and told her that nothing could
have happen'd more lucky; for, my Dear,
said he, I am at this Time solliciting a Place
at Court, and my Lord R&wblank;, on whose
Interest I chiefly depend, has really order'd me
to attend him on Sunday Morning: Now, as
his Lordships Hour of rising is usually about
the time of Divine Service, Sir Thomas does
not expect me to go to Church, and will suppose
I stay to dress for this Visit. Then, cry'd
she, I will be in my Lady's Chamber, because
of the Convenience of the Closet, in case any
of the Maids that are left at home should
chance to come up for any thing—But,
Sir, pursu'd she, don't you think me very
forward now? Does not agreeing too soon to
see you in private, look as if I were consenting
in a manner to every thing—if it does,
indeed I won't be there; for tho' I love to
be with you, and my Heart is ready to break
when I don't see you, as you know sometimes
I don't, for two or three Days together, yet I
won't be dishonest—I will die first. My
dearest, sweetest Innocence, reply'd he, time
will convince you, that I would not hurt you
for the World. They had no time for farther
Conversation, nor did they meet again,
till the Morning equally long'd for by both,
tho' for different Reasons was arrived. 
The Family went to Church, little imagining,
while they were in this laudable Act of
Devotion, what a Scene of Mischief was preparing
for them at home, by a Creature whom 

they took to be the most artless and innocent
of her Sex. The young Deceiver was ready
in the appointed Chamber to meet her expected
Lover, who no sooner found the Coast
clear, than he flew to her with all the Raptures
of an unfeign'd Affection, after the most
vigorous Pressures on the one side, and a well-acted
childish Fondness, mingled with a shame-faced
Simplicity on the other, he gained the
utmost of his Desires, and she the Opportunity
to attempt the Accomplishment of her's. 
He had no sooner left the Chamber, than
she tore her Hair and Cloaths, pinch'd her
Arms and Hands till they became black; 
pluck'd down one of the Curtains from the
Bed, and throw'd it on the Floor, and put
her self and every thing in such Disorder, that
the Room seem'd a Scene of Distraction — 
Then having watch'd at the Window Mr.
L&wblank;'s going out, she rung the Bell with
all her Strength, and the Maids below came
running up, surpriz'd what could be the meaning,
but were much more so, when they saw
Syrena in the most pity-moving Posture imaginable 
—She was lying cross the Bed, her
Eyes rolling as just recover'd from a Fit— 
She wrung her Hands —She cry'd to Heaven
for Justice —Then rav'd, as if the
Anguish of her Mind had deprived her of
Reason. —The Girls were strangely alarm'd
at so unexpected a Sight—and ask'd her the
Occasion—but instead of giving any direct
Answer, she only cry'd, let me be gone — 
O let me get out of this accursed, this fatal 

House —O that I had been bury'd quick
before I ever set my Foot in it—and then
begg'd of them, that they would send some
body for a Coach or a Chair for her, but
they refusing to let her go out of the House
till the Family came Home, she started up,
and snatching a Penknife that lay upon the
Table, cry'd she would run it into her Heart,
if they offer'd to detain her—No, said
she I will never see my Lady, Lady L&wblank;,
nor Sir Thomas any more —I cannot bear
it—let me go—raved she—I am
sure I have taken nothing from any body— 
My Trunk is here—keep that and search,
but as for me I will go—I will—I will,
continu'd she; and in spite of all they could
do, broke from them and ran down Stairs,
and so into the Street, in that torn and dishevell'd
Condition, where she soon got a Coach,
and was carry'd to her Mother's; who highly
applauded her Management in this Affair,
and gave her fresh Instructions for the perfecting
their most detestable Plot. 
Nothing ever equall'd the Surprize that Sir
Thomas, the Ladies, and whole Family were
in, when on their coming Home they were
told the Departure of Syrena, and the Confusion
of her Behaviour —They look'd one
upon the other, as not knowing what to think
of the Matter—Mrs. Brown and Mr.
Groves shook their Heads, as if they apprehended
somewhat they durst not speak— 
and all of them at once demanded who had
been in the Chamber with her? The Maids 

answer'd, that they knew of no body, and
were certain no Person had come into the
House since they went out. In fine, as 'twas
impossible she could have been in such a Condition
as was described without some very extraordinary
Occasion, the least Mischief they
could think of it was, that she had been taken
suddenly mad—This unhappy Adventure
engross'd not only their Thoughts, but Conversation
also, and on Mr. L&wblank;'s return
from visiting the Nobleman his Friend, and
was inform'd of it, all he could do to command
himself, was insufficient to prevent some
part of the Concern he felt from appearing in
his Countenance —He said the least, however,
of any of them; and endeavour'd frequently
to turn the Discourse on other Subjects
—telling the Ladies, that tho' Syrena
was a pretty modest Girl he believ'd, yet he
wonder'd they should be so uneasy about her; 
that probably some Disorder in the Brain had
seized her, which might be removed by proper
Remedies; and it was pity they should give
themselves so much Trouble about a Servant. 
But this affected Carelessness, which he Thought
so politick, was very prejudicial to himself
afterward; and help'd greatly to assist the base
Designs form'd against him, tho' at present
none took notice of it, or at least seem'd to
do so. As soon as Dinner was over, one of
the Men was order'd to go to Syrena's Mother,
to see if she was with her, and learn, if possible,
the Truth of this Affair: Mr. Groves
desired he might be the Person employ'd, and
Mrs. Brown and the Chambermaid who all 

had a great Regard for her on the score of her
Youth and pretended Innocence, begg'd they
might accompany him in this Errand, which
was readily granted, and Sir Thomas told them
they might have the Coach; but before it
could be got ready, so industrious is Villany,
Mr. L&wblank; was informed two Gentlemen
desired to speak with him, he went to receive
them in the Parlor, where they had been conducted
by the Footman, who had open'd the
Door. He no sooner was within the Room,
than one of them coming up close to him,
told him, that he was sorry he was obliged to
execute the Duty of his Office on a Gentleman
like Mr. L&wblank;, but had a Warrant
against him, on account of a Rape and Assault
sworn to be committed by him that Morning,
on the Body of Syrena Tricksy. Not all
the Astonishment Mr. L&wblank; was in, and
there could not be a greater, quelled the Emotions
of his Rage at so vile an Accusation,
and without considering the Consequences, laid
his Hand on his Sword, with Intention to
draw it; but both the others seizing him at
once, prevented what else his Passion might
have prompted him to; and there ensued so
great a Scuffle among them, that Sir Thomas
and the Ladies, who were in the next Room,
heard it, and ran in: The Occasion was soon
discover'd, and it would be very difficult to
describe the Consternation, the Terror, the
Grief, the Shame, with which every one of
their Faces was overspread; the Ladies fell into
Fits, the Servants who assisted in recovering
them, were little better themselves, and 

all were in the utmost Hurry and Confusion. 
Sir Thomas offer'd to engage for his Son's Appearance; 
but the Officers said it could not be
allow'd in a capital Case: That the Girl had
suffer'd Violence, which perhaps might be her
Death; but as they knew the Respect due to
so worthy a Family, Mr. L&wblank; should
have no reason to complain of the want of
any thing but Liberty, during the time he was
with them; and added, that they hoped things
might be made up so with the Plaintiff's Mother,
that he would be restored to that also in
a short time. Mr. L&wblank; gave no answer
to this Insinuation; but a Look which shewed
his Contempt of coming to any Terms with
such abandon'd Wretches. In fine, after some
little Debate he was compell'd to obey the
Order, brought against him, and quitted his
Father's House with Company he little expected
ever to be among. 
This was the Stratagem which these pernicious
Creatures had devised, and thus was it
executed; the Moment Syrena came home,
the same Coach carry'd her, in the deplorable
Condition she had made her self appear,
with her Mother to a Magistrate, who seeing
the Youth and seeming Modesty of the Girl,
doubted not the Truth of their Accusation,
and sent Tipstaves immediately to seize on Mr.
L&wblank;, which being done, Mrs. Tricksy congratulated
her Daughter in Iniquity, as well as
Blood, for the Success of their Enterprize:
Now, Child, said she, you will be Lady L&wblank;,
the proud Puppy will be glad to marry you 

now to save his Neck; and marry you he shall,
or come down with a Sum sufficient to entitle
you to a Husband of as good an Estate as he
will have. 
But the Satisfaction they had in this Event,
greatly as it flatter'd their presuming Hopes,
was short of the Anguish the unspeakable
Horror in which it involved Sir Thomas and
his noble Family: Dear as Mr L&wblank; was
to them all, not one, when they consider'd
Circumstances, the Time, the Place, the still
believed Artlessness of Syrena, the Confusion
he appear'd in at hearing she was gone, and
which he strove to conceal, but could not — 
All concurr'd to make him seem as guilty as
he was represented to be, and was rather an
Addition, than an Alleviation of their Sorrows,
especially to the Ladies. 
As for the young Gentleman in Custody,
Rage, Shame, and Amazement took up all
his Mind, and left no room for any Thought
how to disintangle himself from the Snare his
Love for an unworthy Object had brought him
into —He never could conceive there was
so much Villany in Womankind, much less
in one so young; and was ready to curse the
whole Sex, for the Sake of the perfidious Syrena:
So unjustly do our Passions often make us
blend the worthy with the unworthy! 
Sir Thomas in the mean time neglected nothing
that might remedy this Misfortune — 
The best Councel was consulted in the Affair, 

who, on hearing the whole of the Affair, advised
to make it up, if possible, with the Mother
of Syrena; but that Monster would listen
to no Proposals, and set the Virtue and Reputation
of her Child at no less Price than Marriage. 
'Tis impossible for Heart to conceive
the Indignation of the young Gentleman when
he was informed of this; he protested that he
would sooner yield to all the Law inflicts in
such Cases, than become the Property of those
vile Serpents; for that was all the Name he
could bring himself to call them by. Hard,
indeed, was his Fate, when those who most
endeavoured to defend him, in their Souls believ'd
him guilty —His Councel, his Parents,
all the Servants in the Family, even his
own Man (who had been the Person who
call'd the Coach for Syrena, when she was
carry'd to Blackheath, and knew his Master
had a Design upon her) had the matter been
brought before a Court of Judicature, could
have said nothing but what must have tended
to prove the imaginary Crime. How false
and weak, therefore, is that Notion which
some Men have, that they may do any thing
with a Woman, but marry her, and that nothing
but a Wife can make them unhappy; 
when, in reality, there are often more Disquiets,
more Perplexities, more Dangers attend
the Prosecution of an unlawful Amour,
than can be met with, even with the worst of
Wives; for if a Woman cannot be sincere in
a State where 'tis her Interest to be so; what can
be expected from her in one where 'tis her
Interest to deceive: Besides, the Artifices 

practised to gain the Sex at first, gives them
a kind of Pretence for Retaliation afterward; 
and Men frequently find to their Cost, they
but too well know how to be even with
them. 
Thus Mr. L&wblank;, who in the Morning
thought himself happy in the Possession of a
beautiful innocent Creature, that loved him
with the extremest Tenderness, found himself
before the Sun went down, the wretched
Property of a presuming, mercenary, betraying,
perjur'd and abandon'd Prostitute — 
His Friends incensed—his Reputation
blasted—his Liberty at the Disposal of the
lowest and most despised Rank of Men, and
his Life in Danger of the most shameful and
ignominious end. 
So greatly were all Appearances against him,
that what a Day before his Friends would
have looked upon as the heaviest Misfortune
could have befallen them, they now labour'd
with all their Might to bring about, as the
only remaining Remedy for the present Evil; 
and Mr. L&wblank;, to aggravate the Horrors
of his Mind, was compelled to hear every
Moment, from all who wish'd him well, the
distracting Solicitations, that he would Consent
to make the supposed injured Girl his
Wife. Whether he would at last have been
prevailed upon by their Arguments; or whether
he would rather have chose to endure the
Sentence of the Law; or whether, to avoid 

both, he would not have been guilty of some
Act of Desperation on himself, is uncertain; 
Providence thought not fit to punish him any
farther, and when he least expected it, sent
him a Deliverance. 
The Villains who had robb'd the ***** 
Mail, as beforementioned, after they had taken
out the Bills, threw the Bag and Letters into
a Ditch; but there happening to be no
Water in it, the Papers receiv'd no Damage; 
but the Post-Man had been so beaten
and cruelly used, that he was not capable of
telling what had become of them; they were
afterwards found by a Country-Fellow, who
seeing what they were, carry'd them as directed; 
there being two for Sir Thomas L&wblank;,
and one for Mrs. Syrena Tricksy; the Man
delivered them at his Seat, but the Family
being come to London that Morning, a Servant
took them, and putting them altogether
under a Cover, sent them up by the next
Post. Those for Sir Thomas were nothing
to the Purpose of this Story, but every body
agreeing that it would be proper to open that
for Syrena, they found it from her Mother,
and contained as follows: 

Dear Syrena,
I Have considered on all you acquainted me
with; and have been much perplex'd in
my Mind how to advise you in this ticklish
Affair; but am at last come to a Resolution. 
Sir Thomas's Proposals are very niggardly; 

what is an hundred Pounds a Year to a Woman
that would appear handsome in the
World?—and then if he dies, to be reduced
to Fifty—good God! I wonder how he
can offer to think of having a fine Girl, and
a Maid too, as he takes you for, on such poor
Terms;—but it may be it would have
been better for his Family, if he had bid higher; 
for I have a Project in my Head to
force his Son to marry you, in Case all your
Arts to draw him in should fail —Nay,
and to oblige Sir Thomas and my Lady, and all
of them, to consent to it; and if he should
refuse to live with you afterward, the Allowance
they must give you as his Wife, will be
more than his Father's pitiful hundred Pounds
a Year: Besides, when Sir Thomas dies (and
what I design to do, will go a good way towards
breaking his Heart) you will be Lady
L&wblank;, they can't hinder you of that; and
a Title will give you such an Air among the
young Fellows, that you may make what
Terms you will with any of them;—the
Contrivance I have formed is indeed pretty
dangerous, and requires Abundance of Cunning
and Courage too to go thro' with it to
Purpose; but I perceive with Pleasure, you
have a good share of the one; and as I shall
be obliged to act a Part in it myself, I don't
doubt but I shall be able to give you enough
of the other also;—but nothing of this
can be put in Practice till you come back to
London;—all you have to do in the mean
time, is to heighten the young Squire's Affection,
by all the little Stratagems you can invent; 

—as to the Father, I would have
you avoid, if you possibly can, giving him
any positive Answer; but be sure not to part
with the Proposals he gave you; they may be
useful hereafter, in making him fearful of
provoking us to expose him;—if he should
ask for the Paper, you may pretend you burn'd
it as soon as you had examin'd it, for fear of
its being found. —My dear Girl, my Head
is always at work for thee—be careful to
do as I direct; let Mr. L&wblank; believe you
love him to Madness if he will; but be still
more and more tenacious of your Virtue, till
I inform you the proper time for resigning it
—'tis possible as he loves you so well, you
may persuade him to marry you, when he
finds there's no having you without; but once
again depend that I have the sure Means to
make him be glad to do it. So no more at
present, from 
Your affectionate Mother,
ANN TRICKSY. 

Here Mr. L&wblank;'s Parents found a full as
well as a seasonable Discovery of the wicked
Plot, and their Son's Innocence, as to the pretended
Rape, cleared. Their Transport could
not but be great, tho' somewhat allayed by
the Story of Sir Thomas and his Proposals; the
Confusion of that Gentleman, and the jealous
Disdain of his Lady, a while combated
with the sincere Satisfaction they would otherwise
have felt—some few Upbraidings on 

the one side, and Excuses on the other were
natural on the Occasion, but at length were
wholly swallowed up in the Joy for the Deliverance
of an only Son. The next thing they
had to think upon, was how to proceed for
the Punishment of these vile Creatures who
had imposed upon them; but when they
found that it could not be done without
bringing the whole Affair to a public Trial; 
their Counsel advised them rather to compromise
it, and rest contented with the Disappointment
Syrena and her Mother had met
with, and not pursue a Justice which would
occasion so much Town-talk of themselves; 
especially considering that such Practices would
infallibly some time or other, draw on the
Authors the publick Shame they merited,
where perhaps the Avengers had not laid
themselves so open to Ridicule, as Sir Thomas
and his Son had done. The Letter therefore
being produced, and the Person who brought
it, detained as an Evidence, in Case they had
offered to deny the Hand, the audacious
Expectations of our female Plotters, were
turned into Submissions; and all their Arts employed
only to prevail on the Lawyer, who
negotiated between them, that Sir Thomas and
his Family would not prosecute them for
Perjury and Fraud, which he pretended to accomplish
with a great deal of Difficulty; and
so this troublesome and dangerous Business
ended, and was, 'tis to be hoped, a means
of preventing both Father and Son from
rendring themselves liable to any future Impositions
of the same Nature. 

Now had the wicked Mrs. Tricksy and her
Daughter time to reflect on the ill Success of
their Stratagem; but instead of acknowledging
the Justice of Divine Providence in unravelling
this Affair, they only cursed Fortune,
and accused themselves for having trusted the
Secret of their Design to Pen and Paper:
Dreadful Proof that their Hearts were totally
void of all Distinction between Vice and Virtue! 
The best may have fallen into Errors
which they have afterwards so truly repented
of, that even those Faults have contributed to
the rendering them more perfect. —Others
again may have been guilty of repeated Crimes,
and yet have felt Remorse, even in the Moment
of perpetrating them; but the Wretch,
incapable either of Penitence or Remorse, one
may, without Breach of Charity, pronounce
irreclaimable but by a Miracle, and fit for the
engaging in any Mischief where Temptation
calls. 
When our young Deceiver and her Mother
had a little recovered from the Emotions occasioned
by their Disappointment, they began
to consider what they had best do: The Family
Syrena had quitted, kept so much Company,
that for her to think of getting into any
other as a Servant was dangerous; as she possibly
might be seen, by those she had ill treated,
and by that means be exposed: It therefore
seem'd most prudent to get out of the way for
some time, and trust to Chance for Adventures. 
Greenwich was the Place they pitch'd 

on for a Retirement; and Mrs. Tricksy having
sold what few Houshold-Goods she had, took
a neat, but plain ready-furnish'd Lodging,
for herself and Daughter, at a House which
had a Door into the Park; as judging not improbable,
but that by frequent walking there,
the little Harpy might happen on some Prey
to her Advantage: The Event in part answered
to their wish; her Youth, her Beauty,
and seeming Innocence, soon made her be
taken Notice of by several Gentlemen, whom
the Season of the Year, and the Pleasantness
of the Place, had drawn thither; but he that
seem'd most affected with her Charms, was
Mr. D&wblank;, he had often seen her walking
in the Park, sometimes with her Mother,
and sometimes with a young Lady, who
lodged in the same House with them; and
had more than once fallen into such little
Conversations with them, as the Freedom of a
Country-Place allows, without being particular; 
his Eyes however discovered something,
which did not 'scape the vigilant Observation
of both Mother and Daughter, and afforded
a Prospect they so much wish'd to find. 
Mr. D&wblank; was a young Gentleman of
about 800l. a Year, was contracted to a
Lady called Maria, and shortly to be married
to her, with the Consent of the Friends
on both sides; but a near Relation in Lincolnshire,
from whom she expected a considerable
Augmentation of her Fortune, being taken ill,
the young Lady was gone to make her Visit. 
During her Absence, Mr. D&wblank; intended to 

pass the time at Greenwich, a Place he always
liked, but now more especially; the solemn
Prospect of the Sea indulging those Ideas,
which Persons separated from those they love,
are ordinarily possess'd of. The first Sight of
Syrena struck him with a kind of pleasing
Surprize;—he fancy'd he saw something
in her Face, like that of her he had for many
Years been accustomed to admire: he little
thought how much he injured the virtuous
Maid, by making any Comparison between
her and this unworthy Resemblance; or that
the Affection he had vow'd to Maria, could
ever be diminish'd by an innocent Conversation
with Syrena; yet so it was, by pleasing
himself with seeing her for the Sake of another,
he by degrees grew delighted with seeing
her for her own —So little do we
know ourselves, and so hard it is to preserve
Constancy in Absence. As on his first Acquaintance
with Syrena, he had no manner of
Design upon her, he made no Secret of his
Affairs, and talked of his beloved Maria in
the most tender Terms; but afterwards mentioned
her Name with less and less Emotions; 
and from being passionately fond of talking of
her, fell at last into an Uneasiness of hearing
her spoken of at all. 
Mrs. Tricksy therefore had some Reason to
flatter herself, that the Impression her Daughter
had made on him, had erased that of the
Mistress he had so long adored; and that he
wanted nothing but an Opportunity to confess
it to her; on which it was contrived, that 

she should throw herself in his Way, at a
time, when there should be no Witnesses of
their Conversation. They knew he was accustomed
to walk early in the Morning, on
that side of the Park that has the Prospect of
the Sea; and there on the side of a Hill did
Syrena place herself, leaning in a pensive Posture,
her Head upon her Hand; she had not
waited long before Mr. D&wblank; came that
way, and felt (as he afterwards called it) a
guilty Flutter at his Heart, in perceiving she
was alone. He accosted her at first only with
the usual Salutations of the Morning; but she,
with a modest Blush, downcast Eyes, and all
the Tokens of an Innocent Surprize (which
she before had practised in her Glass) soon allured
him to entertain her in a more tender
manner. I am afraid Miss, said he, I have
disturbed your Contemplations, and perhaps
been injurious to the happy Man who was the
Subject of them; for it cannot be that a young
Lady like you should chuse this solitary Place,
but to indulge Ideas more agreeable than any
Company can afford. It is certain, Sir, replied
she, that there is a Pleasure in being
alone sometimes; but I assure you that is not
my Case at present: I love to rise early, the
Sweetness of the Morning tempted me abroad,
and the few Acquaintance I have here, are all
too lazy to partake of it. Then, rejoined he,
you will give me leave to be your Companion?
provided, answered she gayly, your
Complaisance is no Violence on your Inclination; 
for as you have owned yourself a Lover,
it may very well be supposed you come 

here to indulge those Ideas, you just now accused
me of. Perhaps, Miss, said he, I can
no where so well indulge them as in your
Presence. That's impossible, replied she, unless
I had seen the Object of your Affections,
and could expatiate on the Beauties of her
Shape, her Air, her Face, and Wit; while
you shew me your own, cried he, I need no
more to inspire me with the most passionate
Sentiments. —Sure none, added he, catching
her in his Arms, can see the charming
Syrena, and lose a Thought on any other Object. 
——Hold!——hold! good Sir! said she,
disingaging herself from him, you grow a
little too free, and I shall be in Danger of
growing too serious—what! continued
she, this from a Man in love with another
Woman! whatever I may have felt, for any
other Woman, replied he, while I see Syrena,
I can love nothing but her. O fie! rejoined
she, what has a Man to offer, that has already
disposed of his Vows. His Heart, answer'd
he. O! then I find, said she, your
Heart is like a ready-furnish'd Chamber, to
be let to the first Comer, who must go out at
a short Warning, on the Prospect of a more
advantageous Lodger. 
The Reader will perceive she was here acting
the Coquette. —The Reason of it was, that
imagining a sprightly Behaviour would be most
agreeable to a Man of his gay Temper; and
as she could have no hopes of gaining him for
a Husband, things having been gone so far
with Maria, whose Fortune she had heard 

was to pay off his Sister's Portion, she thought
too great a Reserve might deter him from
making any Addresses to her; and tho' she
could not expect any Settlement, as her Affairs
now were, it seemed better to play at a small
Game, than stick out. 
She continu'd to rally with him for some
time, and her Wit and the little Artifices she
made use of, so much inflam'd his amorous
Inclinations, that he was ready almost to take
the Advantage of that solitary Place, and become
a Ravisher for the Gratification of them; 
but it needed not, she received his Caresses in
such a manner, as afforded him a sufficient
Cause to hope, she would not be cruel. — 
She promised to meet him the next Morning,
at the same Place and Hour, and let fall, as if
unguarded, some Hints that she wanted only
to be convinc'd of his Affection, to give him
the Proof of hers that he desired. 
The Time of their Assignation being arrived,
both were punctual, and she allow'd him
yet greater Freedoms than before, but kept
back that he was most eager to obtain; he
was not to seek what 'twas she aim'd at,
and presented her with a Diamond Ring,
which she accepted on as a Proof of his Love. 
—The next Day he brought her a Gold
Watch, and after that an embroider'd Purse
with Fifty Broad Pieces. —All which she
took, without returning him any Thing in
Exchange, but the liberty of Kissing and Embracing
her, not that she absolutely refus'd 

him; but pretended she would find a fitter
Opportunity, and that her Mamma was to go
shortly to London, on some Business that would
detain her the whole Day and Night; and
that she would then contrive a Way, to get
him privately into their own Lodging. This
satisfied him for the present, but finding no
Effect of the Promises she made him, he began
to grow impatient; and was for seizing the Joy
he aimed at, in a Place where the seeming Delicacy
of Syrena, would not consent to yield it
him. —She found Means, however, to
prevent him, both from having any Suspicion
she had a Design to jilt him, or from compassing
his Intent, till she thought fit to grant it. 
The Motives of her behaving in this Fashion,
were two; the first was to get as much
as she could of him, before she granted him
any material Favour, having an After-game in
her Head to play upon him; and the other
was, that she had another Lover whom she
found her Account in managing. 
This was a rich Portuguese Merchant, who
having finish'd some Business, which had
brought him to England, was on the Point of
returning to his Family, when Mrs. Tricksy
and her Daughter came to Greenwich: 
He lodg'd at the next Door to them, and
being charm'd with Syrena, soon got acquainted
with them. The cunning Mother soon
perceiv'd his Inclination, and to encourage
him to discover it, in a proper Manner, was
always entertaining him with the Misfortunes 

of her Family, and the Straits to which they
were subjected. —He took the Hint, and gave
her to understand, he was ready to contribute
to the Relief of the Necessities she complain'd
of, provided he might obtain a grateful Return
from the fair Syrena. —In fine, the Agreement
was soon struck up between them— 
he gave his Gold, and Syrena her Person. — 
As he had begun to visit them at their first
coming, there was no suspicion in the House
of the Amour, which lasted for about a
Month; at the End of which, having fully
satisfied his Desires, and the Necessity of his
Affairs calling him to Portugal, he took his
leave: And Syrena had now leisure to prosecute
her Intrigue with Mr. D&wblank;, which
she could not so well do, while the Merchant
was so near her. 
She had met by Appointment this young
Gentleman for several Mornings; but she
now came not according to her Promise,
which did not a little perplex him; but he
saw her in the Afternoon in the Park, accompanied
by that Lady, who frequently walked
with her in the Evenings. He joined them as
usual, and discoursed with them on ordinary
Things; but perceived a Gloom on the Face
of Syrena, which he had never seen before,
and found that she frequently sigh'd: He
long'd for an Opportunity to enquire the
Cause, but could find none in that Company. 
Syrena too, whenever she look'd upon him,
expressed some Impatience in her Eyes; but
for what he was not able to guess; till they 

turned a Corner to go down a Walk, she let her
Handkerchief drop, which he taking up, and
returning to her she slipt a Paper into his Hand
at the same Time, and he convey'd into his
Pocket unperceiv'd by the other. Syrena after
this seem'd tir'd with walking, and with her
Companion took leave of Mr. D&wblank;, who eager
to see what his Billet contain'd, made no
Efforts to detain them; and as soon as they
were out of Sight, found to his great Surprize
these Lines. 

Dear Sir,
That I met you not this Morning, was
owing to the Misfortune of my Mother's
finding the Presents, you were so kind to make
me; and which I had conceal'd from her,
knowing how scrupulous she is in such Things. 
—She would needs make me tell her how
I came by them, I had no way to conceal the
Truth, and was obliged to endure a strict
Examination on what had past between us. I
assur'd, as I well might, that our Conversation
had been perfectly innocent; but was
oblig'd to add, that your Addresses to me were on
an honourable Foot. —She told me she
would believe nothing of it, unless she heard
it confirm'd by your Mouth, and had sent for
you to Day, if Company had not come from
London to visit us, on Purpose to return the
Watch and Ring; for the Purse she knows
nothing of, and hear what you would say as to
your Designs on me. —Therefore, dear
Sir, do not contradict what I have said, unless 

you would for ever be deprived of the Sight,
and thereby break the Heart of, 
Your
Syrena. 
P. S. If you humour my Mamma in this
Article, you will have leave to Visit me, and we
may be together as much as either of us desire. Pray burn this. 

Mr. D&wblank; was so much shock'd at this
Proposal, that for some Moments all the Love
he had for Syrena was converted into Contempt,
imagining it a Trick contrived beween
Mother and Daughter, to draw him into
a Promise of Marriage; but when he reflected
that the Girl had behav'd in a quite
contrary Manner, the good Opinion he had
of her Sincerity, soon clear'd her from having
any share in it. He had great Debates within
himself what to do in the Affair: He thought
it base to pretend a Thing which he was far
from intending; but then the exposing a
young Creature who loved him, to the Rage
of a Mother, whom he suppos'd she stood
much in awe of; together with the thoughts
of never see her any more, out-balanced the
Consideration of his own Honour; and he
chose, as, indeed, most do, when they are in
love; to sacrifice his Character to his Passion,
rather than his Passion to his Character, since
he found himself in a Dilemma, where both
could not be maintain'd. 
The next Day, as he expected, the Servant
of the House, where Mrs. Tricksey lodg'd, 

brought him a Letter, which was to this
Purpose. 

SIR,
I Am sorry to have Occasion to write to desire
you will call on me, on an Affair
which you ought to have found an Occasion
of communicating to me. —I scarce think
you can be Ignorant of what I mean, tho' I
am as to your real Designs; but if they are of a
Nature fit to be acknowledg'd, to a Person in
the Circumstances I am in; you will not hesitate
to come, and immediately declare to her,
who wishes to be with Honour, 
SIR,
Your oblig'd humble Servant,
Ann Tricksy. 

This Letter, and the Summons it contain'd,
renew'd his Confusion; but he found himself
under a Necessity of giving some Answer; and
as he did not care to write, bid the Messenger
give his Service to the Lady, and say he
would wait on her as soon as he was drest. He
was afterwards several Times prompted by his
good Genius to break his Word on this
Occasion, and go directly for London, without
troubling himself about what Syrena or her
Mother should think of him; but the Presents
he had made, and the Happiness which
they were to purchase for him, got again the
better of the Dictates of his Prudence, or his 

Consideration for Maria; and he went with a
Resolution to make the Mother of his new
Charmer satisfied. 
Few Women knew better how to behave
themselves on all Occasions than Mrs. Tricksy;
and on this 'tis not to be doubted if she
exerted all her Artifice: She receiv'd him with
the greatest Respect, yet at the same time
mingled a certain Severity in her Air, which
gave him to understand, she expected to be
answer'd with Truth, to the Questions she
had to ask him; the principal of which were,
on what Score he had made her Daughter such
valuable Presents? And when he had told her
on the most honourable One: Wherefore his
Intentions, and the Courtship between them
had been conceal'd from the Person, who as a
Parent ought to have been consulted? To this
he replied, that he was willing to know how
far he could influence the Affections of the
young Lady, without the Interposition of a
Mother's Commands; and that also as he was
contracted to another, it would be highly improper
that the World should have any Suspicion
he had made a second Choice, 'till he
had found some Pretence to break entirely off
with the first. 
On these Declarations, Mrs. Tricksey seem'd
perfectly easy, and telling him she depended
on his Honour and Veracity, gave him leave
to visit Syrena, as often as he pleas'd; and assured
him at the same Time, that she would
keep his Secret inviolably till a proper Time 

for revealing it; and that the Family where
they liv'd should never know he came there,
with any other View than to chat away a leisure
Hour, as an ordinary Acquaintance. 
Glad was Mr. D&wblank;, when he was got
over this Task: He was a Man who naturally
hated all kind of Deceit, and look'd
on Lying, as beneath the Dignity of his Specie; 
he could not therefore utter Words so
foreign to his Heart without feeling an inward
Shock. Yet so great an Ascendant had the
Charms of Syrena gain'd over him, that the
unhappy Passion he had for her, corrupted even
his very Morals; and made him think nothing
vile that tended to the Enjoyment of her. 
Mrs. Tricksy, in the mean time was far
from believing what he said, tho' she feigned to
do so, nor indeed had not yet formed any Design
to draw him in to marry her Daughter; 
because his former Engagement, and the necessity
of his Affairs requiring he should keep
it, she had looked on it as an impracticable
Attempt. All her Design in obliging him to
pretend an honourable Passion, was only to
support her own Character, and compel him
afterwards to do more for Syrena, than perhaps
his Inclinations would have excited him to; 
but I will not anticipate. 
Mr. D&wblank;, had now all the Opportunity
he could wish with Syrena, which he did
not fail to make use of for the Gratification of
his Desires; and our young Dissembler so well
acted her Part, that he imagined never Woman 

loved to a greater height than she did:
In the midst of this Intrigue, he received a
Letter from Maria, and another from that
Kinswoman at whose House she was: That
Lady being recovered from her Indisposition,
and loth to lose Maria's Company, made him
an Invitation to come down, telling him as
what she imagin'd would be a great Inducement,
that he would have the Pleasure of Conducting
to London, that dear Person, who was
shortly to be his Companion for Life. Maria
also desired him to come, in Terms as pressing
as her Modesty would permit, and the engaging Manner in which she wrote somewhat
awaked his former Tenderness; but happening
to see Syrena the same Evening, and mentioning
the Invitation, the artful Creature presently
fell into Fits, crying out between her counterfeited
Agonies, O! I shall never see you
more—you love Maria—you will
marry her —Syrena will be forgot— 
but I will not live to be forsaken—then
run to the Window as tho' she would throw
herself out; and on his taking her in his Arms,
and vowing never to be ungrateful to her
Love, clung about his Waste, bathed his Hands
and Bosom with her Tears—then swooned
again, and in fine, so well feign'd the desperate
half dying Lover, that he thought he
should be the most cruel of Mankind, to quit
so soft, so endearing a Creature; all he could
say or do however could not pacify her, till
he gave her the most solemn Assurances not
to go to Lincolnshire; and the more to convince
her of the Sincerity of what he said, wrote an 

Excuse to the Ladies in her Presence, for his
refusal. 
When Syrena told her Mother how much
he was affected with her pretended Grief, and
the Condescention he had made, the old
Woman began to be of Opinion that he really
lov'd enough to marry her, if it were not for
his Engagement with Maria, and from that
Moment thought of nothing but how it might
be broke off—the most feasible Way she
could invent was to make that Lady think
him unworthy her Affection —She knew
very well how far Pride and slighted Love
work in the Minds of Women, and without
farther delay wrote to Maria in the following
Terms. 

To Miss Maria S&wblank;, at Mrs. J&wblank;'s
House in Lincolnshire.
Madam,
The Assurances you have given Mr.
D&wblank; of making him happy in your
Person and Fortune, might justly render any
Man highly contented with his Lot; but as
our Happiness consists chiefly in the Sense we
have of it; I am sorry to inform you Mr.
D&wblank; is ignorant of his. I beg you will
not suspect I give you this unwelcome Intelligence
out of any sinister View, for I assure
you, Madam, I am a Person who have not 

the last Self-interest in this Point; and nothing
but the Love I bear to Truth and Justice could
have prevail'd on me to let you know how void
of both Mr. D&wblank; is now become. You
had no sooner left London than he went to
Greenwich, in pursuit of a young Girl esteemed
very beautiful, but I have never seen her,
so take that Character of her upon Trust; I
am, however, very certain that she is so in
the Eyes of Mr. D&wblank;; that he makes honourable
Addresses to her, and has assured her
Mother that he only waits an Opportunity to
break with you, and will then avow his Passion
for her in the face of the World — 
I appeal to yourself for one Proof of what I
say, if it be true as he gives out that you invited
him to Lincolnshire, and he declined accepting
that Favour on a frivolous Pretence— 
if you know this to be real, it is easy for you
to convince yourself yet farther, by employing
any Person to inspect into his Behaviour,
while you are absent —It would be vain
to wish you might hear it is such as would
merit your Approbation—the next Blessing
therefore that can attend you is, that you
may be undeceived in your good Opinion before
the indissoluble Knot is tied, that would
put it out of your power to punish his Ingratitude,
which is the sole Motive of this trouble,
from 
Madam,
Your unknown Friend. 


This mischievous Letter Mrs. Tricksy sent
to Lincolnshire by the Post, after having got it
copied by a Friend in London, to prevent any
Suspicion it was herself that wrote it, in Case
Maria in a rage should either send it up to
Mr. D&wblank;, or shew it him at her return. 
The unfortunate Gentleman little guessing
what had been contrived against him, continued
treating, presenting, and caressing his
pretty Syrena, till he was sent for to London on
the arrival of an Uncle, who had been three
Years in Antigua; and whose Absence, he being
Guardian to his Nephew, alone had so
long retarded the Nuptials of Mr. D&wblank; and
Maria, the Friends of that Lady insisting on
Accounts being made up between them before
Marriage. 
Syrena no sooner heard this News, than she
had recourse to all her Artifices to retain him; 
Tears, Complaints, and Faintings were all
employed to detain him, while the Mother on
the other hand plied him with Remonstrances
of the Promise he had made her of breaking
with Maria, than which she told him there
could not be a fitter Time than the present,
as he might easily find some way to embarrass
the Accounts, so as to render it impossible to
make any Settlement on a Wife to the Satisfaction
of her Kindred. —To this he
cooly answer'd, that she might depend he
would act as became a Man of Honour; but
tho' he had enough to do between the Mother
and Daughter, and had a Heart relenting to 

the Sorrows of Syrena, he began now to be
satiated with Enjoyment, and the virtuous
Affection he had avowed to Maria to resume
its former Dominion over his Soul. —He
therefore took his leave of them with so ill-dissembled
a Concern, that they easily perceived
there was a Change in him no way to
their Advantage. Mrs. Tricksy however, flatter'd
herself with some Success in her Plot on
Maria; she imagined that if it did not absolutely
break the Match it would breed a Jealousy
and Uneasiness on her side, which in
time would create a disgust on his; and that
join'd with a Stratagem she had from the beginning
intended to put in Practice, would
renew his Affections for her Daughter, and
cement him to her more firmly than ever. 
Mr. D&wblank; being got to London, the Pleasure
he took in the Society of an Uncle he had
not seen in so long a Time, and who he looked
upon as a Parent, being left very young to
his Care, together with the hurry of settling
his Affairs, so took up all his Mind, that there
was little room for remembering his Greenwich
Amour; he had not however left that Place
above ten Days before he was reminded of it
by a Letter from Syrena's Mother. The Contents
whereof were as follow: 

SIR,
I am very much surprized that you have
not in all this Time found a leisure Hour
for a Visit at Greenwich, or at least for writing 

a Line to let us know you remember'd that
you have some Friends here, who have reason
to expect that Proof of your Sincerity — 
I am loth to call your Honour in question, yet
as I am a Mother, must beg you to reflect,
how cruel it would be, to take so much Pains
as you have done to gain the Affection of a
poor innocent Girl, for no other purpose than
to leave her to despair —I see the concern
she is in through all her Care to hide it from
me; and tho' I find enough to chide her for,
in the course of her Conversation with you,
yet I have a Mother's Heart; and cannot but
tremble at the Apprehensions to what she will
be reduced, if you should prove ungrateful or
unkind—Put an end therefore, I beseech
you, Sir, to the suspence we both are in, inform
us how your Affairs are, and if you have
made any Progress towards getting rid of your
old Engagement —Syrena would fain have
accompanied this with one from herself, but
I would not permit it, till I had first heard
from you, which I once more intreat may be
with a Speed, conformable to the professions you
have done her the Honour to make, and your
Promises to, 
SIR,
Your most Obedient Servant,
Ann Tricksy. 

This Letter put Mr. D&wblank; into a very
ill-humour, he now saw some Part of the 

ill Consequences attending the Prosecution of
an unlawful Flame, and condemned his own
Inconstancy as much as any other Person could
have done. He was in the utmost perplexity
what to do to rid himself of this troublesome
Affair, and for a long time could not decide
within his Mind, whether not answering Mrs.
Tricksy at all, or answering her in such Terms
as might let her see there was nothing to be
hoped from him on the score of Marriage,
would most contribute to that End. At length
he resolved on the latter, and wrote in this
manner. 

Madam,
As I have a great Opinion of your Honour,
and Sense of Religion, I can scarce think
you will blame me, that on mature Reflection
I dare not make any Efforts to break an Engagement,
into which I voluntarily enter'd. — 
I have the utmost Regard for your Daughter,
and doubt not but she may be much happier
with any other, then she could be with one,
who to be hers must be perjur'd. —I ask
your Pardon for having deceiv'd you; and
shall rejoice in any Opportunity that shall
put it my power to attone, for what I have
done, by any Act of Friendship, that is consistent
with the Character of a Person, who
is shortly to give his Hand to another. I dare
say, you have too much Prudence to make
any Talk of this Adventure, which would only
create Uneasiness to me, without any manner
of Advantage to yourself and Daughter. 

—Pray make my best Wishes acceptable
to her; but at the same Time let her know,
that all future Correspondence between us,
would be disreputable to her, and highly inconvenient
to, 
Madam,
Your humble Servant,
D&wblank;. 

He wrote at the same Time to Syrena, in
these Terms. 

Dear Syrena,
I Suppose you are no Stranger to the Contents
of your Mother's Letter; and as you
very well know, there never was any real Intention
of Marriage between us, and that
what I said to her, was merely in Complaisance
to your Request; I should have taken it
kind, if you had saved me the Shock of her
Remonstrances, or Upbraidings on that Score; 
by seeming to think me unworthy of your Affection,
and pretending to her that that the imaginary
Courtship, broke off wholly on your
Side. —Believe, dear Girl, that I shall always
retain the most grateful Sense of the Favours,
I have receiv'd from you; but as I am now
going to enter into a State, which allows
not the Continuation of them, our Interviews
hereafter must be as private as possible, for
both our Sakes. —Therefore, I beg you will
make yourself easy—in a little Time, 

perhaps, you will hear from me, more to your
Satisfaction, and be convinced that I shall never
cease to love you. 
Yours,
D&wblank;. 

Both these he sent by the Penny-Post; but
directed that for Syrena under a Cover, to the
Person at whose House he had lodg'd, while he
was at Greenwich, that it might not fall into
the Mother's Hands; and betray to her, that
her Daughter had been of the Plot to deceive
her: Poor Gentleman, little suspecting himself
was the only Person impos'd upon, or that the
Excursion he had made, would be attended
with Consequences, which he soon after dreadfully
experienced. But, methinks, I hear
many of my fair Readers cry out, that no
Punishment could be too severe for the Inconstancy
of Mr. D&wblank;, and that the least inflicted
on him, ought to be the everlasting
Contempt of the Woman to whom he was
false, and the Insincerity of her for whose Sake
he was so. It cannot, indeed, be deny'd that
he had acted an ungenerous Part; and if we
may take his own Word for it, in the latter
Part of his Letter to Syrena, had no Intention
to be more constant to Maria after Marriage
than before: 'Tis certain, however, that tho'
that insinuating Creature had got but too much
Possession of his Heart, he had at sometimes
his repenting Moments. He was soon after
involved in Perplexities from another Quarter; 
he had wrote three Letters to Maria, to none 

of which he had receiv'd any Answer; and
the last being accompanied with one to Mrs.
F&wblank;, he obtain'd one from that Lady, in
which he found these Lines. 

SIR,
Your Letters for my Cousin came safe to
my House, but she being gone from me, I
have according to her Desire, laid them by in
order to send to her, when I shall receive Directions
from her where to do so; for at Present,
I am entirely ignorant of her Retirement. 
—I know not what has happened, since
she left my House, to go to that of a Relation
we have Twenty Miles hence; where, she
said, she intended to pass some Days; but I
have heard went from thence directly in the
London Stage. —I am greatly surpriz'd
you have not seen her, nor that she not has
wrote to me. —She seem'd in a good deal of
inward Agitation at her Departure;—but
I could get nothing from her of the Motive. 
—I wish all is well. —I do not doubt now
you have this Intelligence, but you will make
a strict Enquiry, and beg as soon as 'tis in
your power, you will let me know, for I am
in more Concern, than I am able to express. 
SIR,
Your most humble Servant,
K. J&wblank;. 


'Tis a common saying, that People seldom
know the Value of any Thing, till they are
in danger of losing it. —Mr. D&wblank; was
not sensible himself how much he lov'd Maria,
till this Letter. Jealousy, and the Fears
that some Accident had befallen her, by Turns
distracted him; he sent—he went himself
to all the Relations and Acquaintaince she had
in Town, to enquire after her; but to no Effect; 
whoever he spoke to on this Head, seem'd
no less amaz'd and concern'd than himself, and
the more he reflected on it, the more he was
bewildered in his Thoughts. One Evening as
he return'd to his Lodging with a Heart full
of disturb'd Emotions from this fruitless Search; 
he was told by the People where he lodg'd, that
a young Lady had waited for him some Time; 
as he then thought of nothing but Maria, he
imagin'd it must be she, and flew up Stairs
with all the Impatience of Love and Curiosity. 
But how great was his Surprize, when
instead of her, he found Syrena: A Visit from
her seem'd so presuming, and at the same
Time so distant from that Modesty she had
always counterfeited before him; that on his
first coming into the Room, he had scarce command
enough over himself, to forbear saying
something, that might have been accounted too
shocking to a Person of her Sex, and whom
he once pretended to love. She gave him
not much Time, however, to consider how
he should receive her; for rising from an easy
Chair into which she had thrown herself, and
running to him with a most artfully assum'd
Wildness in her Countenance, the Moment
he enter'd the Room. —Pardon me, cry'd 

she, my dear, dear Mr. D&wblank;, that I come
here an uninvited Guest. —'Tis the first
and last Trouble I shall give you; but I could
not die without seeing you: —All I beg is
a kind Farewel, and that you will pity the
unfortunate, the too tender Syrena. If he was
before amaz'd and angry at an Action, which
he look'd upon as too bold; he was now more
confounded and grieved at a Behaviour, which
had in it so much the Appearance of Despair; 
and demanded hastily what had happened, and
what she meant by talking of dying, and Farewell? 
On which she told him with a Flood of
Tears, that her Mother had intercepted the
Letter he wrote to her, and finding by it the
Truth of their Correspondence, and that she
had been of the Party to deceive her; she
flew into such an Extremity of Rage, that she
turned her out of Doors, with an Oath never
to see her more, or own her as her Child. — 
Thus, added the young Dissembler, I am abandon'd
to the World. —Destitute of
Friends, of Lodging, or any Means of supporting
a wretched Life; and what encreases my
Misfortune, I fear I am with Child? — 
What then can I do but die? And die I will. 
The Minute I go from you, I will seek out
some private Stairs that lead to the Thames,
and throw myself in. Mr. D&wblank;, who believed
all she said, thought now of nothing,
bur disswading her from so dreadful a Resolution:
He made use of all the Arguments he
was master of; assur'd her of his everlasting
Friendship, and swore that neither she, nor
the dear little One, in case it was as she apprehended, 

should ever be to seek for Support. 
This being what she wanted to bring him to,
her Distractions by little and little seem'd to
abate. —He sent his Man to provide a
handsome Lodging for her, gave her Twenty
Guineas for her Pocket, and promised to bring
her Three Pounds every Week, till something
should offer more to her Advantage. 
Now was Syrena a kept Mistress, and being
by his Good-nature, settled in a commodious
and reputable Lodging, found many Excuses
besides her pretended Pregnancy to drain Money
from him, more than her Allowance; 
but not all the Extravagance of Love she
pretended to have for him, nor all the
liking he had of her Person and Behaviour,
had the Efficacy to drive Maria from
his Mind: Her strange absenting herself
from him and from all her Relations, at a
Time, when it was expected their Marriage
would have been celebrated, gave him Discontents,
which it was in the power of no
other Woman to dissipate. To aggravate his
Confusion, he receiv'd by the Penny-Post an
anonymous Letter, the Contents whereof were
these. 

SIR,
I Am no Stranger to your Engagement with
Miss S&wblank;, nor to the Disquiet you at
present labour under on her Account, and am
enough your Friend to advise you, not to give
yourself any farther Trouble in searching after 

one, who if found, might occasion you to be
guilty of somewhat unworthy of your Character; 
—in fine, she is in the Arms of a
Man, whom an Inconstancy natural to the
Sex, makes her prefer to him intended for her
Husband; —Chance discovered the Secret
to me; nor would I have been so cruel to the
Lady, to inform you of it, had I not thought
I could not have conceal'd it without Ingratitude,
having once received an Obligation from
you, which I cannot forget;—I chuse,
however, to stand behind the Curtain, till it is
known how you relish so disagreeable an Intelligence. 
—If you have Love enough to
forgive this false Step in Miss S&wblank;, and
and make her your Wife, when she thinks fit
to be visible, you cannot expect to know the
Person, whom you could not look upon without
a Blush;—but if, thus warn'd, you
take the Advantage she has given you of concealing
herself to break off, you shall be made
acquainted with the whole Story of her Infidelity,
and also the Name of him, who now subscribes
himself, 
Your Well wisher. 

Mr. D&wblank; believing Syrena to be the
most disinterested, open and sincere Creature
in the World, had been so weak as to entrust
her with Maria's having absented herself
from all her Friends; the fruitless Enquiry
both himself and they had made after her,
and also some jealous Sentiments, which ever
and anon rose in his Mind, that so odd an 

Elopement could have no other Motive, than
a new and more favour'd Lover; and the artful
Hypocrite appear'd always to take the suspected
Lady's part, invented Excuses for her
having acted in that manner, and apologized
for her with so much seeming Earnestness, that
Mr. D&wblank; was perfectly charm'd with her
Generosity, and in some Moments thought he
should not be much concern'd to hear the worst
that could be of Maria, since he had in Syrena
so faithful a Friend as well as Mistress. He
no sooner receiv'd the above Letter, than he
flew to communicate it to her, tho' it was then
very late at Night, and he had passed all the
Afternoon with her; but as if since his unhappy
Amour with her, he was to be continually
involved in Matters of Surprize, of one
kind or other, he met one here he little expected,
that of being told she was abroad; as
he had left her quite undrest, and she had
mentioned no Occasion that should call her
out, he knew not what to think of such a
nocturnal Ramble; he resolved however to
wait till she returned, tho' it should be all
Night, and bid the Servant of the House light
him up Stairs; for Syrena boarding with the
Family, had yet taken no Maid of her own; 
the People durst not refuse him, and he sat
down, full of various and disturbed Emotions. 
He had not long indulged them, before casting
his Eye on the Table, he saw a seal'd
Letter; he took it up, and finding it directed
to Mrs. Syrena Tricksy, and as he thought in
her Mother's Hand, he broke it hastily open, 

and found he was, not deceiv'd; it was indeed
from Mrs. Tricksy, and contained these
Lines: 

Dear Syrena,
I Was in Town Yesterday, and should have
been glad to have given you my Opinion
on what you wrote; but durst not come or
send for you any where, for fear of Mr.
D&wblank;'s being with you—a little Circumspection,
my Girl, may draw the Fool in
to marry you at last; therefore I am vex'd
you have gone so far with Captain H&wblank;s;
if any thing should happen to discover your
Intrigue with him, and Mr. D&wblank; should
turn you off before you have got a Settlement,
the other you know has no Estate, but
it is too late to advise you now, only be cautious; 
it is lucky your Keeper depends so
much on your Sincerity, as to tell you his
Suspicions of Maria; I took the hint you gave
me, and sent him a Letter as from an unknown
Person, which will make him quite
confirm'd of her Falshood. That I sent to
Lincolnshire I am positive has had a good
Effect, for a Person has been at Greenwich
since you left it, making great Enquiry concerning
you and Mr. D&wblank;, which could
be only by Maria's Orders —I dare believe
by this time they heartily hate one
another, and as we have contrived it, can never
come to a right Knowledge of the Matter; 
only I once more charge you to take
care, that nobody has it in their power to 

betray your Affair with the Captain; and also,
that you will get as much as you can of him
soon, for I hear his Ship will sail in a Month's
Time;—let your next bring me an Account
how Mr. D&wblank; takes my anonymous
Letter, and whether Maria is heard of
yet —I think to leave Greenwich soon, and
then we may see one another privately, for I
must not pretend to forgive your yielding to
Mr. D&wblank; yet a-while. Adieu, dear Girl. 
I am, 
Your Loving Mother,
Ann Tricksy. 

No Man that has not loved, entrusted, and
been jilted, and betray'd, like Mr. D&wblank;,
can have a true Notion of what he felt at this
Scene of Villany, so wonderfully laid open to
him—he shudder'd to think there could
be so much Wickedness in the World; but
when he reflected that it had been practis'd on
himself, by a Person he had so much confided
in, he was all Rage and Madness. Had
he follow'd the first Dictates of his Fury, he
would have staid till the false Syrena had come
home, and torn out her beguiling Eyes, and
soft dissembling Tongue; but Reason afterward
remonstrating, that all he could do,
would be but a demeaning of himself, and fall
short of what her Hypocrisy merited at his
Hands, he took Pen and Paper, and wrote to
her in these Terms. 


Base Monster,
A Letter from your vile Mother and Accomplice
of your Crimes, has fallen into my
Hands; I need say no more to let you know,
I am no longer a Stranger to your Treachery
to me, and the injured Maria. —Tremble
then, curs'd Deceiver! thou abandon'd Profligate!
thou hoard of complicated Crimes, at
my just Resentment, and fly for ever from my
Sight, lest I stamp Deformity on every Limb,
and make thy Body as hideous as thy Soul. — 
'Tis highly probable I am not the first, but am
resolv'd to be the last on whom your detestable
Artifices shall take Effect—Captain H&wblank;s
shall be immediately inform'd what a Viper he
cherishes; and after, your Character shall be
made Publick, to warn all Mankind from
falling into those Snares, so fatal to the Reputation
and Peace of Mind of 
D&wblank;. 

This Letter he left for her on the Table, and
put that from her Mother into his Pocket, as
an Evidence of their confederated Baseness; he
read it over several times after he got home; 
but tho' he plainly perceived by it, that Maria
had been imposed upon and made uneasy, as
well as himself, by their Artifices; yet he
could find nothing that could give him room
to think they knew what Steps she had taken,
any more than that a Person enquiring after
him at Greenwich, seem'd probably employed 

by her; but who this Person was, he could not
guess; and his Curiosity in that Point was so
great, imagining, that if he could discover
this Agent of Maria, he might by that means
be informed where she was; that he was
sometimes tempted to offer old Mrs. Tricksy
a free Pardon for herself and Daughter, if she
would in the first Place turn her prolific Brain,
for discovering the Person that came to Greenwich;
and in the second, make a full Recantation
of all she had put in Practice, for sowing
Dissention between Maria and him; but
tho' he would have done almost any thing to
come at the Knowledge of the Truth, yet
when he came to consider a second time, he
could not yield ever to see or to hold any Conversation
more, tho' for never so small a time,
with those Wretches, who had so grosly imposed
upon and betrayed him. 
Much Compassion had been due to the Vexation
this Gentleman was involved in, had not
his Infidelity, in a manner, merited the Mischifs
it drew upon him; but what the innocent
and wrong'd Maria suffered all this time,
cannot but excite the Pity of every generous
Reader. 
