

To make you perfectly comprehend the Truth
of my Affairs, (said she,) I must acquaint you
of what Condition my Parents were: Though their
Names I shall beg leave to conceal, least by declaring to
any one that so deservedly unhappy a Creature is their
Child, I shou'd disturb the sacred Quiet of their Ashes. 

She cou'd not speak this without bursting into a Torrent
of Tears, which, for some Moments, hinder'd
her from proceeding: But as soon as she had a little
repell'd the Violence of her Grief, You must know
(continu'd she) that my Father was a younger
Branch of a Family which boasts a Place among the
Prime of the Nobility; and my Mother was descended
from Ancestors whose noble Actions merited Titles,
though they wore none, but that of being the
Best and most Ancient of the Gentry. They had
both been from their Infancy accustom'd to a Court,
and had Spirits far above their Circumstances,
which made them unable to endure the Thoughts
either of a Retirement, or appearing in Publick with
an Equipage any way inferior to what those of the
same Rank maintain'd. Thus was I, who was their
only Child, bred up in all the Pomp and Pride of
Quality; and great Part of what shou'd have been reserv'd
for my Fortune, spent in my Education, and
lavish'd on those unnecessary Ornaments and Expences,
which all young Girls, who are fond of
making a Shew, affect. I was not much above
Thirteen when my Father died: His Loss was so
real a Grief to my Mother, that for a long Time she
remain'd inconsolable, nor did her former Gaiety
ever return. Instead of entertaining any Thoughts
of a second Marriage, she transplanted all the Tenderness
she had born my Father on me; and the
Consideration how improbable it was for her to
match me according to my Birth, or the Expectations
I had been bred to, (my Father being able to
leave me no more than three thousand Pounds,) every
Day encreas'd her Affliction: Nor were these
Reflections unaccompanied with Fears, that my
Youth, and some Attractions which her Love made
her fancy she saw about me, might draw on Temptations
to the Disadvantage of my Reputation; she
therefore resolv'd on the sudden to quit the Court, as
a Place too dangerous for a young Woman to continue
in, who had not a Fortune sufficient to entitle 

her to the honourable Affections of the Great, and
too much Pride to listen to the Solicitations of the
inferior Sort who frequented it. That the less Notice
might be taken of the Change of her Humour,
she pretended an Indisposition, and that the London
Air did not agree with her; and in a short Time took
a House about six Miles distant from it. This was
like present Death to me: But all I cou'd say was of
no Effect; the more pressing I appear'd to stay, the
more she thought it needful I shou'd go; and the
passionate Fondness I express'd for the Town Diversions,
and Disdain of a Country Life, confirm'd her,
that it was absolutely necessary at once to prevent the
Dangers she imagin'd threaten'd me, and repel the
Growth of that Ambition which she found had already
taken too deep a Root in my youthful Heart. 
In fine, we went: And this so sudden and disagreeable
an Alteration in my Manner of Living, gave me
a Shock which I know not how to express. My
Mother, entirely throwing off the fine Lady, began
to practise the meer Country Gentlewoman, and us'd
her utmost Endeavour to make me do so too. She
was continually telling me, that my Fortune, join'd
with all she cou'd be able to do for me, cou'd entitle
me to no greater Hopes. ––––That it was time for me
to learn to play the good Housewife, and forget that
there ever were such Things as Balls, Plays, Masquerades,
or Assemblies. All this, which was really the
Effect of her Prudence, I look'd upon as Whimsy; and
the Restraint she laid me under, of not visiting, or being
visited by any Persons, whom she cou'd have the
least Apprehension of, I consider'd as an Affront to
my Understanding. I am oblig'd (said she, my dear
Belinda) to enter into these Particulars, because this
sudden Change from all the Liberties in the World,
to the most strict Confinement, is all the Excuse I
can make for my ill Conduct. ––––But why (continu'd
she, after a Pause) shou'd I alledge that for my Vindication,
which Time, perhaps, and Consideration,
might have made easy to me, if a more fatal Enemy 

to my Repose, as well as my Interest, my Honour, and
my Virtue, had not made it more hateful to me. 
Here was her Speech, a second Time, interrupted by
her tempestuous Grief; and Belinda was forc'd to
make Use of all the Arguments she was Mistress of,
to perswade her to Moderation. 
At last, getting leave to resume her Discourse, One
Day, (said she,) one fatal Day,–––wou'd to God it had
been the last of my Life, as it was of my Repose,
two Ladies came to visit my Mother; and speaking
of a magnificent Ball that Night at Court, told her
they were come on Purpose to entreat her to permit
me to accompany them. By the Account I have
given, you may judge how little Probability there
was she shou'd consent; but whether she was really
overcome by their Reasons, or only yielded to their
Perswasions, being Persons she very much esteem'd, I
know not; but when I least expected it, she order'd
me to make myself ready to wait on them. Never
was any Prisoner, who long had languish'd in a
Dungeon, more rejoic'd to see the open Air, than I
to find myself once more in Court, where every body
welcom'd me, every body carress'd me, and, indeed,
I believe, some of them with a good deal of Sincerity:
For not being of a Quality great enough to
create Envy, nor so mean as to beget Contempt, and
tolerably well humour'd. I am sensible there were
many whose kind Wishes I heartily possess'd. I had
my Admirers too; at least, there were several young
Sparks, and those not of the lowest Rank, who took
Pleasure in making me believe so. Not that my
Heart was any way affected with what they said,
though I had Vanity enough to encourage it: Love
was a Passion I had so little Notion of, that I consider'd
it no more than as a Fiction, and only dress'd
up by the Poets in such Variety of Shapes, to make
the Amusement more entertaining. But this, alas!
was the unlucky Hour in which I was to be convinc'd
of the real Being of that Power I so slightly
had regarded; and soon learn'd to pity, by my own, 

those Pains which, with an unregarding Ear, I often
had heard others mourn. 
About the Middle of the Ball, as I was dancing
with a young Nobleman, who had done me the Honour
to take me out, I saw, on a sudden, the Eyes
of the whole Company turn'd towards the Door; 
but, being too busily engag'd in what I was about,
had not Time to consider what the Meaning might
be, till having ended my Dance, and it being my Turn
to take a Partner, a Lady of my Acquaintance whisper'd
me, and said, There's the fine young Lord. –––– 
(I will not call him by any other Name than that
of Lysander.) He is lately (continued my Friend)
come from his Travels, and but this Moment enter'd; 
it will be an envy'd Gallantry, if you lead him out. 
While she was speaking, I directed my Eyes where
I perceiv'd she look'd, and saw a Form which appear'd
more than Man, and nothing inferior to those
Idea's we conceive of Angels: His Air! his Shape!
his Face! were more than human! ––––Miriads of
light'ning Glories darted from his Eyes, as he cast
them round the Room, yet temper'd with such a
streaming Sweetness, such a descending Softness, as
seem'd to entreat the Admiration he commanded! A
thousand Times have I attempted since to speak what
'twas I felt at this first fatal Interview; but Words
cou'd never do Justice to the Wonders of his Charms,
or half describe the Effect they wrought on me: Oh!
had his Soul been worthy of that lovely, that transporting
Outside, I shou'd have been too blest, been
happy to as superlative a Degree, as now I am curs'd
and wretched. But not to tire you with unavailing
Wishes, or as fruitless Exclamations, I Lov'd!––––was
plung'd in a Wild Sea of Passion, before I had Time
to know, or stem the Danger! I had so many disorder'd
Motions in my Heart, that I am amaz'd my
Feet kept any just Measure with the Musick; or
that, so little us'd as I had ever been to disguise my
Thoughts, my Eyes did not betray the Confusion of
my Soul, and make visible to the whole Company 

what I was not yet acquainted with myself: But
whether the great Concourse of much finer Ladies
who were there, hinder'd me from being much regarded,
or those Changes which, I am very sure, appear'd
in my Countenance, were only taken for the
Effects of Bashfulness in dancing with a Person who
was altogether a Stranger, I cannot tell; but I scap'd
that Raillery, which I must have expected to have
met with, if any Body had been sensible of the true
State of my Condition. When I had done Dancing,
I mingled with those Ladies who came with me,
and some others of my Acquaintance: Lysander soon
join'd us, and enter'd into a Conversation, which
shew'd his wit was, if possible, superior to his
Beauty: He was perfectly well bred, obliging and
gallant, and had something of I know not what peculiarly
graceful and enchanting in his Voice and
Manner of Address; and what added to his other Engagements,
at least endear'd 'em to my (already
doating) Heart, was, that though he said nothing in
particular to me at that Time, yet I cou'd easily discern
he aim'd at pleasing only me. But he behav'd
himself not in so general a Manner the whole Night:
A little after, perceiving I was separated a good
Distance from the Persons I had been with, he came
up to me, and making a low Bow, Madam, (said
he,) how fortunate am I, who after having been in
many Courts, where I have seen Ladies who justly
may be call'd Beautiful, and since my Return home
have met with nothing that cou'd bring me into
good Humour with my Native Country, have now
the Blessing of beholding a Face, which not only
sums up all the different Lovelinesses of other Charmers,
but has also an immensely Divine Treasure of
its own! ––––Others may move the Heart by slow Degrees,
and with some one Perfection captivate the
Sense; but you have Graces which strike the very
Soul, and at first Sight subdue each Faculty! Blush
not, fair Excellence! (continued he, finding I was
silent, as indeed I had no Power to speak,) I tell you 

but the Sense of all Mankind,––––but what Millions
of Tongues are full of, and what your happy Glass,
as often as you look in it, informs you. If, my
Lord, (reply'd I, recollecting myself as well as I was
able,) there were a Possibility of being unacquainted
with my own Defects, so good-natur'd a Compliment
might give me Graces which before I wanted:
But as I have the Misfortune of knowing myself but
too well, all the Advantage I can gain by it, is the
Honour of being in the Company of a Person whose
Wit can find something to praise in those the least
Praise-worthy. O most Angelick, (resum'd he,
tenderly pressing my unresisting Hand,) most Adorable
of your Sex! rob not the brightest Temple of
the Deity, your Divine Self, of your just Due. –––– 
If (but that's impossible) you can distrust the Force
of your too potent Charms, the Effects they have on
me will quickly tell you what they are:–––Cou'd those
inspiring Eyes but look into my Soul, they wou'd
perceive their Power. ––––Pardon this Declaration: A
vulgar Passion, and for a vulgar Object, may wait
on the dull Formalities of Decorum; but what I feel
for you, bursts out and blazes too fierce to be
conceal'd. ––––It is not to be express'd,–––it is not to
be imagin'd, how he look'd while he was speaking
these Words, and much less in what Manner I behav'd
at hearing them: Surprise, and Joy, and Hope,
and Fear, and Shame, at once assaulted me, and hurried
my wild Spirits with such Vehemence, that had
I answer'd at all, it must have been something
strangely incoherent; but, happily for me, some Company
came that Instant to the Place where we were
standing, and deliver'd me from the greatest Perplexity
I cou'd be in. I did not, however, recover
myself the whole Time of my being there; yet, so
much was I infatuated, so lost to all Thought of
Reason or Discretion, that whenever he approach'd
me, I had not Courage to avoid him, as I might easily
have done, without being taken Notice of. 'Tis
sure, he took all Opportunities of entertaining me 

in the Manner he had begun, and without doubt, as
he has since own'd to me, he saw enough in my
Eyes to make him know the Pleasure I took in
hearing him speak, far exceeded my Confusion at
what he said. 
It was almost Morning when the Ball broke up; 
and there being no Possibility of my going home
till next Day, I pass'd that Time at the Lady's House
who brought me out: But, though the Fatigue and
Hurry of the Night wou'd at another Season have
made me glad of Rest, I had now enough to keep
me waking: Lysander's Charms, his Beauty, his Wit,
the Declaration he had made me, and the Manner in
which I had receiv'd it, gave me sufficient Matter of
Reflection: I cou'd not think I had listen'd to any
Protestations of Love, from a Man I had never seen
before, without an inexpressible Shock to my Modesty; 
but these Considerations soon gave Place to
others even more destructive to my Peace: Lysander
was too lovely, and appear'd too deserving, for me
to repent, for any long Time, the Complaisance I
had shew'd him; and my greatest Trouble was the
Fear that I shou'd never see him more. I resolv'd
to say nothing to my Mother of what had pass'd,
believing, with Reason enough, that she wou'd not
only condemn me for Mismanagement, but also take
such Measures as shou'd for ever deprive me of the
Sight of him: Love taught me a Cunning which before
I was a Stranger to; and though I burn'd with
Desire to be talking something of my ador'd Lysander,
and vent some Part of the Overflowings of my
ravish'd Soul, yet I so well dissembled, that at my
Return home I never mention'd the least Syllable
which cou'd give Suspicion; and contented myself,
as well as I was able, with the Belief that Lysander
(who, I found by his calling me by my Name had
enquired who I was) wou'd find some Means to
send to me. Nor did that Hope deceive me: The
very next Day, happening to be at a Window, I
perceiv'd a Fellow walking backwards and forwards 

before our House: It presently came into my
Head, that there was a Probability he might be a
Messenger from Lysander. I observ'd his Motions a
good while, and finding he still lurk'd about, with
his Eyes continually fix'd on our Door, I made a
Pretence to go down; and standing there a little,
the Man drew nearer, but with a Circumspection
which confirm'd me my Conjectures were true. 
No body being within hearing, I call'd to him,
and ask'd him if he wanted any thing. Madam,
(answer'd he softly, and pulling a Letter out of his
Pocket,) by the Description which was given me, I
believe this is design'd to you. It is, it is, (cry'd I,
as soon as I saw the Superscription,) and immediately
ran in, too much transported to say any more. I got
into an Arbor in the Garden, to peruse the dear
Contents, which I very well remember, and are
too deeply engraven in my Mind, ever to be forgotten. 

To the Divine Cleomira.
If the most adorable Cleomira wanted any Proof of
the Dominion of her Charms, besides the just Title
they have to reign over the Souls of all Mankind, this
had come to convince her of a Truth, which Yesterday
she seem'd so cruelly to doubt. But you are too Divine
to be ignorant of your Attributes; and, if there is any
Thing in you, which is not of a Piece with Heaven, it is
that you are not sufficiently stor'd with Mercy to look favourably
on a Man who has no other Merit than his
Zeal. It is with an inconceivable Terror I look back on
that Declaration, which the Force of the most violent
Passion that ever was, oblig'd me to make, in so unpolite
and unprepar'd a Manner; and tremble when I consider
how much Reason you have to condemn the Presumption
of this. But, if as many Years of humble
faithful Services as Fate has allotted for my Life, may
purchase a Pardon for the Sin of my Temerity, I devote 

them entirely to you:––––Henceforth rule my every Word
and Action,–––I had almost said my every Wish: But, Oh!
that is not in your Power, vast as it is! for shou'd you
command me to cease burning with impatient Desires to
obtain the Blessing of pleasing you, I freely own, I cou'd
not,––––nay, I wou'd not, in that, obey you:––––In spite,
even of yourself I must for ever Love,––––for ever
Worship you! ––––Permit me then to owe to your Bounty,
what else my own Obstinacy will give me, the
Title of, the 
Most excellent Cleomira's
Truest and Everlasting Votary,
Lysander. 

There was a Postscript, (continu'd the Recluse,)
in which he press'd very strenuously
for an Answer; the Words of which I do not very
well remember: And, indeed, 'tis needless to have
troubled you with this, or many others of the like
Nature; but as there are some of his Letters, which,
in the Course of my Story, I shall be oblig'd to repeat,
I thought it proper to let you see the mighty
Difference 'twixt Hoping and Possessing; to what an
elevated Heighth the Wings of Fancy soar, while in
Pursuit; and how low, how faint, and drooping is
their Flight, when there is nothing farther to be obtain'd. 
I will not pretend to tell you what my Transports
were while I was reading; if, as you confess,
you really know the Power of Love, your own Heart
will make you comprehend what 'twas mine felt,
much more than any Words cou'd do. I was almost
distracted for fear the Messenger shou'd be gone, and
I have no Opportunity to send an Answer: But he
was better instructed by his Master; and when I
open'd the Door, he presently started out from behind
a great Tree that grew before the House. I
made a Sign to him that he shou'd stay, and went to
my Chamber to write: I durst not allow Time for 

Thought, lest any Interruption shou'd happen; and
only following the Dictates of my inconsiderate and
transported Passion, return'd an Answer in these
Words: 

To the Noble Lysander.
If Cleomira were half so worthy Adoration as Lysander
truly is, she might, without any Difficulty, be
brought to believe all you say to her: But, as I am
sensible I have no other Graces than those your Fancy
is pleas'd to bestow on me, you cannot blame me, if I
am a little diffident of the Continuance of a Passion so
weakly grounded. ––––I shall not, however, desire you to
desist giving me any farther Testimonies of it; because,
as you say, while you are possess'd of it, Entreaties of
that kind wou'd be altogether unavailing. I think myself
extremely oblig'd to you for the Caution with which
your Letter was deliver'd; and if you favour me with
any more, hope you will make use of the same, which
will be of the greatest Consequence to the Peace of 
Cleomira. 

Notwithstanding the Violence of my Passion, there
were some Intervals in which I endur'd severe Upbraidings
from my Modesty, for engaging thus precipitately
in a Love-Affair; but they lasted not long,
and at every Return grew weaker than before: Lysander's
Idea wou'd suffer nothing but itself to have
any Prevalence in my Soul; and the Glory, methought,
of appearing amiable in his Eyes, was more Happiness
than all the World besides cou'd give. 
The next Morning, almost the first Person I saw,
was the Messenger again, walking as he had done
the Day before: I made no doubt but he had another
Billet for me, and the first Moment I had an Opportunity,
went down to receive it. I was not deceiv'd; 

for as soon as I had open'd the Door, he slipp'd a Paper
into my Hand, and retir'd to his Covert quick
as Lightning. The Words of this were; 

To my Ador'd Cleomira.
How much was I mistaken while I believ'd it impossible
there was a Charm more touching than your
Wit and Beauty: Your Goodness ravishes beyond both! ––– 
The Brightness of your Eyes inflame the Heart;––––the
Harmony of your Voice enchants the Ear;––––but
this divine Sweetness of your Nature diffuses Heaven,
and gives Raptures which Angels only, and the happier
Man whom Cleomira favours, can be bless'd with! –––– 
Say, with what Words, thou wond'rous Abstract of Perfection!
thou loveliest,––––wisest,––––best of all created
Beings! shall I repay a Condescention so unhop'd,––––unmerited! 
To be permitted to adore you, is Exstasy too
great to bear in Silence! ––––O give my impetuous
Transports leave to vent themselves!––––let me beneath
your Feet declare the mighty Sense I have of so unvalued
an Obligation!––––let, on that happy Earth you tread
on, my humble Body avow the lower Prostration of my
devoted Soul, and never rise, till by some Arguments forcible
as my Passion, I have convinc'd you with how
much Truth, Purity, and everlasting Zeal, I am your
Slave! I have not been so sparing of my Enquiries, as
not to know it will be almost impossible to obtain the
Blessing I entreat at your House; but if you can think
of any other, where with Convenience I may be favour'd,
let the same unequal'd Excellence of Disposition, which
has already done such Miracles for me, incline you to let
me know it by the Bearer: As also if you will feast my
longing Eyes with a transient View from your Window,
as I pass by to Morrow-Morning on Horseback. Tho'
your Idea has never been absent from my Soul, since
the first Moment I beheld you, yet my impatient Sense
reproaches me that I have liv'd these two long Days,
without endeavouring at least a greater Proportion of 

Felicity, and testifying by all the Ways I am able, how
much I am the never-too-much deify'd Cleomira's 
Eternally Devoted
and most Passionate
Lysander. 

Any Body but me, wou'd have been too much
alarm'd at the reading these Lines, to have return'd
any Answer, unless it were such a one as shou'd have
entirely taken away those Hopes my former Complaisance
had inspir'd. The Boldness of desiring me
to appoint a Meeting was so great, as all the fine
Things he said to me cou'd not attone for; and was
sufficient to have taught me, how dangerous it was
to make any Condescentions of this kind to a Man
I had so little Knowledge of: To another, I say,
this might have been a timely Warning; but, alas! 
I was so blinded with my Passion, that I cou'd think
of nothing but which way I should gratify it; and
without any Struggles from that Bashfulness which
till now had never forsook me, writ him a Reply
in this Manner: 

To the Worthy Lysander.
The Gratitude you express for that, perhaps, too
great Compliance you have found in me, is infinitely
obliging: For I wou'd much rather you shou'd impute it
to any thing, than to that Vanity, which too often influences
a Woman of my Age, to encourage Addresses
her Heart is no way affected with; and, tho' it may
appear too free a Declaration, I am so little acquainted
with disguising the Truth, that I cannot forbear telling
you, it is to your Merits alone you are indebted for the
Liberty of a Correspondence, which you are pleas'd to
think agreeable. Your Information, that it is impossible 

for me to receive the Honour you wou'd do me at our
House, has not deceiv'd you; and I must also let you
know I am too strictly confin'd to promise it at any
other. I must therefore leave it entirely to Fortune,
to procure me any farther Pleasure in your Conversation
than what your Letters afford: But, in the mean
time, shall not fail being at the Window that overlooks
the Road, in the Hope of seeing a Person, whose Regard
shall always be most valuable to 
Cleomira. 

When I had sent this away, I feign'd myself a
little indispos'd, to avoid the Necessity of Talking; 
for Speech was now become a Pain, since I durst
not employ it in the Praise of my adored Lysander. 
I pass'd the whole Day, and good Part of the Night,
in contemplating the Happiness I shou'd enjoy next
Morning; and it cou'd be call'd scarce Dawn when
I got up, and took my Post at the appointed Window,
whence I believe it wou'd have been impossible for
any Thing to have remov'd me. My Mother was
no sooner out of Bed than she enquir'd after my Health; 
her Tenderness making her doubt the Disorder I complain'd
of was increas'd, because I had not been in
her Chamber, as it was my Custom every Morning,
to entreat her Blessing: And being told where I
was, came in to me, not a little surpris'd to find me
in a Room, which, by reason of the great Dust of
the Highway, was very seldom made use of, and
the least pleasant of any in the House. She did not
fail to ask the Cause of my being there; and I told
her, That not being very well, I hop'd some Benefit
from the Air, which I thought blew fresher on that
Side of the House, than on the other. She cou'd
have no Suspicion of the Truth, and this Excuse
pass'd well enough. Breakfast being ready, she sent
a Servant to call me; but I not being prevail'd on
to come, she order'd it shou'd be brought where I
was. This vex'd me to the Heart; for I was not
willing that any body, much less that she shou'd be a 

Witness of this Interview, tho' at such a Distance,
with Lysander. I knew she had discerning Eyes; 
and fear'd she might discover more than I wish'd
she shou'd, in one or both of our Faces. I refus'd
to drink Tea, scarce spoke, or if I did, it was so
peevishly and unmannerly, that I am amaz'd she did
not leave me in a Rage to indulge my ill Humour:
But she, taking my Behaviour for the Effect of Vapours; 
continued to sooth me by a thousand endearing
Expressions, which were wholly lost upon me:
I had no Eyes, no Ears, no Heart open for any
Thing but Lysander. At length he came, and with a
Mein and Air, so soft, so sweet, so graceful, that
Painters might have copy'd an Adonis from him, fit,
indeed, to charm the Queen of Beauty. He was
dress'd in a strait Jocky-Coat of green Velvet, richly
embroider'd at the Seams with Silver; the Buttons
were Brillians, neatly set in the Fashion of Roses; 
his Hair, which is as black as Jet, was ty'd with a
green Riband, but not so straitly but that a thousand
little Ringlets stray'd o'er his lovely Cheeks, and wanton'd
in the Air; a crimson Feather in his Hat, set
off to vast Advantage the dazzling Whiteness of his
Skin. In fine, he was all over Charms!––––all over
glorious! and I believe it impossible for the most Insensible
to have beheld him without adoring him! –––– 
What then became of me? ––––O God! how fruitless
wou'd any Endeavours be to represent what 'twas I
felt! ––––Transported! ––––Ravish'd! ––––I wonder the
violent Emotions of my Soul did not bear my Body
out of the Window! –––––Oh! wou'd it had been so
that Love and Life might then have had an End,
and 'scap'd the Woes which both have since endur'd! 
The great Trampling which the Horses made, (for
he had four Servants in rich Liveries, and gallantly
mounted, attending him,) oblig'd my Mother to rise
from her Chair, to see what it was that occasion'd it. 
She came to the Window the Moment that Lysander
was making me a profound Reverence. I know not
how I return'd it; but, doubtless, with a Confusion 

suitable to what I felt within, and which was but
too visible to my Mother's Observation: For after he
was pass'd by, and my Eyes were pursuing him as
far as I was able, she rouz'd me from the enchanting
Dream I had been in, by pulling me by the Sleeve
from the Window, and looking earnestly in my Face,
as tho' she wou'd penetrate into my Soul, bad me
tell her who that Gentleman was. I know not,
Madam, (answer'd I, with a Voice which sufficiently
discover'd the Insincerity of my Words.) I am
afraid, (said she, changing her Countenance to more
Severity than ever I had seen her wear,) you know
him but too well: Acquaint me therefore this Moment
with the Truth; where, when, and how often
you have seen him. I cou'd not immediately gather
Courage to make any Reply to this Command; and,
when I assur'd her, as I truly might, that I had never
seen him, but at the Ball, she was so far from giving
Credit to what I said, that she flew into the greatest
Passion I had ever seen her in: And after she had a
little vented it in some Exclamations on the Follies
of Love, and Disobedience to Parents, left me alone
to meditate on her Words. 
This was a dreadful Alloy to the Pleasure I had
lately enjoy'd: I perceiv'd the Secret I had taken so
much Pains, and fancy'd myself so artful in concealing,
was, by my own Inadvertency, discover'd. ––––I
cou'd not reflect on the Indignation of a Mother,
who, bating the Restraint she laid me under, I had
reason to think a most Affectionate one, without a
Concern very near Remorse, for doing any Thing to
occasion it: But when I reflected on the Injustice she
did me, (for so my Love taught me to consider it,)
in condemning my Admiration of a Person so every
way deserving as Lysander appear'd to be, I regretted
nothing but the Power she had over me, lest she
should exert it yet more, and deprive me of any future
Means of seeing him. I had been happy never
to have been more deceiv'd than I was in my Conjecture,
that she wou'd take all possible Precaution to 

prevent my having any Conversation with a Person,
whom she so justly believ'd dangerous. 
I had not past many Hours in contemplating the
Misfortunes I fancy'd myself in, before an old Woman
(formerly my Governess, and now a sort of
Overseer in the Family) came into the Room, and
took upon her to reprove me, in Terms I cou'd not
well support. On my giving her some tart Replies,
she told me, That she had Orders from my Mother
to confine me to my Chamber, till I had learn'd the
Lesson of Humiliation. I was forc'd to obey; and,
indeed, was well enough contented to be any where,
to avoid the hearing of such Sermons: All that I
thought an Affliction was, that 'twou'd be impossible
for me to receive or answer any Letters from Lysander; 
and, it was only on this Account that I pass'd
three Days of my Confinement in mortal Inquietudes:
On the fourth, I saw the Mercury to my Jove, mounted
on a little Heap of Rubbish that the Gardiner
had thrown out, and peeping over the Wall. The
poor Fellow, as I since understood, had been every
one of those Days watching about the House; but
not being able to get a Sight of me, either at the
Door, or Windows, he at last came round that way. 
The Appearance of this Man made me almost mad; 
till casting in my Mind, if there were not a Possibility
of giving him Notice of my Condition, Invention
furnish'd me with this: I open'd the Window, and thrusting
myself out as far as I cou'd, made a Sign to him
that he shou'd tarry a little where he was; then taking
a Piece of Paper, writ it in these Words: 

I know who you come from; and therefore guess your
Business. –––Let your Lord know I am in the strictest
Confinement imaginable on his Account. –––I fear it
will be impossible for me to continue the Happiness of a
Correspondence with him. It will be to no Purpose for
you to stay, or return any more on the Design you are
sent on; but if you are taken Notice of, may occasion
worse Usage, if possible, than what I now endure. 
Cleomira. 


I pull'd a Lead out of the Sleeve of my Gown,
and wrapping it up in this Paper, to give it Weight,
made a Shift to hurl it to the Place where he cou'd
reach it. He took a Letter out of his Pocket, and
held up to shew me, making several Motions; by
which I understood he was charg'd to give it me; 
but by shaking my Head, and putting my Handkerchief 
to my Eyes, I testify'd the Impossibility of his
Attempt, and part of the Concern I was in. I say,
but part; for after he was gone, and I began to reflect,
that indeed I never shou'd be able to see Lysander
more, no Tongue can express the Emotions of
my Soul. For many Days I did nothing but weep,
and that in so violent a Manner, that the Servants,
whom my Mother sent in to wait on me, apprehended
I shou'd fall into Fits. This, when it was
told her, gave so considerable an Alarm to her Tenderness,
that it half dissipated her Anger; and, when
I least expected it, she order'd I shou'd come down
into the Parlour; and receiving me with her usual
Affability, You have suffer'd enough (said she) for
the Imprudence of contracting an Acquaintance without
my Approbation; but as I shall forget it, at least
so far as never to reproach you with it, so I wou'd
have you remember it enough to make you avoid,
for the future, any Faults of the like Nature. And,
to convince me that there is nothing farther between
you and this Gentleman, than what you wou'd have
me believe, you must resume that Chearfulness which
is becoming your Youth, and the little Cause you yet
have met with to be otherwise. My Heart was too
full to suffer me to make any other Reply to these
Words than a low Cursey; but when I had gather'd
Courage enough to speak, I endeavour'd to assure her,
that my Melancholy proceeded from no other Cause,
than being on a sudden depriv'd of all those Diversions
I had ever been accustom'd to; but that, since
it was her Pleasure, I wou'd use my utmost Efforts
to make it easy to me. She seem'd satisfy'd with
what I said; and, perhaps, believing she had been a 

little too severe, from that Time took me abroad
with her wherever she went: She carry'd me to
visit several Relations, and a great many Acquaintance,
whose Society I formerly took Delight in: But, alas!
this now cou'd afford no Comfort to my bleeding
Heart; it rather encreas'd than diminish'd the Anguish
of my secret Discontent; and since I cou'd not see
Lysander, I cou'd have been better pleas'd to have seen
no body. There was no Possibility of conveying a
Letter to him; I knew not where to direct; or if
I had, notwithstanding the Privileges my Mother now
allow'd me, she scarce ever trusted me out of her
Sight. Thus, for two Months, did I languish out
my Nights in fruitless Wishes, and my Days in the
most tormenting (of all) Employments, that of being
oblig'd to wear a seeming Gaiety, when all my
Soul was full of Horror and Distraction. In this
Time a new Family came into the Neighbourhood; 
they soon made an Acquaintance with ours; and my
Mother was so well pleas'd with the good Breeding
and Gravity of the Master and Mistress of it, that
she enter'd into an Intimacy with them much sooner
than was her Custom to do with any body. They
visited frequently at our House; and my Mother always
made me accompany her to return them, though
much against my Inclination; for, as I have already
told you, my own Thoughts, unquiet as they were,
gave me more Satisfaction than any Company's but
Lysander cou'd bestow. Both the Man and the Woman
seem'd wonderfully charm'd with me; took
all Occasions of complimenting me; and Mrs. Marvir
(for that was the Name they were call'd by) wou'd
often endeavour to engage me in particular Conversation; 
which I, as carefully as I cou'd, without being
rude, avoided: Till one Day, she began a little
kind of Raillery on my affecting a Demureness in
my Behaviour, which (she said) she was sure was
not in my Nature. My Mother, who was willing
to take all Opportunities of perswading me to Chearfulness,
join'd with her in this Assertion; and between 

'em both I was pretty much put to it (so
inwardly perplex'd as I was) to make any Defence; 
which, by the Aukwardness of it, discover'd
that I had, indeed, something at my Heart which
clouded the Gaiety of my Looks. I am afraid (said
Mrs. Marvir to my Mother) that your Daughter is
in Love: I warrant if we shou'd search her Chamber,
we shou'd find a Number of amorous Books,
and Epistles of the same Nature. I never had that
Curiosity, (reply'd my Mother;) but I hope she wou'd
receive none of the latter without my Knowledge; 
and I have taken Care to instil such Principles in her
Mind, as will not let her be over fond of the other. 
Will you give me leave to search? (resum'd she laughing.) 
Yes, with all my Heart, (answer'd I, glad to
put an End to this Discourse.) I waited on her up
Stairs; where, after she had a little look'd about her,
and prais'd the Pleasantness of the Chamber, having
a full Prospect of the Garden, I told you (said she)
that I shou'd find something here more tender than
you wou'd have the World be sensible of. I dare
swear (continu'd she, taking a Letter from my Toilet,
and giving it to me) the Contents of this may justly
be call'd Amorous. I had no sooner cast my Eyes
on the Direction, than I knew the Hand to be Lysander's:
The Consternation I was in may be more
easily imagin'd than express'd: I had not Power to
break the Seal, but continu'd looking sometimes on
her, sometimes on the Table, and sometimes on
the Letter, as wond'ring by what means it had been
convey'd there. Cease your Surprise, (resum'd she:)
It was no other who laid the Letter on your Toilet
than she who took it off, and deliver'd it to your
Hand, and she who you need make no Scruple to
confide in, since your Lysander; your adoring, dying
Lysander, has thought me worthy of the Trust of
bearing you his Soul, his Vows, and everlasting Faith. 
I will make some Excuse (continu'd she) for leaving
you above, that you may have Time both to read
this and return an Answer, which I have engag'd to 

bring him. I cou'd not get leave from my Astonishment
to make any Reply to what she said; but when
she was gone had my Senses enough about me to
lock the Door, and then fed my impatient and transported
Wishes with these Lines. 

To my Soul's only Treasure, the Adorable Cleomira.
How easily might be spar'd the Stings,–––the Scorpions,
–––the never-dying Fires, and all the fancy'd
Tortures which Priests invent to ride the frighted
World, if any of those Soul-enslavers knew what it was to
love like me! Absence from Cleomira is a Hell which all
their labour'd Policy wants Skill to paint! ––––Within my
burning Breast ten thousand real Furies rage, and tear
me with Variety of Anguish! ––––Mad with Desire, and
wing'd with daring Hopes, sometimes I cou'd tear down
the envious Walls, and baffle all Impediments which
hold you from me! ––––Sometimes, despairing, chill'd
with deadly Horror, I fancy you regardless of my Woe,
and easy under this Restraint! ––––One Moment imagine
I see a favour'd Rival bask in your Smiles, gaze on
your Eyes in happy tranquil Pleasure, and kiss that
Hand, which, but to touch, I wou'd forego my Life! –––– 
The next, distracted, think I behold you dragg'd by a
cruel Mother to some detested Choice your Soul abhors! 
Then soften into more than Female Tenderness, and weep
for you and for myself! ––––O Cleomira! all the Names
of Misery, of Woe, of Anguish insupportable, are poor to
what, indeed, my Soul endures for you! ––––My Passion,
and my Pains, are, like your Charms, unutterable! and
only can be felt! ––––This Age of Absence has been spent
in nothing but Contrivances to shorten it, till these good
People, whose Fidelity you may rely on, were so fortunate
to get into your Acquaintance. ––––O then, thou
dearest, brightest, loveliest of thy Sex! indulge the fond
Design, and let them not be less regarded by you, now
you know they are the Instruments by which you must
receive the Testimonies of a Passion too sublime to be 

inspir'd by any but your divine Self; and which can be
felt, in so high a Degree, by none but 
Your eternally Devoted
Lysander. 

I need not tell you the Raptures of my overjoy'd
Soul at reading this Letter: My Answer to it will
sufficiently inform you, that I had no Consideration
but of the Exstasy it produc'd. 

To the most Excellent Lysander.
You paint the Woes of Love in so extravagant a
Manner, that one had need be more than ordinarily
sensible of that Passion, to be able to give any Credit
to a Description so far beyond what is commonly
conceiv'd of it. I am afraid Lysander is too well acquainted
with his Perfections not to know the Effects
they must produce, and but feigns to feel what he alone
is capable of inspiring: Were I really possess'd of as many
Charms as your all-powerful Wit wou'd dress me up
in, you have a thousand Opportunities of diverting your
Thoughts: Business,––––Variety of Objects,––––and gay
Conversation, make your Hours slide away in vastly
different Entertainments;–––while I, of much the softer
Sex, and consequently susceptible of a deeper Impression,
have nothing to do but to indulge a Passion, which in
the Beginning seems delectable. ––––The Dawn, indeed,
promises ten thousand future Joys;––––what the Meridian
will be, is wholly in your Faith and Honour to be
prov'd. ––––But, I have so implicite a Dependance on
both, that I will make no Scruple to confess the Transport
of hearing from you again, is more than Recompence
for all those Inquietudes you have so perfectly represented
in yours, and which, I hope, will be no more
the Portion of 
Your Cleomira. 


When I had finish'd this, I went down to the
Company, and soon found an Opportunity, unperceiv'd,
to slip it into Mrs. Marvir's Hand. Scarce
a Day pass'd after this without my receiving a Letter,
either through hers or her Husband's Means. I
will not trouble you with the Repetition of them,
being of no great Consequence to my Story, and
would draw it into a Length too tedious for your
Patience. By those you have heard, you may guess
the Purport of the rest; so shall only tell you, that
every one of his grew more pressing for an Engagement
of my Affection, and mine still more complying. 
I pass'd my Time contentedly enough, tho'
not so happily as I wish'd: The continual Assurances
he gave me of his Passion, and the Hopes that thro'
these Peoples Means I should soon enjoy the Blessing
of his Presence, were Cordials sufficient to
keep a Love less ardent than mine alive. And,
indeed, I had no great Exercise for my Patience:
Lysander was too eager, and his Agents too industrious,
to permit me to grow cool in my Desires, or
imagine him to be so. 
One Evening, my Mother and I being invited
to sup at Marvir's House, while he engaged her in
a serious Discourse, his Wife took me into the Garden. 
The Transports of my beating Heart inform'd
me to what End I was brought there, before she
had Time to tell me that Lysander waited my Approach
in the Arbour. But, when I came near enough
to see him, no Confusion sure was ever equal to
mine:––––The Reflection that this was but the
third Time I had seen him,––––but the second in
which I had an Opportunity to speak to him;–––– 
the Condescentions of my Letters;––––and that
which I now gave of meeting him, came all at
once into my Head, and I was ready to sink with
Shame. But never did any Votary approach the Image
of the Saint he worshipp'd with more Humility and
aweful Reverence than Lysander me: He fell at my
Feet,––––embrac'd my Knees, and kiss'd my Hands 

with such a tender Transport,––––such an enchanting
Mixture of Delight and Fear, as one would think no
false Love could feign, and was impossible to behold
unmov'd: My Spirits were in too violent an Agitation
to suffer me to raise him from the Posture he
was in, till gaining Confidence to do it himself, and
interpreting my Disorders in his Favour, he took me
in his Arms, all blushing,––––trembling, and incapable
of Defence; and laying his Head upon my panting
Bosom, seem'd to breathe out all his Soul in fervent
Tenderness. He held me thus some Moments before
I knew what I was doing; and when, at last,
I struggled to get free, it was so faintly, that he
might easily perceive the Liberties he had taken were
not unpardonable. I look'd for Mrs. Marvir, designing
to upbraid her for the Boldness her Guest had
been guilty of; but she was gone, and the Reproaches
I made him were such as did not discourage
him from a Repetition of his Crime. In
short, all the Time of our being together (which I
believe was above an Hour) was past in nothing
but offending, and forgiving. I found by myself
that Love is a Passion that disdains Restraint, and
thought it unjust to be angry at almost any Thing
the Force of it might influence him to commit. 
To go about to tell you what he said,––––in what
Manner he look'd,––––and with what Graces every
Thing he did, and spoke, were accompanied, would
be to wrong him; for no Words, no Accents, no
Motions but his own, can give you a just Idea of
his Perfections. ––––Never was any so form'd to
charm, and to betray! ––––Never was such foul Deceit,
Hypocrisy, and Villany, couch'd in such seeming
Sweetness, Softness, and Sincerity. ––––Heaven! with
what a counterfeited Vehemence has he exclaim'd
against the Inconstancy of his Sex! ––––With what
an Appearance of Sanctity and Truth has he invoked
the Saints and Angels to be a Witness of his
Vows! when, lavish of them, he has a thousand
––––thousand Times protested, that Cleomira should 

ever be more dear to him than Life! Oh! record 'em,
all ye blessed Spirits, and in the last great Day, when
I alone can hope for Justice, bring 'em in dreadful
Testimony against him, and force his black, his leprous
Soul to own Conviction! 
Here the Remembrances of some Passages made
this unhappy Lady, wholly unable to prosecute her
Discourse; and all that Belinda could say to mitigate
the Rage of Temper she was rais'd to, prov'd of
no Effect, till a Shower of new returning Tears in
part allay'd the Tempest. When she was a little come
to herself, After this, (resum'd she,) I had many
Opportunities, by Mrs. Marvir's Contrivance, of indulging
my fond Wishes in Lysander's Presence; and
so zealous was he in making me believe the Passion
he pretended was sincere, that in those Days, when
there was no other Way to see me, he would come
disguis'd, and walk before the House till I had taken
notice of him: Then by some Motion discover who
he was, and tell me by his Eyes a thousand tender
Things; nor stir from the Place, till by my withdrawing
myself he knew it was improper he should
stay any longer. I cannot but say, fierce as my
Passion was before, this uncommon Assiduity of his
made a vast Addition to it; and I thought it the
greatest Hardship in the World that I could not have
the Freedom of conversing with him, without all
this Difficulty on both Sides. Mrs. Marvir, who
kept continual Watch over my Humour, took this
Advantage of my Discontent, and whenever we
were alone, endeavour'd to heighten it: She was always
representing the Injustice my Mother did me,
in debarring me from all those Liberties young Ladies
in this Kingdom are permitted to enjoy; and
made use of all her Cunning to convince me, that
those Restrictions were laid upon me, only to wean
me by Degrees from the Pleasures of the World,
that I might be the more willing to accept of a
Husband, who, she told me, my Mother had provided
for me: By what I can guess from her Discourse, 

(said she,) you are to be married to a Country
Gentleman; and that in so short a Time, as will
amaze you. She spoke this in such a Manner, as gave
me no Suspicion of the Truth; and recollecting how
much my Mother had labour'd to perswade me into
a good Opinion of a Country Life, was assur'd in
my Mind that she had really some Body in View,
to whom she design'd to sacrifice me; and 'tis impossible
to represent the Perplexity this Belief involv'd
me in. If any such Thing happen, Madam,
(said I,) how should I avoid it? I know not, (answer'd
this wicked Woman, having brought me to
the Point she aim'd at,) unless, by chusing a Guardian,
you entirely divest your Mother of the Power of
disposing of you. She said no more at this Time,
because my Mother happen'd to come into the
Room; but whenever they had an Opportunity, it
was with such like Speeches, both she and her Husband
entertain'd me; till at last, the Fears of what
they infus'd into my Imagination,––––the Hopes of
enjoying my belov'd Liberty, and my infinitely
more belov'd Lysander's Company uncontroul'd,
made me resolve to do as they advis'd. I could
think of no Person so proper for me to make choice
of for a Guardian, as Marvir himself. It was not
very difficult to perswade him to it, (it being the
only Thing he wanted,) tho' at first he seemed
averse. Every Thing being concluded on, one Morning,
before my Mother was out of Bed, I left her
House, and went to Marvir's, whence immediately
I took Coach with him for London; and by electing
him according to Law, put it out of her Power to
oblige me to return. Her Behaviour, on the first
Knowledge of what I had done, was all Distraction; 
she fell into Fits, rav'd, came to Marvir's House,
and without any Regard to that Decorum she was
us'd so strictly to observe, loudly exclaim'd against
their Treachery, and my Ingratitude and Disobedience. 
I had not Assurance to appear before her; 
and they (having gain'd their End) could endure 

the Brunt of her Upbraidings. In a few Days we
remov'd to London, and I was out of the Fear of
meeting her; but her Tenderness soon getting the
better of her Indignation, she sent a Letter to me,
full of Perswasions, in the most endearing Terms,
to return to her again. I had the Courage to write
to her, tho' I had not to see her, and return'd an Answer
of Excuses for the Measures I had taken; but
told her it was wholly owing to that unreasonable
Restraint she had laid me under;––––that I abandon'd
her, only in Pursuit of that innocent Liberty,
which all Persons of my Age were desirous of enjoying; 
and that I never would make use of it to
the Disadvantage of my Reputation, or the Dishonour
of my Family; and that in all material Affairs
of Life, tho' I had chose a Guardian, I would do nothing
without consulting her. This was far from
being any Satisfaction to her; she writ me several
Letters, sometimes entreating, sometimes commanding
and threatning; and engag'd all those Relations
who were near enough to interest themselves in my
Behaviour, to come, and talk to me: But the People
I was with took care I should be seen by none
of them; alledging, as a Proof of their Love to me,
that they would not have me teas'd with any Sollicitations
of that Nature. I was very well satisfy'd
with their Proceedings: I saw Lysander every Day; 
and while I listen'd to his Vows, should not have
been pleas'd with an Interruption of any kind: That
ardent, yet respectful Passion which appeared in all
his Words and Actions, was to me a Heaven, which
nothing else could give. I had not, for some time,
any Reason to suspect he had the least dishonourable
Thought; for tho' the little Power I had of disguising
my Sentiments, had made me guilty of many
imprudent Actions, and embolden'd him to the taking
greater Freedoms than otherwise he would
have dar'd to have attempted, yet he offer'd nothing
which justly could be call'd offensive to Virtue; till
one Night;––––Oh! ever be accurst that Night,–––– 

that Hour,––––that damn'd undoing Minute, when
all the good Angels slept, and left to Fiends the
Fate of Cleomira! I had undress'd, and thrown my
self on the Bed, restless and uneasy that Lysander
had not been to visit me that Day; for it was now
become an inconsolable Affliction to me to pass
four and twenty Hours without seeing him. I
was so buried in Thought, that I heard not the
Tread of any Body coming into my Chamber, till
I saw a Man stand close by me: It was about Ten
a-Clock, at that Time of the Year when there is
scarce any Darkness; and willing to indulge Contemplation,
I had not call'd for Candles, and could
not presently discern who was there; but not suspecting
it any other than Mr. Marvir, (who might
be come to call me to Supper,) without removing
from the Posture I was in, ask'd carelesly what he
wanted. He must be a very ill Judge of Happiness,
(answer'd he,) that could form a Wish beyond the
Treasure which this Bed contains. These Words,
and the Accent of his Voice, always dear and charming
to my Ears, soon told me it was Lysander, and
oblig'd me to endeavour to rise; but he had thrown
himself down by me while he was speaking, and
seizing both my Hands, and gently forcing them
to circle his Waste, join'd his Lips to mine with too
strenuous a Pressure to suffer me to reproach the
Liberties he took. ––––What could I do! surpris'd
in this unguarded Moment! ––––Full of Desires and
and tender Languishments before, his glowing
Touch now dissolv'd my very Soul, and melted
every Thought to soft Compliance! ––––In short, I
suffer'd,––––or, rather let me say, I cou'd not resist his
proceeding from one Freedom to another, till there
was nothing left for him to ask, or me to grant. 
The guilty Transport pass'd, a thousand Apprehensions
all at once invaded me! Remorse and Shame
supply'd the Place of Exstacy! ––––Tears fill'd my
Eyes,––––cold Tremblings seiz'd my Limbs,––––and
my Breast heav'd no more with Joy, but Horror!–––– 

too sure Presages of that future Woe, which this
black Hour brought forth! ––––It was not in the
lovely Undoer's Power, dear as he was, to make me
satisfied with what I had done; and the whole Time
he stay'd with me, which was best Part of the
Night, I utter'd nothing but Reproaches: The next
Day, and many following ones, I entertain'd him in
no other Manner; and it was some Weeks before all
his Wit, his Tenderness, and seeming Truth, cou'd
make me hope I had not done a Deed, I shou'd, all
my Life, have Occasion to repent. But what is it a
Woman may not in Time be perswaded to, by the
Man she loves? He behav'd himself in such a Manner,
so kind, so soft, so ravishingly tender, respectful and
engaging,––––made so many solemn Protestations of
eternal Faith, and imprecated such unheard-of Curses
on his Falshood, if ever he shou'd give me Cause to
tax him with it, that one wou'd think indeed the
most harden'd Villain cou'd not thus have dar'd to
dress his Perjuries in such a Form of Sanctity! –––– 
How cou'd I then, who lov'd him, disbelieve him? ––– 
No, it was not in Nature,––––it was not in Reason,
that, after what he had sworn, I cou'd be doubtful
of his Sincerity or Honour; and I must have consider'd
him as monstrously unworthy of my Love, before
I cou'd think there was a Possibility he shou'd
ever cease to love me. Thus was I, at last, rais'd
to the highest Pinacle of human Felicity! an Assurance
of the real and everlasting Tenderness of the
Man who took up all my Wishes! But when I
thought myself most happy,––––most secure, I was
on a sudden thrown from all my Height of Transport,
to the lowest State of Misery and Despair. Ever
since my being at Marvir's House, I had not pass'd
one Day without seeing Lysander; and the first Absence,
which was about a Week, fill'd me with most
terrible Suspicions: I did not fail to acquaint him with
'em by Letters; which he answer'd with the same
Fondness he had accustom'd me to, and made Excuses
for not visiting me in that Time, which seem'd 

plausible enough: When next I saw him, nothing
seem'd more endearing,––––nothing more ardent than
he seem'd to be, yet he pretended some Business, and
stay'd not with me so long as he was wont. After
he was gone, happening to cast my Eyes on the
Ground, I saw a Paper lying, which I, imagining
it might be dropp'd by him, hastily took up: Part
of it had been torn off, and what remain'd was so
blotted that I could scarce read it; I discover'd, however,
that it was a most passionate Declaration of
Love to some Woman; but who, I was altogether a
Stranger, for there was no Name. ––––You may believe
(my dear Belinda) this was enough to give a
Heart, so truly tender as mine, a most terrible Alarm! 
I laid it up carefully, designing to shew it him when
he shou'd come next Day, as he had promis'd he
wou'd; but, alas! I expected him many succeeding
ones in vain; till growing quite out of Patience, I
writ to him according to the Dictates of my Jealousy
and Discontent. This, indeed, engag'd a Visit from
him; and after he had again made some slight Pretences
for his Absence, began to rally me, with so
much Artifice, for the Imagination I had form'd of
his being in Love in another Place, that I was weak
enough, on his swearing it was so, to believe the
Letter I had found was only a foul Copy of one he
intended to send to me, in that Time when he had
not an Opportunity of seeing me; and was pretty
well satisfy'd as to his Constancy. But tho' I assur'd
him, my whole Dependance on the Truth of what
he said hung on the Proof of his visiting me as usual,
and he seem'd willing I shou'd judge his Truth by
that Testimony, yet I saw him not again in another
Week. Now the Mist, my good Opinion of him had
cast before my Eyes, began to wear off, and Reason,
unobscur'd by Passion, shew'd me how truly wretched
I had made myself:––––But what did it avail? My
Fame, my Virtue, and my Peace of Mind were lost,
no more to be retriev'd: Penetration was but the
Mirror which shew'd me my Deformity, but cou'd 

direct me to no Means which cou'd restore those
Beauties, which Guilt and Shame had utterly defac'd. 
From seeing me every Day, he had already
fallen to once a Week; soon, he came but once a
Fortnight; afterwards a Month; and that too was
to be accounted a Favour. ––––Soft as I am by Nature,
and made more so by Love, this Usage turn'd
me all to Indignation: I rav'd, upbraided, threaten'd,
said I know not what, and sometimes was resolv'd
to reveng'd my Injuries by his Death; but, alas! he
grew not less lovely, for his being less faithful; and
whatever I determin'd against him in his Absence, was
in his Presence all dissolv'd. 'Tis true, he never came
without renewing his former Protestations of eternal
Faith, and coin'd each Time some new-invented Oath
to assure me he was still the same. He seem'd to
mourn the Necessity of being so often absent, with a
Tenderness equal to that I truly felt; but as perfect a
Master as he was in the Art of Feigning, I was too
well acquainted with the Force of Love, not to know
that where it is sincere, no Obstacles wou'd be able
to impede the Gratification of it; and one Day, when
he had been telling me a tedious Tale of Business,
and Hurry of Affairs, and I know not what, which
had prevented his coming, I cou'd not restrain the
Violence of my just Resentment; Ungrateful Man!
(said I,) when watchful for my Ruin, no Business
had the Power to hold you; all Day, and every Day,
each flying Minute was Witness of your Vows:–––– 
But now,––––now, when I have given up all my
Soul!––––am lost to all the World but you! I may
alone, unpity'd, mourn my Fate, and curse the Fondness
that betray'd me to your Scorn! ––––He wou'd
not suffer me to go on long in this Strain; but taking
me in his Arms, and tenderly embracing me, Unjust
and Cruel Charmer, (interrupted he,) if I cou'd be
capable of the Coldness, the Perfidy you reproach me
with, I cou'd not sure have Courage to appear before
you:––––Nor cou'd you, if you really believ'd me guilty,
with that dear, that Angel-Look behold me:––––No, 

'tis the Height of Passion only makes you talk thus:
As such I take it; and tho' I grieve to see you rend
your gentle Breast with causless Agonies, yet I consider
it with a kind of Transport, since it assures me
I am indeed more valuable to you, than any Merit
but my Truth can give me Title to. O the Dissembler!
with what an Air of Tenderness did he utter
these, and a thousand the like Expressions? and with
what inexpressible Endearments were they accompany'd? 
––––Enrag'd and stormy, as I was before, my
Soul, now all becalm'd, again Believ'd!––––and was
again Deceiv'd! ––––In this Manner did I continue for a
considerable Time; sometimes hoping,–––sometimes
despairing,–––but never certain or confirm'd of any
Thing!–––all Horror in his Absence,–––all Exstasy in
in his Presence! –––The Business he pretended, which
was Attendance at Court, where he daily expected
Preferment, was feasible enough; but then I thought
it impossible that no Hour, no Moment in a Week,
or in so many Weeks, cou'd not be spar'd. ––––In
fine, my Brain was in a perpetual Whirl;––––Reflection,
tost in wild Uncertainty, became disjointed
quite; and tho'I was always Musing, yet I was often
without the Power of Thinking;––––all my Days
were spent in doubtful Expectation, and my Nights
in Tears, and Heart-rending Agonies, too terrible for
Description;––––and if sometimes Nature o'er-weary'd
sunk into a Slumber, it cou'd not be call'd Rest; for
even then, my ever-wakeful Fancy hurry'd my Spirits
with confus'd Idea's in tormenting Dreams:–––– 
Lysander's Image was never from my Sight, and always
he appear'd unkind, and far unlike the Dear,–––– 
the Soul-enslaving Lover he had been, and still wou'd
feign. To add to my Affliction, I was with Child,
and every Motion of the unborn Innocent encreas'd
at once my Tenderness and Grief. ––––'Tis not in
Thought to form any just Notion of what I felt:––– 
All Passions, but Hatred, took their Turn to persecute
me; and sure, had not Heaven reserv'd me for an
Example of its Power in length'ning Woe to a Degree 

beyond what cou'd be imagin'd, I cou'd not
have surviv'd the Torments of an Hour. On his
first declining to visit me, I writ often to him; but
of late had desisted from giving him that Trouble,
because he had told me, his Father, whose Hands
they might possibly fall into, wou'd have Curiosity
enough to open them. Whether this was Reality,
or whether he said so only to spare himself the Pain
of counterfeiting a Tenderness any oftner than he
was oblig'd to, in my Presence, I know not; but I
had that implicite Obedience to his Will in every
Thing, that I very seldom put it to the Venture. 
But, one Day, after silently enduring an Absence of
five Weeks, I was no longer able to restrain the impatient
Struggles of my Soul, and sent him these
Lines: 

To my Too-dear Lysander.
Pardon me, if, convuls'd and torn with Pangs
too dreadful for Expression, the Anguish of my Soul,
in spite of me, breaks forth into Complainings. –––– 
Am I for ever to live this Life of curs'd Uncertainty? –––– 
Is there a Necessity your Actions must always contradict
your Words? ––––Oh! be once sincere, and tell me
which I must believe! ––––There was a Time when with
a thousand Vows you swore, that Absence was the severest
Tryal a Lover cou'd go through,––––yet now you
bear it,–––bear it with Ease,––––with Unconcern!––– 
and can I then still hope you Love? –––O Heav'n! it is
not, cannot be! –––By your own Arguments you stand
convicted, and I endeavour to deceive myself in vain. ––– 
Heart-rending Thought! I long have held you True,––– 
believ'd your Oaths with such a Faith, as what we pay
to the Divine Mysteries of Salvation; and 'tis difficult,––– 
'tis wondrous to think you can be false! –––What then
must be the Proof? Madness! –––Confusion! –––Everlasting
Woe! –––Horror without a Name! –––Save,––– 
save me from it! Dissemble yet a little longer; my 

Fears will quickly send me to my Grave; let not Despair
weigh down my sinking Soul, as well as Body. –––If I no
longer have the Power to please you, let the Remembrance
of those happy Moments in which I had, engage, at least,
your Gratitude,–––if not your Love: Bless me with your
Friendship:––Pity me, if, no more; for, my Lysander, sure
I merit that. ––––The Thoughts of you anticipate my earliest
Prayers, and still continue for my Evening Theme! ––– 
How often, when all have slept, and nothing but the
Stars and silent Moon were conscious of my Watchings,
have I pour'd out the Anguish of my bleeding Heart,
and to those dumb and unavailing Witnesses vented the
wild Extravagance of my Passion, rather than wound
your Ears with the unwelcome Tale! 'Tis harder to accuse
you, than to die;––––yet, while I have Breath,
'twill all be spent in Wailings, if you are still cruel
enough to suffer me to linger in a Condition which justly
gives me the Title of 
The most Injur'd,
and most Miserable
Cleomira. 

At the Return of my Messeger, I receiv'd an Answer,
which you will scarce believe cou'd be writ by
the same Hand, or dictated by the same Heart, from
which those you have already heard proceeded. 

To the Lovely Cleomira.
Your Sexes Souls are of such narrow Space, that
the least Passion swells them even to bursting: I
wou'd have the Woman I admire endeavour to enlarge
her Genius, and find room for other Views than Love. –––– 
Not but I think myself infinitely oblig'd to yours, and 

shall never cease the Professions of mine. ––––I will see
you in a few Days, and, if possible, convince you that
I am 
Your most Faithful
Lysander. 

One wou'd think I needed no other Proof than
the Style and the Shortness of this Billet, to inform
me, that I was, indeed, as wretched as I cou'd be; 
but spite of Reason, I must join in his Barbarity,
and be my own Tormenter. –––My Soul, too curious,
wou'd search deeper still, though sure to find what
wou'd but more distract me. The Fellow, whom
I employ'd to carry my Letter, told me, that not
finding Lysander at home, he was directed to the
Place where he was, and deliver'd it to him in the
Presence of a young Lady, whom he was leading to
a Chariot; and that as soon as he had writ the Answer
they went out together. This was enough to
give my already justly-suspecting Heart a jealous Curiosity; 
and I immediately dispatch'd him again to
find out, if possible, who the Lady was. He was so
successful in his Enquiry, that he brought me word
that her Name was Melissa, and that Lysander was
frequently with her;–––that they had been seen together
at the Play, at the Ring, in the Mall, and several
other publick Places. If I was before alarm'd,
what now became of me, at this Information? I
had formerly had an Acquaintance with this Woman,
and knew her Temper to be the most intreaguing
upon Earth; and though from a very mean Fortune,
and worse Character, a Gentleman of a good Estate
had rais'd her to an envy'd State of Grandeur, she
had neither Gratitude nor Conduct sufficient to prevent
her from coquetting with every Man that thought
her worth taking Notice of; nay, she was so notoriously
Imprudent, I may say Shameless, that she
sought all Opportunities of dishonouring her Husband,
and cou'd not hear of a Man fam'd for any Perfection, 

without desiring to engage him: She wou'd
write to the most absolute Strangers; and her being
often repuls'd by those whose Discretion made them
despise her, did not discourage her from attempting
others. This is (Belinda) the true Character of this
vile Woman; and the Reflection, that a Creature so
every way undeserving shou'd rob me of his Heart,
rouz'd that little Pride which all Women have some
Share of, to a Disdain which, not able to overcome
my more superior Softness, gave me Disorders which
cannot be express'd. Since I am to be abandon'd,
(said I to my self,) I ought to be pleas'd that he has
abandon'd me for a Creature whom none will envy
him the Possession of:––––One, who is not of a
Humour to regard any one farther than the Reputation
of being admir'd by him:––––One, to whom
all Men are alike; and, as charming as he is, will
not fail to sacrifice him to the next that makes his
Addresses to her. And yet, who knows (cry'd I
again) but this unfaithful,––––this inconstant Creature,
may engage him longer than I, with all my Truth
and Tenderness, cou'd do:––––She has Arts to which
my Innocence is a Stranger, and will, no doubt, make
use of them all to secure a Conquest so much to the
Advantage of her Glory. In this Manner did I torment
myself; and though I thought nothing cou'd
add to what I felt before, yet now I found, that to
be neglected for another was a Sting more terrible
than the Neglect itself. Once I believ'd that the
Death of Lysander wou'd be the extreamest of all
Woes; but now I wish'd him dead, rather than in
the Possession of a Rival. 
When next I saw my Traytor, I utter'd all that
my Rage and Jealousy suggested; but, with his usual
Artifice, he appear'd unmov'd: And when I upbraided
him with the Leisure he had to wait on others, when
he had none for me, he swore, That being an intimate
Acquaintance of her Husband's, and meeting
them by accident at a Place where he had Business,
was desir'd by him to conduct her where she was 

going; which Piece of Gallantry, he said, he cou'd
not handsomely refuse. To give the more Credit to
this, he seem'd to dislike her Person,––––redicul'd her
Humour,––––and laugh'd so heartily at my being capable
of any Uneasiness on her Account, that I was
half perswaded to believe him. I had not, however,
so entire a Dependance on his Truth, but that I employ'd
(unknown to Marvir's People, who I found
were his Creatures) the same Man, who had brought
me the first Intelligence, to watch him wherever he
went, resolving to be satisfy'd one way or other. 
Alas! I fancy'd that if I cou'd be once throughly assur'd
of his Perfidiousness, I shou'd be able to tear
him from my Soul, at least extirpate all the Tenderness
I had for him: But, how little did I know myself? 
When by the Diligence of my Spy, I found out
that he visited her often,––––was with her even at
those very Times when he pretended the utmost Regret
that he cou'd not be with me;––––nay, discover'd
that they had private Meetings; and, by all
Circumstances, was convinc'd, not only that she was
a Rival infinitely more belov'd than I, but also that
she was in Possession of all those Joys, which to
obtain, I had forfeited my Innocence, my Honour,
and my Peace of Mind for ever:––––In spite, I say,
of all these Proofs,––––these stabbing Proofs of his
Ingratitude, I cou'd not,––––did not love him less. I
reproach'd him, indeed, and endeavour'd to make
him think my Resentment had extinguish'd my Tenderness; 
but he still deny'd each particular of my Accusation,
and, at last, seem'd angry that I distrusted
his Sincerity; till I, mean-spirited Wretch, was
forc'd to appear satisfy'd with what he said, least by
persisting to alledge what, I found, he was determin'd
never to confess, I shou'd provoke him never
to see me more. And when I consulted my fond
doating Heart, found I cou'd better bear to share him
with another, than have no Interest in him at all:
But what I suffer'd in such a Submission may, perhaps,
be guess'd, but never describ'd. It was now 

my Woes fell thick upon me; my Pregnancy began
now to discover itself to all who saw me; and Marvir
and his Wife, who had all this Time counterfeited
an Ignorance of what had pass'd between me
and Lysander, seem'd prodigiously uneasy at it; pretended
a Concern for the Reputation of their House; 
us'd me in a Manner which I little expected from
them, of all the World; and told me plainly, that I
must not continue with them any longer; but if I
wou'd go into the Country till I was deliver'd of
my Burden, they wou'd enquire for a Place where
I might be in private. I complain'd to Lysander of
their Unkindness; but receiv'd very little Consolation
from him: He only told me he was sorry they
shou'd behave otherwise to me than I had Reason
to expect, but that he believ'd they meant well; and
that he cou'd not help joining with them in the
Opinion, it was best for me to go into the Country. 
My Concern for leaving a Place which contain'd all
I valu'd in the World, and the cool Tranquillity with
which he advis'd me to banish myself from him,
were new Stabs to my already-bleeding Heart: But
I had now been a good while accustom'd to receive
Wounds of that Nature, and my Spirits were too
much depress'd with a continual Weight of Sorrow,
to be able to exert them selves to resent almost any Usage. 
Besides, what could I do? helpless as I was! I had
no Friend to whom I durst make Application; and
must be oblig'd, in the Condition I was, to do whatever
those, in whose Power I had put myself, would
have me. They were so eager for my Departure,
that a Place was soon found for me to go to; and
in a few Days I took leave of that Town, and that
Person, for whose sake I had renounced every Thing
that ought to have been dear to me. Lysander had
indeed the Complaisance to accompany me a few
Miles on Horseback; and perceiving me ready to die
with Grief, made a thousand Promises of coming
down to visit me in a short Time, tho' I had no
Reason from his late Behaviour, to hope he would 

do as he said; yet this seeming Kindness a little reviv'd
me, and I went thro' my Journey with more
Fortitude than I imagin'd I could. As soon as I arriv'd
at the Place destin'd for my Abode, I writ to
him, reminding him of the Promise he had made, and
conjuring by every tender Plea I could invent, to make
it good; but I receiv'd no Answer. Always willing to
excuse him as far as I was able, I fancied my Letter had
by some Accident miscarried, and sent another; but to
as little Purpose as before. –––Then I grew wild with
Grief, and was ready, in some ungovernable Sallies
of Passion, to lay violent Hands on my own Life. ––– 
I resolv'd at last, if possible to extort an Answer from
him; and prevail'd on a Countryman, for a considerable
Gratification, to ride to Town on purpose to deliver
a Letter into his own Hands, and charg'd him not
to return without some Token he had seen him. 
The Contents of what I writ were these: 

To my Inhuman and Unrelenting Charmer.
Is it then possible that Lysander, the protesting Lysander,
can from all Angel change to a very Fiend? 
For only they delight in the Perdition they occasion. ––– 
Have you with your Love thrown off all Pity too and
Complaisance, that you vouchsafe not to condole, at
least, the Ruins you have made? –––O most ungrateful,
cruel, barbarous, of all that ever was call'd Man! 
––––What have I done that can deserve such Usage? ––– 
Is it because I have forsook the Ties of Duty, Interest,
Honour,––––given up my Innocence,––––my Peace, and
everlasting Hopes, that you despise me? ––––Monster,
for whom have I done this? ––––Can you reflect it was
for you, and your whole Soul not melt in Tenderness and
soft Compassion? ––––Yes, yes, you can! ––––Wretch that
I am! ––––I have cast away all that could make me
truly valuable, and now am justly subjected to your
Scorn:––––But tho' I live unworthily of your Love, my 

Death must farely give you some Concern,––––at least, the
Manner of it, when you shall know it was for you I
died:––––That my last Breath form'd nothing but your
Name;–––and in the extreamest Agonies of my departing
Soul, lamented more your Cruelty than all that dreadful
Separation could inflict. –––O do not, therefore, trifle
with a Passion, which, if the Strength of Reason in your
Sex keeps you from being too deeply touch'd with, is
too impetuous for the Weakness of mine to resist; and
who can tell how far the Torrent may transport me? ––– 
History is not without Millions of Examples of Women,
who have dar'd to die, when Life became a Burden; and
sure, if any e'er could justify Self-Murder, the wretched
Cleomira may:––––None ever lov'd,––––none ever
despair'd like me, or had so just a Cause for both. ––– 
The Means of Death are always easy to be obtain'd; 
and I am this Moment hurried to that Rage of Temper,
that I know not how long I shall be able to refrain
the Use of it. ––––O then be quick, and save
my Soul the Guilt of Murder, and your own the
Pangs of never-ending Remorse, which, when too late
to remedy, you'll feel! ––––Yes, forgotten and abandon'd
as I am, when I am dead, my Ghost will be before
you ever, haunt all your Dreams,––––poison your Pleasures,
and distract Reflection: Then, though I want a
Voice, my Wrongs will speak, and rouze your sleeping
Conscience to Remembrance of your Vows,––––your
broken damning Vows! ––––Heaven! that Heaven,
whose Blessings you have renounc'd, whose Curses you
have imprecated, if ever you prov'd false, will then
exert the Power of swiftest Vengeance, and Penitence
be vain to wash away your Guilt, or call me back to
Life! –––For me, I have nought to fear; I feel already
all the Pains of Hell; nor can another World torment me
worse than this has done;–––Horror and Madness
overtake me! –––I know not what I say, and to my
other Crimes am ready to add Blasphemy;–––cou'd
curse Heaven, and Earth, and Man;–––wish to behold
the World in Flames;–––the Universe dissolv'd;–––for
all, all are Foes to wretched Cleomira! –––O ease 

me,–––pity me,–––write to me,–––see me; if not for
mine, yet for the sake of the Dear yet unborn;–––the
tender Pledge of our once mutual Love! –––Think
how the frighted Innocent starts at its Mother's Anguish,
and is a sad Partaker of all the Sufferings you
inflict on me. –––I will, if possible, support the galling
Load of Life till the Return of my Messenger; but in
your Answer is the Fate of 
The Undone
Cleomira. 

All the Horror and Distraction which I endeavour'd
to represent in this Letter was infinitely short
of what I truly felt. I had so little Hope of Comfort
from him it was sent to, that all the Time of
the Fellow's being gone I had one continu'd Agony,
with the Apprehension that at his Return I should
be more ascertain'd of Lysander's Cruelty; and had
his Stay been long, I believe it would have been impossible
for me to have supported it with Life; but
the poor Man's Speed out-run my Expectations, eager
as they were; and though it was fifty Miles to
London, he dispatch'd his Business, and came back
in two Days. As soon as he saw me, he gave me a
Testimony of his Success in the Business I employ'd
him in; and trembling between Hope and Fear, I
found in it these Words; 

To the Unkind Cleomira.
The Discovery you make of your causless Uneasiness,
gives me an infinite Concern: I had writ to
you before, but that I waited to hear first from you,
which, by all that is sacred, I never have done till now; 
and if you have sent, as your Messenger informs me
you have, your Letters have miscarried. Be assur'd
that I am still the same I ever was, and if any Part 

of that Rapidity which in the Days of Courtship I profess'd,
be now abated, it is sufficiently made up by an
Encrease of Tenderness. –––I beg, for the sake of the
dear Infant you mention, and for mine, who suffer with
you in the Knowledge of your Griefs, that you will entirely
banish them as Enemies as well to Reason, as to
Happiness. I hope the Hurry of my Affairs will
shortly have an End, and I shall enjoy the boundless
Pleasure of seeing you again; till when I hope you will
be satisfy'd with this Assurance, join'd to the innumerable
others I have given you, that I am, 
Yours for ever,
Lysander. 

You will certainly believe I was not in my Senses,
when I shall tell you, that these few, and indeed
but ill-dissembled Lines of Kindness, drove from
my Bosom all the Anxiety that had possess'd it. I
thought of nothing now but Joy and Rapture; and,
in spite of all the Reasons Lysander had given me,
accus'd myself of Injustice for writing to him in
the Manner I did; and to make Reparation for the
Reproaches of my last, dictated another according
to the Transport I now was in. –––I ought to blush
at the Memory of so shameful a Weakness; but as I
have promis'd you a faithful Relation of my Story,
will omit nothing that may give you a just Notion
of my Folly, or his Perfidiousness and Ingratitude. 
The Lines I writ were these; 

To my Ador'd Lysander.
To make you able to conceive the Extacy with which
I read your dear obliging Letter, I must be able
to inspire you with that Sublimity of Passion which
Charms, like your own, have only the Power of doing. 
But think, Lysander, think what a Soul must feel, 

rais'd from the lowest Hell of Misery to the highest
Heaven of Felicity:–––Oh! if I may credit those endearing
Lines, I have all that Fate can give! –––If,
did I say? I must,–––I will:–––Lysander is all Honour; 
and he a thousand Times has sworn himself my
everlasting Votary:–––How have I wrong'd you then,––– 
Divinest of your Sex! –––But you must pardon me;––– 
I love,–––am absent,–––am unworthy;–––and in such
a Circumstance, Patience were a Virtue out of Season. ––– 
O therefore, let it not be too long before you bless me
with your Presence, lest I again relapse;–––again be
wretched:–––Haste to my Arms, while Hopes are
quick within me, while vigorous Transport sparkles in
my Eyes, and my Soul glows with pleasing Expectation. 
––Let not the Fervour of my Joy abate, till in
your Arms I have nothing left to wish, and I indeed
can say thou art all mine, as I am thine: My for-ever-dear
Lysander. 
Thine in the most passionate
and tender Manner,
Cleomira. 

After this, I liv'd for some Time in more Tranquility
than I had known for many Months; and tho'
it was past my Doubt that he had intrigued with
Melissa, yet believing it but a transient Amour, of
which he was now grown weary, found it no Difficulty
to pardon him; and this renewing of his Tenderness
to me, made me assure myself it wou'd be
in the Power of no Woman, hereafter, to engage
him so far as to render him forgetful of what he
owed to me: But, alas! this Peace of Mind was
not of any long Continuance: Eight or nine Days
being elaps'd, without my receiving any Letter from
him, I still thought he was on coming, and the
Hopes of seeing him, made full Amends for the not
hearing from him; but after that, my Fears again 

return'd, and I grew restless as before. I constantly
walked out every Evening into a Field that overlooked
the Road, my Expectations of meeting him
not having quite forsook me. One of the Times
that I was thus employ'd, I encounter'd a Person
whose Sight gave me as much Surprise, as the News
she brought me did Affliction. It was my Nurse,
an honest faithful Creature, who hearing I had left
London, enquir'd at Marvir's House where I was
gone; but receiving no Satisfaction from them,
by diligently asking among the Neighbours, heard
by one, who, by some Accident had learn'd it, that
it was at **** and so, by describing me to the
Stage-Coachman, discover'd what Part of the County
I was carried to, and had travell'd down on purpose
to acquaint me that my Mother lay at the Point
of Death;–––that it was believed her Grief for my
Behaviour had been the Cause of her Illness;–––that
all she seemed to lament, was the Misfortunes she
feared wou'd fall upon me,–––and wish'd for nothing
but to see me before she died. This sad Account
given me by the poor Woman, in the most moving
Circumstances, struck me to the very Soul:–––I
now began to consider whom it was I had abandon'd,
and for whom; and the more I reflected on Lysander's
Ingratitude, the more ingrateful did I appear myself:––– 
To be the Occasion of a Parent's Death,–––a Parent
who had always most tenderly lov'd me, and from
whom I never had been absent (till the Time of my
utterly forsaking her) two Days together in my
Life, fill'd me with so just a Horror, that I know
not if it wou'd have been even in Lysander's Power
to have consol'd me! How gladly wou'd I now
have return'd to her, and implor'd her Pardon for
my Errors,–––endeavour'd to give her Comfort, and
never leave her more: But, alas! the Condition I
was in deterr'd me from the Execution of these pious
Wishes: I could entertain no Thoughts of appearing
before her till I was deliver'd of that Witness
of my Shame: Nor cou'd the poor Woman perswade 

me to it; she rightly judg'd, that to see me
as I then was, would rather be an Encrease of her
Affliction, than any Mitigation of it; and told me she
would return without saying she had seen me, since
there was no Excuse to be made for my not coming
to London, but that which had better remain untold. 
The Concern which I perceiv'd in the Countenance of
this faithful Creature, and the mannerly Freedom
which she took in expressing her Grief for the Misfortunes
I had brought on myself and Family, oblig'd
me to give her the whole History of my Affairs
since the fatal Choice I made of Marvir for my
Guardian; and withal, conjur'd her to make all possible
Enquiry into Lysander's Character and Behaviour,
and to give me a faithful Account of what she
could discover. But it seems she had never learn'd
to write, and I was unwilling the Secret should be
trusted to any other Hand, therefore desir'd she would
treasure it up in her Memory till I came to Town; 
which I resolv'd to do as soon as I was brought to
Bed. I did not think it proper to carry her to the
House where I was, but giving her something to refresh
herself in her Journey back, took my Leave
of her, who parted from me with Tears in her Eyes,
and all the Marks of an undissembled Grief. The
more I ruminated on the sad Relation she had made
me, the deeper Impression it made in my Soul; and
that, join'd to Lysander's Unkindness, who, in spite
of his Promise, neither came, nor sent to me, threw
me into a Condition which is not to be conceiv'd. 
The Horrors of my Mind had such an Influence over
my Body, that it was impossible I shou'd be able to
bring a living Child into the World: My Youth,
however, and the natural Goodness of my Constitution,
brought me through that dangerous State, in
which those who find most Ease, have little Reason
to be assur'd of Life. –––I was safely deliver'd of a
Boy; but, alas! the Grief-kill'd Infant never saw the
Light, and I knew nothing what it was to be a Mother,
but the Pains. It was certainly only my Impatience 

to be gone from a Place where I cou'd hear
nothing of Lysander, which made me willing to use
any Means proper for the Recovery of my Strength; 
but the Hopes of seeing him, and knowing from
his own Mouth my Doom, envigorated my drooping
Spirits, and enabled me to endure Life, rather
than die in the terrible Uncertainty I then was in. I
found I was in a little more than a Month's Time in a
Condition to travel, and was too eager to delay a Moment. 
I wou'd not go to Marvir's House; because I
was assur'd I should hear nothing there, but what they
were order'd by Lysander to tell me; and the late
Unkindness they had shew'd me, made me resolve
never to live with 'em again, but as soon as I got
to London, went directly to my Nurse's; where I
had the mournful Account of my dear Mother's
Death told in so tender and moving a Manner, that
I too was ready to expire at hearing it. When the
first Hurry of my Grief, for so great and irretrieveable
a Loss was over, I began to question her about
Lysander. She told me she had neglected nothing
that might be conducive to my Peace; but that all
she had been able to learn concerning him, was,
that he had lately an Intrigue with Melissa; that by
their ill Conduct it had been discover'd to her Husband,
who, as a just Reward for her Infidelity, had entirely
cast her off; that she was now reduc'd to the
same wretched Circumstances this injur'd Gentleman
took her from; that Lysander had little Regard to
the Miseries he had contributed to bring her to; and
she was become one of the most expos'd and unpitied
Women in the World. I confess I was ungenerous
enough to find some little Consolation in the Knowledge
of my Rival's Misfortunes; not but, as much
Reason as I had to hate her for being the first Occasion
of estranging the Affection of Lysander from
me, I should have highly discommended him for
his Neglect of her in her Affliction, had it fallen on
her only through her Love to him; but as I knew
her Inclination to be so amorous, (to give it no 

worse a Name,) that it had influenc'd her to commit
numerous Faults of the like Nature, and even
without the least Temptation, I look'd on her as an unworthy
Commiseration. –––But, to leave her to all
the Miseries which attend a common Prostitution,
I resolv'd to know how I now stood in Lysander's
Opinion. I writ to him, acquainting him that I
was come to Town, desiring to see him. When
I had done that, I began to consider my Affairs as
to my Money: I thought it unsafe to be lodg'd
any longer in Marvir's Hands, and employ'd one to
bring him to an Account; but that Villain had
made such Bills, and manag'd every Thing so much
to his own Advantage, that of my three thousand
Pounds, I found I had not much more than fifteen
hundred remaining. The Person who I had engag'd
in this Business knew very well what my Father left
me, and perswaded me to have Recourse to Law; 
but the other knew himself secure enough as to that
Point, and when it was hinted to him, he writ me a
Letter to tell me, That if I insisted to bring him to any
publick Account for the Money he had laid out, he cou'd
easily prove it had been expended only for my Use; and
bid me consider, that in the Condition I had been
there was Occasion for more than a trifling Sum,
to bribe those to Secrecy who were oblig'd to be
entrusted with the Knowledge of it. This was
enough to let me see, if I attempted any Thing
against him, he would expose me in the most shameful
Manner he could. I was glad therefore to accept
what little I cou'd get, without daring to molest
him for the rest. But I will not (my dear Belinda)
detain your Attention with any Particulars of this,
which (in Comparison with my others) I look'd on
as a trifling Vexation. Above a Week was past since
I sent to Lysander, and he had not yet answer'd my
Letter. I was very well assur'd he had received it; 
and tho' I had little Hopes of the Continuance of his
Affection, I expected from his Complaisance some sort
of an Excuse for the Inhumanity he had been guilty 

of: My Amazement at this unlook'd-for Slight was
almost equal to my Grief: I now indeed felt more
Resentment than I had ever been capable of before:
Neither to come to me, nor write, after so long an
Absence, and all I had suffer'd on his Account, cou'd
make me consider him no otherwise than as the vilest,
and most justly to be abhor'd of all his Sex: And since
I had no other way to revenge, resolv'd to use my
Pen to him in such a Manner as shou'd let him
know I was no less insensible of his Indignities, than
I had been of his Love. But before I did so, an
Accident happen'd, to give me a fresh Theme
for my Reproaches. Going thro' the Strand one
Day in a Chair, it was suddenly stopp'd by a Footman,
who told me his Lady desir'd to speak with
me, and entreated I wou'd come into her Chariot. 
Neither the Livery, nor the Wearer of it were
Strangers to me, and I knew he belong'd to a Lady,
who, when I frequented the Court, was one of my
greatest Intimates; and I immediately discharg'd my
Chair, and did as he desir'd. Nothing could receive
me with greater Demonstrations of Kindness than
Semanthe, (for so I shall call her;) and after she had
gently upbraided me with Breach of Friendship, for
not letting her know where I had been all the Time
of my absconding, began to ask me a thousand
Questions about my Affairs. But mine was a Story
very improper to be related to her, who, tho' I
knew she had a great deal of good Nature, was
not of a Temper to have approv'd my Proceedings,
and therefore I turn'd the Discourse as soon as I
could into an Enquiry after her Affairs; which she
very ingenuously inform'd me of, little suspecting
the Effect of what she told me. I am (said she)
very near changing my Condition; but the Person
who has prevail'd on me to do it, is so truly
deserving, that without a Blush I may confess, that
the sooner I yield to his Desires, the sooner I make
myself the happiest of my Sex. Ah, Madam!
(cried I, interrupting her,) take care how you depend 

on the Sincerity of Mankind; it requires more
Experience than you or I are Mistresses of, to form
any just Judgment of their Deserts. It is no Wonder
that you talk so, (reply'd she,) since I have not told you
the Name of my Charmer; but when I have, I doubt
not but you will acknowledge, as all the World who
know him do, that every Perfection that Heaven
can adorn a Mortal with, are center'd in my Admir'd
–––O God! who was it but my Lysander
that she nam'd. –––Lightning could not have blasted
me more than this one Word; and I believe the most
artful of all my Sex cou'd not in such a Circumstance
have dissembled her Confusion; but the Shock
was too mighty for my Weakness to sustain, and
wholly depriv'd of Speech, I fell against the Side of
the Chariot senseless, and in all Appearance dead, and
came not to myself till I was brought to Semanthe's
Lodgings. The first Thing I saw when I open'd
my Eyes was her, busily employ'd in helping the
Maids to use Means for my Recovery: The Sight of
her, and the Remembrance of what she had told me,
threw me again into Convulsions, which lasted for
some Time; and when, at last, I had gathered
Power to speak, it was in such a Fashion, so
wild, and so confus'd, that the Standers-by believ'd
I was taken with a sudden Fit of Frenzy. I
desir'd a Chair might be call'd to carry me home; 
and making some sort of an Apology, I know not
what, for the Trouble I had given, took leave of
my happy Rival. My poor Nurse (for I had been
at her House ever since I came to Town) was terribly
alarm'd at the Condition she beheld me in; and,
when I repeated the Occasion of it, join'd with
me in the most bitter Curses we could both invent
on the Perfidiousness of Mankind. I remain'd for
some Time in mortal Agonies, unable to determine
on any Thing; sometimes I was for returning to
Semanthe, to acquaint her with Lysander's Engagements
to me, and implore her to forbear any farther
Invasion on a Right I had so dearly purchas'd;––– 

sometimes I was for going to Lysander's House, and
by publickly reproaching him with his Vows, deter
him from the Breach of them:–––But Modesty rejected
both these Resolutions as soon as form'd; and,
by my Nurse's Perswasion, (who fear'd that proceeding
to any Violence, would be altogether unavailing,
and only serve to expose me more,) I contented
myself with uttering the Fury I was possess'd
of in a Letter; which, tho' incoherent and distracted
as my Mind, I believe you will not think it too severe
for the Occasion. 

To the Inconstant, Ungenerous, and Perfidious Lysander.
I have so long been accustomed to Indignities from
you, that had I not in Possession your Letters, those
Witnesses of your well-dissembled Tenderness, I shou'd
believe I had been enchanted with some delightful
Dream, and that there never was any such Thing, in
Reality, as that Lysander cou'd take the Pains to
make me believe he lov'd me, since for no other Cause
than returning the Passion he pretended, he now can
use me with a Brutality as unexampled as my own
Meanness of Spirit, which has hitherto suffer'd me to
sit down tamely with my Wrongs, and not endeavour,
at least, a suitable Revenge. –––Poisons and Daggers
are the Upbraidings you should receive from me:––– 
Yet I, fond Wretch, have still subjected my very Will
to yours, wrung my own Hands, while you have wrong
my Heart;–––and when a thousand Times, with more
than Devil-like Cruelty you've conjur'd up all that
was raging in me, with my own Tears I have appeas'd
that Tempest, which only Blood,–––your dearest Blood
should have had Power to quell. –––Not one Particular
of your Baseness is unknown to me;–––Cold,–––Cold Betrayer; 
–––Dark designing Villain, your Neglect, your
Absence, your Silence all sprung but from one Cause,
that cursed Mutability of Temper, which damns half 

your Sex, as fond Belief and Tenderness does ours. –––I
was not ignorant of your Intrigue with Melissa, even from
the Beginning, to the guilty Rapture which concluded
it:–––Yet I was patient, and but to Heaven accus'd
you of Perfidiousness:––Fool that I was, I hop'd my
Truth, my Constancy, and Softness, in Time, might
make a Convert of you;–––But now, now that I
find you are for ever lost! that Marriage is about
to give another that Title, which alone is due to me
by your own Vows, and by all those Sufferings I have
bought it with!–––now I grow, indeed, like you, a very
Fiend, and methinks cou'd smile at Mischief! –––Yes, if
you can,–––if you dare attempt to make Semanthe
yours, may the Priest, about to join you, be struck
speechless;–––may Earthquakes shake the Ground,––– 
the Temple's Roof unclose;–––Thunder, and darting
Lightnings proclaim Heaven's just Abhorrence of your
Mockery of the sacred Ceremony, and mark the Bridegroom
for a vile Prophaner! –––But, Oh! shou'd all
the Curses which my Injuries deserve, and jealous Fury
can invent, fall on you,–––shou'd Judgments terrify,
or even Pity for me disswade you from her Arms, what
wou'd it avail? –––Cou'd it afford one Grain of Comfort
to my tormented Soul? –––No,–––Since you're mine
no more, no matter whose:–––Your Heart is lost, for
ever lost to me; and when compar'd with that, your
Body is a Trifle. –––Go on then,–––pursue the Dictates
of your changing Nature; be proud of Perjury, and
wanton in Deceit: A Time will come, when Remorse
will be sufficiently my Avenger–––For me, I shall not
long endure the Pain of Thought; Madness or Death
will ease me of Reflection; but while I have Life or
Sense to know how very wretched you have made me,
be kind enough, at least, to feign Compassion for the
Woes you give, and lay the Blame of your Inconstancy
on Fate,–––the unavoidable Impulse of your Nature,––– 
or any Thing which may make me think you pity me; 
for since, in spite of all you have done, I still must
love you, I wou'd fain imagine you possess'd of some
one good Quality, to justify my Passion. –––O God! 

I can no more! ––––Farewel, dear, cruel Destroyer of
the Soul, and Ruin of the Everlasting Peace of 
The most Wretched
Cleomira. 

In about four or five Days after I sent, I receiv'd
an Answer; which I think proper to repeat, that you
may see there is nothing of Rude or Base impossible
for a Man to do, when once a Woman, by forfeiting
her Honour, has put it in his Power to use
her as he pleases. 

To Cleomira.
I Receiv'd your Letter with some Surprise, but with
none of that Tenderness you seem to aim at inspiring,
or what really has possess'd my Soul at reading
some of your former ones; nor can you blame my
Change of Humour, since your own Extravagance has
been the Cause. Believe me, Cleomira! whatever in
our Days of Courtship we profess, the Excess of any Passion
is ridiculous to a Man of Sense; and Love, of all
others, more excites our Mirth, than our Pity. –––That
foolish Fondness, with which your Sex so much abounds,
is before Enjoyment charming, because it gives us an
Assurance of obtaining all we ask; but afterwards 'tis
cloying, tiresome, and in Times grows odious. –––Had
your Passion, at least the Shew of it, been less violent,
mine might have had a longer Continuance; and as
there is nothing more unnatural, than that a Woman
shou'd expect a Man can be in Love with her always,
the best Way to retain his Complaisance, is, not to take
Notice of his Alteration, or oblige him, by a troublesome
Importunity, to explain himself in the Manner I
now am forc'd to do to you: I confess, indeed, that I am
going to be marry'd to a Lady, whose Discretion will,
I hope, prevent any of those Discontents and Jealousies 

which first made my Amour with you grow uneasy. 
That I once lov'd you, I shall ever acknowledge, and desire
you wou'd be as just in assuring yourself, that your own
Mismanagement was the Cause I cou'd do so no longer. 
The little Storms of Fury which appear in your Letter,
are too frequently met with in Stories, to be wonder'd
at, and are of as little Consequence to move me to
either Fear or Pity, as your proclaiming the Occasion
wou'd be to the Disadvantage of my Reputation; but
if you can resolve to confine your Passion within the
Bounds of Prudence, tho' you lose a Lover, you shall
always find a Friend in 
Lysander. 

I am very apt, indeed, to believe that Lysander in
this spoke the Sense of all his Sex; and one wou'd
think that such an Eclaircissement was enough to have
cur'd me of all Passions, but Disdain and Hate. ––– 
Nothing sure was ever so insulting, so impudent, so
barbarous; yet was my Soul, and all its Faculties, so
truly his, that tho' at the first Reading I resolv'd not
to think of him but with Detestation, I relaps'd immediately,
and instead of wishing I had never seen
him, found a secret Pleasure, even in the midst of
Agony, in the Reflection that he had lov'd me once:
And, if at any Time a Start of just Resentment
rouz'd itself within me, when I wou'd give it Vent
in Curses, a Power superior to Rage arrrested the
flying Breath, and chang'd it into Blessings. I still
lov'd him with such an Adoration, that I cou'd not
bring myself to think that any Thing he cou'd do
was wrong, and began indeed to lay the Blame of my
Misfortune on my own Want of Merit to engage
the Continuance of his Affection, rather than on any
Vice in him; and it was with all the Difficulty in
the World, I forbore writing to him again, to tell
him so. –––Was ever any Infatuation,–––was ever
any Madness equal to mine! –––O God! the bare Remembrance
of it makes me contemn myself, and acknowledge,
that a Creature so meanly Soul'd deserv'd no
better Fate. 

The poor Recluse for some Moments was able
to proceed no farther; a thousand mingled Passions
now struggled in her labouring Breast, with too
much Vehemence to be suppress'd; and throwing
herself down on the Couch she sat on, began again to
pour out the Anguish of her Soul in a Torrent of
Tears. Tho' Belinda cou'd not forbear simpathising
with her, yet finding that her Griefs were indeed past
Remedy, thought nothing she cou'd say wou'd any
way avail to her Consolation, and only bore her
Company in this dumb Scene of Sorrow: But the
Recluse had too much Complaisance and good
Nature, to be able to endure the Influence she perceiv'd
her Afflictions had over the tender Disposition
of the other, and composing herself as well as she
cou'd, continu'd her Discourse in this Manner: 
If (said she) I cou'd have found Words of Force
sufficient to have vented any of those various Passions
which tormented me, my afflicted Soul, perhaps,
might have receiv'd some little Intervals of
Ease; but there were none to express a Condition
such as mine! –––To love to the highest Degree of
Tenderness, what I ought to have abhorr'd;–––to
adore what I knew deserv'd my utmost Scorn;––– 
to have bury'd Hope, and wild Desire survive;––– 
to have Shame, Remorse, and all the Vultures of
conscious Guilt gnaw on my aking Thought;––– 
to wish for Madness, and yet Sense remain, was
Misery! was Horror, sure, without a Name! A
thousand Times in a Day I was about to put an
End to Life, and all its Weight of Anguish: Nor
was it Reason or Religion, but meerly the Consideration
that Death wou'd take from me all Power
of hearing what became of Lysander, that preserv'd
me. 
Thus did I live, if such a State can be call'd Life,
till the Day of Lysander's Marriage; but when I
heard that, imagine you behold a Wretch in the
most raging Fit of Lunacy, and it may give you
some Idea, though but a faint one, of what I then 

appear'd: I tore my Cloaths, my Face, my Hair,
threw myself on the Floor, beat my Breast, made
the House ring with echoing Shrieks and Lamentations,
and was scarce restrain'd by my Nurse from
running in this Manner to the Church where the
Ceremony was perform'd; and it was but when
I had no longer Strength to rage, that partly by
Force, and partly by Perswasion, she got me into
Bed. The Violence of my Agitations threw me
into a Fever; but though I would take nothing
but what I was compell'd to, and committed Extravagancies
in this Illness enough to have kill'd
twenty of a much stronger Constitution than myself,
yet I could not die: In spite of the Malignity
of the Distemper, in spite even of myself,
I recover'd. But not all the bodily Indisposition
I had endur'd, had been able to weaken the passions
of my Soul: I still lov'd, and still despair'd. 
––––My Thoughts were always with Lysander, and
pursu'd him every where, even to the bridal Bed,
that Grave where all my Hopes were buried! My
Nurse's House happening, unluckily to stand in a
Street pretty near that in which Lysander liv'd, as
soon as I had Strength to walk about my Chamber,
I had the Mortification from my Window to behold
him and Semanthe, now his Wife, pass by in
their Chariot almost every Day. You may believe
this Sight gave no small Addition to the Horrors of
my Despair: But I will not pretend to repeat what
it was I felt whenever these grating Objects met
my Eyes; it shall suffice to say, 'twas more than I
cou'd bear; and I resolv'd to rid myself of what I
then endur'd, without any Apprehensions of what
Futurity might give. Death was my determin'd
Care: But in what Manner I should apply it was now
my only Study; and, after a long Debate in my
Mind, Poison was the Means I fix'd on, as being not
only the most decent, but also the most private
Way I could perform this Deed of Desparation; for
I was unwilling the World should be sensible of 

what I had done; and when I was no more, preserve
my Shame still flagant with those scurril Ditties,
which Actions of the kind I was about to do,
are always Themes for. I took care to conceal
my Intentions from my Nurse; and that she might
be the less watchful over me, began to counterfeit a
Chearfulness, which Heaven knows was far distant
from my Heart. The poor Woman was overjoy'd
to find me, as she thought, so much more easy than
I had been; and I went out one Day, unsuspected,
to procure the fatal Drugs. I had Recourse to an
Apothecary who had been us'd to make up Medicines
for our Family; and because I knew how scrupulous
People of that Profession are oblig'd to be,
I told him, I had a little favourite Dog, which by
some Accident was run mad, and having made use
of a thousand Experiments for a Cure for him in
vain, and not enduring to have him destroy'd any
other Way, I wou'd have something to give him,
to put an End to his Misery in the most gentle
Manner I could; something of a sleeping Potion,
I said, which by Degrees shou'd seize upon the
Seats of Life, and give a sure, but easy Death. The
Man look'd on me with a good deal of Surprise,
and, as I thought, more Penetration than I desir'd
he should have; but, after a little Pause, went about
mixing the Composition. I was very well pleased to
think I had so artfully deceiv'd him, and came home
with the Physick, which I design'd should make a
perfect Cure of all my Miseries. As I was going
to drink it, I began to think I cou'd not leave the
World in Peace, without a Farewel to my unjust,
but still too dear Lysander; and taking up some Paper,
writ to him these Lines: 


To the Dear Ruiner of my Soul and Body.
As my Passion for you was built on a more lasting
Foundation than that of your's to me, so not all
your Cruelty can have Power to shake it: I must
be your's, though you cease to desire I shou'd be so; 
and since I cannot hope, nay, now you are another's,
dare not wish any future Testimonies of my Affection
should be pleasing, I take the only Means to rid you of
the Trouble: A Draught of Poison stands before me; 
and the Moment I conclude this Letter, I take my
Journey to that World, whence there is no Return:––– 
What will be my Portion there I know not; but I am
sure of this, that if departed Souls have any Intelligence
of what's acted here, your Pity for my Fate will mitigate
the sharpest Torments. A tender Sigh sometimes,
not even my Rival wou'd deny; and perhaps, a Time
may come, when you shall own I merited much more. 
I do not, however, wish you shou'd be touch'd too deeply
with Remorse:–––You are too dear to me, for me to
desire to give you Pain. Remember me, if you can,
with some little Softness;–––make not my Sufferings the
Subject of your Ridicule, nor seem pleas'd if you hear
others do so; and whenever my Want of Beauty, Wit,
or any other Charm, rises as an Evidence against me,
let my exalted Tenderness still ballance that Deficiency,
and reflect, that as I have liv'd, so now I die, my Dear,
Dear Lysander. 
Only your's,
Cleomira. 

I kept my Word, indeed; for as soon as I had
seal'd this up, I drank the Ingredients I had brought
home with me:–––I drank it without the least
Alarm, or any of those Apprehensions, which so terrify
the Minds of most People at the Approach of 

Death, so much had Despair hardened my Heart,
and stupified my Reason. In above an Hour, either
the Draught it self, or the Force of my Imagination
that it must be so, operated so strongly through my
Veins, that I grew exceeding sick; and fearing the
Effects wou'd come before I had settled those Affairs
I had in my Head, I call'd hastily for the good old
Nurse. It was almost Midnight, and she was in
Bed; and believing I had been so too, was not a little
frighted when she came into my Chamber, and
found me dress'd as I had been all Day, and with
something in my Countenance, as she said, of a Horror
impossible to be express'd. I sent for you (said
I) to take my everlasting Leave,–––to thank you
for the faithful Services I have received from you,
and to make what Recompence my lessen'd Circumstances
have left me Power to do. The poor
Creature star'd in my Face all the Time I was
speaking; but the Astonishment she was in made
her either incapable of understanding me, or took
away the Power of answering. Be not surpris'd,
(resum'd I,) I tell you this Night,–––I know not but
this Hour is the last of my Life:–––Therefore, while
I have Voice to utter the Meanings of my Soul, I
charge you be attentive, and perform my last Requests. 
She certainly thought my Griefs had turn'd
my Brain; and hastily interrupting me, as I spoke
these Words, For Heaven's sake, Madam, (said she,)
give not way to the Suggestions of your Melancholy:
You are now, God be prais'd, pretty well recover'd
from an Illness in which we had just Reason
to despair of you:–––You are now, as it were, risen
from the Grave, and the signal Deliverance shews
that you are destin'd for happier Days than those you
yet have seen. –––Ah! do not then (continued she,
with Tears in her Eyes) endeavour to disappoint the
Designs of your all-wise Preserver, by indulging
Grief to prey upon your Senses for the Loss of an
unworthy Person, whom, at your Return of Reason
you must scorn. I could not suffer her to proceed 

in this Manner, but cutting her off from what
she was going to say, No more, (cried I,) if by an
ill-tim'd and unmannerly Zeal you would not forfeit
all that good Opinion your Fidelity and Obedience
has hitherto inspir'd:–––Once more I tell you, that
I cannot,–––will not live:–––Death is already busy
at my Heart; and, if I make not haste, may rob
me of the only Wish I now can form, and you
of the Glory of serving to the last a Mistress, who,
if she had the Power, would more express her Gratitude. 
–––Therefore, in few Words, by all that
Truth and Honesty which I believe you possess'd of,
I conjure you to deliver a Letter you will find on the
Table into Lysander's Hands, the Moment I expire,––– 
to tell him that his Inconstancy was my Death, and
to relate the Manner of it in the most moving Terms
you can invent. This is all I have to ask, or to
command. –––As to my Funeral, order it as you
please; but let me not be laid too near my Parents,
lest my guilty Ashes shou'd disturb the sacred Repose
of theirs. –––All that remains of my broken Fortune,
after I am laid in the Earth, is yours. Though I
spoke this with all the Solemnity imaginable, it was
to little Purpose; she still took it for the Effects of
my Melancholy, and began to resume her Disswasions
from letting such sad Thoughts get the better of
my Reason; and I was forc'd to tell her what
I had done, before I could make her believe I was
in Danger of Death. But never did Amazement
and real Grief appear more lively than in the Face
of this poor Wretch, at what I told her. At first
she was entirely mute, and when she had Power
to speak, her Words were nothing but Exclamations. 
Then, on a sudden, thinking they were fruitless,
was running for a Physician, for a Divine, and
raising the whole Town for my Preservation; nor
cou'd any Thing I should have said, have prevented
her, if my Strength had not prevail'd to force
her into a Chair, and holding her there, oblig'd her
to hear me tell her, That the Poison I had taken was 

not of a Nature to be expell'd, or if it were, had
now lain too long in me to be depriv'd of its Operation:
Nay, (said I,) put the Case that what I had
done, shou'd by any Means that I shou'd be compell'd
to use be render'd fruitless,––––not all the World
shou'd force me to live another Day:––––If I cannot
die the Way I chuse, still I will some Way;––––If not
by Poison, there are Knives, or Cords:––––My Garters
may be my Executioners:––––Or if deny'd these
Instruments, you cannot hinder me from strangling
myself with my own Hands, or dashing out my Brains
against the Wall:––––To those resolv'd, Death always
is at Call. I spoke these Words with a real Design to
do as I said; and if she had got Liberty to have
brought any Persons in to restrain me, I had certainly
that Moment taken some unfailing Method to
prevent any Thing they cou'd have done to save me. 
But with these, and the like Speeches, at last I perswaded
her to content herself with lamenting my
Desparation, without endeavouring to do any Thing
to remove it. And having convinc'd her of my
Obstinacy to die, to spare the Infamy of Self-Murder,
she promis'd me to keep the Deed conceal'd, and
give out I died of an Apoplexy. But I thought I
shou'd never have prevail'd on her to carry the Letter
to Lysander: Her Abhorrence to him, as the Author
of all my Misfortunes, and now of my Death, was so
great, that she assur'd me the Task of dying with
me wou'd be far less severe than the beholding such
a Monster: But my Tears and repeated Entreaties at
last overcame all her Scruples, and I engag'd an Oath
from her, (for I wou'd not in that Case trust her
Promise,) that she wou'd in the Morning see him, and
say all that I requir'd. In a very little Time after
I had brought her into the Disposition I desir'd, I
found a prodigious Heaviness, like that, indeed, of
Death, seize on my Spirits; and making no doubt
but that the fatal Moment was at hand, with my
Nurse's Assistance, (though, poor Soul, she was in
too great an Agony to be able to afford me much,) 

I got my self undress'd, and put to Bed, where I
had not lain long before I lost all Sense of every
Thing:––––Lysander's Charms,––––his Cruelty,–––– 
my Ruin and Despair, were now no more remember'd! 
––––Oh! if one were sure to enjoy that Tranquility
in a real Death, that I did in my imaginary
one, none wou'd survive their Happiness! At my
return to Thought, that is, when I was loos'd from
the Bands of Sleep, for it was no more which had
bound down my Senses, I was in a Consternation
impossible to be express'd:––––I look'd on myself,
then round the Room, and I believe 'twou'd have
been pleasant enough, if any body had been Witness
of it, to have observ'd the Oddness of my Behaviour
at my first waking: I remember'd very well what
had pass'd before I went to Bed, and cou'd not reconcile
so seeming a Contradiction, as that I shou'd be
still in a World I believ'd I had taken such effectual
Measures to be freed from. As I was in this Dilemma,
my Nurse came into the Chamber, not with
her Eyes o'erflow'd with Tears, and wringing her
Hands, as she had done the Night before, but with
all the Marks of a most perfect Satisfaction, and
kneeling down by the Bedside, testify'd her Joy in
most fervent Thanksgivings to that Divine Power
which had so graciously been pleas'd to disappoint
the unnatural Purpose of my Heart. I cou'd not forbear
interrupting her Ejaculations by some wild sort
of Enquiries, how I came to be still living; which
she presently satisfy'd me in these Words: When I
had left you, (said she,) in all Appearance dead, I
began to consider of the Promise you had oblig'd me to
make; and it being near Morning, got myself ready
to go with your Letter, resolving to take no Notice
of your Death to my Family till my Return. After I
had discharg'd that unwelcome Errand, I found a
Man waiting at home to speak with me; and he
told me, the chief of it was to enquire if a Lady
who lodg'd here was well; and then nam'd you: I
was too much confounded at the Question to be able 

to answer him without trembling and faultering in
my Speech, though, as well as I cou'd, I said I hop'd
you were well;––––that I left you so last Night. I
wish (resum'd he, taking me aside) she may continue
so. Then, Madam, he told me he was the Apothecary
from whom you had demanded Poison; but suspecting
you design'd it for some other Use than what
you pretended, and fearing if he shou'd deny, you
might procure it from some other, he had deceiv'd
you with an Opiate, which cou'd be no way prejudicial
to the Health of the Person that took it, though
it wou'd hold the Senses in a much deeper and longer
Sleep than what was natural. ––––He said also, That
he had caus'd you to be watch'd home, to the End
that he might relate the Truth to those about you,
if any Thing of what he imagin'd shou'd happen. I
was so impatient to know what Lysander had said,
since I found she had been with him, that I cou'd
not give myself much Time to reflect on what she
told me concerning the Apothecary; but I found her
willing to evade the repeating the Manner of his Behaviour,
and guess'd by that he was inhuman to the
last. ––––What, (said I) was he not shock'd to hear I
died for him? ––––If I cou'd believe, that after so fatal
a Proof of Love he cou'd persist in his Barbarity,
I shou'd rejoice my Purpose was defeated, and would
live to scorn him. ––––If you are in earnest, (interrupted
she,) and can, indeed, continue in a Resolution
so truly noble, I will inform you of all. Which after
my assuring her I wou'd do, she went on in this
Manner: I gave your Letter to him, (said she,) and
after looking it carelesly over,––––Your Mistress sure
is mad, (cry'd he, with an Air of Contempt,) I long
have thought her so; and the romantick Stuff she has
writ me here, confirms it. Indeed, Madam, (continued
the good Creature,) I had scarce Power to refrain
flying in his Face; but though my Hands forbore
any Indignities, I gave my Tongue free Scope; 
and when I had told him,––––nay, swore, (as well I
might, for firmly I believ'd it,) that you were really 

dead, I call'd him every Name I cou'd invent, of
base, perfidious, and deceitful; but he seemed as little
to regard the Fury I was in, as the News I
brought him, and only saying,–––If she be dead
the Letter requires no Answer, therefore be gone,
and cease your Clamour; but not finding I was very
hasty to do as he bid me, for methought it was
some little Satisfaction to upbraid this Monster, he
call'd one of his Servants to turn me out of Doors,
and walk'd from me as unconcerned as though I had
brought him an Account of the most indifferent Affair
that cou'd have happen'd. I was too well satisfied in
the Integrity of this good old Woman, to doubt the
Truth of what she said; and it was now that I began
to feel that Resentment, which by a thousand Barbarities
he had long before deserved. And, after some
little Struggles between departing Tenderness and
growing Hate;–––'Tis done, (said I,) Reason, at last,
has gain'd a Conquest over all that Softness which
has hitherto betray'd me to Contempt. –––Now I
will live, and Love alone shall die. –––Nurse brought
so many and well-grounded Arguments to strengthen
me in this Resolution, and express'd her Meaning
in a Manner so much beyond what could be
expected from her, that I have often thought she was
that Moment inspir'd by Heaven to assist my Weakness. 
In short, I gave the Thoughts of Death entirely
over. I cou'd not endure, however, to appear publickly
in the World again; and as Lysander believ'd me
dead, I was willing every Body else shou'd do so too:
I order'd a Will to be drawn according to Law, in
which I made Nurse my Heir and sole Executrix; 
and she has perform'd every Thing I desir'd with
such Exactness and Fidelity, that not a Relation or
Acquaintance has the least Notion of my being living. 
It was she who heard of the Convenience
of this House for boarding in; but I wou'd not let
her come to make any Agreement for me, because
she might chance to be known, and consequently
the Person she recommended guess'd at. Since the 

Time of my being here, she manages my little Fortune,
receives the Income of it when due, and gives
me an Account of it every Quarter; which is all the
Business I have to do in this uneasy World. Thus,
Madam, have I given you a faithful Account of the
Causes which induc'd me to this Retirement; and I
believe, you will own that they are such as merit
no less than my whole Life's Contrition. For, as
Mr. Waller very elegantly expresses it, 

Our Passions gone, and Reason in her Throne,
Amaz'd we see the Mischiefs we have done!

