
Treats of many things as unexpected by the persons concern'd in them, as they can be by the reader himself. 
Lady Speck and her sister had no sooner quitted Jenny's chamber than she fell into a profound sleep; whether owing to the goodness of her constitution, the doctor's prescription, or the fatigue she had undergone, is uncertain, but she awoke next morning greatly refresh'd, and much more so in spirits than could have been expected. 
She now call'd to mind all the particulars that had occasion'd her late disorder; and remembering she had not put up the letter, order'd it should be look'd for and brought to her;—the maid search'd carefully about the room, but it being no where to be found, she concluded that some body must have taken it away, and by that means a secret 
would be divulg'd which she had much rather should have been eternally conceal'd. 
But as this suggestion was only a sudden start of female pride, of which she had as small a share as any of her sex, her good understanding easily got the better of it;—‘I think, said she to herself, the unfaithful man call'd his engagement with me a curst engagement, and promised to break off;—if so, the discovery must be made some time or other;—it is therefore of little importance when, or by what means his perfidiousness is reveal'd.’ 
She was not mistaken indeed,—the letter had dropt from her hand as she fainted,—miss Wingman, during the confusion, seeing a paper lie on the floor, took it up, and finding Jemmy's name subscrib'd was curious to know the contents, and for that purpose put it into her pocket without any one observing what she did. 
She kept not from her sister the knowledge of the petty larceny she had committed, and as soon as they were alone together read it carefully over, examin'd every sentence, and made their own reflections 
upon the whole, which, prejudiced as they were with a belief of Jemmy's inconstancy, were yet less unfavourable to him in this point than those of his offended mistress. 
They were, however, extremely incens'd against Jemmy; and, sincerely pitying the case of their friend, resolved to say and do every thing they could to soften her affliction:—it being near morning when they went to rest, the day was very far advanced before they arose; but they no sooner had quitted their beds than they repair'd directly to Jenny's chamber, and found her much less disconsolate than they had imagined. 
As that young lady doubted not but it was either lady Speck or her sister who had taken away her letter, or at least some person who would not fail of communicating it to them, she had determined, before they came, in what manner she would behave on the occasion. 
The sisters, on their part, were not altogether so well prepar'd;—they expected not that she was as yet in a condition to endure much discourse, especially on so tender and critical a point;—they thought it would be time enough 
to entertain her on that head when the first shock of her misfortune should be over; and had not therefore well consider'd how to break their knowledge of it to her. 
This caution in them was certainly very prudent, as well as very kind; but Jenny had too much spirit and resolution not to render it unnecessary:—on their enterance she started up in her bed, and said to them with a smile,—‘I guess'd, ladies, that your good nature would bring you hither, so was just going to rise that you might be spared the trouble.’ 
‘I am very glad, reply'd lady Speck, to find that a disorder which seem'd to threaten the worst consequences is likely to go off so well;—but, my dear miss Jessamy, I would not have you think of leaving your bed till your health is a little farther re-establish'd;—I will order, added she, breakfast to be brought in here,—and after that, would fain persuade you to take some repose.’ 
The maid then going out of the room to fetch the utensils for breakfast,—‘Instead of this goodness, madam, said 
Jenny, your ladyship ought rather to chide me for my folly;—the inconstancy and ingratitude of mankind are not things so new and strange as to justify that surprise and confusion I was last night involv'd in.’ 
They look'd on each other at these words, but made no answer,—on which Jenny went on,—‘I am very sensible, ladies, pursued she, that neither of you are unacquainted with the cause of my disorder;—the letter I received last night has inform'd you of all,—nor am I sorry it has done what my tongue, perhaps, might have faulter'd in performing.’ 
‘Since I have your pardon, my dear, reply'd miss Wingman, I shall make no scruple to confess the theft which my curiosity made me guilty of; and I am the more ready to excuse myself for what I have done, as I am apt to think that the knowledge my sister and I have of this affair may enable us to give you some little consolation under it.’ 
‘Yes, my dear miss Jessamy, rejoin'd lady Speck, you must believe that, though greatly interested in all that 
concerns you, our minds were less disconcerted than yours must naturally be on reading that epistle; and consequently were in a better capacity of judging, and seeing into the heart of him who wrote it.’ 
‘And what can you see there, madam, cried Jenny hastily, but the most vile ingratitude and perfidiousness?’ —‘I am going about, said that lady, not to palliate his crime; but I think it is your duty to thank Heaven, that by this incident of his directing to you what was doubtless intended for another, you are convinced how unworthy he is of your affection.’ 
‘Besides,’ cried miss Wingman, perceiving Jenny sigh'd and made no answer to what lady Speck had said, —‘methinks it should please you to find, that if mr. Jessamy has slighted you for the sake of miss Chit, he slights her also for some other; and she has no less reason to condemn him than yourself.’ 
‘Do you not think then that the letter was meant for her? demanded Jenny hastily.’ —‘No indeed, resumed lady Speck, nor will you, when you consider more coolly on the matter, believe 
that any man, much less one so polite as mr. Jessamy, would write in such a stile and manner to a woman he intended for a wife. —This woman, pursued she, is rather some petty mistress whom chance may have thrown in his way.’ 
On this miss Wingman, after having urged something in defence of what her sister had said, return'd the letter to Jenny, desiring she would examine it again, and then tell them how far she thought their opinion of it was unreasonable or improbable. 
Jenny obeyed this injunction with a great deal of readiness; and after having paus'd for some moments on what she had read,—‘I confess, ladies, said she, that the freedom mr. Jessamy takes with this woman is little becoming of an honourable passion;—but the more base his inclinations are, the more reason have I to resent he should attempt a gratification of them at the expence of that respect due from him to the engagement he has with me.’ 
‘Men will say any thing to gain their point this way, said lady Speck laughing; and if hereafter you shall find no 
greater cause of complaint against him than what this letter gives you, I should almost pity his inadvertency in exposing his folly to the only woman from whom it most behoved him to have conceal'd it.’ 
Just as she had ended these words tea and chocolate were brought in,—after which, as the maids were present, no farther discourse pass'd upon this subject;—when breakfast was over, the ladies retired in order to dress; but not without conjuring Jenny to lie still and endeavour to take a little more repose;—she promised to comply, but had nothing less in her head, being glad to be alone, and at liberty to make her own reflections on an event which had occasion'd so great a change both in her sentiments and humour. 
As she had imagined, in the first hurry of her spirits on the receipt of this letter, that it was in reality wrote to miss Chit, and a demonstrative proof of the truth of all that had been told her on that account by lady Speck and miss Wingman, it was no inconsiderable alleviation of her trouble, to be now pretty well convinced, that instead of making his honourable addresses to a woman of condition, 
he was only amusing himself with an affair of gallantry,—a thing not much to be wonder'd at in a gentleman of his years and gay disposition; and her good sense would doubtless have enabled her to forgive it, but for the promise he seem'd to have made to this new object of his flame of breaking through all engagements, that he might devote himself entirely to her. 
This, in a man whom she had always look'd upon and regarded as her second self, appeared so treacherous and ungrateful, that resentment got the better of all the tenderness she once had for him, and made her resolve to take him at his word, and be the first to release him from those engagements he had treated in so unworthy a manner. 
Thus did the greatness of her spirit refuse to yield to the impulse of grief;—she got out of bed, in spite of all the intreaties of her maid to the contrary,—put on her cloaths,—lock'd safely up the proof of her lover's infidelity in a little casket where she kept her jewels, and would even have gone down into the dining room as usual, but found her limbs too weak to obey the dictates of her will;—she threw herself into an easy 
chair, and remain'd there for some time, in a situation of mind which only those of my fair readers, who have experienc'd somewhat like the same, can be capable of conceiving. 
She was in a deep resvery when the ladies return'd to her chamber;—she spoke chearfully to them, yet they plainly saw through all the vivacity she assumed, that a heavy melancholy had seated itself upon her heart;—they would not therefore leave her;—they order'd dinner to be served up in that room; and when it was over, call'd for a pack of cards and obliged her to make one at ombre. 
They had play'd but a very short time before a servant acquainted the two ladies, that a man was below who said his name was Landy;—that he was just come from London, and had brought letters of the utmost importance, which he was charg'd to deliver the moment of his arrival. 
‘Bless me,—my mother's steward, cried lady Speck.’ —‘Grant Heaven rejoin'd miss Wingman, that no hurt has happen'd to her ladyship;’—with these words they threw the cards out of their hands and ran immediately down stairs. 
Jenny, who at another time would have been anxious for any thing that concern'd her friends, was now too much ingross'd with her own affairs to give much regard to the exclamations these ladies had made, and return'd to those reflections they had endeavour'd to divert her from. 
It was not long, however, before they both came back, and with countenances which denoted the most extreme surprise. ‘—Well, miss Jessamy, said the younger, I have done my best to console you, now you may do the same kind office to me:—all men are alike perfidious;—there is no faith,—no honour in the whole sex.’ 
‘Aye my dear, cried lady Speck, such a monstrous piece of villany is come to light as when you hear will make you forget every thing besides.’ —All that you can guess is nothing to it, resumed miss Wingman;—but I will keep you no longer in suspence;—you must know I have just received two letters, the one from my guardian, sir Thomas Welby, and the other from my Mamma;—she would not trust the intelligence they contain'd by the 
post for fear of a miscarriage, but sent her own steward on purpose to me;—you shall hear them both;—I will begin with that from sir Thomas.’ 
She then took the letters she mentioned out of her pocket, and read as follows: 
To miss Wingman at Bath.
“Dear miss,
I Thank Heaven for putting it in my power to discover to you, I hope time enough to prevent your ruin, as wicked a design as ever enter'd the heart of the most profligate of our sex to attempt against the innocence of yours. 
“I am ashamed to think that a nobleman of lord Huntley's birth and personal endowments can be capable of descending to such a low piece of villany;—yet so it is,—I can assure you, my dear miss, that nothing is more certain than that he is already married;—his lady I believe is but lately come from Ireland, and is at present lodged at the house of a particular friend of mine;—I both saw and spoke to her ladyship under the pretence of 
having some business with my lord; she told me he was not in town, which indeed I very well knew, having been informed he had followed you down to Bath. —There are, besides this, many other circumstances to evince the truth; but as they are too numerous, and too long to be inserted in the compass of a letter, I shall defer giving you the detail of them till I have the pleasure of seeing you. —My advice to you is, that you put it not in the power of this unworthy lord to deceive you any farther, but return immediately to London;—lady Wingman is of the same opinion; but as this letter will be accompanied with one from herself, I doubt not but it will have all the effect it ought to have on your behaviour. —I am 
“With the best wishes,
My dear charge,
Your very affectionate friend,
And most humble servant,
T. Welby.” 

Jenny had no time to express any part of her sentiments on this occasion; 
—miss Wingman had no sooner ended her Guardian's epistle, than she proceeded to that from her Mother,—the contents whereof were these: 
To miss Wingman at Bath.
“My dear child,
I Cannot sufficiently express the trouble I am under on account of lord Huntley's baseness,—the intelligence of which I first received from our good friend sir Thomas Welby, and am since but too much confirm'd in the truth of it by some enquiries myself has been at the pains to make;—I must confess it was with difficulty I listened to any reports to his prejudice;—I could not tell how to believe such foul deceit could be couch'd under a form so seemingly adorn'd with every virtue, as well as every accomplishment befitting his birth;—but, my dear Kitty, we are never so easily beguiled as by the appearance of honour and sincerity; I tremble to think to what dangers you are exposed, while suffering yourself to be entertain'd with the insinuating addresses of a man who can mean nothing but to involve you in eternal wretchedness;—I conjure 
you therefore,—I command you by all the authority I have over you, never to see him more;—to fly his presence as a serpent that watches to blast your peace and reputation with his envenomn'd breath;—I have sent Landy on purpose to bring you this, and to attend you to London; and hope you will not detain him any longer than is necessary for your getting ready to set out. —Farewell,—that Heaven may have you always under its protection, is the unceasing prayers of, 
“My dear child,
Your most affectionate mother,
K. Wingman.” 
“P. S. I am not now in a condition to write to your sister; but desire you will give my blessing to her; and let her know that if she stays behind you at Bath, as I suppose she will, she may expect to hear from me in a short time. —In the present confusion of my thoughts, I had almost forgot my compliments to miss Jessamy, which pray make acceptable to her.” 

Jenny could scarce find words to express her astonishment at what she heard;—she could not tell how to think lord Huntley guilty in the manner he was represented; and yet could less believe that sir Thomas Welby and lady Wingman, who she knew had always favour'd his pretensions, would write as they had done without having undeniable proofs of the justice of their accusation. 
The three ladies had a long conversation together, the event of which will be seen in the succeeding chapter. 
