


Seems to be calculated rather for the instruction
than entertainment of the
reader. 

How great soever was the shock miss
Betsy had sustained in this interview
with mr. Trueworth, neither did he think
himself much indebted to fortune, for
having thrown her in his way;—he had
once loved her to a very high degree,
and though the belief of her unworthiness,
—the fond endearments of one woman,
—and the real merits of another,
had all contributed to drive that passion
from his breast, yet as a wound but lately
closed is apt to bleed afresh, on every little
accident, so there required no less than the
whole stock of the beautiful and discreet
miss Harriot's perfections, to defend his
heart from feeling anew some part of its
former pain, on this sudden and unexpected
attack. 
Happy was it for him, that his judgment
concurred with his present inclination,
and that he had such unquestionable
reasons for justifying the transition he had 

made of his affections from one object to
another, else might he have relapsed into
a flame, which, if ever it had been attended
with any true felicity, must have
been purchased at the expence of an infinity
of previous disquiets. 
He was now become extremely conversant
with the family of sir Bazil,— 
visited there almost every day,—was
well received by both the sisters, and had
many opportunities of penetrating into
the real sentiments and dispositions of
miss Harriot, which he found to be such
as his most sanguine wishes could have
formed for the woman to be blest with,
whom he would make choice of for a
wife. —When he compared the steady
temper,—the affability,—the easy, unaffected
chearfulness, mixed with a becoming
reserve, which that young lady
testified in all her words and actions,
with the capricious turns,—the pride,— 
the giddy lightness he had observed in
the behaviour of miss Betsy, his admiration
of the one was increased by his disapprobation
of the other. 
How great a pity was it, therefore,
that a young lady, like miss Betsy, so
sormed by heaven and nature to have
rendered any man compleatly happy in 

possessing her, inferior to her fair competitor,
neither in wit, beauty, or any
personal, or acquired endowment,—her
inclinations no less pure,—her sentiments
as noble,—her disposition equally
generous and benign, should, through her
own inadvertency, destroy all the merit
of so many amiable qualities, and for the
sake of indulging the wanton vanity of
attracting universal admiration, forfeit,
in reality, those just pretensions to it,
which otherwise she had been entitled
from the deserving and discerning few! 
Mr. Trueworth, as the reader may have
observed, did not all at once withdraw
his affections from the first object of
them, nor transmit them to a second, but
on very justifiable motives. —The levity
of miss Betsy, and other branches of ill
conduct, had very much weaned her
from his heart, before the wicked artifices
of miss Flora had rendered her quite
contemptible in his opinion, and had not
wholly devoted himself to the beauties of
miss Harriot, 'till he was well convinced
the perfections of her mind were such as
could not fail of securing the conquest
which her eyes had gained. 
He did not however presently declare
himself;—he saw the friendship between 

the two sisters would be somewhat of an
obstacle to his hopes;—he had heard
that miss Harriot had rejected several advantageous
proposals of marriage, merely
because she would not be separated from
mrs. Wellair;—he also found, that sir
Bazil, though for what reason he could
not guess, seemed not very desirous of
having his sister disposed of:—the only
probable way, therefore, he thought of
obtaining his wishes, was to conceal them,
'till he found the means of insinuating
himself so far into the good graces, both
of the one and the other, as to prevent
them from opposing whatever endeavours
he should make to engage their sister to
listen to his suit. 
The stratagem had all the effect for
which it was put in practice:—the intimacy
he had long ago contracted with
sir Bazil, now grew into so perfect a
friendship, that he scarce suffered a day
to pass without an invitation to his house. 
—Mrs. Wellair expressed the highest
esteem and liking of his conversation, and
miss Harriot herself, not imagining of
what consequence every word that fell
from her was to him, said a thousand
obliging things on his account, particularly
one day, after they had been singing
a two-part song together, ‘How often,’ 

cried she to her sister, ‘shall we wish for
this gentleman, when we get into the
country, to act the principal part in
our little operas!’ 
All this he returned in no other manner,
than any man would have done, who had
no farther aim than to shew his wit and
gallantry:—so much of his happiness,
indeed, depended upon the event, that it
behoved him to be very cautious how he
proceeded; and it is likely he would not
have ventured to throw off the mask of
indifference so soon as he did, if he had
not been emboldened to it by an unexpected
accident. 
Among the number of those, who visited
the sisters of sir Bazil, there was a
young lady called mrs. Blanchfield;— 
she was born in the same town with them,
but had been some time in London, on
account of the death of an uncle, who
had left her a large fortune;—she had
a great deal of vivacity and good humour,
which rendered both her person and conversation
very agreeable;—she passed in
the eyes of most people for a beauty, but
her charms were little taken notice of by
mr. Trueworth, though she behaved towards
him in a manner, which would
have been flattering enough to a man of 

more vanity, or who had been less engrossed
by the perfections of another. 
By what odd means does Fortune sometimes
bring about those things she is determined
to accomplish? —Who could
have thought this lady, with whom mr.
Trueworth had no manner of concern,
and but a slight acquaintance, should
even, unknowing it herself, become the
happy instrument of having that done for
him, which he knew not very well how
to contrive for himself;—yet so it proved,
in effect, as the reader will presently
perceive. 
Happening to call one morning on sir
Bazil while he was dressing, ‘O! True-worth,’ 
said he, ‘I am glad you have
prevented me; for I was just going to
your lodgings:—I have something to
acquaint you with, which I fancy you
will think deserves your attention:—” 
I suppose,’ replied mr. Trueworth,
‘you would not tell me any thing, that
was not really so;—but pray what is
it?’ 
‘Why you have made a conquest here
it seems,’ resumed sir Bazil, ‘and may
say with Cæsar, ‘Veni, Vidi, Vici.’ — 
—Prithee how did you sleep last night? 

—Did your guardian angel, or no
kind tatling star, give you notice of
your approaching happiness, that you
might receive the blessing with moderation?’ 
—Mr. Trueworth, not able to
conceive what it was he meaned, but
imagining there was some mystery contained
in this raillery, desired him to explain; 
‘for,’ said he, ‘the happiness you
promise cannot come too soon.’ 
‘You will think so’ replied sir Bazil,
‘when I tell you, a fine lady,—a celebrated
toast, and a fortune of twenty
thousand pounds in her own hands, is
fallen in love with you.’ —‘With me?’ 
cried mr. Trueworth, ‘you are merry
this morning, sir Bazil.’ —‘No faith,
I am serious,’ resumed the other; ‘the
lady I speak of is mrs. Blanchfield:— 
I have heard her say abundance of handsome
things of you myself,—such as,
that you were a very fine gentleman,
—that you had a great deal of wit,— 
sung well;—but my sisters tell me,
that when she is alone with them, she
asks a thousand questions about you,
and in fine talks of nothing else;—so
that, according to this account, a very
little courtship would serve to make you
master both of her person and fortune. 
—What say you?’ 

‘That I am neither vain enough to believe,’ 
answered mr. Trueworth, ‘nor
ambitious enough to desire such a thing
should be real.’ —‘How!’—cried
sir Bazil, in some surprise;—‘why she
is reckoned one of the finest women in
town;—has wit,—good nature,—is
of a good family, and an unblemished
reputation;—then her fortune,— 
though I know your estate sets you
above wanting a fortune with a wife,
yet I must tell you a fortune is a very
pretty thing,—children may come,
and a younger brood must be provided
for.’ 
‘You argue very reasonably indeed,’ 
replied mr. Trueworth; ‘but pray,’ pursued
he, ‘as you are so sensible of this
lady's perfections, how happened it,
that you never made your addresses to
her yourself?’ —‘I was not sure she
would like me so well as she does you,’ 
said he; ‘besides, to let you into the
secret, my heart was engaged before I
ever saw her face, and my person had
been so too by this time, but for an
unlucky rub in my way.’ 
‘What! sir Bazil, honourably in love,’ 
cried mr. Trueworth. —‘Aye, Charles, 

there is no resisting destiny,’ answered
he;—‘I that have ranged through half
the sex in search of pleasure,—doated
on the beauty of one,—the wit of another,
—admired by turns their different
charms, have at last found one in whom
all I could wish in woman is compriz'd; 
and to whom I am unalterably fixed,
beyond even, I think, a possibility of
change.’ 
‘May I be trusted with the name of
this admirable person,’ said mr. Trueworth,
‘and what impedes your happiness?’ 
—‘You shall know all,’ replied
sir Bazil;—‘in the first place, she is
called miss Mabel.’ —‘What! miss
Mabel of Bury-street,’ cried mr. Trueworth,
hastily?’ —‘The same,’ replied
sir Bazil:—‘you know her then?’ — 
‘I have seen her,’ said mr. Trueworth,
‘in company with a lady I visited some
time ago, and believe she is, in reality,
the original of that amiable picture you
have been drawing.’ 
‘It rejoices me, however, that you
approve my choice,’ said sir Bazil; 
‘but her father is, without exception,
the most sordid, avaritious wretch
breathing;—he takes more pleasure in
counting over his bags, than in the happiness 

of an only child;—he seems
glad of an alliance with me,—encourages
my pretensions to his daughter,
—is ready to give her to me tomorrow
if I please; yet refuses to part
with a single shilling for her portion,
till he can no longer keep it;— 
that is, he will secure to me ten thousand
pounds after his decease; and adds,
by way of cajole, that, perhaps, he
will then throw in a better penny; but
is positively determined to make no diminution
of his substance, while he
lives. —These,’ continued he, ‘are the
only terms on which he will give his
consent, and this it is, which has so
long delayed my marriage.’ 
Mr. Trueworth could not here forbear
making some reflections on the cruelty
and injustice of those parents, who rather
than divide any part of their treasures
with their children, suffer them to let
slip the only crisis that could make their
happiness. —After which, sir Bazil went
on in his discourse. 
‘It is not,’ said he, ‘that I would not
gladly accept my charming girl on the
conditions the old miser offers, or even
without any future hopes of what he
promises to do for her; but I am so 

unhappily circumstanced as to be under
a necessity of having ready money with
a wife:—old sir Bazil, my father,
gave my elder sister six thousand pounds
on her marriage with mr. Wellair, and,
I suppose to shew his affection to both
his daughters was equal, bequeathed at
his death the same sum to Harriot, and
this to be charged on the estate, notwithstanding
it was then under some
other incumbrances:—she can make
her demand, either on coming of age,
or on the day of marriage, which ever
happens first; the one indeed is three
years distant, she being but eighteen,
but who knows how soon the other
may happen? —'Tis true, she seems
at present quite averse to changing her
condition; but that is not to be depended
upon,—all young women are
apt to talk in that strain; but when
once the favourite man comes in view,
away at once with resolution and virginity.’ 
Mr. Trueworth now ceased to wonder
at the little satisfaction sir Bazil had shewn,
on any discourse that casually happened
concerning love or marriage to miss Harriot; 
and nothing could be more lucky
for him than this discovery of the cause,— 
he found by it that one obstacle, at least, to 

his hopes might easily be removed, and
that it was in his own power to convert
entirely to his interest, that which had
seemed to threaten the greatest opposition
to it. 
A moment's consideration sufficed to
make him know what he ought to do,
and that a more favourable conjuncture
could not possibly arrive, for his declaring
the passion he had so long concealed:— 
‘Methinks, sir Bazil,’ said he, after a
very short pause, ‘there is not the least
grounds for any apprehensions of the
inconvenience you mention:—whoever
has in view the possession of miss
Harriot, must certainly be too much
taken up with his approaching happiness
to think of any thing besides.’ 
‘Ah friend,’ cried sir Bazil, ‘you
talk like one ignorant of the world.’ — 
‘I talk like one who truly loves,’ replied
mr. Trueworth, ‘and is not ignorant of
the merit of her he loves;—and now,’ 
continued he, perceiving sir Bazil looked
a little surprised, ‘I will exchange secrets
with you, and for the one you,
have reposed in me, will entrust you
with another, which has never yet escaped
my lips:—I love your charming
sister;—the first moment I beheld 

her, made me her adorer;—her affability,
—her modest sweetness,—her
unaffected wit,—her prudence,—the
thousand virtues of her mind have since
confirmed the expressions that her beauty
made, and I am now all her's.’ 
As sir Bazil had never discovered any
thing in mr. Trueworth's behaviour, that
could give him the least cause to suspect
what now he was so fully informed of by
his own confession, he was very much
astonished, ‘Is it possible!’ cried he, ‘are
you in earnest, and do you really love
Harriot?’ —‘Yes, from my soul I do,’ 
replied mr. Trueworth, ‘and wish no
other blessing this side heaven than to
obtain her:—as to the six thousand
pound you speak of, I neither should
demand, nor would accept it, 'till well
assured the payment of it was quite agreeable
to the situation of your affairs.’ 
‘Would you then marry Harriot with
nothing,’ said sir Bazil, ‘or what is
tantamount to nothing, a small fortune,
and that to be paid discretionary,
rather than mrs. Blanchfield with twenty
thousand pounds in ready specie?’ — 
‘Not only rather than mrs. Blanchfield,’ 
replied mr. Trueworth, ‘but than any 

other woman in the world, with all
those thousands multiplied into millions.’ 
‘Amazing love and generosity!’ cried
sir Bazil with some vehemence;—‘could
she be capable of refusing, she were unworthy
of you;—but this you may be
assured of, that if all the influence I
have over her can engage her to be
yours, she shall be so.’ —Mr. Trueworth
could testify the transport this
promise gave him no otherwise than by
a warm embrace, saying, at the same
time, ‘Dear, sir Bazil!’ —‘Yes,’ rejoined
that gentleman, ‘to give my sister
such a husband as mr. Trueworth, I
would put myself to a much greater
inconvenience than the prompt payment
of her fortune, and shall not abuse
your generous offer by—’ ‘I will
not hear a word on that head,’ cried
mr. Trueworth, hastily interrupting him,
‘and if you would add to the favours
you have already conferred upon me,
do not even think of it:—pursue your
inclinations with the deserving object
of them, and be as happy with her as
I hope to be through your friendly
assistance with the adorable miss Harriot.’ 

Here ensued a little contest between
them;—sir Bazil was ashamed to accept
that proof of friendship mr. Trueworth
proffered, but the many arguments he
made use of, joined to the consideration
of his own ease, at last prevailed; after
which sir Bazil told him, the ladies were
gone to the shops, in order to make some
purchases they wanted, but that he would
take the first opportunity on their return,
to acquaint his sister with the sentiments
he had for her, and appointed to meet
him at the chocolate-house in the evening,
to let him know the success. 
