

Returns to miss Betsy's adventures, from
which the two former were but a digression,
though a very necessary one,
as will hereafter appear. 
If miss Betsy had been made acquainted
with the manner in which mr. Trueworth
pass'd his time, and the inducements
he had to stay in London, doubtless
her vanity would have been highly
piqued; but she had not as yet this subject
for mortification; on the contrary,
she rather imagined he lingered here on
her account,—that he repented him of
the letter he had sent her, though his
spirit was too great to acknowledge it
directly, and waited the arrival of her
brother Frank, in hopes of engaging him
to make his peace. 
With these suggestions did she please
herself, whenever he came into her mind; 
but indeed she had but little room for
meditation on his account;—not only
mr. Munden plied her close with presents, 
—treats,—fine speeches, and all the
tokens of impatient love, but she had
also another conquest of a more late, and
consequently to a young lady of her humour,
a more pleasing æra. 
She had been one day at her mantua-maker's,
to consult on some matters relating
to her dress, and was a little surprised
to see the woman come the next
morning, before she was out of bed, to
her lodgings. —‘Heyday, mrs. Modely,’ 
cried she, ‘what brings you here
thus early?’ —‘Indeed, madam,’ answered
she, ‘I could not well come
out;—I have eight or nine gowns in
the house now, which should all have
been finished, and sent home to-day:
—the ladies will tear me to pieces about
them, but I left all my business, and
run away to acquaint you with a thing
you little dream of. —Ah! miss Betsy,
such a fine gentleman!—such a vast
estate!—but 'tis no wonder,’ continued
she, ‘you are so pretty, that you make
all the men die for you.’ —‘What is
it you are talking on?’ cried miss Betsy,
prithee dear Modely explain.’ —‘Lord!’ 
replied the other, ‘I am so transported,
that I know not how to contain myself; 
—but I will tell you,—you were 
yesterday at my house,—sir Frederick
Fineer, who lodges in my first floor,— 
the sweetest and most generous gentleman
that ever lived, to be sure;—but
that is nothing to the purpose,—he
saw you from his dining-room window,
when you came out of your chair,— 
and, would you believe it, was so
struck, that he immediately fell down
in a swoon:—you were but just gone,
when his valet de chambre, for he
keeps three servants, two in livery, and
one out, came down to me, and fetched
me to his master. —‘Oh! mrs. Modely,’ 
said he to me, ‘what angel have
you got below? —Tell me who she
is? —If she is not already married, I
will give my whole estate to obtain
her. —I ask not what her fortune is,
—if I could once call that divine
creature my wife, she should command
all I am worth.” 
‘Indeed, madam,’ continued she, ‘I
was so much amazed, that I had not
the power of speaking; and he, I suppose,
interpreting my silence as a refusal
of answering his demands, fell
into such distractions,—such ravings,
as frighted me almost out of my wits,
and at last, to quiet him, I told him, 
—I hope you will forgive me,—your
name, and where you lived, and that
you were not married:—on this he
seemed pretty easy, and I left him;— 
but about two hours after, he sent for
me again,—desired I would go directly
to you,—make you a declaration of
love in his name, and beg you to give
him leave to visit you in person.’ 
‘Bless me!’ cried miss Betsy, ‘can
the man neither speak, nor write for
himself?’ —‘I told him, madam,’ 
resumed mrs. Modely, ‘that it would
not be well taken from me;—but he
was quite mad, would listen to no
reason, 'till I bethought myself of a
stratagem, which, I fancy, you will not
disapprove:—I made him believe,
that there was no need of my going
to you,—that you were to call upon
me about a gown this afternoon,— 
that I would persuade you to stay and
drink tea, and he might come into the
room, as if by chance, and entertain
you with what discourse he thought
proper. —Now I would fain have you
come,’ pursued she; ‘for if you do
but like his person, such an offer is not
to be rejected.’ 
‘I do not regard the offer,’ said miss
Betsy; ‘but I do not know but I may
come just to divert myself a little.’ — 
‘That's a dear good lady,’ cried the
other. ‘—About five, I believe, will
be a proper time.’ —‘Aye thereabout,’ 
replied miss Betsy; ‘but, dear Modely,
don't let him know you have spoke a
word to me concerning him.’ —‘No,
—no,’ said she, ‘I shall not tell him
I have seen you.’ 
During the whole time this woman
stayed, which was, indeed, much longer
than might have been expected, from a
person of that extraordinary business she
pretended, nothing was talked on but sir
Frederick Fineer;—she told miss Betsy,
that to her certain knowledge, he was
of one of the best families in Cornwall; 
that he had a great estate in possession,
and another in reversion, and, besides,
was the next of kin to a coronet; that
he kept company with nothing but lords
and dukes, and that they were always
courting his company. 
Though miss Betsy affected to treat all
she said with indifference, yet she had
given an attentive ear to it, and after she 
was gone, began to rumage over all her
ornaments,—tryed one, and then another,
to see which would become her
best, in order to secure a victory, which
she imagined would afford so much triumph. 
—‘Whether I marry him or not,’ 
said she to herself, ‘the addresses of a
man of his rank will make me of some
consideration in the world;—and if
ever I do become a wife, I should like
to be a woman of quality;—they may
say what they will, but a title has prodigious
charms in it;—the name of
Fineer also becomes it;—lady Fineer's
servants there!—lady Fineer's coach
to the door, would sound vastly agreeable
at the play or opera.’ 
She also pleased herself with the thought,
that being courted by a person of sir Frederick's
quality, and estate, would immediately
put to silence all the reproaches
and remonstrances she might otherwise
have expected to be persecuted with, by
her brother Frank, on mr. Trueworth's
account;—and this imagination was, of
itself, sufficient to give her an infinite satisfaction:
—in fine, she found so much
in this new effect of her charms, to elevate
and delight both her vanity and convenience,
that she longed with as much 
impatience for a sight of her admirer, as
mrs. Modely had told her he was under,
for a second interview with her. 
Some part of the tedious moments were,
however, taken up, in a manner she was
far from expecting:—she was scarce risen
from her toilette, when word was brought
her, that a young lady, who called herself
miss Flora Mellasin, was come to
wait upon her. As she had never seen
her since her being driven from mr.
Goodman's, the visit a little surprised
her, and she would have been glad, if
common civility had dispensed with her
receiving it; for though the pity she then
had felt for her misfortunes, had greatly
effaced the memory of the injurious treatment
she had met with from her, yet she
never desired to continue any correspondence
with her, after they were once parted:
besides, as she had no reason to look
upon her coming as any proof of her
friendship or good-will, but rather with
a design of doing her some private prejudice,
she resolved to behave entirely reserved
towards her. 
Her conjectures were not groundless:
—that complication of every worst passion
that can fill the human heart, could 
not be perfectly satisfied, even amidst
the most unbounded gratification of her
amorous desires, with the man that had
excited them:—the dread of losing him
embittered all the transports of possession; 
she very well knew he had broke off with
miss Betsy, and doubted not but that
event had happened through the artifice
she had put in practice; yet as there was
a possibility, that the adventure of Denham
should be unravelled, and the innocency
of miss Betsy cleared up, she trembled
lest such an ecclaircisement should
renew all his former tenderness for that
once so much loved rival, and herself be
reduced to all the horrors of despair and
shame. —It was, therefore, to sound the
inclination of miss Betsy, that alone
brought her thither, in the wicked hope,
that if there was the least probability of
a reconciliation between them, she might
find some opportunity of traversing all
the steps that might be taken by either
party for that purpose. 
But miss Betsy was too much upon her
guard, to give her any room to discover
what her sentiments were in that point:
—she received her very coolly, and even
on her first entrance told her, that she
was obliged to go out that evening; but 
the other taking no notice of the little
pleasure miss Betsy expressed on seeing
her, told her, she came out of friendship
to visit her;—that she had been
told mr. Trueworth and she were entirely
parted;—that if she had so great an
affection for him, as the world had been
pleased to say, she must certainly stand
in need of all the consolation could be
given her:—‘but, I hope, my dear,’ 
said she, ‘you have too much good sense,
not to despise him now. Nothing is
more common than that men should be
false. —Remember what the poet says: 

“Ingratitude's the sin, which, first or last,
“Taints the whole sex; the catching court-disease.”

Miss Betsy was so provoked at being
talked to in this manner, that she replied,
That there was neither falshood nor
ingratitude in the case;—if mr. Trueworth
had desisted his visits, it was only
because he was convinced she desired not
the continuance of them. 
'Tis possible these words were more
galling to the jealous heart of miss Flora,
than any thing she could have said, 
though she spoke them with no other intent,
than to clear herself of the imputation
of having been forsaken;—a thing
she looked upon as the worst blemish
that could be cast upon her reputation. 
—Miss Flora finding no more was to be
got out of her, took her leave for this
time, resolving, however, in her own
mind, to keep up an acquaintance with
her; that seeming, to her, the most likely
way, both to satisfy her curiosity, and
prevent any effort of what the extravagance
of her passion made her apprehend. 
Miss Betsy did not give herself much
trouble in reflecting on what miss Flora
had said, but as soon as her watch reminded
her of the appointed hour, she
bid her footman fly and get a chair:—on
her coming to the house, mrs. Modely
herself opened the door at the first rap,
and desired her to walk in. —‘No,— 
no,’ said miss Betsy, still sitting in the
chair, ‘I cannot stay,—I only called to
tell you, that I will have the silver
robings put upon the green night-gown,
and will buy a new trimming for the
pink.’ —‘I shall be sure to obey your
orders, madam,’ replied the other; 
but I must intreat you will do me the 
honour to come in, and drink a dish of
tea,—the kettle boils, and I have just
now had a present of a canister of some
of the finest hyson in the world.’ —‘I
must leave you then as soon as I have
tasted it,’ said miss Betsy, coming out
of the chair; ‘for I have twenty visits
to make this evening.’ 
She had not been three minutes in the
parlour, when the person, for whom all
this ceremony was affected, entered the
room in somewhat of an abrupt manner,
—‘I come, mrs. Modely, to complain,’ 
said he;—‘my servants tell me.’ — 
With these words he stopped short, and
fixed his eyes full on miss Betsy, with a
kind of astonishment. —Mrs. Modely
pretending to be in a great fright, cried,
‘For heaven's sake, sir Frederick, what
is the matter? —I hope nothing in my
house has given your honour any cause
of complaint?’ —‘No, no, 'tis over
now,’ cried he, ‘your house is become
a temple, and this is the divinity that
honours it with her presence;—this
Græcian Venus.’ —Miss Betsy was too
much accustomed to company to be
easily abashed, and answered briskly, ‘if
you mean the compliment to me, sir, the
Græcian Venus's are all painted fat, 
and I have no resemblance of that perfection.’ 
—‘Only in your face, madam,’ 
returned he;‘—such sparkling
eyes,—such a complexion,—such a
mouth;—in your shape you are a Helen
of Troy.’ —‘That Helen of Troy,’ 
said miss Betsy, with an ironical smile,
‘I think was a Græcian princess, and
must also be fat, or she would not
have been reputed a beauty there.’ 
The baronet finding by this, he had
been guilty of an absurdity, when he intended
a fine speech, thought to salve
up the matter by saying, ‘Sure you are
Diana then.’ —‘Worse and worse,’ 
cried miss Betsy;—‘I beseech you, sir,
compare me to no such boisterous
goddess, that runs up and down, bare
footed and bare leg'd, hunting wild
boars in the forest!’ —‘What shall I
call you then,’ resumed he? —‘O!
tell me by what name you will be worshipped?’ 
—‘The ladies name, sir
Frederick,’ cried mrs. Modely hastily,
‘is miss Betsy Thoughtless.’ —‘Betsy,’ 
said he? ‘then Betsy let it be. —Betsy
shall henceforth become more famous
than Cytherea was of old.’ 
He was going on with this fulsome
stuff, in which he was often exposed by
the ready wit of miss Betsy, when a maid
belonging to the house came in, and
told her, that a gentleman in a hackney
coach was at the door, and desired to
speak with her. —‘With me!’—cried
she, not able to guess who should have
followed her there, ‘pray call my footman,
and bid him ask the person's
name that enquires for me.’ —The
maid did as she was ordered, and miss
Betsy's servant presently after brought her
this intelligence,—‘Mr. Munden, madam,’ 
said he, ‘not finding you at
home, has taken the liberty to call on
you here, in order to conduct you
where you are to pass the evening.’ — 
‘He must be a happy man, indeed,
dare take such liberties,’ cried sir Frederick,
somewhat fiercely. —‘Many take
more than they are allowed to do,’ 
said miss Betsy. —‘Go,’ continued she,
to the fellow, ‘and tell him, my mind
is changed,—that I cannot leave the
company I am with, and will not go.’ 
—Mr. Munden having received this message,
ordered the coachman to drive
away, very much dissatisfied, as the reader
may easily suppose. 
Miss Betsy, the day before, had agreed
to pass this evening with the ladies at
St. James's, and some others, to play at
commerce, a game then very much in
vogue;—mr. Munden was to be one of
the company, and calling at miss Betsy's
lodgings, in hopes of having some time
with her before this meeting, the maid,
who had not lived long enough with her
mistrefs to know her humour, presently
told him, she was only gone to her mantua-maker's,
and gave him directions to
the house; he also thinking it no indecorum
to call on her at the house of a
woman of that profession, had reason
enough to be mortified at the rebuff he
met with for so doing. 
As to miss Betsy, though she was a
little angry at the freedom mr. Munden
had taken, yet she was in reality much
more pleased;—and this for two reasons:
—first, because she saw it gave her new
lover some jealous apprehensions; and,
secondly, because it furnished her with a
plausible pretence for complying with his
entreaties to stay, which the protested,
she would not on any terms have been
prevailed upon to do, but to prevent
either him, or mrs. Modely, from suspecting 
she would go where mr. Munden
had desired. 
Mrs. Modely went out of the room several
times, as if called away by some houshold
affairs, that sir Frederick might have
an opportunity of declaring his passion to
miss Betsy, which he did in much the
same rodomontade strain, with which he
had at first accosted her. —A handsome
supper was served in, after which, she
being about to take her leave, he affected
to be in a great fret, that a fine
new chariot, which, he said, he had bespoke,
was not come home, that he might
have seen her safe to her lodgings, with
an equipage suitable to her merit, and
the admiration he had of it:—he would
needs, however, attend her in another
chair; which piece of gallantry, after a
few faint refusals, she accepted. 