


Relates only to such things, as the reader
may reasonably expect would happen. 

As much taken up, as miss
Betsy was, with the pleasure
of having gained a
new admirer, she could not
forbear, after she came
home, making some reflection
on the value of her conquest;— 
she had found nothing agreeable, either
in his person, or conversation:—the 

first seemed to her stiff and aukward,
and looked, as if not made for his cloaths; 
and the latter, weak, romantic, and bombast:
—in fine, he was altogether such
as she could not think of living with as
a husband, though the rank and figure
she was told he held in the world, made
her willing to receive him as a lover. 
—In fine, though she could not consent to
sacrifice herself to his quality, she took a
pride to sacrifice his quality to her vanity. 
No overtures of marriage having been
made to her since mr. Munden began his
courtship, and that gentleman growing,
as she fancied at least, a little too presuming,
on finding himself the only lover,
she was not a little pleased at the opportunity
of giving him a rival, whose quality
might over-awe his hopes. —In this
idea, she was far from repenting her behaviour
towards him the night before:
but how little soever she regarded what
mortification she gave the men, she always
took care to treat her own sex with
a great deal of politeness; and reflecting,
that she had been guilty of an omission,
in not sending her servant to excuse herself
to the ladies, who expected her, went
herself in the morning to make her own
apology. 

In the mean time, mr. Munden, who
it is certain was very much out of humour,
and impatient to let her know some
part of the sentiments her message had
inspired him with, came to make her a
morning visit, having some business,
which he knew would detain him from
waiting on her in the afternoon. —On
finding she was abroad, he desired the
maid to favour him with her lady's standish,
which she accordingly bringing to
him, he sat down, and without taking
much consideration, wrote the following
letter, and left for her on the table. 

To miss Betsy Thoughtless.
‘Madam,
A Midst the enchanting encouragement,
with which you have been pleased
to admit my services, I could not,
without calling your honour and generosity
in question, be altogether void
of hope, that you intended to afford
them one day, a recompence more
ample than a bare acceptance. 
‘Judge then of my surprise, at the
repulse I met with at mrs. Modely's
door. —I could not think it any breach
of the respect I owe you, to call on you 

at the house of your mantua-maker; 
—I could not imagine it possible for
you to have any engagements at such
a place, capable of preventing you
from keeping those, that you had
made with persons for whom you
profess an esteem:—on the contrary,
I rather expected you would
have permitted me to conduct you
thence, with the same readiness you
have done from most of the other places
where you have been, since I first had
the honour of being acquainted with
you. 
‘I know very well, that it is the duty
of every lover to submit, in all things,
to the pleasure of the beautiful object,
whose chains he wears;—yet, madam,
as you have hitherto made mine easy,
you must pardon me, when I say, this
sudden transition from gentleness to
cruelty, appears to me to contain a
mystery, which, though I dread, I am
distracted for the explanation of. 
‘Some business of great moment prevents
my waiting on you this afternoon,
but shall attend your commands
to-morrow at the usual hour, when I
still flatter myself, you will relieve the 

anxieties, and put an end to the suspence
of him, who is, 
‘With the greatest sincerity of heart,
Madam,
Your most humble,
And most faithfully devoted servant,
G. Munden.’ 

Miss Betsy, at her return home, found
also another billet directed for her, which
they told her, had been brought by a
servant belonging to sir Frederick Fineer; 
—she gave that from mr. Munden, however,
the preference of reading first, not
indeed through choice, but chance, that
happening to be first put into her hands. 
—As soon as she had looked it over, she
laughed, and said to herself, ‘The poor
man is jealous already, though he knows
not of whom, or why;—what will become
of him when he shall be convinced? 
—I suppose he was sure of
having me, and 'tis high time to mortify
his vanity.’ 
She then proceeded to sir Frederick's
epistle, in which she found herself more 

deify'd than ever she had been, by all her
lovers put together. 

To the nonpareil of her sex, the incomparable
miss Betsy Thoughtless.
‘Divine Charmer,
Though I designed myself the
inexpressible pleasure of kissing
your fair hands this evening, I could
not exist till then, without telling you
how much I adore you:—you are the
empress of my heart,—the goddess of
my soul;—the one loves you with the
most loyal and obedient passion,—the
other regards you as the sole mover,
and director of all its motions. —I cannot
live without you,—it is you alone
can make me blest, or miserable. —O
then pronounce my doom, and keep
me not suspended between heaven and
hell. —Words cannot describe the ardency
of my flame;—it is actions
only that can do it. —I lay myself, and
all that I am worth, an humble offering
at your feet. —Accept it, I beseech
you, but accept it soon; for I
consume away, in the fire of my impatient
wishes, and, in a very short
time, there will be nothing left for 

you, but the shadow of the man, who
is, 
‘With the most pure devotion,
Madam,
Your beauty's slave,
And everlasting adorer,
F. Fineer.’ 

‘Good lack,’ cried miss Betsy, ‘he
is in a great haste too, but I fancy he
must wait a while, as many of better
sense have done. —What a romantic jargon
is here? —One would think he
had been consulting all the ballads since
fair Rosamond, and the children in the
wood, for fine phrases to melt me into
pity.’ 
She wondered, as indeed she had good
reason, that a man of his birth, and who
it must be supposed had an education
suitable to it, should express himself in
such odd terms; but then she was tempted
to imagine, that it was only his over
care to please her, had made him stretch
his wit beyond its natural extent, and
that if he had loved her less, he would
have been able to have told her so in a
much better stile. —Possessed with this
fancy,—‘What a ridiculous thing this
love is!’ said she: ‘What extravagancies 

does it some times make men
guilty of!—yet one never sees this
madness in them after they become husbands; 
—if I were to marry sir Frederick,
I do not doubt but he would
soon recover his senses.’ 
How does a mind, unbroke with cares
and disappointments, entirely free from
passion, and perfectly at peace with itself,
and with the world, improve, and dwell
on every thing, that affords the least matter
for its entertainment? —This gay
young lady found as much diversion in
anticipating the innocent pranks she intended
to play with the authors of these
two letters, as an infant does in first playing
with a new baby, and afterwards
plucking it to pieces; so true is the observation
of the poet, that 

‘All are but children of a larger growth.’

But this sprightliness of humour in miss
Betsy, soon received a sad and sudden interruption:
—having sent, as she constantly
did every day, to enquire after
the health of mr. Goodman, her servant
returned with an account, that he had
expired that morning. —Though this
was an event, which she, and all who
knew him, had expected for some time, 

yet could she not be told of the death of
a gentleman, under whose care and protection
she so long had been, and who
had behaved, in all respects, so like a
parent towards her, without being very
deeply affected with the news:—she was
then at dinner, but threw down her knife
and fork, rose from the table, and retired
to her chamber and wept bitterly;—the
more violent emotions of grief were soon
asswaged, but her melancholly and dejection
of spirits continued much longer,
and while it did so, she had the power
of making the most just reflections on the
vain pursuits, the fleeting pleasures, and
all the noise and hurry of the giddy
world. —Love, and all the impertinencies
which bear that name, now appeared only
worthy her contempt; and recollecting,
that sir Frederick had mentioned visiting
her that evening, she sent a servant immediately
to mrs. Modely's, desiring her
to acquaint that gentleman, that she had
just lost a very dear friend, and was in
too much affliction to admit of any company. 
This being the day, on which mr.
Francis Thoughtless was expected to be
in London, this affectionate sister perceiving,
by his last letter to her, that his
health was not perfectly established, was 

under a very great concern, lest he
should be put to some inconvenience by
mr. Goodman's death, for a proper lodging
on his first arrival; but she soon
found her tender fears, on this occasion,
altogether groundless. 
Those objections, which had hindered
mr. Thomas Thoughtless from taking
her into his family, had not the same
weight in relation to mr. Francis, whose
sex set him above medling with those
domestic concerns, the command of which
he had given to another, and his reputation
would suffer nothing by being under
the roof with the mistress of his brother's
amorous inclinations. 
He went to the inn where he knew
the L&wblank;e stage put up,—welcomed
mr. Francis with open arms, as
soon as he alighted from the coach, and
gave him all the demonstrations of brotherly
affection, that the place they
were in would admit of; then conducted
him to his house, and insisted that he
should not think of any other home, till
he was better provided for, and settled
in the world. 
A servant, belonging to the elder mr.
Thoughtless, was immediately dispatched 

to miss Betsy, with a letter from the
younger, and it was from this man that
she received the agreeable intelligence,
that the two brothers were together. — 
The terms in which mr. Francis wrote to
her were these: 

To miss Betsy Thoughtless.
‘My dear sister,
Heaven be thanked I am at last
got safe to London;—a place,
which, I assure you, some months ago
I almost despaired of ever seeing more. 
My brother has just given me an account
of the death of honest mr. Goodman,
and, as I doubt not but you are
very much concerned, as indeed we
have all reason to be, for the loss of
so sincere and valuable a friend, I am
very impatient to see you, and give
you what consolation is in my power; 
but the fatigue of my journey, after so
long an illness, requires my taking some
immediate repose;—I shall, however,
wait on you to-morrow morning, 'till
when, believe me, as ever, 
‘With the greatest sincerity,
Dear sister,
Your affectionate brother,
And humble servant,
F. Thoughtless. 

‘P.S. My brother purposes to come with
me, but if any thing should happen
to prevent his visit, you may depend
on one from me. —Once more, my
dear sister, good night.’ 

In the present situation of miss Betsy's
mind, she could not have received a more
sensible satisfaction, than what she felt on
this young gentleman's arrival; but what
ensued upon it will in due time and place
appear. 
