

Relates how, by a concurrence of odd circumstances,
miss Betsy was brought
pretty near the crisis of her fate, and
the means by which she escaped. 
Mr. Francis Thoughtless arrived in town
the very evening before the day in
which sir Ralph Trusty and his lady were
to set out for L&wblank;e. They had
not seen this young gentleman since the
melancholly occasion of his father's funeral,
and would have been glad to have had
some time with him; but could no way
put off their Journey, as word was sent
of the day in which they expected to be at
home: sir Ralph knew very well, that a
great number of his tenants, and friends,
would meet him on the road, and a letter
would not reach them soon enough to prevent
them from being disappointed: they
supped with him, however, at mr. Goodman's,
who would not permit him to have
any other home than his house, during
his stay in town. Lady Trusty, on taking
leave of miss Betsy, said to her, she hoped
she would remember her promise when
her brother was returned to Oxford; on 
which she replied, that she could not be
so much an enemy to her own happiness
as to fail. 
Miss Betsy and this brother had been
always extremely fond of each other, and
the length of time they had been asunder,
and the improvement which that time had
made in both, heightened their mutual satisfaction
in meeting. 
All that troubled miss Betsy now, was,
that her brother happened to come to London
at a season of the year, in which he
could not receive the least satisfaction:
the king was gone to Hanover, all the
foreign ministers, and great part of the
nobility, attended him, and the rest were
retired to their country seats; so that an
entire stop was put to all public diversions
worth seeing. There were no plays,
no operas, no masquerades, no balls, no
public shews, except at the little theatre
in the Hay-market, then known by the
name of F&wblank;g's scandal-shop; because
he frequently exhibited there certain drolls,
or, more properly, invectives against the
ministry: in doing which it appears extremely
probable, that he had two views; 
the one to get money, which he very
much wanted, from such as delighted
in low humour, and could not distinguish
true satire from scurrility; and the other, 
in the hope of having some post given
him by those whom he had abused, in order
to silence his dramatic talent. But it
is not my business to point our either the
merit of that gentleman's performances,
or the motives he had for writing them,
as the town is perfectly acquainted both
with his abilities and success; and has
since seen him, with astonishment, wriggle
himself into favour, by pretending to cajole
those he had not the power to intimidate. 
But though there were none of the diversions
I have mentioned, nor Ranelagh at
that time thought of, nor Vauxhall, Maryle-bone,
nor Cuper's-gardens, in the repute
they since have been, the young gentleman
found sufficient to entertain him:
empty as the town was, lady Mellasin was
not without company, who made frequent
parties of pleasure, and when nothing else
was to be found for recreation, cards filled
up the void. 
Nothing material enough to be inserted
in this history happened to miss Betsy,
during the time her brother stayed, till
one evening, as the family were sitting together,
some discourse concerning Oxford
coming on the tapis, mr. Francis spoke so
largely in the praise of the wholesomeness 
of the air, the many fine walks and gardens
with which the place abounded, and
the good company that were continually
resorting to it, that miss Betsy cried out,
she longed to see it,—miss Flora said the
same. 
On this, the young gentleman gave
them an invitation to go down with him,
when he went, saying, they never could
go at a better time, as both the assizes and
races were to be in about a month. Miss
Betsy said, such a jaunt would vastly delight
her. Miss Flora ecchoed her approbation,
and added, she wished my lady
would consent. “I have no objection to
make to it,” replied lady Mellasin, “as
you will have a conductor, who, I know,
will be very careful of you.” Mr. Goodman's
consent was also asked, for the sake of
form, though every one knew the opinion
of his wife was, of itself, a sufficient sanction. 
Though it is highly probable, that miss
Betsy was much better pleased with this
journey, than she would have been with
that to L&wblank;e, yet she thought herself
obliged, both in gratitude and good
manners, to write to lady Trusty, and
make the best excuse she could for her 
breach of promise, which she did in these
terms. 

To lady Trusty.
Most dear and honoured madam,
“My brother Frank being extremely
desirous of shewing miss Flora and
myself the curiosities of Oxford, has obtained
leave from mr. Goodman, and
lady Mellasin, for us to accompany him
to that place. I am afraid the season
will be too far advanced, for us to take
a journey to L&wblank;e at our return; 
therefore flatter myself your ladyship
will pardon the indispensable necessity I
am under of deferring, till next spring,
the happiness I proposed in waiting on
you. All here present my worthy guardian,
and your ladyship, with their best
respects. I beg mine may be equally
acceptable, and that you will always
continue to favour with your good
wishes, her, who is, 
“With the most perfect esteem,
Madam,
Your ladyship's most obliged,
And most obedient servant,
E. Thoughtless.” 


The time for the young gentleman's
departure being arrived, they went together
in the stage, attended by a footman
of mr. Goodman's, whom lady Mellasin
would needs send with them, in order to
give the young ladies an air of dignity. 
They found, on their arrival at that
justly celebrated seat of learning, that mr.
Francis had given no greater eulogiums
on it, than it merited: they were charmed
with the fine library, the musæum, the
magnificence of the halls belonging to the
several colleges, the physic-garden, and
other curious walks; but that which above
all the rest gave the most satisfaction to
miss Betsy, as well as to her companion,
was that respectful gallantry with which
they found themselves treated, by the
gentlemen of the university. Mr. Francis
was extremely beloved amongst them, on
account of his affability, politeness, and
good humour, and they seemed glad of an
opportunity of shewing the regard they
had for the brother, by paying all manner
of assiduities to the sister; he gave the ladies
an elegant entertainment at his own
rooms, to which also some of those with
whom he was the most intimate were invited. 
All these thought themselves bound
to return the same compliment: the company 
of every one present were desired to
their respective apartments; and as each
of these gentlemen had, besides, other particular
friends of their own, whom they
wished to oblige, the number of the guests
were still increased at every feast. 
By this means, miss Betsy and miss
Flora soon acquired a very large acquaintance,
and as through the care of mr.
Francis they were lodged in one of the
best and most reputable houses in town,
their families known, and themselves were
young ladies who knew how to behave as
well as dress, and receive company in the
most elegant and polite manner, every one
was proud of a pretence for visiting them. 
The respect paid to them would doubtless
have every day increased, during the
whole time they should have thought proper
to continue in Oxford, and on quitting
it have left behind them the highest idea
of their merit, if, by one inconsiderate
action, they had not at once forfeited the
esteem they had gained, and rendered
themselves the subjects of ridicule, even
to those who before had regarded them
with veneration. 
They were walking out one day, about
an hour or two before the time in which 
they usually dined, into the parks, where
they were met by a gentleman-commoner,
and a young student, both of whom they
had been in company with at most of
the entertainments beforementioned. The
sparks begged leave to attend them, which
being readily granted, they walked all together
for some time; but the weather being
very warm, the gentleman-commoner
took an occasion to remind the ladies how
much their beauty would be in danger of
suffering from the immoderate rays of
phœbus, and proposed going to some gardens,
full of the most beautiful alcoves
and arbours, so shaded over, that the sun,
even in his meridian force, could, at the
most, but glimmer through the delightful
gloom: he painted the pleasures of the
place, to which he was desirous of leading
them, with so romantic an energy, that
they immediately, and without the least
scruple or hesitation, consented to be conducted
thither. 
This was a condescension, which he,
who asked it, scarce expected would be
granted, and, on finding it so easily obtained,
began to form some conjectures no
way to the advantage of these ladies reputation. 
It is certain, indeed, that as he
professed a friendship for the brother, he
ought not, in strict honour, to have proposed 
any thing to the sister, which would
be unbecoming her to agree to; but he
was young, gay to an excess, and in what
he said, or did, not always took consideration
for his guide. 
They went on laughing till they came
to the place he mentioned, where the gentlemen
having shewed their fair companions
into the gardens, in which were,
indeed, several recesses, no less dark than
had been described: on entering one of
them miss Betsy cried, “Bless me! this
is fit for nothing but for people to do
what they are ashamed of in the light.” 
The fitter then, madam” replied the
gentleman-commoner, “to encourage a
lover, who, perhaps, has suffered more
through his own timidity, than the
cruelty of the object he adores.” He
accompanied these words with a seizure of
both her hands, and two or three kisses
on her lips. The young student was no
less free with miss Flora; but neither of
these ladies gave themselves the trouble
to reflect what consequences might possibly
attend a prelude of this nature, and
repulsed the liberties they took in such a
manner, as made the offenders imagine
they had not sinned beyond a pardon. 
They would not, however, be prevailed
on to stay, or even to sit down in
that darksome recess, but went back into
a house, where they were shewn into a
very pleasant room, which commanded
the whole prospect of the garden, and was
sufficiently shaded from the sun by jessamin
and honeysuckles, which grew against
the windows: here wine, cakes, jellies,
and such like things being brought, the
conversation was extremely lively, and full
of gallantry, without the least mixture of
indecency. 
The gentlemen exerted all their wit and
eloquence, to perswade the ladies not to
go home in the heat of the day; but take
up with such entertainment as the place
they were in was able to present them
with. Neither of them made any objection,
except that having said they should
dine at home, the family would wait in
expectation of their coming; but this difficulty
was easily got over; the footman,
who had attended miss Betsy and miss
Flora, in their morning's walk, was in
the house, and might be sent to acquaint
the people, that they were not to expect
them. As they were neither displeased with
the company, nor place they were in,
they needed not abundance of perswasions, 
and the servant was immediately dispatched. 
The gentlemen went out of the room,
to give orders for having something prepared,
but staid not two minutes; and,
on their return, omitted nothing that
might keep up the good humour and
sprightliness of their fair companions. 
Persons of so gay and volatile a disposition,
as these four, could not content
themselves with sitting still, and barely
talking,—every limb must be in motion,
—every faculty employed. The gentleman-commoner
took miss Betsy's hand,
and led her some steps of a minuette, then
fell into a rigadoon, then into the louvre,
and so ran through all the school-dances,
without regularly beginning or ending any
one of them, or of the tunes he sung:
the young student was not less alert with
miss Flora; so that between singing,
dancing, and laughing, they all grew extremely
warm. Miss Betsy ran to a window
to take breath, and get a little air; 
her partner followed, and taking up her
fan, which lay on a table, employed it
with a great deal of dexterity, to assist the
wind, that came in at the casement for
her refreshment. “Heaven!” cried he,
“how divinely lovely do you now appear?
the goddess of the spring, nor Venus's
self, was ever painted half so beautiful. 
What eyes!—what a mouth!—and
what a shape!” continued he, surveying
her, as it were, from head to foot,
“how exquisitely turned!—how taper!— 
how slender! —I don't believe you
measure half a yard round the waist.” 
In speaking these words, he put his handkerchief
about her waist, after which he
tied it round his head, repeating these lines
of mr. Waller's: 

“That which her slender waist confin'd
“Shall now my joyful temples bind;
“No monarch but would give his crown,
“His arms might do what this has done.”

“O fie upon it,” said miss Betsy,
laughing, and snatching it from his head,
this poetry is stale, I should rather have
expected from an Oxonian, some fine
thing of his own extempore, on this occasion; 
which, perhaps, I might have
been vain enough to have got printed
in the monthly magazines.” 
“Ah! madam,” replied he, looking
on her with dying languishments, “where
the heart is deeply affected, the brain
seldom produces any thing but incongruous
ideas. Had Sacarissa been mistress 
of the charms you are, or had
Waller loved like me, he had been less
capable of writing in the manner he
did.” 
The student perceiving his friend was
entering into a particular conversation
with miss Betsy, found means to draw miss
Flora out of the room, and left them together,
though this young lady afterwards
protested, she called to miss Betsy to follow; 
but if she did, it was in such a low voice,
that the other did not hear her, and continued
her pleasantry, rallying the gentleman-commoner,
on every thing he said,
till he finding the opportunity he had of
being revenged, soon turned his humble
adoration into an air more free and natural
to him. As she was opening her mouth
to utter some sarcasm or other, he catched
her in his arms, and began to kiss her
with so much warmth and eagerness that
surprized her; she struggled to get loose,
and called miss Flora, not knowing she
was gone, to come to her assistance. The
efforts she made at first to oblige him to
desist, were not, however, quite so strenuous
as they ought to have been, on such
an occasion; but finding he was about to
proceed to greater liberties than any man
before had ever taken with her, she collected
all her strength, and broke from 
him, when looking round the room, and
seeing no-body there, “Bless me,” cried
she, “what is the meaning of all this?— 
where are our friends?” “They are
gone,” said he, “to pay the debt,
which love, and youth, and beauty challenge; 
let us not be remiss, nor waste
the precious moments in idle scruples. 
Come, my angel!” pursed he, endeavouring
to get her once more into his
arms, “make me the happiest of mankind,
“and be as divinely good as you are fair.” 
“I do not understand you, sir,” replied
she, “but neither desire, nor will stay
to hear an explanation.” She spoke this
with somewhat of an haughty air, and was
making towards the door; but he was far
from being intimidated, and, instead of
suffering her to pass, he seized her a little
roughly with one hand, and with the other
made fast the door; “Come, come, my
dear creature,” cried he, “no more resistance,
you see you are in my power,
and the very name of being so, is sufficent
to absolve you to yourself, for any
act of kindness you may bestow upon
me; be generous then, and be assured it
shall be an inviolable secret.” 
She was about to say something, but he
stopped her mouth with kisses, and forced 
her to sit down in a chair, where holding
her fast, her ruin had certainly been compleated,
if a loud knocking at the door had
not prevented him from prosecuting his
design. 
This was the brother of miss Betsy, who
having been at her lodgings, on his coming
from thence met the footman, who had
been sent to acquaint the family the ladies
would not dine at home: he asked where
his sister was, and the fellow having told
him, came directly to the place. A waiter
of the house shewed him to the room; on
finding it locked, he was strangely amazed,
and both knocked and called to have it
opened, with a good deal of vehemence. 
The gentleman-commoner knowing his
voice, was shocked to the last degree; but
quitted that instant his intended prey, and
let him enter. Mr. Francis, on coming in,
knew not what to think; he saw the gentleman
in great disorder, and his sister in
much more. “What is the meaning of
this,” said he: “Sister, how came you
here?” “Ask me no questions at present,” 
replied she, scarce able to speak,
so strangely had her late fright seized on
her spirits, “but see me safe from this
cursed house, and that worst of men.” 
Her speaking in this manner, made mr. 
Francis apprehend the whole, and perhaps
more than the truth. “How, sir!” said
he, darting a furious look on the gentleman-commoner,
“what is it I hear?— 
have you dared to—?” “Whatever
I have dared to,” interrupted the other,
“I am capable of defending.” “'Tis
well,” rejoined the brother of miss Betsy,
“perhaps, I may put you to the trial; 
but this is not a time or place.” He
then took hold of his sister's hand, and
led her down stairs; as they were going
out, miss Betsy stopping a little to adjust
her dress, which was strangely disordered,
she bethought herself of miss Flora, who,
though she was very angry with, she did
not choose to leave behind at the mercy
of such rakes, as she had reason to think
those were, whom she had been in company
with. Just as she was desiring her
brother to send a waiter in search of that
young lady, they saw her coming out of
the garden, led by the young student,
who, as soon as he beheld mr. Francis,
cried, “ha! Frank, how came you here?
you look out of humour.” “How I
came here, it matters not,” replied he,
sullenly; “and as to my being out of
humour, perhaps you may know better
than I yet do, what cause I have for
being so.” 

He waited for no answer to these words,
but conducted his sister out of the house
as hastily as he could: miss Flora followed,
after having taken leave of her
companion in what manner she thought
proper. 
On their coming home, miss Betsy related
to her brother, as far as her modesty
would permit, all the particulars of
this adventure, and ended with saying,
that sure it was heaven alone that gave
her strength to prevent the perpetration
of the villain's intentions. Mr. Francis, all
the time she was speaking, bit his lips, and
shewed great tokens of an extraordinary
disturbance in his mind; but offered not
the least interruption. When he perceived
she had done, “well, sister,” said he, “I
shall hear what he has to say, and will
endeavour to oblige him to ask your
pardon;” and soon after took his leave. 
Miss Betsy did not very well comprehend
his meaning in these words, and
was, indeed, still in too much confusion
to consider on any thing; but what the
consequences were of this transaction the
reader will presently be informed of. 