

Has something in it of the marvellous. 
Though Jemmy had as small a share of vanity in his composition as any man that ever lived, yet it would have been a thing almost supernatural in him, if an adventure, such as he had just now met with, had not elated a heart so unexperienced as was his;—Liberia was a woman of distinction, young, beautiful, and had every requisite to render her the delight and admiration of mankind; to what else then, but a peculiar liking of his person and behaviour, could it seem possible to him to impute the concessions she had made? 
It is not to be understood, however, that the pleasing sensation he felt at this event proceeded from the gratification of any passion he had entertain'd for the lady, who so highly had obliged him;—no, on the contrary, his affection for Jenny was a sure defence from the attacks of any other charms; he had often seen Liberia, had thought her a fine woman, as every one did; but he had never been touched with the least spark of an amorous desire on her account; nor, on looking on her, had even consider'd the difference of sexes: but though what had happened between them was merely casual on his side; yet he could not help believing, that it was a previous inclination on her's which alone could have excited her to act in the manner she had done. 
The hurry in which they were compell'd to part, took from him all opportunity of testifying that desire of continuing a correspondence with her, which otherwise, he thought, she would have had reason to expect; and which even gratitude, politeness, and even common good nature, would have exacted from him. 
He therefore went the next morning to her house, certain in his mind of meeting with a reception suitable to the kindness she had given him such proofs of the night before;—she was just dress'd, and going to court; but, on his sending up his name, gave orders for his admittance; the servant who introduced him immediately withdrawing, he approach'd to salute her with the air and freedom of a favour'd lover. 
But how unspeakable was his surprise, when, going to take her in his arms, she started back, and with a countenance all awful and austere, ‘Hold off, sir, said she, this is a familiarity neither becoming you to take, nor me to grant:’ the confusion he was in not permitting him to make any immediate reply; ‘I do not now, continued she, owe fifty pieces to you. 
‘No, madam,’ reply'd he, a little recovering himself; ‘but you owe me a heart in return for that I have devoted to you.’ —‘I have nothing to do with your heart, resum'd she; and as for mine it is my husband's due.’ —‘If you really think so, madam, cried he, wherefore did you flatter me last night with having so large a part?’ —‘What happened last night, said she, was merely accidental; I had lost all my money, and the debts we contract at play, you know, are debts of honour; but where my own is not concern'd, be assured I shall always have a just regard for that of my husband's.’ 
In spite of the consternation Jemmy was in, he could not refrain smiling at the distinction this lady made, and with an air, which had something of contemptuous in it, ‘I thought madam, said he, that the honour of the husband and the wife had always been inseparable. 
‘They are so, I allow, answer'd she; but necessity sometimes compels a woman to do what otherwise she would not be guilty of; therefore I beg you will think no more of what has happened, it was a foolish affair indeed; but as it cannot be recall'd, should be forgotten.’ 
He was about to make some reply, which it is likely would not have been very pleasing to her, but she went to the door and call'd to know if the chariot was ready, and being told it was, ‘Adieu, mr. Jessamy, said she, I am obliged to attend the princess; I hope whenever we meet, you will always treat me as the wife of lord ***.’ 
She had no sooner spoke these words than she shot like lightning out of the room, leaving Jemmy in a situation of mind not easy to be described, or even conceived, by any one who has not been under the same circumstances. 
It was not that his pride was so much mortifyed at this unexpected rebuff, as his comprehension was confounded at its being given; the more he endeavoured to fathom the mysterious meaning, the more he was absorb'd in wonder; in fine, he knew not what to think, nor by what motive to account for a proceeding so strange, so contradictory to the very nature of the sex. 
The first shock of any thing is very difficult to be conceal'd;—the spirits, when suddenly alarm'd, are in a hurry for a while, then sink into as extreme a languor. —Jemmy dined that day at a tavern, by an appointment he had made with some gentlemen of his acquaintance; but neither their conversation, nor the glass which went briskly about, had the power of dissipating his chagrin, or driving Liberia entirely from his thoughts. 
The least air of seriousness in persons of an extraordinary vivacity cannot fail of being taken notice of;—Jemmy was looked upon as the life and soul of all the company he went into; and now to find him, instead of inspiring others with good humour, stand in need of being inspired himself, made every one desirous of knowing what had occasioned this sudden transformation; but the affair was not a thing proper to be talked on, and he evaded giving any direct answer to the questions put to him on this head. 
He did not long, however, preserve a taciturnity on this occasion, which was pretty painful to him;—the company being broke up, and only one gentlman, with whom he had a greater intimacy than with any of the others, staying behind, he could not forbear speaking of what so much engross'd his thoughts; in fine, he related to him the whole history of his late whimsical adventure, concealing only the name of the heroine concern'd in it. 
But how strangely was he disappointed, when instead of hearing his friend express some astonishment, as he expected he would have done, at an event so new and uncommon, he only burst into such a violent fit of laughter as hindered him from speaking for some moments. 
‘What, cried Jemmy, I suppose the story I have been telling you is too romantic to be believed, and you suspect I have been endeavouring all this while to impose upon your understanding an invention of my own, in the room of a real fact? 
‘No, upon my word, reply'd the other, I am so confident of the truth of all you have repeated, that upon occasion I would be your voucher for every particular of it;—but what made me so merry was, the great care you have taken in keeping the name of this fine lady a secret;—What will you say now, continued he, if I tell you at once that I am very certain no woman but Liberia is capable of behaving in the manner you have describ'd? 
Liberia herself had scarce given Jemmy more surprise than his friend did in mentioning her as the person they were talking of. ‘Liberia, cried he, What have I said to raise such a conjecture in you? 
‘Nothing, upon my soul, answer'd the other; you have nothing to accuse yourself of in this point, and might have told the story to five hundred people without any one of them being able to guess at the woman;—it is not my penetration but my experience, has let me into the secret of this matter;—and to make you master of an other, I must tell you that I have been beforehand with you. 
Jemmy, not perfectly comprehending these words, asked what he meant? ‘It happen'd, said he, the other day, that one evening I play'd at the same table with this extraordinary lady;—I swept the stakes, and she being out of cash, we went on upon credit;—fortune still was on my side;—she lost a considerable sum to me, which I had the same equivalent for that she bestow'd on you; and when I waited on her some days afterwards, in order to repeat my devoirs, received also just the same repulse you did, and found that it was her humour;—no play—no love. 
‘Then neither of us, cried Jemmy, are oblig'd for the favours we have receiv'd to an amorous inclination on her part.’ ‘No, faith, reply'd his friend, I rather take her to be one of the insensibles that way;—but her lust of gaming is insatiate;—she would be eternally at it,—there all the passions of her soul are center'd; and though at present a profest enemy to religion, would be the greatest devotee imaginable, were she once persuaded there were gaming-tables in heaven. 
‘In fine, my dear Jemmy, pursu'd he, the case stands thus,—she loses more at play in one month, perhaps, than the rent-roll of lord **'s estate produces in a year; and being, either through fear or tenderness, unwilling to make him acquainted with her ill luck, prudently takes the method you and I have experienced, of satisfying the winners, and thinks herself no ill wise in so doing; since she forfeits her husband's honour only to preserve his peace, and never repeats her transgression with the same man, unless compell'd to it by a second necessity of the like nature.’ 
Jemmy being now, by this detail, entirely freed from the perplexity of thought which the first surprize at the strangeness of Liberia's behaviour had involved him in, it is not to be doubted but that these two young gentlemen were pleasant enough on the affair in question, and mutually laugh'd at each other for the disappointment each of them had received, in imagining they had been favoured with a peculiar liking by that lady. 
Neither of them having any engagements on their hands, they pass'd the whole evening together till the night was very far advanced, and called them to repose; during all which time little else but Liberia was talked on. 
But as the repetition of a conversation, founded on such a topic, might not be very agreeable to such of our readers as we should be most studious to oblige; and besides, would be not at all material to the business of this history, we may reasonably hope being easily excused for passing it over in silence. 
