

Contains such things as might be reasonably
expected, after the preceding adventure. 
When, in any thing irregular, and
liable to censure, more persons than
one are concerned, how natural it is for
each to accuse the other, and it often happens,
in this case, that the greatest part
of the blame falls on the least culpable. 
After mr. Francis had left the ladies, in
order to be more fully convinced in this
matter, and take such measures as he
thought would best become him for the
reparation of the affront offered to the honour
of his family, miss Flora began to
reproach miss Betsy, for having related
any thing of what had passed to her brother:
“By your own account,” said she,
“no harm was done to you; but some
people love to make a bustle about nothing.” 
“And some people,” replied
miss Betsy, tartly, “love nothing but the
gratifications of their own passions, and
having no sense of virtue or modesty
themselves, can have no regard to that 
of another.” “What do you mean,
miss?” cried the other, with a pert air. 
“My meaning is pretty plain,” rejoined
miss Betsy; “but since you affect so much
ignorance, I must tell you, that the expectations
of a second edition of the
same work mr. Gayland had helped
you to compose, though from another
quarter, tempted you to sneak out of
the room, and leave your friend in danger
of falling a sacrifice to what her
soul most detests and scorns.” These
words stung miss Flora to the quick; her
face was in an instant covered with a scarlet
blush, and every feature betrayed the
confusion of her mind; but recovering
herself from it, much sooner than most
others of her age could have done: “Good
lack,” cried she, “I fancy you are setting
up for a prude; but pray, how
came mr. Gayland into your head? — 
What, because I told you he innocently
romped with me one day in the chamber,
are you so censorious as to infer
any thing criminal passed between us?” 
“Whatever I infer,” replied miss Betsy,
disdainfully, “I have better vouchers for
the truth of, than your report, and
would advise you, when you go home,
to get the chink in the pannel of the
wainscot of my lady's dressing-room
stopped up, or your next rendezvous 
with that gentleman, may possibly have
witnesses of more ill-nature than myself.” 
“That can scarcely be,” said
miss Flora, ready to burst with vexation; 
“but don't think I value your little malice; 
you are only angry because he
slighted the advances you made him,
and took all opportunies to shew how
much his heart and judgment gave
the preference to me.” These words
so piqued the vanity of miss Betsy, that
not able to bear she should continue in the
imagination of being better liked than
herself, though even by the man she hated,
told her the sollicitations he had made to
her, the letter she had received from him,
and the rebuff she had given him upon
it; “so that,” pursued she, “it was not
till after he found there was no hopes
of gaining me, that he carried his devoirs
to you.” 
Miss Flora was more nettled at this
eclaircisement, than she was at the discovery
she now perceived the other had
made of her intrigue: she pretended,
however, not to believe a word of what
she had said; but willing to evade all farther
discourse on that head, returned to
the adventure they had just gone through
with the Oxonians. “Never expect,” 
said she, “to pass it upon any one of 
common sense, that if you had not a
mind to have been alone with that terrible
man, as you now describe him,
you would have staid in the room after
I was gone, and called to you to follow.” 
It was in vain that miss Betsy denied
she either heard her speak, or knew any
thing of her departure, till some time
after she was gone, and the gentleman-commoner
began to use her with such familiarities
as convinced her he was sensible
no witnesses were present. This,
though no more than truth, was of no
consequence to her justication, to one determined
to believe the worst, or, at least,
seem to do so: miss Flora treated with
contempt all she said on this score, derided
her imprecations, and to mortify her
the more, said to her, in a taunting manmer: 
“Come, come, miss Betsy, 'tis
a folly to think to impose upon the
world by such shallow artifices:—what
your inclinations are is evident enough; 
any one may see, that if it had not been
for your brother's unseasonable interruption,
no-body would ever have
heard a word of those insults you now
so heavily complain of.” 

Poor miss Betsy could not refrain letting
fall some tears at so unjust and cruel
an innuendo; but the greatness of her spirit
enabled her in a few moments to overcome
the shock it had given her: she returned
reproaches with reproaches, and as
she had infinitely more of truth and reason
on her side, had also much the better in
this combat of tongues, nevertheless the
other would not give out; she upbraided,
and exaggerated, with the most malicious
comments on it, every little indiscretion
miss Betsy had been guilty of, repeated
every censure which she had heard the
ill-natured part of the world pass upon
her conduct, and added many more, the
invention of her own fertile brain. 
Some ladies they had made acquaintance
with in town coming to visit them,
put an end to the debate; but neither
being able presently to forget the bitter
reflections cast on her by the other, both
remained extremely sullen the whole night,
and their mutual ill humour might possibly
have lasted much longer, but for an
accident more material, which took off
their attention, as it might have produced
much worse consequences than any quarrel
between themselves could be attended with. 
It happened in this manner: 

The brother of miss Betsy was of a
fiery disposition, and though those who
were entrusted with the care of his education,
were not wanting in their pains to
correct this propensity, which they thought
would be the more unbecoming in him,
as he was intended for the pulpit, yet did
not their endeavours for that purpose meet
with all the success they wished. Nature
may be moderated, but never can be
wholly changed, the seeds of wrath still
remained in his soul, nor could the rudiments
that had been given him be sufficient
to hinder them from springing into
action, when urged by any provocation. 
The treatment his sister had received from
the gentleman-commoner, seemed to him
so justifiable a one, that he thought he
ought not, without great submissions on
the part of the transgressor, be prevailed
upon to put it up. 
The first step he took was to sound the
young student, as to what he knew relating
to the affair, who freely told him,
as miss Betsy herself had done, where they
met the ladies, and the manner in which
they went into the house; protesting, that
neither himself, nor according to the best
of his belief, the gentleman-commoner, 
had at that time any designs in view, but
meer complaisance and gallantry. 
“How then came you to separate yourselves?” 
cried mr. Francis, with some
earnestness. “That also was accidental,” 
replied the other: “your sister's companion
telling me, she liked the garden
better than the room we were in, I
thought I could do no less than attend
her thither. I confess I did not consult
whether those we left behind had
any inclination to follow us or not.” 
The air with which he spoke of this
part of the adventure, had something in
it, which did not give mr. Francis the
most favourable idea of miss Flora's conduct; 
but that not much concerning him,
and finding nothing wherewith he could
justly reproach the student, he soon after
quitted him, and went to the gentleman-commoner,
having been told he might find
him in his rooms. 
Had any one been witness of the manner
in which these two accosted each
other, they would not have been at a loss
to guess what would ensue: the brother
of miss Betsy came with a mind full of resentment,
and determined to repair the
affront had been offered to him in the 
person of a sister, who was very dear to
him, by calling the other to a severe account
for what he had done. The gentleman-commoner
was descended of a noble
family, had an estate to support the dignity
of his birth, and was too much puffed
up and insolent on the smiles of fortune:
he was conscious the affront he had
given demanded satisfaction, and neither
doubted of the errand on which mr. Francis
was come, nor wondered at it; but
could not bring himself to acknowledge
he had done amiss, nor think of making
any excuse for his behaviour. Guilt in a
proud heart is generally accompanied
with a sullen obstinacy; for, as the poet
says, 

“Forgiveness to the injur'd does belong;
“But they ne'er pardon who have done the wrong.”

He, therefore, received the interrogatories
mr. Francis was beginning to make,
with an air rather indignant than complying,
which the other not being able to
brook, such hot words arose between
them, as could not but occasion a challenge,
which was given by mr. Francis. 
The appointment to meet was the next
morning at six o'clock, and the place, 
that very field in which the gentleman-commoner,
and his friend had so unluckily
happened to meet the ladies in their
morning's walk. 
Neither of them wanted courage, nor
communicated their rendezvous to any
one person, in hope of being disappointed
without danger of their honour; but each
being equally animated with the ambition
of humbling the arrogance of the other,
both were secret as to the business, and
no less punctual as to the time. 
The agreement between them was sword
and pistol, which both having provided
themselves with, they no sooner came within
a proper distance, than they discharged at
each other, the first course of this fatal entertainment; 
that of the gentleman-commoner
was so well aimed, that one of the bullets
lodged in the shoulder, and the other grazing
on the fleshy part of the arm of his antagonist,
put him into a great deal of pain; but
these wounds rather increased than diminished
the fury he was possessed of; he instantly
drew his sword, and ran at the
other with so well-directed a force, that
his weapon entered three inches deep into
the right side of the gentleman-commoner:
both of them received several other hurts,
yet still both continued the fight with 
equal vehemence, nor would either of
them, in all probability, have receded, till
one or other of them had lain dead upon
the place, if some countrymen, who by
accident were passing that way, had not
with their clubs beat down the swords of
both, and carried the owners of them by
meer force into the village they were going
to, where they were no sooner entered,
than several people who knew them, seeing
them pass by in this manner, covered
all over with their own blood, and guarded
by a pack of rustics, ran out to enquire
what had happened, which being
informed of, they took them out of the
hands of these men, and provided proper
apartments for them. 
By this time they were both extremely
faint through the anguish of their wounds,
and the great effusion of blood that had
issued from them. Surgeons were immediately
sent for, who on examining their
hurts, pronounced none of them to be
mortal, yet such as would require some
time for cure. 
Mr. Francis suffered extreme torture in
having the bullet extracted from his shoulder,
yet notwithstanding that, and the
weak condition he was in, he made a servant
support him in his bed, while he 
scrawled out these few lines to his sister; 
which, as soon as finished, were carried
to her by the same person. 

To miss Betsy Thoughtless.
“My dear sister,
I have endangered my life, and am
now confined to my bed, by the
wounds I have received, in endeavouring
to revenge your quarrel: do not
think I tell you this by way of reproach; 
for, I assure you, would the
circumstance of the affair have permitted
it to have been concealed, you never
should have known it. 
“I should be glad to see you, but
think it not proper that you should
come to me, 'till I hear what is said
concerning this matter. I shall send
to you every day; and that you will
be perfectly easy, is the earnest request
of, 
“Dear Betsy,
Your most affectionate brother,
And humble servant,
F. Thoughtless.” 


The young ladies were that morning at
breakfast in the parlour, with the gentlewoman
of the house, when the maid came
running in, and told her mistress, she had
heard, in a shop where she had been, of
a sad accident that had just happened:
“Two gentlemen,” cried she, “of the
university have been fighting, and almost
killed one another; and they say,” 
continued she, “it was about a young
lady, that one of them attempted to
ravish.” 
Miss Betsy and miss Flora, at this intelligence,
looked at each other with a
good deal of confusion, aiready beginning
to suspect who the persons were, and how
deeply themselves, one of them especially,
was interested in this misfortune. The gentlewoman
asked her servant, if she knew
the names of those who fought: “No,
madam,” answered she, “I could not
learn that, as yet; but the people in
the street are all talking of it, and I
do not doubt but I shall hear the whole
story the next time I go out.” 
The good gentlewoman, little imagining
how much her guests were concerned
in what she spake, could not now forbear
lamenting the ungovernableness of youth; 
the heedless levities of the one sex, and
the mad-brained passions of the other. 
The persons to whom she directed this
discourse would not, at another time, have
given much ear to it, or perhaps have replied
to it with raillery; but the occasion
of it now put both of them in too serious
a temper to offer any interruption, and
she was still going on, inveighing against
the follies and vices of the age, when
miss Betsy received the above letter from
her brother, which confirmed all those
alarming conjectures the maid's report had
raised in her mind. 
The mistress of the house perceiving the
young man, who brought the letter, came
upon business to the ladies, had the good
manners to leave the room, that they
might talk with the greater freedom. 
Miss Betsy asked a thousand questions,
but he was able to inform her of no farther
particulars, than what the letter contained. 
The moment he was gone, she ran up
to her chamber, threw herself upon the
bed, and, in a flood of tears, gave a loose
to the most poignant vexation she had
ever yet experienced. Miss Flora followed,
and seeing her in this condition,
thought she could do no less, in decency, 
than contribute every thing in her power
for her consolation. 
By the behaviour of this young lady,
in other respects, however, the reader will
easily perceive it was more through policy
than real good-nature, she treated her afflicted
companion with the tenderness she
now did: she knew, that it was not by
an open quarrel with miss Betsy she could
wreak any part of the spite she had conceived
against her, and was therefore glad
to lay hold of this opportunity of being
reconciled. 
“I was afraid, my dear,” said she,
“that it would come to this, and that
put me into so great a passion with you
yesterday, for telling mr. Francis any
thing of the matter: the men are such
creatures, that there is no trusting them
with any thing; but come,” continued
she, kissing her cheek, “don't grieve and
torment yourself in this manner, you
find there is no danger of death on
either side, and as for the rest it will
all blow off in time.” Miss Betsy said
little to this, the sudden passion of her
soul must have its vent; but when that
was over, she began to listen to the voice
of comfort, and, by degrees, to resume
her natural vivacity, not foreseeing that 
this unhappy adventure would lay her
under mortifications, which to a person
of her spirit were very difficult to be
borne. 