


Returns to the affairs of mrs. Munden. 

There were present at the entertainment
made by mr. Goodman, several
other of his friends, besides sir Ralph
and lady Trusty,—the two mr. Thoughtlesses,
and mrs. Munden:—the husband
of that lady had also received an invitation
to be one of the guests, but he pretended
a previous engagement would not
permit him to accept the favour intended
him. 
He made his excuse, however, in terms
so polite, and seemingly sincere, that
none of the company, excepting those,
who were in the secret of the disagreement
between him and his wife, had any
apprehensions that his absence was occasioned
by any other motive, than what
his message had expressed. 
Sir Ralph Trusty and his lady, who
were the only persons who had the least
suspicion of the truth of this affair, could
not help being a good deal concerned at
it; but they forbore taking any notice 

till the latter, perceiving mrs. Munden
had retired to a window at the further end
of the room, in order to give herself a
little air, stept hastily towards her, and
in a low voice accosted her in these terms: 
‘I see plainly, my dear,’ said she,
‘through the excuse your husband has
made for not complying with mr. Goodman's
invitation, and am heartily sorry
to find this fresh proof of the disunion
between you;—it is high time something
should be attempted to put things
on a better footing,—I will desire sir
Ralph to send for mr. Munden tomorrow,
and we will try what can be
done.’ 
‘Your ladyship is extremely good,’ 
replied the other, ‘and I shall be always
ready to submit to whatever you shall
think proper for me;—but I am determined
to be entirely passive in this
affair, and shall continue to live with
mr. Munden in the same manner I do
at present, till a very great alteration in
his behaviour shall oblige me to think I
ought, in gratitude, to make some
change in mine.’ 
Lady Trusty would not prolong the
conversation for fear of being observed, 

and they both rejoined the company. — 
After this there passed nothing of sufficient
moment to acquaint the reader with, so
I shall only say, that after a day, and
great part of the ensuing night spent in
feasting, merriment, and all that could
exhilerate the spirits, and excite good humour,
every one retired to their respective
dwellings, highly satisfied with the manner
in which they had been entertained by
the young merchant. 
Lady Trusty was far from being forgetful
of the promise she had made to
her fair friend, and after a serious consultation
with sir Ralph, in what manner
it was most proper to proceed, prevailed
upon that gentleman, who was little less
zealous than herself in doing good offices,
to write the following billet to mr. Munden: 

To George Munden, Esq;
‘Sir,
A Business, which I am perfectly well
assured is of the utmost consequence
both to your present and future happiness,
obliges me to intreat the favour
of seeing you this morning at my house,
it not being so proper, for reasons I 

shall hereafter inform you of, for me to
wait on you at your's. 
‘As I have no other interest in what I
have to impart, than merely the pleasure
I shall take in doing you a service,
and discharging what I think the duty
of every honest man, I flatter myself
you will not fail of complying immediately
with my request, and, at the same
time, believe me to be, what I am, 
‘With the greatest sincerity,
Sir,
Your well wisher,
And most humble,
And most obedient servant,
Ralph Trusty.’ 

This letter being sent pretty early in
the morning, mr. Munden was but just
out of bed when he received it:—a breakfast
much less pleasing to him than his
chocolate;—he doubted not but his wife
had made lady Trusty acquainted with the
whole secret of his family affairs, and
therefore easily guessed on what score he
was sent for in this pressing manner by sir
Ralph; and as it was highly disagreeable 

to him to enter into any discussions on
that head, it was some time before he
could resolve within himself what answer
he should send. 
But whatever deficiencies there might
be in this gentleman, none, excepting
those of his own family, to whom he did
not think it worth his while to be complaisant,
could ever accuse him of want
of politeness. —A character so dear to
him, that, perhaps, he would not have
forfeited it, even for the attainment of any
other of the more shining and valuable
virtues of his sex. 
Perplexing, therefore, as he knew this
interview must necessarily be to him, he
could not think of behaving in an uncourtly
manner to a gentleman of sir
Ralph Trusty's rank and fortune; and
having ordered that the servant, who
brought the letter, should come up, desired
him, in the most affable terms, to
acquaint his master, that nothing should
deprive him of the honour of attending
him the moment he was dressed. 
Sir Ralph Trusty in his younger years
had lived very much in London,—had
kept the best company in it, and though
he was perfectly sincere in his nature, and 

had a thorough contempt for all those idle
superfluous ceremonies, which some people
look upon as the height of good breeding,
and value themselves so much upon, yet
he knew how to put them in practice
whenever he found they would facilitate
any point he had to gain; and as mr.
Munden was altogether the courtier in his
behaviour, he thought it best to address
him in his own way, and receive him rather
in a manner as if he was about to
praise him for some laudable action he
had done, than make any remonstrances
to him, on a conduct, which he wanted
to convince him required some amendment. 
After having said a great many obliging
things to him, in order to bring him
into a humour proper for his purpose, the
politic old baronet began in these terms
to open the business, on which he had desired
to speak with him. 
‘I have not words to make you sensible,’ 
continued he, ‘how much your
absence was regretted yesterday by all
the company at mr. Goodman's, especially
by the two mr. Thoughtlesses,
who, indeed, on all occasions, express
the highest esteem and regard for you,
both as a friend and brother; but I was 

more particularly affected, when, on
coming home, my wife acquainted me
with what she imagined the real cause
that deprived us of you.’ 
‘She told me,’ added he, ‘that having
the other day surprised mrs. Munden in
tears and great confusion, she would not
leave her till she wrested from her a secret,
which I am equally ashamed and
sorry to repeat, but which you can be
at no loss to guess at.’ 
Though mr. Munden had foreseen on
what account he was sent for, and had
prepared himself for it, yet he could not
forbear testifying some confusion; but recovering
himself from it as soon as he
could,—‘Yes, sir Ralph, I easily perceive,’ 
answered he, ‘that my wife has
been making some complaints against
me to your lady, which, doubtless, have
laid me under her displeasure, as I know
the accuser has the advantage of the accused,
in the opinion of those to whom
they appeal.’ 
‘Not at all,’ cried sir Ralph, hastily,
‘I dare answer, that my wife is no less
concerned for your sake, than for that
of mrs. Munden, at the unfortunate disgreement 

that has happened between
you.’ 
As he was speaking these words, lady
Trusty, either by design or accident, pass'd
by the door of the room where they were
sitting. —‘Come in, my dear,’ said sir
Ralph to her, ‘and justify yourself from
being swayed against right reason, by
any partial affection to your fair friend.’ 
‘If you mean in the case of mrs. Munden,
as I suppose you do,’ replied she,
‘I can acquit myself with very great ease
from any imputation on that score, and
am ready even before her husband to
give it as my judgment, that in all disputes
between persons, who are married
to each other, especially when carried
to any height, neither of them are wholly
faultless; for, though one may be the
first aggressor, the other seldom, if ever,
behaves so as not to incur some part of
the blame.’ 
‘Your ladyship is all goodness,’ said
mr. Munden, very respectfully, ‘and in
what you have said, discover not only
a penetration, but also a love of justice,
which can never be too much admired
and applauded. —What your ladyship
has observed between me and mrs. Munden, 

is exactly the thing;—it is certain,
that both of us have been to blame:
—I have, perhaps, acted in a manner
somewhat too abruptly towards her, and
she in one too resentful, and too imperious
towards me; and though I am
willing to allow my dear Betsy all the
merit of those good qualities she is possessed
of, yet I cannot help giving her
some part of the character mr. Congreve
ascribes to Zara in his Mourning
Bride, and saying, 

“That she has passion, which outstrip the winds,
“And root her reason up.’

Lady Trusty, who, for the sake of mrs.
Munden's reputation, was so eager to
patch up a reconciliation at any rate between
her and her husband, would not
seem to defend her behaviour as a wife,
while she gently accused him of having
too far exerted the authority of a husband. 
In a word, both sir Ralph, and his
lady, managed in so artful a manner, still
blending cajolings with remonstrances,
that when they came to enter into a discussion
on this affair, that mr. Munden,
whatever he thought in his heart, could 

not forbear seeming to yield to the justice
of their reasonings. 
He consented, though not without some
scruples, and a much greater share of inward
reluctance, than his complaisance
would permit him to make shew of, to
add one guinea per week to his allowance
for the expences of his table. —As to the
rest, he readily enough agreed to meet his
wife half way towards a reconciliation,— 
assured them, that he was far from requiring
any other submission on her part, than
what he would set her the example of in
himself, and that he wished nothing more
than to exchange forgiveness with her. 
On this, lady Trusty dispatched a servant
directly to mrs. Munden, to let her
know she must needs speak with her immediately; 
—which summons was no
sooner delivered, than complied with. 
This prudent lady having cast about in
her mind all that was proper to be done,
in order to accomplish the good work
she laboured for, and had so much at
heart, would not leave it in the power of
chance to disappoint what she had so happily
begun, and having prevailed over
the ill-nature and sourness of the husband,
thought it equally necessary to prevent the 

resentment, or inadvertency of the wife,
from frustrating her endeavours. 
On being told mrs. Munden was come,
she ran down stairs to receive her,—led
her into a parlour, and informed her, as
briefly as she could, all that part, which
she thought would be most satisfactory to
her, of the conversation which had passed
between them and mr. Munden, on her
score. 
Finding what she said was received by
the other more coolly than she wished,
she took that privilege, which her rank,
her age, and the friendship she had always
shewn to her, might justly claim,
to remonstrate to her, that it did not become
her situation and character to stand
too much upon punctilio's at this time; 
—that all, that either was, or ought to
be dear to womankind, depended on a
speedy accommodation with her husband; 
—‘The unhappy brulée,’ said she, ‘has
lasted too long,—your servants must certainly
know it,—you cannot be assured
of their secrecy,—the whole affair,
perhaps with large additions to it, will
soon become the talk of the town,— 
every one will be descanting upon it,
and how much soever mr. Munden may 

be in fault, you cannot hope to escape
your share in the censure.’ 
Poor mrs. Munden, who looked upon
this lady as a second mother, would not
attempt to offer any thing in opposition
to the arguments she used; and, besides,
could not forbear avowing within herself
the justice of them. —‘Well, madam,’ 
answered she, with a deep sigh, ‘I shall
endeavour to follow your ladyship's advice,
—and, since I am a wife, will do
my best to make the yoke, I have submitted
to, sit as lightly upon me as possible.’ 
Lady Trusty perceiving her spirits were
very much depressed, omitted nothing,
that the shortness of time would allow, to
perswade her to believe, that her condition
was not so unhappy, in reality, as she at
present imagined it to be; and having
brought her to somewhat of a more chearful
temper, conducted her into the room
where sir Ralph and mr. Munden were
still discoursing on the matter in question. 
‘Welcome, my fair charge,’ cried the
former, taking her by the hand, and drawing
her towards mr. Munden,—‘I have
once already had the honour of giving
you to this gentleman, permit me to 

do so a second time;—I hope, with
the same satisfaction on both sides, as
at first.’ 
‘On mine, by heaven it is,’ replied
mr. Munden, flying hastily to embrace
her, as she moved slowly forward;—‘if
my dearest Betsy will promise to forget
what is past, the pains I have suffered,
during this interruption of my happipiness,
will be a sufficient security for
her, that I shall be very careful for the
future, to avoid doing any thing that
may again subject me to the like misfortune.’ 
These words, and the tender air which
he assumed in speaking them, were so
much beyond what mrs. Munden could
have expected from him, after his late
treatment of her, that all her pride,
her anger, and even her indifference, subsided
at that instant, and gave place to
sentiments of the most gentle nature. 
‘You must believe,’ answered she,
with an infinity of sweetness in her voice
and eyes, ‘that I have also had my share
of anguish; but whatever inquietudes
you have sustained on my account must
be forgotten on your part, as it shall be
be mine to make attonement for them, 

by every thing in my power, which can
flatter me with the hopes of doing so.’ 
Insensible and morose as mr. Munden
was, he could not avoid, on this obliging
behaviour in his fair wife, being touched
in reality with some soft emotions, which
he so well knew how to magnify the appearance
of, that not only herself, but the
by-standers, imagined he was the most
transported man alive. 
Impossible is it to express how much
sir Ralph, and his good lady, rejoiced to
see this happy event:—they entertained
them very elegantly at dinner,—in the
afternoon they went all together to take the
air in Kensington gardens,—and a great
deal of company coming in the evening
to visit lady Trusty, every thing contributed
to keep up the spirit and good humour
of the newly re-united pair. 
