

Is a kind of olio, a mixture of many
things, all of them very much to the
purpose, though less entertaining than
some others. 
Lady Mellasin, who little expected
that her husband was made so well
acquainted, or even that he had the least
thought of the worst part of her behaviour
towards him, was ready enough to
flatter herself, both from her experience
of his uncommon tenderness for her, and
from what his lawyer had insinuated, in
order to prevail on her to go away with
the less noise, that when this gust of passion 
was blown over, he would be reconciled,
and consent to her return. 
These imaginations made her carry it
with a high hand before the servants, and
as they were packing up her things, while
mrs. Prinks was gone to prepare a lodging
for her,—“Your master will be
glad to fetch me home again,” cried
she;—“poor man! he has been strangely
wrong-headed of late. —I suppose
he will be ready to hang himself when
he considers what he has done, for he
may be sure I shall not very easily
forgive the affront he has put upon
me.” 
How truly amiable is an unblemished
character, and how contemptible is the
reverse! —Servants naturally love and respect
virtue in those they live with, and
seldom or never either flatter or conceal
the vices they do not greatly profit by. 
—The airs lady Mellasin gave herself,
on this occasion, were so far from making
them believe her innocent, or their master
blameable, that as soon as they had got
out of her sight, they only turned her
pride, and the fall it was going to sustain,
into ridicule and grimace. 
Miss Betsy, however, could not see
them depart in this manner, without feeling
a very deep concern:—their misfortunes
obliterated all the resentment she
had at any time conceived against them,
and she had never before been more angry,
even with miss Flora, for the treachery
she had been guilty of to her, than
she was now grieved at the sight of her
humiliation. 
She was sitting alone, and full of very
serious reflections on this sudden change
in the family, when her brother Thoughtless
came in:—she was glad of the opportunity
of sounding his inclinations, as
to her living with him, and now resolved
to do it effectually:—she began with
telling him, the whole story of lady Mellasin's
and miss Flora's removal, and
then complained how dully she should
pass her time, with only mr. Goodman,
and an old gentlewoman, who was to
come to be his house-keeper. —“I
thought you were about marrying,” 
said he, “and expected from what mr.
Goodman wrote to me, that my first
compliment to you, on my arrival,
would have been to have wished you
joy. —You are not broke off with the
gentleman,—are you?” 
The careless air with which he spoke
these words, stung miss Betsy to the
quick; she took no notice, however, how
much she was piqued at them, but replied,
that the whole affair was mere
suggestion;—that it was true, indeed,
she had for some time received the addresses
of a gentleman, recommended by
her brother Frank;—that he, and some
other of her friends, were very much for
the match, and she supposed had spoke
of it as a thing concluded on, because
they wished it to be so; but for her own
part, she never had as yet entertained
one serious thought about the matter, and
at present was far from having any disposition
to become a wife;—“so that,” 
continued she, “if I am doomed to stay
in mr. Goodman's house, 'till I am
relieved that way, it is very probable
I may be moped to death, and married
to my grave.” 
“Where is the necessity for that?” 
said he:“Are there not places enough
in town, where you may find good
company to board, or lodge with?” — 
“Doubtless there are many such, sir,” 
replied she, with some spirit, “and if I
am so unhappy as not to have any
friend so kind to make me an invitation, 
shall be obliged to seek an asylum
among strangers.” 
Mr. Thoughtless looked a little confounded
at these words;—he had seen
from the beginning of her discourse, the
aim to which it tended, and as he had
his own reasons for not complying with
her desires, would not seem to understand
her, but she now spoke too plain, and he
was somewhat at a loss what answer to
make, so as not to give her any cause of
accusing his want of affection, and at the
same time put her off from expecting he
would agree to, what she would have him,
in this point, when fortunately for his relief,
a letter just brought by the post
was presented to miss Betsy. —“From
L&wblank;e,” said she, as soon as she
took it into her hand. —“From brother
Frank, then, I suppose,” cried he. — 
“No,” answered she, “from lady Trusty:
—you will excuse me, brother, while I
look over the contents.” —She broke
it open while she was speaking, and read
to herself as follows: 

To miss Betsy Thoughtless.
‘My dear miss Betsy,
Sir Ralph received yesterday a letter
from mr. Thoughtless, dated Calais
the third Instant, so I doubt not, but
by this time I may congratulate you on
his safe arrival in London; but I am
sorry to acquaint you, that while you
were embracing one brother, you were
in very great danger of losing another; 
but do not be too much alarmed,— 
I hope the worst is past:—I believe
he gave you an account himself, that
by an unlucky fall from his horse he
was prevented from going to London so
soon as he had designed, but the mischief
done him by this accident, was
much greater than he imagined at the
time of his writing to you. —What he
took only for a common bruise proved
to be a contusion, and for want of proper
care at first, through the outrageousness
of the pain, soon brought on a
fever:—for two whole days we were
in the utmost apprehensions for his life,
but now, thanks to the author of all
mercies, we are assured by the physician
that attends him, and who is esteemed
the most skilful this country affords,
that he is in a fair way of doing well. 
—His delirium has quite left him, and
he has recovered the use of his reason,
so far as to intreat I would send the
warmest wishes of his heart to you,
and to desire you will make the same
acceptable to his dear brother, if you
are yet so happy as to see him:—he
also enjoins you to put his compliments
to mr. Trueworth, in such words as are
befitting the friendship you know he
has for him. —I have much to say to
you from myself, on the score of that
gentleman, and should be glad to add
to the advice I have already given you,
but am deprived of that satisfaction by
the arrival of some company, who are
come to pass a week or fortnight with
us, therefore must defer what I have to
say till another opportunity. —Farewell,
may heaven still keep you under its
protection, and your guardian angel never
fail his charge. —Be assured, that
though I do not write so long, nor so
often to you as I could wish, I am always, 
‘With the greatest sincerity,
My dear miss Betsy,
Your very affectionate friend,
And humble servant,
M. Trusty.’ 
‘P.S. I wrote the above this morning,
because one of our men was to have
gone pretty early to town, but sir
Ralph having some letters of his own,
which were not then ready, detained
him, and I have now the pleasure to
tell you, that the doctor, who is this
moment come from your brother's
chamber, assures me, that he has
found him wonderfully amended,
since his visit to him last night. — 
Once more, my dear, adieu.’ 
Mr. Thoughtless perceiving some tears
in the eyes of miss Betsy, while she was
reading, cried out, “What is the matter,
sister? —I hope no ill news from the
country.” —“Be pleased to read that,
sir,” said she, giving him the letter,
and see if I had not cause to be affected
with some part of it.” 
“Poor Frank,” said he, as soon as he
had done reading, “I am very sorry for the
accident has happened to him, but more
glad that it is like to be attended with no
worse consequences. —Do not be melancholly,
my dear sister, you find he
is in a fair way of recovery, and I
hope we shall soon have him with us. 
I long very much to see him,” continued 
he, “and the more so, as I have
spoke in his behalf to a general officer,
whom I contracted an intimacy with
at Paris, and who has promised him all
the service he can, in procuring him a
commission.” 
They had some further talk on family
affairs, after which he told her, he was
troubled to leave her alone, but was obliged
to return to some company he had
made an elopement from when he came
there. At parting, he saluted her with a
great deal of affection,—desired she
would be chearful, and said, he dare believe
she had too much merit ever to have
any real cause to be otherwise. 
This tenderness very much exhilerated
her drooping spirits,—she entertained
fresh hopes of being in the house with a
brother, who she found designed to live
in the most elegant and polite manner,
which was what she had, at present, the
most at heart of any thing in the world:
—she now began to fancy he did not
propose it to her, either because he did
not think she would approve of it, or
because he feared, that to testify any desire
of removing her might offend mr.
Goodman, as she had boarded with him 
ever since she came to town;—she
therefore resolved to desire the favour of
that gentleman to mention it to him, as
of his own accord, and let her know what
answer he should make. —This idea gave
her some pleasure for a while, but it was
as soon dissipated;—the thoughts of her
brother Frank's misfortune, and the danger
she could not be sure he was yet perfectly
recovered from, came again into
her mind; but this also vanished, on remembring
the hopes lady Trusty had
given her, yet still she was discontented,
though she knew not well at what. —In
fine, she was so little accustomed to reflect
much on any thing, much less to be
alone, that it became extremely irksome
to her. —“What a wilderness is this
house!” cried she to herself. —“What
a frightful sollitude! —One would
think all the world knew lady Mellasin
and miss Flora were gone, that nobody
comes near the door. —How still? — 
How quiet is every thing?” —Then
would she start from her chair, measure
how many paces were in the room,— 
look at one picture,—then on another,
—then on her own resemblance in the
great glass;—but all this would not do:
—she wanted somebody to talk to,— 
something new to amuse herself with. — 
“I wonder,” said she, “what is become 
of Trueworth,—I have not seen him
these three days,—indeed I used him
a little ill at our last conversation;— 
but what of that? If he loves me, as
well as he professes, he will not sure
pretend to be affronted at any thing I
do. —My brother desires me to give
his compliments, but if the man will
not come to receive them, 'tis none of
my fault;—yet after all,” continued
she, having paused a little, “what privilege
has our sex to insult and tyranize
over the men? —It is certainly
both ungenerous and ungrateful to use
them the worse, for using us, perhaps,
better than we deserve. —Mr. Trueworth
is a man of sense, and, if I were
in his place, I would not take such
treatment from any woman in the
world. —I could not much blame him
if he never saw me more. —Well,— 
when next he comes, I will, however,
behave to him with more respect.” 
Thus did the dictates of a truly reasonable
woman, and the idle humour of a
vain coquette, prevail by turns over her
fluctuating mind:—her adventure at
miss Forward's came fresh into her head; 
—she was in some moments angry with
mr. Trueworth for offering his advice; 
in others, more angry with herself, for 
not having taken it. —She remained in
this perplexity till a servant, finding it
grew late, and that his master did not
sup at home, came in, and asked her if
she would not please to have the cloth
laid, to which she answered, with all
her heart; on which, the table being immediately
spread, she eat of something
that was there, and soon after went to
bed, where, 'tis probable, she lost in sleep,
both all the pleasure and the pain of her
past meditations. 
Mr. Goodman was all this while, as
well for several succeeding days also, busily
employed on an affair no less disagreeable
than it was new to him; but by
the diligence and adroitness of his lawyer,
he got the affidavits, the warrant, and
every thing necessary for the intended
prosecution of Marplus and lady Mellasin,
ready much sooner than many others
would have done, or he himself had expected. 
The fatigue and perplexity he was under
was indeed very great, as may be
easily supposed, yet did it not render him
neglectful of miss Betsy:—she had desired
him to speak to her brother on her
account, and he did so the first opportunity,
—not as if the thing had been mentioned 
by her, but as if he, in the present
situation of his family, thought her removal
convenient. 
Mr. Thoughtless, from what his sister
had said, expected he should one time or
other be spoke more plainly to upon
that subject, had prepared himself with
an answer;—he told mr. Goodman,
that nothing could have been more satisfactory
to him, than to have his sister
with him, if her being so were any ways
proper;—“but,” said he, “as I am
a single man, I shall have a crowd of
gay young fellows continually coming
to my house, and I cannot answer that
all of them would be able to behave
with that strict decorum, which I should
wish to see always observed towards a
person so near to me:—her presence,
perhaps, might be some check upon
them, and theirs no less disagreeable
to her. —In fine, mr. Goodman,” 
continued he, “it is a thing wholly inconsistent
with that freedom I propose
to live in, and I would not have her
think on it.” 
It was not that this gentleman wanted
natural affection for his sister, that he refused
what he was sensible she so much
desired, but he was at present so circumstanced, 
that to have complied would,
under a shew of kindness, have done her
a real injury. —He had brought with him
a young and very beautiful mistress from
Paris, of whom he was fond, and jealous
to that extravagant degree, that he could
scarce suffer her a moment from his sight:
—he had promised her the sole command
of his house and servants, and that she
should appear as his wife in all respects
except the name. —How could he, therefore
bring home a sister, who had a right
to, and doubtless would have claimed all
those privileges another was already in
possession of? —And how would it have
agreed with the character of a virtuous
young lady, to have lived in the same
house with a woman kept by her brother
as his mistress? 
But this was a secret miss Betsy was as
yet wholly unacquainted with; and when
mr. Goodman repeated to her what had
passed between them, on her score, and
the excuse her brother had made for not
complying with the proposal, she thought
it so weak, and withal so unkind, that
she could not forbear bursting into tears:
—the good-natured old gentleman could
not see her thus afflicted without being
extremely concerned, and saying many
kind things to pacify her:—“Do not 
weep,” said he, “I will make it my
business,—nay my study, to procure
some place where you may be boarded
to your satisfaction.” —“I beg, sit,
that you will not mistake my meaning,
—I do assure you, sir, I am not wanting
in sensibility of your goodness to
all our family, and to me in particular. 
—I must indeed be strangely stupid
not to think myself happy under the
protection of a gentleman of so humane
and benign a disposition. —No, sir,
be perswaded there is no house in London,
except that of an own brother, I
would prefer to yours;—I will, therefore,
with your permission, continue
here, nor entertain the least thought of
removing, unless some accident yet unforeseen
oblige me to it.” 
Mr. Goodman then told her, that he
should be glad she would always do what
was most for her own ease. This was all
the discourse they had upon this head,
and when miss Betsy began to consider
seriously on the behaviour both of lady
Mellasin and miss Flora, she found there
was little reason for her to regret the loss
of their society;—nor that she ought to
think mr. Goodman's house less agreeable
for their being out of it;—she received
all such as she approved of, who had 
come to visit them, and by doing so were
acquainted with her, and as to those, who
visited herself in particular, it was the
same as ever. —Mr. Goodman's kinswoman,
now his housekeeper, was a wellbred,
accomplished woman, and a chearful
agreeable companion;—she seemed
studious to oblige her;—all the servants
were ready to do every thing she desired,
and it would have been difficult for her to
have found any place where she could
have been better accommodated, or have
had more cause to be contented; and she
would doubtless have thought herself more
happy than she had ever been since her
coming to mr. Goodman's, if other things
of a different nature had not given her
some unquiet moments. 
But besides the unkindness of one brother,
on whom she had built the most
pleasing hopes, and the indisposition of
another, for whom she had a very great
affection, the late behaviour of mr. Trueworth
gave her much matter of mortification:
—she had not seen him for upwards
of a week,—she imputed this absence
to the rebuff she had given him at
his last visit; and though she could not
avoid confessing in her heart, that she had
treated him neither as a gentleman, nor a
friend, yet her vanity having suggested, 
that he was incapable of resenting any
thing she did, received a prodigious
shock by the disappointment it now sustained. 