

Presents the reader with the name and
character of miss Betsy's third lover,
and also with some other particulars. 
Though lady Mellasin had seemed
to blame miss Betsy for not having
communicated to mr. Goodman what her
brother wrote to her in relation to mr.
Trueworth, yet in her heart she was far
from being averse to her receiving a plurality
of lovers, because whenever that
young lady should fix her choice, there
was a possibility some one or other of
those she rejected might transmit his addresses
to her daughter, whom she was extremely
desirous of getting married, and
had never yet been once sollicited on honourable
terms:—she therefore told her
husband, that he ought not to hinder miss
Betsy from hearing what every gentleman
had to offer, to the end she might accept
that which had the prospect of most advantage
to her. 
Mr. Goodman in this, as in every thing
else, suffered himself to be directed by her
judgment, and the next morning, when
miss Betsy came down, talked to her with
his usual pleasantry. “Well,” said he,
“have you forgiven my ill humour last
night? I was a little vexed to think
my friend Staple had so poor a chance
for gaining you, and the more so because
Frank Thoughtless will take it ill
of me, that I have done any thing in
opposition to the person he recommends; 
but you must act as you
please; for my part I shall not meddle
any farther in these affairs.” 
“Sir,” replied miss Betsy, very gravely,
“I shall always be thankful to my friends
for their advice, and whenever I think
seriously of a husband shall not fail to
intreat yours in my choice; but,” continued
she, “one would imagine my brother,
by writing so pressingly to you,
wanted to hurry me into a marriage
whether I would or no; and though I
have as much regard for him, as a
sister can or ought to have, yet I shall
never be prevailed upon by him to enter
into a state to which at present I
have rather an aversion than inclination.” 
“That is,” said mr. Goodman, “you
have rather an aversion, than an inclination,
to the persons who address
you on that score.” “No, sir,” answered
she, “not at all: the persons and
behaviour, both of mr. Trueworth and
mr. Staple, appear to me to be unexceptionable; 
but sure one may allow a
man to have merit, and be pleased with
his conversation, without desiring to be
tacked to him for ever. I verily believe
I shall never be in love; but if I
am, it must be a long length of time,
and a series of persevering assiduities
must make me so.” 
Mr. Goodman told her, these were only
romantic notions, which, he doubted not,
but a little time would cure her of. 
What reply miss Betsy would have made
is uncertain, for the discourse was interrupted
by a footman delivering a letter to
her, in which she found these lines: 

To miss Betsy Thoughtless.
‘Fair Creature,
I am no courtier,—no beau,—and
have hitherto had but little communication
with your sex; but I am honest
and sincere, and you may depend on 
the truth of what I say. I have, heaven
be praised, acquired a very large
fortune, and for some time have had
thoughts of marrying, to the end I
might have a son to enjoy the fruit of
my labours, after I am food either for
the fishes, or the worms;—it is no
great matter which of them. Now I
have been wished to several fine women,
but my fancy gives the reference to
you; and if you can like me as well,
we shall be very happy together. I
spoke to your guardian yesterday, for I
love to be above-board; but he seemed
to lour, or, as we say at sea, to be a little
hazy on the matter, so I thought I
would trouble him no farther, but write
directly to you. I hear there are two
about you; but what of that? I have
doubled the Cape of Good Hope many
a time, and never failed of reaching my
intended port, I therefore see no cause
why I should apprehend a wreck by
land. I am turned of eight and forty,
'tis true, which may-be you may think
too old; but I must tell you, dear pretty
one, that I have a constitution that will
wear out twenty of your washy pampered
landmen of not half my age. Whatever
your fortune is I will settle accordingly,
and moreover will secure something
handsome to you at my decease, 
in case you should chance to be the
longest liver. I know you young women
do not care a man should have any
thing under your hand, so expect no answer; 
but desire you will consider on
my proposals, and let me know your
mind this evening at five o'clock, when
I shall come to mr. Goodman's, let him
take it how he will. I can weather out
any storm to come at you, and sincerely
am, 
‘Dear Soul,
Your most faithful,
And affectionate lover,
J. Hysom.’ 

There were some passages in this letter
that set miss Betsy into such immoderate
fits of laughter, as made her a long time
in going through it. Having finished the
whole, she turned to mr. Goodman, and
putting it into his hands, “Be pleased,
sir, to read that,” said she, “you shall
own, at least, that I do not make a secret
of all my lovers to you.” Mr.
Goodman soon looked it over, and after
returning it to her, “How troublesome a
thing it is,” said he, “to be the guardian
of a beautiful young lady! whether 
I grant, or whether I refuse the consent
required of me, I equally gain ill-will
from one side or the other.” 
Lady Mellasin, who had all this morning
complained of a violent head-ach, and
said nothing during this conversation, now
cried out, “What new conquest is this
miss Betsy has made?” “O, madam,” 
replied miss Betsy, “your ladyship shall
judge of the value of it, by the
doughty epistle I have just received.” 
With these words she gave the letter to
miss Flora, desiring her to read it aloud,
which she did, but was obliged, as miss
Betsy herself had done, to stop several
times, and hold her sides, before she got
to the conclusion, and lady Mellasin, as
little as she was then inclined to mirth,
could not forbear smiling at hearing the
manner in which this declaration of love
was penned. “You are all very merry,” 
said mr. Goodman, “but I can tell you,
captain Hysom is a match that many
a fine lady in this town would jump at; 
he has been twenty-five years in the service
of the East-India company, has
made very successful voyages, and is
immensely rich; he has lived at sea,
indeed, the greatest part of his life, and
much politeness cannot be expected from
him; but he is a very honest good-natured 
man, and I believe means well. 
I wish he had offered himself to Flora.” 
Perhaps, sir, I should not have refused
him,” replied she, briskly; “I should
like a husband prodigiously that would
be abroad for three whole years together,
and leave me to bowl about in
my coach and six, while he ploughed
the ocean in search of new treasures to
throw into my lap at his return.” 
“Well, well,” said miss Betsy, laughing
still more, “who knows but when I
have teized him a little, he may fly for
shelter to your more clement goodness.” 
“Aye! aye,” cried mr. Goodman, “you
are a couple of mad-caps, indeed, and
I suppose between you both the captain
will be finely managed; but no matter,
I shall not pity him, as I partly told
him what he might expect.” 
After this mr. Goodman went out, and
the young ladies went up to dress against
dinner, diverting themselves all the time
with the poor captain's letter. Miss Betsy
told miss Flora, that as he was for coming
so directly to the point, she must use all
her artifice, in order to keep him in suspence; 
“for,” said she, “if I should let
him know any part of my real sentiments
concerning him, he would be 
gone at once, and we should lose all
our sport: I will, therefore,” continued
she, “make him believe, that I dare not
openly encourage his pretensions, because
my brother had recommended one
gentleman to me, and mr. Goodman
another; but shall assure him, at the
same time, that I am inclined to neither
of them, and shall contrive to get rid
of them both, as soon as possible: this,” 
said she, “will keep him in hopes, without
my downright promising any thing
in his particular favour.” 
Miss Flora told her, she was a perfect
Machiavel in love affairs, and was about
to say something more, when a confused
sound of several voices, among which she
distinguished that of lady Mellasin very
loud, made her run down stairs to
see what was the occasion; but miss Betsy
stayed in the chamber, being busily employed
in something belonging to her
dress, or had she been less engaged, it is
not probable she would have troubled herself
about the matter, as she supposed it
only a quarrel between lady Mellasin, and
some of the servants, as in effect it was,
and she, without asking, was immediately
informed. 
Nanny, the upper house-maid, and the
same who had delivered mr. Saving's letter
to miss Betsy, and carried her answer
to him, coming up with a broom in her
hand, in order to sweep her lady's dressing-room,
ran into the chamber of miss
Betsy, and seeing that she was alone, “O
miss!” said she, “there is the devil to
do below.” “I heard a sad noise, indeed,” 
said she carelesly. “Why you
must know, miss,” cried the maid,
“that my lady had given John the butler
warning, and so his time being up,
mrs. Prinks had orders to pay him off
this morning, but would have stopped
thirty shillings for a silver orange strainer
that is missing. John would not allow
it, and being in a passion, told mrs.
Prinks, that he would not leave the
house without his full wages; that for
any thing he knew the strainer might
be gone after the diamond necklace. 
This I suppose she repeated to my lady,
and that put her in so ill a humour
this morning, that if my master had
not come down as he did, we should
all have had something at our heads. 
However,” continued the wench, “she
ordered mrs. Prinks to give him his
whole money; but, would you believe
it, miss? My master was no sooner 
gone out, than she came down into the
kitchen raving, and finding John there
still, (the poor fellow, God knows, only
stayed to take his leave of us,) she tore
about, and swore we should all go; accused
one of one thing, and another of
another.” “Well, but what did the fellow
mean about the diamond necklace?” 
cried miss Betsy, interrupting her. “I
will tell you the whole story,” said she,
but you must promise never to speak a
word of it to any body; for though I
do not value the place, nor will stay
much longer; yet they would not give
one a character, you know, miss.” 
Miss Betsy then having assured her, she
would never mention it, the other shut the
door, and went on in a very low voice,
in this manner. 
‘Don't you remember, miss,’ said she,
‘what a flurry my lady and mrs. Prinks
were in one day? how her ladyship
pulled off all her fine cloaths, and they
both went out in a hackney coach; 
then mrs. Prinks came home, and went
out again?’ ‘Yes,’ replied miss Betsy,
I took notice they were both in a good
deal of confusion.’ ‘Aye, miss, well
they might,’ said Nanny; ‘that very afternoon
John was gone to see a Cousin 
that keeps a pawn-broker's shop in
Thieving-lane, and as he was sitting in
a little room behind the counter, that
it seems shuts in with glass doors, who
should he see through the window, but
mrs. Prinks come in; she brought my
lady's diamond necklace, and pledged
it for a hundred and twenty, or a hundred
and thirty guineas, I am not sure
which he told me, for I have the saddest
memory; but it is no matter for
that. John was strangely confounded,
as you may think, but resolved to see
into the bottom, and when mrs. Prinks
was got into the coach, popped up behind
it, and got down when it stopped,
which was at the sign of the hand and
tipstaff in Knaves-acre; so that this money
was raised to get somebody that
was arrested out of the bailiff's hands,
for John said, it was what they call a
spunging-house that mrs. Prinks went
into. Lord! how deceitful some people
are, my poor master little thinks how
his money goes; but I'll warrant our
house-keeping must suffer for this.’ 
This gossiping young hussey would have
run on much longer, doubtless, with her
comments on this affair; but hearing
miss Flora's foot upon the stairs, she lest
off, and opening the door, softly slipt into 
her lady's dressing-room, and fell to
work in cleaning it. 
Miss Flora came up, exclaiming on the
ill behaviour of most servants, telling
miss Betsy what a passion her mamma
had been in. The other made little answer
to what she said on that or any
other score, having her thoughts very
much taken up with the account just given
her by Nanny; she recollected that
lady Mellasin had never dressed since that
day, always making some excuse to avoid
paying any grand visits, which she now
doubted not but it was because she had
not her necklace. It very much amazed
her, as she well knew her ladyship was never
without a good deal of ready cash, therefore
was certain the sum must be large indeed,
for which her friend was arrested,
that it reduced her to the necessity of applying
to a pawn-broker, and who that
friend could be for whom she would thus
demean herself, puzzled her extremely. 
It was not long, however, before she was
let into the secret, but in the mean time
other matters of more moment must be
treated on. 