

The Reader will doubtless be at a loss for
the meaning of this Epistle; but never had Syrena
given a greater Proof of her Cunning,
than in the Management of this Intrigue; to
prevent his making any Enquiry after her at
Mr. W&wblank;'s; she had told him, that being
left a very young Widow, without any
Children, she lived with her Mother, and to
give him a good Opinion of her Mother's
Virtue, and Care of her, as well as to hinder
him from knowing she had deceived him in
the Place of her Abode, she told him he must
never visit her; and when he wrote, as she
desir'd he would often do, to appoint a Meeting,
it must be in a Woman's Name, whom
she said she would pretend to have commenced
an Acquaintance with, at the House of
some female Friend. She made him believe 

also, that whenever he desired to see her, he
must send the Day before at least, for that
Mrs. Tricksy was so fearful of her entring into
any Correspondence with a Man, that she
made her be denied to all that came, unless
Relations, or such as she had an Intimacy
with herself, nor ever gave her any Letter till
she had first open'd it, and examin'd the Contents; 
so that, said she, you must not be surprized,
if the Messenger you send with your
Billets, never finds me at home; but when
she reads them, and supposes them wrote by a
Woman, which I shall take care to mention
before, as a mighty agreeable young Lady,
who has taken a Fancy to me, she will
make no Scruple of permitting me to come
out. 
Thus having settled every thing, as she
thought, beyond a Possibility of Discovery,
she flew to the Rendezvous, his Cousin's as he
term'd it, which indeed was no other than a
common Bagnio, with a Pleasure which attends
the Gratification of any Passion whatever; 
but more especially that which more or
less is inherent to all animated beings, and for
that Reason called the most natural. 
To keep Mr. W&wblank;'s Servants from
suspecting any thing by old Sarah's coming
twice in one Day; she pretended her Mother
had been taken suddenly ill, after she sent the
first Message; and that the second was to desire
to see her immediately; she back'd this
Excuse with so much seeming Grief, that nobody 

had the least doubt of the Truth of what
she said; and the old Gentleman coming home
before her, and being told the Story, was very
much concerned at the supposed Indisposition
of so good a Woman. 
After passing four or five Hours in a manner
perfectly agreeable to her Inclinations, she
came home in a Hackney-Coach about Eleven
o'Clock, with a Countenance, conformable to
the melancholy Visit she pretended to have
made. Mr. W&wblank; not being gone to
Bed, enquired concerning her Mother's Condition,
in a most tender and obliging Manner; 
and the Hypocrite dropping some well dissembled
Tears, answered, that she had found her
so ill, that she had ventured to intrude on his
Goodness so far, as to promise to go again the
next Day; by all Means, cried the worthy
Gentleman, and I will send a Physician with
you. I most humbly thank you, Sir, replied
she, but my Mother has one, who has
always attended our Family, and is acquainted
with her Constitution. Well then, resumed
he, I desire she may want nothing else proper
for her;—you shall go to her as early
as you please in the Morning;—and pray,
continued he, give her this, with my best
Wishes for her Recovery; with these Words
he put five Guineas into her Hand. Syrena
affected to receive this Favour with an equal
share of Gratitude for his Goodness, and
Grief for the Danger of a much esteemed
and lov'd Parent. Their Conversation, till
he retir'd to his Chamber, was that Night 

wholly taken up with Mrs. Tricksy; Mr.
W&wblank; imagining any gayer Subjects would
be little pleasing to a Person, under the Affliction
Syrena seemed to be. 
She went early in the Morning in reality to
her Mother's, and gave her the five Guineas,
with a full Recital of the Occasion of that
Present; Mrs. Tricksy was very well pleased
with her Management of his Intrigue, and
they both laughed heartily at the ease with
which a Woman beloved, could impose on a
Man of the best Understanding. They breakfasted
together, and then Syrena took her leave,
and went to the Bagnio, having promised her
young Lover to dine with him there, in Confidence,
that the Story she had to tell Mr. W&wblank;
would render it no Difficulty for her to come
out. 
In fine, she carry'd on the Deception of
her Mother's Illness, for above a Fortnight; 
so that in all that time, she never miss'd seeing
her Gallant one Day; nay, staid with him
two whole Nights, under the Pretence that
her Mother being expected to expire every
Moment, she waited to pay the last Duties of
a Child. Mr. W&wblank; was always extremely
indulgent, sent her ten Guineas more, and
some Phials of rich Cordials, which they
drank together with a good deal of Mirth
and Ridicule on the Donor. 
But now Mrs. Tricksy began to think it was
high time for her to be on the mending hand, 

lest a too long counterfeiting, might at length
raise some Suspicion; and also, because that
while she was supposed to continue in this dangerous
way, Syrena's Affair with Mr. W&wblank;
seemed to stand still, that Gentleman having
forborn his amorous Chat, out of Decency to
her Grief; but the young Wanton would
scarce have been prevailed upon by her Mother's
Remonstrances, to have given any Intermission
to a Conversation so pleasing to her,
had she not been compelled to it by the young
Gentleman, who told her a Business of the
most urgent Nature called him into the
Country. Her Grief at parting with him was
really sincere, and she omitted nothing that she
thought might detain him, but tho' he had an extreme
Compassion for the Agonies she threw
herself into, yet there was a Necessity he
should quit her at least for a time; she made
him swear to write to her, and urged to know
the exact Place to which he was going; but it
being highly inconvenient for him to comply
with either of these Requests, he yielded not
to the one without a mental Reservation, and
wholly deceiving her as to the other; and told
her a County as distant as North from South,
from that he went to, which, together with
his having passed with her by a feign'd Name,
render'd it altogether impossible for her to hear
any thing of him, tho' on finding he did not
write to her, she afterwards strenuously endeavoured. 
Well, Mrs. Tricksy recover'd, and Syrena
at home as before this Adventure; the old 

Gentleman began to renew a Conversation,
which with a good deal of Pain to himself, he
had so long stifled in his Breast, what he
said to her on the first Opportunity, will be
seen in the following Letter, wrote by her to
her Mother. 

LETTER VI.
From G&wblank; Square. 
Dear Mother,
My old Gentleman, tho' I allow him to
be the most compassionate and best natur'd
Creature in the World, had certainly a
great Share of Self-Interest in the Concern he
express'd for your imagin'd Sickness; in the
first Place it deprived him of my Company for
the most part, and when I was with him, the
Sorrow that it was necessary for me to assume,
obliged him to restrain the Dictates of his
Heart; but now he thinks you out of Danger,
he seems to give a loose to his gayer Inclinations. 
I never go out, nor come into the
Room, without being saluted by him in the
most tender manner, which I suffer as a Person
who has no Aversion to such a Behaviour,
but what proceeds from my Modesty; and also,
as one who thinks herself too much obliged to
his Bounties, not to refuse any Freedoms that
are consistent with Virtue; so that by behaving
to him in a tender affectionate manner, I
give him room to think I am far from having 

any dislike to his Person; and by a
seeming Struggle within myself, and half
Sentences thrown in a propo, whenever he
takes any extraordinary Liberties, to think
my Gratitude alone hinders my Resentment. — 
I can see he is more and more charm'd with
me, and I flatter myself will soon break his
Mind to me—that is, let me know what
it is I am to expect from him;—Yesterday at
Breakfast, as I was going to fill the Tea-pot,
the Man being out of the Room on some Occasion,
he snatch'd the Kettle from my Hand,
no, my Dear, said he, tho' I am an old Man,
I know better the Regard that ought to be
paid Persons of your Sex, especially such a
one as you, to suffer that. O! Sir, cried I,
you are too good, and forget I am but your
Servant—I never have treated you as such,
replied he; and should be sorry you should ever
think of me as Master—methinks it is
more natural, pursued he, smiling, for you to
look upon yourself as my Mistress, than my
Servant. God forbid Sir! cried I, I do not
mean naughtily, rejoined he, but as the Mistress
of my Affections; and indeed if you
imagine I can place them on any other Woman
you do me wrong. He had perhaps added
something more which might have explained
what he meant by the word Mistress,
but the officious fool of a Footman came unluckily
in and prevented any farther Discourse
on that Head. I saw him no more till Night,
for he dined abroad, and then at Supper, as I
was helping him to a Bit of Rasberry Tart; 
I think, said he, these same Pies are a kind of 

an Emblem of the Passion of Love, where
the sweet and sour seem to strive with each
other, and both together are so grateful to the
Palate that one cannot wish to be without
them; what do you think, pretty Mrs. Tricksy,
is not the comparison just. Indeed Sir, answered
I, the little Experience I am Mistress
of, does not qualify me to form any Sort of
Judgment on that Passion; and as for Tarts
I seldom eat any: Yet you have loaded my
Plate, cried he, and may I not also infer from
thence that you would wish to see me taste
all the Sweets and Sours alone, while you are
unmoved at either? I carried on the Raillery,
and affected not to conceive he had any other
meaning in what he said than meerly literal. 
But he soon obliged me to be more serious, by
telling me, that he would have me henceforward
look upon him as a Man whose very
Soul was devouted to me. These Words so
uncommon with Men of his grave and sober
Deportment, and utter'd with the greatest
Vehemence, made me regard him with some
Astonishment, and indeed render'd me incapable
of replying for some Moments. During
my Silence he took hold of my two Hands,
and pressing them between his, said with a
deep Sigh, O! that there were less disparity
between us! I then perhaps might have been
happy! I know not, Sir, answered I, any
thing that can be wanting to your Happiness; 
but this I know, that I should be very miserable
if any way the cause of giving you one
Moment's Pain—you are, Sir, my Patron,
my Friend, my Benefactor, my Guardian 

Angel, and when I cease to acknowledge your
generous Goodness, may my Ingratitude be
punish'd with some dreadful Mark. —Hold,
dearest Creature, interrupted he, I know thy
sweet, thy tender, grateful Soul—but— 
but what cried I, for Heaven's sake, Sir, inform
me in what I am wanting—in nothing,
said he, that's in your power— 
yet I could wish there were a possibility of— 
don't ask me what—it is irremediable, and
becomes me not to mention—I cannot
do it yet at least—good Night—with
these Words he rose from the Table, called
his Man, and went immediately to Bed. 
Now Mother to what can this Inconsistency
of Behaviour be imputed, but to an excess of
Love and to some Obstacle within himself that
makes him fearful of indulging it—'tis
strange he conceals it in this manner, but there
is no getting it out of him, till he pleases himself
—something sure extraordinary will
be the Event, but what I know not; when I
do, you shall not be a Moment in ignorance. 
I am 
Your Dutiful Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 



LETTER VII.
From G&wblank; Square. 
Congratulate me, my dear Mother, congratulate
your happy Daughter—all
my Fears and my Suspence are over —Mr.
W&wblank; has at last brought himself to confess
an honourable Passion for me —He
will soon come to acquaint you with it, and
then make me his Wife —O! how I
shall roll in Riches and Plenty —How
I shall indulge every Wish—enjoy every
Pleasure, and despise all Restraint —The
very thought of what I shall be is Extasy and
Transport —O! that the joyful Time
were come —I'll make him settle a Jointure
upon me, get possession of his Plate and
Jewels, turn them all into ready Money, that
the Heirs may not come upon me, and then
break the old Fool's Heart, and shine out the
Belle of the Town—but I must tell you
what brought this fortunate Catastrophe about,
and of what infinite Service your Letter concerning
the imaginary Mr. Smith was to me— 
you know 'tis more than a Week since I wrote
to you, nor indeed had I any thing pleasing
to acquaint you with—Mr. W&wblank; after
the Conversation I repeated in my last grew
more than ordinarily thoughtful—spoke
but seldom, and when he did, it was either on
Family Affairs, or other Subjects altogether
foreign to Love—I was very uneasy in 

my Mind, but appeared before him as usual,
tho' indeed I began to imagine I had small
Hopes, not that he either gave me any Words
or Looks that testified he had conceived the least
disgust against me; but his whole Carriage
seemed to tell me, he had conquer'd himself
so far as not to make me any offers of being
in a better Situation with him than he had
placed me in at first. But when I thought my
good Fortune farthest removed from me, it
happened to be nearest—as you shall hear— 
He came home last Night about an Hour before
the Time of lighting Candles, and asking
for me; one of the Servants said he believed I
was in my own Room, and was coming to
call me; but Mr. W&wblank; told him it was no
matter, he was going up, and would speak to
me above. He found me in a musing Posture,
leaning my Head upon my Arm, and indeed
discontented enough at his late Behaviour: 
What, Melancholly, pretty Mrs. Trisksy! said
he, as soon as he came into the Chamber. I
was a little surprized at seeing him there, tho'
very well pleased, especially as he seemed more
chearful than he had done for several Days. 
Not at all, Sir, answered I, but there are
Times when one cannot help being more than
ordinarily serious. There are so, resumed he,
nor am I sorry to see you so now, because I
am come to talk with you on a very serious
Matter. With these Words he made me take
my Seat again, which I had quitted on his coming
in, and placing himself in another Chair
as close to me as he could, I have been reflecting
for some Days past, said he, on the Pleasure 

your agreeable Company has afforded me
ever since you came into my House, and how
forlorn I shall be whenever you leave it. I
hope, Sir, said I, that I have been guilty of
nothing that should lay you under a Necessity
of obliging me to leave it? No, no, cried he,
far from any such Thing—I have already
told you, and I now repeat it, that it will be
yourself alone can ever take you from me— 
but, my dear Creature, I should be unreasonable
to desire a young Person like you, to live always
in the manner you now do—there is
no doubt but you will have offers of bettering
your Fortune—and you will marry— 
here he ceased; and I took the Opportunity of
telling him that I preferred the Honour of
living with him as I now did, to being the
Wife of any Man in the World: And on his
seeming to question my Sincerity in that Point,
as he well might; I endeavoured to convince
him by all the Asseverations befitting a modest
Woman to make; but he stopped my Mouth
with a Kiss, and told me, that tho' what I said
was vastly obliging, yet he could not think I
could be so much an Enemy to myself. I then
thought I had a fine pretence for shewing
him your Letter, and running to the Buroe
brought it in my Hand, and presenting it to
him, Sir, said I, tho' I should die with blushing
to make you the Confidante of such an
Affair, yet I cannot help doing it, to clear
myself from all Deceit—so beg, Sir, you
will give yourself the trouble to read this— 
He made no reply, but did as I desired, and
I could see while thus employed a good deal of 

Impatience in his Eyes. As soon as he had
finished the perusal—he gave me the Letter
again, and ask'd me several Questions concerning
Mr. Smith; to all which I gave him
such ready and natural Answers, that he had
no room to imagine I was amusing him with
a fictitious Story. After he had nothing farther
to inform himself of, he told me he
should be extremely happy if he could be sure
that I refused Mr. Smith, meerly because I
chose to live with him, to which I replied to
give him still a greater Opinion of my Sincerity,
that I could not say I had refused Mr. Smith
altogether on his Account, because I had resolved
not to marry him before I ever had the Happiness
of living with so excellent a Master, but
that since I had enjoyed so great a Blessing, and
had the Experience of his Goodness; not only
Mr. Smith, but all Mankind beside were
perfectly my Avesiron—He seemed overjoyed
to hear me speak in this manner— 
kiss'd me, and embraced me a Hundred Times
I believe, before he was able to make me any
Answer; at last, well but, my dear Love, cried
he, there yet remains one Proof of your preferring
my Society above all others of my Sex,
and if you deny to give me that, you must
give me leave to disbelieve all others?—in
fine, you must consent to put it out of either
of our Powers to part—you must be my
Wife. Judge, my dear Mother, how much
I was transported at these Words, but I concealed
it under a modest Surprize, and hanging
down my Head, said, you are pleas'd to sport,
Sir, with your unworthy Servant. No my 

Dear, reply'd he, the Offer I make you is not
only serious, but well weigh'd, the Result of a
long Consideration—the first Moment I
saw you, I entertained a Thought of it, but
was willing to wait till some Proofs of my
Friendship had in part compensated for a Disparity
of Years—what say you then? —Is it
possible for you to yield that Youth and Beauty
to the Embraces of an old Man, without Reluctance? 
—Can you love me as a Husband?
answer me, continued he, with your usual Sincerity; 
if you can love me as a Husband (I
again repeat it) I shall be happy—if you
cannot, I will endeavour to make you so, either
with any other more agreeable to your
Years; or if you chuse a single Life, by settling
an Annuity upon you; on this I replied, that
his excessive Generosity had entirely overcome
all my Timidity and natural Bashfulness; and
that since he was so good to make me three
Offers, the first, and infinitely the best, must
be my choice. It would be endless to repeat
what he said on this Occasion; had I been a
Queen, and he my Subject, rais'd by me to a
Throne, he could not have express'd greater
Joy. I did not fail, however, to represent to
him, the Fears I had, that his Sons and his
other Relations, would not be satisfied with
our Marriage; but he seem'd to slight all I
urg'd on that Head, and told me, he had not
liv'd so long in the Word, to place his Felicity
in other People's Opinions; and as for his Children,
they were too well acquainted with
their Duty to repine at any thing he thought
fit to approve. 

Thus is every thing agreed between us, and
we shall come this Afternoon or To-morrow
to acquaint you with the Affair, and ask your
Consent for our Marriage, which he intends
to solemnize as soon as a new Coach and Liveries
can be got ready; for he resolves it shall
be in as much Splendor, as if I brought him a
Fortune equal to his own. Well, after all,
he is very good to me, but 'tis all to please
himself; and I shall follow his Example, in
doing every thing to please myself—O! I
shall live a rare Life—but I must conclude,
for I expect him to Dinner every Moment. 
Dear Mother rejoice for the good
Fortune of 
Your happy Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 
P.S. I send this by a Porter, for fear the
Penny-Post should not have come time enough
to apprise you of our coming, for you to get
every thing in order—once more, farewell. 

Mr. W&wblank; having determined, and indeed
desired nothing more than to make Syrena
his Wife, fulfill'd the Contents of her Letter
to her Mother, in going to ask her Consent in
form, which it would be needless to say was
readily granted; after this he made no Secret of
his Intentions, but declared to every body that 

he was going to alter his Condition—accordingly
he bespoke a fine new Coach, ordered
rich Liveries for his Men, and made
some Additions to his Furniture—omitted
nothing that he thought might shew his Regard
for his designed Bride, who he took
abroad with him in his Chariot almost every
Day, either for the Air, or to buy things for
her Appearance as his Wife. 
His eldest Son, tho' doubtless not well pleas'd
in his Mind, was oblig'd to treat her with all
imaginable Respect; and his other Relations
contented themselves with condemning his
Conduct among themselves, and did not pretend
to dissuade or to argue with him on a
thing, which they found he was absolutely
bent upon. 
Mr. W&wblank; resolving however to make
all his Family as easy as possible, in this unexpected
Change of his Condition, sent for his
Son from Oxford, in order to settle a handsome
Fortune upon him before his Marriage; 
and thereby prevent any Apprehensions he
might otherwise have had, of being a Sufferer
by a future Issue. 
By some Accident the Letter was delayed
at the Post-House, so that the young Gentleman
came not so soon as expected, and arriv'd
at his Father's but the Evening before the
Day prefix'd for the Wedding; but happy was
it for the whole Family he came when he did,
as will presently appear. 

The old Gentleman happening to be at
home when he came, took him directly to
his Closet, and entertained him there a considerable
time, telling him, that tho' he was
about being married a second time, as it
was to a Woman, whose Virtue and Good-Nature
would rather make her an Advocate for
his Children, than the contrary; none of them
ought to repine at his Conduct in this Affair. 
The Son assur'd him with a great deal of Submission,
but how much Veracity I cannot
take upon me to determine, that he did not
think it became a Son to call his Father's Actions
in Question; and that whoever he had
made choice of, he, for his part, should not
have the least Reluctance, in paying her all
those Duties she could expect from a Son of
her own, if it should please Heaven to favour
her with any; which, added he, I sincerely
wish. Well said, my Boy, replied Mr. W&blank;,
I assure thee, thy Disinterestedness shall lose
thee nothing—I sent for thee to Town,
for no other Purpose, than to make over to
thee now, what I intended for thee at my
Death; and as near as my Marriage is, thy
Settlement shall be made before it—I will
immediately send for my Lawyer, and the
Writings shall be drawn To-night—in the
mean time you shall see the Lady, I shall
make your Mother To-morrow Morning,
and who has been some time in my House— 
so that, my dear Boy, continued he, it is not
one whose Humour I am unacquainted with,
that I am going to make my Partner for Life; 

but one, whose uncommon Virtues and Goodness
I have experienced, and am perfectly convinced
of; with these Words he led him the
way to Syrena's Chamber, who rose to receive
them with her accustomed Sweetness, and
well affected Innocence. But on his approaching
to salute her, presented by his Father,
never was so odd a Meeting—the young
Gentleman started back as if he had seen a
Gorgon, nor could the reality of that Fiction
have been more shocking to him. Syrena
lost all her Presence of Mind, and gave a
great Shriek—Mr. W&wblank; seem'd thunderstruck
at seeing them so—in fine, never
did three People appear in a greater Consternation
—all of them were in a profound
Silence for some Minutes—during which
time, the Father cast his Eyes from Syrena to
his Son; then from his Son to Syrena again, as
expecting to be inform'd either by the one or
the other, of what at present seem'd so mysterious. 
At last, is this the Lady, Sir, you
intend for my Mother? said the young Gentleman,
with a faultring Voice: Yes, answered
Mr. W&wblank;, I told you so before I
brought you here; have you any thing to
object against my Choice? or have you, Syrena,
continued he, turning to her, any Motives
for being dissatisfied with this young Man? 
No, Sir, reply'd she, by this time having recollected
what was best for her to do, but he
is so very like a Brother I once had, that the
first Sight gave me a Surprize, I could not
presently overcome; and you, Madam, cry'd
the young Gentleman, are so like a Mistress 

of mine, and I doubt not but of half the
Town beside, that I could not with Patience
look on you as the Person intended for my
Father's Wife. How! cry'd Mr. W&wblank;;
with an angry Tone! your Pardon, Sir, reply'd
his Son, putting one Knee to the Ground; 
that I presume to own before you the Folly of
my Youth—on any other Occasion I
could not hope Forgiveness; but here 'tis absolutely
necessary—yes, Sir, I confess, that
without your Permission I came about a Month
past to London, indeed to give a loose to some
Extravagancies, which I will never henceforward
repeat—in my Rambles I met
with this Woman—we fell into Conversation
—she affected in Words to appear
a modest Woman; but her Actions were altogether
the reverse—in fine, Sir, she is
no other than a common Creature—he
was going on, but Syrena had now no Card
but one to play, and interrupted by saying— 
O! barbarous Aspersion! O! that I had died,
rather than lived to hear my Reputation thus
cruelly traduced—and to my Face— 
by one I never saw before, Heaven is my
Witness, tho' the likeness of Faces at first
deceived me—with these Words she fell
into Fits, nor could all the old Gentleman's
Endeavours bring her to herself;—the
Servants were called in to assist, but she no
sooner seemed to recover from one Convulsion,
than she fell into another; insomuch, that all
present, excepting the young Gentleman, who
had experienced her Artifices, imagined she
would die. —Mr. W&blank;, who yet knew 

not what to make of what his Son had said,
was too generous and humane to let her perish
for want of proper help, even tho' she should
be proved guilty of all she was accused of; 
order'd the Maids to take care of her, and
sent immediately for a Physician. Having
given these Directions, he withdrew into another
Room, taking his Son with him; he
questioned him very closely concerning the
time of his Acquaintance with Syrena— 
the Places where they met, and every Particular
that he thought might inform him of the
Truth; for tho' he could not entertain so bad
an Opinion of the young Gentleman, as to
imagine he had forged this Story on Purpose
to break the Match; yet he could not tell
how to bring himself to think he could have
been so grosly imposed upon by a Woman,
whose Temper, Inclinations, and Conduct, he
had observed with the utmost Strictness, ever
since she came into his House. 
I believe the Reader by this time guesses the
Truth, and that the Son of Mr. W&wblank;
was no other, than the last Gallant she had; 
and for whom, to meet with the greater Freedom,
she had pretended her Mother's Indisposition. 
This Article it was, which more than
any thing convinced the old Gentleman, that
the seeming modest Syrena, was the infamous
Wretch his Son had described her; for not
only her Name, and the young Gentleman's
positiveness as to her Person, but the times of
their being so frequently together, agreeing exactly
with those of her pretended Visits to Mrs. 

Tricksy, at length opened his Eyes to the Villany
of both Mother and Daughter; and tho'
he had loved the fair Deceiver, with too much
Tenderness to endure this Detection without
Pain, yet he thought himself bound to thank
Heaven for so timely a Discovery of her Guilt; 
which, had it happened but a Day after, had
made him from the most happy, the most
miserable Man on Earth. The Frailty of
his Son also deserved his Pardon; not only because
of the Temptation that had misled him,
but likewise, because he could no other way
have received a Confirmation of her Crimes. 
After much Talk upon this Head, Mr.
W&blank; burst out into an Exclamation,
Good God! cry'd he, what a Fiend must
this be under an Angel's Form! She knew
herself a Prostitute to the Son, yet would
have marry'd the Father! Monstrous incestuous
Strumpet! Hold, Sir, interrupted the Son,
compound as she is of Leudness and Deceit, let
us not wrong her—She knew not till this
Hour, I was your Son; for the better to conceal
my being in Town from you, I pass'd
with her, and wherever I went, by a different
Name. But she is now no longer ignorant
of that Secret, reply'd the Father, yet would
she have persuaded me, you either had mistook
her for some other, or had Malice enough to
asperse her without Cause. —O what Punishment
is great enough for such a Wretch! The
Physician that Moment came in and broke off
their farther Discourse, by telling them the Lady
was dangerously ill—that he had prescrib'd
for her, but much fear'd the Success. Young 

Mr. W&blank; shook his Head in token of
Contempt, and after he was gone could not
forbear saying, some severe things on the Gentlemen
of that Profession; but in this he was
guilty of some little Injustice; for the Truth
was, that tho' Syrena's Fits were only counterfeited,
yet the Surprize she had been in,
and the Apprehension which immediately follow'd
of losing that great Fortune, she had
but a few Minutes before thought her self secure
of, gave her real Agonies, which put her
whole Frame into such Disorders, as, joyn'd
with the artificial ones she put on, might well
puzzle the Physician's Skill. 
The old Gentleman, however, not being
able to suffer so vile a Creature under his Roof,
made her be told she must quit his House; and
that if she were as ill as she pretended, her
Mother was the most proper Person to take
care of her; and if she were not, it would
be doing her a good Office, to send her where
she would no longer have any need of feigning. 
—She begg'd with Floods of Tears to see
him, protested her Innocence, and left nothing
undone to deceive him once more, and throw
the Odium of all upon his Son's Dislike of their
Marriage; but he was now too well assured
of her Baseness, and remain'd inexorable to all
her Messages; so that with a Heart full of
Rage, and a Tongue full of Imprecations, she
took an everlasting leave of a House she was
so near being Mistress of, after having been
obliged to resign all the fine Jewels that had 

been presented to her when intended for a Bride. 
It would be needless to repeat the Distraction
that both Mother and Daughter were involved
in at this sudden turn in their Fate; neither
could it be pleasing to a virtuous Ear to hear
those shocking and prophane Exclamations,
which 'tis easy to suppose Persons of their
abandon'd Principles make use of, when any
way cross'd by Providence in the Pursuit of
their wicked Designs. It must be confest, indeed,
that Syrena had very ill Luck in being
so often on the very Point of compassing all
her Avarice, Ambition, or Pride could aim at; 
and then, by the most unforeseen Accidents,
thrown from the height of all her Hopes. And
here, methinks, it is worth remarking, how
the indulging one Vice, destroy'd all the Success
she might have expected from the other; 
for had she been less leud, her Hypocrisy, in
all Probability, had obtain'd its end, at least,
in this last Pursuit it had done so: But it is
generally the Fate of such Wretches, who,
while they go about ensnaring and deceiving
all they can, to be themselves ensnar'd and
deceived, either by others, or their own headstrong
and ungovern'd Appetites. 
In a short Space of time they again began to
feel the want of what before they had profusely lavished. Syrena was not idle in spreading
her Nets; but none as yet had the ill Fortune
to fall into them, and the first that did, proved
little to her Advantage, as well as to his 

own. —Their Acquaintance began in this
manner. 
She was walking one Day through the
Strand, equipp'd for Adventures in a modish
Dishabillee, with a little Hat on her Head,
and a Cane in her Hand, when she saw at a
Bookseller's Door a Gentleman, whom she no
sooner cast her Eye upon, than she imagin'd
fit for her purpose: He was in the prime of
his Age, well proportion'd, genteel, and had
somewhat in his Looks that denoted him to
be of a more than ordinary amorous Constitution: 
She perceived he had his Eye upon her
as she past, and the Street being pretty dirty,
and the Kennel of a great breadth just in that
Part, she either had, or seem'd to have an
Occasion to cross the way —The Coaches
driving backward and forward very fast, it being
Term time, made her often obliged to stop, and
return, then go on again, and all this opposite
to where the Gentleman stood; so that
he had a full Opportunity of seeing and admiring
all the pretty Airs she put on; the
Distress she affected, in not being able to prosecute
her little Journey, gave him a Pretence
of offering to assist her —He step'd hastily
to her, and taking her under the Arm with
one Hand, and with the other extending his
Cane to keep off the Horses, like a true Knight-Errant,
lifted his Dalcinea over the muddy
Brook, and safely bore her to the farther Shore
—when arriv'd, she made a Curtesy, and
thank'd him with so bewitching a Softness in
her Eyes and Voice, as wholly compleated the 

Conquest she desired. —He entreated Permission
to attend her to the Place where she
was going, and telling her it was altogether
unfit a Lady of her Appearance should walk
the Streets, without some Person who might
guard her, both from the Insults of the undistinguishing
Populace, and the Dangers also,
such uncommon Charms might lay her under,
from Men of more elevated Rank—To
these obliging Offers and Compliments, she
made him such Answers, as gave him an
Opinion she had been brought up in high Life,
and had conversed only with People of the
greatest Fashion; but seemed to decline accepting
his Protection, any farther, saying
there was no need of his giving himself that
Trouble, since she was only going home, and
there were no more such ugly Places to pass
over in her way thither—adding, that she
was already under too great an Obligation to
his care to consent to receive any Addition; 
since conscious there was nothing in her Conversation
capable of compensating for his Loss
of time. This naturally drew a great many
fine things from him; nor would he be perswaded
to quit her, tho' she often desired he
would; but how sincerely the Reader may
imagine. 
They walk'd on together talking in this
manner, when just as they pass'd by a Tavern,
he perceiv'd her Colour change, and a sudden
Trembling seize all her Limbs, which, as I
have in many Instances explain'd, she could
bring on herself whenever she found it necessary 

for her purpose —He was surpriz'd
and troubled at this Alteration, and was about
to ask the Cause, when she catch'd hold of
his Arm, as if to save her self from falling; 
roll'd her Eyes with a half dying Languor,
then closed them, and appear'd quite fainting. 
—He little suspecting all this for Artifice,
was extremely frighted, and supporting her
as well as he could, led her into the Tavern,
where having call'd for Hartshorn and Water,
she soon became reviv'd, but seem'd not presently
to recollect her Senses enough to know
where she was, or what had happen'd to her; 
but when she did, O Heaven! cry'd she, how
strange an Accident is this! —Bless me,
how can I answer to my self or the World,
being in a Tavern with a Gentleman, I never
saw before!—or how, Sir, can I ever
retaliate the Favours I have received from you
this Day! Besides the common Compliments
on such Occasions, as thinking it an Honour
to be any way serviceable to a Lady who
seem'd so much to deserve it, he being a Man
of great Wit and Gallantry, added a thousand
infinitely more elegant and obliging;— 
his natural Complaisance and Respect to the
fair Sex, being now heighten'd by a Passion
he had never felt before, tho' frequently what
is called a Lover, he expressed himself in a
manner, which might have charm'd a Woman
less susceptible than her he now address'd
—'Tis certain she was transported with
him, and had no need of feigning to make
him see his Behaviour had made an Impression
on her. —All her Subject for Dissimulation, 

was to pass it on him for the first, which
she was too perfect a Mistress of, not to succeed
in. 
On his asking her if she had been accustomed
to these Fainting? —No, Sir, answer'd
she, calling to her Cheeks a most becoming
Blush, I never before knew what it
was to lose my Senses, even for a Moment— 
few Women, I thank Heaven, are blest with
a better Constitution, or a more easy and
chearful Mind. —I know not what to
think of the Accident that has just now happen'd,
nor to what Cause to impute it— 
and were I inclin'd to be superstitious, should
be apprehensive it was the Fore-runner of some
very extraordinary Event. If we pay any
Regard to History or Tradition, said the Gentleman,
whatever happens out of the common
Course of Nature, as your Disorder, Madam,
seems to have been, has ever been look'd upon
as a Presage of some unexpected Change in
Fortune. —But you have not the least Reason
to imagine it an ill Omen; since it would be
calling in question the Justice of Providence,
to suppose it had created an Excellence like
yours, for any thing but to give and receive the
highest Good this World at least can bestow. 
—But I suspect, continued he, with a
Sigh, that as so many Charms cannot be without
an adequate Number of Adorers, it was the
Commiseration for Woes, you cannot bring
yourself to redress, that overwhelm'd your gentle
Heart, and for a Moment depriv'd you of
yourself. 

Here he ceas'd, and look'd stedfastly on her
with a kind of enquiring, yet imploring Eye; 
and she who easily saw into his Thoughts,
and found with Pleasure the Influence she had
gain'd, made no immediate Reply; and when
she did, assuming a half Smile, by the manner
of your talking, said she, I fancy you take me
for a Maid—but, Sir, I have been married,
and as I was so without feeling for him who
was my Husband, much less any other Man; 
those Emotions, Lovers talk of, I can not have
much Compassion for what I always look'd on
fictitious, and meer Words of Course. — 
How, Madam, cry'd he, have you been married,
and are so long a Widow, as to be out
of Mourning, at your Years? On this she told
him the same Story, she had done her former
Lovers; only with this Difference, that as she
knew not his Circumstances, it seem'd most
proper to keep him ignorant of hers, till time
should discover, if it were best to affect Poverty
or Riches. 
After having past about two Hours with
him; she thought it time to pretend being
perfectly recover'd; nor could all his Persuasions,
nor her own secret Inclinations, induce
her to stay longer. —She could not now,
however, refuse giving him leave to go home
with her, which he did; and on her telling
her Mother before him, the Civilities she had
receiv'd from him; he was treated with the
utmost Respect and Gratitude, by the seemingly
good Mrs. Tricksy. And from her as well 

as Syrena, had Permission to wait on them
again. 
When he was gone, and these Ensnarers
had Liberty to consult together, judging by
his Garb and Appearance, that he was a
Man of a Fortune sufficient to maintain
her as a Wife; they set all their Wits to
work to make a Husband of him; for in the
way of Discourse to them both, he had declar'd
himself neither married nor under any
Engagements of that kind. —Schemes
were therefore contriv'd between them to delude
him; which they afterward had but too
much Opportunity to put in Practice; and
which his own Temper and Circumstances
contributed to assist in. 
He was a Gentleman whose Father had been
possess'd of a plentiful Estate, but by giving
too much into the Gallantries of the Times had
dissipated it so far, that at his Decease he had not
an Acre to bequeath; and young Mr. P&wblank; was
only left with small a Fortune in Money, for
which the last Acre had been dispos'd of: His Education
had been the best for a Man of an Estate,
but the worst for a Man of Business: He had too
much Pride to descend to any thing for Bread,
which he thought unbefitting his Birth; and
tho' he had many powerful Friends, whose Interest
might have procur'd him a Place at
Court, or a Commission in the Army, either
of which he would glady have accepted, whenever
such a Thing was in Agitation, some cross
Accident interven'd, and disappointed his Hopes; 

when they seem'd nearest the Accomplishment. 
—Several Years having past over since
the Death of his Father; and nothing succeeding
according to his Expectations, his little
Stock of Money almost exhausted, and
Years coming on, for he was now turn'd of Thirty; 
he could think of nothing to retrieve himself
but Marriage. —He was, therefore, on
his Acquaintance with Syrena, looking out for
some elderly Widow or Maid, whose Substance
might support him in the Eve of Life, in a
decent manner; and as he was a Man perfectly
agreeable both in his Person and Conversation,
'tis not to be doubted, but he might easily have
succeeded in that View, had he not unhappily
met with this fair, and more base Deceiver,
whose Arts engross'd his whole Attention, on
herself, and render'd him incapable because
unwilling, to apply where his good Genius call'd
him. 
He imagin'd by Syrena's Appearance, and
the manner in which her Mother and she liv'd,
that she must have either a good Fortune in
her own Hands, or a Jointure; and tho' he was
enough infatuated with her, to have marry'd her
without a Shilling, could his Affairs have admitted
of it; yet the Belief, that she had sufficient
for them both, was no small Spur to his
Inclinations. With the view therefore of making
his Addresses to her, did he visit her the next
Day; where every thing he saw, serving the
more to confirm him in the good Opinion he
had conceiv'd of their Circumstances; for they
took care to put on the best Outside; he after 

two or three Visits more declar'd himself a
Lover. Syrena receiv'd his Suit with the greatest
Shew of Modesty; but blended with a
certain Languor in her Eyes, which gave him
to understand, as if against her Will, that she
felt the highest Satisfaction on it. —Every
time he entertain'd her on this Topick, she
grew less and less reserv'd, and at last confess'd,
that she lov'd him from the first Moment
she beheld him; and that it was wholly
owing to the Emotions he had occasion'd in her; 
that she fell into those Disorders which gave Rise
to their Acquaintance. How pleasing are the
Thoughts of being belov'd by one who seems
worthy of being lov'd! Mr. P&wblank; thought
himself the happiest of all created Beings; blest
in the purest and tenderest Affections of the
most beautiful, most engaging, and most virtuous
of her Sex; and one who had also a
handsome Competency at least, to make
smooth the rugged Road of Life. Tho' he was
by Nature a Man of very warm Inclinations,
and had been the Destruction of many fine
Women's Virtue and Reputation; so great was
the Respect he bore Syrena; that tho' he had unnumber'd
Opportunities he never took the
Advantage of any of them, or approach'd
her with Liberties beyond a Kiss, which considering
her Constitution, and the real liking
she had to him, was not, perhaps, so agreeable
to her as he imagin'd. — 
He all this time, however, never came directly
to the point, and tho' he courted her on
honourable terms, and she had acknowledged
the greatest Passion for him, he had not press'd 

the Consummation of his Happiness; had not
entreated her to fix the Day that should give
her forever to him. —This very much surprized
both Mother and Daughter, and made
them begin to fear there was some Mystery
in his being so silent on that head; and having
consider'd on what means would be best for
obliging him to explain himself, Mrs. Tricksy
one Day, when Syrena on purpose had left
the Room, took an Occasion to tell him, that
as she found he and her Daughter had settled
their Affections on each other, she hoped he
would not think it an improper Question if she
desir'd to be inform'd of some Particulars relating
to his Fortune. On which he seem'd
a little confounded; but answer'd, that his
Estate at present did not exceed four hundred
Pounds per Annum; but that he expected
more on the Death of a Relation. Well,
resum'd Mrs. Tricksy, four hundred Pounds a
Year frugally manag'd, may keep a little Table
for a time—Mr. P&wblank; thought he
had now an Excuse for expressing a Desire
of knowing in what manner Syrena was left in
her Widowhood; his Ignorance of that having
been, indeed, the cause he had not been
more eager for the Knot being ty'd; for tho'
he lov'd her with an Extremity of Passion, he
had no Notion of living with a Wife in a
mean and penurious manner. Madam, said
he, in answer to Mrs. Tricksy's last Words,
my Estate is much too small to maintain your
Daughter in a fashion worthy of her, and I
should be asham'd to be too much indebted to
a Wife's Purse: I would, therefore, indeavour 

to bring my Kinsman to add something before
his Death to what I at present enjoy. 
If you can do so it will be well, reply'd Mrs.
Tricksy, but if not, you must be content— 
perhaps when you are marry'd and Children
come, he may be prevailed upon. —In the
mean time, you may make some small Settlement
out of what you have upon my Daughter. 
—Gladly, Madam, cry'd he, and
whatever the young Lady is possess'd of, shall
also be settled on herself. This was enough to
let her see he expected a Fortune with her,
and as it was impossible to deceive him in that
point, thought best not to attempt it; but to
seem entirely open in what could not be conceal'd,
that he might the more readily believe
those things in which she had it in her power
to impose on him. Sir, said she, what I have
to tell you will be a certain test of the Sincerity
of that Affection you profess. —I do
assure you, Syrena has at present no Fortune; 
but lives dependant on me who have a tolerable
good Jointure, and is all that is preserved
out of a large Estate her Father once enjoy'd; 
but which, at my Decease goes also to an eldest
Son —Not that she will always be a Beggar
—she is set down six thousand Pounds
in the Will of a rich Cousin, who by the
Course of Nature cannot live many Years, being
now more than Ninety. —Several others
also of our Kindred have promised to leave her
handsomely; so that, as I observ'd before, if
you both live frugally for a while, you may
hereafter indulge what want of Fortune, at 

present, will not suffer you to enjoy with
Prudence. 
Mr. P&wblank; found a shivering at his Heart
from the time Mrs. Tricksy had said her Daughter
was no more than a Dependent on her; 
but he conceal'd the Shock it gave him as much
as possible, and told her, he was only concerned,
that he had not more to lay at Syrena's
Feet. 
Notwithstanding all his Efforts to behave
with the same Gaiety as usual, he could not
conceal from the piercing Eyes of Syrena and
her Mother, his inward Discontent; and reasoning
upon it after he was gone, they both were
of Opinion he would not marry without a
Portion, which was not a little Disappointment
to them both, as they doubted not the
Truth of his being possest of some Estate, if
not altogether so much as he pretended. 
He, on his part, when the Hour came in
which it was proper for him to retire, went
home to his Lodgings with an aking Heart: 
He loved Syrena, too well to be able to live
without her in any tollerable degree of Peace,
and the Impossibility of maintaining her as a
Wife, made him pass the Night in the most
grievous Aggitations—He curs'd Fate and
his Friends, whose Endeavours to get him a
Place had been unsuccessful; for as he doubted
not the Truth of what Mrs. Tricksy had told
him concerning the six thousand Pounds, and
other Legacies, he thought if he could any 

way have supported her till that time, he might
very well venture to marry her—but as
things stood now with him, that was entirely
out of the Question, and how to proceed he
could not determine. 
He went to visit her the next Day, however,
and several succeeding ones as before this
Eclaircissement had been made; but tho' he
could not forbear talking to her as a Lover,
he mention'd not the least Word of Marriage,
which confirming Syrena and her Mother in
their Conjectures, that he intended no such
thing, made them resolve to push the matter
home; but in what manner they could not
yet determine; and were thinking of various
Stratagems, without being able to fix on any,
when Fortune presented Syrena with an Adventure,
which furnish'd her with one, that,
besides being agreeable in itself, promised Success. 
She was walking cross the Park one Morning,
after having breakfasted with a Friend
at Westminster, when she saw a Gentleman
go before her, whose Shape and Air she fancy'd
she was not unacquainted with —She,
therefore, mended her Pace, and tho' he went
not slow came up with him, and pulling her
Hat as low as she could to conceal her Face,
if it should chance to be any of those she had
reason to avoid, look'd full on him as she past,
and found it was Vardine, the Man who had
triumph'd over her Virgin Beauties, and betray'd
her Innocence, if a Creature so early 

bred up in Wiles, can be said to remember
she ever had any. It presently came into
her Head, that he might be of Service in her
Designs on Mr. P&wblank;, and accosted him
with a Tap on the Arm with her little Cane. 
—He started and turned to her taking her
at first for one of those Ladies of Pleasure
who frequent that Place; for he knew her
not immediately, being grown fatter and somewhat
more plump, tho' far from fat; but
she soon by her Voice, and discovering her Face
more fully, let him see who she was— 
He was a little confounded at first, and was
beginning to make Excuses for his Behaviour; 
but she would not suffer him to go on, telling
him she had forgot and forgiven all that was
disagreeable to her in his Conduct—that
she was now glad to see him, and had a Favour
to ask of him, which it would cost him
nothing to grant—He took this as a sort of
Reproach for the little he had done for her; 
but made her no other Answer, than that he
should rejoice in an Opportunity of obliging her
with any thing in his power. After some
Conversation relating to their former Intimacy,
they adjourned to a Tavern, where finding
by him that he was still but a Lieutenant,
and had as little Money to spare in matters of
Gallantry as ever, she attempted not to impose
on him in any Shape, affected not Virtue,
nor refused, on his desiring it, a renewing of
those Endearments he before had experienc'd
from her, tho' then given with more Artifice
than she now took the Trouble to put in practice 
—She told him she was endeavouring 

to draw in a Gentleman to marry her, and
that if he would assist her, he should command
her in every thing. —He readily comply'd
to do any thing she desired on that Score,
and thought he owed her a greater Service, if
in his power, for the Favours she had conferr'd
on him. —She carry'd him home to
Dinner, and having presented him to her Mother,
and told her his Name, soon reconciled
her to him, by informing her also, what he
was to do for her; they then all three enter'd
into a Consultation, and as he was a graceful
young Fellow and well dress'd, it seem'd probable,
that the very sight of him would create
a Jealousy in Mr. P&wblank;, that might serve
to quicken his Love; it was, therefore, agreed
upon, that he should stay till the other came,
which was generally about the Hours of six
or seven—and then take his Leave with a
seemingly dejected Air. 
Vardine acted his Part as naturally as they
could wish, and Mr. P&wblank; made no doubt
but he had a Rival, which, as he truly loved
her, was no small Addition to his Inquietudes 
—He complain'd of it to Syrena in the
most tender Terms, and she confest, blushing,
that indeed that young Officer had made
Pretensions to her almost ever since her Widowhood; 
but that he was always her Aversion,
and that having been oblig'd to go into
the Country to his Regiment, she had hoped
to have been rid of his Importunities, and was
sorry to find he still continued his Passion for
her; but, said she, I had not seen him today, 

if by Chance I had not been at the Window
when he knock'd, and am resolved to be
deny'd to him henceforward, if he comes ever
so often—be easy and satisfy'd, therefore, continued
she, for as I loved him not when my
Heart was wholly unengaged, 'tis impossible to
endure him now, so full as it is of your Idea. 
The believing Lover appear'd transported with
Joy and Gratitude; and had it not been for
the Thoughts of not being able at present to
make so excellent a Woman his own, his Extasy
had been beyond all Bounds. 
Some few Days after this they contrived it
so, that when Mr. P&wblank; was in the Dining-Room
with Mrs. Tricksy and her Daughter, a
great Sound of Voices was heard below, and
the old Deceiver feigning a Surprize, open'd
the Door, as to listen what it meant, having
stood a Moment, Heavens! cry'd she, 'tis
Capt. Vardine! he is quite outrageous on your
being deny'd to him—I must go down
my self, and put a stop to the Clamours of
his Despair —With speaking this she ran
hastily out of the Room, and the Door being
purposely left open, Mr. P&wblank; heard him
say—I have nothing wherewith to accuse
the cruel Charmer, nor the happy Gentleman
I am told she has made choice of—I only
would beg once more to see her—to
take my last Farewel, and die before her Eyes. 
Mrs. Tricksy seem'd expostulating with him; 
but he continued his Exclamations for some
time, and Syrena pretended the utmost Terror,
lest he should force his way up Stairs, and 

there should be a Quarrel between him and
Mr. P&wblank;; at length, however he departed,
and Mrs. Tricksy, return'd, full of a well-counterfeited
Concern for his Condition. 
To refuse a Man who lov'd her with such
an Excess of Passion and unweary'd Constancy,
they thought would lay a kind of Obligation
on Mr. P&wblank;'s Honour, as well as his
Love to make her his Wife; but to strengthen
her Claim to him they also had recourse to
another Artifice, which was this: 
They had several worthy and good Relations,
as has been before mention'd, who had
formerly been very kind and beneficent to
them; but some Whispers concerning the
Conduct of Syrena, which the manner in
which she was supported without following
any Business, served to confirm, having reached
their Ears, they had not seen either her or
her Mother for a long time; but on this Juncture,
that crafty Woman ventur'd to approach
them, saying, that her Daughter was now
about being married to a Gentleman of an
Estate, and that there wanted nothing to hasten
the Marriage, but their vouchsafing to own
her as a Relation, without which, continu'd
she, he may imagine she has been guilty of
some Mismanagement, and break off. To
retrieve the Character, therefore, and settle in
the World a young Person ally'd to them, the
greatest Part of them consented to visit her; 
and now there seldom past an Evening, without
his seeing some or other of his intended 

Wife's Kindred: They all approved highly of
his Person and Behaviour, and he was invited
to all their Houses by turns, which, not knowing
how to avoid accepting, he went with
Syrena and her Mother: The Fashion in which
they lived, and the Entertainments they made
for him, would have convinced him, if he had
not been so before, that she was no mean Person. 
But all this served only to make him
more unhappy, by reflecting, that he had acted
dishonourably, by pretending to have what
he had not; and that he appear'd guilty of Ingratitude,
by not doing what, as his Affairs
were, he had not power to do, without bringing
to the utmost Misery, both himself and
the Person he loved. 
No Offers yet being made by him, of
bringing the Matter to a Conclusion, Mrs.
Tricksy and her Daughter began to despair of
ever compassing their point; but to ascertain
themselves of the Truth, if possible, they
try'd one more Expedient in the following
manner. 
Pretty early one Morning as he was dressing
to go out, the Servant of the House where he
lodged, told him, a Lady desired to speak with
him. He was a little alarmed, imagining it a
young Creature with whom he had commenced
an Amour, before he saw the fatal Face
of Syrena, and who he knew was with Child
by him; as his new Passion had render'd him
wholly neglectful of her of late, he doubted
not but she was come to reproach him, and 

endeavoured to prevail on the Servant to say
he was not at home: How can I do that, Sir,
said she, when I have already told the Lady
you were? Pish, cry'd he, can't you pretend
you were mistaken, and that I went out without
your seeing me—as they were arguing,
Syrena's Impatience at being made wait so
long, with a little mixture of Jealousy, that
some other Woman might be with him, made
her fly up Stairs without being ask'd; he was
agreeably surpriz'd to find it was she, and
begg'd a thousand Pardons for not coming
down to receive her. I have no Reason,
said she, to be offended at your want of Ceremony; 
for as I did not send up my Name,
I believe I was the last Person you could think
of, that was come to disturb you. He was
beginning to make some Compliments on the
Favour she did him, but she put a stop to
them, as soon as the Maid had left the Room,
by saying, the Affair I come upon deserves
not these civil things. —I am come, continued
she, bursting into Tears, to forbid you
our House—you must see me no more— 
my Mother has resolved it, and is prepared to
tell you so at your next Visit—I thought
the News would be less shocking from my
Mouth; and therefore in spite of all the Considerations
that might have restrained me, am
come to take my everlasting leave;—and
to tell you, that tho' I cannot think you love
me with that Tenderness you have profest,
you are too dear to me, for me to be able to
resent any thing you do, and that you ever
will be so to the last Moment of my wretched
Life. 

These Words, and the manner in which
they were spoke, touched him to the very Soul,
—he was ready to keep her Company in
Tears; and tho' he did not absolutely weep,
his Eyes were full, and it was not without
great Difficulty he withheld the swelling Grief
from falling down his Cheeks;—ah,
Madam, cried he, what is it you tell me?
—what can have made this sudden Alteration
in your Mother's Sentiments? that, replied
she, which ought to have had the same
Effect on mine—your Deceit in pretending
to love me only for my Person and Mind,
when in reality you regarded nothing but the
Fortune you supposed me Mistress of. Here
he made a thousand Asseverations to the contrary
of what she accused him of; and that
no Woman in the World, though endowed
with all that could glut the Avarice of
the most sordid Man, could have the power
to alienate his Affection from her; and concluded
what he said with a solemn Vow, never
to marry any other, unless she first should
lead the way; to this she made no Answer,
but Sighs, and he resumed his Protestations; 
had I Millions, said he, I would devote them
all, with myself, to the Service of the charming,
the adorable Syrena; but as the little, the
very little I am at present Master of, is insufficient
to give her even ease in Life, is it
not a greater Proof of Love, to restrain the
burning Wishes she has inspir'd me with, and
delay my Happiness till Fate shall put it in the
power of one of us, to make Marriage comfortable, 

than to desire she should be Partaker
of my abject Fortune? 
Syrena was too penetrating not to see into
the Fallacy of this Argument, but as she was
resolved to pin herself upon him any way, she
forbore to urge the Matter farther, and said,
I should readily agree with you; that it is
better to wait till the Death of this old Impediment
of my Happiness, shall make me Mistress
of my Fortune, but my Mother will never
be brought to think as we do—she
presses me to marry the young Officer, and
though I am resolved never to yield to that,
and could sooner die than suffer the Embraces
of any but him, to whom I have given my
Heart; yet I must, terrible as it is to me,
forbear your Sight and Conversation, till better
times—if you can be constant in Absence
—and preserve your Heart for me, as I
shall do mine for you, we may hereafter find
a Recompence for our present Pains. This
Mr. P&wblank; was ready enough to consent to,
but could not tell how to bring himself to
think of not seeing her till the Time should
arise, of claiming the Performance of her Promise; 
and he expressing the impossibility there
was for him to live without her Society, she
aimed not to render him more satisfied on that
Head, but pretended that whatever she had
said, she doubted not but he would soon hear
she was no more, when she no more enjoyed
his Presence. 
Nothing could be more tender than their
Conversation; but he still persisting in his first 

Resolution of not marrying yet a-while, she
fell into violent Fits, the People of the House
were called up, but as she seemed a little recovered,
withdrew—she then wept, and
hung upon him with Agonies, such as threatned
Distraction;—he kiss'd, embraced,
said all he could to comfort her, and these
Endearments continuing for a long time, rendered
both, according to all Appearance, in
the end forgetful of themselves, and sinking
into each others Arms, they enjoyed the Pleasures
of Matrimony without the Ceremony. 
But Syrena, whose every Word and Look during
the whole time of her being with him,
was studied Artifice, and before concerted
with her Mother, seemed so shocked at what
she had done, that she begg'd he would that
Moment run his Sword through her Heart; 
for Life after the Loss of Honour, cried she,
would be a perfect Hell—he endeavoured to
reconcile her to an Act, which he said could
not be criminal between two People, whose
Souls were already married, and who had resolved
never to receive any other Idea, than
those with which they were at present fill'd— 
she began by Degrees to seem convinced by
his Reasons, but told him, that after what had
happened, she could not think of being absent
from him even a Day—that she now
looked upon him as her Husband, and conscious
of her own Integrity, regarded not what
Opinion the World might have of her Conduct
—and in fine, said she would live
with him as a Mistress, till Circumstances
should admit of her being made a Wife. 

An Offer, such as this, from a Woman of
her supposed Modesty, could not but surprize
him—he took it however as a Proof of the
most exalted and disinterested Passion that ever
was—but when he reflected, that to support
her as a Mistress, would be little less inconvenient
than maintaining her as a Wife, it
very much puzzled him—but he loved
her, and that overcame all other Considerations; 
she staid with him at his Lodgings— 
shared the same Bed, and they lived together
in every Respect, as if they had been married. 
So full an Enjoyment did not in the least
abate his Tenderness; and tho' after she had
been with him some few Days, he was told by
Persons who happened to see her at his Window,
that she was a Woman of an infamous
Character, and made up of Deceit, he looked
upon it all as Malice or Envy, and even
quarrelled with the dearest Friend he had on
Earth, for but seeming to doubt of her Sincerity. 
—Have I not Proofs both of her Love
and Honour, cry'd he, such Proofs as never
Woman but herself ever gave, nor never
Man but me was ever bless'd with? —O!
she is all Charms, both Mind and Body! till
I knew her, I knew not what real Happiness
was, and vainly searched for it in various Pleasures; 
but in my dear Syrena is all that's excellent
compriz'd. 
Those who loved him, pitied and lamented
his Infatuation; and those to whom he was 

Indifferent, ridicul'd it—all who knew his
Circumstances stood amazed, that a Man of
so fine an Understanding in other things,
should neglect all Opportunities of making his
Fortune, dissipate the little Substance he had
left, and devote his whole time to a Woman,
who, had she been as much an Angel, as she was
really a Devil, had it not in her power either to
serve him or herself. 
In the mean time, Syrena was not idle in
providing against a Change, or more properly
speaking, for a Change; she liked Mr. P&wblank;
indeed, but liked Interest better; and frequently
pretending to go to some or other of
her Kindred, where till they were married, it
was improper he should accompany her, went
abroad in hope of meeting with something more
to her Advantage, than she now began to suspect
he could ever be; and continued with him
but till she could be better provided for. 
Her expensive way of living, and the Pleasure
he took in indulging her every Wish, together
with the Shame he found in himself,
whenever he attempted to let her know how
ill he could afford it, had exhausted his little
Stock of Money in a short time—he then
borrowed of all who would lend—and
went in Debt wherever he could—so that
soon he found himself without either Money,
Friends, or Credit; shunn'd by his Acquaintance,
and in Danger of a Goal—this
made him very melancholy, but did not make
him love the less—he cursed his Fate, but 

bless'd the Wretch who had undone him— 
she took Notice of the Alteration in his Countenance,
and press'd him in so endearing a
manner to let her know the Cause, that he at
last confess'd his Misfortunes, concealing nothing
from her of the Truth; she hid the
Vexation it gave her, with her accustomed Artifice,
and said, well my Dear, be as patient
as you can—I love you not the less for
having no Estate; and this old Creature of a
Kinsman cannot live for ever, and my six
thousand Pounds will at least procure you a
Place. 
From this time, however, she thought of
nothing but how to get a new Gallant; but
none offering their Service, she chose rather to
remain with him, till he had made away
with the last things, that would even purchase
a Dinner, than go home to her Mother, where
she must have been put to those Straits herself,
which he alone at present sustained. 
A Gentleman who had been an old Friend
of Mr. P&wblank;'s Father, hearing of his
Misfortunes, made him an Invitation to his
House, which he told him should be to him
as his own, till he could get into some Employment; 
but this unhappy and deluded
Man refused to accept so kind an Offer, on
Syrena's falling into Fits, when he but barely
mention'd it; and chose rather to starve with
her, than forsake her without her own Consent; 
and sure a greater Act of Barbarity and
Ingratitude was never practis'd, than by this 

base Wretch in still hanging on a Man, who
to support her was obliged to be guilty of
Meanesses which his Soul on any other Occasion
would have abhorred; and Heaven only
knows to what Extremes, he might have been
driven, had not Providence discovered to him
her Perfidy in too full a Manner for all her
Dissimulation to evade, had she attempted it; 
but indeed having now run in a Manner, the
last length she could go with him, she took
not any Pains about it. 
As he was taking a solitary Walk one Afternoon
in Chelsea-Fields, indulging his melancholy
Contemplations, he met an Acquaintance,
who would needs make him go into the
next House of Entertainment; where being
seated and discoursing of ordinary Affairs, their
Conversation was interrupted by the loud
laughing of some Persons in the next Room; 
and their being only a Wainscot Partition between
them, they heard distinctly these Words,
by G&wblank;d, my Dear, if ever Fortune throws
a rich Fool in my Way, you shan't want a better
Commission. This was a Woman's Voice, and
sounded so like Syrena's, that Mr. P&wblank;
could not forbear growing as red as Scarlet; 
not that he imagin'd it could be she, whom he
had left at Home undrest, and hard at Work,
for she pretended to be a good Housewife; but
he was enrag'd that any vile Woman, as he
perceiv'd this was, by other Words he heard
her say; should have any thing in her like his
dear modest Creature. The Gentleman, who
knew not his Emotions, cry'd, we have got a 

loving Couple near us, I find. —Prithee,
let's try if we can see who they are. In speaking
this, he went to the side of the Room,
and found a Crevice large enough for the Eye
to take in all that was done within—the
fond Pair by this time were silent, or what they
spoke was in a lower Accent, and, indeed,
they were otherwise employ'd, as Mr. P&wblank;
who going also out of Curiosity, saw to his
Confusion. —He not only found the Voice,
but the Cloaths and Person of the Woman,
were the same with Syrena's, in fine, 'twas
she herself; and in a Posture such as he would
have stabb'd any one, who should have told
him, she could have been in with any other
Man than himself. 
He was naturally of a warm and sanguine
Disposition, impatient of Injuries, and incapable
of Reflection in the first Moments of his
Passion: He made but one Step from the Room
he was in to the next, burst open the Door,
which tho' lock'd gave way to the Violence
he us'd; drew his Sword, and had certainly
destroy'd them both in the Act of Shame, had
not his Friend been quick enough to prevent
him, by catching hold of his Arm behind. — 
Vardine, for it was he, was ill-prepar'd for a
Combat of this kind, but snatch'd up his Sword
which lay in the Window, and stood on his
Defence. —The People of the House hearing
the Noise, by this time came into the
Room, and with the Assistance of Mr. P&wblank;'s
Friend secur'd both their Swords, and prevented
the Mischief which must otherwise have 

happen'd; with much-a-do they got Mr.
P&wblank; out of the Room, tho' not till after
he had loaded the vile Wanton with all the
Reproaches her Treachery merited. — 
Vardine and she went out of the House together; 
and she return'd no more to Mr.
P&wblank;'s Lodgings—a happy Riddance,
and a Day which he has since vow'd to celebrate
every Year, as the most fortunate One,
that he had ever seen. 
The next Morning he receiv'd a Letter by
a Porter, the Contents whereof were these. 

SIR,
Tho' I think it little worth my while to
to demand any Satisfaction on the Score
of the Woman you found me with Yesterday; 
yet it would ill become my Character,
to put up with your forcing into the Room
where I was, and disturbing my Pleasures. — 
I shall therefore expect you will meet me Tomorrow
Morning in the Field behind Montague-house,
to decide with the Points of our Swords,
which of us has been to blame. 
J. Vardine. 

The Gentleman who had been with Mr.
P&wblank;, at the discovery of Syrena's Falshood; 
came to see how he did after this Disorder,
and was at Breakfast with him when
this Letter was brought. Mr. P&wblank; would 

have conceal'd the Contents, but the other
guessing the Business, would needs see it; and
having read it, you shall not go, said he,
How! not go, cry'd Mr. P&wblank; would you
have me posted for a Coward? Not so, replyed
the other, but if you will give me leave
to take this Letter with me, I will go along
with the Porter to him, and engage shall order
matters to the Satisfaction of you both; 
which I am sure is much better, than losing
your Blood in a Cause so unworthy of it. 
It was with great Difficulty Mr. P&wblank;
was persuaded; but knowing his Friend to be
a Man who hated a mean thing, as much as
himself, he at last consented he should act in
it as he thought proper; only bid him be carefull
of his Honour, and his Friend assuring him
he would be so, went with the Porter to the
Place where the Letter had been given to him,
and where Vardine still waited his Return in
Expectation of an Answer. 
It was a Coffee-House, but few People being
there, the Gentleman had opportunity enough
to say what he intended, without Interruption. 
He told him that not having quitted Mr. P&wblank;
since the Skirmish, and happening to rise first,
he took the Letter instead of him to whom it
was directed; and suspecting the Purport open'd
it, and was come to reason with him on the
Affair, before Mr. P&wblank; knew any thing of
it; and also, if he could to prevent the fatal
Consequences which else might possibly ensue. 
Vardine did not seem displeased in the least at 

his Proceeding; and when they came to argue
on the Provocation Mr. P&wblank; had received,
and the almost unparalled Deceit and
Ingratitude of Syrena, Vardine acknowledged
that he could not be expected to act otherwise
than he had done; and concluded with saying,
that he thought now, that they ought to exchange
Pardons with each other, for added he,
I was prevailed on by the Entreaties of that
Woman to joyn in the Deception put upon
Mr. P&wblank;, in order to draw him in to marry
her; and have as much Occasion for his Forgiveness
on that Score, as he has of mine for
forcing into my Room. The Friend of Mr.
P&wblank; then proposed a Meeting between them
three, the same Evening to conclude all Animosities
over a Bottle, the other agreed to it,
and Mr. P&wblank; at hearing what had past was
perfectly satisfyed with the Gentleman's Conduct,
and went with him to the Appointment,
at the time prefix'd, with as much Chearfullness
as his Circumstances would admit of— 
all the Love he had bore Syrena, while he believed
her sincere, was now turn'd into as
great a Contempt, and Vardine expressing the
same, and protesting never to see her more,
added to his Satisfaction. 
Thus ended an Affair, which tho' much to
the Prejudice of Mr. P&wblank;, had it not been for
the prudent Management of his Friend, might
have been much worse, and afforded Business
for the Old Bailey; and ought to be a Warning
to all Gentlemen how they suffer themselves
to be beguiled in the Manner he was, or expect 

Sincerity from Persons whom they commence
an Acquaintance with in the Street. 
Syrena was now once more at Home with
her Mother, who knowing how little was to
be get either by Mr. P&wblank; or Vardine who
resolved to see her no more as well as the other,
was not much troubled at what had happened; 
but her Daughter was of a different Way of
thinking; she had for a long time been accustomed
to be admired and caress'd; and to live
without the Conversation of a Man was
wretchedly irksome, and what her gay and
amorous Constitution could not endure with
any tollerable degree of Patience—she made
some Efforts to retain Vardine, but that young
Gentleman finding what a consummate Jilt she
was grown, and fearful of being brought into
more Broils on her Account, declined any farther
Acceptance of her Favours; this, together
with the Poverty to which she was reduced,
made her almost distracted; the Notion she
had been bred up in, that a Woman who had
Beauty to attract the Men, and Cunning
to manage them afterwards, was secure of
making her Fortune, appeared now altogether
fallacious; since she had not been able to do it
in four Years incessant Application, and such
a Variety of Adventures, as in that time she
had been engaged in. This naturally led her
to reproach her Mother for having given her
ill Advice; and the Mother retorted that the
Misfortunes and Disappointments she had met
with, had not been owing to her Advice, but
to her own ill Conduct—what, said she, 

hindred you from being married to Mr. W&wblank;
but your Amour with his Son? or what from
being still the Darling of Mr. P&wblank; but
your renewing your Acquaintance with Vardine?
by which you have lost both, and will
always do so while you are silly enough to love
any Man. —And pray, interrupted Syrena,
whom may I thank for losing Mr. D&wblank;
but you, first for counselling me to be Captain
H&wblank;'s Mistress, and then by your unlucky
Letter betraying it to the other —Thus with
mutual Upbraidings did they add to their ill
Fate, and as there can be neither true Duty or
Affection where Interest presides, that prevailing
Guide being at present suspended, whoever
had seen them together, and heard the bitter
things they said, without knowing who they
were would little have imagined, how near
they were by Blood. 
The manner in which Syrena had lived, entitled
her not to keep any reputable Company
of her own Sex, and as for Women of the
Town, she always avoided any Acquaintance
with them, as being too much addicted to
tattling, and also malicious to a Face prefer'd
before their own; so that whenever she went
to the Play or Opera, or walk'd in the Park,
she had been always obliged to dress up, some
Tirewoman, Sempstress, or such like Person
to accompany her; but she had now a very
poor Stock of Cloaths, most of those as well
as her Watch and Jewels being gone to satisfy
Demands of a more pressing Nature; so that
she had no Opportunity to shew herself to advantage; 

for a Woman can give herself a
thousand enticing Airs, when she has somebody
to talk to, which cannot be practis'd
when alone. To stay at home, however, she
knew could be of no Service to her, so she
went out every Day, sometimes to Church,
and sometimes to Shops, cheapening Goods,
and to all the Auctions she could hear of. 
It was at one of these last Places, she had
the Good-Luck, as she then thought it, to
be taken particular notice of by Mr. E&wblank;, a
Gentleman of a vast Estate, and most agreeable
Person: He had seen her in the Park some
Months before, and then languished for an
Opportunity to entertain her; but a Relation
of his Wife, for he was married, being with
him, he was obliged to put a Constraint upon
his Inclinations, at that time, and Fortune
had never since thrown her in his way. To
meet with her, therefore, in a Place where the
most reserved of either Sex, make no Scruple
of speaking to each other, was an infinite Satisfaction
to him: He went round the Room
with her, as if examining the Value of the
Goods; but in reality telling her how handsome
she was, and how much he admired her:
To give her some Proof, that what he said
were not Words of course, a fine India Cabinet
being put up to sale, which she seem'd to
praise, he cut-bid all the Company, and made
her a Present of it. —This he did in
hope of knowing by that means, where he
might wait upon her; and she, no less
desirous that he should do so, took care to 

give very exact Directions to the Auctioneer
where it should be sent. Tho' she affected
to receive a Favour of this kind, from a Gentleman
who was a perfect Stranger to her,
with a great deal of Reluctance; yet she omitted
not to let fall Hints, as if she accepted
the Donation merely for the sake of the Donor; 
having found by Experience, that Men,
as well as Women have Vanity enough to
be delighted, with the Belief they have any
thing in them capable of charming at first
Sight, she call'd so much Tenderness into her
Voice and Eyes, whenever she look'd upon
him, or spoke to him; yet at the same time
blended with it such an Innocence, as made
him, while he flatter'd himself with having inspired
her with the softest Passion, imagine
also, that she was asham'd of her own Thoughts,
and was endeavouring all she could to suppress
the rising Inclination: He fancy'd he saw in
every Glance, Desire struggling with Modesty,
and the sweet Contest, which he fancy'd he
found there, so heighten'd the Idea of her
Charms, that he look'd upon himself as the
happiest Man alive. 
As she was about leaving the Room, I would
attend you to your Chair, Madam, said he; but,
as I know how to direct, will give you the
Trouble of a Line, if I may be permitted to
hope you will allow it the Favour of a Perusal. 
I am too fond of imgroving the little
Genius I owe to Nature, answer'd she, with
the most seemingly artless Blush, not to read
with Pleasure whatever falls from the Pen of 

a Gentleman like you. She waited not to
hear how he would reply; but believing he
would think she had said enough, turn'd hastily
away, in an admirably well dissembled Confusion,
and went home to acquaint her Mother
with what had happen'd. 
Early the next Morning a Porter brought
a Letter directed to Miss Tricksy; her Orders
to the Auctioneer being to carry the Cabinet
to Mrs. Tricksy at Mr. N&wblank;'s in H&wblank; street;
and her Youth and seeming Innocence making
Mr. E&wblank; suppose her unmarried, occasion'd
him to write the Superscription in that manner. 
She open'd it with Impatience enough,
and found in it these Words: 

Charming Miss,
As it is impossible to see you without feeling
a Mixture of Love and Admiration, I
fear you are to much accustom'd to Declarations
of this Nature, to have that Compassion
which is necessary to save the Life of your Votaries; 
—permit me, however, to tell you,
that I have a Claim beyond what yet you
have been sensible of, which is having adored
you for a great length of time—Yes, most
angelic Creature! I have languish'd in a hopeless
Flame for many Months—One Sight of
you at a Distance, made me your everlasting
Slave; and tho' I have taken all imaginable
Pains, I never since that fatal Moment could
gain a second interview; till Yesterday, Chance,
more favourable than my Industry, restor'd 

you to my longing Eyes. —What Agonies
I have sustain'd till then, you cannot be able
to comprehend, nor am I to describe — 
But as I have already past those Sufferings,
which are a kind of Probation that Love exacts
from all those who profess themselves his
Votaries; if you are equally just as fair, you
will allow some little Recompence is due from
one who is an old Lover, tho' a new Acquaintance
—that of being permitted to visit you
sometimes, and to sigh my Wishes at your
Feet, is all I yet presume to implore, who
am, 
Divinest of your Sex,
Your most humble,
most passionate, and
most faithful Adorer. 
P. S. If I have your leave to visit you, I
will inform you, not only who I am, but every
thing you shall ask; and also endeavour to
give you greater Proofs than Words of the
Sincerity of my Flame. In the mean time,
favour me with an Answer directed to A. Z. 

There was something so particular in the
Stile of this Letter, that neither Syrena nor
her Mother knew how to form a Judgment
of it; by some Expressions they would have
imagin'd, he took her for a Girl of Virtue, and
intended to address her on the most honourable 

Score, had not others again contradicted
that Belief —As they yet were ignorant of
the Circumstances of him who wrote it, there
was, indeed, no Possibility of fathoming his
Design; but as there was a Necessity of giving
an Answer, and the Porter waited, they contrived
one between both, which should encourage
him to be more open, and at the same
time leave him as much in the dark concerning
their Affairs, as they were at present on
the Account of his. 

To Mr. A. Z.
SIR,
Tho' without ever having been what they call,
in Love my self, I have suffered so much
from that Passion, that I have Reason to tremble
at the very Name; yet as I cannot be vain
enough to imagine what is meant by it in yours,
any more than mere Gallantry, I shall make
no Difficulty of receiving the Visits of a Person
who has so much the Appearance of a Man of
Honour, and whose Civilities to me demand
somewhat as an Acknowledgement from a
grateful Mind; which is all the Merit to be
boasted of by, 
Sir,
Your most oblig'd, and
Humble Servant,
Syrena Tricksy. 


Mr. E&wblank; was too impatient to defer
any longer than the Evening of the same Day
waiting on the admired Object, but was a little
startled when he found there was a Mother
in the way; and who, in the midst of the Civilities
she received him with, mingled a certain
Severity, which render'd him very much
at a loss how to behave: Syrena, however,
said a thousand obliging things to him, and
whenever she had an Opportunity, gave him
Looks sufficient to have encouraged a Man
who had a less Opinion of himself. Tea was
not over when a pretended Messenger came to
inform Mrs. Tricksy her Company was desired
on a Business of great Importance—She
made an Apology for being oblig'd to leave
him, which he very readily excused, rejoiced
to be rid of the Company of one, who seem'd
not likely to favour the purpose he came there
upon. 
She was no sooner gone, than he declared
himself in the most passionate manner to Syrena,
who reply'd to all he said with a well-affected
Modesty; but with a Kindness also,
which confirmed the Hopes her Glances had
before inspired him with. She told him the
same Story of her Marriage and Widowhood,
as she had done others, and gave him to understand
her Circumstances were none of the
best. —He, in return for her suppos'd Sincerity,
acquainted her that he was married,
obliged by his Friends to enter into that State
when he was very young; but that he never 

loved his Lady, nor, indeed, any other Woman,
till he saw the Object before him. — 
Syrena seem'd shock'd at hearing he had a
Wife, and gave him an Opportunity of discovering,
as he imagin'd, that she lik'd him infinitely. 
—She told him, her Mother would
never permit her to receive his Visits when
she should know it; and as it was impossible
it could be long kept a Secret from her, she
could not but look on herself as very unhappy
in being deprived of the Company of a Man,
who by an irresistable Impulse, she could not
help wishing to be eternally with. All this
she spoke as in the first Emotions of her Surprize,
and as tho' it scaped her without Design
—then afterwards appeared confounded
at having so far betrayed herself. 
Mr. E&wblank;, who by this Behaviour had
Reason to believe she loved him to a very
great Excess, was transported, and used many
more Arguments than he need to have done,
to persuade her to leave her Mother, and retire
to Lodgings of his preparing for her. 
Syrena thought it not proper to yield to these
Proposals immediately, but did not seem altogether
averse to them; and in this first Visit
he had Cause to expect every thing he could
wish, so departed highly satisfied; not that he
imagined he had to deal with a Woman of
that strict Virtue she pretended; but his Opinion
of her was, that if she had fallen, it
was merely for the Sake of Interest, and that 

if he gain'd any Favours, they would be the
Effect of Love: In effect, he languish'd not
long; the Circumstances Syrena and her Mother
were in at this Juncture, would not permit
them time for the Artifices they might
otherwise have practised on this Gentleman, so
thought it best to accept of his Offer, and trust
to his future Generosity and their own Management,
for a Settlement. 
In fine, the Agreement in a few Days was
concluded between the amorous Pair, and Syrena
went to an Apartment he had provided,
the Elegance of which shew'd both his Love
and Liberality; he made her a Present of 500l.
the Moment she set her Foot in it; and assured
her, that whatever he was Master of
she should command; Mrs. Tricksy was to
seem ignorant of all this, to the End, that
finding it out afterwards, the Reproaches of a
Mother might oblige him to do something
farther to appease her. 
Many Stratagems they had in Embrio, in
order to impose upon him, but they were all
rendred abortive, by a Misfortune which fell
upon them when they least expected it, and
from a Quarter they little dream'd of. 
Syrena had now provoked a Woman no less
cunning, tho' more virtuous than herself, the
Wife of Mr. E&wblank;, who being informed
by some Spies, she ever kept upon his Actions,
of his Fondness of this new Favourite, resolved 

to break off the Intimacy between them,
and affected it by this Means. 
She had among her Acquaintance a Lady
extremely jealous of her Husband, and of a
Temper too violent and outrageous to forgive
the least Infringement on her Rights; this
Person she contrived to make her Instrument
of Revenge on Syrena, without being seen in
it herself, or giving Mr. E&wblank; any Reason
to imagine she even knew of the Injury
he did her. 
Mr. C&wblank; was a Man of a very amorous
Constitution, tho' secret in his Amours,
on Account of his Wife's excessive tenaciousness
that way; to him did Mrs. E&wblank;
contrive a Letter should be sent, containing
these Lines. 

To Mr. C&wblank;.
SIR,
Love being a Passion that admits of no
Controul, the Custom that obliges Women
to conceal it, is cruel and unjust; and
what I hope you'll excuse the breach of, when
made in Favour of yourself. —In fine, Sir,
there is a Lady in the World, who for a
long time has looked on you with the Eyes
of Tenderness—the Circumstances both
of you are in, will not permit her to take any
other Steps, than she now does to let you 

know it; but if you will venture to meet her
at the King's Arms in &wblank; Street, To-morrow
at Six in the Evening, I believe you will
not think your Time ill bestowed—she
is a Woman of Reputation, young, and accounted
handsome—as to the rest, a few
Hours of her Conversation will enable you to
judge better, than any Description can be given
by 
Sir,
Your unknown humble Servant. 
P. S. Enquire for Number I. 

Mrs. E&wblank; took care to make the Appointment,
contained in this Letter, at a time
when she knew her Husband was too deeply
engaged with other Company, to be able to
see his Mistress; and early in the Morning
sent a Porter to Syrena, as from Mr. E&wblank;,
to tell her, that an extraordinary Accident
had made it improper for him to come to her
Lodgings any more; and that he desired to see
her to inform her of it, at the King's-Arms
Tavern in &wblank; Street. Every thing happened
as Mrs. E&wblank; wish'd — Syrena told
the Porter she would come; and the subtle
Wife having a Letter ready prepar'd, sent it
directly to Mrs. C&wblank;, the Contents of it
were as follows. 

To Mrs. C&wblank;.
Madam,
I am sorry to acquaint you that you are
injured in the most tender Part — Mr.
C&wblank; has long kept Company with one of
the most leud, expensive, insinuating Women
about Town, who if not timely prevented, will
be the ruin of his Estate, as she has already
been of his Honour and Fidelity, to so excellent
a Wife—to accuse him will be of little
Consequence; he is too firmly attached to the
Creature, to break off with her by any moderate
Measures; but if you think proper to
assert the Prerogative the Law allows a Wife
wrong'd in this Manner, and take a Warrant
and proper Officers with you; you will find
her with your Husband at Six this Evening, at
the King's-Arms in &wblank; Street: —Slight
not this Intelligence, because it comes from
one you know not, but convince yourself of the
Truth, and at the same time punish the
Wretch who dares to invade your Right— 
her Name is Syrena Tricksy, she passes for a
Widow, and at this time lodges in Maiden-Lane;
but as Mr. C&wblank; seldom sees her at
home, you can never have an Opportunity like
the present of doing yourself Justice, and reclaiming
the Man, whom both divine and
human Laws ought to bind entirely to you. 
I am, 
Madam,
Your sincere Well-wisher. 

P. S. If you enquire for Number I, you
will be shew directly to the Scene of Guilt and
Shame. 

The Rage this Lady was in at the Receipt
of this, was not at all inferior to what Mrs.
E&wblank; imagined—she went immediately to
a Justice of Peace, obtained a Warrant, and
had a Constable ready to attend her when the
Hour should arrive. 
Mrs. E&wblank; in the mean time was not idle,
she knew her Husband was engaged the whole
Day with his Lawyers on some Business relating
to an Estate in Debate between him, and
a near Relation. So she disguised herself, and
went to the Tavern, resolving to be a Witness
how her Plot succeded. Having placed herself
in a convenient Room, she saw Mr.
C&wblank; come in, and soon after him the deceiving,
but now deceived Syrena, what would
she have given for the gratification of her Curiosity
in hearing what passed between them,
but that was impossible, and she was obliged to
content herself with that of her Revenge which
she soon saw compleated to her Wish. 
The Reader however, must not be left in
Ignorance; when Syrena first came into the
Room, and found a strange Gentleman instead
of him she expected; she guess'd the
Drawer who shew'd her up, had made some
Mistake, and was turning to go out of again, 

but Mr. C&wblank; taking it as Modesty or Affectation
prevented her, by saying, Sure Madam
you do not already repent of your Goodness,
and would leave me before I tell you how happy
I think myself in meeting you here. Sir,
answered she, I ask'd for Number I, being
to see a Friend here by that Token, but perhaps
it may so have happened, that there may be
two who left that Direction at the Bar— 
I know not that, Madam, replyed he, but I
was made to hope, I should here meet with
a Lady young, beautiful, but one altogether
a Stranger to me; so whether you are the
Person who design'd me that Favour or not, I
am certain you have all the Marks, and must
at least detain you till another more agreeable
than yourself (which is altogether impossible)
shall come and relieve you. —Syrena was at
a Loss what to make of this Adventure, she
could have liked well enough to stay with him,
but she feared some Trick in the Case: She
was apprehensive that Mr. E&wblank; had form'd
this Contrivance to make tryal of ber Constancy,
and might be in the next Room a
Witness of her Behaviour; so with all the Appearance
of a virtuous Indignation, she told
Mr. C&wblank; who had fast hold of her Hand,
that she was surprized at the Accident which
had brought two Persons together, in such a
Place, who were entire Strangers to each
other—that she came there to meet a
near Relation and Friend on Business, which
since she was disappointed in, begged he would
not pretend to enforce her Stay, nor imagine 

she was a Woman who would submit to any
thing, that the most strict Modesty would not
allow of. 
She spoke this with so serious and resolute an
Air, that Mr. C&wblank; began indeed to fear
this was not the Person from whose Kindness
he had so much to expect—to convince
himself he took the Letter had been sent him
out of his Pocket, and shew'd it to her,
which made her more than before imagine
that there was something in Agitation against
her—she assured him, as indeed she well
might, that she knew nothing of the sending
it—had never seen him before to her
Knowledge; or if I had, continued she, blushing,
have a Heart already too much taken up
to entertain the Thoughts of any other, tho'
ever so deserving. As she still was possess'd
of the Opinion, that this Gentleman was a
Friend of Mr. E&wblank;, and would report to
him every thing she said, she spoke this the
more to ingratiate herself with him, when he
should be told it; but the Amazement Mr.
C&wblank; was in, and the Vexation he express'd to
find he had been impos'd upon, a little stagger'd
her former Conjecture—I wish, Sir, said she,
there is not some Treachery put in Practice
against us both; but for what End, or from
what Quarter, I cannot guess. —But, added
she, the surest way to disappoint it, is immediately
to separate—therefore, I beg Sir,
you'll not offer to detain me longer. With
these Words she endeavoured to draw back 

her Hand; but he, whose Desires had been
raised by the Expectation of a different Entertainment,
and were now quite enflamed by so
pleasing an Object, could not tell how to let
her go so easily; and instead of quitting his
hold, threw his other Arm about her Neck,
and in that defenceless Posture almost smother'd
her with Kisses. —She was no less
susceptible than himself of the strenuous Embrace; 
and beginning now to believe, that if
there was a Plot, he at least had no Hand in
it, made but faint Efforts to oblige him to desist
what was equally pleasing to her as to
himself, till quite overcome with the dangerous
Temptation, he found her Lips not only
yield, but return Kiss for Kiss—the amorous
Pair thus equally dissolved, had not stopp'd
here, but were proceeding to much greater
Liberties, when Mrs. C&wblank; rush'd into the Room
more like a Fury than a Woman—she flew
upon Syrena, call'd her all the Names that jealous
Rage could suggest; then turning to her
Husband, ungrateful Monster, cry'd she! Is
this the Reward of all my Love and Virtue?
—was it for this I slighted so many noble
Matches, and brought you such a Fortune?
he was beginning to protest his Innocence,
but the very mention made her more outrageous. 
—O! horrid Impudence, said she,
have I not caught you almost in the odious
Act! dare you deny it. —But I forbear saying
farther to you at present—your Strumpet
here shall curse the Hour she ever tempted
you to wrong my Bed—as she spoke 

these Words she stamp'd with her Foot, and immediately
came up the Constable, and other
Persons she had placed in a Room under that
where they were—do your Office, Man,
cry'd she, and carry that filthy Creature, where
your Warrant directs. Mr. C&wblank; begg'd
she would not expose herself and him; and Syrena
frighted almost to Death, fell on her
Knees, and entreated her Mercy and Forgiveness— 
but all Attempts to quell her Fury,
were like fencing the Sea with a Battledor,
when it was Mountains high—the more
they humbled themselves, the more insolent
and impetuous she became; and Mrs. E&wblank;,
who in her Disguise was now mingled with the
croud of Servants, Porters, and others, whom
the Noise drew together, had the Satisfaction
to see her hated Rival in Mr. E&wblank;'s Affections,
dragg'd away like the lowest and most
common Prostitute, that plies the Streets for
the poor Pittance of a Half-Crown Fare; a
Fate, indeed, she long since had deserv'd, tho'
fallen on her when she gave the least Occasion. 
How Mr. C&wblank; and his Spouse made up this
Quarrel between themselves, is not to our present
Purpose; but Mrs. E&wblank; who knew
not but Syrena might have the Confidence to
send to her Husband, even from the Place she
now was in, in hopes of being set at Liberty; did
not here give over. She had by Bribes and incessant
Application, made herself thoroughly acquainted
with every Circumstance of Syrena's 

Family and Circumstances; she knew she had
pretty near Kindred in the City, who were Men
of Worth and Character, and very rich: To one
of these she went, and having made an Apology
for coming on a Business, which she knew
could not but be shocking, told him that Syrena,
was at that time a Prisoner in the House
of Correction: The Lady whose Resentment
confines her there, said she, is my particular
Friend; but having suffer'd a great deal from
her Husband's Intimacy with loose Women,
all I can say in Favour of your unhappy Cousin,
will not prevail on her to give her a Release; 
unless she could be certain of her being removed
too far from London, for her Husband to continue
any Correspondence with her. — 
Now, Sir, added she, tho' she alone is guilty,
her Brother's unfortunate in being so, will
share in her Disgrace—they are young,
and might be eminent Men in time; but what
sober Person will match his Daughter, where
so near a Relative as a Sister is, every Day,
nay every Hour, guilty of Actions, which render
her a Shame, not only to her Family, but
her whole Sex?—besides, Sir, if she continues in
the wretched Place she now is, the horrid Society
she in time will there become acquainted with,
may excite her to Crimes worthy of her second
Removal to Newgate,—in fine, there is no
knowing to what Lengths, Crimes will extend
in a Person of abandon'd Morals; so that
for the sake of her Family, I could wish she
were dispos'd of, so as not to bring herself to 

farther Infamy, nor her Friends to trouble by
the hearing it. 
The Person to whom this Speech was address'd,
seem'd infinitely shock'd, tho' by some
things he had heard of his Kinswoman's Behaviour,
he had dreaded to receive some such
Intelligence for a long time. He thank'd
Mrs. E&wblank; however, with the utmost Civility,
and told her he would consult with
some others of the Family; and she might depend
upon it, order the Affair, so that the Lady her
Friend, should receive no farther Injury from
his abandoned Relative. 
This worthy Citizen, in effect, summon'd
all who were unhappy enough to be nearly
ally'd to the wicked Syrena, and having made
them a brief Recital of what Crimes had come
to his Knowledge, committed by her, and the
shameful Situation she now was in, they all
agreed, that to avoid hearing any thing farther
of her Viciousness, it was best to send her to
some remote Place, where she should be strictly
confined, till time, and a just Sensibility of her
Infamy, should bring her to an Abhorrence
of her past Life. One of them having a
handsome Estate in the farther part of Wales,
proposed sending her to a Tenant he had there; 
to which the others readily comply'd and
each promis'd to contribute somewhat towards
her keeping there. 
This being agreed upon, the Person to
whom Mrs. E&wblank; had spoke, having he 

Directions, waited on her, and begg'd she
would now perform her Promise in exerting
her whole Interest with Mrs. C&wblank;, for
the Discharge of Syrena; and he would engage
in return, that the unhappy Girl should never
wrong her more. Mrs. E&wblank; assured him,
she would undertake the Office. —She
did so, and Mrs. C&wblank; was easily enough
prevail'd upon, on the Conditions her Friend
mentioned. 
All that remain'd now was to let Syrena
know what had been done for her, who,
glad to submit to any thing that would deliver
her from the Place she was in, made a thousand
Vows never to return to London any
more. 
Thus was Syrena taken from the first Captivity
she had ever been in; but when she
consider'd, she was going to a second, which,
tho' less shameful, would in all Probability deprive
her entirely from all Conversation with
Mankind, she was almost inconsolable— 
Fatal Necessity, however, must be obey'd,
and she was sent under the Conduct of an old
Servant of one of her Kinsmen to Wales, where
what befel her, must be the Subject of future
Entertainment. 
