
Recites a passage which will certainly be extremely agreeable to all the ladies; it is much to be feared, however, that there are but very few of them who can, with any reason, flatter themselves with experiencing the like. 
Jenny, who had the mortification of hearing every day that Belpine grew rather worse than better, began to call to mind every trifling accident that had happen'd to give her any disgust in England, to the end that she might have the less 
love for it, and be more reconciled to the thoughts of leaving it for ever;—she found it, indeed, a thing of no great difficulty to conquer all the reluctance she might at first have on that score;—the society of the man she loved, and by whom she was so much beloved, was an over-balance for all she was about to quit for his sake, and her whole mind was now taken up with the manner in which she should order her affairs so as to be prepared to go whenever the circumstances of things should call her. 
Her resolution being settled, her thoughts by degrees became so too, and she now enjoy'd more serenity than she had known since the accident that drove Jemmy from her; but the post not bringing her a letter as she expected, some part of her former discontents began to revive in her;—she was, however, too well assured of his punctuality not to impute this disappointment to some other cause than his neglect. 
She soon found that she had done him no more than justice in this point;—mr. Morgan came the next morning to visit her;—as she had not seen him since she was a girl, his coming at this juncture a little surprised her, and he kept her in suspence for some time, by making her a 
thousand compliments, after the fashion of old men, on the improvements he found in her stature and beauty, before he related to her the business which had brought him thither. 
At last, tho' not till after many circum-locutions, by way of prelude,—‘I have a present for you, my pretty lady, said he; I received a letter last night from my good friend mr. Jessamy, and something inclosed for you, which he commission'd me to deliver into your own hands;—here it is, continued he, giving her a packet, take it, I believe it will not be displeasing to you.’ 
‘I have no apprehensions of receiving any thing that can be so, either from him or you, sir, reply'd she, you will therefore pardon my impatience to see what it contains.’ —‘Aye,—aye, cryed he, read it by all means,—I would have you read it while I am here.’ 
He then retired to a window and took up a book while she opened the packet, in which was a large parchment, heavy with the weight of seals, and a letter from Jemmy containing these lines: 


To miss Jessamy.
“With what words,—O thou more than woman,—thou angel of thy sex,—shall I express that rush of joyous astonishment,—that extacy which on the reading your dear letter overwhelm'd my heart! —Can you then resolve to leave your native country, with all the charms you once found in it? —Can you do this for my unworthy sake,—consent to share my fate, and live in exile with your Jemmy? —Yes,—I know you can,—you have said it, and will not promise without meaning to perform. 
“Thus transcendently blest in your affection, the goods of fortune would be below my care if you had no interest in them;—nor would even life itself be of any estimation with me were it not dear to you;—but as they both are yours, eternally devoted to you, they ought not to be neglected by me. 
“On my relating my affair with Belpine in all its unhappy circumstances, to a lawyer who happen'd to come over with me, he told me I ought to take proper methods for securing my estate, 
in case the wound I had given should prove mortal;—I approved of his advice, and as there is no English attorney at Calais, he has been so good as to draw up an instrument for that purpose himself,—which is the same I now send to you. 
“You will find by it, my dear Jenny, that I am no longer possess'd of any lands or hereditaments;—you are the mistress of all that once was mine;—to whom, indeed, should I commit my estate but to her who has my soul in keeping? 
“I have wrote to mr. Morgan and mr. Ellwood to assist you in whatever cares may attend this accession, and also to my steward and house-keeper to receive their orders henceforward from you, who have now the only right to command and to direct their services. 
“What remittances I may have occasion for I shall become your petitioner to grant, and doubt not but your charity will extend itself as far as you think my wants may reasonably require;—I am sure that I can feel none the thousandth part so great as that of your dear society, which, without my daring 
to ask, you have already promised to relieve. 
“I should be glad methinks, however, to know the certainty of my doom;—that is,—whether I may have hope of returning to England, or must content myself with being a denizen of France; tho' in whatever place my lot is cast, fate will find it very difficult to render me unhappy, while permitted to subscribe myself, 
“With the most pure and perfect passion,
My dearest Jenny's,
Fervently and unalterably
Devoted Servant,
J. Jessamy. 
“P.S. I need not tell my dear Jenny with how much impatience I shall long for the arrival of the next mail, and every mail till we are so happy as to meet again.” 

Having read the letter, she unfolded the writing which accompany'd it, and found it was a deed of conveyance to herself of 
Jemmy's whole estate, both real and personal;—as she knew not well the nature of these things, nor for what end this had been done, it threw her into so deep a resvery that she forgot mr. Morgan was in the room. 
But that gentleman, perceiving she had done reading, returned to the seat he had lately quitted, and, taking her by the hand, ask'd her with a smile what she thought of the gift her lover had made her. —‘Indeed, sir, answered she, I know not what to think; and should be at a very great loss how to behave on the occasion, if I did not depend on being directed by one or other of the two worthy persons mentioned in mr. Jessamy's letter.’ 
He then explained to her all she wanted to know, and concluded with some compliments on the confidence mr. Jessamy reposed in her;—‘If ever I see him again, said he pleasantly, I shall tell him that he relies much on his own merit to imagine he can secure the affection of so a fine lady after endowing her with a fortune which may entitle her to the addresses of the first nobleman in the kingdom. 
‘He need not be very vain, returned she, to be intirely free from all apprehensions on that score. —But, sir, continued she, there is another danger which perhaps he has not thought of;—I have a kinsman, who, tho' a very distant one, is yet my heir in case I die unmarried, and would certainly, after my demise, seize on every thing which could be proved had been in my possession at that time.’ 
‘Demise, cry'd mr. Morgan, how can such a thought come into your head? —A virgin in her bloom talk of dying!’ —‘Things more unlikely, sir, have come to pass, said she, and I am for leaving nothing to chance, especially on such an account as this;—as the first proof, therefore, of that assistance mr. Jessamy makes me hope for from you, I must intreat you will provide me an able lawyer that I may make my will, and by bequeathing back to mr. Jessamy his own estate, with my whole fortune annexed to it, unite both according as our parents always intended they should be.’ 
Mr. Morgan looked on her with the highest admiration all the time she was 
speaking; but making no immediate answer she went on, insisting that he would do as she desired, to which he at last consented, and promised to bring an attorney with him in the afternoon; they had some farther conversation together, in which Jenny display'd herself so well, without aiming to do so, that he departed quite amazed and charmed to find such generosity, such justice, and such prudence in a person of her years. 
When she was left alone, and had leisure to reflect on what Jemmy had done, it did not seem at all strange to her that he should have reposed so much confidence in her, because she thought there was not a possibility for any woman in the world to be wicked enough to abuse such a trust; but she wonder'd at the haste he made to execute a deed of this nature, which she could see no necessity for on the score of what had passed between him and Belpine, at least as yet. 
After a little pause,—‘It must certainly be, cry'd she, that the dear, the generous man, has caused this instrument to be drawn up merely for my sake, that if any unforeseen accident should snatch him suddenly from the world, I should then remain in an undisturbed 
possession of all he left behind;—no other motive can have induced him to act in this manner; and it was only the secret sympathy of my soul with his that has put it into my head to make a will in his favour.’ 
It pleased her to think she had found a way to be even with him in his tender care, and longed for the return of mr. Morgan, that she might put in execution what she had devised. 
That gentleman came in the afternoon, and according to the promise she had exacted from him, brought with him an able lawyer of his particular acquaintance, whom, as soon as the first civilities were over, she immediately set to work upon the business for which she had desired his presence. 
The writing being intirely finished in all its forms, and witnessed by mr. Morgan and the people of the house, whom Jenny had ordered to be called up for that purpose, she deposited it in mr. Morgan's hands, desiring him to keep it till she should die, unless some accident should oblige her to demand it back;—this he assured her he would do, still affecting to smile, tho' admiring within himself a 
precaution so uncommon in a young lady. 
But whatever either he or his friend the lawyer might think of her on this occasion, they were afterwards convinced, by the vivacity and sprightliness of her conversation and behaviour, during the whole time they continued with her, that it was not by any melancholy vapours she had been instigated to the step she had taken, and which appeared so extraordinary to them, as indeed it well might do to persons who never had an opportunity of being acquainted with the greatness of her mind. 
