
Will be found yet more affecting than the former, unless the reader is as dull as perhaps he may think the author. 
When our lovers had regained the opportunity of communicating freely to each other all that their minds were charged with, Jemmy, who had thought a good deal of what had been told him concerning the insults Jenny had received from Celandine and his outrageous mistress, began to testify a desire of being fully informed in the particulars of an adventure he had heard but an imperfect account of at Bath. 
Jenny hesitated not to comply with his request; but tho' she expatiated, with all the wit and satire she was mistress of, on Celandine's behaviour in regard to the challenge sent him by mr. Lovegrove, yet she took care to avoid setting his impertinence towards herself in so bad a light as she might have done, and it indeed deserved. 
Never had this young lady given a greater demonstration of her prudence, than in thus shadowing over, as much as truth would permit, the insolence of Celandine;—she consider'd that it was not unlikely that Jemmy might some time or other meet him, and think himself obliged to call him to a severe account for an affront offerd to the woman whom it was so publickly known he was about to marry. 
She soon found how necessary had been the precaution she had taken;—Jemmy flew into the extremest rage at the presumption of Celandine, even on hearing it in the manner she recited it; and she was obliged, before she could bring him to any degree of moderation, to remind him that all the actions of so egregious a coxcomb proceeded more from folly than design, and merited rather contempt than indignation from a man of sense. 
“You see, my dear Jenny, said he, how many inconveniencies have attended the protraction of our marriage so much beyond the time in which it was expected to have been consummated;—for heaven's sake, therefore, 
let us put an end to the suspence that ever one is in, and convince the world that we indeed are born only for each other.” 
‘Could you then resolve, cryed she, with an air which had something very meaning in it, to renounce all the joys of an unhoused condition, as Otway calls a single life, and give up your liberty before fully satiated with the sweets you men find in it? —How would it sound at mrs. Comode's, that mr. Jessamy was become a husband?’ 
“Mrs. Comode!” repeated he; she made no answer presently, but went again to her cabinet to fetch the letter he had intended for lady Hardy, and put it open into his hands. 
‘How would marriage, my dear Jemmy resumed she, agree with the promise you made in this,—of coming to the arms of the kind she to whom you wrote it, with a heart intirely unincumbered with any cares but those of pleasing her?’ 
The consternation he was in at this sight is utterly impossible to be described; but recovering himself from it as well as 
he could,—“Before I make any attempt, said he, either to excuse or justify my conduct in this point, tell me, I conjure you, by what means this letter came into your possession.” 
‘You need but turn the paper, answered she, and the superscription will inform you:’—he did so, and finding it—‘To miss Jessamy at Bath,’—instantly discovered the mistake he had committed, and cried out in the greatest confusion,—“Good God!—how justly “is my folly punished!—’ then turning to Jenny,—“Yet when known, continued he, by how odd an accident I was betray'd into this error, you will, I am sure, forgive me.” 
‘I will know nothing farther of this matter, reply'd Jenny, nor shall I ever think of it hereafter;—all I desire is, that when we marry you will either have no amours, or be more cautious in concealing them;—and in return, I promise never to examine into your conduct,—to send no spies to watch your motions,—to listen to no tales that might be brought me, nor by any methods whatever endeavour to discover more than you would have me.’ 
“Generous creature, rejoin'd he kissing her hand, yet permit me to assure you, by all my hopes of happiness, that the fault I am now detected in was never eagerly pursued by me;—that it was only an intention;—did not proceed to fact;—and that an angel's form can hereafter never tempt me to swerve, even in thought, from the fidelity I owe my dear forgiving Jenny.” 
‘Make no vows on this last head, I beseech you, said she; I have heard people much older, and more experienced than ourselves, say that the surest way to do a thing is to resolve against it. 
‘Besides, my dear Jemmy, added she with the most engaging sprightliness,—I shall not be so unreasonable to expect more constancy from you than human nature and your constitution will allow; and if you are as good as you can, may very well content myself with your endeavours to be better.’ 
What so much gains upon the soul as to meet endearments where we expected only reproaches, according to the words of a late honourable author? 

Kindness has resistless charms,
All things else but saintly warms;
It gilds the lover's servile chain,
And makes the slave grow pleased and vain.
To find Jenny thus turning into pleasantry what would have made other women swell into a storm of rage and jealousy, transported Jemmy almost beyond himself; he thought she was somewhat superior to mortality and half divine, and ascrib'd to her what mr. Addison makes Juba say of Cato's daughter: 
The virtuous Marcia tow'rs above her sex,
True, she is fair, O how divinely fair!
But then the lovely maid improves her charms,
With wisdom, modesty, good-nature,
And sanctity of manners.—
In the exuberance of his present admiration, he gave her such praises as not being able to endure the hearing, she put her hand before his mouth to silence,—‘Hold Jemmy, said she, you cannot entertain me with any thing less agreeable, than encomiums which, thank Heaven, I am not so silly as to imagine 
I deserve: —If you would oblige me let us change the conversation.’ 
“Oh Jenny,—Jenny,—Jenny,” cried he, sending forth a tender sigh between every repetition of her name,—“How is it possible for me to think or speak of any thing but your transcendent goodness and my own unworthiness?” 
In pronouncing these last words he fix'd his eyes upon the letter which had given him so much confusion, and he had thrown upon the table after having seen what it was. —Jenny perceiving on what his looks were bent, snatch'd it hastily away, and running to a candle set it immediately on fire. —‘This testimonial of your fault, said she, shall no more rise up against you, and as it consumes, may all remembrance of it for ever be extinguish'd.’ 
The heart of Jemmy was of much overwhelmed with love and gratitude at this action, and the words that accompanied it, that he could not refrain the most extravagant demonstrations of what he felt;—he threw himself at her feet, and embraced her knees with transports not to be described, nor even by himself express'd. 
It was with a great deal of difficulty that she made him rise from the posture he was in, and much more that she prevailed on him to talk no more on this affair; to which, on whatever topic she began, he would still return. 
The time pass'd so swiftly, as well as sweetly, in this tender intercourse, that the lovers never so much as thought on hours, nor once look'd upon their watches, till the sonorous guardian of the night, with his usual solemnity, thunder'd in their ears,—‘Past two o'clock.’ 
It was now that Jemmy first reflected how much he had transgress'd on his dear mistress's repose, and therefore prepared to take an unwilling leave; but she would not suffer him to go till her servant, none of his own being there, had got a chair for him, which being brought, they embraced, kiss'd, and parted, the behaviour of each to the other having imprinted a mutual satisfaction in their minds, greater than ever either of them had before experienced. 
