

Seems to bring things pretty near a
conclusion. 
Miss Betsy was now in as happy a
disposition as any of her friends, or
even mr. Trueworth himself could desire; 
—she listened to the confirmations he
was every day giving her of his passion,
with the greatest affability, and much
more seriousness and attention, than she
had been accustomed: —The quarrel she
had with miss Flora making her willing
to avoid her as much as possible, he was
frequently alone with her whole hours together,
and had all the opportunities he
could wish of cultivating the esteem, she
made no scruple of confessing she had
for him. —As mr. Staple was now gone
out of town, pursuant to the resolution
he had taken, and no other rival, at least
none encouraged by miss Betsy, had as
yet seconded him, he had all the reason
in the world to flatter himself, that the
accomplishment of his wishes were not
far distant. 
Plays,—operas,—and masquerades,
were now beginning to come in vogue,
and he had the satisfaction to see his mistress
refuse whatever tickets were offered
her for those diversions, by any of the
gentlemen who visited lady Mellasin, and
at the same time readily agreed to accompany
him to these, or any other public
entertainments, whenever he requested
that favour of her. 
Miss Betsy's behaviour in this point,
however, had more the air, than the
reality of kindness to mr. Trueworth; for
in effect it was not because she would not
accept of tickets from any other person
than himself, but because they were offered
by gentlemen of lady Mellasin's acquaintance,
and consequently, in respect
to her, miss Flora had the same share
in the invitation, with whom she was determined
never more to be seen abroad. 
This required some sort of contrivance,
to be managed in such a manner as to
give no umbrage to mr. Goodman, or
lady Mellasin, for the former of whom
she had always a very great esteem, and
did not chuse to afford the latter any
cause of complaint against her, while she
continued to live in the same house. — 
The method she took therefore to avoid
a thing so disagreeable to her, and at the
same time to give no occasion of offence,
was always to make choice of one diversion,
when she knew miss Flora was
pre-engaged to another. 
To partake of these pleasures, which
mr. Trueworth, seeing into her temper,
was almost every day presenting, she invited
sometimes one lady, sometimes another
of those she conversed with; but the
person who most frequently accompanied
her, was miss Mabel, a young lady, who
lived in the next street, and whom she
had been acquainted with ever since her
coming to London, but had not been altogether
so agreeable to her, as she really
deserved, and otherwise would have been,
if lady Mellasin and miss Flora had not
represented her as a prying, censorious,
ill-natured creature, and, in fine, given
her all the epithets which compose the
character of a prude. 
She was, indeed, both in principles
and behaviour the very reverse of miss
Flora;—she was modest without affectation,
—reserved without austerity,— 
chearful without levity,—compassionate
and benevolent in her nature,—and, to
crown all, was perfectly sincere:—miss 
Betsy had never wanted penetration enough
to see, and to admire the amiable qualities
of this young lady, nor had been at
all influenced by the character given of
her by lady Mellasin and miss Flora,
but being herself of too gay and volatile
a temper, the more serious deportment
of the other gave somewhat of a check
to her's, and for that reason rendered her
society less coveted by her. —The letter
of lady Trusty, however, joined to the
late accidents which had happened, having
now given her a turn of mind vastly
different from what it had been a very
little time before, made her now prefer
the conversation of miss Mabel, to most
others of her acquaintance. 
This young lady having been often in
mr. Trueworth's company, with miss
Betsy, saw enough into him to be assured
the passion he professed for her was perfectly
honourable and sincere; and as
she had a real affection for her fair friend,
and thought it a match greatly to her
advantage, was perpetually remonstrating
to her, that she could not treat with too
much complaisance, a lover so every way
deserving of her. 
It is certain, that what she said on this
score, had some weight with miss Betsy; 
mr. Goodman also was every day admonishing
her in behalf of mr. Trueworth,
as he thought it his duty to do, both as
her guardian and her friend. —In fine,
never was a heart more beset,—more
forced, as it were, into tender sentiments
than that of this young lady:—first by
the merits and assiduities of the passionate
invader, and next by the perswasions of
all those, who she had any reason to believe
had her interest in view, and wished
to see her happiness established. 
Enemy as she was by nature to serious
reflection, on any account, much
more on that of marriage, every thing
now contributed to compel her to it; 
she could not avoid seeing and confessing
within herself, that if ever she became a
wife, the title could not be attended
with more felicity, than when conferred
on her by a person of mr. Trueworth's
fortune, character, and disposition. 
She was one day alone, and in a very
considerative mood, when a letter was
brought to her, which she was told came
by the penny-post; as she was not accustomed
to receive any by that carriage,
it pretty much surprised her, but much
more so, when having hastily opened it,
she found the contents as follow: 

To miss Betsy Thoughtless.
‘Madam,
It is with an inexpressible concern,
that I relate to you a thing, which
I am but too sensible will give you
some disquiet, nor could have prevailed
with myself on any terms to have done
it, were it not to preserve you from
falling into much greater afflictions than
the discovery I am about to make, can
possibly inflict:—but not to keep you
in suspence,—you are courted by a
gentleman whose name is Trueworth; 
—he is recommended by your brother,
who, alas! knows him much less than
he imagines:—he has indeed a large
estate, and does not want accomplishments
to endear him to the fair sex,— 
I wish he had as much intrinsic honour
and sincerity to deserve, as he has personal
endowments to acquire, the favours
so lavishly bestowed upon him. 
—I hope, however, you have not been
so much deceived by the innocence of
your own heart, and the fancied integrity
of his, as to be so distractedly in
love with him, as he has the vanity to
boast, and your companion and supposed
friend, miss Mabel, reports you
are:—if his designs upon you are 
such as they ought to be, he is at least
ashamed to confess they are so; and
the lady I just mentioned, whispers it
in all companies, that a marriage with
you is of all things in the world the
farthest from his thoughts. —He plainly
says, that he but trifles with you,
'till your brothers come to town, and
will then find some pretence to break
entirely with you,—perhaps, on the
score of fortune; but of that I am not
positive,—I only repeat some part of
those unhandsome expressions his unworthy
tongue has uttered. 
But, madam, as I have given you
this intelligence, so I think it my duty
to offer you some advice for your behaviour,
in so nice and critical a juncture. 
—As he threatens to abandon you
on the arrival of your brothers, I
should think, that if you forbid him
your presence, 'till that time, it would
not only be a sure touchstone of his
affection, but also be a means of clearing
your reputation from those blemishes
it has received on his account,—After
what I have said, I believe it would be
needless to add, that the less freely you
converse with miss Mabel, the less you
will suffer, both in the judgment of the 
world, and your own future peace of
mind. 
‘Slight not this counsel, because given
behind the curtain, but be assured it
comes from one, who is, 
‘With the sincerest attachment,
Madam,
Your most humble,
Though concealed servant.’ 

If miss Betsy had received this letter a
very small time before she did, it might
probably have wrought on her all the
effect it was intended for; but she had
scarce read it half through, before the
lucky discovery of miss Flora's baseness,
so seasonably made to her by mr. Saving,
came fresh into her mind, and she was at
no loss to guess at the malicious purpose,
and the author of it, though wrote in a
hand altogether a stranger to her. 
She doubted not but it was a trick of
miss Flora's, to cause a separation between
her and mr. Trueworth; but the motives,
which had instigated her to do this, were
not in her power to conceive. 
“Revenge for her disappointed expectations,” 
said she to herself, “might
make her take the steps she did, on
mr. Saving's account; but what has
mr. Trueworth done to her? —He
never pretended love to her,—he
neither flattered, or deceived her vanity,
—it must be therefore only a wicked
propensity,—an envious,—unsocial
disposition,—a love of mischief implanted
in her nature, and uncorrected
by reason or principle, that has induced
her to be guilty of this poor,—low,
enervate spight; but I am resolved to
mortify it.” 
She was not long considering in what
manner she should proceed, to do as she
had said, and, I believe the reader will
acknowledge, she hit upon one, as effectual
for that end as could have been contrived. 
She appeared extremely gay the whole
time of dinner, and as soon as it was over,
“I will present you with a desert, sir,” 
said she to mr. Goodman:“I'll shew
you what pains has been taken to break
off my acquaintance with mr. Trueworth,
by some wretch, who either
envies me the honour of his affections, 
or him the place they imagine he has
in mine; but, I beseech you, read it,” 
continued she, “and I will appeal to
you, lady Mellasin, and miss Flora,
if ever there was a more stupid plot.” 
“Stupid enough, indeed,” cried the
honest merchant, as soon as he had done
reading, “but it is yet more base. —I am
glad, however,” continued he, “to
find your good sense prevents you from
being imposed upon by such artifices.” 
—“This is so shallow a one,” answered
she, “that a very small share of understanding
might serve to defend any
one from being deceived by it. —I
pity the weakness, while I despise the
baseness of such mean incendiaries;— 
mr. Trueworth, however, will fare
the better for this attempt against
him;—I will now make no scruple
of preferring him to all mankind besides,
—and perhaps, when my brothers
arrive, shall consent to every
thing he desires.” 
Lady Mellasin could not help applauding
the spirit and resolution she shewed
on this occasion, and mr. Goodman was
quite charmed with it; and both of them
joined in the severest exclamations against
the folly and wickedness of the letter-writer; 
but miss Flora said little, and as
soon as she could quit the table with decency,
went up into her chamber, saying,
she had a piece of work in hand, which
she was in haste to finish. 
If miss Betsy had wanted any confirmation
of the truth of her suspicions, the
looks of miss Flora, during this whole
discourse, would have removed all doubt
in her, and the opportunity of venting
the spleen she had so justly conceived
against her, without seeming to do so,
gave her a most exquisite satisfaction. 