


Contains among other particulars, an
example of forgiving goodness and generosity,
worthy the imitation of as
many as shall read it. 

The constraint miss Betsy
had put on herself, while
in the presence of the company
she had been with,
had been extremely painful
to her; but when she
got home she gave a loose to tears, that
common relief of sorrows:—yet amidst 

all these testimonies of a violent affection
for mr. Trueworth, she would not allow
herself to imagine, that she was possessed
of any for him,—nor that the vexation
she was in proceeded from any other motive,
than that of finding a heart, that
had once been devoted to her, capable of
submitting to the charms of any other
woman. 
All she could bring herself to acknowledge
was only, that she had been very
much to blame, in treating the proposals
of mr. Trueworth in the light manner she
had done;—she now wondered at herself
for having been so blind to the merits
of mr. Trueworth's family, estate, person,
and accomplishments, and accused
herself with the utmost severity, for having
rejected, what she could not but confess,
would have been highly for her interest,
honour, and happiness to have accepted. 
Thus deeply was she buried in a too
late repentance, when a letter was brought
to her, the superscription of which was
wrote in a hand altogether unknown to
her;—on opening it, she found the contents
as follows: 


Marshalsea Prison. 
To miss Betsy Thoughtless.
‘Madam,
After the just, though severe resolution
your last informed me you had
taken, of never seeing, nor receiving
any thing from me more, I tremble to
approach you. —Fearing you would
not vouchsafe to open this, knowing
from whence it came, I got a person to
direct it for you, and cannot assure myself
you will, even now, examine the
contents so far, as to see the motive
which emboldens me to give you this
trouble. 
‘I have long since rendered myself unworthy
of your friendship;—it is solely
your compassion and charity that I now
implore:—the date of this petition, in
part, will shew the calamity I labour
under. —I have languished in this
wretched prison for upwards of a month,
for debts my luxury contracted, and
which I vainly expected would be discharged
by those, who called themselves
my admirers; but, alas! all the return
they make for favours they so ardently
requested, is contempt. —I have been
obliged to make away with every thing 

their gallantry bestowed, for my support. 
‘All the partners of my guilty pleasures,
all those who shared with me in
my riots, are deaf to my complaints,
and refuse a pitying ear to the distress
they have in a great measure contributed
to bring upon me. —My creditors,
more merciful than my friends or lovers,
have consented to withdraw their actions,
and I shall have my discharge on paying
the fees of this loathsome prison; 
—three guineas will be sufficient to restore
my liberty, which, if I am so fortunate
once more to obtain, I will think
no labour, though ever so bad or abject,
too much, if it can enable me to
drag on my remains of life in true penitence.’ 
‘Dear madam, if, by favouring me
with the sum I mention, you are so
good as to open my prison gates, heaven
will, I doubt not, reward the generous
bounty; and if the Almighty will vouchsafe
to hear the prayers of an abandoned
creature like me, I shall never cease to
invoke his choicest blessings may be
showered down on the head of my
charming deliverer. 

‘I shall send to-morrow morning by a
poor honest woman, whom I can confide
in, for your answer. —I beseech
you to be assured, that if once freed
from this detested place, no temptations
of what kind soever shall ever prevail
upon me to return to my yet more detested
former course of life, and am determined
to fly to some remote corner
of the kingdom, as distant from London
as from Leicestershire, and there
endeavour to earn a wretched pittance,
by means how low soever I care not. — 
Your grant of the request I make you
at this time, will save both the soul
and body of her, who is, 
‘With the most unfeigned contrition,
Madam,
Your most humble,
And most unfortunate servant,
A. Forward.’ 

Utterly impossible was it for this unhappy
creature to have sent her petition at
a more unlucky time:—miss Betsy, full
of the idea of the misfortune she had sustained
in the loss of mr. Trueworth, could 

not be reminded of miss Forward, without
being also reminded, that the first occasion
of his disgust was owing to her acquaintance
with that woman. 
‘Infamous creature!’ cried miss Betsy,
as soon as she had done reading;—‘she
deserves no compassion from the world,
much less from me. —No,—no,— 
there are but too many objects of charity
to be found, and I shall not lavish
the little bounty I am able to bestow on
a wretch like her.’ 
These were the first reflections of miss
Betsy, on receiving so unexpected a petition,
but they soon subsided, and gave
way to others of a more gentle nature; 
—‘Yet,’ said she, ‘if the poor wretch
is sensible of her faults, and truly resolved
to do as she pretends, it would
be the utmost cruelty to deny her the
means of fulfilling the promise she
makes of amendment.’ 
‘How unhappy is our sex,’ continued
she, ‘either in a too much, or too little
sensibility of the tender passion;—she
was, alas! too easily influenced by the
flatteries of the base part of mankind,
and I too little grateful to the merits of
of the best.’ 

In fine, the natural goodness of her
disposition got the ascendant over all considerations
that opposed the grant of miss
Forward's request. —‘My acquaintance
with her has been fatal to me,’ said she; 
‘but that was less owing to her fault
than my own folly.’ 
Accordingly she sent by the woman,
who came next morning, as mentioned in
the letter, four guineas enclosed in a piece
of paper, and wrote to her in these terms: 

To miss Forward.
‘Madam,
Though I cannot but look upon
your misfortunes as justly fallen on
you, yet heartily commiserate them:— 
if your penitence is sincere, I doubt not
but you will some way or other be
enabled to pursue a more laudable course
of life, than that which has brought
you into this distress. —I add one guinea
to the sum you requested, and wish
it were in my power to do more, being 
‘Your real well-wisher,
And humble servant,
B. Thoughtless.’ 


Though no one could have more refined
notions of virtue, nor a greater abhorrence
for vice, than this young lady,
yet did she never hate the persons of the
guilty, nor would judge with that severity
of their faults, which some others, much
less innocent, are apt to do. 
It pleased her to think, that by this donation
she should gladden the heart of an
afflicted person, who had been of her acquaintance,
how unworthy soever of late
she had rendered herself; and this little
interruption of her meditations contributed
a good deal to compose her mind, after
the sudden shock it had sustained on the
score of mr. Trueworth's marriage. 
But she had very shortly another, and
more agreeable relief:—sir Ralph and
lady Trusty came to town;—which she
no sooner was informed of, and where a
house had been taken for their reception,
than she went early the next morning to
pay her respects, and testify the real satisfaction
she conceived at their arrival. 
Nothing of business would probably
have been said to her on this first visit, if
her two brothers had not come in immediately
after. —The first compliments on 

such an occasion being over:—‘sir
Ralph,’ said the elder mr. Thoughtless,
‘we have wished for your coming to
town on many accounts, but on none so
much as that of my sister, who is going
to be married, and has only waited
to intreat you will do her the favour of
disposing of her hand.’ 
The good baronet replied, that there
was nothing he should do with greater
pleasure, provided it were to a person
worthy of her. —‘That, sir,’ said the
elder mr. Thoughtless, ‘we have taken
care to be convinced of, and I doubt
not but you will think as we do, when
you shall be informed of the particulars.’ 
—Miss Betsy blushed, but uttered not a
word, either to oppose, or to agree to
what had been said. 
Lady Trusty perceiving her in some
confusion, led her into another room, in
order to talk seriously to her, on many
things she had in her head. 
