

This Lady loved Mr. D&wblank; with a
Tenderness, which is rarely to be met with in
these times of Gallantry: She had from her
very Infancy been taught to look upon him,
as the Man who was one Day to be her Husband; 
and her Virtue and Duty improving the
Inclination she naturally had for him, she had 

never indulg'd herself in those Gaities so many
of her Sex are fond of—had never listen'd
to the Sound of Love from any Tongue but
his, nor had a Wish beyond him. He, for
his part, had seem'd to center all his Hopes
and his Desires in her, had never given her
Cause for one uneasy Moment on his Score,
nor did she even know what Jealousy meant; 
till that fatal Letter from the wicked Mrs.
Tricksy awaken'd in her that poisonous Passion,
and forc'd her, all soft and gentle as she was
by Nature, to experience those furious Emotions,
which Love ill-treated, and Confidence
abused, never fail to excite. The Shock she
felt at first reading the malicious Intelligence,
was greater than her tender Frame could well
sustain —She strove to disbelieve it, but
in vain: The racking Idea return'd, in spite
of all she could do to hinder it—sleeping
and waking the hated Vision of a Rival flash'd
upon her Mind —She painted her in Imagination,
sometimes kind and consenting to
his Vows, sometimes reserv'd and haughty,
repaying his Inconstancy with Scorn —In fine,
Love, Hate, Curiosity, and what was more distracting
than them all, Suspence, made her once
tranquil Soul a perfect Chaos of Confusion:
Resolving to be satisfy'd, yet unwilling to make
any one privy to what she felt on the Occasion
of it, she pretended to Mrs. J&wblank; that
she would visit a Kinswoman at some Distance,
and where she knew that Lady would not
offer to accompany her, on account of a little
pique between them —She went, indeed,
but stay'd no longer than one Night, and took 

the Stage for London. She let no Person into
the Secret of her Arrival, but one who had
formerly been a Servant in the Family, and
was now married and kept a House for
Lodgers: With her did the discontented Maria
take up her Residence: It was her whom
she sent to Greenwich, to enquire concerning
Mr. D&wblank; and Syrena, and from her she
received an Account which seem'd to confirm
the Truth of the Letter; for Mrs. Tricksy
had taken care to spread through all that little
Town, that her Daughter was about being
married to Mr. D&wblank;. Being thus, as
she imagined, fully assured of the worst that
could have been suggested to her, Curiosity led
her to try all possible Methods to gain a Sight
of the Face that had undone her: By the
Diligence of her faithful Emissary, she obtain'd
that too; for Mr. D&wblank; being watch'd to
the House where she lodg'd, Maria afterward
went disguised into the Neighbourhood, and
saw not only her Rival, but her ungrateful
Lover also, with her at the Window — 
Killing Sight! All the Fortitude she had assum'd
for this Adventure, was too little to
enable her to endure it. —She fell immediately
into Convulsions, and after into a
high Fever, which from the very beginning
threaten'd Death. The poor Creature who
had been her Confidant, now wish'd she had
been less industrious in obeying Orders, which
were likely to bring on so fatal a Catastrophe; 
and judging it wholly improper to conceal her
any longer, sent to several of her Relations,
who immediately came to visit her full of Surprize, 

to find she was in Town, and had hid
herself till her Condition made it necessary to
disclose the place she was in: no body, however,
question'd her on that Head, believing
it might encrease her Disorder; but they
fail'd not to enquire of the Woman the Motives
which had brought her thither, to which
the other pleaded Ignorance, and kept inviolably
the Secret committed to her trust; tho'
it did not long remain so; for Maria, growing
delirious, so often mention'd the Names of
Mr. D&wblank; and Syrena, that it was easy
to believe that something relating to that Gentleman,
had been the Cause both of her strange
Behaviour, and the Condition they now found
her in. As they were sensible of the Trouble
he was in on her Account, they thought it
best he should be sent for, which he accordingly
was, tho' much against the Will of the
Woman of the House, who fear'd the Sight
of him would heighten her Fever. 
Mr. D&wblank; received the News where
Maria was, and of her Indisposition, the very
Morning after he had detected the Treachery
of Syrena; and not doubting but it was to the
pernicious Arts of Mrs. Tricksy that she owed
her Illness, flatter'd himself, that his Presence,
and a full Confession of what had past, would
greatly contribute to her Recovery; but he
found altogether the reverse; that unhappy
Lady no sooner saw him in her Chamber,
than she fell into such Agonies, that he was
obliged to withdraw: He imputed it, however,
to the Force of her Distemper, and still 

hoped, that if she came a little to her Senses,
she would consent both to see him, and hear
what he had to say; so order'd a Bed to be
prepared for him in the same House, that he
might be near to watch her Intervals of Reason,
and endeavour to make his Peace with
her. In the mean time, he was inform'd by
the Confidant, of the pains Maria had taken to
convince herself of a Truth, she had better
have been eternally ignorant of; and in relating
the Steps that had been taken, highly condemn'd
her self for having assisted in the cruel
Discovery. Mr. D&wblank; shook his Head,
and told her that he wish'd she had been
enough his Friend to have given him a private
Intelligence of Maria's Sentiments —Tho',
added he, I cannot blame your acting in the
manner you did, as Appearances were so
much against me. 
Two Days had Mr. D&wblank; been under
the same Roof without being able to speak to
her; the Physicians having order'd she should
be kept extremely quiet—but at the end of
that time, being, as they thought, somewhat
better, the Women ventur'd to acquaint her,
who was so near her, and his true Remorse for
a false Step, which Youth and Inadvertency
alone had made him take, and his real Innocence
as to the main Point, that of having
any Inclination to breaking of with her, or of
marrying Syrena. The disconsolate Maria
listen'd attentively to her, without giving any
other Answer than Sighs; and when the other
alledg'd the Improbability there was, of his 

having any settled Affection for a Girl, such as
Syrena, and expatiated on the Vileness of both
her, and her Mother; so much the more unhappy
is my Lot, cry'd Maria, to be the Sacrifize
of such Wretches —However, continu'd
she, I will see the still dear and guilty
Man—Let him be call'd in. 
He threw himself on his Knees by her Bedside,
and said every thing that Love and Repentance
could inspire, to assure her, that his
Heart had never been but hers; however, an
unlucky, as well as criminal Inclination, had
for a small time made him act contrary to
his Honour and his Vows —I believe Mr.
D&wblank;, answer'd she, you are now sorry
for and asham'd of your Acquaintance with
Syrena; but, perhaps, it is more owing to the
Discovery of her Baseness, than to your regard
for me; and the next new Face that
pleased you, would have the same Influence; 
at least the Passion you have had for her has
destroy'd all the Confidence I had in you — 
I could not now be happy with you —Nor,
cry'd she, in a low Voice, can I live without
you. In speaking these Words she fainted
away —He was obliged to ring for the
People to come to her Assistance; but all they
could do was ineffectual, she dying in less than
an Hour, and left him, who could not but
look upon himself as the Cause, in a Condition
little different from Distraction. 
The real Affliction Mr. D&wblank; was in
for this sad Accident, made England and the 

Sight of all his Friends hateful to him: He
embark'd in a short time for foreign Parts; 
but before he went, wrote all the Particulars
of this fatal Adventure, and desired it might
be made publick, as a Warning to Gentlemen,
how they inadvertently are drawn into
Acquaintance with Women of Syrena's Character. 
Our hypocritical Mother and Daughter had
all this time Business enough upon their hands:
Syrena no sooner came home, which was about
six in the Morning, than finding Mr. D&wblank;'s
Letter, she made no Delay, for fear he should
return, and use her as she knew she merited
at his hands, but pack'd up her things, quitted
her Lodging, and took a Coach immediately
to Greenwich. Mrs. Tricksy, on being
told what had happen'd, thought that Place
altogether unsafe for them; so they both return'd
the same Day to London, and took
Lodgings at Westminister; where, having no
Acquaintance, they lived quite private for some
Days, to avoid meeting with Mr. D&wblank;
or Capt. H&wblank;s, to whom they did not
doubt, but that the Resentment of the other,
had exposed them, as he had threaten'd in his
Letter. Between the Liberality of Mr. D&wblank;,
the Portuguese Merchant, and the Captain,
they had made a pretty handsome Purse, which
if they could have resolved to be honest, might
have put them in some way of getting Bread; 
but neither of them were of frugal Dispositions,
they indulged themselves in every thing
they liked, and Syrena sent for a Mercer, 

Millener, and other Trades People to equip
her in a gay manner, that when she went
abroad, her Charms might appear to advantage:
By private Enquiries they soon heard
that the Captain had failed, and also of Maria's
Death, and Mr. D&wblank;'s voluntary
Banishment from England; on which Syrena
broke from her Obscurity, drest, and trod the
Mall with as great a Grace, and as little Concern,
as the most virtuous that frequented
that place; she had nothing, indeed, to apprehend; 
but meeting with some or other of
Sir Thomas L&wblank;'s Family; she had, therefore,
her Eyes continually on the Watch, that
if she happen'd to see any of them at a Distance,
she might turn away, before they
came near enough to distinguish her, thus
disguised as the Hussy was in Lace and Embrodery. 
The Season for Park-walking in an
Evening being far advanced, it quite past over
without her being able to make one Conquest,
which was no small Mortification to this fine
Lady, especially as her Money was almost exhausted
in Cloaths, luxurious Eating, and Chair-Hire. 
In short, Winter came on, without
any thing being done. —She durst not go
to Plays, Opera's, nor Concerts, because she
very well knew, that there was seldom a Night
but some or other of that Family she had so
grosly imposed upon, were at those Diversions. 
—The Masquerade was the only place
she could go to without fear of being exposed,
and even there was in Danger of being accosted,
either by Sir Thomas or his Son; she flatter'd
herself, however, that she should have 

Penetration enough to find either of them out
in any Habit, without their being able to discover
her; and she happen'd in reality to be more
lucky than she deserv'd on this score. She
was not so, however, in her principal Intention,
that of being address'd to in a particular
manner. She had been there twice without
having been accosted with any other than the
common Salutations of the Place, as Do you
know me, and I know you, and such like Stuff; 
or the impudent Freedoms which are used to
common Women, and which some who glory
in being accounted Libertines, have the Effrontery
to practise in the most publick Places. 
The Expence of her Tickets, Dress, and
Chair-Hire thus thrown away, was no small
Mortification to her, as Cash began now to
run very low: She adventured, however, a
third time, and happening to be address'd by
a Person, who, on stretching out his Arm to
reach at something on one of the Beaufets,
she perceiv'd, by his Domine falling a little
open, had a Star on his Coat; she resolv'd to
encourage a Conversation with him; and
keeping her Eye constantly fix'd upon him,
had Artifice enough to draw him off, wherever
she found he was engaging with any other of
the Masks. Her Wit and Manner pleas'd
him extremely, and at length he grew very
particular with her —She seem'd no less
charm'd with his Behaviour; and, after a good
deal of feign'd Reluctance, consented he should
conduct her to some place, where they might
discourse with more Freedom; and he accordingly
carry'd her to a Bagnio in St. James's-Street. 

If she had appear'd agreable to him
before, she was much more so now, when
she had an Opportunity of revealing those
Beauties in full, which in the Ball-Room could
but be shewn in Part, and that too, but by
stealth. 
After a Supper, and some amorous Conversation,
he entreated she would stay with him
all Night; but tho' she pretended to have
been struck with an irresistable Passion for
him, the first Moment she saw his Face, and
had it not in her power to refuse him any
thing; yet said, she would sooner die than
be guilty of an Injustice to one of her own
Sex; so begg'd to know if he were married. 
He told her, on his Honour, that he was not. 
—She then insisted on his Name, and
he made no Scruple of letting her know, he
was Lord R&wblank;. 
They past the Time till Morning in mutual
Endearments, and indeed mutual Dissimulation —Syrena artfully mingling with
her pretended Fondness certain modest Shocks
to heighten his good Opinion of her, and he
affecting to be possest of a more than ordinary
Passion, for the more emboldning her to meet
his amorous Desires with equal Warmth. The
Night being past, and his Lordship fully gratify'd,
he made her a Present of ten Guineas,
which she at first refused with an Air of Disdain,
telling him that he injured her greatly if
he imagin'd she had yielded from any motive
but Love. But he forced her to accept this 

Token, as he call'd it of his Affection; on
those Terms, said she, I take it from my dear
Lord; but were every Piece a Thousand I
would reject them with Scorn if offer'd as the
purchase of my Virtue —I am no Prostitute,
continued she, and if I thought you look'd
on me as such, and having accomplish'd your
Desires would never see me more, I would this
Instant undeceive you, by running your Sword
through my too fond, too easily charm'd Heart. 
Lord R&wblank; smiled within himself to hear
her talk in this romantick Stile; but willing
to humour her in it, made her as many promises
of Constancy as she desired, and assured
her in a very small Time, he would write to
appoint a second Meeting, and they would then
settle Things so as to see each other often. 
Thus they parted, and Syrena went home
somewhat better satisfied with the Effects of
this Masquerade than she had been with the
two former, tho' she did not flatter herself with
securing the Heart of this Nobleman, as she
had done those of Mr. L&wblank; and Mr. D&wblank;;
she feared he knew the Town too well to be
drawn into any serious Engagement with a
Woman he had come acquainted with in that
manner, but expected however, that he would
send to her, and that she should have further
Presents from him. 
The first Part of her Conjectures she soon
found were but too true for her, but the other
greatly deceiv'd her; for his Lordship thought
little of her after they were parted, and less 

desired a second Interview: He judged by her
Behaviour that if he were to encourage her
Expectations by making any future Assignations
she would become a troublesome Dependant,
and be a kind of Bur not easily shaken
off. Beside he had a Mistress whose Love and
Fidelity he had for many Years experienced; 
by whom he had several fine Children, and
who was at that Time lying-in at his Seat in
the Country. He would have been loth to
give any Cause of discontent to a Woman he
loved, and had Reason to do so, by any settled
Intrigue with another, and tho' meeting with
Syrena (at a Time when Christians as well as
Jews think they may indulge an amorous Inclination
without breach of Constancy) he had
toyed away a Night, it never entered into his
Head to continue an Acquaintance with her. 
Four Days being past over, Syrena's impatience
would suffer her to wait no longer, and
having enquir'd where Lord R&wblank; lodged,
for he kept no House in Town, drest herself
in as alluring a manner as she could, and went
to make him a Visit. 
His Lordship was strangely surprized when
his Gentleman told him a Lady in a Chair,
who said her Name was Tricksy, desired to
speak with him; he looked on her coming to
his Lodging as a Piece of Impudence altogether
inconsistent with the Modesty she affected
to be Mistress of; however he ordered she
should be admitted, but resolved to behave to 

her in such a manner as should prevent her
from ever troubling him again. 
This was certainly a very wrong step in
Syrena, and what her Mother would fain have
dissuaded her from; she told her that none but
those who were not ashamed to be thought
common, ever went to visit Men at their
Lodgings; and that if Lord R&wblank; were a
Man of Sense, or had but the least Knowledge
of the World, he must contemn her for it; 
but our young Deluder was of a quite different
Opinion; she imagined that going to him
in that manner, would give him a high Idea
of the extreme Passion she had flatter'd him
with, and that also it would make her seem
to act without Disguise, and that she was too
innocent even to know there was any indecency
in what she did. So all the Arguments
Mrs. Tricksy made use of were to no purpose; 
the pert Baggage told her she was capable of
managing now for herself, and would walk
with Leading-Strings no longer. 
This is a Favour I little expected Madam,
said his Lordship, as soon as she was introduced. 
Then, my Lord, answer'd she, you
were ignorant of the Power you have over
me; but it is not to be wonder'd at, that you
should not expect any Effects of Love from
me, when you are so insensible of that Passion
yourself—what, continued she, to be four
long Days without seeing me or sending to
me —I have had Business, return'd he
coldly. O ungrateful! cried she, can you 

have any Business of equal Moment to the
peace of one who adores you as I do, who
have given you the greatest Proofs of it a
Woman can do, and who cannot live without
you? —Hush, Madam, interrupted he, we
may be overheard—this is not a Place for
Expostulations or Upbraidings,—and as I
never receive Visits from your Sex, unless
those who are known to be nearly related to
me; I must beg you will make yours as short
as possible for both our Reputations. O my
Stars! cryed she, are you then asham'd of me?
with these Words she burst into Tears. Fie,
fie, said he, with a half Smile, which denoted
his Contempt, do not spoil that pretty Face
with crying —You were all Gaity when I
saw you before, and good Company, and if
you desire to pass three or four Hours again in
the same Manner, I assure you this is not the
way to charm a Man of my Humour. — 
Syrena now burst into a real Rage, and scrupled
not to treat him in a Manner little befitting
his Quality; on which he bid her leave the
House, and learn better Manners. She had
then Recourse to Fits, and swoon'd so naturally,
that if he had not been well versed in
this Artifice of the Sex, he would have taken
it to be real; but he immediately saw through
it, and instead of calling for any Help, only
said—look you, Madam, these Airs wont
pass upon me, I see your Drift—you want
to pin yourself upon me——but it won't do; 
and instead of softning me into the Cully you
want, you only incur my Disdain, and inspire
me with the worst Sentiments for you I can 

have of any Woman,—therefore put your
Face into Order and be gone; for if you continue
in this Posture, I shall order my Servants
to put your Head in a Pail of Water, which I
look upon to be the best Remedy in the World
for such Disorders as yours. These Words
frighted her, and not doubting by all his Behaviour
to her, that he would do as he said; raised
herself from the Ground, and flew down
Stairs without making any farther Attempts to
bring him to her Purpose. 
I do not doubt but many of my fair Readers
will be highly disobliged at this Nobleman's
Behaviour; they will say, he ought to have
carry'd with more Complaisance, at least to
a pretty young Creature, who had obliged
him; and some perhaps may even tax him
with Savageness and Brutality; therefore to
vindicate his Character from all such Aspersions,
I must inform them, that he had before
met with Women of Syrena's Stamp;— 
that he had for some few Years of his Life
devoted himself so much to Gallantry, that he
was perfectly acquainted with every little Art
put in Practice by those, whose Business it is
to ensnare; and had more than once been
imposed upon by the Pretence of a violent
Affection, which made him not only presently
discern, but likewise abhor those studied
and counterfeited Tendernesses; but as to the
rest, no Man knew more how to value real
Merit in the Sex, nor paid a greater Regard
to it. 

The Disappointment Syrena had met with,
made her half distracted: She was ready on
her coming home to break and tear to pieces
every thing that was in her way; then
her Mother remonstrated to her, that she
could expect no better Usage, when she pretended
to pursue a Man to his Lodgings, and
reproach'd her for not taking her Advice; 
But the other, instead of acquiescing with
what she said, or acknowledging she had
been to blame, flew into a greater Rage than
before, and told her, that all her Misfortunes
had been owing to the Rules she had prescribed. 
You were always preaching up Softness
and Tenderness, cry'd she, but I dare
swear if I had been sawcy, and given myself
an Air of Insolence, as indeed is more to
natural to me, I should have fared better. 
You are a poor ignorant Fool, reply'd the
Mother, if you are not used well by the Man
who thinks you love him, you never will by
the Man who thinks you do not. —Softness
is the most prevailing Arms we have; 
Beauty may attract, but that alone secures the
Heart. A great Argument on this arose between
them, and at length terminated in a
Quarrel, in so much, that Syrena went directly
and took a separate Lodging, and vowed
she would henceforth follow no Direction, but
her own Humour; but this Quarrel did not
last long, each found she had need of the
other, and their mutual Interest reconciled
them; it was judged proper, however, they
should live apart for some time; Syrena having 

embark'd in an Adventure, which could
best be carry'd on without the Appearance of a
Mother. 
She remember'd that in the time she was
kept by Mr. D&wblank;, happening to buy some
Silk for a Short-apron, at a Shop in Covent-Garden,
the Mercer had seemed to look upon
her with an Eye of Admiration, pulled down
several pieces of fine Brocade, under the Pretence
of tempting her to buy; but in reality,
only to have the Pleasure of detaining her as
long as he could; and tho' she bought only
such a Trifle, would fain have sent one of his
young Men home with it. All this she
thought testify'd a Desire of being acquainted
with her, if he could find any Means to bring
it about, so she contrived it for him in this
manner. 
She made it her Business to walk for several
Evenings by his Shop, just in the close of
Day, when they were preparing to shut up; 
and the first time she saw him there, ran in a
vast Hurry and seeming Fright up the Steps,
and cried, I beg a thousand Pardons for this
Trouble, Sir, but for God's Sake give me
House Room for a few Minutes—for I
am frighted to Death. He immediately reach'd
a Chair, and having made her sit down, enquired
the Cause of her Disorder —O! said
she, this Covent-Garden is a wicked Place — 
I hope I have not the look of an ill Woman— 
but a Gentleman has followed me I know not
how far —I could not get rid on him for 

my Life; and he swore I should either go
with him to a Tavern, or he would see me
home. —O! what a Terror he has put
me in—so I took the Liberty to run into
your Shop to avoid him. The complaisant
Mercer told her she was extremely welcome,
and perceiving she grew pale, and ready to
faint (which she could counterfeit whenever
she pleased) ordered a Glass of Water, and
bid his Man ask his Wife for some Drops; the
good Gentlewoman hearing of the Accident,
ran down, and assisted in recovering the Hypocrite
from her pretended Illness, exclaiming
all the time against the Vileness of Mankind; 
who, tho' there were so many fit for their
Purpose, could not suffer civil Women to pass. 
Syrena having created a good deal of Bustle,
began at last to come to her Senses, and then
made a great many Apologies for the Trouble
she had given, but begg'd they would add
to the Obligation, that of letting one of the
Servants call a Chair for her; this was readily
granted, but not till they had made her drink
a Glass of Sack, and eat a bit of rich Cake; 
she assured them she would endeavour to return
their Favours, by buying every thing she
wanted in their way, and recommending the
Shop to all her Acquaintance. As she was going
into the Chair, she took care to give the
Men Directions where to carry her, loud
enough for the Mercer not to be mistaken
in the Place, in case he should take it into his
Head to visit her, as she imagined he would
do, by some tender Looks and Pressures he 

gave her, while he supposed her not in a Condition
to be sensible of them. 
She was not deceived, indeed, for the amorous
Mercer was quite charm'd with her, and
the next Day came to her Lodgings, under the
Pretence of enquiring how she got home, and
found herself after her Fright;—she had
dress'd herself in Expectation of him in a loose
and most becoming Dishabillee, and received
him full of Sweetness and affected Modesty. 
Every Look she gave him, and every Word
she spoke, was new Fuel to the unhappy
Flame she before had kindled in his Heart;— 
he thought there never was so perfect, so
beautiful a Creature born, and wish'd himself
unmarry'd, that he might have endeavoured
to gain her Affection, which he now durst not
presume to attempt. He thought however he
might indulge himself in the Pleasure of seeing
and conversing with her, without any Injury
either to her or his Wife; but the Consequence
proved (as indeed it always does) how
fatal it is to give way to Inclinations of that
sort, which, by not being nipp'd in the Bud,
at length grow too sturdy to be bowed down,
and extend themselves to the most dreadful
and enormous Size. She asked him to drink
Tea, which he too gladly complied with, and
after that a Bottle of Wine; among other
Chat, she led him into that of his Business,
and of the Fashions, asked him many Questions
concerning what Colours, and what Patterns
were most in Vogue; and then told him,
she should soon be his Customer for three or 

four Suits of Cloaths; for, said she, I have
been out of Town for a considerable time,
and am quite out of Gowns and Petticoats; 
but I must stay, continued she, till I receive
a Remittance from my Husband. Husband! 
Madam! interrupted the Mercer, are you
married then? Yes, cry'd she, with a deep
Sigh; you Answer, Madam, added he, as
tho' you were not so happy in that State, as I
am sure you deserve to be; where Hearts are
not united, replied she, there can be no solid
Felicity—however, he is my Husband, and
absent, neither is it owing to him if I am miserable; 
in speaking these Words she let fall
some Tears, which gave him a Curiosity to
know the Motive; and tho' he thought it
would be too great a Freedom to ask it, yet
he could not help dropping some Expressions
which testify'd his Desire, and gave her an
Opportunity of telling him a long Story that
she had invented to amuse him. 
As she found he was married, and that
there could be no hope of drawing him in for
a Husband, she thought it best, for many Reasons,
to pass for a Wife; so said, that being
courted very young by a Gentleman, who
was Heir to a great Estate, her Mother had
compelled her to marry him, but that his
Friends were so enraged at it, that they had
sent him to Venice, where he now resided; and
added she, must do so till Heaven shall turn
their Hearts, which I see little hope of; they
allow him a very handsome Income, however,
out of which he sends me sufficient to 

support me, in the little way you see me in— 
as we lived together but three Days, I do not
chuse to be called by his Name, till I can appear
in a Fashion more befitting his Rank in
the World; and also, because I have been privately
informed, that if they can bring him
to consent to it, they will give me a handsome
Sum of Money to renounce all Claim
to him. Thus, Sir, said she, I am a Wife, and
no Wife—have lost my Peace of Mind
and Character, with those who know not the
Truth of my unhappy Marriage, and all thro'
the mistaken Care of a too covetous Parent. 
The Mercer seemed much affected with
her Misfortunes, but gathered more Courage
for his Love, thinking there was more hope
at least of being listened favourably to by
a Wife in such Circumstances, than there
would have been by a young Virgin of a
handsome Fortune, as he at first took her
for. 
He made her a great many Compliments
on her Beauty and Merit; highly blaming her
Husband's Friends for their inexorable Behaviour; 
and saying, that in his Opinion, such
a Woman as she would become the highest
Rank of Life. He told her moreover, that
as she had said she wanted some Silks, she was
extremely welcome to whatever his Shop afforded,
and begg'd she would come the next
Day, and order what she would have sent
in. 

She thank'd him for his kind Offer, but
seemed loth to accept it, till he press'd her
over and over, and assured her, with the tenderest
Air he could put on, that having it in his
power to oblige her, was the happiest thing
could befall him. At last she promised to
come, and he took his leave, rejoiced at this
Opportunity of continuing an Acquaintance
with her. 
She, who was perfectly sensible of the Ascendant
she had gain'd over him, resolv'd to manage
him, so as to command every Thing he
had: She went the next Day according to Appointment; 
and became his Customer for three
rich Suits and two Night-gowns—which
she carry'd away with her in a Hackney-Coach,
after having invited him and his Wife to
drink Tea at her Lodging, the first Time their
Leisure permitted. 
It is not to be suppos'd he fail'd waiting on
her; and his Wife taking her to be a Lady of
strict Modesty, was so much charm'd with
her, that nothing but the fear of being troublesome,
kept her from being almost continually
with her. She never thought herself so
happy, as in her Company, and was for ever
inviting her to dine and sup at their House. — 
Syrena accepted her Kindness, as often as Prudence
would admit; and the Intimacy
between them encreasing every Day; the
Husband took the Advantage of their Familiarity,
to grow more so also. He told Syrena that 

if she were a Man, he should not approve of
the Affection his Wife had for her; and as she
was a Woman, he thought he merited something
from her in Compensation, for robbing him
of so much of his Wife's Company. —The
sly Deluder answer'd, that she look'd upon
him and his Wife as one, and therefore desired
when she could not have them both, that
she might not be without One. —Your Business
calls you so often my Way, added she,
with a most bewitching Air, that, methinks,
I need not miss the Sight of you once or twice
every Day. —This with some other kind Expressions
she let fall, whenever she had an Opportunity,
by Degrees dissipated the Awe his
good Opinion of her had inspired him with; 
and he at length took Courage to discover his
Inclinations. Never had Syrena given a greater
Proof, how perfect a Mistress she was in the
Art of Dissimulation, than by the Amazement
she put on at hearing him talk to her in the
Language of a Lover—a half Resentment,
and a half Compliance were blended with it,
so as not to dash his Hopes too much, nor lessen
herself with him by approving too easily of his
Addresses. In fine, she behaved in such a Fashion,
as made him think her an Angel of
Virtue, and at the same Time, a Woman
not a little attach'd to him by a secret liking
of his Person. —He was not, however, long
held in Suspence, he was one Night at her
Lodging—they were alone—had drank
a Glass of Wine pretty freely. —He was
bolder than ordinary, and she sunk into his 

Arms at once, and gave herself up entirely to
him, without seeming to know what she did. 
Never Man thought himself happier than
the transported Mercer; and Syrena was perfectly
content with what she done; not doubting
but she should henceforward have the
command of his Purse; as indeed, she had; he
lov'd her too well to refuse her any Thing, and
she had so little Conscience in the Expences she
brought him into, that in three Months, there
was a frightful diminution of his Substance. 
His lavish Love bestowed so much upon her,
that had she liv'd in any frugal Decorum, she
might have sav'd sufficient to have made her
easy for a long time; but having nothing now
to think on, farther than indulging every Luxury,
she became exceedingly leud; and the
Mercer not being able to give her enough of his
Company, and, besides, had something of a
Sobriety in his Nature, not agreeable to her
present Way of thinking; she fell into an Adventure
which was not a little Expensive to
her. 
Living in good Lodgings, appearing always
rich in Dress, and conversing with none who
were any Blemish to her Character, for her
Intimacy with the Mercer's Wife, took off all
Scandal on his Account; she visited, and receiv'd
Visits from several Ladies in the Neighbourhood; 
with them she us'd frequently to
take a Morning's Walk up Constitution-Hill,
as it is call'd, in the Green-Park. She was
seldom there without seeing a Man of a genteel 

Appearance and agreeable Person; she was
struck at first Sight of him, with something
she had never felt before, and which made her
uneasy to become acquainted with him. As she
found he was pretty constantly there; she
went one Morning alone, and had, what she
thought, the good Fortune to meet him— 
as they drew pretty near, she tript her Foot
purposely against a little Pebble, and fell down
as if by Accident, as he was just by her; he
ran and rais'd her, but she pretended to have
sprain'd her Ancle, and was not able to walk
without Support, so she lean'd upon his Arm
till they got into the lower Park, where they
sat down on the first Bench. As she had no
farther Designs on him, than entring into an
Amour, she shew'd herself without Disguise,
and was all the Libertine. On his proposing
to go to a Tavern, she immediately consented,
and yielded herself up to his Embraces,
without the least Reserve or Scruple. — 
If such abandon'd Inclinations can be call'd
Love, she might be said to love this new Gallant
to a very great Degree. —She stay'd
with him the whole Day, and encroach'd some
Hours on the Night; nor parted without telling
him her Name and Lodgings, and exacting
a Promise from him, of coming to see her
the next Day. 
She had no reason to doubt his Punctuality
in this Point. He was of as amorous a Constitution,
as her vicious Desires had made her
languish for. —He was at that time free
from all Engagements, and thought himself 

lucky, in having so young and beautiful a Mistress
thrown in his Way; but what extremely
added to his Satisfaction, in the Enjoyment
of her was, that he was pretty secure, both by
her Appearance and Temper; for she would
not suffer him to pay the Reckoning, that
she would be no manner of Charge to him; 
but on the contrary, he should be able to render
his Acquaintance with her serviceable, as
well to his Interest, as he had found it to his
Pleasure. 
Their second Interview was no less full of
Rapture than the first; and they were so highly
satisfied with each other, that both swore
eternal Constancy, and, perhaps, at that
Juncture intended to preserve it. From this
time they were seldom asunder; he breakfasted
with her at her Lodgings, then they went together
to the White-Eagle in Suffolk-Street to
dine; and parted not till the Hour, in which
she expected the Mercer, or his deluded, injur'd
Wife; she always defraying the Expence,
tho' he complain'd he was asham'd of it; but
that being a young Fellow of a small Fortune,
he had it not in his power to behave towards
her in that Respect, as he could wish. She
told him she had enough for both, and begg'd
he would make himself easy, for his Love
and Constancy, was all she expected from
him; and withal told him, that he might
command whatever she was Mistress of, with
the same Freedom as his own. Nor was she
backward in the Performance of this Promise; 
whenever they went abroad, she took care 

to put more Money in his Pocket, than the
Charges of the Day could possibly amount to. 
So that never any Man, who could content
himself with receiving Obligations of that Nature
from a Woman, had more reason to be
satisfied. 
The Passion she had for this young Gallant,
however, did not make her negligent
in preserving her Interest with the Mercer. 
She was never out of the way, when he appointed
to be with her, and received him with
such an Infinity of Tenderness, that he would
almost have doubted the Testimony of his own
Eyes, had they told him she was false. 
But being willing to prevent any Accident
that might discover her Intrigue, or
render it even suspected by the People of the
House; she consider'd that it would be
proper, he should not be much seen at her
Lodgings: She had past him at first, as a
Country Kinsman just come to Town; but
as a Continuance of such frequent Visits,
might occasion Enquiries, she henceforward
met him at her Mother's; and for this Reason
it was she submitted herself to her, and was reconciled. 
But knowing well that Mrs. Tricksy,
being past the Pleasures of Love herself,
was solely devoted to Interest; she carefully
conceal'd from her the Truth of her Sentiments
for her new Lover, pretending to her
that he was a Man of Fortune, and allow'd
her Five Guineas a Week; and to gain Credit 

for what she said, gave him wherewith, to
make her very handsome Presents. Thus was
the Instructress in Deceit, deceived herself; 
and tho' she did receive some Profit from her
Daughter's Vices, yet it was little in Comparison
of what she might have got, if the other had
been as sincere to her, and to her own Interest,
as she pretended. But it is generally speaking,
the Fate of Prostitutes to lavish on some Indigent
Favourite, who, perhaps, despises them,
what they gain by the Folly of the deluded
Keeper. 
The Mercer at length finding her grow exorbitant
in her Demands upon him, and beyond
what he cou'd continue to grant without ruining
his Family, began to feel some touches of
Remorse for the wrong he did his Wife and
Children, but the artful Syrena, whenever she
found him slack either in his Embraces or
Presents, knew so well how to win him to her
Purpose, and disperse all Thoughts, but those
of the Pleasures he enjoyed in her Arms, that
he could not find in his Heart to refuse any
Thing to so lovely, so endearing, so faithful a
Creature; much less to abandon her entirely; 
and had certainly kept on his Correspondence
with her, till his Destruction had been inevitable,
had not an Accident happened to open
his Eyes to her Perfidy and Ingratitude. 
Early one Morning she receiv'd a Letter
from her beloved, acquainting her, that he
had been arrested the Night before, by his
Taylor, for the Sum of an hundred Pounds, 

and desiring she would forthwith oblige him
with the Money; for he had no Bail to offer,
and had other Debts, which, he fear'd, would
come upon him and fix him in a Goal for Life,
if not discharg'd immediately. This News
gave her the utmost Concern, she had been
too profuse to have half that Sum by her, and
could not bear the Loss of a Lover, so well
qualify'd to please her. She, therefore, sent
directly to the Mercer, begging he would come
to her that Moment, on a Business of equal
Moment with her Life: He had too much
real Tenderness not to obey so pressing a Summons,
and found her lying on her Bed, half
drown'd in Tears. She told him her Mother
was going to be carry'd to Prison for a
Debt of an old standing, and that tho' there
had not been a very good Understanding between
them of late, on account of her unhappy
Marriage; yet she could not live and see
her Parent die in a Goal, as she must do, if the
Money was not paid—It would be highly
improper, both on your own Account and
mine, said she, that you should appear in the
Affair, either as to bail her yourself, or send
any other Person to do it; and besides the
Money must be paid at last, so that if you
have any Love, Friendship, or Pity for the
poor Syrena, let me have the Sum required, that
I may fly to save from Misery, the Person to
whom I owe my Being. —I would have
pawn'd my Jewels, and what little Plate I
have, added she, rather than have given you
this Trouble; but I know not which way to
go about such a Business, and also fear they 

would not raise so much. How moving are
the Griefs of those we love; had she ask'd him
for his Soul he would have given it, and tho'
at that time he could very ill spare it, being
going to pay a Bill drawn on him by one of
his Weavers, yet he immediately took out of
his Pocket-Book two fifty Pound Bank Notes
and gave her, bidding her dry her Tears,
and go instantly to remedy the cause; with
these Words, accompany'd with a thousand
Kisses, he took his leave, and she order'd a
Hackney Coach to carry her to the Place
where her Lover was confined. As the believing
Mercer was going home, he met a
Taylor, with whom he had been long acquainted,
and was a Customer; this Man
seeing him so opportunely, told him he was
going to a Spunging House, to hear what
Offers a Person he had arrested, had to make
him: The Mercer comply'd, and they went
together. On their coming to the Officer's
House, they were told a Lady had just gone
up to the Prisoner, and desired to wait in the
Parlour till she was gone: Accordingly they did
so, but the Door not being shut, what Astonishment
was the Mercer in, when the Lady
passing by to go into the Coach that waited for
her, he saw it was his, till then, suppos'd
faithful Syrena: She had pluck'd her Hood
pretty much over her Face, not that she suspected
in the least who was there, but that
her Face might not be known hereafter, by
any one who should have seen her in such a
Place: Her Cloaths, however, being the same
he had just left her in, and which had come 

from his own Shop, her Shape, her Air, and
and her Voice in speaking to the Coachman,
discover'd Syrena too plainly, to one who had so
much Cause to know her, for him to be mistaken. 
He was scarce able to dissemble his
Confusion, before the Person he was with, but
their being that Moment desired to go up to
the Prisoner, prevented the other from taking
Notice of it. On going in he receiv'd a dreadful
Confirmation of Syrena's Baseness, had he
doubted of it —He saw the two fifty Pound
Bills he had just given to her, and the Number
of which he knew, paid as so much Money
to his Friend, and on the Prisoner's Finger
a Diamond Ring he presented her with,
and which she pretended to have lost. 
Those of my Readers who have some time
or other in their Lives, found themselves in
the Mercer's Case, need not be told what 'twas
he felt at so amazing a Proof, how greatly he
had all along been imposed upon by the Artifices
of this wicked Woman; and those who
have never been so unhappy to experience
such Deceptions, ought to be warn'd by the
Despair this poor Man afterwards fell into,
how they enter into any Engagements with
Women, whose Principles they are not acquainted
with; and not like him be beguil'd
and ruin'd by a fair Face and seeming affection; 
but, as the Poet says, 

Shun the dangerous Beauty of the Wanton—.

For in corrupted Morals no Sincerity can be
expected, and the sacred Names of Love and 

Friendship are but prophan'd and prostituted
for the basest ends. 
The Mercer thought every Moment an
Age till the Business on which his Friend had
brought him there was ended, that he might
go to Syrena, and vent some Part of his
Rage in those Reproaches which her Behaviour
had merited from him. He found her at home,
and was received by her with such a Shew
of Love and Gratitude, that his Astonishment
at her Dissimulation was so great, he had not
presently the power of uttering what was in
his Heart; but he gave her a Look, and, at
the same time push'd her from him, as she
was throwing her Arms about his Waste, as
sufficiently inform'd her somewhat very extraordinary
was labouring in his Mind —She
trembled inwardly, but disguis'd it with her
usual Artifice, and ask'd him tenderly, what
had disorder'd him? As soon as he could speak
there was nothing opprobrious, that he omitted
saying to her; he call'd her every
vile Name that his Passion could suggest, and
on her having recourse to Protestations of Innocence,
and falling into Faintings, he let
her know he was not to be again deceiv'd, and
flung out of the Room, leaving her in a pretended
Swoon. 
The loss of so great a Support vex'd her to
the Heart; but perceiving he was not to be
recover'd, and that the Proofs of her Infidelity
were too plain for her to aim at any Justification
of her Actions, she consoled herself with 

the Reflection, that he would not dare to expose
her, for the sake of his own Character; 
and that she had Youth and Beauty enough to
attract some other, who might be as much
devoted to her Interest as he had been. 
The Mercer after this examining into his
Affairs more heedfully than he had done during
the Hurry of his Passion for the infamous
Syrena, found himself in very bad Circumstances,
and that he was no less than thirteen
hundred Pounds a worse Man, for his Acquaintance
with her, tho' it had not lasted
above four Months —The Injury he had
done his Wife and Family now glared him
full in the Face, and together with the Thoughts
how impossible it was for him to retrieve this
false Step, made him grow extremely melancholy:
His Wife perceiv'd it through all his
Endeavours to conceal it, and often with the
greatest Tenderness, urg'd him to reveal the
Cause; but could get no other Answer from
him, than that he had of late had some Losses
in Trade, which hinder'd him from being so
punctual in his Payments as he had been accustom'd
to be; but that he hoped he should
recover it in time. This he said, to keep her
from the Knowledge of her Misfortune as long
as he could; but finding his Creditors grow
impatient, and no visible way of making things
easy, but by a Statute of Bankruptcy, his
Pride would not suffer him to consent to that,
and, therefore, resolved to put a Period to his
Life and Troubles at once. To this end he
shut himself one Day in his Counting-House, 

and clapp'd a loaded Pistol to his Ear, with an
Intent to shoot himself through the Head; 
but Providence averted his Aim, and by a sudden
shaking of his Hand just in that dreadful
Moment, directed the Bullets another way,
and they but graz'd on the back part of his
Head, and lodg'd in a Shelf behind him. The
Report of the Pistol drew all the Family to
the Place; the Door was immediately broke
open, and they found him with that Instrument
of Death in his Hand, about to charge it for
a second Attempt —His Servants by force
wrested it from him, and his Wife having
made them carry it away, and leave the Room,
threw herself upon her Knees before him, and
conjured him, for the sake of his own Soul,
and for the sake of those dear Babes, who
must be left Orphans, not to harbour Thoughts
so contrary to Religion and to Nature — 
You know, said she, that my Fortune is
by our Marriage-Articles settled on me, I
will give it you up entirely; dispose of it as
you please to make you easy —If that is
not sufficient, take all my Jewels, my Cloths 
—And should all be ineffectual, I will go
to my Father, prostrate my self before him,
and never leave his Feet, till I have obtain'd
wherewith to retrieve your Circumstances — 
It was now he found the Difference between
a virtuous and a vicious Woman; and having
naturally very tender and grateful Sentiments,
was quite overcome with her Generosity — 
He could not resolve to abuse it, nor suffer her
to remain longer in Ignorance. —The
wrong he had done her, was a Burthen on his
Soul, which he could not sustain—O cease 

this Goodness, said he, to an unworthy Husband 
—I have been base, been unfaithful,
and deserve the Punishment my Crime has
brought upon me. —I will not involve
you in my Ruin—Live, my dear virtuous
Wife, continu'd he, and enjoy what, I thank
Heaven, my Creditors cannot dispossess you of; 
and do the best you can with it for your self,
and our unhappy Children—for me, I am
determin'd either not to live, or not to live
in England. The poor Gentlewoman was
ready to die at these Words; but insisted, as
well as she was able, on his accepting her
Offer. O, said he, you little imagine what
a Villain I have been—but you shall know 
—Then after some small Struggles between
Shame and Generosity, he made her
sit down by him, and related the whole Story
of his guilty Commerce, concealing not the least
Article of what he had done for Syrena, nor
the Ingratitude with which she had return'd
his too sincere, tho' criminal Affection—concluding with these Words —Now my
injur'd Dear, said he, judge if a Wretch like
me ought to live, much less to receive any
Marks of Good-will from you, whom I have
so much abus'd and deceiv'd? It was impossible
for a Wife to hear such an Account of
the Cause of their Misfortunes, and from a
Husband's Mouth, without being seized with
many different Emotions, all violent in their
turns; but Jealousy, Resentmeat, Pride, all
subsided, and gave way to Tenderness and
Pity —She was a few Minutes without being
able to give him any Answer for Tears, 

but a kind Embrace supply'd the want of
Words, and when she spoke, it was in these
Terms: My dearest Love, said she, I look
on your making me the Confidant of your
failing, as a full Attonement for it—had I
been told it by any other, I could not, perhaps,
so readily have forgiven it; because I
cannot but think, that the Heart still takes
Pleasure in a Crime which it cannot bring itself
to acknowledge as such, and that there is no true
Penitence without Confession. —But your having
told me all, obliges me in return to pardon all,
and to do all in my power to contribute to
your ease —I now, more than ever, insist
on your commanding my Fortune; and if
you refuse taking it up, I will do it my self,
and distribute it among your Creditors, as far
as it will go. The Husband was confounded
at a Sweetness, so rarely to be found in a Woman
wrong'd in so tender a point; and the
Pleasure he took in having thus eas'd his aking
Heart, mingled with the just sense of Shame,
for having injured a Goodness and Excellence
of Nature, superior to all he ever heard of,
render'd him in a manner beside himself — 
He could say nothing but what a blind Wretch
was I? —How insensible of what was
truly valuable —How could I slight the
real Diamond, and set my Heart upon a common
Pebble, fit only to be trod upon, spurn'd,
and kick'd into the Sewer! —Come, come,
no more of this, my dear, cry'd she, throwing
herself upon his Breast, many Men like you,
have erred where there was less Temptation
to excite them; but few Men like you, have 

honour enough to own they have done amiss— 
if you think me worthy the return of your
Affection, oblige me by speaking no more of
this matter than I shall do, to whom it shall
be as it had never happened; and let us study
how to recover our little Affairs from the Perplexity
they are at present involved in. 
It was with the utmost Difficulty however,
that she at length prevailed on him to call in
her Fortune; and just as he was about to do it,
News arrived of the Death of a Brother he
had abroad, who left him more than ten times
what was necessary for the retrieving of his
Credit;—to make what Reparation he
could to his Wife, he settled upon her all that remained
after paying his Debts; he soon after left
off Trade, and retired into the Country, where
no People live more happy in each other; she
blessing his Return to Virtue, and he the Goodness
that had reclaim'd him. 
Syrena in the mean Time soon began to feel
the want of his Purse, and as her power of
treating and presenting declined, found also
her Favourite's Inclinations declined in Proportion:
He talk'd of nothing now in her Company
but the want of Money, and on her reproaching
him with the change she found in
him, he told her that Love was the Child of
Plenty, and that for his Part he could think
nothing charming that was indigent—this
so enraged her that she gave him a Blow on
the Face, which he, who neither loved nor
regarded her, but for Self-Interest, return'd with 

Interest, and there was a perfect Battle between
them—as she found her Strength inferior
to such Sort of Combats, and liking him too
well for his Ingratitude to extinguish, she fell
into abject submissions, beg'd his Pardon for
doing what indeed he deserved from her, since
vile as she was to others, she had been generous
to him even to Excess; and did every thing in
the Power of Woman to engage a Continuation
of their Acquaintance, which however lasted
not long, Debts came upon him; and she not
having it in her power to discharge them, he
was oblig'd to quit the Kingdom to avoid a
Prison. 
She was now destitute of either Friend or
Lover, and having expended and made away
with all had been given her by the Mercer,
fell into extreme Poverty, and had nothing for
her Support but the Credit, which having laid
out a great deal of Money in the Neighbourhood; 
had given her, on this she lived some
little Time, but the Shop-keepers beginning to
send in their Bills, she was thinking to remove
privately to some other Lodging, to prevent
one being provided for her, she could by no
Means approve, when Chance threw an offer
in her Way, which her Industry had for a
good while in vain sought after. Happening
to be looking at some Lodgings at a Tradesman's
House in the Strand, she perceived as
she was going home a Fellow in a very rich
Livery followed her till she came home, and
as soon as he had seen her enter, go to an
opposite Neighbour's; she could not guess the 

meaning, but was informed by that Person
soon after, that a Footman had enquired there
her Name. And the next Day receiv'd a Letter to this Effect. 

Madam,
I saw you Yesterday at one of my Tradesmen's
Houses where I call'd to pay a Bill,
and at the same Time lost my Heart; if you
will permit a Visit from me this Afternoon,
I shall endeavour to convince you that I think
you deserve a better Situation than his House
can afford—favour me with your Answer
by the Bearer, and believe me, 
Your sincere Admirer,
M&wblank; 

This was indeed wrote with the freedom of
a Man of Quality, to one he thought honour'd
with his Addresses; but she was not at present
in a Condition to stand upon Forms, and
therefore answered him in these Terms, after
being informed by his Servant by what Title
she should address him. 

My Lord,
I am extremely oblig'd to the Honour of
your Lordship's Notice, and know too well
what is owing to your Rank and Character,
not to receive the Favour you are pleas'd to
offer with all Submission; but must take the 

Liberty to acquaint your Lordship, that tho'
under Misfortunes, I am a Gentlewoman, and
have hitherto preserved my Reputation; so
flatter myself, your Lordship has no other
View in this Visit than Commiseration for the
ill Fate that perhaps may have reach'd your
Ears of the 
Unhappy
Syrena Tricksy. 

Having dispatch'd this Epistle, the remainder
of the Day was taken up in setting herself
forth to the best Advantage, and consulting in
what manner she should behave; as she
thought it might give him an ill Opinion of
her Sincerity afterwards, if she pretended to put
herself upon him for a Virgin, she resolved to
tell him the same Story she had done the Mercer,
only with this Addition that her Husband
died abroad, and by that Means she was cut
off from any Hope of future Support from
that quarter. 
About six in the Evening came the expected
Guest, who, struck with her Beauty and seeming
Innocence by seeing her only en passant, was
now quite ravish'd with her Charms; as he
knew well enough however that she could not
be ignorant of the Intention of the Visit, he
made no great Ceremony, but came directly
to the point; and she seeing his Humour was
not to be dallied with, practised none of those
Artifices to keep him in hand, which she had
made use of to others: All she insisted upon 

was a Settlement for Life, but he stop'd her
Mouth, by telling her he was under an Oath
to the contrary, having been deceived by some,
who after that Engagement had ill-treated
him; and, said he, you, Madam, have much
less Occasion than any of your Sex to desire
it, since you may be certain your Charms will
secure me constant while you continue to be
so. Finding that nothing was to be done that
way, she gave over all Speech of it, and told
him she would then depend entirely on his
Love and Honour. So a Bargain as it might
truly be call'd, was struck up between them
the same Night. He made her a Present of
50 Broad Pieces, and the promise of 10 Guineas
per Week to defray common Expences. 
Now was Syrena in high Spirits again, and
her Lord was so fond of her, that she might
have brought him almost to any Thing, if
the Warmth of her Inclinations could have
permitted her to content herself with his Embraces
alone; but publick Affairs, or Pleasures
of a different Nature took up so much of his
Time, that she wanted a Companion in his
Absence; and by keeping a great deal of Company,
and those not of the best Sort, she soon
enter'd into Intrigues in which her usual Cunning
had not the least share: In fine, she became
so free of her Favours, that she at length
got the Disease common in such Cases, and
without knowing it, made a Present of it to
his Lordship: As Persons of his Quality cannot
feel the least Disorder without having immediate
recourse to their Physicians, he was 

soon informed from what source his Ailment
proceeded; and as he had no Gallantries with
any Woman since the Commencement of his
Amour with Syrena, had no room to doubt if
it were she who had done him this unwelcome
Favour: He accused her with it in Terms,
which made her know he was convinced of
her Inconstancy, and tho' she here made use
of every Stratagem to perswade him she was
Innocent, all her Vows, her Tears, her Imprecations
were of no Force, he quitted her,
and told her, if it were not more for demeaning
himself than any remains of regard for
her, he should resent the Injury she had done
him in a severer manner. 
One would imagine she should, in so terrible
an Exigence, have look'd back with Shame
and Confusion on her past Conduct, but she
appeared rather harden'd than abashed, when
her Mother, who soon discovered the Truth,
remonstrated to her the Folly and Madness of
her late Behaviour—'tis possible the old
Woman now began to repent the having
train'd up a Child in that manner; but if she
did, it was of no Service, since the other was
too opinionated and too obstinate to take any
Advice, but such as was agreeable to her own
Inclinations. 'Tis certain, that tho' she at
first taught her to ensnare, to deceive, and to
betray, her Aim was to enable her by those
Arts to secure to herself some one Man, by
whom she might make her Fortune; and never
imagined she would have run such Lengths,
meerly for a precarious Dependance, or to 

gratify Desires, which when once indulg'd,
bring on inevitable Destruction; but it was
too late to reflect on what was past, and she
forbore saying much to her, seeing the Violence
of her Temper, and unwilling to come to a
downright Quarrel, hoping she might still
make some Conquest, that might be of greater
Service than those she had lost; and her Condition
now requiring Medicine rather than Reproof,
she bent all her Cares for her Cure in
the most private Manner; for which Reason
she made her leave the Lodging she was in,
and come to hers; where, by the Assistance
of a skillful Surgeon and good Nurse, she was
perfectly recovered in a short time. 
But her Circumstances were not so easily repair'd
as her Health had been; the Expences of
her Illness had so reduced her, that she had
scarce a change of Garments to appear in; in
such as she had however, she took little Rambles
about the Town, in hope of captivating
some admiring Fool; but nothing offering answerable
to her Expectations, she grew very
much mortify'd, and began to fear she had lost
the Power of pleasing, tho' not yet seventeen. 
No Necessities could almost be greater than
what Mother and Daughter were now in, yet
would neither of them think of betaking themselves
to any honest way of getting a lively-hood. 
Those Relations who had formerly
been kind to them, having heard something
confusedly of Syrena's Conduct, had for a
long time withdrawn their Bounties, so they
were entirely destitute of all Assistance. 

In this melancholy Posture of Affairs Syrena
went one Day into the Park, not with the
view of meeting any Adventure to her Advantage,
for she was now quite hopeless, but
meerly to indulge her Vexation—she sate
down on one of the most remote and unfrequented
Benches, and no body being in
Sight, vented her Spleen in real Tears, mingled
with Sighs, and ever and anon an Exclamation — 
What shall I do?—what will
become of me? did she frequently cry, without
being sensible she did so;—such was
the Agony she now was in, she neither saw,
nor heard the Tread of any Person approaching,
till all at once she turn'd her Head, and
found a grave old Gentleman, sitting by her
on the same Bench. If it would not be an
impertinent Question, pretty Lady, said he,
I should desire to know what occasions such
excessive Grief in one so young and beautiful? 
Overwhelm'd with Sorrow, as Syrena had
been, she felt her Heart spring with Joy, at
being accosted by a Person, who looked as
if he had it in his power to redress her Grievances; 
so drying her Eyes, and assuming all
possible Sweetness in her Countenance, alas,
Sir, answered she, my Misfortunes are too
great to be conceal'd; and as they are not
fallen upon me through any Fault I have
been guilty of, I need make no Scruple of declaring
the real Cause, especially to a Gentleman,
who tho' a Stranger, seems to have a
Heart relenting to Distress. She then told
him, that she had been married very young 

to a Gentleman, whose Friends having been
disoblig'd on the Account of her having no Fortune,
had sent him to Venice; whence, out of
what they allowed him, he had always sent
her something; but that being now dead, all
her Support was lost; she having no Friends
but a Mother, wholly unable to help her— 
adding, that she was a Gentlewoman, and
had never been bred to any Business. 
He seemed very much affected with her
Story, but persuaded her not to give way to
Despair; telling her, that the Ways of Providence
were mysterious, and that frequently
when things had the worst Appearance, good
Fortune was nearest at hand—he talked
to her in this Fashion for a considerable time,
and asked her many Questions, to all which
she answered with so much Sweetness and
seeming Sincerity, that he grew very much
taken with her; and among other Particulars,
having enquired of her where she lived, and her
Name, told her, he would make her a Visit,
if she would give him leave; for, added he, it
may be that I may think of something that
will be to your Advantage. —You seem,
Sir, replied she, too much the Gentleman and
the Man of Honour for me to apprehend you
have any Motives for this Offer, but meerly
Pity for the Calamities you see me involved
in; therefore shall think myself honoured in
your Acquaintance. I assure you, returned
he, I shall never give you any Reason to repent
this Confidence; and when I see you next,
and acquaint you who I am, I flatter my self 

the Character I bear in the World, will entirely
rid you of all Scruples on my Account— 
in the mean time, continued he, you shall
promise me to be chearful, and attend with
Patience a Lot which may be happier than you
at present see any Cause to expect. She replied,
that she would do her Endeavour to follow the
Advice of so worthy a Person—he then
took his leave, and she went home a good
deal more at Ease than she went out— 
her Mother was rejoiced at hearing what had
befallen her, and cry'd out in a sort of Transport,
Syrena, this is the Man will make you
happy! not one Woman in an hundred makes
her Fortune by a young Fellow—a young
Fellow thinks himself upon a Par with any
of us, be we never so handsome; but when
once an old Fellow takes it into his head to
fall in love, he will do every thing, give
every thing to render himself agreeable— 
there is indeed a kind of boyish Love, which
begins about sixteen or seventeen, and lasts till
twenty or something longer, but then it wears
off, and they commonly despise the Object
afterwards, and wonder at themselves for
having found any thing in her to admire— 
from twenty to thirty they ramble from one
to another, liking every new Face, and fixing
on none—after thirty, they grow more
settled and wary; and if they love at all,
it is commonly lasting; but a Passion commenced
between forty and fifty, is hardly
to be worn off—'tis certainly strange,
but true of that Sex, that amorous Desires
grow stronger, as the power of gratifying 

them grows weaker, and an old Lover is
the most doating fond Fool on Earth, especially
if his Mistress be very young; for it is
remarkable, that when a Woman is advanced
in Years, I mean about Forty, she shall look
more lovely in the Eyes of a young Man,
than in those of one of her own Age, who at
that time begin to grow fond of Girls, in
so much, that I have known some forsake
very agreeable Women, and take up with,
nay, have been ready to ravish Creatures
that have been Blear-ey'd, Hump-back'd,
had pimpled Faces, and all for the Sake of
dear Eighteen—so that while you are
young, my Girl, chuse a Lover old enough
to be your Father, and as you grow older,
one who might be your Son. 
With these learned Maxims did the old
Jezebel entertain her Daughter, who stirr'd
not out all that Day nor the next, in hope
of the old Gentleman's coming; but he deferr'd
his Visit till the third Day, either
thinking it unbecoming to his Character to
appear too hasty, or perhaps not altogether determined
within himself how he should act
when he did come. 
At last he came however, and Syrena seeing
him from the Window, ran to tell her Mother,
on which they both took up a Work-Basket:
Syrena seem'd dearning a Cambrick
Apron, and her Mother altering an old Velvet
Mantelet. These Marks of good Houswifry
and Frugality were very engaging to the old 

Gentleman; to find them thus employ'd gave
him an advantageous Idea of their Modesty
and Virtue, and he did not fail to give them
those Praises he thought they merited. 
After some few Compliments and preparatory
Discourses; I have been thinking, said
he, to Mrs. Tricksy, on the Account your
Daughter gave me of her Misfortunes, and have
been ever since very much affected with them. 
—I should be glad, methinks, to have it
in my power to alleviate them; but the way I
have to propose may not, perhaps, be agreeable
to either of you. O! Sir, reply'd she, I dare
believe you are too worthy a Person, to offer
any thing we should not approve of with Joy. 
You might think it an under-valuing of your
Family, which I hear is very good, rejoin'd
he; for your Daughter to undertake the Charge
of a House, I do not mean the servile Offices
of it; but to overlook the Servants, and see
that they did their Duty. —She seems, added
he, to have a Prudence above her Years,
and I imagine would be very fit for such a
Trust in every Respect. I am sure she would
endeavour to be so, cry'd her Mother, if you,
Sir, would do her the Honour to recommed
her. She needs no other Recommendation
than her own, answer'd he, since it is myself,
who would put the care of my Family into her
Hands. He then told them, that he was call'd
Mr. W&wblank;; that he was formerly a
Merchant, but having acquired sufficient for
his Contentment, he had retir'd from Business,
and took a House in an airy Part of the 

Town; that he was a Widower, had but two
Sons, one of whom was married, and settl'd
in the City, and the other a Student at Oxford. 
—So that continued he, I live alone,
and should be glad of a Gentlewoman to eat
with me, play a Game at Picquet in an Evening,
and, in fine, be a Companion as well as
Housekeeper. 
Both the Mother and Daughter seem'd very
much pleas'd with his Proposal, and left it to
himself, what Consideration she should have
for the Trouble she was to take; telling him
that he should reward her as he found she merited. 
This he thought was acting like real
Gentlewomen, and the Confidence they placed
in him highly oblig'd him. It was agreed
that she should come into his House, in the
Station he mention'd, the ensuing Week, and
he then made a Present of a Twenty Pound
Bank Note to Mrs. Tricksy, for hers and her
Daughter's Use till that Time. 
After he was gone, Syrena communicated to
her Mother some Fears she had, that he intended
her for no other than a real Housekeeper; 
but Mrs. Tricksey told her there was not the
least Reason for such Apprehension. —Thou
silly Girl, said she, would any Man, take a
Stranger like you into his Family without
having a more than ordinary liking to her
Person; and will not that liking produce Offers
of a different kind, when he becomes
more acquainted? —Perhaps, he has a
mind to try how you will behave before he 

will discover his Inclinations; therefore it behoves
you, indeed, to be very cautious— 
to keep a strict guard upon every Word and
Look, and above all things to strengthen
the Opinion, he now has of your Innocence
and Virtue. But said, Syrena, if I
should seem too rigidly honest, it might deter
him from any Attempt upon me, and in time
extinguish all amorous Inclinations, if he now
has any for me. Not at all, reply'd her Mother; 
Men, especially rich Men, are apt
enough to think their Wealth will conquer the
most stubborn Virtue—beside have not I
instructed you how to play at fast and loose, as
I call it, with the Men—sometimes kind,
sometimes reserv'd. —Coy when they're
free, and Tender when they seem more cold; 
and all as if by Accident, and as if Design had
not the least share in your Conduct? 
Between Lessons for her Behaviour, and
preparing things necessary for her Departure,
the time was taken up till the appointed Day; 
on which he came in his Chariot, and conducted
her himself to his House; where they
no sooner arrived, then he had all his Servants
call'd into the Parlour, and told them he had
brought a Gentlewoman to be in the Place of
their Mistress, and they must follow her Directions
in every thing. The Keys of all the
Plate and Linnen were then deliver'd to her,
and she took Possession of all, as tho' she had
been Wife, or Daughter of the Owner of the
House. As it was not thought proper her
Mother should come often to visit her any 

more, than when she was at Sir Thomas
L&wblank;'s; they agreed Syrena should write
whenever any Thing material occur'd; and
that her Mother whenever it requir'd any Answer
should send it by old Sarah, who still liv'd
with her, and not trust to the Penny-Post. In
three or four Days she wrote as follows. 

LETTER I.
From G&wblank; Square. 
THURSDAY.
Dear Mother,
I Cannot yet tell what to make of the old
Gentleman's Designs: He uses me with
more Respect than I could look for as a House-keeper,
and with all the Freedom of a Relation; 
but speaks not the least Word of Love. 
He approves of every thing I do, and has never
found the least Fault; tho' God knows I
am ignorant enough how to order the Affairs
of a Family. I do my best, however, to
please him; and every Morning as soon as I
get up, write a Bill of Fare, and shew it him
when he comes down to Breakfast; and I assure
you he has told me more than once, that
I have an elegant Taste; whether he is earnest
or not, I don't know; and I am sometimes
afraid he should think me too delicate,
but I bring myself off: For Yesterday having 

set down Green Pease, are there any yet said
he, pretty hastily, as I thought? yes, Sir, I
reply'd, I saw some Yesterday, but they are
dear; I set them down only to shew you, that
I know they are to be had, if you should have
a Fancy to any; for you see the second Course
is full without them, and they may be omitted. 
You are very obliging, answer'd he,
and I think may spare yourself the trouble of
making any Bills of Fare hereafter, since you
are so good a Judge yourself, of what would
become my Table. I told him that I could
not be easy, unless he saw how his Money was
to be laid out: Well, said he, if it must be
so; but, I believe, you'll seldom find me
either add or diminish to what you shall contrive
for me. I play'd at Cards with him last
Night, till Twelve o'Clock, and he had a
Bowl of Rack Punch made, and set by us on
a Dumb Waiter; but tho' he prest me very
much to drink Glass for Glass with him; 
yet I begg'd to be excus'd, telling him I had a
weak Head, and had never been accustom'd
to drink any thing strong. —Indeed, I
could have drank the whole Quantity, myself; 
and you know how well I love that Liquor; 
but I tell you this, to shew you what
a Command I have over myself—if he intends
to make me either a Wife or a Mistress,
I find 'tis necessary to give him a very high
Opinion of me; for he is devilish wary and
observing; so I must lead the Life of a Vestal,
tho' cruelly against my Inclinations, till
I have got the upper Hand of him; and then
—but I won't build Castles in the Air. — 

As soon as I know any thing farther, I will
write again, and am, 
Dear Mother,
Your dutiful Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 
P. S. Just as I had finish'd the above, he
sent for me to tell me To-morrow is his
Birth-Day, and he shall have his Son in the
City, and his Wife, and several other Relations
to dine with him; so bid me order a
Dinner accordingly. I wonder whether I
shall sit at Table or not, or what he will say
of me to them. —Pray Heaven none of
them know me. 


LETTER II.
From G&wblank; Square. 
SATURDAY.
Dear Mother,
Yesterday was, as I expected it would be,
a very hurrying Day, we had a vast deal
of Company indeed, and a very noble Entertainment
I provided for them. A little before
they came, the old Gentleman sent for me into
the Parlour, and said, Mrs. Tricksy as I shall 

have so many People here to Day, and your
Youth and Beauty may possibly occasion some
Raillery, or if not some Conjectures at least
that I dare say your Modesty would not willingly
excite; I hope you will not take it ill,
if I desire you to dine alone,—I say alone,
for I will not have you dine with the Servants
by any Means—I am sorry I did not think
of bidding you invite your Mother to keep
you Company—but it is too late now— 
when any other such Occasion falls out I shall
be more considerate. I told him nothing could
be more agreeable to my Inclinations than to
avoid being seen by so many Persons to whom
I was an utter Stranger, and not at present in a
rank of Life to entitle me to such Conversation. 
As to that, replied he, you are Company
for any body; and when you have been
here a little longer, it may be, I may introduce
you; in the mean time you must be content. 
I made him a low Curtesy in token of
being perfectly satisfied with his goodness, and
was going out of the Room, but he called me
back and said, I had like to have forgot to tell
you that I insist upon it, that you order a Part
of whatever you like best to be carried into
your own Chamber, and not let any Thing
come to your Table after it has been on
mine—I have my Reasons, continued he,
for this Injunction, and shall not be pleased if
you do not observe it. I made him all the
Acknowledgements so great a Mark of his
Respect deserved from me, but would have declined
accepting it till I found he was resolved
upon it. 

At Night after they were all gone, which
was not till almost 12 o'Clock, I went in to
him to ask if Things had been ordered to his
Satisfaction: Nothing could be more so, my
pretty Manager, said he, with a Look that I
thought had something very amorous in it,
but I perceived he had been drinking pretty
freely; so I asked a great many Questions on
purpose to give him an Opportunity of opening
his Mind, and I imagined he was going to
say something two or three Times, but whatever
it was he restrained himself, only as I
was taking my leave he gave me a gentle pull
by the Gown, and said, I must not omit
making you a small Acknowledgement for the
Care you have taken to Day, and put 5 Guineas
into my Hand, and at the same Time
kissed me with a good deal of Eagerness three
or four Times, then push'd me from him as
it were, and cried go your ways, you little
Temptation you! I neither seemed frighted,
nor yielding all the time, but affected a little
Confusion, and once more wish'd him a good
Repose: He did not call me back again, as I
was in hopes he would; and this Morning at
Breakfast he behaved to me no otherwise than
usual; so whether he has forgot, or repented
of the Freedom he took with me last Night,
I know not, but it vexes me that he comes on
no faster —I hate Suspence of all Things,
and begin to grow weary of this dull insipid
Life, yet I am resolved to endure it a little
longer —I long to see you and have some
talk about this Matter —I have never 

stirr'd out since I have been here, and I find
it pleases him wonderfully to think that I love
home so well —I am sure it would not be
improper for you to come to see me some Day
next Week, so if you don't hear from me before
I shall expect you, who am, 
Your Dutiful Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 

Her Mother came as she desired the Wednesday
following, but Syrena having nothing of
Consequence to inform her their Conversation
is of no moment to the Reader. But on the
Monday following she wrote a third Letter to
this Effect. 

LETTER III.
From G&wblank; Square. 
MONDAY.
I Have now the Satisfaction of acquainting
you, part of the Secret which we so much
wish'd to know is at last reveal'd—I will
tell you how it came out. —Last Saturday
Night I was sitting in the Parlour reading the
Play call'd the Conscious Lovers, when the old
Gentleman came home—I laid down the
Book as soon as I saw him enter, which he 

perceiving, cried, don't let me disturb you— 
pray what is the Subject of your Entertainment,
and then looking into it —O! the Conscious
Lovers, continued he; this is accounted
a very good Play—pray what's your Opinion? 
I told him I was no judge, but it pleased
me. So it does most People, said he, and
indeed is a good Performance, but yet, methinks,
there is somewhat in the Characters of
Bevil and Indiana not quite agreeable to Nature. 
—The Gentleman is very generous,
Sir, cried I; ay, replied he, and less self-interested
than we Men are capable of being to the
Object we love. I could not help looking a
little surprized at these Words, and cried, I
thought, Sir, that Love had inspired Generosity. 
Yes, answered he, it does inspire what
is commonly called Generosity, we are ready
enough to give every thing, and do every
thing for the Person we love; but then that
Passion that makes us so liberal, makes us also
desire something in return—we cannot
content ourselves with rendring happy the Object
of our Affections, but languish for something
more than Gratitude. —Indeed, pretty
Mrs. Tricksy, continued he, taking my
Hand and pressing it, these are all Romantick
Notions; and as charming as you are, you
will never find a Man who loves you for your
own sake alone. I cannot expect it Sir, said
I, without I had as much Merit as Indiana: 
You have as much, and perhaps more, replied
he, at least in my Eyes, than ever Woman
had—yet sweet Creature, my Heart is far
from feeling any Platonick Sentiments for you. 

Here I pretended to be in a vast Confusion,
and hung down my Head as ashamed to hear
him talk so—don't blush, said he, whatever
Liberty I may take in thought, my Actions
shall never be such as shall give you cause
to fear me —I am an old Man now, and
cannot hope to make myself any way equal
with your Youth and Beauty—then perceiving
I made no reply, but seemed more and
more ashamed—is not what I said too sad
a truth for me, pursued he? I know not what
you mean Sir, answered I, but I am sure the
Goodness you have been pleased to shew me,
deserves all the regard I can pay you. Well,
well, resumed he, that's all I expect at present 
—But it may be that in time I shall
grow more covetous and over-rate my Services
in hope of greater reward—but come
let us go to Cards, for I find you are more at
a loss in Conversation of this kind than any
other. I made him no Answer, but rung the
Bell for a Servant to set a Table, and we went
to play—I won every Game, for I found
he lost to me on purpose, and was a gainer
above 50 Shillings—when we left off, you
know how to conquer me every way, said he,
but I must have a small Revenge, and kissed
me with an infinity of warmth—I cannot
help loving you, he cried, two or three times
over, but you must not be angry, then went
up to his Chamber without staying to hear
what I would say. I went soon after to Bed,
but could not sleep all Night for thinking of
his odd Behaviour—yesterday Morning 

at Breakfast he look'd more than usually earnest
upon me, and after being silent some time,
ask'd how long it was since I heard of my Husband's
Death; the Question a little startled me
lest he should happened to have been told something
of me that had made him suspect the
Truth of what I had said; but I disguised my
Confusion well enough, and answered about
eighteen Months. I wonder, said he, you
have not been tempted to make a second venture: 
On which I replied with a Smile, that
it must be something very extraordinary indeed,
that could tempt me to enter again into a
State which had cost me so much disquiet. Indeed,
pursued he, there are so many things requisite
to make a happy Marriage, that if Passion
did not get the better of Reason much
fewer would engage in it than do. These
Words were uttered with a Sort of Coldness,
which I knew not to what Cause to attribute: 
Nor has he since spoke to me but on ordinary
Things —I very plainly see he loves me,
but for what End I know not, and fancy that
he has also a kind of struggle within himself
what he shall do concerning me —I wish
therefore that there could be something contrived
to put him in fear of losing me. — 
I would have him think I had some offer of
Marriage much to my Advantage, if such a
Thing could be artfully brought about — 
I wish you would consider of it, and help me
out—it would certainly make him declare
what he would be at sooner than he seems
willing to do at present; and my Patience is
almost worn out I assure you. For tho' I live 

well, want for nothing, and am treated with
the greatest Respect; yet you must be sensible,
my Youth and Inclinations are not to be satisfy'd
with such a sort of Life; besides I should
be glad to be at some certainty—I shall not
fail to acquaint you with every thing that
happens, but in the mean time think of my
Request, and believe me, 
Dear Mother,
Your dutiful Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 


LETTER IV.
From G&wblank; Square. 
THURSDAY.
Dear Mother,
My old Spark comes on a little, tho' not
so fast as I would have him. —He
both din'd and supp'd abroad Yesterday, and
did not come home till very late—I would
not go to bed, thinking he would take it as a
Mark of my Respect; and so, indeed, he did,
and seem'd mightily pleas'd with it, tho' he
said he was sorry to have been the cause of
breaking my Rest —He was in a very gay
Humour, and I found had been drinking pretty 

hard, tho' he was not what one may call
fuddled neither: He told me, they had been
very merry with him upon my account, and will
need have it, said he, that I should not have made
choice of so young a House-keeper, if I had
not lik'd her for the Management of other
Affairs besides those of the Family —So,
continued he, I am at a loss what Reparation
to make you for the Scandal the living with
me is like to bring upon you. O, Sir, answered
I, putting on a very troubled Countenance,
I fear these are People who envy me the Happiness
of your Favour, and invent this Ridicule
on purpose to make you part with me. 
—No, no, no such matter, said he, they
rather envy me. —But let their Designs
be what they will, if you ever leave me, it
shall not be my Fault—I am only afraid
you will grow tir'd of an old Man's Company,
and I shall lose you by your own Inclination. 
I then assured him, with an Earnestness that
came pretty near to Tenderness, that I thought
my Lot extremely blest in being with him— 
that I looked upon him as my good Angel— 
that nothing could be more perfectly satisfy'd
than I was with my Condition; and would
not quit his Service, for any Consideration
whatever. He was so much transported with
what I said, that he catch'd me in his Arms,
and held me there for some Minutes, then
kiss'd me, and cry'd, My dear Creature, you
shall never quit me—I could not live without
you. —Good God! what a Neck,
what Breasts are here! added he, putting my
Handkerchief back with one Hand, and laying 

the other upon my Breast—I drew a little
back—but he pull'd me to him, and
forc'd me to sit by him on a Couch, where
he took me about the Waste, add kiss'd me
till my Breath was almost gone; I struggled,
and begg'd him to desist; but he pursuing
what I found gave him an Infinity of Pleasure; 
I fell a weeping, and cry'd, O, Sir, do not
compel me to call back the Words, I just now
said, and make me fearful of the Lot I so
lately blest—I am unhappy, it is true; 
but I am virtuous, and will be always so. He
seem'd very much affected with the counterfeit
Terror I was in, and wiping away my
Tears with his Handkerchief, forgive me, said
he, I told you there were times when we Men
could not command our Passions—but I
will never do any thing to your real Prejudice 
—I love you too well for that— 
indeed I do—love you much more than
you imagine—and—here he stop'd,
and after having paus'd a while —But I
won't keep you any longer from your Repose,
good Night, my dear Creature, permit me
one more Kiss, in token of Forgiveness, with
these Words he gave me another tender Embrace,
tho' less vehement than the former,
and so retir'd. 
Now, my dear Mother, I think this looks
as if he had kind of Inclination to make me his
Wife, only the Fear of the World's Censure,
and the Dissatisfaction it would be to his Children,
hinders him from coming to any Resolution
about it. —I am almost sure, if 

he could be made to believe I refused some
good Offer for the sake of living with him,
Jealousy and Gratitude would spur him up to
a Determination in my Favour —'Tis
worth trying for, at least—so I beg you'll
think on't—I know you have a good
working Brain, and can do any thing when
set about it. Consider that if I get him
for a Husband, we are both of us made forever
—but I won't urge you any farther,
I dare say, you will not neglect what shall
be as much your own Interest, as that of, 
Your Dutiful Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 

To this her Mother return'd the following
Answer by old Sarah. 

FRIDAY.
Dear Syrena,
I Have been considering of what you wrote,
of hastning the old Gentleman to come to
a Resolution, ever since your first Letter. — 
There are several Stratagems; but that which
seems most likely to prevent Suspicion, is my
writing to you, concerning some Person that
has been in love with you a long time, and
has a good Fortune; if you can any way contrive
that my Letter might fall into his hands
—but this is a nice point, and must be 

manag'd very delicately, or it would Ruin all. 
—Old Men are naturally wary, and apt
to think every thing has a Design in it; and
if he should once imagine you went about to
deceive or trick him, he would never endure
you more —So without you can order it
so, that he may see what I write, without
your knowing he does so, I would not advise
you to attempt it —I cannot but say, if
it could be done cleverly, it would bind him
very much to you, and also oblige him to declare
himself sooner than, perhaps, he otherwise
will —Therefore weigh the matter well,
and when you have resolved, let me hear
from you again, and you may be sure of all
the Assistance in the power of, 
Your affectionate Mother,
Ann Tricksy. 


LETTER V.
From G&wblank; Square. 
MONDAY.
Dear Mother,
I Have been racking my Brains ever since I
received yours, for some expedient to assist
my Project; but can think of nothing, but
what may give room for Suspicion, and I am 

of your Mind so far, that the least doubt of
my Sincerity would ruin all: However, I
would have you write in the manner you speak
of, and send it to me. Some Opportunity
may happen, that I do not yet foresee — 
In the mean time I must acquaint you, that
he now makes no Scruple of telling me he
loves me, whenever we are alone; but he has
never yet put the Question to me, and all his
Words are so ambiguous, that I cannot, for
Soul of me, discover what he would be at; 
nor dare I ask him for fear of offending him. 
—If he means honourable, it would be
making myself cheap to seem to imagine he
could have any other Designs upon me; and
if he intends me for a Mistress, to give any
Hints that I thought my self deserving of being
his Wife, would look too presuming, and
perhaps at the same time, hinder him from
making any Proposals at all; so that I am in
a strange Dilemma. —However, since my
last to you, I have met with something that
a little sweetens the tastless insipid Hours I
used to pass here —I mean, the Thoughts
of one of the most agreeable pretty young
Fellows I was ever acquainted with — 
Don't be alarm'd; for I have taken such care,
that the old Gentleman can never come to
the Knowledge of the matter —I met
with him by accident the other Day, when I
went to buy some things for our Cook, who
had begg'd that favour of me —It happen'd
to rain while I was abroad, and believing it
would be but a small Shower, I stood for shelter 

under a Porch, my Spark came there also,
we fell into a Chat, and a mutual liking of
each other carry'd us into a Tavern — 
We pass'd two or three Hours as agreeably as
any two young People equally gay, could do 
—In fine, this one Interview made us
know we were fitted by Nature for each
other, and, I hope, we shall always continue
to think as we now do. —I told him I
was a young Widow, had a small Fortune,
and an unblemish'd Reputation. —Swore
he was the first Man, with whom I had ever
made a false Step, and that I liv'd with my
Mother. —So 'tis to your Lodgings I have
appointed him to direct a Letter; which pray
let me have the Moment you receive it, and
only say to the Messenger that brings it, that I
am abroad; but you will deliver it to me as soon
I come home, and for the rest leave it me; 
I know how to order it, so that if he sends
never so often, he will never find out, that I
do not live with you. Now, methinks, I see
you all in a tremble, for fear this Intrigue should
undo me with the old Gentleman; but I beg
you will make yourself easy, for I will engage it
shall never be discover'd, and as for anything else
you ought not to blame me; consider I have liv'd
like a Nun for three Months, including the
time I was sick. —So dear Mother don't
think of chiding my Pleasures; but do your
best to help forward my Interest: Let me
have the Letter I mention'd, and wrote with
as much Artifice as you can; if I can find no
plausible Occasion to make use of it, it will 

be only a little Labour lost, which I flatter
myself, you will not grudge to 
Your obedient Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 
P.S. If any Letter comes from my dear new
Gallant, I beg you'll send it me the same Moment,
for I am half mad with Impatience to
see him again. 

This Epistle was answer'd as soon as receiv'd
by Mrs. Tricksy, with another inclos'd, which
on first opening, Syrena flatter'd herself had
been from her young Spark; but her Conjecture
this time deceiv'd her: They were both from
her Mother, the one for her private Perusal, and
the other for the old Gentleman's, if it could
be brought about. That which contain'd her
real Sentiments was to this Purpose. 

Dear Child,
You see I have not been idle in complying
with your Desires: I had wrote a Letter,
such as I think proper to excite the old Gentlemen
to be more hasty in his Resolution, before
your last came to my Hand; and will add
nothing to the Cautions I before gave you on
that Score; because I think you do not seem
to stand in need of it. I wish there were no
greater Danger of your Inadvertency on another
Score; and that the Inclination you have for
the young Lover, may not be fatal to our Designs 

on the old One. —However, if any
Letter or Message comes from him, Sarah
shall bring it directly. —I neither blame,
nor wonder at your liking a pretty Fellow; 
I would only have you keep it ever in your
Thoughts, that you never were in so fair a
Way of making your Fortune as at present, and
not do any thing that might even give a Possibility
of reversing it. —Remember the
Mercer who was so good a Friend to you; 
and Mr. D&wblank;, who I don't know but
might have married you, if the Discovery of
your Amour with Capt. H&wblank;, had not
ruin'd you with him. —'Tis true that was an
Affair of my own promoting; but, however,
it should be a Warning to you. —Nothing
has contributed more to establish you in the
good Opinion of Mr. W&wblank; than your staying
so much at Home; and if your Passion
for this new Gallant, should take you too
frequently abroad, who knows what Jealousies,
such a Change in your Behaviour might
occasion. —He might send to watch where
you went, and with what Company; or if he
should not go such Lengths, may you not
chance to be seen by some Person or other who
may inform him of it. —A thousand Accidents
may happen, which is not in the power
of Prudence to prevent. But I am very sensible,
who reasons with a Person in love, talks
to the Wind. So I shall say no more than to remind
you, how much it behoves you to be
upon your guard. —I am far from being an
Enemy to your Pleasures; but would have you a 

true Friend to your Interest; and that you may
be so, is the sole Aim of, 
Your indulgent Mother,
Ann Tricksy. 

The enclos'd contain'd these Lines. 

Dear Syrena,
I Have for these three Weeks been strangely
persecuted with the Importunities of Mr.
Smith; I would not have you vain; and you
know very well, have always caution'd you
against putting too great a Faith in Mankind; 
but I think that I may venture to say, he loves
you with a Passion rarely to be found in one of
his Sex, especially in these Days. He behav'd
like a Mad-man, when he first heard you had
left me; but when I refus'd letting him know
where he might see you, or direct a Letter,
his Desperation encreas'd to such a Degree,
that I trembled for the Consequence. He
would not believe but you were married, and
on my protesting you were not, seem'd more
outrageous than before; whether it was that
he was under some Apprehensions you had
dispos'd of yourself a worse Way, or that he
thought I deceiv'd him, I cannot tell: He is
still extremely melancholy, and I could not
forbear letting you know the Proofs he gives of
his Sincerity; tho' I don't expect you will ever
be perswaded to reward it. Yet after all, Syrena,
'tis strange you should be so blind to 

your own Interest. —If ever you design to
marry again, 'tis not to be expected you should
have a better Offer as to Fortune; and as to
Character, 'tis unexceptionable. —His Person
is agreeable enough, I think for any Woman
to love; and you know very well, he
might have had Wives long ago, who are accounted
pretty Women, and handsome Portions. 
—But if you would not resolve to
have him, when you were under such Distresses
as you have been; I can neither flatter
him, nor myself, that you will do so now,
when you want for nothing, and have such
a good Master. However, Child, Service is
no Inheritance, a thousand Accidents may
happen to throw you out, and our Friends who
you found were weary enough of assisting
us before; will do nothing at all if you persist
in this obstinate denying the good that Providence
seems to point out for you. —I
dare answer even Mr. W&wblank; himself, would
very much blame you if he knew the Story; 
and as he has pity'd you, and been so
kind to take you into his House, would rejoice
to see you have one of your own; which
tho' mean in Comparison with his, is yet
what no Gentlewoman need be asham'd to call
herself the Mistress of—therefore, Syrena,
I would have you consider seriously of it— 
'Tis very childish and silly in you, to cry you
can't love him; such an honourable and constant
Affection as his for you, would bring you
to love him in time, especially, if it be true
as you say, that your Heart is not prejudic'd
in Favour of any other Man: But I have so 

often press'd you on this Score, and with such
small Success, that I think 'tis lessening my
Character, as your Mother to say any thing
farther; nor had I done it now, but the poor
Gentleman extorted a Promise from me to
write. —I wish you never may have Cause
to repent the Ingratitude, you are guilty of to
him, or the Injustice you do yourself; which,
with my Blessing, is all at present from, 
Your affectionate Mother,
Ann Tricksy. 
P.S. Your Aunt longs very much to see
you, I believe, to talk to you concerning Mr.
Smith; so if you continue resolv'd to refuse his
Offers, it will be best for you not to go. 

Syrena had scarce time to consider on these
Letters, before old Sarah return'd with another,
which had been left for her by a Porter,
at Mrs. Tricksy's Lodgings, while she was
abroad. This was the dear expected Billet,
she had entreated her Mother to be so careful
of, and contain'd these Lines. 

Dear Creature,
You must be too sensible of the Pleasure
your Conversation affords, not to believe
whoever has once enjoy'd it, must languish for
a second Interview. —You told me other
Engagements would detain you for some Days,
so have deferr'd Writing as long as my Impatience 

would permit; but, now I hope my
charming Syrena will no longer hold herself
from me. I shall be at my Cousin's To-morrow
about four; and earnestly entreat nothing
may disappoint me of a Pleasure, I till then
shall live in the most eager Expectation of,
who am, 
Lovely Widow,
Your sincerely devoted
Friend and Admirer,
Harriot Manly. 

