
Discovers Celia of the woods on her first acquaintance with Jemmy, and also some other particulars of equal importance. 
Though Jemmy, when he was at Oxford, debar'd himself from few of those gay amusements which he saw taken by his fellow collegians, yet he 
apply'd himself to his studies more closely than most gentlemen commoners think they are under any obligation to do; and, because he would not be interrupted, would frequently steal from the university and pass whole hours together in the fields, either reading or contemplating. 
A pretty warm dispute happening to rise one day between two students concerning the true reading of Persius, he was ambitious of becoming more master of the subject than either of them seem'd to be;—accordingly he put the book into his pocket and repair'd to his usual place of retirement. 
The evening was fair and pleasant, and he was so much absorb'd in meditation, that he wander'd on to a greater distance from the town than he had been accustom'd, till at last, finding himself a little weary, he sat down at the foot of a large spreading oak. 
Here he prosecuted his examination of that crabbed author, but had not long done so before he was interrupted, and his eyes taken off by the sudden appearance of a sight more pleasing. 
The tree, which served him at once for a support and screen, was just at the entrance of a little wood;—a rustling among the leaves made him look that way, where he immediately saw a young country maid;—she was neat, tho' plainly dress'd, and had eyes which might vye with any that sparkled in the box or drawing-room. 
At this view he was not master of himself;—like Carlos at the sight of Angelina in the play, he threw away his book,—started from the posture he was in, and advanced towards the sweet temptation;—she saw him too and fled, but not so fast as not to be easily overtaken. 
The first rencounter between these two young persons reminds me of a passage I have read in one of our best poets: 

As Mahomet was musing in his cell,
Some dull insipid paradice to trace,
A brisk Arabian girl came tripping by,
Passing she shot at him a side-long glance,

And look'd behind as if to be pursu'd;
He took the hint, embraced the flying fair,
And having found his Heaven, he fix'd it there.
It is not to be imagined that Jemmy accosted a maid of her degree with any set speeches or formal salutations;—those charms which in a woman of condition would have inspired him with a respectful awe, served only to fill his heart with the most unwarrantable desires;—he told her she was very pretty, and at the same time attempted to convince her that he thought her so by catching her forcibly in his arms, and giving her two or three hearty kisses. 
She struggled,—blush'd,—cried—‘fye sir,’ and desired him to forbear; but our young commoner was not to be so easily rebuffed;—the little repulses she gave him served only the more to inflame his amorous inclination; and he had perhaps completed his conquest, without any farther ceremony, if she had not fallen on her knees, and with tears besaught him to desist. 
Jemmy had too much honour and good nature not to be touch'd with a behaviour so moving, and which he had so little reason to expect from the weak efforts she at first had made to repel his caresses. 
‘Nay,—my dear creature, said he, I scorn to do any thing by force; but if all the love in the world can make you mine I shall be happy;—tell me therefore, continued he, who you are, and where you live, that I may see you another time.’ 
‘Oh lud, sir, cried she, that is impossible; —What do you think my friends would say, if they should see such a gentleman as you come to visit me?’ —‘I did not mean so, reply'd he, but I suppose your father lives here about, and it may be is of some business that might give a pretence for my calling at his house.’ 
‘My father keeps a farm, said she, about six miles off; but I am at present with my uncle, who is a Gardener, and lives on the other side the wood.’ —That's unlucky, rejoin'd he, for I have no sort of occasion for any thing in his way. —You must then consent to meet me, my little angel, added he, tenderly pressing her hand.’ 
On this she blush'd,—hung down her head, but made no answer; till he repeating his request, and enforcing it by all 
the rhetoric he was master of, whether real or feign'd I will not pretend to say, she at last promised to meet him the next evening at the place where they now were. 
He received this grant with the greatest shew of transport, but made her swear to the fulfilling it; after which he ask'd her by what name he should think of his dear pretty charmer. ‘They call me Celia, sir, said she.’ —‘Then, cried he, you shall be my Celia of the woods, and I will be your Jessamy of the plains.’ 
The sun beginning now to withdraw his beams, they were obliged to part; but before they did Celia gave evident indications that her Jessamy had made no slight impression on her young and unexperienced heart. 
Jemmy return'd from his evening's excursion with thoughts very full of this new amour, which he flatter'd himself would afford him a most agreeable amusement, without costing much pains in the acquisition. 
Besides, the liking he had for this country girl seem'd to him to be no breach of his fidelity to Jenny, or any 
way interfere with the honourable affections he had for that young lady;—she being then but in her sixteenth year, himself not quite nineteen, and was not intended by their parents that they should marry till he had attain'd the age of one and twenty;—so that it was a long time to the completion of his felicity with her. —I know not whether my fair readers will look upon this as a sufficient excuse for him; but dare answer that those of the other sex will think what he did was no more than a venial transgression. 
As for poor Celia, she was in agitations which she had never known nor had the least notion of before;—she was charm'd with the person of Jemmy;—she was quite ravish'd with the kind things he had said to her; and though the liberties he had taken with her at that first interview would have been shocking to her modesty, had they been offer'd by any of those whom she was accustom'd to converse with, yet did that very rudeness in him appear too agreeable to alarm her with any dreadful apprehensions of his repeating it. 
More full of joy than fear she long'd for the appointed hour of meeting him again, and hasted to the rendezvous, 
where she had not waited many minutes before the charmer of her soul appear'd;—he flew to her with open arms, and the transport she felt made her half return the strenuous embrace he gave her. 
They sat down together upon a little hillock beneath the shade of some trees which arch'd above their heads and form'd a kind of canopy;—here Jemmy finding her softened to his wish, would fain have finish'd the affair he had made so considerable a progress in; but, on perceiving his intent, she burst a second time into tears,—begg'd he would not ruin her,—confess'd she loved him, but said she could not bear the thoughts of being naught. 
He could scarce keep himself from laughing; but as he had promised not to make use of force, fail'd not to urge all the arguments that such a thing would admit of to perswade her that what he requested of her was not naught in itself, but perfectly conformable to the laws of nature. 
She was too ignorant, and perhaps also too little inclined to attempt any thing in order to confute what he said on this occasion; but though she refused with 
less resolution than she had done, yet she would not absolutely consent to his desires:—on which Jemmy, not doubting but the fruit thus ripened would soon fall of itself, told her,—that he was not of a humour to accept of any favours granted with reluctance, and that he would content himself with such as he should find her willing to bestow. 
He kept his word, and press'd her no farther at that time;—this the poor innocent creature look'd upon as so great a condescention in him, and thought herself so much obliged by it that she readily allow'd his kisses, his embraces, and in fine every freedom except that only one which he had assured her he would not take without her leave. 
Notwithstanding what they call'd the crown of a lover's felicity was wanting, this couple pass'd the time they were together in a manner pleasing enough to both; nor parted without a mutual promise of re-enjoying the same happiness again on the ensuing day. 
Jemmy, however, who was of too sanguine and amorous a disposition not to feel a good deal of impatience for the consummation of his wishes, in order to 
hasten it contrived a stratagem, which, from the ascendant he had gain'd over Celia's heart, gave him no room to doubt would fail of success in making her lovely person no less entirely his,—it was this: 
He approach'd her at their next meeting with the most solemn and dejected air;—she had brought him a fine posy selected from the choicest flowers in her uncle's garden, tied together with a piece of green riband;—she was going to present it to him, when perceiving the change in his countenance she started, and asked him if he was not well. 
‘No Celia, answer'd he, affecting to speak in a very faint voice,—I am sick,—sick at heart,’—‘Indeed I am very sorry, said she, smell to this posy,—I hope it will refresh you, my dear sir.’ —No, Celia, return'd he, it is not in the power of art or nature to relieve me, you must lose your lover;—I must die, my Celia.’ —‘Now all that's good forbid it, cried she, and wept bitterly.’ 
‘I must die, said he again, or what is worse than death,—never see my Celia more.’ —Surprised and overwhelm'd with the mingled passions of love and grief at hearing him speak in 
this manner, she threw her taper arms about his neck, laid her cheek close to his, and begg'd him to tell her what he meant, and the cause of his complaint. 
‘You, dear cruel maid, answer'd he with a well counterfeited agony,—it is you which is the cause of my complaint;—and it is you alone can be my cure:—in fine, it is impossible for me to breathe the same air with you and not see you,—yet every time I see you gives fresh tortures to my bleeding heart, by letting me know still more of the Heaven I am deny'd possessing;—I have therefore taken a resolution to banish myself for ever from you, and from this country. You must then, continued he,—embracing her with the utmost eagerness, either lose all your Jessamy or give me all my Celia.’ 
The consternation she was in is not to be express'd; but every look,—every motion, betray'd to him the inward trouble of her mind;—she could not speak for several minutes; but at last cried out, with a voice interrupted by sighs,—‘Oh mr. Jessamy, will you,—can you be so barbarous to leave me,—leave me for ever!’ 
‘Call not that barbarous which your unkindness drives me to, rejoin'd he;—if I loved you with a common passion, I could perhaps be easy under the severe restriction you have laid upon me,—but you are too beautiful, and I too much enamoured—Oh then throw off at once this cruel coyness,—this unmerited reserve,—generously say you will be all mine, and make both me and yourself completely bless'd.’ 
He utter'd these last words in accents which pierced her to the soul;—she was all confusion,—irresolute for a while,—sometimes looking on him, and sometimes on the ground; but love at length,—prevailing love, got the better of that bashfulness, which 'tis likely had, more than any other principle, till now restrain'd her from yielding to his suit;—she threw herself into his arms, and hiding her head within his bosom,—‘I cannot part with you, cried she, I can deny you nothing,—you have my heart, and must command whatever Celia has to give.’ 
There is a strong probability, if it does not amount even to a certainty, that Jemmy would not have given her time 
for a second thought, which might have revok'd the promise she had made; but his plot, hitherto so successful, was now entirely frustrated by the sudden sound of men's voices at a distance, and which seem'd to approach more near. 
‘Oh lud, cried she extremely frighted, I hear my uncle;—if he should come this way and find me with a gentleman, he will tell my father, and I shall be half kill'd; —Dear mr. Jessamy, make all the haste you can out of the wood;—I will go and face him, and pretend I was going to carry these flowers to a great lady who lives hard by.’ 
Jemmy could not forbear cursing both the uncle and the interruption; but thought proper to comply with Celia's advice, after having exacted an oath from her to meet him again the next day and fulfil her engagement, which she readily gave, and then tripp'd away as fast as her legs could carry her. 
Thus did they part, not to see each other again for a much longer time than either of them imagined,—the cause of which will presently be shewn. 
