

Contains some things well worthy of being seriously attended to, by those especially for whose service they are chiefly inserted. 
Though Jenny had not doubted, by the lady's letter, but that something very extraordinary and perplexing had happen'd to her, yet she was far from expecting to find her in the condition she now did. 
That half distracted fair one was lying extended on a couch,—her hair loose and hanging in wild disorder over her face,—her lovely eyes pouring forth tears,—all her features distorted with excess of passion, and every symptom of despair, grief, and rage about her. 
Jenny was quite frighted; and indeed, who that had beheld her in this manner, but must have thought the most terrible accident imaginable had befallen her! ‘Ah, my dear miss Jessamy, said she, as soon as she saw her enter how charitable is this visit to the most undone, forlorn, and miserable woman upon earth! 
‘Bless me,—cried Jenny, seating herself near her,—what can have occasioned this sudden change in your late happy condition? —Oh, I will tell you all, replyed the other; but when you shall hear how I have been treated by my ungrateful,—my perfidious husband, you will forswear marriage, and curse the whole race of false dissembling man. 
‘I sent for you,—continued she,—to make you the confidante of my resentment, as you have always been of my love; for this unworthy man, whom from my slave is now become my tyrant; and, instead of studying how to please me, has the insolence to attempt making me subservient to his will, and to contradict me even in things where every woman has a right to rule. —Could you ever have believed it, my dear miss Jessamy,—went she on,—the vain creature imagines I have love enough for him to be satisfied with whatever he does? 
‘I thought, indeed, said Jenny, that both of you had love enough to be satisfied with what the other did;—But pray what may be the subject of the present dispute between you? —Oh such a gross affront upon my understanding, my humour,—my every thing that is dear to woman-kind, reply'd mrs. Marlove,—But of what nature,’—again demanded her impatient friend? 
It was in vain she repeated the question over and over for several times successively, mrs. Marlove was too much overcome by her passion to be able to give any direct account of the occasion, and all that could be gather'd from her incoherent exclamations was, that a favourite servant of mr. Marlove's had quarrelled with her waiting-maid;—that she had insisted on the man's being turn'd away, and he as strenuously that she should part with her maid;—that very high words had rose on this occasion;—that he had endeavoured to exert the authority of a husband, and she to maintain the respect and complaisance due to a wife; and that after having absolutely refused to do as she desired, he had flung out of the house in very great discontent. 
She was but just beginning to enter somewhat farther into the merits of the cause, when a servant put his head between the door, and told mrs. Marlove, that the cloth was laid for supper,—and that his master was come home. —‘Well, and what of that, cried she hastily? Nothing, madam, said the man, only my master desires that your ladyship and the young lady will be pleased to walk down. —Tell him,’—reply'd she, with the utmost disdain in her voice and countenance,—‘that I am not pleased to do any thing that he desires; and that I will neither eat nor sleep with him while he keeps that fellow Jonathan in the house.’ 
On this, he said no more but withdrew, and mr. Marlove came up in a moment after;—his looks express'd the utmost discontent;—he saluted Jenny, however, with respect, and then turning to his wife: —‘I am surprised, my dear, cried he, that you should expose yourself in this manner: family disputes ought to be discuss'd in private; it is impertinent to trouble our friends with them, and ridiculous to make our servants the witnesses of them;—for Heaven's sake, therefore, consider a little.— 
‘I shall consider nothing, said she interrupting him, but your unkindness and ingratitude;—What, pursued she with vehemence,—to refuse me in so poor a trifle as the dismission of a servant? 
‘Trifles, madam, answer'd he very gravely, when insisted on too peremptorily, become things of consequence; besides, you have often heard me say this man lived with my father;—that when I went abroad he gave him to me as the choicest present he could make; that he attended me in my travels through the greatest part of Europe; and that I have experienced his love and fidelity to me in a thousand instances:—it would therefore be highly unjust and ungenerous in me to turn him off; and I can look upon it as no less unreasonable in you to request it merely on the idle complaints and tittle-tattle of a chamber-maid. 
‘That chamber-maid,’—said she in the most haughty tone,—while she belongs to me, is at least upon a level with your valet,—though in spite to me, I suppose, you have now raised him to your house-steward.’ 
Mr. Marlove grew very red at these words, and was about to have made some reply, which perhaps might have heighten'd the quarrel, when the person who had been the occasion of it enter'd the room. 
He was a grave, well look'd man, and had a certain open honesty in his countenance, which answer'd to the character given of him by his master. 
‘Sir, said he to mr. Marlove, bowing in the most respectful manner,—I have never known in my whole life so real a grief as I now feel, in finding myself the unhappy cause of any disagreement between your honour and my lady;—I therefore most humbly beseech you will be pleased to permit me to quit the house directly; for it is not fit your honour's peace of mind should suffer any disturbance, or my lady the least uneasiness, even for a moment, on so worthless a subject as myself. 
‘How, Jonathan, demanded mr. Marlove, are you in such haste to leave my service, that you would go before I am provided with a proper person to supply your place? —Oh, there is no reason for detaining him on that account, cried mrs. Marlove, my Abigail has a brother just now come out of place;—by the character I have heard of him he will be extremely fit for you, and we can have him at a minute's warning. 
‘'Tis very likely,’—reply'd he;—then having paused a little on what his wife had said;—‘Well, Jonathan,—pursued he, we will talk farther on this matter to-morrow; but leave the room, and bid somebody Send Abigail hither.’ Mrs. Marlove exulted within herself on hearing him speak in this manner, and pulling Jenny by the sleeve,—My dear, cried she to her in a low voice, ‘I shall conquer this domineering husband at last.’ 
Abigail immediately obeying the summons, that had been sent for her; Well, Abigail, said mr. Marlove, with a half smile; which she then took for an indication of his being in great good humour with her; but, as it afterwards proved, was no more than a sarcastick sneer, ‘I am told you have a brother perfectly qualified for my service. 
‘Yes, please your honour, answer'd she simpering; and, though I say it, as clever a fellow as ever stepp'd in shoe-leather; he can comb a wig to a charm, and buckle too upon occasion; he does every thing in taste, I assure your honour;—besides, he is a spruce young man, and a thousand times fitter to attend your honour than the old formal creature you have now.’ 
‘It may be so, said mr. Marlove; but I have no business for him, nor have you any in my house longer than this night; therefore pack up your trumpery and be gone to-morrow morning:’ she was opening her mouth to speak, but he prevented her by saying, in a stern and resolute voice, ‘No raparties, minx, I will have no incendiaries in my family;—out of my sight this moment and come into it no more.’ 
Though scarce any creature was ever endow'd with a greater share of confidence than this wench, yet was she now so terrified at the looks of her master, that she durst not utter a single syllable while in his presence, and contented herself with muttering all the way she went down stairs, what she had not courage to say loud enough to be heard. 
But it is altogether impossible to describe the rage mrs. Marlove was in at this last proof of her husband's resolution; which was the more insupportable to her, as she had not above a moment or two before flattered herself with a belief that he was inclinable to conform to her desires. 
She would have spoke, but excess of passion choak'd the passage of her words;—she flew into her chamber and threw herself upon the bed, where she certainly would have fallen into a fit, if Jenny, who had immediately follow'd her, had not cut the laceings of her stays, in order to give her air. 
On this she began to revive a little, and Abigail that instant coming up gave her a glass of cold water, which perfected the cure:—the first use she made of her received breath was to inveigh against the injustice, as she term'd it, of her husband:—Jenny was endeavouring to persuade her to more moderation, but was interrupted in the midst of what she was saying by Abigail. 
‘Nay, madam, cried that malapert huzzy, for that matter my lady has as much reason to be vex'd as I;—for my part, I do not know what my master means by using me as he has done;—he gives himself strange airs, methinks: I am sure it is not like a gentleman to shew so little respect for a servant.’ 
These saucy reflections brought mrs. Marlove more to herself than all the assistance that had been given her; angry as she was with her husband, she could not bear to hear him mentioned by such a creature in the manner she now did. Airs, cried she,—‘respect,—was ever any thing so ridiculously impudent! sure, wench, thou hast forgot that the gentleman thou speakest so contemptuously of is my husband. 
‘No, madam, answered she, bridling up her head, ‘I forget nothing that I ought to remember; and I must say again, that it does not become him to treat either you or me so unhandsomely as he has done. —What, does the odious thing pretend to make comparisons?’ cried mrs. Marlove; and, provoked beyond all patience at the insolence of her deportment, snatch'd a powder-box from off the dressing-table and threw it at her head,—saying, at the same time, ‘Be gone this instant;—I shall keep no such bold-face about me. 
‘Bold-face, madam, returned the audacious creature; very pretty truly; but don't think I shall beg to stay; there are other places to be had, and I do not value.’ —She would have ran farther on in the same strain, if the sudden appearance of her master had not stopp'd her mouth, and made her think proper to go out of the room. 
Mr. Marlove being heartily ashamed that Jenny had been witness of this foolish affair, resolved to salve it up, if possible, before she went away; and, to that end, came into his wife's chamber; chusing rather to recede a little from what he thought his just prerogative as a husband, than suffer her to depart with the notion of his having asserted it too far. 
As he came into the room at one door Abigail was going out at the other;—he easily perceived, by her countenance, that some brulée had happened between her and her lady, which taking for a good omen of succeeding in his design, he approach'd mrs. Marlove; and, with an air perfectly degagée and unembarras'd, ‘I hope, my dear, said he, you are by this time convinced, that your maid had a farther view in quarreling with Jonathan than she pretended, and also how little she deserves you should espouse her cause. 
‘She has been impertinent, indeed, answer'd she; but it is no wonder that she is so; when a woman is ill treated by her husband, she can expect no other than to be so by her servants also; and it is to you,—to you alone, that I either have, or shall hereafter be deprived of the respect due to me from our domestics. 
‘Accuse me not, said he, of a thing so contrary to my nature;—your merits, and my just sense of them, will always engage me to behave towards you, both in public and in private, with all the complaisance and tenderness that man can pay or woman can expect. 
‘Then you would not contradict me in trifles, cried she, a little soften'd. I will contradict you in nothing, said he, that my reason will permit me to grant, or your own, on mature deliberation, induce you to desire. —As for the present dispute between us, continued he, I only beg you will defer any farther speech of it till to-morrow; and if, in that time, you do not find cause to alter your opinion, I shall endeavour to accede to yours. 
‘A very fair proposal, indeed, sir, said Jenny smiling; and, my dear mrs. Marlove, if you do not accept it I shall lay the whole blame of all the disagreements that may hereafter happen between you entirely on your ill-nature. 
‘That is a very severe inference, reply'd she; however, to oblige you, I shall comply with mr. Marlove's request.’ —‘I am glad to obtain it at any rate, cried he;—and I hope we may now go down to supper, which has waited for us this half hour.’ —Mrs. Marlove said she did not care for eating, and desir'd they would excuse her absence; but, by the intreaties of her husband, and some little pleasantries Jenny made use of on this occasion, she was at last prevailed upon, and they all went down together into the parlour. 
Jenny kept an observant eye over both the husband and the wife all the time they were at table; and, as she was happy in a penetration, which few of her sex, especially at her years, can boast of, easily perceived that though he behaved with a politeness beyond what could have been expected after what had pass'd, and she seemed to have abated a great part of her late haughtiness and resentment, yet neither of them were sincerely inclined to submit to the will of the other, in any thing which was not entirely agreeable to their own. 
The apologies they made to her, however, on the account of the unpleasing entertainment she had met with in this visit, with her obliging answers to them in return, and repeated good wishes for their future peace, engrossed a great part of their conversation during the whole time she stayed. 
But the night being pretty far advanced, when supper was ended she took her leave of the half reconciled pair, and went home full of those reflections which, on the scene she had been witness of, must naturally have occurr'd even to a person of a much less considerative disposition. 
