

Affords matter of condolance, or railery,
according to the humour the reader
happens to be in for either. 
We often see, that the less encouragement
is given to the lover's suit,
with the more warmth and eagerness he
prosecutes it; and many people are apt to
ascribe this hopeless perseverance to an
odd perverseness in the very nature of
love; but, for my part, I rather take it
to proceed from an ambition of surmounting
difficulties: it is not, however, my
province to enter into any discussion of so
nice a point;—I deal only in matters of
fact, and shall not meddle with desinition. 
It was not, till after miss Betsy had
reason to believe she had engaged the
heart of her lover too far for him to recall
it, that she began to take a pride in
tormenting him. While she looked on
his addresses as of a piece with those who
called themselves her admirers, she had
treated him in that manner which she
thought would most conduce to make him 
really so; but no sooner did she perceive,
by the tokens before-mentioned, and many
others, that his passion was of the most
serious nature, than she behaved to him
in a fashion quite the reverse, especially
before company; for as she had not the
least affection, or even a liking towards
him, his submissive deportment under the
most cold, sometimes contemptuous carriage,
could afford her no other satisfaction,
than, as she fancied, it shewed the power
of her beauty, and piqued those ladies of
her acquaintance, who could not boast of
such an implicit resignation, and patient
suffering from their lovers; in particular
miss Flora, who she could not forbear
imagining looked very grave on the occasion. 
What foundation there was for a
conjecture of this nature was, nevertheless,
undiscoverable, 'till a long time after. 
As this courtship was no secret to any
of the family, mr. Goodman thought himself
obliged, both as the guardian of miss
Betsy, and the friend of alderman Saving,
(for so the father of this young enamorato
was called) to enquire upon what footing
it stood. He thought, that if the old
man knew and approved of his son's inclinations,
he would have mentioned the
affair to him, as they frequently saw each
other, and it seemed to him, neither for 
the interest, nor reputation of his fair
charge, to receive the clandestine addresses
of any man whatsoever. She had a handsome
fortune of her own, and he thought
that, and her personal accomplishments,
sufficient to entitle her to as good a match
as mr. Saving; but then he knew the sordid
nature of the alderman, and that all
the merits of miss Betsy would add nothing
in the balance, if her money was
found too light to poize against the sums
his son would be possessed of. This being
the case, he doubted not but that he was
kept in ignorance of the young man's intentions,
and fearing the matter might be
carried too far, resolved either to put a stop
to it at once, or permit it to go on, on such
terms as should free him from all censure
from the one or the other party. 
On talking seriously to the lover, he
soon found the suggestions he had entertained
had not deceived him. Young Saving
frankly confessed, that his father had
other views for him; but added, that if
he could prevail on the young lady to
marry him, he did not despair but that
when the thing was once done, and past
recall, the alderman would, by degrees,
receive them into favour. “You know,
sir,” said he, “that he has no child
but me, nor any kindred for whom he 
has the least regard, and it cannot be
supposed he would utterly discard me
for following my inclinations in this
point, especially as they are in favour of
the most amiable and deserving of her
sex.” 
He said much more on this head, but it
had no weight with the merchant:—he
answered, that if the alderman was of his
way of thinking, all the flattering hopes
his passion suggested to him, on that score,
might be realized; but that, according
to the disposition he knew him to be of,
he saw but little room to think he would
forgive a step of this kind:—“Therefore,” 
continued he, “I cannot allow
this love-affair to be prosecuted any
farther, and must desire you will desist
visiting at my house, 'till you have
either conquered this inclination, or
miss Betsy is otherwise disposed of.” 
This was a cruel sentence for the truly
affectionate Saving; but he found it in
vain to sollicit a repeal of it, and all he
could obtain from him, was a promise to
say nothing of what had passed to the alderman. 
Mr. Goodman would have thought he
had but half compleated his duty, had he 
neglected to sound the inclinations of miss
Betsy on this account, and, in order to
come more easily at the truth, he began
with talking to her, in a manner which
might make her look on him rather as a
favourer of mr. Saving's pretensions than
the contrary, and was extremely glad to
find, by her replies, how indifferent that
young lover was to her. He then acquainted
her with the resolution he had
taken, and the discourse he had just had
with him: and, to keep her from ever
after encouraging the addresses of any
man, without being authorised by the consent
of friends on both sides, represented,
in the most pathetic terms he was able,
the danger to which a private correspondence
renders a young woman liable. She
seemed convinced of the truth of what he
said, and promised to follow, in the strictest
manner, his advice. 
Whether she thought herself, in reality,
so much obliged to the conduct of her
guardian in this, I will not take upon me
to say; for tho' she was not charmed with
the person of mr. Saving, it is certain she
took an infinite pleasure in the assiduities
of his passion: it is therefore highly probable,
that she might imagine he meddled
in this affair more than he had any occasion
to have done. She had, however, 
but little time for reflection on her guardian's
behaviour, an accident happening,
which shewed her own to her in a light
very different from what she had ever
seen it. 
Lady Mellasin had a ball at her house:
—there was a great deal of company,
among whom was a gentleman, named
Gayland: —He was a man of family,— 
had a large estate,—sung, danced, spoke
French, and dressed well;—frequent successes
among the women had rendered him
extremely vain, and as he had too great
an admiration for his own person to be
possessed of any great share of it for that of
any other, he enjoyed the pleasures of
love, without being sensible of the pains. 
This darling of the fair it was, that miss
Betsy picked out, to treat with the most
peculiar marks of esteem, whenever she
had a mind to give umbrage to poor Saving; 
much had that faithful lover suffered
on the account of this fop; but the
fair inflictor of his torments was punished
for her insensibility and ingratitude, by a
way her inexperience of the world, and the
temper of mankind in general, had made
her far from apprehending. 
While the company were employed,
some in dancing, and others in particular 
conversations, the beau found an opportunity
to slip into miss Betsy's hand a little
billet, saying to her, at the same time,
“You have got my heart, and this little
bit of paper will convey to you the sentiments
it is inspired with in your favour.” 
She imagining it was either a
sonnet, or epistle, in praise of her beauty,
received it with a smile, and put it into
her pocket. After every body had taken
leave, and she was retired to her chamber,
she examined it, and found to her great
astonishment the contents as follow: 

“Dear Miss,
I must certainly be either the most
ungrateful, or most consumedly dull
fellow upon earth, not to have returned
the advances you have been so kind to
make me, had the least opportunity offered
for my doing so; but lady Mellasin,
her daughter, the fool Saving, or
some impertinent creature or other, has
always been in the way, so that there
was not a possibility of giving you even
the least earnest of love; but, my dear,
I have found out a way to pay you the
whole sum with interest;—which is
this: —You must invent some excuse
for going out alone, and let me know
by a billet directed for me at White's,
the exact hour, and I will wait for you 
at the corner of the street in a hackney
coach,—the window drawn up,
and whirl you to a pretty snug place I
know of, where we may pass a delicious
hour or two, without a soul to
interrupt our pleasures. Let me find
a line from you to-morrow, if you can
any way contrive it, being impatient
to convince you how much I am, 
“My dear creature,
Yours, &c. &c.
J. Gayland.” 

Impossible is it to express the mingled
emotions of shame, surprize, and indignation,
which filled the breast of miss
Betsy, on reading this bold invitation:
—she threw the letter on the ground,
she stamped upon it, she spurned it, and
would have treated the author in the same
manner, had he been present; but the first
transports of so just a resentment being
over, a consciousness of having, by a too
free behaviour towards him, emboldened
him to take this liberty, involved her in
the utmost confusion, and she was little
less enraged with herself, than she had
reason to be with him. She could have
tore out her very eyes, for having affected 
to look kindly on a wretch, who durst
presume so far on her supposed affection,
and tho' she spared those pretty twincklers
that violence, she half drowned their lustre
in a deluge of tears. Never was a night
passed in more cruel anxieties than what
she sustained, both from the affront she
had received, and reflection, that it was
chiefly the folly of her own conduct,
which had brought it on her; and what
greatly added to her vexation, was the
uncertainty how it would best become her
to act, on an occasion which appeared so
extraordinary to her. She had no friend
whom she thought it proper to consult; 
—she was ashamed to relate the story to
any of the discreet and serious part of her
acquaintance;—she feared their reproofs
for having counterfeited a tenderness for
a man, which she was now sensible she
ought, if it had been real, rather to have
concealed with the utmost care, both from
him, and all the world:—and as for lady
Mellasin and miss Flora, though their conduct
inspired her not with any manner of
awe, yet she thought she saw something
in those ladies, which did not promise
much sincerity, and shewed as if they
would rather turn her complaints into ridicule,
than afford her that cordial and
friendly advice she stood in need of. 
These were the reasons which determined
her to keep the whole thing a secret
from every one. At first she was tempted
to write to Gayland, and testify her disdain
of his presumption, in terms which
should convince him how grossly his vanity
had imposed upon him; but she afterwards
considered, that a letter from her
was doing him too much honour, and,
though never so reproachful, might draw
another from him, either to excuse and
beg pardon for the temerity of the former,
or possibly to affront her a second
time, by defending it, and repeating his
request. She despised and hated him too
much to engage in a correspondence with
him of any kind, and therefore resolved,
as it was certainly most prudent, not to
let him have any thing under her hand,
but, when next she saw him, to shew her
resentment by such ways as occasion should
permit. 
He came not to mr. Goodman's, however,
for three days, possibly waiting that
time for a letter from miss Betsy; but on
the fourth he appeared at lady Mellasin's
tea-table. There were, besides the family,
several others present, so that he had not
an opportunity of speaking in private to
miss Betsy; but the looks she gave him, 
so different from all he had ever seen her
assume towards him, might have shewn
any man, not blinded with his vanity,
how much she was offended; but he imagining
her ill-humour proceeded only from
the want of means to send to him, came
again the next day, and happening to
find her alone in the parlour, “What,
my dear,” said he, taking her in a free
manner by the hand, “have you been so
closely watched by your guardian and
guardianesses here, that no kind moment
offered for you to answer the devoirs
of your humble servant?” “The
surest guardians of my fame and peace,” 
replied she, snatching her hand away, “is
the little share of understanding I am
mistress of, which, I hope, will always
be sufficient to defend my honour in
more dangerous attacks, than the rude
impertinencies of an idle coxcomb.” 
These words, and the air with which
they were spoke, one would think, should
have struck with confusion the person to
whom they were directed; but Gayland
was not so easily put out of countenance,
and looking her full in the face,—“Ah,
Child!” cried he, “sure you are not
in your right senses to-day:—understanding,
—impertinencies,—idle coxcomb,
—very pleasant i faith! but upon 
my soul, if you think these airs become
you, you are the most mistaken woman
in the world.” “It may be so,” cried
she, ready to burst with inward spite at
his insolence, “but I should be yet more
mistaken, if I were capable of thinking
a wretch, like you, worthy of any thing
but contempt.” With these words she
flung out of the room, and he pursued
her with a horse-laugh, till she was out of
hearing, and then went into the dining-room,
where he found lady Mellasin, and
several who had come to visit her. 
Miss Betsy, who had gone directly to
her own chamber, sent to excuse coming
down to tea, pretending a violent headach; 
nor would be prevailed upon to join
the company, 'till she heard Gayland had
taken his leave, which he did much sooner
than usual, being probably a good deal
disconcerted at the shock his vanity had
received. 