

Affords but small matter of entertainment; yet, if well consider'd, may be of singular use to some readers. 
There is a certain haughty surliness almost inherent to old age, which will not let people, when they come to be any thing advanced in years, allow the least share of understanding in those of a younger sort;—they treat them as mere idiots, incapable of comparing,—judging, or even of knowing right from wrong. 
But this is a partiality which betrays that want of discernment in themselves which they accuse in others;—if youth, through too much fire, is adicted to vanity, rashness and impetuosity; age, through too much phlegm, is no less liable to peevishness,—obstinacy, and pride:—in both, the faults of constitution have but too great an effect upon the will, and deprive reason of half its force. 
The faculties of the mind certainly decay, and grow weaker in proportion as the vigour of the body is impair'd;—a keenness of conception,—a readiness of thought, and what is generally call'd wit, are the gifts of youth;—when the organs, through which the soul is said to operate, are in their full strength as nature made them, unobstructed by diseases, and unworn by time. —Age is chiefly wise by experience, and by improving those observations, which a long series of years had treasured up. 
It must therefore be allow'd, that young people are far from being incapable of making the most just reflections; but the baits of sense,—the excitements of pleasure, and the whirl of a thousand different passions, which incessantly agitate the ideas, prevent those reflections from making any lasting impression, and consequently from being of any real use in regulating their actions;—so that they can be said to be discreet only by starts; and it is in this alone that all the boasted advantages of age consists. 
Nothing was ever more strictly true than what that celebrated poet, mr. Dryden, says, when speaking of the difference between youth and age, he expresses the whole sense of the argument in these two equally elegant and comprehensive lines: 
Experience vainly in our youth is sought,
And, by age purchas'd, is too dearly bought.
Our Jemmy was one of those who never did any thing which reason could condemn, without being immediately self-convicted and ashamed of his error, though, as I said before, through the fire of youth,—the enchantments of pleasure, and the prevalence of example, he could not sometimes avoid falling again into the same. 
As to play in particular, without any extraordinary propensity of his own, he was frequently drawn in to make a party at several gaming-tables, both private and public, yet did he never reflect on what money he had lost without being convinced he could not have disposed of it a worse way;—nor did he ever win of any gentleman, whose circumstances he knew could not well bear a diminution, without being shock'd to the soul or having been one of those who had contributed to his misfortune. 
He was perfectly sensible both of the vice and folly of gaming, as at present practiced among almost all degrees of people; and stood amaz'd whenever he recollected, that he had seen men of the first figure and fortune in the kingdom, not only condescend to mix in company with the common sharpers and gamblers of the town, but also to make use of the same low arts they did, in order to force chance as it were, to be their friend. 
He could not think, without a mixture of pity and contempt on those, who neglecting the accounts of their estates, and trusting all to their stewards and bailiffs, boasted how well they were versed in mr. Hoyle's calculation in the cutting of a pack of cards, and swear five pieces an hour was too small pay for the instructions of so learned a doctor in the great, mysterious, and most polite science of gaming. 
He very often run over in his mind all the various amusements of the town; and on comparing them with this of gaming, none of them seem'd to him to have so small a plea for engrossing either the time or attention of a man of sense and honour. 
‘Every other pleasure or diversion, said he within himself, have something in them deserving of that name; they either regale the senses, or exercise the body, or relieve the mind; but gaming is the contrary of all these; it impedes the gratification of our most natural appetites, it enervates the limbs with too long sitting, it racks the brain with cares, it fills the bosom with anxieties, and in fine, is a fatigue, which were it not the effect of our own free choice, would be intolerable. 
‘Nor is this all, would he sometimes add; an inordinate love of gaming certainly proceeds from avarice, the most sordid passion of the heart, and consequently destroys all that is generous, noble, and sincere; deadens that social feel, that kindly warmth, which nature has implanted in us towards our fellow creatures; and renders the man devoted to this vice capable of no other wish than to enjoy the infamous triumph of bearing off the spoils of him he plays against, though it should even happen to be one he calls his friend, or one who must be entirely ruined by the loss of what he is now in possession of, through the favour of fortune, or a superior skill in the destructive art.’ 
He concluded from all this, that to undo others, or be undone oneself, was the almost certain consequence of gaming high; for which reason he made many resolutions to avoid it as much as possible; and indeed persisted in them more than could be well expected from a man of his gay temper, and who, by the company he kept, was continually surrounded with temptations of that fort. 
But if he thought the love of play so pernicious a thing in those of his own sex, in what light must he behold it in regard to those of the other? —He had read some old musty authors, who maintained that modesty was the peculiar characteristic of womanhood; that an innocence of deportment was the chief beauty of a virgin; and œconomy in private, and a decent reserve in public, that of a married woman; and he could not get it out of his head but that these maxims were just contrary, as they were to what he had seen practised at play by some ladies, who pass for patterns of politeness and fashionable good breeding; and in comparing the difference, he could not forbear crying out. —‘Sure, when these books were wrote, gaming was a thing never heard of among women!’ 
These having always been his notions, it could not be otherwise but that the example of Liberia must greatly contribute to fortify them in him, as he had now experienced what he had many times been told by those better acquainted with the ladies, that those debts, which are called debts of honour, are frequently discharged by loss of honour. 
‘What an amiable figure in life might this woman make, said he, speaking of Liberia, if it were not for this mad attachment to gaming? —I dare believe she has no vicious inclinations of her own, and her quality and marriage with lord ** defends her from all impertinent addresses of our sex. —How strange then is the infatuation which compels her to run the fatal risque of being reduced to yield such condescentions, as otherwise her pride would scorn, and her virtue shudder at!’ 
He never ruminated in this manner without falling immediately after into a profound resverie, which whoever had seen him in would not have taken him for that gay, laughing, spirituous creature he appeared at other times; but it generally happens that persons of that humour, when they think at all, think more deeply than those of a heavy and phlegmatic disposition. 
The many mischiefs which sometimes befall the fair sex, by indulging themselves in this dangerous amusement, made him tremble for Jenny; he knew she play'd occasionally, but though he had never heard her testify any extraordinary pleasure in it, yet he could not assure himself that she might not, by degrees, be drawn into a better liking of it, and consequently become liable to the same inconveniencies, to which so many others of her sex were every day subjected. 
Love, friendship, and the consideration of his own interest and honour, as Jenny was one day to become his wife, obliged him therefore to do every thing in his power to prevent so great an evil; nor could he think of any method more effectual for that end, than by reminding her, in a delicate way, and without seeming to do it with design, of the dangers to which women who love play, could not fail of being exposed. 
He had no sooner thought on this, than he resolved to put it into immediate execution; and to give the greater weight to what he intended to say, ransack'd his memory for all the alarming circumstances of a gaming-table, that he had ever either seen or heard of. 
