


Displays miss Betsy in her penitentials,
and the manner in which she behaved
after having met with so much matter
for the humiliation of her vanity,
as also some farther particulars,
equally worthy the attention of the curious. 

While miss Betsy had her brothers
with her, and was treated by them
with a tenderness beyond what she could
have expected, just after the unlucky adventure
she had fallen into, she felt not 

that remorse and vexation, which it might
be said her present situation demanded. 
But when they were gone, and she was
left intirely to those reflections, which
their presence and good humour had only
retarded, how did they come with double
force upon her! —To think she had received
the addresses, and entertained with
a mistaken respect, the lowest, and most
abject dregs of mankind;—that she had
exposed herself to the insults of that ruffian; 
—that it had not been in her power
to defend herself from his taking liberties
with her, the most shocking to her delicacy,
and that she was on the very point
of becoming the victim of his base designs
upon her, made her feel over again, in
idea, all the horrors of her real danger. 
By turns, indeed, she blessed heaven for
her escape;—but then the means to
which she was indebted for that escape,
was a fresh stab to her pride. —‘I am
preserved, 'tis true,’ said she, ‘from
ruin and everlasting infamy;—but then
by whom am I preserved?—by the
man, who once adored,—then slighted,
—and must now despise me. —If nothing
but a miracle could save me, O!
why, good heaven, was not that miracle
performed by any instrument but him! 

—What triumph to him! —What lasting
shame to me, has this unfortunate
accident produced!’ 
‘Alas!’—continued she, weeping,— 
‘I wanted not this proof of his honour,
—his courage,—his generosity;—nor
was there any need of my being reduced
in the manner he found me, to
make him think me undeserving of his
affection.’ 
Never was a heart torn with a greater
variety of anguish, than that of this unfortunate
young lady:—as she yet was
ignorant of what steps her brothers intended
to take in this affair, and feared
they might be such as would render what
had happened to her public to the world,
she fell into reflections that almost turned
her brain;—she represented to herself all
the sarcasms,—all the comments, that
she imagined, and probably would have
been made on her behaviour,—her danger,
and her delivery;—all these thoughts
were insupportable to her,—she resolved
to hide herself for ever from the town,
and pass her future life in obscurity;— 
so dreadful to her were the apprehensions
of becoming the object of derision, that
rather than endure it she would suffer any 

In the present despondency of her humour,
she would certainly have fled the
town, and gone directly down to L&wblank;e,
if she had not known, that sir Ralph and
lady Trusty were expected here in a very
short time; and she was so young when
she left that country, that she could not
think of any family to whom it was proper
for her to go, without some previous
preparations. 
All her pride,—her gaiety,—her
vanity of attracting admiration;—in
fine, all that had composed her former
character, seemed now to be lost and
swallowed up in the sense of that bitter
shame and contempt, in which she imagined
herself involved, and she wished for
nothing but to be unseen, unregarded,
and utterly forgotten, by all that had ever
known her,—being almost ready to cry
out with Dido, 

‘Nor art, nor nature's hand can ease my grief,
‘Nothing but death, the wretch's last relief;
‘Then, farewell youth, and all the joys that dwell
‘With youth and life,—and life itself, farewell.’


The despair of that unhappy queen, so
elegantly described by the poet, could not
far transcend what poor miss Betsy sustained
during this whole cruel night;— 
nor did the day afford her any more tranquility; 
—on the contrary, she hated the
light,—the sight even of her own servants
was irksome to her;—she ordered,
that whoever came to visit her, except
her brothers, should be denied admittance,
—complained of a violent pain in her
head,—would not be prevailed upon to
take the least refreshment, but kept herself
upon the bed, indulging all the horrors
of despair and grief. 
In the afternoon mr. Francis Thoughtless
came,—seemed a little surprised to
find his brother was not there, and told
miss Betsy, that having been called different
ways, they had appointed to meet
at her lodgings, in order to have some
serious discourse with her, concerning her
future settlement; to which she replied,
that her late fright hung so heavy on her
spirits, that she was in little condition at
present to resolve on any thing. 
She spoke this with so dejected an air,
that mr. Francis, who truly loved her, in
spite of all the resentment he had for the 

errors of her conduct, could not forbear
saying a great many tender things to her; 
but nothing afforded her so much consolation,
as the account he gave her, that
no prosecution would be commenced
against the sham sir Frederick Fineer:— 
‘The villain,’ said he, ‘is run away from
his lodging, but questionless might easily
be found out, and brought to justice; 
but the misfortune is, that in cases of
this nature, the offended must suffer as
well as the offender;—to punish him,
must expose you;—you see, therefore,
to what your inadvertency has reduced
you,—injured to the most shocking
degree, yet denied the satisfaction of revenge.’ 
Miss Betsy only answering with her
tears,—‘I speak not this to upbraid you,’ 
resumed he, ‘and would be far from adding
to the affliction you are in;—on
the contrary, I would have you be
chearful, and rejoice more in the escape
you have had, than bewail the danger
you have past through;—but then, my
dear sister, I would wish you also to
put yourself into a condition, which
may defend you from attempts of this
vile nature.’ 

He was going on with something farther,
when the elder mr. Thoughtless
came in:—‘I have been detained,’ said
that gentleman, ‘longer than I expected; 
—my friend is going to have his picture
drawn, and knowing I have been
in Italy, would needs have my judgment
upon the painter's skill.’ 
‘I suppose then,’ said mr. Francis,— 
‘your eyes have been feasted with the resemblance
of a great number of beauties,
either real or fictitious.’ —‘No faith,’ 
replied the other, ‘I believe none of the
latter;—the man seems to be too much
an artist in his profession, to stand in
any need of having recourse to that stale
stratagem of inviting customers, by exhibiting
shadows, which have no substances
but in his own brain, and I
must do him the justice to say, that I
never saw life imitated to more perfection.’ 
‘Then you saw some faces there you
were acquainted with,’ said the younger
mr. Thoughtless. —‘Two or three,’ answered
the elder;—‘but one, which
more particularly struck me, as I had
seen the original but twice;—but once
indeed to take any notice of:—it was 

your friend,—the gentleman we waited
on this morning.’ 
‘What! —Trueworth!’—demanded
mr. Francis. ‘The same,’ resumed the
other:—‘never was there a more perfect
likeness;—he is drawn in miniature; 
I believe, by the size of the piece,
intended to be worn at a lady's watch; 
—but I looked on it through my magnifier,
and thought I saw his very self
before me.’ 
He said much more in praise of the
excellence of this artist, as indeed he was
very full of it, having a desire his favourite
mistress's picture should be drawn,
and was transported to have found a person,
who, he thought, could do it so
much justice. 
Though miss Betsy sate all this time in
a pensive posture, and seemed not to take
any notice of this discourse, yet no part
of it was lost upon her. —‘You extol
this painter so much, brother,’ said she,
‘that if I thought my picture worth
drawing, I would sit to him myself. — 
Pray,’ continued she, ‘where does he
live, and what is his name?’ —Mr.
Thoughtless having satisfied her curiosity
in these points, no more was said on the 

occasion, and the brothers immediately
entered into a conversation, upon the business
which had brought them thither. 
The elder of them remonstrated to her,
in the strongest terms he was able, the
perpetual dangers to which, through the
baseness of the world, and her own inadvertency,
she was liable every day to be
exposed:—‘This last ugly accident,
said he, ‘I hope may be hushed up,— 
mr. Trueworth, I dare believe, is too
generous to make any mention of it, and
those concerned in it will be secret for
their own sakes;—but you may not
always meet the same prosperous chance. 
—It behoves us therefore, who must
share in your disgrace, as well as have
a concern for your happiness, to insist
on your putting yourself into a different
mode of life:—mr. Munden makes
very fair proposals;—he has given me
leave to examine the rent-roll of his
estate, which accordingly I have ordered
a lawyer to do;—he will settle an hundred
and fifty pounds per annum on
you for pin-money, and jointure you in
four hundred, and I think your fortune
does not entitle you to a better offer.’ 
‘Brother, I have had better,’ replied
miss Betsy, with a sigh. —‘But you rejected 

it,’ cried mr. Francis, with some
warmth;—‘and you are not to expect
a second Trueworth will fall to your
share.’ —‘Let us talk no more of
what is past,’ resumed the elder mr.
Thoughtless;—‘but endeavour to perswade
our sister to accept of that, which
at present is most for her advantage.’ 
Both these gentlemen, in their different
turns, made use of every argument that
could be brought on the occasion, to prevail
on miss Betsy to give them some assurance,
that as now there was no better
prospect for her, she would trifle no longer
with the pretensions of mr. Munden, but
resolve to marry him, in case the condition
of his affairs was proved, upon enquiry,
to be such as he had represented
it to them. 
She made, for a great while, very little
reply to all this;—her head was now indeed
very full of something else;—she
sate in a kind of reverie, and had a perfect
absence of mind, during this latter
part of their discourse;—she heard, but
heard without attention, and without considering
the weight of any thing they
urged; yet, at last, meerly to get rid of
their importunities and presence, that she
might be alone to indulge her own meditations, 

she said as they said, and promised
to do whatever they required of
her. 
Mr. Thoughtless having now, as he
imagined, brought her to the bent he
wished, took his leave; but mr. Francis
stayed some time longer, nor had, perhaps,
gone so soon, if miss Betsy had not
discovered a certain restlessness, which
made him think she would be glad to be
alone. 
This was the first time she had ever
desired his absence, but now, indeed, most
heartily did so;—she had got a caprice
in her brain, which raised ideas there, she
was in pain till she had modelled, and
brought to the perfection she wanted. — 
What her brother had cursorily mentioned,
concerning the picture of mr. Trueworth,
had made a much deeper impression
on her mind, than all the serious discourse
he had afterwards entertained her
with;—she longed to have in her possession
so exact a resemblance of a man,
who once had loved her, and for whom
she had always the most high esteem,
though her pride would never suffer her to
shew it to any one, who professed himself
her lover. —‘This picture,’ said she,
‘by looking on it, will remind me of the 

obligation I have to him,—I might
forget it else,—and I would not be
ungrateful;—though it is not in my
nature to love, I may, nay I ought,
after what he has done for me, to have
a friendship for him.’ 
She then began to consider, whether
there was a possibility of becoming the
mistress of what she so much desired;— 
she had never given her mind to plotting,
—she had never been at the pains of any
contrivances, but how to ornament her
dress, or place the patches of her face
with the most graceful art, and was extremely
at a loss what stratagem to form
for the getting this picture into her hands; 
—at first, she thought of going to the
painter, and bribe him to take a copy of
it for her use;—‘but then,’ said she, ‘a
copy taken from a copy goes still farther
from the original;—besides, he
may betray me, or he may not have
time to do it, and I would leave nothing
to chance. —No, I must have
the very picture that my brother saw,
that I may be sure is like, for I know
he is a judge.’ 
‘Suppose,’ cried she again, ‘I go under
the pretence of sitting for my picture,
and look over all his pieces,—I 

fancy I may find an opportunity of slipping
Trueworth's into my pocket,— 
I could send the value of it the next
day, so the man would be no sufferer
by it.’ 
This project seemed feasible to her for
a time, but she afterwards rejected it, on
account, she could not be sure of committing
the theft so artfully, as not to be
detected in the fact;—several other little
stratagems succeeded this in her inventive
brain, all which, on second thoughts,
she found either impossible to be executed,
or could promise no certainty in their effects. 
Sleep was no less a stranger to her eyes
this night, than it had been the preceding
one;—yet of how different a nature were
the agitations which kept her waking:— 
in the first, the shock of the insult she
had sustained, and the shame of her receiving
her protection from him, by
whom, of all men living, she was least
willing to be obliged, took up all her
thoughts;—in the second, she was equally
engrossed by the impatience of having
something to preserve him eternally in her
mind. 

After long revolving within herself, she
at last hit upon the means of accomplishing
her desires;—the risque she ran, indeed,
was somewhat bold, but as it succeeded
without suspicion, she had only to
guard against accidents, that might occasion
a future discovery of what she had
done. 
Early the next morning she sent to
Blunt's,—hired a handsome chaise and
pair, with a coachman, and two servants,
in a livery very different from that she
gave her own man;—then dressed herself
in a riding habit, and hunting-cap,
which had been made for her, on her going
down to Oxford, and she had never
been seen in by mr. Trueworth;—so that
she thought, she might be pretty confident,
that when he should come to examine
who had taken away his picture, the description
could never enable him to guess
at the right person. 
With this equipage she went to the
house where the painter lived;—on enquiring
for him by his name, he came
immediately to know her commands. — 
‘You have the picture here of mr. Trueworth,’ 
said she; ‘pray is it ready?’ — 
‘Yes, madam,’ answered he, ‘I am just 

going to carry it home.’ —‘I am glad
then, sir,’ resumed miss Betsy, ‘that I
am come time enough to save you the
trouble:—mr. Trueworth went to
Hampstead last night, and being to follow
him this morning, he desired I
would bring it with me, and pay you
the money.’ —O, madam, as to the
money,’ said he, ‘I shall see mr. Trueworth
again;’—and then called to his
man to bring down his picture. —‘Indeed
I shall not take it without paying
you,’ said she; ‘but in the hurry I
forgot to ask him the sum,—pray how
much is it?’ —‘My constant price,
madam,’ replied he, ‘is ten guineas,
and the gentleman never offered to beat
me down.’ 
By this time the man had brought the
picture down in a little box, which the
painter opening, as he presented to her,
cried, ‘Is it not a prodigious likeness,
madam?’ —‘Yes really, sir,’ said she,
‘in my opinion there is no fault to be
found.’ —She then put the picture into
her pocket,—counted ten guineas to him
out of her purse, and told him, with a
smile, that she believed he would very
shortly have more business from the same
quarter,—then bid the coachman drive
on. 

The coachman having previous orders
what to do, was no sooner out of sight of
the painter's house, than he turned down
the first street, and carried miss Betsy directly
home;—she discharged her retinue,
undressed herself with all the speed
she could, and whoever had now seen
her, would never have suspected she had
been abroad. 
This young lady was not of a temper
to grieve long for any thing;—how deep
soever she was affected, the impression
wore off on the first new turn that offered
itself. —All her remorse,—all her vexation,
for the base design laid against her
at mrs. Modely's, were dissipated the moment
she took it into her head to get possession
of this picture, and the success of
her enterprize elated her beyond expression. 
It cannot be supposed, that it was altogether
owing to the regard she had for
mr. Trueworth, though in effect much
more than she herself was yet sensible of,
that she took all this pains; it looks as if
there was also some little mixture of female
malice in the case. —Her brother
had said, that the picture seemed to be
intended to be worn at a lady's watch; 

—she doubted not but it was so, and the
thoughts of disappointing her rival's expectations,
contributed greatly to the satisfaction
she felt at what she had done. 
