


Contains only some few particulars of
little moment in themselves, but serve
to usher in matters of more importance. 

Mr. Goodman, who, both living and
dying, had sincerely at heart the
welfare of all with whom he had any
concern, could not content himself to
leave the world, without giving to those,
who had been under his care, such advice
as he thought necessary for their future
happiness. 

Accordingly, the day preceding that
which happened to be his last, he sent
for mr. Thoughtless, and on his being
come, and seated by his bedside, he took
his hand, and began to remonstrate to
him, in the most pathetic, though very
gentle, terms, how unjustifiable to the
eyes of heaven, and how disreputable to
those of the world, it was, to avow and
indulge, in the public manner he did, an
unwarrantable flame. 
‘I never was severe,’ said he, ‘in
censuring the frailties of youth and nature; 
but think the claim they have
to pardon consists chiefly in an endeavour
to conceal them;—when gloried
in, they lose the name of frailties, and
become vices:—besides, others by our
example might be emboldened to offend,
and if so, what are we but accessary
to their faults, and answerable
for them, as well as for our own? — 
You are at present,’ continued he, ‘the
head of your family,—have a large
estate,—are young,—handsome,— 
accomplished;—in fine, have all the
requisites to make a shining character
in life, and to be a service, and an honour
to your country. —How great a
pity would it be, that such a stock of 

fortune's blessings,—such present benefits,
and such glorious expectations,
should all be squandered in the purchase
of one guilty pleasure!’ 
He then proceeded to a short discussion
of the difference of a lawful and an unlawful
communication between the sexes; 
—he expatiated on the wife and laudable
institution of marriage;—the solid comforts
arising from that state, in the choice
of a worthy partner;—the many advantages
of an honourable alliance;—the
serene and lasting pleasures to be found
in the society of a faithful, discreet, and
endearing companion. —‘A wife,’—said
he, with a sigh, which the memory of
his own hard fate drew from him, ‘may
some times be bad, but a mistress we
are sure is never good;—her very
character denies all confidence to be
reposed in her;—it is the interest of
a wife to secure the honour of her husband,
because she must suffer in his
disgrace;—a mistress having no reputation
of her own, regards not that of
her keeper. —It is the interest of a
wife to be frugal of her husband's substance,
because she must be a sharer in
those misfortunes, which the want of
œconomy creates;—but it is the interest
of a mistress to sell her favours 

as dear as she can, and to make the
best provision she can for herself, because
her subsistence is precarious, and
depends wholly on the will of him
who supports her. —These, my dear
friend,’ continued he, ‘are truths,
which I hope you will not wait for experience
to convince you of.’ 
It is probable mr. Thoughtless did not
relish this admonition;—he seemed,
however, to take it in good part, and returned
for answer, that he should ever retain
the most grateful sense of the kind
concern he expressed for him, and added,
that whatever inconveniencies he might
have been hurried into, by an inadvertent
passion, he should always take care not
to become the dupe of any woman. 
Mr. Goodman then fell into some discourse,
concerning the younger mr.
Thoughtless, and the elder telling him,
that, by his interest, he procured a commission
for him on very easy terms, that
worthy old gentleman appeared very
much pleased, and said, he hoped they
would always live together in that perfect
amity, which both good policy and nature
demands, between persons of the
same blood. 

‘And now,’ continued he, ‘I have
but one thing more to recommend to
you,—and that is in relation to your
sister, miss Betsy. —I doubt not of her
innocence, but I fear her conduct;— 
her youth,—her beauty,—the gaiety
of her temper, and the little vanities of
her sex, are every day exposing her to
temptations fatal to reputation;—I
wish, therefore, she were well married; 
—I know not how the courtship of
mr. Trueworth happened to be broke
off, perhaps on some trifling occasion,
either on the one or the other side:— 
if so, 'tis likely mr. Francis, when he
comes to town, may bring about a reconciliation,
—According to my Judgment
of mankind, she cannot make a
more deserving choice. —There is another
gentleman, who now makes his
addresses to her,—his name is Munden; 
—but I know nothing of his character,
—he never applied to me, nor
did she consult me on the affair;—it
will however be a brother's part in you,
to enquire how far he may be worthy
of her.’ 
Perceiving mr. Thoughtless listened
to him, with a good deal of attention, he
went on;—‘I should also think it right’, 

said he, ‘that while she remains in a
single state, she should be boarded in
some social, reputable family;—I do
not like this living by herself,—her
humour is too volatile to endure solitude; 
she must have her amusements; 
and the want of them at home, naturally
carries her in search of them abroad:
—I could wish,’ added he, ‘that you
would tell her what I have said to you
upon this subject; she is convinced I
am her friend, I believe has some regard
for me, and it may be, my dying
admonitions will have greater effect upon
her, than all she has heard from me
before.’ 
Mr. Goodman, after this, beginning
to grow extremely faint, and altogether
unable to hold any farther discourse, the
brother of miss Betsy judged it convenient
to retire, assuring the other, as he
took his leave, that no part of what he
had said, should be lost upon him. 
Though the promise he had made mr.
Goodman, was chiefly dictated by his
complaisance, yet it was not totally forgot
after he had left him. —As to what that
worthy gentleman had said, in relation to
his own manner of living, he thought he
had talked well, but he had talked like an 

old man, and that it was time enough for
him to part with his pleasures, when he
had no longer any inclination to pursue
them;—but what had been alledged to
him concerning his sister's conduct, made
a much deeper impression on his mind:
—he considered, that the honour of a family
depended greatly on the female part
of it, and therefore resolved to omit nothing
in his power, to prevent miss Betsy
from being caught by any snares, that
might be laid to entrap her innocence. 
He communicated to mr. Francis
Thoughtless on his arrival, all that mr.
Goodman had said to him on this score,
and his own sentiments upon it:—that
young gentleman was entirely of his brother's
opinion in this point; and they both
agreed, that marriage was the only sure
refuge from temptation, for a young woman
of miss Betsy's disposition and humour. 
—They had a very long and pretty
serious conversation on this head, the
result of which was, that they should go
together to her, and each exert all the
influence he had over her, in order to
draw from her some farther eclaircisement
intentions, than could yet be gathered
of her from her behaviour. 

Miss Betsy, who little suspected their
design, received them with all the tenderness
that could be expected from a sister,
especially her brother Frank, whose return
after so long an absence, gave her, in
reality, an infinite satisfaction; but she
had scarce time to give him all the welcomes,
with which her heart overflowed,
before the elder mr. Thoughtless fell on
the topic of mr. Goodman, and the misfortune
they sustained, in the loss of so
good a friend; after which, ‘He has left
you a legacy, sister,’ said he:—‘A legacy!’ 
cried she, ‘pray of what kind?’ 
‘Such a one,’ replied he, ‘as perhaps you
will not be very well pleased in receiving,
nor would I chuse to deliver it,
but for two reasons;—first, that the
injunctions of a dying friend are not to be
dispensed with; and secondly, that it is
of a nature, I fear, you stand in too
much need of.’ 
Miss Betsy, whose ready wit made her
presently comprehend the meaning of
these words, replied with some smartness,
that whatever she stood in need of, she
should certainly receive with pleasure, and
he might have spared himself the trouble
of a prelude, for any thing that could be 

delivered by him, or bequeathed to her
by mr. Goodman. 
He then told her, how that gentleman,
the day before his death, had sent for him,
‘For no other purpose,’ said he, ‘than
to talk to me on your account, and to
exhort me as your brother, and now
your guardian, to have a watchful eye
over all your actions;—to remind you
of some inadvertencies of the past, and
to warn you against falling into the
like for the future:—sorry I am, to
find myself under a necessity of speaking
to you in this manner; but harsh as it
may seem at present, I doubt not, but
you will hereafter own, is a proof of
the greatest affection I could shew you.’ 
He then repeated to her, all that mr.
Goodman had said to him, in relation to
her; to which he also added many things
of his own, which he thought might serve
to strengthen, and enforce the arguments
made use of by the other. 
It is impossible to describe the various
and disturbed emotions, which discovered
themselves in the countenance of miss
Betsy, during the whole time her brother
was speaking;—she looked extremely
grave, at the manner in which he ushered
what he had to deliver to her from mr. 

Goodman,—appeared confounded and
perplexed at what she heard that gentleman
had said concerning mr. Trueworth,
—was quite peevish at the mention of
mr. Munden, but when told of the dangers
to which she was exposed, by living
alone, and trusted with the management
of herself, her eyes sparkled with disdain
and rage, at a remonstrance she looked
upon as so unnecessary and so unjust. 
If this message had been sent to her by
any other, than mr. Goodman, whose
memory, on account of the benefits she
had received from him, was precious
to her; or had it been repeated by any
other mouth than that of a brother, she
had certainly vented the indignation she
was possessed of, in the most bitter terms; 
but gratitude, respect, and love, denying
her this remedy, she burst into a flood of
tears,—‘Good God!’ cried she, ‘what
have I done to raise such cruel suggestions
in the heart of any friend? — 
Which of my actions can malice construe
into a crime? —I challenge my
worst of enemies to prove me guilty of
any thing might justly cast a blemish on
my reputation, much less to call my
virtue in question.’ 

The two brothers seemed very much
moved at the agonies that they saw her
in, especially the elder, who repenting
he had gone so far, took her in his arms,
and tenderly embracing her, ‘My dear
sister,’ said he, ‘you wrong your
friends, while you imagine yourself
wronged by them;—your reputation,
I hope, is clear;—your virtue not suspected; 
—it is not to accuse you of
any guilt, but to prevent your innocence
from becoming a prey to the
guilt of others, that mr. Goodman sent
you his dying admonition, or that I
took upon me to deliver it.’ 
Mr. Francis Thoughtless seconded what
the other had said, and both joining their
endeavours to pacify the late tempest of
her mind, she soon recovered that good
humour and chearfulness, which was too
natural to her to be long suspended by
any accident whatsoever. 
‘I flattered myself,’ said the younger
of these gentlemen, ‘that cautions of this
kind would have been altogether unnecessary,
and that before now you would
have been disposed of to a man, under
whose protection all that is dear to your
sex had been secure;—I need not tell 

you,’ continued he, ‘that I mean mr.
Trueworth.’ 
Miss Betsy looking a little confus'd,
and not making any reply, the elder mr.
Thoughtless immediately took up the
word, and said, he had heard so high a
character of that gentleman's merit, that
he had wished for few things with more
ardency, than the honour of being allied
to him, and that he never could find out
what objection his sister had, to accept
of an offer so every way to her advantage. 
To this miss Betsy made answer, though
not without some disorder, and hesitation
in her speech,—that she had never made
any objection, either to his person or
qualification;—but that she did not care
to marry yet a while, and he had not love
enough to wait the event of her resolution
in that point;—that, besides, their humours
did not suit, and there was little
likelihood they would agree better after
marriage;—that there had been a little
pique between them;—that he gave
himself airs of resenting something she
had said, and thereupon had sent her a
very impertinent letter, since which she
had never seen him;—‘so that,’ added
she, ‘our breaking off acquaintance is
wholly owing to himself.’ 

Mr. Francis not doubting but this letter
would explain what he so much desired
to know the truth of, cried out to
her hastily, to let him see it;—miss Betsy
already repented, that she had mentioned
such a thing, as she was conscious there were
some expressions in it, which would greatly
countenance the disagreeable remonstrances
she had just now received; but she
wanted artifice to pretend, she had either
lost, or burnt it, and went that instant to her
cabinet, where easily finding it, she gave
it into her brother's hands, with these
words, ‘he reproaches me,’ said she,
‘with things I know nothing of, and in
terms, which, I think, do not very well
become the passion he pretended to
have for me.’ 
‘That he once loved you,’ said mr.
Francis, coolly, ‘I am very certain;— 
how his sentiments may be changed,
and the reasons of their being so, this
may, perhaps, give me room to guess.’ 
He then read the letter aloud, and while
he was doing so, several times cast a
look at miss Betsy, which shewed he
was highly dissatisfied with her, for having
given any cause for the reflections
contained in it. 

‘I see very well,’ said he, returning
her the letter ‘that he has done with you,
and that it is your own fault:—I
shall, however, talk to him on the affair,
and if there be a possibility of accommodating
matters between you,
shall endeavour it for your sake.’ 
Here miss Betsy's spirit roused itself,
in spite of the respect she had for her brothers; 
‘I beseech you, sir,’ said she to
mr. Francis, ‘not to go about to force
your sister upon any man;—if mr.
Trueworth, of his own accord, renews
the professions he has made, I shall on
your account receive them as I did before
any misunderstanding happened between
us; but as to changing my condition,
either in favour of him or any
other man, I know not when, or whether
ever I shall be in the humour to do
it:—you may, however, if you please,
continued she, hear what he has to say
for himself, and what mighty matters
against me, that can excuse the abrupt
manner of his quitting me.’ 
‘I know not as yet,’ replied mr.
Francis, with some vehemence, ‘whether
I shall interfere any farther in the
thing, and am heartily sorry I have 

given myself any trouble about it, since
you so little consider your own interest,
or will follow the advice of those, who
are at the pains to consider for you.’— 
‘Come, come,’ said the elder mr.
Thoughtless, ‘you are both too fiery; 
—I am confident my sister has too
much good sense to suffer any little caprice
to impede her real happiness,— 
therefore, prithee Frank, let us drop
this subject at present, and leave her to
her own reflections.’ 
To which miss Betsy answered, that
there required but little reflection to instruct
her what she ought to do, and that
though she could not consent to be kept
always in leading-strings, the love and
respect she had for her brother, would
never permit her to do any thing without
their approbation. There passed nothing
more of consequence between them at
this visit; but what had been said served
to engross pretty much the minds of each
of them after they were separated. 
