


More of the same. 

Mr. Markland did not, like too many
of his profession, ever flatter his
clients with an assurance of success in any
cause, of which himself was doubtful:— 
He plainly told mrs. Munden, that he
feared not all the ill usage she had sustained
would be sufficient to compel her
husband to allow her a separate maintenance. 
—‘Honour and generosity may
indeed,’ added he, ‘oblige him to do
that, which I am very apprehensive the
law will not enforce him to.’ 
‘Alas,’ cried mrs. Munden, bursting
into tears, ‘if I can have no relief but
from his honour and generosity, I must
be miserable.’ —‘Not so, my dear
sister,’ said mr. Thoughtless, ‘while you
have a brother, who has it in his power
to support you against all the injuries of
fortune, and the injustice of a husband
so unworthy of you.’ 

She thanked him in terms which so
affectionate an offer demanded from her,
but could not help appearing very much
dejected at what mr. Markland had said
to her; on which, ‘Madam,’ said he,
‘though the letter of the law may not
be altogether so favourable for you in
this point, as you certainly deserve, yet
notwithstanding that, and how refractory
soever mr. Munden may be in his
principles or dispositions, I hope there
may be means found to bring him to
do you justice;—I will wait on him,— 
will talk to him in a proper manner,
and do flatter myself with being able
to give you a good account of what I
have done.’ 
It is not to be doubted but both the
brothers and the sister earnestly intreated
he would exert all his abilities in an affair,
which they easily saw would be difficult
enough to manage; but the answers
of this honest good natured gentleman
soon convinced them, that there was no
need of any persuasions to induce him to
do every thing in his power for the service
of ill-treated innocence. 
Mrs. Munden having told him, that
about eleven o'clock was the most certain 

time for her husband to be spoke with,
he went the next morning at that hour; 
on sending up his name, mr. Munden
guessed the errand on which he came, but
that did not hinder him from ordering
he should be introduced, nor when he
was so, from receiving him with that politeness
he always used to strangers. 
Mr. Markland began with telling him
he was extremely sorry for the occasion
on which he waited on him that morning,
‘I little imagined,’ said he, ‘that
when I drew up the articles for a union
between you, sir, and mrs. Munden, I
should ever have been employed in
transacting a deed of separation:— 
but since it has unhappily proved so,
I hope at least it may be done as amicably
as the nature of the thing will
admit.’ 
Mr. Munden at first affected to treat
this proposal in a manner somewhat ludicrous,
but perceiving it was not well
taken by the other,—‘You will pardon
me, sir,’ cried he, ‘I protest I am under
the greatest consternation in the world,
that my wife should have the assurance
to trouble a gentleman of your character
on so foolish an affair;—upon 

my honour, sir, there is nothing in it
but meer whim,—caprice.’ 
‘If I did not think it sufficiently serious,’ 
replied mr. Markland, ‘and
were not also well convinced you will
hereafter find it so, I should not have
given either myself, or you, the trouble
of this visit;—but sir, continued he,
you may depend, that the lady's complaints
will have their weight.’ 
‘All womanish spite, upon my soul,
sir,’ resumed mr. Munden; ‘I defy her
to accuse me of any one action that
can justify her quitting my house, much
less to prove any real injury received
from me, without which you
know, sir, there can be no pretence for
a separation.’ 
‘You cannot as yet, sir, be sensible
what is in her power to prove,’ said the
lawyer, ‘but God forbid this unhappy
dissention should ever come to that,
for admitting she should be wanting in
such proofs as the strictness of the law
requires in these cases, the very attempt
must necessarily involve you in
an infinity of disquiet. —Consider, sir,’ 
pursued he, ‘when the affairs of a family
are laid open, and every dispute between 

the husband and the wife exposed
before a court of judicature, or
even in a petition to a lord chancellor,
the whole becomes a public talk, and
furnishes a matter of ridicule for the
unthinking scoffers of the Age.’ 
‘I can easily prevent all this,’ cried
mr. Munden, hastily, ‘by procuring a
warrant from the lord chief justice to
force her immediately home.’ —‘You
may certainly do so,’ cried mr. Markland,
with a half smile,‘—but, sir, are
you sure of keeping her at home, when
you have got her there? —Is it not in
her power to leave you again the same
day,—nay, even the same hour in
which you compelled her to return? so
that your whole time may be spent in
an unavailing chase—somewhat of a
piece with the fable of the Sisiphœan
stone which as often as the driver
forced to the height he aimed at,
rolled back to its beloved descent. — 
In fine, sir, as mrs. Munden is determined
to live apart, you have no way
to preserve her but by confinement,
and I appeal to your own judgment
how that would look in the eyes of the
world, and what occasion for complaint
it would afford to all her friends, who 

would doubtless have a strict watch on
your behaviour.’ 
These words threw mr. Munden into a
deep resverie, which the other would not
interrupt, being willing to see how far
this last remonstrance had worked upon
him, till coming out of it, and vexed
that he had shewn any discomposure,— 
‘Well sir,’ said he, ‘if she resolves to persist
in this obstinacy. let her enjoy her
humour, I shall give myself no pain
about it,—but she must not expect I
shall allow one penny towards her
maintenance.’ 
It was on this head, that mr. Markland
found he had occasion to employ all
the rhetoric he was master of:—he urged
the unreasonableness, the injustice,
the cruelty of denying the means of subsistance
to a lady whose whole fortune he
enjoyed;—said, such a thing was altogether
unprecedented among persons of
condition; and to prove what he alledged,
produced many instances of wives, who
on parting from their husbands, were allowed
a provision proportionable to the
sums they had brought in marriage. 
All these arguments were enforced in
terms so strong, and so pathetic, that mr. 

Munden could make no other answer
than,—that he did not desire to part,
that it was her own fault, and that if she
would not return to her duty, she ought
to be starved into a more just sense of it; 
and that he was very sure the law would
not compel him to do any thing for her; 
on which, mr. Markland again reminded
him of the vexation, the fatigue, the disgrace,
with which a suit commenced by
either party must be attended, in whose
favour soever the decision should be
made. 
He talked so long on this subject, that
Mr. Munden, either to get rid of him, or
because he was really uncertain what to
do, at last told him, that he would consider
on what he had been saying, and
let him know his resolution in a week's
time. —Mr. Markland then replied, that
he would trouble him no farther for the
present, and after having prefixed a day
for waiting on him again, took his leave. 
The mind of mr. Munden was indeed
in the utmost confusion amidst that variety
of vexatious incidents which he had
now to struggle with,—the little probability
he found there was of re-establishing
himself in the favour of his patron,— 
the loss of all his hopes that way,—the 

sudden departure of a wife, whom, tho'
he had no affection for, he looked upon
as a necessary appendix to his house,— 
the noise her having taken such a step
would make in the town, the apprehensions
of being obliged to grant her a separate
maintenance, all these things put
together, it is certain were sufficient to
overwhelm a man of a less impatient
temper. 
He cursed his amour with the French
woman, as having been the cause of this
last misfortune falling on him, and to
prevent all farther trouble on her account,
ordered, that the luggage she had left behind
should be immediately put on board
a vessel, and sent after her to Bologne; 
he also wrote to her at the same time,
acquainting her with the disturbance
which had happened, and that it was
highly necessary for his future peace, that
he should see her no more, nor even hold
any correspondence with her. 
Mrs. Munden in the mean time was
far from being perfectly easy, though mr.
Markland gave her hopes that her husband
would very speedily be brought to
settle things between them in a reasonable
way, and her brother was every day giving
her fresh assurances of his friendship 

and protection, whether that event prov'd
favourable or not; yet all this was not
enough to quel some scruples, which now
rose in her mind;—the violence of that
passion, which had made her resolve to
leave mr. Munden being a little evaporated,
the vows she had made to him at
the altar were continually in her thoughts; 
—she could not quite assure herself, that
a breach of that solemn covenant was to
be justified by any provocations; nor
whether the worst usage on the part of
the husband could authorize resentment
in that of a wife. 
She was one day disburdening her disquiets
on this score to her dear lady
Loveit, in terms which made that lady
see more than ever she had done before,
the height of her virtue, and the delicacy
of her sentiments, when sir Basil
came hastily into the room with a paper
in his hand, and after paying his compliments
to mrs. Munden, ‘My dear,’ 
said he to his lady, ‘I have very agreeable
news to tell you,—I have just received
a letter from my brother Trueworth,
which informs me, that he is
upon the road, and we shall have him
with us this evening.’ —I am extremely
glad,’ replied she, ‘and likewise
that he is so good to let us know 

it, that I may make some little preparations
for his welcome. 
Mrs. Munden could not be told that
mr. Trueworth was so near, and might
presently be in the same room with her,
without the utmost confusion, which she
fearing would be observed, laid hold of
the pretence lady Loveit's last words furnished
her with, of taking her leave, and
rising hastily up, ‘I will wait on your ladyship,’ 
said she, ‘at a more convenient
time, for I perceive you are now
going to be busy.’ —‘Not at all,’ replied
the other, ‘three words will serve
for all the instructions I have to give,
therefore, prithee, dear creature, sit
down.’ —In speaking these words, she
took hold of one of her hands, and sir
Basil of the other, in order to replace her
on the settee she had just quitted, but she
resisting their efforts, and desiring to be
excused staying any longer,—‘I protest,’ 
cried lady Loveit, ‘this sudden
resolution of leaving us would make
one think you did it to avoid mr. Trueworth,
and if that be the case, I must
tell you, that you are very ungrateful,
as he always expresses the greatest regard
for you.’ —‘Aye, aye,’ said sir
Basil, laughing, ‘old love cannot be forgot:
I have heard him utter many tender 

things of the charming miss Betsy
Thoughtless, even since his marriage
with my sister.’ 
I ought not then,’ replied she, ‘to
increase the number of the obligations
I have to him by that compassion,
which I know he would bestow on my
present distrefs; but I assure you, sir
Basil, I would not quit you, and my
dear lady Loveit, thus abruptly, if
some letters I have to write, and other
affairs, which require immediate dispatch,
did not oblige me to it.’ 
On this, they would not offer to detain
her, and she went home to give a
loose to those agitations, which the
mention of mr. Trueworth always involved
her in. 
