

Contains the narrative of a very odd adventure, but perfectly a'-pro-pos, tho' at present it may perhaps appear a little foreign to the business in hand. 
During the short time that Jemmy stay'd at Oxford, his fair mistress took it into her head to make a visit to a friend in the country, about some one or two and twenty miles distant from London, where she had received several pressing invitations to come, but had hitherto been prevented from complying by one accident or other. 
This was a young lady, for whom Jenny had as great a regard as for any one of her female acquaintance;—they had received part of their education together, and tho' Sophia, for so she was called, being somewhat older than Jenny, had much sooner left the school, yet their intimacy was not broke off by this separation, and they continued to see each other as often as opportunity permitted;—but the brother of Sophia, who was a batchelor, having prevail'd with his sister to come down, and take upon her the management of his house, had now occasioned between these ladies an absence for many months. 
It is not, therefore, to be doubted, but that Jenny found herself very sincerely welcome. —Sophia omitted nothing that might convince her that she was so;—and as nothing more truly demonstrates the cordiality of the heart, than an open and undisguised behaviour, these ladies reciprocally related to each other all the little accidents that had befallen either of them since last they parted. 
Among other things that Sophia communicated to her fair guest, she told her that her brother was about marrying, and at present was in London, prosecuting his addresses for that purpose, to a young lady of condition, ‘which, said she, if he succeeds in, I shall not long be a resident in the country, as he then will have no farther occasion for my assistance, nor should I chuse to continue in the house with a sister-in-law. 
‘I sincerely wish him all the happiness he can hope for, replyed Jenny, not only as he is your brother, but for his own sake also,—since I believe there are few men who deserve more:—we are both extremely obliged to you my dear, returned the other, but I fear’— 
She was going on with something, which it is likely would have let Jenny into the quality and character of the intended bride, but was interrupted by a servant, who came hastily into the room, and told her that his master was just alighted at the gate, out of a landau and six, and had brought a very fine lady home with him. 
‘Bless me, cried Sophia, in a great surprise, the thing we were speaking of is certainly completed; but come, continued she, let us go down to receive them, and be convinced.’ 
In speaking these words she took Jenny by the hand, in order to do as she had said, but was prevented by the sight of her brother and the mistress of his affections, who had come laughing up, and were already on the top of the stair-case; on which she retired some paces back to give them room to enter. 
This gentleman, whom I shall distinguish by the name of Rodophil, immediately presented Sophia to the lady, saying, ‘This, madam, is the sister I have often mentioned to you:’ they then saluted each other with a great deal of politeness, while he paid his compliments to Jenny; but had no sooner done so, than turning to Sophia, ‘I am come a little unexpectedly upon you, sister, said he; but, to make amends, have brought home a lady, who will be so good to take off your hands the trouble of managing my family.’ 
‘I am very ready to resign my place, reply'd she with a smile, to one who, I doubt not, but will much better fit it; but sir, pursued she in the same gay air, I think you should have put it in my power to have given you the last cast of my office, in a more elegant manner, than I am now capable of doing in this sudden surprise.’ 
‘Nay, as to that matter, child,’ cried the lady in a very familiar, and indeed, somewhat of a hoydenish tone, ‘you have nothing to accuse him of on this account, for I assure you neither of us thought of being here to-night, two hours before we set out from London; but I know not how it happen'd, but we were both in a frolicksome humour; he swore he would have me, and I swore if he had, he should run away with me;—the impudent thing took me at my word,—sent in a minute for a Landau and six,—thrust me into it, and hurried me away without any farther preparation than just as you see. 
‘Then the ceremony is not yet perform'd,’ said Sophia; ‘No, reply'd her brother, but I hope to-morrow morning will put a final end to my suspence, and make me happy in my utmost wishes;—What say you, madam, pursued he to the lady,—shall it not be so? —What occasion has the man to ask any questions!’—answered she, patting him on the cheek, ‘you have got me into your possession here, and must even do with me what you will.’ 
Soon after this Sophia withdrew, to give the necessary orders for preparing supper, which, in spite of her being taken so unawares, was served up in a manner that shew'd there was little need of the apology had she made on the first entrance of her new guest. 
Nothing was wanting to complete the elegance of the table, but a little more politeness of behaviour in the person, for whom chiefly such care had been taken in furnishing it;—but, tho' she was the daughter of a nobleman, and could not fail of having had an education suitable to her birth, yet the pride of blood,—the insolence of flatter'd beauty, and the vanity of imagining, that she could do nothing unbecoming in her, made her act and talk in so affected, and so odd a fashion, as greatly defaced all the charms she had received from nature. 
‘You are very ugly, Rodophil, would she cry; I wonder what it is I like you for; then rejoin'd with the same breath, well, you are a dear bewitching toad, however;’ one moment she would push him from her, swearing she hated him,—the next pull him towards her, protesting he could not be too near;—her discourse to the ladies was also of the same piece: she told Sophia, she had a pair of fine eyes, but did not look as if she knew she had any such things in her head; and laugh'd at Jenny, as having reason to accuse nature for not having endued her with the talent of elocution. 
Jenny, indeed, spoke but little the whole evening; but as her silence was occasioned only by the other's excess of volubility, the usual vivacity of her temper was rous'd by this reproach, and she reply'd, with some tartness, ‘Madam, if Sophia and myself were half so conscious as your ladyship seems to be, of having every thing we said approv'd of, we should certainly be all speakers and no hearers, and consequently this gentleman here be in danger of losing one of his senses, if a man in love can be supposed to have any.’ 
The lady, in spite of all the assurance she was possess'd of, could not avoid appearing a little disconcerted at what Jenny had said;—Rodophil perceiving it, thought himself obliged, as a lover, to take up the word, and turning to Jenny; Madam, said he to her, ‘the man who has the honour to be capable of distinguishing the perfections of that lady, must certainly be supposed to have no senses for any thing but her.’ 
Jenny made no other reply to this, than that she doubted not but his passion was worthy of the object that inspired it; and, after a few hours past in a conversation not material enough to be repeated, Sophia conducted the mistress of her brother to an apartment she had caused to be got ready for her; and, through respect to him, waited in the room till she had seen her into bed. 
Jenny having always been a sharer with Sophia in the same bed, when they were together at the boarding-school, would not hear of sleeping apart from her during the time she stay'd in the country, not only to avoid giving any unnecessary trouble to the family, but also because she was willing to lose as little of her company as possible. 
Though the night was pretty far advanced when the ladies went into their chamber, neither of them had the power to close their eyes without discovering to the other some part of their sentiments in relation to the intended bride. 
That a young maid of quality should suffer herself to be conducted in so odd a manner by a gentleman to his country seat, and that she should behave towards him in so affected, and indeed so confident a fashion, in the presence of two persons of her own sex, whom she had never seen before, had something in it so new, and so strange to them, that they could not well find words to express their astonishment. 
‘It must certainly be an excess of love, said Jenny, that can oblige a man of Rodophil's good understanding to bear with such extravagancies in the woman he makes choice of for a wife.’ 
‘As for love,’ replied the other, ‘I believe that is quite out of the question; I think I may be pretty positive, from a thousand circumstances, that my brother is neither charmed with the beauties of her person, nor blind to the follies of her temper;—but he imagines,—how rightly I cannot as yet take upon me to determine, that her fortune, her birth, and the interest of her family will compensate for all other deficiencies.’ 
Women, for the most part, are but too justly accused of being severe on the foibles of each other; and some will have it, that they even take a malicious pleasure in finding something to condemn; but it was not by this propensity that either of these ladies were instigated;—the one, who loved her brother extremely, was sorry and ashamed at having observ'd such errors in a woman who was to be his partner for life;—and the other, more through good-nature than the contrary, was vexed when any opportunity for censure presented itself. 
Rodophil, however, full of the thoughts of being a bridegroom, quitted his bed much sooner than he was accustomed to do, and went to a neighbouring clergyman, who having licences always ready by him, got one immediately fill'd up with the two parties names; and as the thing was to be private, promis'd to bring a friend with him, who should officiate in giving the lady's hand. 
Sophia also rose very early that morning, being willing, in spite of her dislike to this match, to do it all the honour in her power, and that the shortness of the time would admit her. 
None of the family were sluggards on this occasion,—all appeared in their several stations alert and chearful; sprightliness sat on every face, excepting that of the intended bride; but never was there so strange,—so sudden a transformation in any one person,—she that had the evening before been so wildly gay and volatile, even to a ridiculous excess, was now become quite moped and stupid;—twice had Sophia been in her chamber before she could prevail on her to leave it and come down stairs; and when Rodophil accosted her with the usual salutation of the morning, and told her it was the happiest he had ever seen, she made no answer, nor scarce vouchsafed to look upon him. 
On the sight of the clergyman and his friend, who came exactly at the time they were expected by Rodophil;—‘What is all this for? said she sullenly;—I won't be married: —Not married, madam,—cried Rodophil, ‘you are not certainly in earnest: —Indeed, but I am,—so pray let the parson go about his business; for he has none with me at this time. 
‘What is it you mean? madam,’—demanded Rodophil, so much confounded that he could scarce utter these few words: —‘I have told you, answered she, that I won't be married,—at least at present;—therefore send away the man. 
‘I am sorry, sir,’ said the reverend divine,—‘that you did not take care to be better acquainted with the lady's mind before you gave us the trouble of waiting on you;’—and, with these words, went hastily out of the room, followed by the gentleman he had brought with him, equally affronted as surpriz'd. 
Rodophil went after them, to make the best apology he could for the caprice, as he then imagined it, of the lady's humour: —Sophia and Jenny were all this time in such a consternation, that they could only look sometimes on the person who had occasioned it, and sometimes on each other, without being able to speak a single syllable. 
Rodophil return'd, and with a countenance which testify'd the resentment of his heart,—‘Madam, said he to the lady,—‘what have I done to deserve that you should treat me in this manner? —What motive could induce you to render me the jest of the whole country? 
‘If you thought me unworthy of the honour I solicited,’—pursued he,—wherefore did you encourage me to hope it?—assign at least some reason for so strange a reverse in your behaviour towards me.’ —These questions, and several others to the same purpose, being repeated over and over, she at last reply'd,—that she would satisfy him, but no body else. 
Sophia, on hearing this, started immediately from her seat, crying: —‘Oh, madam, we will be no hindrance to the eclaircisement my brother has so much right to expect;’—in speaking this she left them together, taking Jenny with her. 
Her curiosity was, however, raised to a pitch too high not to inspire her with an eagerness to be one of the first at the explanation of this mystery,—it presently came into her head, that there was a closet which opened from the passage, and was divided from the room where Rodophil and the lady were but by a thin partition, and guessing her friend's impatience by her own, they both went together, as softly as possible, into this little recess, where, putting their ears close to the pannel of the wainscot, they could easily distinguish what discourse passed on the other side. 
As in reaching this place, they were obliged to take a circuit through a gallery of a pretty large extent, they lost some part of what had been said, but arrived timely enough to be witnesses of the main point, and to which all that had pass'd before could have been only the prelude. 
‘Married!’—they heard Rodophil cry, with a voice sonorous enough to have been audible at a much greater distance,—‘death and furies,—when, where,—to whom! —You have no occasion,—replied the lady, to put yourself into this violent agitation,—I dare say I may be easily unmarried again. 
‘Confusion, rejoin'd Rodophil,—what trifling is here! married,—and may be easily unmarried again;—for heaven's sake, madam, explain the meaning of all this, if there be really any meaning in what you say? 
‘Have a little patience,’—replied she,—‘I will tell you every thing:— you must know, that captain La Val, persuaded me one day to go with him to May-Fair Chapel,—where a man in a black coat read something over to us,—it was the marriage ceremony I think;—for my part, I did nothing but laugh all the time, yet the creature has ever since taken it into his head to imagine I am his wife. 
‘Very likely, indeed, said Rodophil scornfully,—‘and what followed?’ —‘Nay, what signifies what followed, cried she, the business is to get this foolish marriage dissolved; which I think may easily be done, especially as there were no witnesses, and we now heartily hate one another. —Were these always your sentiments?—demanded Rodophil;—No, answer'd she,—he pretended a furious passion for me, and I lik'd him well enough,—but he is now as indifferent as most other husbands, and I have never been able to endure him since I came acquainted with you;—therefore, my dear Rodophil, help me to get quite rid of him. 
‘As how pray?—said he: —Oh, I have contrived the means,—answer'd she,—you must send him a challenge, I know he does not love fighting, tho' he has made two campaigns, and I believe will be glad to relinquish me rather than come to tilt-work;—but if he should venture, you will certainly have the better; for I am told he does not understand the sword. 
‘I am highly obliged to you, madam, reply'd he, with the extremest disdain, for the undertaking you would engage me in;—but really it is not my humour to risque my own throat, or attempt cutting that of another man's, in the hope of becoming master of his property; and am so far from envying the good fortune of my rival, that I wish him all the happiness a man can enjoy with a lady of your consummate virtue and discretion. 
‘Ungrateful creature, cried she, bursting into tears, is this the love you have profess'd for me, or a recompence for the proofs you have receiv'd of mine? —Oh, madam,’—replied he, still more contemptuously, ‘you will find I know how to set a just value on such love as yours,—the landau that brought us is not yet return'd, and is at your service to conduct you to your husband's arms, or where ever you think proper.’ 
On this she call'd him monster,—villain, and all the names that rage and disappointment could suggest;—but he, little regarding what she said, rung the bell for a servant, and order'd the landau should be immediately brought. —Our fair eve-droppers thought this a proper cue for enterance, and came forth from their concealment: —‘Sister, said Rodophil, I leave you to take care of this lady, who seems a little disorder'd;—I am going out. 
Sophia, after her brother had left the room, began to say some civil things, in order to moderate the distraction she appeared in; but she answer'd not a word; and, as soon as the landau was at the gate, flung herself into it without any farther ceremony:—but what effect her behaviour had on the minds of those she left behind, the reader will presently discover. 
