


Presents the Reader, among many other
particulars, with a full, tho' as concise,
an account, as can be given, of
the real quality and condition of the
lady, that mrs. Munden had seen, and
been so much charmed with at the
mercer's. 

Mrs. Munden carried enough home
with her from lady Loveit's, to employ
her mind for that whole night at
least;—what she had been told in relation
to the death of mrs. Trueworth,
raised a strange contrariety of ideas in her,
which it was impossible for her either to 

reconcile, or oblige either the one or the
other totally to subside. 
She thought it great pity, that so virtuous,
so beautiful, and so accomplish'd
a young lady, as she had been told mrs.
Trueworth was, should thus early be
snatch'd away from all the joys of love
and life, but could not lament so melancholly
an incident, in a manner she was
sensible it deserved:—envy had ever been
a stranger to her breast, yet since her own
marriage, and that of mr. Trueworth
with his lady, she had sometimes been
tempted to accuse heaven of partiality, in
making so wide a difference in their
Fates:—and though the blame of her
misfortunes lay wholly on herself, had
been apt to imagine, that she had only
been impelled by an unavoidable impulse,
to act as she had done, and was fated by
an invincible necessity, to be the enemy
of her own happiness. 
Thus did this fair predestinarian reason
within herself, whenever the illusage
of mr. Munden made her reflect on
the generosity of mr. Trueworth:— 
she repined not at the felicities, she supposed
were enjoyed by mrs. Trueworth,
but regretted that her own lot had been
cast so vastly different. 

But though all these little heart-burnings
now ceased, by the death of that
so lately happy lady, and even common
humanity demanded the tribute of compassion
for her destiny, of which none had
a greater share, on other occasions, than
mrs. Munden, yet could she not on this
pay it without some interruptions from a
contrary emotion;—in these moments,
if it may be said she grieved at all, it was
more because she knew, that mr. Trueworth
was grieved, than for the cause that
made him so. 
Her good sense, her justice, and her
good nature, however, gave an immediate
check to such sentiments, whenever
she found them rising in her, but her utmost
efforts could not wholly subdue
them;—there was a secret something in
her heart, which she would never allow
herself to think she was possest of, that
in spite of all she could do, diffused an
involuntary satisfaction at the knowledge,
that mr. Trueworth was a widdower. 
If lady Loveit could have foreseen the
commotions her discourse raised in the
breast of her fair friend, she would certainly
never have entertained her with
it, but she so little suspected her having 

any tenderness for mr. Trueworth, that
she observed not the changes inher countenance,
when she mentioned that gentleman,
as she afterwards frequently did,
on many occasions, in the course of the
visits to each other;—nor could mrs.
Munden, being ignorant herself of the
real cause of the agitations she was in,
make her ladyship a confidant in this, as
she did in all her other affairs,—the
little happiness she enjoyed in marriage
not excepted. 
Lady Loveit had indeed a pretty right
idea of her misfortune in this point, before
she heard it from herself:—sir Basil,
tho' not at all conversant with mr. Munden,
was well acquainted with his character,
and manner of behaviour, and the
account he gave of both to her on being
told to whom he was married, left her no
room to doubt how disagreeable a situation
the wife of such a husband must be
in:—she heartily commiserated her hard
fate;—yet, as lady Trusty had done,
said every thing to perswade her to bear
it with a becoming patience. 
Perceiving she had lost some part of her
vivacity, and would frequently fall into
very melancholly musings, sir Basil himself,
now fully convinced of her merit, and 

good qualities, added his endeavours
to those of his amiable consort for the exhilerating
her spirits:—they would needs
have her make one in every party of pleasure,
either formed by themselves, or
wherein they had a share, and obliged her
to come as often to their house as she
could do without giving offence to her
domestic tyrant. 
An excess of gaiety when curbed, is apt
to degenerate into it's contrary extream:— 
it must therefore be confess'd that few
things could have been more lucky for
mrs. Munden than this event,—she had
lost all relish for the conversation of the
miss Airishes, and those other giddy
creatures, which had composed the greatest
part of her acquaintance, and too
much solitude might have brought on a
gloominess of temper, equally uneasy to
herself, and to those about her; but the
society of these worthy friends,—the
diversions they prepared for her, and the
company to which they introduced her,
kept up her native liveliness of mind, and
at the same time convinced her, that
pleasure was no enemy to virtue, or to
reputation, when partook with persons
of honour and discretion. 
She had been with them one evening, 

when the satisfaction she took in their
conversation, the pressures they made to
detain her, joined to the knowledge, that
there was no danger of mr. Munden's
being uneasy at her absence, he seldom
coming home till towards day-break, engaged
her to stay till the night was pretty
far advanced, yet late as it was, she was
presented with an adventure of as odd a
kind, as ever she had been surprized with 
She was undressing, in order to go to
bed, when she heard a very loud knocking
at the street-door, after which her
footman came up, and told her, that a
woman was below, who said she must
speak with her immediately. —‘I shall
speak to no body at this time of the
night,’ said mrs. Munden, ‘therefore
go down and tell her so. —The fellow
went, but returned in a moment or two,
and told her, that the person would take
no denial, nor would go out of the house
without seeing her. —‘Some very impudent
creature, sure, said mrs. Munden,
—‘but do you go,’ added she in
the same breath, to the maid that waited
on her, ‘and ask her name and business,
—if she will tell neither, let her
be turned out of the house.’ 
She was in a good deal of perplexity, 

to think who should enquire for her at
that late hour, when the servant she had
sent to examine into the matter, came
back, and before she had well entered the
chamber, cried out,—‘Lord, madam, I
never was so astonished in my life! I
wonder Tom could speak in such a rude
manner;—the woman, as he called her,
is a very fine lady, I am sure, though
she has no hoop, nor stays on,—nothing
but a fine rich brocade wrapping
gown upon her:—she looks, as if she
was just going to bed, or rather coming
out of bed, for her head-cloaths are
in great disorder, and her hair all
about her ears. 
‘Well, but her name and business,’ 
demanded mrs. Munden, hastily. ‘Nay,
madam,’ replied the maid, ‘she will
tell neither, but to yourself; so pray,
dear madam, either come down stairs,
or let her be brought up,—I am sure
she does not look as if she would do
you any hurt.’ 
Mrs. Munden paused a little on what
she had heard, and believing there must
be something very extraordinary, indeed,
both in the person, and the visit, resolved
to be convinced of the truth, therefore,
having given a strict charge, that both 

the footmen should be ready at her call,
in case there should be any occasion for
them, went into the dining-room, and
ordered that the person who enquired for
her, should be introduced. 
Her whole appearance answered exactly
to the description that had been given of
her by the maid, but it was her face
which most alarmed mrs. Munden, as
being positive she had seen it before, tho'
when, or where, she could not at that instant
recollect. 
But the stranger soon eased her of the
suspense she was in, when throwing herself
at her feet, and bursting into a flood
of tears, ‘you once offered me your
friendship, madam,’ said she,—‘a consciousness
of my own unworthyness,
made me refuse that honour, but I now
come to implore your compassion, and
charitable protection. —I have no hope
of safety, or of shelter, but in your
goodness and generosity.’ 
The accents of her voice now discovered
her to be no other, than the lady
mrs. Munden had seen at the mercer's:— 
she was strangely confounded, but not so
much as to hinder her from raising the
distressed fair one, with the greatest civility, 

and seating her in a chair,—‘Tho'
I cannot comprehend, madam,’ answered
she, ‘by what accident you are
reduced to address me in these terms,
yet you may rely upon my readiness
to assist the unfortunate, especially, a
person, whom I cannot but look upon,
as far from deserving to be so. 
‘Oh, would to God,’ cryed the other,
very emphatically, ‘that my history
could preserve that kind opinion in you; 
but alas, though I find myself obliged
to relate it to you, in order to obtain
the protection I intreat, I tremble, lest
by doing so, I should forfeit those pretentions
to your mercy, which otherwise
my sex, and my distress, might
justly claim.’ 
These words were sufficient to have excited
the curiosity of a woman, who had
less of that propensity in her nature, than
mrs. Munden;—she told her, that by
being made the confidant of her affairs,
she should think herself obliged to excuse
whatever she found not worthy of
her approbation. 
Prepare yourself then, madam, said
her still weeping guest,—summon all
your goodness to forgive the frailties of 

youth, and inadvertency, and to pity the
sad consequences, which sometimes attend
the pride of flattered beauty, and
vain desire of admiration. 
This expression sunk more deeply in
the mind of mrs. Munden, than the person
uttered it, imagined:—she made no
reply, however, and the other began the
narrative she had promised, in these, or
the like terms. 
The History of Mademoiselle de Roquelair.
“I need not tell you, madam’, said she,
that I am not a native of this kingdom,
my bad pronunciation of the
language, speaks it for me;—I am,
indeed, by birth a Parisian, and daughter
of the sieur de Roquelair, a man
of some estimation in the world. 
“The great hopes conceived of me
in my infancy, encouraged him to be
almost profuse in the expences of my
education;—no accomplishment befitting
of my sex and rank, was denied
me;—in fine, it was easy to see
he had an affection for me, above all
his other children, and that the partial
opinion he had of my person and
understanding, made him build the 

highest expectations on my future
fortune. 
“But alas! what he intended for my
happiness, proved my undoing;—I
had but just attained my fifteenth
year of age, when the little beauty I
was mistress of, was taken notice of
by the duke de M&wblank;as I was walking
one evening in the Tuilleries, with
a young companion of my own sex:— 
he past us twice without speaking,
but at the third turn, accosted us with
a gallantry natural to persons of his
high rank;—the praises he bestowed
on me, were such as might excuse
some vanity in a heart so young and
unexperienced as mine then was. 
“On our leaving the walks, a gentleman
of his retinue followed, and as
I afterwards was informed, enquired
who I was, and many other particulars
concerning me;—the next morning,
being at mass in the church of St.
Sulpice, I saw the duke again, and on
my coming out, had a letter put into
my hands, which as soon as I got to a
convenient place, I opened, and found,
as I before imagined, from the duke. 
“After magnifying the power of my wit, 

my beauty, my fine shape, and a thousand
charms, with which his amorous
fancy painted me, and protesting with
the most solemn imprecations words
could form, his everlasting adoration
of me, he intreated I would meet him
at the same place, where he had first
seen me, and appointed an hour in
which he knew least company would
be there. 
“I was imprudent enough to comply
with this request;—my illustrious
lover was there before me,—he saluted
me with the utmost transport in
his voice and eyes,—led me to a retired
part of the walk,—made me
the most splendid offers, and endeavoured
to persuade me, that being his
mistress was a station more respectable,
than being the wife of a private
gentleman, or even of a little marquis. 
“I was unprepared to confute the
arguments he urged, and to confess
the truth, felt but too much satisfaction
in hearing him speak;—my
tongue obeyed the dictates of my heart,
and told him, that I would be his,— 
though I cannot say, that I was tempted
by any extraordinary liking of his 

person, but merely by my ambition of
pleasing a prince of the blood royal. 
“It was agreed between us, that a
proper place should be provided for
my reception, and I should quit my
father's house entirely, and this was to
be accomplished at the end of three
days, but before the expiration of that
time, a person, who had seen me in
the Tuilleries, carried home intelligence
with what company I had been,
and my father, who preferred virtue
above grandeur, took all imaginable
precautions to prevent my continuing
so dangerous an intercourse. 
“But what cannot the power of gold
effect?—though I was locked up in
my chamber,—no letters or messages
permitted to be delivered to me, an
agent of the duke's, by a large bribe,
corrupted one of the servants, by whose
assistance I got out of the house, when
all the rest of the family were asleep,
and a chariot waiting for me at the
end of the street, carried me to a magnificent
hotel, where I found my noble
lover, and every thing I could
wish, ready to receive me. 
“Here I lived, for near two whole 

years, in a pomp which excited the
envy, and set me above the scandal of
the censorious;—but at length malice
overtook me,—the baseness of
those about me accused me to my prince
of having wronged his bed;—he too
easily gave credit to their aspersions,
and not only withdrew his affection
and his favours from me, but cruelly
discarded me, without the least provision
for my future support. 
“My father, who would never see me
in my exalted state, equally shunned
me in my fallen one;—but at last,
through the intercession of some friends,
he was prevailed upon to forgive what
was past, provided I would leave Paris
for ever, and spend the remainder
of my days in a monastery:—to this,
in the distracted condition I then
was, yielded, and a convent at Roan
was made choice of for my retreat;— 
the abbess was wrote to concerning me,
and every thing was prepared for my
departure, when chance brought me
acquainted with mr. Thoughtless. 
“You start, madam,” continued she,
perceiving mrs. Munden looked very
much confused,—“but know at once,
that I am that very unfortunate woman 

your brother brought with him
from Paris,—who has ever since liv'd
with him, and whom you must have
heard of.” 
The amazement mrs. Munden was in,
on finding her the mistress of her brother,
was such, as would not permit her to
make any other reply, than to desire she
would go on with what she had farther to
relate, on which, mademoiselle de Roquelair
resumed her discourse in this manner. 
“This gentleman,” said she, “was
well acquainted with my story, but it
did not hinder him from entertaining
a passion for me;—he declared it to
me,—the aversion I had to a recluse
life,—the allurements of the world,
and his more persuasive rhetoric, soon
won me to yield to his desires: —I
made a second elopement;—we embarked
together, and came to England,
where I have had the command of his
family, and lived with him in all things
like a wife, except the name. —But
fortune, always my enemy, conjured up
a spirit of jealousy in him, for my torment
at first, and at last for my utter
ruin. —His fears of losing me, as he
pretended, secluded me from all society,
—denied me all the public diversions 

of the town, and though I lived amidst
the very seat of pleasures, kept me as
much a stranger to them, as if I had
been a thousand leagues removed;— 
but oh! this night, this night, madam,
has compleated all his too suspicious
temper long since threatened. —The
poor mercer, at whose house you saw
me, came this night to bring a piece
of silk I had bespoke of him,—mr.
Thoughtless came home immediately
after, and being told who was above
with me, flew up stairs,—burst open
the door, which by some accident was
locked, rushed in with his drawn sword,
swearing he would sacrifice us both;— 
the man, to avoid his fury, jumped out
of the window into the yard; mr.
Thoughtless ran down the back stairs,
in order, I suppose, to make him in
that place the victim of his rage:— 
whether he has effected it, I know not,
for trembling at my own danger, I
took that opportunity of running directly
out of the house, though where
to go I knew not:—I had no friend,
—no acquaintance, to whom I could
apply;—I found myself all alone in
the street, and exposed to insults,
even worse than those from which I
fled:—my good genius, for so I
hope it was, which in that dreadful 

instant, reminded me of you;—I
had heard a high character of your
goodness, and was assured of it, even
by the little I had seen of you, when
you were pleased to think me worthy
your notice.” 
“This, madam,” added she, “has
brought me to you, and I once more
beseech shelter and protection under
your roof, for this night, at least,
till I can recollect in what manner
I shall dispose of my wretched self.” 
Though mrs. Munden was apprehensive
this lady had favoured herself
too much in the recital she had made
yet she could not think of refusing what
she asked:—she ordered a bed to be instantly
prepared for her, and having
conducted her to the chamber where she
was to lie, told her, she would defer till
the next morning any farther discourse
on the subject they had been talking of,
as it was very late, and she expected mr.
Munden home,—so wishing her a good
repose, returned to her own apartment,
to reflect at more leisure on this strange
adventure. 
