

Contains some incidents which will be
found equally interesting and entertaining,
or the author is very much
mistaken. 
Mr. Trueworth had all the reason imaginable
from the whole deportment
of miss Betsy towards him, to believe that
there wanted little more for the conclusion
of his marriage with her, than the 
arrival of her two brothers; she had often
told him, whenever he pressed her on
that score, that she would give no definitive
answer, till she had received the advice
and approbation of the elder mr.
Thoughtless. 
That gentleman was now expected in
a few days, and mr. Francis Thoughtless
having intelligence of his being on his
return, was also preparing to leave
L&wblank;e, in order to meet him on his
first arrival in London; but during this
short space of time, some events fell out,
which put a great damp on the gaiety
of those, who had with so much impatience
wished for their approach. 
Mr. Trueworth had an aunt, who besides
being the nearest relation he had
living, and the only one in London, was
extremely respected by him, on account
of her great prudence, exemplary virtue,
and the tender affection she had always
testified for him. —This good lady
thought herself bound by duty, as she
was led by love, to make a thorough enquiry
into the character of the young person
her nephew was about to marry:
—she was acquainted with many who
had been in company with miss Betsy,
and were witnesses of her behaviour;— 
she asked the opinion of those among
them, whom she looked upon as the most
candid, concerning the match now on the
carpet, and was extremely troubled to
find their answers such, as were no way
conformable to the idea mr. Trueworth
had endeavoured to inspire her with of
his mistress's perfections:—they all, indeed,
agreed that she was handsome,— 
well-shaped,—genteel,—had a great
deal of wit, vivacity, and good-humour; 
but shook their heads when any of those
requisites to make the marriage-state agreeable
were mentioned. 
Poor miss Betsy, as the reader has had
but too much opportunity to observe,
was far from setting forth to any advantage,
the real good qualities she was possessed
of:—on the contrary, the levity
of her conduct rather disfigured the native
innocence of her mind, and the purity
of her intentions; so that, according
to the poet, 

‘All saw her spots, but few her brightness took:’

The old lady not being able to hear
any thing concerning her intended niece,
but what was greatly to her dissatisfaction,
was continually remonstrating to mr. 
Trueworth, that the want of solidity in
a wife was one of the worst misfortunes
that could attend a marriage-state;— 
that the external beauties of the person
could not atone for the internal defects of
the mind;—that a too great gaiety du
cœur, frequently led women into errors
without their designing to be guilty of
them; and conjured him to consider well
before the irrevocable words, ‘I take
you for better and for worse,’ were past,
how ill it would suit, either with his honour,
or his peace of mind, if she whom
he now wished to make his partner for
life should, after she became so, behave
in the same manner she now did. 
Mr. Trueworth listened to what she
said, with all the attention she could desire,
but was too passionately in love to be
much influenced by it:—not that he
did not see there were some mistakes in
the conduct of miss Betsy, which he could
wish reformed, yet he could not look
upon them as so dangerous to her virtue
and reputation, and therefore omitted no
arguments, which he thought might justify
his choice, and clear the accused fair
one from all blame, in the eyes of a person,
whose approbation he was very desirous
of obtaining. 
The warmth with which he spake,
convinced his aunt, that to oppose his inclinations
in this point was only warring
with the winds, she desisted from speaking
any more against the marriage, and
contented herself with telling him, that
since he was bent on making miss Betsy
his wife, she should be glad if, at least,
he would remove her into the country,
and prevent her returning to this town
as long as possible. 
This last counsel had a great deal of
weight with mr. Trueworth;—he had
often wished in his heart, when seeing
her, as he often did, encompassed with a
crowd of such, whom his good understanding
made him despise, that if ever
he became her husband, it might be in
his power to prevail on her, to break off
acquaintance with the greatest part of
those she at present conversed with; and
now being admitted to entertain her with
more freedom and seriousness than ever,
he resolved to sound her sentiments on
that score, and try to discover how far
she could relish the retirements of a country
life. 
Accordingly, the next visit he made to
her, he began to represent, in the most 
pathetic terms he was able, the true felicity
that two people, who loved each
other, might enjoy when remote from the
noise and interruption of a throng of giddy
visitors. —“The deity of soft desires,” 
said he, “flies the confused glare of pomp
and public shews;—'tis in the shady
bowers, or on the banks of a sweet
purling stream, he spreads his downy
wings, and wafts ten thousand name-less
pleasures on the fond,—the innocent,
—and the happy pair.” 
He was going on, but she interrupted
him with a loud laugh; —“Hold,— 
hold,” cried she, “was there ever such
a romantic description? —I wonder
how such silly ideas come into your
head? —Shady bowers! and purling
streams! —Heavens, how insipid! — 
Well,” continued she, “you may be
the Strephon of the woods, if you
think fit; but I shall never envy
the happiness of the Cloe that accompanies
you in these fine recesses. — 
What! to be cooped up like a tame
dove, only to coo,—and bill,—and
breed? —O, it would be a delicious
life indeed!” 
Mr. Trueworth now perceived, to his
no small vexation, the late seriousness he 
had observed in miss Betsy, and which
had given him so much satisfaction, was
no more than a short-lived interval,—a
sudden start of reason and recollection
soon dissipated, and that her temper, in
reality, was still as light, as wild, and as
inconsiderate as ever. —The ridicule with
which she treated what he said, did not,
however, hinder him from proceeding in
the praise of a country life; but happening
to say, that innocence could no where
else be so secure, she presently took up
the word, and with a disdainful air replied,
that innocence in any one, but an
ideot, might be secure in any place; to
which he retorted, that reason was at
sometimes absent, even in those who had
the greatest share of it at others. 
Many smart repartees passed between
them on this subject, in most of which
miss Betsy had the better; but mr. Trueworth,
not willing to give up the point,
reminded her that Solomon, the most luxuriant,
and withal the wisest of men, pronounced,
that all the gaieties, and magnificence
of the earth were vanity and vexation
of spirit. —“He did so,” replied
she, with a scornful smile; “but it was
not till he had enjoyed them all, and
was grown past the power of enjoying 
yet further:—when I am so, 'tis possible
I may say the same.” 
Mr. Trueworth finding she was pretty
much stung at some things he had said,
and conscious that in this discourse he
had in some measure forgot the respect
due from a lover to his mistress, would
not pursue the topic any farther, but, as
artfully as he could, turned the conversation
on things more agreeable to miss
Betsy's way of thinking:—he could not,
however, after they had parted, forbear
ruminating on the contempt she had
shewn of a country life, and was not so
easy as the submissiveness of his passion
made him affect to be, on taking leave. 
This was, however, a matter of slight
moment to him, when compared with
what soon after ensued. 
I believe, that from the last letter of
miss Forward to miss Betsy, the reader
may suspect it was not by a kinsman she
was maintained; but it is proper to be
more particular on that affair, and shew
how that unfortunate creature, finding
herself utterly discarded by her father,
and abandoned to the utmost distresses,
accepted of the offer made her by a rich
Jew-merchant, of five guineas a week to
be his mistress. 
But as few women, who have once lost
the sense of honour, ever recover it again,
but, on the contrary, endeavour to lose
all sense of shame also, devote themselves
to vice, and act whatever interest or inclination
prompts them to; miss Forward
could not content herself with the
embraces, nor allowance of her keeper,
but received both the presents and caresses
of as many as she had charms to attract. 
Sir Bazil Loveit was a great favourite
with her, and if among such a plurality one
might be said to have the preference, it
was he:—this young baronet had been
intimately acquainted with mr. Trueworth
abroad;—they had travelled together
through the greatest part of Italy, and
had been separated only by mr. Trueworth's
being called home, on account of
some family affair. —Sir Bazil being but
lately arrived, they had not seen each
other since, 'till meeting by accident in
a coffee-house, they renewed their former
friendship. —After the usual compliments,
mr. Trueworth proposed passing the evening
together: to which sir Bazil replied,
that he should be glad of the opportunity,
but was engaged to sup with a lady; but,
said he, after a pause, 'tis where I can be
free, and you shall go with me. —To 
which the other having consented, sir
Bazil told him, as they were going towards
the house, that there would be no occasion
to use much ceremony; for it was
only to a lady of pleasure he was conducting
him; but added, that she was a fine
girl,—seemed to have been well brought
up,—had been but lately come upon the
town, and behaved with more modesty
than most of her profession. 
Mr. Trueworth had never any great
relish for the conversation of these sort of
women, much less now, when his whole
heart was taken up with an honourable
passion for a person, who, in spite of the
little errors of her conduct, he thought
deserving of his affections; yet as he had
given his promise, he imagined, that to
go back would be too precise, and subject
him to the raillery of his less scrupulous
friend. 
Miss Forward, for it was she to whom
this visit was made, received them in a
manner, which justified the character sir
Bazil had given of her. —There was,
however, a certain air of libertinism, both
in her looks and gestures, which would
have convinced mr. Trueworth, if he had
not been told so before, that she was one
of those unhappy creatures, who make 
traffic of their beauty. The gentlemen
had not been there above a quarter of an
hour, before a maid-servant came into
the room, and told miss Forward, that
a young lady, who said her name was
Thoughtless, was at the door in a chair,
and desired to see her; —“O my dear
miss Betsy Thoughtless,” cried she,
“desire her to walk up immediately.” — 
“This is lucky,” said sir Bazil, “I
wanted a companion for my friend,— 
now each man will have his bird.” — 
“Hush,” cried miss Forward, “I can
assure you she is virtuous,—take care
what you say.” 
Mr. Trueworth was so much alarmed
at hearing the name of miss Betsy, that
being retired to a window, in order to
recover himself from the confusion he
was in, that he heard not what miss Forward
had said to sir Bazil:—miss Betsy
presently entering the room, miss Forward
ran to embrace her, saying, “My
dear miss Betsy, how glad am I to see
you!” —To which the other returned,
My dear miss Forward, how ashamed
am I to have been so long absent!— 
but one foolish thing or other has still
prevented my coming.” 
Sir Bazil then saluted her with a great
deal of politeness, though with less respect
than doubtless he would have done,
had he seen her in any other place. — 
Mr. Trueworth, who by this time had resolved
in what manner he should act,
now turned, and advanced towards the
company,—miss Betsy on seeing him,
cried out, in some surprise, “Mr. Trueworth!
good God! who thought of
finding you here?” —“You did not,
madam, I dare answer,” replied he,
with a very grave air, “and I as little
expected the honour of meeting you
here.” —O, you are acquainted then,
said sir Bazil, laughing, “this is merry
enough,—I find we are all right.” 
Mr. Trueworth made no direct answer
to this, but endeavoured to assume a gaiety
conformable to that of the company he
was in:—after some little time being
past in discourse on ordinary affairs, miss
Forward took miss Betsy into the next
room to return the money she had been
so kind to lend her at mrs. Nightshade's,
and told her, she had much to say to her,
but could not be so rude to leave the gentlemen
for any long time. —While they
were absent, which indeed was not above
half a minute, “This is a delicious girl,” 
said sir Bazil to mr. Trueworth, “i'faith
Charles, you will have the best of the
market to-night.” —What reply mr.
Trueworth would have made is uncertain,
—the ladies returned that instant, and
the conversation became extremely sprightly,
though, on sir Bazil's part, sometimes
interspersed with expressions not altogether
consistent with that decorum, he
would have observed towards women of
reputation. 
Miss Betsy, far from thinking any ill
herself, took every thing as well meant,
and replied to whatever was uttered by
this gay young gentleman, with a freedom,
which, to those who knew her not
perfectly, might justly render her liable
to censure. —Mr. Trueworth would fain
have taken some share, if possible, in this
conversation, in order to conceal the perplexity
of his thoughts, but all his endeavours
were ineffectual, and though his
words were sometimes gay, the tone with
which he spoke them plainly shewed,
that his heart was very far from corresponding
with his expressions. 
Sir Bazil having ordered a handsome
supper, miss Betsy stayed till it was over,
and then rose up, and took her leave,
saying, she was obliged to go home, and 
write some letters. —As none of them
had any equipage there, a hackney coach
was ordered to be called, and mr. Trueworth
offering to accompany her, sir Bazil,
on waiting on them down stairs, said
to him some merry things on the occasion,
which, though miss Betsy did not
comprehend, her lover understood the
meaning of but too well for his peace of
mind. 