

Cannot fail of exciting compassion in
some readers, though it may move
others to laughter. 
The few remonstrances miss Betsy
would vouchsafe to listen to from
mr. Trueworth, had a much greater effect
upon her mind, than her pride, and
the excessive homage she expected from
her lovers, would suffer to make shew of,
or than he himself imagined. —She had
too much discernment, heedless as she
was, not to know he was above any little
malicious inuendos; but, on the contrary,
was extremely cautious in regard to the
character of whomsoever he spoke;—she
feared therefore he had but too good
grounds for the uneasiness he expressed,
for her continuing a correspondence with
miss Forward;—she knew that she had
been faulty, and could not be assured she
was not still so; and it was more owing 
to her impatience to be ascertained of the
truth, than to any real resentment she
had conceived against mr. Trueworth,
that she complied with the invitation of
her now suspected friend, and resolved
to put the question home to
her, concerning her present manner of
life, and the means by which she was
supported:—she had found her removed
from the lowest degree of penury and
wretchedness into a state, equal to what
she could have been mistress of, had she
been re-established in the favour of her
father; and now, for the first time, began
to think it strange she should be so,
from the mere bounty of a distant relation,
to whom in her utmost distress she
had never applied, nor even once mentioned
in the recital of her melancholly
history: —“I will talk to her,” said
she to herself, “watch carefully, not only
the replies she makes to what I say,
but also her very looks, unperceiving
my suspicions, and if I find the least
room to believe what mr. Trueworth
has insinuated, shall pity, but will
never see her more.” 
In this prudent disposition did she enter
the lodgings of miss Forward, but had
no opportunity for the execution of her
purpose;—some company, which she 
herself thought, by their behaviour, to
be not of the best sort, happening to be
just come before her, and departed not
till it was time to go to the play. — 
Miss Betsy was more than once about to
tell miss Forward, that she had changed
her mind, and would not go; but her
complaisance, as having been the person
who made the first proposal, as often
stopped her mouth. 
In fine, they went, but the house being
very full, and the fellow; who had
been sent to keep places for them, going
somewhat too late, they were obliged
to content themselves with sitting in the
third row. —This, at another time, would
have been a matter of some mortification
to miss Betsy; but in the humour she
now was, to shew herself was the least of
her care. —Never had she entered any
place of publick entertainment with so
little satisfaction;—mr. Trueworth's
words ran very much in her mind;— 
she had lost no part of them, and though
she could not bring herself to approve of
the freedom he had taken, yet, in her
heart, she could not forbear confessing,
that his admonitions testifyed the most
zealous and tender care for her reputation; 
and if given by any one, except a 
lover, would have demanded more of her
thanks than her resentment. 
But, alas! those serious considerations
were but of short duration:—the brillant
audience,—the musick,—the moving
scenes exhibited on the stage, and above
all the gallantries, with which herself and
miss Forward were treated, by several
gay young gentlemen, who, between the
acts, presented them with fruits and sweetmeats,
soon dissipated all those reflections,
which it was so much her interest to
have cherished, and she once more relapsed
into her former self. 
Towards the end of the play, there
were two rakes of distinction, that stuck
very close to them, and when it was ended,
took the liberty to invite them to sup
at a tavern;—miss Betsy started at the
motion, but was very well pleased to find
miss Forward shewed an equal dislike to
it. —“You will give us leave then,” 
cried one of the gentlemen, “to guard
you safe home, ladies?” —“That I
think, my dear,” said miss Forward to
miss Betsy, “may be granted, for the
sake of being protected from the insults
of those, who may know less how to
behave towards our sex.” 
Miss Betsy making no opposition, they
all four went in a hackney coach to miss
Forward's lodging, it being agreed upon
between them, that miss Betsy should be
set down there, and take a chair from
thence to mr. Goodman's. —Nothing indecent,
nor that could be any way shocking
to the most strict modesty, being offered
during their passage, on their
alighting from the coach at mr. Screener's
door, miss Forward thought, that to ask
them to come in would incur no censure
from her fair friend, as they had behaved
with so much civility and complaisance; 
—accordingly she did so, and
they, who expected no less, took each
man his lady by the hand, and immediately
tript up stairs. 
Miss Betsy did not presently make any
offer to go home, because she thought it
would appear very odd in her to leave
her companion with two strange gentlemen. 
—She little guessed the designs they
had in their heads, and doubted not but
they would soon take leave;—she did
not, however, continue in this mistake
for many minutes, for one of them drawing
miss Forward to a window, in order
to speak to her with more privacy, the
other, that he might have the better opportunity 
to do so, addressed himself to
miss Betsy,—“How killing handsome
you are,” said he, taking her by both
her hands, and looking full in her face,
“What a pity it is you did not shine in
the front to-night? By my soul you
would have out-dazzled all the titled
prudes about you.” 
“Pish,” replied she, “I went to see
the play, not to be seen myself.” — 
“Not to be seen!” cried he, “why then
have you taken all this pains to empty
the whole quiver of Cupid's arrows to
new point those charms you have received
from nature?—Why does the
jessamine, and the blooming violet
play wanton in your hair?—Why is
the patch with so much art placed on
the corner of this ruby lip,—and here
another to mark out the arched symmetry
of the jetty brow?—Why does the
glittering solitaire hang pendant on the
snowy breast, but to attract, and allure
us poor, admiring men, into a pleasing
ruin?” 
Miss Betsy answered this raillery in its
kind, and as she had a great deal of ready
wit, would soon perhaps, had the same
strain continued, have left the beau nothing
to say for himself; but miss Forward, 
and the other gentleman having
finished what they had to say, coming
towards them, put an end to it. —“What
do you think,” cried miss Forward,
“this gentleman swears he won't go out
of the house, till I give him leave to
send for a supper?” —“You may do
as you please,” said miss Betsy, “but
I must be excused from staying to partake
of it.” —Whether she was really
in earnest or not, is not very material,
but her refusal was looked upon only as
a feint, and they pressed her to tarry in
such a manner, as she could not well
avoid complying, even though she had
been more averse, in effect, than for some
time she pretended to be. 
The conversation was extremely lively,
and tho' sprinkled with some double entendres,
could not be said to have any
thing indecent, or that could raise a blush
in the faces of women who were accustomed
to much company. —Miss Betsy
had her share in all the innocent part of
what was said, and laughed at that which
was less so. —But not to dwell on trifles,
she forgot all the cautions given her by
mr. Trueworth,—considered not that she
was in the company of two strange gentlemen,
and of a woman whose character
was suspected; nor, though she had a 
watch by her side, regarded not how the
hours passed on, 'till she heard the nightly
monitor of time, cry, “Past twelve o'
clock, and a cloudy morning.” 
After this she would not be prevailed
upon to stay, and desired miss Forward
to send somebody for a chair. —“A
chair, madam,” cried that gentleman,
who, of the two, had been most particular
in his addresses to her, “you cannot
sure imagine we should suffer you to go
home alone at this late hour?” —“I
apprehend no great danger,” said she,
“though I confess it is a thing I have
not been accustomed to.” —He replied,
that in his company she should not begin
the experiment:—on this a coach was
ordered. —Miss Betsy made some few
scruples at committing herself to the
conduct of a person so little known to
her. —“All acquaintance must have a
beginning,” said he, “the most intimate
friends were perfect strangers at
first. —You may depend upon it I am
a man of honour, and cannot be
capable of an ungenerous action.” 
Little more was said on the occasion,
and being told a coach was at the door,
they took leave of miss Forward, and the
other gentleman, and went down stairs. 
—On stepping into the coach, miss Betsy
directed the man where to drive; but the
gentleman, unheard by her, ordered him
to go to the bagnio in Orange-street. — 
They were no sooner seated, and the windows
drawn up, to keep out the cold,
than miss Betsy was alarmed with a treatment,
which her want of consideration
made her little expect:—since the gentleman-commoner,
at Oxford, no man
had ever attempted to take the liberties
which her present companion now did:
—she struggled,—she repelled with all
her might, the insolent pressures of his
lips and hands. —“Is this,” cried she,
“the honour I was to depend upon?— 
Is it thus you prove yourself incapable
of an ungenerous action?” —“Accuse
me not,” said he, “'till you have
reason. —I have been bit once, and
have made a vow never to settle upon
any woman while I live, again;—but
you shall fare never the worse for that,
—I will make you a handsome present
before we part, and if you can be constant
will allow you six guineas a
week.” 
She was so confounded at the first mention
of this impudent proposal, that she
had not the power of interrupting him; 
but recovering herself, as well as she was 
able, “Heavens!” cried she, “what
means all this?—What do you take
me for?” —“Take you for,” answered
he-laughing, “prithee, dear girl, no
more of these airs:—I take you for
a pretty,—kind,—obliging creature,
and such I hope to find you, as soon
as we come into a proper place. —In
the mean time,” continued he, stopping
her mouth with kisses, “none of
this affected coyness.” 
The fright she was in, aided by disdain
and rage, now inspired her with an
unusual strength;—she broke from him,
thrust down the window,—and with one
breath called him monster,—villain;— 
with the next screamed out to the coachman
to stop, and finding he regarded not
her cries, would have thrown herself out,
if not forcibly with-held by the gentleman,
who began now to be a little startled
at her resolute behaviour,—“What is
all this for,” said he? “would you
break your neck, or venture being
crushed to pieces by the wheels?” — 
“Any thing,” cried she, bursting into
tears, “I will venture, suffer any thing,
rather than be subjected to insults, such
as you have dared to treat me with.” 
Though the person by whom miss Betsy
was thus dangerously attacked was a libertine,
or, according to the more genteel
and modish phrase, a man of pleasure,
yet he wanted neither honour, nor good
sense:—he had looked on miss Betsy as
a woman of the town, by seeing her with
one who was so; and her too great
freedom in conversation, gave him no
cause to alter his opinion; but the manner
in which she had endeavoured to rebuff
his more near approaches, greatly staggered
him:—he knew not what to
think, but remained in silent cogitation
for some minutes, and though he held
her fast clasped round the waste, it was
only to prevent her from attempting the
violence she had threatened, not to offer
any towards her:—“Is it possible,” 
said he, after this pause, “that you are
virtuous?” —“I call heaven to witness,” 
answered she, with a voice faultering,
through the excess of terror and
indignation, “that I never have entertained
one thought that was not strictly
so;—that I detest and scorn those
wretched creatures of the number of
whom you imagine me to be one; and
that I would sooner die the worst of
deaths, than live with infamy. —Yes,
sir, be assured,” continued she, gathering 
more courage, “that whatever appearances
may be this fatal night against
me, I am of a family of some consideration
in the world, and am blest with
a fortune, which sets me above the
low temptations of designing men.” 
As she had ended these words, they
came to the bagnio, and the coach immediately
stopping, two or three waiters
came running to open the door, on which
miss Betsy, more terrified than ever,
shrieked in a most piteous manner, “O
God!” cried she, “What's here?— 
Where am I?—What will become of
me?” And at that instant recollected,
that no help was near;—that she was in
the power of a man, whose aim was her
eternal ruin;—and that it was by her
own indiscretion alone, this mischief had
fallen on her, was so overcome with the
dread,—the shame,—the horror, as
she then supposed, of her inevitable fate,
that she was very near falling into a
swoon. 
The gentleman discovering, by the
light of the lamps at the bagnio door,
the condition she was in, was truly touched
with it. —“Retire,” said he, hastily,
to the fellows, “we do not want you.” 
—Then throwing himself on his knees 
before her, “Let this posture, madam,” 
continued he, “obtain your pardon,
and at the same time ease you of all
apprehensions on my score.” —“May
I believe you?” said she, still weeping. 
—“You may,” replied he; then
rising, and placing himself on the seat
opposite to her,—“I love my pleasures,
and think it no crime to indulge
the appetites of nature. —I am charmed
with the kind free woman, but I honour
and revere the truly virtuous,
and it is a maxim with me never to
attempt the violation of innocence. — 
—These, madam, are my principles
in regard to your sex;—but to convince
you further,—Here, fellow,” 
continued he to the coachman, who was
walking backwards and forwards at some
distance,—“get up into your box, and
drive where you were first directed.” 
Miss Betsy acknowledged the generosity
of this behaviour, and, on his asking
by what accident it had happened,
that he found her in company with a woman
of miss Forward's character, she
told him ingenuously the truth,—that
they knew each other when children in
the country; but that she had not seen
her more than three times since their coming 
to London, and was entirely ignorant
of her conduct from that time. 
He then took the liberty of reminding
her, that a young lady more endangered
her reputation, by an acquaintance with
one woman of ill fame, than by receiving
the visits of twenty men, though professed
libertines. —To which she replied,
that for the future she should be very
careful what company she kept, of both
sexes. 
This was the sum of the conversation,
that passed between them during their
little stage to mr. Goodman's, where being
safely arrived, after having seen her
within the doors, he saluted her with a
great deal of respect, and took his leave. 