

Gives an account of some passages, which, added to the former, affords our heroine much matter of discontent.
Jenny had been so much discomposed and ruffled at the discourse of the ladies, and the letter shewn to her by them, that neither her natural sprightliness and gayety, nor all the efforts her reason made, were sufficient to re-settle in her mind that happy serenity she enjoy'd before. 
She had not the least tincture of jealousy in her composition; she had always depended on the sincerity of Jemmy, and as yet was far from believing that he could be false; but it vexed her to be told that others thought him so; that he pass'd in the eyes of the world for an inconstant and ungrateful man; and what was still more insupportable, that herself was look'd upon as a slighted and forsaken mistress. 
Pity is so near a-kin to contempt, that few women of spirit can bear it; even those who have the least share of vanity, I believe, would rather chuse to be envy'd and hated for having too much the power of pleasing, than commiserated for their want of it. 
The affection she had for Jemmy was not of that fond and foolish nature as to make her wish to be for ever in his sight; she had been absent from him more weeks than she had now been days, without the least repining or inquietude; but on the hearing of this story she could not keep herself from being excessively impatient for his coming down to Bath;—not that she desir'd his presence to clear any doubts of her own, but that his behaviour might convince the company she was with of their mistake as to his fidelity. 
The promise he had made of following her when she left London, and which had since been confirmed by two several letters she had received from him, made her expect his arrival would be very soon, and she was pleasing herself with the thoughts how that event would make lady Speck and miss Wingman ashamed of having too rashly given credit to a calumny, which she doubted not but they would then see had not the least foundation. 
But this was a satisfaction which vanish'd in a very short space of time; a few hours made her know that she must wait much longer than she had imagined for the completion of what at present her pride made her so ardently desire. 
The evening of that very same day, whose morning had occasion'd in her breast these various perturbations, presented her with something which was far from lulling them to rest. —Just as she was going to the assembly-room with the ladies and some other company, the post brought her a letter, the contents whereof were these: 
To Miss Jessamy, at Bath.
Dear Jenny,
“I am in so ill a humour, that I believe it would be utterly out of my power to write to any one person in the world except yourself; and yet it is almost entirely on your account that I am thus disconcerted. This you may think a paradox, but I shall soon explain the riddle.” 
“For three whole days successively I have been every hour expecting the arrival of my steward; but last night, instead of himself I received a letter from him, acquainting me that having been obliged to make a seisure on one of my tenant's effects, that affair would of necessity detain him at least seven or eight days longer.” 
“Judge how severely this accident has mortify'd me, as it deprives me so much longer than I hop'd of the pleasures of the Bath, and what is infinitely more valuable to me, the sight of my dear Jenny;—console me as often you can with your letters;—it is in them alone I can take any true satisfaction during this enforced absence. —Farewel;—I flatter myself there is no need of fresh assurances to convince you that I am, 
With the warmest affection,
My dear Jenny's
Most devoted and
Obedient servant,
J. Jessamy. 
P. S. “My friend Bellpine, who is now with me, desires you will accept his compliments and best wishes;—we are just going together to hear a fine piece of music, if my chagrin does not turn the notes into discord. —Once more for this time,—my dear Jenny,—adieu.” 

Jenny withdrew to a window to take just a cursory view of this epistle; for being waited for by the company she could not, without a breach of civility, give herself time to examine it with that strictness the present situation of her mind inclined her to do. She was, however, sufficiently mistress of the sense of it to perceive she must not expect to see him at Bath so soon as she wish'd; and this delay, as my fair readers will easily believe, gave no small mortification both to her pride and love. 
The assembly was more than ordinarily brilliant that night; but not all the diversions and gallantries of the place could dissipate the gloom that hung heavy on her spirits, and as she was an ill dissembler, was but two visible in her countenance. 
It was not that in the slight perusal she had been able to give Jemmy's letter she had found any thing to confirm the informations of lady Speck and miss Wingman, but the delay of his coming, at a time when she thought his presence so necessary to clear both his own and her reputation, that alone gave her these inquietudes; and the disappointment was more grievous, as it was the first she as yet had ever met with. 
Not all her efforts could enable her to behave with her accustomed vivacity that night;—she bore very little part in the conversation;—was wholly unattentive to the music, as well as the fine things said to her; and whenever she spoke, it was in such a manner as made it easy to perceive she would rather have chose to have remain'd silent. 
Conscious of this defect, and finding herself altogether unfit for company, she pretended a violent head-ach, and retir'd some hours before the usual time. 
On her coming home she shut herself up in her own apartment, and gave strict orders to her maid that no one should disturb her; then fell to examining, with the utmost exactness, every sentence of the letter which had created in her so much uneasiness;—she compared it with the others she had received from him since her arrival at Bath, and found it nothing different either in the stile or manner;—till coming to the postscript, the mention he made of going to hear a fine piece of music, she suddenly cry'd out,—‘That musick perhaps may be perform'd by miss Chit; a story, such as I have been told, could not certainly be raised without some little truth for its foundation.’ 
But this fit of jealousy lasted scarce a moment, ‘How unjust and foolish am I! said she: I know he loves music, but what then? if being mistress of that accomplishment had given miss Chit, or any other woman, the preference to me in his esteem, he would have been entirely silent on the pleasure he was going to take; the guilty always carefully avoid speaking on the theme which calls their crime in question.’ 
In this favourable disposition she might perhaps have continued, if a thousand instances of the deceit and perfidy of men in the affairs of love, which she had either heard or read of, had not immediately presented themselves to her remembrance, and reminded her that she ought not to be too secure; that the passion of love, like the wind, blew where it lifted, and that, as the poet says: 
Man is but man, inconstant still and various,
There's no to-morrow in him like today;
Perhaps the atoms rolling in his brain
Make him think honestly this present hour:
The next a swarm of base ungrateful thoughts
May mount aloft,
Who would trust chance, since all men have the seeds
Of good or ill, which would work upwards first.
Yet for all this could she not bring herself to believe him absolutely false; if one moment accused him in her thoughts, the next acquitted him; but what gave her the greatest perplexity of all was, the difficulty she found in guessing by whom or to what end this aspersion had first been raised, and how it came to be so spread. 
She thought that neither Jemmy nor herself had done ony thing to incur the malice of the world, so far as that even any one person should be desirous of rendering them unhappy; ‘It cannot therefore be, cried she, but that some vile self-interested view must be the source of all this; no body sure would be at the wicked pains to separate two persons whose hearts from their infancy have been united by the strictest bonds of love and friendship, merely for the sake of mischief; no, it is utterly impossible that human nature can be so depraved.’ 
This reflection leading her still farther on, she began to argue within her mind for what end a contrivance to part her and Jemmy could be form'd, and found none so conformable to probability, as that the author of it aimed to be in the place either of the one or the other. 
As for her own part, the engagements between her and Jemmy were so well known that no man had ever made his serious addresses to her, and if sir Robert Manley had now any such intentions, the character of that gentleman would not permit her to believe he could be capable of making use of base means for the forwarding his wishes; besides, lady Speck and miss Wingman had assured her, in the most solemn manner, that they had heard the report before their coming down to Bath, or that he had ever seen her. 
It rested therefore, that it must be on the account of Jemmy that all this had happen'd; she knew very well that he convers'd freely with the ladies, he had never made a secret to her of his doing so, and it seem'd not in the least improbable, that some one among them might like him but too well. ‘Perhaps, said she, miss Chit herself mistaking for love what he meant only as gallantry, might have the vanity to boast of having inspired him with a real passion.’ 
‘The smallest hint, continued she, that such a thing is,—or possibly may be, passes with many people for an undoubted fact. —And who knows but the whisper of Jemmy's imaginary infidelity may have been carried from one to another till it reach'd the ears of some person, who more compassionate than wise, wrote to lady Speck in the manner I have seen.’ 
Thus did she endeavour to dive into the bottom of this mysterious affair, assigning for it every cause that reason or her fertile imagination could suggest;—yet wavering still, and uncertain on which of them she should fix, her mind at length grew quite fatigued with the unavailing search; and she resolved to wait till time should bring to light what all her penetration could not at present enable her to discover. 
In this manner was the sweetest and most serene temper in the world disconcerted, and thrown off its byass, by the dark villany of a man whom she had not the least suspicion of. —She went to bed however, and for ought I ever heard to the contrary, slept as well as if nothing had happen'd to perplex her waking thoughts. 
