


The terrible consequences, which may
possibly attend our placing too great a
dependance on persons whose principles
we are not well assured of, are here
exemplified, in a notable act of villainy
and hypocrisy. 

Miss Betsy no sooner found herself
alone, than she began to reflect very
seriously on the preceding passage:—she
knew very little of these two young noblemen,
yet thought she saw enough in their
behaviour to make any woman, who had
the least regard for her honour or reputation,
fearful to trust herself with them
in any place, where both might be so
much endangered;—she was, therefore,
very much amazed, that miss Airish
should run so great a risque, and to find
that she did so, joined to some other
things, which she had of late observed in
the conduct of both the sisters, contributed
to diminish the love and esteem she
once had for them. 

She found, however, too many objects
of satisfaction in the visits she made to
those ladies, to be willing to break acquaintance
with them, and as she doubted
not but that she had highly disobliged
the one, by not complying with her invitation,
and that this would infallibly
occasion a rupture with the other also, if
not in time reconciled, she went the next
morning to their apartment, in order to
make her peace. 
On her enquiring for that lady, the
footman told her, she was but just come
home, and he believed was going to-bed,
but he would tell the chamber-maid she
was there. —‘No,—no,’ cried miss
Betsy, ‘only give my compliments to
your lady, and tell her, I will wait on
her in the afternoon.’ —She was going
away with these words, but miss Airish,
lying on the same floor, heard her voice,
and called to her to come in. 
Miss Betsy did as she was desired, and
found her in a much better humour than
she expected. —‘O, my dear,’ said she,
‘what a night have you lost by not being
with us! —Such a promiscuous enjoyment
of every thing that can afford
delight or satisfaction! —Well, after 

all, there is nothing like playing the
rake a little sometimes,—it gives such
a fillup to the spirits.’ 
‘Provided it be innocent, I am of your
mind,’ replied miss Betsy;—‘I suppose
every thing was managed with decency
among you.’ —‘O quite so,’ 
cried the other;—‘all harmless libertinism:
—'tis true, there were private
rooms; but you know one might
chuse whether one would go into them
or not.’ —‘I am not sure of that,’ said
miss Betsy:—‘I am glad however you
were so well pleased with your entertainment,
and equally so, that you were
not hindered from enjoying it, by my
not being able to share with you in it.’ 
‘I am obliged to you, my dear,’ replied
miss Airish,—‘I was a little vexed
with you at first, indeed, but knew you
could not help it;—the lady we called
upon went very readily with us, so as
it happened there was no disappointment
in the case.’ 
‘It was only to be convinced of that,’ 
said miss Betsy, ‘that I came hither thus
early; but I will now take my leave,
—repose I am sure is necessary for you,
after so many waking hours.’ —The 

other did not oppose her departure, being
in effect desirous of taking that rest,
which her exhausted spirits wanted. 
Never had miss Betsy felt within herself
a greater or more sincere satisfaction,
than she now did, for having so prudently
avoided falling into inconveniencies,
the least of which, as she very rightly
judged, would have been paying too dear
a price for all the pleasures she could have
received. 
Sweet indeed are the reflections, which
flow from a consciousness of having done
what virtue, and the duty owing to the
character we bear in life, exacted from us,
but poor miss Betsy was not to enjoy, for
any long time, so happy a tranquility;— 
she was roused out of this serenity of
mind, by an adventure of a different
kind from all she had ever yet experienced,
and which, if she were not properly
guarded against, it ought to be imputed
rather to the unsuspecting goodness
of her heart, than to her vanity, or
that inadvertency, which had occasioned
her former mistakes. 
She was sitting near the window, leaning
her arm upon the slab, very deep in
contemplation, when, hearing a coach stop 

at the door, she looked out, imagining it
might be somebody to her, and saw mrs.
Modely come out;—she wondered what
business that woman should now come
upon, after the letter she had sent her,
and resolved to chide her for any impertinent
message she should deliver. 
Mrs. Modely, whose profession was
known to the people of the house, always
ran up without any other ceremony than
asking if miss Betsy was at home and
alone:—being now told she was so, she
flew into the room, with a distraction in
her countenance which very much surprised
miss Betsy; but before she had time
to ask the meaning, the other throwing
herself down in a chair, increased her
astonishment by these words: 
‘O! madam,’ cried she, ‘I am come
to tell you of the saddest accident:— 
poor sir Frederick Fineer! —O that he
had never seen you! —O that I had
never meddled between you! —I am
undone, that is to be sure,—ruined for
ever:—I shall never get another lodger,
—nay, I believe, I shall never recover
the fright I am in.’ 
Here she burst into a violent fit of
tears, and her sobs interrupting the passage 

of her words, gave miss Betsy opportunity
to enquire into the mystery of
her behaviour:—‘For heaven's sake,
what is the matter,’ said that young
lady? ‘prithee cease these exclamations,
and speak to be understood.’ 
‘Ah, dear miss Betsy,’ resumed the
other, ‘I scarce know what I say or do,
—poor sir Frederick has run himself
quite through the body.’ —‘What!
killed himself,’ cried miss Betsy hastily? 
—‘He is not dead yet,’ replied mrs.
Modely; ‘but there he lies the most dismal
object that ever eyes beheld:— 
the agonies of death in his face,—the
sword sticking in his breast; for the
surgeon says, that the moment that is
drawn out, his life comes with it.’ 
Perceiving miss Betsy said nothing, and
looked a little troubled, she went on in
this manner:—‘But this is not the worst
I have to tell you, madam,’ continued
she,—‘his death is nothing; but it is
his soul,—his soul, miss Betsy:— 
hearing them say he could not live above
three hours at most, I sent for a parson,
—and there the good man sits and
talks, and argues with him;—but,
would you think it, he will not pray,
—nor be prayed for,—nor confess his 

sins,—nor say he is sorry for what he
has done,—nor do any thing that is
right, till he has seen you.’ 
‘Me!’ said miss Betsy, ‘what would
he see me for?’ —‘Nay, I know not,
—but it is his whim, and he is obstinate,
—therefore, my dear madam, in
christian charity, and in compassion to
his soul, hear what he has to say.’ 
‘What good can I do him by going,
mrs. Modely,’ said miss Betsy?— 
‘none, as to his share in this world,’ answered
she;—‘but, dear madam, consider
the other,—think what a sad
thing it is for a man to die without the
rites of the church;—I'll warrant he
has sins enough upon him, as most
young gentleman have, and sure you
would not be the cause of his being miserable
to all eternity!’ 
‘Indeed, mrs. Modely, I do not care
to go,’ said miss Betsy. —‘The sight
is very terrible indeed,’ cried the other,
‘but you need not stay two minutes,— 
if you but just step in and speak to
him, I fancy it will be enough;—but
lord he may be dead while we are talking,
and if he should leave the world
in this manner, I should not be able to 

live in my house,—and I have a lease
of eleven years to come,—I should
think I saw his ghost in every room; 
—so dear, dear miss Betsy, for my
sake, if not for his, go with me;—I
came in a hackney-coach for haste, and
it is still at the door.’ 
‘Well, Modely, you shall prevail,’ 
answered miss Betsy; ‘but you shall
stay in the room all the time I am there.’ 
—‘That you may be sure I will,’ returned
the other;—‘but come,—pray
heaven we are not too late.’ 
They said little more to each other,
'till they came to the house of mrs.
Modely, where the first sound that reached
the ears of miss Betsy, were groans,
which seemed to issue from the mouth of
a person in the pangs of death. 
Mrs. Modely led her into sir Frederick's
chamber, which was judiciously
darkened, so as to leave light enough to
discern objects, yet not so much as to
render them too perspicuous:—miss Betsy
saw him lying on the bed, as mrs. Modely
described, with a sword sticking upright
in his breast,—a clergyman, and another
person, who appeared to be the surgeon,
were sitting near him. —‘Miss Betsy is 

so good,’ said mrs. Modely, ‘to come
to visit you, sir Frederick.’ —‘I am
glad of it,’ replied he, with a low voice,
‘—pray, madam, approach.’ 
‘I am sorry, sir Frederick, to find you
have been guilty of so rash an action,’ 
said miss Betsy, drawing towards the bed. 
—‘I could not live without you,’ rejoined
he, ‘nor would die without leaving
you as happy as it is in my power
to make you;—I have settled two
thousand pounds a year upon you, during
your natural life;—but as I would
consult your honour in every thing I
do, and people might imagine I made
you this settlement in consideration of
some favours, which I had too true a
regard for you ever to desire, you must
enjoy it as my widow, and with it the
title of lady Fineer.’ 
Miss Betsy was so much amazed at this
proposal, that she had not the power to
speak; but mrs. Modely cried out, ‘Was
ever any thing so generous!’ —‘Truly
noble indeed,’ added the surgeon, ‘and
worthy of himself, and the love he
has for this lady.’ —‘Bless me!’ said
miss Betsy, ‘would you have me marry
a dying man? —You ought, sir Frederick, 

to have other thoughts, as you
are going out of the world.’ 
‘Aye, sir Frederick,’ cried the parson,
‘think of your immortal part.’ —‘I
can think of nothing,’ answered he,
groaning bitterly, ‘of my own happiness,
'till I have fixed that of miss Betsy's.—’ 
‘Lord, madam,’ cried mrs. Modely,
softly, ‘you would not be so mad to refuse:
—what two thousand pounds a
year, and a ladyship, with liberty to
marry who you will?’ 
‘This is the most generous offer I
ever heard of,’ said the parson; ‘but
I wish the lady would resolve soon, for
it is high time sir Frederick should prepare
for another world.’ —‘He cannot
live above an hour,’ rejoined the
surgeon, ‘even if the sword is not withdrawn; 
—therefore, good madam,
think what you have to do.’ 
While they were speaking sir Frederick
redoubled his groans, and they went
on pressing her to accept the terms he
offered. —‘Do not plunge a man into
a sad eternity, merely for his love to
you,’ said the parson. —‘All the world
would condemn you, should you refuse,’ 
cried the surgeon. —‘A virgin widow 

with two thousand pounds a year,’ added
mrs. Modely. 
In this manner did they urge her, and
the parson getting on the one side of her,
and the surgeon on the other, plied her
so close with arguments, both on the advantages
accruing to herself, and the compassion
owing from her to a gentleman,
who had committed this act of desperation
on himself, meerly through his love
of her, that she neither could, nor knew
how to make any answer, when sir Frederick
giving two or three great groans,
which seemed more deep than before, and
the surgeon pretending to take miss Betsy's
silence for consent, cried out, ‘Madam,
he is just going,—we must be speedy.’ 
And then turning to the parson, ‘Doctor,’ 
said he, ‘proceed to the ceremony,— 
pass over the prelude, and begin at the
most essential part, else my patient won't
live to the conclusion.’ 
The parson knew very well what he
had to do, having his book ready, began
at—‘sir Frederick Fineer, baronet, wilt
thou have this woman to thy wedded
wife?’—and so on. —To which sir
Frederick answered, in the same dismal
accents he had hitherto spoken, ‘I will.’ 
—Then the parson turning to miss Betsy, 

said, ‘Betsy Thoughtless, wilt thou have
this man to be thy wedded husband?’ 
—and so forth. —Miss Betsy in the confusion
of her mind, not well knowing
what she said, or did, replied in the affirmative,
on which he was hurrying
over the rest of the ceremony, but she
recollecting herself, cried out,—‘Hold,
doctor, I cannot be married in this
manner.’ —But he seemed not to regard
her words, but read on, and the
surgeon taking hold of her hand, and
joining it with sir Frederick's, held it in
spite of her resistance, 'till the ring was
forced upon her finger. 
This action so incensed her, that the
instant she got her hand at liberty, she
plucked off the ring, and threw it on the
ground:—‘What do you mean,’ said
she? —‘Do you think to compel me to
a marriage? —Modely, you have not
used me well.’ —With these words she
was turning to go out of the room, but
perceived, not till then, that mrs. Modely
had slipped out, and that the door was
locked;—she then began to call, ‘Mrs.
Modely,—mrs. Modely:’ to which no
answer was made. 
‘Come, come, madam,’ said the surgeon,
‘this passion will avail you nothing; 

—you are effectually married, whatever
you may imagine to the contrary.’ ‘Yes, yes,’ rejoined the parson, ‘the
ceremony is good and firm:—I will
stand to what I have done before any
bishop in England.’ —‘There wants
only consummation,’ cried the surgeon,
‘and that we must leave the bridegroom
to compleat before he dies.’ —With
these words they both went out, making
the door fast after them. 
Miss Betsy made use of her utmost
efforts to pass at the same time they did,
but they pushed her back with so much
violence, as almost threw her down, and
sir Frederick at the same time jumping
off the bed, and throwing away the sword,
which she imagined sheathed in his body,
catched her suddenly in his arms. 
'Tis hard to say, whether rage for the
imposition she now found had been practised
on her, or the terror for the danger
she was in, was the passion now most predominant
in the soul of miss Betsy; but
both together served to inspire her with
unusual strength and courage. 
‘Your resistance is in vain,’ cried he,
you are my wife, and as such I shall
enjoy you:—no matter whether with 

your will or not.’ —She made no answer
to these words, but collecting all
her force, sprung from him, and catching
hold of one of the posts at the bed's
foot, clung so fast round it, that all his
endeavours to remove her thence were
ineffectual for some moments, though the
rough means he made use of for that
purpose, were very near breaking both
her arms. 
Breathless at last, however, with the
continual shrieks she had sent out for
help, and the violence she had sustained
by the efforts of that abandoned wretch,
who had as little regard to the tenderness
of her sex, as to any other principle of
humanity, she fell almost fainting on the
floor; and was on the point of becoming
a victim to the most wicked stratagem
that ever was invented, when on a sudden
the door of the chamber was burst open,
and a man, with his sword drawn, at that
instant rushed in upon them. 
‘Monster!’ cried he, that entered,
‘what act of villainy are you about to
perpetrate?’ —Miss Betsy rising from
the ground at the same time, said to him,
—‘Oh! whoever you are, that heaven
has sent to my deliverance, save me, I
conjure you, from that horrid wretch.’ 

—‘Fear nothing, madam,’ answered he. 
He had time for no more, the intended
ravisher had snatched up his sword, and
was advancing towards him with these
words, ‘That woman is my wife,’ said
he; ‘how dare any one interfere between
us?’ —‘O, 'tis false!—'tis false!— 
believe him not,’ cried miss Betsy. — 
Her protector made no reply, but flying
at his antagonist, immediately closed with
him, wrenched the sword out of his hand,
which, throwing on the ground, he set
his foot upon, and snapped it in pieces. 
The obscurity of the room, joined to
the excessive agitations miss Betsy was in,
had, 'till now, hindered her from discovering,
either by the voice or person, who
it was to whom she owed her safety; on
his drawing back one of the window curtains
to give more light into the place,
that he might see with whom he had been
engaged, she presently saw, to her great
amazement and confusion, that her deliverer
was no other than mr. Trueworth. 
But how great soever was her astonishment,
that of mr. Trueworth was not
less, when looking on the face of the pretended
sir Frederick Fineer, he presently
knew him to be a fellow, who had serv'd
in quality of valet de chambre to a gentleman 

he was acquainted with in France,
who had robbed his master, and only
through his lenity and compassion had
avoided the punishment his crimes deserved. 
‘Rascal!’ cried mr. Trueworth, ‘have
you escaped breaking on the wheel at
Paris, to attempt deeds more deserving
death in England.’ —The wretch, who
hitherto had behaved with a very lofty air,
now finding he was discovered, fell at
mr. Trueworth's feet, and begged he
would have mercy on him;—alledged,
that what he had done was occasioned by
mere necessity;—said, he was told the
lady had a great fortune, and might be
easily gained, and such like stuff, which
putting mr. Trueworth beyond all patience,
he gave him three or four blows
with the flat of his sword, before he
sheathed it, saying, at the same time,— 
‘Execrable dog!—if thou wert not
unworthy of death from any hand but
that of the common hangman, thou
shouldst not live a moment to boast the
least acquaintance with this lady.’ — 
Then turning to miss Betsy, who was
half dying with the various emotions she
was possessed off: —‘Madam,’ said he,
‘I will not ask by what means you came
into this villain's company, only permit 

me to conduct you hence, and see
you safely home.’ 
Miss Betsy was seized with so violent a
fit of trembling through all her frame,
that she had neither voice to thank him,
for the extraordinary assistance she had received
from him, nor strength enough to
bear her down stairs, if he had not with
the greatest politeness and most tender
care, supported her at every step she took. 
They found no creature below, the
house seemed as if forsaken by all its inhabitants; 
but the parlour door being open,
mr. Trueworth placed his fair charge in
an easy chair, while he ran to find somebody
to get a coach. 
After much knocking and calling, mrs.
Modely came out of a back-room, into
that where miss Betsy was. —As soon as
that young lady saw her, ‘Oh, mrs.
Modely,’ cried she, ‘I could not have
believed you would have betrayed me
in this cruel manner.’ —‘Bless me!
madam,’ replied she, in a confusion,
which she in vain endeavoured to conceal; 
—‘I know not what you mean. — 
I betray you! —When you were talking
with sir Frederick I was sent for out,
—when I came back, indeed, I saw the 

parson and the surgeon pass through the
entry in a hurry, and at the same time
hearing a great noise, was going up as
soon as I had pulled off my things; 
but I hope,’ continued she, in a whining
tone, ‘nothing has happened to
my dear miss Betsy.’ —‘Whatever has
happened, said mr. Trueworth, fiercely,
will be inquired into;—in the mean
time, all we require of you is to send
somebody for a coach.’ 
Mrs. Modely then ringing a bell, a
maid servant appeared, and what mr.
Trueworth had requested was immediately
performed; but, though miss Betsy now
saw herself safe from the mischief which
had so lately threatened her, she had still
emotions very terrible to sustain, and
would have, doubtless, thrown her into a
swoon, if not vented in a violent flood of
tears. 
Being arrived at the house where miss
Betsy lodged, just as mr. Trueworth was
helping her out of the coach, they were
met by the two mr. Thoughtless's coming
out of the door:—they started back
at a sight, which, it must be confessed,
had something very alarming in it;— 
they beheld their sister all pale and trembling,
—her eyes half drowned in tears, 

—her garments torn,—her hair hanging
loosely wild about her neck and face,
—every token of despair about her,— 
and in this condition conducted by a gentleman,
a stranger indeed to the one, but
known by the other to have been once
passionately in love with her, might well
occasion odd sort of apprehensions in both
the brothers, especially in the younger. 
The sudden sight of her brothers,
made a fresh attack on the already so
much weakened spirits of miss Betsy, and
she would have sunk on the threshold of
the door, as mr. Trueworth quitted her
hand in order to present it to mr. Francis,
if the elder mr. Thoughtless, seeing her
totter, had not that instant catched her
in his arms. 
‘Confusion!’ cried mr. Francis, ‘what
does all this mean? —Trueworth, is it
thus you bring my sister home?’ —‘I
am heartily sorry for the occasion,’— 
said mr. Trueworth, ‘since’—He was
going on, but mr. Francis, fired with a
mistaken rage, prevented him, crying out,
‘'Sdeath, sir, how came you with my
sister?’ —Mr. Trueworth, a little provoked
to find the service he had done so
ill requited, replied in a disdainful tone,
‘she will inform you,—after that, if 

you have any farther demands upon me,
you know where I am to be found;— 
I have no leisure now to answer your
interrogatories.’ 
With these words he stepped hastily
into the coach, and ordered to be drove
to the two red lamps in Golden Square. 
Miss Betsy's senses were entirely lost
for some moments, so that she knew nothing
of what had passed:—mr. Francis
hearing what directions mr. Trueworth
had given the coachman, was for following
and forcing him to an explanation,
but the elder mr. Thoughtless prevailed
on him to stay till they should hear what
their sister would say on this affair. 
She was carried into her apartment,
rather dead than alive, but being laid on
a settee, and proper means applied, she
soon returned to a condition capable of
satisfying their curiosity. 
