
In which, among other things, it will be found highly proper that some passages formerly inserted should be re-capitulated, in order to form the better understanding of those which are now upon the tapis. 
Jemmy return'd to the college in no very good humour, as may be supposed, though the mortification of the disappointment he had received was very much alleviated by the assurance he had of Celia's affection for him; but on his entering into his chambers he met with something which made the adventures of the day, and indeed all that had pass'd between him and the country maid, vanish like a dream from his remembrance. 
A letter was presented to him which had been left for him by the post, summoning him immediately to London to receive the last commands and blessing of a dying father;—filial piety and duteous affection now took up all his mind, and he thought of nothing but to 
be speedy in his obedience to the authoritative mandate. 
Accordingly he rose the next morning by break of day,—rode post, and arrived in London before evening, as has been already related in the beginning of the first volume of this work. 
On his going back to the university, after the melancholy solemnity of his father's funeral was over, Celia came again a little into his head; and though he design'd shortly to quit Oxford entirely, yet he thought that for the time he said he could not have a more agreeable amusement than the prosecution of that amour to divert his affliction for the loss he had sustain'd. 
To this end he went to the wood,—ranged through every part of that scene of their loves, but found no Celia there;—he knew her uncle's name, but not directly where he lived; or if he had, would not have thought it proper to go to his house to make any enquiry concerning her;—happening, however, to see a fellow cutting down wood, he ventur'd to ask him if one mr. Adams, a gardener, did not live somewhere there-abouts,—‘Ay, sir, reply'd the man, if you 
turn by that thicket on your right hand you may see his house.’—‘Nay, said Jemmy carelesly, I have no business with him,—I have only heard he was a very honest man.’ —‘Ay, sir, rejoin'd the other, that he is to be sure, as ever broke bread;—I have known him above these thirty years, and never heard an ill thing of him in my life.’ 
Jemmy finding this fellow seem'd to be of a communicative disposition, demanded of him what family mr. Adams had. —‘Ah, sir, said the man,—he has only two boys,—one he brings up to his own business and the other is a gentleman's servant;—his wife,—rest her soul, has been dead two years come Michaelmas next, and he would have been quite helpless if he had not got a brother's daughter of his to look after his things;—but she is gone now;—I know not what the poor man will do,—he must even hire a maid, and there are so few of them good.’ —‘What is his niece dead too, cried Jemmy pretty hastily,’ ‘No sir, answer'd he,—but she is gone away;—her father, belike, sent for her home,—I know not on what account,—not I; but she has left poor Adams, and he is in a piteous plight.’ 
Jemmy being desirous of receiving as much intelligence as he could of his little mistress, affected to be in some concern for the honest gardener, her uncle, pretending he had heard much in his commendation from those that knew him; and said it was a great pity that the maid should be sent for away, as she was so useful to him, and so notable a manager. 
‘Ay very handy, indeed sir, answer'd mr. Adams's friend,—she kept every thing in the house so clean and so tight it would have done your heart good to have seen it;—but as to her father's sending for her away,—I don't know,—mayhap he had a mind to have her under his own eye,—he has the character of a parlous-shrewd man, and sees things a great while before they come.’ 
‘Was there any danger then to be apprehended in her staying, demanded Jemmy?’ —‘I can say nothing as to that, sir,—she is as likely,—as comely a lass as any in the county round,—but I believe very honest;—though she has a kind of leer with her eyes, and is always simpering and smirking; and you know sir, that gives encouragement;—there were a power of young fellows that had 
a hankering after her,—I have heard my wife say a thousand times I believe,—and she is seldom mistaken, that she wish'd Celia might come to good. 
‘Besides, sir, continued he, shaking his head, we are so near the University here, and the young students are most of them wild blades, and spend their time more in running after the girls than on their books.’ 
It must be observed that Jemmy was now in his travelling dress; for had he appeared as a gentleman-commoner, no body can suppose that the countryman would have been so free in his discourse with him, which being once enter'd into he would probably have gone on with till he had related all he knew of the news of the whole parish. 
But Jemmy having satisfied his curiosity as fully as he could have desired, and much more than he had any reason to expect, grew quite weary of this kind of conversation, and soon after took leave of his informer, and walk'd back to the College. 
He had now lost his Celia of the woods,—he knew indeed where to find her; 
but as his stay in Oxford was to be very short, and he had many friends to see before he went away, he had no time to devote to the pursuit of a mistress so far removed;—besides, he knew not what inconveniencies might attend his seeking her at her father's house; and was too indolent in his nature to risque any difficulties for the sake of gratifying a passion such as the beauty of that girl had inspired him with. 
After he had quitted the University entirely, and was settled in London, besides the society of his dear Jenny, whom, in spite of the little excursions of his youth, he loved with the most pure and respectful passion, new scenes of life,—new amusements,—new pleasures, crowded upon his senses, and presently obliterated the memory of those he left behind. 
Celia, no more was wish'd for, no more thought on by him, how was it possible that after so long a space of time as two whole years, and having seen such a variety of beautiful faces, he should be able to recollect his plain country maid under the character of a fine town lady, blazing with gold and jewels, attended by a splendid equipage, and dignify'd with a title. 
This adventure, notwithstanding, served greatly to dissipate all the chagrine which the story invented in relation to his infidelity to Jenny had involved him in;—he could not keep himself from being highly pleased at meeting with a person who had once so many charms for him, nor with finding, by her behaviour towards him, that so prodigious a change of fortune had not made the least change in her sentiments on his account:—in a word, all the long dormant inclinations which he had formerly felt for Celia, now revived in his bosom at sight of lady Hardy; and he hesitated not a moment whether he should comply with the appointment she had made him. 
How uncertain,—how wandering are the passions of mankind,—how yielding to every temptation that presents itself;—seldom are they masters of their own hearts or actions, especially at Jemmy's years; and well may they deceive others in what they are deceived themselves. 
When they protest to love no other object than the present, they may, perhaps, resolve to be as just as they pretend;—but alas!—this is not in their power, even though it may in their will;—they 
can no more command their wishes than they can their thoughts, which, as Shakespear tells us,—‘Once lost, are gone beyond the clouds.’ —We often see that to reverse this boasted constancy is the work of but a single minute,—and then in vain their past professions recoil upon their minds;—in vain the idea of the forsaken fair haunts them in nightly visions. 
For mighty love, which honour does despise,
For reason shews them a new charmer's eyes.
