


Affords variety of amusements. 

Mrs. Munden was so ignorant of her
own heart, in relation to what it
felt on mr. Trueworth's account, that she
imagined she had only fled his presence 

because she could not bear a man who
had courted her so long, should see her
thus unhappy by the choice she had made
of another. 
‘I am well assured,’ cried she, ‘that
he has too much generosity to triumph
in my misfortune, and too much complaisance
to remind me of the cause; 
—yet would his eyes tacitly reproach
my want of judgment,—and mine too
might perhaps, in spite of me, confess, as
the poet says, that 

“I, like the child, whose folly prov'd its loss,
“Refus'd the gold, and did accept the dross.”

This natually leading her into some
reflections on the merit of mr. Trueworth,
she could not help wondering, by what
infatuation she had been governed, when
rejecting him, or what was tantamount to
rejecting him, treating him in such a manner
as might make him despair of being
accepted. —‘What though my heart
was insensible of love, said she, my
reason—nay my very pride, might
have influenced me to embrace a proposal,
which would have rendered me
the envy of my own sex, and excited 

the esteem and veneration of the other.’ 
—Thinking still more deeply,—‘O
God,’ cried she, with vehemence, ‘to
what a height of happiness might I
have been raised! And into what an
abyss of wretchedness am I now plunged! 
—Irretrievably undone, married without
loving or being loved, lost in my
bloom of years to every joy that can
make life a blessing.’ 
Nothing so much sharpens the edge of
affliction as a consciousness of having
brought it upon ourselves; to remember
that all we could wish for,—all that
could make us truly happy, was once in
our power to be possessed of, and wantonly
shunning the good that heaven and
fortune offered, we headlong run into the
ills we mourn, renders them doubly
grievous. 
This being the case with our heroine,
how ought all the fair and young to
guard against a vanity so fatal to a lady,
who but for that one foible, had been the
happiest, as she was in all other respects,
the most deserving of her sex! —But to
return. 
A just sensibility of the errors of her
past conduct, joined with some other 

emotions, which the reader may easily
guess at, though she as yet knew not the
meaning of herself, gave her but little repose
that night; and pretty early the next
morning she received no inconsiderable
addition to her perplexities. 
The time, in which mr. Munden had
promised to give his answer to the lawyer,
was now near expired, yet was he as irresolute
as ever:—loth he was to have
the affair between him and his wife made
public, and equally loth to comply with
her demands;—before he did either, it
therefore came into his head to try what
effect menaces would produce, and accordingly
wrote to her in these terms. 

To mrs. Munden.
‘Madam,
Though your late behaviour has
proved the little affection you have
for me, I still retain too much for you
to be able to part with you. —No, be
assured, I never will forego the right
that marriage gives me over you,— 
will never yield to live a widower while
I am a husband, and if you return not
within four and twenty hours, shall
take such measures as the law directs
to force you back to my embraces;— 

by this time to morrow you may expect
to have such company at your levee,
as you will not be well pleased with,
and from whose authority not all your
friends can screen you:—but as I am
unwilling to expose you, I once more
court you to spare yourself this disgrace,
and me the pain of inflicting it;—I
give you this day to consider on what
you have to do,—the future peace of
us both depends on your result, for your
own reason ought to inform you, that
being brought to me by compulsion,
will deserve other sort of treatment than
such as you might hope to find on returning
of your own accord to 
‘Your much afronted husband,
G. Munden.’ 

This letter very much alarmed both
the sister and the brother,—the former
trembled at the thoughts of seeing herself
in the hands of the officers of justice,
and the latter could not but be uneasy
that a disturbance of this kind should
happen in his house:—they were just
going to send for mr. Markland to consult
him on what was to be done, when
that gentleman, whom chance had
brought that way, luckily came in:—he 

found mr. Thoughtless in great discomposure,
and mrs. Munden almost drown'd
in tears. On being informed of the occasion,
—‘I see no reason,’ said he
gravely, ‘for all this;—I cannot think
that mr. Munden will put in execution
what he threatens, at least not till after
I have spoke to him again;—I rather
think he writes in this manner only to
terrify you, madam, into a submission
to his will; however,’ continued he,
after a pretty long pause, ‘to be secure
from all danger of an affront this way,
I think it would be highly proper you
should retire to some place, where he
may not know where to find you, till I
have once more tried how far he may
be prevailed upon to do you justice.’ 
This advice being highly approved of,
‘my wife's sister,’ resumed he, ‘has a
very pleasant and commodious house
on the bank of the river on the Surry
side;—she takes lodgers sometimes,
but at present is without, so that if you
resolve to be concealed, you cannot
find a more convenient retreat, especially
as its being so near London, nothing
of moment can happen here, but
what you may be apprized of in little
more than an hour.’ 

Mrs. Munden testifying as much satisfaction
at this proposal as a person in her
circumstances could be capable of feeling,
mr. Markland told her, that he was ready
to conduct her immediately to the place
he mentioned, and her brother adding
that he would accompany them, and see
his sister safe to her new abode, they all
set out together on their little voyage,
mrs. Munden having first given directions
to her servants where they should
follow her with such things, as she
thought would be wanted during her
stay there. 
On their arrival they found mr. Markland
had spoken very modestly of the
place he recommended: the house was
pleasant almost beyond description, and
rendered much more so by the obliging
behaviour of its owner. 
They all dined together that day, and,
on parting, it was agreed, that mrs.
Munden should send her man every
morning to town, in order to bring her
intelligence of whatever accidents had
happened, in relation to her affair, on the
preceding day. 
As much as this lady had been rejoiced
at the kind reception she had met with 

from her brother under her misfortunes,
she was now equally pleased at being removed
for a time from him, not only
because she thought herself secure from
any insults might be offered by her husband,
but also because this private recess
seemed a certain defence against the sight
of mr. Trueworth;—a thing she knew
not well how to have avoided in town,
without breaking off her acquaintance
with lady Loveit. 
After the gentlemen were gone, the
sister in law of mr. Markland led her fair
guest into the garden, which before she
had only a cursory view of;—she shewed
her among many other things, several
curious exotic plants, which she told
her she had procured from the nurseries
of some persons of condition, to whom
she had the honour to be known; but
mrs. Munden being no great connoisseur
that way, did not take much notice of
what she said concerning them, till
coming to the lower end, she perceived
a little wicket gate,—‘To where does
this lead?’ cried she: ‘I will shew you
presently, madam,’ replied the other,
and plucking it open, they both entered
into a grass walk, hemmed in on each
side with trees, which seemed as old as
the creation;—they had not gone many 

paces, before an arbour, erected between
two of these venerable monuments of antiquity,
and overspread with jessamines
and honey-suckles, attracted mrs. Munden's
eyes. —‘Oh how delightful is this!'
said she:—‘It would have been much
more so, madam, if it had been placed
on the other side of the walk,’ said the
gentlewoman, ‘and if I live till next
spring, will have the position of it
altered;—you will presently see my
reasons for it,’ continued she, ‘if you
please to turn your eyes a little to the
right.’ —Mrs. Munden doing as she
was desired, had the prospect of a very
beautiful garden, decorated with plots of
flowers, statues, and trees cut in a most
elegant manner. —‘Does all this belong
to you,’ demanded she, somewhat surprized? 
—No, madam, answered the
other, ‘but they are part of the same
estate, and at present rented by a gentleman
of condition, who lives at the
next door:—the walk we are in is also
common to us both, each having a
gate to enter it at pleasure, though indeed
they little frequent it, having
much finer of their own.’ —With such
like chat they beguiled the time till the
evening dew reminded them it was best
to quit the open air. 

Mrs. Munden passed this night in
more tranquillity than she had done many
preceding ones;—she awoke however
much sooner than was her custom, and
finding herself less disposed to return to
the embraces of sleep than to partake that
felicity she heard a thousand chearful
birds tuning their little throats in praise
of, she rose, and went down into the
garden:—the contemplative humour she
was in, led her to the arbour she had
been so much charmed with the night
before;—she threw herself upon the
mossy seat, where scenting the fragrancy
of the sweets around her, made more delicious
by the freshness of the morning's
gale—‘how delightful—how heavenly,’ 
said she to herself, ‘is this solitude, how
truly preferable to all the noisy giddy
pleasures of the tumultuous town, yet
how have I despised, and ridiculed the
soft serenity of a country life;’—then
recollecting some discourse she formerly
had with mr. Trueworth on that subject,
‘I wonder,’ cried she, what mr. Trueworth
would say if he knew the change
that a little time has wrought in me!
he would certainly find me now more
deserving of his friendship than ever
he could think me of his love;—but
he is ignorant—insensible of my real 

sentiments, and if sir Basil, and lady
Loveit, should tell him with what abruptness
I fled their house at the news
of his approach, I must appear in his
eyes the most vain, stupid, thankless
creature I once was; but such is my
unhappy situation, that I dare not even
wish he should discover what passes in
my heart; the just sensibility of his
amiable qualities, and of the services
he has done me, which would once
have been meritorious in me to have
avowed, would now be highly criminal.’ 
With these reflections she took mr.
Trueworth's picture, which she always
carried about her, and looking on it with
the greatest tenderness, ‘Though I no
more must see himself,’ said she, ‘I may
at least be allowed to pay the tribute of
my gratitude to this dumb representative
of the man to whom I have been
so much obliged.’ —At this instant, a
thousand proofs of love given her by the
original of the copy in her hand occuring
all at once to her remembrance, tears
filled her eyes, and her breast swelled
with involuntary sighs. 
In this painfully pleasing amusement did
she continue for some time, and had
doubtless done so much longer, if a sudden 

rustling among the leaves behind
her, had not made her turn her head to
see what had occasioned it;—but where
are the words that can express the surprize,
the wild confusion she was in,
when the first glance of her eyes presented
her with the sight of the real object,
whose image she had been thus tenderly
contemplating:—she shrieked, the
picture dropped from her hand, the use of
all her faculties forsook her, she sunk from
the seat where she was sitting, and had certainly
fainted quite away, but for the immediate
assistance of the person, who had
caused these extraordinary emotions. 
Her fancy indeed, strong as it was,
had formed no visionary appearance: it
was the very identical mr. Trueworth,
whom chance had brought to make the
discovery of a secret, which of all things
in the world he had the least suspicion
of. 
He was intimately acquainted with the
person, to whom the house adjoining to
that where mrs. Munden lodged belong'd,
and hearing where he was, on his return
from Oxfordshire, had come the evening
before, intending to pass a day or two
with him in this agreeable recess. 

As he was never a friend to much
sleeping, he rose that morning, and went
down into the garden before the greatest
part of the family had quitted their beds; 
he saw mrs. Munden while at too great a
distance to know who she was, yet did
her air and motion as she walked, strike
him with something, which made him
willing to see what sort of face belonged
to so genteel a form;—drawing more
near, his curiosity was gratified with a
sight he little expected:—he was just
about to accost her with the salutations of
the morning, when she went into the
arbour, and seated herself in the manner
already described:—the extreme pensiveness
of her mind had hindered her
from perceiving, that any one was near; 
but the little covert under which she was
placed being open on both sides, he had
a full view of every thing she did:— 
though she was in the most negligent
night-dress that could be, she seemed as
lovely to him as ever; all his first flames
rekindled in his heart, while gazing on
her with this uninterrupted freedom,— 
he longed to speak to her, but durst not,
lest by doing so he should be deprived of
the pleasure he now enjoyed, till observing
she had something in her hand,
which she seemed to look upon with 

great attention, and sometimes betrayed
agitations he had never seen in her before,
he was impatient to discover if
possible the motive,—he therefore advanced
as gently as he could towards the
back of the arbour, which having no
woodwork, and the leafy canopy only
supported by ozier boughs, placed at a
good distance from each other, he had a
full opportunity of beholding all that the
reader has been told:—but what was his
amazement to find it was his own picture!
that very picture, which had been taken
from the painter's, was the object of her
meditations!—he heard her sighs, he
saw her lovely hand frequently put up
to wipe away the tears that fell from her
eyes while looking on it;—he also saw
her more than once, though doubtless in
those moments not knowing what she did,
press the lifeless image to her bosom with
the utmost tenderness;—scarce could he
give credit to the testimony of his senses,
near as he was to her, he even strained his
sight to be more sure, and forgetting all
the precautions he had taken, thrust himself
as far as he was able between the
branches of which the arbour was composed. 
On perceiving the effect this last
action had produced, the gate, though 

not above twenty paces off, seemed too slow
a passage to fly to her relief, and setting
his foot upon a pedestal of a statue, quick
as thought, or the flash of elemental fire,
sprang over the myrtle hedge that parted
the garden from the walk,—‘Ah, madam,’ 
cried he, catching her in his
arms to hinder her from falling,—‘what
has the unhappy Trueworth done to
render his presence so alarming! — 
How have I deserved to appear thus
dreadful in your eyes!’ 
That admirable presence of mind, which
mrs. Munden had shewn on many occasions,
did not in this entirely leave her; 
—the time he was speaking those few
words sufficed to enable her to recollect
her scattered spirits, and withdrawing herself
from the hold he had taken of her,
and removing a little farther on the bench
as if to give him room to sit,—‘Sir,
said she, with a voice pretty well composed,
—the obligations I have to you
demand other sort of sentiments than
those you seem to accuse me of;—but
I thought myself alone, and was not
guarded against the surprize of meeting
you in this place. —I ought indeed,
replied he, to have been more
cautious in my approach, especially
as I found you deep in contemplation, 

which perhaps I have been my own
enemy by interrupting.’ 
Till he spoke in this manner, she was
not quite assured how far he had been
witness of her behaviour, but what he
now said confirming her of what she had
but feared before, threw her into a second
confusion little inferior to the former;— 
he saw it,—but saw it without that pity
he would have felt had it proceeded from
any other motive, and eager to bring her
to a more full eclaircissment,—‘If you
really think, madam,’ said he, ‘that
you have any obligations to me, you
may requite them all by answering sincerely
to one question:—Tell me I beseech
you,’ continued he, taking up the
picture, which she had neither thought
nor opportunity to remove from the
place where it had fallen, ‘resolve me
how this little picture came into your
possession?’ What was now the condition
of mrs. Munden! —She could
neither find any pretence to evade the
truth, not fit words to confess it, till mr.
Trueworth repeating his request, and
vowing he would never leave her till she
granted it,—‘What need have I to
answer?’ said she, blushing,—‘you
know in what manner it was taken
from the painter's, and the sight of it 

in my hand is sufficient to inform you
of the whole.’ 
‘Charming declaration—transporting
—ravishing to thought,’ cried he, kissing
her hand,—‘Oh had I known it
sooner, engaged as I then was to one,
who well deserved my love, could I
have guessed miss Betsy Thoughtless
was the contriver of that tender fraud,
I know not what revolution might have
happened in my heart! the empire
you had there, was never totally extirpated,
and kindness might have regained
what cruelty had lost:’—‘Do
not deceive yourself, sir, said she, interrupting
him with all the courage she
could assume, ‘nor mistake that for
love, which was only the effects of mere
gratitude:’ These words were accompanied
with a look, which once would
have struck him with the most submissive
awe, but he was now too well acquainted
with the sentiments she had for him to be
deterred by any other outward shew of
coldness;—‘Call it by what name you
please,’ cried he, ‘so you permit me
the continuance of it, and vouchsafe
me the same favours you bestow on my
insensible resemblance.’ —In speaking
this, he threw his arms about her waist,
not regarding the efforts she made to hinder
him, and clasp'd her to his breast 

with a vehemence, which in all his days
of courtship to her he never durst attempt:
—‘Forbear, sir,’ said she, ‘you
know I am not at liberty to be entertained
with discourses, nor with actions
of this nature;—loose me this moment,
or be assured all the kind
thoughts I had of you, and on which
you have too much presumed, will be
converted into the extremest hate and
detestation.’ —The voice, in which she
uttered this menace; convincing him how
much she was in earnest; he let go his
hold, removed some paces from her, and
beheld her for some moments with a
silent admiration:—‘I have obeyed you,
madam,’ cried he, with a deep sigh,— 
‘you are all angel—be all angel still,
far be it from me to tempt you from
the glorious height you stand in; yet
how unhappy has this interview made
made me! —I love you without daring
even to wish for a return; nay so
fully has your virtue conquered, that I
must love you more for the repulse you
have given my too audacious hopes;— 
you may at least pity the fate to which
I am condemned.’ 
‘It would be in vain for me,’ replied
she, in a voice somewhat broken by the
inward conflict she sustained, ‘to endeavour
to conceal what my inadvertencies 

have so fully betrayed to you, and
you may assure yourself, that I shall
think on you with all the tenderness
that honour and the duties of my station
will admit:—but remember, sir, I am
a wife, and being such, ought never to
see you more;—in regard therefore to
my reputation and peace of mind, I
must intreat you will henceforth avoid
my presence, with the same care I will
do yours.’ 
‘Severe as this injunction is,’ replied
he, ‘my soul avows the justice of it, and
I submit.’ —‘Farewell then’, said she,
rising from her seat, ‘oh farewell’ cried
he, and kissed her hand with emotions
not to be expressed, ‘farewell for ever,’ 
rejoined she, turning hastily away to
prevent his seeing the tears, with which
her eyes were over-charged, and in that
cruel instant overflowed her cheeks:— 
she advanced with all the speed she could
towards the wicket-gate, but when there,
could not forbear giving one look behind,
and perceiving he had left the walk, and
was proceeding through the garden with
folded arms, and a dejected pace, ‘Poor
Trueworth!’ cried she, and pursued him
with her eyes till he was quite out of
sight. 
Some readers may perhaps blame mr. 

Trueworth, as having presumed too far
on the discovery of the lady's passion,
and others of a contrary way of thinking,
laugh at him for being so easily repulsed,
but all in general must applaud the conduct
of mrs. Munden; till this dangerous
instance she had never had an opportunity
of shewing the command she had over
herself, and as mr. Estcount justly says, 

‘Ne'er let the fair-one boast of virtue prov'd,
‘Till she has well refus'd the man she truly lov'd.’

