

Will occasion various speculations in the inquisitive reader. 
When our pair of lovers came to relate mutually to each other the foregoing narratives, they were both of opinion, that most of the disagreements that happened in marriage were occasion'd chiefly by the parties entering into that state too early, and too precipitately. 
‘If your friends, who now so much rejoice in being reunited, said Jenny, had taken care before marriage to attain those qualifications necessary for the performance of the duties required from their respective stations, they would probably never have fallen into those errors which caused their separation 
‘Nor would their guest, continued she, be so unreasonably jealous of his wife's conduct, if, previously to his becoming a husband, he had made himself well acquainted with her principles and disposition, and also equally so with his own humour. 
‘Nor would mrs. Marlove, replied Jemmy, if she had at all studied the temper of mankind, have been so vain as to expect the same submission from her husband as she received from him while her lover;—much less have pretended to contradict him in things where it was not her province to interfere. 
‘Right, resumed she smiling, and you may now easily perceive the advantage it is to us not to hurry ourselves into wedlock, as too many people do, without reflecting what they are about, or being any way prepared to make the noose set easy. 
‘Then you persist in your resolution, rejoined Jemmy, of not being married yet a while?’ to which she answering in the affirmative, and repeating the arguments she had before made use of in her vindication, he readily enough yielded to the justice of her reasons; but that he did so was not so much owing to his discretion, as to another motive, which, though Jenny was ignorant of, it is not convenient that the reader should be so. 
He had, in reality, met with some adventures of late which had given him too high a relish for the modish pleasures of the town for him to be able to quit them without reluctance, and which he had too much good sense not to know it would ill become him to indulge the pursuit of after he should be a married man. 
Among the many places of diversion this great and luxurious town abounds with, lady Racket's assembly has been always look'd upon as the most general rendezvous for all the young and gay of both sexes. 
Jemmy went frequently thither, and it happening that one evening the company playing very high, he was stripp'd of all the money and bank notes he had about him, which amounted to a considerable sum. 
A little vex'd at his ill fortune he was retiring to a window, in order to compose himself, when the sound of a female voice very loud made him turn his head; he found it proceeded from Liberia,— the celebrated Liberia, who having been playing at another table, had lost all her money, and had not temper to bear it. 
‘Was ever such cursed luck!’ cried she, starting up from her seat, ‘I have not a single stake left;—I have a good mind to make a solemn vow never to touch a card again.’ ‘Patience,—patience, madam,’—said Jemmy, advanceing towards her;—‘behold in me your brother in affliction; these things will happen if we depend on the blind goddess.’ —‘Have you lost all your money too? demanded she. Every doit, upon my soul, reply'd he; so neither of us have any thing to do at present but to observe the fate of others. 
‘That would be an insipid way of killing time indeed, said she; suppose you and I should set down to picquet, as we both are in the same condition, and can play with nobody else.’ —‘With all my heart, answered he, and stake honour against honour.’ —‘Perhaps that would be just nothing at all, cried she laughing. —I dare trust yours, rejoined he, if you will put the same confidence in mine. 
‘It would be ungenerous in me, reply'd she, not to return good opinion with good opinion;—but I think it is against the rules of gaming to play merely upon credit;—I will set my solitaire against that ring you have upon your finger.’ 
Jemmy had a great regard for this ring, not so much for the intrinsic value of it, though it was a fine diamond, as because it had been his father's, who had given it to him some little time before he died: a moment's recollection, however, served to make him know what he should do on this occasion; and he reply'd with great alertness,—‘Madam, I heartily agree to your proposal, with this proviso, that which ever of us is the winner, the stakes may be redeemable;—nor would it be fair in me to play with you on any other terms, as your solitaire is worth much more than my ring. 
‘Well, it shall be just as you would have it, reply'd she, twenty guineas shall be the event;’—to which Jemmy agreeing, they sat down to a table which some company had just quitted; she pluck'd off her solitare and he his ring, both the pledges were laid under the candlestick, and to play they went;—fortune, for several deals, seem'd dubious in whose favour she should decide; but at length, after a hard fought battle, gave the victory to Jemmy. 
‘Was ever any thing so unluckly, said she, but I won't give out, come, sir,’ continued she, shuffling the cards, ‘twenty guineas more;—or, if you please, thirty; I shall then either be indebted fifty pieces to you, or have a claim on you for ten.’ 
Jemmy would fain have persuaded her to give over, but she would hear nothing he said on that score; they cut the cards, poor Liberia, had the advantage of the deal, but was nothing a gainer by it, she had not even the satisfaction of a second struggle; he immediately produced point—queen—and quatorze, without the trouble of playing a card. 
‘Confusion, cried she, bursting into tears, sure all the stars in the firmament have conspired this night against me!’ with these words she rose from table; ‘you have won, sir, pursued she, I know your directions, and will send the money in a day or two.’ She stayed not to hear what answer he would make, but flew out of the room with an air which denoted the utmost agitation of mind. 
Liberia had a great share of beauty, and Jemmy of good nature; the distress she appeared in render'd her more lovely in his eyes than ever he had thought her; his heart was that instant fill'd with emotions she had never before inspired it with;—he followed, with the solitaire in his hand, and overtook her as she was passing through a room in order to reach the stair-case. 
‘Madam, said he to her, I cannot suffer that beautiful neck should be without so becoming an ornament, even for the smallest space of time; I beseech you therefore to resume this jewel, and also to assure yourself, that I dare take your word of honour as a sufficient security for a much greater sum than the trifle to which fortune has just now entitled me. 
‘No mr. Jessamy, answer'd she, that must not be, my lord is at present out of town, or if he were at home, I should not chuse to acquaint him with my losses at play;—it is also improper for me to let the steward know any thing of the matter;—it may be longer than I could wish, or you perhaps expect, before I can, with any convenience, discharge my obligation;—so desire you will say no more, but keep the pledge till in my power to redeem it.’ 
All this was delivered in a voice so broken and hesitating, that Jemmy easily perceived by that, as well as by her looks, that it was with the utmost reluctance she refused the offer he had made, though her pride would not suffer her to accept it. 
Something, which the reader will presently discover, coming that moment into his head, ‘Since you insist, madam,’ said he, looking tenderly on her, ‘and will needs force me to retain something of yours in my hands, consent, at least, that I exchange this mortgage for some other, if you will permit me to wait on you home, and look over your trinkets, I shall certainly find somewhat that will please me as well, and you can much better spare. 
‘I must not reject every thing you propose,’ replied she with a half smile, and then received the solitaire from him, which he assisted her in replacing, and while he was doing so gave her neck a gentle pressure, which she was not so insensible as not to know the meaning of. 
There needed no more,—she gave him her hand to lead her down stairs,—her own chair waiting in the hall she went into it, and he follow'd in a hackney. 
On coming to her house, she conducted him directly to her dressing room, where her woman being sitting at work, she bad her set a bottle of wine on the table, and retire till call'd for,—saying she had some accounts to settle with that gentleman. 
This attendant was no sooner withdrawn than the reduced Liberia opened a little cabinet, which contain'd her Jewels. —‘Here, sir, cried she, are all the toys of this nature I am mistress of.’ —Jemmy scarce vouchsafeing a glance towards them, reply'd,—‘They must be fine, indeed, since owned by you, and must dazzle the sight of a man less knowing than I pretend to be in what is truly valuable;—but what is all the lustre they can boast while you are in presence? —How faint are the rays of the diamond to those your eyes send forth!—how insipid,—how weak is the glow of the ruby to these lips! 
He began this speech with looking intently on her face, and finding nothing there to discourage his attempt, concluded it with throwing his arms about her waist, and giving her more lively indications of his sense of the perfections he had praised, than all in the power of language could have done. 
They were alone,—a couch was in the room, she resisted not his encroachments, and one moment gave him the full possession of a happiness, which not half an hour before he had not even the least thought of ever solliciting. 
Scarce had he time to express the transports of his gratitude for the unhoped favours he had received, when Liberia, hearing the sound of voices on the stairs, rang her bell to know who was there; on which her woman immediately came in, and told her that two ladies, who had been at lady Racket's assembly, and seeing her leave the company so abruptly, had call'd to know the occasion, fearing she might be indisposed. 
‘Lord, how impertinent is some people's friendship! cried Liberia;—Why did you not tell them I was well, but very busy?’ ‘I did so, madam, reply'd the other, and that you was shut up in your closet, writing letters; but they insisted on seeing you,—ran up stairs in spite of me, and are now in the drawing room.’ 
‘Well,—there is no remedy for these things, said she, I must go to them, or they will brust in upon me here; you'll excuse me, mr. Jessamy,—it is highly improper you should be seen;—then turning to her woman; shew him down the back stairs, added she, with as little noise as you can.’ 
She said no more, but went out of the room to receive her company, and Jemmy suffer'd himself to be conducted by her woman in the manner she had order'd. 
