


Contains a second matrimonial contest,
of worse consequence than the former. 

Whoever considers miss Betsy
Thoughtless in her maiden character,
will not find it difficult to conceive what
she now endured in that of mrs. Munden. 
—All that lightened her poor heart,— 
all that made her patiently submit to the
fate her brothers had, in a manner, forced
upon her, was her belief of her being passionately
beloved by the man she made her
husband;—but thus cruelly undeceived,
by the treatment she had just met with
from him, one may truly say, that if it
did not make her utterly hate and despise
him, it at least destroyed at once, in her,
all the respect and good-will she had, from
the first moment of her marriage, been
endeavouring to feel for him. 

It is hard to say, whether her surprise
at an eclaircissement she had so little expected,
—her indignation at mr. Munden's
mean attempt to encroach upon her
right,—or the shock of reflecting, that it
was by death alone she could be relieved
from the vexations which she was threatened
with from a man of his humour,
were most predominant in her soul; but
certain it is, that all together racked her
with most terrible revulsions. 
She was in the midst of these agitations,
when lady Trusty came to visit her. — 
In the distractions of her thoughts she had
forgot to give orders to be denied to all
company, which otherwise she would,
doubtless, have done, even without excepting
that dear and justly valued friend. 
She endeavoured, as much as possible,
to compose herself, and prevent all tokens
of discontent from appearing in her countenance,
but had not the power of doing
it effectually enough, to deceive the penetration
of that lady;—she immediately
perceived, that something extraordinary
had happened to her, and as soon as she
was seated began to enquire into the cause
of the change she had observed in her. 

Mrs. Munden, on considering what
was most becoming in a wife, from the
first moment of her becoming so, had absolutely
resolved always to adhere, as
strictly as possible, to this maxim of the
poet: 

‘Secrets of marriage should be sacred held,
‘Their sweets and bitters by the wise conceal'd.’

But finding herself pretty strongly pressed
by a lady, to whom she had the greatest
and most just reason to believe she
ought to have nothing in reserve, she hesitated
not long to relate to her the whole
story of the brulée she had had with her
husband. 
Lady Trusty was extremely alarmed at
the account given her, and because she
would be sure not to mistake any part
of it, made mrs. Munden repeat several
times over every particular of this unhappy
dispute;—then, after a pause of
some minutes, began to give her advice
to her fair friend in the following terms: 
‘It grieves me to the soul,’ said that
excellent lady, ‘to find there is already 

any matter of complaint between you; 
—you have been but two months married,
and it is, methinks, by much
too early for him to throw off the lover,
and exert the husband;—but since it
is so, I would not have you, for your
sake, too much exert the wife: —I fear
he is of a rugged nature,—it behoves
you, therefore, rather to endeavour to
soften it, by all the means in your
power, than to pretend to combat with
unequal force;—you know the engagements
you are under, and how little relief
all the resistance you can make will
be able to afford you’ 
‘Bless me, madam!’ cried mrs. Munden,
spirituously, ‘would your ladyship
have me give up, to the expence of
house-keeping, that slender pittance allowed
for cloaths and pocket-money in
my marriage-articles?’ 
‘No, my dear,’ cried lady Trusty,
far be it from me to give you any such
counsel;—on the contrary, I am
apprehensive, that if you should suffer
yourself to be either menaced, or cajoled,
out of even the smallest part of
your rights, 'tis possible that a man of
mr. Munden's disposition, might hereafter
be tempted to encroach upon the 

whole, and leave you nothing you could
call your own.’ 
‘It is very difficult, if not wholly impossible,’ 
continued she, ‘to judge, with
any certainty, how to proceed with a
person, whose temper one does not
know;—I am altogether a stranger to
that of mr. Munden, nor can you as yet
pretend to be perfectly acquainted with
it;—all I can say, therefore, is, that I
would have you maintain your own privileges,
without appearing too tenacious
of them.’ 
‘I have then no other part to take,’ 
said mrs. Munden, ‘than just to lay out
in the best manner I can what money
he is pleased to allow, without making
any addition, what accidents soever may
happen to demand it.’ 
‘I mean so,’ replied lady Trusty, ‘and
whenever there is any deficiency, as some
there must necessarily be, in what might
be expected from your way of living, I
would not have you seem to take the
least notice of it;—behave, as if entirely
unconcerned,—contented, and
easy;—leave it to him to complain,
and when he does so, you will have an
opportunity, by shewing the bills of 

what you have laid out, of proving,
that it is not owing to your want of
good management, but to the scarcity
of the means put into your hands, that
his table is so ill supplied;—but still
let every thing you urge on this occasion; 
be accompanied with all the softness
it is in your power to assume.’ 
To this mrs. Munden, with a deep
sigh, made answer, that though she was
an ill dissembler, and besides had little
room, from her husband's late carriage
towards her, to flatter herself with any
good effect of her submission, yet she
would endeavour to follow her ladyship's
counsel, in making the experiment, however
irksome it might be to her to do so. 
They had a very long conversation together
on this head, during the whole
course of which lady Trusty laboured all
she could to perswade the other to look
on her situation in a much less disagreeable
light, than in reality it deserved. 
But how little is it in the power of argument
to reason away pain!—one is
much more deeply affected with what one
feels than what one hears:—the heart of
mrs. Munden was beset with thorns,
which all the words in the world 

would have been ineffectual to remove; 
—disappointed in every thing,
that could have rendered this marriage
supportable to her;—her good nature
abused,—her spirit humbled and depressed,
—no considerations were of force
to moderate her passions, but that melancholy
one that as her misfortunes were
without a remedy, the best, and indeed
the only relies, that fate permitted was,
in patiently submitting. 
She acted, nevertheless, in every respect
for several days, conformable to the method
lady Trusty had prescribed, and restrained
her temper so, as neither by word
or action to give mr. Munden any just
cause of offence;—he also kept himself
within bounds, though it was easy for her
to perceive, by his sullen deportment,
every time he was at table, how ill he
was satisfied with the provisions set before
him. 
A cold civility on the one side, and an
enforced complaisance on the other, hindered
the mutual discontent that reigned
in both their hearts from being perceptible
to any who came to visit them, and also
from breaking into any indecencies between
themselves, 'till one day, a gentleman
of some consideration in the world 

happening, unexpectedly, to come to dine
with them, mr. Munden was extremely
shocked at being no better prepared for
his entertainment. 
‘What! my dear,’ said he to his
wife, ‘have you nothing else to give us?’ 
—To which she replied, with a great
deal of presence of mind,—‘I am quite
ashamed and sorry for the accident,
but you know, my dear, we both
intended to dine abroad to day, so
I gave a bill of fare accordingly, and
this gentleman came too late to make
any addition to what I had ordered.’ 
It may be easily supposed the guest assured
them, that there needed no apologies,
—that every thing was mighty well,
and such like words of course; so no more
was said upon this subject. 
But the pride of mr. Munden filled
him with so much inward rage and spite,
that he was scarce able to contain himself
till his friend had taken leave, and he no
sooner was at liberty to say what he
thought proper, without incurring the censure
of being unmannerly or unkind,
than he began to reproach her in the
most unjust and cruel terms, for having,
as he said, exposed him to the contempt 

and ridicule of a person, who had hitherto
held him in the highest estimation. 
She made no other reply, than that she
was no less confounded than himself, at
what had happened,—that it was not in
her power to prevent it,—that she could
wish to be always prepared for the reception
of any friend, and that she was certain,
when he reflected on the cause, he
would be far from laying any blame on
her. 
In speaking these words, she ran to her
cabinet, and as lady Trusty had directed,
produced an account to what uses every
single shilling she had received from him
had been converted, since the last dispute
they had with each other on this score. 
In presenting the papers to him,— 
‘Read these bills,’ said she, ‘and be convinced
how little I deserve such treatment
from you:—you will find that
there are no items inserted of coffee, tea,
or chocolate. —Articles,’—continued
she, with an air a little disdainfully,— 
‘which you seemed to grumble at, tho'
yourself and friends had the same share
in, as well as me and mine.’ 

‘Rot your accounts,’ cried he, tearing
the papers she gave him into a thousand
pieces,—‘have you the folly to imagine
I will be troubled with such stuff? — 
It is sufficient I know upon the whole
what ought to be done, and must plainly
tell you, once for all, that you should
rather think of retrenching your expences,
than flatter yourself with expecting
an increase of my allowance to
you.’ 
‘My expences!—my expences!’ reiterated
she, with vehemence,—‘what
does the man mean?’ —‘My meaning,’ 
answered he, sullenly, ‘would
need no explanation, if you had either
any love for me, or prudence enough
to direct you to do what would entitle
you to mine;—but since you are so
ignorant, I must tell you, that I think
my family too much encumbered;— 
you have two maids,—I do not desire
you to lessen the number, but they are
certainly enough to wait upon you in a
morning. —I have a man, for whom I
never have any employment after that
time, and he may wait at table, and
attend you the whole afternoon;—I
see therefore no occasion you have to
keep a fellow meerly to loiter about the 

house,—eat,—drink, and run before
your chair when you make your visits,
—I insist, therefore, that you either
discharge him, or consent to give him
his livery and wages, and also to allow
for his board out of your own annual
revenue of pin money.’ 
What usage was this for a young lady,
scarce yet three months married,—endued
with every qualification to create
love and esteem,—accustomed to receive
nothing but testimonies of admiration from
as many as beheld her, and addressed with
the extremest homage and tenderness, by
the very man who now seemed to take
pride in the power he had obtained of
thwarting her humour, and dejecting that
spirit and vivacity he had so lately pretended
to adore. 
How utterly impossible was it for her
now to observe the rules laid down to her
by lady Trusty! —Could she after this
submit to put in practice any softening arts
she had been advised to win her lordly tyrant
into temper? —Could she, I say,
have done this, without being guilty of a
meanness, which all wives must have condemned
her for. 

But though the answers she gave to the
proposal made her by this ungenerous husband
were such as convinced him, she
would never be prevailed upon to recede
from any part of what was her due by
contract, and though she testified her resentment,
on his attempting such a thing,
in terms haughty enough, yet did she
confine herself within the limits of decency,
not uttering a single word unbecoming
of her character, either as the woman
of good understanding, or the wife. 
Mr. Munden's notions of marriage had
always been extremely unfavourable to the
ladies;—he considered a wife no more
than an upper servant, bound to study
and obey, in all things, the will of him
to whom she had given her hand;—and
how obsequious and submissive soever he
appeared when a lover, had fixed his resolution,
to render himself absolute master
when he became a husband. 
On finding himself thus disappointed in
his aim, he was almost ready to burst
with an inward malice, which not daring
to wreak, as perhaps at that time he could
have wished, he vented in an action mean
and pitiful indeed, but not be wondered 

at in a man possessed of so small a share
of affection, justice, or good-nature. 
The reader may remember, that mr.
Trueworth, in the beginning of his courtship
to miss Betsy, had made her a present
of a squirrel;—she had still retained
this first token of love, and always cherished
it with an uncommon care;—the
little creature was sitting on the ridge of
its cell cracking nuts, which his indulgent
mistress had bestowed upon him;—the
fondness she had always shewn of him put
a sudden thought into mr. Munden's head,
he started from his chair, saying to his
wife, with a revengeful sneer,—‘Here
is one domestic, at least, that may be
spared.’ —With these words he flew to
the poor harmless animal, seized it by the
neck, and throwing it with his whole force
against the carved work of the marble
chimney, its tender frame was dashed to
pieces. 
All this was done in such an instant,
that mrs. Munden had not time to make
any attempt for preventing it, but on the
sight of so disasterous a fate befalling her
little favourite, and the brutality of him
who inflicted it, raised emotions in her,
which she neither endeavoured, nor at that
instant could have power to quell. 

‘Monster!’—cried she;—‘unworthy
the name of man;—you needed
not have been guilty of this low piece
of cruelty, to make me see to what a
wretch I am sacrificed.’ —‘Nor was
there any occasion for exclamations such
as these,’ replied he, scornfully, ‘to
make me know that I was married to a
termagant.’ 
Many altercations of the like nature
passed between them, to which mrs. Munden
was the first that put a period:— 
finding herself unable to restrain her tears,
and unwilling he should be witness of that
weakness in her, she flew out of the room,
saying at the same time, that she would
never eat, or sleep with him again. 
