

Treats on no fresh matters, but serves
to heighten those already mentioned. 
Mr. Goodman had stayed abroad 'till
very late that night the concert had
been performed, so was not a witness of
any thing that had passed after the company
came home; but on lady Mellasin's
repeating to him every thing she remembered,
was very well pleased to hear that
she had reconciled the captain to him,
though extremely sorry, that the blunt
ill-judged affection of that gentleman had
exposed him to the ridicule, not only of
miss Betsy, but also of all her followers. 
That young lady, in the mean time,
was far from having any commiseration
for the anxieties of those who loved her; 
—on the contrary, she triumphed in the
pains she gave, if it can be supposed that
she, who was altogether ignorant of them
in herself, could look upon them as sincere
in others:—but I am apt to believe
ladies of this cast, regard all the professions
of love made to them (as indeed
many of them are) only as words of course, 
—the prerogative of youth and beauty in
the one sex, and a duty incumbent on the
other to pay;—they value themselves on
the number and quality of their lovers, as
they do upon the number and richness of
their clothes, because it makes them of
consideration in the world, and never take
the trouble of reflecting how dear it may
sometimes cost those to whom they are indebted
for indulging this vanity. 
That this, at least, was the motive
which induced miss Betsy to treat her lovers
in the manner she did, is evident to a demonstration,
from every other action of
her life:—she had a certain softness in
her disposition, which rendered her incapable
of knowing the distress of any one,
without affording all the relief was in her
power to give, and had she sooner been
convinced of the reality of the woes of
love, she sooner had left off the ambition
of inflicting them, and perhaps have been
brought to regard those who laboured under
them, rather with too much than too
little compassion;—but of this the reader
will be able to judge on proceeding farther
in this history. 
There were now three gentlemen who
all of them addressed this young lady on
the most honourable terms, yet did her 
giddy mind make no distinction between
the serious passion they had for her, and
the idle gallantries she received from those
who either had no design in making
them, or such as tended to her undoing. 
Impatient to hear in what fashion mr.
Trueworth would declare himself, and
imagining he would come the next day,
as he had made so handsome an apology
for not having waited on her the preceding
one, she told mr. Staple and captain
Hysom, in order to prevent their coming,
that she was engaged to pass that whole
afternoon, and evening, with some ladies
of her acquaintance: neither the captain
nor mr. Staple suspected the truth of what
she said, but the former was in too much
haste to know some issue of his fate to
be quite contented with this delay. 
Miss Betsy was not deceived in her expectations; 
—soon after dinner was over,
she was told mr. Trueworth had sent to
know if she was at home, and beg leave
to wait upon her. —Lady Mellasin having
a great deal of company that day in the
dining-room, she went into an adjacent
one to receive him;—he was charmed at
finding her alone, a happiness he could
not flatter himself with, on entering the
house, as he was assured by the number 
of footmen that he saw in the hall, that
many visitants were there before him: — 
this unexpected piece of good fortune, as
he then thought i, especially as he found
her playing with the squirrel he had sent
to her the day before, so much elated him,
that it brightened his whole aspect, and
gave a double share of vivacity to his eyes,
“May I hope your pardon, madam,” 
said he, “for presuming to approach you
with so trifling a present, as that little
creature?” —“Oh, mr. Trueworth!” 
answered she, “I will not forgive you if
you speak slightly of my squirrel,
though I am indebted to you for the
pleasure he gives me. —I love him excessively!
—you could not have made
me a more obliging present.” 
“How, madam!” cried he, “I should
be miserable, indeed, if I had nothing
in my power to offer more worthy
your acceptance than that animal. — 
What think you, madam, of an adoring
and passionately devoted heart?” 
“A heart!” rejoined she, “oh dear, a
heart may be a pretty thing for ought I
know to the contrary; but there is such
an enclosure of flesh and bone about it,
that it is utterly impossible for one to 
see into it, and consequently to know
whether one likes it or not.” 
“The heart, madam, in the sense I
mean,” said he, “implies the soul,
which being a spirit and invisible, can
only be known by its effects:—if the
whole services of mine may render it
an oblation, such as may obtain a gracious
reception from the adorable miss
Thoughtlefs, I shall bless the hour in
which I first beheld her charms, as the
most fortunate one I ever had to boast
of.” In ending these words he kissed
her hand, with a look full of the greatest
respect and tenderness. 
She then told him, the services of the
soul must needs be valuable, because they
were sincere; but as she knew not of what
nature those services were he intended to
render her, he must excuse her for not
so readily accepting them:—on which,
it is not to be doubted, but that he assured
her, they should be only such as
were dictated by the most pure affection,
and accompanied by the strictest honour. 
He was going on with such protestations
as may be imagined a man so much
enamoured would make to the object of
his wishes, when he was interrupted by 
miss Flora, who came hastily into the
room, and told him, that her mamma
hearing that he was in the house, expected
he would not leave it without letting her
have the pleasure of seeing him;—that
they were just going to tea, and that her
ladyship intreated he would join company
with those friends she had already with
her. 
Mr. Trueworth would have been glad
to have found some plausible pretence for
not complying with this invitation, but as
he could not make any, that would not
be looked on as savouring of ill manners,
and miss Betsy insisting on his going, they
all went together into the dining-room. 
The lover had now no farther opportunity
of prosecuting his suit in this visit; 
but he made another the next day, more
early than before, and found no-body but
mr. Goodman with miss Betsy, lady Mellasin
and miss Flora being gone among
the shops, either to buy something they
wanted, or to tumble over goods, as they
frequently did, meerly for the sake of seeing
new fashions. —Mr. Trueworth having
never been seen by mr. Goodman,
miss Betsy presented him to him with
these words, Sir, this is a gentleman
from Oxford,—an intimate friend of 
brother Frank's, and who did me the
favour to bring me a letter from him. 
There needed no more to make mr. Goodman
know, both who he was and the business
on which he came:—he received
him with a great deal of good manners; 
but knowing his absence would be most
agreeable, after some few compliments,
pretended he was called abroad by urgent
business, and took his leave. 
How much it rejoiced the sincerely devoted
heart of mr. Trueworth, to find
himself once more alone with the idol of
his wishes, may easily be conceived by
those who have had any experience of the
passion he so deeply felt;—but his felicity
was of a short continuance, and he
profited but little by the complaisance of
mr. Goodman. 
He was but just beginning to pour
forth some part of those tender sentiments,
with which his soul overflowed, when he
was prevented from proceeding, by a second
interruption, much more disagreeable
than the former had been. 
Mr. Staple, and captain Hysom, for
whom miss Betsy had not left the same
orders she had done the day before, came
both to visit her: the former had the advantage 
in being there somewhat sooner
than the other, and accosted her with an
air, which made the enamoured heart of
mr. Trueworth immediately beat an alarm
to jealousy. Mr. Staple, who had seen
him there once before, when he brought
her brother's letter to her, did not presently
know him for his rival, nor imagined
he had any other intent in his visits,
than to pay his compliments to the sister
of his friend. 
They were all three engaged in a conversation,
which had nothing particular in
it, when miss Betsy was told captain Hysom
desired to speak with her; on which
she bid the fellow desire him to walk in. 
“He is in the back parlour, madam,” 
replied he;—“I told him you had company,
so he desires you will come to
him there; for he says he has great
business with you, and must needs speak
with you.” Both miss Betsy and mr.
Staple laughed immoderately at this message; 
but mr. Trueworth, who was not
in the secret, looked a little grave, as not
knowing what to think of it. “You
would scarce believe, sir,” said mr.
Staple to him, “that this embassy came
from the court of cupid, yet I assure
you the captain is one of this lady's
most passionate admirers.” —“Yes, indeed,” 
added miss Betsy, “and threatens
terrible things to every one, who
should dare to dispute the conquest of
my heart with him;—but go,” continued
she, to the footman, “tell him, I
have friends with me whom I cannot
be so rude to leave, and that I insist on
his giving us his company in this
room.” 
The captain on this was prevailed upon
to come in, though not very well pleased
at finding himself obliged to do so, by the
positive commands of his mistress. —He
paid his respects, however, in his blunt
manner to the gentlemen, as well as miss
Betsy, and having drawn his chair as near
her as he could, “I hoped, madam,” said
he, “you would have found an opportunity
of speaking to me before now:
—you must needs think I am a little
uneasy till I know what I have to depend
upon.” —“Bless me, sir,” cried
she, “you talk in an odd manner!”—and
then, continued she, pointing to mr. Trueworth,
“this gentleman here, who is a
friend of my brother's, will think I
have out-run my income, and that you
come to dun me for money borrowed
of you.” —“No, no,” answered he,
“as to that you owe me nothing but
good-will,—and that I think I deserve 
for the respect I have for you, if it
were for nothing else;—but, madam,
I should be glad to know some answer
to the business I wrote to you upon.” 
“—Lord, sir!” replied she, “I have
not yet had time to think upon it,— 
much less to resolve on any thing.” — 
“That is strange,” resumed he, “why
you have had three days, and sure that
is long enough to think and resolve too,
on any thing.” —“Not for me indeed,
captain, answered she, laughing;—but
come, here are just four of us,—what
think you, gentlemen, of a game of
quadrille to kill time?” 
Mr. Trueworth and mr. Staple told her
at once, that they approved the motion,
and she was just going to call for the
cards and fishes, when the captain stopped
her, saying, “I never loved play in my
life, and have no time to kill as mayhap
these gentlemen have, who, 'tis
likely have nothing else to do than to
dress and visit;—I have a great deal
of business upon my hands,—the ship
is taking in her lading, and I do not
know but we may sail in six or seven
weeks, so must desire you would fix a
a day for us to be alone together, that
I may know at once what it is you design
to do.” —“Fye, captain!” replied 
she, “how can you think of such a
thing? —I assure you, sir,” added she,
with an affected disdain, “I never make
appointments with gentlemen.” 
“That I believe,” said he, “but you
should consider that I live a great way
off;—'tis a long walk from Mile-end
to St. James's, and I hate your jolting
hackney-coaches;—besides I may come
and come again, and never be able to
get a word with you in private, in an
afternoon, and all the morning I am
engaged either at the India-House, or
at 'Change;—therefore I should think
it is better for both of us not to stand
shilly, shally; but come to the point at
once; for lookye, fair lady, if we happen
to agree, there will be little enough
time to settle every thing, as I am obliged
to go so soon.” —“Too little
in my opinion, sir,” answered she,
“therefore I think it is best to defer talking
any more of the matter, 'till you
come back.” 
“Come back,” cried he, “why do
you consider I shall be gone three
years.” —“Really, sir,” said she, “as
I told you before I have never considered
any thing about it, nor can promise I
should be able to say any more to you 
at the end of twice the time you mention,
than I can do at present, which I
assure you is just nothing at all.” 
Though both mr. Trueworth, and mr.
Staple, had too much good manners to do
any thing that might affront the captain,
yet neither of them could restrain their
laughter so well as to prevent some marks
of the inclination they had for it, from
being visible in their faces;—and willing
to contribute something on their parts to
the diversion they perceived she gave herself,
with a lover so every way unsuitable
to her,—one told her, it was a great pity
she did not consult the captain's convenience; 
—the other said, that it must needs
be a vast fatigue for a gentleman, who
was accustomed only to walk the quarter
deck, to take a stretch of four miles at
once;—“And all to no purpose,” cried
he, that had spoken first, “pray, madam,
give him his dispatch.” 
As little acquainted as the captain was
with raillery, he had understanding enough
to make him see, that miss Betsy's behaviour
to him had rendered him the jest of
all the company that visited her, and this
he took so ill, that all the liking he before
had to her was now turned into contempt. 
—Finding they were going on in the ironical 
way they had began,—“Lookye, gentlemen,” 
said he, with a pretty stern
countenance, “I would advise you to
meddle only with such things as concern
yourselves;—you have nothing
to do with me, nor I with you. —If
your errand here be as I suspect it is,
there sits one who I dare answer will
find you employment enough, as long
as you shall think it worth your while to
dance attendance. As for you, Madam,” 
continued he, turning to miss Betsy,
“I think it would have become you as
well, to have given me a more civil
answer,—if you did not approve of
my proposals, you might have told me
so at first;—but I shall trouble neither
you nor myself any farther about the
matter. —I see how it is well enough,
and when next I steer for the coast of
matrimony, shall take care to look out
for a port not cumbered with rubbish; 
—so your servant.” 
As he was going out of the house, he
met lady Mellasin and miss Flora just entering,
being returned from the ramble
above-mentioned: —they saw he was very
angry, and would fain have perswaded
him to turn back, telling him, that if
any misunderstanding had happened between
him and miss Betsy, they would endeavour 
to make it up, and reconcile
them. —To which he replied, that he
thanked them for their love, but he had
done with miss Betsy for good and all; 
—that she was no better than a young
first, and did not know how to use a
gentleman handsomely;—said, he should
be glad to take a bowl of punch with mr.
Goodman before he went on his voyage; 
but would not come any more to his house
to be scoffed at by miss Betsy, and those
that came after her. 
Miss Flora told him, that it was unjust
in him to deprive her mamma, and herself,
of the pleasure of his good company
for the fault of miss Betsy, who, she said,
she could not help owning was of a very
giddy temper. —Lady Mellasin, to what
her daughter had said, added many obliging
things, in order to prevail on him,
either to return, or renew his visits hereafter; 
but the captain was obstinate, and
persisting in his resolution of coming there
no more, took his leave, and miss Flora
lost all hope of receiving any benefit from
his being rejected by miss Betsy. 