
Is inserted for no other purpose than merely to gratify the curiosity of the reader. 
The event which once more separated our lovers is of so interesting a nature, that I believe there are but very few who will not be desirous of knowing those particulars concerning it which 
Jemmy had no opportunity of relating to his fair mistress, in the short time his safety allow'd him to stay with her. 
But first,—as some people may be apt to think that miss Chit, in making the discovery she had done, had a view to the consequences which ensued; and that in mere spite to Jemmy for not loving her, and to Belpine for having imposed upon her, she had taken this method of revenging herself on both;—in justice to her character I must therefore beg leave to observe, that if this had been the case, she would rather have chose to have wrote the whole matter to Jemmy, with whom she was acquainted, than have gone in person to a lady to whom she had never spoke in her whole life, and from whom she could not be certain of meeting a very candid reception. 
On hearing herself accused in the manner she had been by mr. Morgan, and not doubting but that Jenny, as the party most concerned, had been equally severe upon her on that occasion, she came, in the heat of her passion, to clear herself to that lady from the imputation of a vanity of which she was indeed not guilty; and to convince her, by relating the whole proceeding of Belpine in this affair, that 
she neither was, nor ever imagined herself her rival in Jemmy's affections. 
It is true, that on seeing him there she might have forbore making any mention of Belpine, or the business on which she came;—but then, what other excuse could she have made to Jenny for this visit, at least she was not at that time prepared with any, so that it must be allow'd the mischief she did sprung more from inadvertency than design? 
As for Jemmy, no body, I believe, will either wonder at or condemn his just indignation, on finding himself thus treacherously dealt with, by a person he had loved and so much confided in;—the laws both of honour and of nature obliged him to demand some satisfaction for the injury that had been done him; and he must have been little of a lover, and indeed little of a man, not to have resented it in the manner he did. 
Fired with a rage impossible to be express'd, he had not patience to wait the dull formality of a challenge; but the moment he left Jenny's apartment flew in search of that infamous traducer of his reputation. 
As he knew most of the houses frequented by Belpine, he went from one to another enquiring for him, but without success, and was just going home in order to send him a summons to meet him the next morning, when in his way thither he saw, by the light of the lamps, for it was then dark, the person he had vainly fought for, coming out of a tavern with another gentleman arm in arm. —‘Belpine,’ cried he. ‘Jessamy, rejoin'd the other, What, left Bath so soon?’ —‘Yes, resumed Jemmy,—and must needs speak with you this instant.’ —‘I was going to supper with this gentleman, said Belpine, but will put off my engagement if your business be of any importance.’ —‘It is, reply'd Jemmy, and cannot be delay'd.’ 
Belpine perceiving by his manner of speaking that he had somewhat more than ordinary in his mind, and perhaps imagining it might be some new incident relating to lady Hardy, excused himself to his friend for quitting him, and they went into the tavern and up into the same room where he, Belpine, and the other gentleman had been drinking. 
The bottles and glasses were not yet removed, but as soon as they were so, and fresh wine brought in,—‘Now, my dear friend, your pleasure, said Belpine.’ —‘To tell you that you are a villain! reply'd Jemmy,—a most consummate villain.’ —‘ A villain, sir, retorted Belpine.’ —‘Yes,—I again repeat the name, cried Jemmy,—a villain,—a base incendiary, or you would not, by the most monstrous of all falshoods, have defamed the character of one you call'd your friend,—and endeavour'd to break the bands of union between two hearts inseparably link'd by love and honour.’ 
Conscious guilt now stared this base man in the face, and assisted the reproaches of his injured friend;—he affected, however, an intire ignorance of what he was accused of, and would fain have seem'd to take as only a jest what the other said to him. 
But our hero was in too great a heat to endure this trifling; he told him that he had learned the truth of every thing from miss Chit;—that she was now with Jenny, and insisted that he should either go with him to those two ladies,—renounce 
all he had said, and ask pardon on his knees, or with his sword defend the injustice he had done. 
To this he sullenly reply'd, that he knew of no obligation he was under to do either the one or the other. —‘Then you are a coward,—a scoundrel, and poltroon, cry'd Jemmy, and deserve to be used as such;’—with these words he took one of the Glasses, which the drawer had fill'd before he left the room, and threw full in his face;—the other could not now be any longer passive,—both their swords were out in an instant,—they made several thrusts, and Belpine had the advantage of having the first hit by wounding his antagonist in the arm; but this slight hurt was soon return'd with double interest,—Jemmy making a furious push ran him quite through the body;—he fell immediately, crying out, ‘—Oh! I am kill'd.’ 
Jemmy ran to him, but he spoke no more, nor shewed the least signs of life; on which he thought it behoved him to make the best of his way out of the house, which he did directly; though not without ordering a drawer, as he pass'd by the bar, to go up to the gentleman above. 
After he had got out of that street he stood still awhile, to consider what course he should take in case Belpine was really dead; and on reflecting how much circumstances were against him, found it most adviseable to leave England, till he should hear whether the wound he had given him was mortal or not. 
Having resolved on this, he called upon a Surgeon of his acquaintance and directed him to go immediately to the Tavern where he had left Belpine, contenting himself with having his own Arm, which had only a flesh wound, dressed and bound up by the Apprentice. 
He then went home and made his servants get every thing ready for his departure;—they loved their master too well not to be very expeditious in executing his command; and, indeed, as it was not likely but that what had happened would presently be known, there was no time to be lost;—the danger he was in, however, would not prevent him from biding adieu to his dear Jenny, as has been already said. 
As for Belpine, he was not dead, nor speechless, as he had fain'd to be, but 
finding himself deeply pierced had fallen out of policy to prevent his enemy from giving a second blow;—so apt are men of mean minds to judge of others by themselves. 
A surgeon had been sent for by the people of the tavern before Jemmy's friend arrived;—both these gentlemen coming almost at the same time examined, the wound together; but neither of them could pretend as yet to give his opinion how far it might be dangerous. 
The condition he was in not permiting him to be put either into a coach or chair, they were obliged to lay him on a mattress, and cover'd close over with blankets, make him be carried by two fellows on a bier to his lodgings;—both the surgeons immediately follow'd, saw him into bed, and gave exact directions in what manner he should be order'd till they should attend him again the next morning, which they did very early, as believing his case extremely dangerous. 
To their care, and the secret remorse of his own conscience for having so justly incurr'd the misfortune now fallen upon him, we shall leave him for a time, and 
return to subjects more capable of affecting the heart of every generous reader. 
