

Is multum in parvo. 
There is an unaccountable pride in
human nature, which often gets the
better of our justice, and makes us espouse
what we know within ourselves is wrong,
rather than appear to be set right by any
reason, except our own. 
Miss Betsy had too much of this unhappy
propensity in her composition. — 
A very little reflection enabled her to see
clearly enough the mistakes she sometimes
fell into; but she could not bear they
should be seen by others. —Miss Mabel 
was not only in effect the most valuable
of all the young ladies she conversed
with, but was also the most esteemed and
loved by her, yet was she less happy and
delighted in her company, than in that of
several others, for whom her good sense
would not suffer her to have the least real
regard. —The truth is, that though she
was very well convinced of her errors, in
relation to those men who professed themselves
her admirers, yet she loved those
errors in herself,—thought they were
pretty, and became her;—and therefore
as she could not as yet resolve to alter
her mode of behaviour, was never quite
easy in the presence of any one, who acted
with a prudence she would not be at
the pains to imitate. 
There were two young ladies, who had
an apartment in the palace of St. James's,
their father having an office there, who
exactly suited with her, in the most volatile
of her moments:—they had wit,— 
spirit, and were gay almost to wildness,
without the least mixture of libertinism,
or indecency. —How perfectly innocent
they were, is not the business of this history
to discuss, but they preserved as good
a reputation as their neighbours, and were
well respected in all public places. 
There it was miss Betsy chiefly found
an asylum from those perplexing thoughts,
which in spite of her pride, and the indifference
she had for mankind, would
sometimes intrude upon her mind on mr.
Trueworth's account;—here she was
certain of meeting a great variety of company; 
—here was all the news and scandal
the town could furnish;—here was
musick,—dancing,—feasting,—flattery; 
—in fine, here was every thing, that was
an enemy to care and contemplation. 
Among the number of those, who filled
the circle of these two court belles, there
was a gentleman named Munden:—he
appeared extremely charmed with miss
Betsy at first sight, and after having informed
himself of the particulars of her
family and fortune, took an opportunity,
as he was conducting her home one night,
to intreat she would allow him to pay
his respects to her where she lived. — 
This was a favour miss Betsy was never
very scrupulous of granting, and consented
now the more readily, as she thought the
report of a new lover would gall mr.
Trueworth, who, she heard by some, who
had very lately seen him, was not yet
gone out of town. 
Mr. Munden, to testify the impatience
of his love, waited on her the very next
day, as soon as he thought dinner would
be over, at mr. Goodman's:—he had
the satisfaction of finding her alone; 
but fearing she might not long be so,
suffered but a very few minutes to escape
before he acquainted her with the errand
on which he came:—the terms in which
he declared himself her admirer, were as
pathetic as could be made use of for the
purpose;—but though this was no more
than miss Betsy had expected, and would
have been strangely mortified if disappointed,
by his entertaining her on any
other score, yet she affected, at first, to
treat it with surprise, and then, on his
renewing his protestations, to answer all
he said with a sort of raillery, in order to
put him to the more expence of oaths and
asseverations. 
It is certain, that whoever pretended
to make his addresses to miss Betsy, stood
in need of being previously provided with
a good stock of repartees, to silence the
sarcasms of the witty fair, as well as fine
speeches to engage her to more seriousness. 
—Mr. Munden often found himself at
his ne plus ultra, but was not in the least
disconcerted at it;—he was a courtier; 
—he was accustomed to attend at the
levees of the great, and knew very well,
that persons in power seldom failed to
exercise it over those, who had any dependance
on them; and looking on the
case of a lover with his mistress, as the
same with one who is soliciting for a pension,
or employment, had armed himself
with patience, to submit to every
thing his tyrant should inflict, in the hope,
that it would one day be his turn to impose
laws,—according to the poet's
words: 

‘The humblest lover, when he lowest lies,
‘But kneels to conquer, and but falls to rise.’

Miss Betsy was indeed a tyrant, but a
very gentle one; she always mingled
some sweet with the sharpness of her expressions:
—if in one breath she menaced
despair, in the next she encouraged hope,
and her very repulses were sometimes so
equivocal, as that they might be taken
for invitations;—she played with her
lovers, as she did with her monkey, but
expected more obedience from them;— 
they must look gay or grave, according
as she did so;—their humour, and even
their very motions must be regulated by 
her influence, as the waters by the moon:
—in fine, an exterior homage was the
chief thing to be required; for as to the
heart, her own being yet untouched, she
gave herself but little trouble how that
of her lovers stood affected. 
Mr. Munden, with less love, perhaps,
than many, who had addressed her, knew
better how to suit himself to her humour; 
—he could act over all the delicacies of
the most tender passion, without being
truly sensible of any of them, and though
he wished, in reality, nothing so much as
attaining the affections of miss Betsy, yet
wishing it without those timid inquietudes,
—those jealous doubts,—those perplexing
anxieties, which suspence inflicts on a
more solid mind, he was the more capable
of behaving towards her in the way
she liked. 
He was continually inviting her to some
party of pleasure or other,—he gallanted
her to all public shews,—he treated her
with the most exquisite dainties of the
season, and presented her with many curious
toys. —Being to go with these ladies,
at whose appointment he first commenced
his acquaintance with her, and
some other company to a masquerade, he
waited on her some hours before the time, 
and taking out of his pocket a ruby, cut
in the shape of a heart, and illustrated
with small brilliants round about,—‘I
beg, madam,’ said he, ‘you will do
me/the honour of wearing this to-night,
either on your sleeve, or breast, or some
other conspicuous place. —There will
be a great deal of company, and some
perhaps in the same habit as yourself,
—this will direct my search, prevent
my being deceived by appearances,
which otherwise I might be, and prophanely
pay my worship to some other,
instead of the real goddess of my soul.’ 
This was the method he took to ingratiate
himself into the favour of his mistress,
and it had the effect, if not to make
her love him, at least to make her
charmed with this new conquest, much
more than she had been with several of
her former ones, though never so much
deserving her esteem. 
In the midst of these gay scenes, however,
mr. Trueworth came frequently into
her head. —To find he was in town,
made her flatter herself, that he lingered
here on her account, and that, in spite of
all his resolution, he had not courage to
leave the same air she breathed in;—she
fancied, that if she could meet him, or 
any accident throw him in her way, she
should be able to rekindle all-his former
flames, and render him as much her slave
as ever. —With this view she never went
abroad without casting her eyes about, in
search of him;—nay she sometimes even
condescended to pass by the house where
he was lodged, in hopes of seeing him
either going in or out, or from some one
or other of the windows; but chance did
not befriend her inclinations this way, nor
put it in her power again to triumph
over a heart, the sincerity of which she
had but too ill treated, when devoted to
her. 
In the mean time mr. Goodman, in
spite of the perplexities his own affairs involved
him in, could not help feeling a
great concern for those of miss Betsy; 
—he knew that mr. Trueworth had desisted
his visits to her,—that she had got
a new lover, who he could not find had
consulted the permission of any one but
herself, to make his addresses to her;— 
the late hours she kept, seldom coming
home, 'till some hours after the whole
family, except the servant who sate up
for her, were in bed, gave him also much
matter of uneasiness, and he thought it his
duty to talk seriously to her on all these
points. 
He began with asking her, how it happened
that he had not seen mr. Trueworth
for so long a time? To which she replied,
with the utmost indifference, that she
took some things ill from that gentleman,
and that, perhaps, he might have
some subject of complaint against her,— 
‘Therefore,’ said she, ‘as our humours
did not very well agree, it was best to
break off conversation.’ 
He then questioned her concerning mr.
Munden;—‘I hope,’ said he, ‘you
have taken care to inform yourself as
to his character and circumstances.’ — 
‘No truly, sir,’ answered she, with the
same careless air as before, ‘as I never
intend to be the better or the worse for
either, I give myself no pain about
what he is.’ —Mr. Goodman shook his
head, and was going to reason with her,
on the ill consequences of such a behaviour,
when some company coming in, broke
off, for a time, all further discourse between
them. 