

Marcellus having promis'd to espouse
the Cause of his accidental Guest,
inform'd them who he was and the Reason
of his being there in Disguise; and, in Pursuance
of this his Promise, he took Orders
to have such Necessaries provided, as were
fit to appear in before Publius, to whom he
resolv'd to state the Case of his Amour
with Clelia, considing in his Wisdom and
Goodness, to have all Things adjusted according
to Reason and Honour; and whilst
Accoutrements were thus preparing, the
Person who was still unknown, at the Desire
of the others, recited his Adventures
to them as follows: 
The History of Exilius.
My Name, (said he) is Exilius, and
by my Speech I should be a Roman; 
but I never knew any other Place or Habitation,
but a certain Rocky Island near
Sardinia, where, in a Cave, my Father and
I liv'd, or rather breath'd, for one cannot
call such an Abode living. Some confus'd 
Notions remain still in my Mind of
another kind of Being before we came thither,
but I know not what nor where; nor
was my Father ever willing to inform me,
when Curiosity excited me to enquire. In
this Island we were Lords and Servants,
Prince and People, having no other Co-habitants
for us either to command or to obey; 
the Sun and Stars were our unerring
Clocks and Kalendars; our Thoughts and
Actions, like our Food, admitted no Variety; 
our necessitated Temperance was our Physick,
and we felt no Change of Weather in
our Bones, till we saw it in the Skies; our
Health made our Food and hard Lodging
as grateful to us, as all the costly Feasts the
noble Romans enjoy under their rich embroider'd
Canopies; a good Conscience
was our never failing Opiate, to procure
us sound Sleep; and if a Night-Crow or a
Skriech-Owl thought fit to serenade us at
our Couchée, it did not fright us into dismal
Dreams, any more than roaring Winds
or beating Billows could disturb the Tranquility
of our waking Thoughts. Hope
and Fear, the Companions of human Life,
were to us mere Strangers, that if we saw
a Comet in the Sky, we dreaded not its Influence,
nor did good Aspects make us
hope for any Thing but what we had; our
Way of Living reconcil'd us to all the Contradictions
of human Life, and took away 
the Fear of Death. Content was to us
great Riches, and Poverty was our sure
Guard; we found Plenty in a very little,
and satisfy'd our Ambition in the Contempt
of sublunary Acquests. Thus we pass'd our
Moments in a serene or rather insipid Tranquility,
each succeeding Day supplanted
its Predecessor, without the least Adventure
to render any one remarkable; for we
knew not what our Fellow-Creatures acted
in the great World, excepting sometimes
that we went to Sardinia to buy Provisions,
having a little Boat of our own for that
Use. Never would my Father be persuaded
to leave this his belov'd Retreat,
tho' I sometime solicited him with such
Arguments as my Youth and Vanity inspir'd. 
Having been one Day at Sardinia, we
heard News of the great Preparation for
the Asian Expedition, in which the young
Scipio was constituted General. My Father
perceiving in me a certain Inclination
to practise in the Army some of those
Precepts in which he had long instructed
me, his dear Disciple, with much Goodness
and paternal Affection told me, the
Time was now come, in which Reason oblig'd
him to use Violence to his Inclinations,
in resolving to part with me, the only
Happiness of his disconsolate Abode:
But, said he, Heaven requires it, the Service 
of your Country calls for it, and, most
of all, your own Merits lay a just Claim
to it; and tho' your tender Affection towards
me restrains your Words on that
Subject, nevertheless your Eyes and every
Action of your Life speaks, and I am bound
to hear, and grant a Request so just and
reasonable; then go, my Son, the Darling
of my Soul, the Happiness of the poor
Remnant of my Days, go, I say, serve thy
Country, assist thy noble young General,
and gain Glory to thy self; whilst I, thy
poor doating Sire, in this my uncouth Solitude
shall offer my perpetual Vows. These
tender Words, mix'd with his Tears, in
spight of all my Endeavours, forc'd a Passage
for mine, that 'twas some Time before
I could reply for Weeping; and with humble
Thanks told him, that I should so carefully
observe these excellent Instructions,
which he had daily inculcated into me his
much oblig'd Disciple, that I doubted not
but to reap a very fertile Harvest of Glory,
which I promis'd to bring Home to him,
not only as the Proprietor, but the Cultivator
of the Soil; and 'tis certain, had my
Application answer'd his Industry, I
might have been a very accomplish'd Person; 
for there is not a greater Master in all
Learning, Military and Civil, in all Exercises,
both of Arts and Arms, than my
Father. I perceiving that he was extreamly 
pleas'd at the Promise of my Return,
repeated it to him again; adding, that no
Diversity of Fortune should frustrate that
Resolution, (if the Gods spar'd my Life)
for if good, his Presence would make it
double; if bad, his wise Conversation
would diminish its Disagreements. This
Assurance my Father receiv'd with all the
Marks of Kindness possible, telling me,
that my Love now equall'd that Duty I
had always shew'd to him, and both made
him a most happy Father; that he valued
this Favour from the Gods much before
Riches, or Honours, or any other Blessing
of human Life. Many of these endearing
Discourses pass'd between us during the
Time that my small Equipage was preparing. 
In fine, our Parting was very sorrowful; 
a thousand Caresses, mixt with Tears,
attended that ungrateful Moment; innumerable
Sighs and Blessings accompany'd
my Departure, and his constant Prayers
follow'd me in my Voyage. 
I got to the Army but few Days before
that great Battle, which was to decide the
Fate of Asia. I think I had the good Fortune
to do some particular Service to the
General: At these Words Marcellus in a
great Suprize said, O good Gods, are you
that signal Person, who so valiantly reliev'd
our General, and thereby made Victory
wait upon our Roman Eagles, who began 
to flag their Wings: O valiant Sir,
(continued Marcellus, embracing him) you
are not only in my Arms, but in my
Heart, and in the Hearts of all honourable
Commanders, and indeed of all noble Romans,
who at this Time do, and for all future
Ages shall, enjoy the Fruits of your
Valour in that Day's Service. O! Sir, why
were you so cruel to the noble General, and
to us all, as to take your self from us, without
giving us Opportunity to testify our
Gratitude? How often have I heard the
generous Scipio lament his Misfortune, in
being depriv'd of you the Author of his
Safety, before he had the Opportunity to
render you Acknowledgments suitable to
your Merits. Sir, reply'd Exilius, I knew
the General's noble Nature would have
heap'd greater Honours upon me, than my
weak Merit was capable to support; and
not only so, but I knew also his courteous
affable Humour to be so engaging, that I
durst not trust my self under the Temptation,
having promis'd to return to my Father; 
therefore I chose rather to desert the
most excellent Scipio, when simply my General,
than when become my Benefactor; 
and perhaps his Benefits adorn'd with his
Friendship also, which would have been
too many strong Links for me to have
broke, especially being already infeebled
by a great Inclination towards this illustrious 
Hero. These Considerations, Sir,
(continued Exilius) made me secretly leave
the Army, and return to my Father in his
Rocky Island, whose Health and tender
Caresses were to me all that Ambition
could prompt a young Heart to hope for,
or Glory make it to enjoy. He signaliz'd
his Love in every Word, and when Joy
overcharg'd his aged Heart, so as to make
him dumb, his Tears spoke, and in a more
eloquent Manner than Words, testify'd his
Satisfaction. His Thanksgiving to the
Gods were incessant, as had been his Supplications
on my Behalf while absent. 
Here we pass'd our Days in the same Tranquility
as before, my Father in Devotion,
and I in divers Sorts of Study; but chiefly
Poetry was my darling Favourite. The
Conversation of other Books were passant,
as are the Entertainments of coquet Mistresses; 
but this, like a faithful Spouse, was
my constant Companion; in her I enjoy'd
the whole World, from the Shepherd's
peaceful Shades, to the Victor's triumphant
Lawrels: In her I enjoy'd the Greatness
of the Roman Senators, and the Riches of
the Alexandrian Merchants; the Power of
Kings, and the Happiness of well-govern'd
People; the Brightness of the Court-Lady,
and the Innocence of the Country-Maid; 
the Consolation of a faithful Friend, and
the Diversion of a pleasant Companion. 
By her I thought our rocky Island a terrestrial
Paradise, there being nothing to
disturb my Enjoyment of this my fantastick
Spouse. I here walking one Evening
on the Side of the Rock, admiring the extreme
Calm of the Sea and Serenity of the
Air, contrary to what it had been the Day
before, and having been reading a Greek
Poet, who compares Women to Winds,
and Seas, and other Things turbulent and
changeable, my Thoughts turn'd themselves
into these Words: 

Ah! happy are we Anchorites that know
Not Fortune's Ebbs, nor when her Love will flow;
Nor yet the Storms that rage in Womens Breasts,
But here in Quiet build our Halcyon Nests,
Where no deceitful Calm our Faith beguiles,
No cruel Frowns, nor yet more cruel Smiles;
No rising Wave of Fate our Hopes advance,
Nor fear we fathomless Despair, or Chance:
But our strong Minds, like Rocks, their Firmness prove.
Defying both the Storms of Fate and Love.

As I thus entertain'd my Thoughts, lifting
up my Eyes, I saw at a Distance like a
Fire on the Sea, and looking on it earnestly,
I perceiv'd something floating from it,
driven by the Motion of the Waves; wherefore
I made out our little Boat, concluding
it some Thing or Person that had escap d 
the Fury of the Flames. Approaching near,
I found it was a Woman fasten d on a Piece
of the Ship, whom I took up, as Charity
oblig'd me, and brought Home, where my
Father and I used our Endeavours to bring
her to Life, which in a little Time prov'd
effectual. We put her into my Bed, and I
gave my Father the Trouble of a Bedfellow
that Night where I slept not at all; 
the Strangeness of the Adventure, and the
Beauty of the Person, gave a pleasing Surprize
to my whole Interiour, and put such
a Guard on the Avenues of my Eyes, that
Sleep could not enter, even when befriended
by the Darkness of the Night, and the
Silence of our rocky Cavern. 
When Light, the busy Inspectrix of all
our Actions, had exercis'd her prying Faculty
into our Cave, I, being excited by
Curiosity, drew near the Bed, where the
weary Stranger lay in a profound Sleep,
with her Arms carelesly cast over her Head; 
O Gods, how was my poor Heart charm'd,
and all my Senses ravish'd at this pleasing
View! I concluded that nothing human
could be so divinely fair; no, no, (said I)
it is some Goddess descended from Above,
and by her seeming Distress tries how we
would exercise our Charity towards our
Fellow-Creatures on the like Occasion,
therefore as such she ought to be ador'd. 
Then kneeling down, in soft Whispers I 
implor'd her Protection; a thousand extravagant
Things I utter'd, as on my Knees
I lay all trembling in a devout Extasy. 
The clear Light shining into the Cave,
awak'd my Father, which I no sooner
perceiv'd, but I softly left my Station. He
arose with as little Noise as possible, that
he might not disturb her; however, he was
scarce got ready when she awak'd, to whom
he address'd with the usual Civilities of the
Morning; after which he enquir'd of her
Country, and the Cause of her Distress: 
To which she reply'd, that her Name was
Scipiana, Daughter to Publius Scipio, who
had been carried away by Clodius, and so
was reduc'd to that Distress, by means of
the Ship's being burnt. This Knowledge of
her Quality augmented our Respect, and
doubled our Desires of rendering her Service,
of which my Father made all the
Assurances possible, withal telling her, that
no Opportunity should be omitted for her
Return, either speedily in Person, or by
sending Letters to her Father, that he
might give Order as he thought convenient. 
Scipiana giving my Father Thanks,
told him she desir'd to return in Person with
all possible speed, tho' I shall find little
Satisfaction (continued she) in my native
Country, since I can no more see nor enjoy
that Delight of my Eyes and Treasure
of my Heart, the noble Asiaticus, my belov'd 
Brother, of whom I am depriv'd by
an unfortunate Death. O Gods! said Marcellus,
interrupting her, is it certain then,
that the brave, the generous Scipio Asiaticus
is no more! Has the Tyrant Death depriv'd
Mankind of that Ornament of our Being
in general, and of our Country in particular? 
Scipiana, his Sister, affirm'd it,
reply'd Exilius: At which Marcellus again
interrupted him with Tears and Lamentations
for his own and the publick Loss, in
the Death of that incomparable Hero: 
Never could Rome boast of a more accomplish'd
Worthy, (continued he) for he was
in all Things exemplary; Learning and
Wisdom, Valour and Vertue, he possess'd,
with all their most bright Imbellishments,
Asiaticus! Asiaticus! my dear Friend! my
noble General! unhappy that I am to live
to hear this doleful News. I was honour'd in
thy Friendship; I glory'd in being thine
Associate in the War: I was proud of being
thy Cotemporary. But, ah! my Friend,
my Glory, Happiness, and Satisfaction, is
all sunk with thee into thy Grave. O ye
Gods, why have ye made Mankind of such
a brittle Nature! or why have you made
some so desireable and pleasing to all others,
and then snatch them away from us, when
our Affections are most firmly fix'd to their
Merits, or when we stand most in Need of
their Examples! O ye Divine Powers! if 
I durst, I wou'd accuse your Providence; 
but ah! that wou'd not restore me my
Asiaticus, my Country's Asiaticus, nay, even
the World's Asiaticus; with many other
doleful Lamentations of this Kind, to that
Degree, that the Company (tho' Strangers)
cou'd not forbear weeping also. After having
paid this just Tribute to the Memory
of his worthy Friend, he endeavour'd
to refrain himself, and begg'd Exilius to
proceed. 
Exilius returning to his Discourse, said,
Whilst my Father endeavour'd to consolate
and assist Scipiana, I withdrew out of the
Cave, as not being able to support the Sight
of those Tears, each Drop of which was
more painful than so much Blood pouring
from my Heart; and taking the same little
Walk on the Side of the Rock, where, the
Evening before, I had entertain'd my Muse
in Praise of that dismal Abode. I here
chid my Heart for the Crimes it had committed
all its Life against Love and Beauty. 
I told it, that such a Rebel deserv'd to wear
less noble Chains than those Fortune had
provided for it in the Person of Scipiana. 
Alas! said I, how ignorant was I last
Night of true Happiness, to think it consisted
in a dull Neglect, or Stoical Contempt
of all Human Pleasures; or to imagine
any true Felicity cou'd be had without
its true Author, Woman. With these 
kind of Thoughts I entertain'd my self,
till the pregnant Fancy took Birth in these
Words: 

Ah! beauteous Sex, to you we're bound to give
Our Thanks for all the Blessings we receive:
Ev'n that we're Men, the Chief of all our Boast,
Without your Sex, were a vast Blessing lost.
In vain wou'd Man his mighty Patent show,
That Reason makes him Lord of all below;
If Woman did not moderate his Rule,
He'd be a Tyrant, or a softly Fool:
For e'er Love's Documents inform his Breast,
He's but a thoughtless kind of Houshold Beast.
Houses, alas! there no such Things wou'd be,
He'd live beneath the Umbrage of a Tree;
Or else usurp some Free-born *  Native's Cave,
And so inhabit, whilst alive, a Grave;
Or o'er the World this lordly Brute wou'd rove,
Were he not taught and civiliz'd by Love.
'Tis Love and Beauty regulate our Souls;
No Rules so certain as in Cupid's Schools.
Your Beauty teaches whatsoe'er is good,
Else Good from Bad had scarce been understood;
What's eligible by your Smiles we know,
And by your Frowns refuse what is not so.
Thus the rough Draught of Man you have refin'd,
And polish'd all the Passions of his Mind.
His Cares you lessen, and his Joys augment,
To both Extreams set the just Bounds, Content.
In fine, 'tis you to Life its Relish give,
Or 'twere insipid, not worth while to live.
Nay, more, we're taught Religion too by you;
'Twas not by Chance that such Perfections grew;
No, no, it was th'Eternal Pow'rs which thus
Chose to exhibit their bright Selves to us;
And, for an Antepast of future Bliss,
Sent you (their Images) from Paradise.

I had scarce finish'd these Words, when I
saw Scipiana coming out of the Cave, like
Lightning out of a Cloud, striking me, the
poor Beholder, that I remain'd immoveable,
'till she, approaching, ask'd me divers
Questions of the Place, and our Way of
Living; telling me it was Pity that such a
Personage should live in such a Kind of
savage Solitude, where I cou'd no way be
useful to the World, nor answer the End of
my Creation. I have (said she) been perswading
your Father to quit this uncouth
Way of Living, and make Mankind happy
in his excellent Conversation; and not
only so, but reform the World by his vertuous
Example. In this Discourse we were,
when my Father, coming out of the Cave,
commanded me to go to Sardinia, and there
hire a Ship, with all Things necessary, to
carry Scipiana into Italy, to her Father,
according as she desir'd. This I perform'd 
with Speed and Success, in few Hours
bringing with me a Vessel, and all Conveniencies
for her Service; and by my Father's
Command, I was to wait upon her in
her Voyage, which she was very unwilling
to permit, as being loth to bereave my Father
of his Company; and therefore most
earnestly invited Him along with me; but
he cou'd not be prevail'd upon to leave his
beloved Cell, which no doubt was to him
a certain Heaven, where his devout Soul
conversed daily with the Powers divine. 
We sail'd with a prosperous Gale, which
in a little Time wou'd have brought us on
the Italian Shoar at Cajeta, where we intended
to disembark, that Port being near
the House of Publius Scipio, her noble Father; 
but passing by the Coasts of Sicily,
we were met by Pyrates, who being many
and well arm'd, soon made themselves our
Masters. They carry'd us into Egypt,
where we were sold to a Merchant of Alexandria. 
Here Scipiana thought fit to conceal
her Name and Quality, 'till she cou'd
find Means to inform her Father of her
Condition, thereby to receive his Orders,
and so direct her Measures accordingly. 
She call'd herself Exilia, by which Name
you are to know her in my succeeding Discourse. 
She was pleas'd to honour me so
far as to oblige me to call her Sister, pretending
to be private Citizens of Rome, 
and had been at Sardinia on some Business,
and were taken in our Return. 
Our Master, who was one of the wealthiest
Citizens of Alexandria, and of a generous
genteel Inclination, observ'd in us
something so agreeable, that he treated us
more like Friends than Slaves; and finding
Scipiana of an extraordinary Beauty, and
all other Qualifications equivalent to that
of her lovely Person, he made a Present of
her to a certain Court Lady, his Friend,
at once to oblige her, and to place Scipiana
in a better State of Servitude. This Lady
observing Exilia's Perfections, (which indeed
were such as could not be hid) put her
into a very rich Dress, and on the Queen's
Birth Day made a Present of her to her
Majesty. The Queen, who is in her Nature
very gracious and affable, soon became
acquainted with Exilia's Perfections; in
particular, Exilia was Mistress of a very
fine Voice, with which she frequently diverted
the Queen, who lov'd the Italian
Airs, as well as their Language. Exilia
being thus esteem'd by the Queen, her Majesty
was graciously pleas'd to ask her about
her Country and Kindred; which gave her
an Opportunity to let her Majesty know
of my being in Bondage with the Merchant
my Master, representing me as her
Brother; upon which her Majesty was
pleas'd to order me to be brought into her 
Presence, and when she saw me, she told
me, 'twas Pity a Person of my Stature
shou'd remain in Bondage, and therefore
with much Goodness purchas'd my Freedom; 
and in Consideration that Romans
are generally good Soldiers, made me to be
plac'd in the Guards, 'till some proper Post
might fall for my Advancement. In the
mean Time, Exilia's Merits promoted her
daily in the Queen's Favour, that in a
little Time the Queen not only discharg'd
her of Bondage, but plac'd her among the
chief of her Retinue. 
Thus was Exilia advanc'd in few Days
from Slavery, to a Station of great Honour,
where her Beauty and Virtue shin'd in
their proper Sphere, rendering her the Object
of every Bodies Esteem. Her Words
and Actions were the Model by which the
Ladies fashion'd their Discourse and Behaviour; 
her Beauty was the Theme of the
Gentlemens Admiration and Entertainment; 
her Piety edify'd the Devout and
Aged, and her Wit charm'd the Gay and
Young: her courteous affable Way made
her belov'd by Inferiours, and her Prudence
made her esteem'd by Equals and
Superiours, and by none more than by her
Majesty. 
Thus I beheld her at a Distance, without
Hopes of farther Happiness, too well
knowing myself and her, to dare to name 
my Passion to her, telling myself that I
ought to conceal it from my own Thoughts
and Knowledge, if possible; but alas, the
Flame was too violent to be extinguish'd,
and all the Efforts of my Reason were
little enough to suppress it so far as not to
be perceiv'd by others. O Scipiana, Scipiana!
said I to myself, thou who art Daughter
to one of the Grandees of the Earth, as
a Goddess fair, and as the Graces good; 
how dare a Wretch like me think on thee,
but as a Thing most sacred? Yet, Wretch
as I am, I must for ever think, and wish,
and long, and love thee, though without
Hope; for it is impossible for Gods or Fortune
ever to render me worthy to own my
Passion to thee, so great is the Disparity
between us; for no Advancement on my
Side can level our original Inequality. 
Then die, Exilius, for Shame die, let Despair
kill thee, thou deservest no less Punishment,
for harbouring a Thought so
arrogant, or rather impious, in daring to
love one who ought only to be belov'd by
a King or a Deity. Thus I pass'd my Moments
in deadly Anxiety and Despair,
which augmented by the Discovery I made
of the King's Inclinations towards Exilia; 
for his Majesty, who never kept any Guard
over his Eyes or Heart, but suffer'd them
to range after every fresh Beauty, soon became
sensible of Exilia's Charms; of which, 
as a quick-sighted Rival, I could not be
ignorant, nor could have possibly supported,
had I not been fortify'd by the Assurance
of Exilia's Vertue. 
One Day, the King going to see a new
Ship, which lay in the Port of Alexandria,
as he pass'd from that to view another of
equal Greatness, which lay just by; his
Foot slipp'd, so that he fell down between
the two Ships: Whilst all look'd on without
Hopes of recovering him, I, who had
accustom'd myself to swimming, and in
particular to diving, leap'd in, and caught
hold of him, and brought him up, to the
great Joy of all the By-standers. This
Service the King accepted with greater Expressions
of Gratitude than I expected, forasmuch
as that therein I did but what my
Duty oblig'd me to; for tho' I was not his
Subject, yet he was my Master and Benefactor; 
and tho' he was my Rival, he was
not mine Enemy, and above being my
Competitor. A while after this, his Majesty
being dissatisfy'd with one of the
Captains of his Guard, Piso by Name (of
whom more hereafter) he took away his
Commission and gave it to me; which
Honour was not only a Happiness to me in
itself, but doubly so, in Regard that it a
little diminish'd the Inequality betwixt
me and the bright Scipiana. 
Now you must know, that the Egyptians
are extreamly jealous of the Roman Greatness,
therefore cannot endure that we
should bear any Office of Honour or Profit
among them; and this being a Charge of
great Trust as well as Honour, caused
perpetual Murmurings among the People,
which was fomented by the disgraced Captain
and his Friends, with all the subtil
Insinuations possible; as if the King meant
to join with the Romans, to overthrow the
Religion and Laws of the Ægyptians. These
Murmurings once infus'd into the Heads
and Hearts of the People, fermented so till
their Discontents broke out into an absolute
Rebellion, which took its Beginning
in the Country, some Miles distant from
Alexandria. The Rebels were headed by
Piso, the aforesaid disgrac'd Captain; who
making towards Alexandria, daily increas'd
their Body, pretending that all they did
or intended, was for the Service of the
Gods, and the Preservation of their Laws
and Religion. 
The King resolv'd to send the Prince
Philometer, his Brother, against them, with
what Force he could make, which was not
great, having but few regular Troops, and
those which were then rais'd, for want of
understanding Discipline, were capable of
doing but small Service; besides the Danger
of their being already infected with rebellious 
Principles; and what was equally
unhappy, the Prince Philometer, who was to
lead these Troops, was very little belov'd,
being counted in his Heart a Jew, which
was the Religion on Earth the most hated
by the Egyptians. These Things being consider'd,
there was great Reason to doubt
the Success, tho' otherwise Philometer was
an excellent Prince, endow'd with great
Wisdom and Courage, and much experienc'd
in the War; a very just and pious
Prince, a true Friend, and a kind loving
Brother; the best of Masters to his Servants,
and a faithful Subject to his King; but these
and divers other excellent Qualities, could
not counterpoize that Aversion the People
had taken against his Religion, to wit, the
Jewish Way of Worship. In fine, his
Want of Fortune, or the Soldiers Want of
Fidelity, I know not which, lost the Day,
and the Army was put to Flight, and he
himself taken Prisoner. 
This Success of the Rebels, as it afflicted
all honest and honourable Hearts, so it
rejoiced all wicked and rebellious Spirits; 
that as the Country was the Theatre of an
open and actual Rebellion, so Alexandria
was the Nursery where they got their Parts; 
for in all their Clubs and Cabals, Treason
went down smoother than their Liquor,
and black Contrivances were easier digested
into Action, than their plentiful Suppers 
into Nourishment. Scandalous Libels,
stuffed with Malice and awkward Wit, (fit
to take raw young Readers) were thrown
into every Shop, thereby to make the Boys
silly Hands ready to execute in the Day
what their Masters more silly Heads contriv'd
in the Night: The Priests prophane
the Temples with false Explanations of the
Oracles, and made the Gods the Authors
of their Crimes, and pretend, that all their
Sacrilege and Rebellion is for the Sake of
the Gods. Thus they fed themselves with
Iniquity, and cloath'd themselves with
Hypocrisy; they bubbled the Vulgar with
Lies, and betray'd their Superiours with
Perjury. One ridiculous Custom they have
lately taken up, that on the Feast-Day of
their God Apis, they make a solemn Procession,
in Contempt of the Jews and their
Religion, making Figures of their chief
Writers and Rabbins, and when they have
carry'd them thro' the City with shouting
and reviling Acclamations, they come to
the Place prepar'd, and there burn them
with loud Shouts and Huzzas; so, by these
and the like Practices, they keep themselves
in a continual Heat and Ferment against
they know not who or what; for the Jews
are so few, and so little formidable, that
there is no Cause of Fear; but to be sure
their Leaders direct their Malice against
the King, perswading the People that he 
design'd to subvert the Government, and
submit himself to the Roman Senate, which
in them is the last Degree of Madness. 
Nevertheless, in this Condition was his
Majesty in a Manner besieg'd in his own
Palace, and subordinate to his Subjects; 
his Army ruin'd by the Rebels, his City
mutinous, his Servants and Counsellors
treacherous, that he knew not which Way
to turn himself, nor on whom he could depend. 
However, he drew out another Army
of such Forces as he could make; many
of the Army being Romans, he made Officers
over his new-rais'd Troops; and, in
Consideration of the good Success which
commonly attends the Romans, he was pleas'd
to commit these Troops to my Conduct. 
Now it was that I had a great Debate
with myself, whether I should discover my
Passion to Scipiana, before I went, or no; 
sometimes resolving on the Positive, in
Consideration of her Goodness, supposing
she would now compassionate my Absence,
especially going on so dangerous an Enterprize,
or rather desperate, by Means of the
little Hopes there were of the Fidelity of
the Troops; this I thought would extort
her Pity, and moderate that Anger I might
justly fear from an Attempt so audacious. 
I thought, that if it should be my Fate to fall
in this Service, one Tear shed on my Hearse,
as on the Hearse of her Lover, would render 
me happy in Eternity. But then again,
reflecting on her original Greatness, and
my own Obscurity, I concluded, no Goodness
could or ought to pardon such a Declaration,
but that it would make my Memory
her Aversion: Which Thought made
me fix on the Negative, saying to my self, 

Oh! no, Exilius, thou must be content
With Friendship's Tears to deck thy Monument.
For 'tis a Crime thy Passion to relate,
Exposing thee to her just Scorn and Hate.

Withal concluding, that if the Gods should
unexpectedly favour me with Victory, my
Love would then be a more reasonable Offering
to her divine Perfections. Wherefore,
at my Departure, I only behav'd my
self to her as a Friend and Brother, with
which Title she had honour'd me, as before
mention'd. 
When I took my Leave of the Princess
Philometra, the King's Niece, I was a little
surpriz'd at some sensible Expressions from
her Highness. Pardon me (continued Exilius)
if I am too bold in the Interpretation
of her Words and Looks. I know it to be a
Fault our Sex is extreamly accus'd of, that
we misinterpret the Words and Looks of
Ladies, and so flatter our selves into a vain
Hope or Expectation of Favours never
meant us; and when, in the Conclusion, we 
find our selves balk'd, we as falsly accuse
them of Inconstancy, as before we censur'd
them of Kindness, for one is commonly
the Consequent of the other; and when we
build the airy Castle of fancy'd Favours,
it is but just we fall into the Abyss of their
Displeasure. How far I may seem guilty
in your Opinions I know not; but the
Princess, after divers Turns of Discourse,
all tending to a particular Concern for me,
at last presented to me a large Ruby, cut in
Form of a flaming Heart, and commanded
me to be careful of my Life for her Sake. 
This Jewel was a little Present made her by
the Prince of Lybia, and perhaps was the
Cause of that Discontent which made him
leave the Egyptian Court, as you shall know
hereafter. 
I march'd the Army with all convenient
Speed against the Rebels, who, flush'd with
Success, were become dissolute and abandon'd
to all manner of Crimes and loose
Living; Murder, Rapin, and Oppression,
were frequently practis'd by them; and if
the suffering Inhabitants complain'd to the
Commanders, they found no Redress, the
Soldiers being now as ready to rebel against
their Officers, as before against their King; 
insomuch that Justice could not be executed,
for fear of a Mutiny or total Revolt,
which is not strange; for where there is
only a precarious and not a legal Authority, 
Commands are ill exhibited, and worse
obey'd; for such a Kind of an usurp'd Power
is, as it were, a Burlesque on Justice,
and a Banter on Government, which serve
rather to increase than to correct Crimes; 
for, a wild Vine cannot bring forth good
Grapes, but certain Berries, to poyson and
intoxicate. I need not enlarge on the
Madness of a Multitude, it being too well
known; but as a Mob rampant is a most
formidable Monster, so nothing is more
serviceable than that Beast when couchant; 
to which State, by the Assistance of the
Gods, I reduc'd the Egyptian Mob, (for an
Army of Rebels deserve no better Title.) 
I defeated their Force, deliver'd the Captive
Prince, retook all their fortify'd Towns,
and so utterly dispers'd the Rebels, that I
left no Marks of this Rebellion, but the
executed Bodies of their Leaders, the chief
of whom was the wicked Piso. 
Thus I return'd to Alexandria, with as
much Happiness as Victory could help me
to, and receiv'd such Honours and Acknowledgments
from the King, and the Prince
Philometer, as anticipated Expectation, and
non-plus'd even Ambition; all which Royal
Favours I valu'd in a double Regard, as
being most worthy and honourable in themselves,
and supposing them fit Garlands to
adorn the Offering of my Love, which I
design'd to make to Exilia the first Opportunity. 
But, oh good Heavens! how were
my Hopes blasted, when I heard that the
King design'd to espouse her. The Queen,
by her own earnest Desire, and the Consent
of the Council, was to be divorc'd; 
for she being the King's own Sister, and a
devout Woman, was never thoroughly content
with that incestuous Marriage; and
'tis suppos'd also, that the King's Conscience
upbraided him, especially when he
was under those Apprehensions which
were cast upon him by the late Rebellion,
Afflictions from the Hand of Heaven, often
making us look into our selves, to find
the original Cause, by which Means we
detect and punish those Crimes and Follies
which we had industriously conceal'd,
or perhaps audaciously avow'd. And thus it
was with this Royal Couple; the King and
Queen of Egypt, touch'd in their Consciences,
brought this Affair before the Great
Council of the Nation, who declar'd the
Marriage null, and his Majesty at Liberty
to chuse where he pleas'd; who, after a
little Deliberation (for Decency's Sake)
declar'd Exilia to be the Object of his
Choice; alledging, that her Brother had
done him such Service in sustaining the
falling Crown, that even such an Honour
to the Sister, was not over-paying the
Obligation. His Majesty alledg'd also,
that he having many Princes and Nobles, 
whose Daughters had equal Right both in
Birth and Beauty, he could not prefer
one without displeasing the other; so he
hoped they would all unite in the Election
he had made of this beautiful Stranger; and
indeed, this Reason took with the greatest
Part of the Nobility. In fine, it was in this
as in most Things of the World, every one
was pleas'd or displeas'd, as they were carry'd
by Interest, Fancy, or Caprice; it was
only I that was the miserable Wretch exalted
into Ruin. Distracted and afflicted as
I was, I went to Exilia's Apartment, where
I found her just going to wait upon the
Queen, who within a Day or two was to
quit Alexandria, together with her Royal
Dignity, and retire to a House prepar'd
for her, far distant from the Town, and
there to live as a Princess, the King's Sister. 
Exilia permitted me to wait on her to the
Queen, where she cast herself at the Queen's
Feet, and with all Earnestness, within the
Bounds of Humility and Respect, begg'd
her Majesty to believe the Protestation she
came to make of her Innocence. The
Gods are my Witnesses, (said she) I was so
far from contributing to this Affair on
Foot, that I never knew the least of the
King's Intention, neither against your Majesty,
nor towards me; if I had, I should
have thought myself bound in Duty to have
used my poor Endeavours to have prevented 
its Progress e'er it came to this Pitch; for
I am so thoroughly sensible of your Goodness
towards me, that if my Life would restore
you to the King's Favour, or secure
your Royal Dignity, I would with Pleasure
lay it down at your Feet this Moment. O! 
Madam, testify that you believe the Sincerity
of my Words, by using your Endeavours
with the King, that I may at least attend
you to your Retreat; perhaps his Majesty
in my Absence may change his Sentiments,
and think on some great Princess,
worthy to be Partner in his Royal Dignity. 
O leave me not here, a poor abandon'd
Stranger, to be this Country's Aversion,
and the World's Censure, in being declar'd
the Object of the King's Affections! The
King, I know, is too good and gracious to
espouse me by Force, and my Consent I
cannot give, in Prejudice of you, my Royal
Mistress and Benefactrix. Then embracing
the Queen's Knees, with a Shower of Tears,
she repeated her Supplication. 
The Queen very graciously embrac'd Exilia,
commanded her to dry her Tears, and
cease her Apprehensions; for (said her Majesty)
I perfectly know your Innocence; 
and that you may have true Repose of
Mind, be assur'd that all this is the Will
of Heaven, as I shall now inform you: So
commanding us both to sit down, she related
as follows: 

The History of the Queen of
Egypt, related by Exilius. 
I was very young, said the Queen,
when I was marry'd to the King my
Brother, of which our Laws allow, or at
least connive at. Now, tho' my Brother's
amiable Person, and tender Passion for me,
render'd these Espousals very agreeable, yet
I had a secret and inward Reluctancy in
Consideration of our Proximity; and tho'
I lov'd him more than a Brother, yet wish'd
he had not been so. I lov'd him as my
Husband, honour'd him as my King, tender'd
him as my Lover; yet the Remembrance
of his being my Brother, imbitter'd
all these. Whether this proceeded from
that Veneration I had for the Jewish Law,
or that it was the Law of Nature, I know
not; but I durst not oppose the Marriage,
least I should be suspected of Judaism, (to
which the Royal Family are suppos'd to be
too much inclin'd) for tho' the Jews marry
in their own Families, yet never such near
Relations as Brother and Sister. After being
marry'd some Years, and had no Child,
I was more troubled in my Thoughts, and
my Doubts increas'd, fearing the State in
which I liv'd with my Brother, was not
pleasing to the Gods; wherefore, on a solemn 
great Festival, I made my Devotions
in the Temple of Isis, begging this Goddess
of my Country to inspire me what to do, as
also lifting up my Heart to the God of the
Jews: The Night following I had a strange
Vision, for I thought I saw in my Sleep this
Goddess appear to me, saying these Words: 

Change thy Life: Thy Time improve:
Let not Marriage Vows with hold thee:
To a Roman yield thy Love:
Fear not th'Event; the Gods have told thee.

The Vision was so plain, and I remember'd
it so perfectly, that I could not but think
it more than a Dream, but knew not how
to believe it divine Inspiration, because it
seem'd to counsel a Crime; for one cannot
think Divinity and Immorality consistent. 
However, I sent for the High Priest of Isis,
in whom I thought I might confide, he
being my Nurse's Son, and, for her Sake,
by me preferr'd to that great Dignity. 
Now you must know that my Nurse was
a natural Daughter to a Prince of the
Blood Royal of the Ptolemys. She had been
marry'd to one Piso, a Native of Rome; but
having liv'd in my Father's Service from
his childhood, his Original was so forgot
by the Egyptians, that he was not look'd on
as a Stranger, nor malign'd as a Roman. 
My Father having Occasion to send him to 
Rome, on an Embassy, he took his Wife along
with him, and had there his Son, the
wicked Piso, Leader of the late Rebellion,
who, tho' he was a Roman born, and the
Son of a Roman, yet was never look'd on
as such, being always in our Service: Unless,
perhaps, his rebellious Inclinations
wove himself a Veil, which hid his Original
from the People's Notice. But to return: 
I secretly consulted the said High-Priest,
who told me, that the Vision, without all
Doubt, was literally to be interpreted, and
that I ought to embrace a Roman, for the
Good of my Country; that the Gods, who
were just and good, preferr'd the greater to
a lesser Advantage, a publick to a private
Benefit; that we ought to follow their
Example; and now, that the Welfare of
Egypt, nay, perhaps, the very Being of its
Laws and Constitutions, depended on this
Action. I was bound to obey the Gods,
who, in a Manner, had given me a positive
Command. But I insisted, that I thought
it impossible that the Gods could authorize
a Crime of any Kind, much less one so black
as this, and of such dangerous Consequence. 
To which he reply'd, that nothing was
good or bad, criminal or innocent in itself,
but as the Powers Divine had ordain'd; and
when it pleas'd them to dispense with those
their Ordinances, we their Creatures were
bound to obey with all Submission. These, 
and many more Arguments of this Kind,
he employ'd to evince his Assertion, which,
I believe, is according to the Doctrine of
that Religion, which is so far short of the
Purity of that of the Jews, that there is no
Place left for Comparison. The Consideration
of which made me still more inclin'd
to their Religion, of which (as aforesaid) I
was already too much suspected. 
After the High-Priest was return'd to
Memphis, the Place of his proper Abode,
his Mother (my Nurse) fail'd not to mind
me of what he had said, (she having been
present at this Discourse) always alledging
the Will of the Gods, and the Good of Egypt; 
by which one sees how People are capable
of being besotted, and fall into the
worst of Ills, when once intoxicated with
the Notion of some imaginary Good, especially
their Country's Happiness, their
Laws and Religion: When once their Understandings
are bubbled with that Fancy,
what is't they will not do? For, I perswade
myself, this poor Woman meant, in some
Degree, the Good of her Country, and the
securing its Rights, Privileges, and Properties,
Laws, and Religion, which made her
so often mind me of the Will of the Gods. 
But I, who was innocent, and my Intentions
truly vertuous, did not penetrate the
whole Drift of her Insinuations, notwithstanding
many gross Hints, 'till at last, with 
humble Apologies, and earnest Protestations
of Duty to the Gods, and the Royal
Interest, she let me know that Piso, her unfortunate
Son Piso, dy'd for me; with Showers
of Tears, begging my Pardon on her
Knees, and with her Tears mixing her Suplications,
not to neglect the Will of Heaven,
minding me also of Piso's being a Roman,
and, on her Side, of the Blood Royal
of the Ptolomys. Thus People often disguise
their own Crimes, Follies, and Passions,
dressing them as it were in Masquerade,
and make them pass on Mankind for
the Will of the Gods, and by this Means
engage the World in the most criminal Undertakings. 
But I was too well acquainted
with the Doctrine of the Jews, to be thus
put upon, otherwise, perhaps, my Vertue
might have stagger'd at these their plausible
and godly Arguments; to which add
Piso's handsom Person and engaging Mien,
together with the two most excellent Accomplishments
of his Sex, Wisdom and Valour,
which he possess'd most distinctly,
one might truly say, he had the Head
of Ulysses, and the Arms of Achilles; if he
had also the Heart of an honest Man, and
a faithful Subject, he had been a compleat
finish'd Worthy. But to return to what I
was saying of his Mother: I charg'd her
never to speak to me more of that Subject,
on Pain of my highest Displeasure, which 
she durst not disobey. But whilst her
Tongue was silent, Piso's Eyes, and all his
Gestures, spake; they talk'd and supplicated
on his Behalf; his Looks declar'd his
Thoughts, and his Eyes spake what his
Lips conceal'd; all which my Looks answer'd
with Scorn and Reprimands. But
I am now sensible that was not sufficient; 
I ought to have punish'd him, his Mother,
and his Brother the High-Priest, and so
have nipp'd in the Bud their audacious Enterprize; 
for where Persons of my Station
slack the Reins of Justice, it is not strange
that the Practices of the Wicked take Effect,
and hurry us on to our Overthrow; 
for 'tis certain, Rewards and Punishments,
duly exhibited, are the very Nerves of
Government: But in these, the King, as
well as myself, was to blame; for he
heap'd Favours according to his Fancy,
and I pardon'd Faults according to the
Mildness of my Nature, not Judgment:
And tho' these were Errors on the right
Hand, yet still they were Errors which
led us almost to our Ruin; for had I degraded
and punish'd the High-Priest, for
having misinterpreted the holy Oracles, I
had broke the Cords of their fine-wove
Intrigue, and stopp'd that Source of Mischief
which has since flow'd with such Violence. 
The Truth is, I had sometimes
Thoughts to let the King know the Affair; 
but then again, I consider'd that would endanger
Piso's Life, at least I knew it would
be his total Ruin; for Piso already began
to totter in the King's Favour; his Majesty
having remark'd how ready he was
to take Part with those that were suspected
of Mutiny; and when any were charg'd
with seditious Words or Libels, Piso was
always the Advocate to justify or excuse
them to the King; and so, on all Accounts,
the King's Enemies were Piso's Friends,
that his Majesty had great Reason to suspect
him, according to the common Remark,
If one will know a Man, observe what
Company he keeps. But tho' the King had
Reason to suspect, yet he had no just Cause
to punish, not knowing his Crime towards
me; and on the other Side, I was willing
to forget, or not understand it; for since
he lock'd up his Passion in Silence, I
thought it was best to leave it so, without
seeking the Key, or picking the Lock, by
taking any Notice of it; moreover, I had
a real Kindness for him, not only as a Person
endow'd with many excellent Qualities,
but as he was my Nurse's Son, and
Play-fellow in my Childhood, for which
Cause I had continually patroniz'd him,
and rais'd him and his Brother to these
Dignities; and on the same Consideration
conceal'd this Folly, thinking it was only 
the Effect of Youth, which would pass
with those Precautions I had taken. 
In the mean Time the Wretch used all
sinister and indirect Means to make himself
popular, and diminish the People's Affections
towards the King. By his Industry,
under-hand and unperceiv'd, he found
Means to remove the King's Friends out of
all Places and Offices of Trust, rais'd the
People's Clamour against the Jews and the
Romans, 'till they were all remov'd; for
they being Strangers, without Patron or
Dependance, but on the immediate Favour
of his Majesty, were not likely to comply
with Piso's Interest, or any other, in Opposition
to the King's: Among these were
two Jewish Eunuchs, who belong'd to my
Apartment, whose Fidelity Piso knew; and
that, I believe, was one Cause that they
and all the Jews were banish'd the Court,
under Pretence of their being dangerous
Persons, and Enemies to the Royal Interest; 
whereas the Bottom of all was, Piso
thought they were too just to be suborn'd
to his Projects. 
Piso having by his own Industry, and
the King's Negligence, brought Things to
this Pass, thought that now he need stick at
nothing, and resolv'd to make his lewd Addresses
to me: Wherefore he conspir'd with
his Mother, that on a certain Night, when
it should be her Turn to lodge in my Bed-chamber, 
and the King in his own Apartment,
that Piso should be hid in my Lodgings
'till all was quiet, and then to appear,
having suborn'd my Eunuchs who
waited in my Anti-chamber. But behold
the Goodness of the Powers Divine! 
There was an old Jew, of the Tribe of
Levi, who liv'd always under the Protection
of my Brother, the Prince Philometer, I
suppose, not unknown to you, the good
old Shadrac being known to every Body. 
This Man liv'd a most pious holy Life, up
in a Turret in my Brother's Palace, where
he rather dy'd daily than liv'd, his Life
was so austere: This holy Shadrac, notwithstanding
the strict Prohibition and
Laws in Force against them all, came creeping
to my Apartment, where I immediately
receiv'd him into my Closet, as
knowing he had something of Moment to
say to me; so, in his Kind of Dialect he
said, O Queen, the Snares of the Wicked
are laid for thee this Night, therefore sleep
not from thy Husband; for I am warn'd in
a Dream because of thee; having said
these Words, he went strait away. The
wicked Piso at this Time was hid in a little
Corridor which join'd to my Closet, and
hearing what this holy Shadrac said, knew
he should be disappointed of his intended
Treason that Night; so, with a Nimbleness
suitable to his Fury, went out the back 
Way thro' the Corridor, and came round
up the Great Stairs time enough to meet
poor Shadrac, where he treated him with
very opprobrious Words, for having broke
the King's Orders, in coming to the Court,
and, in particular, to the Queen's Apartment,
after such strict Prohibition. The
good Shadrac, tho' a very holy Person, yet
not insensible, perhaps reply'd with a little
Sharpness, that the King's Prohibition
might with more Justice be apply'd to Piso
than to Shadrac; for that he came by the
Order of the God of his Fathers. These
Words so transported the guilty Piso, that
he beat and spurn'd the poor old Man with
great Cruelty, bidding him, at every Blow,
carry that to the God of his Fathers. 
Now the King, as I told you before,
wanted only a fair Occasion to be rid of
Piso, so would not let slip this which offer'd; 
but for his Rashness in striking in
the Court, took away all his Commissions,
both as General and Captain of the Guard,
and divested him of all Honour and Preferments,
as well Civil as Military; for he
possess'd many. 
Piso being thus disgrac'd, went strait
away to Memphis, to his Brother the High-Priest, 
to whom he related the Business in
a very malicious Manner, saying, That
the King had punish'd him for doing his
Duty against a Criminal who broke his 
Commands; that the whole Royal Family
were so bigotted to the Jewish Superstition,
those ancient Enemies and Slaves to Egypt,
that in a little Time the King would change
and subvert the Laws and Customs of his
Country, both Sacred and Civil, and make
them submit to foreign Constitutions, unknown
to them or their Ancestors. Thus
he gain'd the High-Priest, and in him all
the subordinate Clergy, who with pious
Care sow'd the Seeds of Rebellion in the
Hearts of the People, which brought forth
a very plentiful Harvest. At the same
Time Piso had left his Agents in the Court
and City of Alexandria, to ferment that
Part of Egypt, whilst he himself went into
the Country, to set on Foot an open Rebellion. 
You see (continu'd the Queen)
how careful Kings ought to be to keep the
Reins of Government in their own Hands,
and not commit them to any Phaeton, to
set the World in a Combustion; for thus it
far'd with us: The King gave himself to
Pleasure, and I myself to Devotion, both
neglecting what the Gods had committed
to our Care, and so were punish'd according
to our Demerits. It is a common and
true Saying, that Kings and Queens see
and hear with the Eyes of others; and 'tis
as true, that if they do not endeavour to
see and hear with their own also, there
will be but a blind Administration of Government; 
for the depending on others, is
giving away the Sceptre, and making the
Crown precarious. This we experienc'd,
tho' too late, in the Practice of Piso and his
Adherents; for you know to what a State
we were reduc'd by this Man's Treachery,
when the ancient Monarchy of Egypt was
ready to tumble into Anarchy, and the
Royal Family of the Ptolemys into Oblivion,
by which Means the People must have
been miserably crush'd in the Overthrow of
their Laws and Constitutions, and, poor
Creatures, were led head-long by their
pretended Patriots, who industriously infused
Notions suitable to their own Ambition
and Revenge; the Truth is, I believe
Piso's Rebellion proceeded from the latter,
he being doubly enrag'd, first, by the
Disappointment of his lewd Intentions towards
me; secondly, at his Disgrace from
the Hands of the King. These were the
Bases on which he built the Structure of
his Rebellion, tho' he daub'd them over
so, as to make the People believe it was
their Laws and Religion he took in Hand
to protect, of which he knew the People
to be so jealous in their Nature, that they
are ready to deify the worst of Men, that
will but make themselves their Patriots,
like the Sheep in the Fable, who chose the
Wolf for their Guardian; tho' at the same
Time that they make such a Bustle about 
their Religion, no People on Earth practise
so little. Things being come to such Extremity,
that we despair'd of all Help, but
immediately from the Hand of Heaven,
made us address our selves more directly to
the Divine Assistance; wherefore, I resolv'd
to consult the holy Shadrac, who, I had
great Reason to believe, was endow'd with
Divine Inspiration: So, in the first Place,
I ask'd him what he meant by those Words,
That the Snares of the Wicked were laid for
me that Night, &c. He told me, that Piso's
Mother had intended to admit her Son
into my Lodging that Night: Wherefore,
I examin'd her in the Presence of Shadrac,
promising to pardon her if she told me the
Truth. She, poor old Woman, immediately
confess'd the whole Matter, alledging
for her Excuse, that it was the Effect of
her mistaken Zeal, believing it to be the
Will of the Gods, according to the Interpretation
of her Son the High-Priest. 
Now the holy Shadrac having, by his
Spirit of Prophesy, frustrated this Conspiracy,
I thought it reasonable to apply my
self to his Interpretation of that Dream I
had after my Sacrifice to the Goddess Isis. 
Wonder not, said the Queen, (interrupting
herself) that we take such Notice of our
Dreams, it has always been the Custom of
our Country, especially those which happen
to People of great Rank and Authority, 
and chiefly on certain Days of Devotion. 
'Tis true, some gay and youthful
Heads lay all that aside, as fabulous
and superstitious; but while they pretend
to avoid Superstition, they fall into Prophaneness
and Irreligion; for, in my Opinion,
Dreams, with their Interpretations,
very much evince the Existence of a Divinity,
or immortal Being. Which Way
it is, I know not, but I told my Dream to
Shadrac, who gave me a quite different
Interpretation from that of the High-Priest. 
He told me, that the Words, Change thy
Life, was to change it from a vertuous to a
holy Life. By Thy Time improve, was meant,
that I must improve my Time in the Service
of the true God, and not to be with-holden
by Marriage-Vows, which were
incestuous and displeasing to Heaven. To
a Roman yield thy Love, signify'd that I
must yield the King to a Roman, he being
my Love, my Joy, and Satisfaction; all
which should have a good Event, as being
foretold by the Powers Divine. This Interpretation
seem'd so just, reasonable, and
consonant to Vertue, that I told the whole
Affair to the King; and at the same Time
engag'd him, together with my self, to
make a Promise to the Gods, (that if we had
Success in the Troops we committed to
Exilius) to obey this Revelation, and that 
his Majesty should take what fair Roman
he lik'd best, whilst I retir'd to improve my
Time in a holy Way of Living; where I
resolved to examine throughly the Doctrine
of the Jews, and, if possible, find out whether
or no those Wonders were true, which
they pretend were done in this our Country
by their Great Legislator. And now
you see, Exilia, (continu'd the Queen) that
this my Retirement is the Will of Heaven,
and my own seeking; therefore, make no
Scruple to accept of those Honours offer'd
thee by his Majesty. 
Exilia, with profound Respect, return'd
her Majesty infinite Thanks, saying, That
she knew herself bound in Duty to obey
her Majesty in all Things; but (said she)
the Consideration of your Majesty's Honour,
and the Interest of the Royal Family,
(which every Body ought to prefer
to their own) makes my Affections revolt
against my Duty, in opposing your Majesty's
Sentiments. Madam, since the Gods
did not point me out in particular, I hope,
your Majesty will not be displeas'd, if I
put you in mind, that there are several
Romans in Egypt, whose Birth as well as
Beauty, in some Degree, qualifies them for
such Espousals. In particular, the bright
Fabiel, who, being born at Rome, is in
Strictness a Roman, and her Mother the
Daughter of Fabius, an ancient Roman Family. 
'Tis true, reply'd the Queen, Fabiell
is of a noble Descent; I know the Fabii at
Rome are truly great and honourable, and
her Father one of the Grandees of Egypt,
descended from the Royal Race of the
Ptolomies: Her Person no less bright than
her illustrious Birth, and her Vertue perfect; 
for when she perceiv'd the King to
cast some amorous Looks on her, she begg'd
her Mother to remove her from Court, far
distant, to their Castle in the Country; 
since which his Majesty has transferr'd his
tender Thoughts on you, with which I
am perfectly well satisfy'd; therefore do
not resist your own Happiness. So, embracing
Exilia most tenderly, wish'd her much
Felicity in that Royal Dignity prepar'd for
her by the Powers above. The Queen, rising
up, oblig'd Exilia to take her Leave,
which she did, with her Eyes swell'd with
Tears, and her Heart over-charg'd with
Grief, for being separated from the Queen,
whom she lov'd most unfeignedly. 
Exilia being return'd to her Apartment,
took me with her into her Closet, where,
commanding me to seat my self by her,
she endeavour'd to dry her Tears, and then
desir'd my Counsel; for (said she) these
Transactions at Court to me are very disagreeable; 
I hoped to have been rescu'd by
the Queen's Interest or Authority; but you
see her Majesty has been the chief Instrument 
of this my glorious Undoing. I call
it so, because it is so far distant from my
Inclinations; for, both by Nature and Education,
I love Solitude and Retirement. 
The Muses and the Rural Deities were ever
the Objects of my Devotion, and a Country
Life my temporal Satisfaction. A Castle
of my own, situated in a serene Air and
a benign Soil, faithful Servants, and kind
Neighbours, being the utmost Bounds of my
Ambition; which makes it evident, the
Gods have not cast my Soul in a Mould fit
for this Royal Dignity which courts me; 
for I look on Persons of that Rank but as
Slaves to the Publick, chain'd to the Oar of
Ceremony, to tug through Storms of Censure
and Clamour. They are watch'd by
the Eyes of Envy, and over-heard by the
Ears of Malice. Behind their Backs they
are scourg'd by the Tongues of Spite, and
to their Faces flatter'd 'till they know not
themselves, much less others. They are
courted by Multitudes, and lov'd by few; 
their Defects expos'd, and their Vertues conceal'd
or traduc'd; their Rest is broke with
Cares, and their Food imbitter'd with a
thousand Apprehensions; for their Table
is surrounded with Sycophants, and their
Bed with Traitors. Spies enter their Closets,
and Hypocrites wait on their Devotions. 
Being thus surrounded, where can
they find the least Peep-hole to spy out 
Happiness; for what is all their Pomp and
Parade, but glittering Ornaments, to deck
them as Sacrifices to the Service of the State. 
These Considerations, and a thousand more
such, makes this Station appear to me but
as a shining Pageant, which draws the Eyes
of Spectators, but loads the Shoulders of
those that bear it; therefore my weak Merit
is very unfit to support such a Weight. 
So, I hope I am in the right, in being desirous
to leave it to those to whom the Gods
have given a Soul tun'd and set to such a
Key, as can either find or make Musick in
this Kind of Noise, which to me is so inharmonious
and discordant; amongst whom
I know none more truly qualify'd than my
Cousin Fabiell. Her great Soul makes her
love to be in a Station of Grandeur, where
she may be supplicated and sought after,
and thinks it God-like to be able to make
and unmake, to set up and cast down, and
with her Word or Look to alarm or appease
Mankind. Besides, I know she has a secret
Inclination for the King; but withal she is
so truly vertuous, that she no sooner perceiv'd
the King's Passion for her, but she
gain'd her Mother to leave the Court; as
not daring to trust her Honour between two
such Assailants, as the King's Courtship
and her own Inclinations. I wish our Sex
would use these Precautions frequently, and
not trust their selves with themselves, there 
would not be so many Shipwrecks of Honour. 
Now Fabiell having made me the
Confident of these her Thoughts, I should
do most unjustly and ungenerously to supplant
her in her Absence, especially knowing
her to be my Relation by Marriage; 
for she is Neece to the same Noble Fabius
who marry'd my Aunt; and as I should do
unworthily by her, so I should act undutifully
towards my Father, he having promis'd
me to my Cousin the young and vertuous
Fabius, Son to the said Noble Roman. 
Now, tho' Fabiell made me her Confident,
I did not do the same by her, nor let her
know I was her Kinswoman; which in the
End would make this Transaction appear
to her the more unworthy, as if it were a
Treason long contriv'd. 
Now, Exilius, consider my Duty to my
Father, my Friendship to Fabiell, my own
innate Aversion to Grandeur, and then, as
a Friend, give me your Counsel. Madam,
(reply'd I) had your Ladyship added one
Consideration more, I could easily have given
my Counsel; had you added, that the
poor Exilius dies for you; that he has ador'd
you since the first Moment he beheld your
Beauties; Exilius, the unfortunate Exilius,
that has most respectfully conceal'd his
Flame, lest it should offend you; had you
said, the Consideration of his Sufferings
were some Concern to you, then, Madam, 
I could readily counsel you; I could say,
Love Exilius, or, at least, do not hate Exilius,
the unfortunate Slave, whose Life
and Happiness depend on your Looks. 
Then casting my self at her Feet, begg'd
her at least to pardon this Declaration of my
Love, which I should still have conceal'd,
if her Commands had not in a manner extorted
it from me. To all which she answer'd
with a confus'd Voice, Your Words, Exilius,
surprize and confound me, and are an Addition
to my Sorrows; therefore, seeing you
can neither counsel nor assist me, pray
leave me; leave, leave this most unhappy
and confus'd of all Creatures: At
which Words, with Tears in my Eyes, I
took the Liberty to kiss her Hand, and, in
Obedience to her Command, departed. 
I pass'd this Night in divers Thoughts
and Agitations of Mind, having a secret Satisfaction
that she had receiv'd the Declaration
of my Love so calmly; that Thought
more than counterpois'd all that I had to
fear from my potent Rival. Thus we suffer
our selves to be blown and toss'd by our
Passions, without casting Anchor on the
Coast of sound Judgment, or steering to the
Harbour of right Reason; for when I made
a serious Reflection on this Passage, I found
how I had overshot my self, in thus declaring
my Passion to her, fearing that her
nice Vertue would not let her consent to 
steal away with me into Italy, after this Overture; 
yet that was the only Card I had
to play in this Juncture, and the Method
we had partly resolv'd on some Time before. 
These, and a thousand Things of this
Kind, agitated my Thoughts that Night. 
Next Morning I went to her Apartment,
where I had free Access as a Friend and
Brother. I found her in the same Closet
where I had left her the Night before; and,
falling on my Knees, begg'd her to accept
those Adorations I came to pay her, as my
Divinity, from whom I expected Protection
the succeeding Day, and all the Days of
my Life. Do not persecute me, said she,
with your profane Complements, nor attribute
any Divinity to me, a miserable
Mortal, the most unhappy of my Sex. Rise,
rise, Exilius, (continu'd she, with Tears in
her Eyes) and reserve your Adorations for
the Princess Philometra. The Princess Philometra's
Beauty (reply'd I) is of Power sufficient
to command all who have not seen
Exilia; but in him who has not only seen
but sacrific'd his Heart to you, it would be
a Sacrilege unpardonable; therefore, Madam,
you must permit me to adore, sigh,
and languish at your Feet; the rest of my
Days, whether few or many, happy or miserable,
belongs only to you to determine. 
Many Things more of this Kind she permitted
me to utter, making very little Answer 
but Sighs and Tears, which gave me Occasion
to hope that I was not altogether indifferent
to her; insomuch that I let slip no
Opportunity of asserting my Passion, which
was not hard to be found; for, after the
Queen's Departure, the King kept himself
retir'd, partly out of Affection to the Queen,
whom he truly lov'd, and partly Decency. 
Now it was that the King of Lybia declar'd
War against the King of Egypt, pretending,
because the King of Egypt did not
assist him with Forces against his powerful
Enemy, the Queen of Numidia; whereas,
in Reality, he cou'd not, by Reason of the
Rebellion which employ'd him at that
Time; and therefore this cou'd be only a
Pretence. But the true Cause was suppos'd
to be some Distaste the Prince of Lybia had
taken in the Egyptian Court; for he came
there to prosecute the Marriage propos'd
between him and the Princess Philometra,
hoping by that Means to be one Day King
of that rich and fertile Country, she being
the presumptive Heiress of that Crown. 
But whether the Divorce of the Queen, or
whether he perceiv'd any kind Sentiments
in the Princess towards me, or what Reason
else mov'd him, we could not tell; but he
had left the Egyptian Court both secretly
and suddenly, as before-mention'd. And
now the War being ended between Lybia
and Numidia, tho' much to the Disadvantage 
of the Lybians, nevertheless, the King
of Lybia muster'd his shatter'd Forces, rais'd
new ones, and came against Egypt, hoping
(no Doubt) for a Party amongst the discontented
Egyptians. 
These, and some other Affairs, held the
King late in Council, where his Majesty
was pleas'd to declare me General of the
Army a second Time, with unanimous Approbation
of the Council; moreover, he
let me know secretly, that if I conquer'd
Lybia, he wou'd give me the Princess Philometra
in Recompence. For which I was
oblig'd to thank him with profound Respect
tho' I never intended to accept the
Favour, but knew my Ruin depended on
the Refusal. 
Behold in this the different Changes of
Human Life, yet all conspire to the same
Event, to wit, my Undoing; for it was
t'other Day I thought Poverty and low
Rank the only Obstacles to my Happiness; 
and now, quite contrary, Midas like, I was
ready to perish in the Midst of Riches and
royal Favours; for Exilia being the Object
and End of my Desires, it was the
same Thing to me whether my Way to her
was obstructed by a Dunghil or a Dignity; 
perhaps the latter more difficult to be remov'd
or surmounted than the other. On
which Caprice of Fortune, if one duly reflect,
Reason wou'd oblige us to wish for 
nothing but the Will of the Gods to be accomplish'd. 
But to return: 
The Council being broke up, I hasted
into the City, where I was invited, with
Exilia, to the rich Merchant, our former
Master; but the Council sitting late, (as I
told you) Exilia went without me, and as
she came back, her Chariot was surrounded
by the City Mob, saying, they would pull
that Roman Coquet in Pieces, who was the
Cause of all their Discontents, the Divorce
of the Queen, and the War that threaten'd
them from Lybia. In this State was this
innocent Lady when I arriv'd to her Rescue,
which I perform'd by killing the foremost
of that headless Rabble, my Servants
couragiously assisting me till they were all
dispers'd; for a Mob is but like a great
Number of wild Asses, who bray and make
a hideous Noise, but able to act nothing
in their own Defence. After this, I mounted
the Chariot with Exilia, whose Acknowledgments
transcended the Merit of the
Service. I excus'd my self for not having
accompany'd her thither, telling her the
Reasons, and what had pass'd in the Council
that Evening, and how the King had
promis'd me the Princess Philometra, which
(said I) is an Honour I cannot accept,
being already devoted to the Divine Exilia. 
Refuse not then, Madam, this your
faithful Adorer, though unworthy the 
Honour to which he pretends. That
Person cannot be thought below the highest
of Honours, (reply'd Exilia) on whom
the King of Egypt thinks fit to bestow
his Neece, the presumptive Heiress of his
Crown: But in particular I am oblig'd
to think him most worthy, to whom I am
twice indebted for my Life; who, for my
Sake, overlooks all Glory, and the greatest
Advancement with which Fortune can gratify
her most ambitious Favourites. And
since you have made me more than Competitor
with Grandeur itself, it were an unpardonable
Injustice to suspend your Hopes. 
Then giving me her Hand, she said, Take
your Exilia, for to you I belong by Right
of Redemption, and yours I will be for
ever, if my Father and the Senate refuse
not their Consent. How much I was transported
at this Promise none can imagine,
that has not lov'd like me. I was all Extasy
and Rapture, the Joys I then felt can
neither be express'd nor imagin'd. Thus
ravish'd out of myself into a Heaven of
Happiness, I pass'd the rest of the silent
Night in a continual Meditation, and
thinking on that dear Moment in which
she had given me her Hand, that Pledge
of unspeakable Happiness. 
Next Morning the King sent for me, to
applaud my good Fortune in the Rescue of
Exilia, ordering her a Guard for the Security 
of her Person, and gave me a Present
of very rich Jewels to carry to her, commanding
me to intercede for him, and
make her dry those Tears which his Majesty
heard she daily shed for the Queen's
Absence; as also to endeavour to soften
that Roman Haughtiness which presided in
her Heart, and make it flexible to his
amorous Proposals. This was an Embasy
more difficult, than if his Majesty had sent
me to the Roman Senate, to perswade them
to crown him King in the Capitol; well
knowing, that I must either betray my
Trust or my own Happiness, or rather my
Life; for my Love and Life were now inseparable. 
However, I deliver'd the Present,
and perswaded her to receive it, which
otherwise she would not have done; but I
told her, it would be Wisdom to keep calm
the King's Thoughts, 'till such Time as we
could steal away; which we had resolv'd
on the first Opportunity, tho' we foresaw
great Difficulty in the Enterprize, by means
of the Guard given to Exilia. Nevertheless,
she always told me she reserv'd her
Duty to her Father, that if he gave not
his Consent at our Arrival, I must pretend
no farther. 
Now this our Love, tho' unsuspected by
all the World, (whom Unconcern kept in
a constant Slumber) yet was not long undiscover'd
by the piercing Eyes of a vigilant 
Rival: For those cold Returns the Princess
Philometra found to all her little Advances,
made her penetrate the Cause,
the Cloak of Respect to her Royal Person
being of too thin a Texture to cover this
my Indifferency. These her Thoughts,
either out of Duty or Malice, she discover'd
to the King, telling him withal, if he
would go privately to such a Place in the
Garden, (where she knew we were) there
perhaps he might unravel the fine-wove
Intrigue, and make himself Master of the
whole Secret. 
Now, the better to make you understand
the Place where we were accidentally retir'd,
give me Leave a little to digress into
the Description of this Garden, which is
certainly the finest in the Universe, and
no less sumptuous also is the Palace, which
would be too tedious to describe. 
One descends by eight or ten Steps into
the Garden, which is very large; at
each Corner whereof stands a stately Pyramid,
marvellous to behold, and on their
Bases is carv'd the chief and most remarkable
Glories of Egypt. At each Side of the
Garden is a long cover'd Walk or Arbor,
which reaches from Pyramid to Pyramid; 
these Walks are cover'd over with a certain
Plant, whose Leaves are red, and shining
like Sattin. On each Side of these cover'd
Alleys are open Walks of Orange, Lemmon, 
and Palm-Trees, and fine Seats and Statues
plac'd at proper Distances, serving
both for Use and Ornament. Thus are
the outside Walks compos'd: Next these
are six distinct Separations, three on a Side,
fenc'd in with gilt Balasters of fine wrought
Iron. The first is a Garden of all Kinds
of Flowers that can gratify the Sight or
Smell, the most Part of which are planted
in Pots, that they may be remov'd, and
others put in their Places, according to their
respective Seasons; which Pots are all of
such fine Earth or Stone, that they are an
Embellishment to the Flowers they contain. 
In the Midst of this little Garden
is the Statue of the Goddess Flora, seeming
to give her Benediction, having a large
Nosegay in her Hand, from whence spouts
forth small Streams of Water, as if she
meant therewith to bedew the whole Garden. 
At the four Corners stand the four
Seasons of the Year, with their respective
Emblems; and here and there young
Nymphs seeming to make Nosegays, and
Chaplets of Flowers, all of fine white
Marble. Opposite to this, on the other
Side of the Garden, is a Collection of Medicinal
Plants, in every Thing conformable
to the other, the same Number of Pots,
and placed in the same Order and Method. 
In the Middle is the Figure of the God
Apollo, with a Table before him, seeming 
to teach the Use of those Herbs to the
World; and at a Distance before him is
Daphne, half metamorphos'd, and on the
Table writ these Words, 

Unhappy God, which can no Simple find
To cure the Fever of his Love-sick Mind.

At the four Corners stand four Figures of
the most famous Teachers of the Medicinal
Art; 1st, Æsculapius; 2dly, Chiron; 
3dly, Hygea; and, 4thly, Hecate. The
three first being the Figures of those who
taught the good and sanative Use of Plants; 
the last taught their poisonous, baneful,
and diabolick Qualities. 
The third of these Enclosures is a Grove
of Myrtles, Roses, and Eglantines. In the
Midst is Venus, crowning her Adonis with
Flowers; at one Corner she is playing with
Cupid, in another, drawn in her Chariot
with Doves, and divers other Representations
of her Power and Folly. 
Opposite to this, in the same Form and
Figure, is another Grove of Aromatick
Spices, and sweet smelling Gums. In the
Midst is a Cupid, as if laughing at his Victories; 
for in divers Parts of this Grove are
placed the Figures of his most renowned
Conquests, amongst which none is more
ridiculous than Hercules spinning. 
The fifth is a Maze of Water-Works,
which runs in such wondrous Turnings, by
Channels of fine Marble, so intricate, that
unless you know the Manner to direct your
Steps, it is impossible to get in or out. In
the Midst is a Fountain of Diana, where
she, with her Nymphs about her, seem to
bathe themselves Breast high; and at divers
Turnings, at proper Distances, were
placed Water-Nymphs, and River Gods, of
very fine Sculpture. 
Opposite to this is a Wood-Maze, of a
short, green, bushy Plant, something like
Rosemary. In the Midst is the God Pan,
seeming to play on his Pipe, and a Ring
of Shepherds and Shepherdesses in a dancing
Posture round him. At divers Turnings
are Satyrs, Wood-Nymphs, and the
like, all of most exquisite Workmanship. 
These two Mazes are compos'd of the
two Royal Cyphers, which contain the
two Royal Names of Egypt, one Pharoah,
and the other Ptolemy. These are the six
Enclosures, three on one Side, and three
on the other, of this great Garden. 
In the Midst is a Wood, or Grove, which
represents Troy Town. The Hedges which
encompass this Grove are so high, even,
and thick, that they may truly be call'd
what they represent, to wit, the Walls of
Troy; and not only so, but they have
Towers, Ballasters, and Battlements on 
them, cut out of the Green, admirable to
behold. Round these Hedges, or green
Walls, are divers Statues of the most renown'd
Greks and Trojans; one of white
Marble, the other of polish'd Brass; here
an Achilles, there an Hector; here an Ajax,
there an Æneas; so that one sees the History
of that renown'd Siege in Sculpture
and cast Statues. 
Within these green Walls are Walks representing
Streets, and little Arbors instead
of Houses; and here and there, in proper
Uniformity, are larger and higher Arbours,
representing the Palaces of the Trojan Princes. 
In the Midst is King Priam's Palace,
more large, and better adorn'd than all the
rest. 
It was in one of these Arbours of Troy
Town that Exilia and I happen'd to meet,
our disconsolate Circumstances having, it
seems, the like Effect on us both, which
conducted us into this Solitude. Now it
was, that the Forces were ready to march
against Lybia, which made me tell her I
was driven to the last Exigence, not finding
it possible to go without her, or stay
with her; therefore begg'd her to instruct
me how to extricate myself and her out
of these Difficulties in which we were involv'd. 
Go, (said she) conquer Lybia, receive
your just Reward, the Princess Philometra,
the Heiress of the Egyptian Crown, 
and, in her Right, become in Time a happy
King. That I cannot be (reply'd I)
unless Exilia be my Queen. I will go conquer
Lybia, and set the Crown upon Exilia's
Head; but that, alas, is too little for her
Merit; I will—At these Words the King,
entering the Arbour, said, Yes, it is too
little for Exilia's Merits, but too great for
a Traytor; and so calling a Guard, I was
immediately hurry'd away to Prison, where
I remain'd many Days, as absolutely ignorant
of what pass'd in Court or Camp, as
poor Mortals are of what is transacted amongst
the Celestial Inhabitants. 
Here it was I had sufficient Occasion to
exercise my passive Courage, and become
a miserable Pattern of Patience. Here it
was I stood in need of more Philosophy
than I really posses'd, wherewith to bubble
my Fancy, and cheat my Understanding,
with that wild Notion, that a virtuous
Man can never be unhappy, because he
bears his Happiness in himself. I endeavour'd
to apply that Stoical Receipt, but
found it very fallible. I frequently ask'd
myself why I could not be as happy in that
Restraint, as formerly in the voluntary Prison
with my Father; but the Answer was
obvious, That ones own Will and Choice
renders a Dungeon a Palace; and, on the
contrary, a Heaven would be no longer so
without Exilia. Thus I pass'd my tedious 
Hours, 'till one Day the Captain of the
Guard, who succeeded me, being a Roman,
came to visit me, and made me divers Complements
and Assurances of his Desire to
serve me, adding, that it was a great Affliction
to him to see me ruin my Fortune,
and perhaps lose my Life for one who deserv'd
it not. Ah me! (reply'd I) she deserves
more than I can make manifest: One
may as well say the heavenly Bodies shine
not, or Fire warms not, or any Thing in
Nature has not its proper Qualities, as to say
she deserves not. Ah! Exilia, I know her
vertuous Inclinations for me; I remember
the Promise she made me; I am sensible of
what she suffers for me; but no Sufferings,
nor Death itself, is capable to alienate her
Affections from one single Moment, though
never so long absent; for our Love is all
Soul, and needs not the Supplement of Conversation
to keep it alive; its Being is pure
and immortal, as those Gods that infus'd it
into our Hearts, and shall survive all Opposition. 
Alas! reply'd the Captain, I am
sorry to find your Wisdom so impos'd upon; 
but when once Passion blinds us, Passion
misguides us, Passion overthrows us, Passion
destroys us, and no Passion so strong and so
deceitful as that of Love; Love rocks our
Reason into a Lethargy, and then does
what it pleases with the rest of our Interior; 
it fools the wise Man, and infeebles the 
strong; it makes the Philosopher become a
Fop, and the Divine a Madman; the soft
Courtier becomes fierce, and the Warrior
effeminate; it makes the Poor cease to earn
their Bread, and the rich Usurer squander
his hard gotten Wealth; it makes the best
Friends become mortal Enemies, and one's
Benefactor become one's Adversary. All
these, and thousands of other Ills attend
this unfortunate Passion; and after all, be
recompens'd with Scorn or Falshood: The
Truth of which, your Experience, or this
Letter, may evince; withal giving me a
Letter from Exilia, containing these Words: 

Exilius,
I Hope you have made so true a Use of your
Misfortunes, as to consider your own Safety
and my Advantage; and consequently resolve to
act in Regard of both, as becomes a rational
Creature, and one that professes the Fear of the
Gods; for the unkind Treatment which our
Love has found from the Hand of Heaven, is
a Demonstration that it is not agreeable to their
Wills, to which we ought to submit with an entire
Resignation. Wherefore, I beg you to believe
that my accepting the Royal Dignity, so
generously and earnestly offer'd, is an Act of
Obedience to the Gods, and of Friendship to
you, in putting myself in a Condition to restore
you to the King's Favour as firmly as ever; 
then testify your Prudence and Piety, in a ready 
Compliance with your own Interest, and the
Will of Heaven, as also with the Desire of your
Friend, 
Exilia. 

It's impossible to express, said Exilius,
what Agitation of Mind the Sight of this
Letter gave me; I knew the Character too
well to doubt it to be her Writing; I knew
the Stile too perfectly to think it not of her
own composing; the two Topicks on which
the Letter was founded (Reason and the
Will of Heaven) too clearly represented
the Image of her Mind to leave any Room
for Doubt. Moreover, Reason told me she
was in the Right; Friendship, or, indeed,
Humanity itself, bid me comply with her
Demand, it being so much her Advantage. 
Duty and Gratitude requir'd a ready Submission
to the King, who was not only my
Master and Benefactor, but graciously left
it to me to make a Merit of Necessity; 
for such it was, his Majesty having us both
in his Power. These Thoughts, like soft
Musick, seem'd to hush my Griefs for a
Moment; but then again, Love and Exilia's
Promise, like violent Thunder, awak'd
all my Sorrows, and made me feel a thousand
Torments, that I accus'd the fair perjur'd
Sorceress in all the violent Words that
Rage could dictate. A thousand Maledictions
I vented against the Sex; I curs'd my 
self, and the Hour of my Birth, the Gods,
and my own hard Fortune; threw myself
on the Floor, tore my Hair and Cloaths,
suffer'd an Extremity of Pain in Body as
well as Mind, endeavour'd to tear out my
Eyes, the Inlets of these my Misfortunes; 
but that the Captain restrain'd me, and
used what Arguments he could for my Pacification. 
After these violent Efforts of Passion
were a little moderated, other Considerations
began to flatter my Understanding,
and I fancy'd this Letter might be forged,
and her Character counterfeited; for, said
I, a Vertue like hers can never be viciated
to that Degree, as voluntarily to require
the Breach of faithful Vows, nor her Reason
and Religion impos'd upon so far as to
believe the Gods to be Authors or Abettors
of Crimes, as her Letter seems to intimate: 
No, no, Exilia is all Vertue and Wisdom,
not capable of being abus'd by false Notions,
or wrong Ideas; her noble Soul is so
well fortify'd with Constancy, that it is
able to resist the most violent Attacks of
different Fortune; the Menaces of Adversity
can no more affright her, than the Allurements
of Honour or Interest entice her; 
the Crown of Egypt, or the World's Empire
are not able to move her Constancy, no not
in the least Thought. Then, foolish Exilius,
torment not thyself with Fears or 
Fancies; her Vertue, like thy good Genius,
will secure thy Happiness. 
At all which the Captain smil'd, saying,
If a Man will murder himself, no Physician
can make him live; otherwise, said he,
I believe I could make you an Eye-Witness
that she is not only obliging but fond of
the King, if (continu'd he) you could so far
govern your self as not to be discover'd; 
adding, that if my Passion should transport
me, he were for ever ruin'd. I gave
him my Faith and Honour to suffer any
thing, even the infernal Pains, rather than
do the least Action that might be to his
Prejudice, and so begg'd him to accomplish
this his Proposal. 
Next Day he treated with one of Exilia's
Women, to whom he had pretended Love,
and by Means of a Present he made her,
obtain'd his Desire in Regard of me, and so
came and fetch'd me secretly out of Prison,
and conducted me to that Closet where I
had first reveal'd my Passion to Exilia. 
Here, thro' a Cleft of the Wall under
the Hangings, I saw into the next Room,
where the King and Exilia were sitting. 
She receiv'd his Courtship with all the Satisfaction
of a false and perjur'd Creature. 
During which, one of the Captains of the
Guard came in, telling the King that he
was come, according to his Majesty's Commands,
to receive his Orders about Exilius; 
at which the King turning towards Exilia,
told her, it was at her Disposal whether
Exilius should live or die. Then let him
die, (said she) rather than live to upbraid
me with Falshood and Inconstancy. Since
it is your Will (said the King) it shall be
so: Then turning towards the Captain,
gave Orders for my Death, as I suppose,
tho' he spake in so low a Voice, that I did
not hear his Words at that Distance. Then
he ask'd Exilia what Time she thought fit
to prescribe for my Execution, (as I gather'd
by her Answer) who said, This very
Night. Give me your Hand (said the King)
and you shall have your Desire. Now be
pleas'd to know, that in that Country this
is a Thing never to be done by any Woman,
but on the Account of Marriage, or worse; 
for no Pretence of Friendship or Gratitude,
(which sometimes makes it a reasonable
Action among us) can render it excusable
amongst them. However, she so far forgot
all Modesty, and her given Faith, that
she refus'd not this obligatory Favour to his
Majesty, and that on so barbarous an Engagement,
as the Promise of my Death
that very Night; as if my Life embitter'd
every Moment of hers, and my Death was
the only Step to her Felicity. 
Tho' this Transaction put me out of all
Patience, yet I forgot not my Promise to
my Friend the Captain; but so far bridled 
my Passion, as not to make any extravagant
Excursion to his Disadvantage, and
in Silence return'd with him to my Prison,
where I expected Death with a real Satisfaction; 
for I look'd on every Moment of
my Life now but as an additional Link to
that unhappy Chain of Misfortunes which
attended mine innocent and virtuous Actions. 
Thus I pass'd the Night in Expectation
of mine Executioner, every Moment thanking
the Gods for the Favour; but nothing
was acted 'till Morning, and then the Sentence
was chang'd from a present Death, as
I expected, to a greater Punishment; for I
was hurry'd out of Prison to a Sea-port,
and there put into an old Carcass of a Vessel,
without Sails, Oars, or anything wherewith
to conduct myself. In this helpless
Condition I arriv'd on that Coast of Africa
which is border'd by the great Numidian
Forest. Here, being driven into a Creek, I
quitted this desperate Instrument of my
Escape, to seek a Being the most desolate
and miserable in the World, in that Cave
where this young Gentleman (addressing
himself to Ismenus) found me. Then think
it not strange, that in my Rage and Despair,
when my Thoughts entertain'd no
other Object but Scipiana, that my Words
and Actions corresponded, making me rave
and adore the first female Figure that my 
Eyes encountred; which was the Cause
that I fell at the Feet of Ismenus, when he
was array'd in Woman's Habit, thinking
him my Scipiana, my Goddess, or good
Genius, till he undeceiv'd me, as you have
already been inform'd. 
The distressed Condition of Ismenus and
Clarinthia, oblig'd me to quit this my Den
of Horror and Despair, and out of a Principle
of Humanity endeavourd to assist my
Fellow-Creatures, whose Danger and Distress
commanded that Compassion for them
I could not have for my hated self, and as
they have already inform'd you, accomplishd
their Escape. And now I mean to
go seek my Father in his rocky Island, and
there pass the rest of my woful Days, 'till
Death put a Period to my Sorrows. 
Exilius having thus finish'd his Story, the
Company gave him Thanks, much admiring
his Vertue and Constancy in those extraordinary
Vicissitudes of Fortune. 