


David Simple refuses to accept a friendly
Offer from Mrs. Orgueil. 
Mr. and Mrs. Orgueil both agreed in
the Resolution of laying Camilla decently
in the Grave. Mr. Orgueil, from the
Rightness and Fitness of it; and his Wife,
from Compassion (as she thought and termed
it) nay she even shed Tears; for a Shower
of Tears was always ready to gush from her
Eyes at the Sound of Death. She in reality
led her whole Life in bemoaning the Certainty
of her own Mortality, and in the
Height of her Sorrow she could not forbear
sighing that Camilla could not be
changed for Cynthia; throwing out many
Hints how very insensibly Cynthia would behave
on the News of Camilla's Death; for
as she was so stupidly insensible for the Loss
of such a Husband as Valentine, it could not
be expected she should have the least Feeling
for any other Misfortune. 

It has been already observed, that one of
Mrs. Orgueil's chief Employments and Pursuits
from the Time she became acquainted
in David's Family, had been to lessen Cynthia
in the Eyes of Camilla; and whenever
she could possibly impose on herself so far
as to imagine she had the least Hopes of
Success, she admired Camilla's Understanding,
and thought she was her Bosom Friend; 
but whenever all her Endeavours to impose
this Fallacy on herself, failed, Camilla's Understanding
in a Moment vanished from her
Thoughts, and she suddenly became the silliest
as well as the most hateful of Women. 
One Morning as Mrs. Orgueil was revolving
over many Schemes of great Consequence,
a Thought arose in her Mind, that
although the long Friendship which had
subsisted between Cynthia and Camilla had
always baffled all her Designs, yet that the
young Mind of David's Daughter would
certainly bend under her Artifices, and yield
to whatever Impressions she chose to give it. 
The Consequence of this Thought was her
immediately writing a Note to David, in
which she offered, as a great Favour, that
if he would place Camilla under her Care,
she would finish her Education. 

It has already been related with what Timidity
of Mind David had long been seized. 
But the Death of his Camilla, as it almost
annihilated all his Hopes and Fears, so also
did it in a great measure cure this Timidity:
but still some Anxiety remained; for
his Daughter's Welfare must be the Object
of his Regard, and therefore he was perplexed
at this Offer of Mrs. Orgueil. Not
that he deliberated one Moment whether or
no he should throw the only Remains of his
beloved Family into the Power of Mrs. Orgueil; 
for his Resolution was firmly fixed
against it: but he was willing to find a civil
Pretence for the Refusal, as he was
fearful of irritating Mrs. Orgueil to an inveterate
Hatred against his Daughter; for David
was perfectly sensible of the Strength of
her Hatred, and how inexorable was her
Anger. 
Camilla would not have been guilty of
Disobedience to any of her Father's Commands; 
but he could have done nothing so
irksome to her, as to have accepted of Mrs.
Orgueil's Invitation; for she knew enough
of her Behaviour to look with the greatest
Dread on being in her Power. 

David answered Mrs. Orgueil with Thanks
and Civility; but said that he could not
prevail on himself, unsettled as his Mind
was at that Time, to part with his Daughter,
his only remaining Comfort. Mrs. Orgueil
was inwardly fired with Indignation at
the Refusal; but thought proper to conceal
her Rage, still flattering herself with Hopes
that by the Shew of Friendship, she might
perhaps in Time gain her Point of preserving
Camilla from the Possibility of being
educated by Cynthia. As this was a Point
she had no Chance of carrying, it cannot
therefore be said how she did behave to the
young Camilla; but I think it may with
pretty great Certainty be affirmed how she
would have behaved, could she have staggered
David's Resolutions. 
At first she would have put on all the
Charms of Good-humour (which she was
capable, when she pleased, of doing in the
highest Degree) till the tender Mind of
young Camilla, capable of strong Affections,
had been wrought to give Credit to her Pretence
of Friendship. Then, if by Cynthia's
Death, or any other Accident, her Fears of
her falling into her Hands, had been once
removed, she would have proved a Tyrant. 

But if she had found that Camilla, still inflexible,
retained the first Impression she had
received of her Aunt, then would all her
Indignation have been let loose on her innocent
Head, and she would have proved the
worst of Tyrants; and the poor Girl, hitherto
unaccustomed to any thing but gentle
Treatment, would have been an eternal
Mark of her ill Nature. If she had endeavoured
to gain any Instruction, she would
have been continually told that it was impertinent
in her to grasp at Knowledge; and
she ought to content herself with learning to
perform menial Offices. And if she employed
herself ever so industriously to finish what
she was set about, yet would she not have
been the least the forwarder; for Mrs. Orgueil,
being versed in the Art of keeping
back a docile Capacity, would have given
her an additional Task every Day, rather
than she should have got any Opportunity of
improving her Mind; being firmly of Opinion,
that Improvements of such a kind were
only fit for young Ladies, who, like Miss
Henrietta, were born to Fortunes. Joyfully
I write thus that Mrs. Orgueil would have
acted, for it was not Camilla's miserable
Fate. 