




To which we will prefix no Preface. 
The Doctor found Amelia alone,
for Booth was gone to walk with
his new revived Acquaintance,
Captain Trent, who seemed so pleased with
the Renewal of his Intercourse with his old
Brother Officer, that he had been almost
continually with him from the Time of
their meeting at the Drum. 
Amelia acquainted the Doctor with the
Purport of her Message, as follows: 
‘I ask you Pardon, my dear Sir, for
troubling you so often with my Affairs; 
but I know your extreme Readiness
as well as Ability to assist any one with
your advice. The Fact is, that my 

Husband hath been presented by Colonel
James with two Tickets for a Masquerade,
which is to be in a Day or two; 
and he insists so strongly on my going
with him, that I really do not
know how to refuse, without giving
him some Reason; and I am not able to
invent any other than the true one,
which you would not, I am sure, advise
me to communicate to him. Indeed I
had a most narrow Escape the other
Day; for I was almost drawn in inadvertently,
by a very strange Accident,
to acquaint him with the whole Matter.’ 
She then related the Serjeant's Dream,
with all the Consequences that attended it. 
The Doctor considered a little with himself,
and then said, ‘I am really, Child,
puzzled as well as you about this Matter. 
I would by no means have you go to the
Masquerade: I do not indeed like the
Diversion itself, as I have heard it described
to me: Not that I am such a
Prude to suspect every Woman who
goes there of any evil Intentions; but
it is a Pleasure of too loose and disorderly
a Kind for the Recreation of a
sober Mind. Indeed you have still a
stronger and more particular Objection. 

I will try myself to reason him out
of it.’ 
‘Indeed it is impossible,’ answered she; 
‘and therefore I would not set you about it. 
I never saw him more set on any thing. 
There is a Party, as they call it, made on
the Occasion; and he tells me my Refusal
will disappoint all.’ 
‘I really do not know what to advise
you,’ cries the Doctor: ‘I have told you
I do not approve these Diversions; but
yet, as your Husband is so very desirous,
I cannot think there will be any
Harm in going with him. However, I
will consider of it, and do all in my
Power for you.’ 
Here Mrs. Atkinson came in, and the
Discourse on this Subject ceased; but soon
after Amelia renewed it, saying, there was
no Occasion to keep any thing a Secret
from her Friend. They then fell to debating
on the Subject; but could not come
to any Resolution: But Mrs. Atkinson,
who was in an unusual Flow of Spirits,
cried out, ‘Fear nothing, my dear Amelia; 
two Women surely will be too hard for one
Man. I think, Doctor, it exceeds Virgil.’ 


Una dolo divûm si Fœmina victa duorum est.
‘Very well repeated indeed,’ cries the
Doctor. ‘Do you understand all Virgil
as well as you seem to do that Line?’ 
‘I hope I do Sir,’ said she, ‘and Horace
too; or else my Father threw away his
Time to very little Purpose in teaching
me.’ 
‘I ask your Pardon, Madam,’ cries the
Doctor, ‘I own it was an impertinent
Question.’ 
‘Not at all, Sir,’ says she; ‘and if you
are one of those who imagine Women
incapable of Learning, I shall not be
offended at it. I know the common Opinion; 
but 

Interdum vulgus rectum videt, est ubi peccat.
‘If I was to profess such an Opinion,
Madam,’ said the Doctor, ‘Madam Dacier
and yourself would bear Testimony against
me. The utmost indeed that I should
venture would be to question the Utility
of Learning in a young Lady's Education.’ 

‘I own, said Mrs. Atkinson, as the
World is constituted, it cannot be as serviceable
to her Fortune, as it will be
to that of a Man; but you will allow,
Doctor, that Learning may afford a Woman
at least a reasonable and an innocent
Entertainment.’ 
‘But I will suppose,’ cried the Doctor,
‘it may have its Inconveniencies. As for
Instance, if a learned Lady should meet
with an unlearned Husband, might she
not be apt to despise him?’ 
‘I think not,’ cries Mrs. Atkinson—‘and
if I may be allowed the Instance—I
think I have shewn myself that Women
who have Learning themselves, can be
contented without that Qualification in a
Man.’ 
‘To be sure,’ cries the Doctor, ‘there
may be other Qualifications which may
have their Weight in the Balance. But let
us take the other Side of the Question,
and suppose the Learned of both Sexes to
meet in the Matrimonial Union, may it
not afford one excellent Subject of Disputation,
which is the most learned.’ 

‘Not at all,’ cries Mrs. Atkinson; ‘for,
if they had both Learning and good
Sense, they would soon see on which Side
the Superiority lay.’ 
‘But if the learned Man,’ said the
Doctor, ‘should be a little unreasonable
in his Opinion, are you sure that the
learned Woman would preserve her Duty
to her Husband, and submit?’ 
‘But why,’ cries Mrs. Atkinson, ‘must
we necessarily suppose that a learned Man
would be unreasonable?’ 
‘Nay, Madam,’ said the Doctor, ‘I am
not your Husband; and you shall not
hinder me from supposing what I please. 
Surely it is not such a Paradox to conceive
that a Man of Learning should be
unreasonable. Are there no unreasonable
Opinions in very learned Authors, even
among the Critics themselves. For Instance,
What can be a more strange, and
indeed unreasonable Opinion, than to
prefer the Metamorphoses of Ovid to the
Æneid of Virgil?’ 
‘It would be indeed so strange,’ cries
the Lady, ‘that you shall not persuade 

me it was ever the Opinion of any
Man.’ 
‘Perhaps not,’ cries the Doctor ‘and I
believe you and I should not differ in
our Judgments of any Person who maintained
such an Opinion—What a Taste
must he have?’ 
‘A most contemptible one indeed,’ 
cries Mrs. Atkinson. 
‘I am satisfied,’ cries the Doctor. ‘And
in the Words of your own Horace, Verbum
non amplius addam.’ 
‘But how provoking is this!’ cries Mrs.
Atkinson, ‘to draw one in in such a Manner. 
I protest I was so warm in the Defence
of my Favourite Virgil, that I was
not aware of your Design; but all your
Triumph depends on a Supposition that
one should be so unfortunate as to meet
with the silliest Fellow in the World.’ 
‘Not in the least,’ cries the Doctor. 
‘Dr. Bentley was not such a Person; and
yet he would have quarrelled, I am convinced,
with any Wife in the World, in
behalf of one of his Corrections. I don't 

suppose he would have given up his
Ingentia Fata to an Angel.’ 
‘But do you think,’ said she, ‘if I had
loved him, I would have contended with
him?’ 
‘Perhaps you might sometimes,’ said
the Doctor, ‘be of these Sentiments; but
you remember your own Virgil—Varium
et mutabile semper Fœmina.’ 
‘Nay, Amelia,’ said Mrs. Atkinson, ‘you
are now concern'd as well as I am; for he
hath now abused the whole Sex, and quoted
the severest Thing that ever was said
against us, though I allow it is one of the
finest.’ 
‘With all my Heart, my Dear,’ cries
Amelia. ‘I have the Advantage of you
however, for I don't understand him.’ 
‘Nor doth she understand much better
than yourself,’ cries the Doctor; ‘or she
would not admire Nonsense even though
in Virgil.’ 
‘Pardon me, Sir,’ said she. 

‘And pardon me, Madam,’ cries the
Doctor, ‘I say a Boy in the fourth Form
at Eton would be whipt, or would deserve
to be whipt at least, who made the
Neuter Gender agree with the Feminine.
You have heard however, that Virgil left
his Æneid incorrect; and perhaps had he
lived to correct it, we should not have
seen the Faults we now see in it.’ 
‘Why it is very true as you say, Doctor,’ 
cries Mrs. Atkinson—‘There seems to
be a false Concord. I protest I never
thought of it before.’ 
‘And yet this is the Virgil,’ answered
the Doctor, ‘that you are so fond of,
who hath made you all of the Neuter
Gender; or as we say in English, he hath
made mere Things of you: For if we
translate it thus; 

Woman is a various and changeable Thing,
‘there will be no Fault, I believe, unless
in point of Civility to the Ladies.’ 
Mrs. Atkinson had just Time to tell the
Doctor he was a provoking Creature, before 

the Arrival of Booth and his Friend put
an end to that learned Discourse, in which
neither of the Parties had greatly recommended
themselves to each other, the
Doctor's Opinion of the Lady being not
at all heightened by her Progress in the
Classics; and she on the other hand, having
conceived a great Dislike in her Heart
towards the Doctor, which would have
raged, perhaps, with no less Fury from
the Consideration that he had been her
Husband. 



What happened at the Masquerade. 
From this Time to the Day of the
Masquerade, nothing happened of
Consequence enough to have a Place in
this History. 
On that Day Colonel James came to
Booth's about Nine in the Evening, where
he stay'd for Mrs. James, who did not come
till near Eleven. The four Masques then
set out together in several Chairs; and all
proceeded to the Hay-Market. 

When they arrived at the Opera-House,
the Colonel and Mrs. James presently left
them; nor did Booth and his Lady remain
long together, but were soon divided
from each other by different Masques. 
A Domino soon accosted the Lady and
had her away to the upper End of the furthest
Room on the right Hand, where both
the Masques sat down: Nor was it long before
the He Domino began to make very
fervent Love to the She. It would perhaps
be tedious to the Reader to run thro' the
whole Process, which was not indeed in
the most romantick Stile. The Lover
seemed to consider his Mistress as a mere
Woman of this World, and seemed rather
to apply to her Avarice and Ambition
than to her softer Passions. 
As he was not so careful to conceal his
true Voice as the Lady was, she soon discovered
that this Lover of hers was no
other than her old Friend the Peer, and
presently a Thought suggested itself to her
of making an Advantage of this Accident. 
She gave him therefore an Intimation that
she knew him, and expressed some Astonishment
at his having found her out. ‘I 

suspect, says she, my Lord, that you
have a Friend in the Woman where I
now lodge, as well as you had in Mrs.
Ellison.’ My Lord protested the contrary
—To which she answered, ‘Nay,
my Lord, do not defend her so earnestly
till you are sure I should have been angry
with her.’ 
At these Words, which were accompanied
with a very bewitching Softness, my
Lord flew into Raptures rather too strong
for the Place he was in. These the Lady
gentle checked, and begged him to
take care they were not observed; for
that her Husband, for aught she knew,
was then in the Room. 
Colonel James came now up, and said,
‘So, Madam, I have the good Fortune
to find you again; I have been extremely
miserable since I lost you.’ The
Lady answered in her Masquerade Voice
that she did not know him. ‘I am Colonel
James,’ said he, in a Whisper. ‘Indeed,
Sir,’ answer'd she, ‘you are mistaken, I
have no Acquaintance with any Colonel
James.’ Madam, answer'd he, in a Whisper
likewise, ‘I am positive I am not mistaken,
you are certainly Mrs. Booth. —Indeed 

Sir,’ said she, ‘you are very impertinent,
and I beg you will leave me.’ My
Lord then interposed, and speaking in his
own Voice, assur'd the Colonel that the Lady
was a Woman of Quality, and that they were
engaged in a Conversation together; upon
which the Colonel asked the Lady's Pardon; 
for as there was nothing remarkable
in her Dress, he really believ'd he had been
mistaken. 
He then went again a hunting through
the Rooms, and soon after found Booth,
walking without his Mask between two
Ladies, one of whom was in a blue Domino,
and the other in the Dress of a
Shepherdess. ‘Will,’ cries the Colonel,
‘do you know what is become of our
Wives; for I have seen neither of them
since we have been in the Room? Booth
answered, that he supposed they were
both together, and they should find
them by and by.’ ‘What,’ cries the
Lady in the blue Domino, ‘are you
both come upon Duty then with your
Wives? As for yours, Mr. Alderman,
said she to the Colonel, I make no Question
but she is got into much better
Company than her Husband's.’ ‘How 

can you be so cruel, Madam, said the
Shepherdess, you will make him beat
his Wife by and by, for he is a military
Man I assure you. In the Trained Bands
I presume, cries the Domino, for he is
plainly dated from the City. —I own,
indeed, cries the other, the Gentleman
smells strongly of Thames-Street, and, if
I may venture to guess, of the honourable
Calling of a Taylor.’ 
‘Why what the Devil hast thou pick'd
up here,’ cries James? 
‘Upon my Soul, I don't know,’ answered
Booth; ‘I wish you would take
one of them at least.’ 
‘What say you, Madam,’ cries the Domino,
‘will you go with the Colonel? 
I assure you, you have mistaken your
Man, for he is no less a Person than the
great Colonel James himself. 
‘No Wonder, then, that Mr. Booth
gives him his Choice of us; it is the
proper Office of a Caterer, in which Capacity
Mr. Booth, hath, I am told, the
Honour to serve the noble Colonel.’ 

‘Much Good may it do you with your
Ladies, said James, I will go in Pursuit
of better Game. At which Words he
walked off.’ 
‘You are a true Sportsman,’ cries the
Shepherdess; ‘for your only Pleasure, I
believe, lies in the Pursuit.’ 
‘Do you know the Gentleman, Madam?’ 
cries the Domino. 
‘Who doth not know him?’ answered
the Shepherdess. 
‘What is his Character?’ cries the Domino; ‘for though I have jested with
him I only know him by Sight.’ 
‘I know nothing very particular in his
Character,’ cries the Shepherdess. ‘He
gets every handsome Woman he can, and
so they do all.’ 
‘I suppose then he is not married,’ said
the Domino. 
‘O yes, and married for Love too,
answered the other; but he hath loved
away all his Love for her long ago, and 

now, he says, she makes as fine an Object
of Hatred. —I think if the Fellow
ever appears to have any Wit, it is when
he abuses his Wife, and luckily for him,
that is his favourite Topick. —I don't
know the poor Wretch, but as he describes
her, it is a miserable Animal.’ 
‘I know her very well,’ cries the other,
‘and I am much mistaken if she is not
even with him: But hang him, what is
become of Booth?’ 
At this Instant a great Noise arose near
that Part where the two Ladies were. 
This was occasioned by a large Assembly
of young Fellows, whom they call Bucks,
who were got together and were enjoying,
as the Phrase is, a Letter, which one of
them had found in the Room. 
Curiosity hath its Votaries among all
Ranks of People, whenever therefore an
Object of this appears, it is as sure of
attracting a Croud in the Assemblies of the
Polite, as in those of their Inferiors. 
When this Croud was gathered together,
one of the Bucks, at the Desire of
his Companions, as well as of all present, 

perform'd the Part of a public Orator, and
read out the following Letter, which we
shall give the Reader, together with the
Comments of the Orator himself, and of
all his Audience. 
The Orator then being mounted on a
Bench began as follows: 
‘Here beginneth the first Chapter of
—Saint—Pox on't, Jack, what is the
Saint's Name? I have forgot.’ 
‘Timothy, you Blockhead,’ answer'd another
‘—Timothy.’ 
‘Well, then,’ cries the Orator, ‘of Saint
Timothy.’ 
‘Sir, I am very sorry to have any Occasion
of writing on the following Subject,
in a Country that is honoured with
the Name of Christian; much more am
I concern'd to address myself to a Man
whose many Advantages derived both
from Nature and Fortune should demand
the highest Return of Gratitude to the
great Giver of all those good Things. 
Is not such a Man guilty of the highest
Ingratitude to that most beneficent Being, 

by a direct and avowed Disobedience of
his most positive Laws and Commands.’ 
‘I need not tell you that Adultery is
forbid in the Laws of the Decalogue,
nor need I, I hope, mention, that it is
as expresly forbid in the New Testament. 
‘You see therefore,’ said the Orator,
‘what the Law is, and therefore none of you
will be able to plead Ignorance when you come
to the Old-Baily in the other World. — 
But here goes again.—’ 
‘If it had not been so expressly forbidden
in Scripture, still the Law of Nature
would have yielded Light enough
for us to have discovered the great Horror
and Atrociousness of this Crime. 
‘And accordingly we find, that Nations
where the Sun of Righteousness
hath yet never shined, have punished the
Adulterer with the most exemplary
Pains and Penalties, not only the polite
Heathens, but the most barbarous Nations
have concurred in these; in many
Places the most severe and shameful corporal
Punishments, and in some, and 

those not a few, Death itself hath been
inflicted on this Crime. 
‘And sure in a human Sense there is
scarce any Guilt which deserves to be
more severely punished. It includes in
it almost every Injury and every Mischief
which one Man can do to, or can
bring on another. It is robbing him of
his Property.’ 
‘Mind that, Ladies,’ said the Orator,
‘you are all the Property of your Husbands; 
and of that Property, which, if he is a
good Man, he values above all others. 
It is poisoning that Fountain whence he
hath a Right to derive the sweetest and
most innocent Pleasure, the most cordial
Comfort, the most solid Friendship, and
most faithful Assistance in all his Affairs,
Wants and Distresses. It is the Destruction
of his Peace of Mind, and even of his
Reputation. The Ruin of both Wife
and Husband, and sometimes of the whole
Family, are the probable Consequence
of this fatal Injury. Domestic Happiness
is the End of almost all our Pursuits,
and the common Reward of all our Pains. 
When Men find themselves for ever
barred from this delightful Fruition, they 

are lost to all Industry, and grow careless
of all their wordly Affairs. Thus they
become bad Subjects, bad Relations, bad
Friends and bad Men. Hatred and Revenge
are the wretched Passions which
boil in their Minds. Despair and Madness
very commonly ensue, and Murder
and Suicide often close the dreadful Scene.’ 
‘Thus, Gentlemen and Ladies, you see the
Scene is closed. So here ends the first Act— 
and thus begins the second.’ 
‘I have here attempted to lay before
you a Picture of this Vice, the Horror of
which no Colours of mine can exaggerate. 
But what Pencil can delineate the
Horrors of that Punishment which the
Scripture denounces against it. 
‘And for what will you subject yourself
to this Punishment? Or for what
Reward will you inflict all this Misery
on another? I will add on your Friend? 
For the Possession of a Woman; for the
Pleasure of a Moment? But if neither
Virtue nor Religion can restrain your inordinate
Appetites, are there not many
Women as handsome as your Friend's
Wife, whom, though not with Innocence, 

you may possess with a much less
Degree of Guilt? What Motive then can
thus hurry you on to the Destruction of
yourself and your Friend? Doth the peculiar
Rankness of the Guilt add any Zest to
the Sin? Doth it enhance the Pleasure as
much as we may be assured it will the
Punishment? 
‘But if you can be so lost to all Sense
of Fear, and of Shame, and of Goodness,
as not to be debarred by the Evil
which you are to bring on yourself, by
the extreme Baseness of the Action, nor
by the Ruin in which you are to involve
others, let me still urge the Difficulty, I
may say the Impossibility of the Success. 
You are attacking a Fortress on a Rock; 
a Chastity so strongly defended, as well,
by a happy natural Disposition of Mind,
as by the strongest Principles of Religion
and Virtue, implanted by Education,
and nourished and improved by
Habit, that the Woman must be invincible
even without that firm and
constant Affection of her Husband, which
would guard a much looser and worse
disposed Heart. What therefore are you
attempting but to introduce Distrust,
and perhaps Disunion between an innocent 

and a happy Couple, in which
too you cannot succeed without bringing,
I am convinced, certain Destruction on
your own Head? 
‘Desist, therefore, let me advise you,
from this enormous Crime; retreat from
the vain Attempt of climbing a Precipice
which it is impossible you should ever
ascend, where you must probably soon
fall into utter Perdition, and can have no
other Hope but of dragging down your
best Friend into Perdition with you. 
‘I can think of but one Argument more,
and that indeed a very bad one: You
throw away that Time in an impossible
Attempt, which might, in other Places
crown your sinful Endeavours with Success.’ 
‘And so ends the dismal Ditty.’ 
‘D&wblank;n me,’ cries one, ‘did ever mortal
hear such d&wblank;nd Stuff?’ 
‘Upon my Soul,’ said another, ‘I like
the last Argument well enough. There
is some Sense in that: For d&wblank;n me if
I had not rather go to D&wblank;g&wblank;ss at any 

Time, than follow a virtuous B&wblank;for
a Fortnight.’ 
‘Tom,’ says one of them, ‘let us set the
Ditty to Musick; let us subscribe to have
it set by Handel, it will make an excellent
Oratorio.’ 
‘D&wblank;n me, Jack,’ says another, ‘we'll
have it set to a Psalm Tune, and we'll
sing it next Sunday at St. James's Church,
and I'll bear a Bob, d&wblank;n me.’ 
‘Fie upon it, Gentlemen, fie upon it,’ 
said a Frier who came up, ‘do you think
there is any Wit and Humour in this Ribaldry; 
or if there were, would it make
any Atonement for abusing Religion and
Virtue?’ 
‘Hey day!’ cries one, ‘this is a Frier
in good earnest.’ 
‘Whatever I am,’ said the Frier, ‘I hope
at least, you are what you appear to be. 
Heaven forbid, for the Sake of our Posterity,
that you should be Gentlemen.’ 
‘Jack,’ cries one, ‘let us toss the Frier
in a Blanket.’ 

‘Me in a Blanket!’ said the Frier, ‘by
the Dignity of Man, I will twist the
Neck of every one of you as sure as ever
the Neck of a Dunghil-Cock was twisted. 
At which Words he pulled off his Masque,
and the tremendous Majesty of Colonel
Bath appear'd, from which the Bucks fled
away as fast as the Trojans heretofore from
the Face of Achilles. The Colonel did
not think it worth while to pursue any
other of them except him who had the
Letter in his Hand, which the Colonel
desired to see, and the other delivered,
saying it was very much at his
Service.’ 
The Colonel being possess'd of the Letter
retired as privately as he could, in order to
give it a careful Perusal; for badly as it
had been read by the Orator, there were
some Passages in it which had pleased the
Colonel. He had just gone through it
when Booth passed by him; upon which
the Colonel called to him, and delivering
him the Letter, bid him put it in his
Pocket, and read it at his Leisure. He
made many Encomiums upon it, and told
Booth it would be of Service to him, and
was proper for all young Men to read. 

Booth had not yet seen his Wife; but as
he concluded she was safe with Mrs. James,
he was not uneasy. He had been prevented
by searching farther after her, by the
Lady in the blue Domino, who had joined
him again. Booth had now made these
Discoveries; that the Lady was pretty well
acquainted with him; that she was a Woman
of Fashion; and that she had a particular
Regard for him. But though he was
a gay Man, he was in reality so fond of his
Amelia, that he thought of no other Woman; 
wherefore, though not absolutely a
Joseph, as we have already seen; yet could
he not be guilty of premeditated Inconstancy. 
He was indeed so very cold and
insensible to the Hints which were given
him, that the Lady began to complain of
his Dulness. When the Shepherdess again
came up, and heard this Accusation against
him, she confirmed it, saying: ‘I do assure
you, Madam, he is the dullest Fellow in
the World. Indeed I should almost take
you for his Wife, by finding you a second
Time with him; for I do assure you the
Gentleman very seldom keeps any other
Company.’ ‘Are you so well acquainted
with him, Madam?’ said the Domino. 
‘I have had that Honour longer than your 

Ladyship, I believe,’ answered the Shepherdess. ‘Possibly you may, Madam,’ 
cries the Domino, ‘but I wish you would
not interrupt us at present; for we have
some Business together.’ ‘I believe, Madam,’ 
answered the Shepherdess, ‘my
Business with the Gentleman is altogether
as important as yours; and therefore your
Ladyship may withdraw if you please. — 
My dear Ladies,’ cries Booth, ‘I beg
you will not quarrel about me.’ —‘Not
at all,’ answered the Domino, ‘since you
are so indifferent, I resign my Pretensions
with all my Heart. If you had not been
the dullest Fellow upon Earth, I am convinced
you must have discovered me.’ — 
She then went off muttering to herself,
that she was satisfied the Shepherdess was
some wretched Creature whom no body
knew. 
The Shepherdess overheard the Sarcasm,
and answered it, by asking Booth what
contemptible Wretch he had picked up. 
‘Indeed, Madam, said he, you know
as much of her as I do; she is a masquerade
Acquaintance like yourself. Like
me!’ repeated she, ‘Do you think if
this had been our first Acquaintance, I
should have wasted so much Time with 

you as I have? For your Part indeed, I
believe a woman will get very little Advantage
by her having been formerly
intimate with you.’ ‘I do not know,
Madam, said Booth, that I deserve that
character, any more than I know the Person
that now gives it me.’ ‘And you
have the Assurance then,’ said she in her
own Voice, ‘to affect not to remember
me.’ ‘I think,’ cries Booth, ‘I have
heard that Voice before; but upon my
Soul I do not recollect it.’ ‘Do you recollect,’ 
said she, ‘no Woman that you
have used with the highest Barbarity? I
will not say Ingratitude.’ ‘No, upon
my Honour,’ answered Booth. ‘Mention
not Honour,’ said she, ‘thou Wretch: 
For hardened as thou art, I could shew
thee a Face, that in spite of thy consummate
Impudence, would confound thee
with Shame and Horrour. Do'st thou
not yet know me?’ ‘I do, Madam,
indeed,’ answered Booth, ‘and I confess,
that of all Women in the World you
have the most Reason for what you said.’ 
Here a long Dialogue ensued between
the Gentleman and the Lady, whom, I
suppose, I need not mention to have been
Miss Mathews; but as it consisted chiefly 

of violent Upbraidings on her Side, and
Excuses on his, I despair of making it entertaining
to the Reader, and shall therefore
return to the Colonel, who having
searched all the Rooms with the utmost
Diligence, without finding the Woman he
looked for, began to suspect that he had
before fixed on the right Person, and that
Amelia had denied herself to him, being
pleased with her Paramour, whom he had
discovered to be the noble Peer. 
He resolved therefore, as he could have
no Sport himself, to spoil that of others; 
accordingly he found out Booth, and asked
him again what was become of both their
Wives; for that he had searched all over
the Rooms, and could find neither of them? 
Booth was now a little alarmed at this Account,
and parting with Miss Mathews,
went along with the Colonel in search of
his Wife. As for Miss Mathews, he had
at length pacified her with a Promise to
make her a Visit; which Promise she extorted
from him, swearing bitterly in the
most solemn Manner, unless he made it
to her, she would expose both him and
herself at the Masquerade. 

As he knew the Violence of the Lady's
Passions, and to what Heights they were
capable of rising, he was obliged to come
into these Terms; for he had, I am convinced,
no Fear upon Earth equal to that
of Amelia's knowing what it was in the
Power of Miss Mathews to communicate
to her, and which to conceal from her,
he had already undergone so much Uneasiness. 
The Colonel led Booth directly to the
Place where he had seen the Peer and Amelia
(such he was now well convinced she
was) sitting together. Booth no sooner
saw her, than he said to the Colonel, sure
that is my Wife in Conversation with that
Masque—I took her for your Lady myself,
said the Colonel; but I found I was
mistaken. —(Hark ye, that is my Lord
—, and I have seen that very Lady
with him all this Night.) 
This Conversation past at a little Distance,
and out of the Hearing of the supposed
Amelia; when Booth looking stedfastly
at the Lady, declared with an Oath that
he was positive the Colonel was in the right. 
She then beckon'd to him with her Fan; upon 

which he went directly to her; and she
asked him to go home, which he very
readily consented to. The Peer then walked
off, the Colonel went in pursuit of his
Wife, or of some other Woman; and
Booth and his Lady returned in two Chairs
to their Lodgings. 



Consequences of the Masquerade, not uncommon
nor surprising. 
The Lady getting first out of her
Chair ran hastily up into the Nursery
to the Children; for such was Amelia's
constant Method at her return home, at
whatever Hour. Booth then walked into
the Dining-room, where he had not been
long before Amelia came down to him, and
with a most chearful Countenance said,
‘My Dear, I fancy we have neither of us
supped, shall I go down and see whether
there is any cold Meat in the House?’ 
‘For yourself, if you please,’ answered
Booth; ‘but I shall eat nothing.’ 
‘How, my Dear,’ said Amelia, ‘I hope
you have not lost your Appetite at the 

Masquerade?’ For Supper was a Meal
at which he generally eat very heartily. 
‘I know not well what I have lost,’ said
Booth; ‘I find myself disordered. My
Head aches. I know not what is the
Matter with me.’ 
‘Indeed, my Dear, you fright me,’ said
Amelia; ‘you look indeed disordered. I
wish the Masquerade had been far enough,
before you had gone thither.’ 
‘Would to Heaven it had,’ cries Booth; 
‘but that is over now. But pray, Amelia,
answer me one Question, who was that
Gentleman with you, when I came up to
you?’ 
‘The Gentleman, my Dear,’ said Amelia,
‘what Gentleman?’ 
‘The Gentleman, the Nobleman, when
I came up; sure I speak plain.’ 
‘Upon my Word, my Dear, I don't
understand you,’ answered she; ‘I did
not know one Person at the Masquerade.’ 

‘How’ said he, ‘what spend the whole
Evening with a Masque without knowing
him?’ 
‘Why, my Dear,’ said she, ‘you
know we were not together.’ 
‘I know we were not,’ said he? ‘but
what is that to the Purpose? sure you
answer me strangely. I know we were
not together; and therefore I ask you
whom you were with?’ 
‘Nay but, my Dear,’ said she, ‘can I
tell People in Masques?’ 
‘I say again, Madam,’ said he, ‘would
you converse two Hours or more with a
Masque whom you did not know?’ 
‘Indeed, Child,’ says she, ‘I know nothing
of the Methods of a Masquerade
for I never was at one in my Life.’ 
‘I wish to Heaven you had not been at
this,’ cries Booth. ‘Nay you will wish
so yourself, if you tell me Truth—What
have I said? do I, can I suspect you of
not speaking Truth? —Since you are ignorant 

then I will inform you, the Man
you have conversed with was no other
than Lord &wblank;.’ 
‘And is that the Reason,’ said she, ‘you
wish I had not been there?’ 
‘And is not that Reason,’ answered he,
‘sufficient? Is he not the last Man upon
Earth with whom I would have you converse?’ 
‘So you really wish then that I had not
been at the Masquerade?’ 
‘I do,’ cried he, ‘from my Soul.’ 
‘So may I ever be able,’ cried she, ‘to
indulge you in every Wish as in this. —I
was not there.’ 
‘Do not trifle, Amelia,’ cried he, ‘you
would not jest with me if you knew the
Situation of my Mind.’ 
‘Indeed I do not jest with you,’ said
she. ‘Upon my Honour I was not there. 
Forgive me this first Deceit I ever practised,
and indeed it shall be the last; for
I have paid severely for this by the 

Uneasiness it hath given me.’ She then
revealed to him the whole Secret, which
was thus. 
I think it hath been already mentioned
in some Part of this History, that Amelia
and Mrs. Atkinson were exactly of the same
Make and Stature, and that there was
likewise a very near Resemblance between
their Voices. When Mrs. Atkinson therefore
found that Amelia was so extremely averse
to the Masquerade, she proposed to go
thither in her stead, and to pass upon Booth
for his own Wife. 
This was afterwards very easily executed; 
for when they left Booth's Lodgings,
Amelia, who went last to her Chair, ran
back to fetch her Masque, as she pretended,
which she had purposely left behind. She
then whipt off her Domino, and threw it
over Mrs. Atkinson, who stood ready to
receive it, and ran immediately down
Stairs, and stepping into Amelia's Chair
proceeded with the rest to the Masquerade. 
As her Stature exactly suited that of Amelia,
she had very little Difficulty to carry
on the Imposition; for besides the natural
Resemblance of their Voices, and the Opportunity 

of speaking in a feigned one, she had
scarce an Intercourse of six Words with
Booth during the whole Time; for the
Moment they got into the Crowd, she took
the first Opportunity of slipping from him. 
And he, as the Reader may remember, being
seized by other Women, and concluding
his Wife to be safe with Mrs. James
was very well satisfied, till the Colonel set
him upon the Search, as we have seen before. 
Mrs. Atkinson, the Moment she came
home, ran up Stairs to the Nursery, where
she found Amelia, and told her in Haste
that she might very easily carry on the
Deceit with her Husband; for that she
might tell him what she pleased to invent,
as they had not been a Minute together
during the whole Evening. 
Booth was no sooner satisfied that his
Wife had not been from home that Evening,
than he fell into Raptures with her,
gave her a thousand tender Caresses,
blamed his own Judgment, acknowledged
the Goodness of hers, and vowed never to
oppose her Will more in any one Instance
during his Life. 

Mrs. Atkinson, who was still in the Nursery
with her Masquerade Dress, was then
summoned down Stairs; and when Booth
saw her, and heard her speak in her mimic
Tone, he declared he was not surprised at
his having been imposed upon; for that if
they were both in the same Disguise, he
should scarce be able to discover the Difference
between them. 
They then sat down to half an Hour's
chearful Conversation; after which they
retired all in the most perfect good Humour. 



Consequences of the Masquerade. 
When Booth rose in the Morning,
he found in his Pocket that Letter
which had been delivered to him by Colonel
Bath, which, had not Chance brought
to his Remembrance, he might possibly
have never recollected. 
He had now however the Curiosity to
open the Letter, and beginning to read it
the Matter of it drew him on, 'till he perused 

the whole; for notwithstanding the
Contempt cast upon it by those learned
Critics the Bucks, neither the Subject, nor
the Manner in which it was treated, was
altogether contemptible. 
But there was still another Motive which
induced Booth to read the whole Letter; 
and this was, that he presently thought he
knew the Hand. He did indeed immediately
conclude it was Dr. Harrison; for the
Doctor wrote a very remarkable one; and
this Letter contained all the Particularities
of the Doctor's Character. 
He had just finished a second Reading
of this Letter, when the Doctor himself
entered the Room. The good Man was
impatient to know the Success of Amelia's
Stratagem; for he bore towards her all that
Love which Esteem can create in a good
Mind, without the Assistance of those selfish
Considerations, from which the Love of
Wives and Children may be ordinarily deduced. 
The latter of which Nature, by
very subtle and refined Reasoning, suggests
to us to be Part of our dear selves; 
and the former, as long as they remain the
Objects of our Liking, that same Nature
is furnished with very plain and fertile Arguments, 

to recommend to our Affections. 
But to raise that Affection in the human
Breast, which the Doctor had for Amelia,
Nature is forced to use a kind of Logic,
which is no more understood by a bad
Man, than Sir Isaac Newton's Doctrine of
Colours is by one born blind. And yet
in reality it contains nothing more abstruse
than this, That an Injury is the Object of
Anger, Danger of Fear, and Praise of Vanity: 
For in the same simple Manner it
may be asserted, that Goodness is the Object
of Love. 
The Doctor enquired immediately for his
Child (for so he often called Amelia;) Booth answered
that he had left her asleep; for that she
had had but a restless Night. ‘I hope she is
not disordered by the Masquerade,’ cries
the Doctor. Booth answered, he believed
she would be very well when she waked. 
‘I fancy,’ said he, ‘her gentle Spirits were
a little too much fluttered last Night; 
that is all.’ 
‘I hope then,’ said the Doctor, ‘you
will never more insist on her going to
such Places, but know your own Happiness
in having a Wife that hath the
Discretion to avoid those Places; which, 

though perhaps they may not be as some
represent them, such Brothels of Vice
and Debauchery, as would impeach the
Character of every virtuous Woman who
was seen at them, are certainly however
Scenes of Riot, Disorder, and Intemperance,
very improper to be frequented
by a chaste and sober Christian Matron.’ 
Booth declared, that he was very sensible
of his Error; and that so far from soliciting
his Wife to go to another Masquerade,
he did not intend ever to go thither
any more himself. 
The Doctor highly approved the Resolution; 
and then Booth said: ‘And I
thank you, my dear Friend, as well as
my Wife's Discretion, that she was not
at the Masquerade last Night.’ He then
related to the Doctor the Discovery of the
Plot; and the good Man was greatly pleased
with the Success of the Stratagem, and that
Booth took it in such good Part. 
‘But, Sir,’ says Booth, ‘I had a Letter
given me by a noble Colonel there, which
is written in a Hand so very like yours,
that I could almost swear to it. Nor is
the Stile, as far as I can guess, unlike 

your own. Here it is, Sir. Do you own
the Letter, Doctor, or do you not?’ 
The Doctor took the Letter, and having
looked at it a Moment, said—‘And
did the Colonel himself give you this
Letter?’ 
‘The Colonel himself,’ answered Booth. 
‘Why then,’ cries the Doctor, ‘he is
surely the most impudent Fellow that
the World ever produced. What did he
deliver it with an Air of Triumph?’ 
‘He delivered it me with Air enough,’ 
cries Booth, ‘after his own Manner, and
bid me read it for my Edification. To
say the Truth, I am a little surprised
that he should single me out of all Mankind
to deliver the Letter to; I do not
think I deserve the Character of such a
Husband. It is well I am not so very
forward to take an Affront as some
Folks.’ 
‘I am glad to see you are not,’ said the
Doctor; ‘and your Behaviour in this Affair
becomes both the Man of Sense and
the Christian: For it would be surely the 

greatest Folly, as well as the most daring
Impiety, to risque your own Life for
the Impertinence of a Fool. As long as
you are assured of the Virtue of your
own Wife, it is Wisdom in you to despise
the Efforts of such a Wretch. Not
indeed that your Wife accuses him of any
downright Attack, though she hath observed
enough in his Behaviour to give
Offence to her Delicacy.’ 
‘You astonish me, Doctor,’ said Booth. 
‘What can you mean? My Wife dislike
his Behaviour! Hath the Colonel ever
offended her?’ 
‘I do not say he hath ever offended her
by any open Declarations. —Nor hath he
done any Thing which, according to the
most romantic Notion of Honour, you can
or ought to resent; but there is something
extremely nice in the Chastity of a truly
virtuous Woman.’ 
‘And hath my Wife really complained
of any Thing of that kind in the Colonel?’ 
‘Look ye, young Gentleman,’ cries
the Doctor, ‘I will have no quarrelling, or 

challenging; I find I have made some
Mistake, and therefore I insist upon it,
by all the Rights of Friendship, that you
give me your Word of Honour you will
not quarrel with the Colonel on this Account.’ 
‘I do with all my Heart,’ said Booth; 
‘for if I did not know your Character, I
should absolutely think you was jesting
with me. I do not think you have mistaken
my Wife; but I am sure she hath
mistaken the Colonel; and hath misconstrued
some overstrained Point of Gallantry,
something of the Quixotte Kind,
into a Design against her Chastity; but
I have that Opinion of the Colonel, that
I hope you will not be offended, when I
declare I know not which of you two I
should be the sooner jealous of.’ 
‘I would by no Means have you jealous
of any one,’ cries the Doctor; ‘for I
think my Child's Virtue may be firmly
relied on; but I am convinced she would
not have said what she did to me, without
a Cause; nor should I, without such
a Conviction, have written that Letter to
the Colonel, as I own to you I did. 
However, nothing I say hath yet past 

which, even in the Opinion of false Honour,
you are at Liberty to resent; but
as to declining any great Intimacy, if you
will take my Advice, I think that would
be prudent.’ 
‘You will pardon me, my dearest Friend,’ 
said Booth; ‘but I have really such an
Opinion of the Colonel, that I would pawn
my Life upon his Honour; and as for
Women, I do not believe he ever had
an Attachment to any.’ 
‘Be it so,’ said the Doctor. ‘I have
only two Things to insist on. The first
is, that if ever you change your Opinion,
this Letter may not be the Subject of
any Quarrelling or Fighting: The other
is, that you never mention a Word of
this to your Wife. By the latter I shall
see whether you can keep a Secret; and
if it is no otherwise material, it will be a
wholesome Exercise to your Mind; for the
Practice of any Virtue is a kind of mental
Exercise, and serves to maintain the
Health and Vigour of the Soul.’ 
‘I faithfully promise both,’ cries Booth. 
And now the Breakfast entered the Room,
as did soon after Amelia, and Mrs. Atkinson. 

The Conversation ran chiefly on the Masquerade; 
and Mrs. Atkinson gave an Account
of several Adventures there; but
whether she told the whole Truth with regard
to herself, I will not determine. For
certain it is, she never once mentioned the
Name of the noble Peer. Amongst the rest,
she said there was a young Fellow that had
preached a Sermon there upon a Stool, in
Praise of Adultery she believed; for she
could not get near enough to hear the Particulars. 
During that Transaction, Booth had been
engaged with the blue Domino in another
Room, so that he knew nothing of it; so
that what Mrs. Atkinson now said, only
brought to his Mind the Doctor's Letter to
Colonel Bath; for to him he supposed it
was written; and the Idea of the Colonel
being a Lover to Amelia struck him in so
ridiculous a Light, that it threw him into
a violent Fit of Laughter. 
The Doctor, who, from the natural Jealousy
of an Author, imputed the Agitation
of Booth's Muscles to his own Sermon, or
Letter on that Subject, was a little offended,
and said gravely: ‘I should be glad to 

know the Reason of this immoderate
Mirth. Is Adultery a Matter of Jest
in your Opinion?’ 
‘Far otherwise,’ answer'd Booth. ‘But
how is it possible to refrain from Laughter
at the Idea of a Fellow preaching a
Sermon in Favour of it at such a Place.’ 
‘I am very sorry,’ cries the Doctor, ‘to
find the Age is grown to so scandalous a
Degree of Licentiousness; that we have
thrown off not only Virtue, but Decency. 
How abandoned must be the Manners of
any Nation where such Insults upon Religion
and Morality can be committed
with Impunity? No Man is fonder of true
Wit and Humour than myself; but to
profane sacred Things with Jest and
Scoffing is a sure Sign of a weak and a
wicked Mind. It is the very Vice which
Homer attacks in the odious Character
of Thersites. The Ladies must excuse
my repeating the Passage to you, as I
know you have Greek enough to understand
it. 
—&GREsa;&grp;&gre;&gra; &grf;&grr;&gre;&grs;&grig;&grn; &grhric;&grs;&grig;&grn; &grasa;&grk;&gro;&grs;&grm;&graa; &grt;&gre;, &grp;&gro;&grl;&grl;&graa; &grt;&gre; &grhsia;&grd;&grh;, 
&grM;&grag;&grY;, &gras;&grt;&grag;&grr; &gro;&grus; &grk;&gra;&grt;&grag; &grk;&groa;&grs;&grm;&gro;&grn; &gres;&grr;&gri;&grz;&grea;&grm;&gre;&grn;&gra;&gri; &grb;&gra;&grs;&gri;&grl;&gre;&gruc;&grs;&gri;&grn; 

&GRAs;&grl;&grl;&grap; &grora; &grt;&gri; &gro;&grirc; &gre;&grisa;&grs;&gra;&gri;&grt;&gro; &grg;&gre;&grl;&gro;&gric;&gri;&gro;&grn; &GRAs;&grr;&grg;&gre;&gria;&gro;&gri;&grs;&gri;&grn; 
&GREa;&grm;&grm;&gre;&grn;&gra;&gri;* . 
And immediately adds, 
‘—&grasa;&gri;&grs;&grc;&gri;&grs;&grt;&gro;&grst; &grd;&greg; &gras;&grn;&grhg;&grr; &grur;&grp;&grog; &GRIsa;&grl;&gri;&gro;&grn; &grhsc;&grl;&grq;&gre; † .’ 
Horace again describes such a Rascal. 

‘———Solutus
Qui captat risus hominum famamque dicacis § .’
‘And says of him, 
‘—Hic niger est, hunc tu, Romane, caveto &verbar2; .’ 
‘O charming Homer,’ said Mrs. Atkinson,
‘how much above all other Writers!’ 
‘I ask your Pardon,’ Madam, said the 

Doctor, ‘I forgot you was a Scholar; but
indeed I did not know you understood
Greek as well as Latin.’ 
‘I do not pretend,’ said she, ‘to be a
Critic in the Greek; but I think I am
able to read a little of Homer, at least
with the Help of looking now and then
into the Latin.’ 
‘Pray, Madam,’ said the Doctor, ‘how
do you like this Passage in the Speech of
Hector to Andromache. 
‘—&GREs;&gri;&grst; &gro;&grisc;&grk;&gro;&grn; &gris;&gro;&gruc;&grs;&gra; &grt;&grag; &grs;&gra;&gru;&grt;&grhc;&grst; &gresa;&grr;&grg;&gra; &grk;&groa;&grm;&gri;&grz;&gre;, 
&GRIr;&grs;&grt;&groa;&grn; &grt;&grap; &grhs;&grl;&gra;&grk;&graa;&grt;&grh;&grn; &grt;&gre;, &grk;&gra;&grig; &gras;&grm;&grf;&gri;&grp;&groa;&grl;&gro;&gri;&grs;&gri; &grk;&grea;&grl;&gre;&gru;&gre; 
&GREsa;&grr;&grg;&gro;&grn; &gres;&grp;&gro;&gria;&grc;&gre;&grs;&grq;&gra;&gri;* .’ 
‘Or how do you like the Character of
Hippodamia, who, by being the prettiest
Girl, and best Workwoman of her Age,
got one of the best Husbands in all
Troy. —I think, indeed, Homer enumerates
her Discretion with her other Qualifications; 
but I do not remember he
gives us one Character of a Woman of
Learning. —Don't you conceive this 

to be a great Omission in that charming
Poet? However, Juvenal makes you
amends, for he talks very abundantly of
the Learning of the Roman Ladies in his
Time.’ 
‘You are a provoking Man, Doctor,’ 
said Mrs. Atkinson, ‘Where is the Harm
in a Woman's having Learning as well
as a Man?’ 
‘Let me ask you another Question,’ 
said the Doctor. ‘Where is the Harm in a
Man's being a fine Performer with a
Needle as well as a Woman? And yet,
answer me honestly, Would you greatly
chuse to marry a Man with a Thimble
upon his Finger? Would you in earnest
think a Needle became the Hand of
your Husband as well as a Halberd?’ 
‘As to War, I am with you,’ said she. 
‘Homer himself, I well remember, makes
Hector tell his Wife, that warlike Works
—What is the Greek Word—Pollemy
—something—belonged to Men
only; and I readily agree to it. I hate
a masculine Woman, an Amazon, as
much as you can do; but what is there
masculine in Learning? 

‘Nothing so masculine, take my Word
for it. As for your Pollemy, I look
upon it to be the true Characteristic of
a Devil. So Homer every where characterizes
Mars.’ 
‘Indeed, my dear,’ cries the Serjeant,
‘you had better not dispute with the
Doctor; for upon my Word, he will be
too hard for you.’ 
‘Nay, I beg you will not interfere,’ 
cries Mrs. Atkinson, ‘I am sure you can be
no judge in these Matters.’ 
At which the Doctor and Booth burst
into a loud Laugh; and Amelia, though
fearful of giving her Friend Offence, could
not forbear a gentle Smile. 
‘You may laugh, Gentlemen, if you
please,’ said Mrs. Atkinson; ‘but I thank
Heaven, I have married a Man who is
not jealous of my Understanding. I
should have been the most miserable
Woman upon Earth with a starched Pedant,
who was possessed of that nonsensical
Opinion, that the Difference of Sexes
causes any Difference in the Mind. Why 

don't you honestly avow the Turkish Notion,
that Women have no Souls; for
you say the same thing in Effect?’ 
‘Indeed, my dear,’ cries the Serjeant,
greatly concerned to see his Wife so angry,
‘you have mistaken the Doctor.’ 
‘I beg, my dear,’ cried she, ‘you will
say nothing upon these Subjects. —I hope
you at least do not despise my Understanding.’ 
‘I assure you, I do not,’ said the Serjeant,
‘and I hope you will never despise
mine; for a Man may have some
Understanding, I hope, without Learning.’ 
Mrs. Atkinson reddened extremely at
these Words; and the Doctor fearing
he had gone too far began to soften Matters,
in which Amelia assisted him. By
these Means the Storm rising in Mrs. Atkinson
before was in some measure laid, at least
suspended from bursting at present; but
it fell afterwards upon the poor Serjeant's
Head in a Torrent; who had learn'd perhaps
one Maxim from his Trade, that a
Cannon-Ball always doth Mischief in proportion 

to the Resistance it meets with; 
and that nothing so effectually deadens its
Force as a Wool-pack. The Serjeant therefore
bore all with Patience; and the Idea of
a Wool-pack perhaps bringing that of a
Featherbed into his Head, he at last not
only quieted his Wife; but she cried out
with great Sincerity, ‘Well, my dear, I
will say one thing for you, that I believe
from my Soul, though you have no
Learning, you have the best Understanding
of any Man upon Earth; and I must
own I think the latter far the more profitable
of the two.’ 
Far different was the Idea she entertained
of the Doctor, whom, from this
Day, she considered as a conceited Pedant,
nor could all Amelia's Endeavours ever
alter her Sentiments. 
The Doctor now took his Leave of
Booth and his Wife for a Week, he intending
to set out within an Hour or two
with his old Friend, with whom our Readers
were a little acquainted at the latter
End of the Ninth Book, and of whom perhaps
they did not then conceive the most
favourable Opinion. 

Nay I am aware that the Esteem which
some Readers before had for the Doctor,
may be here lessened; since he may appear
to have been too easy a Dupe to the gross
Flattery of the old Gentleman. If there
be any such Critics, we are heartily sorry
as well for them as for the Doctor; but it
is our Business to discharge the Part of a
faithful Historian, and to describe Human
Nature as it is, not as we would wish it to be. 



In which Colonel Bath appears in great Glory. 
That Afternoon, as Booth was
walking in the Park, he met with
Colonel Bath, who presently asked him for
the Letter which he had given him the
Night before, upon which Booth immediately
returned it. 
‘Don't you think,’ cries Bath, ‘it is
writ with great Dignity of Expression
and Emphasis of—of—of Judgment?’ 
‘I am surprised though,’ cries Booth,
‘that any one should write such a Letter
to you, Colonel.’ 

‘To me?’ said Bath. —‘What do you
mean, Sir, I hope you don't imagine
any Man durst write such a Letter to
me? D&wblank;n me if I knew a Man who
thought me capable of debauching my
Friend's Wife, I would—d&wblank;n me.’ 
‘I believe indeed Sir, cries Booth, that
no Man living dares put his Name to
such a Letter: But you see it is anonymous.’ 
‘I don't know what you mean by ominous,’ 
cries the Colonel; ‘but, blast my Reputation,
if I had received such a Letter, if
I would not have searched the World to
have found the Writer. D&wblank;n me, I
would have gone to the East Indies to
have pulled off his Nose.’ 
‘He would indeed have deserved it,’ 
cries Booth. —‘But pray, Sir, how came
you by it?’ 
‘I took it,’ said the Colonel, ‘from a
Set of idle young Rascals, one of whom
was reading it out aloud upon a Stool,
while the rest were attempting to make
a Jest, not only of the Letter, but of all 

Decency, Virtue and Religion. A Set
of Fellows that you must have seen or
heard of about Town, that are, d&wblank;n me,
a Disgrace to the Dignity of Manhood; 
Puppies that mistake Noise and Impudence,
Rudeness and Profaneness for
Wit. If the Drummers of my Company
had not more Understanding than twenty
such Fellows, I'd have them both whipt
out of the Regiment.’ 
‘So then you do not know the Person
to whom it was writ,’ said Booth. 
‘Lieutenant,’ cries the Colonel, ‘your
Question deserves no Answer. I ought to
take Time to consider whether I ought
not to resent the Supposition. Do you
think, Sir, I am acquainted with a
Rascal?’ 
‘I do not suppose, Colonel,’ cries Booth,
‘that you would willingly cultivate an Intimacy
with such a Person; but a Man
must have good Luck who hath any
Acquaintance, if there are not some Rascals
among them.’ 
‘I am not offended with you, Child,’ 
says the Colonel. ‘I know you did not
intend to offend me.’ 

‘No Man, I believe, dares intend it,’ 
said Booth. 
‘I believe so too,’ said the Colonel, ‘d&wblank;n
me, I know it. But you know, Child,
how tender I am on this Subject. If I
had been ever married myself, I should
have cleft the Man's Scull who had dar'd
look wantonly at my Wife.’ 
‘It is certainly the most cruel of all Injuries,’ 
said Booth. ‘How finely doth
Shakespeare express it in his Othello! 

‘But there, where I had treasur'd up my Soul.’
‘That Shakespeare,’ cries the Colonel,
‘was a fine Fellow. He was a very pretty
Poet indeed. Was it not Shakespeare that
wrote the Play about Hotspur? You
must remember these Lines. I got them
almost by Heart at the Play-House; for
I never missed that Play whenever it was
acted, if I was in Town. 

‘By Heav'n it was an easy Leap,
‘To pluck bright Honour into the Full Moon.
‘Or drive into the bottomless Deep.

‘And—and—Faith I have almost forgot
them; but I know it is something about
saving your Honour from drowning— 
O it is very fine. I say, d&wblank;n me,
the Man that writ those Lines was the
greatest Poet the World ever produced. 
There is Dignity of Expression and Emphasis
of thinking, d&wblank;n me.’ 
Booth assented to the Colonel's Criticism,
and then cried ‘I wish, Colonel, you
would be so kind to give me that Letter.’ 
The Colonel answered, if he had any particular
Use for it, he would give it him
with all his Heart, and presently delivered
it; and soon afterwards they parted. 
Several Passages now struck all at once
upon Booth's Mind, which gave him great
Uneasiness. He became confident now
that he had mistaken one Colonel for another; 
and though he could not account
for the Letter's getting into those Hands
from whom Bath had taken it (indeed
James had dropt it out of his Pocket) yet
a thousand Circumstances left him no room
to doubt the Identity of the Person, who
was a Man much more liable to raise
the Suspicion of a Husband than honest
Bath, who would at any Time have rather 

fought with a Man than lain with a
Woman. 
The whole Behaviour of Amelia now
rushed upon his Memory. Her Resolution
not to take up her Residence at the
Colonel's House; her Backwardness even
to dine there, her Unwillingness to go to
the Masquerade, many of her unguarded
Expressions, and some where she had been
more guarded, all joined together to raise
such an Idea in Mr. Booth, that he had
almost taken a Resolution to go and cut
the Colonel to Pieces in his own House. 
Cooler Thoughts, however, suggested themselves
to him in Time. He recollected
the Promise he had so solemnly made to
the Doctor. He considered moreover, that
he was yet in the Dark, as to the Extent
of the Colonel's Guilt. Having nothing
therefore to fear from it, he contented
himself to postpone a Resentment which
he nevertheless resolved to take of the
Colonel hereafter, if he found he was in
any Degree a Delinquent. 
The first Step he determined to take
was, on the first Opportunity, to relate to
Colonel James the Means by which he became
possessed of the Letter, and to read 

it to him. On which Occasion he thought
he should easily discern by the Behaviour
of the Colonel, whether he had been suspected
either by Amelia or the Doctor
without a Cause: But as for his Wife, he
fully resolved not to reveal the Secret to
her till the Doctor's Return. 
While Booth was deeply engaged by
himself in these Meditations, Capt. Trent
came up to him, and familiarly slapp'd
him on the Shoulder. 
They were soon joined by a third Gentleman,
and presently afterwards by a
fourth, both Acquaintances of Mr. Trent; 
and all having walked twice the Length
of the Mall together, it being now past
Nine in the Evening, Trent proposed going
to the Tavern, to which the Strangers
immediately consented; and Booth
himself, after some Resistance, was at
length persuaded to comply. 
To the King's-Arms then they went,
where the Bottle went very briskly round
till after Eleven; at which Time Trent
proposed a Game at Cards, to which Proposal
likewise Booth's Consent was obtain'd,
though not without much Difficulty; for 

though he had naturally some Inclination
to Gaming, and had formerly a little indulged
it; yet he had entirely left it off for
many Years. 
Booth and his Friend were Partners, and
had at first some Success; but Fortune,
according to her usual Conduct, soon shifted
about, and persecuted Booth with such
Malice, that in about two Hours he was
strip'd of all the Gold in his Pocket, which
amounted to twelve Guineas, being more
than half the Cash which he was at that
Time worth. 
How easy it is for a Man who is at
all tainted with the Itch of Gaming, to leave
off Play in such a Situation, especially
when he is likewise heated with Liquor,
I leave to the Gamesters to determine. 
Certain it is, that Booth had no Inclination
to desist; but, on the contrary, was so eagerly
bent on playing on, that he called
his Friend out of the Room, and asked
him for ten Pieces, which he promised
punctually to pay the next Morning. 
Trent chid him for using so much Formality
on the Occasion. ‘You know,’ 

said he, ‘dear Booth, you may have what
Money you please of me. Here is a 20l.
Note, at your Service, and if you want
five times the Sum, it is at your Service. 
We will never let these Fellows go away
with our Money in this manner; for we
have so much the Advantage, that if
the knowing ones were here, they would
lay odds of our Side.’ 
But if this was really Mr. Trent's Opinion,
he was very much mistaken; for the
other two honourable Gentlemen were not
only greater Masters of the Game, and
somewhat soberer than poor Booth, having
with all the Art in their Power evaded the
Bottle; but they had moreover another
small Advantage over their Adversaries,
both of them, by means of some certain
private Signs, previously agreed upon
between them, being always acquainted
with the principal Cards in each other's
Hands. It cannot be wonder'd therefore,
that Fortune was on their Side; for however
she may be reported to favour Fools,
she never I believe shews them any Countenance
when they engage in Play with
Knaves. 

The more Booth lost, the deeper he made
his Bets; the Consequence of which was,
that about two in the Morning, besides
the Loss of his own Money, he was 50l.
indebted to Trent. A Sum indeed which
he would not have borrowed, had not the
other, like a very generous Friend, push'd
it upon him. 
Trent's Pockets became at last dry, by
means of these Loans. His own Loss indeed
was trifling; for the Stakes of the
Games were no higher than Crowns; and
betting, (as it is called) was that to which
Booth owed his Ruin. The Gentlemen
therefore, pretty well knowing Booth's
Circumstances, and being kindly unwilling
to win more of a Man than he was
worth, declined playing any longer, nor
did Booth once ask them to persist; for
he was ashamed of the Debt which he
had already contracted to Trent, and very
far from desiring to encrease it. 
The Company then separated. The two
Victors and Trent went off in their Chairs to
their several Houses near Grosvenor-Square; 
and poor Booth, in a melancholy Mood,
walk'd home to his Lodgings. He was 

indeed in such a Fit of Despair, that it
more than once came into his Head to put
an End to his miserable Being. 
But before we introduce him to Amelia,
we must do her the Justice to relate the
manner in which she spent this unhappy
Evening. It was about seven when
Booth left her to walk in the Park: From
this Time till past Eight she was employ'd
with her Children, in playing with
them, in giving them their Supper, and in
putting them to Bed. 
When these Offices were performed, she
employ'd herself another Hour in cooking
up a little Supper for her Husband, this
being, as we have already observed, his
favourite Meal, as indeed it was hers; and
in a most pleasant and delightful Manner
they generally passed their Time at this
Season, though their Fare was very seldom
of the sumptuous Kind. 
It now grew dark, and her hashed Mutton
was ready for the Table, but no Booth
appear'd. Having waited therefore for him
a full Hour, she gave him over for that Evening; 
nor was she much alarmed at his
Absence, as she knew he was in a Night 

or two to be at the Tavern with some
Brother Officers. She concluded therefore
that they had met in the Park, and had
agreed to spend this Evening together. 
At Ten then she sat down to Supper by
herself; for Mrs. Atkinson was then abroad. 
And here we cannot help relating a little
Incident, however trivial it may appear to
some. Having sat some Time alone reflecting
on their distress'd Situation, her
Spirits grew very low; and she was once
or twice going to ring the Bell to send her
Maid for half a Pint of White-wine, but
check'd her Inclination in order to save the
little Sum of Sixpence; which she did the
more resolutely as she had before refused
to gratify her Children with Tarts for their
Supper from the same Motive. And this
Self-denial she was very probably practising
to save Sixpence, while her Husband was
paying a Debt of several Guineas incurred
by the Ace of Trumps being in the Hands
of his Adversary. 
Instead therefore of this Cordial she took
up one of the excellent Farquhar's Comedies,
and read it half through, when the
Clock striking Twelve, she retired to Bed,
leaving the Maid to sit up for her Master. 

She would indeed have much more willingly
have sat up herself; but the Delicacy
of her own Mind assured her that Booth
would not thank her for the Compliment. 
This is indeed a Method which some Wives
take of upbraiding their Husbands for staying
abroad till too late an Hour, and of
engaging them, thro' Tenderness and Good-nature
never to enjoy the Company of their
Friends too long, when they must do this
at the Expence of their Wives Rest. 
To Bed then she went, but not to sleep. 
Thrice indeed she told the dismal Clock,
and as often heard the more dismal Watchman,
till her miserable Husband found his
Way home, and stole silently, like a Thief,
to Bed to her; at which Time pretending
then first to awake she threw her snowy
Arms around him; though, perhaps, the
more witty Property of Snow, according to
Addison, that is to say, its Coldness, rather
belonged to the poor Captain. 




Read, Gamester, and observe. 
Booth could not so well disguise the
Agitations of his Mind from Amelia,
but that she perceived sufficient Symptoms
to assure her that some Misfortune had befallen
him. This made her in her Turn so
uneasy, that Booth took Notice of it, and
after Breakfast said, ‘Sure, my dear Emily,
something hath fallen out to vex
you.’ 
Amelia looking tenderly at him answered,
‘Indeed, my Dear, you are in the right. 
I am indeed extremely vexed.’ ‘For
Heaven's Sake,’ said he, ‘what is it?’ 
‘Nay, my Love,’ cries she, ‘that you
must answer yourself. Whatever it is
which hath given you all that Disturbance
that you in vain endeavour to conceal
from me, this it is which causes all my
Affliction.’ 
‘You guess truly, my Sweet,’ replied
Booth; ‘I am indeed afflicted, and I will
not, nay I cannot conceal the Truth from
you. I have undone myself, Amelia.’ 

‘What have you done, Child?’ said she,
in some Consternation, ‘pray tell me.’ 
‘I have lost my Money at Play,’ answered
he. 
‘Pugh!’ said she, recovering herself,— 
‘what signifies the Trifle you had in your
Pocket? Resolve never to play again,
and let it give you no further Vexation. 
I warrant you we will contrive some
Method to repair such a Loss.’ 
‘Thou heavenly Angel, thou Comfort
of my Soul,’ cried Booth tenderly embracing
her—Then starting a little from
her Arms, and looking with eager Fondness
in her Eyes, he said, ‘Let me survey
thee, art thou really human, or art thou
not rather an angel in a human Form? 
—O, no,’ cried he, flying again into
her Arms, ‘thou art my dearest Woman,
my best, my beloved Wife.’ 
Amelia having returned all his Caresses
with equal Kindness told him she had
near eleven Guineas in her Purse, and asked
how much she should fetch him. —‘I would
not advise you, Billy, to carry too much 

in your Pocket, for fear it should be a
Temptation to you to return to Gaming,
in order to retrieve your past Losses. 
Let me beg you, on all Accounts, never
to think more, if possible, on the Trifle
you have lost, any more than if you had
never possessed it.’ 
Booth promised her faithfully he never
would, and refused to take any of the money. 
He then hesitated a Moment—and
cried—‘You say, my Dear, you have eleven
Guineas; you have a Diamond Ring
likewise, which was your Grandmother's,
I believe that is worth twenty Pound; 
and your own and the Child's Watch
are worth as much more.’ 
‘I believe they would sell for as much,’ 
cried Amelia; ‘for a Pawnbroker of Mrs.
Atkinson's Acquaintance offered to lend
me thirty-five Pounds upon them, when
you was in your last Distress. —But why
are you computing their Value now?’ 
‘I was only considering,’ answered he,
‘how much we could raise in any Case of
Exigency.’ 

‘I have computed it myself,’ said she; 
‘and I believe all we have in the World,
besides our bare necessary Apparel, would
produce about sixty Pounds: And suppose,
my Dear,’ said she, ‘while we
have that little Sum, we should think of
employing it some Way or other to procure
some small Subsistence for ourselves
and our Family. As for your Dependance
on the Colonel's Friendship, it is
all vain, I am afraid, and fallacious. 
Nor do I see any Hopes you have from
any other Quarter, of providing for
yourself again in the Army. And though
the Sum which is now in our Power is
very small; yet we may possibly contrive
with it to put ourselves into some mean
Way of Livelihood. I have a Heart,
my Billy, which is capable of undergoing
any Thing for your Sake; and I hope
my Hands are as able to work, as those
which have been more inured to it. But
think, my Dear, think what must be
our wretched Condition, when the very
little we now have, is all moulder'd away,
as it will soon be in this Town.’ 
When poor Booth heard this, and reflected
that the Time which Amelia foresaw 

was already arrived (for that he had already
lost every Farthing they were worth)
it touched him to the Quick; he turned
pale, gnashed his Teeth, and cried out,
‘Damnation! this is too much to bear.’ 
Amelia was thrown into the utmost
Consternation by this Behaviour, and with
great Terror in her Countenance cried out,
‘Good Heavens, my dear Love, what is
the Reason of this Agony?’ 
‘Ask me no Questions,’ cried he, ‘unless
you would drive me to Madness.’ 
‘My Billy, my Love,’ said she, ‘what
can be the Meaning of this? —I beg you
will deal openly with me, and tell me
all your Griefs.’ 
‘Have you dealt fairly with me, Amelia?’ 
said he. 
‘Yes surely,’ said she, ‘Heaven is my
Witness how fairly.’ 
‘Nay, do not call Heaven,’ cried he,
‘to witness a Falshood. You have not
dealt openly with me, Amelia. You have
concealed Secrets from me; Secrets which 

I ought to have known, and which if I
had known, it had been better for us
both.’ 
‘You astonish me, as much as you
shock me,’ cried she. ‘What Falshood,
what Treachery have I been guilty of?’ 
‘You tell me,’ said he, ‘that I can
have no Reliance on James, why did you
not tell me so before?’ 
‘I call Heaven again,’ said she, ‘to
witness; nay I appeal to yourself for the
Truth of it; I have often told you so. 
I have told you I disliked the Man, notwithstanding
the many Favours he had
done you. I desired you not to have too
absolute a Reliance upon him. I own I
had once an extreme good Opinion of
him, but I changed it, and I acquainted
you that I had so—’ 
‘But not,’ cries he, ‘with the Reasons
why you had changed it.’ 
‘I was really afraid, my Dear,’ said she,
‘of going too far. I knew the Obligations
you had to him; and if I suspected
that he acted rather from Vanity than
true Friendship—’ 

‘Vanity!’ cries he, ‘take Care, Amelia,
you know his Motive to be much worse
than Vanity—A Motive, which if he had
piled Obligations on me 'till they had
reached the Skies, would tumble all down
to Hell. It is in vain to conceal it longer
—I know all—your Confident hath
told me all.’ 
‘Nay then,’ cries she, ‘on my Knees
I entreat you to be pacified, and hear me
out. It was, my Dear, for you, my
dread of your jealous Honour, and the
fatal Consequences.’ 
‘Is not Amelia then,’ cried he, ‘equally
jealous of my Honour! Would she,
from a weak Tenderness for my Person,
go privately about to betray, to undermine
the most invaluable Treasure of my
Soul? Would she have me pointed at as
the credulous Dupe, the easy Fool, the
tame, the kind Cuckold of a Rascal,
with whom I conversed as a Friend?’ 
‘Indeed you injure me,’ said Amelia. 
‘Heaven forbid I should have the Trial; 
but I think I could sacrifice all I hold
most dear to preserve your Honour. I 

think I have shewn I can. But I will— 
when you are cool, I will—satisfy you I
have done nothing you ought to blame.’ 
‘I am cool then,’ cries he—‘I will with
the greatest Coolness hear you. —But do
not think, Amelia, I have the least Jealousy,
the least Suspicion, the least Doubt
of your Honour. It is your Want of Confidence
in me alone which I blame.’ 
‘When you are calm,’ cried she, ‘I
will speak, and not before.’ 
He assured her he was calm; and then
she said—‘You have justified my Conduct
by your present Passion, in concealing
from you my Suspicions; for they were
no more, nay it is possible they were unjust: 
For since the Doctor, in betraying
the Secret to you, hath so far falsified my
Opinion of him, why may I not be as
well deceived in my Opinion of the Colonel; 
since it was only formed on some
Particulars in his Behaviour, which I disliked?
for upon my Honour he never
spoke a Word to me, nor hath been ever
guilty of any direct Action which I could
blame.’ She then went on, and related
most of the Circumstances which she had 

mentioned to the Doctor, omitting one or
two of the strongest, and giving such a
Turn to the rest, that if Booth had not had
some of Othello's Blood in him, his Wife
would have almost appeared a Prude in his
Eyes. Even he, however, was pretty well
pacified by this Narrative, and said he was
glad to find a Possibility of the Colonel's
Innocence, but that he greatly commended
the Prudence of his Wife, and only wished
she would for the future make him her
only Confident. 
Amelia upon that expressed some Bitterness
against the Doctor for breaking his
Trust, when Booth in his Excuse related all
the Circumstances of the Letter, and plainly
convinced her, that the Secret had dropt
by mere Accident from the Mouth of the
Doctor. 
Thus the Husband and Wife became
again reconciled, and poor Amelia generously
forgave a Passion, of which the sagacious
Reader is better acquainted with
the real Cause, than was that unhappy Lady. 




In which Booth receives a Visit from Captain
Trent. 
When Booth grew perfectly cool,
and began to reflect that he had
broken his Word to the Doctor, in having
made the Discovery to his Wife, which we
have seen in the last Chapter, that Thought
gave him great Uneasiness; and now to
comfort him, Captain Trent came to make
him a Visit. This was indeed almost the
last Man in the World, whose Company
he wished for; for he was the very Man he
was ashamed to see, for a Reason well
known to Gamesters; among whom the
most dishonourable of all Things, is not
to pay a Debt, contracted at the Gaming-Table,
the next Day, or the next Time at
least that you see the Party. 
Booth made no Doubt, but that Trent
was come on Purpose to receive this Debt; 
the latter had been therefore scarce a Minute
in the Room, before Booth began, in
an aukward Manner, to apologize; but
Trent immediately stopt his Mouth, and
said, ‘I do not want the Money, Mr. 

Booth, and you may pay it me whenever
you are able; and if you are never able,
I assure you I will never ask you for it.’ 
This Generosity raised such a Tempest of
Gratitude in Booth (if I may be allowed
the Expression) that the Tears burst from
his Eyes, and it was some Time before he
could find any Utterance for those Sentiments
with which his Mind overflowed; 
but when he began to express his Thankfulness,
Trent immediately stopt him, and
gave a sudden Turn to their Discourse. 
Mrs. Trent had been to visit Mrs. Booth
on the Masquerade Evening, which Visit
Mrs. Booth had not yet returned. Indeed
this was only the second Day since she had
received it. Trent therefore now told his
Friend, that he should take it extremely
kind if he and his Lady would wave all
Ceremony, and sup at their House the next
Evening. Booth hesitated a Moment—but
presently said, ‘I am pretty certain my
Wife is not engaged, and I will undertake
for her. I am sure she will not refuse
any Thing Mr. Trent can ask.’ And
soon after Trent took Booth with him to
walk in the Park. 

There were few greater Lovers of a
Bottle than Trent; he soon proposed therefore
to adjourn to the King's Arms Tavern,
where Booth, though much against his Inclination,
accompanied him. But Trent
was very importunate, and Booth did not
think himself at Liberty to refuse such a
Request to a Man, from whom he had so
lately received such Obligations. 
When they came to the Tavern, however,
Booth recollected the Omission he had
been guilty of the Night before. He wrote a
short Note therefore to his Wife, acquainting
her that he should not come home to Supper; 
but comforted her with a faithful Promise
that he would on no Account engage himself
in Gaming. 
The first Bottle past in ordinary Conversation; 
but when they had tapped the
second, Booth, on some Hints which Trent
gave him, very fairly laid open to him
his whole Circumstances, and declared he
almost despaired of mending them. ‘My
chief Relief,’ said he, ‘was in the Interest
of Colonel James; but I have given up
those Hopes.’ 

‘And very wisely too,’ said Trent. ‘I
say nothing of the Colonel's good Will. 
Very likely he may be your sincere
Friend; but I do not believe he hath the
Interest he pretends to. He hath had
too many Favours in his own Family, to
ask any more yet a while. But I am
mistaken, if you have not a much more
powerful Friend than the Colonel; one
who is both able and willing to serve you. 
I dined at his Table within these two
Days, and I never heard kinder nor
warmer Expressions from the Mouth of
Man, than he made use of towards you. 
I make no Doubt you know whom I
mean.’ 
‘Upon my Honour I do not,’ answered
Booth; ‘nor did I guess that I had such a
Friend in the World as you mention.’ 
‘I am glad then,’ cries Trent, ‘that I
have the Pleasure of informing you of it.’ 
He then named the noble Peer, who hath
been already so often mentioned in this
History. 
Booth turned pale and started at his
Name. ‘I forgive you, my dear Trent,’ 

cries Booth, ‘for mentioning his Name to
me, as you are a Stranger to what hath
past between us.’ 
‘Nay, I know nothing that hath past
between you,’ answered Trent. ‘I am
sure if there is any Quarrel between you
of two Days standing, all is forgiven on
his Part.’ 
‘D&wblank;n his Forgiveness,’ said Booth. 
‘Perhaps I ought to blush at what I have
forgiven.’ 
‘You surprise me,’ cries Trent. ‘Pray
what can be the Matter?’ 
‘Indeed, my dear Trent,’ cries Booth
very gravely, ‘he would have injured me
in the tenderest Part. I know not how
to tell it you; but he would have dishonoured
me with my Wife.’ 
‘Sure you are not in Earnest,’ answered
Trent; ‘but if you are, you will pardon
me for thinking that impossible.’ 
‘Indeed,’ cries Booth, ‘I have so good
an Opinion of my Wife, as to believe it
impossible for him to succeed; but that 

he should intend me the Favour you will
not, I believe, think an Impossibility.’ 
‘Faith! not in the least,’ said Trent. 
‘Mrs. Booth is a very fine Woman; and
if I had the Honour to be her Husband,
I should not be angry with any Man for
liking her.’ 
‘But you would be angry,’ said Booth,
‘with a Man, who should make use of
Stratagems and Contrivances to seduce
her Virtue; especially if he did this under
the Colour of entertaining the highest
Friendship for yourself.’ 
‘Not at all,’ cries Trent. ‘It is Human
Nature.’ 
‘Perhaps it is,’ cries Booth; ‘but it
is Human Nature depraved, stript of all
its Worth, and Loveliness and Dignity,
and degraded down to a Level with the
vilest Brutes.’ 
‘Look ye, Booth,’ cries Trent, ‘I would
not be misunderstood. I think, when I
am talking to you, I talk to a Man of
Sense, and to an Inhabitant of this Country; 
not to one who dwells in a Land 

of Saints. If you have really such an
Opinion as you express of this noble
Lord, you have the finest Opportunity
of making a complete Fool and Bubble
of him that any Man can desire, and of
making your own Fortune at the same
Time. I do not say that your Suspicions
are groundless; for of all Men upon
Earth I know, my Lord is the greatest
Bubble to Women, though I believe he
hath had very few. And this I am confident
of, that he hath not the least
Jealousy of these Suspicions. Now, therefore,
if you will act the Part of a wise
Man, I will undertake that you shall
make your Fortune without the least Injury
to the Chastity of Mrs. Booth.’ 
‘I do not understand you, Sir,’ said
Booth. 
‘Nay,’ cries Trent, ‘if you will not
understand me I have done. I meant
only your Service; and I thought I had
known you better.’ 
Booth begged him to explain himself. ‘If
you can, said he, shew me any Way to improve
such Circumstances as I have opened
to you, you may depend on it I shall readily 

embrace it, and own my Obligations
to you.’ 
‘That is spoken like a Man,’ cries
Trent. ‘Why what is it more than this? 
Carry your Suspicions in your own Bosom. 
Let Mrs. Booth, in whose Virtue
I am sure you may be justly confident,
go to the public Places; there let her
treat my Lord with common Civility
only; I am sure he will bite. And thus
without suffering him to gain his Purpose,
you will gain yours. I know several
who have succeeded with him in
this Manner.’ 
‘I am very sorry, Sir,’ cries Booth,
‘that you are acquainted with any such
Rascals. I do assure you, rather than I
would act such a Part I would submit to
the hardest Sentence that Fortune could
pronounce against me.’ 
‘Do as you please, Sir,’ said Trent; ‘I
have only ventured to advise you as a
Friend. But do you not think your
Nicety is a little over scrupulous?’ 
‘You will excuse me, Sir,’ said Booth; 
‘but I think no Man can be too scrupulous 

in Points which concern his Honour.’ 
‘I know many Men of very nice Honour,’ 
answered Trent, ‘who have gone
much farther; and no Man, I am sure,
had ever a better Excuse for it than yourself. 
—You will forgive me, Booth, since
what I speak proceeds from my Love to
you; nay, indeed, by mentioning your
Affairs to me, which I am heartily sorry
for, you have given me a Right to speak. 
You know best what Friends you have
to depend upon; but if you have no
other Pretensions than your Merit, I
can assure you, you would fail if it
was possible you could have ten Times
more Merit than you have. And if you
love your Wife, as I am convinced you
do, what must be your Condition, in
seeing her want the Necessaries of Life?’ 
‘I know my Condition is very hard,’ 
cries Booth; ‘but I have one Comfort in
it, which I will never part with, and that
is Innocence. As to the mere Necessaries
of Life, however, it is pretty difficult to
deprive us of them; this I am sure of,
no one can want them long.’ 

‘Upon my Word, Sir,’ cries Trent,
‘I did not know you had been so great a
Philosopher; but believe me, these Matters
look much less terrible at a Distance,
than when they are actually present. You
will then find, I am afraid, that Honour
hath no more Skill in Cookery, than
Shakespeare tells us it hath in Surgery. — 
D&wblank;n me if I don't wish his Lordship
loved my Wife as well as he doth yours,
I promise you I would trust her Virtue; 
and if he should get the better of it, I
should have People of Fashion enough
to keep me in Countenance.’ 
Their second Bottle being now almost out,
Booth, without making any Answer, called
for a Bill. Trent prest very much the
drinking another Bottle; but Booth absolutely
refused, and presently afterwards they
parted, not extremely well satisfied with
each other. They appeared indeed one to
the other in disadvantageous Lights of a very
different kind. Trent concluded Booth to
be a very silly Fellow; and Booth began
to suspect that Trent was very little better
than a Scoundrel. 




Contains a Letter and other Matters. 
We will now return to Amelia, to
whom immediately upon her Husband's
Departure to walk with Mr. Trent,
a Porter brought the following Letter,
which she immediately opened and read. 

‘Madam,
The quick Dispatch which I have
given to your first Commands will, I
hope, assure you of the Diligence with
which I shall always obey every Command
that you are pleased to honour
me with. I have indeed in this trifling
Affair, acted as if my Life itself had
been at Stake, nay, I know not but it
may be so: for this insignificant Matter
you was pleased to tell me would oblige
the charming Person in whose Power is
not only my Happiness; but as I am
well persuaded my Life too. Let me
reap therefore some little Advantage 

in your Eyes as you have in mine from
this trifling Occasion: for if any Thing
could add to the Charms of which you
are Mistress; it would be perhaps that
amiable Zeal with which you maintain
the Cause of your Friend. I hope indeed
she will be my Friend and Advocate
with the most lovely of her Sex,
as I think she hath Reason, and as you
was pleased to insinuate she had been: 
Let me beseech you, Madam, let not
that dear Heart whose Tenderness is so
inclin'd to compassionate the Miseries of
others, be harden'd only against the
Sufferings which itself occasions. Let
not that Man alone have Reason to think
you cruel, who of all others would do the
most to procure your Kindness. How
often have I lived over in my Reflections,
in my Dreams those two short Minutes
we were together? but alas! how faint are
these Mimickries of the Imagination! 
What would I not give to purchase the
Reality of such another Blessing! This,
Madam, is in your Power to bestow
on the Man who hath no Wish, no Will,
no Fortune, no Heart, no Life, but
what are at your Disposal. Grant me
only the Favour to be at Lady &wblank;'s
Assembly. —You can have nothing 

to fear from indulging me with a Moment's
Sight, a Moment's Conversation. 
I will ask no more. I know your Delicacy,
and had rather die than offend
it. Could I have seen you sometimes,
I believe the Fear of offending you
would have kept my Love for ever
buried in my own Bosom; but to be
totally excluded even from the Sight
of what my Soul doats on is what I
cannot bear. It is that alone which
hath extorted the fatal Secret from me. 
Let that obtain your Forgiveness for
me. I need not sign this Letter, otherwise
than with that Impression of my
Heart which I hope it bears; and to
conclude it in any Form, no Language
hath Words of Devotion strong enough
to tell you with what Truth, what
Anguish, what Zeal, what Adoration
I love you.’ 
Amelia had just Strength to hold out to
the End, when her Trembling grew so
violent, that she dropt the Letter, and
had probably dropt herself, had not Mrs.
Atkinson come timely in to support her. 
‘Good Heavens! cries Mrs. Atkinson,
What is the Matter with you, Madam?’ 

‘I know not what is the Matter, cries
Amelia; but I have receiv'd a Letter at
last from that infamous Colonel.’ 
‘You will take my Opinion again then,
I hope, Madam, cries Mrs. Atkinson. 
But don't be so affected; the Letter
cannot eat you, or run away with you. 
—Here it lies, I see, will you give
me Leave to read it?’ 
‘Read it with all my Heart, cries
Amelia, and give me your Advice how
to act; for I am almost distracted.’ 
‘Hey day!’ says Mrs. Atkinson, ‘here is a
Piece of Parchment too—What is
that?’ In Truth this Parchment had
dropt from the Letter when Amelia first
open'd it, but her Attention was so fixed
by the Contents of the Letter itself that
she had never read the other. Mrs. Atkinson
had now opened the Parchment first, and
after a Moment's Perusal, the Fire flash'd
from her Eyes, and the Blood flush'd into
her Cheeks, and she cried out in a Rapture,
‘It is a Commission for my Husband; 
upon my Soul it is a Commission
for my Husband;’ and at the same 

Time began to jump about the Room in
a Kind of frantic Fit of Joy. 
‘What can be the Meaning of all this?’ 
cries Amelia, under the highest Degree of
Astonishment. 
‘Do not I tell you, my dear Madam,
cried she, that it is a Commission for
my Husband, and can you wonder at
my being overjoyed at what I know
will make him so happy. —And now
it is all out. The Letter is not from
the Colonel, but from that noble Lord
of whom I have told you so much. But
indeed, Madam, I have some Pardons
to ask of you. —However I know
your Goodness, and I will tell you all. 
‘You are to know then, Madam, that
I had not been in the Opera House six
Minutes before a Masque came up, and
taking me by the Hand led me aside. 
I gave the Masque my Hand, and seeing
a Lady at that Time lay hold on Capt.
Booth, I took that Opportunity of slipping
away from him; for tho' by the
Help of the squeaking Voice, and by
attempting to mimic yours, I had pretty
well disguised my own, I was still afraid, 

if I had much Conversation with your
Husband, he would discover me. I
walk'd therefore away with this Masque,
to the upper End of the farthest Room
where we sat down in a Corner together. 
He presently discover'd to me that he
took me for you; and I soon after found
out who he was; indeed, so far from
attempting to disguise himself, he spoke
in his own Voice, and in his own Person. 
He now began to make very violent
Love to me, but it was rather in
the Stile of a great Man of the present
Age, than of an Arcadian Swain. In
short, he laid his whole Fortune at my
Feet, and bade me make whatever Terms
I pleased, either for myself or for others. 
By others I suppose he meant your
Husband. This however put a Thought
into my Head, of turning the present
Occasion to Advantage. I told him,
there were two Kinds of Persons, the
Fallaciousness of whose Promises had
become proverbial in the World. 
These were Lovers and great Men. 
What Reliance then could I have
on the Promise of one who united in
himself both those Characters. That
I had seen a melancholy Instance in a
very worthy Woman of my Acquaintance, 

(meaning myself, Madam) of his
Want of Generosity. I said I knew the
Obligations that he had to this Woman,
and the Injuries he had done her, all
which I was convinced she forgave: for
that she had said the handsomest Things
in the World of him to me. He answer'd
that he thought he had not been
deficient in Generosity to this Lady,
(for I explain'd to him whom I meant)
but that indeed if she had spoke well
of him to me, (meaning yourself, Madam)
he would not fail to reward her for such
an Obligation. I then told him, she
had married a very deserving Man, who
had served long in the Army abroad as
a private Man, and who was a Serjeant
in the Guards, that I knew it was so
very easy for him to get him a Commission,
that I should not think he had
any Honour or Goodness in the World,
if he neglected it. I declar'd this Step
must be a Preliminary to any good Opinion
he must ever hope for of mine. 
I then professed the greatest Friendship
to that Lady (in which I am convinced
you will think me serious) and assured
him he would give me one of the highest
Pleasures, in letting me be the Instrument
of doing her such a Service. 

He promised me in a Moment to do
what you see, Madam, he hath since
done. And to you I shall always think
myself indebted for it.’ 
‘I know not how you are indebted to
me, cries Amelia. Indeed, I am very
glad of any good Fortune that can attend
poor Atkinson; but I wish it had been
obtain'd some other Way. Good Heavens!
what must be the Consequence of this? 
What must this Lord think of me, for listning
to his Mention of Love, nay, for making
any Terms with him? For what must
he suppose those Terms mean? Indeed,
Mrs. Atkinson, you carried it a great deal
too far. No Wonder he had the Assurance
to write to me in the Manner he
hath done. It is too plain what he conceives
of me, and who knows what he
may say to others. You may have blown
up my Reputation by your Behaviour.’ 
‘How is that possible, answer'd Mrs.
Atkinson? Is it not in my Power to clear
up all Matters? If you will but give
me Leave to make an Appointment
in your Name, I will meet him myself,
and declare the whole Secret to him.’ 

‘I will consent to no such Appointment,’ 
cries Amelia, ‘I am heartily sorry
I ever consented to practise any Deceit. 
I plainly see the Truth of what Dr. Harrison
hath often told me, that if one steps
ever so little out of the Ways of Virtue
and Innocence, we know not how we
may slide; for all the Ways of Vice are
a slippery Descent.’ 
‘That Sentiment,’ cries Mrs. Atkinson,
‘is much older than Dr. Harrison. Omne
Vitium in proclivi est.’ 
‘However new or old it is, I find it is
true,’ cries Amelia. —‘But pray, tell me
all, though I tremble to hear it.’ 
‘Indeed, my dear Friend,’ said Mrs. Atkinson,
‘you are terrified at nothing— 
Indeed, indeed, you are too great a
Prude.’ 
‘I do not know what you mean by
Prudery,’ answered Amelia. ‘I shall never
be ashamed of the strictest Regard
to Decency, to Reputation, and to that
Honour in which the dearest of all human
Creatures hath his Share. But pray
give me the Letter, there is an Expression 

in it which alarmed me when I
read it. —Pray what doth he mean by
his two short Minutes, and by purchasing
the Reality of such another Blessing?’ 
‘Indeed I know not what he means by
two Minutes,’ cries Mrs. Atkinson, ‘unless
he calls two Hours so; for we were
not together much less. —And as for
any Blessing he had—I am a Stranger
to it. Sure I hope you have a better
Opinion of me than to think I granted
him the last Favour.’ 
‘I don't know what Favours you
granted him, Madam,’ answer'd Amelia
peevishly; ‘but I am sorry you granted
him any in my Name.’ 
‘Upon my Word,’ cries Mrs. Atkinson,
‘you use me unkindly—and it is a Usage
I did not expect at your Hands; nor do
I know that I have deserved it. I am
sure I went to the Masquerade with no
other View than to oblige you; nor did
I say or do any thing there which any
Woman, who is not the most confounded
Prude upon Earth, would have started at
on a much less Occasion than what induced
me. Well, I declare upon my 

Soul then that if I was a Man, rather than
be married to a Woman who makes such
a Fuss with her Virtue, I would wish my
Wife was without such a troublesome
Companion.’ 
‘Very possibly, Madam, these may be
your Sentiments,’ cries Amelia, ‘and I
hope they are the Sentiments of your
Husband.’ 
‘I desire, Madam, cries Mrs. Atkinson,
you would not reflect on my Husband. 
He is as worthy a Man, and as brave a
Man as yours; yes, Madam, and he is
now as much a Captain.’ 
She spoke those Words with so loud a
Voice, that Atkinson, who was accidentally
going up Stairs heard them, and being
surprised at the angry Tone of his Wife's
Voice, he entered the Room, and with a
Look of much Astonishment, begged to
know what was the Matter. 
‘The Matter, my Dear,’ cries Mrs. Atkinson,
‘is, that I have got a Commission
for you, and your good old Friend here
is angry with me for getting it.’ 

‘I have not Spirits enow,’ cries Amelia,
‘to answer you as you deserve, and if I
had you are below my Anger.’ 
‘I do not know, Mrs. Booth,’ answered
the other, ‘whence this great Superiority
over me is derived; but if your Virtue
gives it you I would have you to know,
Madam, that I despise a Prude, as much
as you can do a &wblank; ’ 
‘Though you have several times,’ cries
‘Amelia, insulted me with that Word, I
scorn to give you any ill Language in Return. 
If you deserve any bad Appellation,
you know it without my telling it you.’ 
Poor Atkinson, who was more frightned
than he had ever been in his Life, did all
he could to procure Peace. He fell upon
his Knees to his Wife, and begged her to
compose herself; for indeed she seemed
to be in a most furious Rage. 
While he was in this Posture, Booth, who
had knocked so gently at the Door, for
fear of disturbing his Wife, that he had
not been heard in the Tempest, came into
the Room. The Moment Amelia saw him,
the Tears which had been gathering for 

some time, burst in a Torrent from her
Eyes, which however she endeavoured to
conceal with her Handkerchief. The Entry
of Booth turn'd all in an Instant into a silent
Picture; in which the first Figure which
struck the Eyes of the Captain was the
Serjeant on his Knees to his Wife. 
Booth immediately cried—‘What's
the Meaning of this?’—but received
no Answer. He then cast his Eyes towards
Amelia, and plainly discerning her Condition,
he ran to her, and in a very tender
Phrase begged to know what was the matter. 
To which she answered—‘Nothing,
my Dear, nothing of any Consequence. 
He replied—that he would know, and
then turned to Atkinson, and asked the
same Question.’ 
Atkinson answered, ‘Upon my Honour,
Sir, I know nothing of it. —Something
hath passed between Madam and my
Wife, but what it is I know no more
than your Honour.’ 
‘Your Wife,’ said Mrs. Atkinson, ‘hath
used me cruelly ill, Mr. Booth. If you
must be satisfied, that is the whole
Matter.’ 

Booth rapt out a great Oath, and cried
‘It is impossible, my Wife is not capable
of using any one ill.’ 
Amelia then cast herself upon her Knees
to her Husband, and cried, ‘For Heaven's
Sake, do not throw yourself into a
Passion—Some few Words have past— 
Perhaps I may be in the wrong.’ 
‘Damnation seize me if I think so,’ cries
Booth. ‘And I wish whoever hath drawn
these Tears from your Eyes, may pay it
with as many Drops of their Heart's Blood.’ 
‘You see, Madam,’ cries Mrs. Atkinson,
‘you have your Bully to take your part; 
so I suppose you will use your Triumph.’ 
Amelia made no Answer, but still kept
hold of Booth, who, in a violent Rage, cried
out,—‘My Amelia triumph over such a
Wretch as thee! —What can lead thy
Insolence to such Presumption? Serjeant, I
desire you'll take that Monster out of the
Room, or I cannot answer for myself.’ 
The Serjeant was beginning to beg his
Wife to retire, (for he perceived very
plainly, that she had, as the Phrase is, 

taken a Sip too much that Evening,) when,
with a Rage little short of Madness, she
cried out,—‘And do you tamely see me insulted
in such a manner, now that you are a
Gentleman and upon a Footing with him?’ 
‘It is lucky for us all, perhaps,’ answer'd
Booth, ‘that he is not my Equal.’ 
‘You lie, Sirrah, said Mrs. Atkinson,
he is every way your Equal; he is as good
a Gentleman as yourself, and as much an
Officer. —No, I deny what you say— 
he hath not the Spirit of a Gentleman,
nor of a Man neither—or he would not
bear to see his Wife insulted.’ 
‘Let me beg of you, my Dear,’ cries
the Serjeant ‘to go with me and compose
yourself.’ 
‘Go with thee, thou Wretch,’—cries
she, looking with the utmost Disdain upon
him,—‘no, nor ever speak to thee
more’—At which Words she burst
out of the Room; and the Serjeant, without
saying a Word, followed her.’ 
A very tender and pathetic Scene now
passed between Booth and his Wife, in 

which, when she was a little composed,
she related to him the whole Story. For
besides that it was not possible for her
otherwise to account for the Quarrel which
he had seen, Booth was now possessed of the
Letter that lay on the Floor. 
Amelia having emptied her Mind to her
Husband, and obtained his faithful Promise
that he would not resent the Affair to
my Lord, was pretty well composed, and
began to relent a little towards Mrs. Atkinson; 
but Booth was so highly incensed,
with her, that he declared he would leave
her House the next Morning; which they
both accordingly did, and, with the Assistance
of his old Friends at the Register-Office,
immediately accommodated themselves
with convenient Apartments within a
few Doors of their Friend the Doctor. 



Containing some Things worthy Observation. 
Notwithstanding the Exchange of his
Lodgings, Booth did not forget to
send an Excuse to Mr. Trent, of whose
Conversation he had taken a full Surfeit
the preceding Evening. 

That Day in his Walks Booth met with
an old Brother-Officer, who had served
with him at Gibraltar, and was on Half-pay
as well as himself. He had not indeed
had the Fortune of being broke as well
as Booth; but had gone out, as they call
it, on Half-pay as a Lieutenant, a Rank
to which he had risen in five and thirty
Years. 
This honest Gentleman, after some Discourse
with Booth, desir'd him to lend him
half a Crown; which he assured him he
would faithfully pay the next Day, when
he was to receive some Money for his
Sister. This Sister was the Widow of an
Officer that had been killed in the Sea Service; 
and she and her Brother lived together,
on their joint Stock, out of which
they maintained likewise an old Mother,
and two of the Sister's Children, the eldest
of which was about nine Years old. ‘You
must know,’ said the old Lieutenant, ‘I
have been disappointed this Morning
by an old Scoundrel, who wanted fifteen
per Cent. for advancing my Sister's Pension; 
but I have now got an honest
Fellow, who hath promised it me Tomorrow,
at ten per Cent.’ 

‘And enough too of all Conscience,’ 
cries Booth. 
‘Why indeed, I think so too,’ answer'd
the other, ‘considering it is sure to be paid
one Time or other. To say the Truth,
it is a little hard the Government doth
not pay those Pensions better; for my
Sister's hath been due almost these two
Years; that is my Way of thinking.’ 
Booth answered he was ashamed to refuse
him such a Sum; but ‘Upon my
Soul,’ said he, ‘I have not a single Half-penny
in my Pocket; for I am in a worse
Condition if possible than yourself; for I
have lost all my Money, and what is
worse, I owe Mr. Trent, whom you remember
at Gibraltar, 50l.’ 
‘Remember him! yes, d&wblank;n him, I
remember him very well,’ cries the old
Gentleman, ‘though he will not remember
me. He is grown so great now, that
he will not speak to his old Acquaintance; 
and yet I should be ashamed of
myself to be great in such a Manner.’ 
‘What Manner do you mean?’ cries
Booth a little eagerly. 

‘Why by pimping,’ answered the other,
‘He is Pimp in ordinary to my Lord &wblank; 
who keeps his Family; or how the Devil
he lives else I don't know; for his Place
is not worth 300l. a Year, and he and
his Wife spend a Thousand at least. But
she keeps an Assembly, which, I believe,
if you was to call a Bawdy-House, you
would not miss-name it. But d&wblank;n me
if I had not rather be an honest Man,
and walk on Foot, with Holes in my
Shoes, as I do now, or go without a Dinner,
as I and all my Family will to Day,
than ride in a Chariot, and feast by such
Means. I am honest Bob Bound, and
always will be; that's my Way of thinking; 
and there's no Man shall call me
otherwise; for if he doth, I will knock
him down for a lying Rascal; that is
my Way of thinking.’ 
‘And a very good Way of thinking
too,’ cries Booth. ‘However you shall
not want a Dinner to Day; for if you
will go home with me, I will lend you
a Crown with all my Heart.’ 
‘Lookee,’ said the old Man, ‘if it be
anywise inconvenient to you, I will not
have it; for I will never rob another 

Man of his Dinner, to eat myself— 
that is my Way of thinking.’ 
‘Pooh,’ said Booth, ‘never mention
such a Trifle twice between you and me. 
Besides you say you can pay it me Tomorrow; 
and I promise you that will be
the same Thing.’ 
They then walked together to Booth's
Lodgings, where Booth, from Amelia's Pocket,
gave his Friend double the little Sum
he had asked. Upon which the old Gentleman
shook him heartily by the Hand,
and repeating his Intention of paying him
the next Day, made the best of his Way to
a Butcher's, whence he carried off a Leg
of Mutton to a Family that had lately
kept Lent without any religious Merit. 
When he was gone, Amelia asked her
Husband who that old Gentleman was. 
Booth answered, He was one of the Scandals
of his Country. That the Duke of Marlborough
had about thirty Years before made
him an Ensign from a private Man, for very
particular Merit, and that he had not long
since gone out of the Army with a broken
Heart, upon having several Boys put over
his Head. He then gave her an Account 

of his Family, which he had heard from
the old Gentleman in their Way to his
House, and with which we have already
in a concise Manner acquainted the Reader. 
‘Good Heavens!’ cries Amelia, ‘what
are our great Men made of! Are they
in Reality a distinct Species from the rest
of Mankind? Are they born without
Hearts?’ 
‘One would indeed sometimes,’ cries
Booth, ‘be inclined to think so. In truth
they have no perfect Idea of those common
Distresses of Mankind which are
far removed from their own Sphere. 
Compassion, if thoroughly examined,
will, I believe, appear to be the Fellow-feeling
only of Men of the same Rank
and Degree of Life for one another, on
account of the Evils to which they themselves
are liable. Our Sensations are, I
am afraid, very cold towards those who
are at a great Distance from us, and
whose Calamities can consequently never
reach us.’ 
‘I remember,’ cries Amelia, ‘a Sentiment
of Dr. Harrison's, which he told
me was in some Latin Book; I am a 

Man myself, and my Heart is interested in
whatever can befal the rest of Mankind. 
That is the Sentiment of a good Man,
and whoever thinks otherwise is a bad
one.’ 
‘I have often told you, my dear Emily,’ 
cries Booth, ‘that all Men, as well the
best as the worst, act alike from the
Principle of Self-Love. Where Benevolence
therefore is the uppermost Passion,
Self-Love directs you to gratify it
by doing good, and by relieving the
Distresses of others; for they are then
in Reality your own. But where Ambition,
Avarice, Pride, or any other Passion
governs the Man, and keeps his
Benevolence down, the Miseries of all
other Men affect him no more than they
would a Stock or a Stone. And thus
the Man and his Statue have often the
same Degree of Feeling or Compassion.’ 
‘I have often wished, my dear,’ cries
Amelia, ‘to hear you converse with Dr.
Harrison on this Subject; for I am sure
he would convince you, though I can't,
that there are really such Things as Religion
and Virtue.’ 

This was not the first Hint of this Kind
which Amelia had given; for she sometimes
apprehended from his Discourse that
he was little better than an Atheist. A
Consideration which did not diminish her
Affection for him; but gave her great Uneasiness. 
On all such Occasions Booth immediately
turned the Discourse to some other
Subject; for tho' he had in other Points a
great Opinion of his Wife's Capacity; yet as
a Divine or a Philosopher he did not hold
her in a very respectable Light, nor did
he lay any great Stress on her Sentiments
in such Matters. He now therefore gave
a speedy Turn to the Conversation, and
began to talk of Affairs below the Dignity
of this History. 