




Which is writ only with a View to instruct
our Readers, that Whist is a
Game very much in Fashion. 
David's next Scheme was, to
converse amongst People in High
Life, and try if their Minds were
as refined, as the Education and Opportunities
they had of improving themselves,
gave him hopes of. But then, as he had
never lived at that end of the Town before,
kept no Equipage, and was besides
a very modest Man, he was under some
difficulty how to get Introduction to Persons
of Fashion. Mr. Spatter told him, 

“he need be in no pain on that account,
for that he frequented all the
Assemblies, and kept the best Company
in Town, and he would carry
him wherever he went; he had nothing
to do, but to get a fine Coat,
a well-powdered Wig, and a Whist-Book,
and he would soon be invited to
more Routs than he would be able to
go to.” “And, pray Sir, said David,
What do you mean by a Whist-Book? 
It is a Game I have often played, to
pass away a Winter-Evening, but I
don't find any Necessity of a Book to
learn it.” “Why, really Sir, replied
Spatter, I cannot tell what use it is of,
but I know it is a Fashion to have it,
and no one is qualified for the Conversation
in Vogue without it. Though
I can't but say, I have known several
People, especially among the Ladies,
who used to play tolerably well; but
since they have set themselves to learn
by Book, are so puzzled, they cannot
tell how to play a Card. For as a
Traveller, who is ignorant of the
Country he passes through, is the most
perplexed where he finds the greatest
variety of Roads; so a weak Head is
the most distracted, and the least able 

to pursue any point in view, where
it endeavours to get many Rules, and
comprehend various Things at once. 
“But as to the Routs, I can give
you no other account of them, than
that it is the genteel Name for the Assemblies
that meet at private Houses
to win, or lose Money at Whist. The
Method pursued to gather these Companies
together is, that the Lady of the
House where the Rout is to be held, a
Fortnight or three Weeks before the
intended Day, dispatches a Messenger
to every Person designed to be there,
with a few magick Words properly
placed on a Card, which infallibly brings
every one at the appointed Time: but
if by chance, notwithstanding the Care
that is taken of sending so long beforehand,
two of these Cards should happen
to interfere, and the same Person be
under a necessity of being at two Places
at once; the best Expedient to be
found out is, to play a Rubbers at one
place, and then drive their Horses to
death, to get to the other time enough
not to disappoint their Friends. For
you must know, every Lady looks on
herself as in the highest Distress, who 

has not as many Tables at her House
as any of her Acquaintance.” But says
David, “I don't see how this will at all
promote my Scheme; for by going
amongst People, who place their whole
Happiness in Gaming, and where there
is no sort of Conversation, how is it
possible I should come at their Sentiments,
or enter into their Characters.” 
“Indeed, Sir, replied the other, you was
never more mistaken in your Life, for
People's Minds, and the Bent of their
Inclination, is no where so much discovered
as at a Gaming-Table: for in
Conversation, the real Thoughts are
often disguised; but when the Passions
are actuated, the Mask is thrown off,
and Nature appears as she is. I could
carry you into several Companies, where
you should see very pretty young Women,
whose Features are of such exact
Proportion, and in whose Countenances
is displayed such a delightful Harmony,
as you would think was the strongest
Indication, that every Thought within
was Peace and Gentleness, and that
their Breasts were all Softness, and
Good-nature. Yet but follow them
to one of these Assemblies, and in half
an hour's time you shall see all their 

Beauty vanish; those Features, with
which you were so charmed before, all
distorted, and in confusion; and that
Harmony of Countenance, which could
never be enough admired, converted
into an Eagerness and Fierceness,
which plainly prove the whole Soul to
be discomposed, and filled with Tumult
and Anxiety; and all this perhaps only
from a desire of getting Jewels something
finer than they could otherwise
procure, and in order to surpass some
Lady who had just bought a new Set. 
Besides, I can give you the Character of
most of the People where we shall go,
and that will be an Entertainment to
us every Night, at our return home.” 
DAVID thanked him for his Offer; 
and they agreed to set out every Day to
different Houses, in order to make Observations. 
The first Assembly they went
to, there were ten Tables at Whist, and
at each of them the Competitors seemed
to lay as great a stress on either their
Victory, or Defeat, as if the whole Happiness
of their Lives depended on it. 
DAVID walked from one to the other,
to make what Observations he could; but 

he found they were all alike. Joy sparkled
in the Eyes of all the Conquerors, and
black Despair seemed to surround all the
Vanquished. Those very People, who,
before they sat down to play, conversed
with each other in a strain so polite and
well-bred, that an unexperienced Man
would have thought the greatest Pleasure
they could have had, would have been in
serving each other, were in a moment
turned into Enemies, and the winning of
a Guinea, or perhaps five, (according to
the Sum played for) was the only Idea
that possessed the Minds of a whole Company
of People, none of whom were
in any manner of want of it. 
This was a melancholy Prospect for
poor David; for nothing could be a
stronger Proof of the selfish and mercenary
Tempers of Mankind, than to see
those People, whom Fortune had placed in
Affluence, as desirous of gaining from
each other, as if they really could not
have had Necessaries without it. 
The two Gentlemen staid till they
were heartily weary, and then retired to
spend the rest of the Evening together at
a Tavern; where the whole Conversation 

turned on what they had seen at the
Assembly. David asked his Companion,
if this was the manner in which People,
who have it in their power to spend their
Time as they pleased, choose to employ
it. “Yes, Sir, answered Mr. Spatter,
I assure you, I have very few Acquaintance
at this end of the Town, who
seem to be born for any other purpose
but to play at Whist, or who have any
use for more Understanding than what
serves to that End.” He then run
through the Characters of the whole Company,
and at the finishing of every one,
uttered a Sentence with some Vehemence,
(which was a Manner peculiar to himself)
calling them either Fools or Knaves, but as
he had a great deal of Wit, he did this in
so entertaining a way, that David could
not help laughing sometimes, though he
checked himself for it; thinking the Faults
or Follies of Mankind were not the proper
Objects of Mirth. 
The next Morning Mr. Spatter carried
him to the Toilette of one of the Ladies,
who was of the Whist-Party the Night
before, where great part of the Company
were met. There was not one single Syllable
spoke of any thing but Cards; the 

whole Scene of the foregoing Night was
played over again, who lost,—or won;— 
who played well,—or ill: —In short,
there was nothing talked of, that can be
either remembered, or repeated. 
DAVID led this Life for about a
Week, in the Morning at Toilettes, the
Evening at Cards, and at Night with Mr.
Spatter, who constantly pulled to pieces,
ridiculed, and abused all the People they
had been with the Day before. He told
him Stories of Ladies, who were married
by Men infinitely their Superiors, who
raised their Fortunes, indulged them in
every thing they could wish, were wholly
taken up in contemplating their Charms,
and yet were neglected and slighted by
them, who would abandon every thing
that can be thought most valuable, rather
than lose one Evening playing at their
darling Whist. 
DAVID was soon tired of this manner
of Life, in which he saw no hopes of
finding what he was in Search of, and in
which there was no Variety, for the
Desire of winning seemed to be the only
thing thought on by every body; he observed
to his Companion here and there a 

Person who played quite carelessly, and
did not appear to trouble themselves whether
they won or lost. These Mr. Spatter
told him, were a sort of People, who
had no pleasure in Life, but in being with
People of Quality, and in telling their Acquaintance,
they were such a Night at the
Dutchess of &wblank; another time at the
Countess of &wblank; and although they do
not love play themselves, yet as they find
it the easiest Passport into that Company
where their whole Happiness is center'd,
they think it a small Price to pay, for
what they esteem so valuable. But the
worst of it is, some of them cannot afford
to play, but sacrifice that Fortune to nothing
but the Vanity of appearing with
the Great, which would procure them
every thing essentially necessary in their
own Sphere of Life. 
Thus was David again disappointed; 
for he had entertain'd some Hopes, that
those few People in whom he had seen a
Calmness at Play, were disinterested, and
had that contempt for Money, which he
esteemed necessary to make a good Character; 
but when he found it arose from
so mean a Vanity, he could not help thinking
them the most despicable of all Mortals. 

“I do assure you, says Spatter, I
have known People spend their whole
time in the most servile Compliances,
for no other Reason, but to have the
Words Lordship, and Ladyship, often
in their Mouths, and who measure their
Happiness and Misery every Night, by
the number of People of Quality they
had spoke to that Day. But as your
Curiosity seems to be fully satisfied
with what you have seen of the Whist-players,
I will carry you to-morrow
into a Set of Company, who have an
utter Contempt for Cards, and whose
whole Pleasure is in Conversation.” 
DAVID thanked him, approved of
what he said, and they separated that
Night with a Resolution of changing the
Scene next Day. And I believe my Reader,
as well as myself, is heartily glad to
quit a Subject so extremely barren of
Matter, as that of Gaming; and into
which I would not have entered at all,
but that it would have been excluding my
Hero from one of the chief Scenes to be
viewed at present in this great Town. 




Which contains a Conversation, in
which is proved, how high Taste
may be carried by People who have
fixed Resolutions of being Criticks. 
When David was alone, he began
to reflect with himself, what
could be the meaning that Mr. Spatter
seemed to take such a Delight in abusing
People; and yet as he observed, no one
was more willing to oblige any Person,
who stood in need of his Assistance; he
concluded that he must be good at the
Bottom, and that perhaps it was only his
Love of Mankind, which made him have
such a Hatred and Detestation of their
Vices, as caused him to be eager in reproaching
them; he therefore resolved to
go on with him, till he knew more of his
Disposition. 
The next Day they went to visit a
Lady, who was reputed to have a great
deal of Wit, and was so generous as to 

let all her Acquaintance partake of it,
by omitting no Opportunity of displaying
it. There they found assembled a large
Company of Ladies, and two or three
Gentlemen; they were all busy in Discourse,
but they rose up, paid the usual
Compliments, and then proceeded as
follows: 
First Lady. “Indeed, Madam, I
think you are quite in the right, as to
your Opinion of Othello; for nothing
provokes me so much, as to see Fools
pity a Fellow, who could murder his
Wife. For my part, I cannot help
having some Compassion for her, though
she does not deserve it, because she
was such a Fool as to marry a filthy
Black. Pray, did you ever hear any
thing like what my Lady True-wit
said the other Night, that the Part of
the Play which chiefly affected her,
was, what that odious Wretch must
feel, when he found out that Desdemona
was innocent; as if he could suffer too
much, after being guilty of so barbarous
an Action.” 
Second Lady. “Indeed, I am not at
all surprized at any thing that Lady 

True-wit says; for I have heard her
assert the most preposterous things in
the World: Nay, she affirms, a Man
may be very fond of a Woman, notwithstanding
he is jealous of her, and
dares suspect her Virtue.” 
Third Lady. “That Lady once said,
that one of the most beautiful Incidents
in all King Lear, was the Impertinence
of his Daughter's Servant,
being the first Thing that made him
uneasy; and after that, I think one
can wonder at nothing: For certainly
it was a great Oversight in the Poet,
when he was writing of a King, to
take notice of the Behaviour of such
vulgar Wretches; as if what they did
was any thing to the purpose. But some
People are very fond of turning the
greatest Faults into Beauties, that they
may be thought to have found out
something extraordinary: And then
they must admire every thing in Shakespeare,
as they think to prove their
own Judgment: But for my part, I
am not afraid to give my Opinion
freely of the greatest Men that ever
wrote.” 

Fourth Lady. “There is nothing so
surprizing to me, as the Absurdity of
almost every body I meet with; they
can't even laugh or cry in the right
place. Perhaps it will be hardly believed,
but I really saw People in the
Boxes last Night, at the Tragedy of
Cato, set with dry Eyes, and show no
kind of Emotion, when that great
Man fell on his Sword; nor was it
at all owing to any Firmness of Mind,
that made them incapable of crying
neither, for that I should have admired. 
But I have known those very People
shed tears at George Barnwell.” 
A good many Ladies speak at one time. 
“Oh intolerable! cry for an odious
Apprentice-Boy, who murdered his Uncle,
at the Instigation too of a common
Woman, and yet be unmoved, when
even Cato bled for his Country.” 
Old Lady. “That is no Wonder, I
assure you Ladies, for I once heard
my Lady Know-all, positively affirm
George Barnwell to be one of the best
Things that ever was wrote; for that
Nature is Nature in whatever Station 

it is placed: And that she could be as
much affected with the Distress of a
Man in low Life, as if he was a Lord
or a Duke. And what is yet more
amazing, is, that the Time she chuses
to weep most, is just as he has killed
the Man who prays for him in the
Agonies of Death: And then, only
because he whines over him, and
seems sensible of what he has done,
she must shed tears for a Wretch,
whom every body of either Sense or
Goodness, would wish to crush, and
make ten times more miserable than
he is.” 
A Lady who had been silent, and was a
particular Friend of Lady Know-all's,
speaks. “Indeed that Lady is the most
affected Creature that I ever knew, she
and Lady True-wit think no one can
equal them; they have taken a fancy
to set up the Author of George Barnwell
for a Writer, tho' certainly he
writes the worst Language in the
World: There is a little Thing of his,
called, The Fatal Curiosity, which, for
my part, I know not what to make
of; and they run about crying it up,
as if Shakespeare himself might have 

wrote it. Certainly that Fellow must
be something very low, for his Distresses
always arise from Poverty; and
then he brings his wicked Wretches,
who are to be tempted for Money to
some monstrous Action, which he
would have his Audience pity them
for.” 
She would have talked on more in
this Strain, but was interrupted by another
Lady, who assured the Company,
she had the most ridiculous Thing to tell
them of the two Ladies they were talking
of, in the World: “For, (continued
she) I was once at Don Sebastian with
them, which is a favourite Play of
their's; and they make a great Noise
about the Scene between Dorax and
Sebastian, in the fourth Act. I observed
them more than the Play, to
see in what manner they behaved: 
And what do you think they did? 
Why truly, all the time the Two
Friends were quarrelling, they sat, indeed,
with great Attention, altho' they
were quite calm; but the Moment
they were reconciled, and embraced
each other, they both burst into a
Flood of Tears, which they seemed 

unable to restrain. They certainly must
have something very odd in their Heads,
and the Author is very much obliged
to them, for grieving most when his
Hero, Don Sebastian, had most Reason
to be pleased, in finding a true Friend
in the Man he thought his Enemy.” 
Here the whole Company fell into a
violent Fit of Laughter, and the Word
ridiculous was the only Sound heard for
some time; and then they fell back again
to their Discourse on Authors, in which
they were all so desirous to prove their
own Judgment, that they would not give
one another leave to speak. 
And now, Reader, if ever you have lived
in the Country, and heard the Cackling of
Geese, or the Gobbling of Turkeys, you
may have an Idea something adequate to
this Scene; but if the Town has been
mostly your Place of Abode, and you are
a Stranger to every rural Scene, what will
give you the best Idea of this Conversation
is the'Change at Noon, where every
one has a particular Business of his own,
but a Spectator would find it a very difficult
matter to comprehend any thing
distinctly. Addison, Prior, Otway, Congreve, 

Dryden, Pope, Shakespeare, Tom
Durfey, &c. &c. &c. were Names all
heard between whiles, tho' no one could
tell who spoke them, or whether they
were mention'd with Approbation or Dislike. 
The words Genius,—and no Genius; 
—Invention,––Poetry,—fine Things,–– 
bad Language,—no Style,—charming Writing,
—Imagery,—and Diction, with many
more Expressions which swim on the Surface
of Criticism, seem'd to have been caught
by those Fishers for the Reputation of Wit,
tho' they were intirely ignorant what Use
to make of them, or how to apply them
properly: But as soon as the Noise grew
loud, and the whole Company were engaged
in admiring their own Sentiments
so much, that they observed nothing else,
David made a Sign to his Companion,
and they left the Room, and went home; 
but were, for some time, in the Condition
of Men just escaped from a Shipwreck,
who tho' they rejoice in their Safety, yet
is there such an Impression left on them
by the Bellowing of the Waves, the
Cursing and Swearing of some of the Sailors,
the Crying and Praying of others,
with the Roaring of the Winds, that it is
some time before they can come to their
Senses. But as soon as David could recover 

himself enough to speak coherently,
he told the Gentleman, “He had now
shewn him what had surpriz'd him
more than any thing he ever saw before; 
for he could comprehend what it was
People pursued who spent their time
in Gaming, but he could not find out
what were the Schemes of this last Set
of Company, nor what could possibly
make so many People eager about
nothing; for what was it to them who
writ best or worst, or how could they
make any Dispute about it, since the
only Way of writing well was to draw
all the Characters from Nature, and to
affect the Passions in such a manner, as
that the Distresses of the Good should
move Compassion, and the Amiableness
of their Actions incite Men to
imitate them; and the Vices of the Bad
stir up Indignation and Rage, and
make Men fly their Foot-steps: That
this was the only kind of Writing useful
to Mankind, tho' there might be
Embellishments, and Flights of Imagination,
to amuse and divert the Reader.” 
His Companion was quite peevish with
him, (which was no hard matter for him
to be) to find him always going on with
his Goodness,––Usefulness,––and Morality. –– 

However, at last he fell a-laughing, and
told him, “He was much mistaken, if
he thought any of them troubled their
Heads at all about the Authors, or ever
took the least Pleasure in reading them; 
nay, half of them had not read the
Books they talk'd of; but they are a
Set of People, who place their whole
Happiness in the Reputation of Wit
and Sense, and consequently all their
Conversation turns on what they think
will establish that Character; and they
are the most inveterate Enemies to any
Person they imagine has more Reputation
that way than themselves.” 
David had no longer Patience, but
cry'd out, “What Hopes can I ever
have of meeting with a Man who deserves
my Esteem, if Mankind can be
so furious against each other, for things
which are of no manner of Consequence,
and which are only to be
valued according to the Use that is
made of them, while they despise what
is in every one's Power of attaining; 
namely, acting with Honour and Integrity. 
But I observed one young Lady who
shew'd, by her Silence, the Contempt
for the Company they deserved: Pray, 

Sir, do you know her? I should be
glad to be acquainted with her.” “I
know no more of her, replied Spatter,
than that she is Daughter to one of the
Ladies who was there; but her Silence
is no Proof of any thing but that she is
unmarried; for you must know, that
it is reckon'd a very ill-bred thing for
Women to say any more than just to
answer the Questions ask'd them, while
they are single. I cannot tell the Meaning
of it, unless it is a Plot laid by Parents
to make their Daughters willing
to accept any Match they provide for
them, that they may have the Privilege
of speaking. But, if you are not tired
of Criticism, I will carry you To-morrow
where you shall hear some of a
quite different Kind; for there are
three Sorts of Criticks, the one I have
already shewn you, who arrogantly set
up their own Opinions, tho' they know
nothing, and would be asham'd of
taking any thing from another; and as
they cannot say any thing to engage
any one's Attention, make a great
Noise, and stun those they cannot confute. 
The second Sort are a Degree
above them; have fix'd it in their
Minds it is necessary for them to know 

every thing; but, as they have something
more Sense than the former, they
find out that they have no Opinions of
their own, and therefore make it their
whole Study to get into Company with
People of real Understanding, and to
pick up every thing that is said. And
they are so generous of their Treasure,
they vent it in every Company they go
into, without any Distinction, by which
means they impose on the Undiscerning,
and make them wonder at their
Knowledge and Judgment; but there
is an Aukwardness and Want of Propriety
in their Way of Speaking,
that soon discovers them to the discerning
Eye: for borrow'd Wit becomes
the Mouth as ill as borrow'd
Clothes the Body; and whoever has
no delicate Sentiments, nor refined
Thoughts of his own, makes as ill a
Figure in speaking them, as the most
aukward Country Girl could do, dress'd
up in all the Finery of a Court Lady. 
I remember a Man of that Sort, whom
I once heard run through most of the
famous Authors, without dropping one
Word that was not right; and yet
there was something so preposterous
when it came from him, something so 

like a School-boy saying his Lesson, it
struck me with Laughter and Contempt,
rather than that Admiration he
proposed to gain by it; but he has
stuck himself on to a Man of Sense,
whom he takes so much Pains to oblige,
that, as he is not ill-natured, he does
not know how to throw him off; 
by which Means, he has laboriously
gather'd together all he says. 
I'll say no more of him; he will be
To-morrow Evening where I propose
to carry you; and, I dare say, you will
be very well entertain'd with him; only
mention Books, and he will immediately
display his Learning.” David
said, “He should be glad to accompany
him.” On which they separated for
that Evening. 




Which proves Memory to be the only
Qualification necessary to make a
modern Critick. 
The next Night they went to a Tavern,
where there were three Gentlemen
whom Spatter had promised to
meet; and as the Ceremony is not so difficult
to introduce Men to each other as
Women, they soon fell into a Freedom of
Conversation. David remember'd his
Cue, and began to talk of Authors; on
which the Gentleman, whom Spatter had
mention'd, presently began as follows: 
“Homer undoubtedly had the greatest
Genius of any Man who ever writ: 
There is such a Luxuriancy of Fancy,–– 
such a Knowledge of Nature,–––such a
Penetration into the inmost Recesses of
all the Passions of Human Kind display'd
in his Works, as none can
equal, and few dare imitate. Virgil
certainly is the most correct Writer 

that ever was; but then his Invention
is not so fruitful, his Poem is more of
the narrative Kind, and his Characters
are not so much alive as those of his
great Master. Milton, who imitates
the other two, I think, excels the latter,
tho' he does not come up to
the former: he certainly can never
be enough admired; for nothing can
at once be more the Object of Wonder
and Delight than his Paradise Lost. 
Shakespeare, whose Name is immortal,
had an Imagination which had the
Power of Creation, a Genius which
could form new Beings, and make a
Language proper for them. Ben Johnson,
who writ at the same time, had a
vast deal of true Humour in his Comedies,
and very fine Writing in his Tragedies; 
but then he is a laborious Writer,
a great many of those beautiful
Speeches in Sejanus and Catiline are
Translations from the Classicks, and
he can by no means be admitted into
any Competition with Shakespeare. But
I think any Comparison between them
ridiculous; for what Mr. Addison says
of Homer and Virgil, That reading the
Iliad is like travelling through a Country
uninhabited, where the Fancy is entertain'd 

with a thousand savage Prospects
of vast Desarts,—wide uncultivated
Marshes,––huge Forests,––mis-shapen Rocks
and Precipices: —On the contrary, the
Æneid is like a well-order'd Garden,
where it is impossible to find out any Part
unadorn'd, or to cast our Eyes upon a
single Spot that does not produce some
beautiful Plant or Flower: is equally
applicable to Shakespeare and Ben Johnson; 
so that to say that the one or the
other writes best, is like saying of a
Wilderness, that it is not a regular
Garden; or, of a regular Garden, that
it does not run out into that Wildness
which raises the Imagination, and is to
be found in Places where only the Hand
of Nature is to be seen. In my Opinion,
the same thing will hold as to
Corneille and Racine: Corneille is the
French Shakespeare, and Racine their
Ben Johnson. The Genius of Corneille,
like a fiery Courser, is hard to be restrain'd; 
while Racine goes on in a majestick
Pace, and never turns out of the
Way, either to the Right or Left. The
Smoothness of Waller's Verse resembles
a gentle cooling Stream, which
gives Pleasure, and yet keeps the Mind
in Calmness and Serenity; while Dryden's 

Genius is like a rapid River, ready
to over-leap its Bounds; which we view
with Admiration, and find, while we
are reading him, our Fancy heighten'd
to rove thro' all the various Labyrinths
of the human Mind. It is a thousand
pities he should ever have been forced
to write for Money; for who that has
read his Guiscarda and Sigismonda, could
ever have thought he could have pen'd
some other Things that go in his Name? 
Prior's Excellence lay in telling of
Stories: And Cowley had a great deal
of Wit; but his Verse is something
hobbling. His pindarick Odes have
some very fine Thoughts in them, altho'
I think, in the main, not much to
be admired; for it's my Opinion, that
manner of Writing is peculiar to Pindar
himself; and the Pretence to imitate
him is, as if a Dwarf should undertake
to step over wide Rivers, and
stride at once over Mountains, because
he has seen a Giant do it.” 
Here our Gentleman's Breath began
to fail him, for he had utter'd all this as
fast as he could speak, as if he was afraid
he should lose his Thread, and forget all
that was to come. When he had ceased,
his Eyes rolled with more than usual 

Quickness, to view the Applause he expected,
and thought he so well deserved,
and he look'd bewilder'd in his own Eloquence. 
The two Gentlemen who were with
him seem'd struck with Amazement; 
and yet there was a Mixture of Uneasiness
in their Countenances, which
plainly proved they were sorry they had
not spoke every Word he had said. David
stared to hear so much good Sense
thrown away, only by being convey'd
thro' a Channel not made by Nature for
that Purpose; whilst his Companion diverted
himself with the Thoughts how
ridiculous a Figure the Man made, at the
same time that he fancied he was the Object
of Admiration. They staid at the
Tavern but a short time, and concluded
the Evening at home, as usual, with Spatter's
Animadversions on the Company they
had just left. David said, “He thought
there was no great Harm in this Sort of
Vanity; for if a Man could make
himself happy by imagining himself six
Foot tall, tho' he was but three, it certainly
would be ill-natured in any one
to take that Happiness from him.” 
Spatter smiled, and said, “He believed
he at present spoke without Consideration; 

for nothing hurts a Man or his
Acquaintance more than his possessing
himself with the Thoughts he is any
thing he is not. If, indeed, a short
Man would think himself tall, without
being actuated by that Fancy, there
would be no great matter in it; but if
that Whim carries him to be continually
endeavouring at Things out of his
Reach, it probably will make him pull
them down on his own Head, and
those of all his Companions; and if
the looking as if you did not believe
he is quite so tall, as he is resolved you
shall think him, will turn him from
being your Friend into your most inveterate
Enemy, then it becomes hurtful: 
And I never yet knew a Man
who did not hate the Person, who
seemed not to have the same Opinion
of him as he had of himself; and, as
that very seldom happens, I believe it
is one of the chief Causes of the Malignity
Mankind have against one another. 
If a Man who is mad, and
has taken it into his head he is a King,
will content himself with mock Diadems,
and the tawdry Robes of Honour
he can come at, in some it will
excite Laughter, and in others Pity, 

according to the different sorts of Men; 
but if he is afraid that others don't pay
him the Respect due to the Station, his
own wild Brain has placed him in,
and for that reason carries Daggers and
Poison under his fancied royal Robes,
to murder every body he meets, he
will become the Pest of Society; and,
in their own Defence, Men are obliged
to confine him. The three Fellows
we were with to-night, have an Aversion
to every body who don't seem to
think them as wise as they think themselves; 
and, as they have some reason
to believe that does not often happen,
there are but very few People to whom
they would not willingly do any Injury
in their power: Whereas, if they
would be contented with being as non-sensical
dull Blockheads as Nature made
them, they might pass through the
World without doing any Mischief; 
and perhaps, as they have Money,
they might sometimes do a good Action.” 
DAVID said, he had convinced him he
was mistaken, and he was always more
ashamed to persist in the wrong than to own
his having been so. His Companion asked
him if he would spend the next day in 

relaxing his Mind, by being continually in
what is called Company, and conversing
with a Set of No-bodies. But I shall defer
the Adventures of the next day to another
Chapter. 



In which is seen the negative Description
most proper to set forth the No
Qualities of a great number of Creatures,
who strut about on the Face
of the Earth. 
The next Morning David asked
Spatter, what it was he meant by
his No-bodies. He told him he meant a
number of Figures of Men, whom he
knew not how to give any other Denomination
to: But if he would saunter with
him from Coffee-house to Coffee-house,
and into St. James's Park, which are
Places they much haunt, he would shew
him great numbers of them: He need not
be afraid of them, for altho' there was no
Good in them, yet were they perfectly inoffensive; 
they would talk for ever, and say
nothing; were always in motion, and yet 

could not properly be said ever to act. 
They have neither Wit nor Sense of any
kind; and yet, as they have no Passions,
they are seldom guilty of so many
Indiscretions as other Men; the only
thing they can be said to have, is Pride,
and the only way to find that out, is by a
Strut in their Gait, something resembling
that of the Peacocks, which shews they are
conscious (if they can be said to have any
Consciousness) of their own Dignity; and
like the Peacock, their Vanity is all owing
to their find Feathers: for they are
generally adorned with all the Art imaginable. 
But sometimes by Accident in Life,
such as having extravagant Fathers, who
took no Care to provide for them, and
they cannot do any thing for themselves,
they have it not in their power to come
at these Ornaments; and then, instead of
the strutting Gait, and erect Mien, they
hang their Heads, like Birds in moulting-time,
and mope and pine themselves to
death, and nothing can recover them to
that Gaiety which is natural to them, unless
any one will have Compassion enough
to dress them in some of those fine things,
which are so very necessary to them, that
they seem to be Part of their very Essence. 
I have known some of them, from the 

most desperate State of ill Health, occasioned
by the want of a few Yards of
Lace, when they have attained them by
half starving themselves for a considerable
time, immediately recover, chirp, and
perch about on all their usual Haunts,
like little warbling Birds at the Return of
Spring. 
But come, if you will go with me,
you may see them; for now is the Time
for them to peep abroad, which they generally
do about Noon. 
DAVID and Spatter spent all that
Day in rambling about with these Nobodies; 
for as Spatter knew their Walks,
they soon met whole Clusters of them. 
David found them just what his Companion
had described them: And when
they came home at Night, he said, “it
had been the most agreeable Day he
had spent a great while; for what hurt
him, was conversing with mischievous
Animals, but these Creatures appeared
quite harmless, and they certainly
were created for some wise Purpose. 
They might, perhaps, like Ciphers
in an Account, be of great Use
in the whole, tho' it was not to be 

found out by the narrow Sight of ignorant
Mortals.” Spatter made no
other Answer, but speaking the word
Fools with some Earnestness, a Monosyllable
he always chose to pronounce before
he went to Bed; insomuch, that it
was thought by some who knew him, he
could not sleep without it. After this,
they both retired to Rest. 
The next Day they accidentally met
at a Coffee-house, an Acquaintance of
Spatter's, who behaved with that extreme
Civility and Good-humour to every thing
around him, that David took a great
fancy to him, and resolved to spend the
Day with him. They went all to a Tavern
to Dinner, and there passed a Scene,
which would have been no ill Entertainment
to the true Lovers of Ridicule: 
The Conversation turned mostly on the
Characters of the Men best known about
Town. Mr. Varnish, for that was this
Gentleman's Name, found something
that was praise-worthy in every body that
was mentioned; he dropped all their
Faults, and talked of nothing but their
good Qualities, sought out good Motives
for every Action that had any Appearance
of bad, he turned Extravagance 

into Generosity, Avarice into Prudence,
and so on, through the whole Catalogue
of Virtues and Vices: And when he was
pushed so home on any Person's Faults,
that he could not intirely justify them, he
would only say, “indeed, they were not
what he could wish them; however,
he was sure they had some Good in
them.” On the contrary, Spatter fell
to cutting up every fresh Person that was
brought on the Carpet, without any
Mercy. He loaded them with Blemishes,
was silent on all their Perfections, imputed
good Actions to bad Motives; 
looked through the Magnifying-Glass on
all their Defects, and through the other
end of the Perspective, on every thing
that was commendable in them: And
quite opposite to Mr. Varnish, he always
spoke in the Affirmative when he was
condemning, and in the Negative when
he was forced, in spite of himself, to allow
the unfortunate Wretch, whom he was so
horribly mauling, any good Qualities. 
If the Reader has a mind to have a
lively Idea of this Scene, let him imagine
to himself, a Contention between a Painter,
who is finishing his favourite Piece,
and a Man who places his Delight in 

throwing Dirt; as fast as the one employs
his Art to make it beautiful, and hide its
Blemishes, the other comes with Shoals
of Dirt, and bespatters it all over. And
poor David was in the Situation of a
Man, who was to view his Piece, which
had thus alternately been touched by
the Pencil, and daubed with Mud, till
it was impossible to guess what it originally
was. Or if this will not give him
an adequate Idea of it, let him fancy a
vain Man giving his own Character, and
a revengeful one giving that of his most
inveterate Enemy. This Contrast, in
these two Men, and the Eagerness with
which they both espoused their favourite
Topicks, one of praising, and the other
of blaming, would have been the highest
Diversion to all those Men, who make it
their Business to get together such Companies,
as by opposing each other, afford
them Matter of Laughter. 
But poor Mr. Simple looked on things
in another light, he was seriously considering
the Motives from which they both
acted; he could not help applauding Mr.
Varnish, but then he was afraid lest he
should be too credulous in his good Opinion,
as he had often been already, and 

in the end discover, that all this Appearance
of Good-nature was not founded
on any real Merit as most of the People
they had talked of were Strangers to
him, and he was not of the Opinion, that
the more ignorant a Man is of any Subject,
the more necessary it is to talk of it. He
said very little: but when he came home
in the Evening, he asked Spatter, what
could be the Reason he so earnestly insisted
on putting the worst Construction
on every Man's Actions; who replied,
“that he hated Detraction as much as
any Man living, and was as willing to
allow Men the Merit they really had; 
but he could not bear to see a Fellow
imposing himself as a good-natured
Man on the World, only because Nature
had given him none of that Melancholy,
which Physicians call by the
Name of the Black Blood, which
makes him, to please himself, look on
every thing on the best side. I can't
say (continued he) that Gentleman is ill-humoured,
but I am confident he has
none of those Sensations which arise
from Good-Nature; for if the best
Friend he had, was in ever so deplorable
a Situation, I don't say he would
do nothing to relieve him, but he 

would go on in his good-humoured
Way, and feel no Uneasiness from any
thing he suffered. This I say, only
to shew you, how desirous I am of
placing things in the most favourable
light: for it is rather my Opinion, he
is so despicable a Fellow, as to lead a
Life of continual Hypocrisy, and affects
all that Complaisance only to deceive
Mankind. And as he is no Fool,
he may think deeply enough to know,
that the praising of People for what
they don't deserve, is the surest way
of making them contemptible, and leading
others into the thinking of their
Faults. For with all his Love of his Species,
I can't find it goes farther than
Words: I never heard of any thing remarkable
he did to prove that Love.” 
David said, “let what would be the
Cause of his Good-humour, and apparent
Good-nature, yet if his Actions
were not conformable to his Discourse,
he could not esteem him, altho' he
could not help being pleased with his
Conversation.” 
Thus they talked on, from one Subject
to another, till they happened on
Revenge. David said, “of all things in 

the world he should hate a Man
who was of a vindictive Temper; for
his part he could never keep up Anger
against any one, even tho' he
should endeavour to do it. All he
would do, when he found a Man capable
of hurting him (unprovoked)
was to avoid him.” “Indeed, Sir,
(says Spatter) I am not of your mind,
for I think there is nothing so pleasant
as Revenge; I would pursue a Man
who had injured me, to the very
Brink of Life: I know it would
be impossible for me ever to forgive
him, and I would have him live,
only that I might have the Pleasure of
seeing him miserable.” David was
amazed at this, and said, “Pray, Sir,
consider, as you are a Christian, you
cannot act in that manner.” Spatter
replied, “he was sorry it was against the
Rules of Christianity, but he could not
help his Temper; he thought forgiving
any body a very great Meanness,
and he was sure it was what he could
never bring himself to do.” But as
they were both tired, they separated without
any further Discourse on that Subject
for that Night. 




In which People of no Fortune may
learn what monstrous Ingratitude
they are guilty of, when they are insensible
of the great Obligation of
being ill used; with many other
Things which I shall not acquaint the
Reader with before-hand. 
David could not sleep that Night,
for reflecting on this Conversation. 
He had never yet found any Fault with
Spatter, but his railing against others; and
as he loved to excuse every body till he
found something very bad in them, he
imputed it to his Love of Virtue and
Hatred of Vice: But what he had just
been saying made him think him a perfect
Dæmon, and he had the utmost Horror for
his Principles; he resolved therefore to stay
no longer with him. He accordingly got
up the next Morning, and went out, without
taking Leave or any Notice of him,
in order to seek a new Lodging. 

In his Walk he met with Mr. Varnish,
who accosted him in the most agreeable
Manner, and ask'd him if he would not
take a Turn in the Park with him. The Discourse
naturally fell on Spatter, as he was
the Person who introduced them to each
other; and Varnish ask'd David, “How
he could be so intimate with a Man,
who did nothing but laugh at and ridicule
him behind his back?” And said,
“He believed he was mad; for no Person,
in his Senses, could ever have enter'd
into such a Scheme as that of
hunting after a real Friend; which was
just the same thing as little Children
do, when they cry for the Moon.” 
David, in whom it was difficult to raise a
Resentment, yet found an Indignation
within him at having his favourite Scheme
made a jest of: for his Man of Goodness
and Virtue was, to him, what Dulcinea
was to Don Quixote; and to hear it was
thought impossible for any such thing to
be found, had an equal Effect on him as
what Sancho had on the Knight, when he
told him, “His great Princess was winnowing
of Wheat, and sifting Corn.” 
He cry'd out, “Is there a Man on Earth
who finds so much Badness in his own 

Bosom, as to convince him, for from
thence he must be convinced, that
there is no such thing in the World as
Goodness? But I should wonder at nothing
in a Man, who professes himself
a Lover of Revenge, and of an inexorable
Temper.” Varnish smiled, and
said, “If he would please to hear him,
he would tell him Spatter's Character,
which, by what he had said, he found
he was wholly mistaken in; for it was
so odd a one, that no body could find it
out, unless they had conversed with
him a great while: That, for his part,
he should never have known it, had he
not been told it by a Man who had
been a long time intimate with him,
and who knew the History of his whole
Life.” David said he would be all
Attention. Then Mr. Varnish went on
as follows: 
“You are to know, Sir, Mr. Spatter's
Ill-nature dwells no-where but in his
Tongue; and the very People whom
he so industriously endeavours to abuse,
he would do any thing in his power to
serve. I have known Instances of his
doing the best-natured Actions in the
World, and, at the same time, abusing 

the very Person he was serving. He
deals out the Words Fool and Knave
with that Pleasure, and finds out such
a Variety of Epithets, which all tend
to the same Meaning, that it is incredible; 
by which means he often makes
Enemies, where he does not at all suspect
it. He forgets what he has said,
finds no Ill-Will in himself, and thinks
no more of it; but these People hear
of it, and never forgive him. I myself
was once a Witness of his doing
the most generous thing in the world
by a Man, who, the Moment he was
gone out of the Room, he fell to pulling
to pieces, in a manner as if he had
been his greatest Enemy. What can
be the Cause of it, I cannot imagine; 
whether, as you see he has a great deal
of Wit, and it lies chiefly in Satire, he
does it in order to display his Parts; 
or whether it is owing to a natural
Spleen in his Temper, I cannot determine. 
But as to his being of a revengeful
Temper, I can assure you he is
quite the contrary; for I have seen
him do friendly things to People,
whom, I am certain, had done him
great Injuries; but that is his Way. 
And so great is his Love of Abuse, that 

when no one else is talk'd of, to give
him an Opportunity of displaying his
favourite Talent, he falls to abusing
himself, and makes his own Character
much worse than it is; for I have
known him say such things of his own
Principles, as would make any one
think him the worst Creature in the
World, and the next Minute act quite
the contrary; nay, I verily believe, this
Humour so strongly possesses him,
could he be put into a World by himself,
he would walk about abusing himself
even to inanimate Things: for I
don't think but he would die of the
Spleen, if it was not for that Vent. 
He is like a mad Man, who, when he
finds nothing else to cut and slash, turns
his Sword on himself.” 
DAVID's Anger at Spatter's turning
him into Ridicule, was now quite vanish'd,
for Rage never lasted above two
Minutes with him; and he was glad to
hear an Account of him, which did not
make him so black as, by his last Conversation,
he began to suspect him. 
On the other hand, he was pleased to
think all the Characters of Men he had
had from him were not so bad as he had 

represented them. However, he resolved
to leave him; for nothing was more unpleasant
to him than continual Invectives; 
nor could he resist an Offer Mr. Varnish
made him of lodging in the same House
with him, for in his Company he always
found himself pleased. 
The next Day Varnish told him he
would carry him to visit my Lady—,
who was just come from abroad, where he
believed he would be very well entertain'd,
as her House was frequented by a
great deal of good Company. David,
who was never out of his way, very willingly
accompanied him. There happen'd
that Afternoon to be only three Ladies,
(who all appear'd, by their manner, to be
very intimate in the Family) besides the
Lady of the House, and a young Woman
who lived with her. Our Hero, on whose
Tenderness the least Appearance of Grief
in others made an immediate Impression,
could not help observing, in the Countenance
of this young Creature, a fix'd
Melancholy, which made him uneasy. 
They had not been long seated before
my Lady—sent her out of the Room
for some Trifle, saying, with a Sneer, “She 

hoped the Expectation of being a Lady
had not turn'd her Head in such a
manner, that she had forgot to walk
across the Room.” Cynthia (for that
was the young Woman's Name) gave her
a Look, which at once express'd Indignation
and Shame at being thus treated; 
with such a Mixture of Softness, as plainly
proved she was sorry she had so much
Reason to despise the Person she wish'd
to love. As soon as she was gone out of
the Room, my Lady, without any Reserve,
began to declare, “what an ungrateful
Creature she was; said, she
had taken her into her House from
meer Compassion, used her as well as if
she had been her nearest Relation; and
the Reward she had for all this, was
the Wretch's endeavouring to draw in
her Nephew (a Boy about 17) to marry
her.” David, who utterly detested
all Ingratitude, began in his Mind to be
of my Lady's side; but then he could
not help reflecting, that Insult was not the
proper Manner of shewing Resentment
for such Usage; if Cynthia was really
guilty of such a piece of Treachery, he
thought it would be better to part with
her, than to keep her only to abuse her. 

The other Ladies gave several Instances
of the Ingratitude of those low mean Animals,
who were forced to be Dependants, declaring,
“That, from the Experience
they had had of the Badness of the
World, they were almost tempted to
swear they would never do any thing to
serve anybody;” at the same time giving
very broad hints, “what a vast Restraint
this would be upon their Inclinations,
which naturally led them to do Good.” 
One of the Ladies, amongst several
others, gave the following Instance
how ungrateful the World was: “That
she had bred up a young Woman from
her Childhood, who was, indeed, the
Daughter of a Man of Fashion, a very
good Friend of her's, for which Reason
she took to her, purely from Good-nature; 
but when she came to be old
enough to be capable of serving her,
she only desired her to keep her House,
take care of her Children,—overlook all
her Servants,—be ready to sit with her
when she call'd her,—with many more
trifling things; and Madam grew out
of humour at it, altho' she never put
her at all on the footing of a Servant,
nor paid her any Wages as such, but 

look'd on her as her Companion. Indeed,
(continued she) I soon grew weary
of it; for the Girl pined and cried in
such a manner, I could not bear the
Sight of her. I did not dare to speak
to her, which I never did but in the
gentlest Terms, only to tell her what a
Situation she was in, and how unbecoming
it was in her to think herself
on a footing with People of Fortune; 
for that she was left by her Father on
the World, without any Provision, and
was beholden to me for every thing
she had. And I do assure you, I never
talk'd to her in this manner, but she
had Tears in her Eyes for a Week afterwards.” 
All the Company, except David,
join'd with this Lady in condemning the
poor Girl's monstrous Ingratitude; but
he could not forbear telling her, “He
thought it was a little unkind in her to
upbraid so unfortunate a Person, as the
young Woman she had been talking
of, with any Favours she conferr'd on
her.” On this ensued a Discourse between
the four Ladies, concerning Obligation
and Ingratitude, of which I really
cannot remember one Word. 

When the two Gentlemen got home,
David said to his Companion, “He had
a great Curiosity to hear Cynthia's Story; 
for there was something so good-natured
in her Countenance, that he
was very much inclined to believe my
Lady—had not represented the Case
fairly.” Adding, “That he should be
obliged to him, if he would carry him
the next day to see Cynthia alone; for
he had observed by my Lady's Conversation,
that she was to go out of Town
in the Morning, and leave Cynthia at
home.” Varnish, who was all Complaisance,
readily comply'd with his Request; 
for he had a long time been intimate
in the Family, and had Admittance
as often as he pleased; only he told
him, “He must leave him there some
time, being obliged to meet a Gentleman
at a Coffee-house.” This gave
David an Opportunity of being alone with
Cynthia, which he eagerly embraced, to
tell her, “That he saw by her Look and
Manner she was very unhappy, and
begg'd, if it was any way in his power
to serve her, she would let him know
it; for nothing in this World was capable
of giving him so much Pleasure, 

as relieving the Distress'd.” Cynthia
at first reply'd, “That she dared
not ever receive any more Obligations; 
for she had already suffer'd so much by
accepting them, that she heartily wish'd
she had gone thro' all the Miseries
Poverty could have brought upon her,
rather than endured half what she
had done for living in Plenty at another's
Expence.” 
But, at last, by the Innocence of David's
Looks, and the Sincerity which was
visible in his Manner of expressing himself,
she was prevail'd on to relate the
History of her Life; which will be the
Subject of another Chapter. 




In which is displayed the Misery young
Persons, who have any Taste, suffer,
unless they are bred up with reasonable
People. 
“I cannot say, I ever had any Happiness
in my Life; for while I was
young, I was bred up with my Father
and Mother, who, without designing
me any harm, were continually
teazing me. I loved reading, and had
a great Desire of attaining Knowledge; 
but whenever I asked any Questions of
any kind whatsoever, I was always
told, such Things were not proper for
Girls of my Age to know. If I got
any Book that gave me pleasure, and
it was any thing beyond the most silly
Story, it was taken from me. For
Miss must not enquire too far into
things—it would turn her Brain— 
she had better mind her Needle-work— 
and such Things as were useful for Women
—Reading and poring on Books, 

would never get me a Husband. —Thus
was I condemned to spend my Youth,
the Time when the Imagination is at
the highest, and we are capable of most
Pleasure, without being indulged in
any one thing I liked; and obliged to
employ myself, in what was fancied by
my mistaken Parents to be for my
Improvement, altho' in reality it was
nothing more than what any Person, a
degree above a natural Fool, might
learn as well in a very small time, as
in a thousand Ages. And what yet
aggravated my Misfortunes was, my
having a Brother who hated reading
to such a degree, he had a perfect
Aversion to the very Sight of
a Book; and he must be cajoled or
whipp'd into Learning, while it was
denied me, who had the utmost Eagerness
for it. Young, and unexperienced
as I was in the World, I could
not help observing the Error of this
Conduct, and the Impossibility of ever
making him get any Learning, that
could be of Use to him, or of preventing
my loving it. 
“I had two Sisters, whose Behaviour
was more shocking to me than that of 

my Father and Mother; because as
we were more of an Age, we were
more constantly together. I should
have loved them with the sincerest Affection,
if they had behaved to me in
a manner I could have borne with Patience: 
They neither of them were to be
reckon'd amongst the silliest of Women; 
and had both some small glimmering
Rays of Parts and Wit. To this was
owing all their Faults, for they were
so partial to themselves, they mistook
this faint Dawn of Day, for the Sun in
its Meridian; and from grasping at
what they could not attain, obscured,
and rendered useless all the Understanding
they really had. From hence,
they took an inveterate Hatred to me,
because most of our Acquaintance allowed
me to have more Wit than they
had; and when I spoke, I was generally
listened to with most Attention. 
I don't speak this from Vanity; for I
have been so teazed and tormented
about Wit, I really wish there was no
such thing in the World. I am very
certain, the Woman who is possessed
of it, unless she can be so peculiarly
happy as to live with People void of
Envy, had better be without it. The 

Fate of those Persons who have Wit,
is no where so well described, as in
those excellent Lines in the Essay on
Criticism, which are so exactly suited
to my present Purpose, I cannot forbear
repeating them to you:” 

Unhappy Wit, like most mistaken Things,
Atones not for that Envy which it brings;
In Youth alone its empty Praise we boast,
But soon the short-liv'd Vanity is lost:
Like some fair Flower, the early Spring supplies,
That gayly blooms, but even in blooming dies.
What is this Wit, which must our Cares employ?
The Owner's Wife, that other Men enjoy:
The most our Trouble still, when most admir'd,
The more we give, the more is still requir'd.
The Fame with Pains we gain, but lose with Ease;
Sure some to vex, but never all to please:
'Tis what the Vicious fear, the Virtuous shun,
By Fools 'tis hated, and by Knaves undone.
“I never spoke, but I was a Wit;— 
if I was silent, it was Contempt. —I
certainly would not deign to converse 

with such People as they were. —Thus
whatever I did, disobliged them; and
it was impossible to be otherwise, as
the Cause of their Displeasure was what
I could not remove. I should have
been very well pleased with their Conversation,
if they had been contented
to have been what Nature design'd
them; for Good-humour, and a Desire
to please, is all I wish for in a
Companion. In my Opinion, being
inoffensive goes a great way in rendering
any Person agreeable; every
Word I spoke was misunderstood, and
turned to my disadvantage. I remember
once on my saying, I would follow
my Inclinations while they were
innocent, and no ill Consequences attended
them; my eldest Sister made
me so absurd an Answer, I cannot help
relating it to you: for she said, she did
not at all doubt, but I would follow my
Inclinations,—she was really afraid
what I should come to—as she saw,
I fancied it a Sign of Wit to be a Libertine. 
She had somewhere heard the
Word, (you will observe how well she
understood it) but she imagined it
was a Term of Contempt, and always
exulted, in saying any thing she 

thought could hurt me: If I dropt an
unguarded Word or Expression, they
could possibly lay hold on, to turn into
what they thought Ridicule, the Joy
it gave them was incredible; if I took
up a Book, they could not comprehend,
they suddenly grew very modest,
and did not pretend to know
what was only fit for the Learned. It
is really entertaining to see the shifts
People make to conceal from themselves
their own want of Capacities: for
whoever really has Sense, will understand
whatever is writ in their own Language,
altho' they are intirely ignorant
of all others, with an Exception
only of the Technical Terms of
Sciences. But I was once acquainted
with an old Man, who, from a small
Suspicion, that he was not thought by
the World to be extremely wise, was
always considering which way he should
flatter himself that the Fault was not
in him, but owing to some Accident; 
till at last, he hit on the Thought that
his Folly was caused by his Father's
Neglect of him; for he did not at all
seem to doubt, but he should have had
as much Sense as another, if he had
but understood Greek and Latin: As 

if those Languages had a Charm in
them, which could banish all Stupidity
and Nonsense from any Person who understood
them. But to proceed in my
Story: 
“If Youth and Liveliness sometimes
led me into any Action, which they,
in their riper Judgments, (for the youngest
of them was five Years older than
I was) term'd Indiscretions, they immediately
thank'd God, tho' they had no
Wit, they had common Sense, and
knew how to conduct themselves in Life,
which they thought much more valuable; 
but these Wits had never any Judgment. 
This is a Mistake which prevails generally
in the World, and, I believe,
arises from the strong Desire most Men
have to be thought witty; but when
they find it's impossible, they would
willingly be thought to have a Contempt
for it; and perhaps they sometimes
have the Art of flattering themselves
to such a Degree, as really to
believe they do despise it: For Men
often impose so much on their own Understandings,
as to triumph in those very
Things they would be ashamed of, if
their Self-Love would but permit them 

for a Moment, to see things clearly as
they are: They go beyond the *  Jack-daw
in the Fable, who never went farther
than to strut about in the Peacock's Feathers,
with a design of imposing on
others. For they endeavour so long to
blind other Men's Eyes, that at last
they quite darken their own; and altho'
in their Nature they are certainly Jays,
yet they find a Method of persuading
themselves that they are Peacocks. But
notwithstanding all the Industry People
may make use of to blind themselves,
if Wit consists, as Mr. Locke
says, in the Assemblage of Ideas, and
Judgment in the separating them; I really
believe the Person who can join them
with the most Propriety, will separate
them with the greatest Nicety. A Metaphor
from Mechanism, I think, will very
plainly illustrate my Thoughts on this
Subject: For let a Machine, of any
kind, be joined together by an ingenious
Artist, and I dare say, he will
be best able to take it apart again: a
Bungler, or an ignorant Person, perhaps,
may pull it asunder, or break it
to pieces; but to separate it nicely, and 

know how to divide it in the right
Places, will certainly be the best performed,
by the Man who had Skill
enough to set it together. But with
strong Passions, and lively Imaginations,
People may sometimes be led
into Errors, altho' their Judgments
are ever so good; and when People,
who are esteemed by the World to
have Wit, are guilty of any Failing,
all the Envious, (and I am afraid they
are too great a part of the human
Species) set up a general Outcry against
them.” 
DAVID, into whose Head not one
envious Thought ever entered, could
easily comprehend the Reasonableness of
what Cynthia said; but was too well
pleased with her Manner of talking, to
interrupt her: And she thus continued
her Story: 
“We had a young Cousin lived with
us, who was the Daughter of my Father's
Brother, she was the oddest Character
I ever knew; for she certainly
could not be said to have any Understanding,
and yet she had one of the
strongest signs of Sense that could be: 

For she was so conscious of her Defect
that way, that it made her so bashful,
she never spoke but with Fear and
Trembling, lest she should make herself
ridiculous. This poor Creature
would have been made a perfect Mope,
had it not been for me; for she was
the only Person I ever submitted to
flatter. I always approved whatever
she said, and never failed the asking
her Opinion, whenever I could contrive
to do it without appearing to make a
Jest of her. This was the highest Joy
to my Sisters, who thought that in
this Instance, at least, they could prove
my want of Sense and their own Superiority; 
for their Delight was in making
a Butt of this poor Girl, rallying,
as they were pleased to term it, and
putting her out of countenance.” 
“Pray, Madam, (said David) what
is the meaning of making a Butt of any
one?” Cynthia replied, “It is setting
up a Person as a Mark to be scorned,
and pointed at for some Defect of
Body or Mind, and this without any
Offence committed, to provoke such
Treatment: Nay, on the contrary, it
generally falls on the Bashful and Innocent; 

and when a poor Creature is
thus undeservedly put to the Torment
of feeling the uneasy Sensation of
Shame, these Ralliers exult in the
Thoughts of their own Wit. To be
witty without either Blasphemy, Obscenity,
or Ill-nature, requires a great
deal more than every Person, who
heartily desires the Reputation of being
so, can come up to; but I have made
it my Observation, in all the Families
I have ever seen, that if any one Person
in it is more remarkably silly than
the rest, those who are the next degree
to them, always despise them the most; 
they are as glad to find any body below
them, that they may triumph over
and laugh at, as they are envious and
angry to see any one above them; as
Cowards kick and abuse the Person who
is known to be a Degree more timorous
than themselves, as much as they tremble
at the Frown of any one, who has
more Courage. Thus my Sisters always
treated my Cousin as a Fool,
while they upbraided me with being a
Wit; little knowing, that if that Term
has any Meaning at all, when it is used
by way of Contempt, they were the
very People who deserved to be called 

so. For if I understand it, it signifies
a Person with but a very moderate
Share of Understanding, who from
Affectation, and an insatiable Desire of
being thought witty, grows impertinent,
and says all the ill-natured things he
can think of. For my part, I think
all manner of Raillery the disagreeablest
Conversation in the World: unless it
be amongst those People who have Politeness
and Delicacy enough to rally
in the manner La Bruyere speaks of; 
that is, to fall only on such Frailties
as People of Sense voluntarily give up
to Censure: these are the best Subjects
to display Humour, and turns into a
Compliment to the Person rallied, as
it is a sort of Insinuation that they have
no greater Faults to be fallen upon. 
“When I was about sixteen, I became
acquainted with a young Lady,
in whose Conversation I had the utmost
Pleasure, but I had not often
an Opportunity of seeing her; for as
she too was fond of Reading, my Mother
was frighten'd out of her Wits,
to think what would become of us, if
we were much together. I verily believe,
she thought we should draw Circles––– 

and turn Conjurers. –––Every new Acquaintance
we had, increased my Sisters
Aversion to me; for as I was
generally liked best, they were in a
continual Rage at seeing I was taken
so much notice of. But the only Proof
of their Sense they ever gave me, was
the being irritated more than usual, at
the Fondness which was shewn me by
this young Woman: for since they
could be so low as to be envious, there
was more Understanding in being so at
my attaining what was really valuable,
than at what was of no consequence,
and gave me no other Pleasure but
finding it was in my power to give it; 
which was the Case with most of the
People I conversed with. 
“When I was seventeen, my Mother
died, and after that, I got with
more Freedom to my Companion; 
for my Father did not trouble himself
much about me, he had given way to
my Mother's Method of educating me,
as indeed he always complied with
her in every thing; not that he had
any extraordinary Affection for her,
but she was one of those sort of Women,
who, if they once take any thing 

in their Heads, will never be quiet till
they have attained it, and as he was
of a Disposition which naturally loved
Quietness, he would sooner consent to
any thing, than hear a Noise. 
“One Day, at Dinner, my Father
told me, if I would be a good Girl— 
I should be married very soon. —I
laugh'd and said, I hoped, I should
see the Man who was to be my Husband,
at least an Hour before-hand. — 
Yes, yes, replied he, you shall see him
time enough; but it suffices I have an
Offer for you, which I think to your Advantage,
and I expect your Obedience; 
you know, your Mother always obeyed
me, and I will be Master of my own
Family. I really could hardly forbear
laughing in his face; but as I thought
that would be very unbecoming in me
to my Father, I turned the Discourse
as fast as possible. My Sisters both fell
out a laughing; one cried, Oh! now,
we shall have fine Diversion—Cynthia
will be a charming Mistress of a Family. –– 
I wonder which of her Books will teach
her to be a Housewife. Yes, says the
other,—undoubtedly her Husband will
be mightily pleased, when he wants his 

Dinner, to find she has been all the
Morning diverting herself with Reading,
and forgot to order any; which I
dare say will be the Case. I had now
been so long used to them, that what
they said gave me no manner of Concern,
and I was seldom at the trouble
of answering them. 
“The next day my Father brought
a Country Gentleman home to dinner
with him, who was a perfect
Stranger to me; I did not take much
notice of him, for he had nothing remarkable
in him, he was neither handsome
nor ugly,–––tall nor short,––old nor
young;—he had something, indeed,
of a Rusticity in his Person,—what
he said, had nothing entertaining in
it, either in a serious or merry way,— 
and yet it was neither silly nor ridiculous. 
—In short, I might be in Company
with a thousand such sort of Men,
and quite forget I had ever seen them:
but I was greatly surprized after Dinner,
at my Father's calling me out
of the Room, and telling me, that
was the Gentleman he designed for my
Husband, that he expected me to receive
him as such, and he would take the first 

Opportunity to leave us together, that he
might explain himself. Which, as soon
as he could contrive it, he did, by sending
my Sisters and Cousin one after
another out of the Room, and then
withdrawing himself. I had so ridiculous
an Idea of being thus shut up with
a Stranger in order to be made Love
to, that I could not resist the Temptation
of making a little Diversion with
a Person who appeared to me in so
despicable a Light. The Gentleman
took three or four strides across the
Room, looked out of the Window
once or twice, and then turned to me,
with an aukward Bow, and an irresistable
Air, (as I fancy he thought it)
and made me the polite Compliment,
of telling me, that he supposed my Father
had informed me that they two
were agreed on a Bargain. I replied,
I did not know my Father was of any
Trade, or had any Goods to dispose
of; but if he had, and they could
agree on their Terms, he should have
my Consent, for I never interfered with
any Business of my Father's: And
went on rattling a good while, till he
was quite out in his Catechism, and
knew not what to say. But he soon recollected 

himself, for he had all the
Assurance of a Man, who from knowing
he has a good Fortune, thinks he
does every Woman an Honour he condescends
to speak to; and assured me, I
must interfere in this Business, as it
more particularly concerned me. In short,
Madam, continued he, I have seen you
two or three times, altho' you did not
know it; I like your Person, hear you
have had a sober Education, think it
time to have an Heir to my Estate, and
am willing, if you consent to it, to make
you my Wife; notwithstanding your Father
tells me, he can't lay you down
above two thousand Pounds. I am none
of those nonsensical Fools that can whine
and make romantick Love, I leave that
to younger Brothers, let my Estate speak
for me; I shall expect nothing from you,
but that you will retire into the Country
with me, and take care of my Family. I
must inform you, I shall desire to have
every thing in order; for I love good
Eating and Drinking, and have been
used to have my own Humour from my
Youth, which if you will observe and
comply with, I shall be very kind to you,
and take care of the main Chance for
you and your Children. I made him a low 

Court'sey, and thanked him for the Honour
he intended me; but told him,
I had no kind of Ambition to be his
upper Servant: Tho', indeed, I could
not help wondering how it was possible
for me to escape being charmed
with his genteel Manner of addressing
me. I then asked him how many Offices
he had allotted for me to perform,
for those great Advantages of having
him to humour in all his Whims, and
receiving Meat, Drink, and Lodging
at his hands; but hoped he would allow
me some small Wages, that I might
sometimes recreate myself with my Fellow-Servants. 
In short, my Youth led me
into indulging myself in a foolish Ridicule,
for which I now condemn my
self. He grew angry at my laughing
at him, and left me, saying, he should
let my Father know in what manner I
had used him; that I might very likely
repent the refusing him, for such Estates
as his were not to be met with every
day. 
“I could not help reflecting on the
Folly of those Women who prostitute
themselves, (for I shall always call it
Prostitution, for a Woman who has 

Sense, and has been tolerably educated,
to marry a Clown and a Fool) and give
up that Enjoyment, which every one
who has taste enough to know how to
employ their time, can procure for
themselves, tho' they should be obliged
to live ever so retired, only to know
they have married a Man who has an
Estate; for they very often have no
more Command of it, than if they
were perfect Strangers. Some Men, indeed,
delight in seeing their Wives finer
than their Neighbours, which to some
Women, whose whole Thoughts are
bent on fine Clothes, may be a Pleasure; 
but for my part, I should in that case
think myself just in the Situation of the
Horse who wears gaudy Trappings only
to gratify his Master's Vanity, whilst
he himself is not at all considered in it. 
I was certain I could live much more
to my Satisfaction on the Interest of my
own little Fortune, than I could do with
subjecting myself to the Humours of a
Man I must have always disliked and
despised. 
“I don't know how it was brought
about, but this Man married my second
Sister, and she took the other 

away with her, so that I was happily
rid of them both. My Father was very
angry with me for the present, but I
thought that would be soon over, and
did not at all doubt his being reconciled
to me again. I now began to
flatter myself, that I should lead a Life
perfectly suitable to my Taste; my
Cousin was very fond of me, for I was
the only Woman she had ever met
with, who had not shewn a Contempt
for her. I carried her with me wherever
I went, and had the Pleasure of
seeing. I was the Cause of her being
happy. I conversed as much as I pleased
with my beloved Companion, and
Books and Friendship shared my peaceful
Hours. But this lasted but a very
short time; for my Father, in the heat
of his Anger against me, made a Will,
in which he left me nothing; and before
his Rage abated enough for him to
alter it, he died of an Apoplexy. As
soon as my Sisters heard of his Death,
they hurried to Town, when the Will
was opened, and they found I was excluded
from having any share in my
Father's Fortune; they triumphed over
me with all the Insolence imaginable,
and vented all their usual Reproaches; 

saying, it was impossible but that a Person
of my great Wit and Genius—must
be able to provide for myself,—they did
not doubt but I could do very well without
Money. —Thus this unpardonable
Crime of being thought to have more
Sense than they had, was never to be
forgiven; they staid no longer in
town, than while they were settling
their Affairs, and left me with but five
Guineas, which I happened to have
saved out of my Pocket-Money, while
my Father was alive. The young Woman
I have so often mentioned to you,
was so generous as to let me have all
the little Money she was mistress of. 
I wish nothing so much as to see her
again; but while I was abroad, she and
her Brother went from their Father's
House, on his bringing home a Mother-in-law,
and I cannot hear what is
become of them. Whilst I was in this
Situation, my Lady—with whom
I had had a small Acquaintance for
some time, took such a fancy to
me, she invited me to come and live
with her; she seemed as if she loved
me, and I was ignorant enough of the
World to think she did so. She was
going abroad, and as I had a great 

Desire to see more Countries than my
own, I proposed to myself a great deal
of Pleasure in going with her: the
only Regret I had, was in leaving my
dear Companion, but I was not in Circumstances
to refuse my Lady &wblank;'s
Offer. 
“And now I am come to the Conclusion
of my History, whilst I went under
the Denomination of a Wit, and
am really quite tired of talking; but if
you have a Curiosity to know the rest of
my History, and will favour me with
your Company to-morrow, I will resume
it.” David assured her, nothing
could oblige him more, and in a little
while took his leave of her for that Night. 




The Continuation of the History of
Cynthia, with an Account in
what manner she was suddenly
transformed from a Wit into a
Toad-eater, without any visible
Change, in either her Person or Behaviour. 
David went exactly at the Time
appointed the next Day, and after
some little Discourse, Cynthia went on
with her Story, as follows: 
“I think I left off at my going abroad
with my Lady. —My Cousin went
home to live with her Mother; as they
had but a very small Income to keep
them, I should have been heartily glad
if it had been in my power to have encreased
it. I forgot to tell you, that
my Brother died at School when he
was fifteen; for he had but a weakly
Constitution, and the continual tormenting
and beating him, to make 

him learn his Book (which was utterly
impossible) had such an Effect on the
poor Boy, it threw him into a Consumption,
and killed him. I shall not
undertake to give you a Description of
the Countries through which we passed,
for as we were only to make the Tour of
France and Italy, I suppose you have
read a hundred Descriptions of them
already. The Lady I went with, had
something very amiable in her Manner,
and at first behaved to me with so much
Good-nature, that I loved her with the
utmost Sincerity. I dwelt with pleasure
on the Thoughts of the Obligations
I owed her, as I fancied she was
generous enough to delight in conferring
them; and I had none of that sort
of Pride, by Fools mistaken for Greatness
of Mind, which makes People disdain
the receiving Obligations: for I
think the only Meanness consists in accepting,
and not gratefully acknowledging
them. I had learned French, that is, I
had read some French Books with the
help of a Dictionary, to satisfy my own
Curiosity; for no body had ever taught
me any thing: On the contrary, I was
to be kept back as much as possible,
for fear I should know too much. But 

the little I had learned by myself,
helped me when I came into the Country,
to talk it tolerable well. My
Lady &wblank; could not speak it at
all, and as she did not care to take
much pains while we were at Paris,
which was a whole Winter, we herded
mostly amongst the English. 
“I was now in the place of the
World I had often most wished to go
to, where I had every thing in great plenty,
and yet I was more miserable than
ever. Perhaps you will wonder what
caused my Unhappiness; but I was to
appear in a Character I could not bear,
i. e. that of a Toad-eater: and what hurt
me most, was, that my Lady herself
soon began to take pains to throw me
into it as much as possible.” 
DAVID begged an Explanation of
what she meant by a Toad-Eater; for he
said it was a Term he had never heard before. 
On which Cynthia replied, “I
don't wonder, Sir, you never heard
of it, I wish I had spent my Life
without knowing the Meaning of it: 
It is a Metaphor taken from a Mountebank's 

Boy's eating Toads, in order
to shew his Master's Skill in expelling
Poison: It is built on a Supposition,
(which I am afraid is too generally
true) that People who are so unhappy
as to be in a State of Dependance, are
forced to do the most nauseous things
that can be thought on, to please and
humour their Patrons. And the Metaphor
may be carried on yet farther,
for most People have so much the Art
of tormenting, that every time they
have made the poor Creatures they
have in their power swallow a Toad,
they give them something to expel it
again, that they may be ready to swallow
the next they think proper to prepare
for them: that is, when they
have abused and fooled them, as Hamlet
says, to the top of their bent, they
grow soft and good to them again, on
purpose to have it in their power to
plague them the more. The Satire of
the Expression, in reality, falls on the
Person who is mean enough to act
in such a manner; but as it is no uncommon
thing for People to make use
of Terms they don't understand, it is
generally used, by way of Derision, to 

the unfortunate Wretch who is thrown
into such a miserable Situation. 
“I remember once I went with my
Lady &wblank; to visit some English
Ladies, where there happened to be a
great deal of Company: As we went
out of the Room, I heard some-body
mention the word Toad-eater; I
thought it was me they were speaking
of, and dropt my Fan, for an Excuse
to make a stop at the Door; when I
heard one Lady say to another— 
What a Creature it is! I believe she is
dumb, for she has not spoke one Word
since she has been here; but yet I don't
dislike to see her, for I love Ridicule of
all things—and there is certainly nothing
so ridiculous as a Toad-eater. I could
not stay to hear any more, but I despised
both these Women too much to
let it be in their power to give me any
Pain, for I knew by their manner of
talking they were fine Ladies; and
that is the Character in Life I have the
greatest Contempt for.” 
DAVID begged her to let him know
what she meant by fine Ladies. On which
she replied, “Indeed, Sir, you have 

given me the hardest Task in the
World: I know them when I meet
with them; but they have so little of
what we call Character, that I don't
know how to go about the describing
them. They are made up of Caprice— 
and Whim,—they love—and hate,—are
angry—and pleased,—without knowing
any reason for either. If they have any
Characteristick, it is Vanity, to which
every thing else seems to be subservient; 
they always affect a great deal
of Good-nature, are frighted out
of their Wits at the sight of any
Object in bodily Pain, and yet value
not how much they rack People's
Minds. But I must justify them so
far as to say, I believe this is owing to
their Ignorance; for as they have no
Minds of their own, they have no Idea
of others Sensations. They cannot, I
think, well be liable to the Curse attending
Eve's Transgression, as they
do not enjoy the Benefit proposed by
it, of knowing Good from Evil. They
are so very wise, as to think a Person's
being ignorant of what it is utterly impossible
they should know, is a perfect
sign of Folly. Congreve seems to me
to have known them the best of any 

body: My Lady Wish-for't at her Toilette
is a perfect Picture of them, where
she insults over, and thinks herself witty
on a poor ignorant Wench, because she
does not know what she has never
been taught, or used to. That fine Ridicule
of the Brass-Thimble and the
Nutmeg jingling in her Pocket; with
the Hands dangling like Bobbins, is
exactly their sort of Wit; and then
they never call any body by their
right Names, Creatures,—Animals,— 
Things,—all the Words of Contempt
they can think of, are what they delight
in. I think Shakespear has made
Hamlet give the best Description that
can be of them, in that one Line he
speaks to Ophelia;–––Ye lisp–––and
ye amble,–––and ye nick-name God's
Creatures. An Expression I never understood
till I knew the World enough
to have met with some of those sort of
Women. They are not confined to
any Station; for I have known while
the Lady has been insulting her Waiting-woman
in the Dressing-Room, the
Chamber-Maid has been playing just
the same Part below stairs, with the
Person she thought her inferior, only
with a small Variation of Terms. But 

I will dwell no longer on them; for I
am tired of them, as I have often been
in Life. 
“But this would have had no Effect
on me, had my Lady—behaved well
herself. To her Usage was owing all my
Misery; for by that time I had been
with her two or three Months, she began
to treat me as a Creature born to
be her Slave: whenever I spoke, I was
sure to offend her; if I was silent, I
was out of humour;—if I said any
thing in the softest Terms, to complain
of the Alteration of her Affection,
I was whimsical and ungrateful. 
—I think it impossible to be in a
worse Situation. She had raised my
Love, by the Obligations she had confer'd
on me, and yet continually provoked
my Rage by her Ill-nature: I
could not for a great while, any way
account for this Conduct: I thought,
if she did not love me, she had no
Reason to have given herself any trouble
about me; and yet I could not
think she could have used me in that
manner, if she had had the least Regard
for me. At last, I reflected, it must be
owing to a love of Tyranny, and as we 

are born in a Country where there
is no such thing as Slavery, People
lay Plots to draw in others to be
their Slaves, with the pretence of
having an Affection for them: And
what is yet more unfortunate, they
always chuse the Persons who are least
able to bear it. It's the fierce mettled
Courser (who must be brought to
their Lure, by fawning and stroaking)
that they love to wring, and gird the
Saddle on; whilst the Mule, which
seems born to bear their Burdens, passes
by them unheeded and neglected. 
I was caught like the poor Fish, by the
Bait which was treacherously extended
for me, and did not observe the Hook
which was to pierce my Heart, and be
my Destruction. You cannot imagine
what I felt; for to be used ungratefully,
by any one I had confer'd Favours
on, would have been nothing to me,
in comparison of being ill used by the
Person I thought myself obliged to. I
was to have no Passions, no Inclinations of
my own, but was to be turned into a
piece of Clock-Work, which her Ladyship
was to wind up or let down, as
she pleased. I had Resolution enough
to have taken any Consequence that
might have attended my leaving her; 

but I could not bear the Thoughts of
even the Imputation of Ingratitude,
for there are very few People, who
have any Notion of Obligations, that
are not pecuniary. But in my Opinion,
those Persons who give up their
Time, and sacrifice all their own Inclinations,
to the Humours of others,
cannot be over-paid by any thing
they can do for them. Nobody thinks
a Slave is obliged to them for giving
them Bread, when they have performed
their task: And certainly it is a
double Slavery to be made servile under
the pretence of Friendship; for no
Labour of the Body could have been so
painful to me, as the having my Mind
thus teazed and tortured. My Wit,
which I had heard so much of, was
now all fled; for I was looked on in
so contemptible a Light, no body
would hearken to me: The only Comfort
I had, was in the Conversation of
a led Captain, who came abroad with
a Gentleman of my Lady's Acquaintance. 
There are two sorts of led
Captains, the one is taken a fancy to
by somebody much above them, seated
at their Table, and can cringe and
flatter, *  fetch and carry Nonsense for 

my Lord; thinking themselves happy
in being thus admitted into Company
their Sphere of Life gives them no
Pretensions to keep. The other is a
sort of Male Toad-eater, who by some
Misfortune in Life, is thrown down
below his proper Station, meets with a
Patron who pretends to be his Friend; 
and who by that means draws him in to
be sincerely his. This Gentleman's Case
and mine were so much alike, that our
greatest Pleasure was in comparing
them; but I was much more astonished
at his Patron's Behaviour than at
my Lady &wblank;'s; for altho' she had a tolerable
Understanding, yet it was not
of that sort, that would make one wonder
at her Frailties. But he was remarkable
for his Sense and Wit, and
yet could not forbear making this poor
Gentleman feel all the weight of Dependance. 
He was so inconsistent with
himself, he could not bear he should
see his Tyranny, because he was very
fond of gaining every body's Esteem; 
not considering, his Aim would have
been lost, if the other had not been
sensible of his Behaviour: but because
he saw him uneasy under it, he took
a perfect Aversion to him. I have 

heard of a Gentleman, who would never
go to another's House, if they had
ever so many Coaches and Six to carry
him in, without Horses of his own:
saying, the only Way to be treated well,
was to shew People he had it in his
power to leave them whenever he
pleased. And I think he was perfectly
in the right; for melancholy Experience
has taught me how miserable it
is to abandon one's self to another's
Power. But now to shew you the unaccountable
Caprice of Human Nature,
I must tell you, that this very Gentleman,
who had thus groaned under the
Affliction of another's using him ill,
coming to an Estate which was entailed
on him by a Cousin's dying without
Children, became the greatest Tyrant
in the World; and kept a led
Captain, whom he used much worse
than his former Patron had ever done
him: And instead of avoiding treating
another in a manner he himself had
found so difficult to bear, he seemed as
if he was resolved to revenge his former
Sufferings, on a Person who was perfectly
innocent of them. 

“I know not to what Malignity it is
owing, but I have observed in all the
Families I have ever been acquainted
with, that one part of them spend
their whole time in oppressing and
teazing the other; and all this they do
like Drawcansir, only because they dare,
and to shew their Power: While the
other Part languish away their Days,
in bemoaning their own hard Fate,
which has thus subjected them to the
Whims and Tyranny of Wretches, who
are so totally void of Taste, as not to
desire the Affection of the very People,
they appear willing to oblige. It's late
to-night, but if you have a Curiosity
to hear the remainder of my Story,
to-morrow I will proceed.” 
DAVID, who never desired any one
to do what was the least irksome to them,
took his leave for that Evening, and returned
the next day, according to her
own Appointment. 




A continuation of Cynthia's
Story. 
The next Evening, after the usual
Civilities had passed between David
and Cynthia, she, at his Request, went
on with her Story. 
“I spent the whole time I was abroad
in Misery; because my Lady
&wblank; chose to see me unhappy, and
sighing at her Tyranny, instead of viewing
me always (which she might have
done) with cheerful Looks, and a Countenance
that expressed the most grateful
Acknowledgments, for owing a Life
of Ease and Plenty to her Benevolence.” 
DAVID, whose only Pleasure was in
giving it others, was more amazed at this
Account of my Lady &wblank;'s Behaviour,
than he would have been at the most
surprizing Phænomenon in Nature: But 

he had so much Curiosity to know the
End of Cynthia's Story, that he would
not interrupt her: And she went on as
follows. 
“Since we have been come home,
an Accident has happened to me,
which was as little thought on as wish'd
for. My Lady &wblank; has a Nephew
of about seventeen Years of Age, who
after the Death of his Father, will be
Earl of &wblank; with a great Estate. 
This young Man took such a fancy to
me, that the very first Opportunity he
had of speaking to me alone, he made
me a Proposal of Marriage. This is, in
my Opinion, a very odd way of proceeding; 
but it is not very uncommon
amongst Men who think themselves so
much above us, that there is no danger
of a Refusal; and consequently
that they may be excused the usual
Forms on such Occasions. I was, at
first, so surprized, I knew not what to
answer; but as soon as I could recollect
my Thoughts, and revolve in my
Mind the Situation I was in, I told him
that I was infinitely obliged to him, for
his good Opinion of me; but that as
I lived in my Lady &wblank;'s House, I 

should think myself guilty of the utmost
Treachery, to marry so near a
Relation of her's without her Consent; 
and as in my Circumstances I was not
likely to obtain that, I begged him to
give up all Thoughts of it. The more
I refused him, the more earnest he was
with me to comply: But while we were
talking, my Lady &wblank; entered the
Room; I could not help blushing and
looking confused, and my Lord— 
was almost as much so as myself. She
has very penetrating Eyes, and immediately
saw something extraordinary
had happened. However, she said
nothing till my Lord—was gone,
when she insisted on knowing the
whole Truth, and was so very pressing,
that at last I told it her; as I had done
nothing I had any reason to be ashamed
of, but acted (as I thought) with
great Honour towards my Lady &wblank; I
had no Suspicion, that letting her know
her Nephew liked me, could possibly
turn out to my disadvantage. But the
Moment I had complied with her Desire,
in telling her what it was that
caused that Confusion in us both, when
she came in, she flew into as great a
Rage, as if I had been guilty of the 

worst of Crimes; talked in her usual
Style, of my Ingratitude; said, It was
a fine Return for all her Kindness,
to endeavour to draw in her Nephew
to marry me. All I could say or
do, could not pacify her. She immediately
sent to my Lord's Father, who
carried his Son out of town, and intends
to send him abroad, in order to
prevent his seeing me any more. 
“And now I am to be used ten times
worse than ever I was; but I shall not
bear it much longer, for let the Consequence
be what it will, I am sure I cannot
lead a more unhappy Life, than I
do at present. I verily believe if my
Lord—was to marry any other Woman,
without a Fortune, it would not
give her half the Uneasiness; but to
think that a Person, whom she has so
long looked on as her Subject, should
have an Opportunity of becoming her
Equal, is more than she can bear. 
Thus, Sir, I am come to the End of
my Story; I wish there was any thing
more entertaining in it, but your desiring
to know it, appeared to me to
arise from so much Good-Nature and 

Compassion for the Afflicted, I could
not refuse to gratify your Curiosity.” 
DAVID assured her, “if it was any
way in his Power to serve her, he
should have the utmost Pleasure in doing
it; and that if she thought it proper
to leave my Lady &wblank; and go
into a Lodging by herself, he would
supply her with whatever she wanted: 
That she had no Reason to
be afraid that he should upbraid her
with being obliged to him; for that, on
the contrary, he should be thankful to
her for giving him an Opportunity of
being any ways useful to a Person of
her Merit: For that he had observed
the World in general was so very
mercenary, he could not help being at
once pleased and surprized, to find a
Person of her Age, and in her Circumstances,
who had Resolution enough to
think of refusing any Offer that was
for her Advantage, from a Notion of
Honour.” 
Whilst they were in this Discourse,
my Lady &wblank; who had altered her
Mind, and did not stay out of town as
long as she at first intended, returned 

home. David thinking he might be troublesome
at her first coming off her Journey,
soon retired, and the Moment he
was gone, my Lady &wblank; vented all the
most ill-natured Reproaches on poor Cynthia,
she could think on; saying, “she
supposed, now her House was to be
made the Receptacle for all the young
Fellows in town: —That she was sure
there must be something very forward
in her Behaviour,––for it could not be
her Beauty that drew Men after her.” 
—In short, she treated her as if she had
been the most infamous Creature alive; 
nor did she scruple to do this before all
the Servants in her House. I suppose, besides
her natural Love of Tyranny, she
was one of those sort of Women, who,
like Venus in Telemachus, lose the Pleasure
of their numberless Votaries, if one
Mortal escapes their Snares. Besides, she
thought it insupportable, that a Wretch
whom she looked upon to be so much
below her as Cynthia, should have any
Charms at all. 
The next Day, David went to see
her again, and as my Lady &wblank; was gone
to make a Visit, he met with Cynthia
alone: He found her dissolved in Tears, 

and in such an Agony, that she was hardly
able to speak to him: At last, however,
she informed him in what manner
my Lady &wblank; had used her, because he
happened to be there when she came
home. David begged her not to bear
this Treatment any longer, but to accept
his Offer; and assured her, he would
both protect and support her, if she would
give him leave. Cynthia was charmed
with his generous manner of offering to
assist her, but said, her case was the most
to be lamented in the world; for that if
she accepted of what he with so much
Good-nature offered her, it would be
in my Lady &wblank;'s Power (and she was
certain it would be in her Will) to make
her infamous. But on David's assuring
her that he would submit to what Rules
she pleased, supply her with whatever she
wanted, and at the same time deny himself
even the Pleasure of seeing her, if she
thought it proper; she at last consented,
and they consulted together the Method
they should take. They agreed that Cynthia
should leave a place she so much detested,
as the House where she then was,
the next day. But she said, she would acquaint
my Lady &wblank; with her Resolution, 

that it might not look like running
away from her: She was very sensible,
she must bear great Invectives and
Reproaches; but however, she thought
she should be able to go through them,
as she hoped it would be the last time. 
DAVID was to take her a Lodging,
and send her word by some Woman,
where it was, that she might go to it
without his appearing in it. When they
had settled every thing to their Satisfaction,
he took his leave, that he might
not be there when my Lady &wblank; came
home. Now the Anxiety was over, for
the Perplexity which is caused by not
knowing how to act, is the greatest Torment
imaginable; but as Cynthia had fix'd
her Resolution, her Mind was calmer and
her Countenance more cheerful than it
had been for some time. My Lady &wblank; 
designed that Evening to use her very
well, which she generally did once a
week or fortnight, as if she laid a plot
sometimes just to give her a taste of Pleasure,
only to make her feel the want of
it the more. But when she saw her look
pleased, and on inquiry found that David
had been there, her Designs were altered,
and she could not forbear abusing 

her. But the moment she began, Cynthia,
instead of keeping her usual Silence,
intreated her to give her one quarter of an
Hour's Attention; which, after two or
three Speeches, which my Lady &wblank; 
thought Witticisms, (such as, That what she
said must be worth hearkening to; That
may be, her new Gallant had put some fresh
Nonsense in her Head;) was at last obtain'd: 
When Cynthia began as follows. 
“I confess, Madam, you took me
from Poverty and Distress, and gave
me Plenty; I own the Obligation, nor
have I ever, even in my Thoughts,
tried to lessen it. The moment People's
Pride makes them wish or endeavour,
by the Power of Imagination and
Fallacy, to lose the Sense of any Favours
conferred on them, all Gratitude must
necessarily be at an end. Had you behaved
to me, as I first flattered myself
you intended, your Ladyship in me,
might have had a willing Slave: I
should have thought my Life would
have been but a small Sacrifice, could
any Interest of your's have required it. 
Nay, I have already done more, I
have given up my Youth, the time
which is the most valuable in Life, to 

please all your Whims, and comply with
all your Humours. You have chose,
that instead of looking on you as my
generous Benefactress, I should find you
an arbitrary Tyrant: the Laws of England
will not suffer you to make Slaves
of your Servants, nor will I bear it any
longer. I am certain, the meanest Person
in your House has not gone thro'
half what I have done for Bread: 
And, in short, Madam, here your
Power is at an end, to-morrow I
shall take my leave of you; I cannot
help wishing you happy, but must
own, I heartily hope you will never
have any body so much in your Power
again.” 
My Lady, who had been used to be
treated by every thing in her House, (her
Husband not excepted) with the greatest
deference, swelled and reddened at this
Discourse of Cynthia's, till at last, for
want of Words to vent her Rage, she
burst into Tears. Cynthia, whose Good-nature
nothing could exceed, thinking
this arose from my Lady's Consciousness
of her own wrong Behaviour, was softened,
and threw herself at her Feet,
asked ten thousand Pardons, said, if she 

could have guessed the Effect what she
said would have had on her, she would
sooner have been for ever dumb, than
have spoke a Word to offend her. But,
alas! how was she mistaken? For as
soon as my Lady's&wblank;Tears had made way
for her Words, she fell upon her with all
the most bitter Invectives she could think
of, and even descended so far as to forget
her Quality, (which was seldom out of her
Thoughts) and use Terms that were perfectly
vulgar, in order to abuse her. 
Cynthia, who had a great Aversion to all
Broils and Quarrels, seeing her Passion
was so high, said no more, but let her
rail on, till it was time to go to bed. 
When Cynthia waked the next Morning,
she thought she had now performed her
Duty in informing my Lady&wblank;of her Design
to leave her, and therefore chose not
to bear any farther Abuses from her: so
that as soon as David's Messenger came,
which was very early, she went with her,
without any more Ceremony, to the Lodging
he had taken for her. And here, I
doubt not, but the graver sort of my Female
Readers will be as ready to condemn
Cynthia for taking such a Step, and thus
putting herself in the power of a Man, 

with whom she had had so short an Acquaintance,
as my Lady &wblank; herself was. 
I do not pretend wholly to justify her; 
but without doubt there are some Circumstances
in Life, where the Distress is so high,
and the Mind in such an Agitation, that
a Person may be pardoned, being thrown so
much off their guard, as to be drawn into
Actions, which if they did in the common
Occurrences of Life, would admit of no
Alleviation. 
CYNTHIA, herself, as soon as she
had time to reflect, suffered as much by
the Consideration of what she had done,
as she did while she lived with my Lady
&wblank; She knew too much of the
World, to be easily persuaded that any
Man could act as David did by her, from
pure Friendship: nor was she indeed long
left in doubt in this matter; for altho'
he paid her all imaginable Respect, yet
she plainly saw that he liked her. This
perplexed her more than ever, for it gave
her very little Relief, to find his Designs
were honourable, as in her Situation she
could not comply with them. For to confess
the Truth, altho' I hope she would
have acted the same part, with relation to
her Refusal of my Lord—had she 

had no other Motive but Honour to induce
her to it; yet she had the additional
Reason for it, of having from her Youth
secretly liked and esteemed a young Gentleman,
with whom she was then acquainted. 
At last, after many Reflections,
and often revolving in her Mind
which way she should act, she fixed on a
Resolution of going into the Country to
see her Cousin, a Person whom she has
often mentioned in the foregoing part of
this History. 
DAVID, altho' it was with great Regret
he parted with her, did not attempt
to say any thing to dissuade her from
what he saw she had so great an Inclination
to; only insisted on her accepting
Money enough to bear her Expences. 
This she would not have done on any
other Consideration, but that of seeing he
would be very uneasy if she refused him: 
And here, for the present, we must take
our leave of Cynthia. 
DAVID's stay with Varnish, was but
of small duration; for altho' he was agreeably
entertained, by continually hearing
the Praises of all the Company they
met with, yet he could not help observing, 

that notwithstanding that Appearance
of Good-nature there was in Varnish,
yet, that in Reality he was not at all
affected with others Sufferings. His Mother
lived with him, and he shewed her
so much Respect, and treated her with so
much Complaisance, that David at first
thought he loved her with the greatest
Tenderness; but as this poor Woman
was afflicted with the Stone and Gout, to
such a degree as often threw her into violent
Agonies, it gave David an Opportunity
of observing that in the midst of her
Groans, which often pierced him to the
Soul, Varnish preserved his usual Serenity
of Countenance, nor did the Gaiety of his
Temper fail him in the least. This reminded
him of the Character that Spatter
had given of him, viz. that he kept up
an eternal Cheerfulness, only because he
had none of those Sensations which arise
from Good-nature; and made David resolve
not to live with a Man he could not
esteem; which was the point he was always
aiming at: And altho' he had met
with so many Disappointments, he was
not yet drove to Despair, but went on in
his Pursuit. 




In which Mr. Simple gave a fresh
Proof, that he was not insensible of
his Fellow-Creatures Sufferings. 
My Hero now had left Varnish,
Cynthia was gone out of Town; 
so that he was to begin the World again. 
And the next Fancy he took into his
Head, was to dress himself in a mean
Habit,––take an ordinary Lodging,––and
go amongst the Lower Sort of People,
and see what he could make of them. 
He went from House to House for a whole
Month; for as he was now got amongst
a Class of People, who had not had those
Advantages from Education, which teaches
Men the Way of artfully disguising their
Dispositions; whilst he lived with them,
he never imagined he had met with
any thing he could esteem. For mercenary
Views there, were so immediately
perceptible in every thing they
all said, or did, that he met with
fewer Disappointments in this way, than 

in any other. This gave him but a melancholy
Prospect; for he thought, if
a Disposition was naturally good, it
would appear as well in the lowest as in
the highest Station. 
As he was sitting one Evening revolving
these things in his Mind, he suddenly
heard a great Scolding in a Female
Voice over his Head; which was so shrill,
and continued so long in one Tone, that
it gave him a Curiosity to know the
Meaning of it. He went up stairs into
a Garret, where he saw a most moving
Scene. There lay on a Bed, (or rather on
a parcel of Rags patched together, to
which the Mistress of the House chose to
give the Name of a Bed) a young Man,
looking as pale as Death, with his Eyes
sunk in his Head, and hardly able to
breathe, covered with half a dirty Rug,
which would scarce come round him. 
On one Side of him sat holding him by
the Hand, a young Woman in an old
Silk Gown, which looked as if it had
been a good one, but it was so tattered,
it would barely cover her with Decency; 
with a Countenance turned wan with
Affliction, and Tears standing in her
Eyes; which she seemed unwilling to let 

fall, lest she should add to the Sorrow of
the Man she sat by, and yet was not
able to restrain. The Walls were bare,
and broke in many places in such a manner,
that they were scarce sufficient to
keep out the Weather. The Landlady was
standing by them, looking like a Fury,
and swearing, “she would have her
Money;—that she did not understand
what People meant to come and lodge
in other Folks Houses,—and not pay
them for it;—she had been put off
several times,—and she could not stay
any longer.” 
DAVID stood like one struck dumb; 
he stared at the Man on the Bed,––viewed
the young Woman;––then turned his Eyes
on the Landlady, whom he was ready to
throw down stairs for her Cruelty. He
was for some time disabled from speaking
by the Astonishment he was under. 
The young Woman in a low Voice, interrupted
with Sobs and Tears, begged
her to have Patience; that if she ever
lived to be worth the Money, she would
pay it her double;—that she must see by
the Condition her Brother was in,—how
improper it was he should be disturbed;–– 
and if he must die, she begged he might
die in Peace. During the time she was 

speaking, David's Tears flowed as fast as
hers; his Words could find no Utterance,
and he stood motionless as a Statue. The
Landlady replied immediately in a surly
Tone, “Brother!––––Yes, it was very
likely, indeed,––that any one would be
so concerned for only a Brother: and
she believed, if she was to tell her
Butcher and Baker, she would pay
them, if ever she should be worth the
Money,––she must go without Bread or
Meat;––she could not think how Folks
could fancy she could live, unless she
was paid her own.” 
DAVID now could hold no longer,
but cried out, “Can any thing in a human
Shape persecute Creatures in the Misery
this young Man and Woman are? –What
do they owe you? I will pay you immediately,
if you will let them be quiet.” 
––As soon as the Woman heard she was to
have her Money, she turned her furious
Look and Tone into the mildest she was
capable of; made a low Court'sy, and said,
“she was sure no one could think her
unreasonable in desiring what was her
Due,––she asked no more;––and if the
Gentleman would promise to pay for
it, she would fetch them any thing
they wanted. –––For her part, she was as 

willing to be obliging as another.” In
saying this, she left the Room. 
The young Woman stared for the
space of a Minute on David, with a
Wildness which quite frightned him; at
last she got up, threw herself at his Feet,
and said, “She was sure he was some
Angel, who had put on a human Form,
to deliver her from the only Distress
that could affect her in that manner; 
which was her Brother's Illness, and
her being totally void of a Capacity
to help him.” 
DAVID, who was very much surprized
at her Air and Manner, had no time then
for Reflections, but only asked her, what
he should get to refresh them, and begged
her to think of nothing at present, but
how to recruit her's and her Brother's Spirits. 
She returned this Goodness with a
Look that expressed more Thankfulness
than all the pompous Words of laboured
Eloquence could have done; “she would
not waste a Moment, before her Brother
was taken care of; and therefore
desired her Benefactor would get
a Glass of Wine, and a Biscuit for him:
for I am sure, says she, it is a great 

many Hours since the poor Creature
has had any thing.” 
DAVID with his Heart ready to
burst, and his Eyes overflowing, ran
down stairs, and made the Landlady (who
was now as sollicitous to oblige, as she
was before to be rude) send immediately
for what they desired; and when he had
got it, ran up stairs with the utmost Joy. 
The young Woman took no Thought
for herself, but used all her Endeavours
to make her Brother get something down,
to revive him; it was with great difficulty
he could swallow, for his Weakness
was so great, he could hardly move. 
He had not yet spoke; but at last, by the
help of the Refreshment he had taken,
he got Strength enough to say, “I
hope, Sir, I shall live to acknowledge
your Goodness, though I am now
utterly unable to do it.” He then
turned to his Sister, and begged her for
God's sake to drink something herself; 
for he was certain she must want it. He
had not Strength enough to go on, but
looked sometimes at her, and expressed
his Amazement at the unexpected Relief
they had found. Sometimes he looked
on David with an Air of Softness and 

Gratitude, in which our Hero's Sensibility
read as much as in any thing he could
have said. The poor Woman, who had
a long time stifled her own Sorrows, lest
she should add to her Brother's, found
now such a struggle of Variety of Passions,
labouring in her Mind at once; the
Tenderness she had for her Brother––the
Joy that suddenly rushed on her, to see
him a little relieved––and the Gratitude
she felt for her generous Benefactor,––that
it quite overcame her; she was unable to
speak, or to refrain any longer from
bursting into a Flood of Tears, which
was the only way she had left, to express
her Thoughts. 
DAVID, who had more of what
Shakespear calls the Milk of Human Kind,
than any Man that ever was born, perceived
by her manner of Behaviour, all
that must pass in her Mind, and was
much less able to comfort her, than what
is generally called a good-humoured Man
would have been: for his Sensations were
too strong, to leave him the free Use of
his Reason, and he stood some time without
knowing what to do. At last, he recollected
himself enough to beg her to
dry her Eyes; saying, it would be the 

utmost Injury to her Brother, to continue
in the Agony, seeing her in that Condition
must unavoidably cause. That Thought
immediately rouzed her, and suddenly stopt
her gushing Tears. As soon as she grew a
little calm, David's Senses began to return
to him; and he asked her, if she
thought her Brother would be able to bear
a Chair, to carry him to some place where
he might get what was decent, and be
taken care of. He had indeed a Chamber
below stairs, where every thing was
clean, tho' in a very plain way, which he
should be welcome to have; but he supposed
they would be willing to move
from a place in which they had met with
such Treatment; besides, there was not
room enough for them all; and he would
not leave them, till he saw them recovered
from the Condition they were now in. 
On which, she replied, “that, indeed,
that last Consideration weighed greatly
with her; but as to the Treatment they
had met with, she had learned from
sad Experience in the World, that
good or bad Usage was to be had, just
according to the Situation any Person
appeared in, and that most People
weighed the Respect they paid others
very exactly in a Scale against the Money 

they thought them worth, taking
great care not to let the one exceed
the other.” The Brother, who found
himself revived, said, “he was sure he
could bear being carried wherever he
pleased; and that nothing could make
him suffer so much, as the being separated
from him.” On which, David
presently went out, got a good Lodging
for them and himself, returned, and
paid the Landlady his and their Bills, (the
whole of what she had been so clamourous
about, amounting to the Sum of only
one Guinea.) He could not help reflecting
with peasure, that this Woman had been
a Loser by her Cruelty––and Ill-nature;–– 
for he paid her whatever price she asked,
and might have stayed with her some
time, had it not been for this Accident. 
DAVID ordered a couple of Chairs,
and put the two poor young Creatures
into them, and followed them to the
Place he had provided for them; where
when they arrived, they were so faint, and
worn out, that he ordered them immediately
to be carried to their Beds, and they
had something warm prepared for them
to take. But the mean Appearance they
made, set all the People in the House 

staring, and wondering what they could
be; neither would they shew them to
their Beds, or get them any thing, till
David, whose Dress, tho' it was but mean,
was whole and clean, pulled out Money
enough to convince them he could pay
for any thing they had: For nothing but
the sight of the Money, could have got
the better of that Suspicion the first sight
of them had occasioned. The next thing
David thought on, was to send for a Physician,
to endeavour to restore these miserable
Wretches to Health. When the
Doctor came, and had seen his Patients,
he told David in a great many Words,
too learned for me either to understand,
or remember, that from the Perturbation
of Mind the young Woman had suffered,
she was in great danger of a Fever; and
that the Man was so excessively weak, it
would be some time before he could be
restored: But he would immediately order
something for them to sleep, and was
in hopes of setting them up again. 
DAVID took care of every thing for
them, and as soon as they had taken the
Doctor's Prescription, left them with proper
People to attend them, and retired into
his own Chamber. His Head was filled 

with the Thoughts of what he had seen
that Day–––nor could he imagine what
these two young People could be; he was
certain by their Manner, and Behaviour,
they could not have been bred in very
low Life; and if they had, he thought it
still a stronger proof of their Sense, that
they could so much get the better of the
want of Education, as to be able, notwithstanding
that Disadvantage, and the
Disguise of their Dress, to show in every
Word, and Gesture, a Delicacy, which
could not be surpassed by the best-bred
Person in the World. 
DAVID got up very early the next
Morning to inquire for them; he heard
they were both fast asleep, and had been
so all Night. This News gave him the
greatest Pleasure imaginable; he sent out
and bought them decent Clothes, to put
on when they got up: And as soon as he
heard the young Man was awake, he
went into his Room, and was surprized
to find such an Amendment: Who, the
moment he saw him, said, “Sir, your
Goodness has worked a Miracle on me,
for it is so long since I have layed in
a Place fit for a Human Creature,
that I have seemed in Heaven to-night. 

I have had no Distemper on me for
some time, but a Weakness occasioned
by a Fever, and the want of Necessaries
had brought me to the Condition
you found me in: I am still faint and
low, but don't in the least doubt soon
to get the better of it. I hear my poor
Sister is not yet awake; no wonder,
the good Creature has sat up with me
a great many Nights, and has had no
Sustenance but a bit of dry Bread: 
Nature must be worn out in her, but
I hope, with the Blessing of God, this
Sleep will refresh her.” 
DAVID then told him, if he was able
to rise that Day, he had prepared some
Clothes fit for him to put on, and likewise
for his Sister; which he had already
sent by the Maid, to be in readiness for
her against she waked. What this poor
Creature, whose Heart was naturally tender
and grateful, felt at seeing himself
loaded with Benefits from a Stranger, I
leave to the Imagination of every Reader,
who can have any Sense of Obligations; 
and those that have none, I am sure must
think enough of Trifles, to imagine he
must be pleased, after being some time in
Rags, to have whole Clothes to put on. 

As soon as the young Woman opened
her Eyes, she got up, and dressed herself
in the things David had sent her, and
then came to see her Brother. She look'd
very pale and weak, but very beautiful; 
her whole Person was exactly formed, and
genteel to Admiration; her Rags could
not totally disguise her, but now she was
clean, she made a most charming Figure. 
The meeting between the Brother and
Sister was with the greatest Joy, to see
each other so much better than they had
been; and David's Pleasure was perfectly
equal with either of theirs, in the Thoughts
that he was the Cause of it. He took such
Care of them, that a little time perfectly
recovered them, and they lived together
in the most agreeable manner: Sometimes
they would say, as they had not a Farthing
in the World, they were so much
ashamed to be such a Burthen to him,
they could not bear it. David desired
them to be easy, for he could not spend
his Money more agreeably to himself than
in supplying People who had the Appearance
of so much Merit. — 
Indeed it was true; for there was such an
open Simplicity in their Manner, and such
a Goodness of Heart appeared in their 

Love to each other, as would have made
any one less credulous than Mr. Simple
have a good Opinion of them; and they
had both such a Strength of Understanding,
as made them the most delightful
Companions in the World. 
DAVID longed to know their Story,
and yet was afraid to ask it, lest by that
means he should discover something in
their Conduct which would lessen his
Esteem for them; besides, he was afraid
they might not care to tell it, and it would
look like thinking he had a right to know
what he pleased, because they were obliged
to him; a Thought, which he would have
utterly detested himself for, could it once
have entered into his Head. He began
to feel for Camilla, (for so we shall call
the young Woman for the future) something
more soft than Friendship, and more
persuasive than common Compassion:
for although Cynthia appeared to be a Person
perfectly deserving of his Esteem,
which was what he had a long time sought
for, and he really very much admired
her; yet there was something which more
nearly touched his Heart in this young
Woman, and immediately caused him to
lose all Regret on the account of the 

other's refusing him; and as he was not
at all suspicious in his Nature, he never
entertained any Notion of what the Landlady
hinted, as if her Companion was
not her Brother. For as he was capable
of the strongest Affection without
the mixture of any Appetite with it,
he did not doubt but others might be so
too, though it is a thing some few People
in the World seem to have no Notion of. 
He lived in a continual Fear, lest she
might not turn out as he wished her: 
He as yet saw nothing but what he approved; 
but as he had been so often deceived,
he was afraid of providing for
himself those Sorrows he had already felt
by too forward a Credulity. 
However, one Evening as David
and Camilla were sitting together, Valentine,
(for that was the Brother's Name)
being walked out for the Air, he resolved
to ask her to let him into her History; 
which he did with the greatest Caution
and Respect, lest she should be offended
at his Request. She told him, “she should
already have related it to him, but that
there was nothing entertaining in it; on
the contrary, she feared from the Experience
she had had of his Good-nature, 

it might raise very uneasy Sensations in
him; but as he desired it, should think
it unpardonable in her not to comply:
only whenever her Brother came in,
she must leave off, not being willing
to remind him of some Scenes, which
she used her utmost Art to make him
forget.” David told her, “he would
not for the World have her do any
thing to give either herself, or Brother
a Moment's Pain.” She then proceeded
to relate what will be seen in the following
Chapter. 




The History of Camilla. 
The Task I have undertaken, Sir,
cannot be performed without Interruptions
from the Remembrance of past
Sorrows; but I make no question, you
will be so good as to pardon my Weaknesses. 
Nay, from what I have observed
of your Disposition, I believe you will
simpathize with me in my Griefs. I am
the Daughter of Mr. &wblank; a Man very
well known in the World from many extraordinary
Actions he has performed; his
Reputation for Sense, and Courage, are
equal. 
I spent my Infancy from the time
I can remember, very different from what
most Children do; it being the usual Method
of most of the wise Parents I have
ever seen, to use their Little-ones in such a
manner, as if they were laying Plots to
make them take an aversion to them all
their Lives afterwards; but my Father 

used to say, that as he lived in a Country
where Christianity was professed, there
was no danger his Posterity would ever
be Slaves. He therefore would never use
them to the Thoughts of Whips and
Rods, nor on any account have them terrified
into any Action by servile Fears. 
Indeed he often added, we did not scruple
buying and selling Slaves in our Colonies; 
but then we took care not to convert
them to our Faith, for it was not lawful
to make Slaves of Christians. My Mother
was a very good-natured Woman,
and shewed her Judgment, in always submitting
to my Father; so that my Brother
and I passed our Childhood in all
the Happiness that state is capable of enjoying; 
and the only Punishment we ever
had for any Fault, was that of being
sent from our Parents sight, which made
us more afraid to offend than any thing
else could possibly have done: for we
soon became so fond of our kind Indulgers,
that our chief Pleasure was to prattle
round them, and see them delighted with
our little childish Remarks. When we
asked any Questions, we were never bid to
be silent, nor called impertinent, but informed
and instructed in every thing we
were desirous to know. This Encouragement 

heightened our Curiosity, and we
were in a manner led into a Knowledge
beyond our Years. We loved each other
with a perfect Fondness; there was no
Partiality shewn to either of us, nor were
we ever told, if we did not do right, the
other should be loved best, in order to
teach us to envy, and consequently to
hate each other. 
When Valentine was Nine, and I was
Eight Years old, he was sent to a publick
School; it was with great difficulty these
fond Parents were induced to part with
him, but they thought it was for his Good,
and had no Notion of indulging themselves,
at his Expence. Their Grief at this
Separation was greatly abated by the Sorrow
we both expressed at parting, as they
thought it a Proof of that Love for one
another, which they had made it their
Study to cultivate, and which they hoped
would be useful to us throughout our
Lives. I was too young to consider any
other Good than the present Pleasure, and
was for some time inconsolable; but my
Father and Mother's Goodness, who endeavoured
all they could to comfort me,
and told me they had only sent Valentine
away for his own Profit, that he might 

be the happier Man, at last intirely pacified
me: We heard from him once a
Week, and I then lived in a Situation, I
think, the most desirable in the World; 
I am sure I have often regretted it since,
and wished to live it over again. This
Life continued till I was twelve Years old,
when all my Tranquillity was interrupted
by a fatal Accident, which has never been
out of my Thoughts twenty-four Hours
since it happened, and which I can never
mention without the most piercing Grief. 
One Morning, as my Mother and I
were walking in the Fields, (as was our
Custom an Hour before Breakfast,) a
Thorn ran into her Foot, which put her
into the most violent Pain; insomuch,
that she was unable to stir. As we were
alone, I knew not what to do to help her: 
I saw her turn as pale as Death, and look
ready to faint away; this threw me into
such Agonies, that I fell a screaming so
loud, that I was heard by some labouring
Men, who were at plough in a Ground
not far from the Place where we were. 
They immediately came to our Assistance: 
I desired them to take one of their
Horses, and contrive if they could to
carry my Mother home; we were not 

above a quarter of a Mile distant, so that
one of the Men made a shift, as she was
a little Woman, to carry her before him. 
It would be in vain to attempt to describe
what my Father, (who loved her
very affectionately,) felt at this sight. 
We rubbed her Foot with some Spirits,
and in a little time she seemed to
be easy, and went about the House only
a little limping, without any great Complaint,
for four Days; at the end of which
she began to be very uneasy. We presently
looked at her Foot, the Point of
the Thorn was just visible; all around it
was very much swelled, and in the middle
was a great black Spot: We neither of
us had Skill enough to pull out the Thorn,
and our Hands trembled at the very approaching
her. 
We therefore dispatched a Messenger
with the utmost speed to fetch a Surgeon,
who, when he arrived, and had
pulled out the Thorn; I, who observed
his Looks, saw he shook his head, and
seemed to fear some terrible Consequence. 
My Mother, who had a Resolution not
to be staggered by any Event, begged of
him to let her know the worst of his 

Thoughts, for she saw he apprehended
something very bad. The Surgeon said,
indeed he had great reason to fear, that
nothing but the immediate Loss of her
Foot could save her Life. At first she
said, she had much rather die; but on
my Father's Persuasions, (in whose power
it was to bring her to any thing) she consented,
but the Operation threw her into
Agonies, which caused so high a Fever,
as could not be got the better of by all
the means that were used. She kept her
Senses to the last, my Father and I never
left her, but sat by her Bed-side as long
as she had any Signs of Life. As she
knew her Sufferings, and losing her was
as much as we were able to bear, she
avoided saying any thing tender, lest she
should add to our Sorrows; but in her
Looks we read what any one who had
less Consideration, and yet had a Mind
capable of feeling, would have said. We
saw her struggling with herself to keep
down, and prevent the Utterance of what
was always uppermost in her Thoughts,
her Tenderness for her Husband and
Children. Only one day when I was left
alone with her, she went so far as to say,
Camilla, make it the business of your
Life to obey, and please your Father: if 

you should live to see him an old Man,
return him that Care by which he has
supported your Infancy, cherish your
Brother's Love, don't remember me to
afflict yourself, but only follow my Example
in your Behaviour to the Man who
has been so good to us both. She saw me
ready to burst, and said no more, but
soon after expired, without ever shewing
the least Emotion of Fear; she looked
forward with Pleasure instead of Terror,
and died with the same Resolution of
Mind, which had conducted her through
all the various Scenes of this Life. 
Thus I lost the best of Mothers, and
from her Loss I date all the Miseries of
my Life. My Father at first was like one
distracted, but as soon as the first Sallies
of his Grief were abated, his good Sense
came in to his assistance; and, by the
help of the many Arguments his Understanding
suggested to him, he calmed
his Mind, and in a great measure overcame
his Affliction; tho', like Macduff,
he could not but remember such Things
were, &c.—yet he bore the common
Fate of Mortals, of losing what they
are fond of, with that Greatness of Mind,
of which no Man had a greater share. I 

was too young to be so philosophical; 
the only Motive I had to command myself,
was the fear of hurting my Father:
and that indeed was sufficient to make me
do, or suffer any thing; for I loved him
with inexpressible Fondness, and did not
want the Addition of my Mother's last
Command to make me obey him, for it
was all the Pleasure I had in Life. He
had no occasion to tell me what to do,
for I watched his very Looks, by them
found out his Will, and in the performing
it, employed all my Time. I resolved
never to marry, for it was impossible
for me to change my Situation
for a happier; for, in my Opinion, to
live with any one we love, and find that
every Action we do is pleasing to them,
is the Height of human Felicity. 
My Brother continued to write to us,
and I had the Satisfaction of hearing he
was in health; and found, by all his Letters,
his Affections were as strong to me, as
when we were Children. He would sometimes
send to my Father for Money a little
faster than he thought convenient; upon
which he would say to me, “This Brother
of yours is so extravagant, I don't know
how I shall do to support him.” But I 

have since thought this was only done to
try me, and to hear me plead for him,
which I always did with all the little Rhetorick
I was mistress of; so that by this
means he contrived to give me the utmost
Pleasure, in letting me believe I procured
my Brother what he wanted. So indulgent
was this Parent, that he used every
Art he was master of, to give me all the
pleasing Sensations that arise from Generosity
and Delicacy. 
As I constantly lived with him, and
was sollicitous in my Attendance on him,
tho' he was very impartial, yet I believe
I was something his Favourite; but I always
made use of that Favour rather for
my Brother's Advantage than my own. 
I have heard of Women's living at home
with their Fathers, and using all their
Arts to make them hate their Brothers,
in hopes by that means to better their own
Fortunes; but to me it is surprizing, for
I could never have forgiven myself, if I
could once have reflected that I had ever
done my dear Valentine any Injury, or
omitted any Opportunity of serving him. 
I lived on in this State, in which I had
nothing to wish but my Mother's being 

alive again, nor any thing to regret but
her Loss. 
I had a Companion in a young Woman
in the Neighbourhood, who had
more Wit and Vivacity than any Woman
I ever knew; and we spent our Time,
when my Father was in his Study, or
gone abroad, in little innocent Amusements,
suitable to Girls of our Age. In
this manner did I live till I was Eighteen; 
happy had it been for me, if my Life had
ended there, I should then have escaped
all those Scenes of Misery I have since
suffered. I lost my Companion; for her
Father dying, and leaving her in bad
Circumstances, she went to live with a
Lady of Fashion, who took a great fancy
to her. This was some Uneasiness to
me, however I could not be miserable,
while my Father was happy and fond of
me. 
But on a sudden I observed he turned
quite thoughtful and melancholy, I grew
very uneasy at it, and took the liberty
one day to ask him the Cause of it, and
begged, if I did any thing he disliked,
he would let me know it, that I might
take care to avoid it for the future. He 

looked at me with an Air of the greatest
Tenderness, and said, My dear Child,
how can you suspect you ever offend
me? No! I am more and more pleased
every day with your Conduct, which is
much above what I ever saw in a Person
of your Years; nay indeed, a Man of the
greatest Understanding would not be
ashamed of your Conversation. I cannot
deny but this Acknowledgment from a
Man of his Judgment had some effect on
my Vanity; but I can sincerely say, that
the greatest Joy I had in it, was owing to
the Thoughts of my Father's Partiality,
and Fondness for me. No, on the contrary,
continued he, my Love of you is
the Cause of my Uneasiness, for I have
let a Passion unawares steal on me, which
I am afraid will be to your disadvantage; 
for altho' with Œconomy I am able to
support you and your Brother in a tolerable
manner, yet my Fortune is not
large, and if I should marry, and have
an Increase of Family, it might injure
you. 
The Object of this Passion is Livia,
the Daughter of &wblank;, her Fortune must
be small, for almost all the Estate that is
in the Family is gone to the eldest Son; 

who, as he is married, and has Children
of his own, cannot be expected to do
much for her. I was overcome with this
Goodness, and desired him not to have
any Consideration for me; and I was sure
I could answer for my Brother, his Sentiments
would concur with mine, in giving
up every thing to his Father's Happiness,
and I would by all means have him
gratify himself; for I should hate myself,
if I thought I was a Burthen, rather than
a Pleasure to him; if we lived on less, we
might be contented, which it was impossible
to be, whilst he was uneasy. During
the time I was speaking, I saw the most
lively Joy in his Eyes; he was happy that
I approved his Passion, and I, to find
what I said was agreeable to him. 
The next day he sent for me into his
Chamber, and told me he had been
thinking on what I said concerning the
Reasonableness of his indulging himself
with respect to Livia, he really believed I
was in the right; that he had turned it in
his Mind every way, and found, that as
he could not be easy without her, it would
be more for all our advantages that he
should have her. In short, he presently
proved, that the most prudent, and wisest 

thing he could do, was to marry her. It
was no hard matter for him to make me
believe whatever he pleased; for I had so
implicit a Faith in whatever he said, that
his bare Assertion was to me the strongest
Proof. But I have often since reflected,
that it is a great Misfortune that a good
Understanding, when it is accompanied
with a very strong Imagination, only makes
People judge right, where their own Inclinations
are not concerned; but when
once any violent Passion interposes, it
serves only to hide and gloss over all bad
Consequences that attend the Gratification
of that Passion, and removes Difficulties
out of the way, to a Man's own destruction; 
which a Person of less Sense,
and a cooler Fancy, would never be able
to accomplish: for Strength of either
Mind or Body, is useful only as it is employed. 
But I ask pardon, Sir,—for
troubling you with my Remarks, and
will proceed in my Story, if you are not
tired with it. 
“DAVID begged her not to be afraid
of that; for, by what he had
heard already, he was but the more curious
to know what remained; and, as
to her Remarks, he desired her always 

to tell him what she felt and thought
on every Incident that befel her; for
nothing could give him greater Pleasure,
as he was sure, by what she had
hitherto expressed, her Sentiments
were just on all occasions.” Camilla
thanked him for the favourable Construction
he put on her Thoughts, and resumed
her Story. 
My Father then told me, he would
send for my Brother home, for he had
now finished his Studies, and he knew
nothing would be so agreeable to us both
as to be together: His Melancholy was
dispersed, the Struggle was over; he had
fixed it in his Mind, it was right for him
to do what his Inclination prompted him
to, and I was perfectly satisfied with it; 
for a Cloud on his Countenance was the
greatest Pain I could suffer: and now I saw
him chearful, I thought that Chearfulness
could not be bought too dear. Valentine
came home immediately on my Father's
Summons, and his Sentiments all perfectly
agreed with mine. 
My Father introduced me to Livia,
and we soon became intimate; she appeared
very fond of me, and I found her 

so agreeable, that I was inclined to like
her as much as my Father could wish. 
He asked me my Opinion of her; I told
him, I thought she seemed a reasonable
Woman, and I did not doubt but she
would make a very good Wife, and be
contented to live in the manner his Circumstances
could afford. He replied,
with a sort of Extasy, that if he had
wanted any Proofs of my Judgment,
what I had now said of Livia could not
fail of convincing him of it. Altho' he
was near Fifty, yet was his Person very
agreeable, and he had such an eternal
Fund of Entertainment in his Conversation,
that all the World coveted his
Company. It was no wonder Livia was
pleased with his Addresses, and withstood
them no longer than was just necessary to
keep up the Ceremonies appointed by
Custom for Women in such Cases, when
they were married to the entire Satisfaction
of all Parties. Valentine paid his
Mother the Respect that was due to her; 
and, for my part, I really liked Livia
from Inclination: but, as I found she
was the Object that gave the greatest
Pleasure to the Man in the World I most
loved, and to whom I owed all the Duty
I was capable of paying, I thought I 

could never do enough to oblige her. 
My Father grew every day fonder and
fonder of his Wife; and now, Sir, I believe
you will think the Happiness of
this little Family could admit of no Addition. 
I thought so at that time, and if the
Opinion I then had of Livia could have
been supported with any Colour of Reason,
I should never have known a Wish
beyond what I then enjoyed. But perhaps,
Sir, if you have not had a great
deal of Experience in the World, you
may be yet to learn, that there are Women,
who, in order to prove their Love
to their Husbands, take an utter Aversion
to every thing that belongs to them. This
was my unhappy Case: the Woman
whom I thought my best Friend, from
the moment she became my Mother,
turned my Enemy, only because my Father
was fond of me; for I am certain
she never had any other Reason for a
Conduct like her's. 
The first step she took, was to assume
an Air of forced Civility, instead of that
Familiarity, which, from the Beginning
of our short Acquaintance, we had been 

used to treat each other with, and throw
me at a distance; for, as Shakespear
says, “When hot Love grows cold, it
useth an enforced Ceremony.” But
in this she for some time lost her Aim; 
for I knew so little of the World, I took
it for a Mark, that she was resolved, as
she was got into a Character in Life so
much hated, (and, I am afraid, too often
deservedly) as that of a Mother-in-Law,
that the World should say she paid me
rather more, than less Respect than before. 
I was not so well pleased with this Behaviour
as I should have been, had she
continued her former Manner; but however,
as I mistook the Motive of her Actions,
I did not esteem her the less. 
But this did not last long, she went
on from one thing to another; till it was
impossible, with all my Partiality for
her, to be deceived any longer; and I
shall never be ashamed to own, it was
with great difficulty my Eyes were opened
enough to see her in the true Light: for
I shall always look on young People, who
are apt to be suspicious, especially of their
Friends, as Persons that can have no real
Goodness in them. They may, if they
please, boast their Judgment; but I cannot 

help imputing it more to the Badness
of their Hearts, than the Goodness of
their Heads. 
DAVID, who never suspected any
body without the strongest Proofs, very
much applauded Camilla's Judgment,
and concurred with her in her Sentiments. 
And she proceeded as follows. 
You will be amazed, Sir, to find all
the Guile and Cunning this Woman made
use of, to make me and Valentine hated
by my Father. I suppose it must be,
because she thought her Interest incompatible
with ours; and that the only way
to spend all her Husband's Fortune, was
to make him believe we were his greatest
Enemies. She was quite different from
the Opinion I had formed of her; for,
instead of being contented with what my
Father could afford, she never thought
any thing extravagant enough; buying
Jewels, going to publick Places, every
thing that was to spend the most Money,
was her chief Delight; and the only Article
in which she ever thought of saving,
was in denying my Brother and me what
we wanted. But this she never did openly; 
for whatever was proposed for us, 

she always came very gladly into. The
Method she took to disappoint us, was,
that by her Conduct, Money soon became
very scarce; for she spent all that was to
be come at, and by that means we were
obliged to go without it. She would
condescend to such mean Arts, that had
I not been witness of it, I could not have
believed any human Creature could have
been capable of them. I have known her
several times bring in Bills to my Father,
where she has set down things for us we
never had, in order to make him think
she had a great Affection for us, that he
might esteem her the more; and when
to our Generosity she owed the Success of
her Schemes, for we neither of us would
discover any thing to make my Father
uneasy, she then exulted in the Thoughts
of her great Sense, and applauded her
own Understanding: for she was wise
enough to mistake a low Cunning, and
such little mean Arts, as People who had
any Understanding could never submit to,
for Sense. I soon found out that all the
Softness and Tenderness I used to imagine
her possessed of, was entirely owing to
her Person, the Symmetry and Proportion
of which gave so pleasing an Air to every
thing she said or did, that nothing but 

Envy could have prevented her Beholders
from being prejudiced in her favour. 
I often thought, could she have beheld
herself in the Goddess of Justice's
Mirror of Truth, as it is described in that
beautiful Vision in the Tatler, she would
have loathed and detested, as much as
now she admired herself. Her fine Chesnut-brown
Hair, which flowed in natural
Ringlets round her Neck, was it to have
represented the Strings that held her
Heart, must have become as harsh and
unpliable as the stiffest Cord: Her large
blue Eyes, which now seemed to speak
the Softness of a Soul replete with Goodness,
had they on a sudden, by the irresistible
Power of a Goddess's Command,
been forced to confess the Truth, would
have lost all their Amiableness, and have
looked askew an hundred ways at once,
to denote the many little Plots she was
forming to do mischief: Her Skin would
have become black and hard, as an Emblem
of her Mind; her Limbs distorted,
and her Nails would have been changed
into crooked Talons, which however,
should have had power to shrink in such
a manner, as that the Unwary might come
near enough (without Suspicion) to be 

got into her Clutches. Not a Metamorphosis
in all Ovid could be more surprizing
than hers would have been, was this Mirror
of Truth to have been held to her. I have
really shuddered with Horror at the Image
my own Fancy has presented me; and
notwithstanding all her Cruelty to me; 
nay, what is much more, to my dear Valentine; 
my Indignation never could rise
so high, as to wish her the Punishment
to see herself in this Glass, unless it could
have been a Means of her Amendment. 
She never abused us; but found Means
to work on our Tempers in such a manner,
as in my Father's sight always to
make us appear in the wrong. She knew
I could not bear the least Slight from any
one I loved without distraction, and
therefore she would contrive, by all the
Methods she could invent, to touch me in
that tender Point, and to raise me into
such a Height of Passion, as might make
me behave in a manner to be condemned
by my Father. Valentine seldom said any
thing, he bore every thing with Patience; 
but unless he too would have joined in
tormenting me, he was never to be forgiven; 
besides, ours was looked on by
her as a common Interest, and he was as 

great an Offence to her Sight as I was. 
When she had worked me up to a Pitch,
in which perhaps I might drop an unguarded
Word, she was then in her
Kingdom; for as she was cool, and all on
her side was Design, she knew how to
play her part. She was always sorry I
was so passionate: —As to her, she loved me
so well, she could put up with any thing
from me;—but as she was my Father's
Wife, she thought it a Disrespect to him,
—and she could not bear the Thoughts of
any one's treating him otherwise than they
ought to do,––and as she was sure he deserved
from every body. ––––He sat wondring
and admiring at her Goodness, blessing
himself at the great Love he saw she
had for him. I was astonished at her
giving things that Turn, and she triumphed
in finding how easily she could
make every thing go to her Wish; but
still she had not done, she must do Acts
of Supererogation, and interceed with
my Father not to be angry with me, for
she really believed it was only Passion. 
He had not yet got so much the better
of the long Affection he had for me, but
he was glad to find any Excuse to be reconciled
to me. 

Thus she flattered him, by engaging
him to follow his own Inclinations, at the
same time that she displayed her own
Goodness. By Means like these, she increased
his Esteem for her, while she deserved
his Detestation: Then she would
come into the best Humour in the world,
and appear as if there was nothing more
in it than an accidental Dispute, which
was all over; she would be so like her
former Self, that for several times she deceived
me, and I began to think I fancied
things, which had no Existence but in my
own Brains. Thus barbarously she often
took pains to pull me off the Rack, only
that she might have the pleasure when I
was almost healed and well, to torture
me again: for to behave inconsistently,
sometimes well, and sometimes ill, is the
greatest Curse, a Mind disposed to Love,
can ever meet with. 
My Brother and I looked with Horror
on the Consequences of the expensive
sort of Life Livia was drawing her Husband
into; and yet as we saw it impossible
to prevent it, we commanded ourselves
enough to be silent. But this was
not sufficient; the Dread we had of what 

our Father would be brought to, broke
out in our Countenances in spite of any
Resolutions we could form to the contrary. 
This she insinuated was owing to Selfishness
in us, and a Fear lest we should
have the less for what she spent. As my
Father could not resist giving way to her
Desires in every respect, and observed
our Disapprobation of it in our Faces, he
began to look upon us as Bars to his
Pleasures, and the Reproachers of his
Actions; which by degrees lessened his
Affections for us in such a manner, that
he esteemed us rather as his Enemies than
his Children. 
Thus my Father's House, which used
to be my Asylum from all Cares, and the
Comfort of my Life, was converted by
this Woman's Management into my
greatest Torment; and my Condition
was as miserable, as a Person's would be,
who had lost the best Friend he had in
the World, and was to be haunted hourly
by his Ghost; but so changed, so altered,
from that pleasing Form in which he
used to place his whole Delight, he
could hardly know him; his Face made
grim with Death, and furious with
some Perturbation of Spirit. Such now 

my Father become to me, instead of that
kind,—that fond,—that partial approving
every thing I said or did; my every Action
was displeasing to him, and he never
saw me, but his Looks expressed that
Anger and Dislike, which pierced me to
the Soul; every thing I wanted was too
much for me: And though I denied myself
every thing but the bare Necessaries
of Life, yet all the Expence of the Family
was imputed to me and my Brother. All
the Servants in the House finding it their
Interest to be as disobliging as they could
to us, took care not to be too officious
in serving us. Such mercenary Wretches
were below my Notice; but yet their Behaviour
was shocking to me, as it was one
of the Proofs of the Decay of my Father's
Love. 
“DAVID here interrupted her, by
saying, that she was very much in the
right, for there was nothing so strong
a Proof, that the Master of a House
has no regard for any one, as his Servants
not behaving well to them; he
had had the melancholy Experience of
it: But he thought she was mistaken,
in thinking any Station could make
People below her Notice; for as to 

him, there was nothing in Life he attended
to more earnestly than the Behaviour
of those Men, whose want of
Education shewed more openly, and
with less disguise, what their Natures
were: indeed hitherto his Observations
of that kind had given him but a melancholy
Prospect.” His Eyes expressed
so much Sorrow as he spoke this,
and his Mind appeared so agitated, that
Camilla gave him a thousand Thanks for
the good-natured part he took in her Afflictions,
and said, she would now take
Leave of him, it being late, and to-morrow
would resume her Story. 