


Of Proverbs. A Chapter full of
very cunning and curious Learning. 
Here, Reader, we cannot omit an
Opportunity of commending the
vast Usefulness of that Learning, which is
to be collected from those Funds of Knowledge,
called PROVERBS: Being short
Aphorisms, in which Men of Great Genius
have wrapt up some egregious Discovery,
either in Nature or Science, making
it thus easily portable for the Memory,
which is apt to fail under the Burthen of
voluminous Erudition. Next, therefore, to
the Merit of those Sages who first drop'd
these inestimable Pearls, are we obliged to
their Care and Industry, who have collected
them together. And here, as it would be
needless to add to the Encomiums given to
Erasmus on this Occasion, I shall pass on
to the incomparable Publisher of Joe Miller's
Jests; whether he be the lamentable Elijah
Jenkins Esq; or the facetious Edmundus 

de Crull Esq; is not very material. In these,
as the learned Lord Bacon says of the Proverbs
of Solomon, We see not a few profound
and excellent Cautions, Precepts, Positions,
extending to much Variety of Occasions,
whereupon we will stay a while offering
to Consideration some Number of Examples. 
PROVERB I.
THE greatest Men may sometimes
overshoot themselves, but their very Mistakes
are so many Lessons of Instruction. 
To teach others the Art of over-reaching. 
PROVERB II.
A good Outside is the best Sir Clement
Cotterel in a strange Place. Here is noted,
Sir Clement Cotterel doth with excellent
Address usher Persons into a strange
Place. 
PROVERB III.
WERE we to believe nothing but what
we can comprehend, every Man upon the 

Face of the Earth would be an Atheist. 
Nothing being so easy as to believe that
Proportion is the Effect of Chance, nor any
Proposition so comprehensible, as that dead
Matter should of its own Accord produce
Life, Thought, &c. 
PROVERB IV.
ARGUMENTS among Men are like
Bones among Dogs; serve to set them together
by the Ears. Ergo, an Argument is
called a Bone of Contention. 
PROVERB V.
THE Chimney and the Garret are related,
and therefore Taylors and Chimney-Sweepers
are Cousin-Germans. This is not
to be understood literally but metaphorically. 
Taylors are in very great Contempt among
the English, nine of them being said to make
only one Man; and in the Play-House the
Public express their Contempt of your Judgment
by calling you a Taylor. Some imagine
this to proceed from the ancient Britons
going naked, and consequently never
using this Mechanic: But I rather apprehend 

the Reason to be from the Moderns
using him so much that they are never out
of his Books. 
PROVERB VI.
THE sick Man doth ill for himself, who
makes his Physician his Heir. Here Caution
is given, that it is not adviseable to
make it that Man's Interest to hurt you, who
hath the Power. 
PROVERB VII.
THE sensible Man and the silent Woman
are the best Conversation. Here is noted
that a Woman talks best who says nothing. 
PROVERB VIII.
HE who rises from Table without saying
Grace, may be said to go away without
paying his Ordinary. Here is noted,
that he who hath no Chaplain at his Table
will not pay his Dues to the Ordinary,
i. e. Bishop. 

PROVERB IX.
A young Fellow who falls in Love with
a Whore, may be said to fall asleep in a
Hogstye. Here is observed the likeness or
Resemblance between a Whore and a Hogstye. 
PROVERB X.
OUR Carts are never worse employed
than when waited on by Coaches. i. e. 
When they carry Rogues to Tyburn. 
PROVERB XI.
FIVE of the most agreeable Things on
a Journey, are Money in one's Pocket, a
good Road, a wholsome Bed, fine Weather,
and a kind Landlady; if she be handsome
too, 'tis so much the better. Here are five
excellent Things brought together in the Compass
of two or three Lines. 

PROVERB XII.
DEBAUCHING a Member of the House
of Commons from his Principles, and creating
him a Peer, is not much better than
making a Woman a Whore, and afterwards
marrying her. Here a Member of the
House of Commons is set forth in the lovely
State of virgin Simplicity and Innocence,
and it is insinuated that if you first debauch
him from that State of Purity and make
him a Rogue, he remains a Rogue still, notwithstanding
a subsequent Peerage; as a
Woman who is debauched remains a Whore
still, notwithstanding a subsequent Marriage. 
And this the Proverb would say farther,
notwithstanding the World calls the former
Right Honourable, and the latter an
HONEST Woman. 
Thus having (to use the Words of that
noble Author once more) staid somewhat
longer on these Sentences than is agreeable
to the Proportion of an Example, and perhaps
offended some, who will direct the
Force of this Chapter (if it have any) where 

it was little meant; I now return to our
Hero, who, to the Surprise, I apprehend,
of the Reader, exemplified the Truth of one
Proverb, viz. He that is born to be hang'd
will never be drowned; which, as Shakespear
phrases it, may be somewhat musty; 
but I am convinced never had so pregnant
an Example of its Veracity before. 