


More Adventures in Elysium. 
A Croud of Spirits now joined us,
whom I soon perceived to be the
Heroes, who here frequently pay their Respects
to the several Bards, the Recorders of
their Actions. I now saw Achilles and Ulysses 

addressing themselves to Homer, and Æneas and
Julius Cæsar to Virgil: Adam went up to
Milton, upon which I whispered Mr. Dryden,
that I thought the Devil should have paid
his Compliments there, according to his Opinion. 
Dryden only answered, I believe the
Devil was in me, when I said so. Several applied
themselves to Shakespeare, amongst
whom Henry V. made a very distinguishing
Appearance. While my Eyes were fixed on
that Monarch, a very small Spirit came up to
me, shook me heartily by the Hand, and told
me his Name was Thomas Thumb. I expressed
great Satisfaction in seeing him, nor
could I help speaking my Resentment against
the Historian, who had done such Injustice
to the Stature of this Great little Man; which
he represented to be no bigger than a Span; 
whereas I plainly perceived at first sight, he
was a full Foot and a half, (and the 37th
Part of an Inch more, as he himself informed
me) being indeed little shorter than some
considerable Beaus of the present Age. 
I Asked this little Hero, concerning the
Truth of those Stories related of him, viz.
of the Pudding, and the Cow's Belly. As to 

the former, he said it was a ridiculous Legend,
worthy to be laughed at; but as to the latter,
he could not help owning there was some
Truth in it: nor, had he any reason to be
ashamed of it, as he was swallowed by Surprize; 
adding with great Fierceness, that if he
had had any Weapon in his Hand, the Cow
should have as soon swallowed the Devil. 
He spoke the last Word with so much
Fury, and seemed so confounded, that perceiving
the Effect it had on him, I immediately
waved the Story, and passing to other Matters,
we had much Conversation touching Giants. 
He said, So far from killing any, he had never
seen one alive; that he believed those Actions
were by mistake recorded of him, instead of
Jack the Giant-killer, whom he knew very
well, and who had, he fancied, extirpated the
Race. I assured him to the contrary, and told
him I had myself seen a huge tame Giant, who
very complacently staid in London a whole
Winter, at the special Request of several
Gentlemen and Ladies; tho' the Affairs of
his Family called him home to Sweden. 

I Now beheld a stern-looking Spirit
leaning on the Shoulder of another Spirit, and
presently discerned the former to be Oliver
Cromwell, and the latter Charles Martel. I
own I was a little surprized at seeing Cromwell
here; for I had been taught by my Grandmother,
that he was carried away by the Devil
himself in a Tempest: but he assured me
on his Honour, there was not the least Truth
in that Story. However, he confessed he had
narrowly escaped the Bottomless Pit; and, if
the former Part of his Conduct had not been
more to his Honour than the latter, he had
been certainly soused into it. He was nevertheless
sent back to the upper World with
this Lot, 

Army.
Cavalier.
Distress.
He was born for the second Time, the day
of Charles II's Restoration, into a Family
which had lost a very considerable Fortune
in the Service of that Prince and his Father
for which they received the Reward very often 

conferred by Princes on real Merit, viz.
&wblank;000. At 16, his Father bought a small
Commission for him in the Army, in which
he served without any Promotion all the Reigns
of Charles II. and of his Brother. At the
Revolution he quitted his Regiment, and followed
the Fortunes of his former Master, and
was in his Service dangerously wounded at
the famous Battle of the Boyne, where he
sought in the Capacity of a private Soldier. 
He recovered of this Wound, and retired
after the unfortunate King to Paris, where
he was reduced to support a Wife, and seven
Children, (for his Lot had Horns in it) by
cleaning Shoes, and snuffing Candles at the
Opera. In which Situation after he had spent
a few miserable Years, he died half-starved
and broken-hearted. He then revisited Minos,
who compassionating his Sufferings, by
means of that Family, to whom he had been
in his former Capacity so bitter an Enemy,
suffered him to enter here. 
My Curiosity could not refrain asking him
one Question, i. e. Whether in reality he had
any desire to obtain the Crown? He smiled
and said, No more than an Ecclesiastic hath 

to the Mitre, when he cries Nolo Episcopari. 
Indeed, he seemed to express some Contempt
at the Question, and presently turned away. 
A Venerable Spirit appeared next,
whom I found to be the great Historian Livy. 
Alexander the Great, who was just arrived
from the Palace of Death, past by him with a
Frown. The Historian observing it, said, ‘Ay,
you may frown: but those Troops which
conquered the base Asiatic Slaves, would have
made no Figure against the Romans.’ We
then privately lamented the Loss of the most
valuable Part of his History, after which he
took occasion to commend the judicious Collection
made by Mr. Hooke, which he said was
infinitely preferable to all others; and at my
mentioning Echard's, he gave a Bounce, not
unlike the going off of a Squib, and was departing
from me, when I begged him to satisfy
my Curiosity in one Point, Whether he
was really superstitious or no? For I had always
believed he was, till Mr. Leibnitz had
assured me to the contrary. He answered
sullenly,–––‘Doth Mr. Leibnitz know my
Mind better than myself?’ and then walked
away. 