


Sea-Adventures very new and surprizing. 
When they arrived at Harwich,
they found a Vessel, which had
put in there, just ready to depart for Rotterdam. 
So they went immediately on
Board, and sailed with a fair Wind; but
they had hardly proceeded out of Sight of
Land, when a sudden and violent Storm
arose, and drove them to the South West; 
so that the Captain apprehended it impossible
to avoid the Goodwin Sands, and he
and all his Crew gave themselves for lost. 
Mrs. Heartfree, who had no other Apprehensions
from Death, but those of leaving
her dear Husband and Children, fell on 

her Knees to beseech the Almighty's Favour,
when Wild, with a Contempt of
Danger truly GREAT, took a Resolution as
worthy to be admired perhaps as any recorded
of the bravest Hero, ancient or modern. 
He saw the Tyrant Death ready to
rescue from him his intended Prey, which
he had yet devoured only in Imagination. 
He therefore swore he would prevent him,
and immediately attacked the poor Wretch,
who was in the utmost Agonies of Despair,
first with Solicitation, and afterwards with
Force. 
Mrs. Heartfree, the Moment she understood
his Meaning, which, in her present
Temper of Mind, and in the Opinion
she held of him, she did not immediately,
rejected him with all the Repulses
which Indignation and Horrour could animate: 
But when he attempted Violence,
she filled the Cabin with her Shrieks,
which were so vehement, that they reached
the Ears of the Captain, the Storm at this
Time luckily abating. This Man, who
was a Brute rather from his Education,
and the Element he inhabited, than from 

Nature, ran hastily down to her Assistance,
and finding her struggling on the
Ground with our Hero, he presently rescued
her from her intended Ravisher; who
was soon obliged to quit the Woman, in order
to engage with her lusty Champion, who
spared neither Pains nor Blows in the Assistance
of his said Passenger. 
When the short Battle was over, in
which our Hero, had he not been over-powered
with Numbers, who came down
on their Captain's Side, would have been
victorious; the Captain rapped out a hearty
Oath, and asked Wild, If he had no more
Christianity in him than to ravish a Woman
in a Storm! To which the other
GREATLY and sullenly answered: “It was
very well; but d&wblank;n him, if he had
not Satisfaction the Moment they came
on Shore.” The Captain replied, Kiss
—&c. and then, turning Wild
out of the Cabin, he, at Mrs Heartfree's
Request, locked her into it, and returned
to the Care of his Ship. 

The Storm was now entirely ceased, and
nothing remained but the usual ruffling of
the Sea after it, when one of the Sailors
spied a Sail at a Distance, which the Captain
wisely apprehended might be a Privateer
(for we were then engaged in a War
with France) and immediately ordered all
the Sail possible to be crowded; but his
Caution was in vain; for the little Wind
which then blew, was directly adverse; 
so that the Ship bore down upon them,
and soon appeared to be what the Captain
had feared, a French Privateer. He was
in no Condition of Resistance, and immediately
struck on her firing the first Gun. 
The Captain of the Frenchman, with
several of his Hands, came on Board the
English Vessel; which they rifled of every
thing valuable, and, amongst the rest, poor
Mrs. Heartfree's whole Cargo, and then
taking the Crew, together with the two
Passengers, aboard his own Ship, he determined
as the other would be only a Burthen
to him, to sink her, she being very
old and leaky, and not worth going back
with to Dunkirk. He preserved, therefore, 

nothing but the Boat, as his own was none
of the best, and then pouring a Broad-side
into her, he sent her to the bottom. 
The French Captain, who was a very
young Fellow, and a Man of Gallantry,
was presently enamoured to no small Degree
with his beautiful Captive; and imagining
Wild, from some Words he dropt, to
be her Husband, notwithstanding the ill
Affection towards him which appeared in
her Looks, he asked her, if she understood
French? She answered in the Affirmative, for
indeed she did perfectly well. He then asked
her, how long she and that Gentleman (pointing
to Wild) had been married? She answered
with a deep Sigh, and many Tears, that she
was married indeed, but not to that Villain,
who was the sole Cause of all her Misfortunes. 
That Appellation raised a Curiosity
in the Captain, and he importuned
her in so pressing, but gentle a manner to
acquaint him with the Injuries she complained
of, that she was at last prevailed on
to recount to him the whole History of her
Afflictions. This so moved the Captain,
who had too little Notions of Greatness, 

and so incensed him against our Hero, that
he resolved to punish him; and, without Regard
to the Laws of War, he immediately
ordered out his shattered Long-boat, and,
making Wild a Present of half-a-dozen
Biscuits to prolong his Misery, he put
them therein, and then committing him
to the Mercy of the Sea, proceeded on his
Cruize. 