


The Event of Fireblood's Adventure,
and a Treaty of Marriage, which
might have been concluded either
at Smithfield or St. James's. 
Fireblood returned from his Enterprize
unsuccessful. The Gentleman
happened to go home another Way than he
had intended; so that the whole Design
miscarried. Fireblood had indeed robbed
the Coach, and wantonly discharged a Pistol
into it, which slightly wounded one
of the Passengers in the Arm. The Booty
he met with was not very considerable,
and much less than that with which he acquainted
Wild; for, of eleven Pounds in
Money, two Silver-watches, and a Wedding-Ring,
he produced no more than two
Guineas and the Ring, which he protested
with numberless Oaths was his whole Booty. 
However, when an Advertisement of
the Robbery was published, with a Reward
promised for the Ring and the Watches,
Fireblood was obliged to confess the whole, 

and to acquaint our Hero where he had
pawned the latter; which he, taking the
full Value of them for his Pains, restored
to the right Owner. 
He did not fail catechizing his young
Friend on this Occasion. He said, he was
sorry to see any of his Gang guilty of a
Breach of Honour; that without Honour
Priggery was at an End; that if a Prig
had but Honour, he would overlook every
Vice in the World. But, nevertheless, he
said, he would forgive him this time, as he
was a hopeful Lad, and wished never afterwards
to find him delinquent in this grand
Point. 
Wild had now brought his Gang to
great Regularity: He was obeyed and feared
by them all. He had likewise established
an Office where all Men, who were
robbed, paying the Value only, (or a little
more) of their Goods might have them again. 
This was of notable Use to several
Persons who had lost Pieces of Plate they
had received from their Grandmothers; to
others who had a particular Value for certain 

Rings, Watches, Heads of Canes,
Snuff-Boxes, &c. for which they would
not have taken twenty times as much as
they were worth, either because they had
them a long time, or that somebody else
had had them before, or from some other
such excellent Reason, which often stamps
a greater Value on a Toy, than the great
Bubble-boy himself would have the Impudence
to set upon it. 
By these Means he seemed in so promising
a Way of procuring a Fortune, and
was regarded in so thriving a Light by all
the Gentlemen of his Acquaintance, as
by the Keeper and Turnkeys of Newgate,
by Mr. Snap, and others of his Occupation; 
that Mr. Snap one Day, taking Mr. Wild
the elder aside, very seriously proposed
what they had often lightly talked over, a
strict Union between their Families, by
marrying his Daughter Tishy to our Hero. 
This Proposal was very readily accepted by
the old Gentleman, who promised to acquaint
his Son with it. 

On the Morrow, on which this Message
was to be delivered, our Hero, little
dreaming of the Happiness which, of its
own Accord, was advancing so near towards
him, had called Fireblood to him,
and, after informing him of the Violence
of his Passion for the young Lady, and assuring
him what Confidence he reposed in
him and his Honour, to which the other
answered, he would be sure to discharge
whatever he entrusted to him, with the utmost
Fidelity; he dispatched him to Miss
Tishy with the the following Letter, which
we here insert, not only as we take it to
be extremely curious, but to be a much
better Pattern for that Epistolary kind of
Writing, which is generally called Love-Letters,
than any to be found in the
Academy of Compliments, and which we
challenge all the Beaus of our Time to equal
either in Matter or Spelling. 

“Most Deivine and adwhorable Creture,
I dout not but those IIs, briter than
the Son, which have kindled such a
Flam in my Hart, have likewise the 

Faculty of seeing it. It would be the
hiest Preassumption to imagin you eggnorant
of my Loav. No, Maddam, I
sollemly purtest, that, of all the Butys
in the unaversal Glob, there is none kapable
of hateracting my IIs like you. 
Corts and Pallaces would be to me Deserts
without your Kumpany, and with
it a Wilderness would have more Charms
than Haven itself. For I hop you will
beleve me when I sware every Place in
the Univarse is a Haven with you. I
am konvinced you must be sinsibel of my
violent Passion for you, which, if I endevored
to hid it, would be as impossible
as for you, or the Son to hide your Butys. 
I assure you I have not slept a
Wink since I had the Hapness of seeing
you last; therefore hop you will, out of
Kumpassion, let me have the Honour
of seeing you this Afternoon; for I am,
with the greatest Adwhoration, 
“Most Deivine Creeture,
Iour most pessionate Amirer,
Adwhorer, and Slave,
Johanatan Wyld. 

If the spelling of this Letter be not so
strictly orthographical, the Reader will be
pleased to remember, that such a Defect
might be worthy of Censure in a low and
and scholastic Character; but can be no
Blemish in that sublime Greatness, of
which we endeavour to raise a complete
Idea in this History. In which kind
of Composition, Spelling, or indeed any
kind of human Literature, hath never been
thought a necessay Ingredient; for if these
sort of GREAT Personages can but complot
and contrive their noble Schemes, and hack
and hew Mankind sufficiently, there will
never be wanting fit and able Persons who
can spell, to record their Praises. Again,
if it should be observed that the Style of
this Letter doth not exactly correspond
with that of our Hero's Speeches, which
we have here recorded, we answer, it is
sufficient if in these the Historian adheres
faithfully to the Matter, though he embellishes
the Diction with some Flourishes of
his own Eloquence, without which the excellent
Speeches recorded in ancient Historians
(particularly in Sallust) would have 

scarce been found in their Writings. Nay,
even amongst the Moderns, famous as they
are for Elocution (it may be doubted whether
those inimitable Harangues, published
in the Monthly Magazines) came literally
from the Mouths of the Hurgos, &c. as
they are there inserted, or whether we may
not rather suppose some Historian of great
Eloquence hath borrowed the Matter only,
and adorned it with those Rhetorical
Flowers for which many of the said Hurgos,
are not so extremely eminent. 