


Curious Anecdotes relating to the History
of Newgate. 
There resided in the Castle at the
same Time with Mr. Wild, one Roger
Johnson, a very great Man, who had
long been at the Head of all the Prigs, and
had raised Contributions on them. He examined
into the Nature of their Defence, procured
and instructed their Evidence, and made
himself, at least in their Opinions, so necessary
to them, that the whole Fate of Newgate
seemed entirely to depend upon him. 
Wild had not been long under Confinement,
before he began to oppose this Man. 

He represented him to the Prigs as a Fellow,
who under the plausible Pretence of
assisting their Causes, was in Reality undermining
the Liberties of Newgate. He at
first only threw out certain sly Hints and
Insinuations; but having by Degrees formed
a Party against Roger, he one Day assembled
them together, and spoke to them
in the following florid Manner. 
Friends and Fellow-Citizens. 
“The Cause which I am to mention to
you this Day, is of such mighty Importance,
that when I consider my own
small Abilities, I tremble with an Apprehension,
lest your Safety may be rendered
precarious by the Weakness of him
who is representing to you your Danger. 
Gentlemen, the Liberty of Newgate is at
Stake: Your Privileges have been long
undermined, and are now openly violated
by one Man; by one who hath engrossed
to himself the whole Conduct of
your Trials, under Colour of which, he
exacts what Contributions on you he
pleases: But are these Sums appropriated
to the Uses for which they are raised? 

Your frequent Convictions at the
Old Baily must too sensibly and sorely
demonstrate the contrary. What Evidence
doth he ever produce for the Prisoner,
which he of himself could not
have provided, and often better instructed? 
How many noble Youths have there
been lost, when a single Alibi would
have saved them! Should I be silent,
nay, could your own Injuries want a
Tongue to remonstrate, the very Breath,
which by his Neglect hath been stopped
at the Cheat, would cry out loudly against
him. Nor is the Exorbitancy of his
Plunders visible only in the dreadful Consequences
it hath produced to the Prigs,
nor glares it only in the Miseries brought
on them: It blazes forth in the more desirable
Effects it hath wrought for himself,
in the rich Perquisites acquired by
it: Witness that Silk Night-Gown, that
Robe of Shame, which to his eternal Dishonour
he publickly wears; that Gown,
which I will not scruple to call the
Winding-Sheet of the Liberties of Newgate. 
Is there a Prig who hath the Interest
and Honour of Newgate so little at 

Heart, that he can refrain from Blushing
when he beholds that Trophy, purchased
with the Breath of so many Prigs! 
Nor is this all. His Wastecoat embroidered
with Silk, and his Velvet Cap,
bought with the same Price, are Ensigns
of the same Disgrace. Some would think
the Rags which covered his Nakedness,
when first he was committed hither,
well exchanged for these gaudy Trappings; 
but in my Eye, no Exchange
can be profitable when Dishonour is the
Condition. If, therefore, Newgate—” 
Here the only Copy which we could procure
of this Speech breaks off abruptly; 
however, we can assure the Reader from
very authentic Information, that he concluded
with advising the Prigs to put their
Affairs into other Hands. After which,
one of his Party, in a very long Speech, recommended
him (Wild himself) to their
Choice. 
NEWGATE was divided into Parties
on this Occasion; the Prigs on each Side
writing to one another, and representing
their Chief of GREAT Man to be the only 

Person by whom the Affairs of Newgate
could be managed with Safety and Advantage. 
The Prigs had indeed very different
Interests; for both Parties were permitted
by their Leader to have their Share in the
Plunder, which the Friends of Johnson had
already enjoyed, and which those of Wild
expected on his Exaltation; what may seem
more remarkable was, that the Debtors,
who were entirely unconcerned in the Dispute,
and who were the destined Plunder
of both Parties, should interest themselves
with the utmost Violence, some on Behalf
of Wild, and others in Favour of Johnson. So
that all Newgate resounded with Wild for
ever, Johnson for ever. And such Quarrels
and Animosities happened between them,
that they seemed rather the People of two
Countries long at War with each other, than
the Inhabitants of the same Castle. 
WILD's Party at length prevailed, and
he succeeded to the Place and Power of
Johnson, whom he presently stript of all
his Finery; but when it was proposed, that he
should sell it, and divide the Money for the
good of the whole; he waved that Motion, 

saying, it was not yet Time, that he should
find a better Opportunity, that the Clothes
wanted cleaning, with many other Pretences,
and, within two Days, to the Surprize
of many, he appeared in them himself; 
for which he vouchsafed no other Apology
than, that they fitted him much better than
they did Johnson, and that they became him
in a much more elegant Manner. 
This Behaviour in Wild greatly incensed
the Debtors, particularly those by
whose Means he had been promoted. They
grumbled extremely, and vented great Indignation
against Wild; when one Day a
very grave Man, and one of much Authority
among them, bespoke them as follows: 
“Nothing sure can be more justly ridiculous
than the Conduct of those, who,
like Children, lay the Lamb in the
Wolf's Way, and then lament his being
devoured. What a Wolf is in a Sheepfold,
a Great Man is in Society. Now,
when one Wolf is in Possession of a
Sheepfold, how little would it avail the 

simple Flock to expel him, and place
another in his stead? Of the same Benefit
to us is the overthrowing one Prig in
Favour of another. And for what other
Advantage was your Struggle? Did
you not all know, that Wild and his
Followers were Prigs, as well as Johnson
and his? What then could the Contention
be among such, but that which
you have now discovered it to have
been? Perhaps some would say, Is it
then our Duty tamely to submit to the
Rapine of the Prig who now plunders
us, for Fear of an Exchange? Surely No: 
But I answer, It is better to shake the
Plunder off than to exchange the Plunderer. 
And by what Means can we effect
this, but by a total Change in our
Manners? Every Prig is a Slave. His
own Priggish Desires, which enslave him
themselves, betray him to the Tyranny
of others. To preserve, therefore, the
Liberty of Newgate, is to change the
Manners of Newgate. Let us, therefore,
who are confined here for Debt only,
separate ourselves entirely from the
Prigs; neither drink with them, nor 

converse with them. Let us, at the same
time, separate ourselves farther from
Priggism itself. Instead of being ready,
on every Opportunity, to pillage each other,
let us be content with our honest
Share of the common Bounty, and with
the Acquisition of our own Industry. 
When we separate from the Prigs, let us
enter into a closer Alliance with one another. 
Let us consider ourselves all as
Members of one Community, to the
public Good of which we are to sacrifice
our private Views; not to give up the
Interest of the whole for the least Pleasure
or Profit which shall accrue to our
selves. Liberty is consistent with no
Degree of Honesty inferiour to this, and
the Community where this abounds, no
Prig will have the Impudence or Audaciousness
to endeavour to enslave; but,
while one Man pursues his Ambition,
another his Interest, another his Safety; 
while one hath a Roguery (a Priggism
they here call it) to commit, and another
a Roguery to defend, they must naturally
fly to the Favour and Protection of
those, who have Power to give them 

what they desire, and to defend them from
what they fear; nay, in this View it becomes
their Interest to promote this
Power in their Patrons. Now, Gentlemen,
when we are no longer Prigs, we
shall no longer have these Fears or these
Desires. What remains, therefore, for us,
but to resolve bravely to lay aside our
Priggism, our Roguery, in plainer
Words, and preserve our Liberty, or to
give up the latter in the Preservation and
Preference of the former. 
This Speech was received with much
Applause; however, Wild continued to levy
Contributions among the Prisoners, to apply
the Garnish to his own Use, and to strut
openly in the Ornaments which he had
stript from Johnson. To speak sincerely,
there was more Bravado than real Use or
Advantage in these Trappings. As for the
Night-Gown, its Outside indeed made a
glittering Tinsel Appearance, but it kept
him not warm; nor could the Finery of it
do him much Honour, since every one
knew it did not properly belong to him,
nor indeed suited his Degree: As to the 

Wastecoat, it fitted him very ill, being infinitely
too big for him; and the Cap was so
heavy, that it made his Head ake. Thus these
Clothes, which perhaps (as they presented
the Idea of their Misery more sensibly to
the People's Eyes) brought him more Envy,
Hatred, and Detraction, than all his deeper
Impositions, and more real Advantages; afforded
very little Use or Honour to the Wearer; 
nay, could scarce serve to amuse his own
Vanity, when it was cool enough to reflect
with the least Seriousness. And, should I
speak in the Language of a Man who estimated
human Happiness without regard to
that Greatness, which we have so laboriously
endeavoured to paint in this History,
it is probable he never took (i. e. robbed
the Prisoners of) a Shilling, which he himself
did not pay too dear for. 