


Will not let the reader fall asleep. 

I Believe the reader will easily perceive,
that it was owing to the apprehensions
of miss Betsy's fluctuating disposition, that
her brothers testified so great an impatience
for bringing the affair of her marriage
to a conclusion; and also, that it
was to confirm her in her resolution, and
reconcile her to the promise she had made,
that lady Trusty had kept her with her
that whole day. 
The arguments urged by that worthy
lady;—the obliging and chearful manner
in which they were delivered, joined to
the facetious and entertaining remarks,
which sir Ralph had occasionally made,
had, indeed, a great effect for the present,
on the too wavering and uncertain
mind they were intended to fix. 
Though she was far from expecting mr.
Munden would come that evening with
her brothers, or even from imagining, he
could as yet be informed of what had
passed in his favour; yet she was not displeased 

when she saw him enter, and if
she looked a little confounded, it was rather
to be attributed to modesty than
anger. 
That gentleman having made his first
compliments to sir Ralph and lady Trusty,
on his being presented to them, flew directly
to miss Betsy, and expressed his
sense of the happiness her brothers had
made him hope, in terms, the most passionate
that words could form;—she received
what he said to her, on this occasion,
with a sweetness which must have
infinitely charmed a heart truly sensible
of the tender passion:—that of mr.
Munden, though less delicate than he pretended,
could not but be greatly affected
with it. 
In fine, the behaviour of both towards
each other, gave great contentment to all
the friends of miss Betsy; and her elder
brother, for form's sake, recapitulating
the proposal of mr. Munden, concerning
her settlement and jointure, sir Ralph gave
that approbation in public, which he before
had done in private:—the intended
bridegroom and mr. Thoughtless agreed
to go together the next morning to mr.
Markland the lawyer, and give him the 

necessary instructions for drawing up the
marriage articles. 
They broke not up company till the
night was pretty far advanced, and mr.
Thoughtless not having his own coach
there, a hackney set them all down at
their respective habitations. 
Thus far all went extremely well:— 
the parties chiefly concerned seemed perfectly
satisfied with each other, and with
themselves, for the agreement they had
mutually entered into, and there appeared
not the least likelihood of any future difficulty
that would arise to interrupt, or
delay the consummation of the so-much
desired nuptials. 
Miss Betsy had not as yet had time to
meditate on what she had given her promise
to perform:—the joy she found her
compliance had given all her friends,— 
the endearing things they said to her upon
the occasion, and the transport mr. Munden
had expressed, on seeing himself so
near the end of all his wishes, had kept
up her spirits, and she imagined, while in
their presence, that her inclination had
dictated the consent her lips had uttered. 

But when she was alone,—shut up in
her own appartment;—when she no
longer received the kind caresses of her
smiling friends, nor the flattering raptures
of her future husband, all the lively ideas,
which their conversation and manner of
behaviour towards her had inspired, vanished
at once, and gave place to fancies,
which might justly bear the name of splenetic. 
‘I must now look upon myself,’ said
she, ‘as already married:—I have promised,
—it is too late to think of retracting. 
—A few days hence, I suppose,
will oblige me to the performance
of my promise, and I may say with
Monimia in the play: 

“I have bound up for myself a weight of cares,
“And how the burthen will be borne none knows.”

‘I wonder,’ continued she, ‘what can
make the generality of Women so fond of
marrying? —It looks to me like an infatuation. 
—Just as if it were not a greater
pleasure to be courted, complimented,
admired, and addressed by a number,
than be confined to one, who from a 

slave becomes a master, and, perhaps,
uses his authority in a manner disagreeable
enough.’ 
‘And yet it is expected from us.— 
One has no sooner left off one's bib and
apron, than people cry,—‘Miss will
soon be married.’—And this man,
and that man, is presently picked out
for a husband.—Mighty ridiculous— 
they want to deprive us of all the pleasures
of life, just when one begins to
have a relish for them.’ 
In this humour she went to bed, nor
did sleep present her with images more
pleasing;—sometimes she imagined herself
standing on the brink of muddy,
troubled waters;—at others, that she
was wandering through deserts, overgrown
with thorns and briars; or seeking to find
a passage through some ruin'd building,
whose tottering roof seemed ready to fall
upon her head, and crush her to pieces. 
These gloomy representations, amidst
her broken slumbers, when vanished, left
behind them an uncommon heaviness
upon her waking mind:—she rose;— 
but it was only to throw herself into a
chair, where she sate for a considerable 

time, like one quite stupid and dead to
all sensations, of every kind. 
At last, remembring, that they were
all to dine at her brother's that day, by
appointment, she roused herself as well as
she was able, and started from the posture
she had been in:—‘I see I am at the
end of all my happiness,’ said she,
and that my whole future life is condemned
to be a scene of disquiet;— 
but there is no resisting destiny;—they
will have it so:—I have promised, and
must submit.’ 
On opening a little cabinet, in which
she always kept those things she most valued,
in order to take out some ornaments
to put on that day, the picture of
mr. Trueworth stared her in the face. — 
‘Ah!’ said she, taking it up, and looking
attentively upon it, ‘if my brother
Frank and lady Trusty had been in
town, when the original of this made
his addresses to me, I should then, as
now, have been compelled to have given
my hand. —It is likely too. I
should have yielded with the same reluctance. 
—Blinded by my vanity,— 
led by a mistaken pride,—I had not
considered the value I ought to have set
upon his love. —He had not then done 

any thing for me more than any other
man, who pretended courtship to me,
would have done. —I know not how
it is, I did not then think him half so
agreeable as I now find he is. —What
a sweetness is there in these eyes!’ cried
she, still looking on the picture. — 
‘—What an air of dignity in every feature! 
—Wit,—virtue,—bravery,— 
generosity,—and every amiable quality
that can adorn mankind, methinks are
here compris'd.’ 
‘But to what purpose do I now see all
these perfections in him!’ went she on. 
‘—He is the right of another;—he has
given himself to one, who knows better
than my unhappy self to do justice to
such exalted merit:—he thinks no
more of me, and I must henceforth think
no more of him.’ 
She ended these words with a deep sigh,
and some tears, then laid the picture up,
and endeavoured to compose herself as
well as she could. 
She was but just drest when mr. Munden
came to wait on her, and conduct
her to her brother's, where they were to
dine:—he told her, he had been with
the elder mr. Thoughtless at the lawyer's 

about the writings;—‘so that now, my
angel,’ said he, ‘I flatter myself, that my
days of languishment are near a period.’ 
He took the freedom of accompanying
these words with a pretty warm embrace. 
—‘Forbear, mr. Munden,’ cried she,
with the most forbidding coldness;— 
‘you have yet no right to liberties of
this nature.’ 
‘Cruel and unkind miss Betsy!’ resumed
he;—‘must nothing then be allowed
to love, and all be left to law?’ 
—He then went on with some discourses
of the passion he had for her, and the
joy he felt in the thoughts of his approaching
happiness:—to all which she
made very short replies, 'till at last it
came into her head to interrupt him in
the midst of a very tender exclamation,
by saying,—‘Mr. Munden, I forgot to
mention one thing to you; but it is
not yet too late,—I suppose you design
to keep a coach?’ 
This a little startled him, and looking
upon her with a very grave air,—‘Madam,’ 
said he, ‘you are sensible my
estate will not permit me to oblige you
in this point.’ —‘And can you imagine 

I will ever marry to trudge on foot,’ 
cried she? 
‘I should be both sorry and ashamed,’ 
replied he, ‘to see you do that; but
there are other conveniencies, which
will, I hope, content you, 'till fortune
puts it in my power to do otherwise.’ 
He then reminded her of the expectations
she had frequently heard him make
mention of, concerning his hopes of soon
obtaining, both an honourable and lucrative
employment, and assured her, that
as soon as he had procured a grant of it,
he would set up an equipage accordingly. 
But this did not at all satisfy her;— 
she insisted on having a coach directly,
and gave him some hints, as if she would
not marry without one, which very much
nettling him, he desired she would remember
her promise, which was absolutely
given, without the least mention of a
coach being made. 
‘I would not have you,’ said she,
‘insist too much on that promise, lest I
should be provoked to give you the
same answer Leonora, in the play, gives
to her importunate lover: 


“That boasted promise ties me not to time,
“And bonds without a date, they say are void.”

Mr. Munden could not now contain
his temper;—he told her, he could not
have expected such treatment, after his
long services, and her favourable acceptance
of them:—that he thought he merited,
at least, a shew of kindness from
her; and in fine, that she did not act towards
him as became a woman of honour. 
This was a reproach, which the spirit
of miss Betsy was too high to bear;— 
she blushed with indignation, and casting
the most disdainful look upon him, was
about to make some answer, which, perhaps,
in the humour he then was, would
have occasioned him to retort in such a
manner, as might have broken off all the
measures which had been so long concerting,
if a sudden interruption had not prevented
it. 
Mr. Francis Thoughtless not knowing
any thing of mr. Munden's being there,
and happening to pass that way, called on
his sister to know if she was ready to go 

to his brother's, it being near dinner
time;—he immediately perceived, by
both their countenances, that some brulée
had happened between them, and on his
asking, in a gay manner, the cause of it,
mr. Munden made no scruple to relate
the sum of what had passed. —The brother
of miss Betsy, though in his heart
very much vexed with her, affected to
treat what mr. Munden had said as a
bagatelle, and calling to his sister's footman
to get a hackney coach to the door,
made them both go with him to his brother's,
saying, They would there adjust
every thing. 
