

Is full of remarkable and interesting particulars. 
Bellpine had no occasion to make any previous apology to miss Chit for bringing a friend with him to visit her, having already taken that liberty, without her being displeased with it, in favour of several of his companions, who had testified to him a desire of becoming acquainted with her. 
But it was not in this manner he chose to introduce Jemmy;—the plot he had laid required they should appear as agreeable as possible to each other;—it was therefore highly necessary to prepossess her with such an idea of the person she was to see, as should make her neglect nothing that might set off all the charms she was mistress of to the best advantage. 
Having well considered within himself under what character a man was likely to appear in the eyes of a young,—gay,—vain woman, he went to her pretty early in the morning, and began with telling her he was come in behalf of a gentleman, who had entreated him to be his intercessor for permission to wait on her with him that afternoon. 
This formal speech, from a man whose usual deportment might rather be accused of too little than too much ceremony, made her laugh very heartily: —‘Bless me,—said she,—what romances have you been reading!—we are not sure running back to the days of Oroondates and Statyra; if you have any friend to bring here, what need all this prelude? you know very well that every one you introduce is welcome.’ 
Bellpine on this threw off the serious air he had affected, and resumed that free and undaunted one which was most natural to him, ‘Faith, madam, answer'd he, I can easily join with you in laughing at myself; I know I must make an odd figure in the grave strain, by the pains I took in putting it on; but I thought as I was one of cupid's harbingers, my message ought to be deliver'd in somewhat above the common phrase.’ 
‘A harbinger from cupid, cried she; I find then you would persuade me you have this commission to me from a lover. Most certainly, answer'd he, from one who is three parts so at least; he is already charmed with your face, your air, your shape, and there is only wanting your fine voice to complete the conquest. 
‘Of whom? demanded she; 'tis fit I should know the name of this new vassal.’ ‘Have a little patience, said he, and I will tell you everything; in the first place he is a young heir, lately come to the possession of an estate sufficient to support a coach and six; in the next he is handsome, well made, has as genteel an address as any man about town; lastly, he is allow'd to have wit, honour, and good nature, and his name is Jessamy.’ 
‘I have seen that gentleman, return'd she, somewhat seriously; and believe you have done him no more than justice in the representation you have made of him; but I have been told he is deeply engaged, and on the point of being married to a young lady of his own name; I think they call her miss Jenny Jessamy.’ 
‘Nothing in it, upon my honour, cried Bellpine; I can aver to you from my own knowledge, that there are no two people in the world of different sexes that have a more perfect indifference for each other; there was, indeed, such a thing intended for them by their fathers; but the old men are both dead, and you know, madam, we young folks are apt to pay but little regard to the injunctions laid upon us by those who are no longer in a condition to resent our disobedience. 
‘It is true, continued this artful deceiver, they see each other very frequently, hold a good correspondence, converse as friends; but without one grain of inclination on either side. I am very well assured, by what I have heard both of them declare, that should either of them insist on the performance of the covenant made between their parents, an eternal breach must infallibly ensue.’ 
Jemmy and Jenny Jessamy kept too much company not to be well known in the polite world; their characters, their fortunes, and their mutual engagements, were no secret; they were the subjects of conversation among many who had not the least personal acquaintance with either of them; and it was a matter of surprise to every one that a marriage, which had so long ago been projected, was not as yet consummated. 
As no body had pretended to discover any reason for this unaccountable delay, miss Chit might easily give credit to that which Bellpine now assigned for it. Bellpine watch'd her every look, and perceiving that his insinuations had wrought thus far on her belief, proceeded to what now seem'd to him a task not difficult to be accomplish'd; that of persuading her Jemmy in reality felt some beginnings of a passion for her. 
‘You cannot imagine, said he, with what raptures he expresses himself concerning you; the first time he saw you was at court; I was with him the same evening, and he could talk on nothing but you the whole time we were together. —What eyes she has,—how bright, how sparkling,—what a mouth,—how finely turn'd,—how delicate is her shape,—how enchanting is her air!’ 
‘Hold, mr. Bellpine,’ interrupted she, putting her hand before his mouth, ‘for the sake of curiosity no more; if you go on at this rate I shall know all before-hand, and he will have nothing new to say to me when he comes.’ 
‘Nay, rejoin'd Bellpine, I do not suppose he will say much to you at this first visit, nor perhaps at the second, or even at the third. I have been told, by those who have experienced the passion, that a true lover never gets courage to declare what he feels to his mistress till half the town are appriz'd of it by his behaviour; but, pursued he, you will have penetration enough to read in his looks what his lips wants boldness to reveal.’ 
‘Pish, said she, do you think I shall give myself the trouble to examine his looks? it will be time enough for me to attend to them when his tongue shall have explain'd the dictates of his heart.’ 
They had some farther discourse on this head, and in spite of the careless air miss Chit affected to put on, the cunning Bellpine saw the impression his words had made upon her; and, after adding all that he thought necessary for strengthening it in her, took his leave, highly applauding himself in his mind for what he had done. 
He met Jemmy at the appointed hour at the chocolate house, and about tea time went with him on their purposed visit; on his sending up his name they were immediately shew'd to the room where miss Chit was sitting; when he found, by the great care she had taken in her dress, and the exactness of every thing about her, that he had not flattered himself with a vain conjecture, but that she was indeed as desirous as he could wish of appearing lovely in the eyes of this new guest. 
Jemmy, being presented her by Bellpine, saluted her with the utmost gallantry; she received him with a becoming modesty, which, notwithstanding, had something of inviting in it; the conversation at first turn'd only on general topics; but Bellpine would not suffer it to continue so, and told her, in his usual free manner, that he should not think himself forgiven for the liberty he had taken, till she had obliged both him and his friend with a song and a touch of her harpsichord. 
To this she replied, with a sprightly tone of voice and gesture, that whatever he might think of her, she had too much complaisance for a stranger, who seem'd so well to deserve it, not to do every thing in her power to render the visit he had favour'd her with agreeable to him. 
In speaking these words she sat down to her instrument, and, without waiting for any more intreaties, began to sing one of the most favourite airs in mr. Handel's last oratorio. 
As she had in reality a very fine voice, great skill in music, and played admirably well, there was no occasion that Jemmy should stretch truth to a pitch too high in expressing the pleasure he took in hearing her. 
But it was not in mere words alone he testified the mighty influence that the well concerted notes had over him;—he languished,—he died,—his soul seem'd all absorb'd,—dissolv'd in extacy;—and he not only spoke, but look'd in such a manner as without being prepossess'd, as she was, with an opinion of his having a passion for her, might well make her believe she had other charms for him besides those of her voice and skill in music. 
As often as she gave over, Bellpine press'd her to renew the harmony; and sometimes Jemmy assumed the boldness to second a petition, which he was very sensible was made entirely on his account. The lady was not refractory to their united intreaties, and continued playing till her father came into her room. 
The usual compliments being past, they all sat down and enter'd into conversation; but whatever subject was started by the old gentleman, either the one or the other of miss Chit's visitors had the address to turn it on the praise of music, and the perfection which she had attain'd to in that science. 
Jemmy said many things which might seem extravagant on this occasion; but thinking he had stay'd long enough for a first visit, rose up and was preparing to take his leave, when mr. Chit, who had been tutor'd before-hand by his daughter how he should behave, would not suffer him to speak of going, seiz'd upon his hat and gloves, and said that if his daughter had afforded them any entertainment, it was owing to him for having provided the best masters for her; and he therefore expected they would recompence him for it, by giving him their company the remainder of the evening; adding, that supper was just ready to be served up. 
Jemmy would fain have excused himself, as he had an appointment which he was very unwilling to break; but there was no resisting the present kind compulsion, especially as miss Chit condescended to join her intreaties with her father's; he therefore comply'd and contented himself with sending an apology to those who expected his coming. 
The collation prepared for them was so elegant, the old gentleman's conversation so facetious, and his daughter's music so delightful, that the night was almost lost in morning-dawn when Jemmy and his false friend came away; but what use the latter made of this long visit the reader will very soon discover. 
