

CHAP. I.
May more properly be called an introduction to the ensuing history, than a part of it. 
p. 1
CHAP. II.
Contains the narrative of a very odd adventure, but perfectly a'-pro-pos, tho' at present it may perhaps appear a little foreign to the business in hand. 
9
CHAP. III.
Is of still more importance than the former. 
25
CHAP. IV.
Will probably occasion various conjectures on what is to come. 
40
CHAP. V.
Is somewhat more explicit than the former. 
50
CHAP. VI.
Contains some things well worthy of being seriously attended to, by those especially for whose service they are chiefly inserted. 
61

CHAP. VII.
Affords fresh matter for edification to those who stand in need of it, as well as entertainment to such who do not. 
75
CHAP. VIII.
Will occasion various speculations in the inquisitive reader. 
88
CHAP. IX.
Has something in it of the marvellous. 
98
CHAP. X.
Affords but small matter of entertainment; yet, if well consider'd, may be of singular use to some readers. 
108
CHAP. XI.
A little more to the purpose. 
116
CHAP. XII.
Contains a very notable Instance of friendship a-la-mode. 
127
CHAP. XIII.
Is full of remarkable and interesting particulars. 
137
CHAP. XIV.
Seems big with the promise of some mighty matters hereafter to be brought to light. 
147
CHAP. XV.
Contains an example that for a woman to be too good is not one of those things which are impossible to be found in human life. 
158

CHAP. XVI.
Treats only on such matters as it is highly probable some readers will be apt to say might have been recited in a more laconic manner, if not totally omitted; but as there are others, the author imagines much the greater number, who may be of a different opinion, it is judged proper that the majority should be obliged. 
170
CHAP. XVII.
Will in all likelihood appear, to the greatest part of our readers, a good deal more interesting than the former. 
182
CHAP. XVIII.
Contains a brief account of Jenny's journey to Bath; and also some passages which happen'd on her arrival there. 
190
CHAP. XIX.
Treats of many things, which tho' they may seem at present less affecting than some others, yet are very necessary for the reader to be acquainted with, before we proceed farther into the history. 
204
CHAP. XX.
Is taken up with a conversation of very great importance. 
211
CHAP. XXI.
Gives an account of some passages, which, added to the former, affords our heroine much matter of discontent. 
223

CHAP. XXII.
Affords some very useful and exemplary hints to young persons of both sexes; which if they are not the better and wiser for, it is wholly owing to themselves, and not the fault of the author. 
234
CHAP. XXIII.
Relates how, in the compass of an hour, Jenny met with two surprising adventures of very different kinds; and the manner in which she behaved in them, with some other no less extraordinary particulars, which the reader will doubtless be puzzled to know the meaning of. 
247
CHAP. XXIV.
Contains some part of the history of the furious stranger, as told by herself. 
257
CHAP. XXV.
Contains a continuation of mrs. M&wblank;'s adventures. 
267
CHAP. XXVI.
Will gratify the reader's impatience with the conclusion of mrs. M&wblank;'s history; and also with what effects the recital of it produced in the minds of those who heard it. 
277

