


Is very full of Business. 

The two brothers of miss Betsy having
some reason to apprehend, she
would still find some pretence, if possible,
to evade fulsilling the promise she had
made them, in regard to mr. Munden,
and also, that he, finding himself trifled
with, might become weary of prosecuting
so unavailing a suit, and break off as mr.
Trueworth had done, resolved to omit
nothing in their power for bringing to a
conclusion an affair, which seemed to them
so absolutely necessary for securing the
honour of their family, in that of their
sister. 
They suspected, that her putting off
the marriage till the arrival of sir Ralph
and lady Trusty, was only to gain time,
and invent some excuse to get that lady on
her side:—they therefore judged it highly
proper to acquaint her previously with
the motives, which made them so impatient
to see their sister disposed of, and by
that means prevent her ladyship from being 

prepossessed by any ideas the other
might prepare for that purpose. 
Accordingly, mr. Francis Thoughtless
having been informed by letter, of the day
in which they intended to be in town, he
went on horseback, and met them at the
inn where they dined, about twenty miles
from London. 
That good lady was so much troubled
at the recital he made her of miss Betsy's
late adventures, that she could not forbear
letting fall some tears; and though she
laid the blame of her ill-conduct chiefly
on her having lived so long under the
tuition and example of a woman, such as
lady Mellasin; yet she could not but allow
there was a certain vanity in her composition,
as dangerous to virtue, as to reputation,
and that marriage was the only
defence for both. 
Sir Ralph, who was an extreme facetious,
good-natured man, was a little pleasant
on what his lady had said on this occasion. 
—‘You forget, my dear,’ cried
he, ‘how many ladies of late have broke
the conjugal hoop, and think themselves
justified in doing so, by having been
prevailed upon to enter into it without 

inclination. —Remember the words of
the humorous poet Hudibrass: 

“Wedlock without love, some say,
“Is but a lock without a key;
“And 'tis a kind of rape to marry
“One, who neglects, or cares not for ye;
“For what does make it ravishment,
“But being against the mind's consent.’

‘Does miss Betsy,’ continued he, to
mr. Francis, ‘love the gentleman you
would have her marry?’ —To which
the other replied, ‘That the temper of
his sister was too capricious for any one
to be able to judge of the real situation
of her heart, or even for herself to be
perfectly assured of it.’ 
He then proceeded to inform him how
long mr. Munden had courted her, and
of the great encouragement she had always
given to his addresses:—her submitting
the decision of the affair to the
elder mr. Thoughtless's inspection into the
circumstances of his estate, which being
found agreeable to the report made of it,
she now only waited, or pretended to wait,
for the approbation of sir Ralph, as being
by her father's will constituted her
guardian. 

‘Well then,’ said sir Ralph, ‘since it
is so, and you are all desirous it should
be a match, I shall not fail to give my
verdict accordingly.’ 
As impatient as the two brothers were
to see her married, and out of the way of
those temptations she at present lay under,
they could not be more so than lady
Trusty now was;—she doubted not, that
the virtue and good sense of that young
lady, would render her a very good wife,
when once she was made one, and therefore
heartily wished to see her settled in
the world, even though it were to less
advantage, than her beauty, and the many
good qualities she was possessed of might
entitle her to expect. 
It was in order to do every thing in
her power to bring about what she thought
so good a work, that she had drawn miss
Betsy from the company, and retired with
her into the closet, in the manner already
related. 
Miss Betsy, who knew nothing of all
this, or even that her brother had gone to
meet them on the road, was extremely
surprized to find by the discourse, with
which lady Trusty entertained her, that 

no part of what had happened to her, ever
since the death of mr. Goodman, was a
secret to her ladyship. 
She presently saw, however, it must be
by her brother Frank, that this intelligence
had been given, and was not at all
at a loss to guess the motive of his having
done it.—‘I find, madam,’ said she,
‘that all the errors and inadvertencies I
have been guilty of are betrayed to you,
and am far from being sorry they are
so, since the gentle reproofs you take
the trouble to give me, are so many
fresh marks of the friendship with which
you vouchsafe to honour me, and which
I shall always esteem as my greatest
happiness. —I flatter myself, however,
continued she, that the remembrance of
what has lately befallen me, and the
imminent dangers I have escaped will
enable me to regulate my conduct, in
such a manner, as to give your ladyship
no farther pain on my account.’ 
Lady Trusty on this embraced her with
the utmost tenderness, and told her, that
there were few things she either wished
or hoped for with greater ardency, than
to see her happily settled, and freed from
all temptations of what kind soever. 

This worthy lady then fell on the subject
of mr. Munden, and recapitulated all
the arguments which had been already
urged, to perswade her to come to a determination:
—in fine, she left nothing
unsaid, that was suitable to the occasion. 
Miss Betsy listened to her with the most
submissive attention, and after a short
pause, replied in these terms:—‘Madam,’ 
said she, ‘I am convinced by my own
reason, as well as by what your ladyship
has been pleased to say, that I have
indeed gone too far with mr. Munden
to be able to go back with honour, and
since I find he has the approbation of
all my friends, shall no longer attempt
to trifle with his pretensions.’ 
‘You will marry him then,’ cried lady
Trusty? —‘Yes, madam,’ answered miss
Betsy; and added, though not without
some hesitation, ‘since my marriage is a
thing so much desired by those, to whose
will I shall always be ready to submit,
mr. Munden has certainly a right to
expect I should decide in his favour.’ 
She said no more, but hung down her
head, and lady Trusty was going to make
some reply,—perhaps to ask how far 

her heart acquiesced in the consent her
tongue had given, but was prevented by
sir Ralph, who pushing open the door of
the room where they were, told her, she
engrossed his fair charge too long;—that
it was now time for himself, and her brothers,
to have some share in their conversation. 
‘Some polite wives, sir Ralph,’ said lady
Trusty, laughing, ‘would not have excused
so abrupt a breaking in on their privacy,
and I assure you, if you had interrupted
us a moment sooner, you might
have spoiled all; for miss Betsy has but
just given me her promise to marry mr.
Munden.’ 
‘I should have been heartily sorry indeed,’ 
said he, ‘if my over zeal had
rendered me a Marplot on this occasion; 
—but come,’ continued he, ‘since the
young lady has at last resolved, let us
carry the joyful news to her brothers.’ 
In speaking these words he gave one of
his hands to lady Trusty, and the other to
miss Betsy, and led them into the dining
room, where the mr. Thoughtlesses were:
— ‘Well, gentlemen,’ said he, ‘your
sister has at last consented to give you a 

brother,—pray thank her for the addition
she is going to make to your family.’ 
‘I hope,’ said the elder mr. Thoughtless,
‘she will find her own happiness in
doing so. —The younger added something
to the same purpose. —After this
the conversation turned chiefly on the solid
satisfaction of a married life, in which
miss Betsy took but little part, only saying
to her two brothers:— ‘Well,— 
since both of you have so high an opinion
of matrimony, and will needs have
me, who am by some years younger
than either of you, lead the way, I
hope I shall soon see you follow the example.’ 
‘Our elder brother,’ said mr. Francis,
‘may, doubtless, marry whenever he
pleases; and as for my part, when it
can be proved that I have an offer made
me, equally advantageous to what you
have rejected, and I should refuse it, I
could not be angry with the world for
condemning my want of judgment.’ 
‘No more of that,’ cried sir Ralph;— 
‘you see she hears reason at last.’ —Lady
Trusty would fain have perswaded the
gentlemen to stay dinner there, but they 

excused themselves, as expecting company
at home, and said, if possible they would
return towards evening;—she would not
however permit miss Betsy to take leave,
and her continuing there that whole day
happened to bring things somewhat sooner
to a conclusion, than perhaps they otherwise
would have been. 
Mr. Munden, as soft and complaisant
as he carried it to miss Betsy, was very
much disgusted in his mind at her late behaviour; 
—he found she loved him not,
and was far from having any violent inclination
for her himself; but the motives,
which had made him persevere in his
courtship, after being convinced of the
indifference she had for him, made him
also impatient to bring the affair to as
speedy a result as possible. —Sir Ralph
was the last person to whom she had referred
the matter;—he had heard by
accident of that gentleman's arrival, and
went to her lodgings, in order to see in
what manner she would now receive him; 
but not finding her at home, called at the
house of mr. Thoughtless, who had always
been very propitious to his suit. 
On the two brothers returning from sir
Ralph's, they met him just coming out
of the house:—the elder desired him to 

walk in,—told him with a great deal of
freedom, that sir Ralph was come to
town;—that the business having been
communicated to him, he approved of
the match, and his sister had consented. 
—Mr. Munden received this information
with all the seeming transport of a man
passionately in love:—he made them a
thousand retributions for the part they had
taken in his interest, and they expressed
no less satisfaction in the accomplishment
of his desires. —After some few compliments
on both sides, the elder mr. Thoughtless
informed him, that miss Betsy was to
stay the whole day with sir Ralph and
lady Trusty;—that himself and brother
had promised to return thither in the
evening, and that he should be glad if he
would accompany them, in order that
when they were all together, every thing
might be settled for the completion of
the nuptials. 
It is not to be doubted but that the lover
readily embraced this proposition, and an
hour for his waiting on them being prefixed,
he took his leave, the company
that was to dine with mr. Thoughtless
that instant coming in. 
