

New circumstances arose, which unexpectedly
changed the course of our
hero's mind. There was a certain Lady
Millicent, Lady Norton had read from
her memorandum-book among the list
of guests expected at Castle Hermitage.
Sir Ulick, as Ormond recollected, had
pronounced her to be a charming, elegant,
fascinating creature. Sir Ulick's
praise was sometimes exaggerated, and
often lavished from party motives, or
given half in jest and half in earnest,
against his conscience. But when he did
speak sincerely, no man's taste or judgment
as to female beauty, manners, and
character, could be more safely trusted.

He was sincere in all he said of Lady
Millicent's appearance and manners,
but as to the rest, he did not think himself
bound to tell all he knew about her.
Her ladyship arrived at Castle Hermitage.— 
Ormond saw her, and thought
that his guardian had not in the least
exaggerated as to her beauty, grace, or
elegance.
She was a very young widow, still in
mourning for her husband, a gallant
officer, who had fallen the preceding
year at a siege in Flanders.
Lady Millicent, as Lady Norton said,
had not, and she feared never would,
recover from the shock her health had
received, at the time of her husband's
death. This account interested Ormond
exceedingly for the young widow.
There was something peculiarly engaging
in the pensive softness and modesty
of her manner. It seemed free
from affectation. Far from making any
display of her feelings, she seemed as

much as possible to repress them,—and
to endeavour to be cheerful, that she
might not damp the gaiety of others.
Her natural disposition, as Lady Norton
said, was very sprightly, and however
passive and subdued she might appear at
present, she was of a high independent
spirit, that would, on any great occasion,
think and act for itself. Better and
better—Each trait suited Ormond's character
more and more—His own observation
confirmed the high opinion,
which the praises of her friend tended
to inspire. Ormond was particularly
pleased with the indulgent manner in
which she spoke of her own sex; Lady
Millicent was free from that propensity
to detraction, which had so disgusted
him in his last love. Even of those by
whom, as it had been hinted to him, she
had been hardly treated, she spoke with
gentleness and candour. Recollecting
Miss Lardner's assertion, that “Lady
Annaly had used Lady Millicent barbarously,”

he purposely mentioned Lady
Annaly, to hear what she would say.— 
“Lady Annaly,” said she, “is a most
respectable woman—she has her prejudices— 
who is there that has not?—It is
unfortunate for me, that she had been
prepossessed against me. She is one of
my nearest connexions by marriage—one
to whom I might have looked in difficulty
and distress—one of the few persons
whose assistance and interference I
would willingly have accepted, and
would even have stooped to ask, but
unhappily—I can tell you no more,” 
said she, checking herself—“It is every
way an unfortunate affair—and,” added
she, after a deep sigh, “the most unfortunate
part of it is, that it is my own fault.”
That Ormond could hardly believe; 
and whether it were or not, whatever
the unfortunate affair might be, the candour,
the gentleness, with which she
spoke, even when her feelings were obviously
touched and warm, interested

him deeply in her favour. He had
heard that the Annalys were just returning
to Ireland, and he determined to
go as soon as possible to see them; he
hoped they would come to Castle Hermitage— 
and that this coolness might be
made up. Mean time the more he saw
of Lady Millicent, the more he was
charmed with her. Sir Ulick was much
engaged with various business in the
mornings, and Lady Norton, Lady Millicent,
and Ormond spent their time together— 
walking, driving in the sociable,
or boating on the lake—they were
continually together. Lady Norton, a
very good kind of well bred little
woman, was a non-entity in conversation,
but she never interrupted it, or laid
the slightest restraint on any one by her
presence, which, indeed, was usually
forgotten by Ormond. Though Ormond
did not yet even foresee the time in
which he could venture to hope for himself,
yet his conversation with Lady

Millicent generally took a sentimental
turn. She did not always speak sense,
but she talked elegant nonsense with a
sweet persuasive voice and eloquent eyes
—hers was a kind of exalted sentimental
morality, referring every thing to feeling,
and to the notion of sacrifice, rather
than to a sense of duty, principle, or reason.
She was all for sensibility and
enthusiasm—enthusiasm in particular— 
With her there was no virtue without
it.—Acting from the hope of making
yourself or others happy, or from any
view of utility, was acting merely from
low selfish motives. Her “point of
virtue was so high, that ordinary mortals
might well console themselves by
perceiving the impossibility of ever
reaching it.” Exalted to the clouds,
she managed matters as she pleased
there, and made charming confusion.
When she condescended to return to
earth, and attempted to define—no, not
to define—definitions were death to her

imagination!—but to describe her notions,
she was nearly unintelligible. She
declared, however, that she understood
herself perfectly well; and Ormond, deceived
by eloquence, of which he was a
passionate admirer, thought that he
understood, when he only felt. Her
ideas of virtue were carried to such extremes,
that they touched the opposite
vices—in truth, there was nothing to
prevent them; for the line between right
and wrong—that line which should be
strongly marked, was effaced; so delicately
had sentiment shaded off its boundaries.
These female metaphysics, this
character of exalted imagination and
sensitive softness, was not quite so cheap
and common some years ago as it has
lately become. The consequences to
which it practically leads were not then
fully foreseen and understood. At all
times a man experienced in female character,
who had any knowledge of the
world, even supposing he had no skill in

metaphysics, would easily have seen to
what all this tends, and where it usually
terminates; and such a man would never
have thought of marrying Lady Millicent.
But Ormond was inexperienced; 
the whole, matter and manner, was new
to him; he was struck with the delicacy
and sensibility of the fair sophist, and
with all that was ingenious and plausible
in the doctrine, instead of being
alarmed by its dangerous tendency. It
should be observed, in justice to Lady
Millicent, that she was perfectly sincere,
if we may use the expression of
good faith in her absurdities. She did
not use this sentimental sophistry, as it
has since been too often employed by
many, to veil from themselves the criminality
of passion, or to mask the deformity
of vice. There was, perhaps,
the more immediate hazard of her erring
from ignorance and rashness; but there
was in her youth and innocence a chance,
that she should instinctively start back

the moment she should see the precipice.
Sir Ulick O'Shane had often said, in
speaking of Lady Millicent, that under
the guidance of a man of sense she
would be one of the first women he ever
saw—that a man who could once win
Lady Millicent's affections, and who
could not keep them, would deserve to
be miserable.
Ormond perfectly agreed with him.
He knew that Sir Ulick saw the impression
Lady Millicent had made upon
him, nor did he attempt or wish to conceal
it—though it was not yet come to
the time, when he could determine to
speak of his sentiments. He was now
too seriously in love to talk of it lightly,
or to be as precipitate as he had been
when he meant nothing in praising the
Darrells, Lardners, &c.
One evening Sir Ulick was talking of
Lord Chesterfield's Letters, a book at
that time much in vogue, but which the

good sense and virtue of England soon
cast into disrepute; and which, in spite
of the charms of wit and style, in spite
of many sparkling and some valuable
observations mixed with its corruption,
has since sunk, fortunately for the nation,
almost into oblivion—But when these
private letters were first published, and
when my lord, who now appears so stiff
and awkward, was in the fashion of the
day, there was no withstanding it. The
book was a manual of education—with
the vain hope of getting cheaply second-hand
knowledge of the world, it was
read universally by every young man
entering life, from the nobleman's son,
while his hair was powdering, to the
prentice thumbing it surreptitiously behind
the counter.—Sir Ulick O'Shane,
of course, recommended it to his ward:
to Lady Millicent's credit, she inveighed
against it with honest indignation.
“What!” said Sir Ulick, smiling
“you are shocked at the idea of Lord

Chesterfield's advising his pupil at Paris
to prefer a reputable affair with a married
woman to a disreputable intrigue with an
opera girl—Well, I believe you are
right as an English woman, my dear
Lady Millicent; and I am clear, at all
events, you are right, as a woman, to
blush so eloquently with virtuous indignation;— 
Lady Annaly herself could not
have spoken and looked the thing better.”
“So I was just thinking,” said Ormond.
“Only the difference; Harry, between
a young and an elderly woman,” said Sir
Ulick, “Truths divine come mended
from the lips of youth and beauty.”
His compliment was lost upon Lady
Millicent. At the first mention of Lady
Annaly's name she had sighed deeply,
and had fallen into reverie—and Ormond,
as he looked at her, fell into raptures at
the tender expression of her countenance.
Sir Ulick tapped him on the shoulder,
and drawing him a little on one side—

“Take care of your heart, young
man,” whispered he, “no serious attachment
here—remember, I warn you.”— 
Lady Norton joined them, and nothing
more was said.
“Take care of my heart,” thought
Ormond, “why should I guard it against
such a woman,—what better can I do
with it than offer it to such a woman.”
A thought had crossed Ormond's mind,
which recurred at this instant. From
the great admiration Sir Ulick expressed
for Lady Millicent, and the constant attention,
more than gallant, tender attention
Sir Ulick paid her, Ormond was
persuaded, that but for that half of the
broken chain of matrimony, which still
encumbered him whom it could not bind,
Sir Ulick would be very glad to offer
Lady Millicent not only his heart but his
hand. Suspecting this partiality, and
imagining this jealousy, Ormond did not
quite like to consult his guardian about
his own sentiments and proceedings.—

He wished previously to consult his impartial
and most safe friend, Dr. Cambray.
But Dr. Cambray was absent
from home ever since the arrival of Lady
Millicent. The doctor and his family
had been on a visit to a relation at a distance.
Ormond, impatient for their return,
had every day questioned the
curate, and at last, in reply to his regular
question of “When do you expect the
doctor, Sir?” he heard the glad tidings
of “We expect him to-morrow, or next
day, Sir, positively.”
The next day, Ormond, who was now
master of a very elegant phaeton and beautiful
grey horses, and, having for some
time been under the tuition of that knowing
whip Tom Darrell, could now drive
to admiration, prevailed upon Lady Millicent
to trust herself with him in his
phaeton—Sir Ulick came up just as Ormond
had handed Lady Millicent into the
carriage, and, pressing on his ward's
shoulder, said—

“Have you the reins safe?”
“Yes.”
“That's well—remember now, Harry
Ormond,” said he, with a look which
gave a double meaning to his words— 
“remember, I charge you, the warning
I gave you last night—drive carefully— 
pray, young Sir, look before you—no
rashness!—young horses these,” added
he, patting the horses, “pray be careful,
Harry.”
Ormond promised to be very careful,
and drove off.
“I suppose,” thought he, “my guardian
must have some good reason for this
reiterated caution; I will not let her see
my sentiments till I know his reasons;— 
besides, as Dr. Cambray returns to-morrow,
I can wait another day.”
Accordingly, though not without putting
considerable restraint upon himself,
Ormond talked of the beauties of nature,
and of indifferent matters. The conversation
rather flagged, and sometimes on

her ladyship's side as well as on his. He
fancied that she was more reserved than
usual, and a little embarrassed. He exerted
himself to entertain her;—that was
but common civility;—he succeeded,
was pleased to see her spirits rise, and
her embarrassment wear off. When she
revived, her manner was this day so peculiarly
engaging, and the tones of her
voice so soft and winning, that it required
all Ormond's resolution to refrain
from declaring his passion. Now, for
the first time, he conceived a hope that
he might make himself agreeable to her; 
that he might, in time, soothe her grief,
and restore her to happiness. Her expressions
were all delicately careful to
imply nothing but friendship—but a
woman's friendship insensibly leads to
love. As they were returning home after
a delightful drive, they entered upon this
subject, so favourable to the nice casuistry
of sentiment, and to the enthusiastic eloquence
of passion,—when, at an opening

in the road, a carriage crossed them so
suddenly, that Ormond had but just time
to pull up his horses.
“Dr. Cambray, I declare, the very
man I wished to see.”
The doctor, whose countenance had
been full of affectionate pleasure at the
first sight of his young friend, changed
when he saw who was in the phaeton with
him. The doctor looked panic struck.
“Lady Millicent—Doctor Cambray.” 
Ormond began the introduction, but each
bowing, said, in a constrained voice— 
“I have the honour of knowing—” 
“I have the pleasure of being acquainted—” 
The pleasure and honour seemed to be
painful and embarrassing to both.
“Don't let us detain you,” said the
doctor—“but I hope, Mr. Ormond, you
will let me see you as soon as you can
at Vicar's Vale?”
“You would not doubt that, my dear
doctor,” said Ormond—“If you knew

how impatient I have been for your return— 
I will be with you before you are
all out of the carriage.”
“The sooner the better,”—said the
doctor.
“The sooner the better,” echoed the
friendly voices of Mrs. Cambray and her
daughter.
Ormond drove on—but from this moment,
till they reached Castle Hermitage,
no more agreeable conversation passed
between him and his fair companion. It
was all constrained.
“I was not aware that Dr. Cambray
had the honour of being acquainted with
Lady Millicent,” said Ormond.
“Oh! yes, I had the pleasure some
time ago,” replied Lady Millicent, “when
he was in Dublin, not lately—I was a
great favourite of his once.”
“Once, and always, I should have
thought.”
“Dr. Cambray's a most amiable, respectable
man,” said her ladyship; “he

must be a great acquisition in this neighbourhood— 
a good clergyman is always
so valuable every where; in Ireland most
especially, where the spirit of conciliation
is much wanted. 'Tis unknown how much
a good clergyman may do in Ireland.”
“Very true—certainly.”
So, with a repetition of truisms, interspersed
with reflections on the state
of Ireland, tithes, and the education of
the poor, they reached Castle Hermitage.
“Lady Millicent, you look pale,” said
Sir Ulick, as he handed her out.
“Oh! no, I have had a most delightful
drive.”
Harry just stayed to say that Dr. Cambray
was returned, and that he must run
to see him, and off he went. He found
the doctor in his study.
“Well, my dear doctor,” said Ormond,
in breathless consternation—“what
is the matter?”
“Nothing, I hope,” said the doctor,
looking earnestly in Ormond's face—

“and yet your countenance tells me, that
my fears are well founded.”
“What is it you fear, Sir?”
“The lady who was in the phaeton
with you, Lady Millicent, I fear—” 
“Why should you fear, Sir?—Oh!
tell me at once, for you torture me— 
what do you know of her?”
“At once, then, I know her to be
a very imprudent—though, I hope she is
still an innocent woman.”
“Innocent!” repeated Ormond, “Good
heavens, is it possible that there can
be any doubt. Imprudent! My dear
doctor, perhaps you have been misinformed.”
“All I know on the subject is this,” 
said Dr. Cambray, “during Lord Millicent's
absence in the army, a gentleman
of high rank and gallantry paid assiduous
attention to Lady Millicent. Her
relation and friend, Lady Annaly, advised
her, to break off all intercourse with
this gentleman in such a decided manner,

as to silence scandal. Lady Millicent followed
but half the advice of her friend; 
she discountenanced the public attentions
of her admirer, but she took opportunities
of meeting him at private parties; 
Lady Annaly again interfered— 
Lady Millicent was offended: but the
death of her husband, at the siege of
&wblank;, where he behaved most gallantly,
saved her from further danger,
and opened her eyes to the views of
a man, who thought her no longer
worthy his pursuit, when he might have
her for life.”
Ormond saw that there was no resource
for him, but immediately to quit Castle
Hermitage; therefore, the moment he
returned, he informed Sir Ulick of his
determination, pointing out to him the
impropriety of his remaining in the
society of Lady Millicent, when his
opinion of her character, and the sentiments
which had so strongly influenced
his behaviour, were irrevocably changed.

—This was an unexpected blow upon
Sir Ulick; he had his private reasons
for wishing to detain Ormond at Castle
Hermitage till he was of age, to
dissipate his mind by amusement and
variety, and to obtain over it an habitual
guidance.
Ormond proposed immediately to visit
the continent; by the time he should
arrive at Paris, Dora would be settled
there, and he should be introduced into
the best company. The subtle Sir
Ulick, perceiving that Ormond must
change his quarters, suggested to him
the propriety of seeing something of
his own country before he went abroad,
and in the course of a few days, various
letters of recommendation were
procured for Ormond from Sir Ulick
and his connexions; and, what was
of still more consequence, from Dr. Cambray
and his friends.
During this interval, Ormond once
more visited the Black Islands; the

scenes of his early youth recalled to
Ormond a thousand tender, and a few
embittering, recollections. He was
greeted with heartfelt affection by
many of the inhabitants of the island,
with whom he had past some of his
boyish days. Of some scenes he had
to be ashamed; of others he was justly
proud; and, from every tongue, he
heard the delightful praises of his departed
friend and benefactor.
His little farm had been well managed
during his absence, the trees he
had planted began to make some appearance; 
and, upon the whole, his visit
to the Black Islands revived the
generous feelings of his youth, and refreshed
those traces of early virtue, which
had been engraven on his heart.
At his return to Castle Hermitage,
he found every thing prepared for his
departure; and, upon visiting his excellent
friend at the vicarage, he found
the whole family heartily interested in his

welfare, and ready to assist him by letters
of introduction to the best people
in every part of Ireland, which Ormond
intended to visit.