

When Count Altenberg went to London
to obtain his passports, he attended
the minister's levee, to repeat his thanks
for the attentions with which he had
been honored, and to pay his parting
respects to Lord Oldborough, whose talents
and uncommon character had made
an indelible impression on his mind.
After levee, when the Count was alone
with the minister, and when he asked
whether his Lordship had any commands
that he could execute at his own court,
he was surprised, by receiving at once
a commission of a difficult and delicate
nature. Lord Oldborough, whose penetration
had seen into Count Altenberg's
character, and who knew how and when
to trust, though he was supposed to be
the most reserved of men, confided to

the Count his dissatisfaction with the
proceedings of Cunningham Falconer,
his suspicions that the Envoy was playing
double, and endeavoring to ingratiate
himself abroad and at home with a
party inimical to his Lordship's interests.
“Diplomatists are all, more or less,
insincere,” said Lord Oldborough.— “But
to have chosen an Envoy, who
joins ingratitude to duplicity, would reflect
no credit upon the minister by
whom he was appointed. Were I speaking
to a common person, I should not
admit the possibility of my having committed
such an error. But Count Altenberg
will judge by the whole, and not
by a part.—He knows that every man
in power is sometimes the slave of circumstances.
This Cunningham Falconer,
all these Falconers were forced
upon me—how,—it is of little consequence
to you to hear.—It is sufficient
for me to assure you, Count, that it was
not my judgment that erred.—Now the
necessity has ceased. By other means

my purpose has been accomplished.—The
Falconers are useless to me. But
I will not abandon those whom I have
undertaken to protect, till I have proof
of their perfidy.”
Lord Oldborough then explained the
points on which he desired to inform
himself, before he should decide with regard
to Cunningham. Count Altenberg
undertook to procure for his Lordship
the means of ascertaining the fidelity of
his Envoy; and Lord Oldborough then
turned the conversation on general politics.
He soon perceived, that the Count
was not as much interested in these subjects
as formerly. At parting, Lord Oldborough
smiled, and said,
“You have been, since I saw you
last, Count Altenberg, too much in the
company of a philosopher, who prefers
the happiness of a country gentleman's
life, to the glory of a statesman's career.—But
height will soon recall high
thoughts. Ambition is not dead, only
dormant within you. It will, I hope

and trust, make you in time the minister,
and pride of your country. In this
hope, I bid you farewell.”
Commissioner Falconer having been
told by one of the people in the antichamber,
that Count Altenberg had arrived,
and was now with the minister,
waited anxiously to see him, caught him
in his way out, and eagerly pressed an
invitation from Mrs. Falconer, to dine
or spend the evening with them—but
the Count had now his passports, and
pleaded the absolute necessity for his
immediately setting out on his return to
his own country. The Commissioner,
from a word or two that he hazarded
upon the subject, had the vexation to
perceive, that his hopes of engaging
Count Altenberg to assist the views of
his son Cunningham were vain, and he
regretted, that he had wasted so much
civility upon a foreigner, who could
make him no return.
Miss Georgiana Falconer's mortification
at the Count's leaving England was

much alleviated, by finding that he had
not been detained by the charms of Miss
Caroline Percy, and she was almost consoled
for losing the prize herself, by seeing
that it had not been won by her
rival. Mrs. Falconer too, though she
had long abandoned all hopes of the
Count as a son-in-law, yet rejoiced to
be spared the humiliation of writing to
congratulate Mr. and Mrs. Percy upon
the marriage and splendid establishment
of their daughter.
“After all, how ill they have managed,” 
said Mrs. Falconer, “the game
was in their own hands. Certainly Mrs.
Percy must be the worst mother in the
world, and the daughter, with all her
sense, a perfect simpleton, or they might
have made up the match when they had
the Count all to themselves at Hungerford-Castle.”
“I told you long ago, but you would
never believe, Mrs. Falconer,” cried the
Commissioner, “that Count Altenberg's
ruling passion was ambition, and that

he was not the least likely to fall in love,
as you ladies call it.—The old Prince
of&wblank;is going fast, and Count Altenberg's
father has sent for him, that he
may be on the spot to secure his favor
with the hereditary Prince—I am sure I
hope Count Altenberg will not be minister,
for, from the few words he said to
me just now when I met him, he will
not enter into my views with regard to
Cunningham.”
“No, those political visions of yours,
Commissioner, seldom end in any thing
but disappointment,” said Mrs. Falconer.— “I
always said it would be so.”—
Then followed a scene of recrimination,
such as was the usual consequence
of the failure of any of the plans of this
intriguing pair.
“And, Mrs. Falconer,” concluded the
Commissioner, “I augur as ill of your
present scheme for Georgiana, as I did of
the last.—You will find, that all your
dinners and concerts will be just as much
thrown away upon the two Clays, as

your balls and plays were upon Count
Altenberg.—And this is the way, Ma'am,
you go on, plunging me deeper and
deeper in debt,” said the Commissioner,
walking about the room much disturbed.— “If
any thing was to go wrong with
Lord Oldborough, what would become
of us!”
“My dear, that is a very unseasonable
apprehension, for Lord Oldborough,
as I hear on all sides, is firmer in power
now than he ever was—of that, you
know, you were but yesterday giving me
assurance and proof.—His favor, you
know, is so high, that all, who were
leagued against him in that combination
he detected, were, in consequence of his
Lordship's letter, instantly dismissed
from office—his colleagues are now of
his choosing—the cabinet, I understand,
completely his own friends.—What more
security can you desire?”—
“You don't understand me, Mrs. Falconer,
I am not thinking of the security
of Lord Oldborough's power—of that,

after all, I have seen I can have no
doubt—but I am not so sure of ...”
“The continuance of my own favor” he
was going to say, but it was painful to
him to utter the words, and he had a
superstitious dread common to courtiers
of speaking of their decline of favor.—Besides,
he knew that reproaches for
want of address in managing Lord Oldborough's
humor would immediately
follow from Mrs. Falconer, if he gave
any hint of this kind; and on his address
the Commissioner piqued himself
not without reason.—Abruptly changing
his tone, and taking that air of authority,
which every now and then he thought
fit to assume, he said,
“Mrs. Falconer, there's one thing I
won't allow—I won't allow Georgiana
and you to make a fool of young Petcalf.”
“By no means, my love, but if he
makes a fool of himself, you know.”
“Mrs. Falconer, you recollect the
transaction about the draught.”

“For Zara's dress?”—
“Yes, Ma'am—The condition you
made then in my name with Georgiana,
I hold her to, and I expect, that she be
prepared to be Mrs. Petcalf within the
year.”
“I told her so, my dear—and she acquiesces—she
submits—she is ready to
obey—if nothing better offers—”
“If—Ay, there it is!—All the time
I know you are looking to the Clays,
and if they fail, somebody else will start
up, whom you will think a better match
than Petcalf, and all these people are to
be fêted, and so you will go on wasting
my money and your own time. Petcalf
will run restive at last, you will lose
him, and I shall have Georgiana left
upon my hands after all.”
“No danger, my dear.—My principle
is the most satisfactory and secure imaginable.—To
have a number of tickets
in the wheel—then, if one comes up a
blank, still you have a chance of a prize

in the next.—Only have patience, Mr.
Falconer.”
“Patience, my dear, how can a man
have patience, when he has seen the
same thing going on for years? And I
have said the same thing to you over
and over—a hundred times, Mrs. Falconer.”
“A hundred times at least, I grant,
and that, perhaps, is enough to try my
patience you'll allow, and yet, you see,
how reasonable I am.—I have only to
repeat what is incontrovertible, that
when a girl has been brought up, and
has lived in a certain line, you must
push her in that line, for she will not do
in any other.—You must be sensible, that
no mere country gentleman would ever
think of Georgiana—We must push her
in the line for which she is fit—The
fashionable line.”—
“Push! Bless my soul, Ma'am! you
have been pushing one or other of those
girls ever since they were in their teens,

but your pushing signifies nothing.—The
men, don't you see, back as fast as the
women advance.”
“Coarse!—Too coarse! too common-place
an observation for you, Commissioner,” 
said Mrs. Falconer, with admirable
temper, “but when men are angry,
they will say more than they think.”
“Ma'am, I don't say half as much as
I think ... ever.”
“Indeed!—That is a candid confession,
for which I owe you credit at all
events.”—
“It's a foolish game ... it's a foolish
game ... it's a losing game,” continued
the Commissioner, “and you will play
it, till we are ruined.”
“Not a losing game if it be played
with temper, and spirit.—Many throw
up the game like cowards, when, if they
had but had courage to double the bet,
they would have made their fortune.”
“Pshaw! Pshaw!” said the Commissioner,— “Can
you double your girls'
beauty? can you double their fortune?”

“Fashion stands in the place both of
beauty and fortune, Mr. Falconer; and
fashion, my girls, I hope you will allow,
enjoy.”
“Enjoy! What signifies that?—Fashion,
you told me, was to win Count
Altenberg,—has it won him? Are we
one bit the better for the expense we
were at in all those entertainments?”
“All that,—or most of it ... at least
the popularity ball must be set down to
Lord Oldborough's account, and that is
your affair, Commissioner.”
“And the play, and the play-house,
and the dresses!—Was Zara's dress my
affair.—Did I not tell you, you were wasting
your time upon that man?”
“No waste, nothing has been wasted,
my dear Commissioner; believe me, even
in point of economy we could not have
laid out money better, for at a trifling expense
we have obtained for Georgiana
the credit of having refused Count Altenberg.—Lady
Kew and Lady Trant
have spread the report.—You know it is

not my business to speak—and now the
Count is gone, who can contradict it
with any propriety?—The thing is universally
believed.—Every body is talking
of it, and the consequence is, Georgiana
is more in fashion now than ever she was.—Theres
a proposal I had for her this
morning,” said Mrs. Falconer, throwing
a letter carelessly before the Commissioner.
“A proposal! That is something worth
attending to,” said the Commissioner,
putting on his spectacles.
“No, nothing worth our attention,” 
said Mrs. Falconer, “only eighteen hundred
a year, which you know Georgiana
could not possibly live upon.”
“Better than nothing surely,” said the
Commissioner, “let me see.”
“Not better than Petcalf, not within
a thousand a year so good, putting
Asia Minor out of the question.—So,
you know, I could not hesitate an instant.”
“But I hope your answer was very

civil.—People are not aware what dangerous
enemies they make on these occasions,” 
said Mr. Falconer— “I hope
your answer was very polite.”—
“Oh the pink of courtesy,” said Mrs.
Falconer. “I lamented, that my daughter's
fortune was so small, as to put it out of
her power, &c.—and I added a great deal
about merit, and the honor done our family,
and so on.—But I wonder the man had
the assurance to propose for Georgiana,
when he had nothing better to say for
himself.”
“Petcalf, to be sure, if the General
dies, is a thousand a year better.—I believe
you are right there,”—said Mr. Falconer,
and with an air of calculating
consideration,—he took up a pen.—
“But what are you about, Commissioner,
going to write on that letter, as if
it was waste paper,”—said Mrs. Falconner,
starting up, and taking it hastily from
him,— “I must have it for Lady Trant,
Lady Kew, and some more of our intimate
friends, that they may be able to

say they have seen the proposal, for mothers
and daughters too in these days
are so apt to boast, that it is quite necessary
to have some written document to
produce, and there's no going beyond
that.”—
“Certainly—quite necessary.—And
what written document,” said the Commissioner,
smiling,— “have you to produce
in the case of Count Altenberg?”—
“Oh, that is another affair,” said Mrs.
Falconer, smiling in her turn. “One
must not in all cases have recourse to the
same expedients.—Besides, if we produce
our proofs on one occasion, we shall depend
upon having our word taken on
trust another time.—And it would be too
much, to make a practice of showing
gentlemen's letters.—It is not what I
should always do—certainly not with regard
to a man of Count Altenberg's rank
and pretensions, who merits to be treated
with somewhat more consideration surely,
than a man who hazards such a proposal
as this.—I merely produced it to

show you, that Georgiana is in no absolute
distress for admirers.—And now, my
dear, I must trouble you ... those public
singers are terribly expensive,—yet at
a concert we must have them, and one
cannot have them without coming up
to their price.—I must trouble you to
sign this draught—for our concert last
week.”—
“Now, Mrs. Falconer, I have signed
it,”—cried the Commissioner,— “and it
is the last, for a similar purpose, I ever
will sign——Upon my honor.”——
“I have invited every body to a concert
here next week,” said Mrs. Falconer,—“ 
What can I do?”—
“Do as others do,” said the Commissioner,— “let
these musical professors
give a concert at your house,—then, instead
of paying them, you share their
profits, and you have the best company
at your house into the bargain.”—
“Such things are done, I know,” said
Mrs. Falconer, “and by people of rank; 
but Lady Jane Granville would not do

it, when she was more distressed for money
than we are, and I know many say
it is what they would not do.”
“It must be done by you, Mrs. Falconer,
or you must give up having concerts
altogether,”—said the Commissioner,
leaving the room.
To give up concerts was quite impossible,
especially as French Clay was,
or pretended to be, passionately fond of
music, and it was at her musical parties,
that he never failed to attend assiduously.—The
next concert was given by a
celebrated performer at Mrs. Falconer's
house, and she and the singers shared the
profit.—To such meanness can the slaves
of fashion condescend!—
At this concert it happened, that there
was a new and remarkably handsome,
graceful female Italian singer, who was
much admired by all the gentlemen present,
and particularly by French Clay,
who had set up, with little ear, and less
taste, for a great judge of music. He
was ambitious of appearing as the patron

of this young performer.—He went about
every where talking of her in raptures,
and making interest for her with all the
great people of his acquaintance. Her
own voice, and her own charms needed
not the patronage of Mr. Clay; from the
night she was first produced at Mrs. Falconer's,
she became at once the fashion,
and the height of the fashion.—Every
body was eager to have her at their parties,
especially as she had never yet been
upon the stage. Admirers crowded round
her, and among them were many of rank
and fortune; an old earl, and a young
baronet, were of the number. The ardor
of fashion and competition so much
increased the zeal of French Clay, that,
what was at first only affectation, became
real enthusiasm. He was resolved to win
the lady from all his rivals. He had frequent
opportunities of seeing her at Mrs.
Falconer's, where he appeared always in
glory as her patron.
Seraphina, the fair Italian, considering
Mrs. Falconer as her first patroness, made

it a point of gratitude to hold her concerts
frequently at her house. Mrs. Falconer
was proud of the distinction. Fresh
eclat was thrown upon her, and upon her
daughters.
French Clay was always near Miss
Georgiana Falconer, or near Seraphina; 
and he applauded each by turns with all
the raptures of an amateur. Mrs. Falconer
saw, that rivalship with the old earl
and the young baronet had worked Mr.
Clay into a passion for Seraphina; but
she thought she knew how a passion for
a singer must end, and as this did not interfere
with her matrimonial designs, it
gave her little inquietude—Bets ran high
in the fashionable world upon the three
candidates. Mrs. Falconer had no doubt,
that the old Earl would carry off the
prize, as he was extremely rich, and
was ready to make any settlement and
any establishment—Her prophecy would,
probably, have been accomplished, but
that French Clay, strongly urged by the
immediate danger of losing the lady,

and flattered by Seraphina's mother,
who, in another style of life, was equal
to Mrs. Falconer in address and knowledge
of the world, was drawn in to offer
what alone could balance the charms of
the Baronet's youth, and of the Earl's
wealth—He offered marriage—A week
after the offer was made, Seraphina became
Mrs. French Clay——Upon this
marriage Commissioner Falconer hastened
immediately to reproach his wife.
“There! Mrs. Falconer, I told you
it would never do—There is another son-in-law
who has escaped you.”—
Never did Mrs. Falconer's genius appear
so great as in circumstances, which
would have confounded one of inferior
resource. It is true, she had been thrown
into surprise and consternation by the
first news of this marriage; but by an
able stroke she had turned defeat to
victory. With a calm air of triumph
she replied to her husband:
“I beg your pardon, Mr. Falconer,
French Clay was only my ostensible object

—I should have been very sorry to
have had him for my son-in-law, for,
though it is a secret, I know that he is
overwhelmed with debt—The son-in-law
I really wished for has not escaped me,
Sir—The elder brother, English Clay—Clay
of Clay-Hall, I apprehend, you
will allow, is rather a better match for
your daughter—and his proposal for
Georgiana, his relation, Lady Trant,
was, last night, authorized to make to
me in form—And now, Commissioner,
there is an end of your fears that your
daughter should be left, at last, upon
your hands—And now, I flatter myself,
you will acknowledge, that I always
knew what I was about—Mistress of
Clay-Hall, and of seven thousand a year—I
think that is doing pretty well for a
girl who has nothing.”
The Commissioner was so much delighted,
that he willingly permitted his
lady to enjoy her triumph over him.
“Now only consider, Commissioner,” 
she pursued— “If I had huddled up that

match with Petcalf!—There are people
who do not know the difference between
a shoe and a shoeing horn; but, I thank
my stars, I am not one of them—Petcalf,
I'll answer for it in case of necessity,
that is, in case of any difficulty on
the part of Mr. Robert Percy, I can
turn over to Bell—Poor Petcalf!” added
she, with a smile— “I really have a regard
for that everlasting partner, and
wish to leave him a chance of being
partner for life to one of my daughters—I
am sure he has reason to be excessively
obliged to me, for thinking of him
at this moment—I must go to Georgiana
and talk about wedding clothes—Laces,
jewels, equipages—Mr. Clay, of Clay-Hall,
piques himself upon having every
thing the best of it's kind, and in the
highest style—Happy! Happy girl!”—
“Happy! Happy father, who has
got her off his hands,” cried the Commissioner.
“'Twas my doing—'Twas all my doing,” 
said Mrs. Falconer.

“It was, my dear—and how was it
brought about?” said Mr. Falconer; 
“stay one minute from the wedding
clothes, and tell me.”
Mrs. Falconer returned, and in the
pride of successful intrigues explained
all—that is, all she chose that her husband
should know.
Lady Trant was Mr. Clay's near relation,
and Mrs. Falconer's intimate
friend—how she had engaged her Ladyship
so zealously in her cause was the
point, which Mrs. Falconer did nto choose
to explain, and into which the Commissioner
never thought of inquiring. There
are moments, in which the most selfish
may be betrayed into a belief, that others
act from generous motives; and the very
principles, which they hold infallible
applied to all other cases, they think
admit in their own of an exception—So
Commissioner Falconer, notwithstanding
his knowledge of the world, and his
knowledge of himself, took it for granted,
that, in this instance, Lady Trant

acted from the impulse of disinterested
friendship. This point happily admitted
without question, all the rest Mrs. Falconer
could satisfactorily explain—Lady
Trant, being a friend, she could trust
entirely. Mrs. Falconer had opened her
mind to her Ladyship, and, by her suggestion,
Lady Trant had seized the
happy moment, when English Clay was
enraged against his brother for his strange
marriage, and had deplored, that Clay-Hall,
and the fine estate belonging to
it, should go to the children of an Italian
singer—English Clay took fresh fire at
this idea, and swore, that much as he
hated the notion of a wife and children,
he had a great mind to marry on purpose
to punish his brother, and to cut him
off, as he deserved, for ever from Clay-Hall—Lady
Trant commended his spirit,
and urged him to put his resolution
into execution—English Clay, however,
baulked a little at this— “Women now
a days,” he said, “were so cursed expensive,
that scarce any fortune could

suffice for a wife, and horses, and all in
style; and as to taking a wife, who
would not be of a piece with the rest of
his establishment, that was what he was
not the man to do”—Lady Trant answered,
“That of course he would wish
to have a fashionable wife, that was the
only thing that was wanting to make
Clay-Hall complete.”
“But, then, an establishment that
was quite correct, and in the first style
for a bachelor, would be quite incorrect
for a married man, and every thing to
do over again.”
“True, but then, to grow into an
old bachelor, and to hear every body
saying, or to know that every body is
saying behind your back—‘He will
never marry, you know; and all his
estate will go to his brother, or the
children of Seraphina the singer.”——There
are some men who might feel
tired of having the same idea repeated,
and the self same words reiterated; but
English Clay was not of the number;

on the contrary, repetition was necessary,
in the first place, to give his mind
time to take in an idea; and afterwards,
reiteration was agreeable, as it impressed
him with a sense of conviction without the
trouble of thought.”—After Lady Trant
had reiterated a sufficient time, he assented,
and declared, “what her Ladyship observed
was d&wblank;d true”—but after a
silence of several minutes, he added— “There's
such a cursed deal of danger
of being taken in by a woman, especially
by one of these fashionable girls, who
are all in the catch-match line.”—Lady
Trant, who had been well tutored
and prepared with replies by Mrs. Falconer,
answered, “that as Mr. Clay,
of Clay-Hall, had a fortune that entitled
him to ask any woman; so he was, for
the same reason, at full liberty to please
himself; and though family connexion
and fashion would of course be indispensable
to him, yet money could be no
object to a man of his fortune—he was
not like many needy young men, obliged

to sell themselves for a wife's fortune, to
pay old debts”— “No,” Lady Trant
said, “she was sure her relation and
friend, Mr. Clay, of Clay-Hall, would
never bargain for a wife, and of course,
where there was no bargaining there
could be no fear of being taken in.”
English Clay had never considered
the matter in this point of view before; 
but now it was pointed out, he confessed
it struck him as very fair—very
fair: and his pride, of which he had a
comfortable portion, being now touched,
he asserted both his disinterestedness
and his right to judge and choose in this
business, entirely for himself—Who had
a right to blame him? his fortune was
his own, and he would marry a girl
without sixpence, if she struck his fancy.
Lady Trant supported him in his humor,
and he began to name some of the
young ladies of his acquaintance—one
would look well in a curricle; another
would do the honors of his house handsomely; 
another danced charmingly,

and would be a credit to him in a ball
room; another would make a sweet
tempered nurse when he should have
the gout—But Lady Trant found some
objection to every one he mentioned,
till, at last, when he had named all he
could think of in remainder to his heart,
Lady Trant proposed Miss Georgiana.
“But she was intended for his brother.”
“Oh! no”—Lady Trant had very
particular reasons for being positive,
that neither Mrs. or Miss Falconer had
ever such an idea, however, they might
have let it go abroad, perhaps, to conceal
their real wishes—Miss Georgiana
Falconer had refused so many gentlemen
... Count Altenberg, report said, among
others, and it was plain to Lady Trant,
that the young lady could not be easily
pleased—that her affections were not to
be engaged very readily—Yet she had a
notion, she owned, that if ... But
she was not at liberty to say more—She
was only convinced, that no girl was

more admired than Miss Georgiana Falconer,
and no woman would do greater
credit to the taste of a man of fashion.
She had all the requisites Mr. Clay had
named. She would look well in a curricle; 
she would do the honors of his
house charmingly—she sung and danced
divinely—And Lady Trant summed
up all by reiterating, that Miss Georgiana
Falconer never would have married
his brother.
This persuasive flattery, combining
with English Clay's anger against his
brother, had such effect, that he protested,
if it was not for the trouble of
the thing, he did not care if he married
next week. But the making the
proposal, and all that, was an awkward,
troublesome business, to which he could
not bring himself—Lady Trant kindly
offered to take all trouble of this sort off
his hands, undertook to speak to Mrs.
Falconer if she had his authority for so
doing, and engaged that he should be
married without any kind of awkwardness

or difficulty.—In consequence of
this assurance, Lady Trant was empowered
by Mr. Clay to make the proposal,
which was received with so much
joy and triumph by Mrs. Falconer and
by her Georgiana.
But their joy and triumph were not of
long duration. In this family, where
none of the members of it acted in concert,
or well knew what the others were
doing, where each had some separate
interest, vanity, or vice to be pursued or
indulged, it often happened, that one
individual counteracted the other, and
none were willing to abandon their selfish
purpose, whether of interest or pleasure.
On the present occasion, by a
curious concatenation of circumstances,
it happened, that Buckhurst Falconer,
who had formerly been the spoiled darling
of his mother, was the person whose
interest immediately crossed hers; and
if he pursued his object, it must be at the
risk of breaking off his sister Georgiana's
marriage with English Clay—It is necessary

to go back a few steps to trace
the progress of Buckhurst Falconer's
history—It is a painful task to recapitulate
and follow the gradual deterioration
of a disposition such as his; to mark the
ruin and degradation of a character,
which, notwithstanding it's faults, had a
degree of generosity and openness, with
a sense of honor and quick feeling; which,
early in life, promised well; and which,
but for parental weakness and mistaken
system, might have been matured into
every thing good and great. After his
mother had, by introducing him early
to fashionable company, and to a life of
idleness and dissipation, disgusted him
with the profession of the law, in which,
with talents such as his, he might, with
application and perseverance, have risen
to wealth and eminence—After his father
had, by duplicity and tyranny,
forced him into that sacred profession,
for which the young man felt himself
unfit, and which his conscience long refused
to consider merely as the means of

worldly provision, the next step was to
send him, with a profligate patron, a
chaplain to a regiment notorious for
gambling—The first sacrifice of principle
made, his sense of honor, duty,
and virtue, once abandoned, his natural
sensibility only hastened his perversion.
He had a high idea of the clerical character; 
but his past habits and his present
duties were in direct opposition.
Indeed, in the situation in which he was
placed, and with the society into which
he was thrown, it would have required
more than a common share of civil courage,
and all the steadiness of a veteran
in virtue, to have withstood the temptations
by which he was surrounded.
Even if he had possessed sufficient resolution
to change his former habits, and
to become a good clergyman, his companions
and his patron, instead of respecting,
would have shunned him as a
censor. Unwilling to give up the pleasures
of conviviality, and incapable of
sustaining the martyrdom of ridicule,

Buckhurst Falconer soon abjured all the
principles to which he could not adhere—He
soon gloried in the open defiance
of every thing, that he had once held
right—Upon all occasions, afraid of
being supposed to be subject to any
restraint as a clergyman, or to be influenced
by any of the prejudices of his
profession, he strove, continually, to
show his liberality and spirit by daring,
both in words and actions, beyond what
others dared.—He might have been
checked and stopped in his career of
extravagance by the actual want of money
and of credit, had he not unluckily
obtained, at this early period, a living,
as a reward for saving Bishop Clay from
being choked—This preferment, obtained
in circumstances so ludicrous, afforded
him matter of much temporary amusement
and triumph; and confirmed him
in the idea his father had long labored
to inculcate, that merit was unnecessary
to rising in the world or in the church.
But however he might endeavor to

blind himself to the truth, and however
general opinion was shut out from
him for a time by those profligate persons
with whom he lived, yet he could
not help now and then seeing and feeling,
that he had lost respectability, and
in the midst of noisy merriment he was
often to himself an object of secret and
sad contempt—Soon after he was separated
for a time from Colonel Hauton
and his companions, by going to take
possession of his living, he made an effort
to regain his self-complacency. He
endeavored to distinguish himself as an
eloquent preacher. Ashamed of avowing
to his associates better motives, by
which he was partly actuated, he protested,
that he preached only for fame
and a deanery—His talents were such
as soon accomplished half his wish, and
ensured him celebrity—he obtained opportunities
of preaching in a fashionable
chapel in London, he was prodigiously
followed—his theatrical manner, perhaps,
increased the effect of his eloquence

upon a certain class of his auditors; 
but the more sober and nice
judging part of his congregation objected
to this dramatic art and declamatory
style, as tending to draw the attention
from the doctrine to the preacher, and
to obtain admiration from man, more
than to do honor to God. This, however,
might have passed as a matter of
speculative opinion or difference of taste; 
provided the preacher is believed to be
in earnest, the style of his preaching is
of little comparative consequence. But
the moment he is suspected of being insincere,
the moment it is found, that he
does not practise what he preaches, his
power over the rational mind ceases; and
to moral feeling such a clergyman becomes
an object, not only of contempt,
but of disgust and abhorrence. Murmurs
were soon heard against the private
conduct of the celebrated preacher—Perhaps
envy for his talents and success
mingled her voice with the honest expressions
of virtuous indignation; the

murmurs grew louder and louder; and
Buckhurst Falconer, to avoid having inquiries
made, and irregularities brought
to light, was obliged to yield to a rival
preacher of far inferior talents, but of
more correct conduct. Buckhurst escaped
from his father's reproaches and his
own, by laying the whole blame upon
his merit—He repeated, what has been
repeated a million of times:
“Envy does merit, as it's shade pursue,
And, like a shadow, proves the substance true.”
Commissioner Falconer was glad, that
his son was disappointed in this manner,
as he thought it would make him more
attentive than he had been, of late, to
Colonel Hauton; and the living of Chipping-Friars
was better worth looking
after, than the fleeting fame of a popular
preacher. Buckhurst, however, still held
fame in higher estimation than it had
ever been held by his father, who never
valued it but as subordinate to interest.
But the love of fame, however superior

to mercenary habits, affords no security
for the stability of conduct; on the contrary,
without good sense and resolution,
it infallibly accelerates the degeneracy
of character. Buckhurst's hopes of
obtaining literary celebrity being lost,
he sunk another step, and now contented
himself with the kind of notoriety which
can be gained by a man of talents, who
condescends to be the wit of private
circles and of public dinners. Still he
met with many competitors in this line.
In the metropolis, the mendicants for
fame, like the professional beggars, portion
out the town among them, and
whoever ventures to ply beyond his allotted
walk is immediately jostled and
abused, and the false pretensions of the
wit, and all the tricks to obtain admiration,
are as sure to be exposed by some
rivals of the trade, as the false legs, arms,
and various impostures of the beggar
are denounced by the brother beggar, on
whose monopoly he has infringed——Our
wit was soon compelled to confine

himself to his own set, and gradually he
degenerated from being the wit, to being
the good story-teller of the company.
A man who lives by pleasing, must become
whatever the society, in which he
lives, desire. Colonel Hauton and his
associates had but little taste for pure
wit—low humor and facetious stories
were more suited to their capacities,
slang and buffoonery were their delight.
Buckhurst had early become a proficient
in all these: the respect due to the clerical
character had not restrained him
from the exercise of arts for his own
amusement, which now he found indispensably
requisite for the entertainment
of others, and to preserve favor with his
patron. Contrary to all calculation,
and, as the Commissioner said, to all
reasonable expectation, the old paralytic
incumbent had continued to live, and so
many years had passed since the promise
had been made to Buckhurst of this
living, the transaction, in consequence
of which it was promised, was now so

completely forgotten, that the Commissioner
feared that Colonel Hauton, no
longer under the influence of shame,
might consider the promise as merely
gratuitous, not binding.—Therefore
the cautious father was solicitous, that
his son should incessantly stick close to
the Colonel, who, as it was observed,
never recollected his absent friends.
Buckhurst, though he knew him to be
selfish and silly, yet had no suspicion
of his breaking his promise, because he
piqued himself on being a man of honor; 
and little as he cared, in general, for any
one but himself, Colonel Hauton had
often declared, that he could not live
without Buckhurst Falconer. He was
always driving with the Colonel, riding,
betting with him, or relieving him from
the sense of his own inability, by making
a jest of some person. Buckhurst's talents
for mimickry were an infallible
resource. In particular he could mimick
the two Clays to perfection, could take
off the affected tone, foreign airs, and

quick talkative vanity of French Clay,
and represent the slow surly reserve,
supercilious silence, and solemn self-importance
of English Clay; Buckhurst
used to imitate not only their manners,
gesture, and voice, but could hold conversations
in their characters, fall naturally
into their train of thinking and
their modes of expression. Once a week,
at least, the two Clays were introduced
for the amusement of their friend Colonel
Hauton, who, at the hundredth representation,
was as well pleased as at the
first, and never failed to “witness his
wonder with an idiot laugh”—quite unconscious
that, the moment afterwards,
when he had left the room, this laugh
was mimicked for the entertainment of
the remainder of the band of friends. It
happened one night, that Buckhurst Falconer,
immediately after Colonel Hauton
had quitted the party, began to set the
table in a roar, by mimicking his laugh,
snuffling voice, and silly observations; 
when, to his utter confusion, his patron,

who he thought had left the room, returned
from behind a screen, and resumed
his place opposite to Buckhurst—Not
Banquo's ghost could have struck
more terror into the heart of the guilty.—Buckhurst
grew pale as death, and
sudden silence ensued. Recovering his
presence of mind, he thought that it was
possible the Colonel might be such a fool
as not to have recognised himself; so by
a wink to one of the company, and a
kick under the table to another, he endeavored
to make them join in his attempt
to pass off the whole as mimickry
of a Colonel Hallerton. His companions
supported him as he continued the farce,
and the laughter recommenced. Colonel
Hauton filled his glass, and said nothing; 
by degrees, however, he joined or pretended
to join in the laugh, and left the
company without Buckhurst's being able
exactly to determine whether he had
duped him or not.—After the Colonel
was fairly gone—for, this time, Buckhurst
took care, not only to look behind

the screen, but even to shut the doors of
the antichamber, and to wait till he
heard his parting wheels—they held a
conference upon the question—duped
or not duped?—All agreed in flattering
Buckhurst, that he had completely
succeeded in giving the Colonel the change,
and he was particularly complimented
on his address by a Mr. sloak, chaplain
to a nobleman who was one of the company.—There
was something of a hypocritical
tone in Sloak's voice, something
of a doubtful cast in his eyes,
which, for a moment, raised in Buckhurst's
mind a suspicion of him.—But,
the next day, Colonel Hauton appeared
as usual, Buckhurst rode, drove, and
jested with him as before, and the whole
transaction was, on his part, forgotten.—A
month afterwards the rector of
Chipping-Friars actually died—Commissioner
Falconer despatched an express
to his son, who stood beside Buckhurst's
bed with the news, the instant he opened
his eyes in the morning.—Buckhurst

sent the messenger on to Colonel Hauton's
at the barracks, and before Buckhurst
was dressed, the Colonel's groom
brought him an invitation to meet a
large party at dinner— “the Colonel
would be unavoidably engaged, by regimental
business, all morning.”
Buckhurst's friends and acquaintance
now flocked to congratulate him, and,
by dinner time, he had, in imagination,
disposed of the second year's tithes, and
looked out for a curate to do the duty
of Chipping-Friars.—The company assembled
at dinner, and the Colonel
seemed in uncommonly good spirits.—Buckhurst,
jovial and triumphant—nothing
was said of the living, but
every thing was taken for granted.—In
the middle of dinner the Colonel cried
“Come, gentlemen, fill your glasses, and
drink with me, to the health of the new
rector of Chipping-Friars.” The glasses
were filled instantly, all but Buckhurst
Falconer's, who, of course, thought he
should not drink his own health.

“Mr. Sloak, I have the pleasure to
drink your health; Mr. Sloak, Rector
of Chipping-Friars”—cried the patron,
raising his voice; “Buckhurst,” added
he with a malicious smile— “You do not
fill your glass.”
Buckhurst sat aghast—
“Colonel, is this a jest?”
“A jest—By G&wblank;no,” said the
Colonel, “I have had enough of jests
and jesters.”
“What can this mean?”
“It means,” said the Colonel, coolly,
“that idiot as you take me, or make
me to be, I'm not fool enough to patronise
a mimick to mimick myself—And
moreover, I have the good of the church
too much at heart, to make a rector of
one who has no rectitude—I can have
my pun too.”
The laugh was instantly turned against
Buckhurst.—Starting from table, he
looked alternately at Colonel Hauton
and at Mr. Sloak, and could scarcely
find words to express his rage—

“Hypocrisy!Treachery! Ingratitude!
Cowardice!—If my cloth did not protect
you, you would not dare—Oh!
that I was not a clergyman!”—cried
Buckhurst.
“It's a good time to wish it, faith,”—said
the Colonel, “but you should
have thought better before you put it
on.”
Cursing himself, his patron, and his
father, Buckhurst struck his forehead,
and rushed out of the room—An insulting
laugh followed from Colonel Hauton,
in which Mr. Sloak and all the company
joined—Buckhurst heard it with feelings
of powerless desperation—He walked
as fast as possible, he almost ran
through the barrack yard and through
the streets of the town, to get as far as
he could from this scene, from these
people—he found himself in the open
fields, and leaning against a tree—his
heart almost bursting—for still he had a
heart,
“Oh, Mr. Percy!” he exclaimed

aloud— “once I had a friend!—A
good, generous friend—And I left him
for such a wretch as this?—Oh, if I
had followed his advice!—He knew
me—knew my better self!—And if he
could see me at this moment, he would
pity me ... Oh, Caroline! you would
pity ... No, you would despise me,
as I despise myself—I a clergyman!—Oh!
father! father! what have you
to answer for!”
To this sudden pang of conscience
and feeling succeeded the idea of the
reproaches, which his father would pour
upon him—the recollection of his debts,
and the impossibility of paying them—his
destitute, hopeless condition—anger
against the new rector of Chipping-Friars,
and against his cold, malicious,
patron, returned with increased force
upon his mind.—The remainder of
that day, and the whole of the night,
were passed in these fluctuations of passion.
Whenever he closed his eyes and
began to dose, he heard the voice of

Colonel Hauton drinking the health of
Mr. Sloak, and twice he started from his
sleep, after having collared both the
rector and his patron—The day brought
him no relief—The moment his creditors
heard the facts, he knew he should be
in immediate danger of arrest—He hurried
to town to his father—his father
must know his situation, sooner or later,
and something must be done.
We spare the reader a shocking scene
of filial and parental reproaches.
They were both, at last, compelled to
return to the question, What is to be
done?—The father declared his utter
inability to pay his son's debts, and told
him, that now there remained but one
way of extricating himself from his difficulties—To
turn to a better patron ...
“Oh, Sir, I have done with patrons,” 
cried Buckhurst— “Never more will I
look back to patronage.”
“What then will you do, Sir?—

Live in a jail the remainder of your
life?”
Buckhurst gave a deep sigh, and, after
a pause, said, “Well, Sir!—Go on—Who
is to be my new patron?”
“Your old friend, Bishop Clay.”
“I have no claim upon him. He has
done much for me already.”
“Therefore he will do more.”
“Not pay my debts—and that is
the pressing difficulty.—He cannot extricate
me, unless he could give me a
good living immediately, and he has
none better than the one I have already,
except Dr. Leicester's—His deanery,
you know, is in the gift of the crown.
Besides, the good dean is likely to live
as long as I shall.”
“Stay—you do not yet, quick Sir, see
my scheme—a scheme which would pay
your debts and put you at ease at once—Miss
Tammy Clay, the Bishop's sister.”
“An old, ugly, cross, avaricious
devil!” cried Buckhurst.

“Rich! passing rich! and well inclined
toward you, Buckhurst, as you
know.”
Buckhurst said, that she was his
abhorrence—that the idea of a man's
selling himself in marriage, was so repugnant
to his feelings, that he could
never think of it—that he would rather
die in a jail.
His father let him exhaust himself
in declamation, certain that he would
be brought to think of it at last, by the
necessity to which he was reduced. The
result was, what the Commissioner saw
it must be.—Creditors pressed.—A jail
in immediate view—no resource but Miss
Tammy Clay.—He went down to the
country to the bishop's, to get out of the
way of his creditors, and—to consider
about it.—He found no difficulty likely
to arise on the part of the lady. The
bishop old, and almost doating, governed
by his sister Tammy, who was an
admirable housekeeper, and kept his
table exquisitely, was brought, though

very reluctantly, to consent to their marriage.
Not so acquiescent, however, were
Miss Tammy's two nephews, French
and English Clay. They had looked
upon her wealth as their indefeasible
right and property.—The possibility of
her marrying had for years been, as they
thought, out of the question: and of all
the young men of their acquaintance,
Buckhurst Falconer was the very last
whom they would have suspected, to
have any design upon aunt Tammy—she
had long and often been the subject
of his ridicule.—French Clay, though he
had just made an imprudent match with
a singer, was the more loud and violent
against the aunt; and English Clay,
though he was not in want of her money,
was roused by the idea of being duped
by the Falconers.—This was just at the
time he had commissioned Lady Trant,
to propose for Miss Georgiana.—Aunt
Tammy had promised to give him six
thousand pounds, whenever he should

marry, he did not value her money a
single sixpence, but he would not be
tricked out of his rights by any man or
woman breathing.—Aunt Tammy, resenting
certain words that had escaped
him derogatory to her youth and beauty,
and being naturally unwilling to give—any
thing but herself—refused to part
with the six thousand pounds.— “In
these hard times, and when she was
going to marry an expensive husband,” 
she laughing said, “that all she had
would be little enough for her own establishment.” 
Buckhurst would willingly
have given up the sum in question,
but English Clay would not receive it,
as a consequence of his intercession. His
pride offended Buckhurst, they came to
high words, and high silence.—English
Clay went to his relation, Lady Trant,
and first reproaching her with having
been too precipitate in executing his
first commission, gave her a second, in
which he begged she would make no delay.—He
requested her Ladyship would

inform Mrs. Falconer, that a double alliance
with her family was more than he
had looked for—and in one word, that
either her son Buckhurst's marriage with
his aunt Tammy, or his own marriage
with Miss Georgiana, must be given up.—He
would not have his aunt at her age
make herself ridiculous, and he would
not connect himself with a family, who
could uphold a young man in duping an
old woman.—Lady Trant might shape
his message as she pleased, but this was
to be it's substance.—
“In consequence of Lady Trant's intimation,
which of course was made with
all possible delicacy, Georgiana and Mrs.
Falconer wrote to Buckhurst in the
strongest terms, urging him to give up
his intended marriage.—There were, as
they forcibly represented, so many other
old women with large fortunes, who
could in the course of a short time be
found, who would be quite as good
matches for him, that it would argue a
total insensibility to the interests and

entreaties of his beloved mother and
sister, if he persisted in his present
preposterous design.—Buckhurst answered—
“My Dear Mother And Georgy,
“I was married yesterday, and
am as sorry for it to day, as you can
be—
Yours truly,
B.F.”
P.S.— “There are other young men
with as good fortunes as English Clay in
the world.”
The letter and the postscript disappointed
and enraged Mrs. Falconer and
Georgiana beyond description.
English Clay left his D.I.O. at Mrs.
Falconer's door, and banged down to
Clay-Hall.—
Georgiana, violent in the expression
of her disappointment, would have exposed
herself to Lady Trant, and to half

her acquaintance; but Mrs. Falconer, in
the midst of her mortification, retained
command of temper sufficient, to take
thought for the future. She warned
Lady Trant to be silent, and took precautions
to prevent the affair from being
known; providently determining, that, as
soon as her daughter should recover from
the disappointment of losing Clay-Hall,
she would marry her to Petcalf, and
settle her at once at the lodge in Asia
Minor.
“Till Georgiana is married,” said she
to herself, “the Commissioner will never
let me have peace—if English Clay's
breaking off the match gets wind, we
are undone—for who will think of a
rejected girl—beautiful or fashionable
though she be.—So the best thing that
can be done is to marry her immediately
to Petcalf.—I will have it so—and
the wedding-clothes will not have been
bought in vain.”—
The bringing down the young lady's
imagination, however, from Clay-Hall

to a Lodge, was a task of much difficulty; 
and Mrs. Falconer often in the bitterness
of her heart exclaimed, that she
had the most ungrateful children in the
world. It seems that it is a tacit compact
between mothers and daughters, of
a certain class, that if the young ladies
are dressed, amused, advertised, and exhibited
at every fashionable public place,
and private party, their hearts, or hands
at least, are to be absolutely at the disposal
of their parents.
It was just when Mrs. Falconer was
exasperated by Georgiana's ingratitude,
that her son Buckhurst was obliged to
come to London after his marriage, to
settle with his creditors. His bride insisted
upon accompanying him, and
chose this unpropitious time for being
introduced to his family.—And such a
bride!—Mrs. Buckhurst Falconer!—Such
an introduction!—Such a reception!—His
mother cold and civil, merely
from policy to prevent their family

quarrels from becoming public—his sisters ...
But enough.—Here let us turn from
the painful scene, and leave this house
divided against itself.—