

SIR, – My last from West Chester, gave you a full account of my progress through Wales, and my coming to Chester, at the end of that really fatiguing journey: I must confess, I that have seen the Alps, on so many occasions, have gone under so many of the most frightful passes in the country of the Grisons, and in the mountains of Tirol, never believed there was any thing in this island of Britain that came near, much less that exceeded those hills, in the terror of their aspect, or in the difficulty of access to them. But certainly, if they are out done any where in the world, it is here: even Hannibal himself would have found it impossible to have marched his army over Snowden, or over the rocks of Merioneth and Montgomery shires; no, not with all the help that fire and vinegar could have yielded, to make way for him.
The only support we had in this heavy journey, was, (1.) that we generally found their provisions very good and cheap, and very good accommodations in the inns. And (2.) that the Welsh gentlemen are very civil, hospitable, and kind; the people very obliging and conversible, and especially to strangers; but when we let them know, we travelled merely in curiosity to view the country, and be able to speak well of them to strangers, their civility was heightened to such a degree, that nothing could be more friendly, willing to tell us every thing that belonged to their country, and to show us every thing that we desired to see.
They value themselves much upon their antiquity. The ancient race of their houses, and families, and the like; and above all, upon their ancient heroes: their King Caractacus, Owen ap Tudor, Prince Lewellin, and the like noblemen and princes of British extraction; and as they believe their country to be the pleasantest and most agreeable in the world, so you cannot oblige them more, than to make them think you believe so too.
I continued at Chester for some time, except that I made two or three excursions into the neighbouring country, and particularly into that part of Shropshire, which I had not viewed as I went; as also into the north, and north west part of Cheshire.
The first trip I made, was into the Cestria Chersonesus, as I think we may properly call it, (viz.) a piece of the country, which runs out a great way into the Irish Sea, and is bounded by the two great firths, or arms of the sea, the one called the mouth of the Dee, and the other of two rivers, the Mersey, and the Wever; this isthmus or neck of land, is about 16 miles long, and about 6 or 7 miles over, and has not one market town in it, though ’tis exceeding rich and fertile; the last occasioned possibly by the neighbourhood of two such great towns, or cities rather: I mean Chester and Leverpool.
We crossed over that fruitful level I mentioned before, and coming to the other water, we ferried over to Leverpool. This town is now become so great, so populous, and so rich, that it may be called the Bristol of this part of England. It had formerly but one church, but upon the increase of inhabitants, and of new buildings in so extraordinary a manner, they have built another very fine church in the north part of the town; and they talk of erecting two more.
This part of the town may indeed be called New Leverpool, for that, they have built more than another Leverpool that way, in new streets, and fine large houses for their merchants. Besides this, they have made a great wet dock, for laying up their ships, and which they greatly wanted; for though the Mersey is a noble harbour, and is able to ride a thousand sail of ships at once, yet those ships that are to be laid up, or lie by the walls all the winter, or longer, as sometimes may be the case; must ride there, as in an open road, or (as the seamen call it,) be haled a shore; neither of which would be practicable in a town of so much trade. And in the time of the late great storm, they suffered very much on that account. This is the only work of its kind in England, except what is in the river Thames, I mean for the merchants; nor is it many years since there was not one wet dock in England for private use, except Sir Henry Johnson’s at Black Wall.
This is still an increasing flourishing town, and if they go on in trade, as they have done for some time, ’tis probable it will in a little time be as big as the city of Dublin. The houses here are exceedingly well built, the streets straight, clean, and spacious, and they are now well supplied with water. The merchants here have a very pretty Exchange, standing upon 12 free-stone columns, but it begins to be so much too little, that ’tis thought they must remove or enlarge it. ’Tis already the next town to Bristol, and in a little time may probably exceed it, both in commerce, and in numbers of people.
We went no farther this way at that time, but came back to Chester, by the same ferry as we went over.
As I am now at Chester, ’tis proper to say something of it, being a city well worth describing: Chester has four things very remarkable in it. 1. Its walls, which are very firm, beautiful, and in good repair. 2. The castle, which is also kept up, and has a garrison always in it. 3. The cathedral. 4. The River Dee, and 5. the bridge over it.
It is a very ancient city, and to this day, the buildings are very old; nor do the Rows as they call them, add any thing, in my opinion, to the beauty of the city; but just the contrary, they serve to make the city look both old and ugly. These Rows are certain long galleries, up one pair of stairs, which run along the side of the streets, before all the houses, though joined to them, and as is pretended, they are to keep the people dry in walking along. This they do indeed effectually, but then they take away all the view of the houses from the street, nor can a stranger, that was to ride through Chester, see any shops in the city; besides, they make the shops themselves dark, and the way in them is dark, dirty, and uneven.
The best ornament of the city, is, that the streets are very broad and fair, and run through the whole city in straight lines, crossing in the middle of the city, as at Chichester. The walls as I have said, are in very good repair, and it is a very pleasant walk round the city, upon the walls, and within the battlements, from whence you may see the country round; and particularly on the side of the Roodee, which is a fine large low green, on the bank of the Dee. In the winter this green is often under water by the inundations of the river, and a little before I came there, they had such a terrible land flood, which flowed 8 foot higher than usual so that it not only overflowed the said green, called the Roodee, but destroyed a fine new wharf and landing-place for goods, a little below the town, bore down all the warehouses, and other buildings, which the merchants had erected for securing their goods, and carried all away goods and buildings together, to the irreparable loss of the persons concerned.
The castle of Chester is a good firm building, and strong, though not fortified, with many out works. There is always a good garrison kept, and here the prisoners taken at Preston, in the late time of Rebellion, were kept a great while, till compassion to their misery, moved the clemency of the conqueror to deliver them.
The great church here is a very magnificent building, but ’tis built of a red, sandy, ill looking stone, which takes much from the beauty of it, and which yielding to the weather, seems to crumble, and suffer by time, which much defaces the building. It was formerly a part of the diocese of Litchfield, and was not made a bishop’s see till the year 1541; when King Henry VIII divided it from Litchfield; nor has there even been above 19 bishops of this see from its foundation. The short account of it is thus. Hugh Lupus gave the old monastery dedicated to St Werburge, to a society of monks, after which, they say, King Edgar who conquered all this part of Britain, and was rowed up the Dee, in his royal barge, by four kings, founded the great church; and Hugh Lupus the great, Earl of Chester, finished and endowed it.
Here is a noble stone bridge over the Dee, very high and strong built, and ’tis needful it should be so, indeed; for the Dee is a most furious stream at some seasons, and brings a vast weight of water with it from the mountains of Wales. Here it was that the first army of King William, designed for the war in Ireland, encamped, for a considerable time before they embarked, ann. 1689.
There are 11 parishes in this city, and very good churches to them, and it is the largest city in all this side of England that is so remote from London. When I was formerly at this city, about the year 1690, they had no water to supply their ordinary occasions, but what was carried from the River Dee upon horses, in great leather vessels, like a pair of bakers’ paniers; just the very same for shape and use, as they have to this day in the streets of Constantinople, and at Belgrade, in Hungary; to carry water about the streets to sell, for the people to drink. But at my coming there this time, I found a very good water-house in the river, and the city plentifully supplied by pipes, just as London is from the Thames; though some parts of Chester stands very high from the river.
Though this is not an ancient bishopric, ’tis an ancient city, and was certainly a frontier of the Roman Empire this way; and its being so afterwards to the English Empire also, has doubtless been the reason of its being so well kept, and the castle continued in repair, when most of the other castles on the frontiers were slighted and demolished.
This county, however remote from London, is one of those which contributes most to its support, as well as to several other parts of England, and that is by its excellent cheese, which they make here in such quantities, and so exceeding good, that as I am told from very good authority, the city of London only take off 14000 ton every year; besides 8000 ton which they say goes every year down the Rivers Severn and Trent, the former to Bristol, and the latter to York including all the towns on both these large rivers. And besides the quantity shipped both here, and at Leverpool, to go to Ireland, and Scotland. Indeed, the whole county is employed in it, and part of its neighbourhood too; for though ’tis called by the name of Cheshire cheese, yet great quantities of it are made in Shropshire, Staffordshire and Lancashire, that is to say, in such parts of them as border upon Cheshire.
The soil is extraordinary good, and the grass they say, has a peculiar richness in it, which disposes the creatures to give a great quantity of milk, and that very sweet and good; and this cheese manufacture, for such it is, increases every day, and greatly enriches all the county; raises the value of the lands, and encourages the farmers to the keeping vast stocks of cows; the very number of the cattle improving and enriching the land.
I now resolved to direct my course east, and making the Wever and the Trent, my northern boundary in this circuit; I came forward to view the midland counties of England. I had taken a little trip into the N.E. parts of Cheshire before, seen a fine old seat of the Lord Delamere’s, and which is beyond it all, the fine forest, which bears the name of that noble family; intending to see the salt pits at Northwich, which are odd indeed, but not so very strange as we were made to believe. So we came away not extremely gratified in our curiosity.
From Northwich we turned S. and following the stream of the river by Middle Wich, we crossed the great London road at Nantwich, or as some write it Namptwych; these are the three salt making towns of this county; there is a fourth which is called Droitwych, in Worcestershire; the nature of the thing is this, they boil the brine into fine salt, which is much prized for the beauty of its colour, and fineness of the grain, but the salt is not so strong, as what we now make from the rock salt, and therefore loses of its value.
Hence we turned a little W. to Whitchurch, in Shropshire. But before I leave Cheshire, I must note two things of it. (1.) That there is no part of England, where there are such a great number of families of gentry, and of such ancient and noble extraction. (2) That it is a County Palatine, and has been for so many ages, that its government is distinct from any other and very particular; it is administered by a chamberlain, a judge special, two barons of the exchequer, three sergeants at law, a sheriff, and attorney, and escheator, and all proper and useful subordinate officers; and the jurisdiction of all these offices are kept up, and preserved very strictly, only we are to note, that the judge special as he is called, tries only civil causes, not criminal, which are left to the ordinary judges of England, who go the circuits here, as in other places.
Whitchurch is a pleasant and populous town, and has a very good church, in which is the famous monument of the great Talbot, first Earl of Shrewsbury, who, perhaps, and not unworthily, was called in his time, the English ACHILLES.
But the most to be said of this town now, is, that they have a good market, and a great many gentry near it, whereof some are Roman Catholics. They tell us that this town when King Charles I removed his standard from Nottingham to Shrewsbury, raised a whole regiment for the king. Nor has this town lost its old loyal principle, to this time; though now it may run a little another way.
From hence we went towards Wales again, and crossed the Dee, at Bangor Bridge; I could not satisfy myself to omit seeing this famous town, which was once so remarkable, but was surprised when I came there, to see there was a stone-bridge over the Dee, and indeed, a very fine one. But as for the town or monastery, scarce any of the ruins were to be seen, and as all the people spoke Welch, we could find no body that could give us any intelligence. So effectually had time in so few years, razed the very foundations of the place. I will not say, as some do, that this is miraculous, and that it is the particular judgment of God upon the place, for being the birth-place of that arch heretic Pelagius, who from hence also began to broach his heretical opinions, which afterwards so terribly overspread the Church : I say I will not insist upon this. That Pelagius was a monk of Bungor, or Banchor, is not doubted; but for the rest I leave it where I find it.
The place is now (I say) a poor contemptible village. From thence we visited Wrexham, having heard much of a fine church there, but we were greatly disappointed. There is indeed a very large tower steeple, if a tower may be called a steeple, and ’tis finely adorned with imagery; but far from fine: the work is mean, the statues seem all mean and in dejected postures, without any fancy or spirit in the workmanship, and as the stone is of a reddish crumbling kind like the cathedral at Chester, Time has made it look gross and rough. There are a great many ancient monuments in this church, and in the church-yard also; but none of note, and almost all the inscriptions are in Welch.
This town is large, well built and populous, and besides the church there are two large meeting-houses, in one of which we were told they preach in Welch one part of the day, and in English the other. Here is a great market for Welch flannel which the factors buy up of the poor Welch people, who manufacture it; and thence it is sent to London; and it is a very considerable manufacture indeed through all this part of the country, by which the poor are very profitably employed.
From hence we turned south, and passing by Wem, the title given by King James II to the late Lord Chancellor Jefferies, we saw the house where his father, then but a private gentleman lived, and in but middling circumstances. Thence we came to Ellsmere, famous for a great lake or mere, which the people pretend has in some places no bottom. This place is remarkable for good fish. From hence we came the same night to Shrewsbury. This is indeed a beautiful, large, pleasant, populous, and rich town; full of gentry and yet full of trade too; for here too, is a great manufacture, as well of flannel, as also of white broad-cloth, which enriches all the country round it. The Severn surrounds this town, just as the Thames does the Isle of Dogs; so that it makes the form of an horse-shoe, over which there are two fine stone bridges, upon one of which is built a very noble gate, and over the arch of the gate the statue of the great Lewellin, the idol of the Welch, and their last Prince of Wales.
This is really a town of mirth and gallantry, something like Bury in Suffolk, or Durham in the north, but much bigger than either of them, or indeed than both together. They speak all English in the town, but on a market-day you would think you were in Wales.
Here is the greatest market, the greatest plenty of good provisions, and the cheapest that is to be met with in all the western part of England; the Severn supplies them here with excellent salmon, but ’tis also brought in great plenty from the River Dee, which is not far off, and which abounds with a very good kind, and is generally larger than that in the Severn.
Near this place was fought the bloody battle between Henry Hotspur and Henry IV King of England, in which the former was killed, and all his army overthrown, and the place is called Battlefield to this day. This town will for ever be famous for the reception it gave to King Charles the I who, after setting up his standard at Nottingham, and finding no encouragement there, removed to Shrewsbury, being invited by the gentry of the town and country round, where he was received with such a general affection, and hearty zeal by all the people, that his majesty recovered the discouragement of his first step at Nottingham, and raised and completed a strong army in less time than could be imagined; insomuch that to the surprise of the Parliament, and indeed of all the world, he was in the field before them, and advanced upon them so fast, that he met them two-thirds onward of his way to London, and gave them battle at Edge-hill near Banbury.
But the fate of the war turning afterward against the king, the weight of it fell heavy upon this town also, and almost ruined them. But they are now fully recovered, and it is at this time one of the most flourishing towns in England. The walls and gates are yet standing, but useless, and the old castle is gone to ruin, as is the case of almost all the old castles in England.
It should not be forgotten here, that notwithstanding the healthiness of the place, one blot lies upon the town of Shrewsbury, and which, though nothing can be charged on the inhabitants, yet it seems they are the most obliged when ’tis least spoken of; namely that here broke out first that unaccountable plague, called the sweating sickness; which at first baffled all the sons of art, and spread itself through the whole kingdom of England : this happened in the year 1551. It afterwards spread itself into Germany, and several countries abroad.
Here is an ancient free-school, the most considerable in this part of England; built and endowed by Queen Elizabeth, with a very sufficient maintenance for a chief or head-master, and three under-masters or ushers. The buildings are very spacious, and particularly the library is a fine building, and has a great many books in it; but I saw nothing curious or rare among them, and no manuscripts.
Here I was showed a very visible and remarkable appearance of the great ancient road or way called Watling-Street, which comes from London to this town, and goes on from hence to the utmost coast of Wales; where it crossed the Severn, there are remains of a stone bridge to be seen in the bottom of the river, when the water is low. On this road we set out now for Litchfield in our way towards London; and I would gladly have kept to this old road, if it had been possible, because I knew several remarkable places stood directly upon it. But we were obliged to make many excursions, and sometimes quit the street for a great way together. And first we left it to go away south to the edge of Stafford-shire, to see the old house called White Ladies, and the royal oak, the famous retreat of King Charles II after the Battle of Worcester. The tree is surrounded with a palisadoe, to preserve it from the fate which threatened it from curiosity; for almost every body that came to see it for several years, carried away a piece of it, so that the tree was literally in danger not to die of age, but to be pulled limb from limb; but the veneration of that kind is much abated, and as the palisadoes are more decayed than the tree, the latter seems likely to stand safe without them.
Entering Stafford-shire we quitted the said Street-way, a little to the left, to see Stafford the county town, and the most considerable except Litchfield in the county. In the way we were surprised in a most agreeable manner, passing through a small but ancient town called Penkrige, vulgarly Pankrage, where happened to be a fair. We expected nothing extraordinary; but was I say surprised to see the prodigious number of horses brought hither, and those not ordinary and common draught-horses, and such kinds as we generally see at county-fairs remote from London. But here were really incredible numbers of the finest and most beautiful horses that can any where be seen; being brought hither from Yorkshire, the bishopric of Durham, and all the horse-breeding countries. We were told that there were not less than an hundred jockeys and horse-copers, as they call them there, from London, to buy horses for sale. Also an incredible number of gentlemen attended with their grooms to buy gallopers, or race-horses, for their Newmarket sport.
We stayed 3 days here to satisfy our curiosity, and indeed the sight was very agreeable, to see what vast stables of horses there were, which never were brought out or shown in the fair. How dextrous the northern grooms and breeders are in their looking after them, and ordering them. Those fellows take such indefatigable pains with them, that they bring them out like pictures of horses, not a hair amiss in them; they lie constantly in the stables with them, and feed them by weight and measure; keep them so clean, and so fine, I mean in their bodies, as well as their outsides, that, in short, nothing can be more nice. Here were several horses sold for 150 guineas a horse; but then they were such as were famous for the breed, and known by their race, almost as well as the Arabians know the genealogy of their horses.
From hence we came in two hours easy riding to Stafford, on the River Sow; ’tis an old and indeed ancient town, and gives name to the county; but we thought to have found something more worth going so much out of the way in it. The town is however neat and well built, and is lately much increased; nay, as some say, grown rich by the clothing trade, which they have fallen into but within the reach of the present age and which has not enriched this town only, but Tamworth also, and all the country round.
The people of this county have been particularly famous, and more than any other county in England, for good foot-manship, and there have been, and still are among them, some of the fleetest runners in England; which I do not grant to be occasioned by any particular temperature of the air or soil, so much as to the hardy breed of the inhabitants, especially in the moorlands or northern part of the county, and to their exercising themselves to it from their child-hood; for running foot-races seems to be the general sport or diversion of the country.
From hence to Litchfield, a city, and the principal, next to Chester, of all the N.W. part of England; neither indeed is there any other, but this and Coventry, in the whole road from London to Carlisle on the edge of Scotland.
Litchfield is a fine, neat, well-built, and indifferent large city; there is a little lake or lough of water in the middle of it, out of which runs a small stream of water, which soon becomes a little rivulet, and save that it has but 4 or 5 miles to the Trent, would soon become a river. This lake parts Litchfield, as it were, into two cities, one is called the town, and the other the close; in the first is the market-place, a fine school, and a very handsome hospital well-endowed. This part is much the largest and most populous: but the other is the fairest, has the best buildings in it, and, among the rest, the cathedral-church, one of the finest and most beautiful in England, especially for the outside, the form and figure of the building, the carved worked, imagery, and the three beauitful spires; the like of which are not to be seen in one church, no not in Europe.
There are two fine causeways which join the city and the close, with sluices to let the water pass, but those were cut through in the time of the late intestine wars in England; and the close, which is walled about, and was then fortified for the king, was very strong, and stood out several vigorous attacks against Cromwell’s men, and was not at last taken without great loss of blood on both sides, being gallantly defended to the last drop, and taken by storm.
There are in the close, besides the houses of the clergy residentiaries, a great many very well-built houses, and well inhabited too; which makes Litchfield a place of good conversation and good company, above all the towns in this county or the next.
They told us there a long story of St Chad, formerly bishop of this church, and how he lived in a little hovel or cell in the church-yard, instead of a bishop’s palace. But the bishops, since that time, have, I suppose, thought better of it, and make shift with a very fine palace in the close and the residentiaries live in proportion to it.
The church I say is indeed a most beautiful building; the west prospect of it is charming, the two spires on the corner towers being in themselves perfect beauties of architecture, in the old Gothic way of building, but made still more shining and glorious by a third spire, which rising from the main tower in the body of the church, surmounts the other two, and shews itself exactly between them.
It is not easy to describe the beauty of the west end; you enter by three large doors in the porch or portico, which is as broad as the whole front; the spaces between the doors are filled with carved work and imagery, no, place being void, where (by the rules of architecture) any ornament could be placed. The great window over the middle door is very large, and the pediment over it finely adorned, a large cross finishing the top of it; on either corner of the west front are two very fine towers, not unlike the two towers on the west end of St Peter’s Church at Westminster, only infinitely finer. Even with the battlement of the porch, and adjoining to the towers, are large pinnacles at the outer angles, and on the top of the towers are to each tower eight more, very beautiful and fine; between these pinnacles, on the top of each tower, rises a spire equal in height, in thickness, and in workmanship, but so beautiful no pen can describe them.
The imagery and carved work on the front as above, has suffered much in the late unhappy times; and they told us the cross over the west window was frequently shot at by the rude soldiers; but that they could not shoot it down, which however they do not say was miraculous.
From Litchfield we came to Tamworth, a fine pleasant trading town, eminent for good ale and good company, of the middling sort; from whence we came into the great road again at Coleshill in Warwickshire. This is a small but very handsome market-town; it chiefly, if not wholly belongs to the Lord Digby, who is lord of the manor, if not real owner of almost all the houses in the town, and as that noble person is at present a little on the wrong side as to the government, not having taken the oaths to King George, so the whole town are so eminently that way too, that they told me there was but one family of Whigs, as they called them, in the whole town, and they hoped to drive them out of the place too very quickly.
The late incumbent of this parish quitted his living, which is very considerable, because he would not take the oaths, and his successor was the famous — who, when I was there, was newly proscribed by proclamation, and the reward of 1000/. ordered to whoever should apprehend him; so their instructors being such, ’tis no wonder the people have followed their leader.
From Coles-hill we came to Coventry, the sister city to Litchfield, and joined in the title of the see. It was a very unhappy time when I first came to this city; for their heats and animosities for election of members to serve in Parliament, were carried to such a height, that all manner of method being laid aside, the inhabitants (in short) enraged at one another, met, and fought a pitched battle in the middle of the street, where they did not take up the breadth of the street, as two rabbles of people would generally do; in which case no more could engage, but so many as the breadth of the street would admit in the front; but, on the contrary, the two parties meeting in the street, one party kept to one side of the way, and one side to the other, the kennel in the middle only parting them, and so marching as if they intended to pass by one another, ’till the front of one party was come opposite to the rear of the other, and then suddenly facing to one another, and making a long front, where their flanks were before, upon a shout given, as the signal on both sides, they fell on with such fury with clubs and staves, that in an instant the kennel was covered with them, not with slain, but with such as were knocked down on both sides, and, in a word, they fought with such obstinacy that ’tis scarce credible. Nor were these the scum and rabble of the town but in short the burgesses and chief inhabitants, nay even magistrates, aldermen, and the like. Nor was this one skirmish a decision of the quarrel, but it held for several weeks, and they had many such fights; nor is the matter much better among them to this day, only that the occasion does not happen so often.
Coventry is a large and populous city, and drives a very great trade; the manufacture of tammies is their chief employ, and next to that weaving of ribbons of the meanest kind, chiefly black. The buildings are very old, and in some places much decayed; the city may be taken for the very picture of the city of London, on the south side of Cheapside before the Great Fire; the timber-built houses, projecting forwards and towards one another, till in the narrow streets they were ready to touch one another at the top.
The tale of the Lady Godiva, who rode naked through the High Street of the city to purchase her beloved city of Coventry exemption from taxes, is held for so certain a truth, that they will not have it questioned upon any account whatever; and the picture of the poor fellow that peeped out of the window to see her, is still kept up, looking out of a garret in the High Street of the city. But Mr Cambden says positively no body looked at her at all.
Here is no cathedral, as some have falsely said, neither is the great church, so called, either collegiate or conventual. In King Henry 8th’s time, the priory being dissolved, the church which they would have called a cathedral, was reduced to a private parish-church, and continues so to this day.
From Coventry we could by no means pass the town of Warwick, the distance too being but about six miles, and a very pleasant way on the banks of the River Avon. ’Tis famous for being the residence of the great Guy Earl of Warwick, known now only by fame, which also has said so much more than the truth of him, that even what was true is become a kind of romance, and the real history of his actions is quite lost to the world.
As to the town of Warwick, it is really a fine town, pleasantly situated on the bank of the Avon, over which there is a large and stately bridge, the Avon being now grown a pretty large river, Warwick was ever esteemed a handsome, well-built town, and there were several good houses in it, but the face of it is now quite altered; for having been almost wholly reduced to a heap of rubbish, by a terrible fire about two and twenty years ago, it is now rebuilt in so noble and so beautiful a manner, that few towns in England make so fine an appearance. The new church also is a fine building, but all the old monuments, which were very many, are entirely defaced, and lost by the fire.
The castle is a fine building, beautiful both by situation and its decoration; it stands on a solid rock of free-stone, from whose bowels it may be said to be built, as likewise is the whole town; the terrace of the castle, like that of Windsor, overlooks a beautiful country, and sees the Avon running at the foot of the precipice, at above 50 foot perpendicular height: the building is old, but several times repaired and beautified by its several owners, and ’tis now a very agreeable place both within and without. One finds no irregularity in the whole place, notwithstanding its ancient plan, as it was a castle not a palace, and built for strength rather than pleasure.
Being at Warwick, I took a short circuit through the S.E. part of the county, resolving after viewing a little the places of note, that lay something out of my intended route, to come back to the same place. Three miles from Warwick we passed over the Foss Way, which goes on to Leicester; then we came by Southam to Daventry, a considerable market town, but which subsists chiefly by the great concourse of travellers on the old Watling-street way, which lies near it; and the road being turned by modern usage, lies now through the town itself, then runs on to Dunsmore Heath.
It is a most pleasant curiosity to observe the course of these old famous highways the Icknild Way, the Watling-street, and the Foss, in which one sees so lively a representation of the ancient British, Roman and Saxon governments, that one cannot help realizing those times to the imagination; and though I avoid meddling with antiquity as much as possible in this work, yet in this case a circuit or tour through England would be very imperfect, if I should take no notice of these ways, seeing in tracing them we necessarily come to the principal towns, either that are or have been in every county.
From Daventry we crossed the country to Northampton, the handsomest and best built town in all this part of England; but here, as at Warwick, the beauty of it is owing to its own disasters, for it was so effectually and suddenly burnt down, that very few houses were left standing, and this, though the fire began in the day-time; ’tis now finely rebuilt with brick and stone, and the streets made spacious and wide.
The great new church, the town-hall, the gaol, and all their public buildings, are the finest in any country town in England, being all new built. But he took very little notice of Northampton, or rather had never seen it, who told us of a cathedral, a chapter-house and a cloister. The great inn at the George, the corner of the High Street, looks more like a palace than an inn, and the cost above 2000l. building; and so generous was the owner, that, as we were told, when he had built it, he gave it to the poor of the town. This is counted the centre of all the horse-markets and horse-fairs in England, there being here no less than four fairs in a year. Here they buy horses of all sorts, as well for the saddle as for the coach and cart, but chiefly for the two latter.
Near this town is the ancient royal house of Holmby, which was formerly in great esteem, and by its situation is capable of being made a royal palace indeed. But the melancholy reflection of the imprisonment of King Charles the First in this house, and his being violently taken hence again by the mutinous rebels, has cast a kind of odium upon the place, so that it has been, as it were, forsaken and uninhabited.
The Earl of Sunderland’s house at Althorp, on the other hand, has within these few years changed its face to the other extreme, and had the late Earl lived to make some new apartments, which, as we were told, were designed as two large wings to the buildings, it would have been one of the most magnificent palaces in Europe. The gardens are exquisitely fine, and add, if it be possible, to the natural beauty of the situation.
From hence we went north to Harborough, and in the way, in the midst of the deep dismal roads, the dirtiest and worst in all that part of the country, we saw Boughton, the noble seat of the Duke of Mountague, a house built at the cost and by the fancy of the late Duke, very much after the model of the Palace of Versailles.
From hence we went on to Harborough intending to go forward to Leicester; but curiosity turned us west a little to see an old town called Lutterworth, famous for being the birth-place of honest John Wickliff, the first preacher of the Reformation in England, whose disciples were afterwards called Lollards; when we came there we saw nothing worth notice, nor did the people, as I could find, so much as know in general, that this great man was born amongst them.
Being thus got a little out of our way, We went on with it, and turning into the great Watling-street way, at High Cross, where the Foss crosses it, and which I suppose occasioned the name, we kept on the street way to Non-Eaton, a manufacturing town on the River Anker, and then to Atherstone, a town famous for a great cheese fair on the 8th of September.
From Atherston we turned N. to see Bosworth-Field, famous for the great battle which put an end to the usurpation of Richard III and to the long and bloody contention between the red rose and the white, or the two royal houses of York and Lancaster, which, as fame tells us, had cost the lives of eleven princes, three and twenty earls and dukes, three thousand noblemen knights, and gentlemen, and two hundred thousand of the common people. They showed us the spot of ground where the battle was fought, and at the town they showed us several pieces of swords, heads of lances, barbs of arrows, pieces of pole-axes, and such like instruments of death, which they said were found by the country people in the several grounds near the place of battle, as they had occasion to dig, or trench, or plough up the ground.
Having satisfied our curiosity in these points, we turned east towards Leicester. Leicester is an ancient large and populous town, containing about five parishes, ’tis the capital of the county of Leicester, and stands on the River Soar, which rises not far from that High Cross I mentioned before. They have considerable manufacture carried on here, and in several of the market towns round for weaving of stockings by frames; and one would scarce think it possible so small an article of trade could employ such multitudes of people as it does; for the whole county seems to be employed in it.
Warwickshire and Northamptonshire are not so full of antiquities, large towns, and gentlemen’s seats, but this county of Leicester is as empty. The whole county seems to be taken up in country business, such as the manufacture above, but particularly in breeding and feeding cattle; the largest sheep and horses in England are found here, and hence it comes to pass too, that they are in consequence a vast magazine of wool for the rest of the nation; even most of the gentlemen are graziers, and in some places the graziers are so rich, that they grow gentlemen: ’tis not an uncommon thing for graziers here to rent farms from 500l. to two thousand pounds a year rent.
The sheep bred in this county and Lincolnshire, which joins to it, are, without comparison, the largest, and bear not only the greatest weight of flesh on their bones but also the greatest fleeces of wool on their backs of any sheep of England : nor is the fineness of the wool abated for the quantity; but as ’tis the longest staple, (so the clothiers call it) so ’tis the finest wool in the whole island, some few places excepted, where the quantity is small and insignificant, compared to this part of the country. These are the funds of sheep which furnish the city of London with their large mutton in so incredible a quantity.
The horses produced here, or rather fed here, are the largest in England, being generally the great black coach horses and dray horses, of which so great a number are continually brought up to London, that one would think so little a spot as this of Leicestershire could not be able to supply them.
Leicester was formerly a very strong and well fortified town, being situated to great advantage for strength, the river compassing it half about, so it was again fortified in the late unhappy wars, and being garrisoned by the Parliament forces, was assaulted by the Royalists, and being obstinately defended, was taken sword in hand, with a great slaughter, and not without the loss also of several of the inhabitants, who too rashly concerned themselves in opposing the conquerors. They preserve here a most remarkable piece of antiquity, being a piece of mosaic work at the bottom of a cellar; ’tis the story of Actæon, and his being killed by his own hounds, wrought as a pavement in a most exquisite manner; the stones are small, and of only two colours, white and brown, or chestnut, and very small.
The Foss Way leads us from hence through the eastern and north east part of the county, and particularly through the vale of Belvoir, to Newark in Nottinghamshire. In all this long tract we pass a rich and fertile country, fruitful fields, and the noble River Trent, for twenty miles together, often in our view; the towns of Mount Sorrel, Loughborough, Melton Mowbray, and Waltham in the Would, that is to say, on the Downs; all these are market towns, but of no great note.
At Newark one can hardly see without regret the ruins of that famous castle, which maintained itself through the whole Civil War in England, and keeping a strong garrison there for the king to the last, cut off the greatest pass into the north that is in the whole kingdom; nor was it ever taken, ’till the king, pressed by the calamity of his affairs, put himself into the hands of the Scots army, which lay before it, and then commanded the governor to deliver it up, after which it was demolished, that the great road might lie open and free; and it remains in rubbish to this day. Newark is a very handsome well-built town, the market place a noble square, and the church is large and spacious, with a curious spire, which, were not Grantham so near, might pass for the finest and highest in all this part of England: the Trent divides itself here, and makes an island, and the bridges lead just to the foot of the castle wall; so that while this place was in the hands of any party, there was no travelling but by their leave.
From Newark, still keeping the Foss Way, which lies as strait as a line can mark it out, we went on to Lincoln, having a view of the great church called the minster all the way before us, the River Trent on the left, and the downs called Lincoln Heath on the right. Lincoln is an ancient, ragged, decayed, and still decaying city; it is so full of the ruins of monasteries and religious houses, that, in short, the very barns, stables, out-houses and as they showed me some of the very hog-sties were built church-fashion; that is to say, with stone walls and arched windows and doors. There are here 13 churches, but the meanest to look on that are any where to be seen; the cathedral indeed and the ruins of the old castle are very venerable pieces of antiquity.
The situation of the city is very particular; one part is on the flat and in a bottom, so that the Wittham, a little river that runs through the town, flows sometimes into the street, the other part lies upon the top of a high hill, where the cathedral stands, and the very steepest part of the ascent of the hill is the best part of the city for trade and business. Nothing is more troublesome than the communication of the upper and lower town, the street is so steep and so straight, the coaches and horses are obliged to fetch a compass another way, as well on one hand as on the other.
The River Wittham, which as I said runs through the city, is arched over, so that you see nothing of it as you go through the main street; but it makes a large lake on the west side, and has a canal, by which it has a communication with the Trent, by which means the navigation of the Trent is made useful for trade to the city; this canal is called the Foss-dike.
There are some very good buildings, and a great deal of very good company, in the upper city, and several families of gentlemen have houses there, besides those of the prebendaries and other clergy belonging to the cathedral.
This cathedral is in itself a very noble structure, and is counted very fine, though I thought it not equal to some that I have already described. Its situation is infinitely more to advantage, than any cathedral in England, for it is seen far and wide; it stands upon an exceeding high hill, and is seen into five or six counties.
The building in general is very noble, and the church itself is very large; it has a double cross, one in the nave or centre on which the great tower stands, and one at the east end of the choir, under which are several ancient monuments; the length of the church is near 500 foot, the breadth 126; so that it is much larger than that at Litchfield; but the spires on the towers at the angles of the west end are mean, small, and low, and not to be named with those at Litchfield. The tower also is very plain, and has only four very ill-proportioned spires, or rather pinnacles, at the four corners small and very mean.
The church, as it is the seat of the bishopric, is not ancient, but the city is ancient, and the ruins of it tell us as much; it was certainly a flourishing city in the time of the Romans, and continued so after the fall of their empire.
The city was a large and flourishing place at the time of the Norman Conquest, though neither the castle or the great church were then built; there were then three and fifty parish churches in it, of which I think only thirteen remain; and by the Domesday Book they tell us it must be one of the greatest cities in England, whence perhaps that old English proverbial line:
Lincoln was, London is, and York shall be.


It is certain William the Conqueror built the castle, and, as ’tis said, to curb the potent citizens; and the ruins show that it was a most magnificent work, well fortified, and capable of receiving a numerous garrison.
The bishopric of Lincoln at that time contained all that now is contained in the diocesses of Ely, Peterborough, and Oxford, besides what is now the diocese of Lincoln. This see, though of no longer date than since the conquest, has produced to the Church and State

Three Saints,
One, Cardinal, (namely Wolsey)
Six Lord Chancellors,
One Lord Treasurer,
One Lord Privy Seal,
Four Chancellors of Oxford,
Two ditto, of Cambridge.


But all this relates to times past, and is an excursion, which I shall atone for by making no more. Such is the present state of Lincoln, that it is an old dying, decayed, dirty city; and except that part which, as above, lies between the castle and the church on the top of the hill, it is scarce tolerable to call it a city.
Yet it stands in a most rich, pleasant, and agreeable country; for on the north, and again on the south east, the noble plain, called Lincoln Heath extends itself, like the plains about Salisbury, for above fifty miles; namely, from Sleeford and Ancaster south to the bank of the Humber north, though not with a breadth equal to the vast stretched out length; for the plain is hardly any where above three or four miles broad.
As the middle of the country is all hilly, and the west side low, so the east side is the richest, most fruitful, and best cultivated of any county in England, so far from London; one part is all fen or marsh grounds, and extends itself south to the Isle of Ely, and here it is that so vast a quantity of sheep are fed, as makes this county and that of Leicester an inexhaustible fountain of wool for all the manufacturing counties in England.
There are abundance of very good towns too in this part, especially on the sea coast, as Grimsby, in the utmost point of the county north east, facing the Humber and the ocean, and almost opposite to Hull. A little farther within Humber is Barton, a town noted for nothing that I know of, but an ill-favoured dangerous passage, or ferry, over the Humber to Hull; where in an open boat, in which we had about fifteen horses, and ten or twelve cows, mingled with about seventeen or eighteen passengers, called Christians; we were about four hours tossed about on the Humber, before we could get into the harbour at Hull; whether I was sea-sick or not, is not worth notice, but that we were all sick of the passage, any one may suppose, and particularly I was so uneasy at it, that I chose to go round by York, rather than return to Barton, at least for that time.
Grimsby is a good town, but I think ’tis but an indifferent road for shipping; and in the great storm, (ann. 1703) it was proved to be so, for almost all the ships that lay in Grimsby road were driven from their anchors, and many of them lost.
Here within land we see Brigg, Castor, Louth, Horncastle, Bolingbroke, Spilsby, Wainfleet, and Boston. As these are all, except the last, inland towns they afford little remarkable, only to intimate that all this country is employed in husbandry, in breeding and feeding innumerable droves and flocks of black cattle and sheep. Indeed I should not have said black cattle. I should have called them red cattle; for it was remarkable, that almost all their cows for 50 miles together are red, or pied red and white, and consequently all the cattle raised there, are the same.
The Fen Country begins about Wainfleet, which is within twenty miles of Grimsby, and extends itself to the Isle of Ely south, and to the grounds opposite to Lynn Regis in Norfolk east. This part is indeed very properly called Holland, for ’tis a flat, level, and often drowned country, like Holland itself; here the very ditches are navigable, and the people pass from town to town in boats, as in Holland. Here we had the uncouth music of the bittern, a bird formerly counted ominous and presaging, and who, as fame tells us, (but as I believe no body knows) thrusts its bill into a reed, and then gives the dull, heavy groan or sound, like a sigh, which it does so loud, that with a deep bass like the sound of a gun at a great distance, ’tis heard two or three miles, (say the people) but perhaps not quite so far.
Here we first saw Boston, a handsome well-built sea port town, at the mouth of the River Wittham. The tower of this church is, without question, the largest and highest in England; and, as it stands in a country, which (they say) has no bottom, nothing is more strange, than that they should find a foundation for so noble and lofty a structure; it had no ornament, spire, or pinnacle on the top, but it is so very high, that few spires in England, can match it, and it is not only beautiful by land but is very useful at sea to guide pilots into that port, and even into the mouth of the River Ouse; for in clear weather ’tis seen quite out at sea to the entrance of those channels, which they call Lynn Deeps, and Boston Deeps, which are as difficult places as most upon the whole eastern shore of Britain.
The town of Boston is a large, populous, and well-built town, full of good merchants, and has a good share of foreign trade, as well as Lynn. Here is held one of those annual fairs, which preserve the ancient title of a mart, whereof I remember only four in England of any considerable note, viz. Lynn, Gainsborough, Beverly, and Boston.
The country round this place is all fen and marsh grounds, the land very rich, and which feeds prodigious numbers of large sheep, and also oxen of the largest size, the overplus and best of which goes all to London market; and from this part, as also from the downs or heath above-mentioned, comes the greatest part of the wool, known, as a distinction for its credit, because of its fineness, by the name of Lincolnshire wool; which is sent in great quantities into Norfolk and Suffolk, for the manufacturers of those counties, and indeed to several other of the most trading counties in England.
From Boston we came on through the fen country to Spalding, which is another sea port in the level, but standing far within the land on the River Welland. Here was nothing very remarkable to be seen as to antiquity, but the ruins of an old famous monastery. There is a bridge over the Welland, and vesels of about fifty or sixty ton may come up to the town and that is sufficient for the trade of Spalding, which is chiefly in corn and coal.
We must not pass by Crowland, another place of great religious antiquity, here being once a famous monastery, the remains of which are still to be seen. The monks of Crowland were eminent in history, and a great many stories are told of the devils of Crowland also, and what conversation they had with the monks, which tales are more out of date now, than they were formerly; for they tell us, that in ancient times those things were as certainly believed for truths, as if they had been done before their faces.
There is one thing here that is curious indeed, and very remarkable, and which is not to be seen in any other place in Britain, if it be in Europe; namely, a triangular bridge. The case is this; the River Welland and another river, or rather branch from the River Nyne, join together just at Crowland, and the bridge being fixed at the very point where they join, stands upon a centre in the middle of the united waters, and then parting into two bridges, lands you one to the right upon Thorney, and one to the left upon Holland; and yet they tell us there is a whirlpool, or bottomless pit, in the middle too; but that part I see no reason to give credit to.
The town of Spalding is not large, but pretty well built and well inhabited; but for the healthiness or pleasantness of it, I have no more to say than this, that I was very glad when I got out of it, and out of the rest of the fen country; for ’tis a horrid air for a stranger to breathe in.
The history of the draining those fens, by a set of gentlemen called the Adventurers, the several laws for securing and preserving the banks, and dividing the lands; how they were by the extraordinary conflux of waters from all the inland counties of England frequently overflowed, and sometimes lay under water most part of the year; how all the water in this part of England, which does not run into the Thames, the Trent, or the Severn, falls together into these low grounds, and empty themselves into the sea by those drains as though a sink; and how by the skill of these Adventurers, and, at a prodigious expense, they have cut new channels, and even whole rivers, with particular drains from one river to another, to carry off the great flux of waters, when floods or freshes come down either on one side or on the other; and how notwithstanding all that hands could do, or art contrive, yet sometimes the waters do still prevail, the banks break, and whole levels are overflowed together; all this though it would be very useful and agreeable to have it fully and geographically described, yet it would take up so much room, and be so tedious here, where you are expecting a summary description of things, rather than the history and reasons of them that I cannot think of entering any farther into it.
Here are also an infinite number of wild fowl, such as duck and mallard, teal and widgeon, brand geese, wild geese, &c. and for the taking of the four first kinds, here are a great number of decoys or duckoys, call them which you please, from all which the vast number of fowls they take are sent up to London; the quantity indeed is incredible, and the accounts which the country people give of the numbers they sometimes take, are such, that one scarce dares to report it from them. But this I can say, of my certain knowledge, that some of these decoys are of so great an extent, and take such great quantities of fowl, that they are let for great sums of money by the year, viz. from 100l. to 3, 4, and 500l. a year rent.

There are many particulars in the managing and draining these levels, throwing off the water by mills and engines, and cultivating the grounds in an unusual manner, which would be very useful to be described.
1. That here are some wonderful engines for throwing up water, and such as are not to be seen any where else, whereof one in particular threw up, (as they assured us) twelve hundred ton of water in half an hour, and goes by wind-sails, 12 wings or sails to a mill. This I saw the model of, but I must own I did not see it perform.
2. Here are the greatest improvements by planting of hemp, that, I think, is to be seen in England; particularly on the Norfolk and Cambridge side of the Fens, as about Wisbech, Well, and several other places where we saw many hundred acres of ground bearing great crops of hemp.
3. Here is a particular trade carried on with London, which is no where else practised in the whole kingdom, that I have met with, or heard of, (viz.) for carrying fish alive by land-carriage; this they do by carrying great butts filled with water in waggons, as the carriers draw other goods. The butts have a little square flap, instead of a bung, about ten, twelve, or fourteen inches square which, being opened gives air to the fish and every night, when they come to the inn, they draw off the water, and let more fresh and sweet water run into them again. In these carriages they chiefly carry especially tench and pike, of which here are some of the largest in England.
From the Fens, longing to be delivered from fogs and stagnate air, and the water of the colour of brewed ale, like the rivers of the Peak, we first set foot on dry land, as I called it, at Peterborough. This is a little city, and indeed ’tis the least in England; for Bath, or Wells, or Ely, or Carlisle, which are all called cities are yet much bigger; yet Peterborough is no contemptible place neither; there are some good houses in it, and the streets are fair and well-built; but the glory of Peterborough is the cathedral, which is truly fine and beautiful.
In this church was buried the body of the unhappy Mary Queen of Scots, mother to King James the First, who was beheaded not far off in Fotheringay Castle in the same county; but her body was afterwards removed by King James the First, her son, into Westminster Abbey, where a monument is erected for her, in King Henry VIIth’s chapel; though some do not stick to tell us, that though the monument was erected, the body was never removed. Here also lies interred another unhappy queen, namely, the Lady Katherine of Spain, the divorced wife of King Henry VIII and mother to Queen Mary: who reigned immediately after King Edward VI. Her monument is not very magnificent, but ’tis far from mean.
’Tis remarkable, that as this church, when a monastery, was famous for its great revenues, so now, as reduced, ’tis one of the poorest bishoprics in England, if not the meanest.
Coming to this little city landed us in Northamptonshire; but as great part of Lincolnshire, which is a vastly extended large county, remained yet unseen, we were obliged to turn north from Peterborough, and take a view of the fens again, though we kept them at some distance too. Here we passed the Welland at Market Deeping, an old, ill-built and dirty town; then we went through Bourn to Folkingham.
From hence we crossed part of the great heath mentioned before, and came into the high road again at Ankaster, a small but ancient Roman village, and full of remnants of antiquity. This place and Panton, a village near it, would afford great subject of discourse, if antiquity was my present province, for here are found abundance of Roman coins, urns, and other remains of antiquity, as also in several parts here about; and at this town of Ankaster there was a station or colony settled of Romans, which afterwards swelled up into a city, but is now sunk again out of knowledge.
From hence we came to Grantham, famous for a very fine church and spire steeple, so finely built, and so very high, that I do not know many higher and finer built in Britain. The vulgar opinion, that this steeple stands leaning, is certainly a vulgar error. I had no instrument indeed to judge it by, but, according to the strictest observation, I could not perceive it, or anything like it, and am much of opinion with that excellent poet:



’Tis height makes Grantham steeple stand awry.


This is a neat, pleasant, well-built and populous town, has a good market, and the inhabitants are said to have a very good trade, and are generally rich. There is also a very good free-school here. This town lying on the great northern road is famous, as well as Stamford, for abundance of very good inns, some of them fit to entertain persons of the greatest quality and their retinues, and it is a great advantage to the place.
From a hill, about a mile beyond this town north west, being on the great York road, we had a prospect again into the Vale of Bever, or Belvoir, also here we had a distant view of Bever, or Bellevoir Castle, which ’tis supposed took its name from the situation, from whence there is so fine a prospect, or Bellevoir over the country; so that you see from the hill into six counties, namely, into Lincoln, Nottingham, Darby, Leicester, Rutland, and Northampton shires. The castle or palace (for such it now is) of Bevoir, is now the seat of the noble family of Mannors, Dukes of Rutland, who have also a very noble estate, equal to the demesnes of some sovereign princes, and extending itself into Nottingham and Darbyshire far and wide, and in which estate they have an immense subterranean treasure, never to be exhausted; I mean the lead mines and coal-pits, of which I shall say more in its place.
Turning southward from hence we entered Rutlandshire, remarkable for being the least county in England, having but two market towns in it, viz. Okeham and Uppingham, but famous for abundance of fine seats of the gentlemen, and some of the first rank, as particularly the Earls of Gainsborough and Nottingham; the latter has at a very great expense, and some years labour, rebuilt the ancient seat of Burleigh on the Hill, near Okeham, and on the edge of the vale of Cathross. This house would indeed require a volume of itself, to describe the pleasant situation, and magnificent structure, the fine gardens, the perfectly well-finished apartments, the curious paintings, and well-stored library: all these merit a particular view, and consequently an exact description; but it is not the work of a few pages, and it would be to lessen the fame of this palace, to say any thing by way of abstract, where every part calls for a full account: at present, all I can say of it is, there may be some extraordinary palaces in England, but I do not know a house in Britain, which excels all the rest in so many particulars, or that goes so near to excelling them all in every thing.
From hence we came to Stamford; the town is placed in a kind of an angle of the county of Lincoln, just upon the edge of three counties, viz. Lincoln, Northampton, and Rutland: this town boasts greatly too of its antiquity, and indeed it has evident marks of its having been a very great place in former days. History tells us it was burnt by the Danes above 1500 years ago, being then a flourishing city. Tradition tells us, it was once a university, and that the schools were first erected by Bladud King of the Britains; the same whose figure stands up at the King’s Bath in the city of Bath, and who lived 300 years before our Saviour’s time. But the famous camps and military ways, which still appear at and near this town, are a more visible testimony of its having been a very ancient town, and that it was considerable in the Romans’ time.
It is at this time a very fair, well-built, considerable and wealthy town, consisting of six parishes, including that of St Martin in Stamford-Baron; that is to say, in that part of the town which stands over the river. The government of this town is not, it seems, as most towns of such note are, by a mayor and aldermen, but by an alderman, who is chief magistrate, and twelve comburgesses, and twenty-four capital burgesses, which, abating their worships’ titles, is, to me, much the same thing as a mayor, aldermen, and common council. They boast in this town of very great privileges, especially to their alderman, who is their chief magistrate, and his comburgesses; such as being freed from the sheriff’s jurisdiction, and from being impanneled on juries out of the town; to have the return of all writs, to be freed from all lords lieutenants, and from their musters, and for having the militia of the town commanded by their own officers.
There are two constant weekly markets here, viz. on Mondays and Fridays, but the last is the chief market. They have also three fairs, viz. St Simon and Jude, St James’s, and Green-goose Fair, and a great Midlent mart; but the latter is not now so considerable, as it is reported to have formerly been.
But the beauty of Stamford is the neighbourhood of the noble palace of the Earl of Excester, called Burleigh House, built by the famous Sir William Cecil, Lord Burleigh, and Lord High Treasurer to Queen Elizabeth. This house, built all of free-stone, looks more like a town than a house, at which avenue soever you come to it; the towers and the pinnacles so high, and placed at such a distance from one another, look like so many distant parish-churches in a great town, and a large spire covered with lead, over the great clock in the centre, looks like the cathedral, or chief church of the town.
The house stands on an eminence, which rises from the north entrance of the park, coming from Stamford. As you mount the hill, you come to a fine esplanade, before the great gate or first entrance of the house, where there is a small but very handsome semi-circle, taken in with an iron balustrade, and from this, rising a few steps, you enter a most noble hall, but made infinitely more noble by the invaluable paintings, with which it is so filled, that there is not room to place any thing between them.
The late Earl of Excester, father of his present lordship, had a great genius for painting and architecture, and a superior judgment in both, as every part of this noble structure will testify; for he changed the whole face of the building; he pulled down great part of the front next the garden, and turned the old Gothic windows into those spacious sashes which are now seen there; and though the founder or first builder, who had an exquisite fancy also, (as the manner of buildings then was) had so well ordered the situation and avenues of the whole fabric, that nothing was wanting of that kind, and had also contrived the house itself in a most magnificent manner; the rooms spacious, well directed, the ceilings lofty, and the decorations just, yet the late Earl found room for alterations, infinitely to the advantage of the whole; as particularly, a noble stair case, a whole set of fine apartments, with rooms of state, fitting for the entertainment of a prince, especially those on the garden side; though at present a little out of repair again.
As this admirable genius, the late Earl, loved paintings, so he had infinite advantage in procuring them; for he not only travelled three times into Italy, and stayed every time a considerable while at Florence, but he was so entertained at the Court of Tuscany, and had, by his most princely deportment and excellent accomplishments, so far obtained upon the great duke, that he might be said indeed to love him, and his highness showed the Earl many ways that esteem; and more particularly, in assisting him to purchase many excellent pieces at reasonable prices; and not only so, but his highness presented him with several pieces of great value.
Besides the pictures, which, as above, were brought from abroad, the house itself, at least the new apartments may be said to be one entire picture. The stair-case, the ceilings of all the fine lodgings, the chapel, the hall, the late Earl’s closet, are all finely painted by VARRIO, of whose work I need say no more than this, that the Earl kept him twelve years in his family, wholly employed in painting those ceilings and stair-cases, &c. and allowed him a coach and horses, and equipage, a table, and servants and a very considerable pension.

N.B. The character this gentleman left behind him at this town, is, that he deserved it all for his paintings; but for nothing else; his scandalous life, and his unpaid debts, it seems, causing him to be but very meanly spoken of in the town of Stamford.
By the park wall, adjoining to Burleigh House, passed an old Roman highway, beginning at Castor, a little village near Peterborough; but which was anciently a Roman station, or colony, called Durobrevum; this way is still to be seen, and is now called the 40 Foot Way, passing from Glunworth Ferry (and Peterborough) to Stamford. This was, as the antiquaries are of opinion, the great road into the north, which is since turned from Stilton in Huntingdonshire to Wandsworth or Wandsford, where there is a very good bridge over the River Nyne; which coming down from Northampton, as I have observed already, passes thence by Peterborough, and so into the Fen country. But if I may straggle a little into antiquity, (which I have studiously avoided) I am of opinion, neither this or Wandsford was the ancient northern road in use by the Romans; for ’tis evident, that the great Roman causeway is still seen on the left hand of that road, and passing the Nyne at a place called Water Neuton, went directly to Stamford, and passed the Welland, just above that town, not in the place where the bridge stands now: and this Roman way is still to be seen, both on the south and the north side of the Welland, stretching itself on to Brig Casterton, a little town about three miles beyond Stamford; which was, as all writers agree, another Roman station; whence it went on to Panton, another very considerable colony, and so to Newark, where it crossed the Foss. This Forty Foot Way then must be a cross road from Castor, and by that from the Fen Country, so leading into the great highway at Stamford.
Lord Fitzwilliams lately built a very fine stone bridge over the Nyne. I was very much applauding this generous action of my lord’s, knowing the inconvenience of the passage there before, especially if the waters of the Nyne were but a little swelled, and I thought it a piece of public charity; but my applause was much abated, when coming to pass the bridge (being in a coach) we could not be allowed to go over it, without paying 2s. 6d. of which I shall only say this, that I think ’tis the only half crown toll that is in Britain.
On the other side of the river is a fine new-built house, all of free stone, possessed by Sir Francis St John, Bart. which affords a very beautiful prospect to travellers, as they pass from the hill beyond Stilton to Wansford Bridge. This Wansford has obtained an idle addition to its name, from a story so firmly believed by the country people, that they will hardly allow any room for contradiction; namely, that a great flood coming hastily down the River Nyne, in hay-making-time, a country fellow, having taken up his lodging on a cock of hay in the meadow, was driven down the stream in the night, while he was fast asleep; and the hay swimming, and the fellow sleeping, they drove together towards Wisbech in the Fens, whence he was fairly going on to the sea; when being wakened, he was seen and taken up by some fishermen, almost in the open sea; and being asked, who he was? he told them his name; and where he lived? he answered, at Wansford in England. From this story the town is called Wansford in England and we see at the great inn, by the south end of the bridge, the sign of a man floating on a cock of hay, and over him written, Wansford in England.
Coming south from hence we passed Stilton, a town famous for cheese, which is called our English Parmesan, and is brought to table with the mites, or maggots round it, so thick, that they bring a spoon with them for you to eat the mites with, as you do the cheese.
Hence we came through Sautrey Lane, a deep descent between two hills, in which is Stangate Hole, famous for being the most noted robbing-place in all this part of the country. Hence we passed to Huntingdon, the county town, otherwise not considerable; it is full of very good inns, is a strong pass upon the Ouse, and in the late times of rebellion it was esteemed so by both parties. Here are the most beautiful meadows on the banks of the River Ouse, that I think are to be seen in any part of England; and to see them in the summer season, covered with such innumerable stocks of cattle and sheep, is one of the most agreeable sights of its kind in the world. This town has nothing remarkable in it; ’tis a long continued street, pretty well built, has three parish churches, and a pretty good market-place; but the bridge, or bridges rather, and causeway over the Ouse is a very great ornament to the place.
Hence we went a little north to see Oundle, being told that the famous drum was to be heard just at that time in the well; but when we came there, they showed us indeed the well and the town, but as for the drum, they could only tell us they heard of it, and that it did drum; but we could meet with no person of sufficient credit, that would say seriously they had heard it: so we came away dissatisfied.
From Oundle we crossed the county of Northampton into Bedfordshire, and particularly to the town of Bedford, the chief town of the county; for this county has no city in it, though even this town is larger and more populous, than several cities in England, having five parish-churches, and a great many, and those wealthy and thriving inhabitants. This is one of the seven counties, which they say lie together, and have not one city among them; namely, Huntington, Bedford, Bucks, Berks, Hertford, Essex, and Suffolk.
But here I must do a piece of justice to the usage of England in denominating of cities, namely, that it is not here as in France, and Flanders, and Holland, where almost all their towns of note are called cities and where the gentry chiefly live in those cities, and the clergy also. But as we have no authority, but ancient usage and custom, for the distinguishing places by the names of towns and cities, so since that ancient usage or authority had the titles of places, ’tis observable some places, formerly of note, are considerably decayed, and scarce preserve the face of their ancient greatness; as Lincoln, Old Sarum, Carlisle, Verulam, and others; and several towns which in those times scarce deserved the name of cities are now, by the increase of commerce and numbers of inhabitants, become greater, more populous and wealthy, than others, which are called cities.
Nor is this all but several towns, which Mr Cambden tells us, were called cities in his time, are now sunk from the dignity, and are only called towns, and yet still retain a greatness, wealth, and populousness superior to many cities, such as Colchester, Ipswich, Shrewsbury, Cambridge, Stamford, Leicester, and others which are without all comparison greater now than Wells, Peterborough, Ely, or Carlisle, and yet have lost the title of cities, which the other retain.
Thus we have at this time the towns of Froom, Taunton, Tiverton, Plymouth, Portsmouth, and others in the west, and towns of Liverpool, Manchester, Leeds, Sheffield, Birmingham, Hull, and several others in the north, that are much larger, richer, and more populous than Rochester, Peterborough, Carlisle, Bath, and even than York itself, and yet these retain but the name of towns, nay even of villages, in some of which the chiefest magistrate is but a constable, as in Manchester, for example.
Another thing is scarce to be equalled in the whole isle of Britain; namely, that though the Ouse, by a long and winding course, cuts through the county, and by its long reachings, so as to make above seventy miles between Oulney and St Neots, though not above twenty by land, yet in all that course it receives but one river into it, namely the little River Ivel.
Bedford, as I have said, is a large, populous, and thriving town, and a pleasant well-built place; it has five parish churches, a very fine stone bridge over the Ouse, and the High Street, (especially) is a very handsome fair street, and very well-built; and though the town is not upon any of the great roads in England, yet it is full of very good inns, and many of them; and in particular we found very good entertainment here.
Here is the best market for all sorts of provisions, that is to be seen at any country town in all these parts of England; and this occasions, that though it is so far from London, yet the higglers or carriers buy great quantities of provisions here for London markets; also here is a very good trade down the river to Lynn.
Here is also a great corn market, and great quantities of corn are bought here, and carried down by barges and other boats to Lynn, where it is again shipped, and carried by sea to Holland. The soil hereabouts is exceeding rich and fertile, and particularly produces great quantities of the best wheat in England. There are but ten market towns in the whole county, and yet ’tis not a small county neither. The towns are,

Bedford,
Biggleswood,
Leighton,
Dunstable,
Ampthill,
Shefford,
Luton,
Potton,
Tuddington,
Wooburn.


The last of these was almost demolished by a terrible fire, which happened here just before my writing this account; but as this town has the good luck to belong to a noble family, particularly eminent for being good landlords; that is to say, bountiful and munificent to their poor tenants, I mean the ducal house of Bedford; there is no doubt but that the trustees, though his grace the present Duke is in his minority, will preserve that good character to the family, and re-edify the town, which is almost all their own.
The Duke’s house, called Wooburn Abbey, is just by the town, a good old house, but very ancient, spacious and convenient rather than fine but exceedingly pleasant by its situation; and for the great quantity of beech woods which surround the parks and cover the hills, and also for great woods of oak too, as rich and valuable, as they are great and magnificent.
Ampthill is graced like Wooburn; for though in itself, like the other, it is not a considerable town, and has no particular manufacture to enrich it, yet by the neighbourhood of that great and noble family of Bruce Earls of Ailesbury, the very town is made both rich and honourable. From hence, through the whole south part of this county, as far as the border of Buckinghamshire and Hertfordshire, the people are taken up with the manufacture of bone-lace, in which they are wonderfully increased and improved within these few years past. Also the manufactures of straw-work, especially straw hats, spreads itself from Hertfordshire into this county, and is wonderfully increased within a few years past. Having thus viewed this county in all its most considerable towns, we came from Dunstable to St Albans, and so into London, all which has been spoken of before; I therefore break off this circuit here, and subscribe,
SIR,
Your most obedient servant.

Appendix to the Second Volume


IN travelling this latter part of this second tour, it has not been taken notice of, though it very well deserves mention; that the soil of all the midland part of England, even from sea to sea, is of a deep stiff clay, or marly kind, and it carries a breadth of near 50 miles at least, in some places much more; nor is it possible to go from London to any part of Britain, north, without crossing this clayey dirty part. For example:
1. Suppose we take the great northern post road from London to York, and so into Scotland; you have tolerable good ways and hard ground, ’till you reach Royston about 32, and to Kneesworth, a mile farther. But from thence you enter upon the clays, which beginning at the famous Arrington-Lanes, and going on to Caxton, Huntington, Stilton, Stamford, Grantham, Newark, Tuxford (called for its deepness Tuxford in the Clays) holds on ’till we come almost to Bautree, which is the first town in Yorkshire, and there the country is hard and sound, being part of Sherwood Forest.
2. Suppose you take the other northern road, namely, by St Albans, Dunstable, Hockley, Newport Pagnel, Northampton, Leicester and Nottingham or Darby. On this road after you are passed Dunstable, which, as in the other way, is about 30 miles, you enter the deep clays, which are so surprisingly soft that it is perfectly frightful to travellers, and it has been the wonder of foreigners, how, considering the great numbers of carriages which are continually passing with heavy loads, those ways have been made practicable; indeed the great number of horses every year killed by the excess of labour in those heavy ways, has been such a charge to the country, that new building of causeways, as the Romans did of old, seems to me to be a much easier expense. From Hockley to Northampton, thence to Harborough, and Leicester, and thence to the very bank of Trent these terrible clays continue; at Nottingham you are passed them, and the forest of Sherwood yields a hard and pleasant road for 30 miles together.
3. Take the same road as it leads to Coventry, and from thence to West Chester, the deep clays reach through all the towns of Brickhill, Fenny and Stony Stratford, Towcester, Daventry, Hill Morton, or Dunchurch, Coventry, Coleshill, and even to Birmingham for very nearly 80 miles.
4. If we take the road to Worcester it is the same through the vale of Aylesbury to Buckingham, and westward to Banbury, Keynton, and the vale of Evesham, where the clays reach, with some intermissions, even to the bank of Severn, as they do more northernly quite to West Chester.
The reason of my taking notice of this badness of the roads, through all the midland counties, is this; that as these are counties which drive a very great trade with the city of London, and with one another, perhaps the greatest of any counties in England; and that, by consequence, the carriage is exceeding great, and also that all the land carriage of the northern counties necessarily goes through these counties, so the roads had been ploughed so deep, and materials have been in some places so difficult to be had for repair of the roads, that all the surveyors rates have been able to do nothing; nay, the very whole country has not been able to repair them; that is to say, it was a burthen too great for the poor farmers; for in England it is the tenant, not the landlord, that pays the surveyors of the highways.
This necessarily brought the country to bring these things before the Parliament; and the consequence has been, that turnpikes or toll-bars have been set up on the several great roads of England, beginning at London, and proceeding through almost all those dirty deep roads, in the midland counties especially; at which turn-pikes all carriages, droves of cattle, and travellers on horseback, are obliged to pay an easy toll; that is to say, a horse a penny, a coach three pence, a cart four pence, at some six pence to eight pence, a waggon six pence, in some a shilling, and the like; cattle pay by the score, or by the head, in some places more, in some less; but in no place is it thought a burthen that ever I met with, the benefit of a good road abundantly making amends for that little charge the travellers are put to at the turn-pikes.
Several of these turn-pikes and tolls had been set up of late years, and great progress had been made in mending the most difficult ways, and that with such success as well deserves a place in this account. And this is one reason for taking notice of it in this manner; for as the memory of the Romans, which is so justly famous, is preserved in nothing more visible to common observation, than in the remains of those noble causeways and highways, which they made through all parts of the kingdom, and which were found so needful, even then, when there was not the five hundredth part of the commerce and carriage that is now. How much more valuable must these new works be, though nothing to compare with those of the Romans, for the firmness and duration of their work?
The causeways and roads, or streetways of the Romans, were perfect solid buildings, the foundations were laid so deep, and the materials so good, however far they were obliged to fetch them, that if they had been vaulted and arched, they could not have been more solid: I have seen the bottom of them dug up in several places, where I have observed flint-stones, chalk-stones, hard gravel, solid hard clay, and several other sorts of earth, laid in layers, like the veins of ore in a mine; a laying of clay of a solid binding quality, then flint-stones, then chalk, then upon the chalk rough ballast or gravel, ’till the whole work has been raised six or eight foot from the bottom; then it has been covered with a crown or rising ridge in the middle, gently sloping to the sides, that the rain might run off every way, and not soak into the work. This I have seen as fair and firm, after having stood, as we may conclude, at least 12 or 1600 years, as if it had been made but the year before.
And that I may not be charged with going beyond the most exact truth, I refer the curious to make their observations upon that causeway, called the Fosse, which is now remaining, and to be seen between Cirencester and Marshfield in Wiltshire, on the road to the Bath, or between the same Cirencester and Birdlip Hill in Gloucestershire, on the road to Gloucester; but more particularly, between Castleford Bridge, near Pontefract in Yorkshire, upon the River Aire, and the town of Aberford, in the road to Tadcaster and York.
In several parts of this causeway, the country being hard, and the way good on either side, travellers have not made much use of the causeway, it being very high, and perhaps exposing them too much to the wind and weather, but have rather chosen to go on either side, so that the causeway in some places, lies as flat and smooth on the top, as if it had never been made use of at all; and perhaps it has not, there being not so much as the mark of a wheel upon it, or of a horse foot for a good way together, for which I refer to the curious traveller that goes that way.
It is true the Romans being lords of the world, had the command of the people, their persons and their work, their cattle, and their carriages; even their armies were employed in these noble undertakings; and if the materials they wanted, were to fetch 20, nay 30 to 40 miles off, if they wanted them, they would have them, and the works were great and magnificent like themselves : witness the numberless encampments, lines, castles and fortifications, which we see the remains of to this day.
But now the case is altered, labour is dear, wages high, no man works for bread and water now; our labourers do not work in the road, and drink in the brook; so that as rich as we are, it would exhaust the whole nation to build the edifices, the causeways, the aqueducts, lines, castles, fortifications, and other public works, which the Romans built with very little expense.
But to return to this new method of repairing the highways at the expense of the turn-pikes; that is to say, by the product of funds raised at those turn-pikes; I shall give some examples here of those which have been brought to perfection already, and of others which are now carrying on.
First, that great county of Essex, of which our first tour gives an ample account. The great road from London, through this whole county towards Ipswich and Harwich, is the most worn with waggons, carts, and carriages; and with infinite droves of black cattle, hogs, and sheep, of any road (that leads through no larger an extent of country) in England. The length of it from Stratford-bridge by Bow, to Streetford-bridge over the Stour, on the side of Suffolk, is 50 miles, and to Harwich above 65 miles.
These roads were formerly deep, in time of floods dangerous, and at other times, in winter, scarce passable; they are now so firm, so safe, so easy to travellers, and carriages as well as cattle, that no road in England can yet be said to equal them; this was first done by the help of a turnpike, set up by Act of Parliament, about the year 1697, at a village near Ingerstone. Since that, another turnpike, set up at the corner of the Dog Row, near Mile-end; with an additional one at Rumford, which is called a branch, and paying at one, passes the person through both. This I say, being set up since the other, completes the whole, and we are told, that as the first expires in a year or two, this last will be sufficient for the whole, which will be a great ease to the country. The first toll near Ingerstone, being the highest rated public toll in England for they take 8d. for every cart, 6d. for every coach, and 12d. for every waggon; and in proportion for droves of cattle. For single horsemen indeed, it is the same as others pay, viz. 1d. per horse, and we are told, while this is doing, that the gentlemen of the county, design to petition the Parliament, to have the commissioners of the last Act, whose turnpike, as above, is at Mile-end and Rumford, empowered to place other turnpikes, on the other most considerable roads, and so to undertake, and repair all the roads in the whole county, I mean all the considerable roads.
But to come back to the counties which I am now speaking of, some very good attempts have been made of this kind on the northern roads, through those deep ways I mentioned, in the high post road; for example. That an Act of Parliament was obtained about 30 years since, for repairing the road between Ware and Royston, and a turnpike was erected for it at Wade’s-mill, a village so called, about a mile and a half beyond Ware. This proved so effectual, that the road there, which was before scarce passable, is now built up in a high, firm causeway; the most like those mentioned above, of the Romans, of any of these new undertakings. And, though this road is continually worked upon, by the vast number of carriages, bringing malt and barley to Ware, for whose sake indeed, it was obtained; yet, with small repairs it is maintained, and the toll is reduced from a penny, to a half-penny, for the ease of the country, and so in proportion.
Beyond this, two grants have been obtained; one for repair of those wretched places, called Arrington Lanes, and all the road beyond Royston, to Caxton and Huntington; and another, for repairing the road from Stukely to Stilton, including the place called Stangate-Hole, and so on, towards Wansford and Santry Lane and Peterborough; by which these roads, which were before intolerable, are now much mended, but I cannot say, they are yet come up to the perfection of that road from London to Colchester.
One great difficulty indeed here, is, that the country is so universally made up of a deep, stiff clay; that ’tis hard to find any materials to repair the ways with, that may be depended upon. In some places they have a red sandy kind of a slate or stone, which they lay with timber and green faggots, and puts them to a very great expense; but this stone does not bind like chalk and gravel, or endure like flint and pebbles, but wears into clay from whence it proceeds; and this is the reason why they cannot expect those roads can reach up, however chargeable the repairs are to the goodness of the roads in Essex.
We see also a turnpike set up at a village very justly called Foul Mire near Cambridge, for the repair of the particular roads to the university, but those works are not yet brought to any pefection.
There is another road, which is a branch of the northern road, and is properly called the coach road, and which comes into the other near Stangate Hole; and this indeed is a most frightful way, if we take it from Hatfield, or rather the park corners of Hatfield House, and from thence to Stevenage, to Baldock, to Biggleswade, and Bugden. Here is that famous lane called Baldock Lane, famous for being so unpassable, that the coaches and travellers were obliged to break out of the way even by force, which the people of the country not able to prevent, at length placed gates, and laid their lands open, setting men at the gates to take voluntary toll, which travellers always chose to pay, rather than plunge into sloughs and holes, which no horse could wade through. This terrible road is now under cure by the same methods, and probably may in time be brought to be firm and solid, the chalk and stones being not so far to fetch here, as in some of those other places I have just now mentioned.
But the repair of the roads in this county, namely Bedfordshire, is not so easy a work, as in some other parts of England. The drifts of cattle, which come this way out of Lincolnshire and the fens of the Isle of Ely, of which I have spoken already, are so great, and so constantly coming up to London markets, that it is much more difficult to make the ways good, where they are continually treading by the feet of the large heavy bullocks, of which the numbers that come this way are scarce to be reckoned up, and which make deep impressions, where the ground is not very firm, and often work through in the winter what the commissioners have mended in the summer.
But leaving these undertakings to speak for themselves when finished; for they can neither be justly praised or censured before; it ought to be observed, that there is another road branching out from this deep way at Stevenage, and goes thence to Hitchin, to Shefford, and Bedford. Hitchin is a large market town, and particularly eminent for its being a great corn market for wheat and malt, but especially the first, which is brought here for London market. The road to Hitchin, and thence to Bedford, though not a great thorough-fare for travellers, yet is a very useful highway for the multitude of carriages, which bring wheat from Bedford to that market, and from the country round it, even as far as Northamptonshire, and the edge of Leicestershire; and many times the country people are not able to bring their corn for the mere badness of the ways.
This road, I hear, will be likewise repaired, by virtue of a turn-pike to be placed near Hitchin on this side, and at the two bridges over the Ouse, namely Barford Bridge and Bedford Bridge, on the other side; as also at Temsford, where they drive through the river without the help of a bridge.
But to leave what may be, I return to what is. The next turnpikes are on the great north west road, or, as I have distinguished it already, the Watling-street Way; which, to describe it once for all, begins at Islington near London, and leads to Shrewsbury, West Chester, and Hollyhead in Wales; with other branches breaking out from it to the north, leading to Nottingham, Darby, Burton on the Trent, and Warrington, and from them all, farther north, into the north west parts of Great Britain.
Upon this great road there are wonderful improvements made and making, which no traveller can miss the observation of, especially if he knew the condition these ways were formerly in; nor can my account of these counties be perfect, without taking notice of it; for certainly no public edifice, almshouse, hospital, or nobleman’s palace, can be of equal value to the country with this, no nor more an honour and ornament to it.
The first attempt upon this road was at Brickhill in Buckinghamshire, and the turn-pike was set up on the hill, near the town called Little Brickhill, by virtue of which, they repaired the road from thence to Stony Stratford, for about ten miles, and with very good success; for that road was broad, and capable of giving room for such a work; and though materials were hard to come at, and far to fetch, yet we soon found a large firm causeway, or highway, and of a full breadth, reaching from Fenny Stratford to Stony Stratford, which is six miles, and where the way was exceeding bad before.
This encouraged the country to set about the work in good earnest; and we now see the most dismal piece of ground for travelling, that ever was in England, handsomely repaired namely, from the top of the chalky hill beyond Dunstable down into Hockley Lane, and through Hockley, justly called Hockley in the Hole, to Newport Pagnall, being a bye branch of the great road, and leading to Northampton, and was called the coach road; but such a road for coaches, as worse was hardly ever seen.
The next (to come southward) was the road from St Albans to South Mims, a village beyond Barnet. Soon after this road parts from the great coach road to the north beginning at Hatfield. This road is so well mended, the work so well done, and the materials so good, so plentifully furnished, and so faithfully applied, that, in short, if possible, it out-does the Essex road mentioned before; for here the bottom is not only repaired, but the narrow places are widened, hills levelled, bottoms raised, and the ascents and descents made easy, to the inexpressible ease and advantage of travellers, and especially of the carriers, who draw heavy goods and hard loads, who find the benefit in the health and strength of their cattle.
From hence, to come still more towards London, another undertaking reaches from the foot of Barnet Hill, called formerly the Blockhouse, to Whetstone, and so over the great heath, called Finchley Common, to Highgate Hill, and up the hill to the gatehouse at Highgate, where they had their turnpike; as also at the Blockhouse; and this work is also admirably well performed, and through a piece of ground, which was very full of sloughs and deep places before.
But from Highgate to London still required help; the road branched into two, at the top of Highgate Hill, or just at the gatehouse there; one came to London by Islington, and there branched again into two, one coming by the north end of Islington, and another on the back of the town, and entering the town at the south west end near the Angel Inn, there dividing again, one branch entered London at Goswell-street and Aldersgate street; and this was the principal road for waggons and pack-horses: the other going directly to St John-street and into Smithfield; and this way was the chief road for Cattle to Smithfield Market. The other road parting off at Highgate, came down the hill and thence passing through Kentish Town, entered London by two ways: one by Grays Inn Lane, and the other by Clerkenwell.
All these roads were to the last extremity run to ruin, and grew worse and worse so evidently, that it was next to impossible, the country should be able to repair them : upon which an Act of Parliament was obtained for a turnpike, which is now erected at Islington aforesaid, as also all the other branches by the Kentish Town way, and others; so that by this new toll, all these roads are now likely to be made good, which were before almost a scandal to the city of London.
Another turnpike, and which was erected before this, was on the great north road, beginning at Shoreditch, and extending to Enfield Street, in the way to Ware; though this road is exceedingly thronged, and raises great sums, yet I cannot say, that the road itself seems to be so evidently improved, and so effectually repaired, as the others last mentioned, notwithstanding no materials are wanting; even on the very verge of the road itself, whether it be, that the number of carriages, which come this way, and which are indeed greater than in any other road about London, is the occasion, or whether the persons concerned do not so faithfully, or so skilfully perform, I will not undertake to determine.
After so many encouraging examples on this great Watling-street road, as I have mentioned above, they have now begun the like on the same way farther down, and particularly from Stony Stratford to Daventry and Dunchurch, and so on to Coventry and Coles-hill; all those parts of it are at this time repairing, and they promise themselves that in a few years those roads will be completely sound and firm, as Watling-street was in its most ancient and flourishing state.
I come next to mention other works of the same kind in remoter places, also more westerly, but within the compass of this midland circuit; as particularly the road from Birdlip Hill to Gloucester, formerly a terrible place for poor carriers and travellers out of Wales, &c. but now repaired very well. Likewise the road from Sandy Lane Hill in Wiltshire to the Bath, which began to be repaired by the direction of Her late Majesty Queen Anne.
By the same happy example, turnpikes are erected at the west end of the town, for repairing that horrid road, formerly also a part of the Watling-street Way, from St Giles Church to Paddington, and thence to Edgworth, obtained first by the interest and motion of his grace the Duke of Chandos.
On the other side of the river is another turnpike erected, or rather two turnpikes, one at the north end of the town of Newington, called Newington Buts, which has two or three collateral branches, viz. one at Vaux-Hall, at the bridge near the Spring Garden corner, and another at Croydon, besides smaller toll-bars on the bye-lanes. This undertaking has been very well prosecuted, and the great Sussex road, which was formerly unsufferably bad, is now become admirably good; and this is done at so great an expense, that they told me at Strettham, that one mile between the two next bridges south of that town, cost a thousand pounds repairing, including one of the bridges, and yet it must be acknowledged, that the materials are very near hand, and very good all the way to Croydon.
The other turnpike on that side is placed near New Cross on the road into Kent, a little before the road to Lusum parts from the road to Deptford Bridge; so that all the road to Lee and Eltham, the road to Bromley and Tunbridge, as well as the great road to Rochester and Canterbury, are taken in there; and this undertaking, they tell us, is likewise very well performed.
So that upon the whole, this custom prevailing, ’tis more than probable, that our posterity may see the roads all over England restored in their time to such a perfection, that travelling and carriage of goods will be much more easy both to man and horse, than ever it was since the Romans lost this island.
Nor will the charge be burthensome to any body; as for trade, it will be encouraged by it every way; for carriage of all kind of heavy goods will be much easier, the waggoners will either perform in less time, or draw heavier loads, or the same load with fewer horses; the pack-horses will carry heavier burthens, or travel farther in a day, and so perform their journey in less time; all which will tend to lessen the rate of carriage, and so bring goods cheaper to market.
The fat cattle will drive lighter, and come to market with less toil, and consequently both go farther in one day, and not waste their flesh, and heat and spoil themselves, in wallowing through the mud and sloughs, as is now the case.
The sheep will be able to travel in the winter, and the city not be obliged to give great prizes to the butchers for mutton, because it cannot be brought up out of Leicestershire and Lincolnshire, the sheep not being able to travel: the graziers and breeders will not be obliged to sell their stocks of wethers cheap in October to the farmers within 20 miles of London, because after that they cannot bring them up.
Another benefit of these new measures for repairing the roads by turnpikes, is the opening of drains and watercourses, and building bridges, especially over the smaller waters, which are oftentimes the most dangerous to travellers on hasty rains, and always most injurious to the roads, by lying in holes and puddles, to the great spoiling the bottom, and making constant sloughs, sometimes able to bury both man and horse.
This improving of the roads is an infinite improvement to the towns near London, in the convenience of coming to them, which makes the citizens flock out in greater numbers than ever to take lodgings and country-houses, which many, whose business called them often to London, could not do, because of the labour of riding forward and backward, when the roads were but a little dirty, and this is seen in the difference in the rents of houses in those villages upon such repaired roads, from the rents of the like dwellings and lodgings in other towns of equal distance, where they want those helps, and particularly the increase of the number of buildings in those towns, as above.
There are indeed some very deep roads in many places of England, and that south by Trent too, where no such provision is yet made for repair of the roads, as particularly in and through the vale of Aylesbury, and to Buckingham, and beyond it into Oxfordshire; also beyond Northampton to Harborough and Leicester; also in Lincolnshire, beyond what we named to be from Huntington to Stilton, the road from Stamford to Grantham, Newark, and Tuxford, in the clays, all which remain very deep, and in some seasons dangerous.
Likewise the roads in Sussex, and that in particular which was formerly a Roman work, called Stony-street or Stone-street: going from Leatherhead to Darking, and through Darking church-yard, then cross a terrible deep country, called the Homeward, and so to Petworth and Arundel. But we see nothing of it now; and the country indeed remains in the utmost distress for want of good roads. So also all over the Wild of Kent and Sussex it is the same, where the corn is cheap at the barn, because it cannot be carried out; and dear at the market, because it cannot be brought in.
The benefit of these turnpikes appears now to be so great, and the people in all places begin to be so sensible of it, that it is incredible what effect it has already had upon trade in the countries where it is more completely finished; even the carriage of goods is abated in some places, 6d. per hundred weight, in some places 12d. per hundred, which is abundantly more advantage to commerce, than the charge paid amounts to, and yet at the same time the expense is paid by the carriers too, who make the abatement; so that the benefit in abating the rate of carriage is wholly and simply the tradesmen’s, not the carrier’s.
Yet the advantage is evident to the carriers also another way; for, as was observed before, they can bring more weight with the same number of horses, nor are their horses so hard worked and fatigued with their labour as they were before; in which one particular ’tis acknowledged by the carriers, they perform their work with more ease, and the masters are at less expense.
The advantage to all other kinds of travelling I omit here; such as the safety and ease to gentlemen travelling up to London on all occasions, whether to the term, or to Parliament, to Court, or on any other necessary occasion, which is not a small part of the benefit of these new methods. Also the riding post, as well for the ordinary carrying of the mails, or for the gentlemen riding post, when their occasions require speed; I say, the riding post is made extremely easy, safe, and pleasant, by the alteration of the roads.
I mention so often the safety of travelling on this occasion, because, as I observed before, the commissioners for these repairs of the highways have ordered, and do daily order, abundance of bridges to be repaired and enlarged, and new ones built, where they find occasion, which not only serve to carry the water off, where it otherwise often spreads, and lies as it were, dammed up upon the road, and spoils the way; but where it rises sometimes by sudden rains to a dangerous height; for it is to be observed, that there is more hazard, and more lives lost, in passing, or attempting to pass little brooks and streams, which are swelled by sudden showers of rain, and where passengers expect no stoppage, than in passing great rivers, where the danger is known, and therefore more carefully avoided.
In many of these places the commissioners have built large and substantial bridges for the benefit of travelling, as is said already, and in other places have built sluices to stop, and opened channels to carry off the water, where they used to swell into the highway. We have two of these sluices near London, in the road through Tottenham High-Cross and Edmonton, by which the waters in those places, which have sometimes been dangerous, are now carried off, and the road cleared; and as for bridges I have been told, that the several commissioners, in the respective districts where they are concerned, have already built about three hundred new ones, where there were none before, or where the former were small and insufficient to carry the traveller safe over the waters; many of these are within a few miles of London.
And for farther confirmation of what I have advanced above, namely, that we may expect, according to this good beginning, that the roads in most parts of England will in a few years be fully repaired, and restored to the same good condition, (or perhaps a better, than) they were in during the Roman government, we may take notice, that there are no less than twelve bills, or petitions for bills, depending before the Parliament, at this time sitting, for the repair of the roads, in several remote parts of England, or for the lengthening the time allowed in former Acts, some of which give us hopes, that the grants, when obtained, will be very well managed, and the country people greatly encouraged by them in their commerce; for there is no doubt to be made, but that the inland trade of England has been greatly obstructed by the exceeding badnesss of the roads.
This is evidenced to a demonstration in the counties of Essex and Suffolk, from whence they already bring their fat cattle, and particularly their mutton in droves, from sixty, seventy, or eighty miles, without fatiguing, harassing, or sinking the flesh of the creatures, even in the depth of winter.
I might give examples of other branches of inland commerce, which would be quite altered for the better, by this restoring the goodness of the roads, and particularly that of carrying cheese, a species of provision so considerable, that nothing, except that of live cattle, can exceed it.
I could enlarge here upon the convenience that would follow such a restoring the ways, for the carrying of fish from the sea coasts to the inner parts of the kingdom, where, by reason of the badness of the ways, they cannot now carry them sweet. This would greatly increase the consumption of fish in its season, which now for that very reason, is but small, and would employ an innumerable number of horses and men, as well as increase the shipping by that consumption.
These, and many others, are the advantages of our inland commerce, which we may have room to hope for upon the general repair of the roads, and which I shall have great occasion to speak of again in my northern circuit, which is yet to come.
