



the 25th and 26th Days of my heavy Restraint. 

Still more and more strange Things to
write! A Messenger is return'd, and now all is
out! O wretched, wretched Pamela! What at last
will become of me! —Such strange Turns and
Trials sure never poor Creature, of my Years,
experienced! He brought two Letters, one to
Mrs. Jewkes, and one to me: But, as the greatest
Wits may be sometimes mistaken, they being
folded and sealed alike, that for me, was directed
to Mrs. Jewkes; and that for her, was directed
to me. But both are stark naught, abominably
bad! She brought me up that directed for me,
and said, Here's a Letter for you: Long look'd-for
is come at last. I will ask the Messenger a
few Questions, and then I will read mine. So
she went down, and I broke it open in my Closet,
and found it directed, To Mrs. Pamela Andrews. 
But when I open'd it, it began,
Mrs. Jewkes. I was quite confounded; but,
thought I, this may be a lucky Mistake; I may
discover something. And so I read on these
horrid Contents: 


“Mrs, Jewkes,
What you write me, has given me
no small Disturbance. This wretched
Fool's Plaything, no doubt, is ready to leap at
any thing that offers, rather than express the
least Sense of Gratitude for all the Benefits
she has receiv'd from my Family, and which
I was determined more and more to heap
upon her. I reserve her for my future Resentment; 
and I charge you double your
Diligence in watching her, to prevent her
Escape. I send this by an honest Swiss, who
attended me in my Travels; a Man I can
trust; and so let him be your Assistant: For
the artful Creature is enough to corrupt a
Nation by her seeming Innocence and Simplicity; 
and she may have got a Party, perhaps,
among my Servants with you, as she
has here. Even John Arnold, whom I confided
in, and favour'd more than any, has
prov'd an execrable Villain; and shall meet
his Reward for it. 
“As to that College Novice, Williams, I
need not bid you take care he sees not this
painted Bauble; for I have order'd Mr.
Shorter, my Attorney, to throw him instantly
into Gaol, on an Action of Debt, for
Money he has had of me, which I had intended
never to carry to account against him; 
for I know all his rascally Practices, besides
what you write me of his perfidious Intrigue
with that Girl, and his acknowledg'd Contrivances 

for her Escape; when he knew not,
for certain, that I design'd her any Mischief; 
and when, if he had been guided by a Sense
of Piety, or Compassion for injur'd Innocence,
as he pretends, he would have expostulated
with me, as his Function, and my
Friendship for him, might have allow'd him. 
But to enter into a vile Intrigue with the amiable
Gewgaw, to favour her Escape in so base
a manner, (to say nothing of his disgraceful
Practices against me, in Sir Simon Darnford's
Family; of which Sir Simon himself has
inform'd me) is a Conduct, that, instead of
preferring the ungrateful Wretch, as I had
intended, shall pull down upon him utter
Ruin. 
“Monsieur Colbrand, my trusty Swiss,
will obey you without Reserve, if my other
Servants refuse. 
“As for her denying, that she encourag'd his
Declaration, I believe it not. 'Tis certain
the speaking Picture, with all that pretended
Innocence and Bashfulness, would have run
away with him. Yes, she would have run
away with a Fellow that she had been acquainted
with (and that not intimately, if
you were as careful as you ought to be) but
few Days; at a time, when she had the strongest
Assurances of my Honour to her. 
“Well, I think I now hate her perfectly; 
and tho' I will do nothing to her myself, yet
I can bear, for the sake of my Revenge, and
my injur'd Honour, and slighted Love, to 

see any thing, even what she most fears, be
done to her; and then she may be turn'd loose
to her evil Destiny, and echo to the Woods
and Groves her piteous Lamentations for the
Loss of her fantastical Innocence, which the
romantick Idiot makes such a work about. I
shall go to London with my Sister Davers; 
and the Moment I can disengage myself, which
may be in Three Weeks from this time, I
will be with you, and decide her Fate, and
put an End to your Trouble. Mean time, be
doubly careful; for this Innocent, as I have
warn'd you, is full of Contrivances. I am 
“Your Friend.” 

I had but just read this dreadful Letter thro',
when Mrs. Jewkes came up, in a great Fright,
guessing at the Mistake, and that I had her Letter; 
and she found me with it open in my
Hand, just sinking away. What Business, said
she, had you to read my Letter? and snatch'd it
from me. You see, said she, looking upon it,
it says, Mrs. Jewkes, at top: You ought, in
Manners, to have read no further. O add not,
said I, to my Afflictions! I shall soon be out of
all your ways! This is too much! too much! I
never can support this—And threw myself
upon the Couch, in my Closet, and wept most
bitterly. She read it in the next Room, and
came in again afterwards: Why this, said she,
is a sad Letter indeed! I am sorry for it: But I
fear'd you would carry your Niceties too far! — 

Leave me; leave me, Mrs. Jewkes, said I, for
a-while: I cannot speak nor talk! –––Poor Heart!
said she; well, I'll come up again presently, and
hope to find you better. But here, take your
own Letter; I wish you well; but this is a sad
Mistake! And so she put down by me that which
was intended for me. But I have no Spirit to
read it at present. O Man! Man! hard-hearted,
cruel Man! what Mischiefs art thou not capable
of, unrelenting Persecutor as thou art! 
I sat ruminating, when I had a little come
to myself, upon the Terms of this wicked Letter; 
and had no Inclination to look into my
own. The bad Names, Fool's Plaything, artful
Creature, painted Bauble, Gewgaw, speaking
Picture, are hard Words for your poor
Pamela! and I began to think, whether I was
not indeed a very naughty Body, and had not
done vile Things: But when I thought of his
having discover'd poor John, and of Sir Simon's
base Officiousness, in telling him of Mr. Williams,
with what he had resolv'd against him,
in Revenge for his Goodness to me, I was quite
despirited; and yet still more, about that fearful
Colbrand, and what he could see done to me; 
for then I was ready to gasp for Breath, and my
Heart quite failed me. Then how dreadful are
the Words, that he will decide my Fate in three
Weeks! Gracious Heaven, said I, strike me
dead, before that time, with a Thunderbolt,
or provide some way for my escaping these
threaten'd Mischiefs! God forgive me, if I
sinn'd! 

At last, I took up the Letter directed for
Mrs. Jewkes, but design'd for me; and I find
that little better than the other. These are the
hard Terms it contains: 

“Well have you done, perverse, forward,
artful, yet foolish Pamela, to convince
me, before it was too late, how ill I had done
to place my Affections on so unworthy an
Object. I had vow'd Honour and Love to
your Unworthiness, believing you a Mirror
of bashful Modesty, and unspotted Innocence; 
and that no perfidious Design lurked
in so fair a Bosom. But now I have found
you out, you specious Hypocrite! and I see,
that tho' you could not repose the least Confidence
in one you had known so many Years,
and who, under my good Mother's misplaced
Favour for you, had grown up, in a manner,
with you; when my Passion, in spite of my
Pride, and the Difference of our Condition,
made me stoop to a Meanness that now I
despise myself for; yet you could enter into
an Intrigue with a Man you never knew, till
within these few Days past, and resolve to
run away with a Stranger, whom your fair
Face, and insinuating Arts, had bewitched
to break thro' all the Ties of Honour and
Gratitude to me; even at a Time when the
Happiness of his future Life depended upon
my Favour. 

“Henceforth, for Pamela's sake,
whenever I see a lovely Face, will I mistrust
a deceitful Heart: And whenever I hear of
the greatest Pretences to Innocence, will I
suspect some deep-laid Mischief. You were
determin'd to place no Confidence in me,
tho' I have solemnly, over and over, engag'd
my Honour to you. What tho' I had alarm'd
your Fears, in sending you one way, when
you hop'd to go another; yet, had I not, to
convince you of my Resolution to do justly
by you, (altho' with great Reluctance, such
then was my Love for you) engaged not to
come near you without your own Consent? 
Was not this a voluntary Demonstration of
the Generosity of my Intentions to you? Yet
how have you requited me? The very first
Fellow that your charming Face, and insinuating
Address, could influence, you have
practis'd upon, corrupted too, I may say,
(and even ruin'd, as the ingrateful Wretch
shall find) and thrown your forward Self
upon him. As therefore you would place
no Confidence in me, my Honour owes you
nothing; and in a little time you shall find
how much you have err'd in treating, as you
have done, a Man, who was once 
“Your affectionate and kind Friend. 
“Mrs. Jewkes has Directions concerning
you: And if your Lot is now harder
than you might wish, you will bear it 

the easier, because your own rash Folly has
brought it upon you.” 

Alas! for me, what a Fate is mine, to be
thus thought artful and forward, and ingrateful!
when all I intended, was to preserve my
Innocence; and when all the poor little Shifts,
which his superior wicked Wit and Cunning
have render'd ineffectual, were forced upon me
in my own necessary Defence! 
When Mrs. Jewkes came up to me again,
she found me bathed in Tears. She seem'd, as
I thought, to be moved to some Compassion; 
and finding myself now intirely in her Power,
and that it is not for me to provoke her, I said,
It is now, I see, in vain for me to contend
against my evil Destiny, and the superior Arts
of my barbarous Master. I will resign myself
to the Divine Will, and prepare to expect the
worst. But you see how this poor Mr. Williams
is drawn in and undone; I am sorry I am made
the Cause of his Ruin: —Poor, poor Man!— 
to be thus involv'd, and for my sake too! — 
But, if you'll believe me, said I, I gave no Encouragement
to what he propos'd, as to Marriage; 
nor would he have propos'd it, I believe,
but as the only honourable way he thought was
left to save me: And his principal Motive to
it all, was Virtue and Compassion to one in
Distress. What other View could he have? You
know I am poor and friendless. All I beg of
you is, to let the poor Gentleman have Notice
of my Master's Resentment; and let him fly 

the Country, and not be thrown into Gaol: 
This will answer my Master's End as well; for
it will as effectually hinder him from assisting
me, as if he was in a Prison. 
Ask me, said she, to do any thing that is in
my Power, consistent with my Duty and Trust,
and I will do it; for I am sorry for you both. 
But, to be sure, I shall keep no Correspondence
with him, nor let you. I offer'd to talk of a
Duty superior to that she mention'd, which
would oblige her to help distressed Innocence,
and not permit her to go the Lengths injoin'd
by lawless Tyranny; but she plainly bid me be
silent on that Head; for it was in vain to attempt
to persuade her to betray her Trust. — 
All I have to advise you, said she, is to be easy; 
lay aside all your Contrivances and Arts to get
away, and make me your Friend, by giving me
no Reason to suspect you; for I glory in my
Fidelity to my Master: And you have both practis'd
some strange sly Arts, to make such a
Progress as he has own'd there was between you,
so seldom as, I thought, you saw one another; 
and I must be more circumspect than I have been. 
This doubled my Concern; for I now apprehended
I should be much closer watch'd than
before. 
Well, said I, since I have, by this strange
Accident, discover'd my hard Destiny, let me
read over again that fearful Letter of yours, that
I may get it by heart, and with it feed my Distress,
and make Calamity familiar to me. 
Then, said she, let me read yours again. I gave 

her mine, and she lent me hers; and so I took
a Copy of it, with her Leave; because, as I
said, I would, by it, prepare myself for the
worst. And when I had done, I pinn'd it on
the Head of the Couch: This, said I, is the
Use I shall make of this wretched Copy of your
Letter; and here you shall always find it wet
with my Tears. 
She said, She would go down to order Supper,
and insisted upon my Company to it: I
would have excused myself; but she began to
put on a commanding Air, that I durst not oppose. 
And when I went down, she took me by the
Hand, and presented me to the most hideous
Monster I ever saw in my Life. Here, Monsieur
Colbrand, said she, here is your pretty Ward
and mine; let us try to make her Time with us
easy. He bow'd, and put on his foreign Grimaces,
and seem'd to bless himself! and, in
broken English, told me, I was happy in de
Affections of de vinest Gentleman in de Varld! 
—I was quite frighten'd, and ready to drop
down; and I will describe him to you, my dear
Father and Mother, if now you will ever see
this; and you shall judge if I had not Reason,
especially not knowing he was to be there, and
being appris'd, as I was, of his hated Employment,
to watch me closer. 
He is a Giant of a Man, for Stature; taller,
by a good deal deal, than Harry Mawlidge, in
your Neighbourhood, and large-bon'd, and
scraggy; and has a Hand! —I never saw such
an one in my Life. He has great staring Eyes, 

like the Bull's that frighten'd me so; vast Jaw-bones
sticking out; Eye-brows hanging over
his Eyes; Two great Scars upon his Forehead,
and One on his left Cheek; and Two huge
Whiskers, and a monstrous wide Mouth; blubber
Lips; long yellow Teeth, and a hideous Grin. 
He wears his own frightful long Hair, ty'd up
in a great black Bag; a black Crape Neckcloth,
about a long ugly Neck; and his Throat sticking
out like a Wen. As to the rest, he was dress'd
well enough, and had a Sword on, with a nasty
red Knot to it; Leather Garters, buckled below
his Knees; and a Foot—near as long as my
Arm, I verily think. 
He said, He fright de Lady; and offer'd to
withdraw; but she bid him not; and I told
Mrs. Jewkes, That as she knew I had been weeping,
she should not have call'd me to the Gentleman
without letting me know he was there. 
I soon went up to my Closet; for my Heart
ak'd all the time I was at Table, not being able
to look upon him without Horror; and this
Brute of a Woman, tho' she saw my Distress
before this Addition to it, no doubt did it on
purpose to strike more Terror into me. And
indeed it had its Effect; for when I went to bed,
I could think of nothing but his hideous Person,
and my Master's more hideous Actions; 
and judg'd them too well pair'd; and when I
dropp'd asleep, I dream'd they were both coming
to my Bed-side with the worst Designs; and I
jump'd out of Bed in my Sleep, and frighted
Mrs. Jewkes; till, waking with the Terror, I 

told her my Dream: And the wicked Creature
only laugh'd, and said, All I fear'd was but a
Dream, as well as that; and when it was over,
and I was well awake, I should laugh at it as
such! 
