



From Lady Davers Mrs. B. 


My dear Pamela,
After I have thanked you for your last agreeable
Letter, which has added the Earl, and Lord
John, and Lady Jenny, to the Number of your Admirers,
(you know Lady Betty, their Sister, was so
before) I shall tell you, that I now write, at all their
Requests, as well as at those of my Lord Davers,
the Countess you so dearly love, and Lady Betty,
for your Decision of an odd Dispute, that, on reading
your Letter, and talking of your domestick Excellencies,
happen'd among us. 
Lady Betty would have it, That notwithstanding
any Aukwardness which you attribute to yourself,
she cannot but decide, by all she has seen of you,
and has heard us say, that yours is the perfectest
Character she ever heard or read of. 
The Countess said, That you wrong yourself, in
supposing, that you are not every thing that is polite 

and genteel, in your Behaviour, as well as Person; 
and that she knows not any Lady in England, who
better becomes her Station than you do. 
Why then, said Lady Jenny, Mrs. B. must be
quite perfect; that's certain. So said her Brother,
Lord John. So said the Earl, their Father. So said
they all. And Lord Davers confirm'd, that you
were. And Jackey swore to it. 
Yet, as we are sure, there cannot be such a Character,
in this Life, as has not one Fault, altho' we
could not tell where to fix it, the Countess started
a whimsical Motion:–––Lady Davers, said she, pray
do you write to Mrs. B. and acquaint her with our
Subject; and as it is impossible, that one who can
act as she does, should not know herself better
than any body else can do, desire her to acquaint
us with some of those secret Foibles, that leave room
for her to be still more perfect. 
A good Thought! said I: A good Thought! said
they all.––– And this is the present Occasion of my
writing; and pray see, that you accuse yourself
of no more than you know yourself guilty: For
Over-modesty borders so nearly on Pride, and too
liberal Accusations seem to be but so many Traps
for Acquittal with Applause, that you (whatever
other Ladies might) will not be forgiven, if you deal
with us in a way so poorly artful: Let them, therefore,
be such Faults, as you think we can subscribe
to, from what we have seen of you, and read of
yours; and you must try to extenuate them too, as
you give them, lest we should think you above that
Nature, which in the most and best Cases is your
undoubted Talent. 
I congratulate you and Miss Darnford, on her Arrival: 
She is a charming young Lady; but tell her,
that we shall not allow her to take you at your Word,
and to think, that she excels you in any one thing: 

Only, indeed, we think you nicer in some Points,
than you need to be, as to your present agreeable
Circumstance. And yet, let me tell you, that the
easy and unaffected conjugal Purity, in Word and
Behaviour, between your good Man and you, is
worthy of Imitation, and what the Countess and I
have with Pleasure contemplated since we left you,
an hundred times, and admire in you both: And
'tis good Policy too, Child, as well as high Decorum; 
for it is what will make you ever new and
respectful to one another. 
But You have the Honour of it all, whose sweet,
natural, and easy Modesty, in Person, Behaviour,
and Conversation, forbid Indecency, even in Thought,
much more in Word, to approach you; insomuch
that no Rakes can be Rakes in your Presence, and
yet they hardly know to what they owe their Restraint. 
However, as People who see you, will take it for
granted, that you and Mr. B. have been very intimate
together, I should think you need not be
asham'd of your Appearance, because, as he rightly
observes, you have no Reason to be asham'd of your
Husband. 
Excuse my Pleasantry, my Dear: And answer our
Demand upon you, as soon as you can; which
will oblige us all; particularly 
Your affectionate Sister,
B. Davers. 

