



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Sat. March 25. 
I follow my last of this date by command. I mentioned
in my former, my Mother's opinion of the
merit you would have, if you could oblige your friends
against your own inclination. Our conference upon 

this subject was introduced by the conversation we had
had with Sir Harry Downeton; and my Mother
thinks it of so much importance, that she enjoins me
to give you the particulars of it. I the rather comply,
as I was unable in my last to tell what to advise
you to; and as you will in this recital have my Mother's
opinion, at least; and, perhaps, in hers, what
the world's would be, were it to know only what she
knows; and not so much as I know. 
My Mother argues upon this case in a most discouraging
manner for all such of our Sex as look forward
for happiness in Marriage with the man of their
choice. 
Only, that I know, she has a side-view to her
Daughter; who, at the same time that she now prefers
no one to another, values not the man her Mother
most regards, of one farthing; or I should lay
it more to heart. 
What is there in it, says she, that all this bustle is
about? Is it such a mighty matter for a young woman
to give up her inclinations to oblige her friends? 
Very well, my Mamma, thought I! Now, may
you ask this—At Forty, you may—But what would
you have said at Eighteen, is the question? 
Either, said she, the Lady must be thought to have
very violent inclinations [And what nice young creature
would have That supposed?] which she could not
give up; or a very stubborn will, which she would
not; or, thirdly, have Parents she was indifferent
about obliging. 
You know my Mother now-and-then argues very
notably; always very warmly at least. I happen
often to differ from her; and we both think so well
of our own arguments, that we very seldom are so
happy as to convince one another. A pretty common
case, I believe, in all vehement debatings. She says,
I am too witty; Anglicè, too pert: I, That, she is
too wise; that is to say, being likewise put into English, 

Not so young as she has been: In short, is grown
so much into Mother, that she has forgotten she ever
was a Daughter. So, generally, we call another cause
by consent—Yet fall into the old one half a dozen
times over, without consent—Quitting and resumeing,
with half-angry faces, forced into a smile, that
there might be some room to piece together again: 
But go to bed, if bed-time, a little sullen nevertheless; 
or, if we speak, her silence is broken, with an
Ah! Nancy! You are so lively! so quick! I wish
you were less like your Papa, child! 
I pay it off with thinking, that my Mother has no
reason to disclaim her share in her Nancy: And if the
matter go off with greater severity on her side than I
wish for, then her favourite Hickman fares the worse
for it next day. 
I know I am a saucy creature. I know, if I do
not say so, you will think so. So no more of This
just now. What I mention it for, is to tell you, that
on this serious occasion I will omit, if I can, all that
passed between us, that had an air of flippancy on my
part, or quickness on my Mother's, to let you into
the cool and the cogent of the conversation. 
‘Look thro' the families, said she, which we both
know, where the man and woman have been said
to marry for Love; which (at the time it is so
called) is perhaps no more than a passion begun in
folly or thoughtlesness, and carried on from a spirit
of perverseness and opposition [Here we had a
parenthetical debate, which I omit]; and see, if
they appear to be happier than those whose principal
inducement to marry has been convenience, or to
oblige their friends; or even whether they are generally
so happy: For convenience and duty, where
observed, will afford a permanent and even an encreasing
satisfaction (as well at the time, as upon the
reflection) which seldom fail to reward themselves: 
While Love, if Love be the motive, is an idle passion’ 

—[Idle in ONE SENSE my Mother cannot say; 
for Love is as busy as a Monkey, and as mischievous as
a school-boy]—‘It is a fervor, that, like all other fervors,
lasts but a little while after marriage; a Bow
over-strained, that soon returns to its natural bent. 
‘As it is founded generally upon mere notional
excellencies, which were unknown to the persons
themselves till attributed to either by the other; 
one, two, or three months, usually sets all right
on both sides; and then with opened eyes they
think of each other—just as every-body else thought
of them before. 
‘The Lovers Imaginaries [Her own notable word!]
are by that time gone off; Nature and Old habits
(painfully dispensed with or concealed) return: Disguises
thrown aside, all the moles, freckles, and
defects in the minds of each, discover themselves; 
and 'tis well if each do not sink in the opinion of
the other, as much below the common standard, as
the blinded imagination of both had set them above
it. And now, said she, the fond pair, who knew
no felicity out of each other's company, are so far
from finding the never-ending variety each had proposed
in an unrestrained conversation with the other
(when they seldom were together; and always
parted with something to say; or, on recollection,
when parted, wishing they had said); that they are
continually on the wing in pursuit of amusements
out of themselves; and those, concluded my sage
Mamma [Did you think her wisdom so very
moderne?] will perhaps be the livelier to each, in
which the other has no share.’ 
I told my Mother, that if you were to take any
rash step, it would be owing to the indiscreet violence
of your friends. I was afraid, I said, that these reflections
upon the conduct of people in the Married
State, who might set out with better hopes, were but
too well grounded: But that this must be allowed me, 

that if Children weighed not these matters so thoroughly
as they ought, neither did Parents make those
allowances for youth, inclination, and inexperience,
which had been found necessary to be made for themselves
at their childrens time of life. 
I remembered a Letter, I told her, hereupon, which
you wrote a few months ago, personating an anonymous
elderly Lady (in Mr. Wyerley's day of plaguing
you) to Miss Drayton's Mother, who, by her severity
and restraints, had like to have driven the young
Lady into the very fault against which her Mother
was most solicitous to guard her. And I dared to say,
she would be pleased with it. 
I fetched the first draught of it, which, at my request,
you obliged me with at the time; and read
the whole Letter to my Mother. But the following
passage she made me read twice. I think you once
told me you had not a Copy of this Letter. 
‘Permit me, Madam [says the personated grave
writer] to observe, That if persons of your experience
would have young people look forward, in
order to be wiser and better by their advice, it
would be kind in them to look backward, and allow
for their childrens youth, and natural vivacity; 
in other words, for their lively hopes, unabated by
time, unaccompanied by reflection, and unchecked
by disappointment. Things appear to us all in a
very different light at our Entrance upon a favourite
Party, or Tour; when, with golden prospects,
and high expectations, we rise vigorous and fresh,
like the Sun beginning its morning course; from
what they do, when we fit down at the End of
our views, tired, and preparing for our journey
homeward: For then we take into our reflection,
what we had left out in prospect, the fatigues, the
checks, the hazards, we had met with; and make
a true estimate of pleasures, which from our raised
expectations must necessarily have fallen miserably 

short of what we had promised ourselves at setting
out—Nothing but experience can give us a strong
and efficacious conviction of this difference: And
when we would inculcate the fruits of that upon
the minds of those we love, who have not lived
long enough to find those fruits; and would hope,
that our advice should have as much force upon
them, as experience has upon us; and which, perhaps,
our Parents advice had not upon ourselves at
our Daughters time of life; should we not proceed
by patient reasoning and gentleness, that we
may not harden, where we would convince? For,
Madam, the tenderest and most generous minds,
when harshly treated, become generally the most
inflexible. If the young Lady knows her heart to
be right, however defective her head may be for
want of years and experience, she will be apt to
be very tenacious. And if she believes her friends
to be wrong, altho' perhaps they may be only so
in their methods of treating her, how much will
every unkind circumstance on the Parent's part, or
heedless one on the Child's, though ever so slight
in itself, widen the difference! The Parent's prejudice
in dis-favour, will confirm the Daughter's in
favour, of the same person; and the best reasonings
in the world on either side, will be attributed
to that prejudiee. In short, neither of them will
be convinced: A perpetual opposition ensues: The
Parent grows impatient; the Child desperate: And,
as a too natural consequence, That falls out which
the Mother was most afraid of, and which possibly
had not happened, if the Child's passions had been
only led, not driven.’ 
My Mother was pleased with the whole Letter; 
and said, It deserved to have the success it met with. 
But asked me what excuse could be offered for a
young Lady capable of making such reflections (and
who at her time of life could so well assume the character 

of one of riper years) if she should rush into
any fatal mistake herself? 
She then touched upon the moral character of Mr.
Lovelace; and how reasonable the aversion of your
relations is, to a man who gives himself the liberties
he is said to take; and who indeed himself denies
not the accusation; having been heard to declare,
that he will do all the mischief he can to the Sex, in
revenge for the ill usage and broken vows of his first
Love, at a time when he was too young [His own expression
it seems] to be insincere. 
I replied, That I had heard every one say, that
the Lady meant, really used him ill; that it affected
him so much at the time, that he was forced to travel
upon it; and, to drive her out of his heart, ran into
courses which he had ingenuousness enough himself to
condemn: That, however, he had denied that he
had thrown out such menaces against the Sex when
charged with them by me in your presence; and declared
himself incapable of so unjust and ungenerous
a resentment against all, for the perfidy of one. 
You remember this, my dear; as I do your innocent
observation upon it, That you could believe his solemn
asseveration and denial: ‘For, surely, said you, the
man who would resent, as the highest indignity that
could be offered to a gentleman, the imputation of
a wilful falshood, would not be guilty of one.’ 
I insisted upon the extraordinary circumstances in
your case; particularizing them. I took notice,
that Mr. Lovelace's morals were at one time no objection
with your relations for Arabella: That then
much was built upon his family, and more upon his
parts and learning, which made it out of doubt, that
he might be reclaimed by a woman of virtue and
prudence: And [Pray forgive me for mentioning it]
I ventured to add, that altho' your family might be
good sort of folks, as the world went, yet nobody,
but you, imputed to any of them, a very punctilious 

concern for Religion or Piety—Therefore were they
the less intitled to object to defects of that kind in
others. Then, what an odious man, said I, have
they picked out, to supplant in a Lady's affections
one of the finest figures of a man, and one noted for
his brilliant parts, and other accomplishments, whatever
his morals may be! 
Still my Mother insisted, that there was the greater
merit in your obedience on that account; and urged,
that there hardly ever was a very handsome and a very
sprightly man who made a tender and affectionate
Husband: For that they were generally such Narcissus's,
as to imagine every woman ought to think as
highly of them, as they did of themselves. 
There was no danger from that consideration here,
I said, because the Lady had still greater advantages,
both of person and mind, than the Man; graceful
and elegant, as he must be allowed to be, beyond
most of his Sex. 
She cannot endure to hear me praise any man but
her favourite Hickman: Upon whom, nevertheless,
she generally brings a degree of contempt which he
would escape, did she not lessen the little merit he
has, by giving him, on all occasions, more than I
think he can deserve, and entering him into comparisons
in which it is impossible but he must be a
sufferer. And now [Preposterous partiality!] She
thought, for her part, that Mr. Hickman, 'bating
that his face indeed was not so smooth, nor his complexion
quite so good, and saving that he was not so
presuming and so bold (which ought to be no fault
with a modest woman) equalled Mr. Lovelace at any
hour of the day. 
To avoid entering further into such an incomparable
comparison, I said, I did not believe, had they left you
to your own way, and treated you generously, that
you would have had the thought of encouraging any
man whom they disliked. 

Then, Nancy, catching me up, the excuse is less
—For, if so, must there not be more of Contradiction,
than Love, in the case? 
Not so, neither, Madam: For I know Miss Clarissa
Harlowe would prefer Mr. Lovelace to all men, if
morals— 
IF, Nancy!—That If is every-thing. —Do you
really think she loves Mr. Lovelace? 
What would you have had me to say, my dear? — 
I won't tell you what I did say: But had I not said
what I did, who would have believed me? 
Besides, I know you love him! —Excuse me, my
dear: Yet, if you deny it, what do you but reflect
upon yourself, as if you thought you ought not to allow
yourself in what you cannot help doing? 
Indeed, Madam, said I, the man is worthy of any
woman's Love [If, again, I could say]—But her Parents— 
Her Parents, Nancy—[You know, my dear, how
my Mother, who accuses her Daughter of quickness,
is evermore interrupting one!] 
May take wrong measures, said I— 
Cannot do wrong—They have reason, I'll warrant,
said she— 
By which they may provoke a young woman,
said I, to do rash things, which otherwise she would
not do. 
But if it be a rash thing [returned she] should she
do it? A prudent Daughter will not wilfully err, because
her Parents err, if they were to err: If she do,
the world which blames the Parents, will not acquit
the Child. All that can be said, in extenuation of a
Daughter's error in this case, arises from a kind
consideration, which Miss Clary's Letter to Lady
Drayton pleads for, to be paid to her Daughter's
youth and inexperience. And will such an admirable
young person as Miss Clarissa Harlowe, whose prudence,
as we see, qualifies her to be an adviser of 

persons much older than herself, take shelter under
poor a covert? 
Let her know, Nancy, out of hand, what I say; 
and I charge you to represent farther to her, That let
her dislike one man and approve of another ever so
much, it will be expected of a young Lady of her
unbounded generosity and greatness of mind, that
she should deny herself, when she can oblige all her
family by so doing—No less than ten or a dozen perhaps
the nearest and dearest to her of all the persons
in the world, an indulgent Father and Mother at
the head of them. It may be Fancy only on her
side; but Parents look deeper: And will not Miss
Clarissa Harlowe give up her Fancy to her Parents
Judgment? 
I said a great deal upon this Judgment subject: All
that you could wish I should say; and all that your
extraordinary case allowed me to say. And my Mother
was so sensible of the force of it, that she
charged me not to write to you any part of my Answer
to what she said; but only what she herself had
advanced; lest, in so critical a case, it should induce
you to take measures which might give us both reason
(me for giving it, you for following it) to repent it as
long as we lived. 
And thus, my dear, have I set my Mother's arguments
before you. And the rather, as I cannot myself
tell what to advise you to do. —You know best
your own heart; and what That will let you do. 
Robin undertakes to deposit This very early, that
you may have an opportunity to receive it by your
first morning Airing. 
Heaven guide and direct you for the best, is the incessant
prayer of 
Your ever-affectionate
Anna Howe. 