


I Remember what he said, of not being obliged to
ask again for my Papers; and what I was forced
to do, and could not help it, I thought I might as
well do, in such a manner as might shew I would
not disoblige on purpose. Tho' I stomach'd this
matter very heavily too. I had therefore got in
Readiness my two Parcels; and he not going to
Church in the Morning, bid Mrs. Jewkes tell me,
he was gone into the Garden. 
I knew that was for me to go to him; and so I
went. For how can I help being at his Beck? which 
grieves me not a little, tho' he is my Master, as I
may say; for I am so wholly in his Power, that it
would do me no good to incense him; and if I refused
to obey him in little Matters, my Refusal in
greater would have the less Weight. So I went
down to the Garden; but as he walked in one Walk,
I took another; that I might not seem too forward
neither. 
He soon 'spy'd me, and said, Do you expect to be
courted to come to me? Sir, said I, and cross'd the
Walk to attend him, I did not know but I should
interrupt you in your Meditations this good Day. 
Was that the Case, said he, truly, and from your
Heart? Why, Sir, said I, I don't doubt but you
have very good Thoughts sometimes: Tho' not towards
me! —I wish, said he, I could avoid thinking
so well of you, as I do. But where are the
Papers? —I dare say, you had them about you
yesterday; for you say in those I have, that you will
bury your Writings in the Garden, for fear you
should be search'd, if you did not escape. This,
added he, gave me a glorious Pretence to search
you; and I have been vexing myself all Night, that
I did not strip you, Garment by Garment, till I had
found them. O fie, Sir, said I; let me not be
scar'd, with hearing that you had such a Thought in
earnest. 
Well, said he, I hope you have not now the Papers
to give me; for I had rather find them myself,
I'll assure you. 
I did not like this way of Talk at all; and, thinking
it best, not to dwell upon it, I said, Well, but,
Sir, you will excuse me, I hope, giving up my Papers. 
Don't trifle with me, said he; Where are they? — 
I think I was very good to you last Night, to humour
you as I did. If you have either added or diminish'd, 
and have not strictly kept your Promise, woe be to
you! Indeed, Sir, said I, I have neither added nor
diminish'd. But here is the Parcel, that goes on
with my sad Attempt to escape, and the terrible
Consequences it had like to have been follow'd with. 
And it goes down to the naughty Articles you sent
me. And, as you know all that has happen'd since,
I hope these will satisfy you. 
He was going to speak; but I said, to drive him
from thinking of any more; And I must beg you,
Sir, to read the Matter favourably, if I have exceeded
in any Liberties of my Pen. 
I think, said he, half-smiling, you may wonder at
my Patience, that I can be so easy to read myself
abus'd as I am by such a saucy Slut. —Sir, said I, I have
wonder'd you should be so desirous to see my bold
Stuff; and for that very Reason, I have thought it
a very good or a very bad Sign. What, said he, is
your good Sign? —That it may not have an unkind
Effect upon your Temper, at last, in my Favour,
when you see me so sincere. Your bad Sign? 
Why, that if you can read my Reflections and Observations
upon your Treatment of me, with Tranquillity,
and not be mov'd, it is a Sign of a very
cruel and determin'd Heart. Now, pray Sir, don't
be angry at my Boldness, in telling you so freely my
Thoughts. You may, perhaps, said he, be least
mistaken when you think of your bad Sign: God
forbid! said I. 
So I took out my Papers; and said, Here, Sir,
they are. But, if you please to return them, without
breaking the Seal, it will be very generous: And
I will take it for a great Favour, and a good
Omen. 
He broke the Seal instantly, and open'd them. So
much for your Omen, said he. I am sorry for it, 
said I; and was walking away. Whither now, said
he? Sir, I was going in, that you might have Time
to read them, if you thought fit. He put them into
his Pocket, and said, You have more than these. Yes,
Sir; but all that they contain you know, as well as
I. —But I don't know, said he, the Light you put
Things in; and so give them me, if you have not a
Mind to be search'd. 
Sir, said I, I can't stay, if you won't forbear that
ugly Word. —Give me then no Reason for it. Where
are the other Papers? Why then, unkind Sir, if it
must be so, here they are. And so I gave him out of
my Pocket the second Parcel, seal'd up, as the former,
with this Superscription; From the naughty
Articles, down, thro' sad Attempts, to Thursday the
42d Day of my Imprisonment. This is last Thursday,
is it? —Yes, Sir; but now you will see what I
write, I will find some other way to employ my
Time: For I can neither write so free, nor with
any Face, what must be for your Perusal, and not
for those I intended to divert with my melancholy
Stories. 
Yes, said he, I would have you continue your
Penmanship by all means; and I assure you, in the
Mind I am in, I will not ask you for any after these; 
except any thing very extraordinary occurs. And
I have, added he, another thing to tell you, That
if you send for those from your Father, and let me
read them, I may very probably give them all
back again to you. And so I desire you will do
it. 
This a little encourages me to continue my Scribbling; 
but for fear of the worst, I will, when they
come to any Bulk, contrive some way to hide them,
if I can, that I may protest I have them not about
me, which before I could not say of a Truth; and 
that made him so resolutely bent to try to find them
upon me; for which I might have suffer'd frightful
Indecencies. 
He led me then to the Side of the Pond; and
sitting down on the Slope, made me sit by him. 
Come, said he, this being the Scene of Part of your
Project, and where you so artfully threw in some of
your Cloaths, I will just look upon that Part of your
Relation. Sir, said I, let me then walk about, at a
little Distance, for I cannot bear the Thought of it. 
Don't go far, said he. 
When he came, as I suppose, to the Place where
I mention'd the Bricks falling upon me, he got up,
and walk'd to the Door, and look'd upon the broken
Part of the Wall; for it had not been mended; and
came back, reading on to himself, towards me; and
took my Hand, and put it under his Arm. 
Why this, said he, my Girl, is a very moving
Tale. It was a very desperate Attempt, and had you
got out, you might have been in great Danger; for
you had a very bad and lonely Way; and I had
taken such Measures, that let you have been where
you would, I would have had you. 
You may see, Sir, said I, what I ventur'd rather
than be ruin'd; and you will be so good as hence to
judge of the Sincerity of my Professions, that my
Honesty is dearer to me than my Life. Romantick
Girl! said he, and read on. 
He was very serious at my Reflections, on what
God enabled me to escape. And when he came to
my Reasonings, about throwing myself into the
Water, he said, Walk gently before; and seem'd so
mov'd, that he turn'd away his Face from me; and
I bless'd this good Sign, and began not so much to
repent at his seeing this mournful Part of my
Story. 
He put the Papers in his Pocket, when he had read
my Reflections, and Thanks for escaping from myself; 
and he said, taking me about the Waist, O my dear
Girl! you have touch'd me sensibly with your
mournful Relation, and your sweet Reflections upon
it. I should truly have been very miserable, had it
taken Effect. I see you have been us'd too roughly; 
and it is a Mercy you stood Proof in that fatal
Moment. 
Then he most kindly folded me in his Arms; Let
us, say I too, my Pamela, walk from this accursed
Piece of Water; for I shall not, with Pleasure, look
upon it again, to think how near it was to have been
fatal to my Fair-one. I thought, said he, of terrifying
you to my Will, since I could not move you by
Love; and Mrs. Jewkes too well obey'd me, when
the Terrors of your Return, after your Disappointment,
were so great, that you had hardly Courage to
stand them; but had like to have made so fatal a
Choice, to escape the Treatment you apprehended. 
O Sir, said I, I have Reason, I am sure, to bless
my dear Parents, and my good Lady, your Mother,
for giving me something of a religious Education; 
for, but for that, and God's Grace, I should more
than upon one Occasion, have attempted, at least, a
desperate Act: And I the less wonder how poor
Creatures, who have not the Fear of God before
their Eyes, and give way to Despondency, cast themselves
into Perdition. 
Come, kiss me, said he, and tell me you forgive me
for rushing you into so much Danger and Distress. 
If my Mind hold, and I can see those former Papers
of yours, and that these in my Pocket give me no
Cause to alter my Opinion, J will endeavour to defy
the World, and the World's Censures, and make my
Pamela Amends, if it be in the Power of my whole
Life, for all the Hardships I have inflicted upon her. 
All this look'd well; but you shall see how strangely
it was all turn'd. For this Sham-marriage then
came into my Mind again; and I said, Your poor
Servant is far unworthy of this great Honour; for
what will it be, but to create Envy to herself,
and Discredit to you? Therefore, Sir, permit me
to return to my poor Parents, and that is all I have
to ask. 
He was in a fearful Passion then. And is it thus,
said he, in my fond conceding Moments, that I am
to be despis'd, and thus answer'd? —Precise, perverse,
unseasonable Pamela, begone from my Sight, and
know as well how to behave in a hopeful Prospect,
as in a distressful State; and then, and not till then,
shalt thou attract the Shadow of my Notice. 
I was startled, and going to speak: But he stampt
with his Foot, and said, Begone, I tell you. I cannot
bear this stupid romantick Folly. 
One Word, said I; but one Word, I beseech
you, Sir. 
He turn'd from me in great Wrath, and took down
another Alley, and so I went in with a very heavy
Heart; and fear I was too unseasonable, just at a Time,
when he was so condescending: But if it was a Piece
of Art of his Side, as I apprehended, to introduce
the Sham-wedding, (and to be sure he is very full
of Stratagem and Art) I think I was not so much to
blame. 
So I went up to my Closet; and wrote thus far,
while he walk'd about till Dinner was ready; and he
is now sat down to it, as I hear by Mrs. Jewkes,
very sullen, thoughtful, and out of Humour; and
she asks what I have done to him? —Now again, I
dread to see him! —When will my Fears be
over?— 

Three o' Clock.
Well, he continues exceeding wroth. He has
order'd his travelling Chariot to be got ready,
with all Speed. What is to come next, I wonder!— 
Sure I did not say so much! But see the Lordliness
of a high Condition! —A poor Body must not put in
a Word when they take it into their Heads to be
angry! What a fine Time a Person of unequal
Condition would have of it, if even they were to
marry such an one! —His poor dear Mother spoil'd
him at first. Nobody must speak to him or contradict
him, as I have heard, when he was a Child, and
so he has not been us'd to be controul'd, and cannot
bear the least Thing that crosses his violent Will. 
This is one of the Blessings of a high Condition! 
Much good may do them with their Pride of Birth,
and Pride of Fortune, say I! —All that it serves for,
as far as I can see, is to multiply their Disquiets, and
every body's else that has to do with them. 
So, so! where will this end! —Mrs. Jewkes has
been with me from him, and she says, I must get me
out of the House this Moment! Well, said I, but
where am I to be carry'd next? Why, home, said
she, to your Father and Mother. And, can it be,
said I! —No, no, I doubt I shall not be so happy as
that! —To be sure, some bad Design is on foot
again! To be sure it is! —Sure, sure, said I, Mrs.
Jewkes, he has not found out some other Housekeeper
worse than you! She was very angry, you
may well think. But I know she can't be made worse
than she is. 
She came up again. Are you ready? said she. 
Bless me, said I, you are very hasty: I have heard of
this not a Quarter of an Hour ago. But I shall be 
soon ready; for I have but little to take with me
and no kind Friends in this House to take Leave of
to delay me. Yet, like a Fool, I can't help crying
Pray, said I, just step down, and ask, if I may not
have my Papers? 
So, I am quite ready now, against she comes up
with an Answer; and so I will put up these few
Writings in my Bosom, that I have left. 
I don't know what to think—nor how to judge; 
but I shall ne'er believe I am with you till I am on
my Knees before you, begging both your Blessings. 
Yet I am sorry he is so angry with me! I thought I
did not say so much. 
There is, I see, the Chariot drawn out, the Horses
to, the grim Colbrand going to get a Horse-back. 
What will be the End of all this! 