



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday, May 19. 
&dotup;I would not, if I could help it, be so continually
brooding over the dark and gloomy face of my
condition [All nature, you know, my dear, and
every-thing in it, has a bright and a gloomy side]
as to be thought unable to enjoy a more hopeful
prospect.&dotup; And this, not only for my own sake,
but for yours, who take such generous concern in all
that befals me. 
&dotup;Let me tell you then, my dear, that I have known
four-and-twenty hours together not unhappy ones,
my situation considered.&dotup; 
She then gives the particulars of the conversation
which she had overheard between Mr. Lovelace, 

Mrs. Sinclair, and Miss Martin; but accounts
more minutely than he had done, for the opportunity
she had of overhearing it, unknown to
them. 
She gives the reason she has to be pleased with what
she heard from each: But is shocked at the measure
he is resolved to take, if he misses her but for
one day. Yet is pleased, that he proposes to avoid
aggressive violence, if her Brother and he meet in
town. 
&dotup;Even Dorcas, says she, appears less exceptionable
to me than before; and I cannot but pity her
for her neglected education, as it is matter of so
much regret to herself: Else, there would not be
much in it; as the Low and Illiterate are the most
useful people in the commonwealth (since such constitute
the labouring part of the public); and as a
Lettered Education but too generally sets people
above those servile offices, by which the business of
the world is carried on. Nor have I any doubt,
that there are, take the world thro', twenty happy
people among the Unlettered, to one among those
who have had a School Education. 
&dotup;This, however, concludes not against Learning
or Letters; since one would wish to lift to some
little distinction, and more genteel usefulness, those
who have capacity, and whose Parentage one respects,
or whose services one would wish to reward. 
&dotup;Were my mind quite at ease, I could enlarge,
perhaps not unusefully, upon this subject; for I
have considered it with as much attention as my
years, and little experience and observation, will
permit. 
&dotup;But the extreme illiterateness and indocility of
this maid are surprising, considering that she wants
not inquisitiveness, appears willing to learn, and,
in other respects, has quick parts. This confirms 

to me what I have heard remarked, That there is
a docible Season, a Learning-time, as I may say,
for every person, in which the mind may be led
step by step, from the lower to the higher (year by
year) to improvement. How industriously ought
these Seasons, as they offer, to be taken hold of,
by Tutors, Parents, and other friends, to whom
the cultivation of the genius of children and youth
is committed; since, once elapsed, and no foundation
laid, they hardly ever return! —And yet it
must be confessed, that there are some genius's,
which, like some fruits, ripen not till late. And
Industry and Perseverance will do prodigious things
—But for a learner to have those first rudiments to
master, at twenty years of age suppose, which
others are taught, and they themselves might have
attained, at ten, what an up-hill labour! 
&dotup;These kind of observations you have always
wished me to intersperse, as they arise to my
thoughts. But it is a sign that my prospects are a
little mended, or I should not, among so many
more interesting ones, that my mind has been of
late filled with, have had heart's-ease enough to
make them. 
&dotup;Let me give you my reflections on my more
hopeful prospects. 
&dotup;I am now, in the first place, better able to account
for the delays about the house, than I was
before—Poor Mrs. Fretchville! —Tho' I know her
not, I pity her! —Next, it looks well, that he
had apprised the women (before this conversation
with them) of his intention to stay in this house,
after I was removed to the other. By the tone of
his voice he seemed concerned for the appearance
this new delay would have with me. 
&dotup;So handsomely did Miss Martin express herself
of me, that I am sorry, methinks, that I judged so
hardly of her, when I first came hither—Free 

people may go a great way, but not all the way: 
And as such are generally unguarded, precipitate,
and thoughtless, the same quickness, changeableness,
and suddenness of spirit, as I may call it, may
intervene (if the heart be not corrupted) to recover
them to thought and duty. 
&dotup;His reason for declining to go in person to bring
up the Ladies of his family, while my Brother and
Singleton continue their machinations, carries no
bad face with it; and one may the rather allow
for their expectations, that so proud a spirit as his
should attend them for this purpose, as he speaks
of them sometimes as persons of punctilio. 
&dotup;Other reasons I will mention for my being easier
in my mind than I was before I overheard this conversation. 
&dotup;Such as, the advice he has received in relation to
Singleton's mate; which agrees but too well with
what you, my dear, wrote to me in yours of May
the 10th (a) . 
&dotup;His not intending to acquaint me with it. 
&dotup;His cautions to the servants about the sailor, if
he should come, and make enquiries about us. 
&dotup;His resolution to avoid violence, were he to fall
in either with my Brother, or this Singleton; and
the easy method he has chalked out, in this case, to
prevent mischief; since I need only not to deny my
being his. But yet I should be exceedingly unhappy
in my own opinion, to be driven into such
a tacit acknowlegement to any new persons, till I
am so, altho' I have been led (so much against my
liking) to give countenance to the belief of the persons
below that we are married.&dotup; 
I think myself obliged, from what passed between
Mr. Lovelace and me on Wednesday, and from what
I overheard him say, to consent to go with him to the
Play; and the rather, as he had the discretion to propose
one of the Nieces to accompany me. 

I cannot but acknowlege that I am pleased to find,
that he has actually written to Lord M. 
I have promised to give Mr. Lovelace an answer to
his proposals as soon as I have heard from you, my
dear, on the subject. 
I hope that in my next Letter I shall have reason to
confirm these favourable appearances. Favourable I
must think them in the wreck I have suffered. 
&dotup;I hope, that in the trial which you hint may happen
between me and myself (as you (a)  express it)
if he should so behave, as to oblige me to leave
him, I shall be able to act in such a manner, as to
bring no discredit upon myself in your eye; and
that is all now that I have to wish for. But if I
value him so much as you are pleased to suppose I
do, the trial which you imagine will be so difficult
to me, will not, I conceive, be upon getting from
him, when the means to effect my escape are lent
me; but how I shall behave when got from him; 
and if, like the Israelites of old, I shall be so weak
as to wish to return to my Egyptian bondage. 
&dotup;I think it will not be amiss, notwithstanding the
present favourable appearances, that you should
perfect the scheme (whatever it be) which you tell
me (b)  you have thought of, in order to procure
for me an asylum, in case of necessity. Mr. Lovelace
is certainly a deep and dangerous man; and it
is therefore but prudence to be watchful, and to be
provided against the worst. Lord bless me, my
dear, how am I reduced! —Could I ever have
thought to be in such a situation, as to be obliged to
stay with a man, of whose honour by me I could
have but the shadow of a doubt! —But I will look
forward, and hope the best. 
&dotup;I am certain, that your Letters are safe. —Be perfectly
easy, therefore, on that head.&dotup; 
Lovelace will never be out of my company by 

his good-will; otherwise I have no doubt that I am
mistress of my goings-out and comings-in; and did I
think it needful, and were I not afraid of my Brother,
and Capt. Singleton, I would oftener put it to trial. 