


Well, where this will end I cannot say. But
here I am, at a little poor Village, almost such
an one as yours; I shall learn the Name of it by-and-by. 
And Robin assures me he has Orders to carry
me to you, my dear Father and Mother. God send
he may say Truth, and not deceive me again. But
having nothing else to do, and I am sure I shall not
sleep a Wink to-night, if I was to go to bed, I will
write my Time away, and take up my Story where I
left off, on Sunday Afternoon. 
Mrs. Jewkes, came up to me, with this Answer
about my Papers. My Master says, he will not read
them yet, lest he should be mov'd by any thing in
them to alter his Resolution. But, if he shall think
it worth while to read them, he will send them to
you afterwards to your Father's. But, said she, here 
are your Guineas that I borrow'd: For all is over
now, I find, with you. 
She saw me cry; and said, Do you repent? —Of
what, said I? —Nay, I can't tell, said she; but to
he sure he has had a Taste of your satirical Flings,
or he would not be so angry. Oh! said she, and held
up her Hand, Thou hast a Spirit!—but I hope it
will now be brought down. —I hope so too, said
I.— 
Well, added I, I am ready. She lifted up the Window,
and said, I'll call Robin to take your Portmanteau: 
Bag and Baggage, said she, I'm glad you're going! 
I have no Words, said I, to throw away upon you,
Mrs. Jewkes; but, making her a very low Curchee,
I most heartily thank you for all your virtuous Civilities
to me. And so, adieu; for I'll have no Portmanteau,
I'll assure you, nor any thing but these few
Things that I brought with me in my Handkerchief,
besides what I have on. For I had all this Time
worn my own bought Cloaths, tho' my Master would
have had it otherwise often; but I had put up Paper,
Ink and Pens, however. 
So down I went, and as I went by the Parlour,
she stept in, and said, Sir, you have nothing to say to
the Girl before she goes? I heard him say, tho' I
did not see him, Who bid you say the Girl, Mrs.
Jewkes, in that Manner? She has offended only
me! 
I beg your Honour's Pardon, said the Wretch; 
but if I was your Honour, she should not, for all
the Trouble she has cost you, go away scot-free. 
No more of this, as I told you before, said he: 
What! when I have such Proof, that her Virtue is
all her Pride, shall I rob her of that? —No, said
he, let her go, perverse and foolish as she is; but
she deserves to go honest, and she shall go so! 
I was so transported with this unexpected Goodness,
that I open'd the Door before I knew what I
did; and I said, falling on my Knees at the Door,
with my Hands folded and lifted up. O thank you,
thank your Honour a Million of Times! —May
God bless you for this Instance of your Goodness to
me! I will pray for you as long as I live, and so
shall my dear Father and Mother. And, Mrs. Jewkes,
said I, I will pray for you too, poor wicked Wretch
that you are! 
He turn'd from me, and went into hi; Closet, and
shut the Door. He need not have done so; for I
would not have gone nearer to him! 
Surely I did not say so much to incur all this Displeasure! 
I think I was loth to leave the House. Can you
believe it? —What could be the Matter with me,
I wonder! —I felt something so strange, and my
Heart was so lumpish! —I wonder what ail'd me! 
—But this was so unexpected! —I believe that was
all! —Yet I am very strange still. Surely, surely, I
cannot be like the old murmuring Israelites, to long
after the Onions and Garlick of Egypt, when they
had suffer'd there such heavy Bondage? —I'll take
thee, O lumpish, contradictory, ungovernable Heart,
to severe Task for this thy strange Impulse, when I
get to my dear Father's and Mother's; and if I find
any thing in thee that should not be, depend upon it,
thou shalt be humbled, if strict Abstinence, Prayer
and Mortification will do it! 
But yet, after all, this last Goodness of his has
touched me too sensibly. I wish I had not heard it,
almost; and yet methinks I am glad I did; for I
should rejoice to think the best of him, for his own
sake. 
Well, and so I went to the Chariot, the same
that brought me down. So, Mr. Robert, said I, here
I am again! a pure Sporting-piece for the Great!
a mere Tennis-ball of Fortune! You have your
Orders, I hope! Yes, Madam, said he. Pray now,
said I, don't Madam me, nor stand with your Hat
off to such a one as I. Had not my Master, said he,
order'd me not to be wanting in Respects to you, I
would have shewn you all I could. Well, said I,
with my Heart full, That's very kind, Mr. Robert. 
Mr. Colbrand, mounted on Horseback, with Pistols
before him, came up to me, as soon as I got
in, with his Hat off too. What, Monsieur, said I,
are you to go with me? —Part of the Way, he said,
to see you safe! I hope that's kind too in you, Mr.
Colbrand, said I. 
I had nobody to wave my Handerchief to now,
nor to take Leave of; and so I resign'd myself to my
Contemplations, with this strange wayward Heart of
mine, that I never found so ungovernable and awkward
before. 
So away drove the Chariot! And when I had got
out of the Elm-walk, and into the great Road, I
could hardly think but I was in a Dream all the
Time. A few Hours before in my Master's Arms
almost, with twenty kind Things said to me, and a
generous Concern for the Misfortunes he had
brought upon me; and only by one rash half Word
exasperated against me, and turn'd out of Doors, at
an Hour's Warning; and all his Kindness changed
to Hate! And I now, from Three o'Clock to Five,
several Miles off. —But if I am going to you, all
will be well again, I hope! 
Lack-a-day, what strange Creatures are Men! 
Gentlemen, I should say rather! For, my dear deserving
good Mother, tho' Poverty be both your Lots, 
has had a better Hap; and you are, and have always
been, blest in one another! —Yet this pleases me
too, he was so good, he would not let Mrs. Jewkes
speak ill of me; and scorn'd to take her odious unwomanly
Advice. O what a black Heart has this
poor Wretch! So I need not rail against Men so
much; for my Master, bad as I have thought him,
is not half so bad as this Woman! —To be sure
she must be an Atheist! Do you think she is
not?— 
We could not reach further than this little poor
Place, and sad Alehouse, rather than Inn; for it began
to be dark, and Robin did not make so much
Haste as he might have done: And he was forc'd
to make hard Shift for his Horses. Mr. Colbrand
and Robert too are very civil. I see he has got my
Portmanteau lash'd behind the Coach. I did not
desire it; but I shall not come quite empty. A
thorough Riddance of me, I see! —Bag and Bag-gage!
as Mrs. Jewkes says. Well, my Story surely
would furnish out a surprizing kind of Novel, if it
was to be well told. 
Mr. Robert came up to me, just now, and begg'd
me to eat something. I thank'd him; but said I could
not eat. I bid him ask Mr. Colbrand to walk up; and
he came; but neither of them would sit, nor put their
Hats on. What Mockado is this to such a poor
Soul as I! I ask'd them, if they were at Liberty to
tell me the Truth of what they were to do with me?
if not, I would not desire it. —They both said, Robin
was order'd to carry me to my Father's. And Mr.
Colbrand was to leave me within ten Miles, and then
strike off for the other House, and wait till my
Master arriv'd there. They both spoke so solemnly,
that I cannot but believe them. 
But when Robin went down, the other said, he
had a Letter to give me next Day, at Noon, when
we baited, as we were to do, at Mrs. Jewkes's Relations,
—May I not, said I, beg the Favour to see
it to-night? He seem'd so loth to deny me; that
I have Hopes, I shall prevail on him by-and-by. 
Well, my dear Father and Mother, I have, on
great Promises of Secrecy, and making no Use of
it, got the Letter. I will try if I can open it, without
breaking the Seal, and will take a Copy of it,
by-and-by: For Robin is in and out; there being
hardly any Room in this little House for one to be
long alone. Well, this is the Letter. 

‘When these Lines are deliver'd to you, you
will be far on your Way to your Father
and Mother, where you have so long desired to
be. And, I hope, I shall forbear thinking of you
with the least Shadow of that Fondness my foolish
Heart had entertain'd for you. I bear you, however,
no Ill-will; but the End of my detaining you
being over, I would not that you should tarry
with me an Hour more than needed, after the ungenerous
Preference you gave against me, at a
Time that I was inclined to pass over all other
Considerations, for an honourable Address to you; 
for well I found the Tables intirely turn'd upon me,
and that I was in far more Danger from you than
you was from me; for I was just upon resolving
to defy all the Censures of the World, and to make
you my Wife. 
‘I will acknowledge another Truth; That had I
not parted with you as I did, but permitted you
to stay till I had read your Journal reflecting, as I
doubt not I shall find it, and till I had heard your 
bewitching Pleas in your Behalf, I fear'd I could not
trust myself with my own Resolution. And this is
the Reason, I frankly own, that I have determin'd
not to see you, nor hear you speak; for, well I
know my Weakness in your Favour. 
‘But I will get the better of this fond Folly. Nay,
I hope I have already done it, since it was likely
to cost me so dear. And I write this to tell you,
that I wish you well with all my Heart, tho' you
have spread such Mischiefs thro' my Family. — 
And yet, I cannot but say, that I could wish you
would not think of marrying in haste; and particularly
that you would not have this cursed Williams. 
—But what is all this to me now? —Only,
my Weakness makes me say, That as I had already
look'd upon you as mine; and you have so soon
got rid of your first Husband, so you will not refuse,
to my Memory, the Decency that every common
Person observes, to pay a Twelve-month's
Compliment, tho' but a mere Compliment, to my
Ashes. 
‘Your Papers shall be faithfully return'd you, and
I have paid so dear for my Curiosity in the Affection
they have rivetted upon me for you, that you
would look upon yourself amply reveng'd, if you
knew what they have cost me. 
‘I thought of writing but a few Lines; but I
have run into Length. I will now try to recollect
my scatter'd Thoughts, and resume my Reason,
and shall find Trouble enough to replace my Affairs,
and my own Family; and to supply the
Chasms you have made in it: For, let me tell
you, tho' I can forgive you, I never can my Sister,
nor my Domestics; for my Vengeance must be
wreak'd somewhere. 
‘I doubt not your Prudence in forbearing to expose
me any more than is necessary for your own 
Justification; and for that, I will suffer myself to
be accused by you, and will also accuse myself, if
it be needful. For I am, and will ever be, 
‘Your affectionate Well-wisher.’ 

This Letter, when I expected some new Plot,
has affected me more than any thing of that Sort could
have done. For here is plainly his great Value for
me confess'd, and his rigorous Behaviour accounted
for in such a Manner, as tortures me much. And
all this wicked Gypsey Story is, as it seems, a Forgery
upon us both, and has quite ruin'd me! For,
Oh! my dear Parents, forgive me! but I found to my
Grief before, that my Heart was too partial in his Favour; 
but now, with so much Openness, so much Affection,
nay, so much Honour too, (which was all I
had before doubted, and kept me on the Reserve)I am quite overcome. This was a Happiness, however,
I had no Reason to expect. But to be sure, I must
own to you; that I shall never be able to think of
any body in the World but him! —Presumption,
you will say; and so it is: But Love is not a voluntier
Thing:—Love, did I say! —But, come, I
hope not! —At least it is not, I hope, gone so far,
as to make me very uneasy; for I know not how it
came, nor when it begun; but creep, creep it has,
like a Thief upon me; and before I knew what was
the Matter, it look'd like Love. 
I wish, since it is too late, and my Lot determin'd,
that I had not had this Letter; nor heard him take
my Part to that vile Woman; for then I should have
bless'd myself, in having escap'd so happily his designing
Arts upon my Virtue; but now, my poor Mind
is all topsy-turvy'd, and I have made an Escape, to be
more a Prisoner! 
But, I hope, since thus it is, that all will be for the
best; and I shall, with your prudent Advice, and
pious Prayers, be able to overcome this Weakness. 
—But, to sure, my dear Sir, I will keep a longer
Time than a Twelve-month, as a true Widow, for
a Compliment, and more than a Compliment, to
your Ashes! —O the dear Word! —How kind, how
moving, how affectionate is that Word! O why was
I not a Duchess, to shew my Gratitude for it? but
must labour under the Weight of an Obligation, even
had this Happiness befallen me, that would have
press'd me to Death, and which I never could return
by a whole Life of faithful Love, and chearful Obedience. 
O forgive your poor Daughter! —I am sorry to
find this Trial so sore upon me; and that all the
Weakness of my weak Sex, and tender Years, who
never before knew what it was to be so touch'd, is
rais'd against me, and too mighty to be withstood
by me. —But Time, Prayer, and Resignation to
God's Will, and the Benefits of your good Lessons
and Examples, I hope, will enable me to get over
this so heavy a Trial. —O my treacherous, treacherous
Heart! to serve me thus! And give no Notice to
me of the Mischiefs thou wast about to bring upon
me! But thus foolishly to give thyself up to the
proud Invader, without ever consulting thy poor
Mistress in the least! But thy Punishment will be
the first and the greatest; and well deservest thou
to smart, O perfidious Traitor, for giving up so
weakly, thy whole Self, before a Summons came,
and to one too, who had us'd me so hardly! And
when, likewise, thou hadst so well maintain'd thy
Post against the most violent and avowed, and therefore,
as I thought, more dangerous Attacks. 
After all, I must either not shew you this my
Weakness, or tear it out of my Writing ––– Memorandum,
to consider of this, when I get home. 