



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Tuesday, 5. Sept. 9 in the morn. at Mr. Smith's. 
When I read yours of this morning, I could not
help pitying you for the account you give of the
dreadful anxiety and suspense you labour under. I wish
from my heart all were to end as you are so willing to
hope: But it will not be; and your suspense, if the worst
part of your torment, as you say it is, will soon be over; 
but, alas! in a way you wish not. 
I attended the lady just now. She is extremely ill: Yet
is she aiming at an answer to her Mrs. Norton's letter,
which she began yesterday in her own chamber, and has
written a good deal; but in a hand not like her own fine
one, as Mrs. Lovick tells me, but much larger, and the
lines crooked. 
I have accepted of the offer of a room adjoining to the
widow Lovick's, till I see how matters go; but unknown
to the lady; and I shall go home every night, for a few
hours: I would not lose a sentence that I could gain 

from lips so instructive, nor the opportunity of receiving
any command from her, for an estate. 
In this my new apartment, I now write, and shall continue
to write, as occasions offer, that I may be the more
circumstantial: But I depend upon the return of my letters,
or copies of them, on demand, that I may have together
all that relates to this affecting story; which I shall
reperuse with melancholy pleasure to the end of my life. 
I think I will send three Brand's letter to Mr. John Harlowe,
recanting his base surmizes. It is a matchless piece
of pedantry; and may perhaps a little divert thy deep
chagrin: Some time hence at least it may, if not now. 
What wretched creatures are there in the world! What
strangely mixed characters! —So sensible and so foolish
at the same time! What a various, what a foolish creature
is man!— 
Three o'lock. 
The lady has just finished her letter, and has entertained
Mrs. Lovick, Mrs. Smith, and me, with a noble discourse
on the vanity and brevity of life, which I cannot do justice
to in the repetition: And indeed I am so grieved for her,
that, ill as she is, my intellects are not half so clear as hers. 
A few things which made the strongest impression upon
me, as well from the sentiments themselves, as from
her manner of uttering them, I remember. She introduced
them thus: 
I am thinking, said she, what a gradual and happy
death God Almighty (Blessed be his name!) affords me!
Who would have thought, that, suffering what I have suffered,
and abandoned as I have been, with such a tender
education as I have had, I should be so long a dying! — 
But see how by little and little it has come to this. I
was first taken off from the power of walking: Then I took
a coach-A coach grew too violent an exercise: Then I took
a chair. —The prison was a large Death-stride upon
me—I should have suffered longer else! —Next, I was unable
to go to Church; then to go up or down stairs; Now
hardly can move from one room to another; and a less
room will soon hold me. —My eyes begin to fail me, so
that at times I cannot see to read distinctly; and now I
can hardly write, or hold a pen. —Next, I presume, I 

shall know no-body, nor be able to thank any of you: I
therefore now once more thank you, Mrs. Lovick, and you,
Mrs. Smith, and you, Mr. Belford, while I can thank you,
for all your kindness to me. And thus by little and little,
in such a gradual sensible death as I am blessed with,
God dies away in us, as I may say, all human satisfactions,
in order to subdue his poor creatures to Himself. 
Thou mayst guess how affected we all were at this
moving account of her progressive weakness. We heard
it with wet eyes; for what with the womens example, and
what with her moving eloquence, I could no more help it
than they. But we were silent nevertheless; and she went
on, applying herself to me. 
O Mr. Belford! This is a poor transitory life in its best
enjoyments. We flutter about here and there, with all
our vanities about us, like painted butterflies, for a gay,
but a very short season, till at last we lay ourselves down
in a quiescent state, and turn into vile worms: And who
knows in what form, or to what condition, we shall rise
again? 
I wish you would permit me, a young creature, just
turned of Nineteen years of age, blooming and healthy as
I was a few months ago, now nipt by the cold hand of
death, to influence you, in these my last hours, to a life of
regularity and repentance for any past evils you may have
been guilty of. For, believe me, Sir, that now, in this
last stage, very few things will bear the test, or be passed
as laudable, if pardonable, at our own Ear, much less at
a more tremendous one, in all we have done, or delighted
in, even in a life not very offensive neither, as we may
think! —Ought we not then to study in our full day, before
the dark hours approach, so to live, as may afford
reflections that will soften the agony of the last moments
when they come, and let in upon the departing soul a ray
of Divine Mercy to illuminate its passage into an awful
eternity? 
She was ready to faint, and, choosing to lie down, I
withdrew, I need not say, with a melancholy heart: And
when I was got to my new-taken apartment, my heart
was still more affected by the sight of the solemn letter the
admirable lady had so lately finished. It was communicated 

to me by Mrs. Lovick; who had it to copy for me; 
but it was not to be delivered to me till after her departure. 
However, I trespassed so far, as to prevail upon the widow
to let me take a copy of it; which I did directly in character. 
I send it inclosed. If thou canst read it, and thy heart
not bleed at thy eyes, thy remorse can hardly be so deep
as thou hast inclined me to think it is. 