



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wednesday Night, June 28. 
O my dearest Miss Howe!
Once more have I escaped—But, alas! I, my
best self, have not escaped! —Oh! your poor
Clarissa Harlowe! You also will hate me, I fear! — 
Yet you won't, when you know All!— 
But no more of my self! My lost self. You that
can rise in a morning, to be blest, and to bless; and
go to rest delighted with your own reflections, and in
your unbroken, unstarting slumbers, conversing with
saints and angels, the former only more pure than
yourself, as they have shaken off the incumbrance of
body; You shall be my subject, as you have long,
long, been my only pleasure. And let me, at awful
distance, revere my beloved Anna Howe, and in 

her reflect upon what her Clarissa Harlowe once
was!— 
* *
Forgive, Oh! forgive my rambling. My peace
is destroyed. My intellects are touched. And what
flighty nonsense must you read, if now you will
vouchsafe to correspond with me, as formerly!— 
Oh! my best, my dearest, my only friend! What
a tale have I to unfold! —But still upon Self, this
vile, this hated Self! —I will shake it off, if possible; 
and why should I not, since I think, except one
wretch, I hate nothing so much! —Self, then, be
banished from Self one moment (for I doubt it will
for no longer) to inquire after a dearer object, my
beloved Anna Howe! —Whose mind, all robed in
spotless white, charms and irradiates—But what
would I say?— 
* *
And how, my dearest friend, after this rhapsody,
which, on re-perusal, I would not let go, but to
shew you, what a distracted mind dictates to my
trembling pen; How do you? You have been very
ill, it seems. That you are recovered, my dear, let
me hear! —That your mamma is well, pray let me
hear, and hear quickly! —This comfort, surely, is
owing to me; for if life is no worse than chequerwork,
I must now have a little white to come, having
seen nothing but black, all unchequered dismal black,
for a great, great while! 
* *
And what is all this wild incoherence for? —It is
only to beg to know how you have been, and how
you now do, by a line directed for Mrs. Rachel
Clark, at Mr. Smith's, a glove-shop, in King-street,
Covent-garden; which (altho' my abode is a secret
to every body else) will reach the hands of—Your
unhappy—but that's not enough— 
Your miserable
Clarissa Harlowe. 