



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday, April 25. 
All hands at work in preparation for London. 
What makes my heart beat so strong? Why rises
it to my throat, in such half-choaking flutters, when I
think of what this removal may do for me? I am hitherto
resolved to be honest: And that encreases my
wonder at these involuntary commotions. 'Tis a plotting
villain of a heart: It ever was; and ever will be, I
doubt. Such a joy when any roguery is going forward! 
—I so little its master! A head likewise so well turned
to answer the triangular varlet's impulses! —No matter. 
I will have one struggle with thee, old friend; and if I
cannot overcome thee now, I never will again attempt
to conquer thee. 
The dear creature continues extremely low and dejected. 
Tender Blossom! How unfit to contend with
the rude and ruffling winds of passion, and haughty and
insolent controul! —Never till now from under the
wing (it is not enough to say of indulging, but) of admiring
parents; the Mother's bosom only fit to receive
this charming Flower! 
This was the reflection, that, with mingled Compassion,
and augmented Love, arose to my mind, when
I beheld the Charmer reposing her lovely face upon the
bosom of the widow Sorlings, from a recovered fit, as
I entered, soon after she had received her execrable
Sister's Letter. How lovely in her tears! —And as I
entered, her lifted-up face significantly bespeaking my
protection, as I thought. And can I be a villain to such
an angel! —I hope not. —But why, Belford, why, once
more, puttest thou me in mind, that she may be overcome? 

And why is her own reliance on my honour so
late and so reluctantly shewn? 
But, after all, so low, so dejected, continues she to
be, that I am terribly afraid I shall have a vapourish
wife, if I do marry. I should then be doubly undone. 
Not that I shall be much at home with her, perhaps, after
the first fortnight, or so. But when a man has been
ranging, like the painful Bee, from flower to flower,
perhaps for a month together, and the thoughts of
Home and a Wife begin to have their charms with
him, to be received by a Niobe, who, like a wounded
vine, weeps her vitals away, while she but involuntarily
curls about him; how shall I be able to bear That? 
May Heaven restore my Charmer to health and spirits,
I hourly pray—that a man may see whether she
can love any-body but her Father and Mother! In their
power, I am confident, it will be at any time, to make
her husband joyless; and that, as I hate them so heartily,
is a shocking thing to reflect upon. —Something
more than woman, an angel, in some things; but a
baby in others: So father-sick! so family-fond! what a
poor chance stands a husband with such a wife, unless,
forsooth, they vouchsafe to be reconciled to her, and
continue reconciled? 
It is infinitely better for her and for me, that we
should not marry. What a delightful manner of life
[O that I could persuade her to it!] would the life of
Honour be with such a woman! The fears, the inquietudes,
the uneasy days, the restless nights; all
arising from doubts of having disobliged me! Every
absence dreaded to be an absence for ever! And then,
how amply rewarded, and rewarding, by the rapture-causing
return! Such a passion as this, keeps Love in a
continual fervour; makes it all alive. The happy pair,
instead of sitting dozing and nodding at each other in
opposite chimney-corners, in a winter-evening, and
over a wintry Love, always new to each other, and
having always something to say. 

Thou knowest, in my verses to my Stella, my mind
on this occasion. I will lay those verses in her way, as
if undesignedly, when we are together at the widow's; 
that is to say, if we do not soon go to church by consent. 
She will thence see what my notions are of wedlock. 
If she receives them with any sort of temper,
That will be a foundation; and let me alone to build
upon it. 
Many a girl has been carried, who never would have
been attempted, had she shewed a proper resentment,
when her ears or her eyes were first invaded. I have
tried a young creature by a bad book, a light quotation,
or an indecent picture; and if she has borne that, or
only blushed, and not been angry; and more especially
if she has leered and smiled; that girl have I, and old
Satan, put down for our own. O how I could warn
these little rogues if I would! Perhaps Envy, more than
Virtue, will put me upon setting up beacons for them,
when I grow old and joyless. 
Tuesday Afternoon. 
If you are in London when I get thither, you will
see me soon. My Charmer is a little better than she
was. Her eyes shew it, and her harmonious voice,
hardly audible last time I saw her, now begins to chear
my heart once more. But yet she has no Love, no
Sensibility! —There is no addressing her with those
meaning, yet innocent freedoms (Innocent, at first setting
out, they may be called) which soften others of her
Sex. The more strange this, as she now acknowleges
preferable favour for me; and is highly susceptible of
grief. Grief mollifies and enervates. The grieved mind
looks round it, silently implores consolation, and loves
the Soother. Grief is ever an inmate with joy. Tho'
they won't shew themselves at the same window at one
time; yet have they the whole house in common between
them. 