



My beloved Lady G.
You will excuse my long Silence, when I shall
tell you the Occasions of it. 
In the first Place, I was oblig'd to pay a dutiful
and concerning Visit to Kent, where my good
Father was taken ill of a Fever, and my Mother of
an Ague: And think, Madam, how this must affect
me, at their Time of Life! —O Death! Death!
thou mayst knock at the Doors of Tenements so
frail, and so beloved: We cannot help ourselves:
But we will not let thee in, if we can possibly
avoid it; for the Lives of such dear Parents are a
Part of my own Life: And, if God see fit, I cannot
spare them! Indeed I cannot! 
Mr. B. kindly accompany'd me, apprehending,
that his beloved Presence would be necessary, if 

the Recovery of them both, in which I thankfully
rejoice, had not happen'd; especially, as a Circumstance
I am, I think, always in, added more
Weight to his Apprehensions. 
I had hardly return'd from Kent to Bedfordshire,
and look'd around, when I was oblig'd to set
out to attend Lady Davers, who sent me word,
that she should die, that was her strong Term, if
she saw me not, to comfort and recover, by my
Counsel and Presence, so she was pleased to express
herself, her sick Lord, who was just got out of an
intermittent Fever, which left him without any
Spirits, and was occasion'd by fretting at the Conduct
of her stupid Nephew, those also were her
Words. 
For you must have heard, (Every-body hears
when a Man of Quality does a foolish Thing!) and
it has been in all the News-papers, That—‘On
Wednesday last the Right Honourable John
(Jackey, they should have said) Lord H. Nephew
to the Right Honourable William Lord Davers,
was marry'd to the Honourable Mrs. P. Relict of
J. P. of Twickenham, Esq; a Lady of celebrated
Beauty, and ample Fortune.’ 
Now, my dear Friend, you must know, that
this celebrated Lady is, 'tis true, of the—Family,
whence her Title of Honourable; but is indeed
so celebrated, that every fluttering Coxcomb
in Town can give some Account of her, even before
she was in Keeping of the Duke of&wblank;,
who had cast her off to the Town he had robb'd
of her. 
In short, my Dear, she is quite a common Woman; 
has no Fortune at all, as one may say, only 

a small Jointure incumbet'd, and is much in Debt. 
—She is a Shrew into the Bargain, and the poor
Wretch is a Father already; for he has had a Girl
of Three Years old (her Husband has been dead
Seven) brought him home, which he knew nothing
of, nor ever inquir'd, Whether his Widow
had a Child! —And he is now imploy'd in paying
the Mother's Debts, and trying to make the best of
his Bargain. 
This is the Fruit of a London Journey, so long
desir'd by him, and his fluttering about there with
his new Title. 
He was drawn in by a Brother of his Lady, and
a Friend of that Brother's, two Town Sharpers,
Gamesters, and Bullies. —Poor Sir Joseph Wittol! 
That was his Case, and his Character, it seems, in
London. 
Shall I present you with a Curiosity? 'Tis a
Copy of his Letter to his Uncle, who had, as you
may well think, lost all Patience with him, on
occasion of this abominable Folly. 

My Lord Davers, 
For iff you will nott call mee Neffew, I have
no Reason to call you Unkell; Shurely you
forgett who it was you held up youre Kane to: I
have as little Reason to valew your Displeassure,
as you have mee; for I am, God be thanked, a
Lord, and a Pcere of the Realme, as well as you:
And as to youre nott owneing me, nor youre Brother
B. nott looking upon me, I care nott a Fardinge; 
and, bad as you thinke I have done, I have
marry'd a Woman of Familly—Take thatt among
you! 

‘As to youre personall Abuses of her, take care
whatt you say. You know the Stattute will defende
us as well as you. —And, besides, she has a
Brother, that won't lett her good Name be call'd
in Question—Mind thatt! 
‘Some Thinges I wish had been otherwife— 
Perhapps I do—Whatt then? —Must you, my
Lord, make more Mischieff, and adde to my
Plagues, iff I have any? —Is this your Unkelship? 
‘Butt I shan't want your Advise. I have as
good an Estate as you have, and am as much a
Lord as yourselfe. Why the Devill then, am I
to be treated as I am? —Why the Plague— 
But I won't sware neither. —I desire not to see
you, any more then you doe me, I can tell you
thatt. And iff we ever meet under one Roose
with my Likeing, it must be att the House of
Peeres, where I shall be upon a Parr with you in
every thing, that's my Comforte. 
‘As to my Lady Davers, I desire not to see her
Ladyshipp; for shee was always plaguy nimbel
with her Fingers; but, lett my false Stepp be
what itt will, I have, in other respectes, marry'd
a Lady, who is as well descended as herselfe, and
no Disparagement neither; so have nott thatt to
answer for to her Pride; and who has as good a
Spiritt too, if they were to come Face too Face,
or I am mistaken: Nor will shee take Affruntes
from any one. So, my Lord, leave mee to make
the best of my Matters, as I will you of youres. 
So no more, but that I am 
Youre Servante,
H. 
‘P. S. I meane no Affrunte to Mrs. B. She is
the best of yee all—by G&wblank;.’ 


I will not take up your Time with further Observations
upon this poor Creature's bad Conduct:
His Reflection must proceed from Feeling; and
will, that's the worst of it, come too late, come
when or how it will. I will only say, I am sorry
for it on his own Account, but more for that of
Lord and Lady Davers, who take the Matter very
heavily, and wish he had marry'd the lowest-born
Creature in England, (so she had been honest and
virtuous) rather than done as he has done. 
But, I suppose, the poor Gentleman was resolv'd
to shun, at all Adventures, Mr. B.'s Fault,
and keep up to the Pride of Descent and Family; 
—and so marry'd the only Creature, as I hope,
(since it cannot be help'd) that is so great a Disgrace
to both: For I presume to flatter myself, for the
sake of my Sex, that, among the poor Wretches,
who are sunk so low as the Town-Women are,
there are very few of Birth or Education; but such,
principally, as have had their Necessities, or their
Ignorance, taken Advantage of by base Men: since
Birth and Education must needs set the most unhappy
of the Sex above so sordid and so abandon'd
a Guilt, as the hourly Wickedness of such a Course
of Life subjects them to. 
But let me pursue my Purpose of excusing my
long Silence. I had hardly return'd from Lord and
Lady Davers's, and recover'd my Family Management,
and resum'd my Nursery Duties, when my
Fourth dear Boy, my Jemmy—(for, I think, I am
going on to make out the Number Lady Davers
allotted* me) press'd upon me in such a manner, 

as not to be refus'd, for one Month or Six Weeks
close Attention. And then a Journey to Lord
Davers's, and that noble Pair accompanying us to
Kent; and daily and hourly Pleasures crouding
upon us, narrow and confin'd as our Room there
was, (tho' we went with as few Attendants as possible)
engrossed more of my Time. So that I hope
you will forgive me, on all these Accounts, because,
as soon as I return'd, I set about writing this, as an
Excuse for myself, in the first place; to promise
you the Subject you insist upon, in the next; and
to tell you, that I am incapable of Forgetfulness or
Negligence to such a Friend as Lady G. For I
must always be, dear Madam, 
Your faithful and affectionate humble Servant,
P. B. 

