



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Saturday, April 15. 
Tho' pretty much pressed in time, and oppressed
by my Mother's watchfulness, I will write a few
lines upon the new light that has broken in upon your
gentleman; and send it by a particular hand. 
I know not what to think of him upon it. He
talks well; but judge him by Rowe's lines, he is certainly
a dissembler, odious as the sin of Hypocrisy, and,
as he says, that other of Ingratitude, are to him. 
And pray, my dear, let me ask, Could he have
triumphed, as it is said he has done, over so many of 

our Sex, had he not been egregiously guilty of both
sins? 
His Ingenuousness is the thing that staggers me: 
Yet is he cunning enough to know, that whoever accuses
himself first, blunts the edge of an adversary's
accusation. 
He is certainly a man of sense: There is more hope
of such a one, than of a fool: And there must be a
beginning to a Reformation. These I will allow in his
favour. 
But this, that follows, I think, is the only way to
judge of his specious confessions and self-accusations— 
Does he confess any-thing that you knew not before,
or that you are not likely to find out from others? — 
If nothing else, what does he confess to his own disadvantage? 
You have heard of his Duels: You have
heard of his Seductions. —All the world has. He owns
therefore what it would be to no purpose to conceal; 
and his Ingenuousness is a Salvo—‘Why, this, Madam,
is no more than Mr. Lovelace himself acknowleges.’ 
Well, but, what is now to be done? —You must
make the best of your situation: And as you say, so
say I, I hope that will not be bad: For I like all that
he has proposed to you of Windsor, and his Canon's
house. His readiness to leave you, and go himself
in quest of a lodging, likewise looks well. And I
think there is nothing can be so properly done, as
(whether you get to a Canon's house or not) that the
Canon should join you together in wedlock as soon as
possible. 
I much approve, however, of all your cautions, of
all your vigilance, and of every-thing you have done,
but of your meeting him. Yet, in my disapprobation
of that, I judge by the event only; for who would
have divined, it would have concluded as it did? But
he is the devil, by his own account: And had he run
away with the wretched Solmes, and your more 

wretched Brother, and been himself transported for life,
he should have had my free consent for all three. 
What use does he make of that Joseph Leman! — 
His Ingenousness, I must once more say, confounds
me; but if, my dear, you can forgive your Brother
for the part he put that fellow upon acting, I don't
know whether you ought to be angry at Lovelace: 
Yet I have wished fifty times, since Lovelace got you
away, that you were rid of him, whether it were by
a burning Fever, by Hanging, by Drowning, or by
a broken Neck; provided it were before he laid you
under a necessity to go into mourning for him. 
I repeat my hitherto-rejected offer. May I send
it safely by your old man? I have reasons for not sending
it by Hickman's servant; unless I had a Bank
Note. Enquiring for such may cause distrust. My
Mother is so busy, so inquisitive—I don't love suspicious
tempers. 
And here she is continually in and out—I must
break off. 
* *
Mr. Hickman begs his most respectful compliments
to you, with offers of his services. I told him I would
oblige him, because minds in trouble take kindly anybody's
civilities: But that he was not to imagine that
he particularly obliged me by this; since I should think
the man or woman either blind or stupid who admired
not a person of your exalted merit for your own sake,
and wished not to serve you without view to other reward
than the honour of serving you. 
To be sure, that was his principal motive, with great
daintiness he said it: But with a kiss of his hand, and
a bow to my feet, he hoped, that the fine Lady's
being my friend did not lessen the merit of the reverence
he really had for her. 
Believe me ever, what you, my dear, shall ever find me, 
Your faithful and affectionate
Anna Howe. 