


Lady G. In Continuation. 


The debate I mentioned, began on Friday morning
at breakfast-time; brought on by some of
uncle Selby's good-natured particularities; for he will
always have something to say against women. I bespoke
my brother's neutrality, and declared I would
enter the lists with Mr. Selby, and allow all the other
men present to be of his side. I had a flow of spirits. 
Man's usurpation, and woman's natural independency,
was the topic. I carried on my argument very triumphantly:
Now-and-then a sly hint, popt out by my
brother, half-disconcerted me; but I called him to
order, and he was silent: Yet once he had like to
have put me out—Wrapping his arms about himself,
with inimitable humour—O my Charlotte, said he,
how I love my Country! England is the only spot in
the world, in which this argument can be properly debated! 
—Very sly—Was it not? 
I made nothing of Mr. Selby. I called him the
tyrant of the family. And as little of Mr. Deane, 

Lord L. and still less of my own Lord, who was as
eager in the debate as if it concerned him more than
any-body to resist me; and this before my brother; 
who by his eyes, more than once, seemed to challenge
me, because of the sorry creature's earnestness. All
those, however, were men of straw, with me; and I
thought myself very near making Mr. Selby ask pardon
of his Dame for his thirty years usurpation. In
short, I had half-established our Sex's superiority on
the ruin of that of the sorry fellows, when the debate
was closed, and referred to Mrs. Shirley, as moderatrix; 
my brother still excluded any share in it. —She
indeed obliged me to lower my topsails a little. 
‘I think, said the venerable Lady, women are generally
too much considered as a species apart. To
be sure, in the duties and affairs of life, where they
have different or opposite shares allotted them by
Providence, they ought not to go out of their own
sphere, or invade the mens province, any more
than the men theirs. Nay, I am so much of this
opinion, that tho' I think the confidence which
some men place in their wives, in committing all
their affairs to their care, very flattering to the opinion
both of their integrity and capacity; yet I
should not choose (and that not out of laziness to
avoid the trouble) to interfere with the management
without-doors, which I think more properly the
man's province, unless in some particular cases. 
‘But in common intercourse and conversation,
why are we to be perpetually considering the Sex of
the person we are talking to? Why must women
always be addressed in an appropriated language; 
and not treated on the common footing of reasonable
creatures? And why must they, from a false
notion of modesty, be afraid of shewing themselves
to be such, and affect a childish ignorance? 
‘I do not mean, that I would have women enter
into learned disputes, for which they are rarely qualified: 

But I think there is a degree of knowlege
very compatible with their duties; therefore not unbecoming
them, and necessary to make them fit
companions for men of sense: A character in which
they will always be found more useful than that of a
plaything, the amusement of an idle hour. 
‘No person of sense, man or woman, will venture
to launch out on a subject with which they are
not well acquainted. The lesser degree of knowlege
will give place to the greater. This will secure
subordination enough. For the advantages of education
which men must necessarily have over women,
if they have made the proper use of them,
will have set them so forward on the race, that we
can never overtake them. But then don't let them
despise us for this, as if their superiority were entirely
founded on a natural difference of capacity! 
Despise us as women, and value themselves merely
as men: For it is not the hat or cap which covers
the head, that decides of the merit of it. 
‘In the general course of the things of this world,
women have not opportunities of sounding the
depths of science, or of acquainting themselves
perfectly with polite literature: But this want of
opportunity is not entirely confined to them. There
are professions among the men no more favourable
to these studies, than the common avocations of
women. For example; merchants, whose attention
is (and perhaps more usefully, as to public utility)
chained down to their accounts. Officers,
both of land and sea, are seldom much better instructed,
tho' they may, perhaps, pass through a
few more forms: And as for knowlege of the
world, women of a certain rank have an equal
title to it with some of them. A learned man, as
he is called, who should despise a sensible one of
these professions, and disdain to converse with him,
would pass for a pedant; and why not for despising 

or undervaluing a woman of sense, who may be put
on the same footing? Men, in common conversation,
have laid it down for a rule of good breeding,
not to talk before women of things they don't understand; 
by which means, an opportunity of improvement
is lost; a very good one too; one that
has been approved by the ablest persons who have
written on the education of children, because it is a
means of learning insensibly, without the appearance
of a task. Common subjects afford only commonplace,
and are soon exhausted: Why, then, should
conversation be confined to such narrow limits, and
be liable to continual repetition; when, if people
would start less beaten subjects, many doubts and
difficulties concerning them might be cleared up,
and they would acquire a more settled opinion of
things (which is what the generality much want,
from an indolence that hinders them from examining)
the same time that they would be better
entertained, than with talking of the weather, and
such kind of insipidities.’ 
Lady W. applauding Mrs. Shirley's sentiments,
Apropos, said she; let me read you the speech (taking
it out of her Pocket-book) of an East-India officer,
to a pedant, who had been displaying his talents, and
running over with terms of art, and scraps of Latin,
mingled with a profusion of hard words, that hardly
any of the company understood; and which, at the
same time that it diverted all present, cured the pretended
scholar of his affectation for ever after. My
Lady read it, as follows: 
‘I am charmed with this opportunity, said the officer,
of discoursing with a gentleman of so much
wit and learning; and hope I shall have his decision
in a point which is pretty nice, and concerns
some Eastern manufactures, of antient and reverend
etymology. Modern critics are undetermined about
them; but, for my part, I have always maintained, 

that Chints, Bullbulls, Morees, and Ponabaguzzy's,
are of nobler and more generous uses
than Doorguzees or Nourfurmannys: Not but I
hold against Byrampauts in favour of Niccannees
and Boralchauders. Only I wish, that so accurate a
judge would instruct me, why Tapzils and Sallampores
have given place to Neganepauts? And why
Bejatapoutz should be more esteemed than the
finer fabrick of Blue Chelloes(a) ?’ 
A very good rebuke of affectation, said Sir Charles
(and your Ladyship hints it was an efficacious one). 
It serves to shew, that men, in their different attainments,
may be equally useful; in other words, that
the knowlege of polite literature leads not to every
part of useful science. I remember, that my Harriet
distinguishes very properly, in some of her Letters to
her Lucy, between Language and Science; and that
poor Mr. Walden (that I think was his name) was
pretty much disconcerted, as a pedant may sometimes
be, when (and he bowed to his Harriet) he has a
natural genius to contend with. She blushed, and
bowed as she sat—And I remember, Sir, said she,
you promised to give me your animadversions on the
Letters I consented you should see: Will you be
pleased to correct me, now? 
Correct you, my dearest Life! —What a word is
that? I remember, that, in the conversation in which
you were obliged, against your will, to bear so considerable
a part, you demonstrated, that genius, without
deep learning, made a much more shining figure,
in conversation, than learning without genius: But,
upon the whole, I was a little apprehensive, that true
learning might suffer, if languages were too slightly
treated. Mr. Walden made one good observation, or
rather remembred it, for it was long ago made, and
will be always of weight, That the knowlege of languages, 

any more than the advantage of birth, was
never thought lightly of by those who had pretensions
to either. The knowlege of the Latin language, in
particular, let me say, is of singular use in the mastery
of every science. 
There are who aver, that men of parts have no
occasion for learning: But, surely, our Shakespeare
himself, one of the greatest genius's of any country
or age (who, however, is an adept in the superior learning,
the knowlege of nature) would not have been a
sufferer, had he had that greater share of human learning
which is denied him by some critics. 
But, Sir Charles, said Mr. Deane, don't you think
that Shakespeare, who lived before the great Milton,
has an easier, pleasanter, and more intelligible manner
of writing, than Milton? If so, may it not be
owing to Milton's greater learning, that Shakespeare
has the advantage of that immortal poet in perspicuity? 
Is the fact certain, my dear Mr. Deane, that Milton
wants perspicuity? I have been bold enough sometimes
to think, that he makes a greater display of his
reading, than was quite necessary to his unbounded subject. 
But the age in which Shakespeare flourished,
might be called, The age of English Learning, as well
as of English Bravery. The Queen and her court,
the very Ladies of it, were more learned than any
court of our English Sovereigns was before, or hath
been since. What a prodigy of learning, in the short
reign of Edward the VIth, was the Lady Jane Grey! 
—Greek, as well as Latin, was familiar to her: So it
was to Queen Elizabeth. And can it be supposed,
that the natural genius's of those Ladies were more
confined, or limited, for their knowlege of Latin and
Greek? Milton, tho' a little nearer us, lived in harsher
and more tumultuous times. 
O, Sir! said Harriet, then I find I was a very impertinent
creature in the conversation to which you
refer. 

Not so, my dearest Love! —Mr. Walden, I remember,
says, that learning in that assembly was not
brought before a fair tribunal. He should have known,
that it had not a competent advocate in him. 
But, Sir Charles, said Mr. Beauchamp, I cannot
but observe, that too much stress is laid upon Learning,
as it is called, by those who have pretensions to it. 
You will not always find, that a scholar is a more
happy man than an unlearned one. He has not generally
more prudence, more wisdom, in the management
of his affairs. 
What, my dear Beauchamp, is this saying, but
that there is great difference between theory and practice? 
This observation comes very generously, and,
with regard to the Ladies, very gallantly, from you,
who are a learned man: But as you are also a very prudent
man, let me ask you, Do you think you have
the less prudence for your learning? If not, Is not
learning a valuable addition? 
But pray, Sir Charles, said Mrs. Selby, let me
ask your opinion: Do you think, that if women
had the same opportunities, the same education, as
men, they would not equal them, in their attainments? 
Women, my dear Mrs. Selby, are women sooner
than men are men. They have not, therefore, generally,
the learning-time that men have, if they had
equal genius's. 
‘If they had equal genius's,’ brother. Very well. 
My dear Sister Harriet, you see you have given your
hand to one of the Lords of the creation—Vassal!
bow to your Sovereign. 
Sir Ch. My dearest Love, take not the advice
without the example. 
Lady G. Your servant, Sir. Well, but let me ask
you, Do you think that there is a natural inferiority
in the faculties of the one Sex? A natural superiority
in those of the other? 

Sir Ch. Who will answer this question for me? 
Not I, said Lord L. Not I, said Mr. Deane. Not
I, said Mr. Beauchamp. 
Then I have fairly taken you in—You would, if
you could, answer it in the Ladies favour: This is
the same as a confession. I may therefore the more
boldly pronounce, that, generally speaking, I have no
doubt but there is. 
Help me, dear Ladies, said I, to sight this battle
out. You say, Sir, you have no doubt that there is
a natural inferiority in the faculties of us, poor women; 
a natural superiority in you, imperial men. 
Generally speaking, Charlotte. Not individually
you Ladies, and us men: I believe all we who are
present, shall be ready to subscribe to your superiority,
Ladies. 
I believe, brother, you fib: But let that pass. 
Thank you, madam. It is for my advantage that
it should; and perhaps for yours, smiling—There is a
difference, pardon me, Ladies, we are speaking generally,
in the constitution, in the temperament, of the
two Sexes, that gives to the one advantages which it
denies to the other: But we may not too closely pursue
this subject, tho' the result, I am apt to believe,
would put the matter out of dispute. Let us be more
at large: Why has nature made a difference in the
beauty, proportion, and symmetry, in the persons of
the two Sexes? Why gave it delicacy, softness, grace,
to that of the woman—as in the Ladies before me; 
strength, firmness, to men; a capacity to bear labour
and fatigue; and courage, to protect the other? Why
gave it a distinction, both in qualities and plumage,
to the different sexes of the feathered race? Why in
the courage of the male and female animals? —The
surly bull, the meek, the beneficent, cow, for one
instance? 
We looked upon one another. 
There are exceptions to general rules, proceeded he. 

Mrs. Shirley surpasses all the men I ever knew, in wisdom. 
—Mrs. Selby and Lady G.— 
What of us, brother! What of us—to the advantage
of your argument? 
Heroic Charlotte! —You are both very happily married
—The men the women, the women the men,
you can mutually assist and improve each other. But
still— 
Your servant, brother, interrupted I. —Your servant,
Sir Charles, said Mrs. Selby. —And I say, Your
servant, too, said Mr. Selby. 
Who sees not that my sister Charlotte is ready to
disclaim the competition in fact, tho' not in words? 
Can there be characters more odious than those of a
masculine woman, and an effeminate man? What
are the distinguishing characteristics of the two
Sexes? And whence this odiousness? There are, indeed,
men, whose minds, if I may be allowed the expression,
seem to be cast in a Female mould; whence
the fops, foplings, and pretty fellows, who buz about
your Sex at public places; women, whose minds seem
to be cast in a masculine one; whence your Barnevelts,
my dear, and most of the women who, at such
places, give the men stare for stare, swing their arms,
look jolly; and those married women who are so kind
as to take the reins out of their husbands hands, in
order to save the honest men trouble. 
Your servant, Sir—Your servant, Sir—And some
of them looked as if they had said, You cannot mean
me, I hope; and those who spoke not, bowed and
smiled thanks for his compliment to one fourth of the
Sex. 
My Lord insultingly rubbed his hands for joy; Mr.
Selby crowed; the other men slily smiled, tho' they
were afraid of giving a more open approbation. 
O my Sister! said I, taking Harriet's hand, we
women are mere Nothings—We are nothing at all! 

How, my Charlotte! Make you no difference between
being Every-thing and Nothing? 
Were it not, my dear Ladies, proceeded he, for
male protectors, to what insults, to what outrages,
would not your Sex be subject? Pardon me, my dearest
Love, if I strengthen my argument by your excellencies,
bowing to his Harriet. Is not the dear creature
our good Mrs. Shirley's own daughter? All the
feminine graces are hers. She is, in my notion, what
all women should be—But wants she not a protector? 
Even a dream, a resverie— 
O Sir, spare me, spare me! sweetly blushing, said
the lovely Harriet. I own I should have made a very
silly, a very pusilanimous man! It is not long since,
you know, Lady G. that I brought this very argument
in favour of— 
Hush, Harriet! You will give up the Female
cause. 
That is not fair, Charlotte, rejoined my brother; 
you should not intercept the convictions of an ingenuous
mind—But I will spare my Harriet, if she will
endeavour, for her own sake, to let nothing disturb
her for the future but realities, and not any of those
long, if they are inevitable ones. 
But pray, Sir, said I, proceed in your argument, if
you have any more to say. 
O Charlotte! I have enough to say, to silence all
your opposition, were I to give this subject its due
weight. But we are only, for pleasantry-sake, skimming
over the surface of the argument. Weaker
powers are given generally for weaker purposes, in
the oeconomy of Providence. I, for my part, however,
disapprove not of our venerable Mrs. Shirley's
observation; That we are apt to consider the Sex too
much as a species apart: Yet it is my opinion, that
both God and Nature have designed a very apparent
difference in the minds of both, as well as in the peculiar 

beauties of their persons. Were it not so, their
offices would be confounded, and the women would
not perhaps so readily submit to those domestic ones in
which it is their province to shine, and the men would
be allotted the distaff, or the needle; and you yourselves,
Ladies, would be the first to despise such. I,
for my part, would only contend, that we men should
have power and right given us to protect and serve
your Sex; that we should purchase and build for
them; travel and toil for them; run through, at the
call of Providence, or of our King and Country,
dangers and difficulties; and, at last, lay all our trophies,
all our acquirements, at your feet; enough rewarded
in the conscience of duty done, and your favourable
acceptance. 
We were all of us again his humble servants. It
was in vain to argue the tyranny of some husbands,
when he could turn upon us the follies of some wives; 
and that wives and daughters were never more faulty,
more undomestic, than at present; and when we were
before a judge, that, tho' he could not be absolutely
unpolite, would not flatter us, nor spare our foibles. 
However, it stuck a little with Harriet, that she had
given cause to Sir Charles, in the dispute which she
formerly bore a part in, relating to learning and languages,
to think her more lively than she ought to be,
and had spoken too lightly of languages. She sweetly
blushing, like a young wife solicitous for the good
opinion of the Beloved of her heart, revived that
cause. 
He spoke very highly in her praise, upon the occasion; 
owned, that the Letters he had been favoured
with the sight of, had given him deeper impressions in
her favour, than even her Beauty: Hoped for farther
communications; applauded her for her principles,
and her inoffensive vivacity—That sweet, that innocent
vivacity, and noble frankness of heart, said he, 

taking her hand, which I hope you will never think of
restraining. 
As to the conversation you speak of, proceeded he,
I repeat, that I was apprehensive, when I read it,
that languages were spoken of in it slightly; and yet,
perhaps, I am mistaken. You, my Beauchamp, I
think, if my dearest Life will oblige us both by the
communication, and chooses to do so (for that must be
the condition on which all her goodness to us must be
expected) shall be judge between us: You know, better
than I, what stores of unexhausted knowlege lie in
the works of those great Antients, which suffered in
the hands of poor Mr. Walden: You know what the
past and present ages have owed, and what all future
will owe, to Homer, Aristotle, Virgil, Cicero: You
can take in the necessity there is of restraining innovation,
and preserving old rules and institutions, and
of employing the youth of our Sex, who would
otherwise be much worse employed (as we see in those
who neglect their studies) in the attainment of languages
that can convey to them such lights in every
science: Tho' it were to be wished, that morals
should take up more of the learner's attention than
they generally do. You know, that the truest parts
of learning are to be found in the Roman and Greek
writers; and you know, that translation (were everything
worthy our notice translated) cannot convey
those beauties which scholars only can relish; and
which learned foreigners, if a man travels, will expect
should not have escaped his observation. As to the
Ladies, Mrs. Shirley has admirably observed, that
there is a degree of knowlege very compatible with
their duties (Condescending excellence! bowing to
Mrs. Shirley) and highly becoming them; such as
will make them rejoice, and, I will add, improve a
man of sense, sweeten his manners, and render him
a much more sociable, a much more amiable creature, 

and, of consequence, greatly more happy in
himself, than otherwise he would be from books and
solitude. 
Well but, brother, you said just now, that we
were only, for pleasantry-sake, skimming over the
surface of the argument; and that you had enough to
say to silence all my opposition, were you to give the
subject its due weight. I do assure you, that, to silence
all my opposition, you must have a vast deal more to
say, than you have said hitherto; and yet you have
thrown in some hints which stick with me, tho' you
have concluded with some magnificent intimations of
superiority over us—Power and right to protect, travel,
toil for us, and lay your trophies at our feet,
and-so-forth—Surely, surely, this is diminishing us,
and exalting yourselves, by laying us under high obligations
to your generosity. Pray, Sir, let us have,
if you please, one or two intimations of those weightier
arguments, that could, as you fansy, silence your
Charlotte's opposition. I say, that we women, were
our education the same—You know what I would be
at—Your weightier arguments, if you please—or a
specimen only en passant. 
Supposing, my Charlotte, that all human souls are,
in themselves, equal; yet the very design of the different
machines in which they are inclosed, is to superinduce
a temporary difference on their original equality; 
a difference adapted to the different purposes for
which they are designed by Providence in the present
transitory state. When those purposes are at an end,
this difference will be at an end too. When Sex
ceases, inequality of Souls will cease; and women
will certainly be on a foot with men, as to intellectuals,
in Heaven. There, indeed, will you no longer
have Lords over you; neither will you have Admirers:
Which, in your present estimate of things, will
perhaps balance the account. In the mean time, if
you can see any occasions that may call for stronger 

understandings in male life, than in your own; you,
at the same time, see an argument to acquiesce in a
persuasion of a present inequality between the two
Sexes. You know, I have allowed exceptions. 
Will you, Charlotte, compliment yourself with being
one? 
Now, brother, I feel, methinks, that you are a
little hard upon Charlotte: But, Ladies, you see how
the matter stands. —You are all silent. —But, Sir, you
graciously allow, that there is a degree of knowlege
which is very compatible with the Duties of us
women, and highly becoming us: Will you have the
goodness to point out to us what this compatible
learning is, that we may not mistake—and so become
excentric, as I may say, burst our orb, and do more
mischief than ever we could do good? 
Could I point out the boundaries, Charlotte, it
might not to some spirits be so proper: The limit
might be treated as the one prohibited tree in the
garden. But let me say, That genius, whether in
man or woman, will push itself into light. If it has
a laudable tendency, let it, as a ray of the Divinity,
be encouraged, as well in the one Sex as in the other:
I would not, by any means, have it limited: A little
knowlege leads to vanity and conceit. I would only,
methinks, have a Parent, a Governor, a Preceptor,
bend his strength to restrain its foibles; but not throw
so much cold water upon the sacred flame as should
quench it; since, if he did, stupidity, at least dejection,
might take place of the emanation, and the
person might be miserable for life. 
Well, then, we must compromise, I think said I:
But, on recollection, I thought I had injoined you,
Sir Charles, to the observance of a neutrality. Harriet,
whispered I, we are only, after all, to be allowed,
as far as I can find, in this temporary state,
like tame doves, to go about house, and-so-forth, as
Biddy says, in the play. 

Harriet, could she have found time (But, by mutual
consent, they are hardly ever asunder) would have
given you a better account of this conversation than I
have done; so would Lucy: But take it, as it offers,
from 
Your ever-affectionate
Charlotte G. 

