

Here end the Letters of the incomparable
Pamela to her Father and Mother. For, as
they arriv'd at their Daughter's House on Tuesday
Evening in the following Week, she had no Occasion
to continue her Journal longer. 
The good old Couple were receiv'd, by her, with
the utmost Joy and Duty; and with great Goodness
and Complaisance by her generous Spouse. And
having resided there till every thing was put in Order
for them at the Kentish Estate, they were carried
down thither by the 'Squire himself, and their
Daughter, and put into Possession of the pretty
Farm he had designed for them. In which they
long liv'd comfortably, doing Good by their Examples,
and their judicious Charities, to all about
them. 
They constantly, twice in every Year, for a Fortnight
together, so long as they liv'd, visited their
dear Daughter; and once a Year, at least, for a
Week at a time, were visited by them again: And
the 'Squire having added, by new Purchases, to
that Estate, they, by their Diligence, augmented the
Value of it, and deserved of him the Kindness he
shew'd them. 
As for the excellent Pamela; she enjoy'd, for
many Years, the Reward of her Virtue, Piety and
Charity; exceedingly beloved by both Sexes, and by
all Degrees; and was look'd upon as the Mirror of
her Age and Sex. 
She made her beloved Spouse happy in a numerous
and hopeful Progeny. And he made her the
best and fondest of Husbands; and, after her Example,
became remarkable for Piety, Virtue, and
all the Social Duties of a Man and a Christian. And
they charm'd every one within the Circle of their
Acquaintance, by the Sweetness of their Manners,
the regular Order and Oeconomy of their Household; 
by their chearful Hospitality, and a diffusive
Charity to all worthy Objects within the Compass
of their Knowledge. 
She was regularly visited by the principal Ladies
in the Neighbourhood; who were fond of her Acquaintance,
and better'd by her Example. 
Lady Davers became one of her sincerest and
most affectionate Admirers. And her Lord, in a
manner, doated upon her. 
The poor little Miss Goodwin was, after a while,
given up to her Wishes and Importunities, in order
to be form'd by her Example; and, in Process of
Time, was joined in Marriage with a Gentleman of
Merit and Fortune, to whom she made an excellent
Wife. 