


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 


Mansfield-house, Thursday, Sept. 14.
You will be so good, my dear friend, as
to let my neighbours, particularly the
gentlemen you mention, know, that the
only reason I forbear paying my compliments
to them, now I am so near, is,
because I cannot as yet enjoy their company with that
freedom and ease which I hope in a little while to do. 
Tell them, that I purpose, after some particular affairs
are determined (which will for a little while
longer engross me) to devote the greatest part of my
time to my native place; and that then I will endeavour
to make myself as good a neighbour, and as social
a friend, as they can wish me to be. 
On Sunday I had a visit from the two Hartleys. 

They gave me very satisfactory proofs of what they
were able to do, as well as willing, in support of the
right of the Mansfields to the estate of which they have
been despoiled; and shewed me a paper, which nobody
thought was in being, of the utmost consequence
in the cause. 
On Monday, by appointment, I attended Sir John
Lambton. Two lawyers of the Keelings were with
him. They produced their demands. I had mine
ready; but theirs were so extravagant, that I would
not produce them: But, taking Sir John aside, I love
not, said I, to affront men of a profession; but I am
convinced, that we never shall come to an understanding,
if we consider ourselves as Lawyers and
Clients. I am no lawyer; but I know the strength
of my friends cause, and will risque half my estate
upon the justice of it. The Mansfields will commission
me, if the Keelings will you; and we perhaps
may do something: If not, let the Law take its course. 
I am now come to reside in England. I will do nothing
for myself, till I have done what can be done to
make all my friends easy. 
Sir John owned, that he thought the Mansfields had
hardships done them. Mr. Keeling senior, he said,
had heard of the paper in the Hartleys hands; and,
praising his honesty, told me in confidence, that he
had declared, that if such a paper could have been
produced in time, he would not have prosecuted the
suit, which he had carried. But Sir John said, that
the younger Keeling was a furious young man, and
would oppose a compromise on the terms he supposed
the Mansfields would expect to be complied with. 
But what are your proposals, Sir? 
These, Sir John: The Law is expensive; delays
may be meditated; appeals may be brought, if we
gain our point. —What I think it may cost us to establish
the right of the injured, which cannot be a
small sum, that will I prevail upon the Mansfields to 

give up to the Keelings. I will trust you, if you give
me your honour, with our proofs; and if you and
your friends are satisfied with them, and will consent
to establish our right by the form only of a new trial; 
then may we be agreed: Otherwise, not. And I leave
you and them to consider of it. I shall hear from you
within two or three days. Sir John promised I should; 
but hoped to have some talk first with the Hartleys,
with whom, as well as with me, he declared he would
be upon honour. 
Wednesday Evening.
I had a message from Sir John last night, requesting
me to dine with him and the elder Mr. Keeling
this day; and to bring with me the two Mr. Hartleys,
and the proofs I had hinted at. 
Those gentlemen were so obliging, as to go with
me; and took the important paper with them, which
had been deposited with their grandfather, as a common
friend, and contained a recognition of the Mansfields
right to the estates in question, upon an amicable
reference to persons long since departed: An attested
copy of which was once in the Mansfields possession,
as by a memorandum that came to hand, but
which never could be found. The younger Keeling
was not intended to be there; but he forced himself
upon us. He behaved very rudely. I had once like
to have forgot myself. This meeting produced nothing:
But as the father is a reasonable man; as we
have obtained a re-hearing of the cause; as he is
much influenced by Sir John Lambton, who seems
convinced; and to whose honour I have submitted an
abstract of our proofs; I am in hopes that we shall be
able to accommodate. 
I have Bolton's proposals before me. The first
child is dead; the second cannot live many months. 
He trembles at the proofs he knows we have of his
villainy. He offers, on the death of this second child,
to give us possession of the estate, and a large sum of 

money (but thought not to be half of what the superannuated
Calvert left) if we will give him general
releases. The wretch is not, we believe, married to
the relict of Calvert. 
I am loth, methinks, to let him escape the justice
which his crimes call for: But such are the delays and
chicaneries of the Law, when practisers are found who
know how to perplex an honest pursuer; and as we
must have recourse to low and dirty people to establish
our proofs; the vile fellow shall take with him the
proposed spoils: They may not be much more than
would be the lawyers part of the estate, were we to
push the litigation. 
As to our poor Everard, nothing, I fear, can be
done for him, with the men who are revelling on his
spoils. I have seen one of them. The unhappy man
has signed and sealed to his own ruin. He regrets,
that a part of the estate which has been so long in the
family and name, should go out of it. What an
empty pride is that of name! The general tenor of
his life was not a credit to it; tho' he felt not that,
till he felt distress. The disgrace is actually incurred. 
Does not all the world know his loss, and the winner's
triumph? And if the world did not, can he conceal
from himself those vices, the consequences of
which have reduced him to what he is? But perhaps
the unhappy man puts a value upon the name, in compliment
to me. 
Mention not to him what I write. The poor man
is sensible enough of his folly, to engage pity: Whether
from a right sense, or not, must be lest to his own
heart. 
As to the woman's claim: What in honour can I
do, against a promise that he owns may be proved
upon him? He did not condition with her, that she
was to be a spotless woman. If he thought she was
so when he solicited her to yield to his desires, he is
the less to be excused: Vile as she comes out to be, 

he had proposed to make her as vile, if he had found
her not so. He promised her marriage: Meant he
only a promise? She is punished in being what she is:
His punishment cannot be condign, but by his being
obliged to perform his promise. Yet I cannot bear to
think, that my cousin Grandison should be made, for
life, the dupe of a successful and premeditated villainy; 
and the less, as, in all likelihood, the profligate Lord
B. would continue to himself, from the merit with her
of having vindicated her claim, an interest in the bad
woman's favour, were she to be the wife of our poor
Everard. 
But certainly this claim must be prosecuted with a
view only to extort money from my cousin; and they
know him to be of a family jealous of its honour. I
think she must be treated with for releases. I could
not bear to appear in such a cause as this, in open
court, in support of my cousin, against a promise made
by him. He is of age, and thought to be no novice
in the ways of the town. I am mistaken in Mr.
Grandison's spirit, if it did not lead him to think himself
very severely punished, were he to have no other
punishment, for those vices, which were to be expensive
to me. 
But if I should be able to extricate the unhappy
man from this difficulty, what can next be done for
him? The poor remains of his fortune will not support
one who has always lived more than genteelly. 
Will he be able, think you, to endure the thoughts of
living in a constant state of dependence, however easy
and genteel I should endeavour to make it to him? 
There may be many ways (in the public offices, for
example) of providing for a broken tradesman: But
for a man who calls himself, and is, a gentleman; who
will expect as such to rank with his employer, who
knows nothing of figures, or business of any kind; 
who has been brought up in idleness, and hardly
knows the meaning of the word diligence; and never 

could bear confinement; what can be done for such a
one in the public offices, or by any other employment
that requires punctual attendance? 
But to quit this subject, for a more agreeable one. 
I have for some time had it in my thoughts to ask
you, my dear friend, Whether your nephew is provided
for to your liking and his own? If not, and he
would put it in my power to serve him, by serving myself,
I should be obliged to you for permitting him so
to do, and to him, for his consent. I would not affront
him, by the offer of a salary: My presents to
him shall be such as befit the services done:—Sometimes
as my amanuensis; sometimes as a transcriber
and methodizer of Papers and Letters; sometimes in
adjusting servants accounts, and fitting them for my
inspection. You need not fear my regard to myself
in my acknowlegements to be made to him (that, I
know, will be all your fear); for I have always considered
profusion and parsimony as two extremes,
equally to be avoided. You, my dear Dr. Bartlett,
have often enforced this lesson on my mind. Can it
then ever be forgotten by 
Your affectionate Friend and Servant,
Charles Grandison? 

