


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Saturday Night. 
Lord have mercy upon me, my dear! —What
shall I do? —The vile Sir Hargrave has sent a
challenge to Sir Charles! —What may be the event! 
—O that I had not come to London! —This is a copy
of the letter, that communicates it. It is from that
Bagenhall. But this is the copy of the letter—I will
endeavour to transcribe it—But, no, I cannot—My
Sally shall write it over. Lord bless me! What shall
I do? 

To Miss Byron.
Cavendish-Square, Feb. 25. 
Madam,
You might easily believe, that the affair betwixt
Sir Hargrave Pollexfen and Sir Charles Grandison
could not, after so violent an insult as the former received
from the latter, end without consequences. 

By all that's sacred, Sir Hargrave knows not that
I write. 
There is but one way that I can think of to prevent
bloodshed; and that, madam, seems to be in your
own power. 
Sir Hargrave insists upon it, that he meant you nothing
but honour. You know the use or abuse of the
power he had obtained over you. If he behaved with
indecency, he tells me not the truth. 
To make a young lady, whatever were her merit,
the wife of a man of near 10,000l. a year, and who
had declared herself absolutely disengaged in her affections,
was not doing dishonour to her, so much
as to himself, in the violent measures his love obliged
him to take to make her so. 
Now, madam, as Sir Charles Grandison was utterly
a stranger to you; as Sir Hargrave intended so
honourably by you; and, as you are not engaged in
your affections; if you will consent to be Lady Pollexfen; 
and if Sir Charles Grandison will ask pardon
for his unprovoked knight-errantry; I will not be Sir
Hargrave's second in the affair, if he refuse to accept
of such satisfaction in full for the violence he sustained. 
I solemnly repeat, that Sir Hargrave knows nothing
of my writing to you. You may (but I insist upon
it, as in confidence to every-body else) consult your
cousin Reeves on the subject. Your honour given,
that you will in a month's time be Sir Hargrave's, will
make me exert all my power with him (and I have
reason to think that is not small) to induce him to
compromise on those terms. 
I went to Sir Charles's house yesterday afternoon,
with a letter from Sir Hargrave. Sir Charles was just
stepping into his chariot to his sister. He opened it; 
and, with a civility that became his character, told me
he was just going with his sister to Colnebrooke, to
meet dear friends on their return from Scotland: That
he should return on Monday; that the pleasure he 

should have with his long-absent friends, would not
permit him to think of the contents till then: But
that the writer should not fail of such an answer as a
gentleman ought to give. 
Now, madam, I was so much charm'd with Sir
Charles Grandison's fine person, and politeness, and
his character is so extraordinary, that I thought this
interval between this night and Monday morning an
happy one. And I took it into my head to make the
above proposals to you; and I hope you will think it
behoves you, as much as it does me, to prevent the
fatal mischief that may otherwise happen, to men of
their consideration. 
I have not the honour of being personally known
to you, madam; but my character is too generally
established for any one to impute to me any other
motives for this my application to you, than those above
given. A line left for me at Sir Hargrave's, in Cavendish-square,
will come to the hands of, madam, 
Your most obedient humble Servant,
James Bagenhall. 

O My dear! What a letter! —Mr. Reeves, Mrs.
Reeves, are grieved to the heart. Mr. Reeves says,
that if Sir Hargrave insists upon it, Sir Charles is obliged,
in honour, to meet him—Murderous, vile
word honour! What, at this rate, is honour! The
very opposite to duty, goodness, piety, religion; and
to every thing that is or ought to be sacred among
men. 
How shall I look Miss Grandison in the face? 
Miss Grandison will hate me! To be again the occasion
of endangering the life of such a brother! 
But, what do you think? —Lady Betty is of opinion
—Mr. Reeves has consulted Lady Betty Williams in
confidence—Lady Betty says, that if the matter can
be prevented—Lord bless me! she says, I ought to
prevent it! —What! by becoming the wife of such a 

man, as Sir Hargrave! so unmanly, so malicious, so
low a wretch! —What does Lady Betty mean? —Yet
were it in my power to save the life of Sir Charles
Grandison, and I refused to do it; for selfish reasons
refused; for the sake of my worldly happiness; when
there are thousands of good wives, who are miserable
with bad husbands—But will not the sacrifice of my
life be accepted by this sanguinary man! That, with
all my heart, would I make no scruple to lay down. 
If the wretch will plunge a dagger in my bosom, and
take that for satisfaction, I will not hesitate one moment. 
But my cousin said, that he was of opinion, that
Sir Charles would hardly be brought to ask pardon. 
How can I doubt, said I, that the vile man, if he may
be induced by this Bagenhall to compromise on my
being his wife, will dispense with that punctilio, and
wreak on me, were I to be his unhappy property, his
whole unmanly vengeance? Is he not spiteful, mean,
malicious? —But abhorred be the thought of my yielding
to be the wife of such a man! —Yet, what is the
alternative? Were I to die, that wretched alternative
would still take place: His malice to the best of men
would rather be whetted than blunted, by my irrevocable
destiny! O my Lucy! violent as my grief was,
dreadful as my apprehensions were, and unmanly as the
treatment I met with from the base man, I never was
distress'd till now! 
But should Miss Grandison advise, should she insist
upon my compliance with the abhorred condition
(and has she not a right to insist upon it, for the sake
of the safety of her innocent brother?) can I then
refuse my compliance with it? —Are we not taught,
that this world is a state of trial, and of mortification? 
And is not calamity necessary to wean our vain hearts
from it? And if my motive be a motive of justice and
gratitude, and to save a life much more valuable to
the world than my own; and which, but for me, 

had not been in danger—Ought I—And yet—Ah!
my Lucy, what can I say? —How unhappy! that I
cannot consult this dear lady, who has such an interest
in a life so precious, as I might have done, had she
been in town? 
O my Lucy! What an answer, as this unwelcome,
this wicked mediator gives it, was that which the excellent
man returned to the delivered challenge—“I
am going to meet dear friends on their return from
Scotland!” What a meeting of joy will be here
saddened over, if they know of this shocking challenge! 
And how can his noble heart overflow with
pleasure on the joyful occasion, as it would otherwise
have done, with such an important event in suspense,
that may make it the last meeting which this affectionate
and most worthy of families will ever know! 
How near may be the life of this dear brother to a period,
when he congratulates the safe arrival of his brother
and sister! And who can bear to think of seeing,
ere one week is over-past, the now rejoicing and harmonious
family, clad in mourning for the first of brothers,
and first of men? And I my Lucy, I, the
wretched Harriet Byron, to be the cause of all! 
And could the true hero say, “That the pleasure he
should have on meeting his long-absent friends would
not permit him to think of the contents of such a
letter, till Monday; but that then the writer should
not fail of such an answer—as a gentleman ought
to give?” —O my dear Sir Charles! [on this occasion,
he is, and ought to be, very dear to me] How I dread
the answer which vile custom, and false honour, will
oblige you, as a gentleman, to give! And is there no
way with honour to avoid giving such an answer, as
distracts me to be told (as Mr. Reeves tells me) must
be given, if I, your Harriet, interpose not, to the sacrifice
of all my happiness in this life? 
But Mr. Reeves asks, May not this Bagenhall, tho'
he says Sir Hargrave knows nothing of his writing, 

have written in concert with him? —What if he has,
does not the condition remain? And will not the resentment,
on the refusal, take place? —And is not the
challenge delivered into Sir Charles's hands? And has
he not declared, that he will send an answer to it on
Monday? This is carrying the matter beyond contrivance,
or stratagem. Sir Charles, so challenged,
will not let the challenger come off so easily. He cannot,
in real honour, now, make proposals for qualifying; 
or accept of them, if made to him. And is
not Monday the next day but one? —Only that day
between, for which I had been preparing my grateful
heart to return my silent praises to the Almighty, in the
place dedicated to his honour, for so signal a deliverance! 
And now is my safety to be owing, as it may
happen, to a much better person's destruction! 
* *
I Was obliged to lay down my pen. —See how the
blister'd paper—It is too late to send away this letter:
If it were not, it would be barbarous to torment you
with it, while the dreadful suspense holds. 
Sunday Morning. 
I Am unable to write on in the manner I used to
do. Not a moment all the past night did I close my
eyes: How they are swelled with weeping! I am preparing,
however, to go to church: There will I renew
my fervent prayers, that my grateful thanksgiving
for the past deliverance may be blessed to me in
the future event! 
Mr. Reeves thinks, that no step ought to be, or
can be, taken in this shocking affair, till Sir Charles
returns, or Miss Grandison can be consulted. He has
taken measures to know every motion of the vile Sir
Hargrave. 
Lord bless me, my dear! the man has lost three of
his fore-teeth! A man so vain of his person! O how
must he be exasperated! 

Mr. Reeves also will be informed of Sir Charles's
arrival the moment he comes to town. He has private
information, that the furious Sir Hargrave has with him
a man skilled in the science of offence, with whom
he is practising—O my dear, how this distracts me! 
For Mr. Reeves or me to answer this Bagenhall,
Mr. Reeves says, is not to be thought of, as he is a
wicked man, and was not likely to have written the
alarming letter from good principles. I once indeed
proposed to write—I knew not what to do, what to
propose—Can you write, said Mr. Reeves, and promise
or give hope to Sir Hargrave? 
O no, no! answered I. 
If you could, it is my opinion, that Sir Charles and
his sister would both despise you, however self-denying
and laudable your motive might be! 

