


Mr. Thomas is return'd from you, my dear
Father, with the good News of your
Health, and your proceeding in your Journey
to my dear Mother, where I hope to hear soon
you are arriv'd. My Master has just now been
making me play upon the Spinnet, and singing
to it; and was pleased to commend me for
both. But he does so for every thing I do; so
partial does his Goodness make him to me. 

One o'Clock.
We are just return'd from an Airing in the
Chariot; and I have been delighted with
his Conversation upon English Authors, Poets
particularly. He entertain'd me also with a
Description of some of the Curiosities he had
seen in Italy and France, when he made what
the polite World call the Grand Tour. He
said he wanted to be at his other Seat; for he
knew not well how to employ himself here,
having not purpos'd to stay half the Time: And
when I get there, Pamela, said he, you will
hardly be troubled with so much of my Company,
after we are settled; for I have a great
many things to adjust: And I must go to London;
for I have Accounts that have run on
longer than ordinary with my Banker there. 
And I don't know, added he, but the ensuing
Winter, I may give you a little Taste of the
Diversions of the Town for a Month or so. I
said, his Will and Pleasure should determine
mine; and I never would, as near as I could,
have a Desire after those, or any other Entertainments
that were not his own Choice. 
He was pleased to say, I make no doubt
but I shall be very happy in you; and hope you
will be so in me: For, said he, I have no very
enormous Vices to gratify; tho' I pretend not
to the greatest Purity neither, my Girl. Sir, said
I, if you can account to your own Mind, I shall
always be easy in whatever you do. But our greatest
Happiness here, Sir, continued I, is of very 

short Duration; and this Life, at the longest,
is a poor transitory one; and I hope we shall
be so happy as to be enabled to look forward
with Comfort, to another, where our Pleasures
will be everlasting. 
You say well, Pamela; and I shall, by degrees,
be more habituated to this way of
Thinking, as I more and more converse with
you; but at present you must not be over-serious
with me, all at once: Tho' I charge
you, never forbear to mingle your sweet Divinity
in our Conversation, whenever it can be
brought in à-propos, and with such a Chearfulness
of Temper, as shall not throw a gloomy
Cloud over our innocent Injoyments. 
I was abash'd at this, and silent, fearing I
had offended; but he said, if you attend rightly
to what I said, I need not tell you again, Pamela,
not to be discouraged from suggesting to
me, on every proper Occasion, the pious Impulses
of your own amiable Mind. Sir, said I,
you will be always indulgent, I make no doubt,
to my Imperfections, so long as I mean well. 
My Master made me dine with him, and
would eat nothing but what I help'd him to; 
and my Heart is, every Hour, more and more
inlarged with his Goodness and Condescension. 
But still, what ails me, I wonder! a strange
sort of Weight hangs upon my Mind, as Thursday
draws on, which makes me often sigh involuntarily,
and damps, at times, the Pleasures of
my delightful Prospects! —I hope this is not
ominous; but only the foolish Weakness of 

an over-thoughtful Mind, on an Occasion the
most solemn and important of one's Life, next
to the last Scene, which shuts up all. 
I could be very serious! But I will commit
all my Ways to that blessed Providence, which
hitherto has so wonderfully conducted me, thro'
real Evils, to this hopeful Situation. 
I only fear, and, surely, I have great Reason,
that I shall be too unworthy to hold the Affections
of so dear a Gentleman! —God teach
me Humility, and to know my own Demerit! 
And this will be, next to His Grace, my surest
Guard, in the State of Life to which, tho' most
unworthy, I am going to be exalted. And
don't cease your Prayers for me, my dear
Parents; for, perhaps, this new Condition
may be subject to still worse Hazards than
those I have escaped; as would be the Case,
were Conceitedness, Vanity, and Pride, to
take hold of my frail Heart! and if I was,
for my Sins, to be left to my own Conduct,
a frail Bark in a tempestuous Ocean, without
Ballast, or other Pilot than my own inconsiderate
Will. But my Master said, on another
Occasion, that those who doubted most, always
erred least; and I hope, I shall always doubt my
own Strength, my own Worthiness! 
I will not trouble you with Twenty sweet
agreeable Things that pass'd in Conversation
with my excellent Benefactor; nor with the
Civilities of Monsieur Colbrand, Mrs. Jewkes,
and all the Servants, who seem to be highly
pleas'd with me, and with my Conduct to 

them: And as my Master, hitherto, finds no
Fault, that I go too low, nor they that I carry
it too high, I hope I shall continue to have
every body's Good-will. But yet, will I not
seek to gain any one's by little Meannesses or
Debasements; but aim at an uniform and regular
Conduct, willing to conceal involuntary
Errors, as I would have my own forgiven; and
not too industrious to discover real ones, or to
hide such, if any such should appear, as might
incourage bad Hearts, or unclean Hands, in
material Cases, where my Master should receive
Damage, or where the Morals of the Transgressors
should appear wilfully and habitually
corrupt. In short, I will endeavour, as much
as I can, that good Servants shall in me find a
kind Incourager; indifferent ones be made
better, by inspiring them with a laudable Emulation; 
and bad ones, if not too bad in Nature,
and quite irreclaimable, reform'd by Kindness,
Expostulation, and even proper Menaces, if
necessary; but most by a good Example. All
this, if God pleases. 
