



Dear Father,
Since my last, my Master gave me more fine
Things. He call'd me up to my old Lady's
Closet, and pulling out her Drawers, he gave me Two
Suits of fine Flanders lac'd Headcloths, Three Pair of
fine Silk Shoes, two hardly the worse, and just fit for
me; for my old Lady had a very little Foot; and
several Ribbands and Topknots of all Colours, and
Four Pair of fine white Cotton Stockens, and Three
Pair of fine Silk ones; and Two Pair of rich Stays,
and a Pair of rich Silver Buckles in one Pair of the
Shoes. I was quite astonish'd, and unable to speak
for a while; but yet I was inwardly asham'd to take
the Stockens; for Mrs. Jervis was not there: If
she had, it would have been nothing. I believe I
receiv'd them very awkwardly; for he smil'd at my
Awkwardness; and said, Don't blush, Pamela: Dost
think I don't know pretty Maids wear Shoes and
Stockens? 

I was so confounded at these Words, you might
have beat me down with a Feather. For, you must
think, there was no Answer to be made to this: So,
like a Fool, I was ready to cry; and went away curcheeing
and blushing, I am sure, up to the Ears; for,
tho' there was no Harm in what he said, yet I did
not know how to take it. But I went and told all to
Mrs. Jervis, who said, God put it into his Heart to
be good to me; and I must double my Diligence. 
It look'd to her, she said, as if he would fit me in
Dress for a Waiting-maid's Place on his Sister Lady
Davers's own Person. 
But still your kind fatherly Cautions came into my
Head, and made all these Gifts nothing near to me
what they would have been. But yet I hope there is
no Reason; for what Good could it do him to harm
such a simple Maiden as me? Besides, to be sure,
no Lady would look upon him, if he should so disgrace
himself. So I will make myself easy; and indeed,
I should never have been otherwise, if you
had not put it into my Head; for my Good, I know
very well. But, may be, without these Uneasinesses
to mingle with these Benefits, I might be too much
puff'd up: So I will conclude, All that happens is
for our Good; and so God bless you, my dear Father
and Mother; and I know you will pray to
God to bless me; who am, and shall always be, 
Your dutiful Daughter. 

