



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday, April 21. 
Mr. Lovelace communicated to me this morning
early, from his intelligencer, the news of my
Brother's Scheme. I like him the better for making
very light of it; and for his treating it with contempt. 
And indeed, had I not had the hint of it from you, I
should have suspected it to be some contrivance of his,
in order to hasten me to town, where he has long
wished to be himself. 
He read me the passage in that Leman's Letter,
which is pretty much to the effect of what you wrote
to me from Miss Lloyd; with this addition, that one
Singleton, a master of a Scots vessel, is the man, who
is to be the principal in this act of violence. 
I have seen him. He has been twice entertained at
Harlowe-Place, as my Brother's friend. He has the
air of a very bold and fearless man; and I fansy it must
be his project; as my Brother, I suppose, talks to everybody
of the rash step I have taken; for he did not spare
me before he had this seeming reason to censure me. 
This Singleton lives at Leith; so, perhaps, I am to
be carried to my Brother's house not far from that port. 
Putting these passages together, I am not a little apprehensive,
that the design, lightly as Mr. Lovelace,
from his fearless temper, treats it, may be attempted to
be carried into execution; and of the consequences that
may attend it, if it be. 

I asked Mr. Lovelace, seeing him so frank and cool,
what he would advise me to do? 
Shall I ask you, Madam, what are your own thoughts? 
—Why I return the question, said he, is, Because you
have been so very earnest that I should leave you as soon
as you are in London, that I know not what to propose,
without offending you. 
My opinion is, said I, that I should studiously conceal
myself from the knowlege of every-body but Miss
Howe; and that you should leave me out of hand; 
since they will certainly conclude, that where one is,
the other is not far off: And it is easier to trace you
than me. 
You would not surely wish, said he, to fall into
your Brother's hands by such a violent measure as this? 
I propose not to throw myself officiously in their way; 
but should they have reason to think I avoided them,
would not that whet their diligence to find you, and
their courage to attempt to carry you off; and subject
me to insults that no man of spirit can bear? 
Lord bless me! said I, to what has this one fatal step
that I have been betrayed into— 
Dearest Madam, let me beseech you to forbear this
harsh language, when you see, by this new scheme,
how determined they were upon carrying their old ones,
had you not been betrayed, as you call it. Have I offered
to defy the Laws of Society, as this Brother of yours
must do, if any-thing be intended by this project? I
hope you will be pleased to observe, that there are as
violent and as wicked enterprisers as myself—But this is
so very wild a project, that I think there can be no
room for apprehensions from it. I know your Brother
well. When at College, he had always a romantic
turn: But never had a head for any-thing but to puzzle
and confound himself. A half invention, and a whole
conceit; but not master of talents to do himself good,
or others harm, but as those others gave him the power
by their own folly. 

This is very volubly run off, Sir! —But violent spirits
are but too much alike; at least in their methods of
resenting. You will not presume to make yourself a
less innocent man surely, who had determined to brave
my whole family in person, if my folly had not saved
you the rashness, and them the insult— 
Dear Madam! —Still must it be folly, rashness! —It
is as impossible for you to think tolerably of any-body
out of your own family, as it is for any one in it to
deserve your Love! Forgive me, dearest Creature! If
I did not love you as never man loved a woman, I might
appear more indifferent to preferences so undeservedly
made. But let me ask you, Madam, What have you
borne from me? What cause have I given you to treat
me with so much severity, and so little confidence? 
And what have you not borne from them? Malice and
Ill-will, indeed, sitting in judgment upon my character,
may not give sentence in my favour: But what of your
own knowlege have you against me? 
Spirited questions, were they not, my dear? —And
they were asked with as spirited an air. I was startled. 
But I was resolved not to desert myself. 
Is this a time, Mr. Lovelace, is this a proper occasion
taken, to give yourself these high airs to me, a young
creature destitute of protection? It is a surprising question
you ask me. Had I aught against you of my own knowlege
—I can tell you, Sir—And away I would have
flung. 
He snatched my hand, and besought me not to leave
him in displeasure. He pleaded his passion for me, and
my severity to him, and partiality for those from whom
I had suffered so much; and whose intended violence,
he said, was now the subject of our deliberation. 
I was forced to hear him. 
You condescended, dearest creature, said he, to ask
my advice. It is very easy, give me leave to say, to
advise you what to do. I hope I may, on this new
occasion, speak without offence, notwithstanding your 

former Injunctions—You see that there can be no hope
of Reconciliation with your Relations. Can you,
Madam, consent to honour with your hand, a wretch
whom you have never yet obliged with one voluntary
favour? 
What a recriminating, what a reproachful way, my
dear, was this, of putting a question of this nature! 
I expected not from him, at the time, and just as I
was very angry with him, either the Question or the
Manner. I am ashamed to recollect the confusion I
was thrown into; all your advice in my head at the
moment: Yet his words so prohibitory. He confidently
seemed to enjoy my confusion [Indeed, my dear, he
knows not what respectful Love is!]; and gazed upon
me, as if he would have looked me through. 
He was still more declarative afterwards indeed, as I
shall mention by-and-by: But it was half extorted from
him. 
My heart struggled violently between resentment and
shame, to be thus teazed by one who seemed to have
all his passions at command, at a time when I had very
little over mine; till at last I burst into tears, and was
going from him in high disgust: When, throwing his
arms about me, with an air, however, the most tenderly
respectful, he gave a stupid turn to the subject. 
It was far from his heart, he said, to take so much
advantage of the streight, which the discovery of my
Brother's foolish project had brought me into, as to renew,
without my permission, a proposal which I had hitherto
discountenanced; and which for that reason— 
And then he came with his half-sentences, apologizing
for what he had not so much as half-proposed. 
Surely, he had not the insolence to intend to teaze me,
to see if I could be brought to speak what became me
not to speak—But, whether he had or not, it did teaze
me; insomuch that my very heart was fretted, and I
broke out at last into fresh tears, and a declaration, that
I was very unhappy. And just then recollecting how 

like a tame fool I stood with his arms about me, I flung
from him with indignation. But he seized my hand,
as I was going out of the room, and upon his knees
besought my stay for one moment: And then, in
words the most clear and explicit, tendered himself to
my acceptance, as the most effectual means to disappoint
my Brother's scheme, and set all right. 
But what could I say to this? —Extorted from him,
as it seemed to me, rather as the effect of his Compassion,
than of his Love? What could I say? I paused,
I looked silly—I am sure I looked very silly. He suffered
me to pause, and look silly; waiting for me to say something: 
And at last (ashamed of my confusion, and aiming
to make an excuse for it) I told him, that I desired
he would avoid such measures as might add to the uneasiness,
which it must be visible to him I had, when
he reflected upon the irreconcileableness of my friends,
and upon what might follow from this unaccountable
project of my Brother. 
He promised to be governed by me in every-thing. 
And again the wretch, instead of pressing his former
question, asked me, If I forgave him for the humble suit
he had made to me? What had I to do, but to try for
a palliation of my confusion, since it served me not? 
I told him, I had hopes it would not be long before
Mr. Morden arrived; and doubted not, that that gentleman
would be the readier to engage in my favour,
when he found, that I made no other use of his (Mr.
Lovelace's) assistance, than to free myself from the addresses
of a man so disagreeable to me as Mr. Solmes: 
I must therefore wish, that every-thing might remain
as it was, till I could hear from my Cousin. 
This, altho' teazed by him as I was, was not, you
see, my dear, a denial. But he must throw himself
into a heat, rather than try to persuade; which any
other man, in his situation, I should think, would have
done: And this warmth obliged me to adhere to my
seeming negative. 

This was what he said, with a vehemence that must
harden any woman's mind, who had a spirit above being
frighted into passiveness: 
Good God! —And will you, Madam, still resolve
to shew me, that I am to hope for no share in your favour,
while any the remotest prospect remains, that you
will be received by my bitterest enemies, at the price of
my utter rejection? 
This was what I returned, with warmth, and with
a salving Art too—You have seen, Mr. Lovelace, how
much my Brother's violence can affect me: But you
will be mistaken, if you let loose yours upon me, with
a thought of terrifying me into measures the contrary of
which you have acquiesced with. 
He only besought me to suffer his future actions to
speak for him; and, if I saw him worthy of any favour,
that I would not let him be the only person within my
knowlege who was not entitled to my consideration. 
You refer to a future time, Mr. Lovelace; so do I,
for the future proof of a merit you seem to think for the
past time wanting: And justly you think so. And I
was again going from him. 
One word more he begged me to hear—He was
determined studiously to avoid all mischief, and every
step that might lead to mischief, let my Brother's proceedings,
short of a violence upon my person, be what
they would: But if any attempt that should extend to
that, were to be made, would I have him to be a quiet
spectator of my being seized, or carried back, or on
board, by this Singleton; or, in case of extremity, was
he not permitted to stand up in my defence? 
Stand up in my defence, Mr. Lovelace! —I should be
very miserable, were there to be a call for that. But
do you think I might not be safe and private in
London? By your friend's description of the widow's
house, I should think I might be safe there. 
The widow's house, he replied, as described by his
friend, being a back-house within a front-one, and looking 

to a garden, rather than to a street, had the appearance
of privacy: But if, when there, it was not approved,
it would be easy to find another more to my
liking—Tho', as to his part, the method he would advise
should be, to write to my Uncle Harlowe as one
of my Trustees, and wait the issue of it here at Mrs.
Sorlings's, fearlesly directing it to be answered hither. 
To be afraid of little spirits, was but to encourage insults,
he said. The substance of the Letter should be,
‘To demand as a Right, what they would refuse if
requested as a Courtesy: To acknowlege, that I had
put myself [too well, he said, did their treatment
justify me] into the protection of the Ladies of his
family [by whose orders, and Lord M's, he himself
would appear to act]: But that upon my own terms; 
which were such, that I was under no obligation to
those Ladies for the favour; it being no more than
they would have granted to any one of my Sex,
equally distressed.’ If I approved not of this method,
happy should he think himself, he said, if I would honour
him with the opportunity of making such a claim
in his own name—But this was a point [with his buts
again in the same breath!] that he durst but just touch
upon. He hoped however, that I would think their
violence a sufficient inducement for me to take such a
wished for resolution. 
Inwardly vexed, I told him, That he himself had
proposed to leave me when I was in town: That I expected
he would: And that, when I was known to be
absolutely independent, I should consider what to write,
and what to do: But that, while he was with me, I
neither would nor could. 
He would be very sincere with me, he said: This
project of my Brother's had changed the face of things. 
He must, before he left me, see whether I should or
should not approve of the London widow, and her family,
if I chose to go thither. They might be people
whom my Brother might buy. But if he saw they 

were persons of integrity, he then might go for a day or
two, or so. But he must needs say, he could not leave
me longer at a time. 
Do you propose, Sir, said I, to take up your lodgings
in the house where I shall lodge? 
He did not, he said; as he knew the use I intended to
make of his absence, and my punctilio—And yet the
house where he had lodgings was new-fronting, and
not in a condition to receive him: But he could go to
his friend Belford's, in Soho; or perhaps he might reach
to the same gentleman's house at Edgware, over-night,
and return on the mornings, till he had reason to think
this wild project of my Brother's laid aside. But to no
greater distance till then should he care to venture. 
The result of all was, to set out on Monday next for
town. I hope it will be in a happy hour. 
Cl. Harlowe. 