



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

If, Belford, thou likest not my plot upon Miss
Howe, I have three or four more as good in my
own opinion; better, perhaps, they will be in thine: 
And so 'tis but getting loose from thy present engagement,
and thou shalt pick and chuse. But as for thy
three brethren, they must do as I would have them: 
And so, indeed, must thou—Else why am I your
general? But I will refer this subject to its proper 

season. Thou knowest, that I never absolutely conclude
upon a project, till 'tis time for execution; 
and then Lightning strikes not quicker than I. 
And now to the subject next my heart. 
Wilt thou believe me, when I tell thee, that I
have so many contrivances rising up and crouding upon
me for preference, with regard to my Gloriana,
that I hardly know which to chuse? —I could tell
thee of no less than six princely ones, any of which
must do. But as the dear creature has not grudged
giving me trouble, I think I ought not, in gratitude,
to spare combustibles for her; but, on the contrary,
to make her stare and stand aghast, by springing three
or four mines at once. 
Thou remembrest what Shakespeare, in his Troilus
and Cressida, makes Hector, who, however, is
not used to boast, say to Achilles, in an interview
between them; and which, applied to this watchful
Lady, and to the vexation she has given me, and
to the certainty I now think I have of subduing her,
will run thus; Supposing the Charmer before me; 
and I meditating her sweet person from head to
foot: 

Henceforth, O watchful Fair-one, guard thee well:
For I'll not kill thee There! nor There! nor There!
But, by the zone that circles Venus' waist,
I'll kill thee Ev'ry-where; yea, o'er and o'er.
Thou, wisest Belford, pardon me this brag:
Her watchfulness draws folly from my lips;
But I'll endeavour deeds to match the words,
Or may I never—
Then, I imagine thee interposing to qualify my
impatience, as Ajax did to Achilles: 

—Do not chafe thee, Cousin:
—And let these threats alone,
Till accident or purpose bring thee to it.

&dotup;All that vexes me, in the midst of my gloried-in
devices, is, that there is a sorry fellow in the world,
who has presumed to question, whether the prize,
when obtained, is worthy of the pains it costs me: 
Yet knows, with what patience and trouble a
birdman will spread an acre of ground with gins
and snares; set up his stalking horse, his glasses; 
plant his decoy-birds, and invite the feathered
throng by his whistle; and all his prize at last (the
reward of early hours, and of a whole morning's
pains) only a simple Linnet. 
&dotup;To be serious, Belford, I must acknowlege, that
all our pursuits, from childhood to manhood, are
only trifles of different sorts and sizes, proportioned
to our years and views: But then is not a fine
woman the noblest trifle, that ever was or could
be obtained by man? —And to what purpose do
we say obtained, if it be not in the way we wish
for? —If a man is rather to be her prize, than she
his?&dotup; 
* *
And now, Belford, what dost think? 
That thou art a cursed fellow, if— 
If—No If's—But I shall be very sick to-morrow. 
I shall, 'faith. 
Sick! —Why sick? —What a devil shouldst thou be
sick for? 
For more good reasons than one, Jack. 
I should be glad to hear but one. —Sick, quotha! 
Of all thy roguish inventions I should not have
thought of this. 
Perhaps thou thinkest my view to be, to draw the
Lady to my bedside: That's a trick of three or four
thousand years old; and I should find it much more
to my purpose, if I could get to hers. However,
I'll condescend to make thee as wise as myself. 
I am excessively disturbed about this Smuggling
scheme of Miss Howe. I have no doubt, that my 

Fair-one, were I to make an attempt, and miscarry,
will fly from me, if she can. I once believed she
loved me: But now I doubt whether she does or not: 
At least, that it is with such an ardor, as Miss Howe
calls it, as will make her overlook a premeditated
fault, should I be guilty of one. 
And what will being sick do for thee? 
Have patience. I don't intend to be so very bad
as Dorcas shall represent me to be. But yet I know
I shall reach confoundedly, and bring up some clotted
blood. To be sure, I shall break a vessel: There's
no doubt of that: And a bottle of Eaton's Styptic
shall be sent for; but no doctor. If she has Humanity,
she will be concerned. But if she has Love,
let it have been pushed ever so far back, it will, on
this occasion, come forward, and shew itself; not only
in her eye, but in every line of her sweet face. 
I will be very intrepid. I will not fear death, or
any-thing else. I will be sure of being well in an
hour or two, having formerly found great benefit by
this astringent medicine, on occasion of an inward
bruise by a fall from my horse in hunting, of which
perhaps this malady may be the remains. And this
will shew her, that though those about me may
make the most of it, I do not; and so can have no
design in it. 
Well, methinks thou sayest, I begin to think tolerably
of this device. 
I knew thou wouldst, when I explained myself. 
Another time prepare to wonder; and banish doubt. 
Now, Belford, I shall expect, that she will shew
some concern at the broken vessel, as it may be attended
with fatal effects, especially to one so fiery in
his temper as I have the reputation to be thought to
be: And the rather, as I shall calmly attribute the accident
to the harasses and doubts under which I have
laboured for some time past. And this will be a further
proof of my Love, and will demand a grateful
return— 

And what then, thou egregious contriver? 
Why then I shall have the less remorse, if I am to
use a little violence: For can she deserve compassion,
who shews none? 
And what if she shew a great deal of concern? 
Then shall I be in hope of building on a good foundation. 
Love hides a multitude of faults, and diminishes
those it cannot hide. Love, when acknowleged,
authorizes freedom; and freedom begets freedom; 
and I shall then see how far I can go. 
Well but, Lovelace, how the duce wilt thou,
with that full health and vigour of constitution, and
with that bloom in thy face, make any-body believe
thou art sick? 
How! —Why, take a few grains of Ipecacuanha; 
enough to make me reach like a fury. 
Good! —But how wilt thou manage to bring up
blood, and not hurt thyself? 
Foolish fellow! Are there not pigeons and chickens
in every poulterer's shop? 
Cry thy mercy. 
But then I will be persuaded by Mrs. Sinclair, that
I have of late confined myself too much; and so
will have a chair called, and be carried to the Park; 
where I will try to walk half the length of the Mall,
or so; and in my return, amuse myself at White's
or the Cocoa. 
And what will this do? 
Questioning again! —I am afraid thou'rt an Infidel,
Belford—Why then shall I not know if my Beloved
offers to go out in my absence? And shall I not see
whether she receives me with tenderness at my return? 
But this is not all: I have a foreboding that
something affecting will happen while I am out. But
of this more in its place. 
And now, Belford, wilt thou, or wilt thou not,
allow, that it is a right thing to be sick? —Lord,
Jack, so much delight do I take in my contrivances, 

that I shall be half-sorry, when the occasion for them
is over; for never, never, shall I again have such
charming exercise for my invention. 
Mean time these plaguy women are so impertinent,
so full of reproaches, that I know not how to do anything
but curse them. And then, truly, they are for
helping me out with some of their trite and vulgar
artifices. Sally particularly, who pretends to be a
mighty contriver, has just now in an insolent manner
told me, on my rejecting her proffered aids, that
I had no mind to conquer; and that I was so wicked
as to intend to marry, tho' I would not own it
to her. 
Because this little devil made her first sacrifice at
my altar, she thinks she may take any liberty with
me: And what makes her outrageous at times, is,
that I have, for a long time, studiously as she says,
slighted her too readily offered favours: But is it not
very impudent in her to think, that I will be any
man's successor? It is not come to that neither. 
This, thou knowest, was always my rule—Once any
other man's, and I know it, and never more mine. It
is for such as thou, and thy brethren, to take up with
harlots. I have been always aiming at the merit of a
first discoverer. 
The more devil I, perhaps thou wilt say, to endeavour
to corrupt the uncorrupted. 
But I say, Not; since, hence, I have but very few
adulteries to answer for. 
One affair, indeed, at Paris, with a married Lady
[I believe I never told thee of it] touched my conscience
a little: Yet brought on by the spirit of intrigue,
more than by sheer wickedness. I'll give it
thee in brief: 
‘A French Marquis, somewhat in years, employed
by his Court in a public function at that of
Madrid, had put his charming young new-married
wife under the controul and wardship, as I may say,
of his insolent Sister, an old Prude. 

‘I saw the Lady at the Opera. I liked her at
first sight, and better at second, when I knew the
situation she was in. So, pretending to make my
addresses to the Prude, got admittance to Both. 
‘The first thing I had to do, was to compliment
my Prude into shyness by complaints of shyness: 
Next, to take advantage of the Marquise's situation,
between her Husband's jealousy, and his Sister's
arrogance; and to inspire her with resentment; 
and, as I hoped, with a regard to my person. 
The French Ladies have no dislike to intrigue. 
‘The Sister began to suspect me: The Lady had
no mind to part with the company of the only man
who had been permitted to visit there; and told
me of her Sister's suspicions. I put her upon concealing
the Prude, as if unknown to me, in a
closet in one of her own apartments, locking her
in, and putting the key in her own pocket: And
she was to question me on the sincerity of my professions
to her Sister, in her Sister's hearing. 
‘She complied. My Mistress was locked up. 
The Lady and I took our seats. I owned fervent
Love, and made high professions: For the Marquise
put it home to me. The Prude was delighted
with what she heard. 
‘And how dost think it ended? —I took my advantage
of the Lady herself, who durst not for her
life cry out; and drew her after me to the next
apartment, on pretence of going to seek her Sister,
who all the time was locked up in the closet.’ 
No woman ever gave me a private meeting for nothing; 
my dearest Miss Harlowe excepted. 
‘My ingenuity obtained my pardon: The Lady
being unable to forbear laughing thro' the whole affair,
to find both so uncommonly tricked; her
gaoleress her prisoner, safe locked up, and as much
pleased as either of us.’ 
The English, Jack, do not often outwit the French. 

‘We had contrivances afterwards equally ingenious,
in which the Lady, the ice once broken
[Once subdued, always subdued] co-operated—But
a more tender Tell-tale revealed the secret—Revealed
it, before the Marquis could come to cover
the disgrace. The Sister was inveterate; the Husband
irreconcileable; in every respect unfit for a
Husband, even for a French one—made, perhaps,
more delicate to these particulars by the customs
of a people among whom he was then resident, so
contrary to those of his own countrymen. She
was obliged to throw herself into my protection— 
Nor thought herself unhappy in it, till childbed
pangs seized her: Then Penitence, and Death,
overtook her the same hour!’ 
Excuse a tear, Belford! —She deserved a better
fate! What hath such a vile inexorable Husband to
answer for! —The Sister was punished effectually— 
That pleases me on reflection—The Sister was effectually
punished! —But perhaps I have told thee
this Story before. 