



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Ivy Summer-house, Eleven o'Clock. 
He has not yet got my Letter: And while I was
contriving here how to send my officious gaoleress
from me, that I might have time for the intended
Interview, and had hit upon an expedient, which I
believe would have done, came my Aunt, and furnished
me with a much better. She saw my little
table covered, preparative to my solitary dinner; and
hoped, she told me, that this would be the last day
that my friends would be deprived of my company
at table. 
You may believe, my dear, that the thoughts of
meeting Mr. Lovelace, for fear of being discovered,
together with the contents of my Cousin Dolly's
Letter, gave me great and visible emotions. She took
notice of them—Why these sighs, why these heavings
here? said she, patting my neck—O my dear Niece,
who would have thought so much natural sweetness
could be so very unpersuadeable? 
I could not answer her, and she proceeded—I am
come, I doubt, upon a very unwelcome errand. Some
things that have been told us yesterday, which came
from the mouth of one of the most desperate and
insolent men in the world, convince your Father, and 

all of us, that you still find means to write out of
the house. Mr. Lovelace knows every-thing that is
done here; and that as soon as done; and great mischief
is apprehended from him, which you are as
much concerned as any-body to prevent. Your
Mother has also some apprehensions concerning yourself,
which yet she hopes are groundless; but, however,
cannot be easy, nor will be permitted to be easy,
if she would, unless (while you remain here in the
Garden, or in this Summer-house) you give her the
opportunity once more of looking into your closet,
your cabinet, and drawers. It will be the better taken,
if you give me chearfully your keys. I hope, my
dear, you won't dispute it. Your desire of dining
in this place was the more readily complied with for
the sake of such an opportunity. 
I thought myself very lucky to be so well prepared
by my Cousin Dolly's means for this search: But yet
I artfully made some scruples, and not a few complaints
of this treatment: After which, I not only
gave her the keys of all, but even officiously emptied
my pockets before her, and invited her to put her
fingers in my stays, that she might be sure I had no
papers there. 
This highly obliged her; and she said, She would
represent my chearful compliance as it deserved, let
my Brother and Sister say what they would. My Mother
in particular, she was sure, would rejoice at the
opportunity given her to obviate, as she doubted not
would be the case, some suspicions that were raised
against me. 
She then hinted, That there were methods taken
to come at all Mr. Lovelace's secrets, and even, from
his careless communicativeness, at some of mine; it
being, she said, his custom, boastingly to prate to
his very servants of his intentions, in particular cases. 
She added, that, deep as he was thought to be, my
Brother was as deep as he, and fairly too hard for 

him at his own weapons—as one day it would be
found. 
I knew not, I said, the meaning of these dark hints. 
I thought the cunning she hinted at, on both sides,
called rather for contempt than applause. I myself
might have been put upon artifices which my heart
disdained to practise, had I given way to the resentment,
which, I was bold to say, was much more justifiable
than the actions that occasioned it: That it was
evident to me from what she had said, that their present
suspicions of me were partly owing to this supposed
superior cunning of my Brother, and partly to
the consciousness, that the usage I met with might
naturally produce a reason for such suspicions: That
it was very unhappy for me, to be made the Butt of
my Brother's Wit: That it would have been more to
his praise, to have aimed at shewing a kind heart,
than a cunning head: That nevertheless, I wished he
knew himself as well as I imagined I knew him; and
he would then have less conceit of his abilities: Which
abilities would, in my opinion, be less thought of, if
his power to do ill offices were not much greater than
they. 
I was vexed. I could not help making this reflection. 
The dupe the other, too probably, makes of
him, thro' his own Spy, deserved it. But I so little
approve of this low art in either, that were I but tolerably
used, the vileness of that man, that Joseph Leman,
should be enquired into. 
She was sorry, she said, to find, that I thought so
disparagingly of my Brother. He was a young man
both of learning and parts. 
Learning enough, I said, to make him vain of it
among us women: But not of parts sufficient to make
his learning valuable either to himself, or to any-body
else. 
She wished, indeed, that he had more good-nature: 
But she feared, that I had too great an opinion of 

Somebody else, to think so well of my Brother, as a
Sister ought: Since, between the two, there was a sort
of Rivalry as to abilities, that made them hate one
another. 
Rivalry, Madam, said I! —If that be the case, or
whether it be or not, I wish they both understood
better than either of them seems to do, what it becomes
Gentlemen, and men of liberal Education, to
be, and to do. —Neither of them, then, would glory
in what they ought to be ashamed of. 
But waving this subject, it was not impossible, I
said, that they might find a little of my writing, and
a Pen or two, and a little Ink [Hated Art!—or rather,
hateful the necessity for it!] as I was not permitted
to go up to put them out of the way: But if
they did, I must be contented. And I assured her,
that, take what time they pleased, I would not go in
to disturb them, but would be either in or near the
Garden, in this Summer-house, or in the Cedar one,
or about my Poultry-yard, or near the great Cascade,
till I was ordered to return to my prison. With like
cunning I said, that I supposed the unkind Search
would not be made, till the servants had dined; because
I doubted not, that the pert Betty Barnes, who
knew all the corners of my apartment and closet,
would be employed in it. 
She hoped, she said, that nothing could be found
that would give a handle against me: For, she would
assure me, the motives to the Search, on my Mother's
part especially, were, that she hoped to find reason
rather to acquit than to blame me; and that my Father
might be induced to see me to-morrow night, or
Wednesday morning, with temper: With tenderness,
I should rather say, said she; for he is resolved so to
do, if no new offence be given. 
Ah! Madam, said I— 
Why that Ah! Madam, and shaking your head so
significantly? 

I wish, Madam, that I may not have more reason to
dread my Father's continued displeasure, than to hope
for his returning tenderness. 
You don't know, my dear! —Things may take a
turn—Things may not be so bad as you fear— 
Dearest Madam, have you any consolation to give
me?— 
Why, my dear, it is possible, that you may be more
compliable than you have been. 
Why raised you my hopes, Madam! —Don't let
me think my dear Aunt Hervey cruel to a Niece who
truly honours her. 
I may tell you more perhaps, said she (but in confidence,
in absolute confidence) if the enquiry within
come out in your favour. Do you know of anything
above that can be found to your disadvantage?— 
Some papers they will find, I doubt: But I must
take consequences. My Brother and Sister will be
at hand with their good-natured constructions. I am
made desperate, and care not what is found. 
I hope, I earnestly hope, said she, that nothing can
be found, that will impeach your discretion; and then— 
But I may say too much— 
And away she went, having added to my perplexity. 
But I now can think of nothing but this Interview. 
—Would to Heaven it were over! —To meet to
quarrel—But, let him take what measures he will, I
will not stay a moment with him, if he be not quite
calm and resigned. 
Don't you see how crooked some of my lines are? 
Don't you see how some of the letters stagger more
than others? —That is when this Interview is more
in my head than my Subject. 
But, after all, should I, ought I to meet him? 
How have I taken if for granted, that I should! —I
wish there were time to take your advice. Yet you 

are so loth to speak quite out—But that I owe, as
you own, to the difficulty of my situation. 
I should have mentioned, that in the course of this
conversation I besought my Aunt to stand my friend,
and to put in a word for me, on my approaching
trial; and to endeavour to procure me time for consideration,
if I could obtain nothing else. 
She told me, that, after the Ceremony was performed
[Odious confirmation of a hint in my Cousin
Dolly's Letter!] I should have what time I pleased
to reconcile myself to my lot, before Cohabitation. 
This put me out of all patience. 
She requested of me in her turn, she said, that I
would resolve to meet them all with chearful duty,
and with a spirit of absolute acquiescence. It was in
my power to make them all happy. And how joyful
would it be to her, she said, to see my Father, my
Mother, my Uncles, my Brother, my Sister, all embracing
me with raptures, and folding me by turns to
their fond hearts, and congratulating each other on
their restored happiness! Her own joy, she said, would
probably make her motionless and speechless, for a
time: And for her Dolly—the poor girl, who had
suffered in the esteem of some, for her grateful attachment
to me, would have every-body love her again. 
Will you doubt, my dear, that my next trial will
be the most affecting that I have yet had? 
My Aunt set forth all this in so strong a light, and
I was so particularly touched on my Cousin Dolly's
account, that, impatient as I was just before, I was
greatly moved: Yet could only shew by my sighs and
my tears, how desirable such an event would be to
me, could it be brought about upon conditions with
which it was possible for me to comply. 
Here comes Betty Barnes with my dinner— 
* *
The wench is gone. The time of meeting is at
hand. O that he may not come! —But should I, or 

should I not, meet him? —How I question, without
possibility of a timely answer! 
Betty, according to my leading hint to my Aunt,
boasted to me, that she was to be employed, as she
called it, after she had eat her own dinner. 
She should be sorry, she told me, to have me
found out. Yet 'twould be all for my good. I should
have it in my power to be forgiven for all at once,
before Wednesday night. The confident creature
then, to stifle a laugh, put a corner of her apron in
her mouth, and went to the door: And on her return,
to take away, as I angrily bid her, she begged my excuse
—But—But—and then the saucy creature laughed
again, she could not help it; to think how I had
drawn myself in by my Summer-house dinnering; 
since it had given so fine an opportunity, by way of
surprize, to look into all my private hoards. She
thought something was in the wind, when my Brother
came in to my dining here so readily. Her young
master was too hard for every body. 'Squire Lovelace
himself was nothing at all at a quick thought, to
her young master. 
My Aunt mentioned Mr. Lovelace's boasting behaviour
to his servants: Perhaps he may be so mean. 
But as to my Brother, he always took a pride in making
himself appear to be a man of Parts and Learning
to our servants. Pride and Meanness, I have often
thought, are as nearly allied, and as close borderers
upon each other, as the Poet tells us Wit and Madness
are. 
But why do I trouble you (and myself, at such a
crisis) with these impertinencies? —Yet I would forget,
if I could, the nearest evil, the Interview; because,
my apprehensions encreasing as the hour is at
hand, I should, were my attention to be engrossed
by them, be unfit to see him, if he does come: And
then he will have too much advantage over me, as
he will have seeming reason to reproach me with change
of resolution. 

The Upbraider, you know, my dear, is in some
sense a Superior; while the Upbraided, if with reason
upbraided, must make a figure as spiritless as conscious. 
I know that this wretch will, if he can, be his own
judge, and mine too. But the latter he shall not be. 
I dare say, we shall be all to-pieces. But I don't
care for that. It would be hard, if I, who have held
it out so sturdily to my Father and Uncles, should
not—But he is at the garden-door— 
* *
I was mistaken! —How may noises un-like, be
made like to what one fears! —Why flutters the fool
so!— 
* *
I will hasten to deposit this. Then I will, for
the last time, go to the usual place, in hopes to find
that he has got my Letter. If he has, I will not
meet him. If he has not, I will take it back, and
shew him what I have written. That will break the
ice, as I may say, and save me much circumlocution
and reasoning: And a stedfast adherence to that my
written mind is all that will be necessary. —The Interview
must be as short as possible; for should it be
discovered, it would furnish a new and strong pretence
for the intended evil of Wednesday next. 
Perhaps I shall not be able to write again one while. 
Perhaps not, till I am the miserable property of that
Solmes! —But that shall never, never be, while I
have my senses. 
If your servant find nothing from me by Wednesday
morning, you may conclude that I can then neither
write to you, nor receive your favours. 
In that case, pity and pray for me, my beloved
friend; and continue to me that place in your affection,
which is the pride of my life, and the only
comfort left to 
Your
Cl. Harlowe. 