


I have just now told you a Trick of mine; now
I'll tell you a Trick of this wicked Woman's. She
comes up to me; says she, I have a Bill I cannot
change till to-morrow; and a Tradesman wants his
Money most sadly; and I don't love to turn poor
Tradesfolks away without their Money: Have you
any about you? How much will do, said I? I have
a little! Oh! said she, I want eight Pounds. Alack,
said I, I have but between five and six. Lend me that,
said she, till to-morrow. I did so; and she went down
Stairs: And when she came up, she laugh'd, and
said, Well, I have paid the Tradesman: Said I, I
hope you'll give it me again to-morrow. At that,
the Assurance, laughing loud, said, Why, what Occasion
have you for Money? To tell you the Truth,
Lambkin, I didn't want it. I only fear'd you might
make a bad Use of it; and now I can trust Nan
with you a little oftener, especially as I have got the
Key of your Portmanteau; so that you can neither
corrupt her with Money or fine things. Never did
any body look more silly than I! –––O how I fretted
to be so foolishly outwitted! —And the more, as I
had hinted to Mr. Williams, to have some to defray
the Charges of my sending to you. I cry'd for
Vexation! —And now I have not five Shillings left
to support me, if I can get away! —Was ever such
a Fool as I! I must be priding myself in my Contrivances
indeed! Said I, was this in your Instructions,
Wolfkin? for she called me Lambkin. Jezebel,
you mean, Child, said she! —Well, I now
forgive you heartily; let's buss, and be Friends! — 
Out upon you, said I! I cannot bear you. But I
durst not call her Names again; for I dread her 

huge Paw most sadly. The more I think of this
thing, the more do I regret it! 
This Night the Man from the Post-house brought
a Letter for Mrs. Jewkes, in which was one inclosed
to me: She brought it me up. Said she,
Well, my good Master don't forget us. He has
sent you a Letter; and see what he writes to me. 
So she read, That he hoped her fair Charge was
well, happy, and contented: Ay to be sure, said I,
I can't chuse! —That he did not doubt her Care and
Kindness to me; that I was very dear to him, and
she could not use me too well; and the like. There
is a Master for you, said she! Sure you will love and
pray for him. I desir'd her to read the rest. No, no,
said she, but I won't. Said I, Are there are any
Orders for taking my Shoes away, and for beating
me? No, said she, nor about Jezebel neither. Well,
said I, I cry Truce; for I have no mind to be beat
again. I thought, said she, we had forgiven one
another. 
My Letter is as follows: 

My dearest Pamela,
I Begin to repent already, that I have bound myself,
by Promise, not to see you till you give
me Leave; for I think the Time very tedious. 
Can you place so much Confidence in me, as to
invite me down? Assure yourself that your Generosity
shall not be thrown away upon me. I the
rather would press this, as I am uneasy for your
Uneasiness; for Mrs. Jewkes acquaints me that
you take your Restraint very heavily; and neither
eat, drink, nor rest well; and I have too great an
Interest in your Health, not to wish to shorten 

the Time of this Trial to you; which will be
the Consequence of my coming down to you. 
John too, has intimated to me your Concern,
with a Grief that hardly gave him Leave for Utterance; 
a Grief that a little alarm'd my Tenderness
for you. Not that I fear any thing, but that
your Disregard to me, which yet my proud Heart
will hardly permit me to own, may throw you
upon some Rashness, that might encourage a daring
Hope: But how poorly do I descend, to be anxious
about such a Menial as he? —I will only say one
thing, that if you will give me Leave to attend you
at the Hall, (consider who it is that requests this
from you as a Favour) I solemnly declare, that you
shall have Cause to be pleased with this obliging
Mark of your Confidence in me, and Consideration
for me; and if I find Mrs. Jewkes has not behaved
to you with the Respect due to one I so dearly love,
I will put it intirely into your Power to discharge
her the House, if you think proper; and Mrs.
Jervis, or who else you please, shall attend you in
her place. This I fay on a Hint John gave me,
as if you resented something from that Quarter. 
Dearest Pamela, answer favourably this earnest
Request of one that cannot live without you, and
on whose Honour to you, you may absolutely depend; 
and so much the more, as you place a
Confidence in it. I am, and assuredly ever will
be, 
‘Your faithful and affectionate, &c. 
‘You will be glad, I know, to hear your Father
and Mother are well, and easy upon your
last Letter. That gave me a Pleasure that I
am resolved you shall not repent. Mrs. Jewkes
will convey to me your Answer.’ 


I but slightly read this Letter for the present,
to give way to one I had hopes of finding by this
time, from Mr. Williams. I took, in Mrs. Jewkes's
Company, an Evening Turn, as I call'd it, and
walking by the Place, I said, Do you think Mrs.
Jewkes, any of my Beans can have struck since
Yesterday? She laugh'd, and said, You are a poor
Gardener; but I love to see you divert yourself. 
She passing on, I found my good Friend had provided
for me, and slipping it in my Bosom, for her
Back was towards me, Here, said I, having a Bean
in my Hand, is one of them; but it has not stirr'd. 
No, to be sure, said she; and turn'd upon me a
most wicked Jest, unbecoming the Mouth of a
Woman, about Planting, &c. —When I came in,
I hy'd to my Closet, and read as follows. 

‘I am sorry to tell you, that I have a Repulse
from Lady Jones. She is concerned at your
Case, she says, but don't care to make herself
Enemies. I apply'd to Lady Darnford, and told
her in the most pathetick manner I could, your
sad Story, and shew'd her your more pathetick
Letter. I found her well dispos'd; but she would
advise with Sir Simon, who, by-the-bye, is not a
Man of extraordinary Character for Virtue; but he
said to his Lady, in my Presence, Why, what is
all this, my Dear, but that the 'Squire our Neighbour
has a mind to his Mother's Waiting-maid? 
And if he takes care she wants for nothing, I don't
see any great Injury will be done her. He hurts
no Family by this.’ ‘(So, my dear Father and Mother,
it seems that poor Peoples Honesty is to go for
nothing)’. ‘And I think, Mr. Williams, you, of all
Men, should not engage in this Affair, against your
Friend and Patron. He spoke this in so determin'd
a manner, that the Lady had done; and I had only 

to beg no Notice should be taken of the Matter as
from me. 
‘I have hinted your Case to Mr. Peters, the Minister
of this Parish, but I am concern'd to say,
that he imputed selfish Views to me, as if I would
make an Interest in your Affections, by my Zeal. 
And when I represented the Duties of our Function,
&c. and protested my Disinterestedness, he
coldly said, I was very good; but was a young Man,
and knew little of the World. And tho' 'twas a
Thing to be lamented, yet when he and I set about
to reform the World in this respect, we should
have enough upon our Hands; for, he said, it was
too common and fashionable a Case to be withstood
by a private Clergyman or two: And
then he utter'd some Reflections upon the Conduct
of the Fathers of the Church, in regard
to the first Personages of the Realm, as a Justification
of his Coldness on this score. 
‘I represented the different Circumstances of your
Affair; that other Women liv'd evilly by their
own Consent, but to serve you, was to save an
Innocence that had but few Examples; and then I
shew'd him your Letter. 
‘He said, It was prettily written; and he was
sorry for you; and that your good Intentions
ought to be encourag'd; but what, said he, would
you have me do, Mr. Williams? Why, suppose
Sir, said I, you give her Shelter in your House,
with your Spouse and Niece, till she can get to
her Friends? —What, and imbroil myself with a
Man of the 'Squire's Power and Fortune! No,
not I, I'll assure you! —And he would have me
consider what I was about. Besides, she owns, said
he, that he promises to do honourably by her; and
her Shyness will procure her good Terms enough; 
for he is no covetous nor wicked Gentleman; 

except in this Case; and 'tis what all young Gentlemen
will do. 
‘I am greatly concern'd for him, I assure you; 
but am not discourag'd by this ill Success, let what
will come of it, if I can serve you. 
‘I don't hear, as yet, that the 'Squire is coming; 
I am glad of your Hint as to that unhappy Fellow
John Arnold; something, perhaps, will strike out
from that, which may be useful. As to your Pacquets,
if you seal them up, and lay them in the
usual Place, if you find it not mistrusted, I will
watch an Opportunity to convey them; but if
they are large, you had best be very cautious. 
This evil Woman, I find, mistrusts me much. 
‘I just hear that the Gentleman is dying, whose
Living the 'Squire has promis'd me. I have almost
a Scruple of taking it, as I am acting so contrary
to his Desires; but I hope he'll one Day thank
me for it. As to Money, don't think of it at
present. Be assured you may command all in my
Power to do for you, without Reserve. 
‘I believe, when we hear he is coming, it will be
best to make use of the Key, which I shall soon
procure you; and I can borrow a Horse for you, I
believe, to wait within half a Mile of the Back-Door,
over the Pasture; and will contrive byimyself,
or somebody, to have you conducted some
Miles distant, to some one of the Villages there-abouts; 
so don't be discomforted, I beseech you. 
I am, excellent Mrs. Pamela, 
‘Your faithful Friend, &c.’ 

I made a thousand sad Reflections upon the former
Part of this honest Gentleman's kind Letter; and
but for the Hope he gave me at last, should have
given up my Case as quite desperate. I then wrote 

to thank him most gratefully for his kind Endeavour; 
to lament the little Concern the Gentry had for my
deplorable Case; the Wickedness of the World to
first give way to such iniquitous Fashions, and then
plead the Frequency of them against the Offer to
amend them; and how unaffected People were to
the Distresses of others. I recall'd my former Hint
as to whiting to Lady Davers, which I fear'd, I said,
would only serve to apprize her Brother, that she
knew his wicked Scheme, and more harden him in
it, and make him come down the sooner, and to be
the more determin'd on my Ruin; besides, that it
might make Mr. Williams guess'd at, as a means of
conveying my Letter; and being very fearful, that
if that good Lady would interest herself in my Behalf,
(which was a Doubt, because she both lov'd
and fear'd her Brother) it would have no Effect upon
him; and that, therefore, I would wait the happy
Event I might hope for from his kind Assistance in
the Key and the Horse, &c. I intimated my Master's
Letter, begging to be permitted to come down; was
fearful it might be sudden; and that I was of Opinion
no Time was to be lost; for we might lose all
our Opportunities, &c. telling him the Money-trick
of this vile Woman, &c. 
I had not time to take a Copy of this Letter, I
was so watch'd. But when I had it ready in my Bosom,
I was easy. And so I went to seek out Mrs.
Jewkes, and told her I would have her Advice upon
the Letter I had receiv'd from my Master, which
Point of Confidence in her, pleas'd her not a little. 
Ay, said she, now this is something like. Why,
we'll take a Turn in the Garden, or where you please. 
I pretended it was indifferent to me; and so we
walk'd into the Garden. I began to talk to her of the
Letter; but was far from acquainting her with all the
Contents; only that he wanted my Consent to come 

down, and hop'd she us'd me kindly, &c. And I said,
Now, Mrs. Jewkes, let me have your Advice as to
this. Why then, said she, I will give it you freely. 
E'en send to him to come down. It will highly oblige
him, and I dare say you'll fare the better for
it. How the better? said I—I dare say, you think
yourself that he intends my Ruin. I hate, said she,
that foolish Word; your Ruin! —Why ne'er a Lady
in the Land may live happier than you, if you will,
or be more honourably used. 
Well, Mrs. Jewkes, said I, I shall not at this time
dispute with you about the Words Ruin or honourable. 
I thank God, we have quite different Notions
of both; but now I will speak plainer than ever I
did. Do you think he intends to make Proposals to
me, as to a kept Mistress, or kept Slave rather; or
do you not? —Why, Lambkin, said she, what dost
thou think thyself? —I fear, said I, he does. Well,
said she, but if he does, for I know nothing of the
Matter, I assure you; you may have your own
Terms—I see that; for you may do any thing with
him. 
I could not bear this to be spoken, tho' it was all I
fear'd of a long time; and began to exclaim most sadly. 
Nay, said she, he may marry you, as far as I
know. —No, no, said I, that cannot be—I neither
desire nor expect it. His Condition don't permit me
to have such a Thought, and that, and the whole
Series of his Conduct to me, convinces me of the
contrary; and you would have me invite him to
come down, would you? Is not this to invite my
Ruin? 
'Tis what I would do, said she, in your Place; 
and if it was to be as you think, I should rather be
out of my Pain, than live in continual Frights and
Apprehensions, as you do. No, said I, an Hour of
Innocence is worth an Age of Guilt; and were my 

Life to be made ever so miserable by it, I should
never forgive myself, if I were not to lengthen out
to the longest Minute my happy Time of Honesty. 
Who knows what God may do for me! 
Why, may-be, said she, as he loves you so well,
you may prevail upon him by your Prayers and
Tears; and for that Reason, I should think you'd
better let him come down. Well, said I, I will
write him a Letter, because he expects an Answer,
or may-be he will make that a Pretence to come
down. You'll send it for me. How can it go? 
I'll take care of that, said she; it is in my Instructions
—Ay, thought I, so I doubt, by the
Hint Mr. Williams gave me, about the Post-house. 
The Gardener coming by, I said, Mr. Jacob I
have planted a few Beans, and I call it my Garden. 
It is just by the Door out-yonder, I'll shew it you; 
pray don't dig them up. So I went on with him; 
and when we had turn'd the Alley out of her Sight,
and were near the Place, said I, Pray step to Mrs.
Jewkes, and ask her if she has any more Beans for
me to plant? He smil'd, I suppose at my Foolishness,
and I popt the Letter under the Mould, and
stept back, as if waiting for his Return; which being
near, was immediate, and she follow'd him. What
should I do with Beans? said she—and sadly scar'd
me; for she whisper'd me, I am afraid of some Fetch!
you don't use to send of such simple Errands— 
What Fetch? said I; it is hard I can neither stir,
nor speak, but I must be suspected—Why, said
she, my Master writes me, that I must have all my
Eyes about me; for, tho' you are as innocent as a
Dove, yet you're as cunning as a Serpent. But I'll
forgive you if you cheat me! 
Then I thought of my Money, and could have
call'd her Names, had I dar'd: And I said, Pray, 

Mrs. Jewkes, now you talk of forgiving me if I
cheat you; be so kind as to pay me my Money; 
for tho' I have no Occasion for it, yet I know
you was but in Jest, and intended to give it me
again. You shall have it in a proper time, said she; 
but, indeed, I was in earnest to get it out of your
Hands, for fear you should make an ill Use of it. 
And so we cavilled upon this Subject as we walk'd
in, and I went up to write my Letter to my Master; 
and, as I intended to shew it her, I resolved to
write accordingly as to her Part of it; for I made
little Account of the Offer of Mrs. Jervis to me,
instead of this wicked Woman, (tho' the most agreeable
thing that could have befallen me, except my
Escape from hence) nor indeed of any thing he
said: For to be honourable, in the just Sense of the
Word, he need not have caus'd me to be run away
with, and confin'd as I am. I wrote as follows: 

Honoured Sir,
When I consider how easily it is for you
to make me happy, since all I desire is to
be permitted to go to my poor Father and Mother:
When I reflect upon your former Proposal
to me, in relation to a certain Person, not
one Word of which is now mentioned; and
upon my being in that strange manner run away
with, and still kept here a miserable Prisoner; do
you think, Sir, (pardon your poor Servant's Freedom; 
my Fears make me bold; do you think,
I say) that your general Assurances of Honour to
me, can have the Effect upon me, that, were it not
for these Things, all your Words ought to have? 
—O good Sir! I too much apprehend, that your
Notions of Honour and mine are very different
from one another: And I have no other Hope 

but in your continued Absence. If you have
any Proposals to make me, that are consistent with
your honourable Professions, in my humble Sense
of the Word, a few Lines will communicate them
to me, and I will return such an Answer as befits
me. But, Oh! what Proposals can one in your
high Station have to make to one in my low one! 
I know what belongs to your Degree too well, to
imagine, that any thing can be expected but sad
Temptations, and utter Distress, if you come down; 
and you know not, Sir, when I am made desperate,
what the wretched Pamela dares to do! 
‘Whatever Rashness you may impute to me, I
cannot help it, but I wish I may not be forced upon
any, that otherwise would never enter into my
Thoughts. Forgive me, Sir, my Plainness; I
should be loth to behave to my Master unbecomingly; 
but I must needs say, Sir, my Innocence
is so dear to me, that all other Considerations are,
and, I hope, shall ever be, treated by me as Niceties,
that ought, for that, to be dispensed with. If you
mean honourably, why, Sir, should you not let me
know it plainly? Why is it necessary to imprison
me, to convince me of it? And why must I be
close watch'd and attended, hinder'd from stirring
out, from speaking to any body, from going so
much as to Church to pray for you, who have
been till of late so generous a Benefactor to me? 
Why, Sir, I humbly ask, why all this, if you
mean honourably? —It is not for me to expostulate
so freely, but in a Case so near to me, with
you, Sir, so infinitely my Superior. Pardon me, I
hope you will; but as to any the least Desire of
seeing you, I cannot so much as bear the dreadful
Apprehension. Whatever you have to propose,
whatever you intend by me, let my Assent be that
of a free Person, mean as I am, and not of a 

sordid Slave, who is to be threatened and frightened
into a Compliance, that your Conduct to her seems
to imply would be otherwise abhorr'd by her. — 
My Restraint is indeed hard upon me. I am
very uneasy under it. Shorten it, I beseech you,
or—But I will not dare to say more, than that I
am 
‘Your greatly oppressed unhappy Servant.’ 

After I had taken a Copy of this, I folded it up,
and Mrs. Jewkes coming up, just as I had done, sat
down by me, and said, when she saw me direct it,
I wish you would tell me if you have taken my Advice,
and consented to my Master's coming down. 
If it will oblige you, said I, I will read it to you. 
That's good, said she, then I'll love you dearly. 
—Says I, then you must not offer to alter one Word. 
I won't, said she; so I read it to her, and she prais'd
me much for my Wording it; but said, she thought
I push'd the Matter very close; and it would better
bear talking of, than writing about. She wanted an
Explanation or two, as about the Proposal to a certain
Person; but I said she must take it as she heard
it. Well, well, said she, I make no doubt you understand
one another, and will do so more and
more. I seal'd up the Letter, and she undertook to
convey it. 
