



My good Lady,
I am honour'd with your Ladyship's Three
Letters, the Contents of which are highly
obliging to me: And I should be inexcusable,
if I did not comply with your Injunctions, and
be very proud and thankful for your Ladyship's
Condescension in accepting of my poor Scribble,
and promising me such a rich and invaluable
Return; of which you have given me already
such ample and such delightful Instances. I
will not plead my Defects, to excuse my Obedience. 
I only fear, that the Awe which will
be always upon me, when I write to your Ladyship,
will lay me under so great a Restraint,
that I shall fall short even of the Merit my
Papers have already made for me, thro your
kind Indulgence. But nevertheless, sheltering
myself under your Goodness, I will chearfully
comply with every thing your Ladyship expects
from me, that is in my Power to do. 
You will give me Leave, Madam, to put
into some little Method, the Particulars of what
you desire of me; that I may speak to them all:
For since you are so good as to excuse me from
sending the rest of my Papers, (which indeed
would not bear in many Places) I will omit
nothing that shall tend to convince you of my
Readiness to obey you in every thing else. 

First, then, your Ladyship would have the
Particulars of the happy Fortnight we pass'd in
Kent, on one of the most agreeable Occasions
that could befal me. 
Secondly, An Account of the Manner
in which your dear Brother acquainted me with
the affecting Story of Miss Godfrey, and my
Behaviour upon it. 
And, thirdly, I presume, your Ladyship,
and Lady Betty, expect, that I should say something
upon your welcome Remarks on my Conduct
to wards Mrs. Jewkes. 
The other Particulars contained in your
Ladyship's kind Letters will naturally fall under
one or other of these Three Heads. —But
expect not, my Lady, tho' I begin in Method
thus, that I shall keep up to it. If your Ladyship
will not allow for me, and keep in View
the poor Pamela Andrews in all I write, but
will have Mrs. B. in your Eye, what will become
of me? —But, indeed, I promise myself
so much Improvement from this Correspondence,
that I enter upon it with a greater
Delight than I can express, not with standing the
mingled Awe and Diffidence, that will accompany
me in every Part of the agreeable Task. 
To begin with the first Article; 
Your dear Brother, and my honest Parents,
(I know your Ladyship will expect from
me, that on all Occasions I should speak of 

them with the Duty that becomes a good Child; 
I say then, your dear Brother, and they) and
myself, set out on the Monday Morning for
Kent, passing thro' St. Albans to London, at
both which Places we stopp'd a Night; for our
dear Benefactor would make us take easy Journeys; 
and on Wednesday Evening we arriv'd at
the sweet Place allotted for the good Couple. 
We were attended only by Abraham and
John, on Horseback; for Mr. Colbrand, having
sprain'd his Foot, was in the Travelling-Coach
with the Cook and House-Maid, and
Polly Barlow, a genteel new Servant, whom
Mrs. Brooks recommended to wait on me. 
Mr. Longman had been down there for a
Fortnight, imploy'd in settling the Terms of an
additional Purchace to this pretty well-wooded
and well-water'd Estate; and the Account he
gave of his Proceedings was very satisfactory
to his honour'd Principal. He told us, He had
much ado to dissuade the Tenants from pursuing
a form'd Resolution of meeting their Landlord
on Horseback, at some Miles Distance; for he
had inform'd them when he expected us: But
knowing how desirous Mr. B. was of being
retired, while he staid here this time, he had
ventured to assure them, that when every thing
was settled, and the new Purchace actually
enter'd upon, they would have his Presence
among them now-and-then; and that he would
introduce them all at different times to their
worthy Landlord, before we left the Country. 

The House, my good Lady, is large, and
very commodious; and we found every thing
about it, and in it, exceeding neat and convenient; 
which was owing to the worthy Mr.
Longman's Care and Direction. The Ground
is well-stock'd, the Barns and Out-houses in
excellent Repair, and my poor Father and Mother
have only to wish, that they and I may
may be deserving of half the Goodness we
experience from the bountiful Mind of your
good Brother. 
But indeed, my Lady, I have the Pleasure
of discovering every Day more and more, that
there is not a better dispos'd and more generous
Gentleman in the World than himself, insomuch
that, I verily think, he has not been so
careful to conceal his bad Actions as his good
ones. His Heart is naturally beneficent, and
his Beneficence is the Gift of God to him, for
the most excellent Purposes, as I have often
been so free as to tell him. —Pardon me, my
dear Lady; I wish I may not be impertinently
grave: But I find a great many Instances of his
considerate Charity, which hardly any body knew
of, and which, since I have been his Almoner,
could not avoid coming to my Knowlege. — 
But this, possibly, is no News to your Ladyship. 
Every body knows the generous Goodness of your
Own Heart: Every one, that wanted Relief,
tasted the Bounty of your excellent Mother,
my late honour'd Lady: So that 'tis a Family
Grace, and I have no need to speak of it to
you, Madam. 

This cannot, my dear Lady, I hope, be
construed as if I would hereby suppose ourselves
less oblig'd. Indeed I know nothing so Godlike
in human Nature as this Disposition to do
Good to our Fellow-creatures; for is it not
following immediately the Example of that
gracious Providence, which every Minute is
conferring Blessings upon us all, and by giving
Power to the Rich, makes them but the Dispensers
of its Benefits to those that want them? 
But yet, as there are but too many Objects of
Compassion, and as the most beneficent Mind
in the World cannot, like Omnipotence, do
Good to all, how much are they oblig'd, who
are distinguish'd from others? And this, kept
in Mind, will always contribute to make the
Benefited receive as they ought the Favours of
the Obliger. 
I know not if I write to be understood in all
I mean; but my grateful Heart is so over-fill'd,
when it is imploy'd on this Subject, that, methinks,
I want to say a great deal more, at the
same time that I am apprehensive I say too
much. —Yet, perhaps, the Copies of the Letters
I here inclose to your Ladyship, (that mark'd
[I.] written by me to my Father and Mother,
on our Return hither from Kent; that mark'd
[II.] from my dear Father in Answer to it, and
that mark'd [III.] mine in Reply to his*  will,
(at the same time that they may convince your
Ladyship, that I will conceal nothing from you, 

in the Course of this Correspondence, that may
in the least amuse and divert you, or that may
better explain our grateful Sentiments) in a
great measure, answer what your Ladyship expects
from me, as to the happy Fortnight we
pass'd in Kent. 
And here I will conclude this Letter, chusing
to suspend the Correspondence, till I know from
your Ladyship, whether it will not be too low,
too idle for your Attention; whether you will
not dispense with your own Commands for my
writing to you, when you see it is so little likely
to answer what you may possibly expect from
me; or whether, if you insist upon my scribbling,
you would have me write in any other
way, be less tedious, less serious—in short, less
or more any thing. For all that is in my Power,
your Ladyship may command from, Madam, 
Your obliged and faithful Servant,
P. B. 
Your dearest Brother, from whose Knowlege
I would not keep any thing that shall take
up any considerable Portion of my Time,
gives me Leave to proceed in this Correspondence,
if you command it; and is
pleas'd to say, He will content himself to
see such Parts of it, and only such Parts, as
I shall shew him, or read to him. —Is
not this very good, Madam? —O my
Lady, you don't know how happy I am! 

