



Miss Cl. Harlowe, To Mrs. Judith Norton. 

Thursday, Aug. 24. 
The relation of such a conversation as passed between
my Aunt and you, would have given me
pleasure, had it come some time ago; because it
would have met with a spirit more industrious than
mine now is, to pick out remote comfort in the hope
of a favourable turn that might one day have rewarded
my patient duty. 
I did not doubt my Aunt's good-will to me. Her
affection I did not doubt. But shall we wonder that
Kings and Princes meet with so little controul in
their passions, be they ever so violent, when in a
private family, an Aunt, nay, even a Mother in that
family, shall chuse to give up a once favoured child
against their own inclinations, rather than oppose an
aspiring young man, who had armed himself with the
authority of a Father, who, when once determined,
never would be expostulated with? 
And will you not blame me, if I say, that good
sense, that kindred indulgence, must be a little offended
at the treatment I have met with; and if I
own, that I think, that great rigour has been exercised
towards me? And yet I am now authorized
to call it rigour by the judgment of two excellent
Sisters, my Mother and my Aunt, who acknowlege
(as you tell me from my Aunt) that they have been
obliged to join against me, contrary to their inclinations; 
and that, even in a point which might seem
to concern my eternal welfare. 
But I must not go on at this rate. For may not
the inclination my Mother has given up, be the effect
of a too fond indulgence, rather than that I merit
the indulgence? And yet so petulantly perverse am I,
that I must tear myself from the subject. 

All then that I will say further to it, at this time,
is, that were the intended goodness to be granted to
me but a week hence, it would possibly be too late
—Too late, I mean, to be of the consolation to me,
that I would wish from it: For what an inefficacious
Preparation must I have been making, if it has not,
by this time, carried me above—But above what? — 
Poor mistaken creature! Unhappy self-deluder! that
finds herself above nothing! Nor able to subdue her
own faulty impatience! 
But in-deed to have done with a subject, that I
dare not trust myself with; if it come in your way,
let my Aunt Hervey, let my dear Cousin Dolly, let
the worthy Mrs. Williams, know, how exceedingly
grateful to me their kind intentions and concern for
me are: And, as the best warrant or justification of
their good opinions (since I know that their favour for
me is founded on the belief that I loved virtue) tell
them, that I continued to love virtue to my last hour,
as I presume to hope it may be said; and assure them,
that I never made the least wilful deviation, however
unhappy I became for one faulty step; which
nevertheless was not owing to unworthy or perverse
motives. 
I am very sorry, that my Cousin Morden has taken
a resolution to see Mr. Lovelace. 
My apprehensions on this intelligence are a great
abatement to the pleasure I have in knowing that he
still loves me. 
My Sister's Letter to me is a most afflicting one— 
So needlesly, so ludicrously taunting! —But for that part
of it that is so, I ought rather to pity her, than to
be so much concerned at it as I am. 
I wonder what I have done to Mr. Brand—I pray
God to forgive both him and his informants, whoever
they be. But if the scandal arise solely from Mr. Belford's
visits, a very little time will confute it. Mean
while, the packet I shall send you, which I sent to 

Miss Howe, will I hope satisfy you, my dear Mrs.
Norton, as to my reasons for admitting his visits. 
My Sister's taunting Letter, and the Inflexibleness
of my dearer friends—But how do remoter-begun
subjects tend to the point which lies nearest the heart!
—As new-caught bodily disorders all croud to a fractured
or distempered part. 
I will break off, with requesting your prayers, that
I may be blessed with patience and due resignation; 
and with assuring you, that I am, and will be to the
last hour of my life, 
Your equally grateful and affectionate
Cl. Harlowe. 