



the 36th Day of my Imprisonment. 

I Took the Liberty yesterday Afternoon, finding
the Gates open, to walk out before the House; 
and before I was aware, had got to the Bottom of
the long Row of Elms; and there I sat myself down
upon the Steps of a sort of broad Stile, which leads
into the Road, that goes towards the Town. And as
I sat musing about what always busies my Mind, I
saw a whole Body of Folks, running towards me
from the House, Men and Women, as in a Fright. 
At first I wonder'd what was the Matter, till they
came nearer; and I found they were all alarm'd,
thinking I had attempted to get off. There was first
the horrible Colbrand, running with his long Legs,
well nigh two Yards at a Stride; then there was one
of the Grooms, poor Mr. Williams's Robber; then I
spy'd Nan, half out of Breath; and the Cook-maid
after her; and lastly, came waddling, as fast as she
could, Mrs. Jewkes, exclaiming most bitterly, as I
found, against me. Colbrand said, O how have you
frighted us all! —And went behind me, lest I should
run away, as I suppose. 
I sat still, to let them see I had no View to get
away; for, besides the Improbability of succeeding,
my last sad Attempt had cur'd me of enterprizing
again. And when Mrs. Jewkes came within hearing, 

I found her terribly incens'd, and raving about my
Contrivances. Why, said I, should you be so concerned? 
Here I have sat a few Minutes, and had not
the least Thought of getting away, or going further; 
but to return as soon as it was duskish. She would
not believe me; and the barbarous Creature struck at
me with her horrid Fist, and, I believe, would have
felled me, had not Colbrand interposed, and said, He
saw me sitting still, looking about me, and not seeming
to have the least Inclination to stir. But this
would not serve: She order'd the two Maids to take
me each by an Arm, and lead me back into the
House, and up Stairs; and there have I been locked
up ever since, without Shoes. In vain have I pleaded
that I had no Design, as, indeed I had not the least; 
and; last Night I was forced to lie between her and
Nan; and I find she is resolved to make a Handle
of this against me, and in her own Behalf––– Indeed,
what with her Usage, and my own Apprehensions
of still worse, I am quite weary of my
Life. 
Just now she has been with me, and given me
my Shoes, and has laid her imperious Commands
upon me, to dress myself in a Suit of Cloaths out of
the Portmanteau, which I have not seen lately, against
three or four o'Clock; for, she says, she is to have
a Visit from Lady Darnford's two Daughters, who
come purposely to see me; and so she gave me
the Key of the Portmanteau. But I will not obey
her; and I told her I would not be made a Shew
of, nor see the Ladies. She left me, saying, It
should be worse for me, if I did not. But how can
that be? 

Five o'Clock is come,
And no young Ladies! –––So that, I fansy––– 
But, hold, I hear their Coach, I believe. I'll
step to the Window. –––I won't go down to them, I
am refolv'd.— 
Good Sirs! good Sirs! What will become of me! 
Here is my Master come in his fine Chariot! –––Indeed he is! –––What shall I do? Where shall I hide
myself! —Oh! what shall I do! —Pray for me! But
Oh! you'll not see this! —Now, good Heaven preserve
me! if it be thy blessed Will! 
Seven o'Clock.
Tho' I dread to see him, yet do I wonder I
have not. To be sure something is resolved
against me, and he stays to hear all her Stories. I can
hardly write; yet, as I can do nothing else, I know
not how to forbear! —Yet I cannot hold my Pen! ––– 
How crooked and trembling the Lines! —I must
leave off, till I can get quieter Fingers! —Why should
the Guiltless tremble so, when the Guilty can possess
their Minds in Peace! 
