



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Tuesday Morning, Six o'clock. 
The day is come! —I wish it were happily over. 
I have had a wretched night. Hardly a wink
have I slept, ruminating upon the approaching Interview. 
The very distance of time to which they consented,
has added solemnity to the meeting, which
otherwise it would not have had. 
A thoughtful mind is not a blessing to be coveted,
unless it had such a happy vivacity with it as yours: 
A vivacity, which enables a person to enjoy the present,
without being over-anxious about the future. 
Tuesday, Eleven o'clock. 
I have had a visit from my Aunt Hervey. Betty,
in her alarming way, told me, I should have a Lady
to breakfast with me, whom I little expected; giving
me to believe it was my Mother. This fluttered me
so much, on hearing a Lady coming up-stairs, supposing
it was she (and not knowing how to account
for her motives in such a visit, after I had been so long
banished from her presence) that my Aunt, at her
entrance, took notice of my disorder; and after her
first salutation, 
Why, Miss, said she, you seem surprised. —Upon
my word, you thoughtful young Ladies have strange
apprehensions about nothing at all. What, taking
my hand, can be the matter with you? —Why, my
dear, tremble, tremble, tremble at this rate? You'll
not be fit to be seen by any-body. Come, my Love,
kissing my cheek, pluck up a courage. By this needless
flutter on the approaching Interview, when it is
over, you will judge of your other antipathies, and
laugh at yourself for giving way to so apprehensive an
imagination. 

I said, that whatever we strongly imagined, was,
in its effects at the time, more than imaginary, altho'
to others it might not appear so: That I had not
rested one hour all night: That the impertinent set
over me, by giving me room to think my Mother
was coming up, had so much disconcerted me, that
I should be very little qualified to see any-body I disliked
to see. 
There was no accounting for those things, she said. 
Mr. Solmes last night supposed he should be under as
much agitation as I could be. 
Who is it, then, Madam, that so reluctant an Interview
on both sides, is to please? 
Both of you, my dear, I hope, after the first flurries
are over. The most apprehensive beginnings, I have
often known, make the happiest conclusions. 
There can be but one happy conclusion to the intended
visit; and that is, That both sides may be satisfied
it will be the last. 
She then represented, how unhappy it would be for
me, if I did not suffer myself to be prevailed upon: 
She pressed me to receive Mr. Solmes as became my
Education: And declared, that his apprehensions on
the Expectation he had of seeing me, were owing to
his Love and his Awe; intimating, That True Love
is ever accompanied by Fear and Reverence; and
that no blustering, braving Lover could deserve encouragement. 
To this I answered, That constitution was to be
considered: That a man of spirit would act like one,
and could do nothing meanly: That a creeping mind
would creep in every-thing, where it had a view to
obtain a benefit by it; and insult, where it had power,
and nothing to expect: That this was not a point
now to be determined with me: That I had said as
much as I could possibly say on this subject: That
this Interview was imposed upon me: By those, indeed,
who had a right to impose it: But that it was 

sorely against my will complied with; and for this
reason, That there was aversion, not wilfulness, in
the case; and so nothing could come of it, but a
pretence, as I much apprehended, to use me still more
severely than I had been used. 
She was then pleased to charge me with prepossession
and prejudice. She expatiated upon the duty of a
child. She imputed to me abundance of fine qualities; 
but told me, that, in this case, that of persuadeableness
was wanting to crown All. She insisted upon
the merit of obedience, altho' my will were not in
it. From a little hint I gave of my still greater dislike
to see Mr. Solmes on account of the freedom I
had treated him with, she talked to me of his forgiving
disposition; of his infinite respect for me; and
I-cannot-tell-what of this sort. 
I never found myself so fretful in my life: And so
I told my Aunt; and begged her pardon for it. But
she said, it was well disguised then; for she saw nothing
but little tremors, which were usual with young
Ladies when they were to see their Admirers for the
first time; and this might be called so, with respect
to me; since it was the first time I had consented to
see Mr. Solmes in that light. —But that the next— 
How, Madam, interrupted I—Is it then imagined,
that I give this meeting on that foot?— 
To be sure it is, child. 
To be sure it is, Madam! Then I do yet desire to
decline it. —I will not, I cannot, see him, if he expects
me to see him upon those terms. 
Niceness, punctilio—Mere punctilio, Niece! —Can
you think that your appointment (Day, Place, Hour)
and knowing what the intent of it was, is to be interpreted
away as a mere ceremony, and to mean nothing? 
—Let me tell you, my dear, your Father,
Mother, Uncles, Every-body, respect this appointment
as the first act of your compliance with their
wills: And therefore recede not, I desire you; but
make a merit of what cannot be avoided. 

O the hideous wretch! —Pardon me, Madam— 
I to be supposed to meet such a man as that, with
such a view! and he to be armed with such an expectation! 
—But it cannot be that he expects it, whatever
others may do. —It is plain he cannot, by the
fear he tells you all, he shall have to see me. If his
hope were so audacious, he could not fear so much. 
Indeed, he has this hope; and justly founded too. But
his fear arises from his reverence, as I told you before. 
His reverence!—his unworthiness! —'Tis so apparent,
that even he himself sees it, as well as everybody
else. Hence his offers to purchase me! —Hence
it is, that Settlements are to make up for acknowleged
want of merit! 
His unworthiness, say you! —Not so fast, my dear. 
Does not this look like setting a high value upon
yourself? —We all have exalted notions of your merit,
Niece; but nevertheless, it would not be wrong,
if you were to arrogate less to yourself; tho' more were
to be your due than your friends attribute to you. 
I am sorry, Madam, it should be thought arrogance
in me, to suppose I am not worthy of a better man
than Mr. Solmes, both as to person and mind: And
as to fortune, I thank God I despise all that can be
insisted upon in his favour from so poor a plea. 
She told me, It signified nothing to talk: I knew
the expectation of every one. 
Indeed I did not. It was impossible I could think
of such a strange expectation, upon a compliance
made only to shew I would comply in all that was in
my power to comply with. 
I might easily, she said, have supposed, that every
one thought I was beginning to oblige them all, by
the kind behaviour of my Brother and Sister to me in
the garden, last Sunday; by my Sister's visit to me
afterwards in my chamber (altho' both more stiffly
received by me, than were either wished or expected); 
by my Uncle Harlowe's affectionate visit to me the 

same afternoon, not indeed so very gratefully received
as I used to receive his favours: —But this he kindly
imputed to the displeasure I had conceived at my confinement,
and to my intention to come off by degrees,
that I might keep myself in countenance for my past
opposition. 
See, my dear, the low cunning of that Sunday-management,
which then so much surprised me! And
see the reason why Dr. Lewen was admitted to visit
me, yet forbore to enter upon a subject about which I
thought he came to talk to me! —For it seems there
was no occasion to dispute with me on the point I
was to be supposed to have conceded to. —See, also,
how unfairly my Brother and Sister must have represented
their pretended kindness, when (tho' they had
an end to answer by appearing kind) their antipathy
to me seems to have so strong, that they could
not help insulting me by their arm-in-arm Lover-like
behaviour to each other; as my Sister afterwards likewise
did, when she came to borrow my Kempis. 
I lifted up my hands and eyes! I cannot, said I,
give this treatment a name! The end so unlikely to be
answered by means so low! I know whose the whole
is! He that could get my Uncle Harlowe to contribute
his part, and procure the acquiescence of the rest
of my friends to it, must have the power to do anything
with them against me. 
Again my Aunt told me, that talking and invective,
now I had given the expectation, would signify
nothing. She hoped I would not shew every one,
that they had been too forward in their constructions
of my desire to oblige them. She could assure me,
that it would be worse for me, if now I receded, than
if I had never advanced. 
Advanced, Madam! How can you say advanced? 
Why, this is a trick upon me! A poor low trick! 
Pardon me, Madam, I don't say you have a hand in
it. —But, my dearest Aunt, tell me, Will not my 

Mother be present at this dreaded Interview? Will
she not so far favour me? Were it but to qualify— 
Qualify, my dear, interrupted she—your Mother,
and your Uncle Harlowe would not be present on this
occasion for the world— 
O then, Madam, how can they look upon my consent
to this Interview as an advance? 
My Aunt was displeased at this home push. Miss Clary,
said she, there is no dealing with you. It would
be happy for you, and for every-body else, were your
obedience as ready as your wit. I will leave you— 
Not in anger, I hope, Madam, interrupted I— 
All I meant was, to observe, that let the meeting
issue as it may, and as it must issue, it cannot be a disappointment
to any-body. 
O Miss! you seem to be a very determined young
creature. Mr. Solmes will be here at your time: 
And remember once more, that upon the coming
afternoon depend the peace of your whole family,
and your own happiness. 
And so saying, down she hurried. 
Here I will stop. In what way I shall resume, or
when, is not left to me to conjecture; much less
determine. I am excessively uneasy! —No good news
from your Mother, I doubt! —I will deposit thus
far, for fear of the worst. 
Adieu, my best, rather, my only friend! 
Cl. Harlowe. 