



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

You may believe, my dear, that these Letters put
me in good humour with him. He saw it in my
countenance, and congratulated himself upon it. Yet I
cannot but repeat my wonder, that I could not have
the contents of them communicated to me last night (a) . 
He then urged me to go directly to Lady Betty's, on
the strength of her Letter. 
But how, said I, can I do that, were I even out of
all hope of a Reconciliation with my friends (which yet,
however unlikely to be effected, is my duty to attempt)
as her Ladyship has given me no particular invitation? 
That, he was sure, was owing to her doubt that it
would be accepted—Else she had done it with the greatest
pleasure in the world. 
That doubt itself, I said, was enough to deter me: 
Since her Ladyship, who knew so well the boundaries
of the Fit and the Unfit, by her not expecting I would
accept of an invitation, had she given it, would have
reason to think me very forward, if I had accepted it; 
and much more forward to go without it. Then, said
I, I thank you, Sir, I have no cloaths fit to go any-whither,
or to be seen by any-body. 
O, I was fit to appear in the 'drawing-room, were
full dress and jewels to be excused; and should make the
most amiable [he must mean extraordinary] figure there. 
He was astonished at the elegance of my dress. By what 

art he knew not, but I appeared to such advantage, as
if I had a different suit every day. Besides, his Cousins
Montague would supply me with all I wanted for the
present; and he would write to Miss Charlotte accordingly,
if I would give him leave. 
Do you think me the Jay in the Fable? said I,
Would you have me visit the owners of the borrowed
dresses in their own cloaths? —Surely, Mr. Lovelace,
you think I have either a very low, or a very confident
mind. 
Would I chuse to go to London (for a few days only)
in order to furnish myself with cloaths? 
Not at your expence, Sir, said I, in an angry tone. 
I could not have appeared in earnest to him, in my
displeasure at his artful contrivances to get me away, if
I were not occasionally to shew my real fretfulness
upon the destitute condition to which he has reduced me. 
When people set out wrong together, it is very difficult
to avoid recriminations. 
He wished he knew but my mind—That should direct
him in his proposals, and it would be his delight
to observe it, whatever it were. 
My mind is, that you, Sir, should leave me out of
hand. —How often must I tell you so? 
If I were any-where but here, he would obey me,
he said, if I insisted upon it. But if I would assert my
Right, that would be infinitely preferable, in his opinion,
to any other measure but one (which he durst only
hint at): For then, admitting his visits, or refusing
them, as I pleased (granting a correspondence by Letter
only) it would appear to all the world, that what I had
done, was but in order to do myself justice. 
How often, Mr. Lovelace, must I repeat, that I
will not litigate with my Father? —Do you think that
my unhappy circumstances will alter my notions of my
own duty, so far as I shall be enabled to perform it? 
How can I obtain possession without Litigation, and
but by my Trustees? One of them will be against me; 

the other is abroad. Then the remedy proposed by
this measure, were I disposed to fall in with it, will
require time to bring it to effect; and what I want, is
present independence, and your immediate absence. 
Upon his Soul, the wretch swore, he did not think
it safe, for the reasons he had before given, to leave me
here. He wished I would think of some place, to
which I should like to go. But he must take the liberty
to say, that he hoped his behaviour had not been so exceptionable,
as to make me so very earnest for his absence
in the interim: And the less, surely, as I was almost
eternally shutting up myself from him; altho' he
presumed to assure me, that he never went from me,
but with a corrected heart, and with strengthened resolutions
of improving by my example. 
Eternally shutting myself up from you! repeated I— 
I hope, Sir, that you will not pretend to take it amiss,
that I expect to be uninvaded in my retirements. I
hope you do not think me so weak a creature (novice
as you have found me in a very capital instance) as to
be fond of occasions to hear your fine speeches, especially
as no differing circumstances require your over-frequent
visits; nor that I am to be addressed to as if I
thought hourly professions needful to assure me of your
honour. 
He seemed a little disconcerted. 
You know, Mr. Lovelace, proceeded I, why I am
so earnest for your absence. It is, that I may appear
to the world independent of you; and in hopes, by that
means, to find it less difficult to set on foot a Reconciliation
with my friends. And now let me add (in order
to make you easier as to the terms of that hoped-for
Reconciliation) that since I find I have the good fortune
to stand so well with your Relations, I will, from time
to time, acquaint you, by Letter, when you are absent,
with every step I shall take, and with every overture
that shall be made to me: But not with an intention
to render myself accountable to you, neither, as 

to my acceptance or non-acceptance of those overtures. 
They know, that I have a power given me by my
Grandfather's Will, to bequeath the Estate he left me,
with other of his bounties, in a way that may affect
them, tho' not absolutely from them: This consideration,
I hope, will procure me some from them when their
passion subsides, and when they know I am independent
of you. 
Charming reasoning! —And let him tell me, that
the assurance I had given him was all he wished for. It
was more than he could ask. What a happiness to have
a woman of honour and generosity to depend upon! 
Had he, on his first entrance into the world, met with
such a one, he had never been other than a man of
strict virtue. —But all, he hoped, was for the best; 
since, in that case, he had never perhaps had the happiness
he had now in view; because his Relations had
been always urging him to marry; and that before he
had the honour to know me. And now, as he had not
been so bad as some peoples malice reported him to be,
he hoped he should have near as much merit in his repentance,
as if he had never erred. —&dotup;A fine Rakish
notion and hope! And too much encouraged, I doubt,
my dear, by the generality of our Sex! 
&dotup;This brought on a more serious question or two. 
You'll see by it what a creature an unmortified Libertine
is. 
&dotup;I asked him, if he knew what he had said, alluded
to a sentence in the best of books, That there was
more joy in heaven— 
&dotup;He took the words out of my mouth, 
&dotup;Over one sinner that repenteth, than over ninety-and-nine
just persons which need no repentance (a) , were his
words. 
&dotup;Yes, Madam, I thought of it as soon as I said it,
but not before. I have read the story of the Prodigal 

Son, I'll assure you: And one day, when I am settled
as I hope to be, will write a dramatic piece on
the subject. I have at times had it in my head; and
you will be too ready, perhaps, to allow me to be
qualified for it. 
&dotup;You so lately, Sir, stumbled at a word, with
which you must be better acquainted, ere you can be
thoroughly master of such a subject, that I am amazed
you should know any-thing of the Scripture, and be
so ignorant of that (a) . 
&dotup;O Madam, I have read the Bible, as a fine piece
of antient history—But as I hope to be saved, it has
for some few years past made me so uneasy, when I
have popped upon some passages in it, that I have
been forced to run to music or company to divert myself. 
&dotup;Poor wretch! lifting up my hands and eyes— 
&dotup;The denunciations come so slap-dash upon one,
so unceremoniously, as I may say, without even the
By-your-leave of a rude London chairman, that they
overturn one, horse and man, as St. Paul was overturned. 
There's another Scripture allusion, Madam! 
The light, in short, as his was, is too glaring to be
borne. 
&dotup;O Sir, do you want to be complimented into Repentance
and Salvation? But pray, Mr. Lovelace, do you
mean any-thing at all, when you swear so often as
you do, By your Soul, or bind an asseveration with
the words, As you hope to be saved? 
&dotup;O my beloved creature, shifting his seat; let us
call another cause. 
&dotup;Why, Sir, don't I neither use ceremony enough
with you? 
&dotup;Dearest Madam, forbear for the present: I am
but in my Noviciate. Your foundation must be laid
brick by brick: You'll hinder the progress of the
good work you would promote, if you tumble in a
whole waggon-load at once upon me. 

&dotup;Lord bless me, thought I, what a character is
that of a Libertine! —What a creature am I, who
have risqued what I have risqued with such a one! — 
What a task before me, if my hopes continue of reforming
such a wild Indian as this! —Nay, worse
than a wild Indian; for a man who errs with his
eyes open, and against conviction, is a thousand times
worse for what he knows, and much harder to be
reclaimed, than if he had never known any-thing
at all. 
&dotup;I was equally shocked at him, and concerned for
him; and, having laid so few bricks (to speak to his
allusion) and those so ill-cemented, I was as willing
as the gay-inconsiderate, to call another cause, as he
termed it—Another cause, too, more immediately
pressing upon me, from my uncertain situation.&dotup; 
I said, I took it for granted, that he assented to the
reasoning he seemed to approve, and would leave me. 
And then I asked him, What he really, and in his most
deliberate mind, would advise me to, in my present
situation? He must needs see, I said, that I was at a
great loss what to resolve upon; entirely a stranger to
London, having no adviser, no protector, at present: 
Himself, he must give me leave to tell him, greatly deficient
in practice, if not in the knowlege, of those decorums,
which, I had supposed, were always to be
found in a man of birth, fortune, and education. 
He imagines himself, I find, to be a very polite
man, and cannot bear to be thought otherwise. He put
up his lip—I am sorry for it, Madam—A man of
breeding, a man of politeness, give me leave to say
[colouring] is much more of a black Swan with you,
than with any Lady I ever met with. 
Then that is your misfortune, Mr. Lovelace, as
well as mine, at present. Every woman of discernment,
I am confident, knowing what I know of you
now, would say as I say [I had a mind to mortify a
pride, that I am sure deserves to be mortified]; that 

your politeness is not regular, nor constant. It is not
habit. It is too much seen by fits, and starts, and sallies,
and those not spontaneous. You must be reminded
into them. 
O Lord! O Lord!—Poor I!—was the light, yet
the half-angry wretch's self-pitying expression! 
I proceeded. —Upon my word, Sir, you are not
the accomplished man, which your talents and opportunities
would have led one to expect you to be. You
are indeed in your Noviciate, as to every laudable attainment. 