



My dearest Child,
It may not be improper to mention ourselves,
what the Nature of the Kindnesses is, which
we confer on our poor Neighbours, and the
labouring People, lest it should be surmised by
any body, that we are lavishing away Wealth
that is not our own. Not that we fear either
your honoured Husband or you will suspect any
such Matter, or that the worthy Mr. Longman
would insinuate as much; for he saw what we
did, and was highly pleased with it, and said
he would make such a Report of it as you write
he did. What we do is in small Things, tho'
the Good we hope from them is not small perhaps:
And if a very distressful Case should happen
among our poor Neighbours, that would
require any thing considerable, and the Objects
be deserving, we would acquaint you with it,
and leave it to you to do as God should direct
you. 
But this, indeed, we have done, and continue
to do: We have furnished ourselves with
Simple Waters and Cordials of several Sorts; 
and when in a hot sultry Day, I see poor
labouring Creatures ready to faint and drop
down, if they are only fatigued, I order them
a Mouthful of Bread or so, and a Cup of good
Ale or Beer, and this makes them go about
their Business with new Spirits; and when they
bless me for it, I tell them, they must bless the
good 'Squire, from whose Bounty, next to God, 

it all proceeds. If any are ill, I give them a
Cordial; and we have been the Means of setting
up several poor Creatures, who have
labour'd under Colicky and Aguish Disorders,
or have been taken with slight Stomach Ailments. 
And nothing is lost by it, my dear
Child; for poor People have as grateful Souls as
any body; and it would delight your dear Heart
to see how many drooping Spirits we have raised,
and how, in an Hour or Two, some of them,
after a little cordial Refreshment, from languishing
under a Hedge, or behind a Hay-stack, have
skipped about, as nimble as Deer, whistling and
singing, and pursuing with Alacrity their several
Imployments; and instead of cursing and swearing,
as is the Manner of some wicked Wretches,
nothing but Blessings and Praises poured out of
their glad Hearts upon his Honour and you; 
calling me their Father and Friend, and telling
me, They will live and die for me and my Wife; 
and that we shall never want an industrious Servant
to do his Honour's Business, or to cultivate
the Farm I am blessed in. And in like sort, we
communicate to our sick or wanting Neighbours,
even altho' they be not Tenants to the Estate. 
Come, my dear Child, you are happy, very
happy, to be sure you are; and, if it can be, may
you be yet happier and happier! But still I verily
think you cannot be more happy than your Father
and Mother, except in this one thing, That all our
Happiness, under God, proceeds from you; and,
as other Parents bless their Children with Plenty
and Benefits, you have bless'd your Parents (or 

your honoured Husband rather, for your sake)
with all the good Things this World can afford. 
The Papers you send us are the Joy of our
Leisure Hours; and you are kind, beyond all
Expression, in taking care to oblige us with
them. We know how your Time is taken up,
and ought to be very well contented, if but now-and-then 
you let us hear of your Health and
Welfare. But it is not enough with such a good
Daughter, that you have made our Lives comfortable,
but you will make them joyful too,
by communicating to us all that befals you: And
then you write so piously, and with such a Sense
of God's Goodness to you, and intermix such
good Reflections in your Writings, that, whether
it be out partial Love or not, I cannot tell,
but, truly, we think nobody comes up to you:
And you make our Hearts and our Eyes so often
overflow, as we read, that we join Hand in
Hand together, and I say to her, Blessed be God,
and blessed be you, my Dear. And she, in the
same Breath, Blessed be God, and you, my Love–––– 
For such a Daughter, says the one—For such a
Daughter, says the other. —And she has your
own sweet Temper, cry I—And she has your
own honest Heart, cries she. And so we go on,
blessing God, and blessing you, and blessing your
Spouse, and blessing ourselves! —Is any Happiness
like our Happiness, my dear Daughter! 
Really and indeed, we are so enraptur'd
with your Writings, that when our Spirits flag,
thro' the Infirmity of Years, which hath begun
to take hold of us, we have recourse to some of 

your Papers. Come, my Dear, cry I, what say
you to a Banquet now? —She knows what I
mean. With all my Heart, says she. —So I
read, altho' it be on a Sunday, so good are your
Letters; and, you must know, I have Copies
of a many of them: And after a little while,
we are as much alive and brisk, as if we had no
Flagging at all, and return to the Duties of the
Day with double Delight. 
Consider then, my dear Child, what Joy
your Writings give us: And yet we are afraid
of oppressing you, who have so much to do of
other Kinds; and we are heartily glad you have
found out a way to save Trouble to yourself,
and rejoice us, and oblige so worthy a young
Lady as Miss Darnford, all at one time. I never
shall forget her dear Goodness to me, and
the Notice she took of me at the Hall*  , kindly
pressing my rough Hands with her fine Hands,
and looking in my Face with so much Kindness
in her Eyes!—to be sure I never shall. — 
What good People, as well as bad, there are in
high Stations! —Thank God there are; else
our poor Child would have had a sad Time of
it too often, when she was obliged to step out of
herself, as once I heard you phrase it, into Company
you could not live with. 
Well, but what shall I say more? And yet
how shall I end? —Only, with my Prayers,
that God will continue to you the Blessings and
Comforts you are in Possession of! —And pray 

now, be not over-thoughtful about what may
happen at London; for why should you let the
Dread of future Evils lessen your present Joys? 
There is no absolute Perfection in this Life,
that's true; but one would make one's self as
easy as one could. 'Tis Time enough to be
troubled when Troubles come:—Sufficient
unto the Day is the Evil thereof. 
Rejoice then, my dear Child, as you have
often said you would, in your present Blessings,
and leave the Event of Things to the Supreme
Disposer of all Events. And what have you to
do, but rejoice? You, who cannot see a Sun
rise, but it is to bless you, and to raise up from
their Beds Numbers to join in the Blessing! You,
who can bless your high-born Friends, and your
low-born Parents, and obscure Relations! who
can bless the Rich by your Example, and the Poor
by your Bounty; and bless, besides, so good and
so brave a Husband! —O my dear Child, what,
let me repeat it, have you to do, but rejoice?–––– 
For many Daughters have done wisely, but you
have excelled them all. 
I will only add, that every thing the 'Squire
order'd, is just upon the Point of being finished. 
And when the good Time comes, that we shall
be again favoured with his Presence and yours,
what a still greater Joy will this afford to the
already overflowing Hearts of 
Your ever loving Father and Mother,
J. and E. Andrews! 

