


Miss Byron, To Lady G. 


Monday Morning, Nov. 6.
I Send you, my dearest Lady G. a copy of your
brother's Letter of Friday last; Lucy has transcribed
it for you. Lucy is very obliging. She desires
to be allowed to correspond with you; and makes
a merit of these transcriptions for an introduction:
That is her view. I give you fair notice of it, that
you may either check or encourage her, as you think
fit. 
Have I not cause to think your brother a little out
of the way in his resolution of so sudden a return? — 
This night perhaps, or to-morrow morning—I am
vexed, my dear, because he is such an anticipater,
that he leaves not to me the merit of obliging him beyond
his expectation. However, I shall rejoice to see
him. The moment he enters the room where I am,
he can have no faults. 
My aunt, who thinks he is full hasty, is gone to
dine with my grandmamma, and intends to settle with
that dear parent every-thing for his reception at Shirley-manor. 
Nancy is gone with her. My uncle, at
Mr. Orme's invitation, is gone to dine with that
worthy man. 

Monday Afternoon.
O my dearest Lady G! what shall we do? All
quarrels are at an end! all petulance! all folly! —I
may never, never, be his at all! —I may, before the
expected time of his arrival, be the most miserable of
women! —Your brother, best of men!—may be— 
Ah—my Charl— 
* *
Terrified to death, my pen fell from my fingers
—I fainted away—Nobody came near me. I know I
was not long insensible—My terrors broke through
even the sit I fell into—Nothing but death itself could
make me long insensible, on such an occasion—O how
I shall terrify you! —Dearest Lady G.—But here,
here comes my Lucy—Let her give the occasion of my
anguish. 

The following written by Miss Lucy Selby.
At my cousin's request, while she is lain down, I
proceed, my good Lady G. to account to you
for her terrors, and for mine also. —Dear creature! — 
But don't be too much terrified: God, we hope,
God, we pray, will protect your brother! Mr. Greville
cannot be capable of the shocking mischief, barbarity,
villainy, which, it is apprehended, he has in
view: God will protect your brother! 
Here, a note was brought from an anonymous hand
—I don't know what I write, from an unknown hand; 
signifying, that Mr. Greville was heard to threaten
the life of your brother; and we are told, by more
than one, that he is moody, and in a bad way as to
his mind. And he left his house this morning; so
the note says (And that he certainly did) and was seen
to take the London road, with several servants, and
others—And the dear Harriet has distracted herself
and me with her apprehensions. My aunt out, my
uncle out, none but maid-servants at home. We, 

before she came up to her closet, ran up and down,
directing, and undirecting; and she promised to go
up, and try to compose herself, till my uncle came
from The Park, where he is to dine with Mr. Orme. 
He is sent for—Thank God my uncle is come!— 

By Miss Byron.
And what, my dear Lady G. can his coming signify? 
Lucy is gone down to shew him the anonymous
writer's note. Dear, dear Sir! Lord of my wishes!
forgive me all my petulance. Come safe—God grant
it! —Come safe! And Hand and Heart I will be yours,
if you require it, to-morrow morning! 
* *
Here follows the copy of the alarming note. I
broke the seal. It was thus directed: 

To George Selby, Esq; With speed, speed, speed.
Honoured Sir,
A Very great respecter of one of the most generous
and noblest of men (Sir Charles Grandison, I
mean) informs you, that his life is in great danger. 
He over-heard Mr. Greville say, in a rageful manner,
as by his voice, ‘I never will allow such a prize to be
carried from me. He shall die the death,’ and swore
to it. He was a little in wine, it is true; and I
should have disregarded it for that reason, had I not
informed myself that he is set out with armed men
this morning. Make what use you please of this:
You never will know the writer. But love and reverence
to the young Baronet is all my motive. So
help me God! 

Two of my uncle's tenants, severally, saw the
shocking creature on the London road, with servants. 
What will become of me, before morning, if he arrives
not this night in safety! 

Monday Night, Eleven. 
My uncle dispatched two servants to proceed on
the London road as far as they could go for day-light. 
He himself rode to Mr. Greville's. Mr. Greville had
been out all day, and well attended—Expected, however,
to return at night. —To prepare for his escape
(who knows?) after the blackest of villainies. My
aunt is in tears; my uncle recollects aggravating circumstances. 
Our preparations, your brother's preparations,
Mr. Deane's expected arrival of to-morrow— 
Lucy weeps; Nancy wrings her hands—Your Harriet
is in silent anguish—She can weep no more! — 
She can write no more! 
Tuesday Morning, 8 o'Clock, Nov. 7.
What a dreadful night have I had! Not a wink
of sleep. 
And nobody stirring. Afraid to come down, I
suppose, for fear of seeing each other. My eyes are
swelled out of my head. —I wonder my uncle is not
down. He might give orders about something—I
know not what! What dreadful visions had I ready,
as it seemed, to continue my disturbance, could I
have closed my eyes to give seeming form to the flying
shadows! Waking dreams: For I was broad
awake: Sally sat up with me. Such startings! such
absences! —I never was so before. Such another night
would I not have for the world! I can only write. 
Yet what do I write? To what purpose? —You must
not see what I have written. Now on my knees,
praying, vowing: Now—O my Lucy! 
* *
Lucy entered just here—Nancy followed her— 
Nancy tormented me with her resveries of the past
night: My aunt is not well; she has not slept: My
uncle fell into a dose, about his usual rising-time: He
has had no rest. My grandmamma must not know 

the occasion of our grief, till it cannot be kept form
her—If—But no more—Dreadful If— 

