


Lady G. To Miss Byron. 


Grosvenor-Square, Tuesday, Oct. 10.
I Return your two Letters: Very good ones, both,
I like them. Lord L. and Lord G. thank you
for allowing them to peruse them. We will know
nothing of the matter. My brother will soon be with
you, I believe. I wish Dr. Bartlett were in town:
One should then know something of the motions of
my brother—Not that he is reserved, neither. But he
is so much engaged, that I go four times to St. James's-Square,
and perhaps do not see him once. My Lord
had the assurance to say, but yesterday, that I was
there more than at home. He is very impertinent: I
believe he has taken up my sauciness. I laid it down,
and thought to resume it occasionally; but when I
came to look for it, behold! it was gone! —But I
hope, if he has it not, it is only mislaid. I intend,
if it come not soon to hand, to set the parish-crier to
proclaim the loss, with a reward for the finder. It
might be the ruin of some indiscreet woman, should
such a one meet with it, and try to use it. Aunt
Eleanor [There I remembred myself: No more aunt 

Nell!] is as joyful, to think her nephew will soon be
married, and to an English woman, as if she were
going to be married herself. Were there to be a
wedding in the family, or among her acquaintance,
once a year! what with preparation, what with solemnization,
good old soul! she would live for ever. 
Chide again, Harriet; I value it not. Yet in your
last chiding you were excessively grave: But I forgive
you. Be good, and write me every-thing how and
about it; and write to the moment: You cannot be
too minute. 
I want you to see Lady Olivia's presents: They are
princely. I want to see a Letter she wrote to my brother:
He mentioned it as something extraordinary. 
When you are his, you must shew me all he writes,
that you are permitted to have in your power long
enough to transcribe. He and she correspond. Do
you like that, Harriet? —Lady L. writes: Emily
writes. So I have only to say, I am 
Your humble Servant, and so-forth,
Ch. G. 

