



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday Night, March 24. 
I have a most provoking Letter from my Sister. I
might have supposed, she would resent the contempt
she brought upon herself in my chamber. Her
conduct surely can only be accounted for by the rage
instigated by a supposed Rivalry. 

To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
I am to tell you, That your Mother has begged
you off for the morrow: But that you have effectually
done your business with her, as well as with
every-body else. 
In your Proposals, and Letter to your Brother, you
have shewn yourself so silly, and so wise; so young,
and so old; so gentle, and so obstinate; so meek, and
so violent; that never was there so mixed a character. 

We all know of whom you have borrowed this
new spirit. And yet the seeds of it must be in your
heart, or it could not all at once shew itself so rampant. 
It would be doing Mr. Solmes a spite to wish
him such a shy, un-shy girl; another of your contradictory
qualities—I leave you to make out what I
mean by it. 
Here, Miss, your Mother will not let you remain: 
She cannot have any peace of mind while such a rebel
of a child is so near her: Your Aunt Hervey will not
take a charge which all the family put together cannot
manage: Your Uncle Harlowe will not see you
at his house till you are married—So, thanks to your
own stubbornness, you have nobody that will receive
you but your Uncle Antony—Thither you must go in
a very few days; and when there, your Brother will
settle with you, in my presence, all that relates to
your modest challenge: —For it is accepted, I assure
you. Dr. Lewen will possibly be there, since you
make choice of him. Another gentleman likewise,
were it but to convince you, that he is another sort of
man than you have taken him to be. Your two Uncles
will possibly be there too, to see that the poor, weak,
and defenceless Sister has fair play. So, you see, Miss,
what company your smart challenge will draw together. 
Prepare for the day. You'll soon be called upon. 
Adieu, Mamma Norton's sweet child! 
Arab. Harlowe. 
I transcribed this Letter, and sent it to my Mother,
with these lines. 

A very few words, my ever-honoured Mamma!
If my Sister wrote the inclosed by my Father's direction,
or yours, I must submit to the usage she
gives me in it, with this only observation, That it is
short of the personal treatment I have received from
her. If it be of her own head—Why then, Madam— 

But I knew, that when I was banished from your presence
—Yet, till I know if she has or has not authority
for this usage, I will only write further, that I am 
Your very unhappy Child,
Cl. Harlowe. 
This Answer I received in an open slip of paper; 
but it was wet in one place. I kissed the place; for
I am sure it was blister'd, as I may say, by a Mother's
tear! —She must (I hope she must) have written
it reluctantly. 

To apply for protection, where authority is defied,
is bold. Your Sister, who would not in your circumstances
have been guilty of your perverseness, may
allowably be angry at you for it. However, we have
told her to moderate her zeal for our insulted authority. 
See, if you can deserve another behaviour, than That
you complain of: Which cannot, however, be so
grievous to you, as the cause of it is to 
Your more unhappy Mother. 
How often must I forbid you any address to me! 
Give me, my dearest Miss Howe, your opinion,
what I can, what I ought to do. Not what you
would do (pushed as I am pushed) in resentment or
passion—since, so instigated, you tell me, that you
should have been with somebody before now—And
steps taken in passion hardly ever fail of giving cause
for repentance: But acquaint me with what you think
cool judgment, and after-reflection, whatever were
to be the event, will justify. 
I doubt not your sympathizing Love: But yet you
cannot possibly feel indignity and persecution so very
sensibly as the immediate sufferer feels them—Are
fitter therefore to advise me, than I am myself. 
I will here rest my cause. Have I, or have I not,
suffered or borne enough? And if they will still persevere; 

if that strange persister against an antipathy so
strongly avowed, will still persist; say, What can I
do? —What course pursue? —Shall I fly to London,
and endeavour to hide myself from Lovelace, as well
as from all my own relations, till my Cousin Morden
arrives? Or shall I embark for Leghorn in my way
to my Cousin? Yet, my Sex, my Youth, considered,
how full of danger is this last measure! —And may
not my Cousin be set out for England, while I am
getting thither? —What can I do? —Tell me, tell
me, my dearest Miss Howe [for I dare not trust myself]
Tell me what I can do. 
Eleven o'Clock at Night. 
I have been forced to try to compose my angry
passions at my Harpsichord; having first shut close
my doors and windows, that I might not be heard
below. As I was closing the shutters of the windows,
the distant whooting of the Bird of Minerva, as from
the often-visited Woodhouse, gave the subject in that
charming Ode to Wisdom, which does honour to
our Sex, as it was written by one of it. I made an
essay, a week ago, to set the three last Stanza's of it,
as not unsuitable to my unhappy situation; and after
I had re-perused the Ode, those were my Lesson: 
And, I am sure, in the solemn address they contain
to the All-wise and All powerful Deity, my heart
went with my fingers. 
I inclose the Ode, and my effort with it. The
subject is solemn: My circumstances are affecting; 
and I flatter myself, that I have not been quite unhappy
in the performance. If it obtain your approbation,
I shall be out of doubt: And should be still more
assured, could I hear it tried by your voice and finger. 


ODE TO WISDOM. By a LADY.


I.
The solitary Bird of Night
Thro' the thick Shades now wings his Flight,
 And quits his Time-shook Tow'r;
Where shelter'd from the Blaze of Day,
In philosophic Gloom he lay,
 Beneath his Ivy Bow'r.

II.
With Joy I hear the solemn Sound,
Which midnight Echoes waft around,
 And sighing Gales repeat.
Fav'rite of Pallas! I attend,
And, faithful to thy Summons, bend
 At Wisdom's awful Seat.

III.
She loves the cool, the silent Eve,
Where no false Shews of Life deceive,
 Beneath the Lunar Ray.
Here Folly drops each vain Disguise;
Nor sport her gaily-colour'd Dyes,
 As in the Beam of Day.


IV.
O Pallas! Queen of ev'ry Art,
That glads the Sense, and mends the Heart,
 Blest Source of purer Joys!
In ev'ry Form of Beauty bright,
That captivates the mental Sight
 With Pleasure and Surprize;

V.
To thy unspotted Shrine I bow:
Attend thy modest Suppliant's Vow,
 That breathes no wild Desires;
But, taught by thy unerring Rules,
To shun the fruitless Wish of Fools,
 To nobler Views aspires.

VI.
Not Fortune's Gem, Ambition's Plume,
Nor Cytherea's fading Bloom,
 Be Objects of my Pray'r:
Let Av'rice, Vanity, and Pride,
Those envy'd glitt'ring Toys divide,
 The dull Rewards of Care.

VII.
To me thy better Gifts impart,
Each moral Beauty of the Heart,
 By studious Thought refin'd;

For Wealth, the Smiles of glad Content;
For Pow'r, its amplest, best Extent,
 An Empire o'er my Mind.

VIII.
When Fortune drops her gay Parade,
When Pleasure's transient Roses fade,
 And wither in the Tomb,
Unchang'd is thy immortal Prize;
Thy ever-verdant Laurels rise
 In undecaying Bloom.

IX.
By Thee protected, I defy
The Coxcomb's Sneer, the stupid Lye
 Of Ignorance and Spite:
Alike contemn the leaden Fool,
And all the pointed Ridicule
Of undiscerning Wit.

X.
From Envy, Hurry, Noise, and Strife,
The dull Impertinence of Life,
 In thy Retreat I rest:
Pursue thee to the peaceful Groves,
Where Plato's sacred Spirit roves,
 In all thy Beauties drest.


XI.
He bad Ilyssus' tuneful Stream
Convey thy Philosophic Theme
 Of Perfect, Fair, and Good:
Attentive Athens caught the Sound,
And all her list'ning Sons around
 In awful Silence stood:

XII.
Reclaim'd her wild licentious Youth,
Confess'd the potent Voice of Truth,
 And felt its just Controul.
The Passions ceas'd their loud Alarms,
And Virtue's soft persuasive Charms
 O'er all their Senses stole.

XIII.
Thy Breath inspires the Poet's Song,
The Patriot's free, unbyass'd Tongue,
 The Hero's gen'rous Strife;
Thine are Retirement's silent Joys,
And all the sweet engaging Ties
 Of STILL, DOMESTIC Life.


XIV.
No more to fabled Names confin'd,
To Thee Supreme all perfect Mind,
 My Thoughts direct their Flight.
Wisdom's thy Gift & all her force
From Thee deriv'd, Eternal source
 Of Intel-lectual Light!

XV
O send her sure, her steady Ray,
To regulate my doubtful Way,
 Thro' Life's perplexing Road:
The Mists of Error to controul,
And thro' its Gloom direct my Soul
 To Happiness and Good.

XVI
Beneath Her clear discerning Eye
The visionary Shadows fly
 Of Folly's painted Show.
She sees thro' ev'ry fair Disguise,
That All but Virtue's solid Joys,
  Is Vanity and Woe.