


Mr. Reeves. In Continuation. 


Monday Night, Feb. 20. 
I Will write one more letter, my dear cousin
Selby, and then I will give up my pen to our beloved
cousin. 

I got to Colnebrooke by nine this morning. I had
the pleasure to find our Miss Byron recovered beyond
my hopes. She had a very good night on Saturday; 
and all Sunday, she said, was a cordial day to her
from morning till night; and her night was quiet and
happy. 
Miss Grandison staid at home yesterday to keep my
cousin company. Sir Charles passed the greatest part
of the day in the library. The two ladies were hardly
ever separated. My cousin expresses herself in raptures
whenever she speaks of this brother and sister. 
Miss Grandison, she says (and indeed every one must
see it) is one of the frankest and most communicative
of women. Sir Charles appears to be one of the most
unreserved of men, as well as one of the most polite. 
He makes not his guests uneasy with his civilities:
But you see freedom and ease in his whole deportment; 
and the stranger cannot doubt but Sir Charles
will be equally pleased with freedom and ease, in return. 
I had an encouraging proof of the justness of
this observation this morning from him, as we sat at
breakfast. I had expressed myself, occasionally, in such
a manner, as shewed more respect than freedom: My
dear Mr. Reeves, said he, like minds will be intimate
at first sight. Receive me early into the list of your
friends; I have already numbered you among mine. 
I should think amiss of myself, if so good a man as I
am assured Mr. Reeves is, should by his distance shew
a diffidence of me, that would not permit his mind
to mingle with mine. 
Miss Grandison, my cousin says, put her on relating
to her, her whole history; and the histories of the
several persons and families to whom she is related. 
Miss Byron concluding as well as I, that Sir Charles
would rather take his place in the coach, than go on
horseback to town; and being so happily recovered,
as not to give us apprehension about her bearing tolerably
the little journey; I kept my horse in our return, 

and Sir Charles went in the coach. This motion
coming from Miss Byron, I raillied her upon it when
I got her home: But she won't forgive me, if she
knows that I told you, whose the motion was. And
yet the dear creature's eyes sparkled with pleasure
when she had carried her point. 
I was at home near half an hour before the coach
arrived; and was a welcome guest. 
My dear Mrs. Reeves told me she had expected our
arrival before dinner, and hoped Sir Charles and his
sister would dine with us. I hoped so too, I told her. 
I found there Lady Betty and Miss Clements, a favourite
of us all, both impatiently waiting to see my
cousin. 
Don't be jealous, Mr. Reeves, said my wife, if
after what I have heard of Sir Charles Grandison, and
what he has done for us, I run to him with open
arms. 
I give you leave my dear to love him, replied I; 
and to express your love in what manner you please. 
I have no doubt, said Lady Betty, that I shall break
my heart, if Sir Charles takes not very particular notice
of me. 
He shall have my prayers as well as my praises,
said Miss Clements. 
She is acquainted with the whole shocking affair. 
When the coach stopt, and the bell rung, the servants
contended who should first run to the door. I
welcomed them at the coach. Sir Charles handed out
Miss Byron, I Miss Grandison: Sally, said my cousin,
to her raptured maid, take care of Mrs. Jenny. 
Sir Charles was received by Mrs. Reeves, as I expected. 
She was almost speechless with joy. He
saluted her: But I think, as I tell her, the first motion
was hers. He was then obliged to go round; and
my cousin, I do assure you, looked as if she would
not wish to have been neglected. 
As soon as the ladies could speak, they poured out 

their blessings and thanks to him; and to Miss Grandison; 
whom, with a most engaging air, he presented
to each lady; and she, as engagingly, saluted her
sister Hartiet by that tender relation, and congratulated
them, and Miss Byron, and herself, upon it; kindly
bespeaking a family relation for herself thro' her dear
Miss Byron, were her words. 
When we were seated, my wife and Lady Betty
wanted to enter into the particulars of the happy deliverance,
in praise of the deliverer; but Sir Charles
interrupting them, My dear Mrs. Reeves, said he, you
cannot be too careful of this jewel. Every-thing may
be trusted to her own discretion; but how can we
well blame the man who would turn thief for so rich a
treasure? I do assure you, my sister Harriet [Do you
know, Mrs. Reeves, that I have found my third sister? 
Was she not stolen from us in her cradle?] that if Sir
Hargrave will repent, I will forgive him for the sake
of the temptation. 
Mrs. Reeves was pleased with this address, and has
talked of it since. 
I never can forgive him, Sir, said Miss Byron, were
it but— 
That he has laid you under such an obligation, said
Miss Grandison, patting her hand with her fan, as
she sat over-against her: But hush, child! You said
that before! —And then turning to Mrs. Reeves, Has
not our new-found sister a very proud heart, Mrs.
Reeves? 
And, dearest Miss Grandison, reply'd my smiling,
delighted cousin, did you not ask that question before? 
I did, child, I did; but not of Mrs. Reeves. —A
compromise however—Do you talk no more of obligation,
and I'll talk no more of pride. 
Charlotte justly chides her Harriet, said Sir Charles. 
What must the man have been that had declined his
aid in a distress so alarming? Not one word more
therefore upon this subject. 

We were all disappointed, that this amiable brother
and sister excused themselves from dining with us. All
I mean of our own family; for Lady Betty and Miss
Clements, not being able to stay, were glad they did
not. 
They took leave, amidst a thousand grateful blessings
and acknowlegements; Miss Grandison promising
to see her sister Harriet very soon again; and kindly
renewing her wishes of intimacy. 
When they went away, There goes your heart,
Miss Byron, said Mrs. Reeves. 
True, answered Miss Byron, if my heart have no
place in it for any-thing but gratitude, as I believe it
has not. 
Miss Grandison, added she, is the most agreeable
of women— 
And Sir Charles, rejoined Mrs. Reeves, archly, is
the most dis-agreeable of men. 
Forbear, cousin, reply'd Miss Byron, and blush'd. 
Well, well, said Lady Betty, you need not, my
dear, be ashamed, if it be so. 
Indeed you need not, joined in Miss Clements; I
never saw a finer man in my life. Such a lover, if
one might have him— 
If, if—replied Miss Byron—But till if is out of the
question, should there not be such a thing as discretion,
Miss Clements? 
No doubt of it, returned that young lady; and if
it be to be shewn by any woman on earth, where
there is such a man as this in the question, and in
such circumstances, it must be by Miss Byron. 
Miss Byron was not so thoroughly recovered, but
that her spirits began to flag. We made her retire,
and at her request excused her coming down to
dinner. 
I told you I had accepted of the offer made by Lady
Betty, when we were in dreadful uncertainty, that
her steward should make further enquiries about the 

people at Paddington. Nothing worth mentioning
has occurred from those enquiries; except confirming,
that the widow and her daughters are not people of
bad characters. In all likelihood they thought they
should intitle themselves to the thanks of all Miss
Byron's friends, when the marriage was completed
with a man of Sir Hargrave's fortune. 
The messenger that I sent to enquire after that Bagenhall's
character, has informed us, that it is a very
profligate one; and that he is an intimate of Sir Hargrave:
But no more is necessary now, God be praised,
to be said of him. 
The vile wretch himself, I hear, keeps his room,
and it is whispered that he is more than half-crazed; 
insomuch that his very attendants are afraid to go near
him. We know not the nature of his hurt; but hurt
he is, tho' in a fair way of recovery. He threatens,
it seems, destruction to Sir Charles the moment he is
able to go abroad. God preserve one of the worthiest
and best of men!— 
Sir Hargrave has turned off all the servants, we are
told, that attended him on his shocking and happily-disappointed
enterprize. 
Miss Byron intends to write to her Lucy by tomorrow's
post, if she continue mending, an ample
account of all that she suffered from the date of her
last letter, to the hour of her happy deliverance. I
am to give her minutes to the best of my recollection
of what I have written to you, that so the account
may be as complete as possible, and that she may
write no more than is consistent with the series, which
she is required to preserve. She begins this evening,
she bids me tell you, that you may be as little a while
in suspense about her as possible. But if she cannot
finish by to-morrow night, she will have an opportunity
to dispatch her letter on Wednesday by a servant
of Mr. Greville's, whom he left in town with some
commissions, and who promises to call for any-thing
we may have to send to Selby-house. 

Sir Rowland—But let my cousin write to you upon
that and other matters. She knows what to say on
that subject better than I do. 
Mean time I heartily congratulate every one of the
dear family upon the return and safety of the darling
of so many hearts, and remain, dear Mr. Selby, 
Your most faithful and obedient Servant,
Archibald Reeves. 

