


I Had a good deal of Employment in chusing
Patterns for my new Cloaths. He thought nothing
too good; but I thought everything I saw was; 
and he was so kind, to pick out Six of the richest,
for me to chuse three Suits out of, saying, we would
furnish ourselves with more in Town, when we went
thither. One was a white flower'd with Gold most
richly; and he was pleased to say, that as I was a
Bride, I should make my Appearance in that the following
Sunday. And so we shall have in two or three
Days, from several Places, nothing but Mantuamakers
and Taylors at Work. Bless me! what a
chargeable, and what a worthless Hussy I am, to the
dear Gentleman! —But his Fortune and Station
require a great deal of it; and his Value for me, will
not let him do less than if he had marry'd a Fortune
equal to his own; and then, as he says, it would be
a Reflection upon him if he did. —And so I doubt
it will be as it is: For, either way, the World will
have something to say. He made me also chuse some
very fine Laces, and Linen; and has sent a Message
on purpose, with his Orders, to hasten all down; 
what can be done in Town, as the Millenary Matters,
&c. to be completed there, and sent by particular
Messengers, as done. All to be here, and
finished by Saturday Afternoon without fail. 
I send away John this Morning, with some more
of my Papers to you, and with the few he will give
you, separate. My Desire is, that you will send me all
the Papers you have done with, that I may keep my
Word with Lady Davers; to beg the Continuance of
your Prayers and Blessings; to hope you will give me
your Answer about my dear Benefactor's Proposal of
the Kentish Farm; to beg you to buy two Suits of
Cloaths, each, of the finest Cloth for you, my dear
Father, and of a creditable Silk for my dear Mother; 
and good Linen, and every thing answerable; and
that you will, as my dearest Sir bid me say, let us
see you here, as soon as possible, and he will have his
Chariot come for you, when you tell John the Day. 
Oh! how I long to see you both, my dear good Parents,
and to share with you my Felicities! 
You will have, I am sure, the Goodness to go to
all your Creditors, which are chiefly those of my poor
unhappy Brothers, and get an Account of all you are
bound for; and every one shall be paid to the utmost
Farthing, and Interest beside, tho' some of them
have been very cruel and unrelenting. —But they
are all intitled to their own, and shall be thankfully
paid. 
Now I think of it, John shall take my Papers
down to this Place; that you may have something to
amuse you of your dear Child's, instead of those you
part with; and I will continue writing till I am settled,
and you are determin'd; and then I shall apply
myself to the Duties of the Family, in order to become
as useful to my dear Benefactor, as my small
Abilities will let me. 
If you think a Couple of Guineas will be of Use
to Mrs. Mumford, who I doubt has not much aforehand,
pray give them to her, from me, (and I will
return them to you) as for a Pair of Gloves on my
Nuptials: And look thro' your poor Acquaintance, 
and Neighbours, and let me have a List of such
honest, industrious Poor, as may be true Objects of
Charity; and have no other Afsistance; particularly
such as are blind, lame, or sickly, with their particular
Cases; and also, such poor Families and House-keepers
as are reduced by Misfortunes, as ours was,
and where a great Number of Children may keep
them from rising to a State of tolerable Comfort: 
And I will chuse as well as I can; for I long to be
making a Beginning, with the kind Quarterly Benevolence
my dear good Benefactor has bestowed on
me for such good Purposes. 
I am resolv'd to keep Account of all these Matters,
and Mr. Longman has already furnish'd me with a
Vellum-book of all white Paper; some Sides of which
I hope soon to fill, with the Names of proper Objects: 
And tho' my dear Master has given me all this
without Account, yet shall he see, (but nobody else)
how I lay it out, from Quarter to Quarter; and I
will, if any be left, carry it on, like an Accomptant,
to the next Quarter, and strike a Ballance four times
a Year, and a general Ballance at every Year's End. 
––– And I have written in it, Humble Returns for
Diyine Mercies; and lock it up safe in my newly
presented Cabinet. 
I intend to let Lady Davers seeno further of my Papers,
than to her own angry Letter to her Brother; for
I would not have her see my Reflections upon it; and
she'll know, down to that Place, all that's necessary
for her Curiosity, as to my Sufferings, and the Stratagems
used against me, and the honest Part God
enabled me to act: And I hope, when she sees them
all, she will be quite reconcil'd; for she will see it is
all God Almighty's Doings; and that a Gentleman
of his Parts and Knowledge was not to be drawnin
by such a poor young Body as me. I will detain John
no longer. He will tell you to read this last Part 

first, and while he stays. And so with my humble
Duty to you both, and my dear Sir's kind Remembrance,
I rest, 
Your ever dutiful and gratefully happy Daughter. 
