



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Monday Morning, March 6. 
They are resolved to break my heart. My
poor Hannah is discharged—disgracefully discharged! 
—Thus it was. 
Within half an hour after I had sent the poor girl
down for my breakfast, that bold creature Betty
Barnes, my Sister's confident and servant (if a favourite
maid and confident can be deemed a servant)
came up. 
What, Miss, will you please to have for breakfast? 
I was surprised. What will I have for breakfast,
Betty! —How! —What! —How comes it! —Then I
named Hannah. I could not tell what to say. 
Don't be surprised, Miss: —But you'll see Hannah
no more in this house. 
God forbid! —Is any harm come to Hannah? — 
What! What is the matter with Hannah? 
Why, Miss, the short and the long is this: Your
Papa and Mamma think Hannah has staid long enough
in the house to do mischief; and so she is ordered to
troop [That was the confident creature's word]; and I
am directed to wait upon you in her stead. 
I burst into tears. I have no service for you, Betty
Barnes; none at all. But where is Hannah? Cannot 

I speak with the poor girl? I owe her half a year's
wages. May I not see the honest creature, and pay
her her wages? I may never see her again perhaps; 
for they are resolved to break my heart. 
And they think you are resolved to break theirs: 
So tit for tat, Miss. 
Impertinent I called her; and asked her, If it were
upon such confident terms that her service was to
begin. 
I was so very earnest to see the poor maid, that
(to oblige me, as she said) she went down with my
request. 
The worthy creature was as earnest to see me; and
the favour was granted in presence of Shorey and
Betty. 
I thanked her, when she came up, for her past service
to me. 
Her heart was ready to break. And she began to
vindicate her fidelity and love; and disclaimed any
mischief she had ever made. 
I told her, that those who occasioned her being
turned out of my service, made no question of her
integrity: That her dismission was intended for an indignity
to me. That I was very sorry to be obliged
to part with her, and hoped she would meet with as
good a service. 
Never, never, wringing her hands, should she meet
with a mistress she loved so well. And the poor creature
ran on in my praises, and in professions of love
to me. 
We are all apt, you know, my dear, to praise our
benefactors, because they are our benefactors; as if
every-body did right or wrong, as they obliged or disobliged
us. But this good creature deserved to be
kindly treated; so I could have no merit in favouring
one whom it would have been ingrateful not to distinguish. 
I gave her a little linen, some laces, and other odd 

things; and instead of four pounds which were due
to her, ten guineas: And said, if ever I were again
allowed to be my own mistress, I would think of her
in the first place. 
Betty enviously whispered Shorey upon it. 
Hannah told me, before their faces, having no
other opportunity, that she had been examined about
Letters to me, and from me: And that she had given
her pockets to Miss Harlowe, who looked into them,
and put her fingers in her stays, to satisfy herself that
she had not any. 
She gave me an account of the number of my Pheasants
and Bantams; and I said, they should be my
own care twice or thrice a day. 
We wept over each other at parting. The girl
prayed for all the family. 
To have so good a servant so disgracefully dismissed,
is very cruel: And I could not help saying,
That these methods might break my heart, but not
any other way answer the end of the authors of my
disgraces. 
Betty, with a very saucy fleer, said to Shorey,
There would be a trial of skill about that, she fansied. 
But I took no notice of it. If this wench
thinks that I have robbed her young mistress of a
Lover, as you say she has given out, she may believe
that it is some degree of merit in herself to be impertinent
to me. 
Thus have I been forced to part with my faithful
Hannah. If you can commend the good creature to
a place worthy of her, pray do for my sake. 