


Miss Selby, To Lady G. 


Thursday night, Nov. 30. 
And must I write your Ladyship one more Letter? 
And will a short one content you? 
Well then, I'll try for it. 

On Sunday last, we hoped to be quiet and good:
But the church was as much crouded as it was the
Sunday before. 
Monday and Tuesday the Bride and Bridegroom
returned the visits made them. At one, they met
Miss Orme, and accompanied her to their seat called
The Park, at her request. You did not seem to like
my account of Sir Charles's interview with Mr. Orme
in my last: So I will not tell you what passed on occasion
of this visit to that worthy man. I will be
as perverse as you are difficult. I don't care. Yet,
as your new sister described the meeting and parting
to me, you would have been pleased with what I could
have told you. 
Yesterday we had a Ball given by Mrs. Shirley. 
Were I able to write to please you, how I could expatiate
on this occasion! How did the Bridegroom
shine! Every-body was in raptures with him, on his
charming behaviour to his Bride. The notice he took
of her was neither too little, nor too much, for the
most delicate observers. Every young Lady envied
her; and how coldly did some of them look on their
own humble servants! They indeed were as regardful
of him as their mistresses; so bore the preference
the better. My uncle Selby was all, and more than
all, he used to be. How happy, that he is a sober
man! His joy, raised by wine, would have made him
mad. 
This day we have been all happy together. A
calm, serene day; at Shirley-manor! And thus is
the matte settled among us—Your brother and new
sister; my uncle and aunt Selby; Mr. Deane, and
your Ladyship's humble servant; are to set out early
to-morrow morning for London. My brother James
would fain accompany us; Sir Charles kindly inviting
him: But I withstood it; so did my aunt; the
private reason because of Miss Jervois. 
Sir Charles thinks to stay in town till the Friday 

following; and then proposes to carry his Bride and
all of us, to Grandison-hall. 
A motion was made to Sir Charles by my grandmamma
Selby; whether he would not choose to be
presented with his Lady to the King on their nuptials. 
Sir Charles answered, that he was ready to comply
with every proposal that should shew his duty to his
Sovereign, and the grateful sense he had of the honour
done him by his Harriet. 
We are to call on Lord and Lady W. at Windfor; 
and take them with us. 
My cousin and I are to write constantly to our
two grandmamma's. My sister Nancy devotes herself
to our grandmother Selby. Miss Holles's will
constantly visit Mrs. Shirley. Sir Charles is to bring
down his Lady twice a year, or oftener, if conveniency
permit. 
He hoped, he said, after awhile, to induce his
Harriet to take a trip with him to Ireland, to inspect
the improvements making in his estate there. He
will find no difficulty, I believe, to prevail upon her
to accompany him thither; nor even, were he disposed
to it, to the world's end. 
He hopes for a visit from the Italian family, so deservedly
dear to him; by which he is to regulate many
of his future motions. 
His new-taken house in Grosvenor-square being,
as you know, nearly ready, he proposes to compliment
with it those noble guests, for the time of their
residence in England; for he will not, it seems, be
so soon obliged to quit his present London-house, as
he had thought he must. 
And thus, my dear Lady G. have I obeyed your
commands. I know you will not be satisfied with me. 
Had I been able to follow a subject that was made to
my hand, I should have attempted the parting scene
between my cousin and her grandmamma. Could I
have borrowed your pen, I would have display'd the 

tender, yet magnanimous parent, not once, tho' tottering
with age and infirmities, hinting that she might
never again see the darling of her heart. She saddened
not hope; but encouraged it. All she said, demonstrated
Love of her Harriet, divested of Self, and a soul
above the weaker passions; and well might she, since
she has already one foot among the stars, and can
look down with pity, unmixed with envy, on all
those who by their youth, are doomed to toil through
the rugged road of life, in search of a happiness that
is not to be met with in it; and at the highest, can
be compounded for, only by the blessing of a contented
mind. With the same pen, before I had resigned it,
would I have described the lovely grandchild embracing
the knees of the indulgent parent, not satisfied
with one, two, three blessings; and, less generously
in the purport, tho' not in the intent (judging from
her own present happiness, that there is still something
worth wishing for to be met with in this world)
praying to God to preserve the over-ripened fruit still
on the withered tree: In which we all joined. But
O how much less generously, as I hinted, because it
was altogether for our own sakes! —But I know not
whose pen I must have borrowed, to have done justice
to Sir Charles Grandison's behaviour on this occasion! 
Excuse this serious conclusion, my dear Lady G.
My cousin shall not see it. May she know nothing
but felicity! In hers is bound up that of Sir Charles
Grandison; and in his that of hundreds. I long,
tho' we parted so lately, to throw myself at your seet,
and to assure you, that whatever defects there are in
my pen, there are none in the Love borne you, by 
Your Ladyship's
Most sincere admirer, and humble Servant,
Lucy Selby. 

