


Miss Byron, To Lady G. 


Monday, Sept. 25.
What have I done to my Charlotte? Is there
not something cold and particular in your stile,
especially in that part of your Letter preceding the
entrance of my good Lady L.? And in your Postscript
—You will give us copies, if you are as obliging as
you used to be. —Why should I, when likely to be more
obliged to you than ever, be less obliging than before? 
I can't bear this from Lady G. Are you giving me a
proof of the truth of your own observation? ‘That
we may be very differently affected by the same
event, when judged of at a distance, and near.’ —I
could not support my spirits, if the sister of Sir Charles
Grandison loved me the less for the distinction her
brother pays me. 
And what, my dear, if Lady Clementina should
relent, as you phrase it? —My friends might be
now grieved—Well, and I might be affected too,
more than if the visit to my grandmamma had not
been made: I own it. —But the high veneration I
truly profess to have for Lady Clementina, would be
parade and pretension, if, whatever became of your
Harriet, I did not resolve, in that case, to try, at least,
to make myself easy, and give up to her prior and
worthier claim: And I should consider her effort,
tho' unsuccessful, as having intitled her to my highest
esteem. To what we know to be right, we ought to
submit; the more difficult, the more meritorious:
And, in this case, your Harriet would conquer, or die. 
If she conquered, she would then, in that instance,
be greater than even Clementina. O my dear, we
know not, till we have the trial, what emulation will
enable a warm and honest mind to do. 

I will send you inclosed, copies of the two Letters
transcribed by Lucy(a) . I am very proud of them
both; perhaps too proud; and it may be necessary
that I should be pulled down; tho' I expected it not
from my Charlotte. ‘To be complimented in so
noble and sincere a manner as you will see I am,
with the power of laying an obligation on him,’ 
(instead of owing it to his compassionate consideration
for a creature so long labouring in suspense, and then
despairing that her hopes could be answered) is enough
at the same time to flatter her vanity, and gratify the
most delicate sensibility. 
You will see ‘how gratefully he takes my grandmamma's
hint, that I knew how by experience to
account for a double, a divided Love, as she is
pleased to call it—and the preference my aunt, and
herself, and I, have given to the claim of Lady
Clementina.’ You, my dear, know our sincerity
in this particular. There is some merit in owning a
truth when it makes against us. To do justice in
another's case against one's self, is, methinks, making
at least a second merit for one's self. ‘He asks my
leave to attend me at Selby-house.’ —I should rejoice
to see him—But I could wish, methinks, that he
had first received Letters from abroad. But how can
I hint my wishes to him without implying either doubt
or reserve? —Reserve in the delay of his visit implied
by such hint; doubt, of his being at liberty to pursue
his intentions: That would not become me to shew; 
as it might make him think that I wanted protestations
and assurances from him, in order to bind him
to me; when, if the situation be such as obliges him
to balance but in thought, and I could know it; I
would die before I would accept of his hand. He has
confirmed and established, as I may say, my pride (I
had always some) by the distinction he has given 

me: Yet I should despise myself, if I found it gave me
either arrogance, or affectation. ‘He is so considerate
as to dispense with my answering his Letters;’ 
for he is pleased to say, ‘That if I do not forbid him
to come down, by my aunt Selby, or my grandmamma,
he will presume upon my leave.’ 
My uncle set out for Peterborough, in order to bring
Mr. Deane with him to Selby-house. Poor Mr.
Deane had kept his chamber for a week before; yet
had not let us know he was ill. He was forbid to go
abroad for two days more; but was so overjoyed at
what my uncle communicated to him, that he said,
he was not sensible of ailing any-thing; and he
would have come with my uncle next day, but neither
he nor the doctor would permit it: But on Tuesday
he came. —Such joy! —Dear good man! —Such
congratulations! —How considerable, to their happiness,
do they all make that of their too-too much obliged
Harriet! 
They have been in consultation often; but they
have excluded me from some particular ones. I guess
the subject; and beg of them, that I may not be too
much obliged. What critical situations have I been
in! When will they be at an end? 
Mr. Deane has written to Sir Charles. I am not
to know the contents of his Letter. The hearts of
us women, when we are urged to give way to a clandestine
and unequal address, or when inclined to favour
such a one, are apt, and are pleaded with, to rise
against the notions of bargain and sale. Smithfield
bargains, you Londoners call them: But unjust is the
odium, if preliminaries are necessary in all treaties of
this nature. And surely previous stipulations are indispensably
so among us changeable mortals, however
promising the sunshine may be at our setting out on
the journey of life; a journey too that will not be
ended but with the life of one of the travellers. 
If I ever were to be tempted to wish for great 

wealth, it would be for the sake of Sir Charles Grandison; 
that I might be a means of enlarging his
power: Since I am convinced, that the necessities of
every worthy person within the large circle of his acquaintance,
would be relieved, according to his ability. 
My dear Emily! —Ah Lady G.! Was it possible for
you to think, that my pity for the amiable Innocent
should not increase my love of her! I will give you
leave indeed to despise me, if you ever find any-thing
in my behaviour to Emily, let me be circumstanced
as I will, that shall shew an abatement of that tender
affection which ever must warm my heart in her favour. 
Whenever I can promise any-thing for myself,
then shall Emily be a partaker of my felicity, in the
way her own heart shall direct. I hope, for her own
sake, that the dear girl puts the matter right, when she
attributes her sudden burst of tears to the weakness of
her spirits occasioned by her mother's remorse: But
let me say one thing; It would grieve me as much as
it did Sir Charles, in the Count of Belvedere's case, to
stand in the way of any-body's happiness. It is not,
you see, your brother's fault, that he is not the husband
of Lady Clementina: She wishes him to marry an
Englishwoman. —Nor is even the hope of Lady Olivia
frustrated by me. You know I always pitied her; 
and that before I knew, from Sir Charles's Letter to
Signor Jeronymo, that she thought kindly of me. — 
Lady Anne S.; Do you think, my dear, that worthy
Lady could have hopes, were it not for me? —And
could my Emily have any, were I out of the world? — 
No, surely: The very wardship, which he executes
with so much indulgent goodness to her, would exclude
all such hopes, considerable enough as his estate
is, to answer a larger fortune than even Emily's. 
Were hers not half so much as it is, it would perhaps
be more likely than now, that his generous mind might
be disposed in her favour, some years hence. 

Let me, however, tell you, that true sisterly pity
overwhelmed my heart, when I first read that part of
your Letter which so pathetically describes her tender
woe. Be the occasion her Duty, or her Love, or
owing to a mixture of both, I am charmed with
her beautiful simplicity: I wept over that part of
your Letter for half an hour (for I was by myself); 
and more than once I looked round and round me,
wishing for the dear creature to be near me, and wanting
to clasp her to my bosom. 
Love me still, and that as well as ever, my dear
Lady G. or I shall want a great ingredient of happiness,
in whatever situation I may be. I have written
to thank my dear Lady L. for her goodness to me, in
dictating to your pen; and I thank you, my dear, for
being dictated to. I cannot be well. Send me but
one line; ease my overburdened heart of one of its
anxieties, by telling me that there has nothing passed
of littleness in me, that has abated your love to 
Your ever-grateful, ever-affectionate,
Harriet Byron. 

