


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Tuesday 12 o'Clock, Nov. 7.
In a small hand, under the Superscription of the inner Cover.
My dearest Lady G. pray read the first page of this Letter, before
you open the other dreadful one, sealed with five seals,
and stitched to the Cover (that it may not slide officiously into
your hands). Lucy will have me send the whole of that
shocking Letter. Against my judgment, I comply. 
We met this morning soul-less, and forlorn, all
equally unable either to give or receive consolation. 
The officious note was taken up, laid down,
taken up again; the hand endeavoured to be guessed
at: And at last it was concluded, to dispatch a servant
to Mr. Greville's, to learn news of the supposed
traitor. 
But, behold! before the servant could return, in a
riding-dress, having alighted at the outward gate, entered
the hall your noble brother. I was the first
whom he saw; the first who saw him. I was just
going out, intending (yet hardly knowing my intention)
to walk in the Elm-row fronting the house, in
order to shorten the way of the returning servant with
news. 
He cast himself at my feet. Something he said,
and more he intended to say; excusing his early return,
and thanking me for my favour of the Wednesday
before; when my joyful surprize overpowered
both my speech and senses. —And what will you say to
me, when I tell you, that, on my recovery, I found
myself in his arms, mine clasped about his neck? 
He was surprised at my emotion! Well he might— 
Every one, in a moment, crouded about him—My 

aunt also folded her arms around him—Welcome,
welcome, welcome, was all she could, at the instant,
say. 
I, utterly abashed, trembling, and doubting my
feet, motioned to quit the hall for the parlour—But
nobody minded me; all were busied in congratulating
the joy of every heart; till Sally presenting herself, I
leaned upon her, and, staggering to the parlour, threw
myself into an elbow-chair. 
Your brother, attended by all my friends, followed
me in. My heart again bid him welcome, tho' my
eye could not, at that instant, bear his. He took my
hand, as I sat, between both his, and, in the most
respectful manner, pressing it with his lips, besought
me to compose myself. 
They had hinted to him in the hall, the cause of all
our emotions—They had as much reason to blush, as I
had. —Nancy, it seems, even Nancy, snatched his
hand, and kissed it, in raptures. How dear is he to
us all! He sees it, now: There can be no reserves to
him, after this. Punctilio! Family-punctilio! mentioned
he in his Letter! —We have now no pretensions
to it— 
His eyes shone with grateful sensibility. Look
down upon me, loveliest of women, said he, with a
bent knee; Look down upon me, and tell me, you
forgive me, for my early return. But tho' returned, I
am entirely at your devotion. 
Lucy says, she never saw me more to my advantage. 
I looked down upon him, as he bid me, smiling
through my tears. He stole gently my handkerchief
from my half-hid face; with it he dried my unaverted
cheek, and put it, she says, in his bosom. I have
lost it. 
My uncle and aunt withdrew with him, and acquainted
him with all particulars. To them he acknowleged,
in words of eloquent Love, my uncle said,
the honour done him by me, and by us all, in the 

demonstrations we had given of our tender regard for
him. 
I was, by the time of their return to us, pretty well
recovered. Sir Charles approached me, without taking
notice of the emotion I had been in. Mr. and
Mrs. Selby tell me, said he, to me, that I am to be
favoured with a residence at our venerable Mrs. Shirley's. 
This, tho' a high honour, looks a little distant; 
so would the next door, if it were not under
the same roof with my Miss Byron: But, smiling
tenderly upon me, I shall presume to hope, that this
very distance will turn to my account. Mrs. Shirley's
Harriet cannot decline paying her accustomed duty to
the best of grandmothers. 
Bowing, I shall not, Sir, said I, be the more backward
to pay my duty to my grandmamma, for your obliging
her with your company. 
Thus, resumed he, snatching my hand, and ardently
pressing it with his lips, do I honour to myself
for the honour done me. How poor is man! that he
cannot express his gratitude to the object of his vows,
for obligations conferred, but by owing to her new obligation! 
Then turning round to my aunt—It is incumbent
upon me, madam, said he, to pay my early devoirs
to Mrs. Shirley, the hospitable Mrs. Shirley, repeated
he, smiling; which looked as if he expected to be
here. There, besides, (looking pleasantly upon my
aunt) I may be asked—here I am not—to break my
fast. 
This set us all into motion. My uncle ran out to
look after Sir Charles's servants, who, it seems, in
our hurry, were disregarded: Their horses in the
court-yard; three of them walking about, waiting
their master's orders. My uncle was ready, in the
true taste of old English hospitality, to pull them in. 
Chocolate was instantly brought for their master; 
and a dish for each of us. We had made but a poor 

breakfast, any of us. I could get nothing down before. 
My aunt put a second dish into my hand: I took her
kind meaning, and presented it to Sir Charles. How
gratefully did he receive it! Will it always be so,
Lady G.? My Love, heightened by my duty, shall
not, when the obligation is doubled, make me less
deserving of his politeness, if I can help it. 
But still this dreadful note, and Greville's reported
moodiness, made us uneasy. The servant we sent returned,
with information that Mr. Greville came home
late last night. He was not stirring, it seems, tho'
Eleven o'Clock, when the servant reached his house. 
He is said to be not well; and, as one servant of his
told ours, so very fretful, and ill-tempered, that they
none of them know how to speak to him. God grant
—But let me keep to myself such of my apprehensions
as are founded on conjecture—Why should I not
hope the best? Is not your beloved brother at present
safe? And is he not the care of Providence? —I humbly
trust he is. 
Sir Charles took the note. I think I have seen the
hand, said he: If I have, I shall find out the writer. 
I dare say, it is written with a good intention. 
My uncle and we all expressed, some in words, some
by looks, our apprehensions. 
There cannot possibly be room for any, said Sir
Charles, always present to himself. Mr. Greville loves
Miss Byron. It is no wonder, as his apprehensions of
losing all hopes of her for ever, grow stronger, that he
should be uneasy. He would make but an ill compliment
to her merit, and his own sincerity, if he were
not. But such a stake as he has in his country, he
cannot have desperate intentions. I remember, to his
advantage, his last behaviour here. I will make him
a visit. I must engage Mr. Greville to rank me in
the number of his friends. 
What he said gave us comfort. No wonder if we
women love courage in a man: We ought, if it be true 

courage, like that of your excellent brother. After
all, my dear, I think we must allow a natural superiority
in the minds of men over women. Do we not
want protection? And does not that want imply inferiority? 
—Yet if there be two sorts of courage, an
acquired and a natural; why may not the former be
obtained by women, as well as by men, were they to
have the same education? Natural courage may
belong to either. Had Miss Barnevelt, for example,
had a boy's education, she would have probably challenged
her man, on provocation given; and he might
have come off but poorly. 
But we have more silly antipathies than men, which
help to keep us down: Whether those may not sometimes
be owing to affectation, do you, Lady G. who,
however, have as little affectation as ever woman had,
determine. A frog, a toad, a spider, a beetle, an
earwig, will give us mighty pretty tender terror; 
while the heroic men will trample the insect under
foot, and look the more brave for their barbarity, and
for our delicate screaming. But for an adventure, if a
Lover get us into one, we frequently leave him a great
way behind us. Don't you think so, Lady G.? — 
Were not this Greville still in my head, methinks I
could be as pert as ever. 
Sir Charles told us, that he should have been with
us last night, but for a visit he was obliged to pay to Sir
Harry Beauchamp; to make up for which hindrance,
he took horse, and ordered his equipage to follow
him. 
He is gone to pay his duty, as he is pleased to call
it, to my grandmamma, in my uncle's coach, my
uncle with him. If they cannot prevail on my grandmamma
to come hither to dinner, and if she is desirous
Sir Charles should dine with her, he will oblige
her—by my aunt's leave, was his address to her. But
perhaps she will have the goodness to add her company
to his, as she knows that will give us all double pleasure: 

She loves to give pleasure. Often does the dear
Lady say, ‘How can palsied age, which is but a terrifying
object to youth, expect the indulgence, the
love, of the young and gay, if it does not study to
promote those pleasures which itself was fond of in
youth? Enjoy innocently your season, girls, once
said she, setting half a score of us into country
dances. I watch for the failure of my memory; 
and shall never give it over for quite lost, till I forget
what were my own innocent wishes and delights in
the days of my youth.’ 
Tuesday, Five o'Clock.
My uncle and Sir Charles came back to dinner; 
my grandmamma with them. She was so good as to
give them her company, at the first word. Sir Charles,
as we sat at dinner, and afterwards, saw me weak in
mind, bashful, and not quite recovered; and he
seemed to watch my uncle's eyes, and so much diverted
him and all of us, that my uncle had not opportunity
to put forth, as usual. How did this kind
protection assure me! I thought myself quite well; 
and was so chearfully silent when Sir Charles talked,
that my grandmamma and aunt, who had placed me
between them, whispered me severally—You look
charmingly easy, love—You look like yourself, my
dear. Yet still this mischievous Greville ran in my
head. 
My uncle took notice, that Sir Charles had said, he
guessed at the writer of the note. He wished he would
give him an item, as he called it, whom he thought
of. 
You observe Sir, answered Sir Charles, that the
writer says, Mr. Greville was in wine. He professes
to be an encourager of the people of the George in
Northampton. He often appoints company to meet
him there. I imagine the writer to be the head waiter
of the house: The bills delivered me in, seem to have
been written in such a hand as the note, as far as I can
carry the hand-writing in my eye. 

Ads-heart, said my uncle, that's undoubtedly right:
Your name's up, Sir, I can tell you, among men,
women, and children. This man, in his note, calls
you (Look, else!) the most generous and noble of
men. He says, we shall never know the writer! — 
Ads-dines! the man must deal in art magic, that conceals
himself from you, if you have a mind to find
him out. 
Well, but, said Lucy, if this be so, I am concerned
for the reality of the information. Such threatenings
as Mr. Greville throws out, are not to be slighted. 
Very true, said my uncle. Mr. Deane and I (Mr.
Deane will certainly be here by-and-by) will go, and
discourse with Greville himself to-morrow, please the
Lord. 
Sir Charles begged that this matter might be left to
his management. Mr. Greville and I, said he, are
upon such a foot, as, whether he be so sincerely my
friend as I am his, or not, will warrant a visit to him; 
and he cannot but take it as a civility, on my return
into these parts. 
Should he be affronting, Sir Charles? said my
uncle— 
I can have patience, if he should. He cannot be
grosly so. 
I know not that, replied my uncle: Mr. Greville is
a roister! 
Well, dear Mr. Selby, leave this matter to me. 
Were there to be danger; the way to avoid it, is not
to appear to be afraid of it. One man's fear gives
another courage. I have no manner of doubt of being
able to bring Mr. Greville with me to an amicable dish
of tea, or to dinner, which you please, to morrow. 
Ads-heart, Sir, I wish not to see at either, the wretch
who could threaten the life of a man so dear to us all. 
Sir Charles bowed to my uncle for his sincere compliment. 
I have nothing to do, said he, but to invite
myself either to breakfast, or dine with him. His 

former scheme of appearing to the world well with me,
in order to save his spirit, will be resumed; and all
will be right. 
My aunt expressed her fears, however, and looked
at me, as I did at her, with a countenance, I suppose,
far from being unapprehensive: But Sir Charles said,
You must leave me, my dear friends, to my own
methods; nor be anxious for my safety. I am not a
rash man: I can pity Mr. Greville; and the man I
pity, cannot easily provoke me. 
We were all the easier for what the charmingly-cool,
because truly-brave, man said on a subject which
has given us all so much terror. 
But was he not very good, my dear, not to say one
word all this day of the important errand on which he
came down? And to lead the subjects of conversation
with design, as my aunt and grandmamma both
thought, as well as I, that my uncle should not?
and to give me time to recover my spirits? Yet when
he did address himself to me, never were tenderness
and respect so engagingly mingled. This my uncle
observed, as well as my Aunt and Lucy. How the
duce, said he, does this Sir Charles manage it? He
has a way no man but him ever found out—He can
court without speech: He can take one's heart, and
say never a word. Hay, Harriet! looking archly. 
* *
Mr. Deane is come—In charming health and spirits
—Thank God! With what cordiality did Sir
Charles and he embrace each other! 
Sir Charles attended my grandmamma home: So
we had not his company at supper. No convenience
without its contrary. He is her own son: She is his
own parent. Such an unaffected love, on both sides! 
—Such a sweetly-easy, yet respectful, familiarity between
them! What additional pleasures must a young
woman in my situation have, when she can consider
herself as the bond of union between the family she 

is of, and that she is entering into! How dreadful,
on the contrary, must be her case, who is the occasion
of propagating dissention, irreconcilable hatred, and
abhorrence between her own relations and those of
the man to whom she for life engages herself! 
My grandmother and Sir Charles were no sooner
gone, than my uncle began to talk with Mr. Deane
on the subject that is nearest all our hearts. I was
afraid the conversation would not be managed to my
liking; and having too just an excuse to ask leave to
withdraw; from bad, or rather no rest, last night, I
made use of it; and here in my closet (preparing now,
however, for it) am I 
Your ever-affectionate
Harriet Byron. 

