



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Sat. Aug. 5. 
I am so excessively disturbed at the contents of
Miss Harlowe's Answer to my Cousin Charlotte's
Letter of Tuesday last (which was given her by the
same fellow that gave me yours) that I have hardly
patience or consideration enough to weigh what you
write. 
She had need indeed to cry out for mercy herself
from her friends, who knows not how to shew any! 
She is a true Daughter of the Harlowes! —By my
Soul, Jack, she is a true Daughter of the Harlowes! 
Yet has she so many excellencies, that I must love
her; and, fool that I am, love her the more for her
despising me. 
Thou runnest on with thy cursed nonsensical
reformado-rote, of dying, dying, dying! and, having
once got the word by the end, canst not help
foisting it in at every period! The devil take me, if
I don't think thou wouldst give her poison with thy
own hands, rather than she should recover, and rob
thee of the merit of being a conjurer! 
But no more of thy cursed knell; thy changes upon
death's candlestick turned bottom-upwards: She'll
live to bury me; I see that: For, by my Soul, I can
neither eat, drink, nor sleep, nor, what is still worse,
love any woman in the world but her. Nor care I
to look upon a woman now: On the contrary, I
turn my head from every one I meet; except by
chance an eye, an air, a feature, strikes me resembling
hers in some glancing-by face; and then I
cannot forbear looking again; tho' the second look
recovers me; for there can be nobody like her. 
But surely, Belford, the devil's in this Woman! 
The more I think of her nonsense and obstinacy, the 

less patience I have with her. Is it possible she can
do herself, her family, her friends, so much justice
any other way, as by marrying me? Were she sure
she should live but a day, she ought to die a wife. 
If her Christian Revenge will not let her wish to do
so for her own sake, ought she not for the sake of her
Family, and of her Sex, which she pretends sometimes
to have so much concern for? And if no sake
is dear enough to move her Harlowe-spirit in my favour,
has she any title to the pity thou so pitifully
art always bespeaking for her? 
As to the difference which her Letter has made between
me and the stupid family here [And I must
tell thee we are all broke in pieces] I value not that
of a button. They are fools to anathematize and
curse me, who can give them ten curses for one,
were they to hold it for a day together. 
I have one half of the house to myself; and that
the best; for the Great enjoy that least which costs
them most: Grandeur and Use are two things: The
Common part is theirs; the State part is mine: And
here I lord it, and will lord it, as long as I please; 
while the two pursy Sisters, the old gouty Brother,
and the two musty Nieces, are stived up in the other
half, and dare not stir for fear of meeting me: 
Whom (that's the jest of it) they have forbidden coming
into their apartments, as I have them into mine. 
And so I have them all prisoners, while I range about
as I please. Pretty dogs and doggesses, to quarrel and
bark at me, and yet, whenever I appear, afraid to
pop out of their kennels; or if out before they see
me, at the sight of me run growling in again, with
their flapt ears, their sweeping dewlaps, and their
quivering tails curling inwards. 
And here, while I am thus worthily waging war
with beetles, drones, wasps, and hornets, and am all
on fire with the rage of slighted Love, thou art regaling
thyself with Phlegm and Rock-water, and art 

going on with thy Reformation-scheme, and thy exultations
in my misfortunes! 
The devil take thee for an insensible dough-baked
varlet! I have no more patience with thee than with
the Lady; for thou knowest nothing either of Love
or Friendship, but art as unworthy of the one, as
incapable of the other; else wouldst thou not rejoice,
as thou dost under the grimace of pity, in my
disappointments. 
And thou art a pretty fellow, art thou not? to
engage to transcribe for her some parts of my Letters
written to thee in confidence? Letters that thou
shouldest sooner have parted with thy cursed tongue,
than have owned thou ever hadst received such: Yet
these are now to be communicated to her! But I
charge thee, and woe be to thee if it be too late!
that thou do not oblige her with a line of mine. 
If thou hast done it, the least vengeance I will
take, is to break thro' my honour given to thee not
to visit her, as thou wilt have broken thro' thine to
me, in communicating Letters written under the Seal
of Friendship. 
I am now convinced, too sadly for my hopes, by
her Letter to my Cousin Charlotte, that she is determined
never to have me. 
Unprecedented wickedness, she calls mine to her. 
But how does she know what Love, in its flaming
ardor, will stimulate men to do? How does she know
the requisite distinctions of the words she uses in this
case? —To think the worst, and to be able to make
comparisons in these very delicate situations, must she
not be less delicate than I had imagined her to be? — 
But she has heard, that the devil is black; and having
a mind to make one of me, brays together, in
the mortar of her wild fancy, twenty chimney-sweepers,
in order to make one sootier than ordinary rise
out of the dirty mass. 
But what a whirlwind does she raise in my Soul, 

by her proud contempts of me! Never, never, was
mortal man's pride so mortified! How does she sink
me, even in my own eyes! —‘Her heart sincerely
repulses me, she says, for my Meanness’—Yet
she intends to reap the benefit of what she calls so! — 
Curse upon her haughtiness, and her meanness, at the
same time! —Her haughtiness to me, and her meanness
to her own relations; more unworthy of kindred
with her, than I can be, or I am mean indeed. 
Yet who but must admire, who but must adore
her? O that cursed, cursed house! But for the women
of that! —Then their damn'd potions! But for
those, had her unimpaired intellects, and the majesty
of her virtue, saved her, as once it did by her humble
eloquence (a) , another time by her terrifying menaces
against her own life (b)  
Yet in both these to find her power over me, and
my Love for her, and to hate, to despise, and to refuse
me! —She might have done this with some shew
of justice, had the last-intended violation been perpetrated: 
—But to go away conqueress and triumphant
in every light! —Well may she despise me for suffering
her to do so. 
She left me low and mean indeed! —And the impression
holds with her. —I could tear my flesh, that
I gave her not cause—that I humbled her not indeed; 
—or that I staid not in town to attend her motions
instead of Lord M's, till I could have exalted myself,
by giving to myself a Wife superior to all trial, to all
temptation. 
I will venture one more Letter to her, however; 
and if that don't do, or procure me an Answer, then
will I endeavour to see her, let what will be the consequence. 
If she get out of my way, I will do some
noble mischief to the vixen girl whom she most loves,
and then quit the kingdom for ever. 

And now, Jack, since thy hand is in at communicating
the contents of private Letters, tell her this,
if thou wilt. And add to it, That if She abandon
me, GOD will: And what then will be the fate
of 
Her Lovelace! 