


Lady Grandison, To Mrs. Shirley. 


Monday, May 28. 
The Marchioness having been desired to break to
Lady Clementina the news of Laurana's death,
as of a fever, she did it with all imaginable tenderness 

this morning: But the generous lady was affected
with it. –––“O my poor cousin! said she–––Once
she loved me. I ever loved her! –––Had she time
given her! –––On what a sandy foundation do we
build our schemes of worldly glory! –––Poor Laurana! 
–––God, I hope, has taken her to the arms of
his mercy!” 
The pious lady and her confessor have shut themselves
up in the oratory appropriated for the devotions
of this noble family, to pray, as I presume, for the
soul of Laurana. 
Every thing is settled according to a plan laid down
by Lady Clementina, at the request of all her family. 
The Count and Signor Sebastiano, are to set out for
Dover on Thursday next. In less than a month
from their departure, the rest of our noble guests are
to embark for France in their way home–––All but
Jeronymo. Sir Charles has prevailed, that he shall
be lest behind, to try what our English baths may
contribute to the perfect re-establishment of his
health. 
This tender point having been referred to his admirable
sister, she generously consented to his stay
with us. She has still more generously, because unasked,
released Sir Charles from his promise of attending
them back to Italy, in consideration of his
Harriet; since, at this time, he would not know
how to leave her; nor she to spare him. But the
next summer, if it be permitted me to look so forward,
or the succeeding autumn to that, we hope
to be all happy at Bologna. Lady L. Lady G. and
their Lords, have promised to accompany us: So
has Dr. Bartlett; and we all hope, that Sir Edward
Beauchamp will not refuse to re-visit Italy with his
friends. 
Friday, June 1. 
Six happy days from the date of the Letter which
Lady Clementina wrote to her father and mother, 

has the Count passed with us; the happiest he often
declared, of his life; for in every one of them, he was
admitted with a freedom that rejoiced his heart, to
converse with the mistress of his destiny. She called
upon him more than once in that space of time, to
behave to her, as a Brother to his Sister; for this, she
thinks, the uncertainty of what her situation may
be a twelvemonth hence, requires for both their
sakes. 
Sweetly composed, sweetly easy, was her whole
behaviour to him and to every-body else, during these
six days. The sisterly character was well supported
by her to him: But in the Count, the most ardent,
the most respectful, and even venerating Lover took
place of the brotherly one. Signor Jeronymo loves
his Sister as he loves himself; but the eyes of the
Count compared with those of Jeronymo, demonstrated,
that there are two sorts of Love; yet both
ardent; and Soul in both. 
The parting scene between Clementina and the
Count, was, on his side, a very fervent, on hers, a
kind, one. On his knees, he pressed with his lips,
her not withdrawn hand. He would have spoken; 
but only could by his eyes; which run over—Be
happy, my Lord of Belvedere, said she. You have
my wishes for your health and safety–––Adieu! 
She was for retiring: But the Count and Signor
Sebastiano (of the latter of whom she had taken
leave just before) following her a few paces, she
turned; and with a noble composure, Adieu, once
more, my two friends, said she: Take care, my
Lord, of Signor Sebastiano: Cousin, take care of
the Count of Belvedere; courtesying to both. The
Count bowed to the ground, speechless. As she
passed me, Lady Grandison, said she, lifting my hand
to her lips, Sister of my heart; the day is fine; shall
I, after you have blessed with your good wishes,
our parting friends, invite you into the garden? I 

took a cordial leave of the two noble youths, and
followed her thither. 
We had a sweet conversation there. And it was
made still more delightful to us both, by Sir Charles's
joining us, in about half an hour; for the two Lords
would not permit him to attend them one step beyond
the court-yard; though he had his horses in
readiness to accompany them some miles on their
way. 
When we saw Sir Charles enter the garden, we
stood still, arm in arm, expecting and inviting his
approach. Sweet sisters! Lovely friends, said he,
when come up to us, taking a hand of each, and
joining them, bowing on both; Let me mark this
blessed spot with my eye; looking round him; then
on me;–––A tear on my Harriet's cheek! –––He dry'd
it off with my own handkerchief–––Friendship, dearest
creatures, will make at pleasure a safe bridge over
the narrow seas; it will cut an easy passage thro'
rocks and mountains, and make England and Italy
one country. Kindred souls are always near. 
In that hope, my good Chevalier; in that hope,
my dear Lady Grandison; will Clementina be happy,
tho' the day of separation must not be far distant. 
And will you here, renew your promise, that when
it shall be convenient to you, my dear Lady Grandison,
you will not fail to grace our Italy with your
presence? 
We do! –––We do!––– 
Promise me again, said the noble Lady. I, too,
have marked the spot with my eye (standing still,
and, as Sir Charles had done, looking round her)
The Orangery on the right-hand; that distant clump
of Oaklings on the left; the Villa, the Rivulet, before
us; the Cascade in view; that Obelisk behind us
–––Be This the spot to be recollected as witness to the
promise, when we are far, far distant from each
other. 

We both repeated the promise; and Sir Charles
said (and he is drawing a plan accordingly) that a
little temple should be erected on that very spot, to
be consecrated to our triple friendship; and, since
she had so happily marked it, to be called after her
name. 
On Monday next, we are to set out for London. 
One fortnight passed we shall accompany our noble
friends to Dover–––And there–––O my grandmamma,
how shall we do to part! 
It is agreed, that Mr. Lowther and Mr. Deane,
tho' the latter, I bless God, is in good health; will
next season accompany Signor Jeronymo to Bath. 
Sir Charles proposes to be his visitor there: And
when I will give permission, is the compliment made
me, Sir Charles proposes to shew him Ireland, and
his improvements on his estate in that kingdom. 
Will not Lucy be rejoiced at that? –––I am happy,
that her Lord and she, take so kindly, the felicitations
I made them both. They are always, my
dear grandmamma, my uncle and aunt, and all my
friends in Northamptonshire, sure of the heart of 
Their and Your
Harriet Grandison. 

