



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Uxbridge, Sat. Sept. 9. 
Jack,
I think is absolutely right that my ever-dear and beloved
lady should be opened and embalmed. It must be done
out of hand—this very afternoon. Your acquaintance
Tomkins and old Anderson of this place, whom I will bring
with me, shall be the surgeons. I have talked to the latter
about it. 
I will see every thing done with that decorum which
the case, and the sacred person of my beloved require. 
Every thing that can be done to preserve the charmer
from decay, shall also be done. And when she will descend
to her original dust, or cannot be kept longer, I will then
have her laid in my family-vault between my own father
and mother. Myself, as I am in my soul, so in person, chief
mourner. But her heart, to which I have such unquestionable
pretensions, in which once I had so large a share, and
which I will prize above my own, I will have. I will keep
it in spirits. I shall never be out of my sight. And all the
charges of sepulture too shall be mine. 

Surely no-body will dispute my right to her. Whose
was she living? Whose is she dead, but mine? —Her
cursed parents, whose barbarity to her, no doubt, was the
true cause of her death, have long since renounced her. She
left them for me. She chose me therefore: And I was her
husband. What tho' I treated her like a villain? Do I
not pay for it now? Would she not have been mine had
I not? No-body will dispute but she would. And has
she not forgiven me? —I am then in statu quo priùs with
her—Am I not!—as if I had never offended? Whose
then can she be but mine? 
I will free you from your Executorship and all your
cares. 
Take notice, Belford, that I do hereby actually discharge
you, and every body, from all cares and troubles relating
to her. And as to her last testament I will execute it myself. 
There were no articles between us, no settlements; and
she is mine, as you see I have proved to a demonstration: 
Nor could she dispose of herself but as I pleased. D&wblank;nation
seize me then if I make not good my right against all opposers! 
Her bowels, if her friends are very solicitous about them,
and very humble and sorrowful (and none have they of
their own) shall be sent down to them—To be laid with
her ancestors—unless she has ordered otherwise. For, except
that she shall not be committed to the unworthy
earth so long as she can be kept out of it, her Will shall be
performed in every thing. 
I send in the mean time for a lock of her hair. 
I charge you stir not in any part of her Will, but by my
express direction. I will order every thing myself. For
am I not her husband? And being forgiven by her, am
I not the chosen of her heart? What else signifies her forgiveness? 
The two insufferable wretches you have sent me, plague
me to death, and would treat me like a babe in strings. 
Damn the fellows, what can they mean by it? —Yet that
crippled monkey Doleman joins with them. And, as I
hear them whisper, they have sent for Lord M. —To controul
me, I suppose. 

What can they mean by this usage of me? Sure all the
world is run mad but myself. They treat me as they ought
every one of themselves to be treated. The whole world
is but one great Bedlam. G&sblank;d confound it, and every
thing in it, since now my beloved Clarissa Lovelace—no
more Harlowe—Curse upon that name and every one
called by it. 
What I write to you for is, 
1. To forbid you intermeddling with any thing relating
to her. To forbid Morden intermeddling also. If I remember
right, he has threatened me, and cursed me, and
used me ill. And let him be gone from her if he would
avoid my resentments. 
2. To send me a lock of her hair instantly by the bearer. 
3. To engage Tomkins to have every thing ready for
the opening and embalming. I shall bring Anderson with
me. 
4. To get her Will and every thing ready for my perusal
and consideration. 
I will have possession of her dear heart this very night; 
and let Tomkins provide a proper receptacle and spirits,
till I can get a golden one made for it. 
I will take her papers. And as no one can do her memory
justice equal to myself, and I will not spare myself,
Who can better shew the world what she was, and what a
villain he, that could use her ill? And the world shall
also see, what implacable and unworthy parents she had. 
All shall be set forth in words at length. No mincing of
the matter. Names undisguised as well as facts. For as
I shall make the worst figure in it myself, and have a right
to treat myself as no-body else shall; Who will controul
me? Who dare call me to account? 
Let me know if the damned mother be yet the subject
of the devil's own vengeance—if the old wretch be dead
or alive? Some exemplary mischief I must yet do. My
revenge shall sweep away that devil and all my opposers
of the cruel Harlowe family, from the face of the earth. 
Whole hecatombs ought to be offered up to the Manes of
my Clarissa Lovelace. 
Altho' her Will may in some respects cross mine, yet I
expect to be observed. I will be the interpreter of hers. 

Next to mine, hers shall be observed, for she is my wife; 
and shall be to all eternity. I will never have another. 
Adieu, Jack. I am preparing to be with you. I charge
you, as you value my life or your own, do not oppose
me in any thing relating to my Clarissa Lovelace. 
My temper is intirely altered. I know not what it is
to laugh, or smile, or be pleasant. I am grown choleric and
impatient, and will not be controuled. 
I write this in characters as I used to do, that no-body
but you should know what I write. For never was any
man plagued with impertinents, as I am. 
R. Lovelace, 
In a separate paper inclosed in the above. 
Let me tell thee, in characters still, that I am in a dreadful
way just now. My brain is all boiling like a caldron
over a fiery furnace. What a devil is the matter with me,
I wonder! I never was so strange in my life. 
In truth, Jack, I have been a most execrable villain. And
when I consider all my actions by this angel of a woman,
and in her the piety, the charity, the wit, the beauty I
have helped to destroy, and the good to the world I have
thereby been a means of frustrating, I can pronounce damnation
upon myself. How then can I expect mercy any
where else! 
I believe I shall have no patience with you when I see
you. Your damned stings and reflections have almost
turned my brain. 
But here Lord M. they tell me, is come! D&wblank;n him, and
those who sent for him! 
I know not what I have written! But her dear heart
and a lock of her hair I will have, let who will be the
gain-sayers! For is she not mine? Whose else can she be? 
She has no Father nor Mother, no Sister, no Brother; no
Relations but me. And my beloved is mine; and I am
hers: And that's enough—But Oh! 

She's out! The damp of death has quench'd her quite!
Those spicy doors, her lips, are shut, close lock'd,
Which never gale of life shall open more!
And is it so! Is it indeed so? —Good God! Good
God!—But they will not let me write on. I must go
down to this officious peer—Who the devil sent for him? 