



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford Esq; 

Sunday Night. 
This Captain Tomlinson is one of the happiest,
as well as one of the best men in the world. 
What would I give to stand as high in my Beloved's
opinion, as he does! But yet I am as good a man as
he, were I to tell my own story, and have equal
credit given to it. But the devil should have had
him before I had seen him on the account he came
upon, had I thought I should not have answered my
principal end in it. I hinted to thee in my last what
that was. 
But to the particulars of the conference between
my Fair-one, and me, on her hasty messages; which
I was loth to come to, because she has had an half
triumph over me in it. 
After I had attended the Captain down to the very
passage, I returned to the Dining-room, and put on
a joyful air, on my Beloved's entrance into it—O my
dearest creature, said I, let me congratulate you on
a prospect so agreeable to your wishes! And I snatched
her hand, and smothered it with kisses. 
I was going on; when, interrupting me, You see,
Mr. Lovelace, said she, how you have embarrassed
yourself, by your obliquities! You see, that you
have not been able to return a direct answer to a
plain and honest question, tho' upon it depends all
the happiness on the prospect of which you congratulate
me. 
You know, my best Love, what my prudent, and
I will say, my kind motives were, for giving out,
that we were married. You see, that I have taken
no advantage of it; and that no inconvenience has
followed it. You see that your Uncle wants only to
be assured from ourselves, that it is so— 

Not another word on this subject, Mr. Lovelace,
I will not only risque, but I will forfeit, the Reconciliation
so near my heart, rather than I will go on to
countenance a story so untrue! 
My dearest soul—Would you have me appear— 
I would have you appear, Sir, as you are! I am
resolved that I will appear to my Uncle's friend, and
to my Uncle, as I am. 
For one week, my dearest life! Cannot you for
one week—only till the Settlements— 
Not for one hour, with my own consent. You
don't know, Sir, how much I have been afflicted,
that I have appeared to the people below what I am
not. But my Uncle, Sir, shall never have it to upbraid
me, nor will I to upbraid myself, that I have
wilfully passed upon him in false lights. 
What, my dear, would you have me say to the
Captain to-morrow morning? I have given him room
to think— 
Then put him right, Mr. Lovelace. Tell the truth. 
Tell him what you please of the favour of your relations
to me: Tell him what you will about the Settlements: 
And if when drawn, you will submit them to
his perusal and approbation, it will shew him how
much you are in earnest. 
My dearest life—Do you think, that he would disapprove
of the terms I have offered? 
No. 
Then may I be accursed, if I willingly submit to
be trampled under-foot by my enemies! 
And may I, Mr. Lovelace, never be happy in this
life, if I submit to the passing upon my Uncle Harlowe
a wilful and premeditated falshood for truth! I
have too long laboured under the affliction which the
rejection of all my friends has given me, to purchase
my Reconciliation with them now at so dear a price
as at that of my veracity. 
The women below, my dear— 

What are the women below to me? I want not
to establish myself with them. Need they know all
that passes between my relations and you and me? 
Neither are they any-thing to me, Madam. Only,
that when, for the sake of preventing the fatal
mischiefs which might have attended your Brother's
projects, I have made them think us married, I
would not appear to them in a light which you yourself
think so shocking. By my soul, Madam, I
had rather die, than contradict myself so flagrantly,
after I have related to them so many circumstances
of our marriage. 
Well, Sir, the women may believe what they
please. That I have given countenance to what you
told them, is my error. The many circumstances
which you own one untruth has drawn you in to
relate, is a justification of my refusal in the present
case. 
Don't you see, Madam, that your Uncle wishes
to find that we are married? May not the ceremony
be privately over, before his mediation can take
place? 
Urge this point no farther, Mr. Lovelace. If
you will not tell the truth, I will to-morrow morning
(if I see Captain Tomlinson) tell it myself. Indeed
I will. 
Will you, Madam, consent, that things pass as
before with the people below? This mediation of
Tomlinson may come to nothing. Your Brother's
schemes may be pursued; the rather, that now he
will know (perhaps from your Uncle) that you are
not under a legal protection. —You will, at least,
consent, that things pass here as before? 
To permit this, is to go on in an error, Mr. Lovelace. 
But as the occasion for so doing (if there can be
in your opinion an occasion that will warrant an untruth)
will, as I presume, soon be over, I shall the 

less dispute that point with you. But a new error
I will not be guilty of, if I can avoid it. 
Can I, do you think, Madam, have any dishonourable
view in the step I supposed you would not scruple
to take towards a Reconciliation with your own family? 
Not for my own sake, you know, did I wish
you to take it; for what is it to me, if I am never
reconciled to your family? I want no favours from
them. 
I hope, Mr. Lovelace, there is no occasion, in
our present not disagreeable situation, to answer such
a question. And let me say, that I shall think my
prospects still more agreeable, if, to-morrow morning,
you will not only own the very truth, but give
my Uncle's friend such an account of the steps you
have taken, and are taking, as may keep up my
Uncle's favourable intentions towards me. This you
may do under what restrictions of secrecy you please. 
Captain Tomlinson is a prudent man; a promoter of
family-peace, you find; and, I dare say, may be
made a friend. 
I saw there was no help. I saw that the inflexible
Harlowe spirit was all up in her. —A little witch! — 
A little—Forgive me, Love, for calling her names! 
And so I said, with an air, We have had too many
misunderstandings, Madam, for me to wish for new
ones: I will obey you without reserve. Had I not
thought I should have obliged you by the other method
(especially as the Ceremony might have been
over, before any-thing could have operated from your
Uncle's intentions, and of consequence no untruth
persisted in) I would not have proposed it. But
think not, my beloved creature, that you shall
enjoy, without condition, this triumph over my
judgment. 
And then, clasping my arms about her, I gave her
averted cheek (her charming Lip designed) a fervent) 

kiss. —And your forgiveness of this sweet freedom
[bowing] is that condition. 
She was not mortally offended. And now must I
make out the rest as well as I can. But this I will
tell thee, that altho' her triumph has not diminished
my Love for her; yet has it stimulated me more than
ever to Revenge, as thou wilt be apt to call it. But
Victory or Conquest is the more proper word. 
There is a pleasure, 'tis true, in subduing one of
these watchful Beauties. But, by my Soul, Belford,
men of our cast take twenty times the pains to be
rogues, that it would cost them to be honest; and
dearly, with the sweat of our brows, and to the
puzzling of our brains (to say nothing of the hazards
we run) do we earn our purchase; and ought not
therefore to be grudged our success when we meet
with it—Especially as, when we have obtained our
end, satiety soon follows; and leaves us little or nothing
to shew for it. But this, indeed, may be said
of all worldly delights. —And is not that a grave reflection
from me? 
I was willing to write up to the time. Altho' I
have not carried my principal point, I shall make
something turn out in my favour from Captain Tomlinson's
errand. But let me give thee this caution; 
that thou do not pretend to judge of my devices by
parts; but have patience till thou seest the whole. 
But once more I swear, that I will not be out-Norris'd
by a pair of novices. And yet I am very apprehensive
at times, of the consequences of Miss Howe's
Smuggling scheme. 
&dotup;My conscience, I should think, ought not to reproach
me for a contrivance, which is justified by
the contrivances of two such girls as these: One
of whom (the more excellent of the two) I have
always, with her own approbation as I imagine,
proposed for my imitation. 
&dotup;But here, Jack, is the thing that concludes  

and cases my heart with adamant: I find by Miss
Howe's Letters, that it is owing to her, that I have
made no greater progress with my blooming Fair-one. 
She loves me. The Ipecacuanha contrivance
convinces me, that she loves me. Where there is
Love, there must be confidence, or a desire of
having reason to confide. Generosity, founded on
my supposed generosity, has taken hold of her heart. 
Shall I not now see (since I must be for ever unhappy,
if I marry her, and leave any trial unessayed)
what I can make of her Love, and her
newly-raised confidence? —Will it not be to my
glory to succeed? And to hers, and to the honour
of her Sex, if I cannot? —Where then will be
the hurt to either, to make the trial? And cannot
I, as I have often said, reward her when I will by
marriage?&dotup; 
'Tis late, or rather early; for the day begins to
dawn upon me. I am plaguy heavy. Perhaps I need
not to have told thee that. But will only indulge a
doze in my chair, for an hour; then shake myself,
wash and refresh. At my time of life, with such
a constitution as I am blessed with, that's all that's
wanted. 
Good night to me! —It cannot be broad day till
I am awake. —Aw-w-w-w-haugh—Pox of this yawning! 
Is not thy Uncle dead yet? 
What's come to mine, that he writes not to my
last? —Hunting after more wisdom of nations, I suppose! 
—Yaw-Yaw-Yawn-ing again! —Pen, begone. 