


Lady G. To Miss Byron. 


London, Sat. Aug. 5.
Thank you, my reverend and dear Mrs. Shirley,
Mrs. Selby, and Harriet the lovely and beloved. 

Thank you, my dear Lucy and Nancy Selby,
and Kitty and Patty Holles; and good Miss Orme; 
and you, my dear disputatious uncle Selby, and honest
cousin James, and all the rest of you; for your particular
graces, favours, civilities, and goodness superabundant,
to my bustling Lord, and his lively Dame. Let the
good Doctor and Emily thank you for themselves. 
And who do you think met us at St. Alban's? — 
Why, Beauchamp, Sir Harry and my Lady, and Mr.
and Mrs. Reeves! 
Poor Sir Harry! He is in a very bad way; and
Lady Beauchamp and his son (who peradventure had
a reason he gave not) prevailed upon him to make
this little excursion, in hopes it would divert him. 
They had not for some weeks past seen him so chearful
as we made him. 
Aunt Nell met us, at Barnet, with Cicely Badger,
her still older woman, whom she keeps about her to
make herself look young, on comparison—But a piece
of bad news, Harriet: Our aunt Nell has lost two
more of her upper fore-teeth. A vile bit of bone (O
how she execrates it!) which lurked in a fricasee, did
the irreparable mischief: And the good old soul is
teaching her upper-lip, when she speaks, to resign all
motion to the under one, that it may as little as possible
make the defect visible. What poor wretches
are we, Harriet, men as well as women! We pray
for long life; and what is the issue of our prayers,
but leave to outlive our teeth and our friends, to stand
in the way of our elbowing relations, and to change
our swan-skins for skins of buff; which nevertheless
will keep out neither cold nor infirmity? But I shall
be serious by-and-by. And what is the design of my
pen-prattle, but to make my sweet Harriet smile? 
The Earl and Lady Gertrude made up differences
with me at first sight. The Lady is a little upon the
fallal; a little aunt Nellish; but I protest I love her,
and reverence her brother. 

Beauchamp is certainly in Love with Emily. When
he first addressed her at St. Alban's, his hands trembled,
his cheeks glowed, his tongue faltered—So
young a gipsey to make a conquest of such importance! 
We women are powerful creatures, Harriet. 
As they say of horses, If we knew our own strength,
and could have a little more patience than we generally
have, we might do what we would with the
powerless Lords of the creation. In my conscience,
Harriet, look all my acquaintance through, of both
Sexes, I think there are three silly fellows to one silly
woman: Don't you think so in yours? —Are your
Grevilles, your Fenwicks, your Ormes, your Fowlers,
your Pollexfens, your Bagenhalls, and half a
score more I could name, to be put in competition
with Mrs. Shirley, Mrs. Selby, Lady D. our Lucy,
Nancy, Miss Orme, the two Miss Holles's? —Let
uncle Selby and cousin James determine on the question. 
I am half in hopes, that the little rogue Emily will
draw herself in. Beauchamp is modest, yet not sheepish; 
he is prudent, manly, lively; has address: He
will certainly draw her in, before she knows where
she is: And how? Why by praising sincerely, and
loving cordially, the man at present most dear to her. 
When he first addressed her at St. Alban's, O Mr.
Beauchamp, said she, with an innocent freedom, not
regarding his tremblings, his glow, and his faltrings,
I am glad to see you: I long to have you entertain
me with stories of my guardian. But, ah! Sir, speaking
lower, and with a fallen countenance, tears ready
to start, Whose, whose is he by this time? Yet, if you
know it, don't tell me: It must not, must not be. 
The praises given to those we really love, I believe,
are more grateful to us than those conferred on ourselves. 
I will tell you how I account for this, in general
cases, my brother out of the question. —We
doubt not our own merits; but may be afraid, that 

the favoured object will not be considered by others as
we are willing to consider him: But if he is, we take
the praise given him as a compliment to our own
judgment. Self-love, self-love, at the bottom of all
we say and do: I am convinced it is, notwithstanding
all you have urged to the contrary. Generally,
you know, I said. Do you think I will allow you to
judge of the generality of the world by what you find
in one of the best hearts in it? 
An instance, in point—I remember a Miss Hurste,
a sweet pretty creature, and very sensible: She had
from her chamber-window been shot through the
heart by the blind archer, who took his stand on the
feather of a military man marching at the head of his
company through the market-town in which she lived. 
Yet was her susceptibility her only inducement; for
the man was neither handsome in his person, nor genteel
in his appearance: Nor could she be in Love with
the sense of a man, had he been a Solomon, whose
mouth she never saw opened, and to whose character
she was as much a stranger, as he was to hers, or her
person, till she contrived to have him made acquainted
with his good fortune. Constant, however, to her
first foolish impression, she, in opposition to all advice,
and the expostulations of a tender and indulgent mother,
married him. A Solomon he was not. And
when he at any time, by virtue of his relation to her,
was introduced into her family, how would she blush,
whenever he opened his mouth! And how did her
eyes sparkle with gratitude upon any one who took
the least respectful notice of him! Compliments to
herself were unheeded; but she seemed ready to throw
herself at the feet of those who smiled upon, and directed
themselves to, her Captain. Poor girl! she
wanted to give credit to the motive by which she had
been acted. 
Now, Harriet, I charge you, that you think not
that this man's name was Anderson. Somebody met 

with an escape! Yet now-and-then I blush for Somebody. 
Yet between this Somebody and Miss Hurste's
cases there was this difference—A father's apprehended
—Tyranny—(shall I call it?) impressing the
one; a tindery fit the other. In the one a timely
recovery; in the other, the first folly deliberately confirmed. 
Dear, dear Harriet! let me make you smile! —I
protest, if you won't, I will talk of Lord D. and then
I know you will frown. 
The excellent Lady of that name has already been
to welcome us to town. She absolutely dotes upon
you; so, she says, does the young Earl. She prays
day and night, she tells me, that my brother may
soon come to England, his Italian bride in his hand. 
She expects every post to hear from Sir Arthur Brandon; 
who has carried a Letter from her, and another
from the Earl of N. recommending that promising
young gentleman to my brother's favour, on his visiting
Italy. She hopes my brother will not take amiss
her freedom, at so short an acquaintance. If Sir Arthur
sends her such news as she wishes, and we dread,
to hear, away drives she to Northamptonshire—And
should she, I don't know who will scruple to wish her
success; for her young man rises every day in his character. 
My dear creature, you must, you shall, be
in our row; and Lady D's last Letter to you is unanswerable. 
Forgive me for touching upon this subject:
But we have no hopes. You have nothing to
fear; since you expect what the next mails will bring. 
And who of us, after all, have our first Love? Aunt
Nell would not have descended sola into her greys,
nor Cicely Badger neither, if they might have obtained
the men of their choice—Poor aunt Nell! she
has been telling me (her taken off spectacles in her
fingers) of a disappointment of this kind in her youth,
with such woeful earnestness, that it made me ready
to cry for her. She lays it at the door of her brother, 

my poor father; and now will you wonder, that, to
this hour, she cannot speak of him with patience? — 
Poor aunt Nell! 
Well, but how do you, my Love? For Heaven's
sake, be well. Could I make you speak out, could I
make you complain, I should have some hope of you:
But so sorrowful when alone, as we plainly see, yet
aiming to be so chearful in company—O my dear!
you must be gluttonous of grief in your solitary hours. 
But what tho' the man be Sir Charles Grandison; Is
not the woman Harriet Byron? 
Lady L. tells me, that Olivia behaved like a distracted
woman, when she took leave of her on her
setting out to return to Italy. She sometimes wept,
sometimes raved, and threatened. Wretched woman! 
Surely she will not again attempt the life of the man
she so ungovernably loves! Our case, Harriet, is not
so hard as hers: But she will sooner get over her talkative,
than you will your silent Love. When a person
can rave, the passion is not dangerous. If the
head be safe, pride and supposed slight will in time
harden the heart of such a one; and her Love will be
swallowed up by resentment. 
You complimented me on my civility to my good
man, all the time we were with you. Indeed I was
very civil to him. It is now become a habit, and I
verily think that it looks well in man and wife to behave
prettily to each other before company. I now-and-then,
however, sit down with a full design to make
him look about him; but he is so obliging, that I am
constrained, against my intention, to let the fit go off,
without making him very serious. 
Am I conceited, Harriet? Which of the two silly
folks, do you think, has most (Not wit—Wit is a foolish
thing, but) understanding? I think the woman has
it, all to nothing. —Now don't mortify me. If you
pretend to doubt, I will be sure. Upon my word,
my dear, I am an excellent creature, so thinking, so 

assured, to behave so obligingly as I do to Lord G.
Never, never, unless a woman has as much prudence
as your Charlotte, let her wed a man who has less understanding
than herself. But women marry not so
much now-a-days for Love, or fitness of tempers, as
for the liberty of gadding abroad, with less censure,
and less controul—And yet, now I think of it, we
need only to take a survey of the flocks of single
women which croud to Ranelagh and Vaux-hall
markets, dressed out to be cheapened, not purchased, to
be convinced that the maids are as much above either
shame or controul, as the wives. But were not fathers
desirous to get the drugs off their hands (to express
myself in young Danby's saucy stile) these freedoms
would not be permitted. As for mothers, many
of them are for escorting their daughters to public
places, because they themselves like racketing. 
But how, Charlotte, methinks you ask, do these
reflexions on your own Sex square with what you said
above of the preference of women to men? —How! 
I'll tell you. The men who frequent those places are
still more silly than we. Is it their interest to join in
this almost universal dissipation? And would the women
croud to market, if there were not men? 
We are entered into our new house. It is furnished
in taste. Lord G. has wanted but very little
of my correction, I do assure you, in the disposition
of every-thing: He begins to want employment. 
Have you, Harriet, any thing to busy him in? —I am
not willing to teach him to knot. Poor man! He
has already knit one that he cannot unty. 
God bless the honest Soul! He came to me, just
now, so prim, and so pleased—A Parrot and Paroquet
—The Parrot is the finest talker! He had great difficulty,
he said, in getting them. He had observed,
that I was much taken with Lady Finlay's Parrot. 
Lady Finlay had a Marmouset too. I wonder the
poor man did not bring me a Monkey. O! but 

you'll say, That was needless—You are very smart,
Harriet, upon my man. I won't allow any-body but
myself to abuse him. 
Intolerable levity, Charlotte! —And so it is. But
to whom? Only to you. I love the man better every
day than the former. When I write of him thus
saucily, it is in the gaiety of my heart: But if, instead
of a smile, I have drawn upon myself your contempt,
what a mortification, however deserved, will
that be to 
Your Charlotte G.! 

