


Divers stratagems are invented and put in practice,
in order to overcome the obstinacy of Trunnion,
who at length is teized and tortured into the noose
of wedlock. 
This abrupt departure and unkind declaration
affected Mrs. Grizzle so much, that
she fell sick of sorrow and mortification; and after
having confined herself to her bed for three days,
sent for her brother, told him she perceived her
end drawing near, and desired that a lawyer
might be brought, in order to write her last will. 
Mr. Pickle surprised at her demand, began to act
the part of a comforter, assuring her that her
distemper was not at all dangerous; and that he
would instantly send for a physician, who would
convince her that she was in no manner of jeopardy; 
so that there was no occasion at present,
to employ any officious attorney in such a melancholy
task. Indeed, this affectionate brother was
of opinion that a will was altogether superfluous
at any rate, as he himself was heir at law to his
sister's whole real and personal estate. But she
insisted upon his compliance with such determined
obstinacy, that he could no longer resist her importunities; 
and a scrivener arriving, she dictated
and executed her will, in which she bequeathed
to commodore Trunnion one thousand pounds,
to purchase a mourning ring, which she hoped
he would wear as a pledge of her friendship and
affection. Her brother, though he did not much
relish this testimony of her love, nevertheless that
same evening gave an account of this particular 

to Mr. Hatchway, who was also, as Mr. Pickle
assured him, generously remembered by the testastrix. 
The lieutenant fraught with this piece of intelligence,
watched for an opportunity, and as soon
as he perceived the commodore's features a little
unbended from that ferocious contraction they had
suffered so long, ventured to inform him that
Pickle's sister lay at the point of death, and that
she had left him a thousand pounds in her will. 
This piece of news overwhelmed him with confusion,
and Mr. Hatchway imputing his silence
to remorse, resolved to take advantage of that
favourable moment, and counselled him to go
and visit the poor young woman, who was dying
for love of him. But his admonition happened
to be somewhat unseasonable; for Trunnion no
sooner heard him mention the cause of her disorder
than his morosity recurring, he burst out
into a violent fit of cursing, and forthwith betook
himself again to his hammock, where he lay uttering
in a low growling tone of voice, a repetition
of oaths and imprecations, for the space of
four and twenty hours, without ceasing. This
was a delicious meal to the lieutenant, who eager
to inhance the pleasure of the entertainment still
more, and at the same time conduce to the success
of the cause he had espoused, invented a
stratagem, the execution of which had all the effect
he could desire. He prevailed upon Pipes,
who was devoted to his service, to get upon the
top of the chimney belonging to the commodore's
chamber, at midnight, and to lower down by a rope
a bunch of stinking whitings, which being performed,
he put a speaking-trumpet to his mouth, and
hollowed down the vent, in a voice like thunder, 

“Trunnion! Trunnion! turn out and be spliced,
or lie still and be damned.” This dreadful note,
the terror of which was increased by the silence
and darkness of the night, as well as the eccho of
the passage through which it was conveyed, no
sooner reached the ears of the astonished commodore,
than turning his eye towards the place from
whence this solemn address seemed to proceed,
he beheld a glittering object that vanished in an
instant; and just as his superstitious fear had improved
the apparition into some supernatural messenger
cloathed in shining array, his opinion was
confirmed by a sudden explosion, which he took
for thunder, though it was no other than the
noise of a pistol fired down the chimney by the
boatswain's mate, according to the instructions
he had received; and he had time enough to descend
before he was in any danger of being detected
by his commander, who could not for a
whole hour recollect himself from the amazement
and consternation which had overpowered his faculties. 
At length, however, he got up and rung his
bell with great agitation. He repeated the summons
more than once, but no regard being paid
to this alarm, his dread returned with double terror,
a cold sweat bedewed his limbs, his knees
knocked together, his hair bristled up, and the
remains of his teeth were shattered to pieces in
the convulsive vibrations of his jaws. 
In the midst of this agony he made one desperate
effort, and bursting open the door of his
apartment, bolted into Hatchway's chamber,
which happened to be on the same floor; and
there found the lieutenant in a counterfeit swoon,
who pretended to wake from his trance in an ejaculation 

of “Lord have mercy upon us!” And
being questioned by the terrified commodore with
regard to what had happened, assured him he had
heard the same voice and clap of thunder by
which Trunnion himself had been discomposed. 
Pipes, whose turn it was to watch, concurred
in giving evidence to the same purpose; and the
commodore not only owned that he had heard
the voice, but likewise communicated his vision,
with all the aggravation which his disturbed fancy
suggested. 
A consultation immediately ensued, in which
Mr. Hatchway very gravely observed, that the
finger of God was plainly perceivable in those signals; 
and that it would be both sinful and foolish
to disregard his commands, especially as the match
proposed was, in all respects, more advantageous
than any that one of his years and infirmities
could reasonably expect; declaring that for his
own part he would not endanger his soul and
body by living one day longer under the same
roof with a man who despised the holy will of
heaven; and Tom Pipes adhered to the same
pious resolution. 
Trunnion's perseverance could not resist the
number and diversity of considerations that assaulted
it; he revolved in silence all the opposite
motives that occurred to his reflection; and after
having been, to all appearance, bewildered in the
labyrinth of his own thoughts, he wiped the sweat
from his forehead, and heaving a piteous groan,
yielded to their remonstrances in these words: 
“Well, since it must be so, I think we must
e'en grapple. But damn my eyes! 'tis a damn'd
hard case that a fellow of my years should be
compelled, d'ye see, to beat up to windward all 

the rest of his life, against the current of his own
inclination.” 
This important article being discussed, Mr.
Hatchway set out in the morning to visit the despairing
shepherdess, and was handsomely rewarded
for the enlivening tidings with which he
blessed her ears. Sick as she was, she could not
help laughing heartily at the contrivance, in
consequence of which her swain's ascent had been
obtained, and gave the lieutenant ten guineas for
Tom Pipes, in consideration of the part he acted
in the farce. 
In the afternoon the commodore suffered
himself to be conveyed to her apartment, like a
felon to execution, and was received by her in a
languishing manner and genteel dishabille, accompanied
by her sister-in law; who was, for
very obvious reasons, extremely sollicitous about
her success. Though the lieutenant had tutored
him touching his behaviour at this interview, he
made a thousand wry faces before he could pronounce
the simple salutation of How d'ye? to his
mistress; and after his counsellor had urged him
with twenty or thirty whispers, to each of which
he had replied aloud, “Damn your eyes I won't,” 
he got up, and halting towards the couch on
which Mrs. Grizzle reclined in a state of strange
expectation, he seized her hand and pressed it to
his lips; but this piece of gallantry he performed
in such a reluctant, uncouth, indignant manner,
that the nymph had need of all her resolution to
endure the compliment without shrinking; and
he himself was so disconcerted at what he had
done, that he instantly retired to the other end of
the room, where he sat silent, and broiled with
shame and vexation. Mrs. Pickle, like a sensible 

matron, quitted the place, on pretence of going
to the nursery; and Mr. Hatchway taking the
hint, recollected that he had lest his tobacco pouch
in the parlour, whither he immediately descended,
leaving the two lovers to their mutual endearments. 
Never had the commodore found himself
in such a disagreeable dilemma before. He sat in
an agony of suspence, as if he every moment
dreaded the dissolution of nature; and the imploring
sighs of his future bride added, if possible,
to the pangs of his distress. Impatient of his
situation, he rolled his eye around in quest of
some relief, and unable to contain himself, exclaimed,
“Damnation seize the fellow and his
pouch too! I believe he had sheered off, and left
me here in the stays.” Mrs. Grizzle, who could
not help taking some notice of this manifestation
of chagrin, lamented her unhappy fate in being
so disagreeable to him that he could not put up
with her company for a few moments without
repining; and began in very tender terms to reproach
him with his inhumanity and indifference. 
To this expostulation he replied, “Zounds!
what would the woman have? let the parson do
his office when he wool, here I am ready to be
reeved in the matrimonial block, d'ye see, and
damn all nonsensical palaver.” So saying, he retreated,
leaving his mistress not at all disobliged
at his plain-dealing. That same evening the treaty
of marriage was brought upon the carpet, and by
means of Mr. Pickle and the lieutenant settled
to the satisfaction of all parties, without the intervention
of lawyers, whom Mr. Trunnion expressly
excluded from all share in the business; 
making that condition the indispensible preliminary
of the whole agreement. Things being 

brought to this bearing, Mrs. Grizzle's heart dilated
with joy; her health, which by the bye
was never dangerously impaired, she recovered as
if by inchantment, and a day being fixed for the
nuptials, employed the short period of her celibacy
in choosing ornaments for the celebration of
her entrance into the married state. 