


Bath, April 24. 
DEAR PHILLIPS,
YOU have, indeed, reason to be surprised, that I
should have concealed my correspondence with miss
Blakerby from you, to whom I disclosed all my
other connections of that nature; but the truth is, I
never dreamed of any such commerce, till your last
informed me, that it had produced something
which could not be much longer concealed. It is a
lucky circumstance, however, that her reputation
will not suffer any detriment, but rather derive advantage
from the discovery; which will prove, at
least, that it is not quite so rotten, as most people
imagined—For my own part, I declare to you, in
all the sincerity of friendship, that far from having
any amorous intercourse with the object in question
I never had the least acquaintance with her person; 
but, if she is really in the condition you describe,
I suspect Mansel to be at the bottom of the
whole. His visits to that shrine were no secret; and
this attachment, added to some good offices, which
you know he has done me, since I left Alma-mater,
give me a right to belive him capable of saddling
me with this scandal, when my back was turned
—Nevertheless, if my name can be of any service
to him, he is welcome to make use of it; and if
the woman should be abandoned enough to swear
his bantling to me, I must beg the favour of you
to compound with the parish: I shall pay the penalty
without repining; and you will be so good as
to draw upon me immediately for the sum required
—On this occasion, I act by the advice of my uncle; 

who says, I shall have good-luck if I pass
through life without being obliged to make many
more compositions of the same kind. The old
gentleman told me last night, with great good humour
that betwixt the age of twenty and forty, he
had been obliged to provide for nine bastards,
sworn to him by women whom he never saw—Mr.
Bramble's character, which seems to interest you
greatly, opens and improves upon me every day. — 
His singularities afford a rich mine of entertainment:
his understanding, so far as I can judge, is well
cultivated: his observations on life are equally just,
pertinent, and uncommon. He affects misanthrophy,
in order to conceal the sensibility of a heart,
which is tender, even to a degree of weakness,
This delicacy of feeling, or soreness of the mind
makes him timorous and fearful; but then he is
afraid of nothing so much as of dishonour; and
although he is exceedingly cautious of giving offence,
he will fire at the least hint of insolence or
ill-breeding—Respectable as he is, upon the whole,
I can't help being sometimes diverted by his little
distresses; which provoke him to let fly the shafts
of his satire, keen and penetrating as the arrows of
Teucer—Our aunt, Tabitha, acts upon him as a
perpetual grind-stone—She is, in all respects, a
striking contrast to her brother—But I reserve her
portrait for another occasion. 
Three days ago we came hither from the Hot
Well, and took possession of the first floor of a
lodging-house, on the South Parade; a situation
which my uncle chose, for its being near the Bath,
and remote from the noise of carriages. He was
scarce warm in the lodgings when he called for his
night cap, his wide shoes and flannel; and declared
himself invested with the gout in his right foot; 
though, I believe, it had as yet reached no farther
than his imagination. It was not long before he 

had reason to repent his premature declaration; for
our aunt Tabitha found means to make such a clamour
and confusion, before the flannels could be
produced from the trunk, that one would have
imagined the house was on fire. All this time,
uncle sat boiling with impatience, biting his fingers,
throwing up his eyes, and muttering ejaculations; 
at length he burst into a kind of convulsive laugh,
after which he hummed a song; and when the
hurricane was over, exclaimed, “Blessed be God
for all things!” This, however, was but the
begining of his troubles. Mrs, Tabitha's favourite
dog Chowder, having paid his compliments to
a female turn-spit, of his own species, in the kitchen,
involved himself in a quarrel with no fewer
than five rivals, who set upon him at once, and
drove him up stairs to the dining-room door, with
hideous noise: there our aunt and her woman, taking
arms in his defence, joined the concert; which
became truly diabolical. This fray being with
difficulty suppressed, by the intervention of our
own foot-man and the cook-maid of the house, the
'squire had just opened his mouth to expostulate
with Tabby, when the town-waits, in the passage
below, struck up their musick, (if musick it may
be called) with such a sudden burst of sound, as
made him start and stare, with marks of indignation
and disquiet. He had recollection enough to send
his servant with some money to silence those noisy
intruders; and they were immediately dismissed,
though not without some opposition on the part of
Tabitha, who thought it but reasonable that he
should have more musick for his money. Scarce
had he settled this knotty point, when a strange
kind of thumping and bouncing was heard right
over-head, in the second story, so loud and violent
as to shake the whole building. I own I was exceedingly
provoked at this new alarm; and before 

my uncle had time to express himself on the subject
I ran up stairs, to see what was the matter. Finding
the room-door open, I entered without ceremony,
and perceived an object, which I cannot
now recollect without laughing to excess—It was a
dancing master, with his scholar, in the act of
teaching. The master was blind of one eye, and
lame of one foot, and led about the room his pupil,
who seemed to be about the age of three-score,
stooped mortally, was tall, raw-boned, hard-favoured,
with a woolen night cap on his head; and
he had stript off his coat, that he might be more
nimble in his motions—Finding himself intruded
upon, by a person he did not know, he forthwith
girded himself with a long iron sword, and advancing
to me, with a peremptory air, pronounced, in
a true Hibernian accent, “Mister What d'ye cal
lum, by my should and conscience, I am very
glad to sea you, if you are after coming in the
way of friendship; and indeed and indeed now
I believe you are my friend sure enough, gra; 
though I never had the honour to sea your face
before, my dear; for becaase you come like a
friend, without any ceremony at all, at all—” I
told him the nature of my visit would not admit of
ceremony; that I was come to desire he would
make less noise, as there was a sick gentleman below
whom he had no right to disturb with such preposterous
doings. “Why, look-ye now, young
gentleman, (replied this original) perhaps, upon
another occasion, I might shivilly request you to
explain the maining of that hard word, prepasterous:
but there's a time for all things, honey—” 
So saying, he passed me with great
agility, and, running down stairs, found our footman
at the dining-room door, of whom he demanded
admittance, to pay his respects to the stranger. 
As the fellow did not think proper to refuse the 

request of such a formidable figure, he was immediately
introduced, and addressed himself to my
uncle in these words: “Your humble servant,
good sir—I'm not so prepasterous, as your son
calls it, but I know the rules of shivility—I'm
a Poor knight of Ireland, my name is Sir Ulic
Mackilligut, of the county of Galway; being
your fellow-lodger, I'm come to pay my respects,
and to welcome you to the South Parade,
and to offer my best services to you, and your
good lady, and your pretty daughter; and even
to the young gentleman your son, though he
thinks me a prepasterous fellow—You must
know I am to have the honour to open a ball next
door to morrow with lady Mac Manus; and
being rusted in my dancing, I was refreshing my
memory with a little exercise; but if I had
known there was a sick person below, by Christ! 
I would have sooner danced a hompipe upon my
own head, than walk the softest minuet over
yours.” —My uncle, who was not a little startled
at his first appearance, received his compliment
with great complacency, insisted upon his being
seated, thanked him for the honour of his visit, and
reprimanded me for my abrupt expostulation with
a gentleman of his rank and character. Thus tutored,
I asked pardon of the knight, who, forthwith
starting up, embraced me so close, that I could
hardly breathe; and assured me, he loved me as
his own soul. At length, recollecting his night-cap,
he pulled it off in some confusion; and, with his
bald-pate uncovered, made a thousand apologies to
the ladies, as he retired—At that instant, the Abbey
bel's began to ring so loud, that we could not hear
one another speak; and this peal, as we afterwards
learned, was for the honour of Mr. Bullock, an eminent
cow keeper of Tottenham, who had just arrived
at Bath, to drink the waters for indigestion. Mr. 

Bramble had not time to make his remarks upon the
agreeable nature of this serenade, before his ears
were saluted with another concert that interested
him more nearly. Two negroes belonging to a
Creole gentleman, who lodged in the same house,
taking their station at a window in the stair-case
about ten feet from our dining-room door, began to
practise upon the French-horn; and being in the
very first rudiments of execution, produced such
discordant sounds, as might have discomposed the
organs of an ass—You may guess what effect
they had upon the irritable nerves of uncle: who,
with the most admirable expression of splenetic surprize
in his countenance, sent his man to silence
those dreadful blasts, and desire the musicians to
practise in some other place, as they had no right to
stand there and disturb all the lodgers in the house. 
Those sable performers, far from taking the hint,
and withdrawing treated the messenger with great
insolence; bidding him carry his compliments to
their master, colonel Rigworm, who would give
him a proper answer, and a good drubbing into
the bargain; in the mean time they continued their
noise, and even endeavoured to make it more disagreeable; 
laughing between whiles, at the thoughts
of being able to torment their betters with impunity
Our 'squire, incensed at the additional insult, immediately
dispatched the servant, with his compliments
to colonel Rigworm; requesting that he
would order his blacks to be quiet, as the noise they
made was altogether intolerable—to this message,
the Creole colonel replied, that his horns had a right
to sound on a common stair-case; that there they
should play for his diversion; and that those who did
not like the noise, might look for lodgings elsewhere. 
Mr. Bramble no sooner received this reply
than his eyes began to glisten, his face grew pale,
and his teeth chattered. After a moment's pause, 

he slipt on his shoes, without speaking a word, or
seeming to feel any further disturbance from the
gout in his toes. Then, snatching his cane, he
opened the door and proceeded to the place where
the black trumpeters were posted. There, without
further hesitation, he began to belabour them both; 
and exerted himself with such astonishing vigour
and agility, that both their heads and horns were
broken in a twinkling, and they ran howling down
stairs to their master's parlour door. The 'squire,
following them half way, called aloud, that the
colonel might hear him, “Go, rascals, and tell
your master what I have done; if he thinks himself
injured, he knows where to come for satisfaction. 
As for you, this is but an earnest of
what you shall receive, if ever you presume to
blow a horn again here, while I stay in the
house.” So saying, he retired to his apartment,
in expectation of hearing from the West Indian; 
but the colonel prudently declined any farther prosecution
of the dispute. My sister Liddy was frighted
into a fit, of which she was no sooner recovered,
than Mrs. Tabitha began a lecture upon patience; 
which her brother interrupted with a most
significant grin, exclaiming, “True, sister, God
increase my patience and your discretion. I
wonder (added he) what sort of sonata we are to
expect from this overture, in which the devil,
that presides over horrid sounds, hath given us
such variations of discord—The trampling of
porters, the creaking and crashing of trunks, the
snarling of curs, the scolding of women, the
squeaking and squalling of fiddles and hautboys
out of tune, the bouncing of the Irish baronet
over-head, and the bursting, belching, and brattling
of the French-horns in the passage (not to
mention the harmonious peal that still thunders
from the Abby steeple) succeeding one another 

without interruption, like the different parts of
the same concert, have given me such an idea of
what a poor invalid has to expect in this temple,
dedicated to Silence and Repose, that I shall certainly
shift my quarters to-morrow, and endeavour
to effectuate my retreat before Sir Ulic
opens the ball with my lady Mac Manus; a
conjunction that bodes me no good.” This intimation
was by no means agreeable to Mrs.
Tabitha, whose ears were not quite so delicate as
those of her brother—She said it would be a great
folly to move from such agreeable lodgings, the
moment they were comfortably settled. She wondered
he should be such an enemy to musick and
mirth. She heard no noise but of his own making:
it was impossible to manage a family in dumb-shew. 
He might harp as long as he pleased upon her
scolding; but she never scolded, except for his advantage; 
but he would never be satisfied, even
tho'f she should sweat blood and water in his service
—I have a great notion that our aunt, who is now
declining into the most desperate state of celibacy
had formed some design upon the heart of Sir Ulic
Mackilligut, which she feared might be frustrated
by our abrupt departure from these lodgings. Her
brother, eyeing her askance, “Pardon me, sister,
(said he) I should be a savage, indeed, were I
insensible of my own felicity, in having such a
mild, complacent, good-humoured, and considerate
companion and house-keeper; but as I
have got a weak head, and my sense of hearing is
painfully acute, before I have recourse to plugs of
wool and cotton, I'll try whether I can't find
another lodging, where I shall have more quiet
and less musick.” He accordingly dispatched his
man upon this service; and next day he found a
small house in Milsham-street, which he hires by
the week. Here, at least, we enjoy covenience 

and quiet within doors, as much as Tabby's temper
will allow; but the 'squire still complains of
flying pains in the stomach and head, for which
he bathes and drinks the waters. He is not so bad,
however, but that he goes in person to the pump,
the rooms, and the coffee-houses; where he picks
up continual food for ridicule and satire. If I can
glean any thing for your amusement, either from
his observation or my own, you shall have it freely
though I am afraid it will poorly compensate the
trouble of reading these tedious insipid letters of, 
Dear Philips,
yours always,
J. Melford. 