


He persuades Cadwallader to assume the character
of a magician, in which he acquires a great
share of reputation, by his responses to three females
of distinction, who severally consult the
researches of his art. 
Her suspicion of his associate, while it afforded
him subject for mirth, struck his
imagination with an idea which he could not help
indulging; and when he communicated the conceit
to Cadwallader, it in a moment acquired his
approbation. This notion he imparted in a proposal,
to subject the town to their ridicule, by
giving responses in the character of a professed 

conjurer, to be personated by the old Misanthrope,
whose aspect was extremely well calculated
for the purpose. The plan was immediately
adjusted in all its parts; an apartment
hired in an house accommodated with a public
stair; so that people might have free ingress and
egress, without being exposed to observation; 
and this tenement being furnished with the apparatus
of a magician, such as globes, telescopes,
a magic lanthorn, a skeleton, a dried monkey,
together with the skins of an alligator, otter and
snake, the conjurer himself took possession of his
castle, after having distributed printed advertisements,
containing the particulars of his undertaking. 
These bills soon operated according to the wish
of the projectors. As the price of the oracle
was fixed at half a guinea, the public naturally
concluded, that the author was no common fortune-teller; 
and the very next day, Peregrine
found some ladies of his quality-acquaintance, infected
with the desire of making an experiment
upon the skill of this new conjurer, who pretended
to be just arrived from the Mogul's empire,
where he had learned the art from a Brachman
philosopher. Our young gentleman affected to
talk of the pretensions of this sage with ridicule
and contempt, and with seeming reluctance, undertook
to attend them to his apartment, observing,
that it would be a very easy matter to
detect the fellow's ignorance, and no more than
common justice to chastise him for his presumption. 
Though he could easily perceive a great
fund of credulity in the company, they affected
to espouse his opinion, and under the notion
of a frolic, agreed, that one particular lady 

should endeavour to baffle his art, by appearing
before him in the dress of her woman, who
should, at the same time, personate her mistress,
and be treated as such by our adventurer, who
promised to squire them to the place. These
measures being concerted, and the appointment
fixed for the next audience-day, Peregrine furnished
his friend with the necessary information; 
and when the hour of assignation arrived, conducted
his charge to this oraculous seer. 
They were admitted by our hero's valet de
chambre, whose visage being naturally meagre
and swarthy, was adorned with artificial whiskers; 
so that he became the Persian dress which he
wore, and seemed a very proper master of the
ceremonies to an oriental Necromancer. Having
crossed his arms upon his breast, with an inclination
of the head, he stalked in solemn silence
before them into the Penetralia of the temple,
where they found the conjurer sitting at a table,
provided with pen, ink and paper, divers books
and mathematical instruments, and a long white
wand lying across the whole. He was habited
in a black gown and fur-cap, and his countenance,
over and above a double proportion of philosophic
gravity which he had assumed for the occasion,
was improved by a thick beard white as snow,
that reached to his middle, and upon each shoulder
sat a prodigious large black cat which had been
tutored for the purpose. 
Such a figure, which would have startled Peregrine
himself, had not he been concerned in
the mystery, could not fail to make an impression
upon those whom he accompanied. The fictitious
chambermaid, in spite of all her natural
pertness and vivacity, changed colour when she 

entered the room, and the pretended lady, whose
intellects were not quite so enlightened, began to
tremble in every joint, and ejaculate petitions to
heaven for her safety. Their conductor advancing
to the table, presented his offering, and
pointing to the suivante, told him, that lady desired
to know what would be her destiny in point
of marriage. The philosopher, without lifting
up his eyes to view the person in whose behalf he
was consulted, turned his ear to one of the sable
familiars that purred upon his shoulder, and
taking up the pen, wrote upon a detached slip of
paper these words, which Peregrine, at the desire
of the ladies, repeated aloud, “Her destiny
will, in a great measure, depend upon what happened
to her about nine o'clock in the morning,
on the third day of last December.” 
This sentence was no sooner pronounced, than
the counterfeit lady uttered a fearful scream, and
ran out into the antichamber, exclaiming, “Christ
have mercy upon us! Sure he is the devil incarnate!” 
Her mistress, who followed her with
great consternation, insisted upon knowing the
transaction to which the response alluded; and
Mrs. Abigail, after some recollection, gave her
to understand, that she had an admirer, who, on
the very hour and day mentioned by the cunning
man, had addressed himself to her in a serious proposal
of marriage. This explanation, however,
was more ingenious than candid; for the admirer
was no other than the identical Mr. Pickle himself,
who was a meer dragon among the chambermaids,
and, in his previous information communicated
to his associate, had given an account
of this assignation, with which he had been favoured
by the damsel in question. 

Our hero seeing his company very much affected
with this circumstance of the wizzard's art,
which had almost frighted both mistress and maid
into hysteric fits, pretended to laugh them out of
their fears, by observing that there was nothing
extraordinary in this instance of his knowledge,
which might have been acquired by some of those
secret emissaries whom such impostors are obliged
to employ for intelligence, or imparted by the
lover himself, who had, perhaps, come to consult
him about the success of his amour. Encouraged
by this observation, or rather prompted
by an insatiable curiosity, which was proof
against all sort of apprehension, the disguised lady
returned to the magician's own apartment, and
assuming the air of a pert chambermaid, “Mr.
Conjurer (said she) now you have satisfied my
mistress, will you be so good as to tell me, if
ever I shall be married?” The sage, without the
least hesitation, favoured her with an answer, in
the following words: “You cannot be married
before you are a widow; and whether or not
that will ever be the case, is a question which my
art cannot resolve, because my foreknowledge exceeds
not the term of thirty years.” 
This reply, which at once cut her off from
the pleasing prospect of seeing herself independent
in the enjoyment of youth and fortune, in a moment
clouded her aspect; all her good humour
was overcast, and she went away, without further
inquiry, muttering, in the rancour of her
chagrin, that he was a silly impertinent fellow,
and a meer quack in his profession. Notwithstanding
the prejudice of this resentment, her
conviction soon recurred; and when the report of
his answers was made to those confederates by 

whom she had been deputed to make trial of his
skill, they were universally persuaded that his art
was altogether supernatural, tho' each affected
to treat it with contempt, resolving, in her own
breast, to have recourse to him in private. 
In the mean time, the maid, tho' laid under
the most peremptory injunctions of secrecy, was
so full of the circumstance which related to her
own conduct, that she extolled his prescience, in
whispers to all her acquaintance, assuring them,
that he had told her all the particulars of her life; 
so that his fame was almost instantaneously conveyed,
thro' a thousand different channels, to all
parts of the town; and the very next time he assumed
the chair, his doors were besieged by curious
people of all sects and denominations. 
Being an old practitioner in this art, Cadwallaner
knew it would be impossible for him to support
his reputation in the promiscuous exercise of
fortune-telling, because every person that should
come to consult him would expect a sample of his
skill, relating to things past; and it could not be
supposed, that he was acquainted with the private
concerns of every individual who might apply to
him for that purpose: he therefore ordered his
minister, whom he distinguished by the name of
Hadgi Rourk, to signify to all those who demanded
entrance, that his price was half a guinea; 
and that all such as were not disposed to gratify him
with that consideration would do well to leave the
passage free for the rest. 
This declaration succeeded to his wish; for
this congregation consisted chiefly of footmen,
chambermaids, prentices, and the lower class of
tradesmen, who could not afford to purchase
prescience at such a price; so that, after fruitless 

offers of shillings and half crowns, they dropped
off one by one, and left the field open for customers
of an higher rank. 
The first person of this species who appeared
was dressed like the wife of a substantial tradesman; 
but this disguise could not screen her from
the penetration of the conjurer, who at first sight
knew her to be one of the ladies of whose coming
he had been apprized by Peregrine, on the supposition
that their curiosity was rather inflamed
than allayed by the intelligence they had received
from his first client. This lady approached
the philosopher with that intrepidity of countenance
so conspicuous in matrons of her dignified
sphere, and in a soft voice, asked with a simper,
of what complexion her next child would be? 
The necromancer, who was perfectly well acquainted
with her private history, forthwith delivered
his response in the following question,
written in the usual form, “How long has Pompey
the black been dismissed from your ladyship's
service?” 
Endued as she was with a great share of that
fortitude which is distinguished by the appellation
of effrontery, her face exhibited some signs of
shame and confusion at the receit of this oracular
interrogation, by which she was convinced of
his extraordinary intelligence; and accosting him
in a very serious tone, “Doctor (said she) I perceive
you are a person of great abilities in the art
you profess; and therefore, without pretending
to dissemble, I will own you have touched the
true string of my apprehensions. I am persuaded
I need not be more particular in my inquiries. 
Here is a purse of money; take it, and deliver
me from a most alarming and uneasy suspence.” 
So saying, she deposited her offering upon the 

table, and waited for his answer with a face of
fearful expectation, while he was employed in
writing this sentence for her perusal: “Tho' I
see into the womb of time, the prospect is not
perfectly distinct; the seeds of future events lie
mingled and confused: so that I am under the
necessity of assisting my divination in some cases,
by analogy and human intelligence; and cannot
possibly satisfy your present doubts, unless you
will condescend to make me privy to all those
occurrences which you think might have interfered
with the cause of your apprehension.” 
The lady having read the declaration, affected
a small emotion of shyness and repugnance, and
seating herself upon a settee, after having cautiously
informed herself of the privacy of the
apartment, gave such a detail of the succession of
her lovers, as amazed while it entertained the necromancer,
as well as his friend Pickle, who
from a closet in which he had concealed himself,
overheard every syllable of her confession. Cadwallader
listened to her story with a look of infinite
importance and sagacity, and after a short
pause told her, that he would not pretend to give
a categorical answer, until he should have deliberated
maturely upon the various circumstances
of the affair; but if she would take the trouble of
honouring him with another visit on his next
public day, he hoped he should be able to give
her full satisfaction. Conscious of the importance
of her doubts, she could not help commending
his caution, and took her leave, with a promise
of returning at the appointed time; then the
conjurer being joined by his associate, they gave
a loose to their mirth, which having indulged,
they began to concert measures for inflicting some 

disgraceful punishment on the shameless and insatiate
termagant who had so impudently avowed
her own prostitution. 
They were interrupted, however, in their
conference, by the arrival of a new guest, who
being announced by Hadgi, our hero retreated to
his lurking-place, and Cadwallader resumed his
mysterious appearance. This new client, tho'
she hid her face in a mask, could not conceal herself
from the knowledge of the conjurer, who by
her voice recognized her to be an unmarried
lady of his own acquaintance. She had, within
a small compass of time, made herself remarkable
for two adventures, which had not at all
succeeded to her expectation: being very much
addicted to play, she had, at a certain route, indulged
that passion to such excess, as not only got
the better of her justice, but also of her circumspection; 
so that she was unfortunately detected
in her endeavours to appropriate to herself what
was not lawfully her due. This small slip was
attended with another indiscretion, which had
likewise an unlucky effect upon her reputation. 
She had been favoured with the addresses of one
of those hopeful heirs who swarm and swagger
about town, under the denomination of Bucks; 
and in the confidence of his honour consented to
be one of a partie that made an excursion as far as
Windsor, thinking herself secured from scandal by
the company of another young lady, who had
also condescended to trust her person to the protection
of her admirer. The two gallants, in
the course of this expedition, were said to use the
most perfidious means to intoxicate the passions
of their mistresses, by mixing drugs with their 

wine, which inflamed their constitutions to such
a degree, that they fell an easy sacrifice to the
appetites of their conductors, who, upon their
return to town, were so base and inhuman as to
boast among their companions of the exploit they
had atchieved. Thus the story was circulated,
with a thousand additional circumstances to the
prejudice of the sufferers, one of whom had
thought proper to withdraw into the country, until
the scandal raised at her expence should subside; 
while the other, who was not so easily put
out of countenance, resolved to outface the report,
as a treacherous aspersion, invented by her
lover as an excuse for his own inconstancy; and
actually appeared in public, as usual, till she
found herself neglected by the greatest part of her
acquaintance. 
In consequence of this disgrace, which she
knew not whether to impute to the card affair,
or to the last faux pas she had committed, she
now came to consult the conjurer, and signified
her errand, by asking whether the cause of her
present disquiet was of the town or country? 
Cadwallader at once perceiving her allusion, answered
her question in these terms. “This honest
world will forgive a young gamester for indiscretion
at play, but a favour granted to a blabbing coxcomb
is an unpardonable offence.” This reponse
she received with equal astonishment and chagrin; 
and, fully convinced of the necromancer's
omniscience, implored his advice touching the
retrieval of her reputation: upon which he counselled
her to wed with the first opportunity; 
and she seemed so well pleased with his admonition,
that she gratified him with a double fee, and
dropping a low curt'sy, retired. 

Our undertakers now thought it high time to
silence the oracle for the day, and Hadgi was accordingly
ordered to exclude all comers, while
Peregrine and his friend renewed the deliberations,
which had been interrupted, and settled a plan of
operations for the next occasion: mean while it
was resolved, that Hadgi should not only exercise
his own talents, but also employ inferior
agents, in procuring general intelligence for the
support of their scheme; that the expence of this
ministry should be defrayed from the profits of
their profession; and the remainder be distributed
to poor families in distress. 