


Which, it is to be hoped, the reader
will find an agreeable medley of mirth
and madness, sense and absurdity. 
It was not without reason that our
adventurer afflicted himself: his
fears were but too prophetic. When
he alighted at the inn, which he had
left so abruptly the preceding evening,
he ran directly to the apartment where
he had been so happy in Aurelia's company; 

but her he saw not—all was
solitary. Turning to the woman of
the house, who had followed him into
the room, “Where is the lady?” 
cried he, in a tone of impatience. 
Mine hostess, screwing up her features
into a very demure aspect, said she saw
so many ladies, she could not pretend
to know who he meant. “I tell thee,
woman, (exclaimed the knight, in a
louder accent) thou never sawest such
another—I mean that miracle of beauty
—” “Very like, (replied the dame,
as she retired to the room-door.) Husband,
here's one as axes concerning a
miracle of beauty; hi, hi, hi. Can
you give him any information about
this miracle of beauty? —Ola! hi, hi,
hi.” Instead of answering this question,
the inn-keeper advancing, and
surveying Sir Launcelot, “Friend,
(said he) you are the person that carried
off my horse out of the stable.” 
“Tell me not of a horse—where is
the young lady?” “Now I will tell
you of the horse, and I'll make you
find him too, before you and I part.” 

“Wretched animal! how dar'st thou
dally with my impatience? —Speak,
or despair. —What is become of Miss
Meadows? Say, did she leave this
place of her own accord, or was she— 
hah!—speak—answer, or, by the
Powers above—” “I'll answer you
flat—she you call Miss Meadows is in
very good hands—so you may make
yourself easy on that score—” “Sacred
Heaven! explain your meaning,
miscreant, or I'll make you a dreadful
example to all the insolent publicans of
the realm.” So saying, he seized him
with one hand, and dashing him on
the floor, set one foot on his belly, and
kept him trembling in that prostrate
attitude. The hostler and waiter flying
to the assistance of their master,
our adventurer unsheathed his sword,
declaring he would dismiss their souls
from their bodies, and exterminate the
whole family from the face of the
earth, if they would not immediately
give him the satisfaction he required. 
The hostess, being by this time terrified
almost out of her senses, fell on 

her knees before him, begging he
would spare their lives, and promising
to declare the whole truth. He would
not, however, remove his foot from
the body of her husband, until she told
him, that, in less than half an hour after
he had sallied out upon the supposed
robbers, two chaises arrived,
each drawn by four horses: that two
men, armed with pistols, alighting
from one of them, laid violent hands
upon the young lady; and, notwithstanding
her struggling and shrieking,
forced her into the other carriage, in
which was an infirm gentleman, who
called himself her guardian: that the
maid was left to the care of a third
servant, to follow with a third chaise,
which was got ready with all possible
dispatch, while the other two proceeded
at full speed on the road to
London. It was by this communicative
lacquey the people of the house
were informed, that the old gentleman
his master was squire Darnel, the
young lady his niece and ward, and
our adventurer a needy sharper, who 

wanted to make prey of her fortune. 
The knight, fired even almost to
frenzy by this intimation, spurned the
carcase of his host; and, his eye
gleaming terror, rushed into the yard,
in order to mount Bronzomarte, and
pursue the ravisher, when he was diverted
from his purpose by a new incident. 
One of the postilions, who had driven
the chaise in which Dolly was
conveyed, happened to arrive at that
instant; when, seeing our hero, he
ran up to him cap in hand, and, presenting
a letter, accosted him in these
words: “Please your noble honour,
if your honour be Sir Launcelot
Greaves of the West Riding, here's a
letter from a gentlewoman, that I promised
to deliver into your honour's
own hands.” 
The knight, snatching the letter
with the utmost avidity, broke it up,
and found the contents couched in
these terms: 


“Honoured Sir,
“The man az gi'en me leave to
lat yaw knaw my dear leady is going
to Loondon with her unkle squaire
Darnel. —Be not conzarned, honoured
Sir, vor I'se teake it on mai
laife, to let yaw knaw wheare we
be zettled, if zo be I can vind wheare
you loadge in Loondon. —The man
zays yaw may put it in the pooblic
prints. —I houp the bareheir will
be honest enuff to deliver this scrowl; 
and that your honour will pardon 
“Your umbil servannt to command
Dorothy Cowslip. 
“P. S. Please my kaind sarvice
to laayer Clarke. Squire Darnel's
man is very civil vor sartain; but
I'ave no thoughts on him I'll assure
yaw. —Marry hap, worse ware may
have a better chap, as the zaying
goes.” 

Nothing could be more seasonable
than the delivery of this billet; which
he had no sooner perused, than his
reflection returned, and he entered
into a serious deliberation with his own
heart. He considered that Aurelia
was by this time far beyond a possibility
of being overtaken; and that
by a precipitate pursuit he should only
expose his own infirmities. He confided
in the attachment of his mistress,
and in the fidelity of her maid, who
would find opportunities of communicating
her sentiments, by the
means of this lacquey, of whom he
perceived by the letter she had already
made a conquest. He therefore
resolved to bridle his impatience, to
proceed leisurely to London, and, instead
of taking any rash step which
might induce Anthony Darnel to remove
his niece from that city, remain
in seeming quiet until she should be
settled, and her guardian returned to
the country. Aurelia had mentioned
to him the name of doctor Kawdle,
and from him he expected, in due 

time, to receive the most interesting
information. 
These reflections had an instantaneous
effect upon our hero, whose
rage immediately subsided, and whose
visage gradually resumed its natural
cast of courtesy and good humour. 
He forthwith gratified the postilion
with such a remuneration as sent him
dancing into the kitchen, where he
did not fail to extol the generosity and
immense fortune of Sir Launcelot
Greaves. 
Our adventurer's next step was to
see Bronzomarte properly accommodated; 
then he ordered a refreshment
for himself, and retired into an apartment,
where mine host with his wife
and all the servants waited on him, to
beseech his honour to forgive their impertinence,
which was owing to their
ignorance of his honour's quality, and
the false information they had received
from the gentleman's servant. He
had too much magnanimity to retain
the least resentment against such inconsiderable
objects. He not only pardoned 

them without hesitation; but
assured the landlord he would be accountable
for the horse, which, however,
was that same evening brought
home by a countryman, who had
found him pounded as it were within
the walls of a ruined cottage. As
the knight had been greatly fatigued,
without enjoying any rest for eight
and forty hours, he resolved to indulge
himself with one night's repose, and
then return to the place where he had
left his squire indisposed: for by this
time even his concern for Timothy
had recurred. 
On a candid scrutiny of his own
heart, he found himself much less
unhappy than he had been before his
interview with Aurelia; for, instead
of being as formerly tormented with
the pangs of despairing love, which
had actually unsettled his understanding,
he was now happily convinced
that he had inspired the tender breast
of Aurelia with mutual affection; 
and though she was invidiously
snatched from his embrace, in the 

midst of such endearments as had
wound up his soul to extasy and transport,
he did not doubt of being able
to rescue her from the power of an
inhuman kinsman, whose guardianship
would soon of course expire; 
and in the mean time, he rested with
the most perfect dependence on her
constancy and virtue. 
As he next day crossed the country,
ruminating on the disaster that
had befallen his squire, and could
now compare circumstances coolly,
he easily comprehended the whole
scheme of that adventure, which was
no other than an artifice of Anthony
Darnel and his emissaries, to draw
him from the inn where he proposed
to execute his design upon the innocent
Aurelia. He took it for granted,
that the uncle, having been made
acquainted with his niece's elopement,
had followed her track by the help of
such information as he received from
one stage to another; and that, receiving
more particulars at the White Hart
touching Sir Launcelot, he had formed 

the scheme in which Crabshaw
was an involuntary instrument towards
the seduction of his master. 
Amusing himself with these and
other cogitations, our hero in the afternoon
reached the place of his destination; 
and entering the inn where
Timothy had been left at sick quarters,
chanced to meet the apothecary
retiring precipitately in a very unsavoury
pickle from the chamber of his
patient. When he enquired about
the health of his squire, this retainer
to medicine, wiping himself all the
while with a napkin, answered in manifest
confusion, That he apprehended
him to be in a very dangerous way,
from an inflammation of the pia mater,
which had produced a most furious
delirium. Then he proceeded to explain,
in technical terms, the method
of cure he had followed; and concluded
with telling him the poor
squire's brain was so outrageously disordered,
that he had rejected all administration,
and just thrown an urinal
in his face. 

The knight's humanity being alarmed
at this intelligence, he resolved
that Crabshaw should have the
benefit of further advice, and asked
if there was not a physician in the
place. The apothecary, after some
interjections of hesitation, owned
there was a doctor in the village, an
odd sort of a humourist; but he believed
he had not much to do in the
way of his profession, and was not
much used to the forms of prescription. 
He was counted a scholar, to
be sure; but as to his medical capacity,
—he would not take upon
him to say—“No matter, (cried
Sir Launcelot) he may strike out
some lucky thought for the benefit of
the patient; and I desire you will call
him instantly.”— 
While the apothecary was absent
on this service, our adventurer took
it in his head to question the landlord
about the character of this physician,
which had been so unfavourably represented,
and received the following
information: 

“For my peart, measter, I knows
nothing amiss of the doctor—he's
a quiet sort of an inoffensive man; 
uses my house sometimes, and pays
for what he has, like the rest of my
customers. They says he deals very
little in physic stuff, but cures his patients
with fasting and water-gruel,
whereby he can't expect the pothecary
to be his friend. You knows,
master, one must live, and let live,
as the saying is. I must say, he, for
for the value of three guineas, set
up my wife's constitution in such a
manner, that I have saved within
these two years, I believe, forty pounds
in pothecary's bills. But what of
that? Every man must eat, tho'f at
another's expence; and I should be in
a deadly hole myself, if all my customers
should take it in their heads to
drink nothing but water-gruel, because
it is good for the constitution. 
Thank God, I have as good a constitution
as e'er a man in England; but
for all that, I and my whole family
bleed and purge and take a diet drink 

twice a-year, by way of serving the
pothecary, who is a very honest man,
and a very good neighbour.” 
Their conversation was interrupted
by the return of the apothecary with
the doctor, who had very little of the
faculty in his appearance. He was
dressed remarkably plain; seemed to
be turned of fifty; had a careless air,
and a sarcastical turn in his countenance. 
Before he entered the sick
man's chamber, he asked some questions
concerning the disease; and
when the apothecary, pointing to his
own head, said, “It lies all here;” 
the doctor, turning to Sir Launcelot,
replied, “If that be all, there's nothing
in it.” 
Upon a more particular enquiry
about the symptoms, he was told that
the blood was seemingly viscous, and
salt upon the tongue; the urine remarkably
acrosaline; and the fæces
atrabilious and fœtid. When the
doctor said he would engage to find
the same phænomena in every healthy
man of the three kingdoms; the apothecary 

added, that the patient was
manifestly comatous, and moreover
afflicted with griping pains and borborygmata. 
—“A f&wblank;t for your borborygmata,
(cried the physician.)
What has been done?” To this question
he replied, that venæsection had
been three times performed: that a
vesicatory had been applied inter scapulas:
that the patient had taken occasionally
of a cathartic apozem, and,
between whiles, alexipharmic boluses
and neutral draughts. —“Neutral,
indeed, (said the doctor;) so neutral,
that I'll be crucified if ever they declare
either for the patient or the disease.” 
So saying, he brushed into
Crabshaw's chamber, followed by
our adventurer, who was almost suffocated
at his first entrance. The
day was close, the window-shutters
were fastened; a huge fire blazed in
the chimney; thick harateen curtains
were close drawn round the bed,
where the wretched squire lay extended
under an enormous load of blankets. 
The nurse, who had all the 

exteriors of a bawd given to drink,
sat stewing in this apartment, like a
damned soul in some infernal bagnio:
but rising, when the company entered,
made her curtsies with great decorum. 
“Well, (said the doctor)
how does your patient, nurse?” 
“Blessed be God for it, I hope in a
fair way:—to be sure his apozem
has had a blessed effect—five and
twenty stools since three o'clock in
the morning. —But then a'would
not suffer the blisters to be put upon
his thighs. —Good lack! a'has been
mortally obstropolous, and out of his
senses all this blessed day.” —“You
lie, (cried the squire) I a'n't out of
my seven senses, thof I'm half mad
with vexation.” 
The doctor having withdrawn the
curtain, the hapless squire appeared
very pale and ghastly; and having
surveyed his master with a rueful
aspect, addressed him in these words: 
“Sir knight, I beg a boon: be pleased
to tie a stone about the neck of
the apothecary, and a halter about the 

neck of the nurse, and throw the one
into the next river, and the other
over the next tree, and in so doing
you will do a charitable deed to your
fellow-creatures; for he and she do
the devil's work in partnership, and
have sent many score of their betters
home to him before their time.” 
“Oh, he begins to talk sensibly.” 
“Have a good heart, (said the physician.) 
What is your disorder?” 
“Physick.” “What do you chiefly
complain of?” “The doctor.” 
“Does your head ake?” “Yea,
with impertinence.” “Have you
a pain in your back?” “Yes, where
the blister lies.” “Are you sick at
stomach?” “Yes, with hunger.” 
“Do you feel any shiverings?” 
“Always at sight of the apothecary.” 
“Do you perceive any load in your
bowels?” “I would the apothecary's
conscience was as clear.” “Are
you thirsty?” “Not thirsty enough
to drink barley-water.” “Be pleased
to look into his fauces, (said the apothecary:)
he has got a  rough tongue, 

and a very foul mouth, I'll assure you.” 
“I have known that the case with
some limbs of the faculty, where
they stood more in need of correction
than of physick. —Well, my honest
friend, since you have already undergone
the proper purgations in due
form, and say you have no other
disease than the doctor, we will set
you on your legs again, without further
question. Here, nurse, open
that window, and throw these vials
into the street. Now lower the curtain,
without shutting the casement,
that the man may not be stifled in his
own steam. In the next place, take
off two thirds of these coals, and one
third of these blankets. —How do'st
feel now, my heart?” “I should
feel heart-whole, if so be as yow
would throw the noorse a'ter the bottles,
and the pothecary a'ter the noorse,
and oorder me a pound of chops for
my dinner; for I be so hoongry, I
could eat a horse behind the saddle.” 
The apothecary, seeing what passed,
retired of his own accord, holding 

up his hands in sign of astonishment. 
The nurse was dismissed in
the same breath. Crabshaw rose,
dressed himself without assistance, and
made a hearty meal on the first eatable
that presented itself to his view. The
knight passed the evening with the
physician, who, from his first appearance,
concluded he was mad; but, in
the course of the conversation, found
means to resign that opinion, without
adopting any other in lieu of it, and
parted with him under all the impatience
of curiosity. The knight, on
his part, was very well entertained
with the witty sarcasms and erudition
of the doctor, who appeared to be a
sort of cynic philosopher, tinctured
with misanthropy, and at open war
with the whole body of apothecaries,
whom, however, it was by no means
his interest to disoblige. 
Next day, Crabshaw being to all
appearance perfectly recovered, our
adventurer reckoned with the apothecary,
payed the landlord, and set out
on his return for the London road, 

resolving to lay aside his armour at
some distance from the metropolis:
for, ever since his interview with Aurelia,
his fondness for chivalry had
been gradually abating. As the torrent
of his despair had disordered the
current of his sober reflection, so now,
as that despair subsided, his thoughts
began to flow deliberately in their ancient
channel. All day long he regaled
his imagination with plans of
connubial happiness, formed on the
possession of the incomparable Aurelia; 
determined to wait with patience,
until the law should supersede the authority
of her guardian, rather than adopt
any violent expedient which might
hazard the interest of his passion. 
He had for some time travelled in
the turnpike road, when his reverie
was suddenly interrupted by a confused
noise; and when he lifted up
his eyes, he beheld at a little distance
a rabble of men and women, variously
armed with flails, pitch-forks, poles,
and muskets, acting offensively against
a strange figure on horseback, who, 

with a kind of lance, laid about him
with incredible fury. Our adventurer
was not so totally abandoned by the
spirit of chivalry, as to see without
emotion a single knight in danger of
being overpowered by such a multitude
of adversaries. Without staying
to put on his helmet, he ordered
Crabshaw to follow him in the charge
against those plebeians: then couching
his lance, and giving Bronzomarte
the spur, he began his career with
such impetuosity as overturned all that
happened to be in his way; and intimidated
the rabble to such a degree,
that they retired before him like a
flock of sheep, the greater part of
them believing he was the devil in
propria persona. He came in the very
nick of time to save the life of the
other errant, against whom three
loaded muskets were actually levelled,
at the very instant that our adventurer
began his charge. The unknown
knight was so sensible of the seasonable
interposition, that riding up to our
hero, “Brother, (said he) this is the 

second time you have holp me off,
when I was bump ashore. —Bess
Mizen, I must say, is no more than
a leaky bumboat, in comparison of the
glorious galley you want to man. I
desire that henceforth we may cruise
in the same latitudes, brother; and
I'll be damned if I don't stand by you
as long as I have a stick standing, or
can carry a rag of canvas.” 
By this address our knight recognized
the novice captain Crowe, who
had found means to accommodate
himself with a very strange suit of armour. 
By way of helmet, he wore
one of the caps used by the light horse,
with straps buckled under his chin,
and contrived in such a manner as to
conceal his whole visage, except the
eyes. Instead of cuirass, mail, greaves,
and the other pieces of complete armour,
he was cased in a postilion's
leathern jerkin, covered with thin
plates of tinned iron: his buckler was
a potlid, his lance a hop-pole shod
with iron, and a basket-hilt broad
sword, like that of Hudibras, depended 

by a broad buff belt, that girded
his middle. His feet were defended
by jack-boots, and his hands by the
gloves of a trooper. Sir Launcelot
would not lose time in examining particulars,
as he perceived some mischief
had been done, and that the enemy
had rallied at a distance: he therefore
commanded Crowe to follow him,
and rode off with great expedition; 
but he did not perceive that his squire
was taken prisoner; nor did the captain
recollect that his nephew, Tom
Clarke, had been disabled and secured
in the beginning of the fray. The
truth is, the poor captain had been
so belaboured about the pate, that it
was a wonder he remembered his own
name. 