


Containing the atchievements of the
knights of the Griffin and Crescent. 
Mr. Sycamore, alias the knight
of the Griffin, so denominated
from a griffin painted on his shield,
being armed at all points, and his
friend Dawdle provided with a certain
implement, which he flattered himself
would ensure a victory over the
novice Crowe; they set out from the
George, with their attendants, in all
the elevation of hope, and pranced
along the highway that led towards
London, that being the road which
our adventurer pursued. As they
were extremely well mounted, and
proceeded at a round pace, they, in
less than two hours, came up with
Sir Launcelot and his company; 
and Sycamore sent another formal
defiance to the knight, by his trumpeter,
Dawdle having for good reasons,
declined that office. 

Our adventurer hearing himself
thus addressed, and seeing his rival,
who had passed him, posted to obstruct
his progress, armed capapie,
with his lance in the rest; determined
to give the satisfaction that was required,
and desired that the regulations of
the combat might be established. The
knight of the Griffin proposed, that
the vanquished party should resign all
pretensions to Miss Aurelia Darnel, in
favour of the victor; that while the
principals were engaged, his friend
Dawdle should run a tilt with captain
Crowe; that squire Crabshaw, and
Mr. Sycamore's servant, should keep
themselves in readiness to assist their
respective masters occasionally, according
to the law of arms; and that
Mr. Clarke should observe the motions
of the trumpeter, whose province was
to sound the charge to battle. 
Our knight agreed to these regulations,
notwithstanding the earnest and
pathetic remonstrances of the young
lawyer, who, with tears in his eyes,
conjured all the combatants, in their 

turns, to refrain from an action that
might be attended with bloodshed
and murder; and was contrary to the
laws both of God and man. In vain
he endeavoured to move them by
tears and entreaties, by threatning
them with prosecutions in this world,
and pains and penalties in the next:
they persisted in their resolution, and
his uncle would have begun hostilities
on his carcase, had not he been prevented
by Sir Launcelot, who exhorted
Clarke to retire from the field,
that he might not be involved in the
consequences of the combat. He relished
this advice so well, that he had
actually moved off to some distance; 
but his apprehension and concern for
his friends co-operating with an insatiable
curiosity, detained him in
fight of the engagement. 
The two knights having fairly divided
the ground, and the same precautions
being taken by the seconds,
on another part of the field, Sycamore
began to be invaded with some
scruples, which were probably engendered 

by the martial appearance, and
well known character of his antagonist. 
The confidence which he had
derived from the reluctance of Sir
Launcelot now vanished, because it
plainly appeared, that the knight's
backwardness was not owing to personal
timidity; and he foresaw that
the prosecution of this joke might be
attended with very serious consequences
to his own life and reputation. 
He, therefore, desired a parley, in
which he observed his affection for
Miss Darnel was of such a delicate
nature, that should the discomfiture
of his rival contribute to make her
unhappy, his victory must render him
the most miserable wretch upon earth. 
He proposed, therefore, that her sentiments
and choice should be ascertained
before they proceeded to extremity. 
Sir Launcelot declared that he was
much more afraid of combating Aurelia's
inclination, than of opposing
the knight of the Griffin in arms; 
and that if he had the least reason to 

think Mr. Sycamore, or any other
person, was distinguished by her preference,
he would instantly give up
his suit as desperate. At the same
time, he observed that Sycamore had
proceeded too far to retract; that he
had insulted a gentleman, and not
only challenged, but even pursued
him, and blocked up his passage in
the public highway; outrages which
he (Sir Launcelot) would not suffer
to pass unpunished. Accordingly, he
insisted on the combat, on pain of
treating Mr. Sycamore as a craven,
and a recreant. This declaration was
reinforced by Dawdle, who told him
that should he now decline the engagement,
all the world would look
upon him as an infamous poltroon. 
These two observations gave a necessary
fillip to the courage of the
challenger. The parties took their
stations: the trumpet sounded to
charge, and the combatants began
their career with great impetuosity. 
Whether the gleam of Sir Launcelot's
arms affrighted Mr. Sycamore's 

steed, or some other object had an
unlucky effect on his eye-sight; certain
it is he started at about midway, and
gave his rider such a violent shake as
discomposed his attitude, and disabled
him from using his lance to the best advantage. 
Had our hero continued his
career, with his launce couched, in
all probability Sycamore's armour
would have proved but a bad defence
to his carcase: but Sir Launcelot perceiving
his rival's spear unrested, had
just time to throw up the point of his
own, when the two horses closed
with such a shock, that Sycamore,
already wavering in the saddle, was
overthrown, and his armour crashed
around him as he fell. 
The victor, seeing him lie without
motion, alighted immediately and began
to unbuckle his helmet, in which
office he was assisted by the trumpeter. 
When the head-piece was removed,
the hapless knight of the
Griffin appeared in the pale livery of
death, tho' he was only in a swoon,
from which he soon recovered by the 

effect of the fresh air, and the aspersion
of cold water, brought from a
small pool in the neighbourhood. 
When he recognized his conqueror
doing the offices of humanity about
his person, he closed his eyes from
vexation, told Sir Launcelot that his
was the fortune of the day, tho' he
himself owed his mischance to the
fault of his own horse; and observed
that this ridiculous affair would not
have happened, but for the mischievous
instigation of that scoundrel
Dawdle, on whose ribs he threatened
to revenge his mishap. 
Perhaps captain Crowe might have
saved him this trouble, had that wag
honourably adhered to the institutions
of chivalry, in his conflict with our
novice: but on this occasion, his ingenuity
was more commendable than
his courage. He had provided at the
inn a blown bladder, in which several
smooth pebbles were inclosed; 
and this he slily fixed on the head
of his pole, when the captain obeyed
the signal of battle. Instead of bearing 

the brunt of the encounter, he
turned out of the straight line, so as
to avoid the launce of his antagonist,
and rattled his bladder with such effect,
that Crowe's horse pricking up
his ears, took to his heels, and fled
across some ploughed land with such
precipitation, that the rider was obliged
to quit his spear, and lay fast hold on
the mane, that he might not be thrown
out of the saddle. Dawdle, who was
much better mounted, seeing his condition,
rode up to the unfortunate novice,
and belaboured his shoulders
without fear of retaliation. Mr.
Clarke, seeing his kinsman so roughly
handled, forgot his fears, and flew to
his assistance; but, before he came
up, the aggressor had retired, and
now perceiving that fortune had declared
against his friend and patron,
very honourably abandoned him in
his distress, and went off at full speed
for London. 
Nor was Timothy Crabshaw without
his share in the noble atchievements
of this propitious day. He 

had by this time imbibed such a tincture
of errantry, that he firmly believed
himself and his master equally
invincible; and this belief operating
upon a perverse disposition, rendered
him as quarrelsome in his sphere, as
his master was mild and forbearing. 
As he sat on horseback, in the place
assigned to him and Sycamore's lacquey,
he managed Gilbert in such a
manner, as to invade with his heels,
the posteriors of the other's horse; 
and this insult produced some altercation,
which ended in mutual assault. 
The footman handled the butt-end
of his horse-whip with great dexterity
about the head of Crabshaw, who
declared afterwards, that it sung and
simmered like a kettle of cod-fish:
but the squire who understood the nature
of long lashes, as having been a
carter from his infancy, found means
to twine his thong about the neck of
his antagonist, and pull him off his
horse half strangled, at the very instant
his master was thrown by Sir
Launcelot Greaves. 

Having thus obtained the victory,
he did not much regard the punctilios
of chivalry; but taking it for
granted he had a right to make the
most of his advantage, resolved to
carry off the spolia opima. Alighting
with great agility, “Brother, (cried
he) I think as haw yawrs bean't a
butcher's horse, a doan't carry calves
well—I'se make yaw knaw your
churning days, I wool—what yaw
look as if yaw was crow-trodden,
you do—now, you shall pay the
score you have been running on my
peate, you shall, brother.” 
So saying, he rifled his pockets,
stripped him of his hat and coat,
and took possession of his master's
portmanteau. But he did not long
enjoy his plunder: for the lacquey
complaining to Sir Launcelot, of his
having been despoiled, the knight
commanded his squire to refund, not
without menaces of subjecting him
to the severest chastisement, for his
injustice and rapacity. Timothy represented,
with great vehemence, that 

he had won the spoils in fair battle,
at the expence of his head and shoulders,
which he immediately uncovered,
to prove his allegation: but his
remonstrance having no effect upon
his master, “Wounds! (cried he) an
I mun gee thee back the pig, I'se gee
thee back the poke also; I'm a drubbing
still in thy debt.” 
With these words, he made a
most furious attack upon the plaintiff,
with his horse-whip, and before the
knight could interpose, repayed the
lacquey with interest. As an appurtenance
to Sycamore and Dawdle, he
ran the risque of another assault from
the novice Crowe, who was so transported
with rage, at the disagreeable
trick which had been played upon
him, by his fugitive antagonist, that
he could not for some time pronounce
an articulate sound, but a few broken
interjections, the meaning of which
could not be ascertained. Snatching
up his pole, he ran towards the place
where Mr. Sycamore sat on the grass,
supported by the trumpeter, and
would have finished what our adventurer 

had left undone, if the knight
of the Crescent, with admirable dexterity,
had not warded off the blow
which he aimed at the knight of the
Griffin, and signified his displeasure
in a resolute tone: then he collared
the lacquey, who was just disengaged
from the chastising hand of Crabshaw,
and swinging his launce with his other
hand, encountered the squire's ribs by
accident. 
Timothy was not slow in returning
the salutation, with the weapon
which he still wielded: Mr. Clarke,
running up to the assistance of his
uncle, was opposed by the lacquey,
who seemed extremely desirous of
seeing the enemy revenge his quarrel,
by falling foul of one another. Clarke,
thus impeded, commenced hostilities
against the footman, while Crowe
grappled with Crabshaw; a battle-royal
insued, and was maintained with
great vigour, and some bloodshed on
all sides, until the authority of Sir
Launcelot, reinforced by some weighty
remonstrances, applied to the squire, 

put an end to the conflict. Crabshaw
immediately desisted, and ran roaring
to communicate his grievances to
Gilbert, who seemed to sympathize
very little with his distress. The lacquey
took to his heels; Mr Clarke
wiped his bloody nose, declaring he
had a good mind to put the aggressor
in the Crown-office; and captain
Crowe continued to ejaculate unconnected
oaths, which, however, seemed
to imply that he was almost sick of
his new profession. “D&wblank;n my eyes,
if you call this—start my timbers,
brother—look ye, d'ye see—a lousy,
lubberly, cowardly son of a&wblank;among
the breakers, d'ye see—lost my
steerage way—split my binnacle; 
haul away—O! damn all arrantry— 
give me a tight vessel, d'ye see, brother
—mayhap you may'nt—snatch
my—sea room and a spanking gale— 
odds heart, I'll hold a whole year's— 
smite my limbs: it don't signify talking.”— 
Our hero consoled the novice for
his disaster, by observing, that if he 

had got some blows, he had lost no
honour. At the same time, he observed
that it was very difficult, if not
impossible, for a man to succeed in
the paths of chivalry, who had passed
the better part of his days in other
occupations; and hinted that as the
cause which had engaged him in this
way of life no longer existed, he was
determined to relinquish a profession,
which, in a peculiar manner, exposed
him to the most disagreeable incidents. 
Crowe chewed the cud upon this insinuation,
while the other personages
of the Drama were employed in
catching the horses, which had given
their riders the slip. As for Mr. Sycamore,
he was so bruised by his fall,
that it was necessary to procure a litter
for conveying him to the next
town, and the servant was dispatched
for this convenience; Sir Launcelot
staying with him until it arrived. 
When he was safely deposited in
the carriage, our hero took leave of
him in these terms. “I shall not
insist upon your submitting to the 

terms, you yourself proposed before
this rencounter. I give you free leave
to use all your advantages, in an honourable
way, for promoting your
suit with the young lady, of whom
you profess yourself enamoured. 
Should you have recourse to sinister
practices, you will find Sir Launcelot
Greaves ready to demand an account
of your conduct, not in the character
of a lunatic knight-errant, but as a
plain English gentleman, jealous of
his honour, and resolute in his purpose.” 
To this address Mr. Sycamore
made no reply, but with a sullen
aspect ordered the carriage to proceed; 
and it moved accordingly to
the right, our hero's road to London
lying in the other direction. Sir
Launcelot had already exchanged his
armour for a riding-coat, hat, and
boots; and Crowe parting with his
skull-cap and leathern jerkin, regained
in some respects the appearance of
a human creature. Thus metamorphosed,
they pursued their way in an 

easy pace, Mr. Clarke endeavouring
to amuse them with a learned dissertation
on the law, tending to demonstrate
that Mr. Sycamore was, by his
behaviour of that day, liable to three
different actions, besides a commission
of lunacy; and that Dawdle might
be prosecuted for having practised
subtle craft, to the annoyance of his
uncle, over and above an action for
assault and battery; because, for why? 
The said Crowe having run away, as
might be easily proved, before any
blows were given, the said Dawdle
by pursuing him even out of the
high road, putting him in fear, and
committing battery on his body, became,
to all intents and purposes, the
aggressor; and an indictment would
lie in Banco Regis. 
The Captain's pride was so shocked
at these observations, that he exclaimed
with equal rage and impatience,
“You lie, you dog, in Bilkum
Regis—you lie, I say, you lubber,
I did not run away; nor was I
in fear, d'ye see. It was my son of 

a bitch of a horse that would not
obey the helm, d'ye see, whereby I
coudn't use my metal, d'ye see—As
for the matter of fear, you and fear
my kiss my—So don't go and heave
your stink-pots at my character, d'ye
see, or agad I'll trim thee fore and
aft with a&wblank;I wool.” Tom protested
he meant nothing but a little speculation,
and Crowe was appeased. 
In the evening they reached the
town of Bugden, without any farther
adventure, and passed the night in
great tranquility. Next morning,
even after the horses were ordered to
be saddled, Mr. Clarke, without ceremony,
entered the apartment of Sir
Launcelot, leading in a female, who
proved to be the identical Mrs. Dolly
Cowslip. This young woman advancing
to the knight, cried, “O,
Sir Launcelot! my dear leady, my
dear leady”—but was hindered from
proceeding by a flood of tears which
the tender hearted lawyer mingled
with a plentiful shower of sympathy. 
Our adventurer starting at this 

exclamation, “O heavens! (cried he)
where is my Aurelia? speak, where
did you leave that jewel of my soul?
answer me in a moment—I am all
terror and impatience!” Dolly having
recollected herself, told him that
Mr. Darnel had lodged his niece in
the new buildings by May-fair; that
on the second night after their arrival,
a very warm expostulation had passed
between Aurelia and her uncle, who
next morning dismissed Dolly, without
permitting her to take leave of
her mistress, and that same day moved
to another part of the town, as she
afterwards learned of the landlady,
though she could not inform her
whither they were gone. That when
she was turned away, John Clump,
one of the footmen, who pretended
to have a kindness for her, had faithfully
promised to call upon her and
let her know what passed in the family; 
but as he did not keep his word,
and she was an utter stranger in London,
without friends or settlement,
she had resolved to return to her mother, 

and travelled so far on foot since
yesterday morning. 
Our knight, who had expected the
most dismal tidings from her lamentable
preamble, was pleased to find
his presaging fears disappointed; tho'
he was far from being satisfied with
the dismission of Dolly, from whose
attachment to his interest, joined to
her influence over Mr. Clump, he had
hoped to reap such intelligence as
would guide him to the haven of his
desires. After a minute's reflection,
he saw it would be expedient to carry
back Mrs. Cowslip, and lodge her at
the place where Mr. Clump had promised
to visit her with intelligence; 
for, in all probability, it was not for
want of inclination that he had not
kept his promise. 
Dolly did not express any aversion
to the scheme of returning to London,
where she hoped once more to
rejoin her dear lady, to whom by this
time, she was attached by the strongest
ties of affection; and her inclination,
in this respect, was assisted by 

the consideration of having the company
of the young lawyer, who, it plainly
appeared, had made strange havock
in her heart, tho' it must be owned, for
the honour of this blooming damsel,
that her thoughts had never once deviated
from the paths of innocence and
virtue. The more Sir Launcelot surveyed
this agreeable maiden, the more
he felt himself disposed to take care
of her fortune; and from this day he
began to ruminate on a scheme which
was afterwards consummated in her
favour—In the mean time, he laid
injunctions on Mr. Clarke to conduct
his addresses to Mrs. Cowslip, according
to the rules of honour and decorum,
as he valued his countenance
and friendship. His next step was to
procure a saddle-horse for Dolly, who
preferred this to any other sort of
carriage; and thereby gratified the wish
of her admirer, who longed to see
her on horseback in her green joseph. 
The armour, including the accoutrements
of the novice and the squire,
were left in the care of the inn-keeper, 

and Timothy Crabshaw was so metamorphosed
by a plain livery-frock,
that even Gilbert with difficulty recognized
his person. As for the novice
Crowe, his head had almost resumed
its natural dimensions; but
then his whole face was so covered
with a livid suffusion; his nose appeared
so flat, and his lips so tumified,
that he might very well have passed
for a Caffre or Æthiopian. Every
circumstance being now adjusted,
they departed from Bugden in a regular
cavalcade, dined at Hatfield,
and in the evening arrived at the Bull
and Gate inn in Holborn, where
they established their quarters for the
night. 