



The Author leaves Lagado, arrives at Maldonada. 
No Ship ready. He takes a short Voyage to
Glubbdubdrib. His Reception by the Governor. 

The Continent of which this Kingdom
is a part, extends itself, as I
have Reason to believe, Eastward
to that unknown Tract of America,
Westward of Califormia, and North
to the Pacifick Ocean, which is not
above an hundred and fifty Miles from Lagado;
where there is a good Port and much Commerce
with the great Island of Luggnagg, situated to
the North-West about 29 Degrees North Latitude,
and 140 Longitude. This Island of Luggnagg
stands South Eastwards of Japan, about an
hundred Leagues distant. There is a strict Alliance
between the Japanese Emperor and the King of
Luggnagg, which affords frequent Opportunities of
sailing from one Island to the other. I determined
therefore to direct my Course this Way, in order to
my Return to Europe. I hired two Mules with a 

Guide to shew me the Way, and carry my small
Baggage. I took leave of my noble Protector, who
had shewn me so much Favour, and made me a
generous Present at my Departure. 
My Journey was without any Accident or Adventure
worth relating. When I arrived at the
Port of Maldonada, (for so it is called) there was
no Ship in the Harbour bound for Luggnagg, nor
like to be in some Time. The Town is about
as large as Portsmouth. I soon fell into some Acquaintance,
and was very hospitably received. A
Gentleman of Distinction said to me, that since the
Ships bound for Luggnagg could not be ready in less
than a Month, it might be no disagreeable Amusement
for me to take a Trip to the little Island of
Glubbdubdrib, about five Leaugues off to the South-West. 
He offered himself and a Friend to accompany
me, and that I should be provided with a small
convenient Barque for the Voyage. 
GLUBBDUBDRIB, as nearly as I can interpret
the Word, signifies the Island of Sorcerers
or Magicians. It is about one third as large as the
Isle of Wight, and extreamly fruitful: It is governed
by the Head of a certain Tribe, who are all Magicians. 
This Tribe marries only among each other; 
and the eldest in Succession is Prince or Governor. 
He hath a noble Palace, and a Park of about three
thousand Acres, surrounded by a Wall of hewn
Stone twenty Foot high. In this Park are several
small Inclosures for Cattle, Corn and Gardening. 
The Governor and his Family are served and
attended by Domesticks of a Kind somewhat unusual. 
By his Skill in Necromancy, he hath Power
of calling whom he pleaseth from the Dead, and 

commanding their Service for twenty four Hours,
but no longer; nor can he call the same Persons
up again in less than three Months, except upon
very extraordinary Occasions. 
When we arrived at the Island, which was about
Eleven in the Morning, one of the Gentlemen
who accompanied me, went to the Governor, and
desired Admittance for a Stranger, who came on
purpose to have the Honour of attending on his
Highness. This was immediately granted, and we
all three entered the Gate of the Palace between
two Rows of Guards, armed and dressed after a very
antick Manner, and something in their Countenances
that made my Flesh creep with a Horror I
cannot express. We passed through several Apartments
between Servants of the same Sort, ranked
on each Side as before, till we came to the Chamber
of Presence, where after three profound Obeysances,
and a few general Questions, we were permitted
to sit on three Stools near the lowest Step of his
Highness's Throne. He understood the Language
of Balnibarbi, although it were different from that
of his Island. He desired me to give him some
Account of my Travels; and to let me see that I
should be treated without Ceremony, he dismissed
all his Attendants with a Turn of his Finger, at
which to my great Astonishment they vanished in
an Instant, like Visions in a Dream, when we awake
on a sudden. I could not recover myself in
some Time, till the Governor assured me that I
should receive no Hurt; and observing my two
Companions to be under no Concern, who had
been often entertained in the same Manner, I began
to take Courage; and related to his Highness a short 

History of my several Adventures, yet not without
some Hesitation, and frequently looking behind me
to the Place where I had seen those domestick
Spectres. I had the Honour to dine with the Governor,
where a new Set of Ghosts served up the
Meat, and waited at Table. I now observed myself
to be less terrified than I had been in the Morning. 
I stayed till Sun-set, but humbly desired his Highness
to excuse me for not accepting his Invitation of
lodging in the Palace. My two Friends and I lay at
a private House in the Town adjoining, which is
the Capital of this little Island; and the next Morning
we returned to pay our Duty to the Governor,
as he was pleased to command us. 
After this Manner we continued in the Island
for ten Days, most Part of every Day with the Governor,
and at Night in our Lodging. I soon
grew so familiarized to the Sight of Spirits, that after
the third or fourth Time they gave me no Emotion
at all; or if I had any Apprehensions left, my Curiosity
prevailed over them. For his Highness the
Governor ordered me to call up whatever Persons
I would chuse to name, and in whatever Numbers
among all the Dead from the Beginning of the
World to the present Time, and command them
to answer any Questions I should think fit to ask; 
with this Condition, that my Questions must be
confined within the Compass of the Times they
lived in. And one Thing I might depend upon,
that they would certainly tell me Truth; for Lying
was a Talent of no Use in the lower World. 
I made my humble Acknowledgments to his
Highness for so great a Favour. We were in a
Chamber, from whence there was a fair Prospect 

into the Park. And because my first Inclination
was to be entertained with Scenes of Pomp and
Magnificence, I desired to see Alexander the Great,
at the Head of his Army just after the Battle of Arbela;
which upon a Motion of the Governor's
Finger immediately appeared in a large Field under
the Window, where we stood. Alexander was
called up into the Room: It was with great Difficulty
that I nnderstood his Greek, and had but little
of my own. He assured me upon his Honour
that he was not poisoned, but dyed of a Fever by
excessive Drinking. 
Next I saw Hannibal passing the Alps, who
told me he had not a Drop of Vinegar in his
Camp. 
I saw Cæsar and Pompey at the Head of their
Troops just ready to engage. I saw the former in
his last great Triumph. I desired that the Senate
of Rome might appear before me in one large
Chamber, and a modern Representative, in Counterview,
in another. The first seemed to be an
Assembly of Heroes and Demy-Gods; the other a
Knot of Pedlars, Pick-pockets, Highwaymen and
Bullies. 
The Governor at my Request gave the Sign for
Cæsar and Brutus to advance towards us. I was
struck with a profound Veneration at the Sight of
Brutus; and could easily discover the most consummate
Virtue, the greatest Intrepidity, and Firmness
of Mind, the truest Love of his Country, and
general Benevolence for Mankind in every Lineament
of his Countenance. I observed with much
Pleasure, that these two Persons were in good Intelligence
with each other; and Cæsar freely confessed 

to me, that the greatest Actions of his own
Life were not equal by many Degrees to the Glory
of taking it away. I had the Honour to have much
Conversation with Brutus; and was told that his
Ancestor Junius, Socrates, Epaminondas, Cato the
Younger, Sir Thomas More and himself, were perpetually
together: A Sextumvirate to which all the
Ages of the World cannot add a Seventh. 
It would be tedious to trouble the Reader with
relating what vast Numbers of illustrious Persons
were called up, to gratify that insatiable Desire I
had to see the World in every Period of Antiquity
placed before me. I chiefly fed mine Eyes with
beholding the Destroyers of Tyrants and Usurpers,
and the Restorers of Liberty to oppressed and injured
Nations. But it is impossible to express the
Satisfaction I received in my own Mind, after such
a Manner as to make it a suitable Entertainment to
the Reader. 
