



A great Storm described. The long Boat sent to
fetch Water, the Author goes with it to discover
the Country. He is left on Shoar, is seized by
one of the Natives, and carried to a Farmer's
House. His Reception there, with several Accidents
that happened there. A Description of the
Inhabitants. 

Having been condemned by Nature
and Fortune to an active and restless
Life; in ten Months after my Return,
I again left my native Country, and
took Shipping in the Downs on the
20th Day of June 1702, in the Adventure, Capt. 
John Nicholas, a Cornish Man, Commander, bound 

for Surat. We had a very prosperous Gale till we
arrived at the Cape of Good-hope, where we landed
for fresh Water; but discovering a Leak we unshipped
our Goods, and wintered there; for the
Captain falling sick of an Ague, we could not leave
the Cape till the End of March. We then set sail,
and had a good Voyage till we passed the Streights
of Madagascar; but having got Northward of that
Island, and to about five Degrees South Latitude,
the Winds, which in those Seas are observed to
blow a constant equal Gale between the North and
West, from the Beginning of December to the Beginning
of May, on the 19th of April began to
blow with much greater Violence, and more Westerly
than usual; continuing so for twenty Days together,
during which time we were driven a little
to the East of the Molucca Islands, and about three
Degrees Northward of the Line, as our Captain
found by an Observation he took the 2d of May
at which time the Wind ceased, and it was a perfect
Calm, whereat I was not a little rejoyced. But
he being a Man well experienced in the Navigation
of those Seas, bid us all prepare against a
Storm, which accordingly happened the Day following:
For a Southern Wind, called the Southern
Monsoon, began to set in. 
Finding it was like to overblow, we took in
our Sprit-sail, and stood by to hand the Fore-sail; 
but making foul Weather, we looked the Guns
were all fast, and handed the Missen. The Ship
lay very broad off, so we thought it better spooning
before the Sea, than trying or hulling. We reeft
the Foresail and set him, we hawled aft the Foresheet; 

the Helm was hard a Weather, The Ship
wore bravely. We belay'd the Foredown-hall; but
the Sail was split, and we hawl'd down the Yard,
and got the Sail into the Ship, and unbound all the
things clear of it. It was a very fierce Storm; the
Sea broke strange and dangerous. We hawl'd off
upon the Lanniard of the Wipstaff, and helped the
Man at Helm. We would not get down our Top-Mast,
but let all stand, because she scudded before
the Sea very well, and we knew that the Top-Mast
being aloft, the Ship was the wholesomer, and made
better way through the Sea, seeing we had Sea room. 
When the Storm was over, we set Fore-sail and
Main-sail, and brought the Ship too. Then we set
the Missen, Maintop-Sail and the Foretop-Sail. Our
Course was East North-east, the Wind was at
South-west. We got the Star-board Tack aboard,
we cast off our Weather-braces and Lifts; we set
in the Lee-braces, and hawl'd forward by the Weather-bowlings,
and hawl'd them tight, and belayed
them, and hawl'd over the Missen Tack to Windward,
and kept her full and by as near as she would
lye, 
During this Storm, which was followed by
a strong Wind West South-west, we were carried
by my Computation about five hundred Leagues
to the East, so that the oldest Sailor on Board could
not tell in what part of the World we were. Our
Provisions held out well, our Ship was staunch,
and our Crew all in good Health; but we lay in the
utmost Distress for Water. We thought it best to
hold on the same Course rather than turn more Northerly,
which might have brought us to the Northwest 

Parts of great Tartary, and into the frozen
Sea. 
On the 16th Day of June 1703, a Boy on the
Top-mast discovered Land. On the 17th we came
in full View of a great Island or Continent, (for
we knew not whether) on the South-side whereof
was a small Neck of Land jutting out into the Sea,
and a Creek too shallow to hold a Ship of above
one hundred Tuns. We cast Anchor within a
League of this Creek, and our Captain sent a dozen
of his Men well armed in the Long Boat, with
Vessels for Water if any could be found. I desired
his leave to go with them, that I might see the
Country, and make what Discoveries I could. When
we came to Land we saw no River or Spring, nor
any Sign of Inhabitants. Our Men therefore wandered
on the Shore to find out some fresh Water
near the Sea, and I walked alone about a Mile on
the other Side, where I observed the Country all
barren and rocky. I now began to be weary, and
seeing nothing to entertain my Curiosity, I returned
gently down towards the Creek; and the Sea being
full in my View, I saw our Men already got into
the Boat, and rowing for Life to the Ship. I was
going to hollow after them, although it had been
to little purpose, when I observed a huge Creature
walking after them in the Sea, as fast as he could:
He waded not much deeper than his Knees, and
took prodigious strides: But our Men had the start
of him half a League, and the Sea thereabouts being
full of sharp pointed Rocks, the Monster was
not able to overtake the Boat. This I was afterwards
told, for I durst not stay to see the Issue of
that Adventure; but run as fast as I could the Way 

I first went; and then climbed up a steep Hill,
which gave me some Prospect of the Country. I
found it fully cultivated; but that which first surprized
me was the Length of the Grass, which in
those Grounds that seemed to be kept for Hay, was
above twenty Foot high. 
I fell into a high Road, for so I took it to
be, although it served to the Inhabitants only as a
foot Path through a Field of Barley. Here I walked
on for sometime, but could see little on either
Side, it being now near Harvest, and the Corn rising
at least forty Foot. I was an Hour walking to
the end of this Field; which was fenced in with a
Hedge of at least one hundred and twenty Foot
high, and the Trees so lofty that I could make no
Computation of their Altitude. There was a Stile
to pass from this Field into the next: It had four
Steps, and a Stone to cross over when you came to
the utmost. It was impossible for me to climb this
Stile, because every Step was six Foot high, and the
upper Stone above twenty. I was endeavouring to
find some Gap in the Hedge; when I discovered
one of the Inhabitants in the next Field advancing
towards the Stile, of the same Size with him whom
I saw in the Sea pursuing our Boat. He appeared
as Tall as an ordinary Spire-steeple; and took about
ten Yards at every Stride, as near as I could guess,
I was struck with the utmost Fear and Astonishment,
and ran to hide my self in the Corn; from whence
I saw him at the Top of the Stile, looking back
into the next Field on the right Hand; and heard
him call in a Voice many Degrees louder than a
speaking Trumpet; but the Noise was so High in the
Air, that at first I certainly thought it was Thunder. 

Whereupon seven Monsters like himself came
towards him with Reaping-Hooks in their Hands,
each Hook about the largeness of six Scythes. 
These People were not so well clad as the first,
whose Servants or Labourers they seemed to be. 
For, upon some Words he spoke, they went to
reap the Corn in the Field where I lay. I kept
from them at as great a Distance as I could, but
was forced to move with extream Difficulty; for
the Stalks of the Corn were sometimes not above
a Foot distant, so that I could hardly squeeze my
Body betwixt them. However, I made a shift to go
forward till I came to a part of the Field where
the Corn had been laid by the Rain and Wind:
Here it was impossible for me to advance a step; for
the Stalks were so interwoven that I could not creep
through, and the Beards of the fallen Ears so
strong and pointed, that they pierced through my
Cloaths into my Flesh. At the same time I heard
the Reapers not above an hundred Yards behind me. 
Being quite dispirited with Toil, and wholly overcome
by Grief and Despair, I lay down between
two Ridges, and heartily wished I might there end
my Days. I bemoaned my desolate Widow, and
Fatherless Children: I lamented my own Folly
and Wilfulness in attempting a second Voyage against
the Advice of all my Friends and Relations. 
In this terrible Agitation of Mind I could not forbear
thinking of Lilliput, whose Inhabitants looked
upon me as the greatest Prodigy that ever appeared
in the World; where I was able to draw an
Imperial Fleet in my Hand, and perform those other
Actions which will be recorded for ever in
the Chronicles of that Empire, while Posterity shall 

hardly believe them, akhough attested by Millions. 
I reflected what a Mortification it must prove to me
to appear as inconsiderable in this Nation, as one
single Lilliputian would be among us. But, this I
conceived was to be the least of my Misfortunes:
For, as human Creatures are observed to be more
Savage and cruel in Proportion to their Bulk; 
what could I expect but to be a Morsel in the Mouth
of the first among these enormous Barbarians who
should happen to seize me? Undoubtedly Philosophers
are in the Right when they tell us, that nothing
is great or little otherwise than by Comparison:
It might have pleased Fortune to let the Lilliputians
find some Nation, where the People were as
diminutive with respect to them, as they were to
me. And who knows but that even this prodigious
Race of Mortals might be equally overmatched in
some distant Part of the World, whereof we have
yet no Discovery? 
Scared and confounded as I was, I could not
forbear going on with these Reflections; when one
of the Reapers approaching within ten Yards of the
Ridge where I lay, made me apprehend that with
the next Step I should be squashed to Death under
his Foot, or cut in two with his Reaping Hook. 
And therefore when he was again about to move, I
screamed as loud as Fear could make me. Whereupon
the huge Creature trod short, and looking round about
under him for some time, at last espied me as
I lay on the Ground. He considered a while with
the Caution of one who endeavours to lay hold on
a small dangerous Animal in such a Manner that it
shall not be able either to scratch or to bite him; 
as I my self have sometimes done with a Weasel in 

England. At length he ventured to take me up
behind by the middle between his Fore-finger and
Thumb, and brought me within three Yards of
his Eyes, that he might behold my Shape more perfectly. 
I guessed his Meaning; and my good Fortune
gave me so much Presence of Mind, that I
resolved not to struggle in the least as he held me
in the Air above sixty Foot from the Ground; although
he grievously pinched my Sides, for fear I
should slip through his Fingers. All I ventured was
to raise mine Eyes towards the Sun, and place my
Hands together in a supplicating Posture, and to
speak some Words in an humble melancholy Tone,
suitable to the Condition I then was in. For, I apprehended
every Moment that he would dash me against
the Ground, as we usually do any little hateful
Animal which we have a Mind to destroy. But
my good Star would have it, that he appeared pleased
with my Voice and Gestures, and began to look
upon me as a Curiosity; much wondering to hear
me pronounce articulate Words, although he could
not understand them. In the mean time I was not
able to forbear Groaning and shedding Tears, and
turning my Head towards my Sides; letting him
know, as well as I could, how cruelly I was hurt by
the Pressure of his Thumb and Finger. He seemed
to apprehend my Meaning; for, lifting up the
Lappet of his Coat, he put me gently into it, and
immediately ran along with me to his Master, who
was a substantial Farmer, and the same Person I had
first seen in the Field. 
The Farmer having (as I supposed by their
Talk) received such an Account of me as his Servant
could give him, took a piece of a small Straw, 

about the Size of a walking Staff, and therewith
lifted up the Lappets of my Coat; which it seems
he thought to be some kind of Covering that Nature
had given me. He blew my Hairs aside to
take a better View of my Face. He called his
Hinds about him, and asked them (as I afterwards
learned) whether they had ever seen in the Fields
any little Creature that resembled me. He then
placed me softly on the Ground upon all four; but
I got immediately up, and walked slowly backwards
and forwards, to let those People see I had no Intent
to run away. They all sate down in a Circle
about me, the better to observe my Motions. I
pulled off my Hat, and made a low Bow towards
the Farmer: I fell on my Knees, and lifted up my
Hands and Eyes, and spoke several Words as loud
as I could: I took a Purse of Gold out of my Pocket,
and humbly presented it to him. He received
it on the Palm of his Hand, then applied it close
to his Eye, to see what it was, and afterwards turned
it several times with the Point of a Pin, (which
he took out of his Sleeve,) but could make nothing
of it. Whereupon I made a Sign that he should
place his Hand on the Ground: I then took the
Purse, and opening it, poured all the Gold into his
Palm. There were six Spanish-Pieces of four Fistoles
each, besides twenty or thirty smaller Coins. 
I saw him wet the Tip of his little Finger upon his
Tongue, and take up one of my largest Pieces,
and then another; but he seemed to be wholly
ignorant what they were. He made me a Sign to
put them again into my Purse, and the Purse again
into my Pocket; which after offering to him several
times, I thought it best to do. 

The Farmer by this time was convinced I must
be a rational Creature. He spoke often to me, but
the Sound of his Voice pierced my Ears like that
of a Water-Mill; yet his Words were articulate
enough. I answered as loud as I could in several
Languages; and he often laid his Ear within two
Yards of me, but all in vain, for we were wholly
unintelligible to each other. He then sent his
Servants to their Work, and taking his Handkerchief
out of his Pocket, he doubled and spread it
on his Hand, which he placed flat on the Ground
with the Palm upwards, making me a Sign to step
into it, as I could easily do, for it was not above a
Foot in thickness. I thought it my part to obey; 
and for fear of falling, laid my self at full Length
upon the Handkerchief, with the Remainder of
which he lapped me up to the Head for further
Security; and in this Manner carried me home to
his House. There he called his Wife, and shewed
me to her; but she screamed and ran back as
Women in England do at the Sight of a Toad or
a Spider. However, when she had a while seen
my Behaviour, and how well I observed the Signs
her Husband made, she was soon reconciled, and
by Degrees grew extreamly tender of me. 
It was about twelve at Noon, and a Servant
brought in Dinner. It was only one substantial
Dish of Meat (fit for the plain Condition of an
Husband-Man) in a Dish of about four and twenty
Foot Diameter. The Company were the Farmer
and Wife, three Children, and an old Grandmother:
When they were sat down, the Farmer
placed me at some Distance from him on the Table,
which was thirity Foot high from the Floor. I 

was in a terrible Fright, and kept as far as I could
from the Edge, for fear of falling. The Wife minced
a bit of Meat, then crumbled some Bread on a
Trencher, and placed it before me. I made her a
low Bow, took out my Knife and Fork, and fell
to eat; which gave them exceeding Delight. The
Mistress sent her Maid for a small Dram-cup,
which held about two Gallons; and filled it with
Drink: I took up the Vessel with much difficulty
in both Hands, and in a most respectful Manner
drank to her Lady-ship's Health, expressing the
Words as loud as I could in English; which made
the Company laugh so heartily, that I was almost
deafened with the Noise. This Liquour tasted like
a small Cyder, and was not unpleasant. Then the
Master made me a Sign to come to his Trencher
side; but as I walked on the Table, being in great
surprize all the time, as the indulgent Reader will
easily conceive and excuse, I happened to stumble
against a Crust, and fell flat on my Face, but received
no hurt. I got up immediately, and observing
the good People to be in much Concern, I
took my Hat (which I held under my Arm out of
good Manners) and waving it over my Head, made
three Huzza's, to shew I had got no Mischief by the
Fall. But advancing forwards toward my Master
(as I shall henceforth call him) his youngest Son
who sate next him, an arch Boy of about ten Years
old, took me up by the Legs, and held me so high
in the Air, that I trembled every Limb; but his
Father snatched me from him; and at the same
time gave him such a Box on the left Ear, as would
have felled an European Troop of Horse to the
Earth; ordering him to be taken from the Table. 

But, being afraid the Boy might owe me a Spight; 
and well remembring how mischievous all Children
among us naturally are to Sparrows, Rabbits, young
Kittens, and Puppy-Dogs; I fell on my Knees, and
pointing to the Boy, made my Master understand,
as well as I could, that I desired his Son might be
pardoned. The Father complied, and the Lad
took his Seat again; whereupon I went to him
and kissed his Hand, which my Master took, and
made him stroak me gently with it. 
In the Midst of Dinner my Mistress's favourite
Cat leapt into her Lap. I heard a Noise behind me
like that of a Dozen Stocking-Weavers at work; 
and turning my Head, I found it proceeded from
the Purring of this Animal, who seemed to be
three Times larger than an Ox, as I computed by
the View of her Head, and one of her Paws, while
her Mistress was feeding and stroaking her. The
Fierceness of this Creature's Countenance altogether
discomposed me; although I stood at the further End
of the Table, above fifty Foot off; and although
my Mistress held her fast for fear she might give a
Spring, and seize me in her Talons. But it happened
there was no Danger; for the Cat took not
the least Notice of me when my Master placed me
within three Yards of her. And as I have been always
told, and found true by Experience in my
Travels, that flying, or discovering Fear before a
fierce Animal, is a certain Way to make it pursue or
attack you; so I resolved in this dangerous Juncture
to shew no Manner of Concern. I walked
with Intrepidity five or six Times before the very
Head of the Cat, and came within half a Yard of
her; whereupon she drew her self back, as if she 

were more afraid of me: I had less Apprehension
concerning the Dogs, whereof three or four came
into the Room, as it is usual in Farmers Houses; 
one of which was a Mastiff equal in Bulk to four
Elephants, and a Grey-hound somewhat taller than
the Mastiff, but not so large. 
When Dinner was almost done, the Nurse
came in with a Child of a Year old in her Arms; 
who immediately spyed me, and began a Squall that
you might have heard from London-Bridge to Chelsea;
after the usual Oratory of Infants, to get me
for a Play-thing. The Mother out of pure Indulgence
took me up, and put me towards the Child,
who presently seized me by the Middle, and got my
Head in his Mouth, where I roared so loud that
the Urchin was frighted, and let me drop; and I
should infallibly have broke my Neck, if the Mother
had not held her Apron under me. The
Nurse to quiet her Babe made use of a Rattle,
which was a Kind of hollow Vessel filled with
great Stones, and fastned by a Cable to the Child's
Waist: But all in vain, so that she was forced to
apply the last Remedy by giving it suck. I must
confess no Object ever disgusted me so much as
the Sight of her monstrous Breast, which I cannot
tell what to compare with, so as to give the curious
Reader an Idea of its Bulk, Shape and Colour. 
It stood prominent six Foot, and could not be less
than sixteen in Circumference. The Nipple was
about half the Bigness of my Head, and the Hue
both of that and the Dug so varified with Spots,
Pimples and Freckles, that nothing could appear
more nauseous: For I had a near Sight of her, she
sitting down the more conveniently to give Suck, 

and I standing on the Table. This made me reflect
upon the fair Skins of our English Ladies, who
appear so beautiful to us, only because they are of
our own Size, and their Defects not to be seen but
through a magnifying Glass, where we find by Experiment
that the smoothest and whitest Skins look
rough and coarse, and ill coloured. 
I remember when I was at Lilliput, the Complexions
of those diminutive People appeared to me
the fairest in the World: And talking upon this
Subject with a Person of Learning there, who was
an intimate Friend of mine; he said, that my Face
appeared much fairer and smoother when he looked
on me from the Ground, than it did upon a nearer
View when I took him up in my Hand, and
brought him close; which he confessed was at first
a very shocking Sight. He said, he could discover
great Holes in my Skin; that the Stumps of my
Beard were ten Times stronger than the Bristles of
a Boar; and my Complexion made up of several
Colours altogether disagreeable: Although I must
beg Leave to say for my self, that I am as fair as
most of my Sex and Country, and very little Sunburnt
by all my Travels. On the other Side, discoursing
of the Ladies in that Emperor's Court, he
used to tell me, one had Freckles, another too wide
a Mouth, a third too large a Nose; nothing of
which I was able to distinguish. I confess this
Reflection was obvious enough; which, however,
I could not forbear, lest the Reader might think
those vast Creatures were actually deformed: For I
must do them Justice to say they are a comely Race
of People; and particularly the Features of my Master's
Countenance, although he were but a Farmer, 

when I beheld him from the Height of sixty Foot,
appeared very well proportioned. 
When Dinner was done, my Master went out
to his Labourers; and as I could discover by his
Voice and Gesture, gave his Wife a strict Charge
to take Care of me. I was very much tired and
disposed to sleep, which my Mistress perceiving,
she put me on her own Bed, and covered me with
a clean white Handkerchief, but larger and coarser
than the Main Sail of a Man of War. 
I slept about two Hours, and dreamed I was at
home with my Wife and Children, which aggravated
my Sorrows when I awaked and found my
self alone in a vast Room; between two and three
Hundred Foot wide, and above two Hundred high; 
lying in a Bed twenty Yards wide. My Mistress
was gone about her houshold Affairs, and had locked
me in. The Bed was eight Yards from the Floor. 
Some natural Necessities required me to get down:
I durst not presume to call, and if I had, it would
have been in vain with such a Voice as mine at so
great a Distance from the Room where I lay, to the
Kitchen where the Family kept. While I was under
these Circumstances, two Rats crept up the
Curtains, and ran smelling backwards and forwards
on the Bed: One of them came up almost to my
Face; whereupon I rose in a Fright, and drew out
my Hanger to defend my self. These horrible
Animals had the Boldness to attack me on both
Sides, and one of them held his Fore-feet at my
Collar; but I had the good Fortune to rip up his
Belly before he could do me any Mischief. He fell
down at my Feet; and the other seeing the Fate of
his Comrade, made his Escape, but not without one 

good Wound on the Back, which I gave him as he
fled, and made the Blood run trickling from him. 
After this Exploit I walked gently to and fro on the
Bed, to recover my Breath and Loss of Spirits. 
These Creatures were of the Size of a large Mastiff,
but infinitely more nimble and fierce; so that
if I had taken off my Belt before I went to sleep, I
must have infallibly been torn to Pieces and devoured. 
I measured the Tail of the dead Rat, and
found it to be two Yards long, wanting an Inch; 
but it went against my Stomach to drag the Carcass
off the Bed, where it lay still bleeding; I observed
it had yet some Life, but with a strong Slash cross
the Neck, I thoroughly dispatched it. 
Soon after, my Mistress came into the Room,
who seeing me all bloody, ran and took me up in
her Hand. I pointed to the dead Rat, smiling and
making other Signs to shew I was not hurt; whereat
she was extremely rejoyced, calling the Maid to
take up the dead Rat with a Pair of Tongs, and
throw it out of the Window. Then she set me on
a Table, where I shewed her my Hanger all bloody,
and wiping it on the Lappet of my Coat, returned
it to the Scabbard. I was pressed to do more
than one Thing, which another could not do for
me; and therefore endeavoured to make my Mistress
understand that I desired to be set down on
the Floor; which after she had done, my Bashfulness
would not suffer me to express my self farther
than by pointing to the Door, and bowing several
Times. The good Woman with much Difficulty
at last perceived what I would be at; and taking
me up again in her Hand, walked into the Garden
where she set me down. I went on one Side about 

two Hundred Yards; and beckoning to her not to
look or to follow me, I hid my self between two
Leaves of Sorrel, and there discharged the Necessities
of Nature. 
I hope, the gentle Reader will excuse me for
dwelling on these and the like Particulars; which
however insignificant they may appear to grovelling
vulgar Minds, yet will certainly help a Philosopher
to enlarge his Thoughts and Imagination, and apply
them to the Benefit of publick as well as private
Life; which was my sole Design in presenting this
and other Accounts of my Travels to the World; 
wherein I have been chiefly studious of Truth,
without affecting any Ornaments of Learning, or
of Style. But the whole Scene of this Voyage
made so strong an Impression on my Mind, and is
so deeply fixed in my Memory, that in committing
it to Paper, I did not omit one material Circumstance:
However, upon a strict Review, I blotted
out several Passages of less Moment which were in
my first Copy, for fear of being censured as tedious
and trifling, whereof Travellers are often, perhaps
not without Justice, accused. 
