



The Author by an extraordinary Stratagem prevents
an Invasion. A high Title of Honour is conferred
upon him. Ambassadors arrive from the
Emperor of Blefuscu, and sue for Peace. The
Empress's Apartment on fire by an Accident; the
Author instrumental in saving the rest of the
Palace. 

The Empire of Blefuscu, is an Island
situated to the North North-East
Side of Lilliput, from whence
it is parted only by a Channel of
eight Hundred Yards wide. I had
not yet seen it, and upon this Notice
of an intended Invasion, I avoided appearing
on that Side of the Coast, for fear of being discovered
by some of the Enemies Ships, who had received
no Intelligence of me; all intercourse between
the two Empires having been strictly forbidden
during the War, upon Pain of Death; and an
Embargo laid by our Emperor upon all Vessels
whatsoever. I communicated to his Majesty a Project
I had formed of seizing the Enemies whole
Fleet; which, as our Scouts assured us, lay at Anchor 

in the Harbour ready to sail with the first
fair Wind. I consulted the most experienced
Seamen, upon the Depth of the Channel, which
they had often plummed; who told me, that in
the Middle at high Water it was seventy Glumgluffs
deep, which is about six Foot of European
Measure; and the rest of it fifty Glumgluffs at
most. I walked to the North-East Coast over
against Blefuscu; where, lying down behind
a Hillock, I took out my small Pocket Perspective
Glass, and viewed the Enemy's Fleet at Anchor,
consisting of about fifty Men of War, and a great
Number of Transports: I then came back to my
House, and gave Order (for which I had a Warrant)
for a great Quantity of the strongest Cable
and Bars of Iron. The Cable was about as thick
as Packthread, and the Bars of the Length and Size
of a Knitting-Needle. I trebled the Cable to make
it stronger; and for the same Reason I twisted
three of the Iron Bars together, binding the Extremities
into a Hook. Having thus fixed fifty
Hooks to as many Cables, I went back to the
North-East Coast, and putting off my Coat, Shoes,
and Stockings, walked into the Sea in my Leathern
Jerken, about half an Hour before high Water. I
waded with what Haste I could, and swam in the
Middle about thirty Yards until I felt the Ground; 
I arrived to the Fleet in less than half an Hour. 
The Enemy was so frighted when they saw me,
that they leaped out of their Ships, and swam to
Shore; where there could not be fewer than thirty
thousand Souls. I then took my Tackling, and fastning
a Hook to the Hole at the Prow of each, I
tyed all the Cords together at the End. While I 

was thus employed, the Enemy discharged several
Thousand Arrows, many of which stuck in my
Hands and Face; and besides the excessive Smart,
gave me much Disturbance in my Work. My
greatest Apprehension was for mine Eyes, which I
should have infallibly lost, if I had not suddenly
thought of an Expedient. I kept, among other little
Necessaries, a Pair of Spectacles in a private
Pocket, which, as I observed before, had escaped
the Emperor's Searchers. These I took out, and
fastened as strongly as I could upon my Nose; and
thus armed went on boldly with my Work in
spight of the Enemy's Arrows; many of which
struck against the Glasses of my Spectacles, but
without any other Effect, further than a little to
discompose them. I had now fastened all the
Hooks, and taking the Knot in my Hand, began
to pull; but not a Ship would stir, for they were
all too fast held by their Anchors; so that the
boldest Part of my Enterprize remained. I therefore
let go the Cord, and leaving the Hooks fixed to
the Ships, I resolutely cut with my Knife the Cables
that fastened the Anchors; receiving above
two hundred Shots in my Face and Hands: Then
I took up the knotted End of the Cables to which
my Hooks were tyed; and with great Ease drew
fifty of the Enemy's largest Men of War after
me. 
The Blefuscudians, who had not the least Imagination
of what I intended, were at first confounded
with Astonishment. They had seen me cut
the Cables, and thought my Design was only to
let the Ships run a-drift, or fall foul on each other:
But when they perceived the whole Fleet moving 

in Order, and saw me pulling at the End; they
set up such a Scream of Grief and Dispair, that
it is almost impossible to describe or conceive. When
I had got out of Danger, I stopt a while to pick
out the Arrows that stuck in my Hands and Face,
and rubbed on some of the same Ointment that
was given me at my first Arrival, as I have formerly
mentioned. I then took off my Spectacles, and
waiting about an Hour until the Tyde was a little
fallen, I waded through the Middle with my
Cargo, and arrived safe at the Royal Port of
Lilliput. 
The Emperor and his whole Court stood on
the Shore, expecting the Issue of this great Adventure. 
They saw the Ships move forward in a
large Half-Moon, but could not discern me, who
was up to my Breast in Water. When I advanced
to the Middle of the Channel, they were yet
more in Pain because I was under Water to my
Neck. The Emperor concluded me to be drowned,
and that the Enemy's Fleet was approaching in
a hostile Manner: But he was soon eased of
his Fears; for the Channel growing shallower every
Step I made, I came in a short Time within
Hearing, and holding up the End of the Cable by
which the Fleet was fastened, I cryed in a loud
Voice, Long live the most puissant Emperor of Lilliput! 
This great Prince received me at my Landing
with all possible Encomiums, and created me
a Nardac upon the Spot, which is the highest Title
of Honour among them. 
His Majesty desired I would take some other
Opportunity of bringing all the rest of his Enemy's 

Ships into his Ports. And so unmeasurable is the
Ambition of Princes, that he seemed to think of
nothing less than reducing the whole Empire of
Blefuscu into a Province, and governing it by a
Viceroy; of destroying the Big-Endian Exiles, and
compelling that People to break the smaller End
of their Eggs; by which he would remain sole
Monarch of the whole World. But I endeavoured
to divert him from this Design, by many
Arguments drawn from the Topicks of Policy as
well as Justice: And I plainly protested, that I
would never be an Instrument of bringing a free
and brave People into Slavery: And when the
Matter was debated in Council, the wisest Part of
the Ministry were of my Opinion. 
This open bold Declaration of mine was so
opposite to the Schemes and Politicks of his Imperial
Majesty, that he could never forgive me: He
mentioned it in a very artful Manner at Council,
where, I was told, that some of the wisest appeared,
at least by their Silence, to be of my Opinion; 
but others, who were my secret Enemies,
could not forbear some Expressions, which by a
Side-wind reflected on me. And from this Time
began an Intrigue between his Majesty, and a Junta
of Ministers maliciously bent against me, which
broke out in less than two Months, and had like
to have ended in my utter Destruction. Of so
little Weight are the greatest Services to Princes,
when put into the Balance with a Refusal to gratify
their Passions. 
About three Weeks after this Exploit, there arrived
a solemn Embassy from Blefuscu, with humble 

Offers of a Peace; which was soon concluded
upon Conditions very advantageous to our Emperor; 
wherewith I shall not trouble the Reader. 
There were six Ambassadors, with a Train of
about five Hundred Persons; and their Entry was
very magnificent, suitable to the Grandeur of their
Master, and the Importance of their Business. 
When their Treaty was finished, wherein I did
them several good Offices by the Credit I now
had, or at least appeared to have at Court; their
Excellencies, who were privately told how much
I had been their Friend, made me a Visit in Form. 
They began with many Compliments upon my
Valour and Generosity; invited me to that Kingdom
in the Emperor their Master's Name; and
desired me to shew them some Proofs of my prodigious
Strength, of which they had heard so
many Wonders; wherein I readily obliged them,
but shall not interrupt the Reader with the Particulars. 
When I had for some time entertained their Excellencies
to their infinite Satisfaction and Surprize,
I desired they would do me the Honour to present
my most humble Respects to the Emperor their
Master, the Renown of whose Virtues had so justly
filled the whole World with Admiration, and
whose Royal Person I resolved to attend before I
returned to my own Country. Accordingly, the
next time I had the Honour to see our Emperor, I
desired his general Licence to wait on the Blefuscudian
Monarch, which he was pleased to grant me
as I could plainly perceive, in a very cold Manner
but could not guess the Reason, till I had a Whisper 

from a certain Person, that Flimnap and Bolgolam
had represented my Intercourse with those Ambassadors,
as a Mark of Disaffection, from which I
am sure my Heart was wholly free. And this was
the first time I began to conceive some imperfect
Idea of Courts and Ministers. 
It is to be observed, that these Ambassadors
spoke to me by an Interpreter; the Languages of
both Empires differing as much from each other as
any two in Europe, and each Nation priding itself
upon the Antiquity, Beauty, and Energy of their
own Tongues, with an avowed Contempt for that
of their Neighbour: Yet our Emperor standing upon
the Advantage he had got by the Seizure of their
Fleet, obliged them to deliver their Credentials,
and make their Speech in the Lilliputian Tongue. 
And it must be confessed, that from the great Intercouse
of Trade and Commerce between both
Realms; from the continual Reception of Exiles,
which is mutual among them; and from the Custom
in each Empire to send their young Nobility and
richer Gentry to the other, in order to polish themselves,
by seeing the World, and understanding
Men and Manners; there are few Persons of Distinction,
or Merchants, or Seamen, who dwell in
the Maritime Parts, but what can hold Conversation
in both Tongues; as I found some Weeks after,
when I went to pay my Respects to the Emperor
of Blefuscu, which in the Midst of great Misfortunes,
through the Malice of my Enemies, proved
a very happy Adventure to me, as I shall relate
in its proper Place. 

The Reader may remember, that when I signed
those Articles upon which I recovered my Liberty,
there were some which I disliked upon Account of
their being too servile, neither could any thing but
an extreme Necessity have forced me to submit. But
being now a Nardac, of the highest Rank in that
Empire, such Offices were looked upon as below
my Dignity; and the Emperor (to do him Justice)
never once mentioned them to me. However, it
was not long before I had an Opportunity of doing
his Majesty, at least, as I then thought, a most signal
Service. I was alarmed at Midnight with the
Cries of many Hundred People at my Door; by
which being suddenly awaked, I was in some Kind
of Terror. I heard the Word Burglum repeated incessantly; 
several of the Emperor's Court making
their Way through the Croud, intreated me to come
immediately to the Palace, where her Imperial Majesty's
Apartment was on fire, by the Carelessness
of a Maid of Honour, who fell asleep while she
was reading a Romance. I got up in an Instant; 
and Orders being given to clear the Way before
me; and it being likewise a Moon-shine Night, I
made a shift to get to the Palace without trampling
on any of the People. I found they had already applied
Ladders to the Walls of the Apartment, and
were well provided with Buckets, but the Water
was at some Distance. These Buckets were about
the Size of a large Thimble, and the poor People
supplied me with them as fast as they could; but
the Flame was so violent, that they did little Good. 
I might easily have stifled it with my Coat, which
I unfortunately left behind me for haste, and came 

away only in my Leathern Jerkin. The Case seemed
wholly desperate and deplorable; and this magnificent
Palace would have infallibly been burnt down
to the Ground, if, by a Presence of Mind, unusual
to me, I had not suddenly thought of an Expedient. 
I had the Evening before drank plentifully
of a most delicious Wine, called Glimigrim, (the
Blefuscudians call it Flunec, but ours is esteemed
the better Sort) which is very diuretick. By the
luckiest Chance in the World, I had not discharged
myself of any Part of it. The Heat I had contracted
by coming very near the Flames, and by my
labouring to quench them, made the Wine begin
to operate by Urine; which I voided in such a
Quantity, and applied so well to the proper Places,
that in three Minutes the Fire was wholly extinguished; 
and the rest of that noble Pile, which had
cost so many Ages in erecting, preserved from Destruction. 
It was now Day-light, and I returned to my
House, without waiting to congratulate with the
Emperor; because, although I had done a very
eminent Piece of Service, yet I could not tell how
his Majesty might resent the Manner by which I had
performed it: For, by the fundamental Laws of the
Realm, it is Capital in any Person, of what Quality
soever, to make water within the Precincts of the
Palace. But I was a little comforted by a Message
from his Majesty, that he would give Orders to the
Grand Justiciary for passing my Pardon in Form; 
which, however, I could not obtain. And I was
privately assured, that the Empress conceiving the
greatest Abhorrence of what I had done, removed 

to the most distant Side of the Court, firmly resolved
that those Buildings should never be repaired
for her Use; and, in the Presence of her
chief Confidents, could not forbear vowing Revenge. 
