

Inner was scarce ended, when
Libidinia, who was very well
recover'd, came to visit the Ladies. 
After they had congratulated
the Restoration of her Health, Clodius
advanc'd, telling her, that he was not only
glad to find her in good Health, but in
Prosperity, and freed from the Fetters of a
prudent. Husband, the Curb of good Humour,
and Bridle of Mirth, the Clog of
Wit, and Bar to all Diversion; from these
and many other Restraints the Gods have
deliver'd you, in taking from you the discreet
Aurelius, and has brought to you a
more suitable Match, the wild, loose, lewd
Clodius, who is ready to be again your
Lover, and in Time your Husband: Trust
me, Madam, I find great Charms in the
Riches of Aurelius, as well as in the Beauty
of his Widow; both are irresistable, and,
I hope, Madam, you will find the same 
Agreements in me, which heretofore did
not displease you; then let us never balk
our Fancies, but marry speedily; no Matter
for the Proverb of repenting leisurely,
for that I am perswaded we shall never
do; for we shall understand the World
and our selves so well, as never to be displeas'd
at what Company each other keeps,
or what Diversions engage our Time, or
where we spend our Money: No, no, we
will be easy to our selves and to each other. 
Truly, reply'd Libidinia, you wou'd
be easy to me if you wou'd cease this
Ramble of Words, and remember what
Respect is due to the illustrious Company,
if you think none due to me. She was
about to proceed, but Scipiana interpos'd,
begging her not to take Notice with Displeasure
of Clodius's Raillery, but remember
what he had suffer'd in Consideration
of her being marry'd to Aurelius, when he
expected the Happiness himself; so begg'd
her to consider how to repair those his
Sufferings. 
Whilst they were in this Discourse, Cordiala
walk'd out into the Grove, there, in
Solitude, to meditate on the late Change in
the Circumstances of Ismenus, well knowing
herself too low in Quality and Fortune ever
to marry a Scipio, nevertheless found it
impossible to disingage her Heart from those
tender Sentiments the lovely Youth had infus'd: 
O cruel Passion, said she to herself,
that in Spite of all Endeavours subjects us
to thy Tyranny; yet I am happy in this,
Scipio knows not what Power he has over
me, nor ever shall; I will dye rather
than discover my Folly. O poor Cordiala,
unhapy Maid! what wild Meanders of
strange and hard Adventures has Fortune
mark'd out for thy Virtue to trace; what
strange Vicissitudes hast thou encounter'd in
the short Space of thy Life; yet short as
it is, it had been happy for thee if it had
pleas'd the Gods to have abridg'd it, and
taken me out of the World ere I had beheld
this lovely Object of my pleasing Pain. 
Yesterday I thought him the Morning-Star
of my Hopes, ushering in the bright Dawn
of some Happiness: But when he became
illustrated with the Glories of his House,
and the poor Ismenus encircled with the
Rays of a Scipio, his Brightness then extinguish'd
all my Hopes, and cast me into the
Abyss of deep Despair. And now that all
Hopes are extinguish'd, my fond Desires
ought to dye with them: But, alas! so
firm a Possession has Love taken of my
Heart, as is not in my Power to eject. O
ye Gods! why did you permit me to see
and love him in his low Condition? Had
I never seen him, 'til refulgent with the
bright Rays of his Family, his Glories had
been too dazling for one in my low Sphere 
to have look'd upon, but at a vast Distance,
amongst the admiring Crowd, have run to
see him pass by, and there to have respected
him as a Hero, equal to a Demi-God. 
What Madness is it then for me, a Thing
so mean, to think on him, but as one of
the Lords of Mankind, above the Reach
of vulgar Thoughts! Yet so it is, I must
not only think of him, but infinitely love
him. He is the only Object of my Tenderness; 
my Eyes never taught my Heart
to make Distinction 'til they beheld Ismenus. 
All the Gallants of Rome, and
Youths of Sicily, were to me alike indifferent. 
I thought Misfortunes hard harden'd
my Heart to such a Temper, as not to love
beyond the Degree of Friendship; but,
poor Girl! how suddenly didst thou become
flexible! The first Onset of his Eyes subjected
my Heart to Love's imperial Commands:
Methinks I could live on the Remembrance
of that dear Moment, when a
gentle Look and a soft Sigh forc'd their
Passage to my Soul; which I had almost
return'd with the like tender Motions, but
that I stifled in the Birth such untimely
Fruits of my Folly, not suffering my
Breast to deliver itself of the Burden of
one Sigh: By which Means Scipio remains
ignorant of my Weakness, for which Conduct
I am thankful to Heaven; for had he
known it, I could not have out out-liv'd the 
Shame of being deserted by him, which
must necessarily have ensu'd this his elevated
State; for whatsoever Inclination
might have whisper'd to him on my Behalf,
Duty and Honour would command,
and are such imperious Mistresses as must
and ought to be obey'd. Then, O ye Gods!
be so kind to me as you were to the
Nymphs of old, and turn me into a Tree in
this Grove, where perhaps Scipio may admire
me in that Form or Species, and carve
some Love Verses on my Bark, sing and
whisper gentle Airs, which the Wind,
joining with my ruffling Leaves, will reverberate,
and so make a happy Consort
of our mutual Loves. And if my thick
Shade shelter him from Sun or Rain, how
pleas'd should I be in rendering him that
Service. But, O ye Gods! if he should
bring some fair She, Daughter of a mighty
Lord, and underneath the Umbrage of my
extended Branches court and languish at
her Feet, then should I die, my Leaves wither,
and my Trunk rot with Indignation. 
Then rather let me follow the Fate of that
babling Nymph whom your Pity turn'd into
a Voice, and I will always follow this
my Narcissus; and when vast Armies and
glorious Triumph shall with loud Applause
shout forth the Name of Scipio, then is my
Time to serve his Fame, by echoing, Scipio, 
Scipio, Scipio, 'til his Name pierce the
Clouds, and make even the Gods jealous
of his rising Glories. Thus did this vertuous
Maid entertain her roving Thoughts in
this her solitary Walk, 'til Scipio, who was
full of Agitation of Mind, also came into
those Walks, and there met her, the Object
of his Tenderness, to whom he address'd
himself, saying, That since the Gods
had been propitious to him in the Advancement
of his Condition, he hoped she would
now cease her Rigour; for (said he) I protest
by all that's good, the chief Satisfaction
I take in this my Advancement, is the
Hopes that it well render me the more worthy
Object of your Consideration, and gives
me Occasion to testify the Sencerity of my
Affection; inasmuch as no Change of Fortune
is capable to change my Sentiments
towards my lovely Maid: Then testify
the Acceptance of this my offer'd Love by
one gentle Look or Smile; let me hope
that I am not wholly indifferent to you. 
Alas! (reply'd Cordiala) those Reasons you
inforce, to oblige me to correspond with
your amorus Pretensions, ought to be employ'd
to justify my Refusal. It is obvious
to any Capacity, that the Inequality of
our present Fortunes must needs be a
greater Obstacle than was our mutual Poverty. 
Then cease to entertain me or your
own Fancy on this Subject; for assure your 
self I will never hear, much less gratify
you: I will not be the Author of your
Misfortunes, nor the Scorns of your Family:
I will not cause you to disoblige the
best of Fathers, nor myself become the Odium
of Mankind. Therefore cease, I say,
to importune me on this Subject. Madam,
(reply'd Scipio) your Commands to me are
sacred, and must be obey'd to the utmost
Degree of Possibility; but know this,
that although I cease to importune you, I
cannot cease to love you: Your Perfections
are made to be belov'd, and chiefly by
me. And though you should forbid me ten
thousand Times, yet still I must love on. 
You took Possession of my Heart the Moment
of our first Interview, and will
hold it against all other Assailants, whether
Riches, Honours, or any other Beauty. 
Then since it is impossible to make my
Heart cease from sighing Love, and my
Mind from thinking Love, my Eyes from
languishing, it is vain to command my
Tongue to cease from declaring what all
my interiour Passions dictate. No, rather
give me Leave to address my Friends, and
obtain not only their Leave but their Assistance
to persuade you on my Behalf. As
he was about to proceed, they discover'd Asiaticus
at the End of the Walk, and seeing
him alone, Scipio took the Opportunity to
go and discourse with him on the Subject 
of his Passion, begging him to intercede
with his Father on his Behalf. This Discourse
both surpriz'd and displeas'd Asiaticus; 
nevertheless he could not refuse his
Importunity, and so promis'd to do what
he could with his Father, tho' he fear'd it
would prove ineffectual; and so left Scipio
to go look for his Father, whilst he return'd
to the Place where he left Cordiala, and
there found with her Clarinthia, who, seating
themselves, and discoursing of Things
indifferent, they saw a Person at the End
of the Walk coming towards them, who
they soon perceiv'd to be Valerius. As he
came near Clarinthia, he cast himself at her
Feet, begging Pardon of her and Heaven
for all the Trouble he had caus'd her; adding,
That he was come on Purpose from
Sicily, and going to Rome, to enquire after
Turpius, in Hopes he may have gotten thither. 
If seeking after Turpius be your Business,
reply'd Clarinthia, you will soon find
Success; for he is at my Lord Publius Scipio's
House, whither I will conduct thee. 
Valerius humbled himself at the Feet of
his Father, who readily receiv'd him. Asiaticus,
at the Request of Clarinthia, forgave
him. All the Company congratulated
his safe Arrival, and oblig'd him to
stay and be a Sharer in the general Happiness,
and the Diversions of the coming
Night, which was design'd for Musick, 
Mirth, and Feasting. Thus these happy
Lovers diverted themselves, in Expectation
of their Friends from Rome, in Order to
conclude and perfect their Felicity. 
But the Gods seldom permit human Happiness
to be compleat, least, perhaps, we
should forget them, the Donors, and fix our
Affections too much on these terrestrial
Objects; and therefore their allwise Providence
mixes something amongst our most
happy Moments, that may mind us on
our Dependance upon their Bounty. Wherefore,
amongst this happy Company of Lovers
and Friends, the poor Scipio was unfortunate,
in the Opposition his Father made
in the Business of his Amour: For Publius
receiv'd the Information from Asiaticus with
great Indignation, telling him, that he had
rather he had remain'd still lost, than thus
to lose himself and disgrace his Family,
with divers other Rebukes of this Kind:
All which were so grievous to him, that
all the Diversion of that Night was not
capable to infuse one easy Thought in the
Heart of Scipio. When the Fatigue of Pleasure
oblig'd them to retire to their Repose,
he retir'd only to Inquietude. O ye Gods!
(said he to himself) in what hard Circumstances
have you plac'd me, that I must
disobey the most honourable and kind of all
Fathers, or violate my Word given to the
most vertuous and beautiful of all Maids, 
and at the same Time render myself the
most unhappy of all Mortals. Ah unhappy
Scipio! It had been well for me if I had
still been ignorant whose Son I was, and
only known myself to be the poor Ismenus; 
then might I have lov'd the fair Cordiala
without Controul. Yesterday I had no
Chains to wear but hers, no Commands to
obey but the Motion of her Eyes, no Friends
to oblige, no Honours to comply with, no
Grandeur to seek, no Parents to obey; all
was concenter'd in her alone. Ah, the Happiness
of Poverty and low Parentage! which
gives us that most valuable Jewel of this
World's Treasure, Liberty; which the Rich
and Great are seldom Masters of, but are
fetter'd with a thousand Impertinencies,
from which they can no more disengage
themselves than I from my unhappy Passion; 
but why do I call it unhappy? Am
I not fortunate, to see and love the finest
Thing of the Creation? Then why do I
make any Doubt or Difficulty? Love on,
Scipio, love thy beauteous Cordiala, and, if
possible, make her wholly thine; such Perfections
were never made for less noble
Ends than to be Wife to a Scipio. But, O
the Thoughts of making her wretched, when
my Father shall discard us, all my Family
scorn us, and the whole World condemn
us! With what Face shall I then look on
her, whom I have brought to inevitable 
Ruin. As she is, her Merits may provide
her an honourable Marriage with some
noble Roman, Master of himself, that can
make her happy, since I only undo her
with my Love. Then, since one must be
miserable, 'tis fit that I sustain the whole
Blow alone, and not endeavour to involve
her, who has no Way been accessary; then
be obedient to thy Father's Commands,
and leave this only Object of my Life's
Happiness; sacrifice all Satisfaction to the
Honour of my Family, and the Repose of
Cordiala. But, ah! if Cordiala should be
sensible of those tender Sighs and faithful
Vows I have so often repeated to her, where
would then be her Ease or Repose? Yesterday
I thought I perceiv'd a Sigh struggling
in her Breast; but she, cruel to herself and
me, stifled it e'er born. Her frequent
Blushes and broken Words seem'd to testify
she spake against the Sentiment of her
Heart; that I brib'd my foolish Hopes to
believe myself not wholly indifferent to
her; for Maids, they say, take great Care
to conceal that Secret from the Knowledge
of their Lovers. If it should be thus with
Cordiala, how could she bear the being deserted
by me, or rather the Death of him
she loves? For die I must, if not possess
her. Ah, cruel Lot! that constrains me,
either to live in Disobedience to the best of
Fathers, or die, rather than displease him 
in marrying the best and most beautiful of
all her Sex. Assist me, Vertue, to conduct
me through this narrow Passage, that I
wreck not upon Scylla or Charybdis. Thus
did this young Heart pass his Hours in
Chagrin, whilst others enjoy'd soft Slumbers. 