

In a short time this gentle girl recovered her senses. She
did not withdraw herself from my sustaining arm, but, leaning
on my bosom, she resigned herself to passionate weeping.
I did not endeavor to check this effusion, believing that its
influence would be salutary.
I had not forgotten the thrilling sensibility and artless
graces of this girl. I had not forgotten the scruples which
had formerly made me check a passion whose tendency was
easily discovered. These new proofs of her affection were,
at once, mournful and delightful. The untimely fate of her
father and my friend pressed with new force upon my heart,
and my tears, in spite of my fortitude, mingled with hers.
The attention of both was presently attracted by a faint
scream, which proceeded from above. Immediately tottering
footsteps were heard in the passage, and a figure rushed
into the room, pale, emaciated, haggard, and wild. She
cast a piercing glance at me, uttered a feeble exclamation,
and sunk upon the floor without signs of life.
It was not difficult to comprehend this scene. I now
conjectured, what subsequent inquiry confirmed, that the
old man had mistaken me for Wallace, and had carried to
the elder sister the news of his return. This fatal disappointment
of hopes that had nearly been extinct, and which
were now so powerfully revived, could not be endured by a
frame verging to dissolution.
This object recalled all the energies of Eliza, and engrossed
all my solicitude. I lifted the fallen girl in my arms;
and, guided by her sister, carried her to her chamber. I
had now leisure to contemplate the changes which a few
months had made in this lovely frame. I turned away from
the spectacle with anguish, but my wandering eyes were
recalled by some potent fascination, and fixed in horror




upon a form which evinced the last stage of decay. Eliza
knelt on one side, and, leaning her face upon the bed, endeavored
in vain to smother her sobs. I sat on the other
motionless, and holding the passive and withered hand of the
sufferer.
I watched with ineffable solicitude the return of life. It
returned, at length, but merely to betray symptoms that it
would speedily depart forever. For a time my faculties
were palsied, and I was made an impotent spectator of the
ruin that environed me. This pusillanimity quickly gave
way to resolutions and reflections better suited to the exigencies
of the time.
The first impulse was to summon a physician, but it was
evident that the patient had been sinking by slow degrees to
this state, and that the last struggle had begun. Nothing
remained but to watch her while expiring, and perform for
her, when dead, the rites of interment. The survivor was
capable of consolation and of succor. I went to her and
drew her gently into another apartment. The old man,
tremulous and wonderstruck, seemed anxious to perform
some service. I directed him to kindle a fire in Eliza's
chamber. Meanwhile I persuaded my gentle friend to remain
in this chamber, and resign to me the performance of
every office which her sister's condition required. I sat beside
the bed of the dying till the mortal struggle was past.
I perceived that the house had no inhabitant besides the
two females and the old man. I went in search of the latter,
and found him crouched as before, at the kitchen fire,
smoking his pipe. I placed myself on the same bench, and
entered into conversation with him.
I gathered from him that he had, for many years, been
Mr. Hadwin's servant. That lately he had cultivated a
small farm in this neighborhood for his own advantage. Stopping
one day in October, at the tavern, he heard that his old
master had lately been in the city, had caught the fever, and
after his return had died with it. The moment he became
sick, his servants fled from the house, and the neighbors refused
to approach it. The task of attending his sick bed,
was allotted to his daughters, and it was by their hands that
his grave was dug, and his body covered with earth. The




same terror of infection existed after his death as before,
and these hapless females were deserted by all mankind.
Old Caleb was no sooner informed of these particulars,
than he hurried to the house, and had since continued in
their service. His heart was kind, but it was easily seen that
his skill extended only to execute the directions of another.
Grief for the death of Wallace, and her father, preyed upon
the health of the elder daughter. The younger became
her nurse, and Caleb was always at hand to execute any
orders, the performance of which was on a level with his
understanding. Their neighbors had not withheld their good
offices, but they were still terrified and estranged by the
phantoms of pestilence.
During the last week Susan had been too weak to rise
from her bed, yet such was the energy communicated by
the tidings that Wallace was alive, and had returned, that
she leaped upon her feet and rushed down stairs. How
little did that man deserve so strenuous and immortal an affection.

I would not allow myself to ponder on the sufferings of
these women. I endeavored to think only of the best expedients
for putting an end to these calamities. After a
moment's deliberation, I determined to go to a house at
some miles distance; the dwelling of one, who, though not
exempt from the reigning panic, had shown more generosity
towards these unhappy girls than others. During my former
abode in this district, I had ascertained his character, and
found him to be compassionate and liberal.
Overpowered by fatigue and watching, Susan was no
sooner relieved by my presence, of some portion of her
cares, than she sunk into profound slumber. I directed
Caleb to watch the house till my return, which should be
before midnight, and then set out for the dwelling of Mr.
Ellis.
The weather was temperate and moist, and rendered the
footing of the meadows extremely difficult. The ground
that had lately been frozen and covered with snow, was
now changed into gullies and pools, and this was no time to
be fastidious in the choice of paths. A brook, swelled by
the recent thaw, was likewise to be passed. The rail which
I had formerly placed over it by way of bridge, had




disappeared, and I was obliged to wade through it. At length I
approached the house to which I was going.
At so late an hour, farmers and farmer's servants are
usually abed, and their threshold is entrusted to their watch-dogs.
Two belonged to Mr. Ellis, whose ferocity and vigilance
were truly formidable to a stranger, but I hoped that in
me they would recognise an old acquaintance, and suffer
me to approach. In this I was not mistaken. Though my
person could not be distinctly seen by star-light, they seemed
to scent me from afar, and met me with a thousand caresses.
Approaching the house, I perceived that its tenants were
retired to their repose. This I expected, and hastened to
awaken Mr. Ellis, by knocking briskly at the door. Presently
he looked out of a window above, and in answer to
his inquiries, in which impatience at being so unseasonably
disturbed, was mingled with anxiety, I told him my name,
and entreated him to come down and allow me a few minutes
conversation. He speedily dressed himself, and opening
the kitchen door, we seated ourselves before the fire.
My appearance was sufficiently adapted to excite his wonder;
he had heard of my elopement from the house of
Mr. Hadwin, he was a stranger to the motives that prompted
my departure, and to the events that had befallen me, and no
interview was more distant from his expectations than the
present. His curiosity was written in his features, but this
was no time to gratify his curiosity. The end that I now
had in view, was to procure accommodation for Eliza Hadwin
in this man's house. For this purpose it was my duty
to describe with simplicity and truth, the inconveniences
which at present surrounded her, and to relate all that had
happened since my arrival.
I perceived that my tale excited his compassion, and I
continued with new zeal to paint to him the helplessness of
this girl. The death of her father and sister left her the
property of this farm. Her sex and age disqualified her for
superintending the harvest field and the threshing floor; and
no expedient was left, but to lease the land to another, and,
taking up her abode in the family of some kinsman or friend,
to subsist, as she might easily do, upon the rent. Meanwhile
her continuance in this house was equally useless and




dangerous, and I insinuated to my companion the propriety
of immediately removing her to his own.
Some hesitation and reluctance appeared in him, which
I immediately ascribed to an absurd dread of infection. I
endeavored, by appealing to his reason, as well as to his pity,
to conquer this dread. I pointed out the true cause of the
death of the elder daughter, and assured him the youngest
knew no indisposition but that which arose from distress. I
offered to save him from any hazard that might attend his
approaching the house, by accompanying her hither myself.
All that her safety required was that his doors should
not be shut against her when she presented herself before
them.
Still he was fearful and reluctant; and, at length, mentioned
that her uncle resided not more than sixteen miles
farther; that he was her natural protector, and he dared
to say would find no difficulty in admitting her into his
house. For his part, there might be reason in what I said,
but he could not bring himself to think but that there was
still some danger of the fever. It was right to assist people
in distress, to be sure; but to risk his own life he did not
think to be his duty. He was no relation of the family, and
it was the duty of relations to help each other. Her uncle
was the proper person to assist her, and no doubt he would
be as willing as able.
The marks of dubiousness and indecision which accompanied
these words, encouraged me in endeavoring to subdue
his scruples. The increase of his aversion to my scheme
kept pace with my remonstrances, and he finally declared
that he would, on no account, consent to it.
Ellis was by no means hard of heart. His determination
did not prove the coldness of his charity, but merely
the strength of his fears. He was himself an object more
of compassion than of anger; and he acted like the man,
whose fear of death prompts him to push his companion
from the plank which saved him from drowning, but which
is unable to sustain both. Finding him invincible to my
entreaties, I thought upon the expedient which he suggested
of seeking the protection of her uncle. It was true,
that the loss of parents had rendered her uncle her legal
protector. His knowledge of the world; his house, and





property, and influence would, perhaps, fit him for this
office in a more eminent degree than I was fitted. To seek
a different asylum might, indeed, be unjust to both, and,
after some reflection, I not only dismissed the regret which
Ellis's refusal had given me, but even thanked him for the
intelligence and counsel which he had afforded me. I took
leave of him, and hastened back to Hadwin's.
Eliza, by Caleb's report, was still asleep. There was
no urgent necessity for awakening her; but something was
forthwith to be done with regard to the unhappy girl that
was dead. The proceeding incumbent on us was obvious.
All that remained was to dig a grave, and to deposit the remains
with as much solemnity and decency as the time
would permit. There were two methods of doing this. I
might wait till the next day; till a coffin could be made
and conveyed hither; till the woman, whose trade it was to
make and put on the habiliments assigned by custom to the
dead, could be sought out and hired to attend; till kindred,
friends, and neighbors could be summoned to the obsequies;
till a carriage were provided to remove the body to a burying
ground, belonging to a meeting-house, and five miles
distant; till those whose trade it was to dig graves, had prepared
one, within the sacred inclosure, for her reception;
or, neglecting this toilsome, tedious, and expensive ceremonial,
I might seek the grave of Hadwin, and lay the daughter
by the side of her parent.
Perhaps I was wrong in my preference of the latter
mode. The customs of burial may, in most cases, be in
themselves proper. If the customs be absurd, yet it may
be generally proper to adhere to them; but doubtless, there
are cases in which it is our duty to omit them. I conceived
the present case to be such a one.
The season was bleak and inclement. Much time,
labor, and expense would be required to go through the
customary rites. There was none but myself to perform
these, and I had not the suitable means. The misery of
Eliza would only be prolonged by adhering to these forms;
and her fortune be needlessly diminished, by the expenses
unavoidably to be incurred.
After musing upon these ideas for some time, I rose from




my seat, and desired Caleb to follow me. We proceeded
to an outer shed where farmers' tools used to be kept. I
supplied him and myself with a spade, and requested him
to lead me to the spot where Mr. Hadwin was laid.
He betrayed some hesitation to comply, and appeared
struck with some degree of alarm, as if my purpose had
been to molest, instead of securing, the repose of the dead.
I removed his doubts by explaining my intentions, but he
was scarcely less shocked, on discovering the truth, than he
had been alarmed by his first suspicions. He stammered
out his objections to my scheme. There was but one mode
of burial he thought that was decent and proper, and he
could not be free to assist me in pursuing any other mode.
Perhaps Caleb's aversion to the scheme might have been
easily overcome, but I reflected that a mind like his was at
once flexible and obstinate. He might yield to arguments
and entreaties, and act by their immediate impulse; but
the impulse passed away in a moment, old and habitual
convictions were resumed, and his deviation from the
beaten track would be merely productive of compunction.
His aid, on the present occasion, though of some use, was
by no means indispensable. I forbore to solicit his concurrence,
or even to vanquish the scruples he entertained
against directing me to the grave of Hadwin. It was a
groundless superstition that made one spot more suitable for
this purpose than another. I desired Caleb, in a mild tone,
to return to the kitchen, and leave me to act as I thought
proper. I then proceeded to the orchard.
One corner of this field was somewhat above the level of
the rest. The tallest tree of the group grew there, and there
I had formerly placed a bench, and made it my retreat at periods
of leisure. It had been recommended by its sequestered
situation, its luxuriant verdure, and profound quiet. On one
side was a potatoe field, on the other a melon patch; and
before me, in rows, some hundreds of apple trees. Here
I was accustomed to seek the benefits of contemplation, and
study the manuscripts of Lodi. A few months had passed
since I had last visited this spot. What revolutions had
since occurred, and how gloomily contrasted was my present
purpose with what had formerly led me hither!
In this spot I had hastily determined to dig the grave of




Susan. The grave was dug. All that I desired was a
cavity of sufficient dimensions to receive her. This being
made, I returned to the house, lifted the corpse in my arms,
and bore it without delay to the spot. Caleb seated in the
kitchen, and Eliza asleep in her chamber, were wholly unapprized
of my motions. The grave was covered, the spade
reposited under the shed, and my seat by the kitchen fire
resumed in a time apparently too short for so solemn and
momentous a transaction.
I look back upon this incident with emotions not easily
described. It seems as if I acted with too much precipitation;
as if insensibility, and not reason, had occasioned that
clearness of conceptions, and bestowed that firmness of
muscles, which I then experienced. I neither trembled nor
wavered in my purpose. I bore in my arms the being
whom I had known and loved, through the whistling gale
and intense darkness of a winter's night; I heaped earth
upon her limbs, and covered them from human observation,
without fluctuations or tremors, though not without feelings
that were awful and sublime.
Perhaps some part of my steadfastness was owing to my
late experience, and some minds may be more easily inured
to perilous emergences than others. If reason acquires
strength only by the diminution of sensibility, perhaps it is
just for sensibility to be diminished.
