

This extraordinary interview was now passed. Pleasure
as well as pain attended my reflections on it. I adhered to
the promise I had improvidently given to Welbeck, but had
excited displeasure, and perhaps suspicion in the lady. She
would find it hard to account for my silence. She would
probably impute it to perverseness, or imagine it to flow from
some incident connected with the death of Clavering, calculated
to give a new edge to her curiosity.
It was plain that some connexion subsisted between her
and Welbeck. Would she drop the subject at the point
which it had now attained? Would she cease to exert herself
to extract from me the desired information, or would
she not rather make Welbeck a party in the cause, and prejudice
my new friend against me? This was an evil proper,
by all lawful means, to avoid. I knew of no other expedient
than to confess to him the truth, with regard to Clavering,
and explain to him the dilemma in which my adherence
to my promise had involved me.
I found him on my return home and delivered him the
letter with which I was charged. At the sight of it surprise,
mingled with some uneasiness, appeared in his looks.
“What!” said he, in a tone of disappointment, “you then
saw the lady?”
I now remembered his directions to leave my message at
the door, and apologized for my neglecting them by telling
my reasons. His chagrin vanished, but not without an




 apparent effort, and he said that all was well; the affair was
of no moment.
After a pause of preparation, I entreated his attention to
something which I had to relate. I then detailed the history
of Clavering and of my late embarrassments. As I went on
his countenance betokened increasing solicitude. His emotion
was particularly strong when I came to the interrogatories
of Mrs. Wentworth in relation to Clavering; but this
emotion gave way to profound surprise when I related the
manner in which I had eluded her inquiries. I concluded
with observing, that when I promised forbearance on the
subject of my own adventures, I had not foreseen any exigence
which would make an adherence to my promise difficult
or inconvenient; that, if his interest was promoted by
my silence, I was still willing to maintain it, and requested his
directions how to conduct myself on this occasion.
He appeared to ponder deeply and with much perplexity
on what I had said. When he spoke there was hesitation
in his manner and circuity in his expressions, that proved
him to have something in his thoughts, which he knew not
how to communicate. He frequently paused; but my answers
and remarks, occasionally given, appeared to deter him
from the revelation of his purpose. Our discourse ended,
for the present, by his desiring me to persist in my present
plan; I should suffer no inconveniences from it, since it
would be my own fault if an interview again took place between
the lady and me; meanwhile he should see her and
effectually silence her inquiries.
I ruminated not superficially or briefly on this dialogue.
By what means would he silence her inquiries? He surely
meant not to mislead her by fallacious representations? Some
inquietude now crept into my thoughts. I began to form
conjectures as to the nature of the scheme to which my suppression
of the truth was to be thus made subservient. It
seemed as if I were walking in the dark and might rush into
snares or drop into pits before I was aware of my danger.
Each moment accumulated my doubts, and I cherished a
secret foreboding that the event would prove my new situation
to be far less fortunate than I had, at first, fondly, believed.
The question now occurred, with painful repetition,
who and what was Welbeck? What was his relation to




 this foreign lady? What was the service for which I was
to be employed?
I could not be contented without a solution of these mysteries.
Why should I not lay my soul open before my new
friend? Considering my situation, would he regard my
fears and my surmises as criminal? I felt that they originated
in laudable habits and views. My peace of mind depended
on the favorable verdict which conscience should
pass on my proceedings. I saw the emptiness of fame and
luxury, when put in the balance against the recompense of
virtue. Never would I purchase the blandishments of adulation
and the glare of opulence at the price of my honesty.
Amidst these reflections the dinner-hour arrived. The
lady and Welbeck were present. A new train of sentiments
now occupied my mind. I regarded them both with
inquisitive eyes. I cannot well account for the revolution
which had taken place in my mind. Perhaps it was a proof
of the capriciousness of my temper, or it was merely the fruit
of my profound ignorance of life and manners. Whencesoever
it arose, certain it is that I contemplated the scene before
me with altered eyes. Its order and pomp was no
longer the parent of tranquillity and awe. My wild reveries
of inheriting this splendor and appropriating the affections
of this nymph, I now regarded as lunatic hope and
childish folly. Education and nature had qualified me for
a different scene. This might be the mask of misery and
the structure of vice.
My companions as well as myself were silent during the
meal. The lady retired as soon as it was finished. My
inexplicable melancholy increased. It did not pass unnoticed
by Welbeck, who inquired, with an air of kindness, into
the cause of my visible dejection. I am almost ashamed
to relate to what extremes my folly transported me. Instead
of answering him I was weak enough to shed tears.
This excited afresh his surprise and his sympathy. He
renewed his inquiries; my heart was full, but how to disburthen
it I knew not. At length, with some difficulty, I expressed
my wishes to leave his house and return into the
country.
“What,” he asked, “had occurred to suggest this new
plan? What motive could incite me to bury myself in rustic





 obscurity? How did I purpose to dispose of myself? Had
some new friend sprung up more able or more willing to
benefit me than he had been?”
“No,” I answered, “I have no relation who would own
me, or friend who would protect. If I went into the country
it would be to the toilsome occupations of a day laborer;
but even that was better than my present situation.”
“This opinion,” he observed, “must be newly formed.
What was there irksome or offensive in my present mode
of life.”
That this man condescended to expostulate with me; to
dissuade me from my new plan; and to enumerate the benefits
which he was willing to confer, penetrated my heart
with gratitude. I could not but acknowledge that leisure
and literature, copious and elegant accommodation were
valuable for their own sake; that all the delights of sensation
and refinements of intelligence, were comprised within
my present sphere, and would be nearly wanting in that
to which I was going. I felt temporary compunction for my
folly, and determined to adopt a different deportment. I
could not prevail upon myself to unfold the true cause of
my dejection, and permitted him therefore to ascribe it to
a kind of homesickness; to inexperience; and to that ignorance
which, on being ushered into a new scene, is oppressed
with a sensation of forlornness. He remarked that
these chimeras would vanish before the influence of time,
and company, and occupation. On the next week he
would furnish me with employment; meanwhile he would
introduce me into company, where intelligence and vivacity
would combine to dispel my glooms.
As soon as we separated, my disquietudes returned. I
contended with them in vain, and finally resolved to abandon
my present situation. When and how this purpose was to
be effected I knew not. That was to be the theme of future
deliberation.
Evening having arrived, Welbeck proposed to me to accompany
him on a visit to one of his friends. I cheerfully
accepted the invitation and went with him to your friend
Mr. Wortley's. A numerous party was assembled, chiefly
of the female sex. I was introduced by Welbeck by the




 title of a young friend of his. Notwithstanding my embarrassment
I did not fail to attend to what passed on this occasion.
I remarked that the utmost deference was paid to my
companion, on whom his entrance into this company appeared
to operate like magic. His eyes sparkled; his features
expanded into a benign serenity; and his wonted reserve
gave place to a torrent-like and overflowing elocution.
I marked this change in his deportment with the utmost
astonishment. So great was it, that I could hardly persuade
myself that it was the same person. A mind thus susceptible
of new impressions must be, I conceived, of a wonderful
texture. Nothing was further from my expectations
than that this vivacity was mere dissimulation and would
take its leave of him when he left the company; yet this I
found to be the case. The door was no sooner closed after
him than his accustomed solemnity returned. He spake
little, and that little was delivered with emphatical and
monosyllabic brevity.
We returned home at a late hour, and I immediately
retired to my chamber, not so much from the desire of repose
as in order to enjoy and pursue my own reflections
without interruption.
The condition of my mind was considerably remote from
happiness. I was placed in a scene that furnished fuel to
my curiosity. This passion is a source of pleasure, provided
its gratification be practicable. I had no reason, in
my present circumstances, to despair of knowledge; yet
suspicion and anxiety beset me. I thought upon the delay
and toil which the removal of my ignorance would cost, and
reaped only pain and fear from the reflection.
The air was remarkably sultry. Lifted sashes and lofty
ceilings were insufficient to attemper it. The perturbation
of my thoughts affected my body, and the heat which oppressed
me, was aggravated, by my restlessness, almost
into fever. Some hours were thus painfully past, when I
recollected that the bath, erected in the court below, contained
a sufficient antidote to the scorching influence of the
atmosphere.
I rose, and descended the stairs softly, that I might not
alarm Welbeck and the lady, who occupied the two rooms
on the second floor. I proceeded to the bath, and filling




 the reservoir with water, speedily dissipated the heat that
incommoded me. Of all species of sensual gratification,
that was the most delicious; and I continued for a long
time, laving my limbs and moistening my hair. In the
midst of this amusement, I noticed the approach of day,
and immediately saw the propriety of returning to my
chamber. I returned with the same caution which I had
used in descending; my feet were bare, so that it was easy
to proceed unattended by the smallest signal of my progress.
I had reached the carpetted staircase, and was slowly
ascending, when I heard, within the chamber that was occupied
by the lady, a noise, as of some one moving.
Though not conscious of having acted improperly, yet I
felt reluctance to be seen. There was no reason to suppose
that this sound was connected with the detection of me, in
this situation; yet I acted as if this reason existed, and made
haste to pass the door and gain the second flight of steps.
I was unable to accomplish my design, when the chamber
door slowly opened, and Welbeck, with a light in his
hand, came out. I was abashed and disconcerted at this
interview. He started at seeing me; but discovering in an
instant who it was, his face assumed an expression in which
shame and anger were powerfully blended. He seemed on
the point of opening his mouth to rebuke me; but suddenly
checking himself, he said, in a tone of mildness, “How is
this?—Whence come you?”
His emotion seemed to communicate itself, with an electrical
rapidity, to my heart. My tongue faltered while I
made some answer. I said, “I had been seeking relief
from the heat of the weather, in the bath.” He heard my
explanation in silence; and, after a moment's pause, passed
into his own room, and shut himself in. I hastened to my
chamber.
A different observer might have found in these circumstances
no food for his suspicion or his wonder. To me,
however, they suggested vague and tumultuous ideas.
As I strode across the room I repeated, “This woman
is his daughter. What proof have I of that? He once asserted
it; and has frequently uttered allusions and hints
from which no other inference could be drawn. The chamber
from which he came, in an hour devoted to sleep, was




 hers. For what end could a visit like this be paid? A parent
may visit his child at all seasons, without a crime. On
seeing me, methought his features indicated more than surprise.
A keen interpreter would be apt to suspect a consciousness
of wrong. What if this woman be not his child!
How shall their relationship be ascertained?”
I was summoned at the customary hour to breakfast.
My mind was full of ideas connected with this incident. I
was not endowed with sufficient firmness to propose the
cool and systematic observation of this man's deportment.
I felt as if the state of my mind could not but be evident to
him; and experienced in myself all the confusion which
this discovery was calculated to produce in him. I would
have willingly excused myself from meeting him; but that
was impossible.
At breakfast, after the usual salutations, nothing was said.
For a time I scarcely lifted my eyes from the table. Stealing
a glance at Welbeck, I discovered in his features nothing
but his wonted gravity. He appeared occupied with
thoughts that had no relation to last night's adventure.
This encouraged me; and I gradually recovered my composure.
Their inattention to me allowed me occasionally
to throw scrutinizing and comparing glances at the face of
each.
The relationship of parent and child is commonly discoverable
in the visage; but the child may resemble either of
its parents, yet have no feature in common with both. Here
outlines, surfaces and hues were in absolute contrariety.
That kindred subsisted between them was possible, notwithstanding
this dissimilitude; but this circumstance contributed
to envenon my suspicions.
Breakfast being finished, Welbeck cast an eye of invitation
to the piano forte. The lady rose to comply with his
request. My eye chanced to be, at that moment, fixed on
her. In stepping to the instrument some motion or appearance
awakened a thought in my mind, which affected my
feelings like the shock of an earthquake.
I have too slight acquaintance with the history of the
passions to truly explain the emotion which now throbbed in
my veins. I had been a stranger to what is called love.
From subsequent reflection, I have contracted a suspicion,




 that the sentiment with which I regarded this lady was not
untinctured from this source, and that hence arose the turbulence
of my feelings, on observing what I construed into
marks of pregnancy. The evidence afforded me was slight;
yet it exercised an absolute sway over my belief.
It was well that this suspicion had not been sooner excited.
Now civility did not require my stay in the apartment,
and nothing but flight could conceal the state of my
mind. I hastened, therefore, to a distance, and shrouded
myself in the friendly secrecy of my own chamber.
The constitution of my mind is doubtless singular and
perverse; yet that opinion, perhaps, is the fruit of my ignorance.
It may by no means be uncommon for men to
fashion their conclusions in opposition to evidence and probability,
and so as to feed their malice and subvert their
happiness. Thus it was, in an eminent degree, in my case.
The simple fact was connected, in my mind, with a train of
the most hateful consequences. The depravity of Welbeck
was inferred from it. The charms of this angelic woman
were tarnished and withered. I had formerly surveyed her
as a precious and perfect monument, but now it was a scene
of ruin and blast.
This had been a source of sufficient anguish; but this
was not all. I recollected that the claims of a parent had
been urged. Will you believe that these claims were now
admitted, and that they heightened the iniquity of Welbeck
into the blackest and most stupendous of all crimes? These
ideas were necessarily transient. Conclusions more conformable
to appearances succeeded. This lady might have
been lately reduced to widowhood. The recent loss of a
beloved companion would sufficiently account for her dejection,
and make her present situation compatible with duty.
By this new train of ideas I was somewhat comforted. I
saw the folly of precipitate inferences, and the injustice of
my atrocious imputations, and acquired some degree of
patience in my present state of uncertainty. My heart was
lightened of its wonted burthen, and I labored to invent
some harmless explication of the scene that I had witnessed
the preceding night.
At dinner Welbeck appeared as usual, but not the lady.
I ascribed her absence to some casual indisposition, and




 ventured to inquire into the state of her health. My companion
said she was well, but that she had left the city for
a month or two, finding the heat of summer inconvenient
where she was. This was no unplausible reason for retirement.
A candid mind would have acquiesced in this representation,
and found in it nothing inconsistent with a supposition
respecting the cause of appearances favorable to her
character; but otherwise was I affected. The uneasiness
which had flown for a moment, returned, and I sunk into
gloomy silence.
From this I was roused by my patron, who requested
me to deliver a billet, which he put into my hand, at the
counting-house of Mr. Thetford, and to bring him an answer.
This message was speedily performed. I entered
a large building by the river side. A spacious apartment
presented itself, well furnished with pipes and hogsheads.
In one corner was a smaller room, in which a gentleman
was busy at writing. I advanced to the door of the room,
but was there met by a young person, who received my
paper, and delivered it to him within. I stood still at the
door; but was near enough to overhear what would pass
between them.
The letter was laid upon the desk, and presently he that
sat at it lifted his eyes, and glanced at the superscription.
He scarcely spoke above a whisper, but his words, never-theless,
were clearly distinguishable. I did not call to mind
the sound of his voice, but his words called up a train of
recollections.
“Lo!” said he, carelessly, “this from the Nabob!”
An incident so slight as this was sufficient to open a spacious
scene of meditation. This little word, half whispered
in a thoughtless mood, was a key to unlock an extensive
cabinet of secrets. Thetford was probably indifferent
whether his exclamation were overheard. Little did he
think on the inferences which would be built upon it.
“The Nabob!” By this appellation had some one been
denoted in the chamber dialogue, of which I had been an
unsuspected auditor. The man who pretended poverty,
and yet gave proofs of inordinate wealth; whom it was
pardonable to defraud of thirty thousand dollars; first, because
the loss of that sum would be trivial to one opulent




 as he; and secondly, because he was imagined to have
acquired this opulence by other than honest methods. Instead
of forthwith returning home, I wandered into the fields,
to indulge myself in the new thoughts which were produced
by this occurrence.
I entertained no doubt that the person alluded to was my
patron. No new light was thrown upon his character; unless
something were deducible from the charge vaguely
made, that his wealth was the fruit of illicit practices. He
was opulent, and the sources of his wealth were unknown,
if not to the rest of the community, at least to Thetford.
But here had a plot been laid. The fortune of Thetford's
brother was to rise from the success of artifices, of
which the credulity of Welbeck was to be the victim.
To detect, and to counterwork this plot was obviously my
duty. My interference might now indeed be too late to
be useful; but this was at least to be ascertained by experiment.

How should my intention be effected? I had hitherto
concealed from Welbeck my adventures at Thetford's house.
These it was now necessary to disclose, and to mention the
recent occurrence. My deductions, in consequence of my
ignorance, might be erroneous; but of their truth his knowledge
of his own affairs would enable him to judge. It was
possible that Thetford and he whose chamber conversation
I had overheard, were different persons. I endeavored in
vain to ascertain their identity by a comparison of their
voices. The words lately heard, my remembrance did not
enable me certainly to pronounce to be uttered by the same
organs.
This uncertainty was of little moment. It sufficed that
Welbeck was designated by this appellation, and that
therefore he was proved to be the subject of some fraudulent
proceeding. The information that I possessed it was
my duty to communicate as expeditiously as possible. I
was resolved to employ the first opportunity that offered for
this end.
My meditations had been ardently pursued, and, when I
recalled my attention, I found myself bewildered among
fields and fences. It was late before I extricated myself
from unknown paths, and reached home.






I entered the parlor; but Welbeck was not there. A
table, with tea-equipage for one person was set; from which
I inferred that Welbeck was engaged abroad. This belief
was confirmed by the report of the servant. He could not
inform me where his master was, but merely that he should
not take tea at home. This incident was a source of vexation
and impatience. I knew not but that delay would be
of the utmost moment to the safety of my friend. Wholly
unacquainted as I was with the nature of his contracts with
Thetford, I could not decide whether a single hour would
not avail to obviate the evils that threatened him. Had I
known whither to trace his footsteps, I should certainly have
sought an immediate interview; but, as it was, I was obliged
to wait with what patience I could collect, for his return to
his own house.
I waited hour after hour in vain. The sun declined, and
the shades of evening descended; but Welbeck was still at
a distance.
