

Well, when these Vagabonds had thus
far carried on their design, and had corrupted
the Town as much as they could, in the
next place they considered with themselves
at what time their Prince Diabolus without,
and themselves within the Town should
make an attempt to seise upon Mansoul; and
they all agreed upon this,A day of worldly cumber. that a Market-day
would be best for that work; for why? then
will the Townsfolk be busie in their ways:
and always take this for a rule, When people
are most busie in the world, they least fear a
surprize. We also then, said they, shall be able
with less suspicion to gather our selves together
for the work of our friends, and Lords;
yea, and in such a day, if we shall attempt
our work, and miss it, we may when they
shall give us the rout,Take heed Mansoul. the better hide our
selves in the croud and escape.
These things being thus far agreed upon
by them, they wrote another Letter to
Diabolus, and sent it by the hand of Mr.
Profane, the Contents of which was this:
The Lords of Looseness send to the great
and high Diabolus from our Dens,
caves, holes, and strong holds, in, and
about the wall of the Town of Mansoul,Look to it Mansoul.
Greeting:
Our great Lord, and the nourisher of our
lives, Diabolus; how glad we were when

we heard of your fatherhoods, readine&esset; to comply
with us, and help forward our design in our
attempts to ruin Mansoul! none can tell but those
 who as we do set themselves against all appearance
of good when and wheresoever we find it.
Touching the incouragement that your greatne&esset;
is pleased to give us to continue to devise,
contrive, and study the utter desolation of Mansoul,
that we are not sollicitous about, for we
know right well that it cannot but be pleasing
and profitable to us, to see our enemies and them
that seek our lives, to die at our feet, or fly
before us. We therefore are still contriving,
and that to the best of our cunning, to make
this work most facile and easie to your Lordships,
and to us.
First we considered of that most hellishly,Look to it Mansoul.
cunning compacted, three-fold project, that
by you was propounded to us in your last; and
have concluded, that though to blow them up
with the Gun-powder of pride would do well,
and to do it by tempting them to be loose and
vain will help on, yet to contrive to bring them
into the gulf of desperation, we think will do
best of all. Now we who are at your beck,
have thought of two ways to do this: First,
we for our parts will make them as vile as we
can, and then you with us, at a time appointed,
shall be ready to fall upon them with
the utmost force. And of all the Nations that
are at your whistle, we think that an army of
Doubters may be the most likely to attack and

overcome the Town of Mansoul. Thus shall we
overcome these enemies,Take heed Mansoul. else the Pit shall open
her mouth upon them, and desperation shall
thrust them down into it. We have also, to effect
this so much by us desired design, sent already
three of our trusty Diabolonians among
them, they are disguised in garb, they have changed
their names, and are now accepted of them,
to wit, Covetousness, Lasciviousness and Anger.
The name of Covetousness is changed
to Prudent-thrifty; and him Mr. Mind has
hired, and is almost become as bad as our
friend. Lasciviousness has changed his name to
Harmless-mirth, and he is got to be the Lord
Wilbewills Lacquy, but he has made his master
very wanton. Anger changed his name into
Good-zeal, and was entertained by Mr.
Godly-fear, but the peevish old Gentleman took
pepper in the nose and turned our companion out
of his house. Nay he has informed us since,
that he ran away from him, or else his old master
had hanged him up for his labour.
Now these have much helped forward ourLook to it Mansoul.
work and design upon Mansoul; for notwithstanding
the spite and quarrelsome temper of the
old Gentleman last mentioned, the other two
ply their busine&esset; well, and are like to ripen the
work apace.
Our next project is, that it be concluded that
you come upon the Town upon a Market-day,
and that when they are upon the heat of their
busine&esset;; for then to be sure they will be most

secure,Take heed Mansoul. and least think that an assault will be
made upon them. They will also at such a time
be le&esset; able to defend themselves, and to offend you
in the prosecution of our design. And we your
trusty, (and we are sure your beloved) ones shall
when you shall make your furious assault without,
be ready to second the busine&esset; within. So shall
we in all likelihood be able to put Mansoul to utter
confusion, and to swallow them up before they
can come to themselves. If your Serpentine heads,
most subtil Dragons, and our highly esteemed
Lords can find out a better way than this, let us
quickly know your minds.
To the Monsters of the Infernal Cave from
the house of Mr. Mischief in Mansoul,
by the hand of Mr. Profane.
Now all the while that the raging runnagates,
and hellish Diabolonians were thus contriving
the ruin of the Town of Mansoul,
they, to wit, the poor Town it self was in a
sad and woful case,The sad state of Mansoul. partly because they had
so grievously offended Shaddai and his Son,
and partly because that the enemies thereby
got strength within them afresh, and also because
though they had by many Petitions
made suit to the Prince Emanuel, and to his
Father Shaddai by him for their pardon and
favour, yet hitherto obtained they not one
smile; but contrariwise through the craft

and subtilty of the Domestick Diabolonians,
their cloud was made to grow blacker and
blacker, and their Emanuel to stand at further
distance.
The sickness also did still greatly rage in
Mansoul, both among the Captains and the
inhabitants of the Town their enemies, and
their enemies only were now lively and
strong, and like to become the head whilest
Mansoul was made the tail.
By this time the Letter last mentioned,Profane arrives at Hellgate-hill.
that was written by the Diabolonians that yet
lurked in the Town of Mansoul, was conveyed
to Diabolus in the Black-den, by the
hand of Mr. Profane. He carried the Letter
by Hellgate-hill as afore, and conveyed it by
Cerberus to his Lord.
But when Cerberus and Mr. Profane did
meet, they were presently as great as beggers,
and thus they fell into discourse about
Mansoul, and about the project against
her.
Cerb. Ah! old friend, quoth Cerberus, art
thou come to Hellgate-hill again! By St. Mary
I am glad to see thee.
Prof. Yes, my Lord,Talk between him and Cerberus. I am come again about
the concerns of the Town of Mansoul.
Cerb. Prithee tell me what condition is
that Town of Mansoul in at present?
Prof. In a brave condition, my Lord, for us,
and for my Lords, the Lords of this place I trow;
for they are greatly decayed as to Godline&esset;,&lhand; and

that's as well as our heart can wish; their Lord
is greatly out with them, and that doth also please
us well. We have already also a foot in their dish,
for our Diabolonian friends are laid in their
bosomes, and what do we lack but to be masters
of the place.
Besides, our trusty friends in Mansoul are daily
plotting to betray it to the Lords of this Town,
also the sickne&esset; rages bitterly among them, and
that which makes up all, we hope at last to prevail.
Cerb. Then said the Dog of Hellgate, no
time like this to assault them, I wish that the
enterprize be followed close, and that the
success desired may be soon effected: Yea,
I wish it for the poor Diabolonians sakes that
live in the continual fear of their lives in that
Trayterous Town of Mansoul.
Prof. The contrivance is almost finished, the
Lords in Mansoul that are Diabolonians are
at it day and night, and the other are like silly
doves, they want heart to be concerned with their
state, and to consider that ruin is at hand. Besides,
you may, yea must think when you put all
things together, that there are many reasons that
prevail with Diabolus to make what hast he
can.
Cerb. Thou hast said as it is, I am glad
things are at this pass. Go in my brave Profane
to my Lords, they will give thee for thy
welcome as good a Coranto as the whole of
this Kingdom will afford. I have sent thy Letter
in already.

Then Mr. Profane went into the Den,Profane's Entertainment. and
his Lord Diabolus met him, and saluted him
with Welcome my trusty servant. I have been
made glad with thy Letter. The rest of the
Lords of the Pit gave him also their salutations.
Then Profane after obeisance made
to them all, said, Let Mansoul be given to my
Lord Diabolus, and let him be her King for
ever. And with that the hollow belly, and
yauning gorge of Hell gave so loud and hideous
a groan (for that is the musick of that
place) that it made the mountains about it
totter, as if they would fall in pieces.
Now after they had read and considered
the Letter, they consulted what answer to
return, and the first that did speak to it was
Lucifer.
Lucif. Then said he,They consult what answer to give to the Letter. The first project of
the Diabolonians in Mansoul is like to be
lucky, and to take; to wit, that they will
by all the ways and means they can, make
Mansoul yet more vile and filthy; no way
to destroy a Soul like this; this is Probationest,
our old friend Balaam went this way andLucifer.
prospered many years ago,  let this therefore
stand with us for a maxim, and be to Diabolonians
for a general rule in all ages, for nothing
can make this to fail but Grace, in
which I would hope that this Town has no
share.Cumberments are dangerous. But whether to fall upon them on a
Market-day, because of their cumber in business;
that I would should be under debate.

And there is more reason why this head
should be debated, than why some other
should; because upon this will turn the
whole of what we shall attempt. If we time
not our business well, our whole project may
fail. Our friends the Diabolonians say that a
Market-day is best,They had need do it. for then will Mansoul be
most busie, and have fewest thoughts of a
surprize. But what if also they shall double
their guards on those days, (and methinks
nature and reason should teach them to do
it) and what if they should keep such a watch
on those days as the necessity of their present
case doth require: yea, what if their
men should be always in arms on those days?
then you may, my Lords, be disappointed in
your attempts, and may bring our friends
in the Town to utter danger of unavoidable
ruin.
Beel. Then said the great Beelzebub, There
is something in what my Lord hath said, but
his conjecture may, or may not fall out. Nor
hath my Lord laid it down as that which
must not be receded from, for I know that he
said it only to provoke to a warm debate
thereabout. Therefore we must understand,
if we can, whether the Town of Mansoul
has such sense and knowledg of her decayed
state, and of the design that we have on foot
against her,A Lesson for Christians. as doth provoke her to set watch
and ward at her Gates, and to double them
on Market-days. But if after enquiry made,

it shall be found that they are asleep, then
any day will do, but a Market day is best;
and this is my judgment in this case.
Diab. Then quoth Diabolus, how should
we know this? and 'twas answered, enquire
about it at the mouth of Mr. Profane. So
Profane was called in and asked the question,
and he made his answer as follows.
Prof. My Lords, so far as I can gather, this
is at present the condition of the Town of Mansoul,Profane's description of the present state of Mansoul.
they are decayed in their faith and love,
Emanuel their Prince has given them the back;
they send often by petition to fetch him again, but
he maketh not hast to answer their request, nor is
there much reformation among them.
Diab. I am glad that they are backward
to a reformation, but yet I am afraid of their
Petitioning. &rhand;However their loosness of life is
a sign that there is not much heart in what
they do, and without the heart things are
little worth. But go on my masters, I will
divert you, my Lords, no longer.
Beel. If the case be so with Mansoul, as Mr.
Profane has described it to be, 'twill be no
great matter what day we assault it, not their
prayers, nor their power will do them much
service.
Apoll. When Beelzebub had ended his Oration,
then Apollyon did begin. My opinion
said he concerning this matter,Dreadful advice against Mansoul. is, that we
go on fair and softly, not doing things in an
hurry. Let our friends in Mansoul go on still

to pollute and defile it, by seeking to draw
it yet more into sin (for there is nothing like
sin to devour Mansoul.) If this be done, and
it takes effect, Mansoul of it self will leave
off to watch, to Petition, or any thing else
that should tend to her security and safety;
for she will forget her Emanuel, she will not
desire his company, and can she be gotten
thus to live, her Prince will not come to her
in hast. Our trusty friend Mr. Carnal Security,
with one of his tricks, did drive him out of
the Town, and why may not my Lord Covetousne&esset;,
and my Lord Lasciviousne&esset;, by what
they may do, keep him out of the Town?
And this I will tell you (not because you
know it not) that two or three Diabolonians,
if entertained and countenanced by the
Town of Mansoul, will do more to the keeping
of Emanuel from them, and towards making
of the Town of Mansoul your own, than
can an army of a legion that should be sent
out from us to withstand him.
Let therefore this first project that our
friends in Mansoul have set on foot, be strongly
Dreadful advice against Mansoul.and diligently carried on with all cunning
and craft imaginable; and let them send
continually under one guise or another, more
and other of their men to play with the people
of Mansoul; and then perhaps we shall
not need to be at the charge of making a
War upon them; or if that must of necessity
be done, yet the more sinful they are, the

more unable, to be sure, they will be to resist
us, and then the more easily we shall overcome
them. And besides, suppose (and that
is the worst that can be supposed) that Emanuel
should come to them again, why may
not the same means (or the like) drive him
from them once more? Yea, why may he
not by their lapse into that sin again be driven
from them for ever, for the sake of
which he was at the first driven from them
for a season? And if this should happen, then
away go with him his Rams, his Slings, his
Captains, his Souldiers, and he leaveth Mansoul
naked and bare. Yea, will not this Town,
when she sees her self utterly forsaken of her
Prince,Dreadful advice against Mansoul. of her own accord open her Gates
again unto you, and make of you as in the
days of old? but this must be done by time,
a few days will not effect so great a work as
this.
So soon as Apollyon had made an end of
speaking, Diabolus began to blow out his
own malice, and to plead his own cause, and
he said, My Lords and Powers of the Cave,
my true and trusty friends, I have with much
impatience, as becomes me, given ear to
your long and tedious Orations. But my furious
gorge, and empty panch, so lusteth
after a repossession of my famous Town of
Mansoul, that whatever comes out I can wait
no longer to see the events of lingering
projects. I must, and that without further

delay, seek by all means I can to fill my unsatiable
gulf with the soul and body of the
Town of Mansoul. Therefore lend me your
heads,Look to it Mansoul. your hearts, and your help, now I
am going to recover my Town of Mansoul.
When the Lords and Princes of the Pit
saw the flaming desire that was in Diabolus to
devour the miserable Town of Mansoul, they
left off to raise any more objections, but
consented to lend him what strength they
could: Though had Apollyons advice been
taken, they had far more fearfully distressed
the Town of Mansoul. But, I say, they were
willing to lend him what strength they
could, not knowing what need they might
have of him, when they should engage for
themselves, as he. Wherefore they fell to advising
about the next thing propounded, to
wit, what Souldiers they were, and also how
many, with whom Diabolus should go against
the Town of Mansoul to take it; and after
some debate it was concluded, according as
in the Letter the Diabolonians had suggested,
that none was more fit for that Expedition
than an Army of terrible Doubters. They
therefore concluded to send against Mansoul
an Army of sturdy Doubters.An army of Doubters raised to go against the Town of Mansoul. The number
thought fit to be imployed in that service;
was between twenty and thirty thousand. So
then the result of that great counsel of those
high and mighty Lords was, That Diabolus

should even now out of hand beat up his
Drum for men in the land of Doubting,
(which land lyeth upon the confines of the
place called Hellgate hill) for men that might
be imployed by him against the miserable
Town of Mansoul.The Princes of the Pit go with them. It was also concluded
that these Lords themselves should help him
in the War, and that they would to that
end head and manage his men. So they drew
up a Letter and sent back to the Diabolonians
that lurked in Mansoul, and that waited for
the back-coming of Mr. Profane, to signifie
to them into what method and forwardness
they at present had put their design. The
Contents whereof now followeth.
From the dark and horrible Dungeon ofAnother Letter from Diabolus to the Diabolonians in Mansoul.
Hell, Diabolus with all the Society
of the Princes of Darkness, sends to
our trusty ones, in and about the walls
of the Town of Mansoul, now impatiently
waiting for our most Devillish
answer to their venomous, and
most poysonous design against the
Town of Mansoul.
Our native ones, in whom from day to day
we boast, and in whose actions all the year
long we do greatly delight our selves: We received
your welcome, because highly esteemed Letter,
at the hand of our trusty and greatly beloved
the old Gentleman Mr. Profane. And do

give you to understand, that when we had broken
it up, and had read the Contents thereof (to your
amazing memory be it spoken) our yauning hollow
bellied place, where we are, made so hideous and
yelling a noise for joy, that the mountains that
stand round about Hellgate-hill, had like to have
been shaken to pieces at the sound thereof.
We could also do no le&esset; than admire your
faithfulness to us, with the greatness of that subtilty
that now hath shewed it self to be in your
heads to serve us against the Town of Mansoul.
For you have invented for us so excellent a method
for our proceeding against that rebellious
people, a more effectual cannot be thought of by
all the wits of Hell. The proposals therefore
which now at last you have sent us, since we saw
them, we have done little else but highly approved
and admired them.
Nay, we shall to incourage you in the profundity
of your craft, let you know, that at a full assembly
and conclave of our Princes, and Principalities
of this place, your project was discoursed
and tossed from one side of our Cave to the
other by their mightinesses, but a better, and as
was by themselves judged a more fit and proper
way by all their wits could not be invented to surprize,
take, and make our own, the rebellious
Town of Mansoul.
Wherefore in fine, all that was said that varied
from what you had in your Letter propounded,
fell of it self to the ground, and yours only was
stuck to by Diabolus the Prince; yea, his gaping

gorge, and yauning panch was on fire to put your
invention into execution.
We therefore give you to understand that our
stout, furious, and unmerciful Diabolus, is raising
for your relief, and the ruin of the rebellious
Town of Mansoul more than twenty thousand
Doubters to come against that people. They are
all stout and sturdy men, and men that of old
have been accustomed to war, and that can therefore
well endure the Drum, I say he is doing of this
work of his with all the possible speed he can; for
his heart and spirit is engaged in it. We desire
therefore that as you have hitherto stuck to us,
and given us both advice and incouragement thus
far; that you still will prosecute our design, nor
shall you lose but be gainers thereby; yea, we intend
to make you the Lords of Mansoul.
One thing may not by any means be omitted,
that is, those with us do desire that every one of
you that are in Mansoul would still use all your
power, cunning and skill, with delusive perswasions,
yet to draw the Town of Mansoul into
more sin and wickedne&esset;, even that sin may be finished
and bring forth death.
For thus it is concluded with us, that the more
vile, sinful, and debauched the Town of Mansoul
is, the more backward will be their Emanuel to
come to their help, either by presence, or other
relief; yea, the more sinful, the more weak, and
so the more unable will they be to make resistance
when we shall make our assault upon them to swallow
them up. Yea, that may cause that their

Take heed Mansoul.mighty Shaddai himself may cast them out of his
protection; yea, and send for his Captains and
Souldiers home, with his Slings and Rams, and
leave them naked and bare, and then the Town
of Mansoul will of it self open to us, and fall as
the fig into the mouth of the eater. Yea, to be sure
that we then with a great deal of ease shall come
upon her and overcome her.
As to the time of our coming upon Mansoul,
we as yet have not fully resolved upon that, though
at present some of us think as you, that a Market-day,
or a Market-day at night will certainly be
the best. However do you be ready, and when
you shall hear our roaring Drum without,  do you
be as busie to make the most horrible confusion
within. So shall Mansoul certainly be distressed
before and behind, and shall not know which way
to betake her self for help. My Lord Lucifer,
my Lord Beelzebub, my Lord Apollyon, my
Lord Legion, with the rest salute you, as doe;
also my Lord Diabolus, and we wish both you,
with all that you do or shall posse&esset;, the very self-same
fruit and succe&esset; for their doing, as we our
selves at present enjoy for ours.
From our dreadful Confines in the most
fearful Pit, we salute you, and so do
those many Legions here with us,
wishing you may be as Hellishly prosperous
as we desire to be our selves.
By the Letter-Carrier Mr. Profane.

Then Mr. Profane addressed himself for
his return to Mansoul, with his Errand from
the horrible Pit to the Diabolonians that dwelt
in that Town. So he came up the stairs from
the deep to the mouth of the Cave whereMore talk between Profane & Cerberus.
Cerberus was. Now when Cerberus saw him,
he asked how matters did go below, about,
and against the Town of Mansoul.
Prof. Things go as well as we can expect.
The Letter that I carried thither was highly approved,
and well liked by all my Lords, and I am
returning to tell our Diabolonians so. I have an
answer to it here in my bosom, that I am sure will
make our masters that sent me glad; for the Contents
thereof is to encourage them to pursue their
design to the utmost, and to be ready also to fall
on within when they shall see my Lord Diabolus
beleaguring of the Town of Mansoul.
Cerb. But does he intend to go against
them himself?
Prof. Does he! Ay,The land from the which the Doubters come. and he will take along
with him more than twenty thousand, all sturdy
Doubters, and men of war, pickt men, from the
land of Doubting, to serve him in the Expedition.
Cerb. Then was Cerberus glad, and said,
And is there such brave preparations a making
to go against the miserable Town of
Mansoul; and would I might be put at the
head of a thousand of them, that I might
also shew my valour against the famous
Town of Mansoul.

Prof. Your wish may come to pass, you look like
one that has mettle enough, and my Lord will
have with him those that are valiant and stout.
But my business requires hast.
Cerb. Ay, so it does. Speed thee to the
Town of Mansoul, with all the deepest mischiefs
that this place can afford thee. And
when thou shalt come to the house of Mr.
Mischief, the place where the Diabolonians
meet to plot, tell them that Cerberus doth
wish them his service, and that if he may,
he will with the army come up against the
famous Town of Mansoul.
Prof. That I will. And I know that my Lords
that are there, will be glad to hear it, and to see
you also.
So after a few more such kind of Complements,
Mr. Profane took his leave of his
friend Cerberus, and Cerberus again with a
thousand of their Pit-wishes, bid him hast
with all speed to his Masters. The which
when he had heard he made obeisance, and
began to gather up his heels to run.
Thus therefore he returned, and went and
came to Mansoul, and going as afore to the
house of Mr. Mischief, there he found the
Diabolonians assembled, and waiting for his
return. Now, when he was come and had
presented himself, he also delivered to them
his Letter, and adjoined this Complement
to them therewith: My Lords from the Confines
of the Pit, the high and mighty Principalities

and powers of the Den salute you
here,Profane returned again to Mansoul. the true Diabolonians of the Town of
Mansoul. Wishing you always the most proper
of their benedictions, for the great service,
high attempts, and brave atchievements
that you have put your selves upon,
for the restoring to our Prince Diabolus
the famous Town of Mansoul.
This was therefore the present state of
the miserable Town of Mansoul: she had offended
her Prince, and he was gone; she had
incouraged the powers of Hell by her foolishness,
to come against her to seek her utter
destruction.
True, the Town of Mansoul was somewhat
made sensible of her sin, but the Diabolonians
were gotten into her bowels; she cried, but
Emanuel was gone, and her cries did not
fetch him as yet again. Besides she knew not
now whether ever or never, he would return
and come to his Mansoul again, nor did they
know the power and industry of the enemy,
nor how forward they were to put in Execution
that plot of Hell that they had devised
against her.
They did indeed still send Petition after
Petition to the Prince, but he answered all
with silence. They did neglect reformation,
and that was as Diabolus would have it, for
he knew, if they regarded iniquity in their
heart, their King would not hear their
prayer; they therefore did still grow weaker

and weaker, and were as a rouling thing before
the whirlwind. They cried to their
King for help, and laid Diabolonians in their
bosoms, what therefore should a King do to
them? Yea, there seemed now to be a mixture
in Mansoul, the Diabolonians and the
Mansoulians would walk the streets together.
Yea, they began to seek their peace, for they
thought that since the sickness had been so
mortal in Mansoul, 'twas in vain to go to
handigripes with them. Besides, the weakness
of Mansoul was the strength of their
enemies; and the sins of Mansoul the advantage
of the Diabolonians. The foes of Mansoul
did also now begin to promise themselves
the Town for a possession, there was no
great difference now betwixt Mansoulians and
Diabolonians, both seemed to be Masters of
Mansoul. Yea, the Diabolonians increased and
grew, but the Town of Mansoul diminished
greatly. There was more than eleven thousand
of men,Good Thoughts. Good conceptions, and good desires. women and children that died
by the sickness in Mansoul.
But now as Shaddai would have it, there
was one whose name was Mr. Prywell, a great
lover of the people of Mansoul. And he as
his manner was did go listning up and down
in Mansoul to see, and to hear if at any time
he might, whether there was any design against
it or no.The story of Mr. Prywell. For he was always a jealous
man, and feared some mischief sometime
would befall it, either from the Diabolonians

within, or from some power without. Now
upon a time it so happened as Mr. Prywell
went listning here and there, that he
lighted upon a place called Vile-hill in Mansoul,
where Diabolonians used to meet; so
hearing a muttering (you must know that it
was in the night) he softly drew near to hear;
nor had he stood long under the house-end,
(for there stood a house there) but he heard
one confidently affirm, That it was not,The Diabolonian Plot discovered, and by whom. or
would not be long before Diabolus should
possess himself again of Mansoul, and that
then the Diabolonians did intend to put all
Mansoulians to the sword, and would kill and
destroy the Kings Captains, and drive all his
Souldiers out of the Town.
He said moreover, That he knew there
were above twenty-thousand fighting men
prepared by Diabolus for the accomplishing
of this design, and that it would not be
months before they all should see it. When Mr.
Prywell had heard this story, he did quickly
believe it was true, wherefore he went forthwith
to my Lord Mayors house,Understanding. and acquainted
him therewith; who sending for the Subordinate
Preacher,Conscience. brake the business to him,
and he as soon gave the alarm to the Town,
for he was now the chief Preacher in Mansoul,
because as yet my Lord Secretary was
ill at ease.The Subordinate Preacher awakened. And this was the way that the
Subordinate Preacher did take to alarm the
Town therewith: The same hour he caused

the Lecture-bell to be rung, so the people
came together, he gave them then a short
Exhortation to watchfulness, and made Mr.
Prywels news the argument thereof. For,
said he, an horrible plot is contrived against
Mansoul even to massacre us all in a day; nor
is this story to be slighted, for Mr. Prywell is
the author thereof. Mr. Prywell was always a
lover of Mansoul, a sober and judicious man,
a man that is no tatler, nor raiser of false
reports, but one that loves to look into the
very bottom of matters, and talks nothing
of news but by very solid arguments.
I will call him,Prywell tells his news to Mansoul. and you shall hear him your
own selves; so he called him, and he came
and told his tale so punctually, and affirmed
its truth with such ample grounds, that
Mansoul fell presently under a conviction of
the truth of what he said. The Preacher did
also back him, saying, Sirs, it is not irrational
for us to believe it, for we have provoked
Shaddai to anger, and have sinned Emanuel
out of the Town; we have had too much
correspondence with Diabolonians, and have
forsaken our former mercies; no marvel
then if the enemy both within and without
should design and plot our ruin; and what
time like this to do it? The sickness is now in
the Town, and we have been made weak
thereby. Many a good meaning man is dead,
Good desires.and the Diabolonians of late grow stronger
and stronger.

Besides, quoth the Subordinate Preacher, I
have received from this good Truth-teller
this one inkling further, that he understood
by those that he over-heard,They take the alarme that several Letters
have lately passed between the Furies and
the Diabolonians in order to our destruction.
When Mansoul heard all this, and not being
able to gain-say it, they lift up their voice
and wept. Mr. Prywell did also in the presence
of the Townsmen, confirm all that
their Subordinate Preacher had said. Wherefore
they now set afresh to bewail their folly,
and to a doubling of Petitions to Shaddai and
his Son. They also brake the business to the
Captains, high Commanders,They tell the thing to the Captains. and men of
War in the Town of Mansoul, entreating of
them to use the means to be strong, and to
take good courage, and that they would
look after their harness, and make themselves
ready to give Diabolus battel by night
and by day, shall he come, as they are inform'd
he will, to beleaguer the Town of Mansoul.
When the Captains heard this, they being
always true lovers of the Town of Mansoul,
what do they but like so many Sampsons they
shake themselves,They come together to consult. and come together to consult
and contrive how to defeat those bold
and hellish contrivances that were upon the
wheel by the means of Diabolus and his
friends against the now sickly, weakly, and
much impoverished Town of Mansoul; and

they agreed upon these following Particulars.
1.Their agreement. That the Gates of Mansoul should be
kept shut, and made fast with bars and locks,
and that all persons that went out,  or came
in, should be very strictly examined by the
Captains of the Guards. To the end, said
they, that those that are managers of the
Plot amongst us, may either coming or going
be taken; and that we may also find out
 who are the great contrivers (amongst us)
of our ruin.
2. The next thing was, that a strict search
should be made for all kind of Diabolonians
throughout the whole Town of Mansoul;
and that every mans house from top to bottom
should be looked into, and that too,
house by house,  that if possible a further discovery
might be made of all such among
them as had a hand in these designs.
3. It was further concluded upon, that
 wheresoever or with whomsoever any of the Diabolonians
were found, that even those of the
Town of Mansoul that had given them house
and harbour, should to their shame, and the
warning of others take penance in the open
place.
4. It was moreover resolved by the famous
Town of Mansoul, that a publick fast,
and a day of humiliation should be kept
throughout the whole Corporation to the
justifying of their Prince, the abasing of

themselves before him for their transgressions 
against him, and against Shaddai his Father.
It was further resolved that all such in
Mansoul as did not on that day endeavour
to keep that fast, and to humble themselves
for their faults, but that should mind their
worldly imploys, or be found wandring up
and down the streets, should be taken for
Diabolonians, and should suffer as Diabolonians
for such their wicked doings.
5. It was further concluded then that
with what speed,  and with what warmth of
mind they could, they would renew their
humiliation for sin, and their Petitions to
Shaddai for help; they also resolved to send
tidings to the Court of all that Mr. Prywell
had told them.
6. It was also determined that thanks
should be given by the Town of Mansoul to
Mr. Prywell for his diligent seeking of the
welfare of their Town; and further, that
forasmuch as he was so naturally inclined toMr. Prywel is made Scout-master General.
seek their good, and also to undermine their
foes, they gave him a Commission of Scout-master-general,
for the good of the Town of
Mansoul.
When the Corporation with their Captains
had thus concluded, they did as they
had said, they shut up their Gates, they made
for Diabolonians strict search, they made those
with whom any was found to take penance
in the open place. They kept their Fast, and

renewed their Petitions to their Prince, and
Mr. Prywell managed his charge, and the
trust that Mansoul had put in his hands with
great Conscience, and good fidelity; for he
gave himself wholly up to his imploy, and
that not only within the Town,Mr. Prywel goes a scouting. but he went
out to pry, to see, and to hear.
And not many days after he provided for
his Journey, and went towards Hellgate-hill
into the Country where the Doubters were,
where he heard of all that had been talked of
in Mansoul, and he perceived also that Diabolus
was almost ready for his march, &c.
so he came back with speed, and calling the
Captains and Elders of Mansoul together, he
told them where he had been, what he had
heard, and what he had seen.
He returns with great news.Particularly he told them that Diabolus
was almost ready for his march, and that he
had made old Mr. Incredulity that once brake
prison in Mansoul, the General of his Army;
that his Army consisted all of Doubters, and
that their number was above twenty thousand.
He told moreover that Diabolus did
intend to bring with him the chief Princes
of the Infernal Pit, and that he would make
them chief Captains over his Doubters. He
told them moreover that it was certainly
true that several of the Black-den would
with Diabolus ride Reformades to reduce the
Town of Mansoul to the obedience of Diabolus
their Prince.

He said moreover that he understood by
the Doubters among whom he had been, that
the reason why old Incredulity was made General
of the whole Army, was because none
truer than he to the Tyrant; and because he
had an implacable spite against the welfare
of the Town of Mansoul. Besides, said he,
he remembers the affronts that Mansoul has
given, and he is resolved to be revenged of
them.
But the black Princes shall be made high
Commanders, only Incredulity shall be over
them all, because (which I had almost
forgot) he can more easily, and more dextrously
beleaguer the Town of Mansoul,  than
can any of the Princes besides.
Now when the Captains of Mansoul with
the Elders of the Town, had heard the tidings
that Mr. Prywell did bring, they thought
it expedient without further delay to put into
execution the Laws that against the Diabolonians,
their Prince had made for them,
and given them in commandment to manage
against them. Wherefore forthwith a diligent
and impartial search was made in all
houses in Mansoul for all and all manner of
Diabolonians. Now in the house of Mr. Mind,Some Diabolonians taken in Mansoul and committed to Prison.
and in the house of the great Lord Wilbewill
were two Diabolonians found. In Mr. Minds
house was one Lord Covetousne&esset; sound, but he
had changed his name to Prudent thrifty. In
my Lord Wilbewills house, one Lasciviousne&esset;

was found; but he had changed his name
to Harmle&esset; mirth. These two the Captains
and Elders of the Town of Mansoul took,
and committed them to custody under the
hand of Mr. Trueman the Gaoler; and this
man handled them so severely, and loaded
them so well with irons, that in time they
both fell into a very deep Consumption, and
died in the Prison-house; their masters also
according to the agreement of the Captains
and Elders,The Lord Wilbewill and Mr. Mind take penance. were brought to take penance
in the open place to their shame, and for a
warning to the rest of the Town of Mansoul.
Now this was the manner of penance in
those days. The persons offending being
made sensible of the evil of their doings,Penance what.
were injoined open confession of their faults,
and a strict amendment of their lives.
After this the Captains and Elders of Mansoul
sought yet to find out more Diabolonians,
where ever they lurked, whether in dens,
caves, holes, vaults, or where else they could,
in, or about the wall, or Town of Mansoul.
&rhand;But though they could plainly see their footing,
and so follow them by their tract, and
smell to their holds, even to the mouths of
their caves and dens, yet take them, hold
them, and do justice upon them they could
not, their ways were so crooked, their holds
so strong, and they so quick to take sanctuary
there.

But Mansoul did now with so stiff an hand
rule over the Diabolonians that were left, that
they were glad to shrink into corners: time
was when they durst walk openly, and in the
day, but now they were forced to imbrace
privacy and the night: time was when a
Mansoulian was their companion, but now
they counted them deadly enemies. This
good change did Mr. Prywells intelligence
make in the famous Town of Mansoul.
By this time Diabolus had finished his Army
which he intended to bring with him for
the ruin of Mansoul, and had set over them
Captains, and other Field-officers, such as
liked his furious stomach best, himself was
Lord paramount, Incredulity was General of
his Army. Their highest Captains shall be
named afterwards, but now for their Officers,Diabolus's Army.
Colours and Scutcheons.
1. Their first Captain was Captain Rage, 
he was Captain over the Election-Doubters,
his were the Red Colours; his Standard-bearer
was Mr. Destructive, and the great Red
Dragon he had for his Scutcheon.
2. The second Captain was Captain Fury,
he was Captain over the Vocation-doubters; 
his Standard-bearer was Mr. Darkne&esset;, his Colours
were those that were pale, and he had
for his Scutcheon the fiery flying Serpent.
3. The third Captain was Captain Damnation,
he was Captain over the Grace-doubters, 
his were the Red Colours, Mr. No-life

bare them, and he had for his Scutcheon the
Black-den.
4.  The fourth Captain was the Captain
Insatiable, he was Captain over the Faith-doubters,
his were the Red Colours, Mr. Devourer
bare them, and he had for a Scutcheon
the yawning Jaws.
5. The fifth Captain was Captain Brimstone, 
he was Captain over the Perseverance-doubters,
his also were the Red Colours, Mr.
Burning bare them, and his Scutcheon was
the Blue and stinking flame.
6. The sixth Captain was Captain Torment,
he was Captain over the Resurrection-doubters, 
his Colors were those that were pale,
Mr. Gnaw was his Ancient bearer, and he had
the Black worm for his Scutcheon.
7. The seventh Captain was Captain No-ease, 
he was Captain over the Salvation-doubters,
his were the Red Colours, Mr. Restle&esset;
bare them, and his Scutcheon was the gastly
picture of death.
8. The eighth Captain was the Captain
Sepulcher,  he was Captain over the Glory-doubters,
his also were the pale Colours, Mr.
Corruption was his Ancient-bearer, and he had
for his Scutcheon a Scull, and dead mens
bones.
9. The ninth Captain was Captain Pasthope,
 he was Captain of those that are called
the Felicity-doubters, his Ancient-bearer
was Mr. Despair; his also were the Red Colours,

and his Scutcheon was the hot iron,
and the hard heart.
These were his Captains, and these were
their forces, these were their Ancients, these
were their Colours, and these were their
Scutcheons. Now over these did the great
Diabolus make superiour Captains, and they
were in number seven: as namely the Lord
Beelzebub, the Lord Lucifer, the Lord Legion,
the Lord Apollyon, the Lord Python, the
Lord Cerberus, and the Lord Belial; these seven
he set over the Captains, and Incredulity
was Lord General, and Diabolus was King.
The Reformades also, such as were like themselves,
were made some of them Captains ofDiabolus his army compleated.
hundreds, and some of them Captains of
more: and thus was the army of Incredulity
compleated.
So they set out at Hellgate-hill (for there
they had their Randezvouz) from whence
they came with a straight course upon their
march toward the Town of Mansoul. Now
as was hinted before, the Town had, as
Shaddai would have it, received from the
mouth of Mr. Prywell the alarm of their
coming before. Wherefore they set a strong
watch at the Gates, and had also doubled
their guards, they also mounted their slings
in good places where they might conveniently
cast out their great stones to the annoyance
of the furious enemy.

Nor could those Diabolonians that were
in the Town do that hurt as was designed
they should; for Mansoul was now awake.
But alas poor people, they were sorely affrighted
at the first appearance of their foes,
and at their sitting down before the Town,
especially when they heard the roaring of
their DRUM.  This, to speak truth, was
amazingly hideous to hear, it frighted all
men seven miles round if they were but awake
and heard it. The streaming of their
Colours were also terrible, and dejecting to
behold.
He makes an assault upon Eargate, and is repelled.When Diabolus was come up against the
Town, first he made his approach to Eargate,
and gave it a furious assault, supposing
as it seems that his friends in Mansoul had
been ready to do the work within; but care
was taken of that before, by the vigilance
of the Captains. Wherefore missing of the
help that he expected from them, and finding
of his Army warmly attended with the
stones that the slingers did sling (for that I
will say for the Captains, that considering
the weakness that yet was upon them by reason
of the long sickness that had annoyed
the Town of Mansoul, they did gallantly behave
themselves),  he was forced to make
some retreat from Mansoul,He retreats and intrenches himself. and to intrench
himself and his men in the field without the
reach of the slings of the Town.

Now having intrenched himself, he did
cast up four Mounts against the Town; the
first he called Mount Diabolus, putting his
own name thereon, the more to affright the
Town of Mansoul;He casts up Mounts against the Town. the other three he
called thus, Mount Alecto, Mount Megæra,
and Mount Tisiphone; for these are the
names of the dreadful Furies of Hell. Thus
he began to play his game with Mansoul, and
to serve it as doth the Lion his prey, even to
make it fall before his terrour. But, as I said,
the Captains and Souldiers resisted so stoutly,
and did do such execution with their stones,
that they made him, though against stomach,
to retreat: wherefore Mansoul began to
take courage.
Now upon Mount Diabolus,Diabolus his standard set up. which was
raised on the North-side of the Town, there
did the Tyrant set up his Standard, and a fearful
thing it was to behold, for he had wrought
in it by Devillish art, after the manner of a
Scutcheon, a flaming flame fearful to behold,
and the picture of Mansoul burning in it.
When Diabolus had thus done, he commanded
that his Drummer should every night approach
the walls of the Town of Mansoul,
and so to beat a parley; the command was
to do it a nights, for in the day time they
annoyed him with their slings;He bids his Drummer to beat his Drum. for the Tyrant
said that he had a mind to parley with
the now trembling Town of Mansoul, and
he commanded that the Drums should beat

every night, that through weariness they
might at last (if possibly, at the first they
were unwilling yet) be forced to do it.
So this Drummer did as commanded, he
arose and did beat his Drum. But when his
Drum did go,Mansoul trembles at the noise of his Drum. if one looked toward the
Town of Mansoul, Behold darkne&esset; and sorrow,
and the light was darkened in the heaven thereof.
No noise was ever heard upon earth more
terrible,  except the voice of Shaddai when
he speaketh. But how did Mansoul tremble!
it now looked for nothing but forthwith to
be swallowed up.
When this Drummer had beaten for a
Parley,Diabolus calls back his Drum. he made this speech to Mansoul, My
Master has bid me tell you, That if you will
willingly submit, you shall have the good of the
earth, but if you shall be stubborn, he is resolved
to take you by force. But by that the fugitive
had done beating of his Drum, the people
of Mansoul had betaken themselves to the
Captains that were in the Castle, so that there
was none to regard, nor to give this Drummer
an answer; so he proceeded no further
that night, but returned again to his Master
to the Camp.
When Diabolus saw that by Drumming he
could not work out Mansoul to his will, the
next night he sendeth his Drummer without
his Drum still to let the Townsmen know that
he had a mind to Parley with them. But when
all came to all, his Parley was turned into a

Summons to the Town to deliver up themselves:
but they gave him neither heed nor
hearing, for they remembred what at first it
cost them to hear him a few words.
The next night he sends again, and then who
should be his messenger to Mansoul but the
terrible Captain Sepulcher; so Captain Sepulcher
came up to the walls of Mansoul, and
made this Oration to the Town.
O ye inhabitants of the rebellious Town ofMansoul summoned by Captain Sepulcher.
Mansoul! I summon you in the name of the
Prince Diabolus, that without any more ado,
you set open the Gates of your Town, and admit
the great Lord to come in. But if you shall still
rebel, when we have taken to us the Town by
force, we will swallow you up as the grave;
wherefore if you will hearken to my Summons, say
so, and if not, then let me know.
The reason of this my Summons, quoth he, is,
for that my Lord is your undoubted Prince and
Lord, as you your selves have formerly owned.
Nor shall that assault that was given to my Lord,
when Emanuel dealt so dishonourably by him,
prevail with him to lose his right, and to forbear
to attempt to recover his own. Consider then, O
Mansoul, with thy self, wilt thou shew thy self
peaceable, or no? If thou shalt quietly yield up
thy self, then our old friendship shall be renewed,
but if thou shalt yet refuse and rebell, then expect
nothing but fire and sword.

They answer him not a word.When the languishing Town of Mansoul
had heard this Summoner, and his Summons,
they were yet more put to their dumps, but
made to the Captain no answer at all, so
away he went as he came.
But after some consultation among themselves,
as also with some of their Captains,
they applied themselves afresh to the Lord
Secretary for counsel and advice from him;They address themselves to their good Lord Secretary.
for this Lord Secretary was their chief Preacher
(as also is mentioned some pages before)
only now he was ill at ease; and of him they
begged favour in these two or three things.
1. That he would look comfortably upon
them, and not keep himself so much retired
from them as formerly. Also that he
would be prevailed with to give them a
hearing while they should make known
their miserable condition to him. But to this
he told them as before, That as yet he was
but ill at ease, and therefore could not do as he
had formerly done.
2. The second thing that they desired,
was, that he would be pleased to give them
his advice about their now so important affairs,
for that Diabolus was come and set
down before the Town with no less than
twenty thousand Doubters. They said moreover,
that both he and his Captains were
cruel men, and that they were afraid of
them. But to this he said, You must look to the
Law of the Prince, and there see what is laid
upon you to do.

3. Then they desired that his Highness
would help them to frame a Petition to
Shaddai, and unto Emanuel his Son, and
that he would set his own hand thereto as
a token that he was one with them in it:
For, said they, my Lord, many a one have
we sent, but can get no answer of peace; but
now surely one with thy hand unto it, may obtain
good for Mansoul.
But all the answer that he gave to this,
was, That they had offended their Emanuel,
and had also grieved himself,The cause of his being ill at ease. and that therefore
they must as yet partake of their own devices.
This answer of the Lord Secretary fell
like a milstone upon them; yea, it crushed
them so that they could not tell what to do,
yet they durst not comply with the demands
of Diabolus,  nor with the demands
of his Captain.The sad straights of Mansoul. So then here were the straights
that the Town of Mansoul was betwixt,
when the enemy came upon her: Her foes
were ready to swallow her up, and her
friends did forbear to help her.
Then stood up my Lord Mayor, whose
name was my Lord Understanding, and he
began to pick and pick,A Comment upon the Lord Secretaries Speech. until he had pickt
comfort out of that seemingly bitter saying
of the Lord Secretary; for thus he descanted
upon it: First, said he, This unavoidably
follows upon the saying of my Lord,

&rhand;That we must yet suffer for our sins. 2. But,
quoth he, the words yet sound as if at last we
should be saved from our enemies, and that after
a few more sorrows Emanuel will come and be
our help. Now the Lord Mayor was the
more critical in his dealing with the Secretaries
words, because my Lord was more
than a Prophet, and because none of his
words were such, but that at all times they
were most exactly significant, and the Townsmen
were allowed to pry into them, and to
expound them to their best advantage.
So they took their leaves of my Lord, and
returned, and went, and came to the Captains,
to whom they did tell what my Lord
high Secretary had said, who when they had
heard it, were all of the same opinion as
was my Lord Mayor himself; the Captains
therefore began to take some courage unto
them, and to prepare to make some brave
attempt upon the Camp of the enemy, and
to destroy all that were Diabolonians, with
the roving Doubters that the Tyrant had
brought with him to destroy the poor
Town of Mansoul.
The Town of Mansoul in order.So all betook themselves forthwith to
their places, the Captains to theirs, the
Lord Mayor to his, the Subordinate Preacher
to his, and my Lord Wilbewill to his. The
Captains longed to be at some work for
their Prince, for they delighted in Warlike
Atchievements. The next day therefore

they came together and consulted, and
after consultation had, they resolved to give
an answer to the Captain of Diabolus with
flings; and so they did at the rising of the
Sun on the morrow; for Diabolus had adventured
to come nearer again, but the
sling-stones were to him and his like Hornets.
For as there is nothing to the Town
of Mansoul so terrible as the roaring of
Diabolus's Drum, so there is nothing to
Diabolus so terrible as the well playing ofWords applied against him by faith.
Emanuels slings. Wherefore Diabolus was
forced to make another retreat, yet further
off from the famous Town of Mansoul.
Then did the Lord Mayor of Mansoul 
cause the Bells to be rung, and that
thanks should be sent to the Lord high Secretary
by the mouth of the Subordinate Preacher;
for that by his words the Captains and
Elders of Mansoul had been strengthened
against Diabolus.
When Diabolus saw that his Captains
and Souldiers, high Lords, and renowned,
were frightened, and beaten down by the
stones that came from the Golden slings of
the Prince of the Town of Mansoul, he bethought
himself, and said, I will try to catch
them by fawning, I will try to flatter them into
my net.
Wherefore after a while he came down
again to the wall, not now with his Drum,Diabolus changes his way.
nor with Captain Sepulcher, but having all

to be sugared his lips, he seemed to be a very
sweet-mouthed, peaceable Prince, designing
nothing for humours sake, nor to be revenged
on Mansoul for injuries by them done to
him, but the welfare, and good, and advantage
of the Town and people therein, was
now, as he said, his only design. Wherefore
after he had called for audience, and desired
that the Townsfolk would give it to him, he
proceeded in his Oration: And said,
O! the desire of my heart, the famous Town
of Mansoul! how many nights have I watched,
and how many weary steps have I taken,  if perhaps
I might do thee good: Far be it, far be it
from me to desire to make a war upon you; if ye
will but willingly and quietly deliver up your
selves unto me.  You know that you were mine of
old. Remember also, that so long as you enjoyed
me for your Lord, and that I enjoyed you for my
subjects,Satan reads all backwards. you wanted for nothing of all the delights
of the earth, that I your Lord and Prince
could get for you; or that I could invent to make
you bonny and blith withal. Consider, you never
had so many hard, dark, troublesome and heart-afflicting
hours, while you were mine, as you
have had since you revolted from me; nor shall
you ever have peace again until you and I become
one as before. But be but prevailed with to imbrace
me again, and I will grant, yea inlarge
your old Charter with abundance of priviledges;Take heed Mansoul.
so that your licence and liberty shall be to take,

hold, enjoy, and make your own all that is pleasant
from the East to the West. Nor shall any of
those incivilities wherewith you have offended me,
be ever charged upon you by me, so long as the
Sun and Moon endureth. Nor shall any of those
dear friends of mine that now for the fear of you,Sins.
lye lurking in dens, and holes, and caves in Mansoul,
be hurtful to you any more, yea, they shall
be your servants, and shall minister unto you of
their substance,The pleasure of sin. and of whatever shall come to
hand. I need speak no more, you know them, and
have sometime since been much delighted in their
company, why then should we abide at such odds?
let us renew our old acquaintance and friendshipNo, no, no not upon pain of eternal damnation.
again.
Bear with your friend, I take the liberty at
this time to speak thus freely unto you. The love
that I have to you presses me to do it, as also does
the zeal of my heart for my friends with you;
put me not therefore to further trouble, nor your
selves to further fears and frights. Have you I
will in a way of peace or war; nor do you flatter
your selves with the power and force of your Captains,
or that your Emanuel will shortly come
in to your help; for such strength will do you no
pleasure.
I am come against you with a stout and valiant
army, and all the chief Princes of the den, are
even at the head of it. Besides, my Captains are
swifter than Eagles, stronger than Lions, and
more greedy of prey than are the evening-wolves.
What is Og of Bashan! what's Goliah of Gath!

and what's an hundred more of them to one of the
least of my Captains! how then shall Mansoul
think to escape my hand and force?
Diabolus having thus ended his flattering,
fawning, deceitful and lying speech to the
famous Town of Mansoul, the Lord Mayor
replied upon him as follows.
O Diabolus,The Lord Mayors answer. Prince of darkne&esset;, and master
of all deceit; thy lying flatteries we have had
and made sufficient probation of, and have tasted
too deeply of that destructive cup already; should
we therefore again hearken unto thee, and so
break the Commandments of our great Shaddai,
to join in affinity with thee; would not our Prince
reject us, and cast us off for ever; and being cast
off by him, can the place that he has prepared for
thee be a place of rest for us! Besides, O thou
that art empty and void of all truth, we are rather
ready to die by thy hand than to fall in with
thy flattering and lying deceits.
When the Tyrant saw that there was little
to be got by parleying with my Lord
Mayor, he fell into an Hellish rage, and resolved
that again with his army of Doubters,
he would another time assault the Town of
Mansoul.
So he called for his Drummer, who beat up
for his men (and while he did beat, Mansoul
did shake) to be in a readiness to give battel
to the Corporation; then Diabolus drew

near with his army, and thus disposed of his
men. Captain Cruel, and Captain Torment,
these he drew up and placed against Feelgate,Feelgate.
and commanded them to sit down
there for the war. And he also appointed,
that if need were, Captain Noease should
come in to their relief.Nosegate. At Nosegate he placed
the Captain Brimstone, and Captain Sepulcher,
and bid them look well to their Ward,
on that side of the Town of Mansoul. But at
Eyegate he placed that grim-faced one theEyegate.
Captain Pasthope, and there also now he did
set up his terrible standard.
Now Captain Insatiable he was to look to
the Carriages of Diabolus, and was also appointed
to take into custody, that, or those
persons and things that should at any time
as prey be taken from the enemy.
Now Mouthgate the inhabitants of Mansoul
kept for a Sally-port,Mouthgate. wherefore that they
kept strong, for that was it, by, and out at
which the Townsfolk did send their Petitions
to Emanuel their Prince, that also was
the Gate from the top of which the Captains
did play their slings at the enemies, for
that Gate stood somewhat ascending, so that
the placing of them there, and the letting of
them fly from that place did much execution
against the Tyrants army;The use of Mouthgate. wherefore for
these causes with others, Diabolus sought, if
possible, to land up Mouthgate with durt.
Now as Diabolus was busie and industrious

in preparing to make his assault upon the
Town of Mansoul without, so the Captains
and Souldiers in the Corporation were as
busie in preparing within; they mounted
their Slings, they set up their Banners, they
sounded their Trumpets, and put themselves
in such order as was judged most for
the annoyance of the enemy, and for the
advantage of Mansoul, and gave to their
Souldiers orders to be ready at the sound of
the Trumpet for war.The Lord Wilbewill plays the man. The Lord Wilbewill
also, he took the charge of watching against
the Rebels within, and to do what he could
to take them while without, or to stifle them
within their caves, dens and holes in the
Town-wall of Mansoul. And to speak the
truth of him, ever since he took penance for
his fault, he has shewed as much honesty
and bravery of spirit as any he in Mansoul,
for he took one Jolley,Jolley and Grigish taken and executed. and his brother Griggish,
the two sons of his servant Harmle&esset;-mirth
(for to that day, though the father was
committed to Ward, the sons had a dwelling
in the house of my Lord) I say he took
them, and with his own hands put them to
the Cross. And this was the reason why he
hanged them up, after their father was put
into the hands of Mr. Trueman the Gaoler;
they his sons began to play his pranks, and
to be ticking and toying with the daughters
of their Lord; nay, it was jealoused that
they were too familiar with them, the which

was brought to his Lordships ear. Now his
Lordship being unwilling unadvisedly to put
any man to death, did not suddenly fall upon
them, but set watch and spies to see if the
thing was true; of the which he was soon
informed, for his two servants, whose names
were Find-out, and Tell-all, catcht them together
in uncivil manner more than once or
twice, and went and told their Lord. So
when my Lord Wilbewill had sufficient ground
to believe the thing was true, he takes the
two young Diabolonians, for such they were
(for their father was a Diabolonian born) and
has them to Eyegate,The place of their Execution. where he raised a very
high Cross just in the face of the army of
Diabolus, and of his army, and there he
hanged the young Villains in defiance to Captain
Pasthope, and of the horrible standard
of the Tyrant.
Now this Christian act of the brave LordMortification of sin is a sign of hope of life.
Wilbewill did greatly abash Captain Past-hope,
discourage the army of Diabolus, put fear into
the Diabolonian runnagates in Mansoul, and
put strength and courage into the Captains
that belonged to Emanuel the Prince; for
they without did gather, and that by this
very act of my Lord, that Mansoul was resolved
to fight, and that the Diabolonians
within the Town could not do such things
as Diabolus had hopes they would. Nor was
this the only proof of the brave Lord Wilbewills
honesty to the Town, nor of his loyalty

to his Prince, as will afterwards appear.
Now when the children of Prudent-thrifty
who dwelt with Mr. Mind, (for Thrift left
children with Mr. Mind,Mr. Mind plays the man. when he was also
committed to prison, and their names were
Gripe and Rake-all, these he begat of Mr.
Mind's Bastard-daughter, whose name was
Mrs. Holdfastbad) I say when his children
perceived how the Lord Wilbewill had served
them that dwelt with him, what do they
but (lest they should drink of the same cup)
endeavour to make their escape? But Mr.
Mind being wary of it, took them and put
them in hold in his house till morning (for
this was done over night) and remembring
that by the Law of Mansoul all Diabolonians
were to die, and to be sure they were at least
by fathers side such, and some say by mothers
side too; what does he but takes them and
puts them in chains, and carries them to the
self-same place where my Lord hanged his
two before, and there he hanged them.
The Townsmen also took great incouragement
at this act of Mr. Mind,Mansoul set against the Diabolonians. and did what
they could to have taken some more of these
Diabolonian troublers of Mansoul; but at that
time the rest lay so quat and close that they
could not be apprehended; so they set
against them a diligent watch, and went
every man to his place.
I told you a little before that Diabolus and
his army were somewhat abasht and discouraged

at the sight of what my Lord WilbewillDiabolus his kindness turned into furious madness.
did, when he hanged up those two young
Diabolonians; but his discouragement quickly
turned it self into furious madness and
rage against the Town of Mansoul, and fight
it he would. Also the Townsmen, and Captains
within, they had their hopes and their
expectations heightened, believing at last
the day would be theirs, so they feared them
the less. Their Subordinate Preacher too
made a Sermon about it, and he took that
theme for his Text, Gad,  a troop shall overcome
him, but he shall overcome at the last.
Whence he shewed that though Mansoul
should be sorely put to it at the first, yet the
victory should most certainly be Mansouls at
the last.
So Diabolus commanded that his Drummer
should beat a Charge against the Town, and
the Captains also that were in the Town
sounded a Charge against them, but they
had no Drum, they were Trumpets of Silver
with which they sounded against them.
Then they which were of the Camp of Diabolus
came down to the Town to take it,
and the Captains in the Castle, with the
slingers at Mouthgate played upon them amain.With heart and mouth.
And now there was nothing heard in
the Camp of Diabolus but horrible rage and
blasphemy; but in the Town good words,
Prayer and singing of Psalms: the enemy
replied with horrible objections, and the

terribleness of their Drum; but the Town
made answer with the slapping of their
flings, and the melodious noise of their
Trumpets. And thus the fight lasted for several
days together, only now and then they
had some small intermission, in the which
the Townsmen refreshed themselves, and the
Captains made ready for another assault.
The Captains of Emanuel were clad in
Silver armour, and the Souldiers in that
which was of Proof; the Souldiers of Diabolus
were clad in Iron, which was made to
give place to Emanuels Engine-shot. In the
Town some were hurt, and some were greatly
wounded. Now the worst on't was, a Chirurgeon
was scarce in Mansoul, for that Emanuel
at present was absent. Howbeit, with
the leaves of a tree the wounded were kept
from dying;  yet their wounds did greatly
putrifie, and some did grievously stink. Of
the Townsmen these were wounded, to
wit,
My Lord Reason, he was wounded in the
head.
Who of Mansoul were wounded.Another that was wounded was the brave
Lord Mayor, he was wounded in the Eye.
Another that was wounded was Mr. Mind,
he received his wound about the Stomach.
The honest Subordinate Preacher also, he
received a shot not far off the heart, but
none of these were mortal.

Many also of the inferiour sort,Hopeful thoughts. were not
only wounded, but slain out-right.
Now in the Camp of Diabolus were wounded,Who in the Camp of Diabolus were wounded and slain.
and slain a considerable number. For
instance,
Captain Rage he was wounded, and so was
Captain Cruel.
Captain Damnation was made to retreat,
and to intrench himself further off of Mansoul;
the standard also of Diabolus was
beaten down, and his standard bearer Captain
Much-hurt, had his brains beat out with
a sling-stone, to the no little grief and shame
of his Prince Diabolus.
Many also of the Doubters were slain outright,
though enough of them are left alive
to make Mansoul shake and totter.The Victory did turn that day to Mansoul, &c. Now the
Victory that day being turned to Mansoul,
did put great valour into the Townsmen and
Captains, and did cover Diabolus's camp
with a cloud, but withal it made them far
more furious. So the next day Mansoul rested,
and commanded that the Bells should be
rung; the Trumpets also joyfully sounded,
and the Captains shouted round the Town.My Lord Wilbewill taketh one Anything, and one Loosefoot, and committeth them to Ward.
My Lord Wilbewill also was not idle, but did
notable service within against the Domesticks,
or the Diabolonians that were in the
Town, not only by keeping of them in awe,
for he lighted on one at last whose name was
Mr. Any-thing, a fellow of whom mention
was made before; for 'twas he, if you remember,

that brought the three fellows to
Diabolus, whom the Diabolonians took out of
Captain Boanerges Companies; and that
perswaded them to list themselves under the
Tyrant, to fight against the army of Shaddai;
my Lord Wilbewill did also take a notable
Diabolonian whose name was Loosefoot; this
Loosefoot was a scout to the vagabonds in
Mansoul, and that did use to carry tidings
out of Mansoul to the camp, and out of the
camp to those of the enemies in Mansoul;
both these my Lord sent away safe to Mr.
Trueman the Gaoler, with a commandment
to keep them in irons; for he intended then
to have them out to be crucified, when
'twould be for the best to the Corporation,
and most for the discouragement of the
camp of the enemies.
My Lord Mayor also, though he could not
stir about so much as formerly, because of
the wound that he lately received,The Captains consult to fall upon the enemy. yet gave
he out orders to all that were the Natives of
Mansoul, to look to their watch, and stand
upon their guard, and as occasion should offer
to prove themselves men.
Mr. Conscience the Preacher, he also did his
utmost to keep all his good documents alive
upon the hearts of the people of Mansoul.
Well, a while after the Captains and stout
ones of the Town of Mansoul agreed, and
resolved upon a time to make a salley out
upon the camp of Diabolus, and this must be

done in the night, and there was the folly of
Mansoul (for the night is always the best for
the enemy, but the worst for Mansoul to sight
in) but yet they would do it, their courage
was so high; their last victory also still stuck
in their memories.
So the night appointed being come,They fight in the night. Who do lead the Van. the
Princes brave Captains cast lots who should
lead the Van in this new and desperate Expedition
against Diabolus, and against his Diabolonian
army, and the lot fell to Captain Credence,
to Captain Experience, and to Captain
Goodhope to lead the Forlorn hope. (This Captain
Experience the Prince created such when
himself did reside in the Town of Mansoul);
so as I said,How they fall on. they made their Salley out upon
the army that lay in the siege against them;
and their hap was to fall in with the main
body of their enemies. Now Diabolus and
his men being expertly accustomed to nightwork,
took the alarm presently, and were
as ready to give them battel, as if they had
sent them word of their coming. Wherefore
to it they went amain, and blows were
hard on every side; the Hell-drum also was
beat most furiously, while the Trumpets of
the Prince most sweetly sounded. And thus
the battel was joined, and Captain Insatiable
looked to the enemies carriages, and waited
when he should receive some prey.
The Princes Captains fought it stoutly,They fight bravely. beyond
what indeed could be expected they

should; they wounded many; they made
the whole army of Diabolus to make a retreat.
But I cannot tell how, but the brave
Captain Credence, Captain Goodhope, and Captain
Experience, as they were upon the pursuit,
cutting down, and following hard after
the enemy in the Rere, Captain Credence
stumbled and fell,Captain Credence hurt. by which fall he caught so
great a hurt that he could not rise till Captain
Experience did help him up, at which
their men were put in disorder; the Captain
also was so full of pain that he could not forbear
but aloud to cry out; at this the other
two Captains fainted,The rest of the Captains faint. supposing that Captain
Credence had received his mortal wound:
their men also were more disordered, and
had no list to sight. Now Diabolus being very
observing, though at this time as yet he
was put to the worst, perceiving that an
hault was made among the men that were
the pursuers, what does he but taking it for
granted that the Captains were either wounded
or dead, he therefore makes at first a
stand,Diabolus takes courage. then faces about, and so comes up
upon the Princes army with as much of his
fury as Hell could help him to, and his hap
was to fall in just among the three Captains,
Captain Credence, Captain Goodhope, and Captain
Experience, and did cut, wound, and
pierce them so dreadfully, that what through
discouragement,The Princes forces beaten. what through disorder, and
what through the wounds that now they had

received, and also the loss of much blood,
they scarce were able, though they had for
their power the three best bands in Mansoul,
to get safe into the hold again.
Now when the body of the Princes armySatan sometimes makes Saints eat their words.
saw how these three Captains were put to
the worst, they thought it their wisdom to
make as safe and good a retreat as they
could, and so returned by the Salley-port again,
and so there was an end of this present
action.Diabolus flusht. But Diabolus was so flusht with this
nights-work, that he promised himself in
few days, an easie and compleat conquest
over the Town of Mansoul; wherefore on
the day following he comes up to the sides
thereof with great boldness, and demands
entrance, and that forthwith they deliver
themselves up to his Government. (The
Diabolonians too that were within,He demands the Town. they began
to be somewhat brisk, as we shall shew
afterward.)
But the valiant Lord Mayor replied, That
what he got he must get by force,The Lord Mayors answer. for as long as
Emanuel their Prince was alive (though he at
present was not so with them as they wisht) they
should never consent to yield Mansoul up to another.
And with that the Lord Wilbewill stood up
and said, Diabolus, thou master of the den, and
enemy to all that is good; we poor inhabitants of
the Town of Mansoul, are too well acquainted
with thy rule and government, and with the end

Brave Wilbewills Speech.of those things that for certain will follow submitting
to thee, to do it. Wherefore though while
we were without knowledg we suffered thee to take
us (as the bird that saw not the snare, fell into
the hands of the fowler) yet since we have been
turned from darkne&esset; to light we have also
been turned from the power of Satan to God.
And though through thy subtilty, and also the
subtilty of the Diabolonians within, we have
sustained much loss, and also plunged our selves
into much perplexity, yet give up our selves, lay
down our arms, and yield to so horrid a Tyrant
as thou, we shall not; die upon the place we chuse
rather to do. Besides, we have hopes that in time
deliverance will come from Court unto us, and
therefore we yet will maintain a war against
thee.
This brave Speech of the Lord Wilbewill,The Captains incouraged.
with that also of the Lord Mayor, did somewhat
abate the boldness of Diabolus, though
it kindled the fury of his rage. It also succoured
the Townsmen and Captains; yea,
it was a plaister to the brave Captain Credence
his wound; for you must know that a
brave speech now, when the Captains of the
Town with their men of war came home
routed, and when the enemy took courage
and boldness at the success that he had obtained
to draw up to the walls, and demand
entrance, as he did, was in season, and also
advantageous.

The Lord Wilbewill also did play the man
within, for while the Captains and Soldiers
were in the field, he was in arms in the Town,
and where ever by him there was a Diabolonian
found, they were forced to feel the weight
of his heavy hand, and also the edg of his
penetrating sword; many therefore of the
Diabolonians he wounded, as the Lord Cavel,
the Lord Brisk, the Lord Pragmatick, and
the Lord Murmur; several also of the meaner
sort he did sorely maim; though there
cannot at this time an account be given you
of any that he slew out-right. The cause, or
rather the advantage that my Lord Wilbewill
had at this time to do thus, was for that the
Captains were gone out to fight the enemy in
the field. For now, thought the Diabolonians
within, is our time to stir and make an uproar
in the Town; what do they therefore
but quickly get themselves into a body, and
fall forthwith to hurricaning in Mansoul,&lhand; as
if now nothing but whirlwind and tempestWilbewills Gallantry.
should be there; wherefore, as I said, he
takes this opportunity to fall in among
them with his men, cutting and flashing with
courage that was undaunted; at which the
Diabolonians with all hast dispersed themselves
to their holds, and my Lord to his
place as before.
This brave act of my Lord did somewhat
revenge the wrong done by Diabolus to the
Captains, and also did let them know that

Mansoul was not to be parted with,Nothing like faith to crush Diabolus. for the
loss of a victory or two; wherefore the
wing of the Tyrant was clipt again, as to
boasting, I mean in comparison of what he
would have done if the Diabolonians had put
the Town to the same plight, to which he
had put the Captains.
Well, Diabolus yet resolves to have the
other bout with Mansoul; for thought he,
since I beat them once, I may beat them
twice: wherefore he commanded his men to
be ready at such an hour of the night to
make a fresh assault upon the Town,He trys what he can do upon the sense and feeling of the Christian. and he
gave it out in special that they should bend
all their force against Feelgate, and attempt to
break into the Town through that: The
word that then he did give to his Officers
and Souldiers was Hellfire. And, said he, if
we break in upon them, as I wish we do, either
with some, or with all our force, let
them that break in look to it, that they forget
not the word. And let nothing be heard
in the Town of Mansoul but Hell fire, Hell-fire,
Hell-fire. The Drummer was also to
beat without ceasing, and the Standard bearers
were to display their Colours; the Souldiers
too were to put on what courage
they could, and to see that they played
manfully their parts against the Town.
So the night was come, and all things by
the Tyrant made ready for the work, he
suddenly makes his assault upon Feelgate, and

after he had a while strugled there,Feelgate but weak. he throws
the Gates wide open. For the truth is, those
Gates were but weak, and so most easily
made to yield. When Diabolus had thus far
made his attempt, he placed his Captains, to
wit, Torment and No ease there; so he attempted
to press forward, but the Princes
Captains came down upon him and made his
entrance more difficult than he desired. And
to speak truth, they made what resistance
they could;When these three Captains are disabled, what can the rest do for the Town of Mansoul? but the three of their best and
most valiant Captains being wounded, and
by their wounds made much uncapable of
doing the Town that service they would
(and all the rest having more than their hands
full of the Doubters, and their Captains that
did follow Diabolus) they were over-powered
with force, nor could they keep them
out of the Town. Wherefore the Princes
men and their Captains betook themselves to
the Castle, as to the strong hold of the Town:
and this they did partly for their own security,
partly for the security of the Town, and
partly, or rather chiefly to preserve to Emanuel
the Prerogative-royal of Mansoul, for so
was the Castle of Mansoul.
The Captains therefore being fled into the
Castle, the enemy without much resistance,
possess themselves of the rest of the Town,
and spreading themselves as they went into
every corner, they cried out as they marched
according to the command of the Tyrant,

Hell-fire, Hell-fire, Hell-fire, so that nothing
for a while throughout the Town of Mansoul
could be heard but the direful noise of
Hell fire; together with the roaring of Diabolus's
Drum. And now did the clouds hang
black over Mansoul,The sad fruits of Apostasy. nor to reason did any
thing but ruin seem to attend it. Diabolus
also quartered his Souldiers in the houses of
the inhabitants of the Town of Mansoul.
Yea, the Subordinate Preachers house was as
full of these outlandish Doubters as ever it
could hold; and so was my Lord Mayors, and
my Lord Wilbewills also. Yea, where was
there a corner, a Cottage, a Barn, or a
Hogstie that now were not full of these vermin?
yea, they turned the men of the Town
out of their houses, and would lye in their
beds, and sit at their tables themselves. Ah
poor Mansoul! now thou feelest the fruits of
sin, and what venom was in the flattering
words of Mr. Carnal Security! They made
great havock of what ever they laid their
hands on;Guilt. Good and tender thoughts. yea, they fired the Town in several
places; many young children also were
by them dashed in pieces; yea, those that
were yet unborn they destroyed in their mothers
wombs: for you must needs think that
it could not now be otherwise; for what
conscience, what pity, what bowels or compassion
can any expect at the hands of outlandish
Doubters?Holy conceptions of good. Many in Mansoul that were
women, both young and old, they forced,

ravished, and beastlike abused, so that they
swooned, miscarried, and many of them died,
and so lay at the top of every street, and in
all by-places of the Town.
And now did Mansoul seem to be nothing
but a den of Dragons, an emblem of Hell,
and a place of total darkness. Now did Mansoul
lye (almost) like the barren wilderness;
nothing but nettles, briers, thorns, weeds,
and stinking things seemed now to cover the
face of Mansoul. I told you before, how that
these Diabolonian Doubters turned the men
of Mansoul out of their Beds,Rest. and now I will
add, they wounded them, they mauled them,
yea, and almost brained many of them.
Many, did I say, yea most, if not all of them.
Mr. Conscience they so wounded, yea, and his
wounds so festred,Sad work among the Townsmen. that he could have no ease
day nor night, but lay as if continually upon
a rack, (but that Shaddai rules all,
certainly they had slain him out-right) Mr.
Lord Mayor they so abused that they almost
put out his eyes; and had not my Lord Wilbewill
got into the Castle, they intended to
have chopt him all to pieces, for they did
look upon him (as his heart now stood) toSatan has a particular spite against a sanctified will.
be one of the very worst that was in Mansoul
against Diabolus and his crew. And indeed
he hath shewed himself a man, and more
of his Exploits you will hear of afterwards.
Now a man might have walked for days
together in Mansoul, and scarce have seen

Thought.one in the Town that lookt like a Religious
man. Oh the fearful state of Mansoul now!
now every corner swarmed with outlandish
Doubters; Red-coats, and Black-coats, walked
the Town by clusters, and filled up all the
houses with hideous noises, vain Songs,The soul full of idle thoughts and blasphemies. lying
stories and blasphemous language against
Shaddai and his Son. Now also those Diabolonians
that lurked in the walls and dens, and
holes that were in the Town of Mansoul,
came forth and shewed themselves; yea,
walked with open face in company with the
Doubters that were in Mansoul. Yea, they
had more boldness now to walk the streets,
to haunt the houses, and to shew themselves
abroad, than had any of the honest inhabitants
of the now woful Town of Mansoul.
But Diabolus and his outlandish men were
not at peace in Mansoul, for they were not
there entertained as were the Captains and
forces of Emanuel; the Townsmen did brow-beat
them what they could: nor did they
partake or make stroy of any of the Necessaries
of Mansoul, but that which they seised
on against the Townsmens will; what they
could they hid from them, and what they
could not, they had with an ill will. They,
poor hearts, had rather have had their room
than their company, but they were at present
their Captives,  and their Captives for the
present they were forced to be. But, I say,
they discountenanced them as much as they

were able, and shewed them all the dislike
that they could.
The Captains also from the Castle did hold
them in continual play with their slings, to
the chafing and fretting of the minds of the
enemies. True, Diabolus made a great many
attempts to have broken open the Gates of
the Castle,Mr. Godlyfear is made keeping of the Castle-gate. but Mr. Godlyfear was made the
Keeper of that; and he was a man of that
courage, conduct and valour, that 'twas in
vain as long as life lasted within him, to
think to do that work though mostly desired,
wherefore all the attempts that Diabolus
made against him were fruitless; (I have wished
sometimes that that man had had the
whole rule of the Town of Mansoul.)
Well,The Town of Mansoul the seat of war. this was the condition of the Town
of Mansoul for about two years and an half;
the body of the Town was the seat of war;
the people of the Town were driven into
holes, and the glory of Mansoul was laid in
the dust; what rest then could be to the inhabitants,
what peace could Mansoul have,
and what Sun could shine upon it? Had the
enemy lain so long without in the plain against
the Town, it had been enough to
have famished them; but now when they
shall be within, when the Town shall be their
Tent, their Trench, and Fort against the
Castle that was in the Town, when the Town
shall be against the Town, and shall serve to
be a defence to the enemies of her strength

and life: I say when they shall make use of
the Forts, and Town-holds, to secure themselves
in even till they shall take, spoil, and
demolish the Castle,Heart. this was terrible; and yet
this was now the state of the Town of Mansoul.
After the Town of Mansoul had been in
this sad and lamentable condition for so long
a time as I have told you, and no Petitions
that they presented their Prince with (all this
while) could prevail; the inhabitants of the
Town, to wit, the Elders and chief of Mansoul
gathered together, and after some time
spent in condoling their miserable state, and
this miserable judgment coming upon them,
they agreed together to draw up yet another
Petition, and to send it away to Emanuel
for relief.Mr. Godlyfears advice about drawing up of a Petition to the Prince. But Mr. Godlyfear stood up, and
answered, that he knew that his Lord the
Prince never did, nor ever would receive a
Petition for these matters from the hand of
any whoever, unless the Lord Secretaries
hand was to it, (and this, quoth he, is the
reason that you prevailed not all this while.)
Then they said, they would draw up one,
and get the Lord Secretaries hand unto it. But
Mr. Godlyfear answered again, that he knew
also that the Lord Secretary would not set his
hand to any Petition that himself had not an
hand in composing and drawing up; and besides,
said he, the Prince doth know my Lord
Secretaries hand from all the hands in the
world; wherefore he cannot be deceived by

any pretence whatever; wherefore my advice
is, that you go to my Lord, and implore
him to lend you his aid (now he did yet abide
in the Castle where all the Captains and
men at arms were).
So they heartily thanked Mr. Godlyfear,
took his counsel, and did as he had bidden
them; so they went and came to my Lord,
and made known the cause of their coming
to him: to wit, that since Mansoul was in
so deplorable a condition, his Highness
would be pleased to undertake to draw up a
Petition for them to Emanuel, the Son of
the mighty Shaddai, and to their King and
his Father by him.
Then said the Secretary to them,The Secretary imployed to draw up a Petition for Mansoul. What
Petition is it that you would have me draw up
for you? But they said, Our Lord knows best
the state and condition of the Town of
Mansoul; and how we are backsliden and degenerated
from the Prince; thou also knowest
who is come up to war against us, and
how Mansoul is now the seat of war. My
Lord knows moreover what barbarous usages
our men, women and children have suffered
at ther hands, and how our home-bred
Diabolonians do walk now with more boldness
than dare the Townsmen in the streets
of Mansoul. Let our Lord therefore according
to the wisdom of God that is in him,
draw up a Petition for his poor servants to
our Prince Emanuel. Well, said the Lord Secretary,

I will draw up a Petition for you, and
will also set my hand thereto. Then said they,
But when shall we call for it at the hands of
our Lord? But he answered, Your selves must
be present at the doing of it. Yea, you must put
your desires to it. True, the hand and pen shall
be mine, but the ink and paper must be yours, else
how can you say it is your Petition? nor have I
need to Petition for my self, because I have not
offended.
He also added as followeth, No Petition
goes from me in my name to the Prince, and so
to his Father by him, but when the people that
are chiefly concerned therein do join in heart and
soul in the matter, for that must be inserted
therein.
So they did heartily agree with the sentence
of the Lord, and a Petition was forthwith
drawn up for them. But now who
should carry it, that was next. But the Secretary
The Petition drawn up and sent to Emanuel by the hand of Captain Credence.advised that Captain Credence should
carry it, for he was a well-spoken man. They
therefore called for him, and propounded to
him the business. Well, said the Captain, I
gladly accept of the motion; and though I
am lame, I will do this business for you, with
as much speed, and as well as I can.
The Contents of the Petition were to this
purpose:
O our Lord, and Sovereign Prince Emanuel,
the potent, the long-suffering Prince: Grace is
poured into thy lips, and to thee belongs mercy

and forgivene&esset;,The Contents of their Petition. though we have rebelled against
thee. We who are no more worthy to be called
thy Mansoul, nor yet fit to partake of common
benefits, do beseech thee, and thy Father by thee
to do away our transgressions. We confe&esset; that thou
mightest cast us away for them, but do it not for
thy names sake; let the Lord rather take an opportunity
at our miserable condition, to let out his
bowels and compassions to us; we are compassed on
every side, Lord, our own back slidings reprove
us; our Diabolonians within our Town fright
us, and the army of the Angel of the bottomle&esset;
pit distresses us. Thy grace can be our salvation,
and whither to go but to thee we know not.
Furthermore, O Gracious Prince, we have
weakened our Captains, and they are discouraged,
sick, and of late some of them grievously worsted
and beaten out of the field by the power and force
of the Tyrant. Yea, even those of our Captains
in whose valour we did formerly use to put most of
our confidence, they are as wounded men. Besides;
Lord, our enemies are lively, and they are strong,
they vaunt and boast themselves, and do threaten
to part us among themselves for a booty. They
are fallen also upon us, Lord, with many thousand
Doubters, such as with whom we cannot
tell what to do; they are all grim-looked, and
unmerciful ones, and they bid defiance to us and
thee.
Our wisdom is gone, our power is gone, because
thou art departed from us, nor have we what
we may call ours but sin, shame and confusion of

face for sin. Take pity upon us, O Lord, take
pity upon us thy miserable Town of Mansoul, and
save us out of the hands of our enemies. Amen.
This Petition as was touched afore, was
handed by the Lord Secretary, and carried to
the Court by the brave and most stout Captain
Credence. Now he carried it out at
Mouthgate, for that, as I said, was the salliport
of the Town; and he went and came
to Emanuel with it. Now how it came out, I
do not know, but for certain it did, and that
so far as to reach the ears of Diabolus. Thus
I conclude, because that the Tyrant had it
presently by the end, and charged the Town
of Mansoul with it, saying, Thou rebellious
and stubborn-hearted Mansoul, I will make thee
to leave off Petitioning;Satan cannot abide Prayer. art thou yet for Petitioning?
I will make thee to leave. Yea, he also
knew who the messenger was that carried
the Petition to the Prince, and it made him
both to fear and rage.
Wherefore he commanded that his Drum
should be beat again, a thing that Mansoul
could not abide to hear; but when Diabolus
will have his Drum beat, Mansoul must abide
the noise. Well, the Drum was beat, and the
Diabolonians were gathered together.
Then said Diabolus, O ye stout Diabolonians,
be it known unto you, that there is treachery
hatcht against us in the rebellious Town of Mansoul;
for albeit the Town is in our possession, as
you see, yet these miserable Mansoulians have

attempted to dare, and have been so hardy as yet
to send to the Court to Emanuel for help. This I
give you to understand, that ye may yet know how
to carry it to the wretched Town of Mansoul.
Wherefore, O my trusty Diabolonians,Poor Mansoul. I command
that yet more and more ye distre&esset; this
Town of Mansoul, and vex it with your wiles,
ravish their women, deflower their virgins, slay
their children, brain their Ancients, fire their
Town, and what other mischief you can; and
let this be the reward of the Mansoulians from
me, for their desperate rebellions against me.
This you see was the charge, but something
stept in betwixt that and execution, for
as yet there was but little more done than
to rage.
Moreover, when Diabolus had done thus,
he went the next way up to the Castle-gates,
and demanded that upon pain of death, the
Gates should be opened to him, and that entrance
should be given him and his men that
followed after. To whom Mr. Godlyfear replied,
(for he it was that had the charge
of that Gate), That the Gate should not be
opened unto him, nor to the men that followed
after him. He said moreover, That Mansoul
when she had suffered a while should be made perfect,
strengthened, setled.
Then said Diabolus,Satan cannot abide Faith. Deliver me then the
men that have Petitioned against me, especially
Captain Credence that carried it to your Prince,
deliver that Varlet into my hands, and I will depart
from the Town.

Then up starts a Diabolonian, whose name
was Mr. Fooling,Mr. Fooling. and said, My Lord offereth
you fair, 'tis better for you that one man perish,
than that your whole Mansoul should be undone.
But Mr. Godlyfear made him this replication,
How long will Mansoul be kept out of the
dungeon, when she hath given up her faith to
Diabolus? As good lose the Town as lose Captain
Credence; for if one be gone, the other
must follow. But to that Mr. Fooling said nothing.
Then did my Lord Mayor reply, and
said, O thou devouring Tyrant, be it known unto
thee, we shall hearken to none of thy words, we
are resolved to resist thee as long as a Captain, a
man, a sling, and a stone to throw at thee, shall
be found in the Town of Mansoul. But Diabolus
answered,Diabolus rages. Do you hope, do you wait, do
you look for help and deliverance? you have sent
to Emanuel, but your wickedne&esset; sticks too close
in your skirts, to let innocent prayers come out
of your lips. Think you, that you shall be prevailers
and prosper in this design? you will fail in your
wish, you will fail in your attempts; for 'tis not
only I, but your Emanuel is against you. Yea, it
is he that hath sent me against you to subdue you;
for what then do you hope, or by what means will
you escape?
Then said the Lord Mayor, We have sinned
indeed, but that shall be no help to thee, for our
Emanuel hath said it, and that in great faithfulne&esset;.
And him that cometh to me I will in no

wise cast out.The Lord Mayors Speech just at the time of the return of Captain Credence. He hath also told us (O our enemy)
that all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven
to the sons of men. Therefore we dare not
despair, but will look for, wait for, and hope for
deliverance still.
Now by this time Captain Credence was
returned and come from the Court from
Emanuel to the Castle of Mansoul, and he returned
to them with a Pacquet. So my Lord
Mayor hearing that Captain Credence was
come, withdrew himself from the noise of
the roaring of the Tyrant, and left him to
yell at the wall of the Town, or against the
Gates of the Castle. So he came up to
the Captains Lodgings, and saluting
him, he asked him of his welfare, and
what was the best news at Court? but when
he asked Captain Credence that, the water
stood in his eyes. Then said the Captain, Cheer
up, my Lord, for all will be well in time. And
with that he first produced his Pacquet, and
laid it by, but that the Lord Mayor,A sign of Goodness. and
the rest of the Captains took for a sign of
good tidings. (Now a season of Grace being
come, he sent for all the Captains and
Elders of the Town that were here and
there in their lodgings in the Castle, and
upon their guard, to let them know that
Captain Credence was returned from the
Court, and that he had something in general,
and something in special to communicate
to them.) So they all came up to him,

and saluted him, and asked him concerning
his journey, and what was the best news at
the Court? And he answered them as he had
done the Lord Mayor before, that all would
be well at last. Now when the Captain had
thus saluted them, he opened his Pacquet,
The Pacquet opened.and thence did draw out his several Notes
for those that he had sent for. And the first
Note was for my Lord Mayor, wherein
was signified:
That the Prince Emanuel had taken it well
A Note for my Lord Mayor.that my Lord Mayor had been so true and trusty
in his office, and the great concerns that lay upon
him for the Town and people of Mansoul. Also
he bid him to know that he took it well that he
had been so bold for his Prince Emanuel, and
had engaged so faithfully in his cause against
Diabolus. He also signified at the close of his
Letter, that he should shortly receive his reward.
The second note that came out, was for
the noble Lord Wilbewill,A Note for the Lord Wilbewill. wherein there was
signified, That his Prince Emanuel did well
understand how valiant and courageous he had
been for the honour of his Lord, now in his absence,
and when his name was under contempt by
Diabolus. There was signified also that his
Prince had taken it well that he had been so
faithful to the Town of Mansoul in his keeping of
so strict a hand and eye over, and so strict a rein
upon the necks of the Diabolonians that did still
lye lurking in their several holes in the famous
Town of Mansoul.

He signified moreover, how that he understood
that my Lord had with his own hand done great
execution upon some of the chief of the rebells
there, to the great discouragement of the adverse
party, and to the good example of the whole
Town of Mansoul, and that shortly his Lordship
should have his reward.
The third Note came out for the Subordinate
Preacher,A Note for the Subordinate Preacher. wherein was signified, That
his Prince took it well from him that he had so
honestly, and so faithfully performed his office, and
executed the trust committed to him by his Lord,
while he exhorted, rebuked, and fore-warned
Mansoul according to the Laws of the Town. He
signified moreover, that he took well at his hand
that he called to fasting, to sackcloth and ashes,
when Mansoul was under her revolt. Also that
he called for the aid of the Captain Boanerges
to help in so weighty a work, and that shortly he
also should receive his reward.
The fourth Note came out for Mr. Godlyfear,A Note for Mr. Godlyfear.
wherein his Lord thus signified, That
his Lordship observed that he was the first of all
the men in Mansoul, that detected Mr. Carnal
Security as the only one that through his subtilty
and cunning had obtained for Diabolus a defection
and decay of goodne&esset; in the blessed Town of
Mansoul. Moreover, his Lord gave him to understand
that he still remembred his tears and
mourning for the state of Mansoul. It was also
observed by the same Note that his Lord took notice
of his detecting of this Mr. Carnal Security,

at his own table among his guests, in his own
house, and that in the midst of his jolline&esset;, even
while he was seeking to perfect his villanies against
the Town of Mansoul. Emanuel also took
notice that this reverend person, Mr. Godlyfear,
stood stoutly to it at the Gates of the Castle against
all the threats and attempts of the Tyrant, and
that he had put the Townsmen in a way to make
their Petition to their Prince, so as that he might
accept thereof, and as that they might obtain an
answer of peace; and that therefore shortly he
should receive his reward.
After all this, there was yet produced a
Note which was written to the whole Town
of Mansoul,A Note for the Town of Mansoul. whereby they perceived that their
Lord took notice of their so often repeating of
Petitions to him, and that they should see more of
the fruits of such their doings in time to come.
Their Prince did also therein tell them, That he
took it well, that their heart and mind, now at
last, abode fixed upon him and his ways, though
Diabolus had made such inroads upon them, and
that neither flatteries on the one hand, nor hardships
on the other, could make them yield to serve
his cruel designs. There was also inserted at
the bottom of this Note, That his Lordship
had left the Town of Mansoul in the hands of
the Lord Secretary, and under the conduct of
Captain Credence, saying, Beware that you yet
yield your selves unto their governance, and in
due time you shall receive your reward.

So after the brave Captain Credence had
delivered his Notes to those to whom theyCaptain Credence retires to the Lord Secretaries Lodgings.
belonged, he retired himself to my Lord Secretaries
Lodgings, and there spends time in
conversing with him; for they two were
very great one with another, and did indeed
know more how things would go with Mansoul
than did all the Townsmen besides. The
Lord Secretary also loved the Captain Credence
dearly; yea, many a good bit was sent
him from my Lords table; also he might
have a shew of countenance when the rest of
Mansoul lay under the clouds; so after some
time for converse was spent, the Captain betook
himself to his Chambers to rest. But
it was not long after but my Lord did send
for the Captain again; so the Captain came to
him, and they greeted one another with usual
salutations. Then said the Captain to the
Lord Secretary, What hath my Lord to say
to his servant? So the Lord Secretary took
him, and had him a to side, and after a sign
or two of more favour, he said,Captain Credence made the Lords Lieutenant over all the forces in Mansoul. I have made
thee the Lords Lieutenant over all the forces in
Mansoul; so that from this day forward, all men
in Mansoul shall be at thy word, and thou shalt
be he that shall lead in, and that shalt lead out
Mansoul. Thou shalt therefore manage according
to thy place, the war for thy Prince, and
for the Town of Mansoul, against the force and
power of Diabolus, and at thy command shall
the rest of the Captains be.

Now the Townsmen began to perceive
what interest the Captain had, both with
the Court, and also with the Lord Secretary
in Mansoul; for no man before could speed
when sent, nor bring such good news from
Emanuel as he. Wherefore what do they,
after some lamentation that they made no
more use of him in their distresses, but send
by their Subordinate Preacher to the Lord Secretary,
to desire him that all that ever they
were and had, might be put under the Government,
care, custody, and conduct of
Captain Credence.
So their Preacher went and did his Errand,The Town of Mansoul craves that she may be under the conduct of Captain Credence.
and received this answer from the mouth of
his Lord, that Captain Credence should be
the great doer in all the Kings Army, against
the Kings enemies, and also for the welfare
of Mansoul. So he bowed to the ground, and
thanked his Lordship, and returned and told
his news to the Townsfolk. But all this was
done with all imaginable secresie, because
the foes had yet great strength in the Town.
But,
To return to our story again: When
Diabolus saw himself thus boldly confronted
by the Lord Mayor, and perceived the stoutness
of Mr. Godlyfear,Diabolus rages. he fell into a rage, and
forthwith called a Council of War that he
might be revenged on Mansoul. So all the
Princes of the Pit came together, and old
Incredulity in the head of them, with all the

Captains of his Army. So they consult what
to do, now the effect and conclusion of the
Council that day, was how they might take
the Castle, because they could not conclude
themselves masters of the Town so long as
that was in the possession of their enemies.
So one advised this way, and another advised
that; but when they could not agree in their
verdict, Apollyon that President of the Council
stood up, and thus he began: My Brotherhood,
quoth he, I have two things to propound
unto you; and my first is this, let us withdraw
our selves from the Town into the Plain again, for
our presence here will do us no good, because the
Castle is yet in our enemies hands; nor is it possible
that we should take that so long as so many
brave Captains are in it, and that this bold fellow
Godlyfear is made the Keeper of the Gates
of it.
Now when we have withdrawn our selves
into the Plain, they of their own accord will
be glad of some little ease, and it may be of
their own accord they again may begin to be
remiss, and even their so being will give
them a bigger blow than we can possibly giveLook to is Mansoul.
them our selves. But if that should sail, our
going forth of the Town may draw the
Captains out after us, and you know what
it cost them when we fought them in the
field before. Besides, can we but draw them
out into the field, we may lay an ambush behind
the Town, which shall, when they are

come forth abroad, rush in and take possession
of the Castle. But Beelzebub stood up and
replied, saying, 'Tis impossible to draw
them all off from the Castle; some you may
be sure will lye there to keep that; wherefore
it will be but in vain thus to attempt, unless
we were sure that they will all come out. He
therefore concluded that what was done,
must be done by some other means. And the
most likely means that the greatest of their
heads could invent was that which Apollyon
had advised to before, to wit, to get the
Townsmen again to sin. For, said he, it is
not our being in the Town, nor in the field,
nor our fighting, nor our killing of their men,
that can make us the Masters of Mansoul;Look to it Mansoul.
for so long as one in the Town is able to lift
up his finger against us, Emanuel will
take their parts, and if he shall take their
parts, we know what time a day it will be
with us. Wherefore for my part, quoth he,
there is in my judgment no way to bring
them into bondage to us,  like inventing a
way to make them sin. Had we, said he,
left all our Doubters at home, we had done
as well as we have done now, unless we
could have made them the Masters and Governours
of the Castle; for Doubters at a
distance are but like Objections refell'd with
arguments.Look to it Mansoul. Indeed can we but get them into
the hold, and make them possessors of
that, the day will be our own. Let us therefore

withdraw our selves into the Plain (not
expecting that the Captains in Mansoul
should follow us) but yet I say let us do this,
and before we so do, let us advise again with
our trusty Diabolonians that are yet in their
holds of Mansoul, and set them to work to
betray the Town to us; for they indeed
must do it, or it will be left undone for
ever. By these sayings of Beelzebub (for I
think 'twas he that gave this counsel) the
whole Conclave was forced to be of his opinion,
to wit, that the way to get the Castle
was to get the Town to sin.Look to it Mansoul. Then they fell
to inventing by what means they might do
this thing.
Then Lucifer stood up and said, The counsel
of Beelzebub is pertinent; now the way to
bring this to pa&esset;, in mine opinion is this: Let us
withdraw our force from the Town of Mansoul,
let us do this, and let us terrifie them no more, either
with Summons, or threats, or with the noise
of our Drum, or any other awakening means.
Only let us lye in the field at a distance, and be as
if we regarded them not (for frights I see do but
awaken them, and make them more stand to their
arms.) I have also another stratagem in my
head, you know Mansoul is a Market-Town, and
a Town that delights in commerce, what therefore
if some of our Diabolonians shall feign
themselves far-country men, and shall go out and
bring to the Market of Mansoul some of our
wares to sell; and what matter at what rates

they sell their wares, though it be but for half
the worth. Now let those that thus shall trade in
their market, be those that are witty and true to
us, and I will lay my Crown to pawn, it will do.
There are two that are come to my thoughts already,
that I think will be arch at this work,
and they are Mr. Penniwise-Pound-foolish,
and Mr. Get-ith'-hundred-and lose-ith'-shire;
nor is this man with the long name at all
inferiour to the other. What also if you join with
them Mr. Sweet-world, and Mr. Present-good,
they are men that are civil and cunning, but our
true friends and helpers.Look to it. Let these with as many
more engage in this busine&esset; for us,  and let Mansoul
be taken up in much busine&esset;, and let them
grow full and rich, and this is the way to get
ground of them; remember ye not that thus we
prevailed upon Laodicea,Heart. and how many at present
do we hold in this snare? Now when they begin
to grow full they will forget their misery, and
if we shall not affright them, they may happen to
fall asleep, and so be got to neglect their Town-watch,
their Castle-watch, as well as their watch
at the Gates.
Yea, may we not by this means, so cumber
Mansoul with abundance, that they shall be forced
to make of their Castle a Warehouse instead of
a Garrison fortified against us, and a receptacle
for men of war. Thus if we get our goods and
commodities thither, I reckon that the Castle is
more than half ours. Besides, could we so order
it that that shall be filled with such kind of wares,

then if we made a sudden assault upon them, it
would be hard for the Captains to take shelter
there. Do you not know that of the Parable,  The
deceitfulness of riches choak the word; and
again.  When the heart is over charged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of
this life, all mischief comes upon them at unawares.
Furthermore, my Lords, quoth he, you very
well know that it is not easie for a people to be filled
with our things, and not to have some of our
Diabolonians as retainers to their houses and
services. Where is a Mansoulian that is full of
this world that has not for his servants, and
waiting-men Mr. Profuse, or Mr. Prodigality,
on some other of our Diabolonian gang, as Mr.
Voluptuous, Mr. Pragmatical, Mr. Ostentation,
or the like? Now these can take the Castle
of Mansoul, or blow it up, or make it unfit
for a Garrison for Emanuel,Look to it Mansoul. and any of these
will do. Yea, these for ought I know may do it
for us sooner than an army of twenty thousand
men. Wherefore to end as I began, my advice is
that we quietly withdraw our selves, not offering
any further force, or forcible attempts upon the
Castle, at least at this time, and let us set on foot
our new project, and lets see if that will not make
them destroy themselves.
This advice was highly applauded by them
all, and was accounted the very masterpiece
of Hell, to wit, to choak Mansoul with
a fulness of this world, and to surfeit her

heart with the good things thereof.&rhand; But see
how things meet together, just as this Diabolonian
counsel was broken up, Captain Credence
received a Letter from Emanuel, the
Contents of which was this,Captain Credence receives that from his Prince which he understandeth not. That upon the
third day he would meet him in the field in the
Plains about Mansoul. Meet me in the field,
quoth the Captain? what meaneth my Lord
by this? I know not what he meaneth by
meeting of me in the field. So he took the
Note in his hand, and did carry it to my
Lord Secretary to ask his thoughts thereupon,
(for my Lord was a Seer in all matters
concerning the King, and also for the good
and comfort of the Town of Mansoul.) So he
shewed my Lord the Note, and desired his
opinion thereof: For my part, quoth Captain
Credence, I know not the meaning
thereof. So my Lord did take and read it,
and after a little pause he said, The Diabolonians have had against Mansoul a great
consultation to day; they have I say, this day
been contriving the utter ruin of the Town; and
the result of their counsel is, to set Mansoul into
such a way, which if taken, will surely make her
destroy her self. And to this end they are making
ready for their own departure out of the Town,
intending to betake themselves to the field again,
and there to lye till they shall see whether this
their project will take or no. But be thou ready
with the men of thy Lord (for on the third day
they will be in the Plain) there to fall upon the

Diabolonians;The riddle expounded to Captain Credence. for the Prince will by that time
be in the field; yea, by that it is break of day,
Sun-rising, or before, and that with a mighty
force against them. So he shall be before them,
and thou shalt be behind them, and betwixt you
both their army shall be destroyed.
When Captain Credence heard this, away
goes he to the rest of the Captains, and tells
them what a Note he had a while since,The Captains are gladed to hear. received
from the hand of Emanuel. And, said
he, that which was dark therein has my Lord
the Lord Secretary expounded unto me. He told
them moreover, what by himself and by them
must be done to answer the mind of their
Lord. Then were the Captains glad, and
Captain Credence commanded that all the
Kings Trumpeters should ascend to the battlementsCurious Musick made by the Trumpeters.
of the Castle, and there in the audience
of Diabolus, and of the whole Town
of Mansoul, make the best musick that heart
could invent. The Trumpeters then did as
they were commanded. They got themselves
up to the top of the Castle, and thus
they began to sound; then did Diabolus
start, and said, What can be the meaning of
this, they neither sound Boot and saddle, nor
horse and away, nor a Charge. What do these
mad men mean, that yet they should be so
merry and glad? Then answered him one
of themselves and said, this is for joy that
their Prince Emanuel is coming to relieve
the Town of Mansoul; that to this end he is

at the head of an Army, and that this relief
is near.
The men of Mansoul also were greatly concerned
at this melodious charm of the Trumpets;
they said, yea, they answered one another
saying, This can be no harm to us;
surely this can be no harm to us. Then said
the Diabolonians, what had we best to do?
and it was answered,Diabolus withdraws from the Town, and why. It was best to quit the
Town; and that said one, Ye may do in
pursuance of your last counsel, and by so doing
also be better able to give the enemy
battel, should an army from without come
upon us. So on the second day they withdrew
themselves from Mansoul, and abode in the
Plains without, but they incamped themselves
before Eyegate, in what terrene and
terrible manner they could. The reason why
they would not abide in the Town (besides
the reasons that were debated in their late
Conclave, was for that they were not possessed
of the strong hold, and because, said they,
we shall have more convenience to fight, and
also to fly if need be when we are incamped
in the open Plains. Besides, the Town would
have been a pit for them rather than a place
of defence, had the Prince come up and enclosed
them fast therein. Therefore they
betook themselves to the field, that they
might also be out of the reach of the slings,
by which they were much annoyed all the
while that they were in the Town.

Well,The time come for the Captains to fight them. the time that the Captains were to
fall upon the Diabolonians being come, they
eagerly prepared themselves for action, for
Captain Credence had told the Captains over
night, that they should meet their Prince in the
field to morrow. This therefore made them
yet far more desirous to be engaging the
enemy: for you shall see the Prince in the Field
to morrow, was like oyl to a flaming fire; for
of a long time they had been at a distance:
they therefore were for this the more earnest
and desirous of the work. So, as I said,
the hour being come, Captain Credence with
the rest of the men of war, drew out their
forces before it were day by the Salliport ofThey draw out into the field.
the Town. And being all ready, Captain
Credence went up to the head of the Army,
and gave to the rest of the Captains the word,
and so they to their Under officers and Souldiers,
the word was,The Word. The Sword of the Prince
Emanuel, and the Shield of Captain Credence,
which is in the Mansoulian tongue, The word
of God and faith. Then the Captains fell on
and began roundly to front, and slank, and
rere Diabolus's Camp.
Now they left Captain Experience in the
Town because he was yet ill of his wounds
which the Diabolonians had given him in theCaptain Experience will fight, for his Prince upon his Crutches.
last fight. But when he perceived that the
Captains were at it, what does he but calling
for his Crutches with hast, gets up, and
away he goes to the battel, saying, Shall I

lye here when my brethren are in the sight,
and when Emanuel the Prince will shew himself
in the field to his servants? But when
the enemy saw the man come with his Crutches
they were daunted yet the more, for
thought they, what spirit has possessed these
Mansoulians that they fight me upon their
Crutches. Well, the Captains as I said fell
on, and did bravely handle their weapons,
still crying out, and shouting as they laid
on blows, The Sword of the Prince Emanuel,
and the Shield of Captain Credence.
Now when Diabolus saw that the Captains
were come out, and that so valiantly they
surrounded his men, he concluded (that for
the present) nothing from them was to be
looked for but blows,The battel joined. and the dints of their
two-edged sword.
Wherefore he also falls on upon the Princes
army, with all his deadly force. So the battel
was joined. Now who was it that at first
Diabolus met with in the fight, but Captain
Credence on the one hand, and the Lord
Wilbewill on the other;Wilbewill ingaged. now Wilbewills blows
were like the blows of a Giant, for that man
had a strong arm, and he fell in upon the
Election-doubters, for they were the life-guard
of Diabolus, and he kept them in play a good
while, cutting and battering shrewdly. Now
when Captain Credence saw my Lord engaged,Credence ingaged.
he did stoutly fall on, on the other hand
upon the same company also; so they put

them to great disorder. Now Captain
Good hope had engaged the Vocation-doubters,Goodhope ingaged.
and they were sturdy men; but the
Captain was a valiant man: Captain Experience
did also send him some aid, so he
made the Vocation-doubters to retreat. The
rest of the Armies were hotly engaged,
and that on every side, and the Diabolonians
did fight stoutly.The Lord Secretary ingaged. Then did my Lord Secretary
command that the slings from the Castle
should be plaid, and his men could
throw stones at an hairs bredth. But after
a while those that were made to fly before
the Captains of the Prince, did begin to
ralley again,The battel renewed. and they came up stoutly upon
the Rere of the Princes Army: wherefore
the Princes Army began to faint; but
remembring that they should see the face of
their Prince by and by, they took courage,
and a very fierce battel was fought. Then
shouted the Captains, saying, The Sword of
the Prince Emanuel,A fierce fight. and the Shield of Captain
Credence; and with that Diabolus gave back,
thinking that more aid had been come.They both retreat, and in the time of respite Captain Credence makes a Speech to his Souldiers. But
no Emanuel as yet appeared. Moreover the
battel did hang in doubt; and they made a
little retreat on both sides. Now in the
time of respite Captain Credence bravely
incouraged his men to stand to it, and
Diabolus did the like as well as he could. But
Captain Credence made a brave Speech to his
Souldiers, the Contents whereof here follow.

Gentlemen Souldiers, and my Brethren in this
design, it rejoiceth me much to see in the field for
our Prince this day, so stout and so valiant an
Army, and such faithful lovers of Mansoul. You
have hitherto as hath become you, shewn your
selves men of truth and courage against the
Diabolonian forces, so that for all their boast,
they have not yet cause much to boast of their
gettings. Now take to your selves your wonted
courage, and shew your selves men even this
once only; for in a few minutes after the next
engagement this time, you shall see your Prince
shew himself in the field; for we must make this
second assault upon this Tyrant Diabolus, and
then Emanuel comes.
No sooner had the Captain made this
Speech to his Souldiers, but one Mr. Speedy
came post to the Captain from the Prince, to
tell him that Emanuel was at hand. This
news when the Captain had received, he
communicated to the other Field-officers,
and they again to their Souldiers and men of
war. Wherefore like men raised from the
dead, so the Captains and their men arose,
made up to the enemy, and cried as before,
The Sword of the Prince Emanuel, and the shield
of Captain Credence.
The Diabolonians also bestirred themselves,
and made resistance as well as they could, but
in this last engagement the Diabolonians lost
their courage, and many of the Doubters fell
down dead to the ground. Now when they

had been in heat of battel about an hour or
more, Captain Credence lift up his eyes and
saw, and behold Emanuel came, and he came
with Colours flying, Trumpets sounding,
and the feet of his men scarce toucht the
ground, they hasted with that celerity towards
the Captains that were engaged. Then
did Credence winde with his men to the Townward,
& gave to Diabolus the field. So Emanuel
came upon him on the one side,When the enemy is betwixt Christ and faith, then down they go to be sure. and the enemies
place was betwixt them both; then again
they fell to it afresh, and now it was but
a little while more but Emanuel and Captain
Credence met, still trampling down the slain
as they came.
But when the Captains saw that the Prince
was come, and that he fell upon the Diabolonians
on the other side, and that Captain Credence
and his Highness had got them up betwixt
them, they shouted, (they so shouted
that the ground rent again) saying, The
Sword of Emanuel, and the Shield of Captain
Credence. Now when Diabolus saw that he
and his forces were so hard beset by the
Prince and his Princely Army, what does he
and the Lords of the Pit that were with him,
but make their escape, and forsake their
Army,The Victory falls to Emanuel, and to his men, who slay all. and leave them to fall by the hand of
Emanuel, and of his noble Captain Credence:
so they fell all down slain before them, before
the Prince, and before his Royal Army;
there was not left so much as one Doubter alive,

live, they lay spread upon the ground dead
men, as one would spread dung upon the
land.
When the battel was over, all things came
into order in the Camp; then the Captains
and Elders of Mansoul came together to salute
Emanuel,  while without the Corporation;
so they saluted him,Mansoul salutes the Prince without, he addresses himself to go into the Town. and welcomed him, and
that with a thousand welcomes, for that he
was come to the borders of Mansoul again:
So he smiled upon them, and said, Peace be
to you. Then they addressed themselves to
go to the Town; they went then to go up
to Mansoul, they, the Prince with all the new
forces that now he had brought with him to
the war. Also all the Gates of the Town
were set open for his reception, so glad were
they of his blessed return. And this was the
manner and order of this going of his into
Mansoul.
First, (as I said) all the Gates of the Town
were set open, yea the Gates of the Castle
also;The manner of his going in. the Elders too of the Town of Mansoul
placed themselves at the Gates of the
Town to salute him at his entrance thither:
And so they did, for as he drew neer, and
approached towards the Gates, they said,
Lift up your heads, O ye Gates, and be ye lift
up ye everlasting doors, and the King of Glory
shall come in. And they answered again, Who
is the King of Glory? and they made return
to themselves, The Lord strong and mighty,

the Lord mighty in battel. Lift up your heads, O
ye Gates, even lift them up ye everlasting doors,
&c.
Secondly, It was ordered also by those of
Mansoul, that all the way from the Towngates
to those of the Castle his blessed Majesty
should be entertained with the Song, by
them that could best skill in musick in all the
Town of Mansoul; then did the Elders, and
the rest of the men of Mansoul answer one
another as Emanuel entered the Town, till
he came at the Castle-gates with Songs and
sound of Trumpets, saying, They have seen
thy goings O God, even the goings of my God,
my King in the Sanctuary. So the Singers went
before, the players on instruments followed after,
and among them were the damsels playing on
timbrels.
Thirdly, Then the Captains (for I would
speak a word of them) they in their order
waited on the Prince as he entred into the
Gates of Mansoul. Captain Credence went
before, and Captain Goodhope with him;
Captain Charity came behind with other of
his companions, and Captain Patience followed
after all, and the rest of the Captains,
some on the right hand, and some on the left
accompanied Emanuel into Mansoul. And all
the while the Colours were displayed, the
Trumpets sounded, and continual shoutings
were among the Souldiers. The Prince himself
rode into the Town in his Armour, which

was all of beaten Gold, and in his Chariot, the
pillars of it were of Silver, the bottom thereof of
Gold, the covering of it were of purple; the
midst thereof being paved with love for the
daughters of the Town of Mansoul.
Fourthly, When the Prince was come to
the entrance of Mansoul, he found all the
streets strewed with lillies and flowers, curiously
decked with boughs and branches from
the green trees that stood round about the
Town.Good and joyful Thoughts. Every door also was filled with persons
who had adorned every one their forepart
against their house with something of
variety, and singular excellency to entertain
him withal as he passed in the streets; they
also themselves as Emanuel passed by, did
welcome him with shouts and acclamations
of joy, saying, Blessed be the Prince that cometh
in the name of his Father Shaddai.
Fifthly, At the Castle-gates the Elders of
Mansoul, to wit, the Lord Mayor, the Lord
Wilbewill, the Subordinate Preacher, Mr. Knowledg,
and Mr. Mind, with other of the Gentry
of the place saluted Emanuel again. They
bowed before him, they kissed the dust of his
feet, they thanked, they blessed, and praised
his Highness for not taking advantage against
them for their sins, but rather had pity
upon them in their misery, and returned to
them with mercies, and to build up their
Mansoul for ever. Thus was he had up
straightway to the Castle; for that was the

Royal Palace, and the place where his Honour
was to dwell; the which was ready
prepared for his Highness by the presence of
the Lord Secretary, and the work of Captain
Credence. So he entred in.
Sixthly, Then the people and commonalty
of the Town of Mansoul came to him into
the Castle to mourn, and to weep, and to
lament for their wickedness, by which they
had forced him out of the Town. So they
when they were come, bowed themselves to
the ground seven times; they also wept,
they wept aloud, and asked forgiveness of
the Prince, and prayed that he would again,
as of old, confirm his love to Mansoul.
To the which the great Prince replied,
Weep not, but go your way, eat the fat, and
drink the sweet, and send portions to them for
whom nought is prepared, for the joy of your
Lord is your strength. I am returned to Mansoul
with mercies, and my name shall be set up, exalted
and magnified by it. He also took these inhabitants
and kissed them, and laid them in his
bosom.
Moreover,The holy Conceptions of Mansoul. he gave to the Elders of Mansoul,
and to each Town-officer a chain of
Gold, and a Signet. He also sent to their
wives ear-rings and jewels, and bracelets,
and other things.Young and tender holy Thoughts. He also bestowed upon the
true born children of Mansoul, many precious
things.

When Emanuel the Prince had done all
these things for the famous Town of Mansoul,
then he said unto them, first, Wash your
garments,  then put on your ornaments, and then
come to me into the Castle of Mansoul. So they
went to the fountain that was set open for
Judah and Jerusalem to wash in;  and there
they washed, and there they made their garments
white, and came again to the Prince into
the Castle, and thus they stood before
him.
And now there was musick and dancing
throughout the whole Town of Mansoul;
and that because their Prince had again granted
to them his presence, and the light of his
countenance; the Bells also did ring, and
the Sun shone comfortably upon them for a
great while together.
The Town of Mansoul did also now more
throughly seek the destruction and ruin of
all remaining Diabolonians that abode in the
walls, and the dens (that they had) in the
Town of Mansoul; for there was of them
that had to this day escaped with life and
limb from the hand of their suppressors in
the famous Town of Mansoul.
But my Lord Wilbewill was a greater terrour
to them now than ever he had been before;Wilbewill a greater terrour to the Diabolonians now, than he had been in former times.
forasmuch as his heart was yet more
fully bent to seek, contrive, and pursue them
to the death; he pursued them night and
day, and did put them now to sore distress,
as will afterwards appear.

After things were thus far put into order
in the famous Town of Mansoul, care was taken,
and order given by the blessed Prince
Emanuel, that the Townsmen should without
further delay appoint some to go forth into
the Plain to bury the dead that were there;
the dead that fell by the sword of Emanuel,Orders given out to bury the dead. and
by the shield of the Captain Credence, lest the
fumes and ill favours that would arise from
them, might infect the air, and so annoy
the famous Town of Mansoul. This also was
a reason of this order, to wit, that as much as
in Mansoul lay, they might cut off the name
and being, and remembrance of those enemies
from the thought of the famous Town
of Mansoul, and its inhabitants.
So order was given out by the Lord Mayor,
that wise and trusty friend of the Town of
Mansoul, that persons should be employed about
this necessary business; and Mr. Godlyfear,
and one Mr. Upright were to be Overseers
about this matter; so persons were put
under them to work in the fields, and to bury
the slain that lay dead in the Plains. And
these were their places of imployment, some
were to make the graves, some to bury the
dead, and some were to go to and fro in the
Plains, and also round about the borders of
Mansoul to see if a skull or a bone, or a piece
of a bone of a Doubter, was yet to be found
above ground any where near the Corporation;
and if any were found, it was ordered

that the Searchers that searched should set up
a mark thereby, and a sign, that those that
were appointed to bury them might find it,
and bury it out of sight, that the name and
Not a skul or a bone, or a piece of a bone of a Doubter to be left unburied.remembrance of a Diabolonian Doubter might
be blotted out from under Heaven. And
that the children, and they that were to be
born in Mansoul might not know (if possible)
what a skull, what a bone, or a piece of a
bone of a Doubter was. So the buriers, and
those that were appointed for that purpose,
did as they were commanded, they buried
the Doubters, and all the skulls and bones, and
pieces of bones of Doubters, where ever they
found them, and so they cleansed the Plains.
Now also Mr. Godspeace took up his Commission,
and acted again as in former days.
Thus they buried in the Plains about
Mansoul, the Election-doubters, the Vocation-doubters,
the Grace-doubters, the Perseverance-doubters,
the Resurrection-doubters, the Salvation-doubters,
and the Glory-doubters; whose
Captains were Captain Rage, Captain Cruel,
Captain Damnation, Captain Insatiable, Captain
Brimstone, Captain Torment, Captain
Noease, Captain Sepulcher, and Captain Pasthope;
and old Incredulity was under Diabolus
their General; there were also the seven
heads of their army, and they were the Lord
Beelzebub, the Lord Lucifer, the Lord Legion,
the Lord Apollyon, the Lord Python, the Lord
Cerberus, and the Lord Belial. But the Princes,

and the Captains with old Incredulity their
General, did all of them make their escape;
so their men fell down slain by the power of
the Princes forces, and by the hands of the
men of the Town of Mansoul. They also
were buried as is afore related, to the exceeding
great joy of the now famous Town of
Mansoul. They that buried them, buried also
with them their arms,Their arms and armour buried with them. which were cruel instruments
of death, (their weapons were arrows,
darts, mauls, fire-brands, and the like)
they buried also their armour, their colours,
banners, with the standard of Diabolus, and
what else soever they could find that did
but smell of a Diabolonian Doubter.
Now when the Tyrant was arrived at Hellgate-hill,
with his old friend Incredulity, they
immediately descended the Den, and having
there with their fellows for a while condoled
their misfortune, and great loss that they sustained
against the Town of Mansoul, they
fell at length into a passion, and revenged
they would be for the loss that they sustained
before the Town of Mansoul; wherefore
they presently call a Councel to contrive yetThe Tyrant resolves to have yet a bout with Mansoul.
further what was to be done against the famous
Town of Mansoul; for their yawning
panches could not wait to see the result of
their Lord Lucifers, and their Lord Apollyons
counsel that they had given before, (for
their raging gorge thought every day even
as long as a short-for-ever, until they were

filled with the body and soul, with the flesh
and bones, and with all the delicates of
Mansoul. They therefore resolve to make another
attempt upon the Town of Mansoul,
and that by an army mixed, and made up
partly of Doubters, and partly of Blood-men
A more particular account now take of
both.
An army of Doubters and Bloodmen. The Doubters are such as have their name
from their nature, as well as from the Lord
and Kingdom where they are born; their nature
is to put a question upon every one of
the Truths of Emanuel, and their Country is
called the land of Doubting, and that land lyeth
off, and furthest remote to the North,
between the land of Darkne&esset;, and that called
the Valley of the shadow of death.Of the Country of the Doubters, and of the Bloodmen where they lye. For though
the land of Darkne&esset;, and that called the land
of the shadow of death, be sometimes called as
if they were one and the self same place; yet
indeed they are two, lying but a little way
asunder, and the land of Doubting points in,
and lyeth between them. This is the land of
Doubting, and these that came with Diabolus
to ruin the Town of Mansoul, are the natives
of that Country.
The Bloodmen are a people that have their
name derived from the malignity of their nature,
and from the fury that is in them to
execute it upon the Town of Mansoul; their
land lyeth under the Dog-star, and by that
they are governed as to their Intellectuals.

The name of their Country is the Province
of Loathgood, the remote parts of it are far
distant from the land of Doubting, yet they
do both butt and bound upon the Hill called
Hellgate-hill These people are always in
league with the Doubters for they jointly do
make question of the faith and fidelity of
the men of the Town of Mansoul, and so
are both alike qualified for the service of
their Prince.
Now of these two Countries did DiabolusThe number of his new army.
by the beating of his Drum raise another
army against the Town of Mansoul, of five
and twenty thousand strong. There were
ten thousand Doubters, and fifteen thousand
Bloodmen, and they were put under several
Captains for the war; and old Incredulity
was again made General of the Army.
As for the Doubters, their Captains were
five of the seven that were heads of the last
Diabolonian army, and these are their names,
Captain Beelzebub, Captain Lucifer, Captain
Apollyon, Captain Legion, and Captain Cerberus;
and the Captains that they had before,
were some of them made Lieutenants,
and some Ensignes of the Army.
But Diabolus did not count that in this Expedition
of his, these Doubters would prove
his principal men, for their manhood had
been tried before, also the Mansoulians had put
them to the worst, only he did bring them
to multiply a number, and to help if need

was at a pinch,His chief strength lyes in the Bloodmen. but his trust he put in his
Bloodmen; for that they were all rugged Villains,
and he knew that they had done feats
heretofore.
As for the Bloodmen they also were under
command,The Captains of the Bloodmen. and the names of their Captains
were Captain Cain, Captain Nimrod, Captain
Ishmael, Captain Esau, Captain Saul, Captain
Absalom, Captain Judas, and Captain Pope.
1. Captain Cain was over two bands, to
wit,  the zealous and the angry Bloodmen; his
Standard-bearer bare the Red colours, and
his Scutcheon was the Murdering Club.
2. Captain Nimrod was Captain over two
bands, to wit, the Tyrannical and Incroaching
Bloodmen; his Standard-bearer bare the Red-colors,
and his Scutcheon was the Great Blood-hound. 
3. Captain Ishmael was Captain over two
bands, to wit, over the Mocking and Scorning
Bloodmen; his Standard bearer bare the Red-colours,
and his Scutcheon was one mocking
at Abrahams Isaac.
4. Captain Esau was Captain over two
bands,  to wit, the Bloodmen that grudged
that another should have the blessing;  also
over the Bloodmen that are for executing their
private revenge upon others; his Standard bearer
bare the Red-colours, and his Scutcheon
was one privately lurking to murder Jacob.
5. Captain Saul was Captain over two
bands, to wit, the Groundlesly jealous, and

the Devilishly furious Bloodmen;  his Standard-bearer
bare the Red-colours, and his Scutcheon
was three bloody darts cast at harmless David.
6. Captain Absalom was Captain over two
bands, to wit, over the Bloodmen that will
kill a father or a friend, for the glory of this
world; also over those Bloodmen that will
hold one fair in hand with words, till they
shall have pierced him with their swords;
his Standard-bearer did bear the Red-colors,
and his Scutcheon was the Son a pursuing the
fathers blood.
7. Captain Judas was over two bands,  to
wit, the Bloodmen that will sell a mans life
for mony, and those also that will betray
their friend with a kiss; his Standard-bearer
bare the Red colours, and his Scutcheon was
thirty pieces of Silver, and the Halter.
8. Captain Pope was Captain over one band, 
for all these spirits are joined in one under
him; his Standard-bearer bare the Red colours, 
and his Scutcheon was the stake, the
flame, and the good man in it.
Now the reason why Diabolus did so soonThe conditions of the Bloodmen, their stoutness, and valor.
ralley another force after he had been beaten
out of the field, were for that he put mighty
confidence in this army of Bloodmen, for he
put a great deal of more trust in them, than
he did before in his army of Doubters;
though they had also often done great service
for him in the strengthening of him in
his Kingdom. But these Bloodmen, he had

proved them often, and their sword did seldom
return empty. Besides, he knew that
these like Mastiffs, would fasten upon any;
upon father, mother, brother, sister, Prince,
or Governour, yea, upon the Prince of Princes.
And that which incouraged him the
more, was for that they once did force Emanuel
out of the Kingdom of Universe, and
why thought he, may they not also drive him
from the Town of Mansoul.
They sit down before Mansoul.So this army of five and twenty thousand
strong, was by their General the great Lord
Incredulity, led up against the Town of Mansoul.
Now Mr. Prywell the Scout-master-general,
did himself go out to spie, and he did
bring Mansoul tidings of their coming:
wherefore they shut up their Gates, and put
themselves in a posture of defence against
these new Diabolonians that came up against
the Town.
So Diabolus brought up his Army,How they dispose of themselvs. and beleaguered
the Town of Mansoul; the Doubters
were placed about Feetgate, and the Bloodmen
set down before Eyegate and Eargate.
Now when this Army had thus incamped
themselves, Incredulity did in the name of
Diabolus, his own name, and in the name of
the Bloodmen, and the rest that were with
him,They summon the Town with a threatning. send a Summons as hot as a red hot iron
to Mansoul, to yield to their demands; threatning
that if they still stood it out against
them, they would presently burn down Mansoul

with fire. For you must know that as for
the Bloodmen, they were not so much that
Mansoul should be surrendred, as that Mansoul
should be destroyed, and cut off out of the
land of the living. True, they send to them
to surrender, but should they so do, that
would not stench or quench the thirsts of
these men. They must have blood, the blood
of Mansoul, else they die; and it is from
hence that they have their name.  Wherefore
these Bloodmen he reserved while now that
they might when all his Engins proved ineffectual,
as his last and sure card be played
against the Town of Mansoul.
Now when the Townsmen had received
this red-hot Summons, it begat in them at
present some changing and interchanging
thoughts; but they jointly agreed in less
than half an hour to carry the Summons to
the Prince, the which they did when they
had writ at the bottom of it,  Lord save Mansoul
from bloody men.
So he took it, and looked upon it, and considered
it, and took notice also of that short
Petition that the men of Mansoul had written
at the bottom of it and called to him the
noble Captain Credence,  and bid him go and
take Captain Patience with him, and go and
take care of that side of Mansoul that was
beleaguered by the Bloodmen. So they went
and did as they were commanded, the Captain
Credence went and took Captain Patience,

and they both secured that side of Mansoul
that was besieged by the Bloodmen.
Then he commanded that Captain Goodhope
and Captain Charity, and my Lord Wilbewill,
should take charge of the other side of the
Town; and I, said the Prince, will set my
standard upon the Battlements of your Castle,
and do you three watch against the
Doubters. This done, he again commanded
that the brave Captain the Captain Experience
should draw up his men in the Market-place,
and that there he should exercise them day
by day before the people of the Town of
Mansoul. Now this siege was long, and many
a fierce attempt did the enemy, especially
those called the Bloodmen, make upon the
Town of Mansoul, and many a shrewd brush
did some of the Townsmen meet with from
them; especially C. Self-denial; who, I should
have told you before, was commanded to
take the care of Eargate and Eyegate now
against the Bloodmen.Captain Self-denial the last of those that were put in office in the Town of Mansoul. This Captain Self-denial
was a young man, but stout, and a Townsman
in Mansoul, as Captain Experience also
was. And Emanuel at his second return to
Mansoul, made him a Captain over a thousand
of the Mansoulians, for the good of the
Corporation. This Captain therefore being
an hardy man, and a man of great courage,
and willing to venture himself for the good
of the Town of Mansoul, would now and
then salley out upon the Bloodmen, and give

them many notable alarms,His valor. and entered several
brisk skirmishes with them, and also
did some execution upon them, but you must
think that this could not easily be done, but
he must meet with brushes himself, for he
carried several of their marks in his face;His signs of manhood.
yea, and some in some other parts of his
body.
So after some time spent for the trial ofEmanuel prepares to give the enemy battel.
the faith, and hope, and love of the Town of
Mansoul; the Prince Emanuel upon a day
calls his Captains and men of war together,
and divides them into two Companies;How he ordereth his men. this
done, he commands them at a time appointed,
and that in the morning very early to
salley out upon the enemy: saying, Let half
of you fall upon the Doubters, and half of
you fall upon the Bloodmen. Those of you
that go out against the Doubters, kill and slay,
and cause to perish so many of them as by
any means you can lay hands on; but for you
that go out against the Bloodmen, slay them
not, but take them alive.
So at the time appointed,The Captains go out. betimes in the
morning the Captains went out as they were
commanded against the enemies: Captain
Goodhope, Captain Charity, and those that
were joined with them, as Captain Innocent,
and Captain Experience, went out against
the Doubters; and Captain Credence, and
Captain Patience, with Captain Self-denial,
and the rest that were to join with them, went
out against the Bloodmen.

The Doubters put to flight.Now those that went out against the
Doubters, drew up into a body before the
Plain, and marched on to bid them battel:
But the Doubters remembring their last success,
made a retreat, not daring to stand
the shock, but fled from the Princes men;
wherefore they pursued them, and in their
pursuit slew many, but they could not catch
them all. Now those that escaped went some
of them home, and the rest by fives, nines,
and seventeens, like wanderers, were stragling
up and down the Country,The Unbelieuer never fights the Doubters. where they
upon the barbarous people shewed and exercised
many of their Diabolonian actions; nor did
these people rise up in arms against them,
but suffered themselves to be enslaved by
them. They would also after this shew themselves
in companies before the Town of
Mansoul, but never to abide it; for if Captain
Credence, Captain Goodhope, or Captain
Experience did but shew themselves, they
fled.
Those that went out against the Bloodmen,The Bloodmen are taken, and how.
did as they were commanded, they forbore
to slay any, but sought to compass them about.
But the Bloodmen when they saw that
no Emanuel was in the field, concluded also
that no Emanuel was in Mansoul; wherefore
they looking upon what the Captains did, to
be, as they called it, a fruit of the extravagancy
of their wild and foolish fancies, rather
despised them, than feared them, but

the Captains minding their business, at last
did compass them round, they also that had
routed the Doubters came in amain to their
aid; so in fine, after some little strugling,
for the Bloodmen also would have run for it,
only now it was too late, (for though they
are mischievous and cruel,&lhand; where they can
overcome, yet all Bloodmen are chicken-hearted
men, when they once come to see
themselves matcht and equal'd) so the Captains
took them, and brought them to the
Prince.
Now when they were taken,They are brought to the Prince and found to be of 3 sorts. had before
the Prince, and examined, he found them
to be of three several Countries, though they
all came out of one land.
1. One sort of them came out of Blindmanshire,
and they were such as did ignorantly
what they did.
2. Another sort of them came out of
Blindzealshire, and they did superstitiously
what they did.
3. The third sort of them came out of
the Town of Malice in the County of Envy, 
and they did what they did out of spite and
implacableness.
For the first of these, to wit, they that
came out of Blindmanshire, when they saw
where they were, and against whom they
had fought, they trembled, and cried as they
stood before him; and as many of these as
asked him mercy, he touched their lips with
his Golden Scepter.

They that came out of Blindzealshire, they
did not as their fellows did, for they pleaded
that they had right to do what they did, because
Mansoul was a Town whose laws and
customs were diverse from all that dwelt
thereabouts; very few of these could be
brought to see their evil but those that did,
and asked mercy, they also abtained favour.
Now they that came out of the Town of
Malice, that is in the County of Envy, they
neither wept, nor disputed, nor repented, but
stood gnawing of their tongues before him
for anguish and madness, because they could
not have their will upon Mansoul.The Bloodmen are bound over to answer for what they have done at the Assizes. Now these
last, with all those of the other two sorts
that did not unfeignedly ask pardon for
their faults:The day of Judgment. Those he made to enter into sufficient
bond to answer for what they had done against
Mansoul, and against her King, at the great
and general Assizes to be holden for our Lord
the King, where he himself should appoint for
the Country and Kingdom of Universe.
So they became bound each man for himself
to come in when called upon to answer
before our Lord the King for what they had
done as before.
And thus much concerning this second
army that were sent by Diabolus to overthrow
Mansoul.
But there were three of those that came
from the land of Doubting, who after they
had wandred and ranged the Country a

while, and perceived that they had escaped,Three or four of the Doubters go into Mansoul, are entertained, and by whom.
were so hardy as to thrust themselves, knowing
that yet there were in the Town Diabolonians,
I say they were so hardy as to thrust
themselves into Mansoul among them. (Three
did I say, I think there were four.) Now to
whose house should these Diabolonian Doubters
go, but to the house of an old Diabolonian
in Mansoul, whose name was Evil questioning,
a very great enemy he was to Mansoul, and a
great doer among the Diabolonians there.
Well, to this Evil-questionings house, as was
said, did these Diabolonians come, (you may
be sure that they had directions how to find
the way thither) so he made them welcome,
pitied their misfortune, and succoured them
with the best that he had in his house. Now
after a little acquaintance, and it was not
long before they had that, this old Evil-questioning
asked the Doubters if they were all of
of a Town, (he knew that they were all of
one Kingdom)? and they answered no, nor
not of one Shire neither; for I, said one,What sort of Doubters they are. am an
Election-Doubter. I, said another, am a Vocation-Doubter;
then said the third, I am a Salvation-Doubter;
and the fourth said he was
a Grace-Doubter. Well, quoth the old Gentleman,
be of what shire you will, I am perswaded
that you are down boys, you have the very
length of my foot, are one with my heart,
and shall be welcome to me. So they thanked
him, and were glad that they had found

themselves an harbour in Mansoul.Talk betwixt the Doubters, and old Evil-questioning. Then
said Evil-questioning to them, How many of
your company might there be that came
with you to the siege of Mansoul? and they
answered, there were but ten thousand
Doubters in all, for the rest of the Army consisted
of fifteen thousand Bloodmen: These
Bloodmen, quoth they, border upon our Country,
but poor men, as we hear, they were
every one taken by Emanuels forces. Ten
thousand! quoth the old Gentleman, I'le
promise you that's a round company. But
how came it to pass since you were so mighty
a number that you fainted, and durst not
fight your foes? Our General, said they, was
the first man that did run for't. Pray, quoth
their Landlord, who was that your cowardly
General? He was once the Lord Mayor of
Mansoul, said they. But pray call him not a
cowardly General, for whether any from the
East to the West has done more service for
our Prince Diabolus, than has my Lord Incredulity,
will be a hard question for you to answer.
But had they catched him they would
for certain have hanged him, and we promise
you hanging is but a bad business. Then said
the old Gentleman, I would that all the ten
thousand Doubters were now well armed in
Mansoul, and my self in the head of them, I
would see what I could do. Ai, said they,
that would be well if we could see that: But
wishes, alas! what are they! and these words

were spoken aloud. Well, said old Evil questioning,
take heed that you talk not too
loud, you must be quat and close, and must
take care of your selves while you are here,
or I'le assure you, you will be snapt.
Why? quoth the Doubters.
Why! quoth the old Gentleman, why, because
both the Prince, and Lord Secretary,
and their Captains and Souldiers are all at
present in Town; yea, the Town is as full
of them as ever it can hold. And besides,
there is one whose name is Wilbewill, a most
cruel enemy of ours, and him the Prince has
made Keeper of the Gates, and has commanded
him that with all the diligence he
can, he should look for, search out, and destroy
all, and all manner of Diabolonians.
And if he lighteth upon you, down you go
though your heads were made of Gold.
And now to see how it happened,They are overheard. one of
the Lord Wilbewills faithful Souldiers, whose
name was Mr. Diligence, stood all this while
listning under old Evil-questionings Eaves,
and heard all the talk that had been betwixt
him and the Doubters that he entertained
under his roof.
The Souldier was a man that my Lord had
much confidence in, and that he loved dearly,
and that both because he was a man of
courage, and also a man that was unwearied
in seeking after Diabolonians to apprehend
them.

Now this man,They are discovered. as I told you, heard all the
talk that was between old Evil-questioning,
and these Diabolonians; wherefore what
does he but goes to his Lord, and tells him
what he had heard. And saist thou so, my
trusty, quoth my Lord? Ay, quoth Diligence,
that I do, and if your Lord shall be pleased
to go with me, you shall find it as I have said.
And are they there, quoth my Lord. I know
Evil questioning well, for he and I were great
in the time of our Apostasie. But I know not
now where he dwells. But I do, said his man,
and if your Lordship will go, I will lead you
the way to his den. Go! quoth my Lord,
that I will. Come my Diligence, let's go find
them out. So my Lord and his man went together
the direct way to his house. Now his
man went before to shew him his way, and
they went till they came even under old Mr.
Evil-questionings wall: then said Diligence,
Hark! my Lord do you know the old Gentlemans
tongue when you hear it? Yes, said
my Lord, I know it well, but I have not
seen him many a day. This I know, he is
cunning, I wish he doth not give us the slip.
Let me alone for that, said his servant Diligence.
But how shall we find the door, quoth
my Lord? Let me alone for that too, said his
man. So he had my Lord Wilbewill about, and
shewed him the way to the door. Then my
Lord without more ado, broke open the
door, rushed into the house, and caught them

all five together,They are apprehended, and committed to Prison. even as Diligence his man
had told him. So my Lord apprehended
them, and led them away, and committed
them to the hand of Mr. Trueman the Gaoler,
and commanded, and he did put them in
Ward. This done, my Lord Mayor was acquainted
in the morning with what my LordThe Lord Mayor is glad at it.
Wilbewill had done over night, and his Lordship
rejoiced much at the news, not only because
there were Doubters apprehended, but
because that old Evil-questioning was taken;
for he had been a very great trouble to Mansoul,
and much affliction to my Lord Mayor
himself. He had also been sought for often,
but no hand could ever be laid upon him till
now.
Well, the next thing was to make preparation
to try these five that by my Lord had
been apprehended,They are brought to trial. and that were in the
hands of Mr. Trueman the Gaoler. So the
day was set, and the Court called and come
together, and the Prisoners brought to the
Bar. My Lord Wilbewill had power to have
slain them when at first he took them, and
that without any more ado, but he thought
it at this time more for the honour of the
Prince, the comfort of Mansoul, and the discouragement
of the enemy, to bring them
forth to publick judgment.
But I say, Mr. Trueman brought them in
chains to the Bar, to the Town-Hall, for that
was the place of Judgment. So to be short,

the Jury was pannelled, the Witnesses sworn,
and the Prisoners tried for their lives, the
Jury was the same that tried Mr. No-truth,
Pitile&esset;, Haughty, and the rest of their companions.
And first old Questioning himself was set
to the Bar; for he was the receiver, the
entertainer and comforter of these Doubters,
that by Nation were outlandish men; then
he was bid to hearken to his Charge, and
was told that he had liberty to object, if he
had ought to say for himself. So his Indictment
was read, the manner and form here
follows.
Mr. Questioning,His Indictment. Thou art here Indicted by
the name of Evil-questioning, an intruder upon
the Town of Mansoul, for that thou art a
Diabolonian by nature, and also a hater of the
Prince Emanuel, and one that hast studied the
ruin of the Town of Mansoul. Thou art also
here indicted for countenancing the Kings enemies,
after wholsome Laws made to the contrary:
For, 1. thou hast questioned the truth of her
Doctrine and State. 2. In wishing that ten thousand
Doubters were in her. 3. In receiving,
in entertaining and encouraging of her enemies,
that came from their Army unto thee. What saist
thou to this Indictment, art thou guilty or not
guilty?
My Lord,His Plea. quoth he, I know not the
meaning of this Indictment, forasmuch as I
am not the man concerned in it; the man

that standeth by this Charge accused before
this Bench, is called by the name of Evil-questioning,
which name I deny to be mine,
mine being Honest-Enquiring. The one indeed
sounds like the other, but I trow, your
Lordships know that between these two
there is a wide difference; for I hope that a
man even in the worst of times, and that too
amongst the worst of men, may make an
honest enquiry after things, without running
the danger of death.
Wilb. Then spake my Lord Wilbewill, for
he was one of the Witnesses: My Lord,The Lord Wilbewills Testimony.
and you the Honourable Bench, and Magistrates
of the Town of Mansoul, you all have heard
with your ears that the prisoner at the Bar has
denied his name, and so thinks to shift from the
charge of the Indictment. But I know him to be
the man concerned, and that his proper name is
Evil-questioning. I have known him (my Lord)
above this thirty years, for he and I (a shame it
is for me to speak it) were great acquaintance,
when Diabolus that Tyrant had the Government
of Mansoul; and I testifie that he is a Diabolonian
by nature, an enemy to our Prince,
and an hater of the blessed Town of Mansoul.
He has in times of rebellion been at, and lain in
my house, my Lord, not so little as twenty nights
together, and we did use to talk then (for the
substance of talk) as he, and his Doubters
have talked of late: true, I have not seen him
many a day. I suppose that the coming of Emanuel

to Mansoul, has made him to change his lodgings,
as this Indictment has driven him to change his
name; but this is the man, my Lord.
The Court.Then said the Court unto him hast thou
any more to say?
Evil. Yes,His Plea. quoth the old Gentleman, that I
have; for all that as yet has been said against
me, is but by the mouth of one Witness,
and it is not lawful for the famous Town of
Mansoul, at the mouth of one Witness to
put any man to death.
Dilig. Then stood forth Mr. Diligence,Mr. Diligence testimony.
and said, My Lord, as I was upon my watch
such a night at the head of Badstreet in this
Town, I chanced to hear a muttering within
this Gentlemans house; then thought I, what's
to do here? so I went up close, but very softly to
the side of the house to listen, thinking, as indeed
it fell out, that there I might light upon some
Diabolonian Conventicle. So, as I said, I drew
nearer and nearer, and when I was got up close
to the wall, it was but a while before I perceived
that there were outlandish men in the house (but I
did well understand their speech, for I have been
a traveller my self) now hearing such language
in such a tottering cottage as this old Gentleman
dwelt in, I clapt mine ear to a hole in the window,
and there heard them talk as followeth. This old
Mr. Questioning asked these Doubters what
they were, whence they came, and what was
their busine&esset; in these parts? and they told him
to all these questions, yet he did entertain them.

He also asked what numbers there were of them,
and they told him ten thousand men. He then
asked them why they made no more manly assault
upon Mansoul? and they told him; so he called
their General coward for marching off when he
should have fought for his Prince. Further,
this old Evil-questioning wisht, and I heard him
wish, would all the ten thousand Doubters were
now in Mansoul, and himself in the head of
them. He bid them also to take heed and lye quat,
for if they were taken they must die, although
they had heads of gold.
Then said the Court,The Court. Mr. Evil-questioning
here is now another Witness against you,
and his Testimony is full: 1. He swears
that you did receive these men into your
house, and that you did nourish them there,
though you knew that they were Diabolonians,
and the Kings enemies. 2. He swears that
you did wish ten thousand of them in Mansoul.
3. He swears that you did give them
advice to be quat and close lest they were
taken by the Kings servants. All which manifesteth
that thou art a Diabolonian; but
hadst thou been a friend to the King, thou
wouldest have apprehended them.
Evil. Then said Evil-questioning, To the
first of these I answer,His Plea. the men that came into
mine house were strangers, and I took them in,
and is it now become a crime in Mansoul for a
man to entertain strangers? That I did also nourish
them is true, and why should my charity be

blamed. As for the reason why I wished ten
thousand of them in Mansoul, I never told it to
the Witnesses, nor to themselves. I might wish
them to be taken, and so my wish might mean well
to Mansoul, for ought that any yet knows. I did
also bid them take heed that they fell not into the
Captains hands, but that might be because I am
unwilling that any man should be slain, and not
because I would have the Kings enemies as such
escape.
My Lord Mayor then replied, That
though it was a vertue to entertain strangers,
yet it was treason to entertain the
Kings enemies. And for what else thou
hast said, thou dost by words but labour to
evade, and defer the execution of Judgment.
But could there be no more proved against
thee but that thou art a Diabolonian, thou
must for that die the death by the Law; but
to be a receiver, a nourisher, a countenancer,
and a harbourer of others of them, yea,
of outlandish Diabolonians; yea, of them
that came from far on purpose to cut off
and destroy our Mansoul: this must not be
born.
Then said Evil-questioning, I see how the
game will go:His Conclusion. I must die for my name, and for
my charity. And so he held his peace.
Then they called the outlandish Doubters
to the Bar, and the first of them that was
arraigned, was the Election doubter; so his
Indictment was read, and because he was an

outlandish man,The Election-doubter tried. the substance of it was told
him by an Interpreter: to wit, That he was
there charged with being an enemy of Emanuel
the Prince, a hater of the town of Mansoul,
and an opposer of her most wholsome Doctrine.
Then the Judg asked him if he would
plead?His Plea. But he said only this, That he confessed
that he was an Election-doubter, and
that that was the Religion that he had ever
been brought up in. And said moreover, If,
I must die for my Religion, I trow, I shall
die a Martyr, and so I care the less.
Judg. Then it was replied, To question
Election is to overthrow a great Doctrine of
the Gospel; to wit, the Omnisciency,The Court. and
Power, and Will of God, to take away the
liberty of God with his Creature, to stumble
the faith of the Town of Mansoul, and to
make Salvation to depend upon works, and
not upon Grace. It also belyed the Word,
and disquieted the minds of the men of
Mansoul, therefore by the best of Laws he
must die.
Then was the Vocation-doubter called, and
set to the Bar;The Vocation-doubter tried. and his Indictment for substance
was the same with the other, only he
was particularly charged with denying the
calling of Mansoul.
The Judg asked him also what he had to
say for himself?
So he replied, That be never believed that
there was any such thing as a distinct and powerful

call of God to Mansoul; otherwise than by
the general voice of the Word, nor by that neither
otherwise than as it exhorted them to forbear
evil, and to do that which is good, and in
so doing a promise of happine&esset; is annexed.
Then said the Judg, Thou art a Diabolonian,
and hast denied a great part of one of
the most experimental truths of the Prince of
the Town of Mansoul; for he has called, and
she has heard a most distinct and powerful
call of her Emanuel, by which she has been
quickned, awakened, and possessed with
Heavenly Grace to desire to have Communion
with her Prince, to serve him, and do his
will, and to look for her happiness meerly of
his good pleasure. And for thine abhorrence of
this good Doctrine thou must die the death.
Then the Grace-doubter was called, and his
Indictment was read,The Grace-doubters tried. and he replied thereto,
That though he was of the land of
Doubting, his father was the off-spring of a
Pharisee, and lived in good fashion among
his neighbours, and that he taught him to
believe, and believe it I do, and will, that
Mansoul shall never be saved freely by Grace.
Then said the Judg, Why, the Law of
the Prince is plain: 1. Negatively, Not of
works:  2. Positively, By grace you are saved.
And thy Religion setleth in and upon the
works of the flesh; for the works of the Law
are the works of the flesh. Besides, in saying (as
thou hast done) thou hast robbed God of

his glory, and given it to a sinful man; thou
hast robbed Christ of the necessity of his undertaking,
and the sufficiency thereof, and
hast given both these to the works of the
flesh. Thou hast despised the work of the
Holy Ghost, and hast magnified the will of
the flesh, and of the Legal mind. Thou art
a Diabolonian, the son of a Diabolonian; and
for thy Diabolonian principles thou must die.
The Court then having proceeded thus
far with them, sent out the Jury, who forthwith
brought them in guilty of death. Then
stood up the Recorder, and addressed himself
to the Prisoner:Their sentence to die. You the Prisoners at the
Bar, you have been here Indicted, and proved
guilty of high crimes against Emanuel
our Prince, and against the welfare of the
famous Town of Mansoul: Crimes for
which you must be put to death; and die
ye accordingly.
So they were sentenced to the death of the
Cross:The places of their death assigned. The place assigned them for Execution
was that where Diabolus drew up his last
Army against Mansoul; save only that old
Evil-questioning was hanged at the top of
Badstreet, just over against his own door.
When the Town of Mansoul had thus far
rid themselves of their enemies, and of the
troublers of their peace; in the next place
a strict commandment was given out that yet
my Lord Wilbewill should with Diligence his
man, search for and do his best to apprehend

what Town-Diabolonians were yet left
alive in Mansoul.A new Warrant granted out against the children of Evil-questioning, with others. The names of several of
them were Mr. Fooling, Mr. Letgoodship, Mr.
Slavishfear, Mr. Nolove, Mr. Mistrust, Mr.
Flesh, and Mr. Sloth. It was also commanded
that he should apprehend Mr. Evil-questionings
children, that he left behind him, and
that they should demolish his house. The
children that he left behind him were these,
Mr. Doubt, and he was his eldest Son; the
next to him was Legal life, Unbelief, Wrong
thoughts of Christ, Clip-promise, Carnal sense,
Live by feeling, Self-love. All these he had by
one wife, and her name was Nohope, she was
the kinswoman of old Incredulity, for he was
her Uncle, and when her father old Dark
was dead, he took her and brought her up,
and when she was marriageable he gave her
to this old Evil-questioning to wife.
Now the Lord Wilbewill did put into execution
his Commission with great Diligence
his man.Wilbewill puts his Warrant into Execution. He took Fooling in the streets,
and hanged him up in Wantwit-alley, over
against his own house.Fooling taken. This Fooling was he
that would have had the Town of Mansoul
deliver up Captain Credence into the hands of
Diabolus, provided that then he would have
withdrawn his force out of the Town.Letgoodslip taken. He
also took Mr. Letgoodslip one day as he was
busie in the Market, and executed him according
to Law; now there was an honest poor
man in Mansoul, and his name was Mr. Meditation,

one of no great account in the days
of Apostasie, but now of repute with the
best of the Town. This man therefore they
were willing to prefer; now Mr. Letgoodslip
had a great deal of wealth heretofore in
Mansoul, and at Emanuels coming it was sequestred
to the use of the Prince; this therefore
was now given to Mr. Meditation to
improve for the common good, and after him
to his Son Mr. Thinkwell; this Thinkwell he
had by Mrs. Piety his wife, and she was the
daughter of Mr. Recorder.
After this my Lord apprehended Clip-promise,Clip promise taken.
now because he was a notorious Villain,
for by his doings much of the Kings
Coyn was abused, therefore he was made a
publick example. He was arraigned and
judged to be first set in the Pillory, then to
be whipt by all the children and servants in
Mansoul, and then to be hanged till he was
dead. Some may wonder at the severity of
this mans punishment, but those that are
honest Traders in Mansoul, are sensible of
the great abuse that one Clipper of Promises
in little time may do to the Town of Mansoul.
And truly my judgment is that all those
of his name and life should be served even
as he.
He also apprehended Carnal sense,Carnal-sense taken. and put
him in Hold, but how it came about I cannot
tell, but he brake Prison and made his escape.
Yea, and the bold Villain will not yet quit

the Town, but lurks in the Diabolonian dens
a days, and haunts like a Ghost honest mens
houses a nights. Wherefore there was a Proclamation
set up in the Market-place in Mansoul,
signifying that whosoever could discover
Carnal sense, and apprehend him and slay
him, should be admitted daily to the Princes
Table, and should be made keeper of the
Treasure of Mansoul. Many therefore did
bend themselves to do this thing, but take
him and slay him they could not, though often
he was discovered.
Wrong-thoughts of Christ taken.But my Lord took Mr. Wrong thoughts of
Christ, and put him in Prison, and he died
there, though it was long first, for he died of
a lingering Consumption.
Self-love taken.Self-love was also taken and committed to
custody, but there were many that were allied
to him in Mansoul, so his judgment was
deferred, but at last Mr. Self-denial stood up
and said, if such Villains as these may be
winked at in Mansoul, I will lay down my
Commission. He also took him from the
croud, and had him among his Souldiers, and
there he was brained. But some in Mansoul
muttered at it, though none durst speak
plainly, because Emanuel was in Town. But
this brave act of Captain Self-denial came to
the Princes ears, so he sent for him, and made
him a Lord in Mansoul.Captain Self-denial made a Lord. My Lord Wilbewill
also obtained great commendations of Emanuel
for what he had done for the Town of
Mansoul.

Then my Lord Self-denial took courage,
and set to the pursuing of the Diabolonians
with my Lord Wilbewill;Live by feeling taken. and they took Live
by feeling, and they took Legal life, and put
them in hold till they died. But Mr. Unbelief
was a nimble Jack, him they could never
lay hold of, though they attempted to do it
often. He therefore, and some few more of
the subtilest of the Diabolonian tribe, did yet
remain in Mansoul, to the time that Mansoul
left off to dwell any longer in the Kingdom
of Universe But they kept them to their
dens and holes; if one of them did appear
or happen to be seen in any of the streets of
the Town of Mansoul, the whole Town
would be up in arms after them, yea the very
children in Mansoul would cry out after them
as after a thief, and would wish that they
might stone them to death with stones. And
now did Mansoul arrive to some good degree
of peace and quiet,The peace of Mansoul, she minds her trade. her Prince also did abide
within her borders, her Captains also, and
her Souldiers did their duties, and Mansoul
minded her trade that she had with the
Country that was a far off,  also she was
busie in her Manufacture.
When the Town of Mansoul had thus far
rid themselves of so many of their enemies,
and the troublers of their peace; the Prince
sent to them, and appointed a day wherein
he would at the Market place meet the
whole people, and there give them in charge

concerning some further matters, that if
observed would tend to their further safety
and comfort, and to the condemnation and
destruction of their home-bred Diabolonians.
So the day appointed was come, and the
Townsmen met together; Emanuel also came
down in his Chariot, and all his Captains in
their state attending of him on the right
hand, and on the left. Then was an O yes
made for silence, and after some mutual carriages
of love, the Prince began, and thus
proceeded.
You my Mansoul,Emanuels Speech to Mansoul. and the beloved of mine
heart, many and great are the priviledges that
I have bestowed upon you; I have singled you
out from others, and have chosen you to my self, not
for your worthine&esset;, but for mine own sake. I have
also redeemed you, not only from the dread of my
Fathers Law, but from the hand of Diabolus.
This I have done because I loved you, and because
I have set my heart upon you to do you good. I
have also, that all things that might hinder thy
way to the pleasures of Paradise might be taken
out of the way, laid down for thee for thy soul,
a plenary satisfaction, and have bought thee to
my self; A price not of corruptible things as of
silver and gold, but a price of blood, mine own
blood, which I have freely spilt upon the ground
to make thee mine. So I have reconciled thee, O
my Mansoul, to my Father, and intrusted thee
in the mansion-houses that are with my Father in
the Royal City, where things are, O my Mansoul,

that eye hath not seen, nor hath entred into the
heart of man to conceive.
Besides, O my Mansoul, thou seest what I have
done, and how I have taken thee out of the hands
of thine enemies; unto whom thou hadst deeply
revolted from my Father, and by whom thou
wast content to be possessed, and also to be destroyed.
I came to thee first by my Law, then by my
Gospel to awaken thee, and shew thee my glory.
And thou knowest what thou wast, what thou
saidest, what thou didst, and how many times
thou rebelledst against my Father and me; yet I
left thee not, as thou seest this day, but came to
thee, have born thy manners, have waited upon
thee, and after all accepted of thee, even of my
meer grace and favour; and would not suffer
thee to be lost as thou most willingly wouldest
have been. I also compassed thee about, and afflicted
thee on every side, that I might make thee
weary of thy ways, and bring down thy heart
with molestation to a willingne&esset; to close with thy
good and happine&esset;. And when I had gotten a
compleat conquest over thee, I turned it to thy
advantage.
Thou seest also what a company of my Fathers
host I have lodged within thy borders, Captains
and Rulers, Souldiers and men of war, Engines
and excellent devices to subdue and bring down
thy foes; thou knowest my meaning, O Mansoul.
And they are my servants, & thine too, Mansoul.
Yea, my design of possessing of thee with them, and
the natural tendency of each of them is to defend,

purge, strengthen, and sweeten thee for my self,
O Mansoul, and to make thee meet for my Fathers
presence, blessing and glory; for thou, my
Mansoul, art created to be prepared unto these.
Thou seest moreover, my Mansoul, how I have
passed by thy back-slidings, and have healed thee.
Indeed I was angry with thee, but I have turned
mine anger away from thee, because I loved thee
still, and mine anger and mine indignation is
ceased in the destruction of thine enemies, O Mansoul.
Nor did thy goodne&esset; fetch me again unto
thee, after that I for thy transgressions have hid
my face, and withdrawn my presence from thee.
The way of back-sliding was thine, but the way
and means of thy recovery was mine. I invented
the means of thy return; it was I that made
an hedge and a wall, when thou wast beginning
to turn to things in which I delighted not. 'Twas
I that made thy sweet, bitter; thy day, night;
thy smooth way, thorny, and that also confounded
all that sought thy destruction. 'Twas I that set
Mr. Godlyfear to work in Mansoul. 'Twas I
that stirred up thy Conscience and Understanding,
thy Will and thy Affections, after thy
great and woful decay. 'Twas I that put life into
thee, O Mansoul, to seek me, that thou mightest
find me, and in thy finding find thine own
health, happine&esset; and salvation. 'Twas I that
fetched the second time the Diabolonians out of
Mansoul; and 'twas I that overcame them,
and that destroyed them before thy face.
And now, my Mansoul, I am returned to

thee in peace, and thy transgressions against me,
are as if they had not been. Nor shall it be with
thee as in former days, but I will do better for
thee than at thy beginning. For yet a little while,
O my Mansoul,  even after a few more times are
gone over thy head, I will (but be not then troubled
at what I say) take down this famous Town
of Mansoul, stick and stone, to the ground. And
will carry the stones thereof, and the timber
thereof, and the walls thereof, and the dust thereof,
and the inhabitants thereof, into mine own
Country, even into the Kingdom of my Father;
and will there set it up in such strength and glory,
as it never did see in the Kingdom where now it is
placed. I will even there set it up for my Fathers
habitation, for, for that purpose it was at first erected
in the Kingdom of Universe; and there will
I make it a spectacle of wonder, a monument
of mercy, and the admirer of its own mercy.
There shall the Natives of Mansoul see all that
of which they have seen nothing here; there shall
they be equal to those unto whom they have been
inferiour here. And there shalt thou, O my Mansoul,
have such communion with me, with my Father,
and with your Lord Secretary, as is not
possible here to be enjoyed. Nor ever could be,
shouldest thou love in Universe the space of a thousand
years.
And there, O my Mansoul, thou shalt be afraid
of murderers, no more; of Diabolonians, and
their threats, no more. There, there shall be no
more Plots, nor contrivances, nor designs against

thee, O my Mansoul. There thou shalt no more
hear the evil tidings, or the noise of the Diabolonian
Drum. There thou shalt not see the Diabolonian
Standard-bearers, nor yet behold
Diabolus his Standard. No Diabolonian
Mount shall be cast up against thee there, nor
shall there the Diabolonian Standard be set up
to make thee afraid. There thou shalt not need
Captains, Engines, Souldiers, and men of war.
There thou shalt meet with no sorrow, nor grief,
nor shall it be possible that any Diabolonian
should again (for ever) be able to creep into thy
skirts, burrow in thy walls, or be seen again
within thy borders all the days of eternity. Life
shall there last longer, than here you are able to
desire it should, and yet it shall always be sweet
and new, nor shall any impediment attend it for
ever.
There, O Mansoul, thou shalt meet with many
of those that have been like thee, and that have
been partakers of thy sorrows; even such as I
have chosen, and redeemed and set apart as
thou for my Fathers Court and City Royal. All
they will be glad in thee, and thou when thou
seest them, shalt be glad in thine heart.
There are things, O Mansoul, even things of
thy Fathers providing and mine, that never were
seen since the beginning of the world, and they are
laid up with my Father, and sealed up among his
Treasures for thee, till thou shalt come thither to
enjoy them. I told you before that I would remove
my Mansoul, and set it up else-where, and where

I will set it, there are those that love thee, and
those that rejoice in thee now, but how much more
when they shall see thee exalted to honour. My
Father will then send them for you to fetch you;
and their bosoms are chariots to put you in.  And
you, O my Mansoul, shall ride upon the wings of
the wind. They will come to convey, conduct, and
bring you to that, when your eyes see more, that
will be your desired haven.
And thus, O my Mansoul, I have shewed unto
thee what shall be done to thee hereafter, if thou
canst hear, if thou canst understand; and now I
will tell thee what at present must be thy duty and
practice, until I shall come and fetch thee to my
self, according as is related in the Scriptures of
truth.
First, I charge thee that thou dost hereafter
keep more white and clean the liveries which I
gave thee before my last withdrawing from thee.
Do it, I say, for this will be thy wisdom. They
are in themselves fine linnen, but thou must keep
them white and clean. This will be your wisdom,
your honour, and will be greatly for my glory.
When your Garments are white, the world will
count you mine. Also when your garments are
white, then I am delighted in your ways; for
then your goings to and fro will be like a flash of
lightning, that those that are present must take
notice of, also their eyes will be made to dazle
thereat. Deck thy self therefore according to
my bidding, and make thy self by my Law
straight steps for thy feet, so shall thy King greatly

desire thy beauty, for he is thy Lord, and worship
thou him.
Now that thou maist keep them as I bid thee, I
have, as I before did tell thee, provided for thee
an open fountain to wash thy garments in. Look
therefore that thou wash often in my fountain, and
go not in defiled garments; for as it is to my
dishonour, and my disgrace, so it will be to thy
discomfort,  when you shall walk in filthy garments.
Let not therefore my garments, your garments,
the garments that I gave thee,  be defiled or spotted
by the flesh. Keep thy garments always white, and
let thy head lack no ointment.
My Mansoul, I have oft-times delivered thee
from the designs, plots, attempts, and conspiracies
of Diabolus, and for all this I ask thee nothing,
but that thou render not to me evil for my good,
but that thou bear in mind my love, and the continuation
of my kindne&esset; to my beloved Mansoul,
so as to provoke thee to walk, in thy measure, according
to the benefit bestowed on thee. Of old the
Sacrifices were bound with cords to the horns of
the Golden altar. Consider what is said to thee, O
my blessed Mansoul.
O my Mansoul, I have lived, I have died, I
live, and will die no more for thee. I live that
thou maist not die. Because I live thou shalt live
also. I reconciled thee to my Father by the blood
of my Cro&esset;, and being reconciled thou shalt live
through me. I will pray for thee, I will fight for
thee, I will yet do thee good.
Nothing can hurt thee but sin; nothing can

grieve me but sin; nothing can make thee base
before thy foes but sin: Take heed of sin, my
Mansoul.
And dost thou know why I at first, and do still
suffer Diabolonians to dwell in thy walls, O
Mansoul? it is to keep thee wakening, to try thy
love, to make thee watchful, and to cause thee yet
to prize my noble Captains, their Souldiers, and
my mercy.
It is also that yet thou maist be made to remember
what a deplorable condition thou once wast in
I mean when, not some, but all did dwell, not in
thy walls, but in thy Castle, and in thy strong
hold, O Mansoul.
O my Mansoul, should I slay all them within,
many there be without that would bring thee
into bondage; for were all those within cut off,
those without would find thee sleeping, and then as
in a moment they would swallow up my Mansoul.&lhand; I
therefore left them in thee, not to do thee hurt
(the which they yet will, if thou hearken to them,
and serve them) but to do thee good, the which
they must if thou watch and fight against them.
Know therefore that whatever they shall tempt
thee to, my design is that they should drive thee,
not further off, but nearer to my Father, to learn
thee war, to make Petitioning desirable to thee,
and to make thee little in thine own eyes. Hearken
diligently to this my Mansoul.
Shew me then thy love my Mansoul, and let
not those that are within thy walls, take thy affections
off from him that hath redeemed thy soul.

Yea, let the sight of a Diabolonian heighten
thy love to me. I came once and twice, and thrice
to save thee from the poyson of those arrows that
would have wrought thy death; stand for me,
thy friend, my Mansoul, against the Diabolonians,
and I will stand for thee before my Father,
and all his Court. Love me against temptation,
and I will love thee notwithstanding thine
infirmities.
O my Mansoul, remember what my Captains,
my Souldiers, and mine Engines have done for
thee. They have fought for thee, they have suffered
by thee, they have born much at thy hands
to do thee good, O Mansoul. Hadst thou not
had them to help thee, Diabolus had certainly
made a hand of thee. Nourish them therefore
my Mansoul. When thou dost well, they
will be well, when thou dost ill, they will be ill,
and sick, and weak. &rhand;Make not my Captains
sick, O Mansoul, for if they be sick, thou canst
not be well; if they be weak, thou canst not be
strong; if they be faint, thou canst not be stout
and valiant for thy King, O Mansoul. Nor
must thou think always to live by sense, thou
must live upon my Word. Thou must believe,
O my Mansoul, when I am from thee, that yet
I love thee, and bear thee upon mine heart
for ever.
Remember therefore, O my Mansoul, that
thou art beloved of me; as I have therefore

taught thee to watch, to fight, to pray, and to
make war against my foes, so now I command
thee to believe that my love is constant to thee.
O my Mansoul, how have I set my heart, my
love upon thee, watch. Behold, I lay none
other burden upon thee, than what thou
hast already, hold fast till I come.