

Sir,
Notwithstanding your constant
Refusal, when I have asked
Leave to prefix your Name to
this Dedication, I must still insist on
my Right to desire your Protection of
this Work. 

To you, Sir, it is owing that this
History was ever begun. It was by
your Desire that I first thought of such
a Composition. So many Years have
since past, that you may have, perhaps,
forgotten this Circumstance: But
your Desires are to me in the Nature
of Commands; and the Impression
of them is never to be erased from
my Memory. 
Again, Sir, without your Assistance
this History had never been completed. 
Be not startled at the Assertion. I
do not intend to draw on you the
Suspicion of being a Romance Writer. 
I mean no more than that I partly owe
to you my Existence during great Part 

of the Time which I have employed
in composing it: another Matter which
it may be necessary to remind you of; 
since there are certain Actions of which
you are apt to be extremely forgetful; 
but of these I hope. I shall always
have a better Memory than yourself. 
Lastly, it is owing to you that the
History appears what it now is. If
there be in this Work, as some have
been pleased to say, a stronger Picture
of a truly benevolent Mind than is to
be found in any other, who that knows
you, and a particular Acquaintance of
yours, will doubt whence that Benevolence
hath been copied? The World
will not, I believe, make me the 

Compliment of thinking I took it from
myself. I care not: This they shall
own, that the two Persons from whom
I have taken it, that is to say, two of
the best and worthiest Men in the
World, are strongly and zealously my
Friends: I might be contented with
this, and yet my Vanity will add a
third to the Number; and him one of
the greatest and noblest, not only in
his Rank, but in every public and private
Virtue. But here whilst my Gratitude
for the princely Benefactions of
the Duke of Bedford bursts from my
Heart, you must forgive my reminding
you, that it was you who first recommended
me to the Notice of my Benefactor. 

And what are your Objections to
the Allowance of the Honour which I
have sollicited? Why, you have commended
the Book so warmly, that you
should be ashamed of reading your
Name before the Dedication. Indeed,
Sir, if the Book itself doth not make
you ashamed of your Commendations,
nothing that I can here write will, or
ought, I am not to give up my Right
to your Protection and Patronage, because
you have commended by Book: 
For though I acknowledge to many Obligations
to you, I do not add this to
the Number; in which Friendship, I
am convinced, hath so little Share: 
Since that can neither biass your Judgment,
nor pervert your Integrity. An
Enemy may at any Time obtain your 

Commendation by only deserving it; 
and the utmost which the Faults of
your Friends can hope for is your Silence; 
or, perhaps, if too severely accused,
your gentle Palliation. 
In short, Sir, I suspect, that your
Dislike of public Praise is your true
Objection to granting my Request. I
have observed, that you have, in common
with my two other Friends, an
Unwillingness to hear the least Mention
of your own Virtues; that, as a great
Poet says of one of you, (he might
justly have said it of all three) you 

Do Good by stealth, and blush to find it Fame.
If Men of this Disposition are as
careful to shun Applause, as others 

are to escape Censure, how just must
be your Apprehension of your Character
falling into my Hands; since
what would not a Man have Reason
to dread, if attacked by an Author who
had received from him Injuries equal
to my Obligations to you! 
And will not this Dread of Censure
increase in Proportion to the Matter
which a Man is conscious of having afforded
for it? If his whole Life, for
Instance, should have been one continued
Subject of Satire, he may well
tremble when an incensed Satyrist takes
him in Hand. Now, Sir, if we apply
this to your modest Aversion to
Panegyric, how reasonable will your
Fears of me appear! 

Yet surely you might have gratified
my Ambition, from this single Confidence,
that I shall always prefer the
Indulgence of your Inclinations to the
Satisfaction of my own. A very strong
Instance of which I shall give you in
this Address; in which I am determined
to follow the Example of all other
Dedicators, and will consider not what
my Patron really deserves to have written,
but what he will be best pleased to
read. 
Without further Preface then, I here
present you with the Labours of some
Years of my Life. What Merit these Labours
have is already known to yourself. 
If, from your favourable Judgment, I 

have conceived rome Esteem for them,
it cannot be imputed to Vanity; since
I should have agreed as implicitly to
your Opinion, had it been given in Favour
of any other Man's Production. 
Negatively, at least, I may be allowed
to say, that had I been sensible of any
great Demerit in the Work, you are
the last Person to whose Protection I
would have ventured to recommend
it. 
From the Name of my Patron, indeed,
I hope my Reader will be convinced,
at his very Entrance on this
Work, that he will find in the whole
Course of it nothing prejudicial to the
Cause of Religion and Virtue; nothing
inconsistent with the strictest Rules of 

Decency, nor which can offend even
the chastest Eye in the Perusal. On
the contrary, I declare, that to recommend
Goodness and Innocence hath
been my sincere Endeavour in this
History. This honest Purpose you have
been pleased to think I have attained: 
And to say the Truth, it is likeliest to
be attained in Books of this Kind; 
for an Example is a Kind of Picture,
in which Virtue becomes as it were
an Object of Sight, and strikes us
with an Idea of that Loveliness, which
Plato asserts there is in her naked
Charms. 
Besides displaying that Beauty of Virtue
which may attract the Admiration
of Mankind, I have attempted to engage 

a stronger Motive to Human
Action in her Favour, by convincing
Men, that their true Interest directs
them to a Pursuit of her. For this
Purpose I have shewn, that no Acquisitions
of Guilt can compensate the
Loss of that solid inward Comfort of
Mind, which is the sure Companion
of Innocence and Virtue; nor can in
the least balance the Evil of that Horror
and Anxiety which, in their Room,
Guilt introduces into our Bosoms. And
again, that as these Acquisitions are in
themselves generally worthless, so are
the Means to attain them not only base
and infamous, but at best incertain, and
always full of Danger. Lastly, I have
endeavoured strongly to inculcate, that
Virtue and Innocence can scarce ever 

be injured but by Indiscretion; and
that it is this alone which often betrays
them into the Snares that Deceit
and Villainy spread for them. A Moral
which I have the more industriously
laboured, as the teaching it is, of all
others, the likeliest to be attended with
Success; since, I believe, it is much
easier to make good Men wise, than
to make bad Men good. 
For these Purposes I have employed
all the Wit and Humour of which
I am Master in the following History; 
wherein I have endeavoured to laugh
Mankind out of their favourite Follies
and Vices. How far I have succeeded
in this good Attempt, I shall submit to
the candid Reader, with only two Requests: 

First, That he will not expect
to find Perfection in this Work; 
and Secondly, That he will excuse
some Parts of it, if they fall short of
that little Merit which I hope may
appear in others. 
I will detain you, Sir, no longer. 
Indeed I have run into a Preface, while
I professed to write a Dedication. But
how can it be otherwise? I dare not
praise you; and the only Means I know
of to avoid it, when you are in my
Thoughts, are either to be entirely
silent, or to turn my Thoughts to
some other Subject. 
Pardon, therefore, what I have said
in this Epistle, not only without your 

Consent, but absolutely against it; and
give me at least Leave, in this public
Manner, to declare, that I am, with
the highest Respect and Gratitude, 
SIR,
Your most Obliged,
Obedient Humble Servant,  
Henry Fielding.