


Of Hats. 
He had now got together a very considerable
Gang, composed of undone
Gamesters, ruined Bailiffs, broken Tradesmen,
idle Apprentices, and loose and disorderly
Youth, who being born to no Fortune,
nor bred to no Trade or Profession,
were willing to live luxuriously without
Labour. As these Persons wore different
Principles, i. e. Hats, frequent Dissentions
grew among them. There were particularly
two Parties, viz. those who wore Hats
fiercely cocked, and those who preferr'd the
Nab or Trencher Hat, with the Brim flapping
over their Eyes; between which, Jars
and Animosities almost perpetually arose. 
Wild, therefore, having assembled them all
at an Alehouse on the Night after Fierce's
Execution, and perceiving evident Marks of
their Misunderstanding, from their Behaviour
to each other, addressed them in the 

following gentle, but forcible Manner * . 
“Gentlemen, I am ashamed to see Men 

embarked in so GREAT and glorious an
Undertaking, as that of robbing the Publick,
so foolishly and weakly dissenting
among themselves. Do you think the
first Inventors of Hats, or at least of
those Distinctions between them, really
conceived that one Form of Hats should
inspire a Man with Divinity, another
with Law, another with Learning, or another
with Bravery? No, they meant no
more by these outward Signs, than to
impose on the Vulgar, and instead of
putting great Men to the Trouble of
acquiring or maintaining the Substance,
to make it sufficient that they condescend
to wear the Type or Shadow of it. 
You do wisely, therefore, when in a
Crowd, to amuse the Mob by Quarrels
on such Accounts, that while they are
listening to your Jargon, you may with
the greater Ease and Safety, pick their
Pockets: But surely to be in earnest, and
privately to keep up such a ridiculous
Contention among yourselves, must argue
the highest Folly and Absurdity. 
When you know you are all Prigs,
what Difference can a broad or a narrow 

Brim create? Is a Prig less a Prig in
one Hat than in another? If the Public
should be weak enough to interest
themselves in your Quarrels, and to prefer
one Pack to the other, while both
are aiming at their Purses; it is your
Business to laugh at, not imitate their
Folly. What can be more ridiculous
than for Gentlemen to quarrel about Hats,
when there is not one among you, whose
Hat is worth a Farthing. What is the
Use of a Hat, farther than to keep the
Head warm, or to hide a bald Crown
from the Public? It is the Mark of a
Gentleman to move his Hat on every
Occasion; and in Courts and noble Assemblies,
no man ever wears one. Let
me hear no more therefore of this
Childish Disagreement, but all toss up
your Hats together with one Accord,
and consider that Hat as the best,
which will contain the largest Booty.” 
He thus ended his Speech, which was followed
by a murmuring Applause, and immediately
all present tossed their Hats together,
as he had commanded them. 