


An Account of the Wheel of Fortune,
with a Method of preparing a Spirit
for this World. 
We now proceeded on our Journey,
without staying to see whether he
fulfilled his Word or no; and without encountering
any thing worth mentioning, came
to the Place where the Spirits on their Passage 

to the other World were obliged to decide
by Lot the Station in which every one was
to act there. Here was a monstrous Wheel,
infinitely larger than those in which I had
formerly seen Lottery Tickets deposited. 
This was called the Wheel of Fortune. 
The Goddess herself was present. She was
one of the most deformed Females I ever
beheld; nor could I help observing the
Frowns she exprest when any beautiful Spirit
of her own Sex passed by her, nor the Affability
which smiled in her Countenance on the Approach
of any handsome Male Spirits. Hence
I accounted for the Truth of an Observation
I had often made on Earth, that nothing is
more fortunate than handsome Men, nor
more unfortunate than handsome Women. 
The Reader may be perhaps pleased with an
Account of the whole Method of equipping a
Spirit for his Entrance into the Flesh. 
First then, he receives from a very sage
Person, whose Look much resembled that of
an Apothecary, (his Warehouse likewise
bearing an affinity to an Apothecary's Shop)
a small Phial inscribed, The Pathetic
Potion, to be taken just before you are born. 

This Potion is a Mixture of all the Passions,
but in no exact Proportion, so that sometimes
one predominates and sometimes another; 
nay, often in the hurry of making up, one particular
Ingredient is as we were informed
left out. The Spirit receiveth at the same
time another Medicine called the Nousphoric
Decoction, of which he is to
drink ad Libitum. This Decoction is an Extract
from the Faculties of the Mind, sometimes
extremely strong and spirituous, and
sometimes altogether as weak: for very little
Care is taken in the Preparation. This Decoction
is so extremely bitter and unpleasant,
that notwithstanding its Wholesomeness, several
Spirits will not be persuaded to swallow
a Drop of it; but throw it away, or give
it to any other who will receive it: by which
means some who were not disgusted by the
Nauseousness, drank double and treble Portions. 
I observed a beautiful young Female,
who tasting it immediately from Curiosity,
screwed up her Face and cast it from her
with great disdain, whence advancing presently
to the Wheel, she drew a Coronet,
which she clapped up so eagerly, that I could
not distinguish the Degree; and indeed, I 

observed several of the same Sex, after a very
small sip, throw the Bottles away. 
As soon as the Spirit is dismissed by the
Operator, or Apothecary, he is at liberty to
approach the Wheel, where he hath a Right
to extract a single Lot: but those whom
Fortune favours, she permits sometimes secretly
to draw three or four. I observed a
comical kind of Figure who drew forth a
Handful, which when he opened, were a
Bishop, a General, a Privy-Counsellor, a
Player and a Poet Laureate, and returning
the three first, he walked off smiling with
the two last. 
Every single Lot contained two or more
Articles, which were generally disposed so as
to render the Lots as equal as possible to each
other. 

On one was writtenEarl,
Riches,
Health,
Disquietude.

On another,Cobler,
Sickness,
Good-Humour.
On a Third,Poet,
Contempt,
Self-Satisfaction.
On a Fourth,General,
Honour,
Discontent.
On a Fifth,Cottage,
Happy-Love.
On a Sixth,Coach and Six,
Impotent jealous Husband.
On a Seventh,Prime-Minister,
Disgrace.
On an Eighth,Patriot,
Glory.
On a Ninth.Philosopher,
Poverty,
Ease.

On a Tenth, Merchant,
Riches,
Care.
And indeed the whole seemed to contain
such a Mixture of Good and Evil, that it
would have puzzled me which to chuse. I
must not omit here, that in every Lot was
directed, whether the Drawer should marry
or remain in Celibacy, the married Lots being
all marked with a large Pair of Horns. 
We were obliged, before we quitted this
Place, to take each of us an Emetic from the
Apothecary, which immediately purged us
of all our earthly Passions, and presently the
Cloud forsook our Eyes, as it doth those
of Æneas in Virgil when removed by Venus,
and we discerned Things in a much clearer
Light than before. We began to compassionate
those Spirits who were making their
Entry into the Flesh, whom we had till then
secretly envied, and to long eagerly for those
delightful Plains which now opened themselves
to our Eyes, and to which we now
hastened with the utmost Eagerness. On our 

way, we met with several Spirits with very
dejected Countenances: but our Expedition
would not suffer us to ask any Questions. 
At length, we arrived at the Gate of
Elysium. Here was a prodigious Croud of
Spirits waiting for Admittance, some of whom
were admitted and some were rejected: for
all were strictly examined by the Porter,
whom I soon discovered to be the celebrated
Judge Minos. 