



Tho' Count D'elmont never had
any Tenderness for Alovisa,
and her Extravagance of Rage and
Jealousy, join'd to his Passion for
Melliora, had every Day abated
it, yet the manner of her Death was
too great a Shock to the Sweetness of his Disposition,
to be easily worn off; he cou'd not remember
her Uneasiness, without reflecting that it sprung
only from her too violent Affection for him; and
tho' there was no Possibility of living happily with
her, when he considered that she died not only
for him, but by his Hand, his Compassion for the 

Cause, and Horror for the unwish'd, as well as
undesign'd Event, drew Lamentations from him,
more sincere, perhaps, than some of Husbands,
who call themselves very loving Ones, wou'd
make. 
To alleviate the Troubles of his Mind, he had
endeavour'd all he cou'd, to persuade Melliora
to continue in his House; but that afflicted Lady
was not to be prevail'd upon; she look'd on herself,
as in a manner, accessary to Alovisa's
Death, and thought the least she ow'd to her Reputation
was to see the Count no more; and tho' in
the forming this Resolution, she felt Torments unconceivable,
yet the Strength of her Virtue enabled
her to keep it, and she return'd to the Monastery,
where she had been educated, carrying with
her nothing of that Peace of Mind with which she
left it. 
Not many Days pass'd between her Departure
and the Count's; he took his way towards Italy,
by the Persuasions of his Brother, who, since he
found him bent to travel, hop'd that Garden of
the World might produce something to divert his
Sorrows: He took two Servants with him, and
those rather for Conveniency than State: Ambition,
once his darling Passion, was now wholly extinguish'd
in him by these Misfortunes, and he no
longer thought of making a Figure in the World; 
but his Love nothing cou'd abate, and 'tis to be
believ'd that the Violence of that wou'd have driven
him to the Use of some fatal Remedy, if the Chevalier
Brillian, to whom he left the Care of
Melliora's and her Brother's Fortune as well
as his own, had not, tho' with much difficulty, obtain'd
a Promise from her, of conversing with him
by Letters. 
This was all he had to keep Hope alive; and
indeed it was no inconsiderable Consolation, for
she that allows a Correspondence of that Kind with 

a Man that has any Interest in her Heart, can never
persuade herself, while she does so, to make
him become indifferent to her. When we give
ourselves the Liberty of even talking of the Person
we have once lov'd, and find the least Pleasure
in that Discourse, 'tis ridiculous to imagine
we are free from that Passion, without which, the
mention of it would be but insipid to our Ears,
and, the Remembrance to our Minds; tho' our
Words are never so cold, they are the Effects of a
secret Fire, which burns not with less Strength for
not being dilated. The Count had too much Experience
of all the Walks and Turns of Passion to
be ignorant of this, if Melliora had endeavour'd
to disguise her Sentiments; but she went
not so far, she thought it a sufficient Vindication
of her Virtue, to with-hold the rewarding of his
Love, without feigning a Coldness to which she
was a Stranger; and he had the Satisfaction to observe
a Tenderness in her Stile, which assur'd him,
that her Heart was unalterably his, and very much
strengthen'd his Hopes, that one Day her Person
might be so too, when Time had a little effac'd
the Memory of those Circumstances, which had
oblig'd her to put this Constraint on her Inclinations. 
He wrote to her from every Post-Town, and
waited till he receiv'd an Answer: by this means
his Journey was extremely tedious; but no Adventures
of any Moment falling in his Way till he
came to Rome, I shall not trouble my Readers with
a Recital of Particulars which cou'd be no way entertaining. 
But how strangely do they deceive themselves,
who fancy that they are Lovers, yet on every little
Turn of Fortune, or change of Circumstance, are
agitated with any Vehemence, by Cares of a far
different Nature? Love is too jealous, too arbitrary
a Monarch to suffer any other Passion to equalize 

himself in that Heart where he has fix'd his Throne. 
When once enter'd, he becomes the whole Business
of our Lives, we think—we dream of nothing
else, nor have a Wish not inspir'd by him:
Those who have the Power to apply themselves so
seriously to any other Consideration as to forget
him, tho' but for a Moment, are but Lovers in
Conceit, and have entertain'd Desire but as an agreeable
Amusement, which when attended with
any Inconvenience, they may without much difficulty
shake off. Such a sort of Passion may be properly
enough call'd Liking, but falls widely short of
Love. Love, is what we can neither resist, expel
nor even alleviate, if we should never so vigorously
attempt it; and tho' some have boasted,
Thus far will I yield, and no farther, they have been
convinc'd of the Vanity of forming such Resolutions
by the Impossibility of keeping them. Liking,
is a flashy Flame, which is to be kept alive only
by Ease and Delight. Love, needs not this Fewel
to maintain its Fire, it survives in Absence, and
Disappointments, it endures, unchill'd, the wintry
Blasts of cold Indifference and Neglect, and continues
its Blaze, even in a Storm of Hatred and
Ingratitude, and Reason, Pride, or a just Sensibility
of conscious Worth, in vain oppose it. Liking,
plays gaily round, feeds on the Sweets in gross,
but is wholly insensible of the Thorns which guard
the nicer and more refined Delicacies of Desire,
and can consequently give neither Pain, nor Pleasure
in any superlative Degree. Love creates intollerable
Torments! unspeakable Joys! raises us to
the highest Heaven of Happiness, or sinks us to
the lowest Hell of Misery. 
Count D'elmont experienced the Truth of
this Assertion; for neither his just Concern for the
Manner of Alovisa's Death cou'd curb the Exuberance
of his Joy, when he consider'd himself
belov'd by Melliora, nor any Diversion, of 

which Rome afforded great Variety, be able to
make him support being absent from her with Moderation. 
There are, I believe, but few modern
Lovers, how passionate and constant soever they
pretend to be, who wou'd not in the Count's Circumstances
have found some Matter of Consolation; 
but he seem'd wholly dead to Gaiety. In
vain all the Roman Nobility courted his Acquaintance; 
in vain the Ladies made use of their utmost
Artifice to engage him: He preferr'd a solitary
Walk, a lonely Shade, or the Bank of some purling
Stream, where he undisturb'd might contemplate
on his beloved Melliora, to all the
noisy Pleasures of the Court, or the Endearments
of the inviting Fair. In fine, he shunn'd as much
as possible all Conversation with the Men, or Correspondence
with the Women; returning all their
Billet-Deux, of which scarce a Day past without
his receiving some, unanswer'd. 
This Manner of Behaviour in a little Time deliver'd
him from the Persecutions of the Discreet; 
but having receiv'd one Letter, which he had us'd
as he had done the rest, it was immediately seconded
by another; both which contain'd as follows. 

Letter I.

To the never enough Admir'd Count D'elmont.
In your Country, where Women are allowed the Previlege
of being seen and address'd to, it would be
a Crime unpardonable to Modesty, to make the first
Advances. But here, where rigid Rules are Bar's,
as well to Reason, as to Nature, it wou'd be as great
a one, to feign an Insensibility of your Merit. I say,
feign, for I look on it, as an Impossibility really to behold
you with Indifferency: But, if I cou'd believe
that any of my Sex were in good earnest so dull, I must
confess, I shou'd envy that happy Stupidity, which
wou'd secure me from the Pains such a Passion as you
create, must inflict; unless, from the Millions whom
your Charms have reach'd, you have yet a Corner
of your Heart unprepossest; and an Inclination willing
to receive the Impression of, 
Your most Passionate and Tender,
(but 'till she receive a favourable Answer)
Your unknown Adorer. 


Letter II.

To the Ungrateful D'elmont.
Unworthy of the Happiness design'd you! Is it thus
that you return the Condescension of a Lady? 
How fabulous is Report, which speaks those of
your Country, warm and full of amorous Desires? — 
Thou sure, art colder than the bleak northern Islanders
—Dull, stupid Wretch! insensible of every Passion
which give Lustre to the Soul, and distinguish Man
from Brute! —Without Gratitude! —Without Love! — 
Without Desire—Dead, even to Curiosity! —How
I cou'd despise thee for this Narrowness of Mind, were
there not something in thy Eyes and Mien which assure
me, that this negligent Behaviour is but affected; and
that there are within thy Breast, some Seeds of hidden
Fire, which want but the Influence of Charms, more
potent perhaps than you have yet beheld, to kindle
into Blaze. Make haste then to be enliven'd, for I
flatter myself 'tis in my Power to work this Wonder,
and long to inspire so lovely a Form with Sentiments
only worthy of it. —The Bearer of this, is a Person
who I dare confide in—Delay not to come with him; 
for when once you are taught what 'tis to love, you'll
not be ignorant that doubtful Expectation is the worst
of Racks, and from your own Experience, pity what
I feel, thus chill'd with Doubt, yet burning with Desire. 
Yours impatiently. 


The Count was pretty much surpriz'd at the
odd Turn of this Billet; but being willing to put
an End to the Lady's Trouble, as well as his own,
sat down and without giving himself much Time to
think, writ these Lines in answer to hers. 

To the fair Incognita.
Madam,
If you have no other Design in Writing to me, than
your Diversion, methinks my Mourning Habit, to
which my Countenance and Behaviour are no way
unconformable, might inform you, I am little dispos'd
for Raillery. If in Earnest, you can find any thing
in me which pleases you, I must confess myself entirely
unworthy of the Honour, not only by my personal
Demerits, but by the Resolution I have made of conversing
with none of your Sex while I continue in
Italy. I shou'd be sorry, however, to incur the Aspersion
of an unmannerly Contemner of Favours,
which tho' I do not desire, I pretend not to deserve. 
I therefore beg you will believe that I return this, as
I did the former, only to let you see, that since I decline
making any use of your Condescensions to my Advantage,
I am not ungenerous enough to do so to your
Prejudice, and to all Ladies deserving the Regard of
a disinterested Well-wisher, shall be an 
Humble Servant,
D'elmont. 

The Count order'd one of his Servants to deliver
this Letter to the Person who brought the other; 
but he return'd immediately with it in his
Hand, and told his Lordship, that he cou'd not prevail 

on the Fellow to take it; that he said he had
business with the Count, and must needs see him; 
and was so importunate, that he seem'd rather to
Demand, than Entreat a Grant of his Request. 
D'elmont was astonish'd, as well he might, but
commanded he should be admitted. 
Nothing cou'd be more comical than the
Appearance of this Fellow; he seem'd to be about
threescore Years of Age, but Time had not been
the greatest Enemy to his Face, for the Number of
Scars was far exceeding that of Wrinkles; he was
tall above the common Stature, but so lean, that
till he spoke, he might have been taken for one of
those Wretches who have pass'd the Hands of the
Anatomists; nor wou'd his Walk have dissipated that
Opinion, for all his Motions, as he enter'd the Chamber,
had more of the Air of Clock-work, than of Nature; 
his Dress was no less particular; he had on
a Suit of Cloaths, which might perhaps have been
good in the Days of his Great-Grandfather, but
the Person who they fitted must have been five
times larger about the Body than him who wore
them; a large broad Buff Belt however remedy'd
that Inconvenience, and girt them close about his
Waste, in which hung a Faulchion, two Daggers,
and a Sword of a more than ordinary Extent; the
rest of his Equipage was a Cloak, which buttoning
round his Neck, fell not so low as his Hips; a Hat,
which in rainy Weather kept his Shoulders dry
much better than an Indian Umbrella, one Glove,
and a formidable Pair of Whiskers. As soon as
he saw the Count, my Lord, said he, with a very
impudent Air, my Orders were to bring yourself,
not a Letter from you; nor do I use to be employ'd
in Affairs of this Nature, but to serve one
of the richest and most beautiful Ladies in Rome,
who I assure you, it will be dangerous to disoblige. 
D'elmont ey'd him intentively all the time he
spoke, and cou'd scarce, notwithstanding his Chagrin, 

forbear laughing at the Figure he made, and
the Manner of his Salutation. I know not, answer'd
he ironically, what Employments you have
been us'd to, but certainly you appear to me, one
of the most unfit Persons in the World for what
you now undertake; and if the Contents of the Paper
you brought me, had not inform'd me of
your Abilities this Way, I should never have suspected
you for one of Cupid's Agents. You are
merry, my Lord, reply'd the other, but I must
tell you, I am a Man of Family and Honour, and
shall not put up an Affront; but, continued he,
shaking the few Hairs which frequent Skirmishes
had left upon his Head, I shall defer my own Satisfaction,
'till I have procur'd the Lady's; therefore,
if your Lordship will prepare to follow, I
shall walk before, at a perceivable Distance, and
without St. Peter's Key, open the Gate of Heaven. 
I should be apt (said the Count, not able to keep
his Countenance at these Words) rather to take
it for the other Place; but be it as it will, I have
not the least Inclination to make the Experiment,
therefore you may walk as soon as you please without
expecting me to accompany you. Then you
absolutely refuse to go (cry'd the Fellow, clapping
his Hand on his Forehead, and staring at him, as
if he meant to scare him into Compliance!) Yes
(answer'd the Count, laughing more and more)
I shall neither go, nor waste any farther Time or
Words with you, so wou'd advise you not to be
saucy, or tarry till my Anger gets the better of my
Mirth, but take the Letter and be gone, and trouble
me no more. The other, at these Words laid his
Hand on his Sword, and was about to make some
very impudent Reply, when D'elmont, growing
weary of his Impertinence, made a Sign to his
Servants, that they shou'd turn him out, which he
perceiving, took up the Letter without being bid
a second Time, and muttering some unintelligible 

Curses between his Teeth, march'd out, in the
same affected Strut with which he enter'd. 
This Adventure, tho' surprizing enough to a
Person so entirely unacquainted with the Character
and Behaviour of these Bravo's as D'elmont
was, gave him but very little Matter of Reflection,
and it being the Time for Evening Service at St. Peter's,
he went, according to his Custom, to hear
Vespers there. 
Nothing is more common, than for the
Nobility and Gentry of Rome, to divert themselves
with walking and talking to one another in the
Collonade after Mass; and the Count, tho' averse to
all other publick Assemblies, wou'd sometimes spend
an Hour or two there. 
As he was walking there this Evening, a Lady
of a very gallant Mien pass'd swiftly by him, and
flurting out her Handkerchief with a careless Air,
as it were by chance, dropp'd an Agnus Dei set
round with Diamonds at his Feet; he had too much
Complaisance to neglect endeavouring to overtake
the Lady, and prevent the Pain he imagin'd she
wou'd be in, when she shou'd miss so rich a Jewel:
But she, who knew well enough what she had done,
left the Walk where the Company were, and cross'd
over to the Fountain, which being more retir'd,
was the most proper for her Design: She stood
looking on the Water, in a thoughtful Posture,
when the Count came up to her, and bowing with
an Air peculiar to himself, and which all his Chagrin
could not deprive of an irresistable Power of Attraction,
presented the Agnus Dei to her. I think
myself, Madam, said he, highly indebted to Fortune
for making me the Means of your recovering a
Jewel, the Loss of which wou'd certainly have given
some Disquiet: Oh Heavens! cry'd she, receiving
it with an affected Air of Surprize, could a Trifle
like this, which I knew not that I had let fall, nor
perhaps should have thought on more, cou'd this, 

and belonging to a Woman too, meet the Regard
of him, who prides in his Insensibility? Him!
who has no Eyes for Beauty, nor no Heart for
Love! As she spoke these Words, she contriv'd to
let her Veil fall back, as if by Accident, and discover'd
a Face, beautiful even to Perfection; Eyes
black and sparkling, a Mouth form'd to invite, a
Skin dazlingly white, thro' which a most delightful
Bloom diffus'd a chearful Warmth, and glow'd in
amorous Blushes on her Cheeks. The Count could
not forbear gazing on her with Admiration, and
perhaps was, for a Moment, pretty near receding
from that Insensibility she had reproach'd him
with; but the Image of Melliora, yet unenjoy'd,
all ravishingly sweet and tender, rose
presently in his Soul, fill'd all his Faculties, and
left no Passage free for rival Charms. Madam,
said he, after a little Pause, the Italian Ladies take
care to skreen their too dazling Lustre behind a
Cloud, and, if I durst take that Liberty, have certainly
reason to tax your Accusation of Injustice; 
he, on whom the Sun has never vouchsafed to
shine, ought not to be condemn'd for not acknowledging
its Brightness; your's is the first Female
Face I have beheld since my Arrival here, and it
wou'd have been as ridiculous to have feign'd myself
susceptible of Charms which I had never seen,
as it would be Stupidity, not to confess those I now
do, worthy Adoration. Well, resum'd she smiling,
if not the Lover's, I find, you know how to act
the Courtier's Part; but, continu'd she, looking languishly
on him, all you can say, will scarce make
me believe, that there requires not a much brighter
Sun than mine, to thaw a certain frozen Resolution,
you pretend to have made. There need no
more to confirm the Count in the Opinion he had
before conceiv'd, that this was the Lady from
whom he had receiv'd the two Letters that Day,
and thought he had now the fairest Opportunity in 

the World to put an End to her Passion, by assuring
her how impossible it was for him ever to return it,
and was forming an Answer to that purpose, when
a pretty deal of Company coming toward them,
she drew her Veil over her Face, and turning hastily
from him, mingled with some Ladies who
seem'd to be of her Acquaintance. 
The Count knew by Experience, the unutterable
Perturbations of Suspence, and what agonizing
Tortures rend an amorous Soul, divided betwixt
Hope and Fear: Despair itself is not so cruel
as Uncertainty, and in all Ills, especially in those
of Love, it is less Misery, to know than dread the
worst. The Remembrance of what he had suffered,
thus agitated, in the Beginning of his Passion
for Melliora, made him extremely pity the
unknown Lady, and regret her sudden Departure; 
because it had prevented him from letting her into
so much of his Circumstances, as he believ'd were
necessary to induce her to recall her Heart. But
when he consider'd how much he had struggled,
and how far he had been from being able to repel
Desire, he began to wonder that it cou'd ever enter
into his Thoughts, that there was even a Possibility
for Woman, so much stronger in her Fancy,
and weaker in her Judgment, to suppress the Influence
of that powerful Passion, against which,
no Laws, no Rules, no Force of Reason, or Philosophy,
are sufficient Guard. 
These Reflections gave no small Addition to
his Melancholy: Amena's Retirement from the
World; Alovisa's Jealousy and Death; Melliora's
Peace of Mind and Reputation, and the
Despair of several, whom he was sensible the
Love of him had rendred miserable, came fresh
into his Memory, and he look'd on himself as most
unhappy, in being the Occasion of making others
so. 

The Night which succeeded this Day of Adventures,
chancing to be abroad pretty late, as he
was passing thro' a Street, he heard a Clashing of
Swords; and going nearer to the Place where the
Noise was, he perceiv'd, by some Lights which
glimmer'd from a distant Door, a Gentleman defending
himself with much Bravery against Three,
who seem'd eager for his Death. D'elmont
was mov'd with the highest Indignation at the sight
of such Baseness; and drawing his Sword, flew
furiously on the Assasins, just as one of them was
about to run his Sword into the Breast of the Gentleman; 
who by the breaking of his own Blade,
was left unarm'd. Turn, Villain, cry'd D'elmont,
or while you are acting that Inhumanity, receive the
just Reward of it from me. The Ruffian fac'd about
immediately, and made a Pass at him, while one
of his Comrades did the same on the other side; 
and the third was going to execute on the Gentleman,
what his Fellow's Surprize had made him
leave undone: But he now gain'd Time to pull a
Pistol out of his Pocket, with which he shot him in
a Moment dead, and snatching his Sword from
him as he fell, ran to assist the Count, who 'tis
likely wou'd have stood in need of it, being engag'd
with two, and those the most desperate
Sort of Bravo's, Villains that make a Trade of
Death. But the Noise of the Pistol made them
apprehensive there was a farther Rescue, and put
'em to flight. The Gentleman seem'd agitated
with a more than ordinary Fury; and instead of
staying to thank the Count, or enquire how he had
escap'd, ran in pursuit of those who had assaulted
him, so swiftly, that it was in vain for the Count,
not being well acquainted with the Turnings of
the Streets, to attempt to follow him, if he had
a Mind to it; but seeing there was a Man kill'd,
and not knowing either the Persons who fought,
or the Occasion of their Quarrel, he rightly judg'd, 

that being a Stranger in the Place, his Word wou'd
not be very readily taken in his own Vindication; 
therefore thought his wisest Course wou'd be to
make off, with what speed he cou'd, to his Lodging. 
While he was considering, he saw something
on the Ground which glitter'd extremely; and taking
it up, found that it was part of the Sword
which the assaulted Gentleman had the Misfortune
to have broke: The Hilt was of a fine Piece of
Agate, set round on the Top with Diamonds,
which made him believe the Person whom he had
preserv'd, was of considerable Quality, as well as
Bravery. 
He had not gone may Paces from the Place
where the Skirmish happened, before a Cry of
Murder met his Ears, and a great Concourse of
People, his Eyes: He had receiv'd two or three
slight Wounds, which, tho' not much more than
Skin deep, had made his Linnen bloody, and he
knew wou'd be sufficient to make him be apprehended,
if he were seen, which it was very difficult
to avoid: He was in a narrow Street,
which had no Turning, and the Crowd was very
near him, when looking round him with a good
deal of Vexation in his Thoughts, he discern'd a
Wall, which in one Part of it seem'd pretty low:
He presently resolv'd to climb it, and trust to Fortune
for what might befall him on the other Side,
rather than stay to be expos'd to the Insults of the
outragious Mob; who, ignorant of his Quality, and
looking no farther than the outside of Things,
wou'd doubtless have consider'd him no otherwise
than a Midnight Rioter. 
When he was got over the Wall, he found
himself in a very fine Garden, adorn'd with Fountains,
Statues, Groves, and every Ornament, that
Art or Nature, cou'd produce, for the Delight of
the Owner: At the upper End there was a Summer-House, 

into which he went, designing to stay
'till the Search was over. 
But he had not been many Moments in his
Concealment, before he saw a Door open from
the House, and two Women come out; they walk'd
directly up to the Place where he was; he made no
doubt but that they design'd to enter, and retir'd
into the farthest Corner of it: As they came pretty
near, he found they were earnest in Discourse,
but could understand nothing of what they said,
'till she, who seem'd to be the Chief, raising her
Voice a little higher than she had done: Talk no
more, Brione, said she; if e're thy Eyes are
Blest to see this Charmer of my Soul, thou wilt
cease to wonder at my Passion; great as it is, 'tis
wanting of his Merit. —Oh! he is more than raptur'd
Poets feign, or Fancy can invent! Suppose
him so, (cry'd the other) yet still he wants that
Charm which shou'd endear the others to you— 
Softness:—Heavens! to return your Letters!— 
to insult your Messenger! to slight such Favours
as any Man of Soul would die to obtain! Methinks
such Usage should make him odious to you. —Even
I should scorn so spiritless a Wretch. Peace, thou
Prophaner, said the Lady in an angry Tone, such
Blasphemy deserves a Stab. —But thou hast never
heard his Voice, nor seen his Eyes, and I forgive
thee. Have you then spoke to him, interrupted the
Confidant? Yes, answer'd the Lady, and by that
Conversation am more undone than ever: It was
to tell thee this Adventure, I came to Night into
this agreeable Solitude. With these Words they
came into the Summer-House, and the Lady seating
her self on a Bench; Thou know'st, resum'd
she, I went this Evening to St. Peter's, there I saw
the glorious Man; saw him in all his Charms; and
while I bow'd my Knee in show to Heaven, my
Soul was prostrate only to him. When the Ceremony
was over, perceiving he stay'd in the Collonade, 

I had no power to leave it, but stood, regardless
who observ'd me, gazing on him with
Transports, which only those who Love like me
can guess! —Gods! with what an Air he walk'd! 
What new Attractions dwelt in every Motion! — 
And when he return'd the Salutes of any that pass'd
by him, how graceful was his Bow! How lofty
his Mien, and yet how affable! —A sort of an inexpressible
awful Grandeur, blended with tender
Languishments, strikes the amaz'd Beholder at once
with Fear and Joy! —Something beyond Humanity
shines round him! Such looks descending Angels
wear, when sent on Heavenly Embassies to
some favourite Mortal! Such is their Form! Such
Radient Beams they dart; and with such Smiles
they temper their Divinity with Softness! —Oh!
with what Pain did I restrain my self from flying
to him! From rushing into his Arms! From hanging
on his Neck, and wildly uttering all the furious
Wishes of my burning Soul! —I trembled— 
panted—rag'd with inward Agonies. Nor was
all the Reason I could muster up, sufficient to
bear me from his Sight, without having first spoke
to him. To that end I ventur'd to pass by him,
and drop'd an Agnus Dei at his Feet, believing
that wou'd give him an Occasion of following
me, which he did immediately, and returning it
to me, discover'd a new Hoard of unimagin'd
Charms—All my fond Soul confess'd before of his
Perfections, were mean to what I now beheld! 
Had'st thou but seen how he approach'd me—with
what an awful Reverence? —With what a soft beseeching,
yet commanding Air, he kiss'd the happy
Triflle as he gave it me, thou would'st have envy'd
it as well as I! At last he spoke, and with an Accent
so Divine, that if the sweetest Musick were compared
to the more Celestial Harmony of his Voice,
it would only serve to prove how vastly Nature
does excell all Art. But, Madam, cry'd the other, 

I am impatient to know the End of this Affair; 
for I presume you discover'd to him both what,
and who you were? My Face only, reply'd the
Lady; for e're I had Opportunity to do more, that
malicious Trifler Violetta, perhaps envious
of my Happiness, came towards us with a
Croud of Impertinents at her Heels. Curse on the
Interruption! and broke off our Conversation,
just at that Blest, but irrecoverable Moment, when
I perceiv'd in my Charming Conqueror's Eyes, a
growing Tenderness, sufficient to encourage me
to reveal my own. Yes, Brione, those lovely
Eyes, while fix'd on mine, shone with a Lustre
uncommon, even to themselves—A livelier Warmth
o'respread his Cheeks—Pleasure sat smiling on his
Lips—those Lips, my Girl, which even when they
are silent speak; but when unclos'd, and the sweet
Gales of balmy Breath blow on you, he kills you
in a Sigh; each hurry'd Sense is ravish'd, and your
Soul glows with Wonder and Delight. Oh! to
be forc'd to leave him in this Crisis, when new
Desire began to dawn; when Love its most lively
Symptoms was apparent, and seem'd to promise
all my Wishes covet, what Separation was ever so
Cruel? Compose your self, dear Madam, said
Brione; if he be really in Love, as who so
insensible as not to be so, that once has seen your
Charms; that Love will teach him speedily to find
out an Opportunity as favourable as that which
you have lately miss'd; or if he should want Contrivance
to procure his own Happiness, 'tis but
your writing to appoint a Meeting. He must— 
He shall be mine! cry'd the Lady in a Rapture,
my Love, fierce as it was before, from Hope receives
Addition to its Fury; I rave—I burn—I am
mad with wild Desires—I die, Brione, if I
not possess him. In speaking these Words, she threw
herself down on a Carpet which was spread upon
the Floor; and after sighing two or three times, 

continued to discover the Violence of her impatient
Passion in this manner: Oh! that this Night, said she,
were past,—the blissful Expectation of to-morrows
Joys, and the distracting Doubts of Disappointment,
swell my unequal beating Heart by turns, and rack
me with Vicissitudes of Pain—I cannot live and
bear it—soon as the Morning breaks, I'll know
my Doom—I'll send to him—but 'tis an Age 'till
then—Oh! that I could sleep—Sleep might perhaps
anticipate the Blessing, and bring him in Idea to
my Arms—but 'tis in vain to hope one Moment's
cool Serenity, in Love like mine—My anxious
Thoughts hurry my Senses in eternal Watchings! 
—Oh D'elmont! D'elmont! Tranquil,
Cold, and Calm D'elmont! Little dost thou
guess the Tempest thou hast rais'd within my Soul,
nor know'st to pity these consuming Fires! 
The Count list'ned to all this Discourse with a
World of Uneasiness and Impatience; and tho'
at the first he fancy'd he remember'd the Voice,
and had Reason enough from the beginning, especially
when the Agnus Dei was mention'd, to
believe it could be no other than himself, whom
the Lady had so passionately describ'd; yet he had
not Confidence to appear 'till she had nam'd him; 
but then, no Consideration was of Force to make
him neglect this Opportunity of undeceiving her; 
his good Sense, as well as good Nature, kept him
from that Vanity too many of his Sex imitate the
weaker in, of being pleas'd that it was in his Power
to create Pains, which it was not in his Power,
so devoted as he was, to ease. 
He stept from his Retirement as softly as he
could, because he was loath to alarm them with
any Noise, 'till they should discover who it was that
made it, which they might easily do, in his advancing
toward them never so little; that part of
the Bower being much lighter than that where he
had stood; but with his over-caution in sliding his 

Feet along, to prevent being heard, one of them
tangled in the Corner of the Carpet, which happened
not to lie very smooth, and not being sensible
presently what it was that embarrass'd him,
he fell with part of his Body cross the Lady, and
his Head in Brione's Lap, who was sitting on
the Ground by her. The Manner of his Fall was
lucky enough, for it hinder'd either of them from
rising, and running to alarm the Family, as certainly
in such a Fright they would have done, if
his Weight had not detain'd them; they both gave
a great Shriek, but the House being at a good Distance,
they could not be heard; and he immediately
recovering himself, begg'd Pardon for the
Terror he had occasion'd them; and addressing
to the Lady, who at first was dying with her Fears,
and now with Consternation. D'elmont, Madam,
said he, cou'd not have had the Assurance to
appear before you, after hearing those undeserv'd
Praises your Excess of Goodness has been pleas'd
to bestow upon him, but that his Soul would have
reproach'd him of the highest Ingratitude, in permitting
you to continue longer in an Error, which
may involve you in the greatest of Misfortunes, at
least I am—As he was speaking, three or four Servants
with Lights came running from the House; 
and the Lady, tho' in more Confusion than can
be well exprest, yet had Presence of Mind enough
to bid the Count retire to the Place where he stood
before, while she and Brione went out of the
Summer-house to learn the Cause of this Interruption:
Madam, cry'd one of the Servants, as
soon as he saw her, the Officers of Justice are
within; who being rais'd by an Alarm of Murther,
come to beg your Ladyship's Permission to
search your Garden, being, as they say, inform'd
that the Offender made his Escape over this Wall. 
'Tis very improbable, reply'd the Lady, for I have
been here a considerable Time, and have neither 

heard the least Noise, nor seen any Body; however,
they may Search, and satisfy themselves— 
Go you and tell them so. Then turning to the
Count, when she had dismiss'd her Servants; my
Lord, said she trembling, I know not what strange
Adventure brought you here to Night, or whether
you are the Person for whom the Search is made; 
but am sensible, if you are found here, it will be
equally injurious to your Safety and my Reputation; 
I have a Back-door, thro' which you may
pass in Security: But, if you have Honour, (continued
she, sighing) Gratitude, or good Nature,
you will let me see you to-morrow Night. Madam,
(reply'd he) assure your self that there are
not many things I more earnestly Desire, than an
Opportunity to convince you how sensibly I am
touch'd with your Favours, and how much I regret
my want of Power to—you (interrupted she)
can want nothing but the Will to make me the
happiest of my Sex—But this is no Time for you
to Give or me to Receive any Proofs of that Return
which I expect—Once more I conjure you to be
here to-morrow Night at Twelve, where the faithful
Brione shall attend to admit you. Fare-well
—be punctual and sincere—'Tis all I ask— 
when I am not, (answer'd he) may all my Hopes
forsake me. By this time they were come to the
Door, which Brione opening softly, let him
out, and shut it again immediately. 
The Count took care to Remark the Place; that
he might know it again, resolving nothing more
than to make good his Promise at the appointed
Hour; but cou'd not help being extreamly troubled,
when he consider'd how unwelcome his Sincerity
would be, and the Confusion he must give
the Lady, when instead of those Raptures the Violence
of her mistaken Passion made her hope,
she shou'd meet with only cold Civility, and the
killing History of the Pre-engagement of his Heart. 

In these and the like melancholy Reflections he
spent the Night, and when Morning came, receiv'd
the severest Augmentation of them, which Fate
cou'd load them with. 
It was scarce full Day when a Servant came into
his Chamber to acquaint him, that a young Gentleman,
a Stranger, desir'd to be admitted, and
seem'd so impatient 'till he was, That, said the
Fellow, not knowing of what Consequence his
Business may be, I thought it better to risque your
Lordship's Displeasure for this early Disturbance,
than by dismissing him, fill you with an unsatisfy'd
Curiosity. The Count was far from being angry,
and commanded that the Gentleman should be
brought up; which Order being immediately obey'd,
and the Servant withdrawn, out of Respect; putting
his Head out of the Bed, he was surpriz'd
with the Appearance of one of the most beautiful
Chevaliers he had ever beheld, and in whose Face,
he imagin'd he trac'd some Features not unknown
to him. Pardon me, Sir, said he, throwing the
Curtains more back then they were before, that I
receive the Honour you do me, in this manner— 
but being ignorant of your Name, Quality, the
Reason of your Desire to see me, or any thing but
your Impatience to do so, in gratifying that, I
fear, I have injur'd the Respect, which I believe
is due, and which, I am sure, my Heart is inclinable
to pay you. Visits, like mine, reply'd the
Stranger, require but little Ceremony, and I shall
easily remit that Respect you talk of, while I am
unknown to you, provided you will give me one
Mark of it that I shall ask of you, when you
do. There are very few, reply'd D'elmont,
that I cou'd refuse to one, whose Aspect promises
to deserve so many. First then, cry'd the other
pretty warmly, I demand a Sister of you, and not
only her, but a Reparation of her Honour, which
can be done no otherwise than by your Blood. It 

is impossible to represent the Count's Astonishment
at these Words, but conscious of his Innocence
in any such Affair: I should be sorry, Seignior,
said he cooly, that Precipitation should hurry you
to do any Action you would afterwards repent; 
you must certainly be mistaken in the Person to
whom you are talking—Yet, if I were rash like
you, what fatal Consequences might ensue; but
there is something in your Countenance which engages
me to wish a more friendly Interview than
what you speak of, therefore wou'd persuade you
to consider calmly, and you will soon find, and
acknowledge your Mistake; and to further that
Reflection, I assure you, that I am so far from
conversing with any Lady in the Manner you seem
to hint, that I scarcely know the Name or Face of
any one—Nay, more, I give you my Word, to
which I join why Honour, that, as I never have,
I never will make the least Pretensions of that kind
to any Woman during the Time of my Residence
here. This poor Evasion, reply'd the Stranger, with a
Countenance inflam'd, ill suits a Man of Honour. — 
This is no Roman, no Italian Bona-Roba, who I
mean—but French like you—like both of us. — 
And if your Ingratitude had not made it necessary
for your Peace, to erace all Memory of Monsieur
Frankville, you would before now, by the
near Resemblance I bear to him, have known me
for his Son, and that 'tis Melliora's—the fond
—the lost—the ruin'd Melliora's Cause,
which calls for Vengeance from her Brother's
Arm! Never was any Soul agitated with more violent
Emotions, than that of Count D'elmont
at these Words. Doubt, Grief, Resentment, and
Amazement, made such a Confusion in his Thoughts,
that he was unable for some Moments to answer
this cruel Accusation; and when he did, the Brother
of Melliora, said he, with a deep Sigh,
would certainly have been, next to herself, the 

most welcome Person upon Earth to me; and my
Joy to have embrac'd him as the dearest of my
Friends, at least have equall'd the Surprize I am in,
to find him, without Cause, my Enemy. —But, Sir,
if such a Favour may be granted to an unwilling
Foe, I would desire to know, why you join Ruin
to your Sister's Name? Oh! give me Patience,
Heaven, cry'd young Frankville, more enrag'd; 
is this a Question fit for you to ask, or me
to Answer? Is not her Honour tainted—Fame betray'd. 
—Herself a Vagabond, and her House abus'd,
and all by you, the unfaithful Guardian of
her injur'd Innocence? —And can you ask the
Cause? —No, rather rise this Moment, and, if
you are a Man, who dare maintain the Ill you have
done, defend it with your Sword, not with vain
Words and Womanish Excuses. All the other
Passions which had warr'd within D'elmont's
Breast, now gave way to Indignation: Rash young
Man, said he, jumping hastily out of Bed, and beginning
to put his Cloaths on; your Father would
not thus have us'd me; nor, did he live, could
blame me, for vindicating as I ought my wounded
Honour—That I do love your Sister, is as true,
as that you have wrong'd me—basely wrong'd me. 
But that her Virtue suffers by that Love, is false! 
And I must write the Man that speaks it, Lyar,
tho' in her Brother's Heart. Many other violent
Expressions to the same Effect, pass'd between
them, while the Count was dressing himself, for
he would suffer no Servant to come in, to be Witness
of his Disorder. But the steady Resolution
with which he had attested his Innocence, and that
inexpressible Sweetness of Deportment, equally
charming to both Sexes, and which, not even Anger
could render less graceful, extreamly cool'd the
Heat Frankville had been in a little before,
and he in secret began to recede very much from
the ill Opinion he had conceiv'd, tho' the Greatness 

of his Spirit kept him from acknowledging he had
been in an Error, 'till chancing to cast his Eyes on
a Table which stood in the Chamber, he saw the
Hilt of the broken Sword, which D'elmont had
brought home the Night before, lying on it; he
took it up, and having first look'd on it, with some
Confusion in his Countenance; My Lord, said he,
turning to the Count, I conjure you, before we
proceed further, to acquaint me truely, how this
came into your Possession? Tho' D'elmont had
as great a Courage when any laudable Occasion
appear'd to call it forth, as any Man that ever liv'd,
yet his natural Disposition had such an uncommon
Sweetness in it, as no Provocation could sowre; 
it was always a much greater Pleasure to him to
Forgive than Punish Injuries; and if at any time
he was angry, he was never rude, or unjust. The
little Starts of Passion, Frankville's rash Behaviour
had occasion'd, all dissolv'd in his more accustomary
Softness, when he perceiv'd the other
growing Calm. And answering to his Question,
with the most obliging Accent in the World: It
was my good Fortune, (said he) to be instrumental
last Night, in the Rescue of a Gentleman who
appear'd to have much Bravery, and being attack'd
by odds, behav'd himself in such a Manner, as
wou'd have made him stand but little in need of
my Assistance, if his Sword had been equal to the
Arm which held it; but the breaking of that, gave
me the Glory of not being unserviceable to him. 
After the Skirmish was over, I took it up, hoping
it might be the Means some time or other of my
discovering who the Person was who wore it; not
out of Vanity of receiving Thanks for the little I
have done, but that I should be glad of the Friendship
of a Person who seems so worthy of my Esteem. 
Oh! far, (cry'd Frankville, with a
Tone and Gesture quite alter'd,) infinitely far from
it—It was my self whom you preserv'd; that very 

Man whose Life you last Night so generously
redeem'd with the hazard of your own, comes now
prepar'd to make the first Use of it against you— 
Is it possible that you can be so heavenly Good to
pardon my wild Passion's Heat? Let this be Witness,
with what Joy I do, answer'd the Count, tenderly
Embracing him, which the other eagerly returning,
they continu'd lock'd in each others Arms
for a considerable Time, neither of them being
able to say more, than—And was it Frankville
I preserv'd! —And was it to D'elmont
I owe my Life! 
After this mutual Demonstration of a perfect
Reconcilement was over: See here, my Lord,
said Frankville, giving a Paper to the Count,
the Occasion of my Rashness, and let my just Concern
for a Sister's Honour, be at least some little
Mitigation of my Temerity, in accosting your Lordship
in so rude a Manner. D'elmont made no
Answer, but looking hastily over the Paper found
it contain'd these Words. 

To Monsieur Frankville.
While your Sister's Dishonour was known but
to few, and the injurious Destroyer of it out of
the Reach of your Revenge, I thought it
would ill become the Friendship I have always profess'd
to your Family, to disquiet you with the Knowledge
of a Misfortune, which it was no way in your Power
to redress. 
BUT Count D'elmont, having by the Solicitations
of his Friends, and the Remembrance of some
slight Services, obtain'd a Pardon from the KING,
for the Murder of his Wife, has since taken but little 

Care to conceal the Reasons whith indue'd him to that
barbarous Action; and all Paris is now sensible that
he made that unhappy Lady's Life a Sacrifice to the
more attractive Beauties of Melliora, in bloody
Recompence for the Sacrifice she had before made him of
her Virtue. 
IN short, the Noble Family of the Frankvilles
is for ever dishonour'd by this unfaithful Guardian;
and all who wish you well, rejoice to hear that
his ill Genius has led him to a Place, which, if he
knew you were at, certainly Prudence wou'd make
him of all others most avoid; for none believes you
will so far degenerate from the Spirit of your Ancestors,
as to let him go unpunish'd. 
IN finding the Count, you may probably find your
Sister too; for tho', after the Death of Alovisa,
Shame made her retire to a Monastery, she has since
privately left it without acquainting the Abbess, or
any of the Sisterhood, with her Departure; nor is
it known to any one, where, or for what Cause she
absconds; but most People imagine, as indeed it is
highly reasonable, that the Violence of her guilty Passion
for D'elmont has engag'd her to follow
him. 
I am not unsensible how much I shock your Temper
by this Relation, but have too much real Concern for
your Honour, to endure you shou'd, thro' Ignorance
of your Wrongs, remain passive in such a Cause, and
perhaps hug the treacherous Friend in your most strict
Embraces? Nor can I forbear, tho' I love not Blood,
urging you to take that just Revenge, which next to
Heaven, you have the greatest Claim to. 
I am, Sir, with all due Respect,
Yours, Sanseverin. 


The Count swell'd with Indignation at every
Paragraph of this malicious Letter; but when he
came to that, which mention'd Melliora's
having withdrawn herself from the Monastery, he
seem'd to be wholly abandon'd by his Reason; all
Endeavours to represent his Agonies wou'd be vain; 
and none but those who have felt the same, can
have any Notion of what he suffer'd. He read the
fatal Scroll again and again, and every time grew
wilder than before; he stamp'd, bit his Lips, look'd
furiously about him, then starting from the Place
where he had stood, measur'd the Room in strange
disorder'd and unequal Paces; all his Motions, all
his Looks, all his Air were nothing but Distraction:
He spoke not for some time, one Word; either
prevented by the rising Passions in his Soul, or
because it was not in the Power of Language to
express the Greatness of his Meaning; and when,
at last, he open'd his Mouth, it was but to utter
half Sentences, and broken Complainings: Is it
possible? he cry'd,—gone,—left the Monastery
unknown—and then again—false—false Woman! 
—Wretched—wretched Man! There's no
such Thing on Earth as Faith—Is this the Effect
of all her tender Passion? —So soon forgot— 
what can be her Reason? —This Action suits not
with her Words or Letters. In this manner he
rav'd with a thousand such like Breathings of a tormented
Spirit, toss'd and confounded between various
Sentiments. 
Monsieur Frankville stood for a good
while silently observing him; and if before, he
were not perfectly assur'd of his Innocence, the
Agonies he now saw him in, which were too natural
to be suspected for Counterfeit, entirely convinc'd
him he was so. When the first Gust of
Passion was blown over, and he perceiv'd any
likelihood of being heard, he said a thousand tender
and obliging Things to persuade him to Moderation, 

but to very little Effect; till finding, that
that which gave him the most stinging Reflection
was, the Belief that Melliora had forsook the
Monastery, either because she thought of him no
more, and was willing to divert her enfranchis'd
Inclination with the Gaieties of the Town, or that
some happier Man had supplanted him in her Esteem. 
Judge not, my Lord, (said he) so rashly
of my Sister's Fidelity, nor know so little of your
own unmatch'd Perfections, as to suspect that
she, who is blest with your Affection, can consider
any other Object as worthy her Regard: For my
part, since your Lordship knows, and I firmly
believe, that this Letter contains a great many Untruths,
I see no Reason why we should not imagine
it all of a Piece: I declare I think it much more
improbable that she should leave the Monastery,
unless sollicited thereto by you, than that she had
the Power to deny you any thing your Passion
might request. The Count's Disorder visibly abated
at this Remonstrance; and stepping hastily
to his Cabinet, he took out the last Letter he receiv'd
from Melliora, and found it was dated
but two Days before that from Monsieur Sanseverin;
he knew she had not Art, nor was accustomed
to endeavour to disguise her Sentiments; 
and she had written so many tender Things in that,
as, when he gave himself leave to consider, he
could not, without believing her to be either the
most dissembling, or most fickle of her Sex, continue
in the Opinion which had made him a few
Moments before so uneasy, that she ws no longer,
what she always subscrib'd herself, Entirely His. 
The Tempest of Rage and Grief being hush'd
to a little more Tranquillity, Count D'elmont,
to remove all Scruples which might be yet remaining
in the Breast of Monsieur Frankville, entertain'd
him with the whole History of his Adventures,
from the Time of his Gallantry with Amena, 

to the Misfortunes which had induc'd him to travel
disguising nothing of the Truth, but some part of
the Discourses which had pass'd between him and
Melliora that Night when he surpriz'd her in
her Bed, and in the Wilderness: For tho' he freely
confess'd the Violence of his own unbounded Passion,
had hurry'd him beyond all Considerations
but those of gratifying it; yet he was too tender
of Melliora's Honour, to relate any thing of
her, which her Modesty might not acknowledge,
without the Expence of a Blush 
Frankville listened with abundance of Attention
to the Relation he made him, and could
find very little in his Conduct to accuse: He was
himself too much susceptible of the Power of Love
not to have Compassion for those that suffer'd by
it, and had too great a Share of good Sense not
to know that, that Passion is not to be circumscrib'd; 
and being not only, not Subservient, but
absolutely Comptroller of the Will, it would be mere
Madness, as well as ill Nature, to say a Person
was blame-worthy for what was unavoidable. 
When Love once becomes in our Power it
ceases to be worthy of that Name; no Man really
possest with it, can be Master of his Actions; and
whatever Effects it may enforce, are no more to be
condemn'd, than Poverty, Sickness, Deformity,
or any other Misfortune incident to humane Nature. 
Methinks there is nothing more absurd than
the Notions of some People, who in other Things
are wise enough too; but wanting Elegance of
Thought, Delicacy, or Tenderness of Soul, to receive
the Impression of that harmonious Passion,
look on those to be mad, who have any Sentiments
elevated above their own, and either censure,
or laugh at what they are not refined enough
to comprehend. These Insipids, who know
nothing of the matter, tell us, very gravely that
we ought to love with Moderation and Discretion, 

—and take Care that it is for our Interest,— 
that we should never place our Affections, but
where Duty leads, or at least, where neither Religion,
Reputation, or Law, may be a Hindrance
to our Wishes. —Wretches! We know all this,
as well as they; we know too, that we both do,
and leave undone many other Things, which we
ought not; but Perfection is not to be expected on
this side the Grave: And since 'tis impossible for
Humanity to avoid Frailties of some kind or other,
those are certainly least blamable, which spring
only from a too great Affluence of the nobler Spirits. 
Covetousness, Envy, Pride, Revenge, are the
Effects of an earthly, base, and sordid Nature,
Ambition, and Love, of an exalted one; and if they
are Failings, they are such as plead their own Excuse,
and can never want Forgiveness from a generous
Heart, provided no indirect Courses are
taken to procure the Ends of the former, nor Inconstancy,
or Ingratitude, stain the Beauty of the
latter. 
Notwithstanding all that Monsieur
Frankville could say, the Count, tho' not in
that Rage of Temper he had been in, was yet very
melancholy; which the other perceiving, Alas,
my Lord, said he sighing, if you were sensible of
the Misfortunes of others, you would think your
own more easy to be born: You love, and are
belov'd; no Obstacle remains between you and
your Desires; but the Formality of Custom, which
a little time will remove, and at your Return to
Paris you will doubtless be happy, if 'tis in my
Sister's Power to make you so: You have a sure
Prospect of Felicity to come, but mine is past, never,
I fear, to be retriev'd. What mean you? 
Cry'd the Count pretty much surpriz'd at his Words,
and the Change which he observ'd in his Countenance; 
I am in Love! reply'd he, belov'd! Nay,
have enjoy'd—Ay, there's the Source of my Despair 

—I know the Heaven I have lost, and that's
my Hell. —The Interest D'elmont had in his
Concerns, as being Son to the Man whom he
he had loved with a kind of filial Affection, and
Brother to the Woman whom he had ador'd above
the World, made him extreamly desirous
to know what the Occasion of this Disquiet was,
and having exprest himself to that Purpose; I shall
make no Difficulty, reply'd Frankville, to
reveal the Secret of my Love, to him who is a
Lover, and knows so well, how to pity, and forgive,
the Errors which that Passion will sometimes
lead us into. The Count was too impatient to
hear the Relation he was about to give him,
to make any other Answer to these Words than
with a half Smile; which the other perceiving,
without any farther Prelude, began to satisfy his
Curiosity in this manner. 



You know, my Lord, said he, that I was
bred at Rheims with my Uncle, the Bishop
of that Place, and continued with him, 'till after,
prompted by Glory, and Hope of that Renown
you have since so gallantly acquir'd, you
left the Pleasures of the Court for the Fatigues and
Dangers of the Field: When I came home, I never
ceas'd solliciting my Father to permit me to
travel, 'till weary'd with my continual Importunities,
and, perhaps, not much displeas'd with my
Thirst of Improvement, he at last gave leave. I
left Paris a little before the Conclusion of the
Peace, and by that Means remain'd wholly a
Stranger to your Lordship's Person, tho' perfectly
acquainted with those admirable Accomplishments,
which Fame is every where so full of. 
I have been in the Courts of England, Spain,
and Portugal, but nothing very material hap'ning 

to me in any of those Places, it would be rather
impertinent, than diverting, to defer, for Trifles,
the main Business of my Life, that of my Love,
which had not a Being 'till I came into this City. 
I had been here but a little Time before I had
a great many Acquaintance; among the Number
of them was Signior Jaques Honorius Cittolini:
He, of all the rest, I was most intimate
with; and tho' to the Generality of People
he behav'd himself with an Air of Imperiousness,
he was to me, all free and easy; he seem'd as if
he took a Pleasure in obliging me; carry'd me every
where with him; introduced me to the best
Company: When I was absent, he spoke of me, as
of a Person who he had the highest Esteem for; 
and when I was present, if there were any in Company
whose Rank oblig'd him to place them above
me in the Room, he took care to testify that
I was not below them in his Respect; in fine, he
was never more happy than when he was giving
me some Proof how much he was my Friend; 
and I was not a little satisfy'd that a Man of almost
twice my Years should believe me qualify'd for his
Companion in such a manner as he made me. 
When the melancholy Account of my Father's
Death came to my Ears, he omitted nothing
to persuade me to sell my Estate in France, and
settle in Rome; he told me he had a Daughter,
whose Heart had been the Aim of the chiefest Nobility; 
but that he wou'd buy my Company at that
Price, and to keep me here, wou'd give me her. 
This Proposition was not altogether so pleasing
to me, as, perhaps, he imagin'd it wou'd be: I
had heard much Talk of this Lady's Beauty, but I
had never seen her; and at that Time, Love was
little in my Thoughts, especially that sort which
was to end in Marriage: however, I wou'd no
absolutely refuse his Offer, but evaded it; which I
had the better Pretence for, because Violleta, 

(so was his Daughter call'd) was gone to Vitterbo
to visit a sick Relation, and I cou'd not have the
Opportunity of seeing her. In the mean time, he
made me acquainted with his deepest Secrets; among
many other Things he told me, that tho'
their Family was one of the greatest in Rome, yet
by the too great Liberality of his Father, himself
and one Sister was left with very little to support
the Grandeur of their Birth; but that his Sister who
was acknowledg'd a Woman of an uncommon
Beauty, had the good Fortune to appear so to Seignior
Marcarius Fialasco: He was the
Possessor of immense Riches, but very old; but
the young Lady found Charms enough in his Wealth
to ballance all other Deficiencies; she married,
and buried him in a Month's time, and he dy'd so
full of Fondness to his lovely Bride, that he left
her Mistress of all he had in the World; giving
only to a Daughter he had by a former Wife, the
Fortune which her Mother had brought him, and
that too, and herself to be dispos'd of, in Marriage,
as this triumphant Widow should think fit; 
and she, like a kind Sister, thought none worthy
of that Alliance, but her Brother; and in a few
Days he said, he did not doubt but that I shou'd
see him a Bridegroom. I ask'd him if he was
happy enough to have made an Interest in the
young Lady's Heart; and he very frankly answer'd,
That he was not of a Humour to give himself
much Uneasiness about it, since it was wholly
in his Sister's Power to make him Master of her
Person, and she resolv'd to do that, or confine her
in a Monastery for ever. I cou'd not help feeling
a compassionate Concern for this Lady, tho' she
was a Stranger to me, for I cou'd not believe, so
beautiful and accomplish'd a Woman, as he had
often describ'd her to be, cou'd find any thing in
her design'd Husband which cou'd make this
Match agreeable. Nothing can be more different 

from Graceful, than the Person of Cittolini;
he is of a black swarthy Complexion, hook'd-Nos'd,
wall-Ey'd, short of Stature; and tho' he
is very lean, the worst shap'd Man I ever saw; 
then for his Temper, as friendly as he behav'd to
me, I discern'd a great deal of Treachery, and
Baseness in it to others; a perpetual Peevishness
and Pride appear'd in his Deportment to all those
who had any Dependance on him: And I had
been told by some who knew him perfectly well,
that his cruel Usage of his first Lady had been
the Means of her Death; but this was none of my
Business, and tho' I pity'd the Lady, yet my Gratitude
to him engag'd me to wish him Success in
all his Undertakings. 'Till one Day, unluckily
both for him and me, as it has since prov'd, he
desir'd me to accompany him to the House of
Ciamara, for so is his Sister call'd, being, willing
I suppose, that I should be a Witness of the
extraordinary State she liv'd in; and indeed, in all
the Courts I had been at, I never saw any thing
more Magnificent than her Apartments; the vast
Quantity of Plate, the Richness of the Furniture,
and the Number of Servants attending on her,
might have made her to be taken for a Princess, rather
than a private Woman. There was a very noble
Collation, and she sat at Table with us herself, a
particular Favour from an Italian Lady: She is by
many Years younger than her Brother, and extreamly
handsome; but has, I know not what, of
Fierceness in her Eyes, which renders her, at least
to me a Beauty, without a Charm. After the Entertainment,
Cittolini took me into the Gardens,
which were answerable to what I had seen
within, full of Curiosities; at one End there was
a little Building of Marble, to which he led me,
and entring into it, see here, Monsieur, said he,
the Place where my Sister spends the greatest part
of her Hours, and tell me if 'tis in this kind of 

Diversion that the French Ladies take Delight. I
presently saw it was full of Books; and guess'd
those Words were design'd as a Satire on our Ladies,
whose Disposition to Gallantry seldom affords
much time for Reading. But to make as
good a Defence for their Honour as I was able; 
Seignior, reply'd I, it must be confest, that there
are very few Ladies of any Nation, who think
the Acquisition of Knowledge, worth the Pains it
must cost in the Search; but that ours is not without
some Examples, that all are not of that Mind,
our famous D'anois and D'acier may evince. 
Well, well, interrupted he, laughing, the Propensity
which that Sex bears to Learning is so trifling,
that I shall not pretend to hold any Argument
on its Praise; nor did I bring you here so
much to engage you to admire my Sister's Manner
of Amusement, as to give you an Opportunity of
diverting your self, while I go to pay a Compliment
to my Mistress, who, tho' I have a very
great Confidence in you, I dare not trust with the
Sight of so accomplish'd a Chevalier. With these
Words he left me; and I, designing to do as he
had desir'd, turn'd to the Shelves to take down what
Book I cou'd find most suitable to my Honour; 
but, good God! as I was tumbling them over, I
saw thro' a Window, which look'd into a Garden
behind the Study, tho' both belonging to one Person,
a Woman, or rather, an Angel, coming down
a Walk directly opposite to where I was: Never did
I see in one Person such various Perfections blended; 
never did any Woman wear so much of her
Soul in her Eyes, as did this Charmer: I saw that
Moment in her Looks, all I have since experienc'd
of her Genius, and her Humour; Wit, Judgment,
good Nature and Generosity are in her Countenance,
conspicuous as in her Actions; but to go
about to make a Description, were to wrong her:
She has Graces so peculiar, that none without knowing 

her, can be able to conceive; and tho' nothing
can be finer than her Shape, or more regular
than her Features; yet those, our Fancy or a
Painter's Art may Copy: There is something so inexpressibly
striking in her Air; such a delightful
Mixture of awful and attractive in every little Motion,
that no Imagination can come up to. But if
Language is too poor to paint her Charms, how
shall I make you sensible of the Effects of them on
me! the Surprize—the Love—the Adoration
which this fatal View involv'd me in, but by that,
which you say, your self felt at the first Sight of
Melliora. I was, methought all Spirit,—I
beheld her with Raptures, such as we imagine
Souls enjoy when freed from Earth, they meet each
other in the Realms of Glory; 'twas Heaven to
gaze upon her: But, oh! the Bliss was short, the
envious Trees obscur'd her Lustre from me. —The
Moment I lost sight of her, I found my Passion
by my Pain, the Joy was vanish'd, but the Sting
remain'd—I was so bury'd in Thought, that I never
so much as stirr'd a Step to endeavour to discover
which way she went; tho' if I had consider'd
the Situation of the Place, it would have been
easy for me to have known, there was a Communication
between the two Gardens, and if I had
gone but a few Paces out of the Study, must have
met her; but Love for the present depriv'd me
of my Sences; and it but just enter'd into my
Head, that there was a Possibility of renewing my
Happiness, when I perceiv'd Cittolini returning. 
When he came pretty near, dear Frankville,
said he, pardon my Neglect of you; but
I have been at Camilla's Apartment, and am
told she is in the lower Garden; I will but speak
to her, snatch a Kiss, and be with you again. He
went hastily by me, without staying for any Answer,
and it was well he did so, for the Confusion
I was in, had made me little able to reply. His 

Words left me no room to hope it was any other
than Camilla I had seen, and the Treachery I
was guilty of to my Friend, in but wishing to invade
his Right, gave me a Remorse which I had
never known before: But these Reflections lasted
not long; Love generally exerts himself on these
Occasions, and is never at a Loss for means to remove
all the Scruples that may be rais'd to oppose
him. Why, said I to my self, should I be
thus tormented? She is not yet married, and 'tis
almost impossible she can with Satisfaction, ever
yield to be so to him. Could I but have Opportunity
to talk to her, to let her know my Passion,— 
to endeavour to deliver her from the Captivity she
is in, perhaps she would not condemn my Temerity:
I found a great deal of Pleasure in this
Thought, but I was not suffer'd to enjoy it long; 
Honour suggested to me, that Cittolini lov'd
me, had oblig'd me, and to supplant him would be
base and treacherous: But would it not be more
so, cry'd the Dictates of my Love, to permit the
Divine Camilla to fall a Sacrifice to one so every
way undeserving of her; one who 'tis likely abhors; 
one who despises her Heart, so he may but possess
her Fortune to support his Pride, and her Person
to gratify a Passion far unworthy of the Name
of Love; One! who 'tis probable, when Master
of the one, and satiated with the other, may treat
her with the utmost Inhumanity. Thus, for a time,
were my Thoughts at Strife; but Love at length
got the Victory, and I had so well compos'd my
self before Cittolini's Return, that he saw
nothing of the Disorder I had been in; but it was
not so with him, his Countenance, at the best,
displeasing enough, was now the perfect Representative
of Ill-Nature, Malice, and Discontent. 
Camilla had assur'd him, that nothing could be
more her Aversion, and that she was resolv'd, tho'
a Monastick Life was what she had no Inclination 

to, yet she would fly to that Shelter, to avoid his
Bed. You may imagine, my Lord, I was transported
with an Excess of Joy, when he told me
this; but Love taught me to dissemble it, 'till I
had taken Leave of him, which I made an Excuse
to do as soon as possible. 
Now all that troubled me was to find an Opportunity
to declare my Passion; and, I confess,
I was so dull in Contrivance, that tho' it took up
all my Thoughts, none of them were to any purpose:
Three or four Days I spent in fruitless Projections,
the last of which I met with a new Embarressment; 
Cittolini's Daughter was return'd,
he renew'd his Desires of making me his
Son, and invited me the next Evening to his House,
where I was to be entertain'd with the Sight of her; 
I could not well avoid giving him my Promise to be
there, but resolv'd in my Mind to behave my self
in such a manner as should make her disapprove of
me. While I was thus busied in contriving how
to avoid Violletta, and engage Camilla,
a Woman, wrapt up very closely in her Vail,
came to my Lodings, and brought me a Note, in
which I found these Words. 

To Monsieur Frankville.
My Father is resolv'd to make me Yours; and if
he has your Consent, mine will not be demanded; 
he has commanded me to receive you tomorrow,
but I have a particular Reason to desire to
see you sooner; I am to pass this Night with Camilla
at my Aunt Ciamara's; there is a little Wicet
that opens from the Garden, directly opposite to the 

Convent of St. Francis: If you will favour me so
far as to come there at Ten a Clock to Night, and give
Seven gentle Knocks at the Gate, you shall know the
Cause of my entreating this private Interview, which is
of more Moment than the Life of, 
Violetta. 

Never had I been more pleasingly surpriz'd,
than at the reading of these Lines; I could not
imagine the Lady could have any other Reason for
seeing me in private, than to confess that her Heart
was pre-engag'd, and disswade me from taking the
Advantage of her Father's Authority; a secret Hope
too, sprung within my Soul, that my adorable
Camilla might be with her; and after I had dismiss'd
the Woman, with an Assurance that I would
attend her Lady, I spent my Time in vast Ideas of
approaching Happiness, 'till the appointed Hour
arriv'd. 
But how great was my Disappointment, when
being admitted, I could distinguish, tho' the Place
was very dark, that I was receiv'd but by one, and
accosted by her in a manner very different from
what I expected: I know not, Monsieur, said she,
how you interpret this Freedom I have taken; but
whatever we pretend, our Sex, of all Indignities,
can the least support those done to our Beauty: I
am not vain enough of mine, to assure my self
of making a Conquest of your Heart; and if the
World should know you have seen and refus'd me,
my slighted Charms would be the Theme of Mirth
to those whose Envy now they are: I therefore
beg, that if I am dislik'd, none but my self may
know it; when you have seen my Face, which you
shall do immediately, give me your Opinion freely; 
and if it is not to my Advantage, make some pretence
to my Father to avoid coming to our House. 
I protest to you, my Lord, that I was so surpriz'd 

at this odd kind of Proceeding, that I knew not
presently how to reply; which she imagining by
my Silence: Come, come, Monsieur, said she, I
am not yet on even Terms with you, having often
seen your Face, and you wholly a Stranger to mine:
But when our Knowledge of each other is mutual,
I hope you will be as free in your Declaration as
I have been in my Request. These Words I
thought were as proper for my Purpose as I cou'd
wish; and drawing back a little, as she was about
to lead me: Madam, said I, since you have that
Advantage, methinks it were but just you should
reveal what sort of Sentiments the Sight of me has
inspir'd, for I have too much Reason, from the
Knowledge of my Demerit, to fear you have no
other Design in exposing your Charms, than to
triumph in the captivating a Heart you have already
doom'd to Misery. I will tell you nothing,
answer'd she, of my Sentiments 'till I have a perfect
Knowledge of yours. As she spoke this, she
gave me her Hand to conduct me out of that
Place of Darkness. As we went, I had all the Concern
at the Apprehension of being too much approv'd
of by this young Lady, as I should have
had for the contrary, if I had imagin'd who it
was I had been talking with; for as soon as we
came out of the Grotto, I saw by the Light of the
Moon, which shone that Night with an uncommon
Lustre, the Face which in those Gardens had before
charm'd me, and which had never since been absent
from my Thoughts. What Joy? What a
Mixture of Extacy and Wonder, then fill'd my
raptur'd Soul at this second View? I could not
presently trust my Eyes, or think my Happiness
was real: I gaz'd, and gaz'd again, in silent Transport,
for the big Bliss surpass'd the reach of Words. 
What, Monsieur, said she, observing my Confusion,
are you yet dumb? Is there any thing so
dreadful in the Form of Violetta, to deprive 

you of your Speech? No, Madam, reply'd I,
'tis not Violetta has that Power, but she,
who unknowing that she did so, caught at first
sight the Victory o're my Soul; She! for whom
I have vented so many Sighs! She for whom I
languish'd and almost dy'd for, while Violetta
was at Vitterbo: She! The Divine Camilla,
only cou'd inspire a Passion such as mine! —Oh
Heavens! cry'd she, and that instant I perceiv'd
her lovely Face all crimson'd o're with Blushes; is
it then possible that you know me, have seen me
before, and that I have been able to make any
Impression on you? I then told her of the Visit
I had made to Ciamara with Cittolini,
and how by his leaving me in the Marble-Study, I
had been blest with the Sight of her; and from his
Friend became his Rival: I let her know the Conflicts
my Honour and my Obligations to Cittolini
had engag'd me in; the thousand various Inventions
Love had suggested to me, to obtain that
Happiness I now enjoy'd, the Opportunity of declaring
my self her Slave; and in short, conceal'd
not the least Thought, tending to my Passion,
from her. She, in Requital, acquainted me, that
she had often seen me from her Window, go into
the Convent of St. Francis, walking in the Collonade
at St. Peter's, and in several other Places, and
prompted by an Extravagance of good Nature and
Generosity, confess'd, that her Heart felt something
at those Views, very prejudicial to her Repose:
That Cittolini, always disagreeable,
was now grown odious; that the Discourse she had
heard of my intended Marriage with his Daughter,
had given her an Alarm impossible to be express'd; 
and that, unable longer to support the Pangs
of undiscover'd Passion, she had writ to me in that
Lady's Name, who she knew I had never seen, resolving,
if I lik'd her as Violetta, to own
herself as Camilla; if not, to go the next Day 

to a Monastery, and devote to Heaven those Charms
which wanted force to make a Conquest, where alone
she wish'd they should. 
I must leave it to your Lordship's Imagination to
conceive the wild tumultuous Hurry of disorder'd Joy
which fill'd my ravish'd Soul at this Condescention; 
for I am now as unable to describe it, as I was
then to thank the dear, the tender Author of it; 
but what Words had not Power to do, Looks and
Actions testified: I threw myself at her Feet, embrac'd
her Knees, and kiss'd the Hand she rais'd
me with, with such a Fervor, as no false Love
cou'd feign; while she, all Softness, all divinely
kind, yielded to the Pressure of my glowing Lips,
and suffer'd me to take all the Freedom which Honour
and Modesty wou'd permit. This Interview
was too felicitous to be easily broken off, it was
almost broad Day when we parted, and nothing
but her Promise, that I shou'd be admitted the next
Night, cou'd have enabled me to take leave of her. 
I went away highly satisfy'd, as I had good
Reason, with my Condition, and after recollecting
all the tender Passages of our Conversation; I began
to consider after what Manner I shou'd proceed
with Cittolini: To visit and address his
Daughter, I thought, wou'd be treacherous and deceitful
to the last Degree; and how to come off, after
the Promise I made of seeing her that Evening, I
cou'd not tell: at last, since Necessity oblig'd me to
one, I resolv'd of the two Evils, to chuse the least, and
rather to seem rude than base, which I must have been,
had I by counterfeiting a Desire to engage Violetta,
left room for a Possibility of creating one
in her. I therefore writ to Cittolini an Excuse
for not waiting on him and his Daughter, as
I had promis'd, telling him that I, on more serious
Reflection found it wholly inconsistent, either
with my Circumstances, or Inclinations, to think 

of passing all my Life in Rome; that I thank'd him
for the Honour he intended me, but that it was
my Misfortune, not to be capable of accepting it. 
Thus, with all the Artifice I was Master of, I endeavour'd
to sweeten the bitter Pill of Refusal, but
in vain; for he was so much disgusted at it, that
he visited me no more: I cannot say, I had Gratitude
enough to be much concern'd at being compell'd
to use him in this Fashion; for, since I had
beheld, and ador'd Camilla, I cou'd consider
him no longer as a Friend, but as the most dangerous
Enemy to my Hopes and me. All this
time I spent the best Part of the Nights with Camilla,
and in one of them, after giving, and
receiving a thousand Vows of everlasting Faith, I
snatch'd a lucky Moment, and obtain'd from the
dear melting Charmer, all that my fondest, and
most eager Wishes cou'd aspire to. Yes, my Lord,
the soft, the trembling Fair, dissolv'd in Love,
yielded without Reserve, and met my Transports
with an equal Ardour; and I truly protest to your
Lordship, that what in others palls Desire, added
fresh Force to mine; the more I knew, the more
I was inflam'd; and in the highest Raptures of Enjoyment,
the Bliss was dash'd with Fears; which
prov'd, alas! but too prophetick, that some curst
Chance might drive me from my Heaven: Therefore
to secure it mine for ever, I press'd the lovely
Partner of my Joys, to give me leave to bring a
Priest with me the next Night; who by giving a
Sanction to our Love, might put it past the Power
of Malice to disunite us. Here I experienced the
Greatness of her Soul, and her almost unexampled
Generosity; for in spite of all her Love, her Tenderness,
and the unbounded Condescensions she
had made me, it was with all the Difficulty in the
World, that I persuaded her to think of marrying
me without a Fortune; which by her Father's Will,
was wholly in the Disposal of Ciamara, who it 

wou'd have been Madness to hope, wou'd ever
bestow'd it upon me. However, my Arguments at
last prevail'd; I was to bring a Fryar of the Order
of St. Francis, who was my intimate Friend, the
next Night to join our Hands; which done, she
told me, she would advise me to leave Rome with
what Speed we cou'd, for she doubted not but
Cittolini wou'd make use of any Means,
tho' never so base or bloody, to revenge his Disappointment. 
This Proposal infinitely pleas'd me; 
and after I had taken leave of her, I spent the Remainder
of the Night, in contriving the Means of
our Escape: Early in the Morning I secur'd Post-Horses,
and then went to the Convent of St. Francis;
a Purse of Louis D'ors soon engag'd the Fryar to my
Interest, and I had every thing in wonderful Order,
considering the Shortness of the Time, for our Design:
When returning Home towards Evening, as
well to take a little Rest after the Fatigue I had had,
as to give some other necessary Directions, concerning
the Affair to my Servants, when one of
them gave me a Letter, which had been just left
for me. 
Monsieur Frankville cou'd not come to
this Part of his Story, without some Sighs; but
suppressing them as well as he was able, he took
some Papers out of his Pocket, and singling out one,
read to the Count as follows. 


To Monsieur Frankville.
With what Words can I represent the Greatness
of my Misfortune, or exclaim against the Perfidy
of my Woman? I was oblig'd to make her
the Confident of my Passion; because without her Assistance,
I cou'd not have enjoy'd the Happiness of your
Conversation; and 'tis by her, that I am now betray'd
—undone,—lost to all Hopes of ever seeing
you more—What have I not endur'd this Day, from
the Upbraidings of Ciamara and Cittolini,
but that I shou'd despise; nay, my own Ruin too, if
you were safe—But oh! then Malice aims to wound
me most, through you—Bravo's are hired, the Price
of your Blood is paid, and they have sworn to take your
Life—Guard it I conjure you, if you would preserve
that of Camilla's. Attempt not to come near this
House, nor walk alone, when Night may be an Umbrage
to their Designs. —I hear my cruel Enemies returning
to renew their Persecutions; and I have Time
to inform no more, than that 'tis to the generous Violetta
you are indebted for this Caution: She, in
pity of my Agonies, and to prevent her Father from
executing the Crime he entends; conveys this to you,
slight it not, if you wou'd have me believe you love, 
Camilla. 

What a Turn was here (continu'd he, sadly)
in my Fortune? How on a sudden was my Scene
of Happiness chang'd to the blackest Despair? — 
But not to tire your Lordship, and spin out my
Narration, which is already too long with unavailing 

Complainings. I every Day expected a Challenge
from Cittolini, believing he wou'd, at
least, take that Method at first; but it seems he was
for chusing the surest, not the fairest Way: And I
have since prov'd, that my dear Camilla had
too much Reason for the Caution she gave me. 
Ten Days I linger'd out without being able to invent
any Means, either to see her, or write to
her; at the End of which I receiv'd another Letter
from her, which, if I were to tell you the Substance
of, wou'd be to wrong her, since no Words but
her own, are fit to express her Meaning, and 'tis
for that Reason only, I shall read it. 

To Mosieur Frankville.
Of all the Woes which wait on human Life, sure
there is none equal to that a Lover feels in Absence; 
'tis a Kind of Hell, an Earnest of those
Pains, we are told, shall be the Portion of the Damn'd— 
Ten whole Nights and Days, according to the vulgar
Reckoning, but in mine, as many Ages, have roll'd
their tedious Hours away since last I saw you; in all
which time, my Eyes have never known one Moments
Cessation from my Tears, nor my sad Heart from Anguish; 
restless I wander thro' this hated House—Kiss
the clos'd Wicket—Stop, and look at every Place which
I remember your dear Steps have blest; then, with
wild Ravings, think of past Joys, and curse my present
Woes—Yet you perhaps are calm, no sympathizing
Pang nvades you Soul, and tells you what mine
suffers; else, you wou'd, you must have found some
Means to ease yourself and me—'tis true, I bid you
not attempt it—But oh! if you had lov'd like me, 

you cou'd not have obey'd—Desire has no regard to
Prudence, it despises Danger, and over—looks Impossibilities
—But whither am I going? I say, I know
not what—Oh, mark not what Distraction utters! 
Shun these detested Walls!—'tis Reason now commands!
fly from this House, where injur'd Love's enslaved,
and Death and Treachery reign—I charge
thee come not near, nor prove thy Faith so hazardous
a Way—Forgive the little Fears, which ever dwell
with Love—I know thou art all Sincerity!—all
God-like Truth, and canst not change—yet, if thou
shouldst,—tormenting Thought! why then, there's
not a Heaven-abandon'd Wretch, so lost—so curst as
I—What shall I do to shake off Apprehension? In spite
of all thy Vows—thy ardent Vows, when I but
think of any Maid, by Love and fond Belief undone,
a deadly Cold runs thro' my Veins, congeals my Blood,
and chills my very Soul! Gazing on the Moon last
Night, her Lustre brought fresh to my Memory, those
transporting Moments, when by that Light I saw you
first a Lover, and, I think inspired me, who am not usually
fond of versifying, to make her this Complaint. 



The Unfortunate Camilla's
Complaint to the Moon, for the
Absence of her dear Henricus
Frankville.
Mild Queen of Shades! thou sweetly shining
Light!
Once, more than Phœbus, welcome to my
Sight:
'Twas by thy Beams I first Henricus saw
Adorn'd with Softness, and disarm'd of Awe!
Never didst thou appear more fair! more bright!
Than on that dear, that Cause-remembred Night!
When the dull Ties of Friendship he diselaim'd,
And to inspire a tend'rer Passion aim'd:
Alas! he cou'd not long, in vain, implore,
For that, which tho' unknown, was his before;
Nor had I Art the Secret to disguise,
My Soul spoke all her Meaning thro' my Eyes,
And every Glance brightn'd with glad Surprize!
Lost to all Thought, but his transporting Charms,
I sunk, unguarded! melting in his Arms!
Blest at that lavish Rate, my State, that Hour
I'd not have chang'd for all in Fortune's Pow'r,
Nay, had descending Angels from on high
Spread their bright Wings to waft me to the Sky,
Thus clasp'd! Cœlestial Charms had fail'd to move,
And Heaven been slighted, for Henricus Love.
How did I then thy happy Influence bless?
How watch each joyful Night, thy Lights encrease?
But oh! how alter'd since—Despairing now,
I view thy Lustre with contracted Brow:

Pensive and sullen from the Rays wou'd hide,
And scarce the glimmering Stars my Griefs abide;
In Deathlike Darkness wou'd my Fate deplore,
And wish thee to go down, to rise no more.

Pity the Extravagance of a Passion, which only
Charms like thine cou'd create; nor too severely chide
this soft Impertinence, which I cou'd not refrain sending
you: when I can neither see you, nor hear from
you, to write, gives some little Respite to my Pains,
because I am sure of being in your Thoughts, while
you are reading my Letters. The tender hearted Violetta,
preferring the Ties of Friendship to those of
Duty, gives me this happy Opportunity; but my ill
Fortune deprives me too of her, she goes to morrow to
her Father's Villa, and Heaven knows when I shall
find means to send to you again. 
Farewel, thou loveliest, dearest, and divinest Charmer
—Think of me with a Concern full of Tenderness,
but that is not enough; and you must pardon me when
I confess, that I cannot forbear wishing you might feel
some of those Pains, impatient Longing brings. —All
others be far away, as far, as Joy is, when you are
absent from 
Your Unfortunate
Camilla. 
P. S. Since I writ this, a Fancy came into my
Head, that if you cou'd find a Friend trusty enough
to confide in, and one unknown to our Family, he
might gain Admittance to me in Cittolini's
Name, as sent by him, while he is at the Villa. I
flatter myself you will take as much pleasure in endeavouring
to let me hear from you, as I do in the
hope of it. Once more 
Adieu. 

Your Lordship may judge, by what I have told
you of the Sincerity of my Passion, how glad I
should have been to have comply'd with her Request,
but it was utterly impossible to find any body
fit for such a Business: I pass'd three or four Days
more, in Disquietudes too great to be express'd; 
I saunter'd up and down the Street where she liv'd,
in hopes to see her at some of the Windows; but
Fortune never was so favourable to me: thus I
spent my Days, and left the Sight of those dear
Walls at Nights, but in obedience to the Charge
she had given me of preserving my Life. 
Thus, my Lord, has the Business of my Love
engrossed my Hours, ever since your Lordship's
Arrival; and tho' I heard that you were here, and
extremely wish'd to kiss your Hands, yet I cou'd
never get one Moment compos'd enough to wait
on you in, 'till what my Desires cou'd not do, the
Rashness of my Indignation effected: Last Night,
being at my Bankers, where all my Bills and Letters
are directed, I found this, from Monsieur Sanseverin;
the Rage which the Contents of it put
me in, kept me from remembring that Circumspection,
which Camilla had enjoyn'd; and I
thought of nothing but revenging the Injury I imagin'd
you had done me: As I was coming home,
I was attack'd as you saw, when you so generously
preserv'd me; the just Indignation I conceiv'd at
this base Procedure of Cittolini's, transported
me so far, as to make me forget what I owed to
my Deliverer, to run in pursuit of those who assaulted
me; but soon lost sight of them, and returning,
as Gratitude and Honour call'd me, to seek
and thank you for your timely Assistance, I found
a Throng of People about the Body of the Villain
I had kill'd; some of them were for examining me,
but finding no Wounds about me, nor any Marks
of the Engagement I had been in, I was left at my
Liberty. 

Thus, my Lord, have I given you, in as brief
a manner as the Changes of my Fortune wou'd
permit, the Account of my present melancholy Circumstances,
in which, if you find many things
blameable, you must acknowledge there are more
which require Compassion. 



I see no Reason, answer'd the Count, either for
the one or the other, you have done nothing but
what any Man who is a Lover, wou'd gladly have
it in his Power to do, and as for your Condition, it
certainly is more to be envy'd than pity'd: The
Lady loves, is constant, and doubtless will some
way or other, find means for her Escape—Impossible!
cry'd Frankville, interrupting him, she
is too strictly watch'd to suffer such a Hope. If
you will prepare a Letter, resum'd D'elmont,
my self will undertake to be the Bearer of it; I am
entirely a Stranger to the People you have been
speaking of, or if I should chance to be known to
them, cannot be suspected to come from you, since
our Intimacy, so lately born, cannot yet be talk'd
of, to the Prejudice of our Design; and how do
you know, continu'd he smiling, but, if. I have the
good Fortune to be introduc'd to this Lady, that
I shall not be able to assist her Invention to form
some Scheme, for both your future Happiness. 
This Offer was too agreeable to be refus'd, Frankville
accepted it with all the Demonstrations of
Gratitude and Joy imaginable, and setting himself
down to the Count's Scrutore, was not long
writing the following Billet, which he gave him to
read before he seal'd it. 


To the most Lovely and Adorable Camilla.
If to consume with inward Burnings, to have no
Breath but Sighs, to wish for Death, or Madness
to relieve me from the Racks of Thought, be Misery
consummate, such is mine! And yet my too unjust Camilla
thinks I feel no Pain, and chides my cold
Tranquillity; cou'd I be so, I were indeed a Wretch
deserving of my Fate, but far unworthy of your Pity
or Regard. No, no, thou loveliest, softest, most angelick
Creature, that Heaven, in lavish Bounty, ever
sent to charm the adoring World; he that cou'd know
one Moment's stupid Calm in such an Absence, ought
never to be blest with those unbounded Joys thy Presence
brings: What wou'd I not give, what wou'd I
not hazard, but once more to behold thee, to gaze upon
thy Eyes, those Suns of kindling Transports! to touch
thy enlivening Hand! to feed upon the ravishing
Sweetness of thy Lips! Oh, the Imagination's Extacy! 
Life were to poor to set on such a Cast; and you shou'd
long e're this, have prov'd the little Value I have for
it, in Competition with my Love, if your Commands
had not restrain'd me. Cittolini's Malice,
however, had last Night been gratify'd, if the Noble
Count D'elmont had not been inspir'd for my
Preservation; it is to him I am indebted, not only for
my Life, but a much greater Favour, that of conveying
to you the Assurance, how much my Life, my
Soul, and all the Faculties of it are entirely Yours. 
Thank him, my Camilla, for your Frankville,
for Words like thine are only fit to praise, as it deserves,
such an exalted Generosity; 'tis with an infinite deal 

of Satisfaction I reflect how much thy Charms will
justify my Conduct when he sees thee, all that Excess
of Passion, which my fond Soul's too full of to conceal,
that Height of Adoration, which offer'd to any other
Woman, wou'd be Sacrilege, the Wonders of thy Beauty
and thy Wit, claim as their due, and prove Camilla,
like Heaven, can never be too much reverenced!
be too much lov'd! —But oh! how poor is
Language to express what 'tis I think, thus raptur'd
with thy Idea, thou best, thou brightest—thou most
perfect—thou something more than Excellence it self— 
thou far surpassing all that Words can speak, or Heart,
unknowing thee, conceive: yet I cou'd d well for ever
on the Theme, and swell whole Volumes with enervate,
tho' well-meaning Praises; if my Impatience, to have
what I have already writ, be with you, did not prevent
my saying any more than, that but in you I live,
nor cou'd support this Death-like Absence, but for
some little Intervals of Hope, which sometimes flatter
me, that Fortune will grow weary of persecuting me,
and one Day re-unite my Body to my Soul, and make
both inseparably Yours. 
Frankville. 

These new-made Friends having a Fellow-feeling
of each others Sufferings, as proceeding
from one Source, pass'd the time in little else but
amorous Discourses, till it was a proper Hour for
the Count to perform his Promise; and taking a
full Direction from Frankville how to find
the House, he left him at his Lodgings to wait his
Return from Ciamara's, forming, all the way
he went, a thousand Projects to communicate to
Camilla for her Escape; he was still extremely
uneasy in his Mind concerning Melliora, and
long'd to be in Paris to know the Truth of that
Affair, but thought he cou'd not in Honour leave
her Brother in this Embarassment, and resolv'd to 

make use of all his Wit and Address to persuade
Camilla to hazard every thing for Love; and
was not a little pleas'd with the Imagination, that he
should lay so considerable an Obligation on Melliora,
as this Service to her Brother wou'd be. 
Full of these Reflections he found himself in the
Portico of that magnificent House he was to enter,
and seeing a Crowd of Servants about the Door,
desir'd to be brought to the Presence of Donna
Camilla Fialasco; one of them immediately
conducted him into a stately Room, and leaving
him there, told him, the Lady shou'd be made
acquainted with his Request; presently after came
in a Woman, who, tho' very young, seem'd to
be in the Nature of a Duenna: The Count stood
with his Back toward her as she enter'd, but hearing
somebody behind him, and turning hastily
about, he observ'd she startled at Sight of him, and
appear'd so confus'd, that he knew not what to
make of her Behaviour; and when he ask'd if he
might speak with Camilla, and said he had a
Message to deliver from Cittolini, she made
no other Answer, than several times, with an amaz'd
Accent, echoing the Names of Camilla
and Cittolini, as if not able to comprehend
his Meaning; he was oblig'd to repeat his Words
over and over before she cou'd recollect herself
enough to tell him, that she wou'd let him know
her Lady's Pleasure instantly. She left him in a
good deal of Consternation, at the Surprize he perceiv'd
the Sight of him had put her into, he form'd
a thousand uncertain Guesses, what the Occasion
shou'd be; but the Mystery was too deep for all
his Penetration to fathom, and he waited with
Abundance of Impatience for her Return, or the
Appearance of her Lady, either of which, he
hop'd, might give a Solution to this seeming
Riddle. 

He attended a considerable Time, and was beginning
to grow excessive uneasy at this Delay,
when a magnificent Anti-porta being drawn up, he
saw thro' a Glass Door, which open'd into a Gallery,
the Duenna approaching: She had now entirely
compos'd her Countenance, and with an obliging
Smile told him, she wou'd conduct him to
her Lady. She led him thro' several Rooms, all
richly furnish'd and adorn'd, but far inferior to the
last he came into, and in which he was again left
alone, after being assured that he should not long
be so. 
Count D'elmont cou'd not forbear giving
truce to his more serious Reflections, to admire the
Beauties of the Place he was in; where e're he
turn'd his Eyes, he saw nothing but was splendidly
luxurious, and all the Ornaments contriv'd in such
a manner, as might fitly be a Pattern, to paint
the Palace of the Queen of Love by: The Ceiling
was vastly high and beautify'd with most curious
Paintings; the Walls were cover'd with Tapestry,
in which, most artificially were woven, in
various colour'd Silk, intermix'd with Gold and
Silver, a great number of amorous Stories; in
one Place he beheld a naked Venus sporting with
Adonis; in another, the Love-transform'd Jupiter,
just resuming his Shape, and rushing to the Arms
of Leda; there the seeming chaste Diana embracing
her entranc'd Endimion; here, the God of
soft Desires himself, wounded with an Arrow of
his own, and snatching Kisses from the no less enamour'd
Psiche: Betwixt every one of these Pieces
hung a large Looking-Glass, which reach'd to the
Top of the Room; and out of each sprung several
chrystal Branches, containing great Wax Tapers,
so that the Number of Lights vy'd with the Sun,
and made another, and more glorious Day, than
that which lately was withdrawn. At the upper
End of this magnificent Chamber, there was a Canopy 

of Crimson Velvet, richly emboss'd, and
trim'd with Silver, the Corners of which were supported
by two golden Cupids, with stretch'd out
Wings, as if prepar'd to fly; two of their Hands
grasp'd the the Extremity of the Valen, and the
other, those nearest to each other, join'd to hold
a Wreath of Flowers, over a Couch, which stood
under the Canopy. But tho' the Count was very
much taken at first with what he saw, yet he was
too sincere a Lover to be long delighted with any
thing in the Absence of his Mistress: How heavenly
(said he to himself sighing) wou'd be this Place, if
I expected Melliora here! But, oh! how preferable
were a Cottage, blest with her, to all this
Pomp and Grandeur with any other: This Consideration
threw him into a deep Musing, which made
him forget either where he was, or the Business
which brought him there; till rous'd from it by the
dazling Owner of this sumptuous Apartment. Nothing
cou'd be more glorious than her Appearance; 
she was by Nature, a Woman of a most excellent
Shape, to which, her Desire of Pleasing, had made
her add all the Aids of Art; she was drest in a
Gold and Silver stuff Petticoat, and a Wastecoat of
plain blue Sattin, set round the Neck and Sleeves,
and down the Seams with Diamonds, and fasten'd
on the Breast with Jewels of a prodigious Largeness
and Lustre; a Girdle of the same encompass'd
her Waste; her Hair, of which she had great
Quantity, was black as Jet, and with a studied
Negligence, fell part of it on her Neck in careless
Ringlets, and the other was turn'd up, and
fastened here and there with Bodkins, which had
pendant Diamonds hanging to 'em, and as she
mov'd, glitter'd with a quivering Blaze, like Stars
darting their Fires from out a sable Sky; she had
a Veil on, but so thin, that it did not, in the least,
obscure the Shine of her Garments, or her Jewels,
only she had contriv'd to double that part of it 

which hung over her Face, in so many Folds,
that it serv'd to conceal her as well as a Vizard
Mask. 
The Count made no doubt but this was the Lady
for whom he waited; and throwing off that melancholy
Air he had been in, assum'd one all gay
and easy; and bowing low, as he advanc'd to
meet her; Madam, said he, if you are that incomparable
Camilla, whose Goodness nothing
but her Beauty can equalize, you will forgive
the Intrusion of a Stranger, who confesses himself
no other way worthy of the Honour of your
Conversation, but by his Desires to serve him
who is much more so. A Friend of Cittolini's,
answer'd she, can never want Admittance here; and
if you had no other Plea, the Name you come in,
is a sufficient Warrant for your kind Reception. I
hope, resum'd he in a low Voice, and looking
round to see if there were no Attendants in hearing,
I bring a better, from Frankville! Madam,
the adoring Frankville! I have
these Credentials to justify my Visit: In speaking
this, he delivered the Letter to her, which
she retiring a few Paces from him to read, gave
him an Opportunity of admiring the Majesty
of her Walk, and the agreeable Loftiness of
her Mien, much more than he had time to do
before. 
She dwelt not long on the Contents of the Letter,
but throwing it carelessly down on a Table
which stood near her, turn'd to the Count, and
with an Accent which express'd not much Satisfaction; 
And was it to you, my Lord, said she, that
Monsieur Frankville ow'd his Preservation? 
I was so happy, reply'd he, to have some little
hand in it; but since I have known how dear he is
to you, think myself doubly blest by Fortune for
the means of acting any thing conducive to your
Peace. If you imagine that this is is so, resum'd 

she hastily, you are extreamly mistaken, as you
will always be, when you believe, when Count
D'elmont appears, any other Man seems worthy
the regard of a discerning Woman; but, continu'd
she, perceiving he look'd surpriz'd, to spare
your Suspence, and my self the Trouble of repeating
what you know already, behold who she is,
you have been talking to, and tell me now, if
Frankville has any Interest in a Heart to
which this Face belongs? With these Words she
threw off her Veil, and instead of lessening his
Amazement, very much increas'd it, in discovering
the Features of the Lady with whom he had
discoursed the Night before in the Garden; he
knew not what to think, or how to reconcile to
Reason, that Camilla, who so lately lov'd,
and had granted the highest Favours to Frankville,
shou'd on a sudden be willing, uncourted,
to bestow them on another; nor cou'd he
comprehend how the same Person shou'd at
once live in two several Places, for he conceiv'd
the House he was in, was far distant from
the Garden which he had been in the Night
before. 
They both remain'd for some Moments in a
profound Silence, the Lady expecting when the
Count shou'd speak, and he endeavouring to recollect
himself enough to do so; 'till she, at last,
possibly guessing at his Thoughts, resum'd her
Discourse in this manner: My Lord, said she,
wonder not at the Power of Love, a Form like
your's might soften the most rugged Heart, much
more one, by Nature so tender as is mine. — 
Think but what you are, continu'd she sighing,
and making him sit down by her on the Couch,
and you will easily excuse whatever my Passion
may enforce me to commit. I must confess, Madam,
answer'd he very gravely, I never in my
Life wanted presence of Mind so much as at this 

juncture, to see before me here, the Person, who,
I believ'd, liv'd far from hence, who, by Appointment,
I was to wait on this Night at a different
Place. —To find in the Mistress of my Friend,
the very Lady, who seems unworthily to have
bestow'd her Heart on me, are Circumstances so
incoherent, as I can neither account for, or make
evident to Reason, tho' they are too truly so to
Sense. It will be easy, reply'd she, to reconcile
both these seeming Contradictions, when you shall
know that the Gardens belonging to the House,
are of a very large Extent, and not only that, but
the Turning of the Streets are so order'd, as make
the Distance between the fore, and back Door
appear much greater than really it is: And for the
other, as I have already told you, you ought to
be better acquainted with your self, than to be surpriz'd
at Consequences which must infallibly attend
such Charms: In saying this, she turn'd her
Head a little on one side, and put her Handkerchief
before her Face, affecting to seem confus'd
at what she spoke; but the Count redned in good
Earnest, and with a Countenance which express'd
Sentiments far different from those she endeavour'd
to inspire: Madam, said he, tho' the good
Opinion you have of me is owing entirely to the
Error of your Fancy, which too often, especially
in your Sex, blinds the Judgment, yet, 'tis certain,
that there are not many Men, whom such
Praises, coming from a Mouth like yours, wou'd
not make Happy and Vain; but if I was ever of
a Humour to be so, it is now wholly mortify'd in
me; and 'tis but with the utmost regret, that I
must receive the Favours you confer on me to the
prejudice of my Friend: And is that, interrupted
she hastily, is that the only Cause? Does nothing
but your Friendship to Frankville prevent my
Wishes? That, of itself, answer'd he, were a sufficient
Bar to sunder us for ever; but there's another, 

if not a greater, a more tender one, which
to restore you to the Path, which Honour, Gratitude,
and Reason call you to, I must inform you
of; yes, I must tell you, Madam, all lovely as
you are, that were there no such Man as Frankville
in the World,—were you as free as
Air, I have a Defence within, which all your
Charms can never pierce, nor Softness melt— 
I am already bound, not with the weak Ties of
Vows or formal Obligations, which confine no
farther than the Body, but Inclination!—the fondest
Inclination! that ever swell'd a Heart with
Rapturous Hopes. The Lady had much ado to
contain herself till he had done speaking; she
was by Nature extreamly haughty, insolent of
her Beauty, and impatient of any thing she thought
look'd like a slight of it; and this open Defiance
of her Power, and acknowledging anothers, had she
been less in Love, wou'd have been insupportable
to her: Ungrateful and uncourtly Man, said she,
looking on him with Eyes that sparkled at once
with Indignation and Desire, you might have spar'd
yourself the trouble of repeating, and me the
Confusion of hearing, in what manner you stand
engag'd; it had been enough to have told me
you never cou'd be mine, without appearing transported
at the Ruin which you make: If my too
happy Rival possesses Charms I cannot boast,
methinks your good Manners might have taught you,
not to insult my Wants, and your good Nature, to
have mingled Pity with your Justice; with these
Words she fell a Weeping, but whether they were
Tears of Love or Anger, is hard to determine; 
'tis certain, that both those Passions rag'd this Moment
in her Soul with equal Violence, and if she
had had it in her Power, wou'd doubtless have
been glad to have hated him, but he was, at all
times, too lovely to suffer a possibility of that,
and much more so at this, for in spite of the Shock, 

that Infidelity he believ'd her guilty of to Frankville,
gave him, he was by Nature so Compassionate,
he felt the Woes he saw, or heard of,
even of those who were most indifferent to him,
and cou'd not now behold a Face, in which all
the Horrors of Despair were in the most lively
manner represented, without displaying a Tenderness
in his, which in any other Man, might have
been taken for Love; the dazling Radiance of
his Eyes, gave place to a more dangerous, more
bewitching Softness; and when he sigh'd, in pity
of her Anguish, a Soul-inchanting Languishment
diffus'd itself thro' all his Air, and added to his
Graces: She presently perceiv'd it, and forming
new Hopes, as well from that, as from his Silence,
took hold of his Hand, and pressing it eagerly to
her Bosom; Oh, my Lord! resum'd she, you cannot
be ungrateful if you wou'd. —I see you cannot
—Madam, interrupted he, shaking off as much
as possible that show of Tenderness, which he
found had given her Encouragement; I wish not
to convince you how nearly I am touch'd with
what you suffer, least it shou'd encrease an Esteem,
which, since prejudicial to your Repose, and the
Interest of my Friend, I rather ought to endeavour
to lessen. —But, as this is not the Entertainment
I expected from Camilla, I beg to know
an Answer of the Business I came upon, and what
you decree for the unfortunate Frankville? 
If the Lady was agitated with an extremity of Vexation
at the Count's Declaration of his Passion for
another, what was she now, at this Disappointment
of the Hopes she was so lately flatter'd with! 
Instead of making any direct reply to what he
said, she rag'd, stamp'd, tore her Hair, curs'd
Frankville, all Mankind, the World, and in
that height of Fury, scarce spar'd Heaven itself; 
but the Violence of her Pride and Resentment being
a little vented, Love took his turn, again she 

wept, again she prest his Hand, nay, she even
knelt and hung upon his Feet, as he wou'd have
broke from her, and begg'd him with Words as
eloquent as Wit cou'd Form, and desperate dying
Love suggest, to pity and relieve her Misery: But
he had now learn'd to dissemble his Concern, lest
it shou'd a second time beguile her, and after raising
her, with as careless and unmov'd an Air, as
he was capable of putting on: My Presence, Madam,
said he, but augments your Disorder, and
'tis only by seeing you no more, that I am qualify'd
to conduce to the recovery of your Peace:
With these Words he turn'd hastily from her, and
was going out of the Room, when she, quick as
Thought, sprung from the Place where she had
stood, and being got between him and the Door,
and throwing her self into his Arms, before he
had time to prevent her; you must not, shall not
go, she cry'd, till you have left me dead: Pardon
me, Madam, answer'd he fretfully, and struggling
to get loose from her Embrace, to stay after
the Discovery you have made of your Sentiments,
were to be guilty of an Injustice almost equal to
your's; therefore I beg you'd give me liberty to
pass. —Hear me but speak, resum'd she, grasping
him yet harder; return but for a Moment,— 
lovely Barbarian! —Hell has no Torments like
your Cruelty. Here, the different Passions working
in her Soul, with such uncommon Vehemence,
hurry'd her Spirits beyond what Nature cou'd support; 
her Voice faulter'd in the Accent, her trembling
Hands by slow degrees relinquish'd what so
eagerly they had held, every Sense forgot its Use,
and she sunk, in all appearance, lifeless on the
Floor: The Count was, if possible, more glad to
be releas'd, than griev'd at the Occasion, and contented
himself with calling her Women to her
Assistance, without staying to see she when she wou'd
recover. 

He went out of that House with Thoughts
much more discompos'd than those with which he
had enter'd it; and when he came Home where
Frankville impatiently waited his Return, he
was at the greatest loss in the World, how to discover
his Misfortune to him. The other observing
the trouble of his Mind, which was very visible in
his Countenance; my Lord, said he, in a melancholy
Tone, I need not ask you what Success, the
Gloom which appears on your Brow, tells me, my
ill Fortune has deny'd you the means of speaking
to Camilla? Accuse not Fortune, answer'd
D'elmont, but the influence of malicious Stars,
which seldom, if ever, suits our Dispositions to
our Circumstances; I have seen Camilla, have
talk'd to her, and 'tis from that Discourse that I
cannot forbear Reflection on the Miseries of Humanity,
which, while it mocks us with a show of
Reason, gives us no Power to curb our Will, and
guide the erring Appetites to Peace. Monsieur
Frankville at these Words first felt a jealous
Pang; and as 'tis natural to believe every Body admires
what we do, he presently imagin'd Count
D'elmont had forgot Melliora in the presence
of Camilla, and that it was from the Consciousness
of his own Weakness and Inconstancy,
that he spoke so feelingly: I wonder not, my
Lord, said he coldly, that the Beauties of Camilla
shou'd inspire you with Sentiments, which,
perhaps, for many Reasons, you wou'd desire to
be free from; and I ought, in Prudence, to have
consider'd, that tho' you are the most excellent of
your Kind, you are still a Man, and have the
Passions incident to Man, and not have expos'd
you to those Dangers the sight of Camilla must
necessarily involve you in. I wish to Heaven, answer'd
the Count, easily guessing what his Thoughts
were, no greater threatned you, and that you cou'd
think on Camilla with the same Indifference as 

I can, or she of me with more; then, in as brief
a manner as he cou'd, he gave him the Substance
of what had happen'd. Frankville, whose
only Fault was Rashness, grew almost wild at the
Recital of so unexpected a Misfortune; he knew
not for a good while what to believe, loath he
was to suspect the Count, but loather to suspect
Camilla, yet flew into extremities of Rage against
both, by turns: The Count pitied, and forgave all
the Violence of his Passion made him utter, but
offer'd not to argue with him, 'till he found him
capable of admitting his Reasons, and then, that
open Sincerity, that honest noble Assurance which
always accompany'd his Sweetness, and made it
difficult to doubt the Truth of any thing he said,
won the disorder'd Lover to an entire Conviction; 
he now concludes his Mistress false, repents the
Tenderness he has had for her, and tho' she still appears
as lovely to his Fancy as ever, she grows
odious to his Judgment, and resolves to use his
utmost Efforts to banish her Idea from his Heart. 
In this Humour he took leave of the Count, it
growing late, and his last Nights Adventures taught
him the danger of Nocturnal Walks; but how he
spent his time till Morning, those can only guess,
who have loved like him, and like him, met so cruel
a Disappointment. 
The Count pass'd not the Night in much less
Inquietude than Frankville, he griev'd the
powerful Influence of his own Attractions; and
had there not been a Melliora in the World,
he wou'd have wish'd himself Deform'd, rather
than have been the Cause of so much Misery, as
his Loveliness produc'd. 
The next Morning the Count design'd to visit
Frankville, to strengthen him in his Resolution
of abandoning all Thoughts of the unconstant
Camilla; but before he cou'd get drest, the other
came into his Chamber: My Lord, said he, 

assoon as they were alone, my perfidious Mistress,
failing to make a Conquest of your Heart, is still
willing to preserve that she had attain'd over mine; 
but all her Charms and her Delusions are but
vain; and to prove to your Lordship that they are
so, I have brought the Letter I receiv'd from her,
scarce an Hour past, and the true Copy of my Answer
to it. 

To Monsieur Frankville.
Tho' nothing proves the value of your Presence,
so much as the Pangs our Absence occasions, and
in my last I rashly wish'd you might be sensible
of mine; yet on examining my Heart, I presently recall'd
the hasty Prayer, and found I lov'd with that
extravagance of Tenderness, that I had rather you
return'd it too little than too much; and methinks
cou'd better bear to represent you to my Fancy, careless
and calm as common Lovers are, than think, I saw
you, Burning,—Bleeding,—Dying, like me, with hopeless
Wishes, and unavailing Expectations: but, ah! I
fear such Apprehensions are but too unnecessary— 
You think not of me; and, if in those happy Days,
when no cross Accident interven'd to part me from
your Sight, my Fondness pleas'd, you now find nothing
in Camilla worth a troubled Thought, nor breath
one tender Sigh in memory of our Transports past. — 
If I wrong your Love, impute it to Distraction; for,
oh! 'tis sure, I am not in my Senses, nor know to
form one regular Desire: I act, and speak, and think
a thousand incoherent things; and tho' I cannot forbear
writing to you, I write in such a manner, so wild,
so different from what I wou'd, that I repent me of 

the Folly I am guilty of, even while I am committing
it; but to make as good a Defence as I am able for
those, perhaps, unwelcome Lines, I must inform you,
that they come not so much to let you know my Sentiments,
as to engage a Discovery of yours: Ciamara
has discharg'd one of her Servants from her
Attendance, who no longer courting her Favour or
regarding her Frowns, I have prevail'd upon, not only
to bring this to you, but to convey an Answer back
to me, by the help of a String which I am to let down
from my Window; therefore, if you are but as Kind
as he has promised to be Faithful, we may often enjoy
the Blessing of this distant Conversation: Heaven only
knows when we shall be permitted to enjoy a nearer,
Cittolini is this Evening return'd from his Villa,
and nothing but a Miracle can save me from the
necessity of making my Choice of him, or a Monastery,
either of which is worse than Death, since it must
leave me the Power to wish, but take away the Means,
of being what I so oft have swore to be, 
Eternally Yours, and,
Yours alone,
Camilla. 

The Count could not forbear lifting up his Eyes
and Hands in token of Amazement, at the unexampled
Falshood this Woman appeared guilty of; 
but perceiving Monsieur Frankville was about
to read the following Answer, wou'd not interrupt
him, by asking any Questions, 'till he had
done. 


To Donna Camilla.
If Vows are any constraint to an Inclination so addicted
to Liberty as yours, I shall make no difficulty
to release you of all you ever made to me! 
Yes, Madam, you are free to dispose both of your
Heart and Person uheresoever you think fit; nor do I
desire you should give your self the pains of farther
Dissimulation. I pay too entire an Obedience to your
Will, to continue in a Passion which is no longer pleasing:
Nor will, by an ill-tim'd and unmannerly Constancy,
disturb the Serenity of your future Enjoyments
with any happier Man than, 
Frankville, 

You see, my Lord, said he with a Sigh, that I
have put it out of her Power to triumph over my
Weakness, for I confess my Heart still wears her
Chains; but e'er my Eyes or Tongue betray to her
the shameful Bondage, these Hands should tear
them out; therefore I made no mention of her
Behaviour to you, nor of my sending any Letter
by you, not only because I knew not if your Lordship
wou'd think it proper, but lest she shou'd imamine
my Resentment proceeded from Jealousy,
and that I lov'd her still. —No, she shall ne'er have
Cause to guess the truth of what I suffer. —Her real
Perfidy shall be repaid with seeming Inconstancy and
Scorn. —Oh! how 'twill sting her Pride,—By Heaven,
I feel a gloomy kind of Pleasure in the
Thought, and will indulge it, even to highest Insults
of Revenge. 

I rather wish, reply'd the Count, you cou'd in
earnest be indifferent, than only feign to be so; her unexampled
Levity and Deceit, renders her as unworthy
of your Anger as your Love, and there is too
much Danger while you preserve the one, that you
will not be able to throw off the other. —Oh! I
pretend not to it, cry'd Frankville, interrupting
him, she has too deep a Root within my
Soul ever to be remov'd—I boast no more than a
Concealment of my Passion; and when I dress the
Horrors of a bleeding, breaking Heart, in all the
Calm of cold Tranquillity, methinks, you should
applaud the Noble Conquest. Time, said the Count,
after a little Pause, and a just Reflection how little
she deserves your Thoughts, will teach you to
obtain a Nobler; that of numbering your Love,
among things that were, but are no more, and make
you, with me, acknowledge that 'tis as great an
Argument of Folly and Meanness of Spirit, to continue
the same Esteem when the Object ceases to
deserve, which we profess'd before the Discovery
of that Unworthiness, as it wou'd be of Villainy
and Inconstancy of Mind to change, without an efficient
Cause. A great deal of Discourse pass'd
between them to the same Effect, and it was but
in vain that Count D'elmont endeavour'd to persuade
him to a real forgetfulness of the Charmer,
tho' he resolv'd to seem as if he did so. 
While they were disputing, one of D'elmont's
Servants gave him a Letter, which, he
told him, the Person who brought it, desir'd he
wou'd answer immediately: He no sooner broke
it open, and cast his Eye over it, than he cry'd
out in a kind of Transport, Oh, Frankville,
what has Fate been doing! You are happy— 
Camilla is Innocent, and perhaps the most deserving
of her Sex; I only am Guilty, who, by a
fatal Mistake have wrong'd her Virtue, and tormented 

you; but read, continu'd he, giving him
the Letter, read, and satisfy your self. 
Monsieur Frankville was too much
astonish'd at these Words, to be able to make any
Reply, but immediately found the Interpretation
of them in these Lines. 

To the dear cruel Destroyer of my Quiet, the never too much Admir'd Count D'elmont.
'Tis no longer the Mistress of your Friend, a perfect
and unjust Camilla, who languishes
and dies by your Contempt, but one, whom all
the Darts of Love had strove in vain to reach, 'till from
your Charms they gain'd a God-like Influence, and
un-erring Force! One, who tho' a Widow, brings you
the Offering of a Virgin Heart. 
As I was sitting in my Closet, watching the progress
of the lazy Hours, which flew not half so swift
as my Desires to bring on the appointed Time, in which
you promis'd to be with me in the Garden, my Woman
came running in, to acquaint me, that you were in
the House, and waited to speak with Camilla:
Surprize and Jealousy at once assaulted me, and I
sunk beneath the Apprehension that you might, by some
Accident, have seen her, and also loved her: To ease
my self of those tormenting Doubts, I resolv'd to appear
before you, in her stead, and kept my Veil over
my Face, 'till I found that hers was unknown to you. 
—You are not ignorant what follow'd; the Dcceit
pass'd upon you for Truth, but I was sufficiently punish'd
for it, by the severity of your Usage: I was
just going to discover my self who I was, when the 

Violence of my Love, my Grief, and my Despair,
threw me into that Swoon, in which, to compleat
your Cruelty, you left me; 'twould be endless to endeavour
to represent the Agonies of my Soul when I
recover'd, and heard you were gone; but all who truly
Love, as they fear much, so they hope much, my
Tortures at length abated, at least, permitted me to
take some Intervals of Comfort, and I began to flatter
my self, that the Passion you seem'd transported with,
for a nameless Mistress, was but a Feint to bring me
back to him you thought I was oblig'd to love, and
that there was a possibility, that my Person and Fortune
might not appear despicable to you, when you
shou'd know, I have no Ties but those of Inclination,
which can be only yours while I am, 
Ciamara. 
P.S. If you find nothing in me worthy of your
Love, my Sufferings are such, as justly may deserve
your Pity; either relieve or put an end to them, I conjure
you—Free me from the ling'ring Death of Doubt,
at once decree my Fate; for like a God, you rule my
very Will; nor dare I, without your Leave, throw
off this wretched Being: Oh! then, permit me once
more to behold you, to try at least, to warm you into
Kindness with my Sighs, to melt you with my Tears,
—to sooth you into Sofiness by a thousand yet undiscover'd
Fondnesses—and, if all fail, to die before
your Eyes. 

Those who have experienc'd the Force of Love,
need not to be inform'd what Joy, what Transsport,
swell'd the Heart of Monsieur Frankville,
at this unexpected Eclaircissment of his
dear Camilla's Innocence; when every thing
concurs to make our Woes seem real, when Hopes
are dead, and even Desire is hush'd by the loud
Clamours of Rage and Despair; then,—then to 

be recall'd to Life, to Light, to Heaven and Love
again, is such a torrent of o're-powering Happiness,
—such a Surcharge of Extacy, as Sense
can hardly bear. 
What now wou'd Frankville not have
given that it had been in his Power to have recall'd
the last Letter he sent to Camilla? His
Soul severely reproach'd him for so easily believing
she cou'd be False; tho' his Experience of the
Sweetness of her Disposition, made him not doubt
of a Pardon from her, when she shou'd come to
know what had been the Reason of his Jealousy; 
his Impatience to see her, immediately put it into
his Head, that as Ciamara had been the occasion
of the mis-understanding between them, Ciamara
might likewise be made the Property to
set all right again; to this end, he entreated the
Count to write an Answer of Compliance, and a
Promise to come to her the next Day, in which
Visit, he wou'd, in a Disguise, attend him, and
being once got into the House, he thought it wou'd
be no difficulty to steal to Camilla's Apartment. 
But he found it not so easy a Task as he imagin'd,
to persuade Count D'elmont to come
into this Design; his generous Heart, averse to all
Deceit, thought it base and unmanly to abuse with
Dissimulation the real Tenderness this Lady had
for him; and tho' press'd by the Brother of Melliora,
and conjur'd to it, even by the Love he
profess'd for her, it was with all the reluctance in
the World, that he, at last, consented; and his
Servant came several times into the Room to remind
him, that the Person who brought the Letter,
waited impatiently for an Answer, before be cou'd
bring himself into a Humour to write in the Manner
Monsieur Frankville desir'd; and tho'
scarce any Man ever had so sparkling a Fancy,
such a Readiness of Thought, or Aptitude of Expression, 

when the Dictates of his Soul were the
Employment of his Tongue or Pen, yet he now
found himself at a loss for Words, and he wasted
more Time in these few Lines, than a Thousand
times as many on any other Subject would have
cost him. 

To the Beautiful and Obliging Ciamara.
Madam,
If I did not sin against Truth when I assur'd you
that I had a Mistress to whom I was engag'd by
Inclination, I certainly did, when I appear'd guilty
of a Harshness which was never in my Nature. The
Justice you do me in believing the Interest of my Friend
was the greatest Motive for my seeming Unkindness,
I have not the Power sufficiently to acknowledge; but,
cou'd you look into my Soul, you wou'd there find the
Effects of your Inspiration, something so tender, and
so grateful, as only Favours, such as you confer, cou'd
merit or create. 
I design to make my self happy in waiting on you tomorrow
Night about Eleven, if you will order me Admittance
at that Back-gate, which was the Place of
our first Appointment; 'till then, I am the lovely
Ciamara's 
Most Devoted Servant
D'elmont. 
P. S. There are some Reasons why I think it not
safe to come alone, therefore beg you'll permit me to
bring a Servant with me, on whose secrecy I dare
rely. 


When the Count had sent away this little Billet,
Monsieur Frankville grew very gay on
the hopes of his Design succeeding; and laughing,
My Lord, said he, I question whether Melliora
would forgive me, for engaging you in this
Affair; Ciamara is extreamly handsome, has
Wit, and where she attempts to Charm, has doubtless
a thousand Artifices to obtain her wish. The
Count was not in a Temper to relish his Raillery; 
he had a great deal of Compassion for Ciamara,
and thought himself inexcusable for deceiving
her; and all that Frankville cou'd do to
dissipate the Gloom, that Reflection spread about
him, was but vain. 
They spent the greatest part of this Day together,
as they had done the former; and when the
time came that Frankville thought it proper
to take Leave, it was with a much more chearful
Heart than he had the Night before; but his Happiness
was not yet secure, and in a few Hours he
found a considerable Alteration in his Condition. 
As soon as it was dark enough for Camilla
to let down her String to the Fellow whom she
had order'd to wait for it, he receiv'd another Letter
fasten'd to it; and finding it was directed as the
other, for Monsieur Frankville, he immediately
brought it to him. 
It was with a mixture of Fear and Joy, that the
impatient Lover broke it open; but both these Passions
give Place to an adequate Despair, when
having unseal'd it, he read these Lines, 


To Monsieur Frankville.
I Have been already so much deceiv'd, that I ought
not to boast of any Skill in the Art of Divination; 
yet, I fancy, 'tis in my Power to form a juster
Guess than I have done, what the Sentiments of your
Heart will be when you first open this—Methinks, I
see you put on a scornful Smile, resolving to remain
unmov'd, either at Upbraidings or Complaints; for to
do one of these, I am satisfied, you imagine is the
reason of my troubling you with a Letter: But, Sir, I
am not altogether silly enough to believe the tenderest
Supplications the most humble of my Sex cou'd make,
has efficacy to restore Desire, once dead, to Life; or
if it cou'd, I am not so mean-spirited as to accept a
Return thus caus'd; nor wou'd it beless impertinent to
Reproach. To tell you, that you are perjur'd—base— 
ungrateful, is what you know already, unless your
Memory is so complaisant as not to remind you of either
Vows or Obligations: But, to assure you, that
I reflect on this sudden Change of your Humour without
being fir'd with Rage, or stupify'd with Grief, is,
perhaps, what you least expect. —Yet, strange as it
may seem, it is most certain, that she, whom you
have found the softest, fondest, tenderest of her
Kind, is in a Moment grown the most Indifferent; 
for in spight of your Inconstancy, I never shall deny
that I have lov'd you—Lov'd you, even to Dotage:
my Passion took birth long before I knew you had a
Thought of feigning one for me, which frees me from
that Imputation Women too frequently deserve, of loving
for no other Reason than because they are beloved;
for if you ne'er had seem'd to love, I should 

have continu'd so in Reality. I found a thousand
Charms in your Person and Conversation, and believ'd
your Soul no less transcending all others in excellent
Qualities, than I still confess your Form to be
in Beauty; I drest you up in vain Imagination, adorn'd
with all the Ornaments of Truth, Honour, good Nature,
Generosity, and every Grace that raise mortal
Perfection to the highest pitch, and almost reach Divinity
—but you have taken care to prove your self; 
meer Man, to like, dislike, and wish you know not
what, nor why! If I never had any Merits, how
came you to think me worthy the pains you have taken
to engage me? And if I had, how am I so suddenly
depriv'd of them? —No, I am still the same, and
the only reason I appear not so to you, is, that you
behold me now no more with Lover's Eyes; the few
Charms I am Mistress of, look'd lovely at a Distance,
but lose their Lustre when approach'd too near; your
Fancy threw a glittering Burnish o're me, which free
Possassion has worn off, and now the Woman only
stands expos'd to View, and I confess I justly suffer for
the guilty Folly of believing, that in your Sex Ardors
could survive Enjoyment, or if they could, that such
a Miracle was reserv'd for me: but, thank Heaven,
my Punishment is past, the Pangs, the Tortures of my
bleeding Heart, in tearing your Idea thence, already
are no more! The fiery Tryal is over, and I am now
arriv'd at the Elizium of perfect Peace, entirely unmolested
by any warring Passion; the Fears, the
Hopes, the Jealousies, and all the endless Train of Cares
which waited on my Hours of Love and fond Dulision,
serve but to endear re-gain'd Tranquillity; and
I can cooly scorn, not hate, your Falshood; and tho'
it is a Maxim very much in use among the Women of
my Country, that not to Revenge, were to deserve
Ill-usage; yet I am so far from having a Wish that
way, that I shall always esteem your Virtues, and
while I pardon, pity your Infirmities; shall praise
yuro flowing Wit, without an indignant Remembrance 

how oft it has been employ'd for my Undoing; shall
acknowledge the brightness of your Eyes, and not
in secret curse the borrow'd sofiness of their Glances; 
shall think on all your past Endearments, your Sighs,
your Vows, your melting Kisses, and the warm Fury
of your fierce Embraces, but as a pleasing Dream,
while Reason slept, and wish not to renew at such a
Price. 
I desire no Answer to this, nor to be thought of
more; go on in the same Course you have begun, Change
till you are tir'd with roving, still let your Eyes inchant,
your Tongue delude, and Oaths betray, and
all who look, who listen, and believe, be ruin'd and
forsaken like 
Camilla. 

The calm and resolute Resentment which appear'd
in the Stile of this Letter, gave Frankville
very just Grounds to fear, it would be no
small Difficulty to obtain a Pardon for what he
had so rashly written; but when he reflected on
the seeming Reasons, which mov'd him to it, and
that he should have an Opportunity to let her
know them, he was not altogether inconsolable:
He pass'd the Night however in a world of Anxiety,
and as soon as Morning came, hurried away,
to communicate to the Count this fresh Occasion of
his Trouble. 
It was now D'elmont's turn to Rally, and
he laugh'd as much at those Fears, which he imagin'd
causeless, as the other had done at the
Assignation he had perswaded him to make with
Ciamara; but tho' as most of his Sex are, he
was pretty much of the Count's Opinion, yet, the
re-instating himself in Camilla's Esteem, was
a Matter of too great Importance to him, to suffer
him to take one Moment's Ease 'till he was perfectly
assur d of it. 

At last the wish'd-for Hour arriv'd, and he,
disguis'd so, as it was impossible for him to be
known, attended the Count to that dear Wicket,
which had so often given him Entrance to Camilla;
they waited not long for Admittance,
Brione was ready there to receive them; the
Sight of her inflam'd the Heart of Monsieur
Frakville with all the Indignation imaginable,
for he knew her to be the Woman, who, by her
Treachery to Camilla, had gain'd the Confidence
of Ciamara, and involv'd him in all the
Miseries he had endur'd! But he contain'd himself
'till she taking the Count by the Hand, in order
to lead him to her Lady, bad him wait her
Return, which she told him should be immediately,
in an outer Room which she pointed him to. 
In the mean Time she conducted the Count to
the Door of that magnificent Chamber, where he
had been receiv'd by the suppos'd Camilla, and
where he now beheld the real Ciamara, drest,
if possible, richer than she was the Night before,
but loose as wanton Fancy cou'd invent; she was
lying on the Couch when he enter'd, and affecting
to seem as if she was not presently sensible of his
being there, rose not to receive him till he was very
near her; they both kept silence for some Moments,
she waiting 'till he should speak, and he,
possibly, prevented by the uncertainty after what
Manner he should form his Address, so as to keep
an equal Medium between the two Extreams, of
being Cruel or too Kind; till at last the Violence
of her impatient Expectation burst out in these
Words,—Oh! that this Silence were the Effect
of Love!—and then perceiving he made no
Answer; tell me, continu'd she, am I forgiven
for thus intruding on your Pity for a Grant, which
Inclination would not have allow'd me? Cease, Madam,
reply'd he, to encrease the Confusion which
a just Sense of your Favours, and my own Ingratitude 

has cast me in: How can you look with
Eyes so tender and so kind, on him who brings
you nothing in Return? Rather despise me, hate
me, drive me from your Sight, believe me as I am,
unworthy of your Love, nor squander on a Bankrupt
Wretch the noble Treasure: Oh, Inhuman!
interrupted she, has then that Mistress of whose
Charms you boasted, engross'd all your stock of
Tenderness? and have you nothing, nothing to
repay me for all this waste of Fondness,—this
lavish Prodigality of Passion, which forces me
beyond my Sex's Pride, or my own natural Modesty,
to sue, to court, to kneel and weep for
Pity. Pity, resum'd the Count, would be a poor
Reward for Love like yours; and yet, alas! continued
he sighing, 'tis all I have to give; I have
already told you, I am ty'd by Vows, by Honour,
Inclination, to another, who, tho' far absent
hence, I still preserve the dear Remembrance of! 
My Fate will soon recall me back to her and Paris;
yours fixes you at Rome; and since we are doom'd
to be for ever separated, it wou'd be base to cheat
you with a vain Pretence, and lull you with Hopes
of pleasing Dreams a while, when you must quickly
wake to added Tortures, and redoubled Woe. 
Heavens! cry'd she, with an Air full of Resentment,
are then my Charms so mean, my Darts
so weak, that near, they cannot intercept those
shot at such a Distance? And are you that dull,
cold Platonist, which can prefer the visionary Pleasures
of an absent Mistress, to the warm Transports
of the Substantial present? The Count was
pretty much surpriz'd at these Words, coming
from the Mouth of a Woman of Honour; and began
now to perceive what her Aim was; but willing
to be more confirm'd, Madam, said he, I
dare not hope your Virtue wou'd permit. —Is this
a Time (interrupted she, looking on him with
Eyes which sparkled with wild Desires, and left no 

want of further Explanation of her meaning) Is
this an Hour to preach of Virtue? —Married,— 
betroth'd, engag'd by Love or Law, what hinders
but this Moment you may be mine; this Moment,
well improv'd, might give us Joys to baffle
a whole Age of Woe; make us, at once, forget
our Troubles past, and by its sweet remembrance,
scorn those to come: In speaking these
Words, she sunk supinely on D'elmont's Breast; 
but tho' he was not so ill-natur'd, as unmannerly
as to repel her, this sort of Treatment made him
lose all the Esteem, and great part of the Pity he
had conceiv'd for her. 
The Woes of Love are only worthy Commiseration, 
according to their Causes; and tho' all
those kinds of Desire, which the difference of Sex
creates, bear in general the name of Love, yet
they are as vastly wide, as Heaven and Hell; 
that Passion which aims chiefly at Enjoyment, in
Enjoyment ends; the fleeting Pleasure is no more
remembred, but all the Stings of Guilt and Shame
remain; but that, where the interiour Beauties are
consulted, and Souls are Devotees, is truly noble; 
Love there is a Divinity indeed, because he is immortal
and unchangeable; and if our earthy part
partake the Bliss, and craving Nature is in all obey'd; 
Possession thus desir'd, and thus obtain'd,
is far from satiating; Reason is not here debas'd to
Sense, but Sense elevates itself to Reason, the different
Powers unite, and become pure alike. 
It was plain that the Passion with which Ciamara
was animated, sprung not from this last
Source; she had seen the charming Count, was
taken with his Beauty, and wish'd no farther than
to possess his lovely Person, his Mind was the least
of her Thoughts, for had she the least Ambition
to reign there, she wou'd not have so meanly
sought to obtain the one, after he had assured her,
the other, far more noble part of him, was dispos'd 

of. The Grief he had been in, that it was not in
his Power to return her Passion, while he believ'd
it meritorious, was now chang'd to the utmost
Contempt, and her Quality, and the State she liv'd
in, did not hinder him from regarding of her, in
as indifferent a manner, as he would have done a
common Courtezan. 
Lost to all Sense of Honour, Pride or Shame,
and wild to gratify her furious Wishes, she spoke,
without reserve, all they suggested to her; and lying
on his Breast, beheld, without Concern, her
Robes fly open, and all the Beauties of her own
expos'd, and naked to his View: Mad at his Insensibility,
at last she grew more Bold, she kiss'd
his Eyes,—his Lips,—a thousand times; then
press'd him in her Arms with strenuous Embraces,
—and snatching his Hand and putting it
to her Heart, which fiercely bounded at his
Touch, bid him be witness of his mighty Influence
there. 
Tho' it was impossible for any Soul to be capable
of a greater, or more constant Passion than
his felt for Melliora, tho' no Man that ever
liv'd, was less addicted to loose Desire,—in
fine, tho' he really was, as Frankville had
told him, the most Excellent of his Kind, yet, he
was still a Man! and, 'tis not to be thought strange,
if to the force of such united Temptations, Nature
and Modesty a little yielded; warm'd with her
Fires, and perhaps, more mov'd by Curiosity, her
Behaviour having extinguish'd all his Respect, he
gave his Hands and Eyes a full Enjoyment of all
those Charms, which had they been answer'd by
a Mind worthy of them, might justly have inspir'd
the highest Raptures; while she, unshock'd, and
unresisting, suffer'd all he did, and urg'd him with
all the Arts she was Mistress of, to more; and it
is not altogether improbable, that he might not
entirely have forgot himself, if a sudden Interruption 

had not restor'd his Reason to the consideration
of the Business which had brought him
here. 
Monsieur Frankville had all this time
been employ'd in a far different manner of Entertainment; 
Brione came to him, according to
her promise, as soon as she had introduc'd the
Count to Ciamara; and having been commanded
by that Lady to discourse with the supposed
Servant, and get what she cou'd out of him, of
the Count's Affairs, she sat down, and began to
talk to him with a great deal of Freedom; but he
who was too impatient to lose much time, told her
he had a Secret to discover, if the place they were
in was private enough to prevent his being overheard,
and she assuring him that it was, he immediately
discover'd who he was, and clapt a Pistol
to her Breast, swearing that Moment shou'd
be the last of her Life, if she made the least Noise,
or attempted to intercept his passage to Camilla:
The Terror she was in, made her fall on her Knees,
and conjuring him to spare her Life, begg'd a
thousand Pardons for her Infidelity, which she
told him was not occasion'd by any particular
Malice to him; but not being willing to leave
Rome herself, the fear of being expos'd to the Revenge
of Ciamara and Cittolini, when they
shou'd find out that she had been the Instrument
of Camilla's Escape, prevail'd upon her timerous
Soul to that Discovery, which was the only
means to prevent what she so much dreaded. 
Frankville contented himself with venting
his Resentment in two or three hearty Curses, and
taking her roughly by the Arm, bid her go with
him to Camilla's Apartment, and discover before
her what she knew of Ciamara's entertaining
Count D'elmont in her Name, which
she trembling promis'd to obey, and they both
went up a pair of Back Stairs which led a private 

way to Camilla's Chambers: When they enter'd,
she was sitting in her Night-Dress on the
Bed-side; and the unexpected sight of Brione,
who, till now, had never ventured to appear before
her, since her Infidelity, and a Man with her
whom she thought a Stranger, fill'd her with such
a Surprize, that it depriv'd her of her Speech, and
gave Frankville time to throw off his Disguise,
and catch her in his Arms, with all the
Transports of unfeign'd Affection, before she
cou'd enough recover her self to make any Resistance; 
but when she did, it was with all the Violence
imaginable; and endeavouring to tear herself
away, Villain, said she, comest thou again to
triumph o're my Weakness,—again to cheat me
into fond Belief? There needed no more to make
this obsequious Lover relinquish his Hold, and
falling at her Feet, was beginning to speak something
in his Vindication; when she, quite lost in
Rage, prevented him, by renewing her Reproaches
in this manner: Have you not given me up my
Vows? resum'd she; have you not abandon'd me
to Ruin,—to Death—to Infamy,—to all the
Stings of self-accusing Conscience and Remorse? 
And come you now, by your detested Presence, to
alarm Remembrance, and new point my Tortures? 
—That Woman's Treachery, continu'd she,
looking on Brione, I freely pardon, since by
that little Absence it occasion'd, I have discovered
the wavering Disposition of your Soul, and learn'd
to scorn what is below my Anger. Here me but
speak, cry'd Frankville, or if you doubt my
Truth, as I confess you have almighty Cause, let
her inform you, what seeming Reasons, what Provocations
urg'd my hasty Rage to write that fatal,
—that accursed Letter. I will hear nothing,
reply'd Camilla, neither from you nor her,—I
see the base Design, and scorn to join in the Deceit,
—You had no Cause,—not even the least 

Pretence for your Inconstancy but one, which,
tho' you all are guilty of, you all disown; and
that is, being lov'd too well. —I lavish'd all the
fondness of my Soul; and you, unable to reward,
despis'd it:—But think not that the Rage you
now behold me in, proceeds from my Despair— 
No, your Inconstancy is the Fault of Nature, a
Vice which all your Sex are prone to, and 'tis we,
the fond Believers only, are to blame; that I forgave,
my Letter told you that I did—but thus to
come—thus insolent in Imagination, to dare to
hope I were that mean-soul'd Wretch, whose easy
Tameness, and whose doating Love, with Joy
would welcome your return, clasp you again in
my deluded Arms, and swear you were as dear as
ever, is such an Affront to my Understanding, as
merits the whole Fury of Revenge! As she spoke
these Words, she turn'd disdainfully from him with
a Resolution to leave the Room, but she could
not make such hast to go away, as the dispairing,
the distracted Frankville did to prevent her; 
and catching hold of her Garments, Stay, Madam,
said he, wildly, either permit me to clear my self
of this barbarous Accusation, or, if you are resolv'd,
unhearing to condemn me, behold me,
satiate all your Rage can wish; for by Heaven,
continued he, holding the Pistol to his own Breast,
as he had done a little before to Brione's, by
all the Joys I have possest, by all the Hell I now
endure, this Moment I'll be receiv'd your Lover,
or expire your Martyr. These Words pronounc'd
so passionately, and the Action that accompany'd
them, made a visible alteration in Camilla's
Countenance, but it lasted not long, and resuming
her Fierceness; your Death, cry'd she, this
way would give me little Satisfaction, the World
would judge more noble of my Resentment, if
by my Hand you fell—Yet, continu'd she, snatching
the Pistol from him, and throwing it out of 

the Window, which happen'd to be open, I will
not—cannot be the Executioner. —No, live!
and let the Punishment be, in reality, to endure
what thou well dissemblest, the Pangs, the racking
Pangs, of hopeless, endless Love! —May'st thou
indeed love Me, as thou a thousand Times hast
falsely sworn,—for ever Love, and I, for ever
Hate! In this last Sentence, she flew like Lightning
to her Closet, and shut her self in, leaving the
amaz'd Lover still on his Knees, stupify'd with
Grief and Wonder. All this while Brione had
been casting about in her Mind, how to make
the best use of this Adventure with Ciamara,
and encourag'd by Camilla's Behaviour,
and taking Advantage of Frannville's
Confusion, made but one Step to the Chamber
Door, and running out into the Gallery, and
down Stairs, cry'd Murder,—Help,—a Rape— 
Help, or Donna Camilla will be carry'd away. 
—She had no occasion to call often, for the
Pistol which Camilla threw out of the Window
chanc'd to go off in the fall, and the Report it
made, had alarm'd some of the Servants who were
in an Out-house adjoining to the Garden, and imagining
there were Thieves, were gathering to
search: Some arm'd with Staves, some with lron
Bars, or any Thing they could get in the Hurry
they were in, as they were running confusedly about,
they met Monsieur Frankville pursuing
Brione, with a design to stop her Mouth, either
by Threatnings or Bribes; but she was too
nimble for him; and knowing the ways of the
House much better than he did, went directly to
the Room where Ciamara was caressing the
Count in the manner already mention'd: Oh, Madam,
said she, you are impos'd on, the Count has
deceiv'd your Expectations, and brought Monsieur
Frankville in Disguise to rob you of Camilla. 
These Words made them both, though with 

very different Sentiments, start from the Posture
they were in, and Ciamara changing her Air of
Tenderness for one all Fury, Monster, cry'd she
to D'elmont, have you then betray'd me? This
is no time, reply'd he, hearing a great Bustle, and
Frankville's Voice pretty loud without, for
me to answer you; my Honour calls me to my
Friend's Assistance; and drawing his Sword, run
as the Noise directed him to the Place where
Frankville was defending himself against a
little Army of Ciamara's Servants; she was not
much behind him, and enrag'd to the highest Degree,
cry'd out, kill, kill them both! but that was
not a Task for a much greater Number of such as
them to accomplish; and tho' their Weapons
might easily have beat down, or broke the Gentlemens
Sword, yet their Fears kept them from
coming too near, and Ciamara had the Vexation
to see them both Retreat with Safety, and
her self disappointed, as well in her Revenge, as
in her Love. 
Nothing cou'd be more surpriz'd than
Count D'elmont was, when he got Home, and
heard from Frankville all that had pass'd between
him and Camilla, nor was his Trouble less,
that he had it not in his Power to give him any
Advice in an Exigence so uncommon: He did all
he could to comfort and divert his Sorrows, but in
vain, the Wounds of bleeding Love admit no
Ease, but from the Hand which gave them; and
he, who was naturally rash and fiery, now grew
to that height of Desparation and Violence of Temper,
that the Count fear'd some fatal Catastrophe,
and wou'd not suffer him to stir from him
that Night, nor the next Day, till he had oblig'd
him to make a Vow, and bind it with the most
solemn Imprecations, not to offer any thing against
his Life. 

But, tho' plung'd into the lowest depth of Misery,
and lost, to all Humane probability, in an
inextricable Labyrinth of Woe, Fortune will find
at last some way to raise and disentangle those
whom she is pleas'd to make her Favourites; and
that Monsieur Frankville was one, an unexpected
Adventure made him know. 
The third Day from that, in which he had seen
Camilla, as he was sitting in his Chamber, in
a melancholy Conversation with the Count, who
was then come to Visit him, his Servants brought
him a Letter, which he said had been just left by
a Woman of an extraordinary Appearance, and
who the Moment she had given it into his Hand,
got from the Door with so much speed, that she
seem'd rather to vanish than to walk. 
While the Servant was speaking, Frankville
look'd on the Count with a kind of a
pleas'd Expectation in his Eye; but then casting them
on the Direction of the Letter; Alas! said he,
how vain was my Imagination! this is not Camilla's,
but a Hand to which I am utterly a
Stranger; these Words were clos'd with a Sigh,
and he open'd it with Negligence, which wou'd
have been unpardonable, cou'd he have guess'd at
the Contents; but as soon as he saw the Name of
Violetta at the bottom, a flash of Hope rekindled
in his Soul, and trembling with Impatience
he Read: 


To Monsieur Frankville.
I Think it cannot be call'd Treachery, if we betray
the Secrets of a Friend, only when Concealment
were an Injury; but, however, I may be able to
answer this Breach of Trust, I am about to make to
myself; 'tis your Behaviour alone, which can absolve
me to Camilla, and by your Fidelity she must judge
of mine. 
Tho' Daughter to the Man she hates, she finds
nothing in me unworthy of her Love and Confidence; 
and as I have been privy, ever since your mutual
Misfortunes, to the whole History of your Amour, so
I am now no Stranger to the Sentiments your last
Conversation has inspir'd her with—She loves you
still, Monsieur—with an Extremity of Passion loves
you—But, tho' she ceases to believe you unworthy
of it, her Indignation for your unjust Suspicion of her,
will not be easily remov'd—She is resolv'd to act the
Heroine, tho' to purchase that Character it shou'd
cost her Life: She is determin'd for a Cloyster, and
has declared her Intention, and a few Days will
take away all Possibility of ever being yours; but I,
who knows the Conflicts she endures, wish it may be
in your Power to prevent the Execution of a Design,
which cannot but be fatal to her: My Father and
Ciamara, I wish I cou'd not call her Aunt, were
last Night in private Conference; but I over-heard
enough of their Discourse, to know there has been some
ungenerous Contrivance carry'd on to make you and
Camilla appear guilty to each other; and 'tis
from that Knowledge I derive my Hopes, that you
have Honour enough to make a right Use of this Discovery,
if you have any thing to say, to further the 

Intercessions I am employ'd in, to serve you: Prepare
a Letter, which I will either prevail on her to read,
or oblige her, in spite of the Resolution she has made,
to hear: But take care, that in the least you hint
not that you have receiv'd one from me, for I shall
persuade her that the Industry of your Love has found
means of conveying it to me, without my Knowledge:
Bring it with you this Evening to St. Peter's, and as
soon as Divine Service is over, follow her who shall
drop her Handkerchief as she passes you, for by that
Mark you shall distinguish her whom you yet know
but by the Name of 
Violetta. 
P. S. One Thing, and indeed not the least, which
induc'd me to write, I had almost forgot, which is,
that your Friend, the accomplish'd Count D'elmont,
is as much endanger'd by the Resentment
of Ciamara, as yourself by that of my Father:
bid him beware how he receives any Letter, or
Present from a Hand unkown, lest he should Experience,
what he has doubtless heard of, our Italian
Art of poysoning by the Smell. 

When Monsieur Frankville had given this
Letter to the Count to read, which he immediately
did, they both of them broke into the highest Encomiums
on this young Lady's Generosity; who,
contrary to the Custom of her Sex, which seldom
forgives an Affront of that kind, made it her study
to serve the Man who had refus'd her, and make
her Rival blest. 
These Testimonies of a grateful Acknowledgment
being over, Frankville told the Count
he believ'd the most, and indeed the only effectual
Means to extinguish Camilla's Resentment,
wou'd be entirely to remove the Cause, which
cou'd be done no other way, than by giving her
a full Account of Ciamara's Behaviour, while 

she pass'd for her: D'elmont readily consented,
and thought it not at all inconsistent with his Honour,
to expose that of a Woman who had shewn
so little Value for it herself: And when he saw that
Frankville had finish'd his Letter, which was
very long, for Lovers cannot easily come to a
Conclusion, he offer'd to write a Note to her, enclos'd
in the other, which shou'd serve as an Evidence
of the Truth of what he had alledged in his
Vindication: Frankville gladly embrac'd
the kind Proposal, and the other immediately made
it good in these Words. 

To Donna Camilla.
Madam,
If the Severity of your Justice requires a Victim,
I only am guilty, who being impos'd upon myself,
endeavour'd, for I cannot say I cou'd accomplish
it, to involve the unfortunate Frankville in
the same fatal Error, and at last, prevail'd on him
to write, what he cou'd not be brought, by all my
Arguments, to think. 
LET the Cause which led me to take this Freedom,
excuse the Presumption of it, which, from one so much
a Stranger, wou'd be else unpardonable: But when
we are conscious of a Crime, the first Reparation we
can make to Innocence, is, to acknowledge we have offended; 
and if the Confession of my Faults, may
purchase an Absolution for my Friend, I shall account
it the noblest Work of Supererogation. 
BE assur'd, that as inexorable as you are, your utmost
Rigour wou'd find its Satisfaction, if you cou'd
be sensible of what I suffer in a sad Repentance for 

my Sin of injuring so heavenly a Virtue; and perhaps,
in time be mov'd by it, to pity and forgive 
The unhappily deceiv'd
D'elmont. 

The time in which they had done writing, immediately
brought on that of Violetta's Appointment; 
and the Count wou'd needs accompany
Monsieur Frankville in this Assignation, saying,
he had an Acknowledgment to pay that Lady,
which he thought himself oblig'd, in good Manners
and Gratitude, to take this Opportunity to do; and
the other being of the same Opinion, they went
together to St. Peter's. 
When Prayers were done, which, 'tis probable,
one of these Gentlemen, if not both, might think
too tedious, they stood up, and looking round, impatiently
expected when the promis'd Signal shou'd
be given; but among the great Number of Ladies
which pass'd by them, there were very few, who
did not stop a little to gaze on these two accomplish'd
Chevaliers; and they were several times
tantaliz'd with an imaginary Violetta, before
the real one appear'd. But when the Crowd were
almost dispers'd, and they began to fear some Accident
had prevented her coming, the long-expected
Token was let fall, and she who threw it,
trip'd hastily away to the farther End of the Collonade,
which happened to be entirely void of Company:
The Count and his Companion were not
long behind her, and Monsieur Frankville
being the Person chiefly concern'd, address'd himself
to her in this manner: With what Words,
Madam, said he, can a Man so infinitely oblig'd,
and so desirous to be grateful, as Frankville,
sufficiently make known his Admiration of a Generosity
like yours? Such an unbounded Goodness, 

shames all Description! makes Language
vile, since it affords no Phrase to suit your Worth,
or speak the mighty Sense my Soul has of it. I
have no other Aim, reply'd she, in what I have
done, than Justice; and 'tis only in the proof of
your Sincerity to Camilla, that I am to be
thank'd Frankville was about to answer
with some Assurances of his Faith, when the Count
stepping forward, prevented him: My Friend,
Madam, said he bowing, is most happy in having
it in his Power to obey a Command, which is the
utmost of his Wishes: but how must I acquit myself
of any part of that Return which is due to you,
for that generous Care you have been pleas'd to
express for the Preservation of my Life? There
needs no more, interrupted she, with a perceivable
Alteration in her Voice, than to have seen
Count D'elmont, to be interested in his Concerns
—She paus'd a little after speaking these
Words, and then, as if she thought she had said
too much, turn'd hastily to Frankville,
The Letter Monsieur, continu'd she, the Letter,— 
'tis not impossible but we may be observ'd,—I
tremble with the Apprehension of a Discovery:
Frankville, immediately deliver'd it to her,
but saw so much Disorder in her Gesture, that it
very much surpriz'd him: She trembled indeed,
but whether occasioned by any Danger she perceiv'd
of being taken notice of, or some other secret
Agitation she felt within, was then unknown to any
but herself; but whatever it was, it transported her
so far, as to make her quit the Place, without being
able to take any other Leave than a hasty Curtesy,
and bidding Frankville meet her the
next Morning at Mattins. 
Here was a new Cause of Disquiet to D'elmont;
the Experience he had of the two fatal
influence of his dangerous Attractions, gave him
sufficient Reason to fear this young Lady was not 

insensible of them, and that his Presence was the
sole Cause of her Disorder; however, he said nothing
of it to Frankville 'till the other mentioning
it to him, and repeating her Words, they
both join'd in the Opinion, that Love had been
too busy in her Heart, and that it was the feeling
the Effects of it herself, had inclined her to so much
Compassion for the Miseries she saw it inflicted upon
others. The Count very well knew, that when
Desires of this Kind are springing in the Soul, every
Sight of the beloved Object encreases their
growth; and therefore, tho' her generous manner
of Proceeding had created in him a very great
Esteem, and he wou'd have been pleas'd with her
Conversation, yet he ceas'd to wish a farther Acquaintance
with her, lest it should render her more
unhappy, and forbore going the next Day to
Church with Frankville, as else he wou'd
have done. 
Violetta fail'd not to come as she had promis'd; 
but instead of dropping her Hankerchief,
as she had done the Evening before, she knelt as
close to him as she cou'd; and pulling him gently
by the Sleeve, oblig'd him to regard her, who else,
not knowing her, wou'd not have suspected she
was so near, and slip'd a Note into his Hand, bidding
him softly, not take any farther notice of her:
He obey'd, but 'tis reasonable to believe, was too
impatient to know what the Contents were, to listen
with much Attention and Devotion to the remainder
of the Ceremony. As soon as he was releas'd,
he got into a Corner of the Cathedral,
where, unobserv'd, he might satisfy his Curiosity,
which none who love will condemn him for, any
more than they will for the thrilling Extacy which
fill'd his Soul at the reading these Lines. 





To Monsieur Frankville.
For fear I should not have an Opportunity of speaking
to you, in safety, I take this Method to inform
you, that I have been so successful in my Negotiation,
as to make Camilla repent the Severity of her
Sentence, and wish for nothing more than to recal it:
you are now entirely justified in her Opinion, by the
Artifice which was made use of to deceive you; and
she is, I believe, no less enrag'd at Ciamara, for
depriving her of that Letter you sent by the Count,
than she was at you for that unkind one, which came
to her Hands. She is now under less Restraint, since
Brione's Report of her Behaviour to you, and the
everlasting Resentment she vow'd, and I have prevail'd
on her to accompany me in a Visit I am to
make to morrow in the Evening, to Donna Clara
Metteline, a Nun, in the Monastery of St. Augustine;
and if you will meet us there, I believe it
not impossible but she may be brought to a Confession
of all I have discover'd to you of her Thoughts. 
THE Count's Letter was of no small Service to you; 
for tho' without that Evidence she wou'd have been
convinc'd of your Constancy, yet she wou'd hardly
have acknowledged she was so! and if he will take
the Pains to come with you to Morrow, I believe his
Company will be acceptable; if you think it proper,
you may let him know as much from 
Violetta. 
P. S. I beg a thousand Pardons both of you and
the Count, for the Abruptness of my Departure 

last Night; something happened to give me a Confusion,
from which I cou'd not at that Time recover,
but hope for the future to be more Mistress of my
self. 

Monsieur Frankville hastened to the
Count's Lodgings, to communicate his good Fortune,
but found him in a Humour very unfit for
Congratulations; the Post had just brought him a
Letter from his Brother, the Chevalier Brillian,
the Contents whereof were these. 

To Count Delmont.
My Lord,
'Tis with an inexpressible Grief that I obey the
Command you left me, for giving you from
time to time an exact Account of Melliora's
Affairs; since what I have now to acquaint you with,
will make you stand in need of all your Moderation to
support it. But, not to keep your Expectation on the
Rack, loth as I am, I must inform you, that Melliora
is, by some unknown Ravisher, stolen from
the Monastery—The Manner of it (as I have since
learned from those who were with her) was thus:
As she was walking in the Fields, behind the Cloyster
Gardens, accompanied by some young Ladies, Pensioners
there as well as her self, four Men well mounted,
but disguis'd and muffled, rode up to them, three of
them jump'd off their Horses, and while one seiz'd on
the defenceless Prey, and bore her to his Arms who
was not alighted, the other two caught hold of her
Companions, and prevented the Out-cries they would
have made, 'till she was carry'd out of Sight, then
mounting again their Horses, immediately lost the
amaz'd Virgins all Hopes of recovering her. 

I conjure my dearest Brother to believe there has
been nothing omitted for the Discovery of this Villany; 
but in spite of all the Pains and Care we have taken
in the Search, none of us have yet been happy enough
to hear the least Account of her: That my next may
bring you more welcome News, is the first Wish of, 
My Lord,
Your Lordship's
Most Zealously Affectionate Brother,
And humble Servant,
Brillian. 
P. S. There are some People here, malicious
enough to report, that the Design of carrying away
Melliora was contriv'd by you, and that it is
in Rome she only can be found. It wou'd be of
great Advantage to my Peace, if I cou'd be of the
Number of those who believe it; but I am too
well acquainted with your Principles, to harbour
such a Thought. Once more, my dear Lord, for
this Time, 
Adieu. 

After the Count had given this Letter to
Frankville to read, he told him, he was resolv'd
to leave Rome the next Day; that no body
had so great an Interest in her Recovery as himself; 
that he would trust the Search of her to no
other, and swore with the most dreadful Imprecations
he could make, never to rest, but wander
Knight-Errand like, over the whole World 'till he
had found her. 

Tho' Monsieur Frankville was extremely
concern'd at what had happened to his Sister, yet
he endeavour'd to disswade the Count from leaving
Rome, till he knew the Result of his own Affair
with Camilla; but all his Arguments were for
a long Time ineffectual, 'till at last, showing him
Violetta's Letter, he prevail'd on him to defer
his Journey till they had first seen Camilla,
on Condition, that if she persisted in her Rigour,
he shou'd give over any further Sollicitations, and
accompany him to Paris: This Frankville
promis'd to perform, and they pass'd the time in
very uneasy and impatient Cogitations, 'till the
next Day about five in the Evening they prepar'd
for the Appointment. 
Count D'elmont and his longing Companion,
were the first at the Rendezvous, but in a
very little while they perceiv'd two Women coming
towards them: The Idea of Camilla was always
too much in Frankville's Thoughts, not
to make him know her, by that charming Air
(which he so much ador'd her for) tho' she was
veil'd never so closely; and the Moment he had
sight of them, O Heaven! (cry'd he to D'elmont)
yonder she comes, that—that! my Lord, is the
divine Camilla: As they came pretty near, she
that indeed prov'd to be Camilla, was turning
on one Side, in order to go to the Grate, where
she expected the Nun. Hold, hold, Donna Camilla,
cry'd Violetta, I cannot suffer you
should pass by your Friends with an Air so unconcern'd; 
if Monsieur Frankville has done any
thing to merit your Displeasure, my Lord the
Count certainly deserves your Notice, in the Pains
he has taken to undeceive you. One so much a
Stranger as Count D'elmont is, answer'd she,
may very well excuse my Thanks for an Explanation,
which had he heen acquainted with me,
he would have spar'd. Cruel Camilla! said 

Frankville, is then the Knowledge of my Innocence
unwelcome? —Am I become so hateful,
or are you so chang'd, that you wish me guilty, for
a Justification of your Rigour? If it be so, I have
no Remedy but Death, which tho' you depriv'd
me of the last time I saw you, I now can find a
thousand Means to compass; he pronounc'd these
Words in so tender, yet so resolv'd an Accent,
that Camilla could not conceal Part of the Impression
they made on her, and putting her Handkerchief
to her Eyes, which in spite of all she had
done to prevent it, overflow'd with Tears; Talk
not of Death, said she, I am not cruel to that Degree,
live! Frankville, live!—but live without
Camilla! Oh, 'tis impossible! resum'd he,
the latter part of your Command entirely destroys
the first. —Life without your Love, would be a
Hell, which I confess my Soul's a Coward but to
think of. 
The Count and Violetta were silent all
this Time; and perceiving they were in a fair way
of Reconciliation, thought the best they could do
to forward it, was to leave them to themselves; and
walking a few Paces from them; You suffer, my
Lord, said she, for your Generosity in accompanying
your Friend, since it condemns you to the
Conversation of a Person, who has neither Wit,
nor Gaiety sufficient to make herself diverting. 
Those, reply'd he, who would make the excellent
Violetta a Subject of Diversion, ought never
to be bless'd with the Company of any, but such
Women who merit not a serious Regard: But you,
indeed, were your Soul capable of descending to
the Follies of your Sex, would be extreamly at a
Loss in Conversation, so little qualified as mine,
to please the Vanities of the Fair; and you stand
in need of all those more than manly Virtues you
possess, to pardon a Chagrin, which even your
Presence cannot dissipate. If it could, interrupted 

she, I assure your Lordship, I should much more
rejoice in the happy Effects of it on you, than pride
myself in the Power of such an Influence—And
yet, continu'd she, with a Sigh, I am a very Woman,
and if free from the usual Affectations and
Vanities of my Sex, I am not so from Faults, perhaps,
less worthy of Forgiveness. The Count
could not presently resolve what Reply to make
to these Words; he was unwilling she should believe
he wanted Complaisance, and afraid of saying
any thing that might give room for a Declaration
of what he had no Power of answering to
her Wish; but after the Consideration of a Moment
or two, Madam, said he, tho' I dare not question
your Sincerity in any other Point, yet you must
give me leave to disbelieve you in this, not only
because, in my Opinion, there is nothing so contemptibly
ridiculous as that Self-sufficiency, and
vain Desire of pleasing, commonly known by the
Name of Coquetry; but also, because she who
escapes the Contagion of this Error, will not, without
much Difficulty be led into any other. Alas!
my Lord, cry'd Violetta, how vastly wide of
Truth is this Assertion? That very Foible, which is
most pernicious to our Sex, is chiefly by Coquetry
prevented: I need not tell you that 'tis Love I
mean; and as blameable as you think the one, I
believe the other would find less Favour from a
Person of your Lordship's Judgment. How! Madam,
interrupted the Count, pretty warmly, have
I the Character of a Stoick? —Or do you imagine
that my Soul is compos'd of that coarse Stuff, as
not to be capable of receiving, or approving a
Passion, which all the Brave and Generous think it
their Glory to profess, and which can only give refin'd
Delight to Minds ennobled—But I perceive,
continu'd he, growing more cool, I am not happy
enough in your Esteem, to be thought worthy the
Influence of that God. Still you mistake my Meaning, 

said Violetta; I doubt not of your Sensibility,
were there a Possibility of finding a Woman
worthy of inspiring you with soft Desires; and if
that should ever happen, Love would be so far
from being a Weakness, that it would serve rather
as an Embellishment to your other Graces; 'tis only
when we stoop to Objects below our Consideration,
or vainly wing our Wishes to those above
our Hopes, that makes us appear ridiculous or
contemptible; but either of these is a Folly which,
—which the incompatible Violetta, interrupted
D'elmont, never can be guilty of. You
have a very good Opinion of my Wit, (resum'd she,
in a melancholy Tone) but I should be much happier
than I am, if I were sure I could secure myself
from doing any thing to forfeit it. I believe, reply'd
the Count, there are not many things you
have less Reason to apprehend than such a Change; 
and I am confident were I to stay in Rome as many
Ages, as I am determin'd to do but Hours, I should
at last leave it, with the same Esteem and Admiration
of your singular Virtues, as I now shall do. 
Violetta could not prevent the Disorder these
Words put her into, from discoveriug itself in the
Accent of her Voice, when, How! my Lord,
said she, are we then to lose you? —Lose you in
so short a Time? As the Count was about to answer,
Frankville and Camilla join'd them,
and looking on Frankville, if any Credit,
said he, may be given to the Language of the Eyes,
I am certain your's speak Success, and I may congratulate
a Happiness you lately cou'd not be persuaded
to hope. Had I a thousand Eyes, cry'd the
transported Lover, a thousand Tongues, they all
would be but insignificant to express the Joy!—the
unbounded Extacy, my Soul is full of,—but take
the mighty Meaning in one Word,—Camilla's
mine—for ever mine!—the Storm is past, and all
the sunny Heaven of Love returns to bless my future 

Days with ceaseless Raptures: Now, my Lord,
I am ready to attend you in your Journey, this
bright! this beauteous Guardian Angel, will partake
our Flight! And we have nothing now to do,
but to prepare with Secrecy and Speed fit Means
for our Escape. As soon as Frankville had
left off speaking, Count D'elmont addressing
himself to Camilla, made her abundance of Retributions
for the Happiness she gave his Friend,
which she receiv'd with a becoming Chearfulness,
and unaffected Gaiety: I am afraid, said she, your
Lordship will think a Woman's Resolution is
henceforth little worth regarding; but, continu'd
she, taking Violetta by the Hand, I see well,
that this unfaithful Creature, has betray'd me, and
to punish her Infidelity, will, by leaving her, put
it out of her Power to deceive my Confidence again. 
Violetta either did not hear, or was
not in a Condition to return her Raillery, nor the
Praises which the Count and Monsieur Frankville
concurr'd in of her Generosity, stood motionless
and lost in Thought, till Camilla seeing it grow
towards Night, told the Gentlemen, she thought
it best to part, not only to avoid any Suspicion at
Home of their being out so long, but also that the
others might order every thing proper for their
Departure, which it was agreed on between Frankville
and her, should be the next Night, to prevent
the Success of those mischievous Designs she
knew Ciamara and Cittolini were forming
against both the Count and Monsieur Frankville. 
Matters being thus adjusted to the entire Satisfaction
of the Lovers, and not in a much less
Proportion to the Count, they all thought it best
to avoid making any more Appointments till
they met to part no more; which was to be at the
Wicket at dead of Night. When the Count took
leave of Violetta, this being the last time he 

could expect to see her, she was hardly able to return
his Civilities, and much less to answer those
which Frankville made her, after the Count
had turn'd from her to give him way; both of
them guess'd the Cause of her Confusion, and
D'elmont felt a Concern in observing it, which
nothing but that for Melliora could surpass. 
The next Day found full Employment for them
all; but the Count, as well as Frankville,
was too impatient to be gone, to neglect any thing
requisite for their Departure; there was not the
least Particular wanting, long before the time they
were to wait at the Wicket for Camilla's coming
forth: The Count's Lodging being the nearest,
they staid there, watching for the long'd-for Hour; 
but a little before it arriv'd, a Youth, who seem'd
to be about 13 or 14 Years of Age, desir'd to be
admitted to the Count's Presence; which being
granted, pulling a Letter out of his Pocket, and
blushing as he approach'd him: I come, my Lord,
said he, from Donna Violetta; the Contents
of this will inform you on what Business; but lest
the Treachery of others should render me suspected,
permit me to break it open, and prove it carries
no Infection: The Count look'd earnestly on
him while he spoke, and was strangely taken with
the uncommon Beauty and Modesty which he observ'd
in him: You need not give yourself the
Trouble of that Experiment, answer'd he, Donna
Violetta's Name, and your own engaging Aspect,
are sufficient Credentials, if I were liable to
doubt; in saying this, he took the Letter, and full
of Fears that some Accident had happened to Camilla,
which might retard their Journey, hastily
read over these Lines. 


To the Worthy Count D'elmont.
My Lord,
If any Part of that Esteem you profess'd to have for
me, be real, you will not deny the Request I make
you to accept this Youth, who is my Relation, in
Quality of a Page: He is inclin'd to travel, and of all
Places, France is that which he is most desirous of going
to: If a diligent Care, a faithful Secrecy, and an
unceasing Watchfulness to please, can render him acceptable
to your Service, I doubt not but he will, by
those, recommend himself hereafter: In the mean
time beg you will receive him on my Word: And if
that will be any Inducement to prejudice you in his Favour,
I assure you, that tho' he is in one Degree nearer
in Blood to my Father, he is by many in Humour and
Principles to 
Violetta. 
P. S. May Health, Safety, and Prosperity attend
you in your Journey, and all the Happiness you wish
for, crown the End. 

The young Fidelio, for so he was call'd,
could not wish to be receiv'd with greater Demonstrations
of Kindness than those the Count gave
him: And perceiving that Violetta had trusted
him with the whole Affair of their leaving Rome in
private, doubted not of his Conduct, and consulted
with him, who they found knew the Place perfectly
well, after what Manner they should watch,
with the least Danger of being discover'd, for Camilla's
opening the Wicket: Frankville 

was for going alone, lest if any of the Servants
should happen to be about, one Person would be
less liable to Suspicion, than if a Company were
seen; the Count thought it most proper to go all
together, remembering Frankville of the
Danger he had lately escap'd, and might again be
brought into; but Fidelio told them, he would
advise that they two should remain conceal'd in the
Portico of the Convent of St. Francis, while himself
would watch alone at the Wicket for Camilla,
and lead her to them, and then afterwards they
might go altogether to that Place where the Horses
and Servants should attend them: The Page's
Counsel was approv'd by both of them, and the
time being arriv'd, what they had contriv'd was
immediately put in Execution. 
Every thing happen'd according to their Desire,
Camilla got safely to the Arms of her impatient
Lover; and they all taking Horse, rode
with such Speed, as some of them would have been
little able to bear, if any thing less than Life and
Love had been at Stake. 
Their eager Wishes, and the Goodness of
their Horses brought them, before Day-break, many
Miles from Rome; but tho' they avoided all high
Roads, and travell'd cross the Country to prevent
being met, or overtook by any that might know
them, yet their Desire of seeing themselves in a
Place of Security was so great, that they refus'd to
stop to take any Refreshment 'till the next. Day
was almost spent; but when they were come into
the House where they were to lie that Night,
not all the Fatigue they had endur'd, kept the Lovers
from giving and receiving all the Testimonies
imaginable of mutual Affection. 
The Sight of their Felicity added new Wings to
Count D'elmont's Impatience to recover Melliora;
but when he consider'd the little Probability
of that Hope, he grew inconsolable, and 

his new Page Fidelio, who lay on a Pallet in
the same Room with him, put all his Wit, of which
he had no small Stock, upon the Stretch, to divert
his Sorrows, he talk'd to him, sung to him, told
him a hundred pretty Stories, and, in fine, made
good the Character Violetta had given him so
well, that the Count look'd on him as a Blessing
sent from Heaven to lessen his Misfortunes, and
make his Woes sit easy. 
They continu'd travelling with the same Expedition
as when they first set out, for three or four
Days; but then, believing themselves secure from
any Pursuit, began to slacken their Pace, and
make the Journey more delightful to Camilla
and Fidelio, who not being accustomed to ride
in that manner, would never have been able to
support it, if the Strength of their Minds had not
by far exceeded that of their Bodies. 
They had gone so much about, in seeking the
By-Roads, that they made it three times as long
before they arriv'd at Avignon, a small Village on
the Borders of Italy, as any, that had come the direct
Way would have done; but the Caution they
had observ'd, was not altogether needless, as they
presently found. 
A Gentleman, who had been a particular
Acquaintance of Monsieur Frankville's, overtook
them at this Place, and after expressing some
Amazement to find them no farther on their Journey,
told Monsieur Frankville he believ'd
he could inform him of some things which happen'd
since his Departure, and could not yet have
reach'd his Knowledge; which the other desiring
him to do, the Gentleman began in this manner: 
It was no sooner Day, said he, than it was
nois'd over all the City, that Donna Camilla,
Count D'elmont, and yourself, had privately
left Rome; every Body spoke of it, according to
their Humour; but the Friends of Ciamara and 

Cittolini were outrageous; a Complaint was
immediately made to the Consistory, and all imaginable
Diligence us'd, to overtake, or stop you; 
but you were so happy as to escape, and the Pursuers
return'd without doing any thing they went
about: Tho' Cittolini's Disappointment, to
all Appearance, was the greatest, yet Ciamara
bore it with the least Patience; and having vainly
rag'd, offer'd all the Treasure she was Mistress of,
and perhaps spent the best part of it in fruitless
means to bring you back, at last she swallow'd
Poison, and in the raving Agonies of Death, confess'd,
that it was not the Loss of Camilla, but
Count D'elmont which was the Cause of her
Despair: Her Death gave a fresh Occasion of
Grief to Cittolini, but the Day in which she
was interr'd, brought him yet a nearer; he had
sent to his Villa for his Daughter Violetta to
assist at the Funeral, and the Messenger return'd
with the surprizing Account of her not having been
there as she pretended she was; nothing was ever
equal to the Rage, the Grief, and the Amazement
of this distracted Father, when after the strictest
Enquiry, and Search that could be made, she was
no where to be found or heard of, it threw him into
a Fever, of which he linger'd but a small Time,
and dy'd the same Day on which I left Rome. 
The Gentleman who made this Recital, was
entirely a Stranger to any of the Company but
Monsieur Frankville, and they were retired
into a private Room during the Time of their Conversation,
which lasted not long; Frankville
was impatient to communicate to Camilla and
D'elmont what he had heard, and as soon as Civility
would permit, took leave of the Gentleman. 
The Count had too much Compassion in his
Nature, not to be extreamly troubled when he
was told this melancholy Catastrophe; but Camilla
said little; the ill usage of Ciamara, 

and the impudent, and interested Pretensions of
Cittolini to her, kept her from being so
much concern'd at their Misfortunes, as she would
have been at any other Person's; and the Generosity
of her Temper, or some other Reason which
the Reader will not be ignorant of hereafter,
from expressing any Satisfaction in the Punishment
they had met: But when the Count, who most of
all lamented Violetta, express'd his Astonishment
and Affliction at her Elopement, she join'd
with him in the Praises of that young Lady, with
an Eagerness, which testify'd, she had no Part in
the Hatred she bore her Father. 
While they were discoursing, Camilla observ'd
that Fidelio, who was all this while in
the Room, grew very pale, and at last saw him drop
on the Ground, quite senseless; she run to him, as did
his Lord and Monsieur Frankville, and after,
by throwing Water in his Face, they brought him
to himself again, he appear'd in such an Agony,
that they fear'd his Fit would return, and order'd
him to be laid on a Bed, and carefully attended. 
After they had taken a short Repast, they began
to think of setting forward on their Journey,
designing to reach Piedmont that Night: The
Count went himself to the Chamber where his Page
was laid, and finding he was very ill, told him he
thought it best for him to remain in that Place, that
he would order Physicians to attend him, and that
when he was fully recover'd, he might follow them
to Paris with Safety. Fidelio was ready to faint
a second Time, at the hearing these Words, and
with the most earnest Conjurations, accompany'd
with Tears, begg'd that he might not be left behind:
I can but die, said he, if I go with you; 
but I am sure, that nothing, if I stay, can save me. 
The Count seeing him so pressing, sent for a Litter,
but there was none to be got, and, in spite
of what Camilla or Frankville could say 

to disswade him, having his Lord's Leave, he ventured
to attend him, as he had done the former
Part of the Journey. 
They travell'd at an easy rate, because of Fidelio's
Indisposition, and it being later than
they imagin'd, Night came upon them before they
were aware of it, usher'd in by one of the most
dreadful Storms that ever was; the Rain, the Hail,
the Thunder, and the Lightning, was so violent,
that it oblig'd them to mend their Pace to get into
some Place of Shelter, for there was no House
near: But to make their Misfortune the greater,
they miss'd the Road, and rode considerably out
of their Way, before they perceiv'd that they were
wrong; the Darkness of the Night, which had no
Illumination than now and then a horrid Flash
of Lightning, the Wilderness of the Desart, which
they had stray'd into, and the little Hopes they had
of being able to get out of it, at least till Day,
were sufficient to have struck Terror in the boldest
Heart: Camilla stood in need of all her Love,
to protect her from the Fears which were beginning
to assault her; but poor Fidelio felt an
inward Horror, which, by this dreadful Scene encreas'd,
made him appear wholly desperate: Wretch
that I am, cry'd he, 'tis for me the Tempest rises! 
I justly have incurr'd the Wrath of Heaven,—and
you who are innocent, by my accurs'd Offence
are drawn to share a Punishment only due to
Crimes like mine! In this manner he exclaim'd,
wringing his Hands in bitter Anguish, and rather
exposing his lovely Face to all the Fury of the
Storm, than any Way endeavouring to defend it. 
His Lord, and the two generous Lovers, tho' harass'd
almost to Death themselves, said all they
could to comfort him; the Count and Monsieur
Frankville consider'd his Words, rather as
Effects of his Indisposition, and the Fatigue he
endur'd, than Remorse for any Crime he could 

have been guilty of, and the Pity they had for one
so young and innocent, made the Cruelty of the
Weather more insupportable to them. 
At last, after long wandering, and the Tempest
still encreasing, one of the Servants, who was before,
was happy enough to explore a Path, and
cry'd out to his Lord with a great deal of Joy, of
the Discovery he had made; they were all of Opinion
that it must lead to some House, because
the Ground was beat down, as if with the Feet of
Passengers, and entirely free from Stubble, Stones,
and Stumps of Trees, as the other part of the Desart
they come thro' was encumber'd with. 
They had not rode very far before they discern'd
Lights: the Reader may imagine the Joy
this Sight produc'd, and that they were not slow
in making their Approach, encourag'd by such a
wish'd-for Signal of Success. When they came
pretty near, they saw by the number of Lights,
which were dispers'd in several Rooms distant from
each other, that it was a very large and magnificent
House, and made no doubt, but that it was
the Country-Seat of some Person of great Quality:
The wet Condition they were in, made them almost
asham'd of appearing, and they agreed not
to discover who they were, if they found they
were unknown. 
They had no sooner knock'd, than the Gate
was immediately open'd by a Porter, who asking
their Business, the Count told him they were Gentlemen,
who had been so unfortunate to mistake
the Road to Piedmont, and desir'd the Owner's
Leave for Refuge in his House, for that Night; 
that is a Courtesy, said the Porter, which my Lord
never refuses; and in Confidence of his Assent, I
may venture to desire you to alight, and bid you
welcome: They all accepted the Invitation, and
were conducted into a stately Hall, where they waited
not long before the Marquis De Sanguillier, 

having been inform'd they appear'd like People of
Condition, came himself to confirm the Character
his Servant had given of his Hospitality. He
was a Man perfectly well bred, and in spite of the
Disadvantages their Fatigue had subjected them to,
he saw something in the Countenance of these Travellers,
which commanded his Respect, and engag'd
him to receive them with a more than ordinary
Civility. 
Almost the first thing the Count desir'd, was,
that his Page might be taken care of; he was presently
carry'd to Bed, and Camilla (to whom
the Marquis made a thousand Apologies, that being
a Bachelor, he could not accommodate her, as
he could the Gentlemen) was shewed to a Chamber,
where some of the Maid-Servants attended to
put on dry Cloaths. 
They were splendidly entertain'd that Night,
and when Morning came, and they were preparing
to take Leave, the Marquis, who was strangely
charm'd with their Conversation, entreated them
to stay two or three Days with him, to recover
themselves of the Fatigue they had suffer'd. The
Count's Impatience to be at Paris, to enquire after
his dear Melliora, would never have permitted
him to consent, if he had not been oblig'd to
it, by being told that Fidelio was grown much
worse, and not in a Condition to travel; Frankville
and Camilla had said nothing, because
they would not oppose the Count's Inclination,
but were extreamly glad of an Opportunity to rest
a little longer, tho' sorry for the Occasion. 
The Marquis omitted nothing that might make
their Stay agreeable; but tho' he had a longing Inclination
to know the Names and Quality of his
Guests he forbore to ask, since he found they
were not free to discover themselves: The Conversation
between these accomplish'd Persons was
extreamly entertaining, and Camilla, tho' an 

Italian, spoke French well enough to make no inconsiderable
Part of it; the Themes of their Discourse
were various, but at last happening to mention Love,
the Marquis spoke of that Passion so feelingly, and
express'd himself so vigorously when he attempted
to excuse any of those Errors, it leads its Votaries
into, that it was easy to discover, he felt the
Influence he endeavour'd to represent. 
Night came on again, Fidelio's Distemper
encreas'd to that Degree, that they all began
to despair of his Recovery, at least they could not
hope it for a long Time, if at all, and Count
D'elmont fretted beyond measure at this unavoidable
Delay of the Progress of his Journey to
that Place, where he thought there was only a Possibility
of hearing of Melliora: As he was in
Bed, forming a thousand various Idea's, tho' all
tending to one Object, he heard the Chamber Door
unlock, and opening his Curtains, perceiv'd somebody
come in; a Candle was burning in the next
Room, and gave Light enough at the opening the
Door, to show it was a Woman, but what Sort of
one he could not discern, nor did he give himself
the Trouble of asking who was there, believing it
might be one of the Servants come in to fetch
something she wanted; 'till coming pretty near the
Bed, she cry'd twice in a low Voice, are you
asleep? No, answer'd he, a little surpriz'd at this
Disturbance, what would you have? I come, said
she, to talk to you, and I hope you are more a
Chevalier, than to prefer a little Sleep to the Conversation
of a Lady, tho' she visits you at Midnight. 
These Words made D'elmont believe
he had met with a second Ciamara; and lest he
should find the same Trouble with this as he had
done with the former, he resolv'd to put a stop it at
once, and with an Accent as peevish as he could
turn his Voice to, the Conversation of Ladies, reply'd
he, is a Happiness I neither deserve, nor 

much desire at any Time, especially at this; therefore
whoever you are, to oblige me, you must
leave me to the Freedom of my Thoughts, which
at present afford me Matter of Entertainment more
suitable to my Humour than any thing I can find
here! Oh Heavens! said the Lady, is this the
courtly, the accomplish'd, Count D'elmont?
so fam'd for Complaisances and Sweetness? Can it
be he, who thus rudely repels a Lady, when she
comes to make him a Present of her Heart? The
Count was very much amaz'd to find he was known
in a Place where he thought himself wholly a
Stranger: I perceive, answer'd he, with more ill-Humour,
if possible, than before, you are very
well acquainted with my Name, which I shall never
deny, (tho' for some Reasons I conceal'd it)
but not at all with my Character, or you would
know, I can esteem the Love of a Woman, only
when 'tis granted, and think it little worth Acceptance,
proffer'd. Oh! unkind, said she, but
perhaps the Sight of me, may inspire you with
Sentiments less cruel. With these Words she went
hastily out of the Room to fetch the Candle she
had left within; and the Count was so much surpriz'd
and vex'd at the Immodesty and Imprudence
he believ'd her guilty of, that he thought he could
not put a greater Affront upon her, than her Behaviour
deserv'd, and turn'd himself with his Face the
other Way, designing to deny her the Satisfaction
of a Look. She return'd immediately, and having
set down the Candle pretty near the Bed, came
close to it herself, and seeing how he was laid; This
is unkind indeed, said she; 'tis but one Look I ask,
and if you think me unworthy of another, I will
for ever shun your Eyes: The Voice in which these
Words were deliver'd, for those she spoke before
were in a feign'd Accent, made the Heart-ravish'd
D'elmont turn to her indeed, with much more
Haste than he had done to avoid her; those dear, 

those well-remember'd Sounds infus'd an Extacy,
which none but Melliora's could create; he
heard—he saw,—'twas she, that very she, whose
Loss he had so much deplor'd, and began almost
to despair of ever being able to retrieve! Forgetting
all Decorum, he flew out of the Bed, catch'd
her in his Arms, and almost stifl'd her with Kisses; 
which she returning with pretty near an equal Eagerness,
You will not chide me from you now she
cry'd? Those who have experienc'd any part of
that Transport D'elmont now was in, will
know it was impossible for him to give her any other
Answer, than repeating his Caresses; Words
were too poor to express what 'twas he felt, nor
had he time to spare for Speech, employ'd in a far
dearer, softer Oratory, than all the Force of Language
could come up to. 
But, when at last, to gaze upon her with more
Freedom, he releas'd her from that strict Embrace
he had held her in, and she blushing, with downcast
Eyes, began to reflect on the Effects of her unbounded
Passion, a sudden Pang seiz'd on his Soul, and
trembling, and convuls'd between Extremity of Joy
and Extremity of Anguish, I find thee Melliora,
cry'd he, but, oh! my Angel! where is it thou art
found?—in the House of the young amorous Marquis
De Sanguillier! Cease, cease, interrupted
she, your causeless Fears,—wherever I am
found, I am,—I can be only yours. —And if you
will return to Bed, I will inform you, not only
what Accident brought me hither, but also every
Particular of my Behaviour since I came. 
These Words first put the Count in mind of
the Indecency his Transport had made him guilty
of, in being seen in that Manner, and was going
hastily to throw on his Night-Gown, when Melliora
perceiving his Intent, and fearing he
would take cold, told him she would not stay a
Moment, unless he granted her Request, of returning 

to his Bed; which he, after having made her
sit down on the Side of it, at last consented to:
And contenting himself with taking one of her
Hands, and pressing it between his, close Prisoner
in his Bosom, gave her Liberty to begin in this
Manner, the Discovery she had promis'd. 
After the sad Accident of Alovisa's Death,
said she, at my Return to the Monastery I found a
new Pensioner there; it was the young Madamoiselle
Charlotte De Mezray, who being
lately left an Orphan, was entrusted to the Care of
our Abbess, being her near Relation, 'till her time
of Mourning was expir'd, and she should be married
to this Marquis De Sanguillier, at
whose House we are; they were contracted by
their Parents in their Infancy, and nothing but
the sudden Death of her Mother, had put a Stop to
the Consummation of what, then, they both wish'd
with equal Ardor. But, alas! Heaven, which decreed
the little Beauty I am Mistress of, should be
pernicious to my own Repose, ordain'd it so, that
this unfaithful Lover, seeing me one Day at the
Grate with Charlotta, should fancy he found
something in me more worthy of creating a Passion
than he had in her, and began to wish himself
releas'd from his Engagement with her, that he
might have Liberty to enter into another, which,
he imagin'd, would be more pleasing: Neither she,
nor I had the least Suspicion of his Sentiments; 
and we having commenc'd a very great Friendship,
she would for the most part, desire me to
partake in the Visits he made her. He still continu'd
to make the same Protestations of Affection
to her as ever; but if on any occasion, she but
turn'd her Head, or cast her Eyes another Way,
he would give me such Looks, as, tho' I then but
little regarded, I have since understood the Meaning
of but too well; in this Manner he proceeded
for some Weeks, 'till at last he came one Day extreamly 

out of Humour, and told Charlotta
the Occasion of it was, that he had heard she gave
Encouragement to some other Lover. She, amaz'd,
as well she might, avow'd her Innocence, and endeavour'd
to undeceive him; but he, who resolv'd
not to be convinc'd, at least not to seem as if he
was, pretended to be more enrag'd at what he
call'd weak Excuses; said, he was satisfy'd she was
more guilty, even than he would speak,—that he
knew not if it were consistent with his Honour,
ever to see her more. —And, in short, behav'd himself
in so unaccountable a Manner, that there was
no room to doubt he was either the most impos'd
on, or most base of Men. It would be endless for
me to endeavour to represent poor Charlotta's
Affliction; so I shall only say, it was answerable
to the Tenderness she had for him, which,
could by nothing be exceeded, but by that, continu'd
she, sighing and looking languishingly on him,
which contrary to all the Resolutions I had made,
brings me to seek the Arms of my enchanting D'elmont,
to rouze Remembrance of his former Passion!
to strengthen my Idea in his Heart! and
Influence him a new with Love and Softness! This
kind Digression made the Count give Truce to his
Curiosity, that he might indulge the Raptures of
his Love; and raising himself in Bed, and pressing
her slender fine proportioned Body close to his,
would permit her no otherwise, than in this Posture
to continue her Discourse. 
Several Days, resum'd Melliora, were
past, and we heard nothing of the Marquis, all
which, as he has told me, were spent in fruitless
Projections to steal me from the Monastery; but at
last, by the means of a Lay-Sister, he found means
to convey a Letter to me; the Contents of it, as
near as I can remember, were these. 


To the Divine Melliora.
'Tis not the Falshood of Charlotta, but the
Charms of Melliora have produc'd this
Change in my Behaviour: Do not therefore, at
the reading this, affect a Surprize at Effects, which
I am sure cannot be uncommon to such Excellence! 
Nor accuse an Inconstancy, which I rather esteem a
Virtue than a Vice: To change from you indeed would
be the highest Sin, as well as Stupidity: but to change
for you, is what all must, and ought to do, who
boast a Capacity of distinguishing. I love you, oh! 
Divinest Melliora! I burn, I languish for you
in unceasing Torments, and you would find it impossible
for you to condemn the Boldness of this Declaration, if
you could be sensible of the Racks which force me to it,
and which must shortly end me, if not happy enough to
be received 
Your Lover,
De Sanguillier, 

'Tis impossible for me to express the Grief and
Vexation this Letter gave me; but I forbore shewing
it to Charlotta, knowing how much it
would encrease her Anguish; and resolv'd when
next I saw him, as I made no doubt but I should
quickly do, to use him in such a fashion, as in
spite of his Vanity, should make him know I was
not to be won in such a Manner; for I confess,
my dear D'elmont, that his Temerity gave no
less a Shock to my Pride, than his Infidelity to her
I really lov'd, did to my Friendship. The next 

Day I was told, a Gentleman enquir'd for me; I
presently imagin'd it was he, and went to the Grate,
with a Heart full of Indignation; I was not deceiv'd
in my Conjecture, it was indeed the Marquis,
who appear'd on the other side, but with so
much Humility in his Eyes, and awful Fear, for
what he saw in mine, as half disarm'd my Anger
for what concern'd myself; and had his Passion not
proceeded from his Inconstancy, I might have been
drawn to pity what was not in my Power to reward; 
but his base Usage of a Woman so deserving as
Charlotta, made me express myself in Terms
full of Disdain and Detestation; and without allowing
him to reply, or make any Excuses, pluck'd
the Letter he had sent me out of my Pocket, with
a Design to return it him, just at that Moment when
a Nun came hastily to call me from the Grate:
Somebody had overheard the Beginning of what I
said, and had told the Abbess, who, tho' she was
not displeas'd at what she heard of my Behaviour
to him, yet she thought it improper for me to hold
any Discourse with a Man, who declar'd himself
my Lover: I did not, however, let her know who
the Person was, fearing it might come to Charlotta's
Ears, and increase an Affliction, which
was already too violent: I was vex'd to miss the
Opportunity of giving back his Letter, but kept it
still about me, not in the least questioning, but
that Boldness which had encourag'd him to make a
Discovery of his Desires, would again lead him to
the Prosecution of them in the same Manner; but I
was deceiv'd, his Passion prompted him to take
other, as he believ'd, more effectual Measures:
One Day, at least a Fortnight after I had seen the
Marquis, as I was walking in the Garden with
Charlotta, and another young Pensioner, a
Fellow who was employ'd in taking away Rubbish,
told us there were some Statues carry'd by
the Gate, which open'd into the Fields, which were 

the greatest Master-pieces of Art that had ever been
seen: They are going, said he, to be plac'd in the
Sieur Valier's Garden; if you step but out, you
may get a Sight of them. We, who little suspected
any Deceit, run without Consideration, to satisfy
our Curiosity; but instead of the Statues we
expected to see, four living Men disguis'd, muffl'd,
and well mounted, came galloping up to us, and,
as it were, surrounded us, before we had Time to
get back to the Gate we came out at: three of
them alighting, seiz'd me and my Companions,
and I, who was the destin'd Prey, was in a Moment
thrown into the Arms of him who was on
Horseback, and who no sooner receiv'd me, than
as if we had been mounted on a Pegasus, we seem'd
rather to fly than ride; in vain I struggl'd, shriek'd,
and cry'd to Heaven for Help, my Prayers were
lost in Air, as quickly was my Speech; Surprize,
and Rage, and Dread, o'erwhelm'd my sinking
Spirits, and unable to sustain the Rapidity of such
Violent Emotions, I fell into a Swoon, from which
I recover'd not, 'till I was at the Door of some
House, but where I yet am ignorant; the first thing
I saw, when I open'd my Eyes, was one of those
Men who had been assistant in my carrying away,
and was now about to lift me from the Horse: I
had not yet the Power to speak, but when I had,
I vented all the Passions of my Soul in Terms of
Distraction and Despair: By what Means the
People of the House were gain'd to my Ravisher's
Interest, I know not, but they took little Notice of
the Complaints I made, or my Implorations for
Succour: I had now not the least Shadow of a
Hope, that any thing but Death could save me
from Dishonour; and having vainly rag'd, I at last
sat down, meditating by what Means I should compass
that only Relief from the worse Ruin which
seem'd to threaten me. While my Thoughts were
thus employ'd, he who appear'd the chief of that 

insolent Company, making a Sign that the rest
should withdraw, fell on his Knees before me, and
plucking off his Vizard, discover'd to me the Face
of the Marquis D'Saguillier. Heavens! 
How did this Sight inflame me? Mild as I am
by Nature, I that Moment was all Fury! –Till
now I had not the least Apprehension who he was,
and believ'd 'twas rather my Fortune than my
Person, which had prompted some daring Wretch
to take this Method to obtain it; but now, my
Woes appear'd, if possible, with greater Horror,
and his Quality and Engagement with Charlotta
made the Act seem yet more base. I
blame you not, said he, oh divinest Melliora! 
The Presumption I am guilty of, is of so high a
Nature, as justly may deserve your utmost Rigour! 
—I know, and confess my Crime; nay, hate
myself for thus offending you. —But oh! 'tis
unavoidable—be then, like Heaven, who
when injured most, takes most delight to pardon. 
Crimes unrepented, answer'd I, can have no Plea
for Mercy; still to persist, and still to ask Forgiveness,
is mocking of the Power we seem to implore,
and but increases Sin. —Release me
from this Captivity, which you have betray'd me
into, restore me to the Monastery—And for
the future, cease to shock my Ears with Tales of
violated Faith, detested Passion! Then I, perhaps,
may pardon what is past. His Reply to all this was
very little to the Purpose, only I perceiv'd he was
so far from complying with my Request, or repenting
what he had done, that he resolv'd to proceed
yet farther; and one of his Associates coming
in, to tell him that his Chariot, which it seems,
he had order'd to meet him there, was ready, he
offer'd to take me by the Hand to lead me to it,
which I refusing with an Air which testify'd the
Indignation of my Soul; Madam, said he, you
are not here less in my Power, than you will be 

in a Place, where I can accommodate you in a
manner more suitable to your Quality, and the
Adoration I have for you: If I were capable of
a base Design on you, what hinders but I now
might perpetrate it? But be assured, your Beauties
are not of that Kind, which inspire Sentiments
dishonourable; nor shall you ever find any other
Treatment from me, than what might become the
humblest of your Slaves; my Love, fierce as it is,
shall know its Limits, and never dare to breathe
an Accent less chaste than your own Virgin
Dreams, and innocent as your Desires. 
Tho' the Boldness he had been guilty of, and
still persisted in, made me give but little Credit to
the latter Part of his Speech, yet the Beginning of
it awak'd my Consideration to a Reflection, that
I could not indeed be any where in a greater Danger
of the Violence I fear'd, than where I was; 
but, on the contrary, it might so happen, that in
leaving that Place, I might possibly meet some
Persons who might know me, or at least be carrv'd
somewhere, whence I might with more Likelihood,
make my Escape: In this last Hope, I
went into the Chariot, and indeed, to do him
Justice, neither in our Journey, nor since I came
into his House, has he ever violated the Promise
he made me; nothing can be with more Humility
than his Addresses to me, never Visiting me without
first having obtain'd my Leave. But to return
to the Particulars of my Story, I had not been here
many Days, before a Servant-Maid of the House,
being in my Chamber, doing something about me,
ask'd me if it were possible I could forget her? The
Question surpriz'd me, but I was much more so,
when looking earneslly in her Face, which I had
never done before, I perfectly distinguish'd the
Features of Charlotta. Oh Heavens! cry'd
I, Charlotta! The very same, said she, but
I dare not stay to unsold the Mystery, lest any of 

the Family take Notice; at Night when I undress
you, you shall know the History of my Transformation. 
Never any Day seem'd so long to me as that,
and I feign'd myself indispos'd, and rung my Bell
for some Body to come up, several Hours before
the time I used to go to Bed. Charlotta
guessing my Impatience, took care to be in the
way, and as soon as she was with me, not staying
for my requesting it of her, begun the Information
she had promis'd, in this manner. 
You see, said she, forcing herself to put on a
Half Smile, your unhappy Rival follows to interrupt
the Triumph of your Conquest; but I protest
to you, that if I thought you esteem'd my perjur'd
Lover's Heart an Offering worthy your Acceptance,
I never wou'd have disturb'd your Happiness; 
and 'tis as much the Hopes of being able to
be instrumental in serving you in your Releasement,
as the Prevention of that Blessing the injurious
D'Saguillier aims at, which has
brought me here: Of all the Persons that bewail'd
your being carry'd away, I was the only one who
had any Guess at the Ravisher; nor had I been so
wise, but that the very Day on which it happen'd,
you drop'd a Letter, which I took up, and knowing
it the Marquis's Hand, made no Scruple
of reading it. I had no Opportunity to upbraid
you for the Concealment of his Falshood; but the
manner of your being seiz'd, convinc'd me you
were innocent of favouring his Passion, and his
Vizard slipping a little on one Side, as he took
you in his Arms, discover'd enough of that Face I
have so much ador'd, for me to know who it was,
that had took this Method to gain you: I will not,
continu'd she, weeping, trouble you with any Recital
of what I endur'd from the Knowledge of
my Misfortune, but you may judge it by my Love; 
however, I bore up against the oppressive Weight, 

and resolv'd to struggle with my Fate, even to the
last; I made an Excuse for leaving the Monastery
the next Day, without giving any Suspicion of the
Cause, or letting any Body into the Secret of the
Marquis, and disguis'd as you see, found means
to be receiv'd by the House-keeper, as a Servant; I
came here in three Days after you, and have had
the Opportunity of being confirm'd by your Behaviour,
of what I before believ'd, that you were
far from being an Assistant in his Design. 
Here the sorrowful Charlotta finish'd
her little Account, and I testify'd the Joy I felt in
seeing her, by a thousand Embraces, and all the
Protestations of eternal Friendship to her, that I
could make: All the times we had any Opportunity
of talking to each other, were spent in forming
Schemes for my Escape, but none of them appear'd
feasible; however, the very Contrivance
was a kind of Pleasure to me; for tho' I began to
banish all my Fears of the Marquis's offering any
Violence to my Virtue, yet I found his Passion
wou'd not permit him to suffer my Departure, and
I was almost distracted when I had no Hopes of
being in a Capacity of hearing from you, or writing
to you: In this fashion, my dearest D'elmont
have I liv'd, sometimes flattering myself
with vain Projects, sometimes desponding of being
ever free: But last Night Charlotta
coming up, according to her Custom, told me in
a kind of Rapture, that you, and my Brother,
were in the House; she, it seems, knew you at
Paris, while her Mother was yet living, and to
make her entirely easy as to the Marquis, I had
now made her the Confident of my Sentiments
concerning you: I need not tell you the Extacy
this News gave me, you are too well acquainted
with my Heart, not to be able to conceive it
more justly than Language can express; but I cannot
forbear informing you of one thing, of which 

you are ignorant; tho' had Prudence any Share in
my Love-directed Soul, I shou'd conceal it: My
Impatience to behold you, was almost equal to
my Joy to think you were so near, and transported
with my eager Wishes, by Charlotta's Assistance,
I last Night found the Way into your
Chamber: I saw you, oh D'elmont! my longing
Eyes enjoy'd the Satisfaction they so much desir'd; 
but yours were clos'd, the Fatigue of your
Journey had laid you fast asleep, so fast, that even
Fancy was unactive, and no kind Dream alarm'd
you with one Thought of Melliora! 
She cou'd not pronounce these last Words very
intelligibly, the greedy Count devour'd 'em as
she spoke; and tho' Kisses had made many a Parenthesis
in her Discourse, yet he restrain'd himself
as much as possible, for the Pleasure of hearing
her; but perceiving she was come to a Period,
he gave a Loose to all the furiours Transports of
his ungovern'd Passion: A while their Lips were
cemented! rivetted together with Kisses such
Kisses! as collecting every Sense in one, exhale
the very Soul, and mingle Spirits! Breathless with
Bliss, then wou'd they pause and gaze, then join
again, with Ardour still increasing, and Looks,
and Sighs, and straining Grasps were all the Eloquence
that either cou'd make use of: Fain wou'd
he now have obtain'd the Aim of all his Wishes,
strongly he press'd, and faintly she repuls'd: Dissolv'd
in Love, and melting in his Arms, at last
she found no Words to form Denials, while he, all
fire, improv'd the lucky Moment, a Thousand Liberties
he took—A Thousand Joys he reap'd,— 
and had infallibly been possess'd of all, if Charlotta,
who seeing it broad Day, had not wonder'd
at Melliora's Stay, and came and knock'd
at the Chamber Door, which not being fasten'd,
gave way to her Entrance; but she made no such
haste, but that they had time enough to disengage 

themselves from that close Embrace they had held
each other in: Heavens! Melliora, cry'd the
careful Interrupter, what mean you by this Stay,
which may be so prejudicial to our Designs; the
Marquis is already stirring, and if he shou'd come
into this Room, or send to yours, what might be
the Consequence: I come, I come, said Melliora,
alarm'd at what she heard, and rising
from the Bed-side: Oh, you will not, said the
Count, in a Whisper, and tenderly pressing her
Hand, you must not leave me thus! A few Hours
hence, answer'd she aloud, I hope to have the
Power to own myself all yours; nor can the
Scheme we have laid fail of the Effects we wish,
if no Discovery happens to postpone it: She was
going with Charlotta out of the Chamber,
with these Words, but remembring herself, she
turn'd hastily back, let not my Brother, resum'd
she, know my Weakness; and when you see me
next, feign a Surprize equal to his own. 
It is not to be suppos'd that after she was gone,
D'elmont, tho' kept awake so long, cou'd
suffer any Sleep to enter his Eyes; Excess of Joy,
of all the Passions, hurries the Spirits most, and
keeps 'em longest busy'd: Anger or Grief rage
violently at first, but quickly flag, and sink at last
into a Lethargy; but Pleasure warms, exhilerates
the Soul, and every rapturous Thought infuses new
Desires, new Life, and added Vigour. 
The Marquis D'Saguillier was no less
happy in Imagination than the Count, and it was
the Force of that Passion which had rouz'd him so
early that Morning, and made him wait impatiently
for his Guests coming out of their Chambers,
for he would not disturb them: As soon as they
were all come into the Drawing-Room, I know
not, Messieurs, said he, with a Voice and Eyes
wholly chang'd from those he wore the Day before,
whether you have ever experienc'd the Force 

of Love to that Degree that I have, but I dare
believe you have Generosity enough to rejoice in
the good Fortune I am going to be possess'd of; 
and when I shall inform you how I have long
languish'd in a Passion, perhaps the most extravagant
that ever was, you will confess the Justice of
that God, who soon or late, seldom suffers his
faithful Votaries to miss their Reward. The Count
could not force himself to a reply to these Words,
but Frankville and Camilla, who were entirely
ignorant of the Cause of them, heartily congratulated
him. I am confident, resum'd the Marquis,
that Despair has no Existence but in weak
and timerous Minds, all Women may be won by
Force or Stratagem; and tho' I had almost invincible
Difficulties to struggle with, Patience,
Constancy, and a bold and artful Management has
at length surmounted them: Hopeless by distant
Courtship to obtain the Heart of my Adorable, I
found Means to make myself Master of her Person,
and by making no other use of the Power I had
over her, than humbly sighing at her Feet, convinc'd
her my Designs were far from being dishonourable; 
and last Night, looking on me with
more Kindness than she ever had done before: My
Lord, said she, your Usage of me has been too
Noble, not to vanquish whatever Sentiments I
may have been possess'd with to your Prejudice; 
therefore since you have Company in the House,
who may be Witness of what I do, I think I cannot
chuse a fitter time than this, to bestow myself,
before them, on him who most deserves me. I
will not now, continu'd he, delay the Confirmation
of my Happiness so long, as to go about to describe
the Extacy I felt, for this so wish'd, and so
unhop'd a Condescension; but when, hereafter,
you shall be told the whole History of my Passion,
you will be better able to conceive it. The Marquis
had scarce done speaking, when his Chaplain came 

into the Room, saying, he believ'd it was the Hour
his Lordship order'd him to attend: It is! it is!
cry'd the transported Marquis. Now my worthy
Guests you shall behold the lovely Author of my
Joys; with these Words he left them, but immediately
return'd, leading the intended Bride. Monsieur
Frankville, tho' he had not seen his
Sister in some Years, knew her at the first Glimpse,
and the Surprize of meeting her—meeting her
in so unexpected a manner, was so great, that his
Thoughts were quite confounded with it, and he
cou'd no otherwise express it, than by throwing
his Eyes wildly sometimes on her, sometimes on
the Count, and sometimes on the Marquis; the
Count tho' appris'd of this, felt a Consternation
for the Consequence, little inferior to his, and both
being kept silent by their different Agitations, and
the Marquis also, by the sudden Change, which he
perceiv'd in their Countenances, Melliora
had Liberty to explain herself in this manner: I
have kept my Word, my Lord, said she to the
Marquis, this Day shall give me to him who best
deserves me; but who that is, my Brother and
Count D'elmont must determine; since Heaven
has restor'd them to me, all Power of disposing of
myself must cease; 'tis they must, henceforth,
rule the Will of Melliora, and only their Consent
can make me yours. All Endeavours wou'd be
vain to represent the Marquis's Confusion at this
sudden Turn, and 'tis hard to say whether his Astonishment,
or Vexation was greatest; her Brother
he wou'd little have regarded, not doubting but his
Quality, and the Riches he was possess'd of, wou'd
easily have gain'd his Compliance; but Count
D'elmont, tho' he knew him not, (having, for
some Disgust he receiv'd at Court, been many
Years from Paris,) yet he had heard much Talk of
him; and the Passion he had for Melliora, by
the Adventure of Alovisa's Death, had made too 

great a Noise in the World not to have reach'd his
Ears; he stood speechless for some time, but when
he had a little recover'd himself; Have you then
Deceiv'd me, Madam, said he? No, answer'd she,
I am still ready to perform my Promise, whenever
these Gentlemen shall command me. —The one my
Brother, the other my Guardian, obtain but their
Consent, and—Mine he can never have, interrupted
Frankville hastily, and laying his Hand
on his Sword. Nor mine, cry'd the Count, while
I have Breath to form Denials, or my Arm strength
to Guard my Beauteous Charge. Hold, Brother,— 
Hold, my Lord, said Melliora, fearing their Fury
wou'd produce some fatal Effects, the Marquis has
been so truly Noble, that you rather ought to
thank, than resent his Treatment of me; and tho'
I see Rage in your Eyes, and all the Stings of Disappointment
glowing fierce in his, yet I have Hopes,
a general Content may crown the End. —Appear!
continu'd she, raising her Voice, appear! thou
lovely faithful Maid! Come forth and Charm thy
roving Lover's Heart again to Constancy, to Peace,
and Thee! She had no sooner spoke, then Charlotta
entred, drest like a Bride indeed, in a Suit
of Cloaths, which she had brought with her, in case
any happy Opportunity shou'd arise for her to discover
herself. If the Marquis was before confounded,
how much more so was he now? That
injur'd Lady's Presence, just at this Juncture, and
the Surprize by what means she came there, made
him utterly unable to resolve on any thing; which
she observing, and taking advantage of his Confusion,
run to him, and catching hold of his Hand; 
Wonder not, my Lord, said she, to see Charlotta
here; nothing is impossible to Love like
mine; tho' slighted and abandon'd by you, still I
pursue your Steps with Truth, with Tenderness,
and Constancy untir'd! —Then perceiving he still
was silent, Come, my Lord, continu'd she, you 

must at last take Pity on my Sufferings; my Rival,
charming as she is, wants a just Sensibility of your
Deserts, and is by that less worthy than I: Oh,
then remember, if not to me, what 'tis you owe
your self, your own exalted Merits, and you will
soon determine in my Favour, and confess that she,
who loves you best, ought to be best beloved. 
She spoke these Words in so moving an Accent,
and they were accompany'd with so many Tears,
that the most rocky Heart must have relented; and
that the Marquis was sensibly touch'd with 'em,
his Countenance testify'd, when sighing, and turning
his Head a little away, not with Disdain, but
Remorse for the Infidelity he had been guilty of:
Oh, cease, said he, this Flood of Softness, it gives
me Pains I never felt before, for 'tis impossible you
can forgive—Oh Heaven! cry'd the transported
Charlotta, all you have done, or even can
do of Unkindness, is by one tender Word made
full amends for; see at your Feet (continued she,
falling on her Knees) thus in this humble Posture,
which best becomes my prostrate Soul, I beg you
to accept the Pardon which I bring, to banish from
your Mind all Thoughts that you have injured me,
and leave it free from all those generous Joys, the
making others happy, must create: This Action of
Charlotta's, join'd to the Reflection, how
strangely every Thing happen'd to prevent his Designs
on the other, won him entirely, and raising
her with a tender Embrace, put it out of her Power
to regret his ever being False,-since his Return
gave her a Taste of Joys, which are not but in Reconciliation
to be found. 
The Count, Monsieur Frankville, and the
two Ladies who had waited all this while in an impatient
Expectation for the End of this Affair, now
paid their several Congratulations, all highly applauding the
Constancy of Chartotta, and
the timely Repentance of the Marquis: These 

Ceremonies being over, the Marquis desir'd
Charlotta to acquaint him by what means she
had gain'd Admittance to his House unknown to
him; which Curiosity she immediately satisfying,
engag'd a-new the Praises of the whole Company,
and more endear'd herself to her belov'd Marquis's
Affections. 
Tranquility now reign'd in those Hearts,
which lately heav'd with various and disturb'd Emotions,
and Joy sate smiling upon every Cheek,
entirely happy in their several Wishes: They could
now talk of past Woes with Pleasure, and began to
enter into a very delightful Conversation, when
Frankville on a sudden missing Camilla,
and asking for her, one of the Servants told him
she was gone to the Sick Page's Chamber: This
News gave him some little alarm, and the rather,
because he had observ'd she expressed a more than
ordinary Tenderness and Care for this Page all
the Time of their Journey; he ran immediately to
the Room where he heard she was, and found her
lying on the Bed, with her Arms round Fidelio's
Neck, and her Face close to his: This shocking Sight
had certainly driven the Rashness of his Temper to
commit some Deed of Horror, if the Amazement
he was in had not prevented it; he drew his Sword
half out, but then, as if some Spell had charm'd
his Arm, remain'd in that Posture, fix'd and motionless
as Marble: Camilla half blinded with
the Tears which fell from her Eyes, saw not the
Confusion he was in, nor considered the seeming
Reason he had to be so, but raising her Head a little
to see who it was that came into the Chamber,
Oh Frankville! said she, see here the Ruins
of Love, behold the Tyranny of that fatal Passion
in this expiring Fair! But haste, continu'd she,
finding him ready to faint, let Count D'elmont
know, the faithful, generous Violetta! Dies— 
she dies for him, and asks no other Recompence, 

than a last Farewell—Violetta! interrupted
Frankville, what means Camilla? This,
this is Violetta, resum'd she, who like a Page
disguis'd, has followed the too lovely Count, and
lost herself: The Rage which at his first Entrance
had possest the Heart of Frankville, now gave
Way to Grief, and coming near the Bed, he began
to testify it, by all the Marks which an unfeign'd
Concern cou'd give; but this unfortunate Languisher,
finding her Strength decay, prevented him from
making any long Speeches, by renewing that Request
which Camilla had already made known,
of seeing her dear Lord before she dy'd, which
Frankville making haste to fulfil; she call'd
to him as loud as her Weakness would permit, to
come back, and as soon as he was, Camilla, said
she, has inform'd me of my Lord's good Fortune
in meeting with the Charmer of his Soul, I would
not deprive him of a Moment's Happiness. I
therefore beg she'd give a dying Rival leave to
wish her Joy; and as neither my Death, nor the
Cause of it can be a Secret to any of the Company
here, I desire they all may be Witnesses, with
what Pleasure I welcome it. Frankville,
fiery as he was, had a vast deal of Compassion in
his Nature, and could not see so beautiful a young
Lady, and one who he had so many Obligations to,
on the Account of his Affair with Camilla, in
this despairing and dying Condition, without being
seiz'd with an Anguish inexpressible; but all the
Pangs he felt were nothing when compar'd to those
he gave D'elmont in the Delivery of her Message; 
he ran into the Room like a Man distracted,
and in the Hurry of his Grief forgot even the Complaisance
he ow'd to Melliora; but she was too
generous to disapprove his Concern, and immediately
followed with her Brother, the Marquis and
Charlotta: What is it that I hear, Madam?
cry'd the Count, throwing himself on the Bed by 

her: Can it be possible that the admir'd Violetta
cou'd forsake her Father,—Country,— 
Friends,—forego her Sexes Pride,—the Pomp of
Beauty,—gay Dresses, and all the Equipage of
State and Grandeur, to follow in a mean Disguise,
a Man unworthy her Thoughts? Oh! no more,
said she, weeping, you are but too, too worthy
Admiration; nor do I yet believe my Love a
Crime, tho' the Consequence is so: I might in
Rome, with Honour and Innocence have died, but
by my shameful Flight, I was the Murderer of my
Father—that—that's a Guilt, which all these
Floods of Penitence can never wash away—Yet,
bear me Witness Heaven, how little I suspected
the sad Event, when first, unable to support your
Absence, I contriv'd this Way, unknown, to keep
for ever in your Sight: I lov'd, 'tis true, but if
one unchaste Wish, or an impure Desire e'er stain'd
my Soul, then may the purging Fire to which I
am going, miss its Effect, my Spots remain, and
not one Saint vouchsafe to own me: Here the
Force of her Passion, agitating her Spirits with
too much Violence for the Weakness of her Body,
she sunk fainting in her Bed: And tho' the Count
and Camilla felt the most deeply her Afflictions,
the one because they proceeded from her Love to
him, and the other as having long been her Friend,
and Partner of her Secrets, yet those in the Company
who were most Strangers to her, participated
in her Sufferings, and commiserated the Woes
they could not heal; and as soon as she recovered
her Swoon, the generous Melliora (not in
the least possest with any of those little Jealousies,
which Women of narrow Souls harbour on such
Occasions) came nearer to the Bed, and taking
her kindly by the Hand, Live and be comforted,
said she, a Love so innocent shall never give me
a Disquiet. —Live and enjoy the Friendship of
my Lord; and if you please to favour me with 

yours, I shall esteem it as it deserves, a Blessing. 
No, Madam, answered the now almost Expiring
Violetta, Life, after this shameful Declaration,
wou'd be the worst of Punishments; but, not to be
ungrateful to so generous an Offer, for a few Moments
I accept it, and like Children placing their
darling Play-things on their Pillow, and then contented
to go to Sleep, so I would keep your Lord,
would view him still while I awake to Life, then
drop insensibly into a Slumber of eternal Peace. 
This mournful Tenderness pierc'd D'elmont
to the very Soul; and putting his Arm gently under
her Head, which he perceiv'd she was too weak
to raise when she endeavour'd it, and laying his
Face on one of her Hands, cou'd not forbear
washing it in Tears; she felt the cordial Drops, and,
as if they gave her a new Vigour, exerting her
Voice to the utmost of her Strength; This is too
kind, said she; I now can feel none of those Agonies
which render Death the King of Terrors; and
thus, thus happy in your Sight,—your Touch— 
your tender Pity,—I can but be translated from
one Heaven to another; and yet, forgive me Heaven,
if it be a Sin, I cou'd wish, methinks, to
know no other Paradise than you, to be permitted
to hover round you, to Form your Dreams, to sit
upon your Lips all Day, to mingle with your
Breath, and glide in unfelt Air into your Bosom:— 
She wou'd have proceeded, but her Voice faultered
in the Accent, and all she spoke distinguishable
was, Oh D'elmont! receive in this one
Sigh, my latest Breath—it was indeed her last,
she died that Moment, died in his Arms, whom
more than Life she priz'd; and sure there are none
who have liv'd in the Anxieties of Love, who
wou'd not envy such a Death! 
There was not in this noble Company, one
whose Eyes were dry, but Count D'elmont was
for some Time inconsolable, even by Melliora; 

he forbore the celebrating of his so eagerly
desired Nuptials, as did the Marquis and Monsieur
Frankville theirs, in Complaisance to him,
'till after Violetta was interr'd, which the
Count took Care should be in a Manner becoming
her Quality, her Merit, and the Esteem he profess'd
to have born her. But when this melancholy Scene
was past, a Day of Joy succeeded, and one happy
Hour confirm'd the Wishes of the three longing
Bridegrooms; the Weddings were all kept in a
splendid Manner at the Marquis's, and it was not
without a great deal of Reluctance, that he and
Charlotta suffered the Count, Monsieur
Frankville, and their Ladies to take leave of
them. When they came to Paris, they were joyfully
received by the Chevalier Brillian and
Ansellina; and those, who, in the Count's
Absence, had taken a Liberty of censuring and condemning
his Actions, aw'd by his Presence, and
in Time won by his Virtues, now swell his Praises
with an equal Vehemence: Both he and Frankville
are still living, blest with a numerous and
hopeful Issue, and continue with their fair Wives,
great and lovely Examples of conjugal Affection. 

