

Gives the catastrophe of the Oxford
ramble, and in what manner the young
ladies returned to London. 
If the wounds mr. Francis had received
had been all the misfortune attending
miss Betsy in this adventure, it is probable,
that as she every day heard he was
in a fair way of recovering, the first gust
of passion would have been all she had
sustained; but she soon found other consequences
arising from it, which were no
less afflicting, and more galling to her
pride. 
The quarrel between the two young
gentlemen, and the occasion of it, was
presently blazed over the whole town; 
it spread like wild-fire, every one made
their several comments upon it, and few
there were who endeavoured to find any
excuses for the share miss Betsy and miss
Flora had in it. 

The ladies of Oxford are commonly
more than ordinarily circumspect in their
behaviour, as indeed it behoves them to
be, in a place where there are such a
number of young gentlemen, many of
whom pursue pleasure more than study,
and scruple nothing for the gratification
of their desires. It is not, therefore, to
be wondered at, that being from their infancy
trained up in the most strict reserve,
and accustomed to be upon their guard,
against even the most distant approaches
of the other sex, they should be apt to
pass the severest censures on a conduct,
which they had been always taught to look
upon as the sure destruction of reputation,
and frequently fatal to innocence and
virtue. 
This being pretty generally the characteristic
of those ladies, who were of any
distinction, in Oxford, miss Betsy and
miss Flora immediately found, that while
they continued there, they must either be
content to sit at home alone, or converse
only with such as were as disagreeable to
them, as they had now rendered themselves
to those of a more unblemished
fame. 

They had received several visits, all of
which they had not yet had time or leisure
to return; but now going to pay the
debt, which complaisance demanded from
them, they were denied access at every
place they went to: all the persons were
either abroad or indisposed; but the manner
in which these answers were given,
easily convinced miss Betsy and miss Flora,
that they were no more than meer pretences
to avoid seeing them. In the public
walks, and in passing through the
streets, they saw themselves shunned even
to a degree of rudeness: those of their acquaintance,
who were obliged to meet
them, looked another way, and went hastily
on without vouchsafing a salute. 
This was the treatment their late unhappy
adventure drew on them, from those
of their own sex, nor did those of the
other seem to behave to them with greater
tenderness or respect, especially the younger
students, who all having got the story,
thought they had a fine opportunity of exercising
their poetic talent; satires and
lampoons flew about like hail: many of
these anonymous compositions were directed
to miss Betsy, and thrown over the
rails into the area of the house where she
lodged; others were sung under her windows 
by persons in disguise, and copies of
them handed about through the whole
town, to the great propagation of scandal,
and the sneering faculty. 
Never, certainly, did pride and vanity
meet with a more severe humiliation,
than what these witicisms inflicted on those,
who by their inconsiderate behaviour had
laid themselves open to them. Neither
the assurance of miss Flora, nor the great
spirit of miss Betsy, could enable them
to stand the shock of those continual affronts,
which every day presented them
with. They dreaded to expose themselves
to fresh insults, if they stirred out of the
doors, and at home they were persecuted
with the unwearied remonstrances of their
grave landlady, so that their condition
was truly pitiable. 
Both of them were equally impatient to
get out of a place where they found their
company was held in so little estimation; 
but miss Betsy thought her brother would
not take it well, should she go to London,
and leave him in the condition he
then was. Miss Flora's importunities, however,
joined to the new occasions she every
day had for increasing her discontent on
staying, got the better of her apprehensions, 
and she wrote to her brother in the
following terms: 

To mr. Francis Thoughtless.
“Dear brother,
Though I am not to my great
affliction permitted to see you, or
offer that assistance might be expected
from a sister in your present situation; 
yet I cannot, without the extremest regret,
resolve to quit Oxford, before
you are perfectly recovered of those
hurts you have received on my account. 
However, as by your judging it improper
for me to come to you, I cannot
suppose you are wholly unacquainted
with the severe usage lately given
me, and must look on every affront offered
to me as an indignity to you, I
am apt to flatter myself you will not
be offended, that I wish to remove from
a place, where innocence is no defence
against scandal, and the shew of virtue
more considered than the reality. 
“Nevertheless, I shall determine nothing,
till I hear your sentiments,
which, if I find conformable to mine,
shall set out for London with all possible
expedition. I would very fain see
you before I go, and, if you consent, 
will come to you so muffled up, as not to
be known, by any who may happen to
meet me. I shall expect your answer
with the utmost impatience, being, 
“My dear brother,
By friendship, as well as blood,
Most affectionately yours,
E. Thoughtless.” 

When this letter was dispatched, miss
Flora made use of all the arguments she
was mistress of, in order to perswade miss
Betsy to go for London, even in case her
brother should not be altogether so willing
for it, as she wished he would. Miss
Betsy, though no less eager than herself to
be out of a place she now so much detested,
would not be prevailed upon to promise
any thing on this score; but persisted
in her resolution of being wholly directed
how to proceed, by the answer she should
receive from mr. Francis. 
Miss Flora was so fretted at this perverseness,
as she called it, that she told
her, in a very great pet, that she might
stay if she pleased, and be the laughing-stock
of the town; but, for her own part,
she had more spirit, and would be gone 
the next day. Miss Betsy cooly replied,
that if she thought proper to do so, she
was doubtless at liberty; but believed mr.
Goodman, and even lady Mellasin herself,
would look on such a behaviour, as
neither consistent with generosity, or common
good manners. 
It is indeed scarce probable, that the
other had the least intention to do as she
had said, though she still continued to
threaten it, in the most positive and peremptory
terms; and this, if we consider
the temper of both these young ladies,
we may reasonably suppose, might have occasioned
a second quarrel between them,
if the servant, whom mr. Francis always
sent to his sister, had not that instant
come in, and put an end to the dispute,
by delivering a letter to miss Betsy, which
she hastily opening, found it contained
these lines: 

To miss Thoughtless.
“My dear sister,
It is with an inexpressible satisfaction
that I find your own inclinations
have anticipated the request I was just
about to make you. I do assure you, 
the moment I received your letter, I
was going to write, in order to perswade
you to do the very thing you
seem to desire. Oxford is indeed a very
censorious place; I have always observed
it to be so, and have frequently
told the ladies, between jest and
earnest, that I thought it was a town
of the most scandal, and least sin, of
any in the world. I am pretty confident
some of those, who pretend to give
themselves airs concerning you and
miss Flora, are as perfectly convinced
of your innocence as I myself am; yet
after all that has happened, I would
not have you think of staying; and the
sooner you depart the better: you need
be under no apprehensions on account
of my wounds; those I received from
the sword of my antagonist are in a
manner healed, and that with the pistol
shot, in my shoulder, is in as fine a
way as can be expected, in so short a
time. Those I had the fortune to give
him, are in yet a better condition; so
that I believe, if it was not for the over
caution of our surgeon, we might both
quit our rooms to-morrow. I hear that
our grave superiors have had some consultations
on our duel, and that there
is a talk of our being both expelled; 
but, for my part, I shall certainly save
them the trouble, and quit the university
of my own accord, as soon as my
recovery is compleated: my genius is
by no means adapted to the study of
divinity; I think the care of my own
soul more than sufficient for me, without
taking upon me the charge of a
whole parish: you may, therefore, expect
to see me shortly at London, as it
is highly necessary I should consult mr.
Goodman concerning my future settlement
in the world. I should be extremely
glad of a visit from you before
you leave Oxford, more especially as I
have something of moment to say to
you, which I do not choose to communicate
by letter; but cannot think
it at all proper, for particular reasons,
that you should come to me, some or
other of the gentlemen being perpetually
dropping into my chamber; and
it is impossible for you to disguise yourself
so as not to be distinguished by
young fellows, whose curiosity would be
the more excited, by your endeavours to
conceal yourself. As this might revive
the discourse of an affair, which I could
wish might be buried in an eternal oblivion,
must desire you will defer the
satisfaction you propose to give me, till
we meet at London, to which I wish 
you, and your fair companion, a safe
and pleasant journey. I am, 
“With the greatest tenderness,
My dear sister,
Your affectionate brother,
F. Thoughtless.” 

The receipt of this letter gave an infinity
of contentment to miss Betsy; she
had made the offer of going to take her
leave of him, chiefly with the view of
keeping him from suspecting she wanted
natural affection, and was no less pleased
with his refusing the request she made
him on that account, than she was with his
so readily agreeing to her returning to
London. Miss Flora was equally delighted; 
they sent their footman that instant
to take places in the stage-coach, and early
the next morning set out from a place,
which, on their entering into it, they did
not imagine they should quit, either so
soon, or with so little regret. 