
Relates some passages subsequent to the preceding adventure. 
After the gentlemen had quitted the justice's house, each repair'd to his respective lodging, in order to dress for the remainder of the day; but meeting again at the coffee-house, it was agreed to adjourn from thence to make a morning visit to lady Speck and her fair companions, without mentioning a word of what had happen'd; mr. Lovegrove being desirous that the whole affair should 
be kept a secret from them, unless chance should by any way make a discovery of it to them. 
Those ladies were all this while in a good deal of uneasiness;—the servants who had been sent out for intelligence were all return'd without being able to bring any thing material for the satisfaction of their curiosity;—miss Wingman and Jenny had both of them a very great regard for mr. Lovegrove, the one as having known him a considerable time, and the other as having perceived in him many indications of his being a man truly worthy of esteem. 
But lady Speck had her own reasons for being much more perplex'd than either of them could be;—she had an high esteem for mr. Lovegrove on account of the amiable qualifications he was possess'd of, and the long and respectful court he had made to her;—the caprice of her destiny had made her find something in the person of Celandine which had attracted but too much of the more tender inclinations of her heart; and to think that any danger threatened either of those gentlemen was an extreme trouble to her. 
But what touch'd her yet the more deeply, was the concern she had for her own reputation;—she doubted not but that the quarrel between them was on her score; nor indeed could she well assign any other probable motive for it; especially when she reflected that mr. Lovegrove, on hearing mrs. M&wblank;&wblank; say that Celandine had come to Bath on the invitation of a woman of quality, had given her not only some looks but also several hints, that he entertain'd the most jealous apprehensions that herself was the woman of quality whose favours that fop had so impudently boasted of;—she had good reason therefore to be fearful, that an affair of this nature might occasion her name to be brought in question, and perhaps too, not in the most honourable fashion. 
Suspence is a kind of magnifying glass, which represents whatever ill we dread in its most formidable shape;—this poor lady figur'd to herself a thousand distracting images; and though she spoke but little, gave such visible demonstrations of her inward disorders, as could not but be taken notice of, both by Jenny and miss Wingman. 
As neither of these young ladies as yet had ever harbour'd the least suspicion of her having a particular regard for any man, much less of the sentiments that Celandine had inspired her with, they imagined they had now made a discovery; but it was in favour of mr. Lovegrove, and both of them cried out almost at the same time. —‘How happy would mr. Lovegrove think himself, if he saw how your ladyship is disquieted on his account.’ 
Though lady Speck affected to be a little peevish at their seeming to suppose her capable of having a tenderness for any man; yet she felt as much satisfaction as the present situation of her mind would admit her to enjoy, in finding they mark'd out mr. Lovegrove as the object, and that Celandine was quite out of the question with them on that account. 
‘Indeed, sister, said miss Wingman, it has been always my opinion, and I believe all your friends are of the same, that the person of mr. Lovegrove, his accomplishments, his fortune, and long services, render him not unworthy of your acceptance; and 
I think you need neither be angry nor ashamed that this accident has discover'd your sensibility of his passion.’ 
‘Lord, my dear, how very silly you are, said lady Speck;—no one man has any charms for me above another;—I am only vex'd that men should fall out,—fight,—and kill one another;—and all this too for nothing perhaps, or what is next to nothing,—some idle punctilio of imaginary honour.’ 
Just as she had ended these words the door was suddenly thrown open by a footman, and lord Huntley, sir Robert Manley, and mr. Lovegrove, came altogether into the room. —‘What, ladies,’ cried the latter of these gentlemen, with an air more than ordinarily gay,—‘not yet dress'd?—we came to attend you to the walks, and you are still in your deshabillee.’ 
‘We must have been strangely insensible, replied lady Speck, to have thought of dress when we were told that two of our acquaintance were going to imbrue their hands in each other's blood.’ 
‘Our hands are all clean, I think, madam, said mr. Lovegrove;’—‘But can you add, rejoin'd she hastily, that your heart is also so? —Can you say you did not rise this morning with an intention to destroy, or be destroyed yourself?’ 
Here mr. Lovegrove appearing a little confused, as debating within himself whether it was most proper for him to confess or to deny the fact, lord Huntley immediately took up the word;—‘No, faith, madam, said his lordship with a smile, I dare answer so far for my friend, that he arose not this morning with the least animosity to any thing worthy of his sword.’ 
‘No ambiguities, good my lord, resumed she;—I expect a plain answer to my question;—therefore tell me at once, mr. Lovegrove, how happened your quarrel with Celandine, and which of you was the aggressor? —You find, continued she, perceiving he was still silent, that we are no strangers to the main point; and consequently have a right to expect you should gratify our curiosity with the particulars.’ 
‘It never has been my practice yet, madam, reply'd mr. Lovegrove, after a little pause, to disobey your ladyship in any thing, nor must I now do it in this;—you command me to tell you the motive of my quarrel with Celandine, and I must answer it was on the score of justice and of virtue. —You also ask who was the aggressor; to which I must also answer, that it was Celandine; who by affronting a person lov'd and esteem'd by you, justly merited chastisement, not only from me but from all who have the honour of being acquainted with your ladyship.’ 
‘So then, said Jenny, I find that all this bustle is to be placed on my account;—but I would not have you imagine, mr. Lovegrove, continued she laughing, that you are entitled to any acknowledgments from me, since I am indebted for what you have done entirely to the friendship I am honoured with by lady Speck.’ 
Mr. Lovegrove was about to make some reply, but was prevented by sir Robert Manley, who, approaching her with the most respectful air,—‘Madam, said he, if others had been as early 
acquainted with the persumption of Celandine, the glory of being your champion would certainly not have fallen to the lot of mr. Lovegrove.’ 
‘I am glad then, return'd Jenny, that it happen'd as it did; because otherwise I should have been laid under an obligation which it was not in my power to requite.’ —‘It is of no importance, my dear, interrupted lady Speck, either who is the obliger or the obliged;—I only want to be fully informed in the particulars of this foolish transaction.’ 
On this mr. Lovegrove repeated all that pass'd between himself and Celandine, till their being carried before a magistrate; and would have gone through the whole, but lord Huntley and sir Robert Manley assisted him in the rest, and gave so pleasant a detail of Celandine's behaviour on that occasion as was highly diverting to the ladies. 
But though lady Speck laugh'd as well as her sister and Jenny, and affected to appear equally unconcern'd at what she heard; yet there still remain'd something on her spirits which she could not 
forbear testifying in these or the like terms: 
The little narrative being concluded, ‘—I am very glad, said she, that no worse consequences attended this adventure;—yet I cannot help being a little concern'd, that any thing shou'd happen to occasion my name, or that of miss Jessamy, to be mentioned before a magistrate, and such a mob of people as generally croud in to be witnesses of the decision he gives in cases of this nature.’ 
‘No, madam, reply'd mr. Lovegrove hastily,—I do assure your ladyship that neither of you have any cause to be in pain on that score;—your names were held too sacred to be quoted as the subjects of a quarrel; and it was for this reason I refused to produce Celandine's answer to the billet I sent him,—he having imprudently, I might say impudently too, inserted them in that scrawl.’ 
‘How, cried lady Speck with the utmost impatience in her voice and eyes,—let us see on what pretence the creature presumed to take that liberty?’ 
Though it is more than probable that mr. Lovegrove was far from being displeased at having this opportunity of convincing lady Speck in what manner she had been spoken of by Celandine, yet he suffer'd her to repeat her demand several times over before he comply'd with it; and at last seem'd to do so with an extreme reluctance. 
‘I intended, madam, said he, that no eyes but my own should have been witnesses of the unparallel'd audacity it contains;—but as your ladyship commands I should deliver it to you, I neither can nor dare be disobedient.’ 
With these words he took the letter he had received from Celandine out of his pocket and presented it to her,—adding, at the same time,—‘This, madam, however will serve to prove, that besides the first motive of my resentment to him he subjoin'd another, not less deserving the punishment I design'd.’ 
Her ladyship snatch'd it out of his hand with emotions which it was not in her power to conceal; but having slightly look'd it over to herself grew a good deal more compos'd; and forcing her 
countenance into a half smile,—‘I doubt not, said she,—but what mr. Lovegrove has said of this billet has raised a curiosity in you all for the contents;—I will therefore read it aloud for the advantage of the company.’ 
‘Well, ladies,—cried lord Huntley as soon as she had done,—though you have not the good fortune to have your merits peculiarly distinguish'd by this fine gentleman, you ought not to fall under too great humiliation, for you find he includes your whole sex; and plainly avows he looks upon no woman worthy venturing the tremendous discomposure of his well-tied sword knot.’ 
Here follow'd much merriment among them, which had perhaps continued longer, as they were all persons of wit, and had so ample a field for ridicule; but it was now almost noon, and the ladies were not yet dress'd, for which reason the gentlemen thought proper to withdraw, and leave them to consult their glasses on those charms that Celandine had affected to despise. 
Jenny and miss Wingman thought little of this adventure afterwards; but 
it made a very deep impression on the mind of lady Speck;—the delicacy mr. Lovegrove had shewn in laying the stress of his resentment on the affront Celandine had offer'd to her friend, and not on the jealousy which she plainly saw he had conceived of herself, open'd her eyes to those merits in him to which her partial inclination for the other had made her so long blind; and she now beheld both the men such as they truly were, and not such as her unjudging fancy had lately painted them. 
Ashamed of her past folly she had no consolation but in the care she had always taken to conceal it from the world:—as for mr. Lovegrove, whose good opinion she was now most concern'd to preserve, she resolved to behave towards him for the future in such a manner as should intirely dissipate whatever suspicions he might have entertain'd to her prejudice. 
It was undoubtedly the good genius, or better angel of this lady, which had brought about, however fortuitious they might seem, such a happy concurrence of events as could not fail of awakening in her a just sense of what she owed to 
her character, and that esteem she was naturally so ambitious of maintaining. 
What advantages she received from this change of humour, and the emanations she was at present enlightened with, will hereafter be demonstrated;—in the mean time there are things of a yet more interesting nature which demand the attention of the reader. 
