
Contains much matter for edification, but very little for entertainment. 
The distresses of a beautiful person have a double influence over the heart,—those misfortunes which the dignity of our nature obliges us to commiserate, excite a more kindly warmth, a more interested concern, in proportion to the loveliness of the object we see labouring under them. 
There was something in the air and whole behaviour of this young stranger; which, join'd to the calamity of her present condition, had a kind of magnetic force capable of attracting both respect and compassion in minds less generous and gentle than those of the company she now was with. 
They thank'd her for the pleasure she had given them in the recital of her adventures, and at the same time testify'd the most affectionate concern for the event. 
Each having express'd some part of their sentiments on this occasion, lady Speck drew her sister and Jenny aside, and, after a short whisper between themselves, all return'd again to their seats, and the former addressing herself to their unfortunate guest, spoke in this manner: 
‘We cannot think, madam, said she, of depriving you of a thing which an unforeseen necessity has oblig'd you to expose to sale; but if you please to receive a small contribution in lieu of a purchase, we shall take your acceptance as a favour done to ourselves.’ 
With these words her ladyship put six guineas into her hand, which she took, bow'd and blush'd, though not half so much as Jenny did, who was extremely scandaliz'd at the meanness of the present, though she did not think proper to discover her opinion of it at that time. 
On this mr. Lovegrove, who doubtless had his own reflections,—cried hastily out,—‘Then, ladies, since you will not buy the box I will,—I have a mind to make a present of it to a lady.’ —‘I protest I will not have it, said lady Speck;’—Nor I, rejoin'd miss Wingman;’ 
—‘Nor I, cried Jenny.’ —‘You need not be under this agitation, ladies, reply'd he smiling, for I assure you, it neither was nor is my intention to make an offering of it to any of you.’ 
They all looked a little grave at hearing him speak in this manner, but said nothing, while he counted ten guineas out of his purse and presented to the fair fugitive with one hand, and with the other in the same moment took up the snuff-box, which had all this time lain on a side-board near which he sat;—‘This, madam, said he, is an equivalent I believe.’ 
He then put the box into his pocket with a very serious air, but immediately taking it out again laid it into the lap of the owner;—‘You are the only person, madam, said he, to whom I ought to make this present,—be pleased to accept it as a token of my sincere respect for a lady who at your years can have behaved with so much fortitude and resolution.’ 
All the ladies were highly pleased at the gallant turn he had given to this affair; but the obliged person was so much overwhelm'd with the sense she 
had of such an unexpected act of generosity, that she was able to express her gratitude only in broken and disjointed phrases,—which notwithstanding mr. Lovegrove would not suffer her to go on with; but ask'd her in what manner she now intended to prosecute her journey. 
She reply'd, that as there was no wheel-carriage to be procured in that village, she had thoughts of taking a man and horse to conduct her as far as Reading, where she was informed she might be sure of being better accommodated. 
Though mr. Lovegrove had no other view in this question than merely to turn the discourse, it proved a very fortunate one for the young traveller;—on hearing the answer she made,—‘You need not, said lady Speck, be at the pains or expence of hiring a man and horse, as we have enough of both standing idle;—I doubt not but the woman of the house will readily provide a pillion, and you may ride behind one of my servants.’ 
This offer being too convenient, as well as obliging, not to be joyfully accepted, the lady immediately called for one of her servants and gave him orders 
to do as she had said; adding withal, that when they came to Reading he should use his endeavours to assist the young lady he carried in getting a post-chaise for her to pursue her journey. 
A very little time served for the execution of this command; and after the most becoming retributions on the one side, and sincere good wishes on the other, the fair stranger took her leave of a company among whom she had been so providentially thrown in a time of such distress. 
Jenny, who had her head and heart a good deal taken up with what had passed, followed her down stairs, and making her step into a little room where they could not be overheard, surprised her with these words: 
‘I cannot express, said she, with the greatest sweetness in her voice and looks, how deeply I have been touched with your misfortunes, nor how much ashamed I am of the slender contribution made for their relief;—Lady Speck is very good, and I never was more amazed than to hear her mention so pitiful a sum as two guineas a piece; but as it was agreed to by her sister I 
could not well oppose it without giving offence;—I shall however never be able to remember this affair without blushing if you do not allow me to make up some part of the deficiency.’ 
She accompanied the latter part of this speech with a present of five guineas, which the other shewed a very great unwillingness to accept,—saying she was already overloaded with favours, and what she had received was more than sufficient for all the purposes she wanted; but Jenny told her that she knew not what accidents might happen to a person at such a distance from her friends, and in fine forced her to take it,—then, after giving her a most cordial embrace, left her and return'd to the company, without taking any notice of the occasion of her leaving them. 
She found them animadverting on this adventure, which doubtless had something pretty extraordinary in it;—lady Speck was just saying how lucky a thing it was for the young stranger that she happen'd to come into the same inn where they were. —‘It was so, indeed, madam, reply'd Jenny, and I think no less fortunate for us also, as the sight of her distress has given us an opportunity 
of doing what every one ought to rejoice in having the power to do.’ 
‘Nothing can be more just, madam, than this reflection of yours, said mr. Lovegrove; but I am sorry to have observ'd, that there are too many who have greatly the power without being blest with the will to do the least good office: others again, who though of a more beneficent disposition confine their bounties within the narrow compass of their own acquaintance. —Distress is not distress with them, unless the person who labours under it be known to them, forgetting that all mankind are the one great family, descended originally from the same parents; that every individual is a branch from the same stock, and consequently have a kindred right to the protection of each other. 
‘I was an ear witness not long ago, continued he, of a very severe, as well as genteel reprimand given to a peer of the first rank by a person in great distress, who had petitioned his lordship for relief, and to whom he sent for answer,—That he knew nothing of him, and that he never gave any thing to strangers;—on this the unfortunate person reply'd to him that deliver'd the 
message,—then tell your lord that he will never relieve an angel.’ 
This worthy gentleman would perhaps have farther expatiated on the beauties of a mind extensively benevolent, if he had not been interrupted by Landy, who came up to acquaint them the necessary repairs of the coach were now entirely finish'd;—on hearing this, as there were yet some hours of day-light, they all agreed to go to Maidenhead that night, not only because they were sure of meeting with better accommodation than they had found here, but also for the sake of being so much the farther on their journey. 
Every thing being got ready with all imaginable expedition, they departed from that village, where lady Speck left orders that the servant who had been sent to conduct the young stranger should refresh himself there that night, and follow them early the next morning to Maidenhead. 
