

Lays a foundation for many events to
be produced by time, and waited for
with patience. 
Miss Betsy, and miss Flora, on their
coming home, were in some perplexity
how to relate the story of their Oxford
adventure to lady Mellasin and mr. Goodman; 
and it is very likely they would
have thought proper to have kept it a secret,
if the unlucky duel between mr.
Francis, and the gentleman-commoner,
which they were sensible would be a known
thing, had not rendered the concealment
of the whole utterly impracticable. 
As there was no remedy, miss Flora took
upon her to lay open the matter to her
mamma; which she did with so much artifice,
that if that lady had been as austere,
as she was really the reverse, she could
not have found much to condemn, either
in the conduct of her daughter, or miss
Betsy: as to mr. Goodman, he left the
whole management of the young ladies,
in these particulars, entirely to his wife,
so said little to them on their share of the 
adventure; but was extremely concerned
for the part mr. Francis had in
it, as he supposed it was chiefly owing to
that unlucky incident, that he had taken
a resolution to leave the college; and he
very well knew, that a certain nobleman,
who was a distant relation of his family,
and godfather to mr. Francis, had always
promised to bestow a large benefice,
in his gift, upon him, as soon as he should
have compleated his studies. 
This honest guardian thought he should
be wanting in the duty of the trust reposed
in him, to suffer his charge to throw
away that fine prospect in his view, if by
any means he could prevent him from taking
so rash and inconsiderate a step: and
as to his being expelled, he doubted not,
but, between him and sir Ralph, interest
might be made to the heads of the university,
to get the affair of the duel passed
over. The greatest difficulty he had to
apprehend, in compassing this point, was
from the young gentleman himself, who
he had observed was of a temper somewhat
obstinate, and tenacious of his own opinion:
resolving, however, to try all means
possible, he wrote immediately to him, representing
to him, in the strongest and
most pathetic terms he was master of, the
vast advantages the clergy enjoyed, the 
respect they had from all degrees of people,
and endeavoured to convince him, that
there was no avocation whatever, by which
a younger brother might so easily advance
his fortune, and do honour to his family. 
He also sent a letter to sir Ralph Trusty,
acquainting him with the whole story, and
earnestly requesting, that he would write
to mr. Francis, and omit nothing that
might engage him to desist from doing a
thing so contrary to his interest, and the
intentions of his deceased father, as what
he now had thoughts of doing was manifestly
so. These efforts, by both the guardians,
were often repeated; but without
the least success: the young gentleman
found arguments to oppose against theirs,
which neither of them could deny to have
weight, particularly that of his having no
call to take upon him holy orders. During
these debates, in which miss Betsy gave herself
no manner of concern, she received a letter
from her brother, containing these lines: 

To miss Betsy Thoughtless.
‘My dear sister,
Though I flatter myself all my
letters afford you some sort of satisfaction,
yet by what little judgment
I have been able to form of the temper 
of your sex, have reason to believe,
this I now send will meet a double portion
of welcome from you. It brings
a confirmation of your beauty's power; 
the intelligence of a new conquest; the
offer of a heart, which, if you will trust
a brother's recommendation, is well deserving
your acceptance: but, that I
may not seem to speak in riddles, you
may remember, that the first time I
had the pleasure of entertaining you at
my rooms, a gentleman called Trueworth,
was with us, and that the next day, when
you dined with that person, who afterwards
treated you with such unbecoming
liberties, he made one of the company; 
since then you could not see him, as he
was obliged to go to his seat, which is
about thirty miles off, on an extraordinary
occasion, and returned not till the
day after you left this town. He seemed
more than ordinarily affected, on my
telling him what had happened, on your
account, and after pausing a little, ‘How
unhappy was I,’ said he, ‘to be absent!
had I been here, there would have been
no need for the brother of miss Betsy
to have exposed his life to the sword of
an injurious antagonist, or his character
to the censure of the university. I
would have taken upon myself to have
revenged the quarrel of that amiable 
lady, and either have severely chastised
the insolence of the aggressor, or lost
the best part of my blood in the attempt.’ 
I was very much surprized at
these words, as well as at the emphasis
with which they were delivered; but
recovering myself as soon as I could,
‘We are extremely obliged to you, sir,’ 
said I; ‘but I know not if such a mistaken
generosity, might not have been
fatal to the reputation of us both. What
would the world have said of me to
have been tamely passive, and suffer
another to revenge the affront offered
to my sister? What would they have
thought of her, on finding her honour
vindicated by one who had no concern
in it?’ ‘No concern!’ cried he, with
the utmost eagerness; ‘yes, I have a
concern, more deep, more strong, than
that of father, brother, or all the ties
of blood could give; and that you had
before now have been convinced of, had
I not been so suddenly and so unfortunately
called hence.’ 
‘Perceiving I looked very much confounded,
as well I might, ‘Ah! Frank,’ 
cried he, ‘I love your charming sister:
my friends have, for these six months
past, been teizing me to think of marriage,
and several proposals have been 
made to me on that score; but never,
'till I saw the amiable miss Betsy, did
I behold the face for whom I would
exchange my liberty: in fine, 'tis she,
and only she, can make me blest; and
I returned to Oxford full of the hopes
of an opportunity to lay my heart, my
person, and my fortune at her feet.’ 
‘It would require a volume instead of
a letter, to repeat half the tender and
passionate expressions he uttered in your
favour. What I have already said is
enough to give you a specimen of the
rest. I shall only add, that being impatient
to begin the attack he is determined
to make upon your heart, he is
preparing to follow you to London with
all possible expedition. I once had
thoughts of accompanying him, but
have since thought it proper to have sir
Ralph Trusty's advice in something I
have a mind to do, and for that purpose
shall take a journey into L&wblank;e,
as soon as I receive remittances from mr.
Goodman, to pay off some trifling debts
I have contracted here, and defray my
travelling expences; so that, if things
happen as I wish they may, my friend's
passion will have made a considerable
progress before I see you. 
‘Indeed, my dear sister, if you have
not already seen a man whose person
you like better, you can never have an
offer that promises more felicity: he
left the college soon after I came into
it, beloved and respected by all that
knew him, for his discreet behaviour,
humanity, and affability: he went afterwards
on his travels, and brought home
with him all the accomplishments of the
several countries he had been in, without
being the least tainted with the vices
or fopperies of any of them: he has a
much larger estate than your fortune
could expect, unincumbered with debts,
mortgages, or poor relations: his family
is ancient, and, by the mother's side,
honourable; but, above all, he has sense,
honour, and good nature,—rare qualities!
which, in my opinion, cannot fail of
making him an excellent husband, whenever
he comes to be such. 
‘But I shall leave him to plead his own
cause, and you to follow your inclinations. 
I am, 
‘With the most unfeigned good wishes,
My dear sister,
Your affectionate brother,
And humble servant,
F. Thoughtless. 
‘P.S. Mr. Trueworth knows nothing of
my writing to you in his behalf, so
you are at liberty to receive him as
you shall think proper.’ 

Miss Betsy required no less a cordial
than this, to revive her spirits, pretty
much depressed since her ill usage at Oxford. 
She had not time, however, to indulge
the pleasure of reflecting on this new triumph,
on her first receiving the news of
it. Lady Mellasin had set that evening apart
to make a grand visit to a person of her
acquaintance, who was just married; the
young ladies were to accompany her, and
miss Betsy was in the midst of the hurry
of dressing, when the post brought the
letter, so she only looked it carelessly over,
and locked it in her cabinet till she should
have more leisure for the examination. — 
They were all ready, the coach with the
best hammock-cloth and harnesses was at
the door, and only waited while mrs.
Prinks was drawing on her lady's gloves,
which happened to be a little too strait. 
In this unlucky instant one of the footmen
came running into the parlour, and
told lady Mellasin, that there was a very 
ill-looking woman at the door, who enquired
for her ladyship, said she must
needs speak with her, and that she had a
letter to deliver, which she would give
into nobody's hand but her own. Lady
Mellasin seemed a little angry at the insolence
and folly of the creature, as she
then termed it; but ordered she should be
shewed into the back parlour: they were
not above five minutes together, before
the woman went away, and lady Mellasin
returned to the room where miss Betsy and
miss Flora were waiting for her. A confusion
not to be described sat on every
feature in her face, she looked pale, she
trembled, and having told the young ladies
something had happened, which prevented
her going where she intended, flew
up into her dressing-room, followed by
mrs. Prinks, who appeared very much
alarmed at seeing her ladyship in this
disorder. 
Miss Betsy and miss Flora were also
surprised, and doubtless had their own
conjectures upon this sudden turn. 'Tis
not likely, however, that either of them,
especially miss Betsy, could hit upon the
right; but whatever their thoughts were,
they communicated them not to each other,
and seemed only intent on considering in
what manner they should dispose of themselves 
that evening, it not being proper
they should make the visit above mentioned
without her ladyship. As they were
discoursing on this head, mrs. Prinks came
down, and having ordered the coach to
put up, and sent a footman to call a hack,
ran up stairs again, in a great hurry, to
her lady. 
In less time than could almost be imagined
they both came down; lady Mellasin
had pulled off her rich apparel, and
mobbed herself up in a cloak and hood,
that little of her face, and nothing of her
air, could be distinguished: the two young
ladies stared, and were consounded at this
metamorphosis. “Is your ladyship going
out in that dress,” cried miss Flora; 
but miss Betsy said nothing. “Aye,
child,” replied the lady, somewhat faultering
in her speech, “a poor relation, who
they say is dying, has sent to beg to see
me.” She said no more, the hackneycoach
was come, her ladyship and mrs.
Prinks stepped hastily into it; the latter,
in doing so, telling the coachman, in so
low a voice, as no-body but himself could
hear, to what place he was to drive. 
After they were gone, miss Flora proposed
walking in the park; but miss Betsy
did not happen to be in a humour to go, 
either there or any where else, at that
time, on which the other told her, she
had got the spleen; but said she, “I am
resolved not to be infected with it, so
you must not take it ill if I leave you
alone for a few hours; for I should
think it a sin against common-sense,
to sit moping at home without shewing
myself to any one soul in the world,
after having taken all this pains in
dressing.”  Miss Betsy assured her, as
she might do with a great deal of sincerity,
that she should not be at all displeased
to be entirely free from any company
whatsoever for the whole evening; 
and to prove the truth of what she said,
gave orders that instant to be denied to
whoever should come to visit her. “Well,” 
cried miss Flora, laughing, “I shall give
your compliments, however, where I
am going,” and then mentioned the
names of some persons she had just then
taken into her head to visit. “As you
please for that,” replied miss Betsy,
with the same gay air; “but don't tell
them it is because I am eaten up with
the vapours, that I choose to stay at
home rather than carry my compliments
in person; for if ever I find out,” continued
she, “that you are so mischievous,
I shall contrive some way or other to
be revenged on you.” 

They talked to each other in this pleasant
manner, 'till a chair miss Flora had
sent for was brought into the hall, in
which she seated herself for her intended
ramble, and miss Betsy went into her
chamber, where how she was amused will
presently be shewn. 