

Caroline took advantage of the opportunity
of returning home with her brother
Alfred, when he went to the country
to prepare Clermont-Park for the
reception of Lord Oldborough. And
now she saw her home again with more
than wonted delight. Every thing animate
and inanimate seemed to smile
upon her, every heart rejoiced at her
return, and she enjoyed equally the pleasure
of loving, and of being beloved by
such friends.—She had been amused and
admired during her residence in London,
but a life of dissipation she had always
thought, and now she was convinced
from experience, could never suit her
taste or character. She would immediately
have resumed her former occupations,
if Rosamond would have permitted,

but Rosamond took entire possession
of her at every moment when her
father or mother had not claimed their
prior right to hear and to be heard.
“Caroline, my dear, don't flatter
yourself that you shall be left in peace
... See!—she is sitting down to write a
letter, as if she had not been away from
us these six months ... You must write
to Lady Jane Granville!—Well, finish
your gratitude quickly—and no more
writing, reading, or drawing, this day,
you must think of nothing but talking,
or listening to me.”
Much as she loved talking in general,
Rosamond now so far preferred the pleasure
of hearing, that, with her eyes
fixed on Caroline, her countenance varying
with every variety of Caroline's expression,
she sat perfectly silent all the
time her sister spoke.—And scarcely was
her voice heard, even in exclamation.—But,
during the pauses of narrative, when
the pause lasted more than a minute,
she would say,

“Go on, my dear Caroline, go on.—Tell
us something more.”
The conversation was interrupted by
the sudden entrance of Mr. Temple—and
Rosamond did not immediately find
her fluency of speech increase. Mr.
Temple had seized the first moment
that duty and gratitude to his master
and friend permitted, to hasten to the
Hills, nor had Lord Oldborough been unmindful
of his feelings. Little as his
Lordship was disposed to think of love
affairs, it seems he recollected those of
his secretary, for, the morning after their
arrival at Clermont-Park, when he proffered
his services, Lord Oldborough said,
that he had only to trouble Mr. Temple
to pay a visit for him, if it would not be
disagreeable, to his old friend Mr. Percy.
—“Tell him that I know his first wish
will be to come to show me, that it is
the man, not the minister, for whom he
had a regard. Tell him this proof of
his esteem is unnecessary—he will wish
to see me for another reason—he is a

philosopher—and will have a philosophical
curiosity to discover how I exist
without ambition.—But of that he cannot
yet form a judgment—nor can I.
—Therefore, if he pleases, let his visit
be delayed till next week.—I have some
papers to arrange, which I should wish
to show him, and I cannot have them
sooner in readiness.—If you, Mr Temple,
can contrive to pass this week at
Mr. Percy's, let me not detain you.—There
is no fear,” added he, smiling,
“that in solitude I should be troubled
by the spectre, which haunted the Duke
of Lerma in his retirement.”
Never was man happier than Mr.
Temple, when he found himself in the
midst of the family circle at the Hills,
and seated beside his mistress, free from
all cares, all business, all intrigues of
courtiers, and restraints of office, no
longer in the horrors of attendance and
dependance, but with the promise of a
competent provision for life, with the
consciousness of it's having been honorably

obtained; and, to brighten all, the
hope, the delightful hope, of soon prevailing
on the woman he loved, to become
his for ever.
Alfred Percy had been obliged to return
directly to London, and for once in
his life Mr. Temple profited by the absence
of his friend. In the small house
at the Hills, Alfred's was the only room
that could have been spared for him,
and in this room, scarcely fourteen feet
square, the ex-secretary found himself
lodged more entirely to his satisfaction,
than he had ever been in the sumptuous
apartments of the great. The happy
are not fastidious as to their accommodations,
they never miss the painted
ceiling, or the long arcade, and their
slumbers require no bed of down.—The
lover's only fear was, that this
happy week would pass too swiftly; 
and, indeed, time flew unperceived by
him, and by Rosamond. One fine day,
after dinner, Mrs. Percy proposed, that
instead of sitting longer in the house,

they should have their desert of strawberries
in some pleasant place in the
lawn or wood. Rosamond eagerly seconded
this proposal, and whispered,
“Caroline's bower.”—
Thither they went. This bower of
Caroline's, this favorite spot, Rosamond,
during her sister's absence, had taken
delight in ornamenting, and it did credit
as much to her taste, as to her kindness.
She had opened a view on one side, to a
waterfall among the rocks, on the other,
to a winding path descending through
the glen. Honeysuckle, rose, and eglantine,
near the bower, were in rich
and wild profusion; all these, the song
of birds, and even the smell of the new
mown grass, seemed peculiarly delightful
to Mr. Temple. Of late years, he had
been doomed to close confinement in a
capital city; but all his tastes were rural,
and, as he said, he feared he should expose
himself to the ridicule Dr. Johnson
throws on those, “who talk of sheep and
goats, and who babble of green fields.”

Mr. Percy thought Dr. Johnson was
rather too intolerant of rural description,
and of the praises of a country life, but
acknowledged, that he quite agreed with
him in disliking pastorals—excepting always
that beautiful pastoral, “The Gentle
Shepherd.”—Mr. Percy said, that, in
his opinion, a life purely pastoral must,
if it could be realised, prove as insufferably
tiresome in reality, as it usually is
found to be in fiction. He hated Delias
and shepherdesses, and declared that he
should soon grow tired of any companion,
with whom he had no other occupation
in common but “tending a few
sheep.” There was a vast difference, he
thought, between pastoral and domestic
life. His idea of domestic life comprised
all the varieties of literature, exercise,
and amusement for the faculties, with
the delights of cultivated society.
The conversation turned from pastoral
life and pastorals, to Scotch and English
ballads and songs. Their various merits
of simplicity, pathos, or elegance, were

compared and discussed. After “the
Reliques of Ancient Poetry” had been
sufficiently admired, Rosamond and Caroline
mentioned two modern compositions,
both by the same author, each
exquisite in it's different style of poetry,
one beautiful, the other sublime.
Rosamond's favorite, was “the Exile of
Erin.”—Caroline's “the Mariners of
England!” To justify their tastes, they
repeated the poems. Caroline fixed the
attention of the company on the flag,
which has
“Brav'd a thousand years the battle and the breeze,”
when suddenly her own attention seemed
to be distracted by some object in the
glen below. She endeavored to go on,
but her voice faltered, her color changed.
Rosamond, whose quick eye followed
her sister's, instantly caught a glimpse
of a gentleman coming up the path from
the glen. Rosamond started from her
seat, and clasping her hands, exclaimed,

“It is! It is he!—It is Count Altenberg!”
They had not recovered from their
astonishment, when Count Altenberg
stood before them.—To Mr. Percy, to
Mrs. Percy, to Rosamond, to each he
spoke, before he said one word to Caroline.—But
one look had said all, had
spoken, and had been understood.
That he was not married she was certain—for
that look said he loved her—and
her confidence in his honor was secure.
Whatever had delayed his return,
or had been mysterious in his conduct,
she felt convinced, that he had never
been to blame.—
And on his part did he read as distinctly
the truth in her countenance?—Was
the high color, the radiant pleasure
in that countenance unmarked?—The
joy was so veiled by feminine modesty,
that he doubted, trembled, and if at last
the rapid feelings ended in hope, it was
respectful hope. With deference the

most marked, mingled with dignity,
tenderness, and passion, he approached
Caroline. He was too delicate, too
well-bred, to distress her by distinguishing
her more particularly, but as he
took the seat, which she left for him
beside her mother, the open and serene
expression of her eye, with the soft
sound of her voice, in the few words she
answered to what he said, were enough
to set his heart at ease. The sight of
Mr. Temple had at first alarmed the
Count, but the alarm was only momentary.
One glance at Rosamond reassured
him.
Ideas, which it requires many words to
tell, passed instantaneously with the rapidity
of light.—After they were seated,
some minutes were spent in common-place
questions and answers, such as
those, which Benjamin Franklin would
wisely put all together into one formula,
to satisfy curiosity. Count Altenberg
landed the preceding day, had not stopped
to see any one in England, had not

even heard of Lord Oldborough's resignation; 
had proceeded directly to the
Hills, had left his equipage at a town a
few miles distant—thought he had been
fully master of the well-known road, but,
the approach having been lately changed,
he had missed his way.
This settled, to make room for a more
interesting explanation, Mr. Temple had
the politeness to withdraw. Rosamond
had the humanity, and Caroline the
discretion, to accompany him in his
walk.
Count Altenberg then said, addressing
himself to Mr. Percy, on whose regard
he seemed to have reliance, and to Mrs.
Percy, whom he appeared most anxious
to interest in his favor.
“You certainly, Sir, as a man of penetration,
and a father; you, madam,
as a mother, and as a lady, who must
have been accustomed to the admiration
of our sex, could not avoid seeing, when
I was in this country before, that I felt
the highest admiration, that I had formed

the strongest attachment for your daughter?—Miss
Caroline Percy.”
Mr. and Mrs. Percy both acknowledged,
that they thought Count Altenberg
had shown some preference for Caroline; 
but as he had never declared his
attachment, they had not felt themselves
justified in inferring more from his attentions,
than his general good opinion.
—A change in his manner, which they
observed shortly before they quitted
Hungerford-Castle, had impressed them
with the idea, that he had no such views
as they had once been led to imagine,
and their never having heard any thing
from him since, had confirmed them in
this belief.
“Painful. ... exquisitely painful, as
it was to me,” said Count Altenberg,
“I felt myself bound in honor to leave
you in that error, and at all hazards to
myself, to suffer you to continue under
that persuasion, as I was then, and have
been till within these few days, in dread
of being obliged to fulfil an engagement,

made without my concurrence or knowledge,
and which must for ever have precluded
me from indulging the first wish
of my heart.—The moment, literally the
moment I was at liberty, I hastened
hither, to declare my real sentiments,
and to solicit your permission to address
your daughter.—But before I can expect
that permission, before I can hope
for your approbation of my suit, an approbation,
which I am well aware, must
depend entirely upon your opinion of my
character—I must, to explain whatever
may have appeared unintelligible in my
conduct, be permitted to make you fully
acquainted with the circumstances, in
which I have been placed.
Beginning with the history of his father's
letters and his own, respecting the
projected marriage with the Countess
Christina, he related, nearly as follows,
all that passed, after his having, in obdience
to his father's summons, returned
home.—He found contracts drawn up
and ready for his signature—the friends

of both families apprised of the proposed
alliance, and every thing actually prepared
for his marriage. Remonstrances
with his father were vain.—The old
Count said that it was impossible to
break off the match, that his honor and
the honor of his house was pledged.—But
independently of all promises, he
considered the accomplishment of this
marriage as most desirable and advantageous; 
with all the vehemence of affection,
and all the force of parental authority,
he charged his son to fulfil his
engagements. The old Count was a
fond, but an imperious father; a good,
but an ambitious man. It was his belief,
that love is such a transient passion,
that it is folly to sacrifice to it's indulgence
any of the solid and permanent interests
of life. His experience at courts, and
his observation on the gallantries of young
princes and nobles, had taught him to
believe, that love is not only a transient,
but a variable and capricious feeling,
easily changing it's object, and subsisting

only by novelty. All that his son
said of his attachment to Caroline, of
the certainty of it's permanence, and of
it's being essential to the happiness of
his life, the father heard, but as the
common language of every youth in love.
—He let his son speak without interruption,
but smiled incredulous, and listened
only as to the voice of one in the paroxysm
of a passion, which, however
violent, would necessarily subside.—Between
the fits, he endeavored to control
the fever of his mind, and as a spell
repeated these words,
“Albert! see and hear the young
Countess Christina—but once—I ask no
more.”
Albert, with the respect due to a father,
but with the firmness due to himself,
and with all the courage, which love
only could have given to oppose the
authority and affection of a parent, refused
to ratify the contract that had been
prepared, and declined the proposed interview.—He
doubted not, he said, that

the lady was all his father described,
beautiful, amiable, and of transcendent
talents, he doubted not her power to win
any, but a heart already won. He would
enter into no invidious comparisons, nor
bid defiance to her charms—his own
choice was made, he was sure of his
constancy, and he thought it not only
the most honorable course, but the most
respectful to the Lady Christina, ingenuously
at once, and without having any
interview with her, or her friends, to
state the truth—that the treaty had been
commenced by his father without his
knowledge, and carried on under total
ignorance of an attachment he had formed
in England. The father, after some
expressions of anger and disappointment
was silent, and appeared to acquiesce.
He no longer openly urged the proposed
interview, but he secretly contrived that it
should take place. At a masked ball at
court, Count Albert entered into conversation
with a Minerva, whose majestic
air and figure distinguished her above

her companions, whose language,
thoughts, and sentiments, perfectly sustained
the character which she assumed.
—He was struck with admiration by
her talents, and by a certain elevation of
thought and sentiment, which, in all she
said, seemed the habitual expression of
a real character, not the strained language
of a feigned personage.—She took
off her mask—he was dazzled by her
beauty—They were at this moment
surrounded by numbers of her friends
and of his, who were watching the effect
produced by this interview.—His father,
satisfied by the admiration he saw in
Count Albert's countenance, when they
both took off their masks, approached
and whispered—“The Countess, Christina.”—Count
Altenberg grew pale,
and for a moment stood in silent consternation.
The lady smiled with an
air of haughty superiority, which in
some degree relieved him, by calling his
own pride to his aid, and by convincing
him, that tenderness, or feminine timidity,

which he would have most dreaded to
wound, were not the characteristics of
her mind.—He instantly asked permission
to pay his respects to her at her
father's palace the ensuing day.—-She
changed color—darted a penetrating
glance at the Count, and after an incomprehensible
and quick alternation of
pleasure and pain in her countenance,
she replied, that “she consented to
grant Count Albert Altenberg that interview,
which he and their mutual
friends desired.”—-She then retired with
her friends from the assembly. In spite
of the haughtiness of her demeanor, it
had been obvious, that she had desired to
make an impression upon Count Albert,
and all who knew her agreed, that she
had never on any occasion been seen to
exert herself so much to shine and please.
—-She shone, but had not pleased.—The
father, however, was content; an
interview was promised—he trusted to
the charms and talents of the Countess,
he trusted to her flattering desire to captivate,

and with impatience and confidence
he waited for the event of the succeeding
day.—Some intervening hours,
a night of feverish and agonizing suspense,
would have been spared to Count
Albert, had he at this time known any
thing of an intrigue, an intrigue which
an artful enemy had been carrying on,
with design to mortify, disgrace, and
ruin his house. The plan was worthy
of him by whom it was formed.—M. de
Tourville—a person, between whom
and Count Albert there seemed an
incompatibility of character, and even
of manner; an aversion openly, indiscreetly
shown by the Count, even
from his boyish years, but cautiously
concealed on the part of M. de Tourville,
masked in courtly smiles and a diplomatic
air of perfect consideration. Fear
mixed with M. de Tourville's dislike.
—He was aware, that, if Count Albert
continued in confidence with the hereditary
prince, he would, when the prince
should assume the reins of government.

become, in all probability, his prime minister,
and then adieu to all M. de Tourville's
hopes of rising to favor and fortune.
... Fertile in the resources of intrigue,
political and gallant, he combined them,
upon this occasion, with exquisite address.
When the Countess Christina was
first presented at Court, he had observed,
that the prince was struck by her beauty.
M. de Tourville took every means, that a
courtier well knows how to employ, to
flatter the taste, by which he hoped to
profit. In secret he insinuated into the
lady's ear, that she was admired by the
prince. M. de Tourville knew her to be
of an aspiring character, and rightly
judged, that ambition was her strongest
passion.—When once the hope of captivating
the prince had been suggested to
her, she began to disdain the proposed
alliance with the house of Altenberg; but
she concealed this disdain, till she could
show it with security; she played her
part with all the ability, foresight, and
consummate prudence, of which ambition,

undisturbed by love, is capable.—Many
obstacles opposed her views.—The projected
marriage with Count Albert Altenberg,—the
certainty, that the reigning
prince would never consent to his son's
forming an alliance with the daughter of
a subject.—But the old prince was dying,
and the Lady Christina calculated, that
till his decease she could protract the
time appointed for her marriage with
Count Albert.—The young prince might
then break off the projected match,—prevail
upon the emperor to create her a
princess of the empire, and then, without
derogating from his rank, or giving
offence to German ideas of propriety, he
might gratify his passion, and accomplish
the fullness of her ambition. Determined
to take no counsel but her own, she never
opened her scheme to any of her
friends, but pursued her plan secretly in
concert with M. de Tourville, whom she
considered but as an humble instrument
devoted to her service. He all the while
considering her merely as a puppet,

played by his art to secure at once the
purposes of his interest and hatred. He
thought he foresaw, that Count Albert
would never yield his intended bride
peaceably to his prince; he knew nothing
of the Count's attachment in England,—the
Lady Christina was charming,—the
alliance highly advantageous to the house
of Altenberg, the breaking off such a
marriage, and the disappointment of a
passion, which he thought the young
Countess could not fail to inspire, would,
as M. de Tourville hoped, produce an
irreparable breach between the Prince
and his favorite. On Count Albert's
return from England, symptoms of alarm
and jealousy had appeared in the Prince,
unmarked by all, but by the Countess
Christina, and by the confidant, who
was in the secret of his passion.
So far M. de Tourville's scheme had
prospered, and from the character of the
hereditary Prince, it was likely to succeed
in it's ultimate view. He was a prince of
good dispositions, but wanting in resolution

and civil courage. Capable of resisting
the allurements of pleasure for a
certain time, but soon weary of painful
endurance in any cause; with a taste for
virtue, but destitute of that power to
bear and forbear, without which there
is no virtue.—A hero when supported by
a stronger mind, such as that of his
friend, Count Albert; but relaxing and
sinking at once, when exposed to the influence
of a flatterer, such as M. de
Tourville.—Subject to exquisite shame
and self-reproach, when he had acted
contrary to his own idea of right; yet,
from the very same weakness that made
him err, disposed to be obstinate in error.
M. de Tourville argued well from his
knowledge of his character, that the
Prince, enamored as he was with the
charms of the fair Christina, would not
long be able to resist his passion; and
that, if once he broke through his sense
of honor, and declared that passion to the
destined bride of his friend, he would ever
afterwards shun and detest the man

whom he had injured.—All this M. de
Tourville had admirably well combined,
—no man understood and managed better
the weaknesses of human nature, but it's
strength he could not so well estimate; 
and as for generosity, as he could not
believe in it's sincerity, he was never
prepared for it's effects. The struggles,
which the prince made against his passion,
were greater, and of longer duration, than
M. de Tourville had expected. If Count
Albert had continued absent, the Prince
might have been brought more easily to
betray him; but his return recalled, in the
midst of love and jealousy, the sense of
respect he had for the superior character
of this friend of his early days:—he knew
the value of a friend—even at the moment
he yielded his faith to a flatterer.—He
could not at once forfeit the esteem of the
being who esteemed him most;—he could
not sacrifice the interest, and as he
thought, the happiness, of the man, who
loved him best.—The attachment his favorite
had shown him, his truth, his confiding

openness of temper, the pleasure
in his countenance, when he saw him
first upon his return from England, all
these operated on the heart of the Prince,
and no declaration of his passion had been
made at the time when the appointed
interview took place between Count Albert
and the Countess Christina at her
father's palace. Her friends, not doubting
that her marriage was on the eve of
it's accomplishment, had no scruple, even
in that court of etiquette, in permitting
the affianced lovers to have as private a
conference as each seemed to desire.—The
lady's manner was this morning most
alarmingly gracious. Count Albert was,
however, struck by a difference in her
air, the moment she was alone with him,
from what it had been, whilst in the presence
of her friends. All that he might
without vanity have interpreted as marking
a desire to please, to show him favor,
and to evince her approbation, at
least, of the choice her friends had made
for her, vanished the moment those

friends withdrew. What her motives
might be, Count Altenberg could not
guess, but the hope he now felt, that she
was not really inclined to consider him
with partiality, rendered it more easy to
enter into that explanation, upon which
he was, at all events, resolved. With all
the delicacy due to her sex, with all the
deference due to her character, and all
the softenings by which politeness can
sooth and conciliate pride, he revealed to
the Countess Christina the real state of
his affections; he told her the whole
truth, concluding by repeating the assurance
of his belief, that her charms
and merit would be irresistible to any
heart that was disengaged.
The lady heard him in astonishment,
—for this turn of fate she had been
wholly unprepared, the idea of his being
attached to another had never once presented
itself to her imagination, she
had never calculated on the possibility
that her alliance should be declined by
any individual of a family less than royal.

She possessed, however, pride of character,
superior to her pride of rank, and
strength of mind, suited to the loftiness
of her ambition.—With dignity in her
air and countenance, after a pause of
reflection, she replied,
“Count Albert Altenberg is, I find,
equal to the high character I have heard
of him.—Deserving of my esteem, and
confidence, by that which can alone
command esteem, and merit confidence,
—Sincerity.—His example has recalled
me to my nobler self, and he has, in this
moment, rescued me from the labyrinth
of a diplomatist.—Count Albert's sincerity—I—little
accustomed to imitation—but,
proud to follow even, in what is good
and great,—shall imitate.—Know then,
Sir, that my heart, like your own, is engaged.—And
that you may be convinced
I do not mock your ear with the semblance
of confidence, I shall, at whatever hazard
to myself, trust to you my secret.—My
affections have a high object,—are
fixed upon him, whose friend and favorite

Count Albert Altenberg deservedly is
—I should scorn myself ... no throne
upon Earth could raise me in my own
opinion, if I could deceive or betray the
man, who has treated me with such sincerity.”
Relieved at once by this explanation,
and admiring the manner in which it
was made, mingled joy and admiration
were manifest in his countenance; and the
lady forgave him the joy, in consideration
of the tribute he paid to her superiority.
—Admiration was a tribute he was most
willing to pay at this moment, when released
from that engagement to love,
which it had been impossible for him to
fulfil.
The Countess recalled his attention to
her affairs and to his own—Without his
making any inquiry, she told him all
that had been done, and all that yet remained
to be done, for the accomplishment
of her hopes—She had been assured,
she said, by one now in the favor
and private confidence of the hereditary

Prince, that his inclination for her was,
painfully and with struggles, which, in
her eyes, made his royal heart worthy
her conquest—suppressed by a sense of
honor to his friend.
“This conflict would now cease,” 
Count Albert said, “It should be his
immediate care to relieve his Prince
from all difficulty on his account.”
“By what means?” the Countess
asked.
“Simply by informing him of the
truth—as far as I am concerned—Your
secret, Madam, is safe—your confidence
sacred—Of all that concerns
myself—my own attachment, and the
resignation of any pretensions that might
interfere with his, he shall immediately
be acquainted with the whole truth.”
The Countess colored, and repeating
the words “The whole truth,”—looked
disconcerted, and in great perplexity
replied, Count Albert's speaking to the
Prince directly, his immediate resignation
of his pretensions, would, perhaps,

defeat her plans. This was not the
course she had intended to pursue—far
from that which M. de Tourville had
pointed out—After some moments'
reflection, she said,
“I abide by the truth—-Speak to
the prince—Be it so—I trust to
your honor and discretion, to speak to
him in such terms as not to implicate
me, to commit my delicacy, or to derogate
from my dignity—We shall see then
whether he loves me, as I desire to be
loved—If he does, he will free me, at
once, from all difficulty with my friends,
for he will speak en prince—and not speak
in vain—If he loves me not—I need
not tell you, Sir, that you are equally
free—My friends shall be convinced,
that I will never be the bride of any other
man.”—
After the explanation with the Lady
Christina, Count Albert lost no time; 
he went instantly to the palace. In his
way thither, he was met by one of the
pages, who told him the Prince desired

to see him immediately. He found the
Prince alone—Advancing to meet
him, with great effort in his manner
to command his emotion, the Prince
said,
“I have sent for you, Count Albert,
to give you a proof, that the friendship
of princes is not, in every instance, so
vain a thing as it is commonly believed
to be. Mine for you has withstood
strong temptation—You come from
the Countess Christina, I believe, and
can measure, better than any one, the
force of that temptation—Know, that
in your absence it has been my misfortune,
to become passionately enamored
of your destined bride. But I have
never, either by word or look, directly
or indirectly, infringed on what I felt to
be due to your friendship, and to my own
honor. Never did I give her the slightest
intimation of my passion, never attempted
to take any of the advantages,
which my situation might be supposed
to give.”

Count Albert had just received the
most convincing testimony, corroborating
these assertions—he was going to express
his sense of the conduct of his Prince,
and to explain his own situation, but
the Prince went on speaking, with the
eagerness of one who fears his own resolution,
who has to say something, which
he dreads that he should not be able to
resume or finish, if his feelings should
meet with any interruption.
“And now let me, as your friend and
Prince, congratulate you, Count Albert,
on your happiness; and, with the same
sincerity, I request, that your marriage
may not be delayed, and that you will
take your bride immediately away from
my father's court. Time will, I hope,
render her presence less dangerous; 
time will, I hope, enable me to enjoy
your society in safety; and when it shall
become my duty to govern this state, I
shall hope for the assistance of your
talents and integrity, and shall have

deserved, in some degree, your attachment.”
The Count, in the strongest manner,
expressed his gratitude to his Prince for
these proofs of his regard, given under
circumstances the most trying to the
human heart. He felt, at this instant, exquisite
pleasure in revealing to his Highness
the truth, in showing him, that the
sacrifice he had so honorably, so generously
determined to make, was not
requisite; that their affections were fixed
on different objects; that before Count
Albert had any idea of the Prince's
attachment to the Lady Christina, it had
been his ardent wish, his determination
at all hazards, to break off engagements,
which he could not fulfil.
The Prince was in rapturous joy—all
his ease of manner towards his friend
returned instantly, his affection and confidence
flowed in full tide. Proud of
himself, and happy in the sense of the
imminent danger from which he had

escaped; he now described the late conflicts
his heart had endured, with the
eloquence of self-complacency, and with
that sense of relief, which is felt in speaking
on the most interesting of all subjects
to a faithful friend, from whom a
secret has been painfully concealed—The
Prince now threw open every
thought, every feeling of his mind.
Count Altenberg rose higher than ever
in his favor, not the temporary favorite
of the moment—the companion of pleasures—the
flatterer of present passion or
caprice, but the friend in whom there
is certainty of sympathy, and security
of counsel—The Prince, confiding in
Count Albert's equal zeal and superior
powers, now took advice from him, and
made a confidant no longer of M. de
Tourville. The very means, which that
intriguing courtier had taken to undermine
Count Altenberg, thus eventually
proved the cause of establishing more
firmly his credit—The plain sincerity of
the Count, and the generous magnanimity

of the lady, at once disconcerted
and destroyed the artful plan of the
diplomatist. M. de Tourville's disappointment,
when he heared from the
Countess Christina the result of her interview
with Count Albert, and the reproaches,
which in that moment of vexation
he could not refrain from uttering
against the lady for having departed
from their plan, and having trusted to
the Count, unveiled to her the meanness
of his character, and the baseness of his
designs—She plainly saw, that his object
had been not to assist her love, but to
gratify his own hate—Not merely to
advance his own fortune, that, she
knew, must be the first object of every
courtier, but ‘to rise upon the ruins of
another's fame’—and this, she determined,
should never be accomplished by
her assistance, or with her connivance.
She put Count Albert on his guard
against this insidious enemy.
The Count, grateful to the lady, yet
biassed neither by hope of her future

favor, nor by present desire to please,
firm in honor and loyalty to the Prince
who asked his counsel, carefully studied
the character of the Countess Christina,
to determine whether she possessed the
qualities fit for the high station, to which
love was impatient that she should be
elevated.—When he was convinced, that
her character was such as was requisite
to ensure the private happiness of the
Prince, to excite him to the attainment
of true glory—then, and not till then,
he decidedly advised the marriage, and
zealously offered any assistance in his
power to promote the union. The hereditary
Prince about this time, became,
by the death of his father, sole master
of his actions; but it was not prudent
to begin his government with an act in
open defiance of the prejudices or customs
of his country. By these customs,
he could not marry any woman under
the rank of a Princess, and the Emperor
had been known to refuse conferring

this rank, even on favorites of
powerful potentates, by whom he had
been in the most urgent manner solicited.
Count Albert Altenberg stood
high in the esteem of the Emperor, at
whose cour the had spent some time; and
his Prince now commissioned him to go to
Vienna, and endeavor to move the Emperor,
to concede this point in his favor.
This embassy was a new and terrible
delay to the Count's anxious desire of
returning to England. But he had
offered his services, and he gave them
generously. He repaired to Vienna,
and persevering through many difficulties,
at length succeeded in obtaining for
the Countess the rank of Princess.—The
attachment of the Prince was then
publickly declared—The marriage was
solemnized—All approved of the Prince's
choice—All—except the envious, who
never approve of the happy.—Count
Albert received, both from the Prince
and Princess, the highest marks of esteem

and favor. M. de Tourville, detected
and despised, retired from court
in disgrace and in despair.
Immediately after his marriage, the
Prince declared his intention of appointing
Count Albert Altenberg his prime
minister; but before he entered on the
duties of his office, and the very moment
that he could be spared by his Prince,
he asked and obtained permission to
return to England, to the lady on whom
his affections were fixed. The old
Count, his father, satisfied with the turn
which affairs had taken, and gratified in
his utmost ambition by seeing his son
minister of state, now willingly permitted
him to follow his own inclination in
the choice of a wife. “And,” concluded
Count Albert, “my father rejoices,
that my heart is devoted to an
Englishwoman—Having himself married
an English lady, he knows, from experience,
how to appreciate the domestic
merits of the ladies of England; he is
prepossessed in their favor. He agrees,

indeed, with foreigners of every nation,
who have had opportunities of judging,
and who all allow that—next to their
own countrywomen—the English are
the most charming and the most amiable
women in the world.”—
When the Count had finished and had
pronounced this panegyric of a nation,
while he thought only of an individual,
he paused, anxious to know what effect
his narrative had produced on Mr. and
Mrs. Percy.
He was gratified both by their words
and looks, which gave him full assurance
of their entire satisfaction.
“And since he had done them the
honor of appealing to their opinion, they
might be permitted to add their complete
approbation of every part of his conduct,
in the difficult circumstances in which
he had been placed.—They were fully
sensible of the high honor, that such a
man as Count Altenberg conferred on
their daughter by his preference.—As
to the rest they must refer him to Caroline

herself.” Mr. Percy said, with a
grave voice, but with a smile, from which
the Count augured well, “that even for
the most advantageous, and in his opinion
the most desirable connexion, he
would not influence his daughter's inclinations,
Caroline must decide.”—
Mr. Percy advised, that the appeal to
Caroline should be postponed till the next
morning.—The Count was impatient—but
Mrs. Percy, who knew that her
daughter, though she had commanded
her feelings, had been much agitated by
his unexpected appearance, prevailed
upon him to defer speaking to her till
the succeeding day, that she might have
an opportunity of relating to her all that
they had just heard from the Count; and
thus, she said, no time would be lost in
preparing Caroline to do him justice.—Count
Altenberg could not leave his
cause in better hands. The sun was
now setting, and not presuming to intrude
longer, he retired.
It was remarked by Rosamond, that

he took his way through the winding
path down the glen with slow and reluctant
steps, very different from the
speed, with which an hour before he had
struck across the wood, and ascended the
hill.
“My dear mother! tell us all in one
word!” exclaimed Rosamond—“Joy or
sorrow?”
“Joy, my love!—Happiness, beyond
our hopes!” cried the delighted mother,
opening her arms to receive and embrace
both her daughters.—“Happy mother
that I am!—Happy beyond expression!”
“Deservedly happy, all, and each!” 
cried Mr. Percy, and with the fervent
gratitude of a father's heart, he thanked
God for having blessed him in his family; 
—“And,” added he, with a look of
chastened pleasure, and that sentiment
of true resignation, which always recurred
to his mind in moments of great felicity.
“If there be any future sorrow or calamity
in store for me, I am now prepared,

and resigned to it, grateful for a
long life of happiness, with few, very few
touches of adversity—loss of fortune, with
such children, we have scarcely felt—I
have had no trials—if they are to come,
let them come.—After this moment I
hope I shall be able to endure as I
ought.—
—“And there must be a great
trial for us both—prepared at this moment” 
—said Mrs. Percy—“No joy unmixed
with sorrow—At this moment,
whilst you hold her to your heart ... We
must remember, that Caroline will soon
be no longer amongst us—Rosamond we
shall not lose—But, Caroline!”—
Caroline turned away, and burst into
tears.
“The first tears her mother ever
made her shed”—said Rosamond—“the
very first from childhood to this hour!”
“Listen to me, my Caroline,” said
Mrs. Percy, sitting down beside her on
the bank on which she had sunk—“Listen
to me, my child ...”

“Listen, Caroline!” cried Mr. Percy,
“to your father's stronger voice.”
“And stronger mind”—said Mrs.
Percy, looking up to her husband, then
rising and leaning upon him as he spoke.
“Caroline!—It must be so—It is the
order of nature—We are fond, but not
selfish, parents—If your happiness be
secured by the sacrifice, we can part
with you—And when the time comes—here
is your mother, will bear it better,
perhaps, than I shall—with all my boast
of fortitude—better, certainly,” continued
Mr. Percy, smiling—“better, infinitely,
than Rosamond, who, at this
instant, thinks us all fools, and stands
there, in her secret thoughts convinced,
Caroline, that you will do whatever you
please with Count Altenberg, make him
give up power, prince, country, and
live where and how you choose.”
“That was just what I was thinking,” 
said Rosamond—“And you will see, that
‘What in my secret soul was understood,
His lips shall utter, and his deeds make good’

“Yes, father,” continued Rosamond,
“you will see, that Caroline will make
the Count say and do whatever she
pleases—she will make him sacrifice
power, fortune, country, all for love.”
“No,” said Caroline—“I never
would ask, never would accept of such
sacrifices—he is bound by honor and
duty to his prince and his country, and
if I become his wife, his honor becomes
mine, his duty mine—However great
the sacrifices required, I must be prepared
to make them—or—resolve ...”
To prevent Caroline from dwelling on
the alternative, Rosamond turned quickly
to her father and mother, and requested
to know, if they might hear the result of
their long conference with Count Altenberg—
During the repetition of this narrative,
Rosamond's eagerness of attention and
solicitude were such, that any one ...
any one but Mr. Temple, might have
imagined, it was to the history of her
own lover she was listening—She was

charmed to find her prophecies, as she
said, accomplished; and that the Count
justified all that she had ever believed of
his constancy. Rosamond forgot, and
Caroline never reminded her, that her
belief and her prophecies had varied
considerably, at different times, during
his absence, and had, some days, been
diametrically opposite to what she now
fancied they had ever steadily continued.
Even of late—very lately—in her pity
for poor Lord William—Rosamond,
though she would not now allow it, was
rather inclined to think Lady Jane Granville
in the right, and was disposed to
suspect the absent lover in the wrong—Caroline,
conscious that she had always
done him justice, and rejoiced that she
had not mistaken his sentiments, was
confirmed now by facts in her favorable
opinion of the Count, and her partiality
was heightened by the grateful conviction
of the steadiness and strength of his
attachment.
The next day the Count, with all the

persuasive tenderness and energy of
truth and love, pleaded his own cause,
and was heard by Caroline with a modest,
dignified, ingenuous sensibility,
which increased his passion—Whilst she
acknowledged how high he stood in her
esteem, she did not attempt to conceal
the impression he had made on her
heart; yet he saw the unaffected anguish
she felt at the idea of quitting her
parents, her sister, all her family, friends,
home, country—Saw that she dreaded
to yield her heart to the promises, the
hopes, of the passion, which must, at
last, require from her such sacrifices—Sacrifices
which, had she contemplated in
the commencement of her acquaintauce,
she said, would have prevented her ever
daring to love, but she became attached
before she ever thought of these, before
she had ever considered Count Altenberg
as a man, whom it was probable she
should marry—The very circumstance
of his being a foreigner, a traveller, with
whom it was likely she would have but a

transient acquaintance, had thrown her
heart off it's guard; and when she was
first wakened to the perception of her
own partiality, it was in circumstances,
when there seemed little chance of his
even wishing to separate her from her
friends—As long as the hope of being
united to him was faint and distant, so
was the fear of the sacrifices that union
might demand—but now, the hope, the
fear, the certainty, at once pressed on
her heart with the most agitating urgency.
The Count soothed, and as far as
possible, relieved her mind, by the
assurance, that though his duty to his
Prince and to his father, though all his
public and private connexions and interests
obliged him to reside for some
time in Germany, yet that he could
occasionally visit England, that he should
seize every opportunity of returning to
a country, that he preferred to all others; 
and, for his own sake, he should cultivate
the friendship of her family, as

each individual was, in different ways,
suited to his taste, and stood high in his
esteem. He might hope, that he had
obtained a portion of their regard, and
that, with the strong inducements Caroline
could hold out to them, they
would be prevailed upon, in their turn,
to visit the Continent, so that, though
separated by distance, she would not be
lost to her family; and, perhaps, she
might, upon the whole, enjoy more of
the society of her friends, though at
longer intervals of time, than married
daughters often do, who live in the same
country with their parents.
Caroline listened with fond anxiety to
these hopes; she was willing to believe
in promises, which she was convinced
were made with entire sincerity; but
she dreaded, that Count Altenberg's
situation and duties, as a statesman and
a minister, would render it impossible
that they should be fulfilled.—And a
life at court, a life of representation, to

say no worse of it ... would be to her
most irksome.”
Nothing but the extraordinary merit,
joined to the extraordinary powers of
pleasing, which Count Altenberg possessed,
nothing in short but love, ...
which appeared more reasonable, and
became stronger the more it was combated,
could have vanquished these objections,
and have prevailed with Caroline
to make these sacrifices—However,
when her affections had been wrought
to this point, when her resolution was
once determined, she never afterwards
tormented the man, to whom she was
attached, with wavering doubts and
scruples; but, disdaining affectation and
caprice, what she gave was doubly
given, from being graciously bestowed; 
and the value of what she sacrificed
was doubly felt—from the dignity and
unostentatious generosity, with which
that sacrifice was made.—Count Altenberg's
promise to his Prince obliged

him to return by an appointed time; 
Caroline wished that time had been
more distant; she would have delighted
in spending the spring time of love in
the midst of those who had formed till
now all the happiness of her life, with
her parents, to whom she owed every
thing, to whom her gratitude was as
warm, as strong, as her affection—with her
beloved sister, who had sympathized so
tenderly in all her sorrow, and who
ardently wished to have some time allowed
to enjoy her happiness.—Caroline
felt all this, but she felt too deeply
to display feeling,—sensible of what the
duty and honor of Count Altenberg demanded,
she made no hesitation,—asked
for no delay.—
The first letters, that were written to
announce her intended marriage, were to
Mrs. Hungerford, and to Lady Jane
Granville—And it may be recorded as
a fact rather unusual, that Caroline was
so fortunate as to satisfy all her friends; 
not to offend one of her relations, by

telling any too soon, or too late, of her
intentions. In fact she made no secret,
no mystery, where none was required by
good sense or propriety. Nor did she
communicate under a strict injunction of
secresy to twenty friends, who were
afterwards each to be angry with the
other for having, or not having told that
of which they were forbidden to speak.—The
order of precedency in Caroline's
confidential communications was approved
by all the parties concerned.
Mrs. Hungerford was at Pembroke,
with her nieces, when she received Caroline's
letter; her answer was as follows,
“MY DEAR CHILD,
I am ten years younger since I
read your letter, therefore do not be surprised
at the quickness of my motions—I
shall be with you at the Hills, in
Town, or wherever you are, as soon as it
is possible, after you let me know when
and where I can embrace you and our
dear Count.—At the marriage of my

niece, Lady Mary Barclay, your mother
will remember, that I prayed to Heaven
I might live to see my beloved Caroline
united to the man of her choice—I am
grateful that this blessing, this completion
of all my earthly hopes and happiness,
has been granted to me,
M. Elizabeth Hungerford.”
The answer of Lady Jane Granville
came next,—
“Confidential.”
“This is the last confidential letter I
shall ever be able to write to you—for a
married woman's letters you know, or
you will soon know, become, like all the
rest of her property, subject to her husband.
Excepting always the secrets of
which she was possessed before marriage,
which do not go into the common stock,
if she be a woman of honor—So I am
safe with you, Caroline; and any erroneous
opinion I might have formed, or any
hasty expressions I may have let drop,

about a certain Count, you will bury in
oblivion, and never let me see you look
even, as if you recollected to have heard
them.
“You were right, my dear, in that
whole business; I was wrong, and all I
can say for myself is, that I was wrong,
with the best possible intentions; I now
congratulate you with as sincere joy, as
if this charming match had been made
by my advice, under my chaperonage,
and by favor of that patronage of fashion,
of which I know your father thinks that
both my head and heart are full—There
he is only half right after all—So do not
let him be too proud—I will not allow
that my heart is ever wrong, certainly
not where you are concerned.
“I am impatient, my dear Caroline,
to see your Count Altenberg. I heard
him most highly spoken of yesterday by
a Polish nobleman, whom I met at dinner
at the Duke of Greenwich's. Is it
true, that the Count is to be prime
minister of the Prince of&wblank;? The

Duke of Greenwich asked me this question,
and I promised I would let his
Grace know from the best possible authority—But
I did not commit you.
“And now, my dear, for my own interest—If
you have really and cordially
forgiven me, for having so rashly said,
upon a late occasion, that I would never
forgive you, prove to me your placability
and your sincerity—use your all powerful
influence, to obtain for me a favor, on
which I have set my heart. Will you
prevail on all your house to come up to
Town directly, and take possession of
mine?—Count Altenberg, you say, has
business to transact with ministers; whilst
this is going on, and whilst the lawyers
are settling preliminaries, where can you
all be better than with me? I hope I
shall be able to make Mr. and Mrs.
Percy feel as much at home, in one hour's
time, as I found myself the first evening
after my arrival at the Hills some years
ago.
“I know the Hungerfords will press

you to go to them, and Alfred and Mrs.
A. Percy, will plead nearest of kin—I can
only throw myself upon your generosity.
The more inducements you have to go to
other friends, the more I shall feel gratified
and obliged, if you favor me with
this proof, of your preference and affection.
Indulge me perhaps, my dear Caroline,
for the last time, with your company,
of which, believe me, I have, though
a woman of the world, sense and feeling
sufficient, fully to appreciate the value—Yours
(at all events), ever and affectionately,
J. Granville.”
Cavendish Square—Tuesday.
“P.S.—I hope your father is of my
opinion, that weddings, especially among
persons of a certain rank of life, ought
always to be public,—attended by the
friends and connexions of the families,
and conducted with something of the
good old aristocratic formality, pomp,
and state of former times.—

“Lady Frances Arlington has just
called to say, she has a vast mind to be
bridemaid—I told her Ladyship that
I could settle nothing till you came to
Town,—Pray come—and immediately.—

Lady Jane Granville's polite and
urgent request was granted. Caroline
and all her family had pleasure in showing
Lady Jane, that they felt grateful
for her kindness.—
Mr. Temple obtained permission from
Lord Oldborough, to accompany the
Percys to Town; and it was settled, that
Rosamond and Caroline should be married
on the same day.
But the morning after their arrival in
London Mr. Temple appeared with a
countenance very unlike that, which had
been seen the night before—Hope and
joy had fled!—All pale and in consternation!—Rosamond
was ready to die
with terror—She was relieved when
he declared, that the evil related only to

his fortune. The place that had been
promised to him was given, indeed—the
word of promise was kept to the ear, but
by some management, either of Lord
Skreene's or Lord Skrimpshire's, the place
had been saddled with a pension to the
widow of the gentleman, by whom it had
been previously held; and the amount of
this pension was such, as to reduce the
profits of the place to an annual income,
by no means sufficient to secure independence,
or even competence, to a married
man—Mr. Temple knew, that, when
the facts were stated to Lord Oldborough,
his Lordship would, by his representations
to the highest authority, obtain
redress; but the secretary was unwilling
to implicate him in this disagreeable
affair, unwilling to trouble his tranquillity
again with court intrigues, especially, as
Mr. Temple said, where his own personal
interest alone was concerned—at
any rate this business must delay his
marriage.—Count Altenberg could not
possibly defer the day named for his

wedding—Despatches from the Continent
pressed the absolute necessity of
his return. Revolutionary symptoms had
again appeared in the city, his Prince
could not dispense with his services. His
honor was at stake.—
Mr. Temple did not attempt or pretend
to bear his disappointment like a
philosopher—he bore it like a lover, that
is to say, very ill—Rosamond!—poor
Rosamond, rallied him with as much
gayety, as she could command with a
very heavy heart.
After a little time for reflection Rosamond's
good sense, which, when called
upon to act, never failed to guide her
conduct, induced her to exert decisive
influence, to prevent Mr. Temple from
breaking out into violent complaints
against those in power, by whom he
had been ill treated.
The idea of being married on the
same day with her sister, she said, after
all was a mere childish fancy, for
which no solid advantage should be

hazarded; therefore she conjured Mr.
Temple, not in heat of passion to precipitate
things, but patiently to wait;—to
return and apply to Lord Oldborough,
if he should find, that the representations
he had already made to Lord
Skreene failed of effect—With much reluctance
Mr. Temple submitted to postpone
the day promised for his marriage,
but both Mr. and Mrs. Percy so strongly
supported Rosamond's arguments, that
he was compelled to be prudent—Rosamond
now thought only of her sister's
approaching nuptials. Mrs. Hungerford
and Mrs. Mortimer arrived in
Town, and all Mr. and Mrs. Percy's
troops of friends gathered round them
for this joyful occasion.
Lady Jane Granville was peculiarly
happy, in finding that Mr. Percy agreed
with her in opinion, that marriages
ought to be publickly solemnized; and
rejoiced, that, when Caroline should be
led to the altar by the man of her
choice, she would feel that choice sanctioned

by the approbation of her assembled
family and friends—Lady Jane
justly observed, that it was advantageous
to mark as strongly as possible the
difference between marriages with consent
of friends, and clandestine unions,
which from their very nature must always
be as private as possible.—
If some little love of show, and
some aristocratic pride of family, mixed
with Lady Jane's good sense upon this as
upon most other occasions, the truly
philosophic will be inclined to pardon
her;—for they best know how much
of all the principles, which form the
strength and happiness of society, depends
upon mixed motives.
Mr. and Mrs. Percy, grateful to
Lady Jane, and willing to indulge her
affection in it's own way, gratified her
with permission to arrange the whole
ceremonial of the wedding.—
Now that Rosamond's marriage was
postponed, she claimed first right to be
her sister's bridemaid, Lady Florence

Pembroke, Mrs. Hungeford's niece, had
made her request, and obtained Caroline's
promise to be the second—and
these were all that Caroline desired to
have—but Lady Jane Granville evidently
wished for the honor and glory of Lady
Frances Arlington for a third, because
she was niece to the Duke of Greenwich; 
and besides, as Lady Jane pleaded,
“Though a little selfish, she really
would have been generous, if she had not
been spoiled—to be sure, she cared in
general for no one but herself, ... yet
she absolutely showed particular interest
about Caroline—Besides, her Ladyship
had set her heart upon the matter, and
never would forgive a disappointment
of a fancy.”—-Her Ladyship's request
was granted.—Further than this
affair of the three bridemaids we know
not—there is no record concerning who
were the bridemen—But before we
come to the wedding day, we think it
necessary to mention, for the satisfaction
of the prudent part of the world, that

the settlements were duly signed, sealed,
and delivered, in the presence of proper
witnesses.
At the moment of recording this fact,
we are well aware, that as much as
we shall gain in the esteem of the old,
we shall lose in the opinion of the
young. We must therefore be satisfied
with the nod of approbation from parents,
and must endure the smile of
scorn from lovers. We know that,
“Jointure, portion, gold, estate,
Houses, householdstuff, or land,
The low conveniences of fate,
Are greek no lovers understand”.