

“Who would prize the tainted posies,
 Which on ev'ry breast are worn?
Who could pluck the spotless roses,
 From their never touched thorn?”
The feeling expressed in these lines
will be acknowledged by every man of
sense and delicacy. “No such man
ever prized a heart much hacknied in
the ways of love.”—It was with exquisite
pain, that Count Altenberg had
heard all that had been said of Caroline—he
did not give credit to half the insinuations; 
he despised those who made
them, he knew that some of the ladies
spoke from envy, others from the mere
love of scandal, but still, altogether, an
impression unfavorable to Caroline, or
rather unfavorable to his passion for
Caroline, was left on his mind.—The
idea that she had been suspected, the

certainty that she had been talked of,
that she had even been named as one
who had coquetted with many admirers—the
notion that she had been in love—passionately
in love—all this took
from the freshness, the virgin modesty,
the dignity, the charm, with which she
had appeared to his imagination, and
without which she could not have
touched his heart.—A heart not to be
easily won—a heart how unlikely to be
won by such a woman as Miss Georgiana
Falconer.
In his own country, at the court
where he resided, in the different parts
of the continent which he had visited,
Germany, Poland, Swisserland, France,
he had seen women celebrated for beauty
and for wit, many of the most polished
manners, many of the highest accomplishments,
some of exquisite sensibility,
a few with genuine simplicity of character,
but in all there had been something,
which had prevented his wishing
to make any one of them the companion

of his life. In some there was a want of
good temper, in others of good sense; 
there was some false taste for admiration
or for notoriety—some love of pleasure,
or some love of sway, inconsistent with
his idea of the perfection of the female
character, incompatible with his plans
of life, and with his notions of love and
happiness.
Ardent and of strong affections, which
had not yet met with their proper objects,
his mind had turned from love to
ambition—not to intrigues for his own
aggrandizement, not to the petty politics
of a court—his was a glorious, generous
ambition, the desire to serve his
country by noble means, to be a statesman
in the largest sense of the word.
So far Commissioner Falconer was right.
Count Altenberg's ruling passion was
ambition—was at the time the Commissioner
first saw him. But another,
a softer passion, had since been awakened.
It was reserved for Count Altenberg, to

meet in England ... in England, where
education, institution, opinion, manners,
the habits of society, and of domestic
life, happily combine to give the just
proportion of all that is attractive, useful,
ornamental, and amiable, to the female
character. ... It was reserved for
Count Altenberg, to meet in England a
woman, who to the noble simplicity of
character, that was once the charm of
Swisserland, joined the polish, the elegance,
that was once the pride of France; 
a woman possessing an enlarged, cultivated,
embellished understanding, capable
of comprehending all his views as a
politician, and a statesman; yet without
the slightest wish for power, or any
desire to interfere in public business, or
political intrigue.—Graced with knowledge
and taste for literature and science,
capable of being extended to the highest
point of excellence, yet free from all pedantry,
or pretension—with wit, conversational
talents, and love of good society,
without that desire of exhibition, that

devouring, diseased appetite for admiration,
which preys upon the mind insatiably
to it's torture, to it's destruction; 
without that undefinable, untranslateable
French love of succès de sociélé, which
substitutes a precarious, factitious, intoxicated
existence in public, for the safe
self-approbation, the sober, the permanent
happiness of domestic life.—It
was reserved for Count Altenberg, to
meet in England with a woman of sensibility,
exquisite, generous as any German
romance could conceive, yet without
exaggeration in expression, or extravagance
in conduct, repressed, regulated,
treasured for the happiness of him
who could merit such a heart.—It was
reserved for Count Altenberg, to find
in England a woman, raised by “divine
philosophy ,” far above all illiberal
prejudice, but preserving a just and
becoming sense of religion, unobtrusive,
mild, and yet firm.—It was reserved

for Count Altenberg, to find in England
one, who appeared all that his warmest imagination
had pictured, all that his sober
judgment approved, and that his fondest
wishes could desire in a wife. Every
thing that he had seen of Caroline had
confirmed his first hope, and exalted his
future expectation—but, by what he had
just heard, his imagination was checked
in full career, suddenly, and painfully.
His heavenly dream was disturbed by
earthly voices—voices of malignant spirits—mysterious—indistinct—yet
alarming
to all his hopes.—He had not conceived
it possible, that the breath of
blame could approach such a character
as Caroline's—he was struck with surprise,
and shocked on hearing her name
profaned by common scandal, attributed
to different lovers, the victim of a disappointed
passion, and the scorn of one of
the most distinguished families in England.—Such
were the first painful
thoughts and feelings of Count Altenberg.—At
the time he heard the whispers,

which gave rise to them, he had
been actually planning a letter to his
father, declaring his attachment to Caroline—he
now resolved not to write.
But he determined to satisfy himself as
to the truth or falsehood of these reports
or insinuations. He was not a man to give
ear lightly to calumny—he detested it's
baseness; he would not suffer himself for a
moment to brood over suspicion, nor yet
would he allow himself for present ease and
pleasure, to gloss over, without examination,
that which might afterwards recur
to his mind, and might create future unjust
or unhappy jealousy. Either the
object of his hopes was worthy of him, or
not—if not worthy, better tear her from
his heart before she had further hold of
it—if worthy, the sooner all doubts could
be removed the better. This determined
him to go immediately to Mrs. Hungerford's—her
son had been named as the
person, to whom Caroline had been attached—at
Hungerford-Castle she had,
it was said, seen Mr. Barclay, and Sir

James Harcourt, with whom she had
been accused of coquetting. Count Altenberg
trusted to his own address and
penetration for discovering all he wished
to know, without betraying any peculiar
interest in the subject.
The first sight of Mrs. Hungerford,
the gracious dignity of her appearance
and manners, the first five minutes’ conversation
he had with her, decided him
in the opinion, that common report had
done her justice; and raised in his mind
extreme anxiety to know her opinion of
Caroline.—But, though he began the
history of Zara, and of the play at Falconer-Court,
for the express purpose of
introducing the Percys, in speaking of
the company who had been present, yet,
conscious of some unusual emotion when
he was going to pronounce that name,
and fancying some meaning in Mrs.
Hungerford's great attention as he spoke,
he mentioned almost every other guest,
even the most insignificant, without
speaking of Caroline, or of any of her

family.—He went back to his friend
Colonel Hungerford. Mrs. Hungerford
opened a letter-case, and took from it
the last letter she had received from her
son since he left England, containing
some interesting particulars, which she
thought his friend might like to see.—Towards
the conclusion of the letter, the
writing changed to a small feminine hand—and
all India vanished from the view
of Count Altenberg, for, as he turned
the page, he saw the name of Caroline
Percy— “I suppose I ought to stop
here—” said he, offering the letter to
Mrs. Hungerford;— “No,”—she replied,
“the whole letter was at his service,
they were only a few lines from her
daughter Lady Elizabeth.”
These few lines mentioned Caroline
Percy among the dear and intimate
friends whom she regretted most in Europe,
and to whom she sent a message
expressive of the warmest affection and
esteem.—Count Altenberg felt his heart
lightened, and a glow of joy instantly

diffused itself over his whole frame. As
far as related to Colonel Hungerford, he
was sure that all he had heard was false.
There was little probability that his wife
should, if those circumstances were true,
be Caroline's most intimate friend.—Before
these thoughts had well arranged
themselves in his head, a pleasing,
sprightly young lady came into the
room, who he at first thought was Mrs.
Hungerford's daughter; but she was too
young to answer exactly the description
of Mrs. Mortimer.
“Lady Mary Pembroke, my niece,”—said
Mrs. Hungerford—
Her Ladyship was followed by Mr.
Barclay—Count Altenberg seemed in
a fair way to have all his doubts satisfied.—But,
in the hurry of his mind, he
had almost forgot to ask for Mrs. Mortimer.
“You will not see her to day,” said
Mrs. Hungerford, “she is gone to see
some friends, who live at a distance too
great for a morning visit.—But I hope,”

continued Mrs. Hungerford, turning to
Lady Mary, “that my daughter will
make me amends for losing a day of her
company, by bringing me our dear Caroline
to morrow.”
“Is there a chance of Caroline's coming
to us?” cried Lady Mary, with affectionate
eagerness.
“Is there any hope of our seeing Miss
Caroline Percy?” said Mr. Barclay, with
an air of respectful regard, very different
from what must have been the feelings
of a man who had trifled with a woman,
or who had thought that she had trifled
with him.
Count Altenberg rejoiced, that he had
come without a moment's delay to Hungerford-Castle.
“You are really a good creature, my
dear,” continued Mrs. Hungerford to
Lady Mary, “for being so anxious to
have Caroline here—many a niece might
be jealous of my affection, for certainly
I love her as well as if she were my own
child.—To morrow, Sir,” said she,

turning to Count Altenberg, “I hope
I shall have the pleasure to introduce
you to this young friend of ours, I shall
feel proud to show her to a foreigner,
whom I wish to prepossess in favor of
my countrywomen.”
The Count said, that he had already
the honor of being introduced to Miss
Caroline Percy—that he had seen her
frequently at Falconer-Court, and at her
own home—and that he was not surprised
at the interest, which she excited
at Hungerford-Castle.—Count Altenberg
showed the interest she had excited
in his own mind, whilst he pronounced,
in the most sober manner in
his power, those few words.
Mrs. Hungerford perceived it, nor had
it escaped her observation, that he had
forborne to mention the name of Percy,
when enumerating the persons he had
met at Falconer-Court. She was both
too well bred in general, and too discreet
on Caroline's account, to take any notice
of this circumstance.—She passed

immediately and easily to a different
subject of conversation.
The next day Mrs. Mortimer returned
with Caroline.—The Count saw the affection
with which she was embraced
by Mrs. Hungerford. The family had
crowded to the door of the antichamber
to receive her, so that Caroline, encompassed
with friends, could not immediately
see Count Altenberg, and he enjoyed
these moments so exquisitely, that
the idea which had previously engrossed
all his soul, anxiety to see how she
would look on meeting him thus unexpectedly,
was absolutely forgotten. When
the crowd opened, and Mrs. Hungerford
led her forward, a smile of frank surprise
and pleasure appeared on her countenance
upon seeing Count Altenberg, but
her color had been previously so much
raised, and so much pleasure had sparkled
in her eyes, that there was no judging
what share of emotion was to be attributed
to this surprise. He was, and he
had reason to be satisfied with perceiving,

that in the midst of the first pleasure
of meeting intimate friends, and
when she did not expect to meet any
but friends, she was not chilled or disappointed
by the sight of one who was, to
her, as yet but a new acquaintance.—
After introducing Count Altenberg to
Mrs. Mortimer, Mrs. Hungerford said,
“Till I had my daughter and all my
friends in full force about me, I prudently
did not make any attempt, Count
Altenberg, upon your liberty, but now,
that you see my resources, I trust you
will surrender yourself, without difficulty,
my prisoner, as long as we can
possibly detain you in this castle.”
Never was man less disposed to refuse
an invitation, than Count Altenberg at
this moment.—He wrote to Mrs. Falconer
immediately that farewell note
which had shocked Miss Georgiana Falconer
so much.
As Lord Oldborough was preparing
to return to town, and likely to be engrossed
by ministerial business, his Lordship,

with less reluctance, relinquished
his company, and the Count, with infinite
satisfaction, found himself established
at once upon a footing of intimacy
at Hungerford-Castle. The letter
he had intended to write to his father
was now written and sent; but it was
expressed in yet stronger terms than he
had originally designed—he concluded,
by conjuring his father, as he valued the
happiness of his son, not to take a step in
any of the treaties of marriage that had
been planned for him, and besought him
to write as soon as it was possible to relieve
his mind from suspense, and to set
him at liberty to declare his attachment,
if, upon further acquaintance with the
English lady who had touched his heart,
he should feel any hope of making such
an impression on her affections, as could
induce her to make for him the great sacrifice
of country—family—and friends.—And
such a country—such a family—and
such friends!—In the mean
time, the hours and days passed on most

happily at Hungerford-Castle. Every
succeeding day discovered to him some
new excellence in the object of his affection.
Mrs. Hungerford, with judicious,
delicate kindness, forbore all attempts
to display even those qualities
and talents in Caroline, which she most
loved and admired, certain that she
might safely leave them to the discernment
of her lover. That Count Altenberg
loved, Mrs. Hungerford had too
much penetration to doubt; and it rejoiced
her heart, and satisfied all her
hopes, to see a prospect of her young
friend's being united to such a man.
Mrs. Mortimer felt as much joy and as
much delicacy upon the subject as her
mother showed; for they loved Caroline,
and were as anxious for her happiness,
as if she had been their own sister or
daughter, and felt almost as much scruple
of praising or seeming to bring her forward
upon any occasion. The grateful
esteem of Mr. Barclay, now free from
every feeling of passion, appearing, indeed

undiminished even in the height
of a passion for her friend; the perfect
confidence and affection evinced by the
warm-hearted Lady Mary Pembroke for
Caroline, all united and conspired to one
and the same end: that which could not
have been prepared or produced by any
art or address, however consummate, was
now the effect of plain truth, and the reward
of real merit. Count Altenberg,
in common with every man of sense and
knowledge of the world, knew that it is
in her own family, in domestic life, he
should judge of a woman's real disposition
and temper—and that from the
manner of her friends towards her he
can form an estimate of the past, and,
consequently, the best augury of the future.
In that near examination in domestic
life, so dangerous to many women of the
highest pretensions, Caroline shone superior.
His love approved by the whole
strength of his reason, and exalted by
the natural enthusiasm of his temper,

was now at the highest. His impatience
was extreme for the arrival of that answer
to his letter, which he hoped would
set him at liberty to declare his passion.
The letter at last arrived; very different
were it's contents from what he had
hoped. A previous letter from his father
to him, sent in a packet with government
despatches by Mr. Cunningham
Falconer, had not reached him.—That
letter, of which his father now sent
him a copy, contained an account of
the steps which had been taken, relative
to a treaty of marriage between his son
and the Countess Christina, a lady of
high birth, beauty, and talents, who had
lately appeared for the first time at that
court.—Count Altenberg's father described
the Countess as one who, he
was sure, must charm his son—and as
the alliance was eagerly desired by the
lady's friends, and the alliance in every
respect honorable for his whole family,
the old Count was impatient to have the
affair concluded. Receiving no answer

to this letter, and pressed by circumstances,
he had gone forward in his son's
name with the treaty, and had pledged
him so far, that there was now, he declared,
no possibility of retracting with
honor. He lamented that his son should,
in the mean time, have taken a fancy to
an English lady; but, as Count Albert's
last letter gave the assurance to his family,
that he would not take any decisive
step till he should receive an answer,
nothing could have been done in
England, that would commit his honor—absence
would soon efface a transient
impression—the advantages of the alliance
proposed in his own country would
appear stronger, the more they should be
examined.—The charms of the Countess
Christina, with her superior understanding,
would have an irresistible effect—and,
concluded the old Count, “I beseech
you, my dear Albert, as your
friend—I will say more—I command
you as your father, return to your own

country as soon as you can obtain passports
after receiving this letter.”—
In consequence of this letter, a sudden
change appeared in Count Altenberg—he
was grave and absent;—instead of seeking
Caroline's company and conversation as
usual, he studiously avoided her, and when
he did speak to her, his behaviour was
so cold and reserved—so unlike his natural
or his former manner, that the difference
struck not only Caroline herself, but
Rosamond and Mrs. Percy, who were, at
this time, at Hungerford-Castle.—It happened
that, on the very day, and nearly
at the very hour, when Count Altenberg
received this letter from his father, of
which letter no one knew any thing but
himself, there arrived at Hungerford-Castle
another of Mrs. Hungerford's nieces,
a young lady of uncommon beauty, and
of the most attractive and elegant manners,
Lady Florence Pembroke.—She was
just returned from Italy with an uncle,
who had resided there for some time.

Count Altenberg, from the moment he
was introduced to Lady Florence, devoted
to her his whole attention—he
sat beside her,—whenever he conversed,
his conversation was addressed to
her; and the evident absence of mind he
occasionally betrayed, and all the change
in his manner seemed to have been caused
by her Ladyship's appearance. Some
sage philosophers know little more of
cause and effect, than that the one immediately
precedes the other; no wonder
then that Rosamond, not famous for the
accuracy of her reasoning, should, in
this instance, be misled by appearances.—To
support her character for prudence,
Rosamond determined not to seem to observe
what passed, and not to mention
her suspicions to her sister; who, as she
remarked, was sensible of the Count's altered
manner; and who, as she rightly
conjectured, did not perceive it with indifference.—The
accomplishments, good
sense, and exalted sentiments of Count

Altenberg had made an unusual impression
on the mind of Caroline. She felt
for him the first delightful sensations of
love. His dignified manners, and that
delicacy, which real merit always possesses,
banished every fear of presumption
on his part, and allowed her opportunity
to see the development of his character,
and to compare it with her own ideas of
excellence. He had paid her few compliments,
fewer than she had often received
from gentlemen, who meant nothing
by their flattery; yet he had professed
high admiration and esteem, and
his attentions to her, unknown to himself,
had passed the bounds of mere politeness,
and the trifling appearance of
common gallantry;—He had never declared
his love, but involuntarily it had
betrayed itself on several occasions. Insensibly
Caroline was thus led to feel for
him more than she dared to avow even to
herself, when the sudden change in his
manner awakened her from this delightful

forgetfulness of every object that was
unconnected with her new feelings, and
suddenly arrested her steps as she seemed
entering the paradise of love and hope.—
At night, when they were retiring to
rest, and Caroline and Rosamond were in
their mother's room, Rosamond, unable
longer to keep her prudent silence, gave
vent to her indignation against Count
Altenberg in general reflections against
the fickleness of man. Even men of the
best understanding were, she said, but
children of a larger growth—pleased with
change—preferring always the newest to
the fairest, or the best.—Caroline did not
accede to these accusations.
Rosamond, astonished and provoked,
exclaimed,
“Is it possible that you are so blind,
as not to see that Count Altenberg ...” 
... Rosamond stopped short, for
she saw Caroline's color change.—She
stood beside her mother motionless, and
with her eyes fixed on the ground.—Rosamond
moved a chair towards her.—

“Dearest mother! beloved sister,” 
cried Caroline, “I have reason, too
much reason, to blush—and you will
blush for me.”
“What can be the matter?” cried Rosamond,
much alarmed.— “How she
trembles! I never saw Caroline so much
agitated before.”
“Sit down, my dear love,” said her
mother, tenderly taking Caroline's hand,
“sit down and compose yourself.—I am
sure you cannot have done any thing ...
nor ever will ... that can give us cause
to blush.”
“That I am certain of,”—said Rosamond,
“as certain as that I am alive.”
“Do not, pray! do not be so secure,
your confidence in me abashes me still
more,” said Caroline, hiding her face, as
she leaned on her mother's shoulder.— “My
dear mother, you required one,
and but one promise from me,—I gave it
you, firmly intending to keep it ... and
yet I fear ... that you will think I have
broken it.—I promised to tell you whenever

I felt the first symptom of preference
for any person.—I did not know my own
mind till this day.—Indeed I thought I
felt nothing but what every body else expressed,
esteem and admiration.”
“In common minds,” replied Mrs.
Percy, “esteem and admiration may be
far, very far, safely distant, from love; 
but in such a mind as yours, Caroline,
the step from perfect esteem to love is
dangerously near—scarcely perceptible.”
“Why dangerously?” cried Rosamond,— “Why
should not perfect love
follow perfect esteem? that is the very
thing I desire for Caroline. Count Altenberg
is all that we could wish for her,
and ...”
“Stop,” cried Caroline, “Oh, my dear
sister; as you wish me to be good and
happy, name him to me no more—for it
cannot be.”—
“Why?” exclaimed Rosamond, with
a look of astonishment and dismay— “Why
cannot it be? It can, it must—it
shall be.”—

Caroline sighed, and turning from her
sister, as if she dreaded to listen to her,
she repeated,— “No;—I will not flatter
myself—I see that it cannot be—I have
observed the change in his manner.—The
pain it gave me first awakened me to
the state of my own affections.—I have
given you some proof of sincerity by
speaking thus immediately of the impression
made on my mind, by making this
avowal at the moment when I was convinced
that hope was vain.—You will acknowledge
the effort was difficult, the
confession humiliating.—Mother, will
you answer me one question ... a question,
which I am afraid to ask ... did
you, or do you think that any body else
perceived my sentiments by my manner?—Caroline
paused, and her mother and
sister set her heart at ease on that point.”
“After all,” said Rosamond, addressing
herself to her mother, “I may be
mistaken in what I hinted about Count
Altenberg.—I own I thought the change
in his manner arose from ... Lady

Florence Pembroke. ... I am sorry I
said any thing of it. ... I dare say when
he sees more of her ... she is very pretty,
very pleasing, very elegant, and amiable
no doubt, but surely, in comparison
with Caroline. ...”
“Oh, do not make any such comparison,
my dear sister, do you think I
would put myself in competition with
Mrs. Hungerford's niece?”—said Caroline.
“I am not certain,” said Rosamond,
“that there is any rivalship in the case.”
“I am certain that there shall be
none,” said Caroline,— “Envy or jealousy
shall never contaminate my mind.—The
best, the noblest, the most delightful
feelings of the heart, may lead to the
meanest, the most odious.—I have, within
a few hours, felt enough to be aware
of this.—I will leave nothing to chance.—A
woman should never expose herself
to any hazard.—I will preserve my peace
of mind, my own esteem.—I will preserve

my dear and excellent friends,—and
that I may preserve some of them,
I am sensible that I must now quit
them.”—
Mrs. Percy was going to speak, but
Rosamond interposed.
“Oh what have I done!” exclaimed
she,— “Imprudent creature that I was,
why did I speak? why did I open your
eyes, Caroline? I had resolved not to
say a single word of the change I perceived
in the Count.”
“And did you think I should not
perceive it?” said Caroline. “Oh, you
little know how quickly ... the first
look ... the first tone of his voice ...
But of that I will think no more—Only,
let me assure you, that you my dear
Rosamond did no harm—It was not what
any body said that alarmed me,—Before
you pointed it out, I had felt that change
in his manner, for which I cannot account.”
“You cannot account?—Can you

doubt that Lady Florence is the cause?” 
said Rosamond.
“Yes, I have great doubts,” said Caroline.
“So have I,”—said Mrs. Percy.
“I cannot believe that a man of his
sense and character would be so suddenly
captivated—I do not mean to detract
from Lady Florence's merits, but
before they could make the impression
you suspect on Count Altenberg, there
must have been time for them to be
known and appreciated—shall I go
on, and tell you all that has passed in
my mind?—Yes, my mother and sister
should see me as I am—perhaps under
the delusion of vanity ... or self love ...
or ... But if I am wrong, you will set
me right ... you will help me to set myself
right—It has never been declared in
words, therefore perhaps I am vain, and
presumptuous, to believe or to imagine—yet
I do feel persuaded, that I am preferred—that
I am ...”
“Loved, Oh, yes,” said Rosamond,
“a thousand times I have thought so, I

have felt certain, that Count Altenberg
loved you, but now I am convinced,
alas! of my mistake—convinced at least
that his love is of that light, changeable
sort, which is not worth having—not
worth your having.”
“That last,” cried Caroline— “I
can never believe,”—She stopped,
and blushed deeply— “What does my
mother say?” added she, in a timid
voice.
“My mother I am sure thought once
that he loved Caroline? Did not you
mother?” said Rosamond.
“Yes, my dear,” answered Mrs. Percy,
“I have thought so—And I am not yet
convinced, that we were mistaken,—but
I entirely agree with Caroline, that this
is a subject, upon which we ought not
to let our thoughts dwell—upon which
she in particular ought not in propriety,
in prudence, to allow herself to think.—Till
a man declares his love, there must
ever be danger and impropriety in a
woman's believing in his attachment.”—

“Oh, so I have thought, so I have
said on former occasions, how often, how
sincerely!” said Caroline— “But this is
the first time I ever felt it difficult to
practise what I know to be wise and
right—Hope!—Sweet deceiver!—No—Vain
deceiver—I will not, since I ought
not to listen to you—Mother, I beg it
as a favor, that you will take me away
from this place ... this place, where
but yesterday, I thought myself so
happy.” ...
“But why, Caroline, why mother,
should she do this,” expostulated Rosamond— “If
she thinks, if you think that
he loves her, if you do not believe that
he has changed, if you do not believe
that he is struck with a new face, why
should Caroline go?—For Heaven's sake,
do not take her away, till you are sure,
that it is necessary.”
“I will be guided by her opinion,” 
said Mrs. Percy, “I can depend entirely
on her own prudence.”
“Indeed, I think it will be most prudent,

that I should not indulge myself in
staying longer,” said Caroline— “From
what I have seen of Count Altenberg,
we have reason to think, that he acts in
general from wise and good motives. We
should therefore believe, that in the present
instance his motives are good and
adequate—I cannot suspect that he acts
from caprice—What the nature of the
obstacle may be, I can only guess—But
I am inclined to think, that some opposing
duty” ...
“His duty,” said Rosamond, “I suppose
he must have known before to day.—What
new duty can he have discovered—No,
no; men are not so very apt
in love matters to think of opposing
duties, as women do—Much more likely,
that he has heard something to your disadvantage,
Caroline, from the Falconers.
I can tell you, that Lady Frances Arlington
gave me a hint, that strange
things had been said, and great pains
taken to misrepresent you to the Count.”
“If injurious representations have

been made of me to him,” replied
Caroline, “he will in time discover the
falsehood of such report; or, if he believe
them without examination, he is
not what I imagine him to be—No—I
am convinced he has too noble a mind,
too just an understanding, to be misled
by calumny.”—
Mrs. Percy declared she was decidedly
of this opinion. “The obstacle,
whatever it may be, my dear mother,” 
continued Caroline, with the earnest tone
and expression of countenance of a person
of strong mind, at once feeling and
thinking deeply— “The difficulty, whatever
it is, must be either such as time
will obviate or increase; the obstacle
must be either conquerable or unconquerable; 
if he love me, as I thought he
did, if he have the energy of character I
think he possesses, he will conquer it, if
it can be conquered—if it be unconquerable,
what misery, what madness, to
suffer my affections to be irrevocably
engaged! or what base vanity to wish, if

it were in my power, to inspire him with
an unhappy passion!—Then, in every
point of view, Mother, surely it is best,
that I should leave this ... dangerous
place,” said Caroline, smiling.— “Yet
you are both so happy here, I am sorry
to be the cause.”
“My Love,” said her mother, “to us
all things are trifles, compared with what
it is right and becoming that you should
do. I entirely approve and applaud
your prudence and resolution—what you
desire shall be done, as soon as possible.
We will go home to morrow morning.”
“But, my dear Ma'am! so suddenly!
consider,” cried Rosamond, “how very
strange this will appear to Mrs. Hungerford,
and to every body!”—
“My dear Rosamond, these are some
of the small difficulties, the false delicacies,
which so often prevent people from
doing what is right, or what is essentially
necessary for the security of the peace
and happiness of their whole lives,” said
Mrs. Percy.

“That is true,” replied Rosamond,
“and I do not object to doing the thing,
but I only wish we had some good decent
excuse for running away—You don't expect
that Mrs. Hungerford will part with
you without remonstrance, without struggle,
without even inquiring, why you
must run away?—I am sure I hope she
will not ask me, for I am not prepared
with an answer—and my face would
never do, and would give way at the first
glance of her penetrating eye—What
will you say to Mrs. Hungerford?”
“The truth,”—replied Caroline,— “Mrs.
Hungerford has ever treated me
with so much kindness, has shown me so
much affection and esteem, feels such a
warm interest in all that concerns me,
and is herself of so noble a character,
that she commands my entire confidence—And
she shall have it without reserve.
Since my mother agrees with me in
thinking, that Lady Florence has not
been in any degree the cause of the
change of manner we have observed,

there can be no impropriety on that
account in our speaking of the subject
to Mrs. Hungerford—My honor is as
safe I am convinced in her hands, as in
my mother's ... as to the rest, it may be
painful, humiliating ... but what is
meant by confidence, by openness towards
our friends? We are all of us
ready enough to confess our virtues,” 
said she, smiling ... “but our weaknesses,
what humbles our pride to acknowledge,
we are apt to find some delicate
reason for keeping secret. Mother,
if you do not disapprove of it, I wish
you to tell Mrs. Hungerford the whole
truth.”
“Mrs. Percy entirely approved of
Caroline's placing confidence in this excellent
friend.”—She observed, “that
this was very different from the girlish
gossipping sort of confidences, which are
made often from one young lady to another,
merely from the want of something
to say, or the pleasure of prattling about
love, or the hope of being encouraged by

some weak young friend, to indulge some
foolish passion.”
The next morning, before Mrs. Hungerford
had left her apartment, Mrs.
Percy went to her, and explained the reasons,
which induced Caroline to refuse
herself the pleasure of prolonging her
visit at Hungerford Castle.
Mrs. Hungerford was touched by the
confidence, which Caroline placed in
her; “believe me,” said she— “it is
not misplaced—I feel all it's value—And
must I lose her? I never parted with
her without regret, and that regret increases
the more I see of her. I almost
forget that she is not my own, till I am
called upon to relinquish her: but much
as I value her, much as I enjoy her
society, I cannot be so selfish, as to
wish to detain her, when her peace of
mind is at stake. How few, how very
few are there, of all the various young
women I know, who would have the
good sense and resolution, I will say it,
the integrity of mind, to act as she does!

—There is usually some sentimental
casuistry, some cowardly fear, or lingering
hope, that prevents young people in
these circumstances from doing the plain
right thing—Any thing but the plain
right thing they are ready to do—and
there is always some delicate reason for
not telling the truth, especially to their
friends—But our daughters, Mrs. Percy,
are above these things.”—With respect
to Count Altenberg, Mrs. Hungerford
said, that, from many observations she
had made, she felt no doubt of his being
strongly attached to Caroline.— “Their
characters, their understandings, are
suited to each other; they have the same
high views, the same magnanimity—With
one exception ... you must allow
a mother's partiality, to make an exception
in favor of her own son,—with one
exception, Count Altenberg is the man
of all others, to whom I could wish to see
Caroline united—I never till yesterday
doubted that it would be—But I was as
much struck with the change in his

manner, as you have been.—I agree
with Caroline, that some obstacle, probably
of duty, has arisen—and I hope ...
But no, I will imitate her example, and
as you tell me she forbids herself to
hope, so will I—if possible.—At all
events she raises herself, high as she was
in my esteem, still higher by her present
conduct. Tell her so, my dear Mrs.
Percy—you, her mother, may give this
praise, without hurting her delicacy.
And tell her, that, old as I am, I have
not forgotten so completely the feelings
of my youth, as not to be aware, that
suspense in some situations is the worst
of evils.—She may be assured, that my
attention shall be as much awake, as
even her mother's could be—And when
any thing that I think important or
decisive occurs, she shall hear from me
immediately, or see me, unless I should
lose the use of my limbs, or my faculties—Or
unless my heart should totally
change in one day—which she will not
readily believe to be possible.”—

A messenger came to summon Mrs.
Hungerford to breakfast—Soon afterwards
a ride was proposed by Mrs. Mortimer.
Count Altenberg was to be one of
this party, and he looked for a moment
surprised and disappointed, when he
found that Caroline was not going with
them—But he forbore to ask, why she
did not ride, and endeavored to occupy
himself solely in helping Mrs. Mortimer
to mount her horse—Rosamond was glad
to perceive, that he did not well know
what he was doing.
Before they returned from their ride,
the Percys were on their way to the
Hills.—Till this moment the sight of
home, even after a short absence, had, on
returning to it, always been delightful to
Caroline; but now, for the first time in
her life, she was not sensible to this delight; 
every object seemed to have lost
it's brightness. In the stillness of retirement,
which she used to love, she felt
something sad and lifeless. The favorite
glade, which formerly she thought the

very spot so beautifully described by
Dryden, as the scene of his “Lady in the
bower;” even this she found had lost
it's charm. New to love, Caroline was
not till now aware, that it throws a radiance
upon every object, which, when
passed away, seems to leave all nature
changed.
To banish recollections, which she
knew that she ought not to indulge, she
employed herself unremittingly. But
her mind did not turn with it's wonted
energy to her occupations, nor was it
acted upon by those small motives of
ordinary life, by which it had formerly
been excited. When reading, her
thoughts would wander even from her
favorite authors: Every subject they
discussed would remind her of some conversation
that had passed at Hungerford
Castle; some coincidence or difference
of opinion would lead her to digress; 
some observation more just or more
striking; some better expression, or
some expression which pleased her better

than the author's, would occur, and
the book was laid down. These digressions
of fancy were yet more frequent,
when she was endeavoring to fix her attention
to drawing, needle-work, or to any
other sedentary employment. Exercise
she found useful.—She spent more time
than usual in planting and in gardening.—A
simple remedy.—But practical
philosophy frequently finds those remedies
the simplest and the best, which
Providence has put within the reach
of all.
One morning, soon after her return
home, when she was alone and busy in
her garden, she heard voices at a distance; 
as they approached nearer, she
thought she distinguished Mrs. Hungerford's.
She listened, and looked towards
the path whence the voices had come.—All
was silent—but, a minute afterwards,
she saw Mrs. Hungerford
coming through the narrow path in the
thicket; Caroline at first sprang forward
to meet her—Then stopped short, her

heart beating violently—she thought
that, perhaps, Mrs. Hungerford was accompanied
by Count Altenberg; but
Mrs. Hungerford was alone. Ashamed
of the hope which had glanced across
her mind, and of the sudden stop which
had betrayed her thoughts, Caroline
now went forward, blushing, yet with
ingenuous dignity.
Mrs. Hungerford embraced her with
tenderness, and then assuming a cheerful
tone—
“Your mother and sister wanted to
persuade me,” said she, “that I should
never find my way to you—but I insisted
upon it that I could.—Had I not the instinct
for a true friend to guide me?—So
now let me sit down and rest myself on
this pretty seat,—a very comfortable
throne!—and that is saying much for a
throne.—So these are your territories?” 
continued Mrs. Hungerford, looking
round, and talking with an air of playfulness,
to give Caroline time to recover
herself.

“Why did you never invite me to your
garden?—Perhaps, you think me a mere
fire-side, arm-chair old woman, dead to
all the beauties of nature; but, I can
assure you, that I have, all my life, from
principle, cultivated this taste, which I
think peculiarly suited to women, salutary
not only to their health, but to their
happiness and their virtues—their domestic
virtues increasing the interest
they take in their homes, heightening
those feelings of associated pleasure,
which extend from persons to places, and
which are at once a proof of the strength
of early attachments, and a security for
their continuance to the latest period of
life. Our friend, Count Altenberg, was
observing to me the other day, that we
Englishwomen, among our other advantages,
from our modes of life, from our
spending so many months of the year
in the country, have more opportunity
of forming and indulging these
tastes, than is usual among foreign ladies
in the same rank of life.—Fortunately

for us, we are not like Mr. Clay's
French Countess, or Duchess, who
declared, that she hated innocent pleasures.”
After mentioning French Clay, Mrs.
Hungerford passed to a comparison between
him and Count Altenberg.—She
had met Mr. Clay in town, and disliked
him.— “He is an Englishman only by
birth, and a Frenchman only by affectation.—Count
Altenberg, on the contrary,
a foreigner by birth, has all the
tastes and principles that make him
worthy to be an Englishman. I am
convinced that, if he had liberty of
choice, he would prefer residing in England
to living in any country in the
world.—Indeed, he expressed that sentiment
at parting from us yesterday.”—
“At parting!”—said Caroline— “He
is gone then.”
“He is, my Love.”—
Caroline wished to ask where?—and
whether he was gone for ever?—yet she

continued silent—and became extremely
pale.
Mrs. Hungerford, without taking any
notice of her emotion, continued, and
answered all the questions which Caroline
wished to ask.
“He is gone back to Germany to his
own court—recalled, as he told me, by
some imperious duty.”—
Caroline revived.—
“So far you see,” my dear, “we were
right, as those usually are, who judge
from general principles.—It was not indeed
to be credited,” continued Mrs.
Hungerford, “that a man of his character
and understanding should act merely
from caprice.—What the nature of the
duty may be, whether relating to his
duty as a public or a private man, he
did not explain.—The latter I fear.—I
apprehend some attachment or engagement,
that will prevent his return to
England.—In this case he has done most
honorably, at whatever risk or pain to

himself, to avoid any attempt to engage
your affections,” my dear.— “And you
have, in these trying circumstances,
acted as becomes your sex and yourself.”—
“I hope so,” said Caroline, timidly— “my
mother, and Rosamond endeavored
to reassure me on one point ... You
have seen more since, and must therefore
be better able to judge ... Count
Altenberg has none of that presumption
of manner, which puts a woman upon
her guard against his inferences.—But,
in secret, do you think he ever suspected ...?”
“I cannot, my love, tell what passes
in the secret recesses of man's heart
... much more difficult to penetrate
than woman's,” replied Mrs. Hungerford,
smiling.— “But let this satisfy
you,—by no word, hint, or look, could I
ever guess, that he had formed such a
suspicion ... Suspicion, I will not call
it ... such a hope.—Of your whole
family he spoke in terms of the highest

regard.—Of you he dared not
trust himself to say much—but the
little he did venture to say was expressive
of the highest respect and esteem,—more
he did not, and ought
not, I am convinced, to have allowed
himself.”—
“I am satisfied—quite satisfied,” said
Caroline, relieving her heart by a deep
sigh,— “and, I thank you, my kind
Mrs. Hungerford.—You have put this
subject at rest for ever in my mind.—If
Count Altenberg can love me with
honor, he will—If he cannot, Heaven
forbid! I should wish it.”
From this time forward, Caroline
never spoke more upon the subject,
never mentioned the name of Count
Altenberg.—She exerted all the strong
command she possessed over herself, to
conquer the languor and indolence, to
which she had found herself disposed.
It is a difficult task to restore what
may be called the tone of the mind; to
recover the power of being acted upon

by common and every day motives,
after sensibility has been unusually excited.
Where the affections have been
deeply and long engaged, this is a
task, which the most severe philosophy
cannot accomplish, without the
aid of Time—and of that superior
power, which it would be irreverent here
to name.
By using no concealment with her
friends, by permitting no self-delusion,
by having the courage to confess the first
symptom of partiality of which she was
conscious, Caroline prevented all danger,
and put it out of her own power, to
nourish a preference into a passion,
which must ultimately have made herself
and her friends unhappy. Beside
the advantages which she derived from
her literary tastes, and her habits of
varying her occupations, she, at this
time, found great resources in her warm
and affectionate attachment to her own
family.—
She had never yet arrived at that state

of egoism, which marks the height of
passion, when all interests and affections
sink and vanish before one exclusive and
tyrant sentiment.—