

There are people who can go on
very smoothly with those whose principles
and characters they despise and dislike.— 
There are people who, provided
they live in company, are happy, and care
but little of what the company is composed.
But our young hero certainly
was not one of these contemptibly contented
people. He was perhaps too much
in the other extreme. He could not,
without overt words, or looks of indignation,
endure the presence of those whose
characters or principles he despised—he
could not even, without manifest symptoms
of restlessness or ennui, submit long
to live with mere companions; he required

to have friends; nor could he
make a friend from ordinary materials,
however smooth the grain, or however
fine the polish they might take. Even
when the gay world at Castle Hermitage
was new to him, amused and enchanted
as he was at first with that brilliant
society, he could not have been
content or happy without his friends at
Vicar's Vale, to whom, once at least in the
four and twenty hours, he found it necessary
to open his heart. We may then
judge how happy he now felt in returning
to Annaly: after the sort of moral constraint
which he had endured in the company
of Marcus O'Shane, we may guess
what an expansion of heart took place.— 
A phlegmatic observer might have
thought, that the young man was absolutely
in love with Lady Annaly: indeed
she had the power of making her company
peculiarly agreeable to youth.— 
Quite content herself to be elderly, she
sympathized with all the feelings of the

young; so that, as Ormond said of her,— 
“She enjoyed many of the pleasures
attendant upon early life with all the
privileges of age.”
The family union and domestic happiness,
which he saw at Annaly, certainly
struck him at this time more forcibly,
from the contrast with what he had just
seen at Castle Hermitage. The effect of
contrast, however, is but transient. It is
powerful as a dramatic resource, but in
real life it is of no permanent consequence.
There was here a charm which
operates with as great certainty, and with
a power secure of increasing instead of
diminishing from habit. The charm of
domestic politeness, in the every day manners
of this mother, son, and daughter,
towards each other, as well as towards
their guests. Ormond saw and felt it irresistibly.
He saw the most delicate attentions
combined with entire sincerity,
perfect ease, and constant respect; the
result of the early habits of good breeding

acting upon the feelings of genuine affection.
The external polish, which Ormond
now admired, was very different from
that varnish, which often is hastily applied
to hide imperfections. This polish was of
the substance itself, to be obtained only
by long use; but, once acquired, lasting
for ever: not only beautiful but
serviceable, preserving from the injuries
of time, and from the dangers of familiarity.
What influence the sister's charms
might have to increase Ormond's admiration
of the brother, we shall not presume
to determine; but certainly he
liked Sir Herbert Annaly better than
any young man he had ever seen.
Sir Herbert was some years older than
Ormond; he was in his twenty-seventh
year: but at this age he had done more
good in life, than many men ever accomplished
during their whole existence.— 
Sir Herbert's principal estates were in
another part of Ireland.—Dr. Cambray

had visited them. The account he gave
Ormond of all that had been done there
to improve the people and to make them
happy; of the prosperous state of the
peasantry; their industry and independance; 
their grateful, not servile attachment
to Sir Herbert Annaly and his
mother; the veneration in which the
name of Annaly was held; delighted the
enthusiastic Ormond.
The name of Annaly was growing
wonderfully dear to him; and, all of a
sudden, the interest he felt in the details
of a country gentleman's life were amazingly
increased. At times, when the ladies
were engaged, he accompanied Sir Herbert
in visiting his estate.—He had
never till lately resided at Annaly, which
had, within but a short time, reverted to
his possession, in consequence of the
death of the person to whom it had been
let. Sir Herbert found much that wanted
improvement in the land, and more in the
people.

This estate stretched along the seashore— 
the tenants whom he found living
near the coast were an idle, profligate,
desperate set of people; who, during the
time of the late middle landlord, had
been in the habit of making their rents by
nefarious practices. The best of the
set were merely idle fishermen, whose
habits of trusting to their luck incapacitated
them from industry—the others
were illicit distillers—smugglers—and
miscreants who lived by waifs and strays; 
in short, by the pillage of vessels on the
coast. The coast was dangerous,— 
there happened frequent shipwrecks; 
owing partly, as was supposed, to the
false lights hung out by these people,
whose interest it was that vessels should
be wrecked. Shocked at these practices,
Sir Herbert Annaly had, from the moment
he came into possession of the
estate, exerted himself to put a stop
to them, and to punish where he could
not reform the offenders.—The people

at first pleaded a sort of tenant's
right, which they thought a landlord
could scarcely resist. They protested
that they could not make the rent, if
they were not allowed to make it their
own way; and shewed, beyond a doubt,
that Sir Herbert could not get half as
much for his land in those parts, if he
looked too scrupulously into the means
by which it was made. They brought,
in corroboration of their arguments or
assertions, the example and constant
practice of “many as good a jantleman
as any in Ireland, who had his
rent made up for him that ways, very
ready and punctual. There was his
honour, Mr. Such-a-one, and so on; and
there was Sir Ulick O'Shane, sure! Oh!
he was the man to live under—he was
the man that knew when to wink
and when to blink; and if he shut his
eyes properly, sure his tenants filled his
fist.—Oh! Sir Ulick was the great man
for favour and purtection, none like him

at all!—He is the good landlord, that will
fight the way clear for his own tenants
through thick and thin—none dare touch
them.—Oh! Sir Ulick's the kind jantleman
that understands the law for the
poor, and could bring them off at
every turn, and show them the way
through the holes in an act of parliament,
asy as through a riddle! Oh, and
if he could but afford to be half as
good as his promises, Sir Ulick O'Shane
would be too good entirely!”
Now Sir Ulick O'Shane had purchased
a tract of ground adjoining to
Sir Herbert's, on this coast; and he
had bought it on the speculation, that
he could set it at very high rent to
these people, of whose ways and means
of paying it he chose to remain in
ignorance. All the tenants whom Sir
Herbert banished from his estate flocked
to Sir Ulick's.
By the sacrifice of his own immediate
interest, and by great personal

exertion, strict justice, a generous and
well secured system of reward, Sir
Herbert already had produced a considerable
change for the better in the
morals and habits of the people. He
was employing some of his tenants on
the coast, in building a light-house, for
which he had a grant from parliament; 
and he was endeavouring to establish
a manufacture of sail cloth, for which
there was sufficient demand. But
almost at every step of his progress,
he was impeded by the effects of the
bad example of his neighbours on Sir
Ulick's estates, and by the continual
quarrels between the idle, discarded
tenants, and their industrious and now
prospering successors.
Whenever a vessel in distress was
seen off the coast, there was a constant
struggle between the two parties who
had opposite interests; the one to save,
the other to destroy. In this state of
things, causes of complaint perpetually

occurred; and Ormond, who was present,
when the accusers and the accused
appealed to their landlord, sometimes
as lord of the manor, sometimes
as magistrate, had frequent opportunities
of seeing both Sir Herbert's principles
and temper put to the test.— 
Ormond's interest in the whole was increased
by the share his guardian, or
his guardian's tenantry, had in the business.
Besides this, his attention was
wakened to these subjects, for he
might hereafter be a country gentleman; 
and, in similar situations, called
upon to judge and to act for himself.— 
He liked to compare the different
modes in which king Corny, his guardian,
and Sir Herbert Annaly managed
these things.—Sir Herbert governed
neither by threats, punishments, abuse,
nor tyranny; nor yet did he govern
by promises nor bribery, favour and
protection, like Sir Ulick.—He neither
cajoled nor bullied—neither held it as

a principle, as Marcus did, that the
people must be kept down, nor that the
people must be deceived.—He treated
them neither as slaves, subject to his
will; nor as dupes, or objects on which
to exercise his wit or his cunning.— 
He treated them as reasonable beings,
and as his fellow creatures, whom he
wished to improve, that he might make
them and himself happy.—He spoke
sense to them; he mixed that sense
with wit and humour, in the proportion
necessary to make it palatable to
an Irishman.
In generosity there was a resemblance
between the temper of Sir Herbert and
of Corny; but to Ormond's surprise,
and at first to his disappointment,
Sir Herbert valued justice more than
generosity. Ormond's heart on this
point was often with king Corny, when
his head was forced to be with Sir
Herbert; but, by degrees, head and
heart came together.—He became practically

convinced, that justice is the
virtue that works best for a constancy; 
and best serves every body's interest in
time and in turn. Ormond now often said
to himself—“Sir Herbert Annaly is but a
few years older than I am; by the time
I am his age, why should not I become
as useful, and make as many human
beings happy as he does?” In the mean
time, the idea of marrying and settling
in Ireland became every day more agreeable
to Ormond; and France and Italy,
which he had been so eager to visit,
faded from his imagination. Sir Herbert
and Lady Annaly, who had understood
from Dr. Cambray, that Ormond was
going to commence his grand tour immediately,
and who had heard him make
a number of preparatory inquiries when
he had been first at Annaly, naturally
turned the conversation often to the subject.
They had looked out maps and
prints, and they had taken down from
their shelves the different books of travels,

which might be most useful to him,
with guides, and post-road books, and
all that could speed the parting guest.— 
But the guest had no mind to part— 
every thing, every body at Annaly, he
found so agreeable and so excellent.
It must be a great satisfaction to a young
man who has a grain of sense, and who
feels that he is falling inevitably and
desperately in love, to see that all the
lady's family, as well as the object of
his passion, are exactly the people whom
he should wish of all others to make his
friends for life. Here was every thing
that could be desired, suitability of age,
of fortune, of character, of temper, of
tastes,—every thing that could make a
marriage happy, could Ormond but win
the heart of Florence Annaly. Was that
heart disengaged?—He resolved to inquire
first from his dear friend Doctor
Cambray, who was much in the confidence
of this family, a great favourite
with Florence, and consequently dearer
than ever to Ormond. He went directly

to Vicar's Vale to see and consult him,
and Ormond thought he was confiding
a profound secret to the Doctor, when
first he spoke to him of his passion for
Miss Annaly; but to his surprise, the
Doctor told him he had seen it long ago,
and his wife and daughters had all discovered
it, even when they were first
with him at Annaly.
“Is it possible?—and what do you
all think?”
“We think that you would be a perfectly
happy man, if you could win Miss
Annaly; and we wish you success most
sincerely.—But—” 
“But—Oh! my dear Doctor, you
alarm me beyond measure.”
“What! by wishing you success?”
“No, but by something in your look
and manner, and by that terrible but— 
you think that I shall never succeed?— 
you think that her heart is engaged;—if
it be, tell me so at once, and I will set
off for France to-morrow.”
“My good Sir, you are always for

desperate measures, and you are in too
great a hurry to come to a conclusion,
before you have the means of forming
any just conclusion.—Remember, I tell
you, this precipitate temper of yours
will some time or other bring some great
evil upon you.”
“I will be patient all my life afterwards,
if you will only this instant tell
me whether she is engaged.”
“I do not know whether Miss Annaly's
heart be disengaged or not—I
can tell you only that she has had a
number of brilliant offers, and that she
has refused them all.”
“That proves that she had not found
one amongst them that she liked,” said
Ormond.
“Or that she liked some one better
than all those whom she refused,” said
Dr. Cambray.
“That is true—that is possible—that
is a dreadful possibility,” said Ormond.
“But do you think there is any probability
of that.”

“There is, I am sorry to tell you, my
dear Ormond, a probability against you— 
but I can only state the facts in general.— 
I can form no opinion, for I have
never had an opportunity of judging—I
have never seen the two people together.— 
But there is a young gentleman of
great merit, of suitable family and fortune,
who is deeply in love with Miss
Annaly, and who I presume has not
been refused, for I understand he is soon
to be here.”
“To be here!” cried Ormond—“a
man of great merit—I hope he is not an
agreeable man.”
“That's a vain hope,” said Dr. Cambray; 
“he is a very agreeable man.”
“Very agreeable!—What sort of person— 
grave or gay?—Like any body that
I ever saw?”
“Yes, like a person that you have
seen—and a person for whom I believe
you have a regard;—like his own father,
your dear king Corny's friend, General
Albemarle.”

“How extraordinary!—how unlucky!” 
said Ormond; “I would rather my rival
was any one else than the son of a
man I am obliged to—and a most dangerous
rival he must be, if he have his
father's merit, and his father's manners.— 
Oh! my dear Dr. Cambray, I am sure
she likes him—and yet she could not be
so cheerful in his absence, if she were
much in love—I defy her;—and it is
impossible that he can be as much in
love with her as I am, else nothing could
keep him from her.”
“Nothing but his duty, I suppose you
mean?”
“Duty!—What duty?”
“Why, there really are duties in this
world to be performed, though a man in
love is apt to forget it. Colonel Albemarle,
being an officer, cannot quit his
regiment, till he has obtained leave of
absence.”
“I am heartily glad of it,” cried Ormond,
“I will make the best use of my
time before he comes.—But my dear

Doctor, do you think Lady Annaly,— 
do you think Sir Herbert wishes it to
be?”
“I really cannot tell;—I know only
that he is a particular friend of Sir Herbert's,
and that I have heard Lady Annaly
speak of him as being a young man
of excellent character and high honour,
for whom she has a great regard.”
Ormond sighed.
“Heaven forgive me that sigh,” said
he, “I thought I never should be brought
so low as to sigh at hearing of any man's
excellent character and high honour.— 
But I certainly wish Colonel Albemarle
had never been born.—Heaven preserve
me from envy and jealousy.”
Our young hero had need to repeat
this prayer the next morning at breakfast,
when Sir Herbert, on opening his letters,
exclaimed, “My friend, Colonel
Albemarle—” 
And Lady Annaly, in a tone of joy— 
“Colonel Albemarle!—I hope he will
soon be here.”

Sir Herbert proceeded—“Cannot obtain
leave of absence yet—but lives in
hopes,” said Sir Herbert, reading the
letter, and handing it to his mother.
Ormond did not dare, did not think it
honourable to make use of his eyes, though
there now might have been a decisive
moment for observation. No sound reached
his ear from Miss Annaly's voice; but
Lady Annaly spoke freely and decidedly
in praise of Colonel Albemarle. As
she read the letter, Sir Herbert, after
asking Ormond three times whether he
was not acquainted with General Albemarle,
obtained for answer, that he
“really did not know.” In truth, Ormond
did not know any thing at that
moment. Sir Herbert surprised, and
imagining that Ormond had not yet heard
him, was going to repeat his question,
but a look from his mother stopped him.
A sudden light struck Lady Annaly.
Mothers are remarkably quick sighted
upon these occasions. There was a silence

of a few minutes, which appeared
to poor Ormond to be a silence that would
never be broken; it was broken by some
slight observation which the brother and
sister made to each other upon a paragraph
in the newspaper, which they were
reading together. Ormond took breath.
“She cannot love him, or she could
not be thinking of a paragraph in the
newspaper at this moment.”
From this time forward Ormond was
for some days in a continual state of
agitation, reasoning as the passions reason,
as ill as possible, upon every, the
slightest circumstance that occurred, from
whence he might draw favourable or unfavourable
omens. He was resolved—and
that was prudent—not to speak of his
own sentiments, till he was clear how
matters stood about Colonel Albemarle; 
he was determined not to expose himself
to the useless mortification of a refusal.
While he was in this agony of uncertainty,
one morning he went out to take

a solitary walk, that he might reflect at
leisure. Just as he was turning from the
avenue to the path that led to the wood,
a car full of morning visitors appeared.
Ormond endeavoured to avoid them, but
not before he had been seen. A servant
rode after him to beg to know “if he
was Mr. Harry Ormond—if he was, one
of the ladies on the car, Mrs. M'Crule,
sent her compliments to him, and requested
he would be so good to let her
speak with him at the house, as she had
a few words of consequence to say.”
Mrs. M'Crule! Ormond did not immediately
recollect, that he had the honour
of knowing any such person, till the servant
said, “Miss Black, Sir, that was— 
formerly at Castle Hermitage.”
His old friend, his old enemy, Miss
Black, he recollected well. He obeyed
the lady's summons, and returned to the
house.
Mrs. M'Crule had not altered in disposition,
though her objects had been

changed by marriage. Having no longer
Lady O'Shane's quarrels with her husband
to talk about, she had become the
pest of the village of Castle Hermitage
and of the neighbourhood—the Lady Bluemantle
of the parish. Had Miss Black
remained in England, married or single,
she would only have been one of a
numerous species too well known to need
any description; but transplanted to a
new soil and a new situation, she proved
to be a variety of the old species, with
peculiar noxious qualities, which it may
be useful to describe, as a warning to the
unwary. It is unknown how much mischief
the Lady Bluemantle class may do
in Ireland, where parties in religion and
politics run high; and where it often
happens, that individuals of the different
sects and parties actually hate without
knowing each other, watch without mixing
with one another, and consequently
are prone reciprocally to believe any
stories or reports, however false or absurd,

which tend to gratify their antipathies.
In this situation, it is scarcely
possible to get at the exact truth as to
the words, actions, and intentions of the
nearest neighbours, who happen to be of
opposite parties or persuasions. What
a fine field is here for a mischief maker.
Mrs. M'Crule had in her parish done her
part; she had gone from rich to poor,
from poor to rich, from catholic to protestant,
from churchman to dissenter, and
from dissenter to methodist, reporting
every idle story, and repeating every ill-natured
thing that she heard said— 
things often more bitterly expressed than
thought, and always exaggerated or distorted
in the repetition. No two people
in the parish could have continued on
speaking terms at the end of the year,
but that happily there was in this parish
both a good clergyman and a good priest,
and still more happily they both agreed,
and worked together for the good of their
parishioners. Dr. Cambray and Mr.

M'Cormuck made it their business continually
to follow after Mrs. M'Crule,
healing the wounds which she inflicted,
and pouring into the festering heart the
balm of christian charity; they were beloved
and revered by their parishioners.
Mrs. M'Crule was soon detected, and
universally avoided. Enraged, she attacked,
by turns, both the clergyman and
the priest; and when she could not separate
them, she found out that it was
very wrong that they should agree. She
discovered that she was a much better
protestant, and a much better christian,
than Dr. Cambray, because she hated her
catholic neighbours.
Dr. Cambray had taken pains to secure
the co-operation of the catholic clergyman
in all his attempts to improve the
lower classes of the people. His village
school was open to catholics as well as
Protestants; and father M'Cormuck,
having been assured that their religion
would not be tampered with, allowed and

encouraged his flock, to send their children
to the same seminary.
Mrs. M'Crule was, or affected to be,
much alarmed and scandalized at seeing
catholic and protestant children mixing
so much together; she knew that opinions
were divided among some families in the
neighbourhood upon the propriety of this
mixture, and Mrs. M'Crule thought it a
fine opportunity of making herself of
consequence, by stirring up the matter
into a party question. This bright idea
had occurred to her just about the time
when Ormond brought over little Tommy
from the Black Islands. During Ormond's
absence upon his tour, Sheelah
and Moriarty had regularly sent the boy
to the village school, exhorting him to
mind his book and his figures, that he
might surprise Mr. Ormond with his
larning, when he should come back.
Tommy, with this excitation, and being
a quick, clever, little fellow, soon got to
the head of his class, and kept there, and

won all the school-prizes, and brought
them home in triumph to his grandame,
and to his dèar Moriarty, to be treasured
up to shew to Mr. Ormond when he
should come home. Dr. Cambray was
pleased with the boy, and so was every
body, except Mrs. M'Crule. She often
visited the school for the pleasure of
finding fault, and she wondered to see
this little Tommy, who was a catholic,
carrying away the prizes from all the
others; she thought it her duty to inquire
further about him, and as soon as she discovered
that he came from the Black
Islands, that he lived with Moriarty, and
that Mr. Ormond was interested about
him, she said she knew there was something
wrong—therefore, she set her face
against the child, and against the shameful
partiality that some people shewed.
Dr. Cambray pursued his course, never
minding her; and little Tommy pursued
his course, improving rapidly in his larning.

Now there was in that county a munificent
charitable institution, for the education
of children from seven to twelve
years old;—a 'prentice fee was given
with the children, when they left the
school, and they had several other advantages,
which made parents of the lower
class extremely desirous to get their sons
into this establishment.
Before they could be admitted, it was
necessary, that they should have a certificate
from their parish minister and catholic
clergyman, stating, that they could
read and write, and that they were well-behaved
children. On a certain day,
every year, a certain number of candidates
were presented. The certificates
from the clergyman and priest of their respective
parishes were much attended to
by the lady patronesses, and by these the
choice of the candidate to be admitted
was usually decided. Little Tommy had
an excellent certificate both from father
M'Cormuck and from Dr. Cambray.—

Sheelah and Moriarty were in great joy,
and had all the hopes in life for him; and
Sheelah, who was very fond of surprises,
had cautioned Moriarty, and begged the
doctor not to tell Mr. Harry a word about
it, till all was fixed, “for if the boy should
not have the luck to be chose at last, it
would only be breaking his little heart
the worse, that Mr. Harry should know
any thing at all about it sure,”
Mean time Mrs. M'Crule was working
against little Tommy with all her might.
Some of the lady patronesses were of
opinion, that it would be expedient in future
to confine their bounty to the children
of protestants only.
Mrs. M'Crule, who had been deputed
by one of the absent ladies to act for her,
was amazingly busy, visiting all the patronessess,
and talking, and fearing, and
“hoping to Heaven!” and prophesying,
canvassing, and collecting opinions and
votes as for a matter of life and death.— 
She hinted that she knew that the greatest

interest was making to get in this year
a catholic child, and there was no knowing,
if this went on, what the consequence
might be.—In short, Ireland would be
ruined, if little Tommy should prove the
successful candidate. Mrs. M'Crule did
not find it difficult to stir up the prejudices
and passions of several ladies, whose education
and whose means of information,
might have secured them from such low
influence.
Her present business at Annaly was to
try what impression she could make on
Lady and Miss Annaly, who were both
patronesses of the school. As to Ormond,
whom she never had liked, she was glad
of this opportunity of revenging herself
upon his little protégé and of making
Mr. Ormond sensible, that she was now a
person of rather more consequence than
she had been, when he used formerly to
defy her at Castle Hermitage. She little
thought, that while she was thus pursuing
the dictates of her own hate, she might
serve the interests of Ormond's love.