

Little versed in the ways of courts or
courtiers, Godfrey had been easily deceived
by the apparent candor of Cunningham
Falconer. The fact was, that
Cunningham, not directly from himself,
but by means of persons, of whom Lord
Oldborough could have no suspicion,
had insinuated to his lordship, that Godfrey
Percy was the secret cause of the
aversion Miss Hauton showed to the
proposed match with the Marquis of
Twickenham. This idea once suggested
was easily confirmed by the account
of the young lady's behaviour at the
opera, which was reported to Lord Oldborough
with proper exaggerations, and
with a total misrepresentation of Godfrey's
conduct.—The fainting at the ball
was also recollected, and many other little

circumstances combined to bring conviction
to Lord Oldborough's mind. He
was now persuaded, that Major Gascoigne's
business was merely a pretence
for Godfrey's coming to town; apprehension
of being disappointed in completing
an alliance essential to his ambitious
views, pique at the idea of being
deceived, and nearly duped by a boy and
a girl, a rooted hatred and utter contempt
for love, and love affairs altogether,
produced that change in Lord Oldborough's
manner towards Captain Percy,
which had appeared so extraordinary.
—Had Captain Percy delayed to
leave town, he would next day have received
orders from his commanding officer
to join his regiment. As to Major
Gascoigne's business, it had made so
little impression upon Lord Oldborough,
that he had totally forgotten the poor
Major's name, till Godfrey repeated it
to him. Indeed, Godfrey himself could
scarcely have blamed his lordship for
this, had he known how much business,

how many cares pressed at this time
upon the mind of the unhappy statesman.
—Besides a load of public business,
and all the open and violent attacks of
opposition, which he had usually to sustain,
he was now under great and increasing
anxiety from the discovery of
that plot against him, among his immediate
associates in office, which the
Tourville papers, deciphered by Commissioner
Falconer and Cunningham,
had but partially revealed. Lord Oldborough
was in the condition of a person
apprised that he is standing upon
ground that is undermined, but who
does not know exactly by what hand, or
at what moment the train that may destroy
him is to be set on fire. One word
frequently recurred in the Tourville papers,
which puzzled Commissioner Falconer
extremely, and of which he was
never able to make out the meaning; 
the word was Gassoc.—It was used
thus:
“We are sorry to find that the Gassoc

has not agreed to our proposal.”—“No
answer has been given to question No. 2
by the Gassoc.”—“With regard to
the subsidy, of which £35,000. have
not been sent or received, the Gassoc
has never explained, in consequence
great discontents here.”—“If the Gassoc
be finally determined against the
Eagle, means must be taken to accomplish
the purposes alluded to, in paragraph
4 in green (of the 7th ult.), also
those in No. B in lemon-juice (of September
last).”—“The Gassoc will take
notes of the mining tools forgotten—also
bullets too large, and no flints—(as per
No. 9, in sympathetic ink)—also the
sea-charts, sent instead of maps—consequent
delay in march of troops—loss
of fortress—to be attributed to the
Eagle.”
The Eagle, which at first had been
taken for granted to be the Austrian
eagle, was discovered to be Lord Oldborough.
An eagle was his lordship's
crest, and the sea-charts, and the mining

tools, brought the sense home to him
conclusively.—It was plain that the Gassoc
stood for some person, who was inimical
to Lord Oldborough, but who it
could be was the question. Commissioner
Falconer suggested, that for Gassoc,
you should read Gosshawk, then said
he, “by finding what nobleman or gentleman
has a gosshawk in his arms, you
have the family name, and the individual is
afterwards easily ascertained.” To
the herald's office the Commissioner went
a goss-hawking, but after spending a
whole day with the assistance of Garter
king at arms, he could make nothing of
his goss-hawks, and he gave them up.
He next presumed, that there might
be a mistake of one letter in the foreign
spelling of the word, and that Gassoc
should be Cassock, and might then mean
a certain bishop, who was known to be
a particular enemy of Lord Oldborough.
But still there were things ascribed to
the Gassoc, which could not come within
the jurisdiction or cognizance of the Cassock

—and the Commissioner was reluctantly
obliged to give up the church.
He next suggested, that not only one
letter, but every letter in the word might
be mistaken in the foreign spelling, and
that Gassoc might be the French or German
written imitation of the oral sound
of some English proper name. The
Commissioner supported this opinion
very plausibly by citing many instances
of the barbarous spelling of English
names by foreigners.—Bassompierre
writes Jorchaux—for York-house, Innimthort
for Kensington.—Even in the polite
memoirs of le Comte de Grammont we
have Soutkask for Southesk—and Warméstre
for some English name not yet deciphered.
Upon this hint the Commissioner
and Cunningham made anagrams
of half the noble names in England, but
in vain.—
Afterwards, recollecting that it was
the fashion in Charles the second's time
even to pun in the coats of arms of the
nobility, and in the choice of their

mottoes, he went to work again at the
Herald's office, and tried a course of
puns, but to no purpose—The Commissioner
was mortified to find all his ingenuity at fault.
Cunningham took care not to suggest
any thing, therefore he could never be
convicted of mistake. Nor was he in the
least vexed by his father's, or his own
fruitless labour, because he thought it
might tend to his future advancement.
Lord Oldborough had thrown out a
hint, that it would soon be necessary to
recal the present, and send a new envoy
or resident to the German court in question; 
Cunningham nourished a hope of
being chosen for this purpose, as the
Tourville papers were already known to
him, and he could, under private instructions,
negociate with M. de Tourville,
and draw from him an explanation. He
did not, however, trust even his father
with the hope he had conceived, but relied
on his own address, and continually
strove, by oblique hints, to magnify the

danger of leaving any part of the plot
unravelled.
What effect these suggestions produced,
or whether they produced any,
Cunningham was unable to judge from
the minister's impenetrable countenance.
—Lord Oldborough lost not a moment in
repairing the mistake about sea-charts,
and the omission of mining tools, which
he had discovered from a paragraph in
the Tourville papers; he stayed not to
inquire whether the error had been wilful
or unintentional—that he left for future
investigation. His next object was the
subsidy. This day the Duke of Greenwich
gave a cabinet-dinner. After dinner,
when the servants had retired, and
when none of the company were prepared
for such a stroke, Lord Oldborough,
in his decided, but very calm manner,
began, with,
“My lords, I must call your attention
to an affair of some importance.—The
subsidy from the secret service to our
German ally.”

All who had within them sins unwhipped
of justice trembled.—
“I have learned, no matter how,”— 
continued Lord Oldborough, “that by
some strange mistake £35,000 of that
subsidy were not remitted at the time appointed
by us, and that discontents, likely
to be prejudicial to his Majesty's service,
have arisen in consequence of this delay.”
His lordship paused, and appeared to
take no notice of the faces of feigned astonishment,
and real consciousness by
which he was surrounded. Each looked
at the other to inquire by what means
this secret was divulged, and to discover
if possible how much more was known.
Lord Skreene began at the same moment
with the Duke of Greenwich, to suggest
that some clerk or agent must certainly
be much to blame. Lord Oldborough, in
his decided tone, replied, “That it was
indifferent to him, what clerk, agent, or
principal was to blame in the business; 
but that if the money were not bona fide

remitted, and acknowledged by the court
to which it was promised, and before
any disagreeable consequences should
ensure, he must be under the necessity
of stating the affair to his Majesty—of
resigning his office, and bringing the
whole before parliament.”
The terror of his voice, and lightning
of his eye, the dread of his determined
spirit, operated powerfully. The subsidy
was remitted the next day, though at
the expense of a service of plate, which
Lord Skreene had bespoken for his mistress,
and though Secretary Cope was
compelled to sell at some disadvantage
a few of the very few remaining acres of
his paternal estate, to make good what
had been borrowed from the secret service
money.—
At the cabinet dinner, the keen eye
of Lord Oldborough had discerned some
displeasure lurking in the mind of the
Duke of Greenwich.—A man of considerable
political consequence, from his
rank and connexions, and from the number

of voices he could command or influence.
Lord Oldborough knew, that, if
he could regain the Duke, he could keep
in awe his other enemies. His Grace
was a puzzle-headed, pompous fool, whom
Heaven had cursed with the desire to be
a statesman. He had not more than four
ideas, but to those four, which he conceived
to be his own, he was exclusively
attached,—Yet a person of address and
cunning could put things into his head,
which after a time he would find there,
believe to be his own, and which he
would then propose as new with great
solemnity, and support with much zeal.
Lord Oldborough, however, was neither
able nor willing to manage his Grace in
this manner; he was too imperious; his
pride of character was at continual variance
with the Duke's pride of rank.
The Duke's was a sort of pride, which
Lord Oldborough did not always understand,
and which, when he did, he despised; 
—it was a species of pride, that was
perpetually taking offence at trifling failures

in etiquette, of which Lord Oldborough,
intent upon great objects, was
sometimes guilty. There is a class of
politicians, who err by looking for causes
in too high a sphere, and by attributing
the changes which perplex states and
monarchs to great passions and large
motives. Lord Oldborough was one of
this class, and with all his talents would
have failed in every attempt, to comprehend
and conciliate the Duke of Greenwich,
had he not been assisted by the
inferior genius of Commissioner Falconer.
While his Lordship was thus searching
far and wide among the reasonable and
probable causes for the Duke's coldness,
examining and reexamining the bearings
of every political measure, as it could
affect his Grace's interest immediately or
remotely, Commissioner Falconer sought
for the cause, and found it in the lowest
scale of trifles.—He made the discovery
by means, which Lord Oldborough could
not have devised, and would not have
used. The Duke had a favorite underclerk,

who, for valuable consideration,
disclosed the secret to the Commissioner.
Lord Oldborough had sent his Grace a
note, written in his own hand, sealed
with a wafer.—The clerk, who was present
when the note was received, said,
that the Duke's face flushed violently,
and that he flung the note immediately
to his secretary, exclaiming,
“Open that, if you please, Sir—I
wonder how any man can have the impertinence
to send me his spittle!”
This nice offence, which bore so severe
a comment, had alienated the mind
of the Duke of Greenwich. When Commissioner
Falconer had thus sagaciously
discovered the cause of the noble Duke's
displeasure, he with great address applied
a remedy. Without ever hinting that he
knew of the offensive circumstance, having
some business to transact with the
Duke, he contrived, as if undesignedly,
to turn the conversation upon his friend
Lord Oldborough's strange and unaccountable
negligence of common forms

and etiquette; as a proof of which he
told the Duke in confidence, and in a
very low voice, an anecdote, which he
heard from his son Cunningham, from
Lord Oldborough's own secretary, or, the
Commissioner protested that he would not,
he could not have believed it—His Lordship
had been once actually upon the
point of sealing a note with a wafer to
one of the Royal Dukes!—had the wafer
absolutely on his lips, when Cunningham
felt it his duty to take the liberty of
remonstrating.—Upon which, Lord Oldborough,
as Commissioner Falconer said,
looked with the utmost surprise, and replied,
“I have sealed with a wafer to
the Duke of Greenwich, and he was not
offended.”
This anecdote, the truth of which it
fortunately never occurred to the Duke
to doubt, had an immediate and powerful
effect upon his mind, as the Commissioner
saw by the complacent smile that
played on his countenance, and still
further, by the condescending pity with

which his Grace observed, that “Great
geniuses never understand common things
—but do every thing awkwardly, whether
they cut a book, or seal a note.”
Mr. Falconer having thus brought the
Duke into fine temper, left him in the
best dispositions possible toward Lord
Oldborough, went to his Lordship to report
progress, and to boast of his success; 
but he told only as much of what
had passed, as he thought would suit the
statesman's character, and ensure his approbation.
—The Duke of Greenwich was
as much pleased by this reconciliation
as Lord Oldborough; for, though in a fit
of offended pride he had been so rash as
to join his Lordship's enemies, yet he
had always dreaded coming to open war
with such an adversary. His Grace felt
infinitely more safe and comfortable
when he was leaning upon Lord Oldborough,
than when he stood opposed
to him, even in secret. There were
points in politics in which he and Lord
Oldborough coincided, though they had

arrived at these by far different roads.
They agreed in an overweening love of
aristocracy, and in an inclination toward
arbitrary power; they agreed in a
hatred of innovation; they agreed in the
principle, that free discussion should be
discouraged, and that the country should
be governed with a high and strong
hand. On these principles Lord Oldborough
always acted, but seldom spoke,
and the Duke of Greenwich continually
talked, but seldom acted. In fact, his
Grace, “though he roared so loud, and
looked so wondrous grim,” was, in action,
afraid of every shadow. Right glad
was he to have his political vaunts made
good by a coadjutor of commanding talents,
resource, and civil courage. Yet,
as Lord Oldborough observed, with a
man of such wayward pride and weak
understanding there was no security
from day to day for the permanence of
his attachment. It was then that Commissioner
Falconer, ever ready at expedients,
suggested that an alliance between

his Grace's family and his Lordship's
would be the best possible security; 
and that this alliance might be
easily effected, since it was evident of
late, that the Marquis of Twickenham
was much disposed to admire the charms
of his Lordship's niece, Miss Hauton.
Lord Oldborough had not remarked, that
the Marquis admired any thing but good
wine; his Lordship's attention was not
turned to these things, nor had he, in
general, much faith in friendships founded
on family alliances; but he observed,
that the Duke was peculiarly tenacious
of connexions and relationships, and,
therefore, this might be the best method
of holding him.—
From the moment Lord Oldborough
decided in favor of this scheme, Mr. and
Mrs. Falconer had done all in their
power, with the utmost zeal and address,
to forward it, by contriving continual
dancing parties and musical meetings,
at their house, for the young people.
Lady Oldborough, who was sickly, whose

manners were not popular, and who
could not bear to be put out of her way,
was quite unsuited to this sort of business,
and rejoiced that the Falconers
took it off her hands. Things were just
in this state, and Lord Oldborough had
fixed his mind upon the match, when
Godfrey Percy's arrival in town had
threatened disappointment. In consequence
of this fear, Lord Oldborough
not only despatched Godfrey directly to
his regiment, but, to put an end to the
danger at once, to banish the idea of
seeing him again completely out of the
young lady's head, the cruel uncle and
decided politician had Godfrey's regiment
ordered immediately to the West
Indies.
Letter from Godfrey Percy to his Father.
“MY DEAR FATHER,
We have a new Lieutenant-colonel.
—Lord Skreene has removed
his precious nephew to another
regiment, and to punish us for not liking

the pretty boy, has ordered us all off to
the West Indies.—So ends our croaking,
—our new King Log we cannot complain
of as too young, or too much on
the qui-vive—he looks as if he was far
gone in a lethargy—can hardly keep
himself awake while he is giving the
word of command, and, instead of being
a martinette, I am sure he would not
care if the whole corps wore their regimentals
the wrong side outwards.—Gascoigne
will have all the regimental business
on his shoulders, and no man can
do it better.—He is now at my elbow,
supplying four hundred men and forty
officers with heads.—The noise of questions
and commands, and the notes of
preparation, are so loud and dissonant,
that I hardly know what I write. Gascoigne,
though not benefited, was obliged
to me for my wronghead-journey to London
—Henry was very angry with Lord
Oldborough for jilting me—Gascoigne
with much ado kept him in proper manners
toward the Lieutenont-colonel, and

I, in admiration of Gascoigne, kept my
temper miraculously. But there was an
impertinent puppy of an Ensign, a partisan
of the Lieutenant-colonel's, who
wanted, I'm convinced, to have the credit
of fighting a duel for the Colonel,
and he one day said, in Captain Henry's
hearing, that “it was no wonder some
men should rail against ministerial influence,
who had no friends to look to, and
were men of no family.”—“Do you
mean that for me, Sir?”—said Henry.
“Judge for yourself, Sir.”—Poor Henry
judged ill, and challenged the Ensign.— 
They fought—and the Ensign was slightly
wounded. In consequence of this
duel, curiosity has been wakened again
about Henry's birth, and he is in danger
of being exposed continually to things
he could not like, and could not well resent.
He consulted Gascoigne and me,
and has told us all he knows of his history.
—Read what follows to yourself, for
I have permission to speak of his affairs
only to you. Captain Henry assured

us, that he really does not know to what
family he belongs, nor who his father
and mother were; but he has reason to
believe, that they were Irish. He was
bred up in a merchant's house in Dublin.
The merchant broke, and went off
with his family to America. Henry was
at that time fifteen or sixteen. The merchant
then said, that Henry was not his
nephew, nor any relation to him, but
hinted that he was the son of a Mr.
Henry, who had taken an unfortunate
part in the troubles of Ireland, and who
had suffered,—that his mother had been
a servant-maid, and that she was dead.
The merchant added, that he had taken
care of Henry from regard to his father,
but that, obliged by his own failure in
business to quit the country, he must
thenceforward resign the charge.—He
further observed, that the army was now
the young man's only resource, and, on
taking leave, he put into Henry's hands a
£50 note, and an Ensign's commission.
—With his commission he joined his regiment,

which was at Cork. A few days after
his arrival, a Cork banker called upon
him, and inquired whether he was Ensign
Charles Henry; and upon his answering
in the affirmative, informed him, that he
had orders to pay him £400 in quarterly
payments. The order came from a
house in Dublin, and this was all the
banker knew. On Henry's application
in Dublin, he was told, that they had
direction to stop payment of the annuity,
if any questions were asked.—Of course,
Henry asked no more.—The annuity
has been regularly paid to him ever since.
—When he was scarcely seventeen he
was pillaged of a couple of hundred
pounds one night by a set of sharpers at
the gaming table.—This loss roused his
prudence, and he has never played since.
He has for many years lived within his
pay, for he prudently considered, that
the extraordinary supply might suddenly
fail, and then he might be left in debt
and distress, and at the same time with
habits of extravagance.—Instead of

which, he has laid up money every year,
and has a considerable sum.—He wishes
to quit the army, and to go into a mercantile
house, for which his early education
has fitted him. He has a particular
talent for languages—speaks French
and Italian accurately—Spanish and
Dutch well enough for all the purposes
of commerce. So any mercantile house,
who wants a partner, agent, or clerk for
foreign affairs (perhaps I am not correct
in the technical terms) could not do
better than to take Charles Henry. For
his integrity and honor I would answer
with my life. Now, my dear father,
could you have the goodness to assist us
so far as to write and inquire about
the partner in London of those Dutch
merchants, whom you had an opportunity
of obliging at the time of the
shipwreck?—I cannot recollect their
strange names, but if I am not mistaken,
they left you their address, and that of
their London correspondent.—If this
partner should be a substantial man,

perhaps our best plan would be to try to
get Henry into his house.—You have
certainly some claim there, and the
Dutchmen desired we would apply to
them, if ever they could do any thing to
serve us—We can but try—I am afraid
you will say, “This is like one of Godfrey's
wild schemes.”—I am still more
afraid, that you should think Henry's romantic
story is against him—but such
things are—that is all I can say—Here
is no motive for deception; and if you
were to see the young man, his countenance
and manner would immediately
persuade you of his perfect truth and
ingenuousness—I am aware that his romantic
history would not do for the
Dutch merchants, or the London partner; 
they would probably set him down
directly for an adventurer, and refuse to
have any thing to do with him.—So I
see no necessity for beginning by stating
it. I know you hate, and I am sure so
do I, all novel like concealments and
mysteries: but, because a man makes a

bargain with another, he is not obliged
to tell him his whole history—because
he takes him for his partner or his master,
he is not called upon to make him
his confidant.—All that the merchants
can want or have a right to know, is
forthcoming and clear as the noon-day— 
character—and money.
“My affectionate love and old-fashioned
duty to my dear mother—pray assure
her and my sisters, that they shall hear
from me, though I am going to have
“one foot on sea and one on land.”—
“Tell dear Caroline the portfolio she
made for me shall go with me to the
world's end; and Rosamond's Tippoo
Saib shall see the West Indies—Gascoigne
has been in the West Indies before
now, and he says and proves, that
temperance and spice are the best preservatives
in that climate; so you need
not fear for me, for you know I love
pepper better than port.—I am called
away, and can only add, that the yellow
fever there has subsided, as an officer

who arrived last week tells me.—Our
regiment is just going to embark in high
spirits—God bless you all.
Your affectionate Son,
G. Percy.
“P. S. Don't let my mother or Rosamond
trust to newspaper reports—Trust
to nothing but my letters—Caroline, I
know, is fit to be the sister, and I hope
will some time be the mother of heroes.”