



From Miss Darnford to Mrs. B. 


My dear Mrs. B.
You have given us great Pleasure in your
Accounts of your Conversations with your
noble Guests, and of the Verses put so boldly
and wickedly under your Seat; and in your just
Observations on the Lines, and the Occasion. 
I am quite shock'd, when I think of Lady Daver's
passionate Intentions, at her first coming
down to you to the Hall; but have let nobody
into the worst of the Matter, in Compliance with
your Desire. We are delighted with your Account 

of your Family Management, and your Sunday
Service. —What an excellent Lady are you! 
And how happy, and how good, you make every
one who knows you, is seen by the Ladies joining
in your Evening Service, as well as their Domesticks. 
We go on here swimmingly with our Courtship. 
Never was there a fonder Couple than
Mr. Murray and Miss Nancy. The moody Girl
is quite alive, easy and pleas'd; except now-and-then
with me. —We had a sad Falling-out t'other
Day. Thus it was: 
She had the Assurance, on my saying, They
were so fond and so free before-hand, that they
would leave nothing for Improvement afterwards; 
to tell me, She had for some time perceived,
that my Envy was very disquieting to
me. This she said before Mr. Murray, who had
the good Manners to retire, seeing a Storm rising
between us. 
Poor, foolish Girl! cry'd I, when he was
gone, provok'd to great Contempt by her Expression
before him, Thou wilt make me despise
thee, in spite of my Heart. —But pr'ythee, manage
thy Matters with common Decency, at least. 
Good-lack! Common Decency, did you say? 
When my Sister Polly is able to shew me what it
is, I shall hope to be better for her Example. 
No, thou'lt never be better for any body's Example! 
Thy Ill-nature and Perverseness will keep
thee from that, as it has always hitherto done. 
My Ill-temper, you have often told me, is
natural to me; so it must become me: But upon 

such a sweet-temper'd young Lady as Miss Polly,
her late-assum'd Petulance sits but ill! 
I must have had no bad Temper, and that
every one says, to bear with thy sullen and perverse
one, as I have done, all my Life. 
But why can't you bear with it a little longer,
Sister? —Does any thing provoke you now,
(with a sly Leer, and affected Drawl) that did not
formerly? 
Provoke me! —What should provoke
me? —I gave thee but a Hint of thy fond Folly,
which makes thee behave so before Company,
that every one smiles at thee; and I'd be glad
to save thee from Contempt for thy new good
Humour, as I used to try to do, for thy old bad
Nature. 
Is that it? —What a kind Sister have I! — 
But perhaps I see it vexes you; and ill-natur'd
Folks love to teize, you know. —But, dear
Polly, don't let the Affection Mr. Murray expresses
for me, put such a good temper'd Body
out of Humour; pray don't! —Who knows,
(continued the Provoker, who never says a tolerable
thing that is not ill-natur'd, that being
her Talent) but the Gentleman may think himself
happy, that he has found a Way, with so
much Ease, to dispense with the Difficulty that
Eldership laid him under? —But as he did you
the Favour to let the Repulse come from you,
don't be angry, Sister, that he took you at the
first Word. 
Indeed, indeed, said I, with a contemptuous
Smile, thou'rt in the right, Nancy, to take the 

Gentleman at his first Word. Hold him fast, and
play over all thy Monkey Tricks with him, with
all my Heart: Who knows but it may engage
him more? For should he leave thee, I might be
too much provok'd at thy Ingratitude, to turn
over another Gentleman to thee—And, let
me tell thee, without such an Introduction, thy
Temper would keep any body from thee, that
knows it. 
Poor Miss Polly! —Come, be as easy as
you can! Who knows but we may find out some
Cousin or Friend of Mr. Murray's between us,
that we may persuade to address you? Don't
make us your Enemies: We'll try to make you
easy, if we can—'Tis a little hard, that you
should be so cruelly taken at your Word, that it is. 
Dost think, said I, poor, stupid, ill-judging
Nancy, that I can have the same Regret for parting
with a Man I could not like, that thou hadst,
when thy vain Hopes met with the Repulse they
deserved from Mr. B.? 
Mr. B. come up again! I have not heard of
Mr. B. a great while! 
No, but it was necessary, that one Nail should
drive out another; for thou'dst been repining still,
had not Mr. Murray been turn'd over to thee. 
Turn'd over! you used that Word once before,
Sister: Such great Wits, as you, methinks,
should not use the same Word twice. 
How dost thou know what Wits should, or
should not do? Thou hast no Talent but Ill-nature,
and 'tis enough for thee, that one View
takes up thy whole Thought. Pursue that— 

But I would only caution thee, not to satiate
where thou wouldst oblige, that's all: Or if thy
Man can be so gross, as to like thy Fondness, to
leave something for Hereafter. 
I'll call him in again, Sister, and you shall
acquaint us how you'd have it. Bell, (for the
Maid came in just then) tell Mr. Murray I desire
him to walk in. 
I'm glad to see thee so teachable all at once! — 
I find out now what was the Cause of thy constant
Perverseness: for had the unavailing Lessons,
my Mamma was always inculcating into thee,
come from a Man thou couldst have had Hopes
of, they had succeeded better. 
In came Sir Simon, with his Crutch-Stick— 
But can you bear this Nonsense, Mrs. B.? — 
What! sparring, jangling again, you Sluts! — 
O what fiery Eyes on one side, and contemptuous
Looks on t'other! 
Why, Papa, my Sister Polly has turn'd over
Mr. Murray to me, and she wants him back again,
and he won't come—That's all the Matter! 
You know your Daughter Nancy, Papa— 
She could never bear Reproof, and yet would
always deserve it! —I was only gently remarking,
for her instruction, on her Fondness before
Company, and she is as she used to be! ––––Courtship,
indeed, is a new Thing, to the poor Girl,
and so she knows not how to behave herself in it. 
So, Polly, because you have been able to run
over a long List of humble Servants, you must
insult your Sister, must you? —But are you
really concern'd, Polly? —Hay! 

Sir, this, or any thing, is very well from
you. —But these Imputations of Envy, before
Mr. Murray, must make the Man very considerable
with himself. Poor Nancy don't consider
that. ––––But indeed how should she? How should
she be able to reflect, who knows not what Reflection
is, except of the spiteful sort? But, Papa,
should the poor Thing add to his Vanity, which
wants no Addition, at the Expence of that Pride,
which can only preserve her from Contempt? 
I saw her affected, and was resolved to pursue
my Advantage. 
Pr'y thee, Nancy, continu'd I, canst thou
not have a little Patience, Child? —My Papa
will set the Day as soon as he shall think it proper. 
And don't let thy Man toil to keep Pace
with thy Fondness; for I have pity'd him many a
time, when I have seen him stretched on the
Tenters to keep thee in Countenance. 
This set the ill-natur'd Girl into Tears and
Fretfulness; all her old Temper came upon her,
as I design'd it should; for she had kept me at
Bay longer than usual; and I left her under the
Dominion of it; and because I would not come
into a fresh Dispute, got my Mamma's Leave,
and the Chariot, and went and begg'd a Dinner
at Lady Jones's; and then came home as cool
and as easy, as I us'd to be; and found Nancy
as sullen and silent, as was her Custom, before
Mr. Murray tendered himself to her ready Acceptance. 
But I went to my Spinnet, and suffer'd
her to swell on. 

We have said nothing but No, and Yes, ever
since; and I wish I was with you for a Month,
and all their Nonsense over without me. I am,
my dear, obliging, and excellent Mrs. B. 
Your faithful and affectionate
Polly Darnford. 

&line;
The Two following, anticipating the Order
of Time, for the Reasons mentioned p. 195.
we insert here. 
