


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


I Left Sir Charles with Dr. Bartlett. They
would both have engaged me to stay longer; 
but I thought the Ladies would miss me, and think
it particular to find me with him in the doctor's
closet. 
My Lord, and the two sisters, were together in the
drawing-room adjoining to the library: On my entrance,
Well, Harriet, said Miss Grandison, we will
now endeavour to find out my brother: You must be
present to yourself, and put in a word now-and-then. 
We shall see if Dr. Bartlett is right, when he says,
that my brother is the most unreserved of men. 
Just then came in Dr. Bartlett—I think, doctor,
said Lady L. we will take your advice, and ask my
brother all the questions in relation to his engagements
abroad, that come into our heads. 
She had not done speaking, when Sir Charles entered,
and drew his chair next me; and just then I
thought myself he looked upon me with equal benignity
and respect. 
Miss Grandison began with taking notice of the
Letter from which Dr. Bartlett, she said, had read
some passages, of the happiness he had procured to
Lord W. in ridding him of his woman. She wished,
she told him, that she knew who was the Lady he had
in his thoughts to commend to my Lord for a wife. 
I will have a little talk with her before I name her,
even to you, my Lord, and my sisters. I am sure my
sisters will approve of their aunt, if she accept of my
Lord for a husband: I shall pay my compliments to
her, in my return from Grandison-hall. —Do you,
Charlotte, choose to accompany me thither? I must,
I think, be present at the opening of the church. I 

don't ask you, my Lord, nor you, Lady L. so short
as my stay will be there. I purpose to go down on
Friday next, and return the Tuesday following. 
Miss Gr. I think, brother, I should wish to be excused. 
If, indeed, you would stay there a week or
fortnight, I could like to attend you; and so, I dare
say, would Lord and Lady L. 
Sir Ch. I must be in town on Wednesday, next
week; but you may stay the time you mention: You
cannot pass it disagreeably in the neighbourhood of the
Hall; and there you will find your cousin Grandison:
He will gallant you from one neighbour to another:
And, if I judge by your freedoms with him, you
have a greater regard for him, than perhaps you know
you have. 
Miss Gr. Your servant, Sir, bowing—But I will
take my revenge—Pray, Sir Charles, may I ask (we
are all brothers and sisters)— 
Sir Ch. Stop, Charlotte (pleasantly). If you are
going to ask any questions by way of revenge, I
answer them not. 
Miss Gr. Revenge! —Not revenge, neither—But
when my Lord W. as by the passages Dr. Bartlett was
so good as to read to us, proposed to you this Lady for
a wife, and that Lady; your answers gave us apprehension
that you are not inclined to marry— 
Lady L. You are very unceremonious, Charlotte— 
Indeed, Lucy, she made me tremble. Sure he can
have no notion that I have seen the whole Letter— 
seen myself named in it. 
Miss Gr. What signifies ceremony, among relations? 
Sir Ch. Let Charlotte have her way. 
Miss Gr. Why then, Sir, I would ask—Don't you
intend one day to marry? 
Sir Ch. I do, Charlotte. I shall not think myself
happy till I can obtain the hand of a worthy woman. 
I was, I am afraid, Lucy, visibly affected: I knew 

not how to stay; yet it would have looked worse
to go. 
Miss Gr. Very well, Sir—And pray, Have you
not, either abroad or at home, seen the woman you
could wish to call yours? —Don't think me impertinent,
brother. 
Sir Ch. You cannot be impertinent, Charlotte. If
you want to know any-thing of me, it pleases me best,
when you come directly to the point. 
Miss Gr. Well, then, if I cannot be impertinent; 
if you are best pleased when you are most freely treated; 
and if you are inclined to marry; pray why did you
decline the proposals mentioned by Lord W. in behalf
of Lady Frances N. of Lady Anne S. and I cannot
tell how many more? 
Sir Ch. The friends of the first-named Lady proceeded
not generously with my father, in that affair. 
The whole family builds too much on the interest and
title of her father. I wanted not to depend upon any
public man: I chose, as much as possible, to fix my
happiness within my own little circle. I have strong
passions: I am not without ambition. Had I loosened
the reins to the latter, young man as I am, my tranquillity
would have been pinned to the feather in another
man's cap. Does this satisfy you, Charlotte,
as to Lady Frances? 
Miss Gr. Why yes: And the easier, because there
is a Lady whom I could have preferred to Lady
Frances. 
I should not, thought I, have been present at this
conversation. Lord L. looked at me. Lord L. should
not have looked at me: The Ladies did not. 
Sir Ch. Who is she? 
Miss Gr. Lady Anne S. you know, Sir—Pray,
may I ask, Why that could not be? 
Sir Ch. Lady Anne is, I believe, a deserving woman; 
but her fortune must have been my principal
inducement, had I made my addresses to her. I never 

yet went so low as to that alone, for an inducement to
see a Lady three times. 
Miss Gr. Then, Sir, you have made your addresses
to Ladies—Abroad, I suppose? 
Sir Ch. I thought, Charlotte, your curiosity extended
only to the Ladies in England. 
Miss Gr. Yes, Sir, it extends to Ladies in England
and out of England, if any there be that have
kept my brother a single man, when such offers have
been made him as we think would have been unexceptionable. 
But you hint, then, Sir, that there are
Ladies abroad— 
Sir Ch. Take care, Charlotte, that you make as
free a respondent, when it comes to your turn, as you
are a questioner. 
Miss Gr. By your answers to my questions, Sir,
teach me how I am to answer yours, if you have any
to make. 
Sir Ch. Very well, Charlotte. Have I not answered
satisfactorily your questions about the Ladies
you named? 
Miss Gr. Pretty well. But, Sir, have you not seen
Ladies abroad whom you like better than either of those
I have named? —Answer me to that. 
Sir Ch. I have, Charlotte, and at home too. 
Miss Gr. I don't know what to say to you—But,
pray, Sir, Have you not seen Ladies abroad whom you
have liked better than any you ever saw at home? 
Sir Ch. No. But tell me, Charlotte, to what does
all this tend? 
Miss Gr. Only, brother, that we long to have
you happily married; and we are afraid, that your
declining this proposal and that, is owing to some
previous attachment—And now all is out. 
Lord L. And now, my dear brother, all is out— 
Lady L. If our brother will gratify our curiosity— 
Had I ever before, Lucy, so great a call upon me
as now, for presence of mind? 

Sir Charles sighed: He paused: And at last said— 
You are very generous, very kind, in your wishes to
see me married. I have seen the Lady with whom,
of all the women in the world, I think I could be
happy. 
A fine blush overspread his face, and he looked
down. Why, Sir Charles, did you blush? Why did
you look down? The happy, thrice happy woman,
was not present, was she? —Ah, No! no! no!— 
Sir Ch. And now, Charlotte, what other questions
have you to ask, before it comes to your turn to answer
some that I have to put to you? 
Miss Gr. Only one. —Is the Lady a foreign Lady? 
How every-body but I looked at him, expecting
his answer! —He really hesitated. At last, I think,
Charlotte, you will excuse me, if I say, that this
question gives me some pain—Because it leads to another,
that, if made, I cannot at present myself answer
[But why so, Sir, thought I?]: And if not made, it
cannot be of any significa ion to speak to this. 
Lord L. We would not give you pain, Sir Charles:
And yet— 
Sir Ch. What yet, my dear Lord L.? 
Lord L. When I was at Florence, there was much
talk— 
Sir Ch. Of a Lady of that city. —Olivia, my
Lord! —There was. —She has fine qualities, but unhappily
blended with others less approveable. —But I
have nothing to wish for from Olivia: She has done
me too much honour. I should not so readily have
named her now, had she been more sollicitous to conceal
the distinction she honoured me with. But your
Lordship, I dare hope, never heard even ill-will open
its mouth to her disreputation, only that she descended
too much in her regard for one object. 
Lord L. Your character, Sir Charles, was as much
to her reputation, as— 
Sir Ch. (interrupting) O my Lord, how brotherly 

partial! But, this Lady out of the question, my peace
has been broken in pieces by a tender fault in my constitution
—And yet I would not be without it. 
The sweet Emily arose, and, in tears, went to the
window. A sob, endeavoured to be suppressed, called
our attention to her. 
Sir Charles went, and took her hand; Why weeps
my Emily? 
Because you, who so well deserve to be happy, seem
not to be so. 
Tender examples, Lucy, are catching: I had much
ado to restrain my tears. 
He kindly consoled her. My unhappiness, my
dear, said he, arises chiefly from that of other people. 
I should but for that be happy in myself, because I
endeavour to accommodate my mind to bear inevitable
evils, and to make, if possible, a virtue of necessity:
But, Charlotte, see how grave you have made
us all! and yet I must enter with you upon a subject
that possibly may be thought as serious by you, as that
which, at present, I wish to quit. 
“Wish to quit!” “The question gave him some
pain, because it led to another, which he cannot
himself, at present, answer!—” 
What, Lucy, let me ask you, before I follow him to
his next subject, can you gather from what passed in
that already recited? If he is himself at an uncertainty,
he may deserve to be pitied, and not blamed:
But don't you think he might have answered, whether
the Lady is a foreigner, or not? —How could he know
what the next question would have been? 
I had the assurance to ask Miss Grandison afterwards,
aside, Whether any-thing could be made out,
or guessed at, by his eyes, when he spoke of having
seen the woman he could prefer to all others? For he
sat next me; she over-against him. 
I know not what to make of him, said she: But be
the Lady native or foreigner, it is my humble opinion, 

that my brother is in love. He has all the symptoms
of it, that I can guess by. 
I am of Charlotte's opinion, Lucy. Such tender
sentiments; such sweetness of manners; such gentleness
of voice! —Love has certainly done all this for
him: And the Lady, to be sure, is a foreigner. It
would be strange if such a man should not have engaged
his heart in the seven or eight years past; and
those from Eighteen to Twenty-six or seven, the most
susceptible of a man's life. 
But what means he by saying, “His peace has been
broken to pieces by a tender fault in his constitution?” 
—Compassion, I suppose, for some unhappy
object. —I will soon return to town, and there prepare
to throw myself into the arms of my dearest relations
in Northamptonshire: I shall otherwise, perhaps, add
to the number of those who have broken his peace. 
But it is strange, methinks, that he could not have
answered, Whether the Lady is a foreigner, or not. 
Dr. Bartlett, you are mistaken: Sir Charles Grandison
is not so very un-reserved a man as you said he
was. 
But Oh! my dear little flattering Emily, how could
you tell me, that you watched his eyes, and saw them
always kindly bent on me? —Yes, perhaps, when you
thought so, he was drawing comparisons to the advantage
of his fair foreigner, from my less agreeable
features!— 
But this Olivia! Lucy. I want to know something
more of her. “Nothing,” he says, “to wish for
from Olivia.” Poor Lady! Methinks I am very
much inclined to pity her. 
Well, but I will proceed now to his next subject. 
I wish I could find some faults in him. It is a cruel
thing to be under a kind of necessity to be angry with
a man whom we cannot blame: And yet, in the next
conversation, you will see him angry. Don't you long,
Lucy, to see how Sir Charles Grandison will behave
when he is angry? 

