


Miss Byron, To Lady G. 


Selby-house, Monday April 24. 
Tho' the kind friends with whom I parted at
Dunstable were pleased, one and all, to allow,
that the correspondence which is to pass between my
dear Lady G. and their Harriet, should answer the just
expectations of each upon her, in the writing way; 
and tho' (at your motion, remember, not at mine) they
promised to be contented with hearing read to them
such parts of my Letters as you should think proper to
communicate; yet cannot I dispense with my duty to
Lady L. my Emily, my cousin Reeves, and Dr. Bartlett. 
Accordingly, I write to them by this post; and
I charge you, my dear, with my sincere and thankful
compliments to your Lord, and to Mr. Beauchamp,
for their favours. 
What an agreeable night, in the main, was Friday
night! Had we not been to separate next morning, it
would have been an agreeable one indeed! 
Is not my aunt Selby an excellent woman? But you
all admired her. She admires you all. I will tell you,
another time, what she said of you, my dear, in particular. 
My cousin Lucy, too—is she not an amiable creature? 

—Indeed you all were delighted with her. But
I take pleasure in recollecting your approbations of one
I so dearly love. She is as prudent as Lady L. and,
now our Nancy is so well recovered, as chearful as
Lady G. You said, you would provide a good husband
for her: Don't forget. The man, whoever he
be, cannot be too good for my Lucy. Nancy is such
another good girl: But so I told you. 
Well, and pray, Did you ever meet with so pleasant
a man as my uncle Selby? What should we have
done, when we talked of your brother, when we
talked of our parting, had it not been for him? You
looked upon me every now-and-then, when he returned
your smartness upon him, as if you thought I
had let him know some of your perversenesses to Lord
G. —And do you think I did not? Indeed I did. 
Can you imagine that your frank-hearted Harriet,
who hides not from her friends her own faults, should
conceal yours? —But what a particular character is
yours! Every-body blames you, that knows of your
over-livelinesses; yet every-body loves you—I think,
for your very faults. Had it not been so, do you
imagine I could ever have loved you, after you had
led Lady L. to join with you, on a certain teazing occasion? 
—My uncle dotes upon you! 
But don't tell Emily that my cousin James Selby is
in Love with her. That he may not, on the score of
the dear girl's fortune, be thought presumptuous, let
me tell you, that he is almost of age; and, when he
is, comes into possession of an handsome estate. He has
many good qualities. I have, in short, a very great
value for him; but not enough, tho' he is my relation,
to wish him my still more beloved Emily. Dear creature!
methinks I still feel her parting tears on my
cheek! 
You charge me to be as minute, in the Letters I
write to you, as I used to be to my friends here: And 

you promise to be as circumstantial in yours. I will
set you the example: Do you be sure to follow it. 
We baited at Stony-Stratford. I was afraid how it
would be: There were the two bold creatures, Mr.
Greville, and Mr. Fenwick, ready to receive us. A
handsome collation, as at our setting out, so now,
bespoke by them, was set on the table. How they
came by their intelligence, nobody knows: We were
all concerned to see them. They seemed half-mad
for joy. My cousin James had alighted to hand us
out; but Mr. Greville was so earnest to offer his
hand, that tho' my cousin was equally ready, I thought
I could not deny to his solicitude for the poor favour,
such a mark of civility. Besides, if I had, it would
have been distinguishing him for more than a common
neighbour, you know. Mr. Fenwick took the
other hand, when I had stept out of the coach, and
then (with so much pride, as made me ashamed of
myself) they hurried me between them, thro' the innyard,
and into the room they had engaged for us; 
blessing themselves, all the way, for my coming down
Harriet Byron. 
I looked about as if for the dear friends I had parted
with at Dunstable. This is not, thought I, so delightful
an inn as they made that—Now they, thought
I, are just got to Barnet, in their way to London, as
we are here in ours to Northampton. —But ah! where,
where is Sir Charles Grandison at this time? And I
sighed! But don't read this, and such strokes as this,
to any-body but Lord and Lady L. —You won't, you
say—Thank you, Charlotte. —I will call you Charlotte,
when I think of it, as you commanded me. 
The joy we had at Dunstable, was easy, serene,
deep, full, as I may say; it was the joy of sensible
people: But the joy here was made by the two gentlemen,
mad, loud, and even noisy. They hardly
were able to contain themselves; and my uncle, and
cousin James, were forced to be loud, to be heard. 

Mr. Orme, good Mr. Orme, when we came near
his park, was on the highway-side, perhaps near the
very spot where he stood to see me pass to London so
many weeks ago—Poor man! —When I first saw him
(which was before the coach came near, for I looked
out only, as thinking I would mark the place where I
last beheld him) he looked with so disconsolate an air,
and so fixed, that I compassionately said to myself,
Surely the worthy man has not been there ever since. 
I twitched the string just in time: The coach stopt. 
Mr. Orme, said I, How do you? Well, I hope? — 
How does Miss Orme? 
I had my hand on the coach-door. He snatched it. 
It was not an unwilling hand. He pressed it with his
lips. God be praised, said he (with a countenance,
O how altered for the better!) for permitting me once
more to behold that face—that angelic face, he said. 
God bless you, Mr. Orme! said I: I am glad to
see you. Adieu. 
The coach drove on. Poor Mr. Orme! said my
aunt. 
Mr. Orme, Lucy, said I, don't look so ill as you
wrote he was. 
His joy to see you, said she—But Mr. Orme is in a
declining way. 
Mr. Greville, on the coach stopping, rode back just
as it was going on again—And with a loud laugh— 
How the d&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;l came Orme to know of your coming,
madam! —Poor fellow! It was very kind of you to
stop your coach to speak to the statue. And he laughed
again. —Nonsensical! At what?— 
My grandmamma Shirley, dearest of parents! her
youth, as she was pleased to say, renewed by the expectation
of so soon seeing her darling child, came (as
my aunt told us, you know) on Thursday night to
Selby-house, to charge her and Lucy with her blessing
to me; and resolving to stay there to receive me. 
Our beloved Nancy was also to be there; so were 

two other cousins, Kitty and Patty Holles, good young
creatures; who, in my absence, had attended my
grandmamma at every convenient opportunity, and
whom I also found here. 
When we came within sight of this house, Now,
Harriet, said Lucy, I see the same kind of emotions
beginning to arise in your face and bosom, as Lady G.
told us you shewed when you first saw your aunt at
Dunstable. My grandmamma! said I, I am in sight
of the dear house that holds her: I hope she is here. 
But I will not surprise her with my joy to see her. 
Lie still, throbbing impatience! speaking to my
heart. 
But when the coach (attended by many neighbours
and friends, who, like a gathering snowball, had got
together, within a few miles of Selby-house) set us
down at the inner gate, there, in the outward-hall,
sat my blessed grandmamma. The moment I beheld
her, my intended caution forsook me: I sprang by my
aunt, and, before the foot-step could be put down,
flew, as it were, out of the coach, and threw myself
at her feet, wrapping my arms about her: Bless, bless,
said I, your Harriet! I could not, at the moment,
say another word. 
Great God! said the pious parent, her hands and
eyes lifted up, Great God! I thank thee! Then folding
her arms about my neck, she kissed my forehead,
my cheek, my lips—God bless my Love! Pride of
my life! the most precious of a hundred daughters! 
How does my Child—My Harriet—O my Love! — 
After such dangers, such trials, such harassings—Once
more, God be praised that I clasp to my fond heart,
my Harriet! 
Separate them, separate them, said my facetious
uncle (yet he had tears in his eyes) before they grow
together! —Madam, to my grandmamma, she is our
Harriet, as well as yours: Let us welcome the saucy
girl, on her re-entrance into these doors! —Saucy, I
suppose, I shall soon find her. 

My grandmamma withdrew her fond arms: Take
her, take her, said she, each in turn: But I think I
never can part with her again. 
My uncle saluted me, and bid me very kindly welcome
home: So did my aunt: So did Lucy—My
equally-beloved Nancy—So did every one. 
How can I return the obligations which the love of
all my friends lays upon me? To be good, to be
grateful, is not enough; since that one ought to be
for one's own sake. What a sweet thing is it to be
beloved by worthy neighbours! I had several visiters
last night, and compliments without number, on my
arrival:—Compliments, for what? For having lost
the better half of my heart? Don't you think I look
silly to myself? You bid me be free in my confessions. 
You promise to look my Letters over before you read
them to any-body; and to mark passages proper to be
kept to yourself—Pray do. 
Mr. Greville and Mr. Fenwick were here separately,
an hour ago: I thanked them for their civility
on the road, and not ungraciously, as Mr. Greville
told my uncle, as to him. He was not, he said, without
hopes, yet; since I knew not how to be ungrateful. 
Mr. Greville builds, as he always did, a merit
on his civility; and by that means sinks, in the narrower
Lover, the claim he might otherwise make to
the title of the generous neighbour. 
* *
Miss Orme has just been here. She could not
help throwing in a word for her brother. 
You will guess, my dear Lady G. at the subject of
our conversations here, and what they will be, morning,
noon, and night, for a week to come. My
grandmamma is better in health than I have known
her for a year or two past. The health of people in
years can mend but slowly; and they are slow to acknowlege
it in their own favour. My grandmamma,
however, allows that she is better within these few 

days past; but attributes the amendment to her Harriet's
return. 
How do they all bless, revere, extol, your noble
brother! —How do they wish—And how do they regret— 
You know what—Yet how ready are they to
applaud your Harriet, if she can hold her magnanimity,
in preferring the happiness of Clementina to her
own! —My grandmamma and aunt are of opinion,
that I should; and they praise me for the generosity of
my effort, whether the superior merits of the man
will or will not allow me to succeed in it. But my
uncle, my Lucy, and my Nancy, from their unbounded
love of me, think a little, and but a little,
narrower; and, believing it will go hard with me,
say, It is hard. My uncle, in particular, says, the
very pretension is flight and nonsense: But, however,
if the girl, added he, can parade away her passion for
an object so worthy; with all my heart: It will be
but just, that the romancing elevations, which so often
drive headstrong girls into difficulties, should now-and-then
help a more discreet one out of them. 
Adieu, my beloved Lady G. Repeated compliments,
love, thanks, to my Lord and Lady L. to my
Emily, to Dr. Bartlett, to Mr. Beauchamp, and particularly
to my Lord G. Dear, dear Charlotte, be
good! Let me beseech you be good! If you are not,
you will have every one of my friends who met you at
Dunstable, and, from their report, my grandmamma
and Nancy, against you; for they find but one sault
in my Lord: It is, that he seems too fond of a Lady,
who, by her archness of looks, and half-saucy turns
upon him, even before them, evidently shewed—Shall
I say what? But I stand up for you, my dear. Your
gratitude, your generosity, your honour, I say, (and
why should I not add your duty?) will certainly make
you one of the most obliging of wives, to the most
affectionate of husbands. 
My uncle says, He hopes so: But tho' he adores 

you for a friend, and the companion of a lively hour; 
yet he does not know but his Dame Selby is still the
woman whom a man should prefer for a wife: And
she, said he, is full as saucy as a wife need to be; 
tho' I think, Harriet, that she has not been the less
dutiful of late for your absence. 
Once more, adieu, my dear Lady G. and continue
to love 
Your Harriet Byron. 

