



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;
[In Answer to his of Aug. 4. See No xxii.] 

Monday, Aug. 7. 
And so you have actually delivered to the fair
Implacable Extracts of Letters written in the
confidence of friendship! Take care—Take care,
Belford—I do indeed love you better than I love any
man in the world: But this is a very delicate point. 
The matter is grown very serious to me. My heart
is bent upon having her. And have her I will, tho'
I marry her in the agonies of death. 
She is very earnest, you say, that I will not offer
to molest her. That, let me tell her, will absolutely
depend upon herself, and the Answer she returns,
whether by pen and ink, or the contemptuous one of
silence, which she bestowed upon my last four to her: 
And I will write it in such humble, and in such reasonable
terms, that, if she be not a true Harlowe,
she shall forgive me. But as to the Executorship
which she is for conferring upon thee—Thou shalt
not be her Executor: Let me perish if thou shalt. — 
Nor shall she die. Nobody shall be any-thing, nobody
shall dare to be any-thing, to her, but I— 
Thy happiness is already too great, to be admitted
daily to her presence; to look upon her, to talk to
her, to hear her talk, while I am forbid to come
within view of her window—What a reprobation is
this, of the man who was once more dear to her than 

all the men in the world! —And now to be able to
look down upon me, while her exalted head is hid
from me among the Stars, sometimes with scorn, at
other times with pity, I cannot bear it. 
This I tell thee, that if I have not success in my
effort by Letter, I will overcome the creeping folly
that has found its way to my heart, or I will tear it
out in her presence, and throw it at hers, that she
may see how much more tender than her own that
organ is, which she, and you, and every one else,
have taken the liberty to call callous. 
Give notice to the people who live back and edge,
and on either hand, of the cursed Mother, to remove
their best effects, if I am rejected: For the first
vengeance I shall take, will be to set fire to that den
of serpents. Nor will there be any fear of taking
them when they are in any act that has the relish of
salvation in it, as Shakespeare says—So that my Revenge,
if they perish in the flames I shall light up,
will be complete as to them. 