



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sunday Night, March 12. 
This man, this Lovelace, gives me great uneasiness. 
He is extremely bold and rash. He was
this afternoon at our Church—In hopes to see me, I
suppose: And yet, if he had such hopes, his usual
intelligence must have failed him. 
Shorey was at church; and a principal part of her
observation was upon his haughty and proud behaviour
when he turned round in the pew where he sat
to our family-pew. My Father and both my Uncles
were there; so were my Mother and Sister. My
Brother happily was not. —They all came home in 

disorder. Nor did the congregation mind any-body
but him; it being his first appearance there, since the
unhappy Rencounter. 
What did the man come for, if he intended to look
challenge and defiance, as Shorey says he did, and as
others, it seems, thought he did, as well as she? Did
he come for my sake; and, by behaving in such a
manner to those present of my family, imagine he
was doing me either service or pleasure? —He knows
how they hate him: Nor will he take pains, would
pains do, to obviate their hatred. 
You and I, my dear, have often taken notice of
his Pride; and you have raillied him upon it; and
instead of exculpating himself, he has owned it: And
by owning it he has thought he has done enough. 
For my own part, I thought Pride in his case an
improper subject for raillery. —People of birth and
fortune to be proud, is so needless, so mean a vice! — 
If they deserve respect, they will have it, without requiring
it. In other words, for persons to endeavour
to gain respect by a haughty behaviour, is to give a
proof that they mistrust their own merit: To make
confession that they know that their actions will not
attract it. —Distinction or Quality may be prided in
by those to whom distinction or quality is a new thing. 
And then the reflection and contempt which such bring
upon themselves by it, is a counter-balance. 
Such added advantages too, as this man has in his
person and mien: Learned also, as they say he is;— 
Such a man to be haughty, to be imperious! —The
lines of his own face at the same time condemning
him—how wholly inexcusable! —Proud of what? 
Not of doing well: The only justifiable Pride. — 
Proud of exterior advantages! —Must not one be led
by such a stop-short pride, as I may call it, in him or
her who has it, to mistrust the interior? Some people
may indeed be afraid, that if they did not assume, they
would be trampled upon. A very narrow fear, however, 

since they trample upon themselves who can
fear this. But this man must be secure, that humility
would be an ornament to him. 
He has talents indeed: But those talents and his
personal advantages have been snares to him. It is
plain they have. And this shews, that, weighed in an
equal balance, he would be found greatly wanting. 
Had my friends confided as they did at first, in
that discretion which they do not accuse me of being
defective in, I dare say I should have found him out: 
And then should have been as resolute to dismiss him,
as I was to dismiss others, and as I am never to have
Mr. Solmes. O that they did but know my heart! — 
It shall sooner burst, than voluntarily, uncompelled,
undriven, dictate a measure that shall cast a slur either
upon Them, or upon my Sex. 
Excuse me, my dear friend, for these grave soliloquies,
as I may call them. How have I run from reflection
to reflection! —But the occasion is recent— 
They are all in commotion below upon it. 
Shorey says, that Mr. Lovelace watched my Mother's
eye, and bowed to her: And she returned the
compliment. He always admired my Mother. She
would not, I believe, have hated him, had she not
been bid to hate him; and had it not been for the
Rencounter between him and her only Son. 
Dr. Lewen was at church; and observing, as every
one else did, the disorder into which Mr. Lovelace's
appearance had put all our family, was so good as to
engage him in conversation, when the Service was
over, till they were all gone to their coaches. 
My Uncles had my Letters in the morning. They,
as well as my Father, are more and more incensed
against me, it seems. Their Answers, if they vouchsafe
to answer me, will demonstrate, I doubt not, the
unseasonableness of this rash man's presence at our
church. 
They are angry also, as I understand, with my 

Mother, for returning his compliment. What an
enemy is hatred, even to the common forms of civility!
which, however, more distinguish the payer of
a compliment, than the receiver. But they all see,
they say, that there is but one way to put an end to
his insults. So I shall suffer: And in what will the
rash man have benefited himself, or mended his prospects? 
I am extremely apprehensive that this worse than
ghost-like appearance of his, bodes some still bolder
step. If he come hither (and very desirous he is of
my leave to come) I am afraid there will be murder. 
To avoid That, if there were no other way, I would
most willingly be buried alive. 
They are all in consultation—Upon my Letters, I
suppose—So they were in the morning; which occasioned
my Uncles to be at our church. I will send
you the copies of those Letters, as I promised in my
last, when I see whether I can give you their Answers
with them. This Letter is all—I cannot tell what— 
the effect of apprehension and displeasure at the man
who has occasioned my apprehensions. Six lines
would have contained all that is in it to the purpose
of my Story. 
Cl. H. 
See p. 205. for Mr. Lovelace's account of his behaviour
and intentions in his appearance at their
church. 