



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

My heart fluttered with the hope and the fear of
seeing my mamma, and with the shame and
the grief of having given her so much uneasiness. But
it needed not: She was not permitted to come. But
my aunt was so good as to return; yet not without my
sister: And, taking my hand, made me sit down by her. 

She came, she must own, officiously, she said, this
once more; tho' against the opinion of my father: 
But knowing, and dreading, the consequence of my
opposition, she could not but come. 
She then set forth to me, my friends expectations
from me; Mr. Solmes's riches (three times as rich he
came out to be as any-body had thought him); the settlements
proposed; Mr. Lovelace's bad character; 
their aversion to him; all in a very strong light; but
not a stronger, than my mamma had before placed
them in. My mamma, surely, could not have given
the particulars of what had passed between herself and
me: If she had, my aunt would not have repeated
many of the same sentiments, as you will find she did,
that had been still more strongly urged, without effect,
by her venerable sister. 
She said, it would break the heart of my father to
have it imagin'd, that he had not a power over his
child; and that, as he thought, for my own good: 
A child too, whom they always had doated upon! 
—Dearest, dearest Miss, concluded she, clasping her
fingers, with the most condescending earnestness, let
me beg of you for my sake, for your own sake, for a
hundred sakes, to get over this averseness, and give
up your prejudices, and make every-one happy and
easy once more. —I would kneel to you, my dearest
niece—Nay, I will kneel to you!— 
And down she dropp'd, and I with her, kneeling
to her, and beseeching her not to kneel; clasping
my arms about her, and bathing her worthy bosom
with my tears! 
Oh rise! rise! my beloved aunt, said I: You cut
me to the heart with this condescending goodness. 
Say then, my dearest niece, say then, that you will
oblige all your friends! If you love us, I beseech you
do! 
How can I promise what I can sooner choose to
die than to perform!— 

Say then, my dear, you'll consider of it. Say you
will but reason with yourself. Give us but hopes. 
Don't let me intreat, and thus intreat, in vain. For
still she kneeled, and I by her. 
What a hard case is mine! —Could I but doubt, I
know I could conquer. —That which is an inducement
to my friends, is none at all to me! —How often, my
dearest aunt, must I repeat the same thing! —Let
me but be single—Cannot I live single? Let me be
sent, as I have proposed, to Scotland, to Florence; 
any-whither: Let me be sent a slave to the Indies; 
any-whither: Any of these I will consent to. But
I cannot, cannot think of giving my vows to a man
I cannot endure!— 
Well then rising; (Bella silently, with uplifted
hands, reproaching my supposed perverseness) I see
nothing can prevail with you to oblige us. 
What can I do, my dearest aunt Hervey? What
can I do? Were I capable of giving a hope I meant
not to inlarge, then could I say, I would consider of
your kind advice. But I would rather be thought perverse
than insincere. Is there, however, no medium? 
Can nothing be thought of? Will nothing do, but to
have a man who is the more disgustful to me, because
he is unjust in the very articles he offers? 
Who now, Clary, said my sister, do you reflect
upon? Consider That. 
Make not invidious applications of what I say,
Bella. It may not be look'd upon in the same light
by every one. The giver and the accepter are principally
answerable, in an unjust donation. While I
think of it in this light, I should be inexcusable
to be the latter. But why do I enter upon a supposition
of this nature? My heart, as I have often,
often said, recoils at the thoughts of the man, in every
light. —Whose father, but mine, agrees upon articles,
where there is no prospect of a liking? Where the
direct contrary is avow'd, all along avow'd, without 

the least variation, or shadow of a change of sentiment? 
—But it is not my father's doing originally. 
O my cruel, cruel brother, to cause a measure to be
forced upon me, which he would not behave tolerably
under, were the like to be offer'd to him! 
The girl is got into her altitudes, aunt Hervey,
said my sister. You see, Madam, she spares no-body. 
Be pleased to let her know what she has to trust to. 
Nothing is to be done with her. Pray, Madam,
pronounce her doom. 
My aunt retir'd to the window, weeping, with my
sister in her hand: I cannot, indeed I cannot, Miss
Harlowe, said she, softly (but yet I heard every word
she said): There is great hardship in her case. She
is a noble child, after all. What pity things are gone
so far! But Mr. Solmes ought to be told to desist. 
O Madam, said my sister, in a kind of loud whisper,
are you caught too by the little Syren? —My
mamma did well not to come up! —I question whether
my papa himself, after his first indignation, would
not be turn'd round by her. Nobody but my brother
can do any-thing with her, I am sure. 
Don't think of your brother's coming up, said my
aunt, still in a low voice—He is too furious by much. 
I see no obstinacy, no perverseness in her manner! 
If your brother comes, I will not be answerable for
the consequences: For I thought twice or thrice she
would have gone into fits. 
O Madam, she has a strong heart! —And you see
there is no prevailing upon her, tho' you were upon
your knees to her. 
My sister left my aunt musing at the window,
with her back towards us; and took that opportunity
to insult me still more barbarously: For, stepping
to my closet, she took up the patterns which
my mamma had sent me up, and bringing them to
me, she spread them upon the chair by me; and, offering
one, and then another, upon her sleeve and 

shoulder, Thus she ran on, with great seeming tranquillity,
but whisperingly, that my aunt might not
hear her. This, Clary, is a pretty pattern enough: 
But This is quite charming! I would advise you to
make your appearance in it. And This, were I you,
should be my wedding night-gown—and This my
second dress'd suit! Won't you give orders, love,
to have your grandmother's jewels new set? Or
will you think to shew away in the new ones that Mr.
Solmes intends to present to you? He talks of laying
out two or three thousand pounds in presents, child! 
Dear heart! —How gorgeously will you be array'd! — 
What! silent, my dear, mamma Norton's sweet dear! 
What! silent still? —But, Clary, won't you have a
Velvet suit? It would cut a great figure in a country
church, you know: And the weather may bear it
for a month yet to come. Crimson Velvet, suppose! 
Such a fine complection as yours, how would it be
set off by it! What an agreeable blush would it give
you! —High-ho! (mocking me; for I sighed to be
thus fooled with): And do you sigh, love?—Well
then, as it will be a solemn wedding, what think you
of black Velvet, child? —Silent still, Clary! —Black
Velvet, so fair as you are, with those charming eyes,
gleaming thro' a wintry cloud, like an April Sun! — 
Does not Lovelace tell you they are charming eyes! — 
How lovely will you appear to every one! —What!
silent still, love! —But about your laces, Clary!— 
She would have gone on still further, had not my
aunt advanced towards us, wiping her eyes—What!
whispering, Ladies! You seem so easy and so pleas'd,
Miss Harlowe, with your private conference, that I
hope I shall carry down good news. 
I am only giving her my opinion of her patterns,
here. —Unask'd indeed. —But she seems, by her silence,
to approve of my judgment. 
O Bella! said I, that Mr. Lovelace had not taken
you at your word! —You had before now been exercising 

your judgment on your own account:  And I
had been happy, as well as you! —Was it my fault,
I pray you, that it was not so? —O how she rav'd! 
To be so ready to give, Bella, and so loth to take,
is not very fair in you. 
The poor Bella descended to call names. 
Why, sister, said I, you are as angry, as if there
were more in the hint, than possibly might be designed. 
My wish is sincere, for both our sakes!— 
for the whole family's sake! —And what (good now)
is there in it? —Do not, do not, dear Bella, give me
cause to suspect, that I have found a reason for your
unsisterly behaviour to me; and which till now was
wholly unaccountable from sister to sister— 
Fie, fie, Miss Clary! said my aunt. 
My sister was more and more outrageous. 
O how much sister, said I, to be a jest, than a
jester! —But now, Bella, turn the glass to you, and
see how poorly sits the robe upon your own shoulders,
which you have been so unmercifully fixing upon mine! 
Fie, fie, Miss Clary! repeated my aunt. 
And fie, fie, likewise, good Madam, to Miss Harlowe,
you would say, were you to have heard her
barbarous insults upon me! 
Let us go, Madam, said my sister, with great
violence; let us leave the creature to swell till she
bursts with her own poison. —The last time I will ever
come near her, in the mind I am in! 
It is so easy a thing, return'd I, were I to be
mean enough to follow an example that is so censureable
in the setter of it, to vanquish such a teazing
spirit as yours, with its own blunt weapons, that I
am amaz'd you will provoke me! —Yet, Bella, since
you will go (for she had hurry'd to the door), forgive
me: I do you. And you have a double reason
to do so, both from eldership, and the offence so studiously
given to one in affliction. —But may you be
happy, tho' I never shall! —May you never have half 

the trials I have had! Be this your comfort, that
you cannot have a sister to treat you, as you have
treated me! And so God bless you! 
O thou art a—And down she flung without saying
what. 
Permit me, Madam, said I to my aunt, sinking
down, and clasping her knees with my arms, to detain
you one moment—Not to say any thing about
my poor sister—She is her own punisher—Only to
thank you for all your condescending goodness to me. 
I only beg of you, not to impute to obstinacy the
immoveableness I have shewn to so tender a friend; 
and to forgive me every thing I have said or done
amiss in your presence: For it has not proceeded
from inward rancour to the poor Bella. But I will
be bold to say, that neither She, nor my Brother, nor
even my Father himself, knows what a heart they have
set a bleeding. 
I saw, to my comfort, what effect my sister's absence
wrought for me. —Rise, my noble-minded
niece!—charming creature! —[Those were her kind
words] kneel not to me! —Keep to yourself what I
now say to you: I admire you more than I can express
—And if you can forbear claiming your estate,
and can resolve to avoid Lovelace, you will continue
to be the greatest miracle I ever knew at your years. — 
But I must hasten down after your sister. —These are
my last words to you: Conform to your father's will,
if you possibly can. How meritorious will it be in
you to do so! Pray to God to enable you to conform. 
You don't know what may be done. 
Only, my dear aunt, one word, one word more
(for she was going)—Speak up all you can for my
dear Mrs. Norton. She is but low in the world: 
Should ill health overtake her, she may not know
how to live without my mamma's favour. I shall
have no means to help her; for I will want necessaries
before I will assert my right: And I do assure you, 

she has said so many things to me in behalf of my resigning
to my father's will, that her arguments have
not a little contributed to make me resolve to avoid
the extremities, which nevertheless I pray to God they
do not at last force me upon. And yet they deprive
me of her advice, and think unjustly of one of the
most excellent of women. 
I am glad to hear you say This: And take This,
and This, and This, my charming niece (for so she
call'd me at every word almost); kissing me earnestly,
and clasping her arms about my neck: And God
protect you, and direct you! But you must submit: 
Indeed you must. Some one day in a month from This,
is all the choice that is left you. 
And this, I suppose, was the doom my sister call'd
for; yet not worse than what had been pronounced
upon me before. 
She repeated these last sentences louder than the
former. And remember, Miss, added she, it is your
duty to comply—And down she went, leaving me
with my heart full, and my eyes runing over. 
The very repetition of this, fills me with almost
equal concern, to that which I felt at the time. I can
write no more; mistinesses of all the colours in the
rainbow twinkling upon my deluged eye. 
Wednesday, Five o'Clock. 
I Will add a few lines—My aunt, as she went
down from me, was met at the foot of the stairs by my
sister,
who seemed to think she had stay'd a good while
after her: And hearing her last words prescribing to me
implicit duty, praised her for it, and exclaim'd against
my obstinacy, with, Did you ever hear of such perverseness,
Madam? Could you have thought, that
your Clarissa, and every body's Clarissa, was such a
girl?—And who, as you said, is to submit, her father
or she? 
My aunt said something in answer to her compassionating 

me, as I thought, by her accent: But I
heard not the words. 
Such a strange perseverance in a measure so unreasonable! 
—But my brother and sister are continually
misrepresenting all I say and do; and I am deprived of
the opportunity of defending myself! —My sister says 
(a) , that had they thought me such a championess,
they would not have engaged with me: And now, not
knowing how to reconcile my supposed obstinacy with
my general character, and natural temper, they seem
to hope to tire me out, and resolve to vary their measures
accordingly. My brother, you see, (b) , is determin'd
to carry this point, or to abandon Harlowe-place,
and never to see it more: —So they are to lose
a son, or to conquer a daughter—the perversest and
most ingrateful that ever parents had! —This is the
light he places things in: And has undertaken, it
seems, to subdue me, if his advice be followed. It
will be further try'd, that I am convinced of; and
what will be their next measure, who can divine? 
I shall dispatch, with this, my answer to yours of
Sunday last; begun on Monday (c) ; but which is not
yet quite finish'd. It is too long to copy: I have not
time for it. In it I have been very free with you, my
dear, in more places than one. I cannot say, that I
am pleas'd with all I have written: —Yet will not now
alter it. —My mind is not at ease enough for the subject. 
—Don't be angry with me. Yet, if you can excuse
one or two passages, it will be, because they were
written by 
Your Clarissa Harlowe. 