



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Wednesday, 11 o'Clock. 
Dr. H. has just been here. He tarried with me
till the minister had done praying by the Lady; 
and then we were both admitted. Mr. Goddard, who
came while the Doctor and the Clergyman were with
her, went away with them when they went. They
took a solemn and everlasting leave of her, as I have
no scruple to say; blessing her, and being blessed by
her; and wishing (when it came to be their lot) for
an Exit as happy as hers is likely to be. 
She had again earnestly requested of the Doctor his
opinion how long it was now probable that she could
continue: And he told her, that he apprehended she 

would hardly see to-morrow night. She said, She
should number the hours with greater pleasure than
ever she numbered any in her life, on the most joyful
occasion. 
How unlike poor Belton's last hours, hers! See
the infinite difference in the effects, on the same awful
and affecting occasion, between a good and a bad
conscience! 
This moment a man is come from Miss Howe with
a Letter. Perhaps I shall be able to send you the contents. 
* *
She endeavoured several times with earnestness,
but in vain, to read the Letter of her dear friend. The
writing, she said, was too fine for her grosser sight,
and the lines staggered under her eye. And indeed she
trembled so, she could not hold the paper: And at
last, desired Mrs. Lovick to read it to her, the messenger
waiting for an Answer. 
Thou wilt see, in Miss Howe's Letter, how different
the expression of the same impatiency, and passionate
love, is, when dictated by the gentler mind
of a woman, from that which results from a mind so
boisterous and knotty, as thine. For Mrs. Lovick will
transcribe it; and I shall send it—To be re'd in this
place, if thou wilt. 

Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
Tuesday, Sept. 5. 
O my dearest friend!
What will become of your poor Anna Howe! 
I see by your writing, as well as read by your
own account (which, were you not very, very ill,
you would have touched more tenderly) how it is with
you! Why have I thus long delayed to attend you! 
Could I think, that the comfortings of a faithful
friend were as nothing to a gentle mind in distress,
that I could be prevailed upon to forbear visiting you
so much as once in all this time! I, as well as everybody 

else, to desert and abandon my dear creature to
strangers! What will become of me, if you be as
bad as my apprehensions make you! 
I will set out this moment, little as the encouragement
is that you give me to do so! My Mother is
willing I should! Why, O why, was she not before
willing! 
Yet she persuades me too (lest I should be fatally
affected were I to find my fears too well justified) to
wait the return of this messenger, who rides our
swiftest horse. —God speed him with good news to
me—Else—But, Oh! my dearest, dearest friend,
what else! —One line from your hand by him! —Send
me but one line to bid me attend you! I will set out
the moment, the very moment, I receive it. I am
now actually ready to do so! And if you love me, as
I love you, the sight of me will revive you to my
hopes. —But why, why, when I can think this, did I
not go up sooner? 
Blessed Heaven! deny not to my prayers, my
Friend, my Admonisher, my Adviser, at a time so
critical to myself! 
But methinks, your style and sentiments are too
well connected, too full of life and vigour, to give
cause for so much despair as the staggering pen seems
to forebode. 
I am sorry I was not at home [I must add thus
much, tho' the servant is ready mounted at the door]
when Mr. Belford's servant came with your affecting
Letter. I was at Miss Lloyd's. My Mamma sent
it to me; and I came home that instant. But he
was gone. He would not stay, it seems. Yet I
wanted to ask him an hundred thousand questions. 
But why delay I thus my messenger? I have a multitude
of things to say to you—To advise with you
about! —You shall direct me in every-thing. I will
obey the holding up of your finger. But, if you leave
me—what is the world, or any-thing in it, to 
Your Anna Howe? 

The effect this Letter had on the Lady, who is so
near the end which the fair writer so much apprehends
and deplores, obliged Mrs. Lovick to make many
breaks in reading it, and many changes of voice. 
This is a friend, said the divine Lady (taking the
Letter in her hand, and kissing it) worth wishing to
live for. —O my dear Anna Howe! How uninterruptedly
sweet and noble, has been our friendship! — 
But we shall one day meet (and this hope must comfort
us both) never to part again! Then, divested of
the shades of body, shall we be all light and all mind! 
—Then how unalloyed, how perfect, will be our
friendship! Our Love then will have one and the
same adorable object, and we shall enjoy It and each
other to all Eternity! 
She said, her dear friend was so earnest for a line
or two, that she would fain write, if she could: And
she tried; but to no purpose. She could dictate,
however, she believed; and desired Mrs. Lovick
would take pen and paper. Which she did, and
then she dictated to her. I would have withdrawn; 
but at her desire staid. 
She wandered a good deal, at first. She took notice
that she did. And when she got into a little train,
not pleasing herself, she apologized to Mrs. Lovick
for making her begin again and again; and said, That
third time should go, let it be as it would. 
She dictated the Farewel part, without hesitation; 
and when she came to the blessing and subscription,
she took the pen, and dropping on her knees, supported
by Mrs. Lovick, wrote the Conclusion; but
Mrs. Lovick was forced to guide her hand. 
You will find the sense surprisingly entire, her
weakness considered. 
I made the messenger wait, while I transcribed it. 
I have endeavoured to imitate the subscriptive part; 
and in the Letter made pauses, where, to the best of
my remembrance, she paused. In nothing that relates
to this admirable Lady, can I be too minute. 


Wedn. near 3 o'Clock. 
My dearest Miss Howe,
You must not be surprised—nor grieved—that
Mrs. Lovick writes for me. Altho' I cannot
obey you, and write with my pen, yet my heart
writes by hers—Accept it so—It is the nearest to obedience
I can! 
And now, what ought I to say? What can I say? — 
But why should you not know the truth? Since soon
you must—Very soon. 
Know then, and let your tears be those, if of pity,
of joyful pity! for I permit you to shed a few, to
embalm, as I may say, a fallen blossom—Know then,
that the good Doctor, and the pious Clergyman,
and the worthy Apothecary, have just now—with
joint benedictions—taken their last leave of me: And
the former bids me hope—Do, my dearest, let me
say hope—hope for my enlargement before to-morrow
sun-set. 
Adieu, therefore, my dearest friend! —Be this
your consolation, as it is mine, that in God's good
time we shall meet in a blessed Eternity, never more
to part! —Once more, then, adieu—and be happy! 
—Which a generous nature cannot be, unless—to
its power—it makes others so too. 
God for ever bless you! prays, dropt on my bended
knees, altho' supported upon them, 
Your obliged, grateful, affectionate,
Cl. Harlowe. 
When I had transcribed and sealed this Letter, by
her direction, I gave it to the messenger myself; who
told me that Miss Howe waited for nothing but his
return, to set out for London. 
Thy servant is just come; so I will close here. 
Thou art a merciless master. The two fellows are
hattered to death by thee, to use a female word; 
and all female words, tho' we are not sure of their 

derivation, have very significant meanings. I believe,
in their hearts, they wish the angel in the heaven
that is ready to receive her, and thee at thy proper
place, that there might be an end of their flurries; 
another word of the same gender. 
What a Letter hast thou sent me! —Poor Lovelace!
—is all the answer I will return. 
Five o'clock.] Colonel Morden is this moment arrived. 