


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Monday Night, October 16.
We have been very happy this day at my grandmamma's. 
Your brother makes himself more
and more beloved by all my friends; who yet declare,
that they thought they could not have loved him better
than they did before. My cousin Holles's say,
they could sooner lay open their hearts to him, than to
any man they ever saw; yet their freedom would never
make them lose sight of their respect. 
He told me, that he had breakfasted with Mr. Greville. 
How does he conciliate the mind of every one
to him! He said kind and compassionate things of
Mr. Greville; and so unaffectedly! —I was delighted
with him. For, regardful as he would be, and is, of
his own honour; no low, narrow jealousy, I dare say,
will ever have entrance into his heart. Charity thinketh
no evil! Of what a charming text is that a
part(a) ! —What is there equal to it, in any of the
writings of the philosophers? 
My dear Miss Byron, said he to me, Mr. Greville
loves you more than you can possibly imagine. Despairing
of success with you, he has assumed airs of
bravery; but your name is written in large letters in
his heart. He gave me, continued he, the importance
of asking my leave to love you still. —What
ought I to have answered?— 
What did you answer, Sir? 
That so far as I might presume to give it, I gave it. 

Had I the honour, added I, of calling Miss Byron
mine, I would not barely allow your love of her; I
would demand it. —Have I not assured you, Mr. Greville,
that I look upon you as my friend? 
You will quite subdue Mr. Greville, Sir, said I. 
You will, by the generosity of your treatment of
him, do more than any-body else ever could—You
will make him a good man. 
Mr. Greville, madam, deserves pity, on more accounts
than one. A wife, such a one as his good Angel
led him to wish for, would have settled his principles. 
He wants steadiness: But he is not, I hope, a
bad man. I was not concerned for his cavalier treatment
of you yesterday, but on your own account; 
lest his roughness should give you pain. But his concluding
wishes, and his preference of a rival to himself,
together with the manner of his departure, unable
as he was to withstand his own emotions, and the
effect it had upon his spirits, so as to confine him to
his chamber, had something great in it—And I shall
value him for it, as long as he will permit me. 
Sir Charles and my grandmamma had a good deal
of talk together. Dearly does she love to single him
out. What a pretty picture would they make, could
they be both drawn so as not to cause a profane jester
to fall into mistakes; as if it were an old Lady making
Love to a handsome young man. 
Let me sketch it out—See, then, the dear Lady,
with a countenance full of benignity, years written by
venerableness, rather than by wrinkles, in her face; 
dignity and familiarity in her manner; one hand on
his, talking to him: His fine countenance shining
with modesty and reverence, looking down, delighted,
as admiring her wisdom, and not a little regardful of
her half-pointing finger [Let that be, for fear of mistakes]
to a creature young enough to be her granddaughter; 
who, to avoid shewing too much sensibility,
shall seem to be talking to two other young Ladies 

[Nancy and Lucy, suppose]; but, in order to
distinguish the young creature, let her, with a blushing
cheek, cast a sly eye on the grandmamma and young
gentleman, while the other two shall not be afraid to
look more free and unconcerned. 
See, my dear, how fanciful I am: But I had a
mind to tell you, in a new manner, how my grandmamma
and Sir Charles seem to admire each other. 
Mr. Deane and he had also some talk together; 
my uncle joined them: And I blushed in earnest at
the subject I only guessed at from the following words
of Mr. Deane, at Sir Charles's rising to come from
them to my aunt and me, who both of us sat in the
bow-window. My dear Sir Charles Grandison, said
Mr. Deane, you love to give pleasure: I never was
so happy in my life, as I am in view of this long-wished-for
event. You must oblige me: I insist upon
it. 
My aunt took it, as I did. —A generous contention!
said she. O my dear! we shall all be too happy. 
God grant that nothing may fall out to disconcert us! 
If there should, how many broken hearts— 
The first broken one, madam, interrupted I, would
be the happiest: I, in that case, should have the advantage
of every-body. 
Dear love! you are too serious [Tears were in my
eyes]: Sir Charles's unquestionable honour is our security! 
—If Clementina be stedfast; if life and health
be spared you and him—If— 
Dear, dear madam, no more Ifs! Let there be
but one If, and that on Lady Clementina's resumption
In that case, I will submit; and God only (as
indeed He always ought) shall be my reliance for the
rest of my life. 
Lucy, Nancy, and my two cousin Holles's, came
and spread, two and two, the other seats of the bow-window
(there are but three) with their vast hoops; 
undoubtedly, because they saw Sir Charles coming to 

us. It is difficult, whispered I to my aunt (petulantly
enough), to get him one moment to one's self. My
cousin James (Silly youth! thought I) stopt him in his
way to me; but Sir Charles would not long be stopt:
He led the interrupter towards us; and a seat not being
at hand, while the young Ladies were making a
bustle to give him a place between them (tossing their
hoops above their shoulders on one side) and my cousin
James was hastening to bring him a chair; he threw
himself at the feet of my aunt and me, making the
floor his seat. 
I don't know how it was; but I thought I never
saw him look to more advantage. His attitude and
behaviour had such a Lover-like appearance—Don't
you see him, my dear? —His amiable countenance, so
artless, yet so obliging, cast up to my aunt and me:
His fine eyes meeting ours; mine, particularly, in
their own way; for I could not help looking down,
with a kind of proud bashfulness, as Lucy told me
afterwards. How affected must I have appeared, had
I either turned my head aside, or looked stiffly up, to
avoid his! 
I believe, my dear, we women in courtship don't
love, that men, if ever so wise, should keep up to us
the dignity of wisdom; much less, that they should be
solemn, formal, grave—Yet are we fond of respect
and observance too. —How is it? —Sir Charles Grandison
can tell. —Did you think of your brother, Lady
G. when you once said, that the man who would
commend himself to the general favour of us young
women, should be a Rake in his address, and a Saint
in his heart? Yet might you not have chosen a better
word than Rake? Are there not more clumsy and
foolish Rakes, than polite ones; except we can be so
mistaken, as to give to impudence the name of agreeable
freedom? 
Sir Charles fell immediately into the easiest (shall I
say the gallantest?) the most agreeable conversation, as 

if he must be all of a piece with the freedom of his
attitude; and mingled in his talk, two or three very
pretty humorous stories; so that nobody thought of
helping him again to a chair, or wishing him in one. 
How did this little incident familiarize the amiable
man, as a still more amiable man than before, to my
heart! In one of the little tales, which was of a gentleman
in Spain serenading his mistress; we asked
him, If he could not remember a sonnet he spoke of,
as a pretty one? He, without answering, sung it in a
most agreeable manner; and, at Lucy's request, gave
us the English of it. 
It is a very pretty sonnet. I will ask him for a copy,
and send it to you, who understand the language. 
My grandmamma, on Sir Charles's singing, beckoned
to my cousin James; who going to her, she
whispered him. He stept out, and presently returned
with a violin, and struck up, as he entered, a minuet-tune. 
Harriet, my Love! called out my grandmamma. 
Without any other intimation, the most
agreeable of men, in an instant, was on his feet,
reached his hat, and took me out. 
How were we applauded! How was my grandmamma
delighted! The words charming couple,
were whispered round, but loud enough to be heard. 
And when we had done, he led me to my seat with an
air that had all the real fine gentleman in it. But
then he sat not down as before.— 
I wonder if Lady Clementina ever danced with him. 
My aunt, at Lucy's whispered request, proposed a
dance between Sir Charles and her. You, Lady G.
observed, more than once, that Lucy dances finely. 
Insulter! whispered I to her, when she had done, you
know your advantages over me! Harriet, replied
she, what do good girls deserve, when they speak
against their consciences? 
My grandmamma afterwards called upon me for
one lesson on the harpsichord; and they made me
sing. 

An admirable conversation followed at tea, in which
my grandmother, aunt, my Lucy, and Sir Charles, bore
the chief parts; every other person delighting to be
silent. 
Had we not, Lady G. a charming day? 
In my next I shall have an opportunity, perhaps,
to tell you what kind of a travelling companion Sir
Charles is. For, be pleased to know, that for some
time past a change of air, and a little excursion from
place to place, have been prescribed for the establishment
of my health, by one of the honestest physicians
in England. The day before Sir Charles came into
these parts, it was fixed, that to-morrow we should
set out upon this tour. On his arrival, we had
thoughts of postponing it; but, having understood
our intention, he insisted upon its being prosecuted; 
and, offering his company, there was no declining the
favour, you know, early days as they, however, are:
And altho' everybody abroad talks of the occasion of
his visit to us; he has been so far from directing his
servants to make a secret of it, that he has ordered
his Saunders to answer to every curious questioner, that
Sir Charles and I were of longer acquaintance than
yesterday. But is not this, my dear, a cogent intimation
that Sir Charles thinks some parade, some delay,
necessary? Yet don't he and we know how little
a while ago it is, that he made his first declaration? 
What, my dear (should he be solicitous for an early
day) is the inference? My uncle, too, so forward, that
I am afraid of him. 
We are to set out to-morrow morning. Peter-borough
is to be our furthest stage, one way. Mr.
Deane insists, that we shall pass two or three days
with him. All of us, but my grandmamma, are to
be of this party. 
* *
O my dear Lady G. what a Letter is just brought
me, by the hand that carried up mine on Saturday! 

Bless me! what an answer! —This wicked wish! — 
But I have not time to enter into so large a field. 
Let me only say, That for some parts I most heartily
thank you and dear Lady L.; for others, I do not; 
and imagine Lady L. would not have subscribed her
beloved name, had she read the whole. What charming
spirits have you, my dear, dear Lady G.! —But,
Adieu, my ever-amiable Ladies, both! 
Harriet Byron. 

