



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wednesday Morning, May 17. 
Mr. Lovelace would fain have engaged me last
night. But as I was not prepared to enter
upon the subject of his proposals (intending to consider
them maturely) and was not highly pleased with
his conclusion, I desired to be excused seeing him till
morning; and the rather, as there is hardly any getting
from him in tolerable time over-night. 
Accordingly, about Seven o'clock we met in the dining-room. 
I find, he was full of expectation that I should meet
him with a very favourable, who knows but with a
thankful aspect? And I immediately found by his sullen
countenance, that he was under no small disappointment
that I did not. 
My dearest Love, are you well? Why look you so
solemn upon me? Will your indifference never be
over? If I have proposed terms in any respect short
of your expectation— 
I told him, that he had very considerately mentioned
my shewing his proposals to Miss Howe; and
as I should have a speedy opportunity to send them 

to her by Collins, I desired to suspend any talk upon
that subject till I had her opinion upon them. 
Good God! —If there were but the least loop-hole!
the least room for delay! —But he was writing a Letter
to Lord M. to give him an account of his Situation
with me, and could not finish it so satisfactorily,
either to my Lord or to himself, as if I would condescend
to say, whether the terms he had proposed
were acceptable or not. 
Thus far, I told him, I could say, That my principal
point was peace and reconciliation with my relations. 
As to other matters, the genteelness of his
own spirit would put him upon doing more for me
that I should ask, or expect. Wherefore, if all he
had to write about was to know what Lord M. would
do on my account, he might spare himself the trouble; 
for that my utmost wishes, as to myself, were
much more easily gratified than he perhaps imagined. 
He asked me then, If I would so far permit him
to touch upon the happy Day, as to request the presence
of Lord M. on the occasion, and to be my
Father? 
Father had a sweet and venerable sound with it,
I said. I should be glad to have a Father who would
own me! 
Was not this plain speaking, think you, my dear? 
Yet it rather, I must own, appears so to me on reflection,
that was designed freely at the time. For I
then, with a sigh from the bottom of my heart,
thought of my own Father; bitterly regretting, that
I am an outcast from him and from my Mother. 
Mr. Lovelace I thought seemed a little affected; at
the manner of my speaking, and perhaps at the sad
reflection. 
I am but a very young creature, Mr. Lovelace,
said I [and wiped my eyes as I turned away my face]
altho' you have kindly, and in love to me, introduced
so much sorrow to me already: So you must not 

wonder, that the word Father strikes so sensibly upon
the heart of a child ever dutiful till she knew
you, and whose tender years still require the paternal
wing. 
He turned towards the window [Rejoice with me,
my dear, since I seem to be devoted to him, that the
man is not absolutely impenetrable!]: His emotion
was visible; yet he endeavoured to suppress it. Approaching
me again; again he was obliged to turn
from me; Angelic something, he said: But then,
obtaining a heart more suitable to his wish, he once
more approached me. —For his own part, he said, as
Lord M. was so subject to the gout, he was afraid,
that the compliment he had just proposed to make
him, might, if made, occasion a longer suspension
than he could bear to think of: And if it did, it
would vex him to the heart that he had made it. 
I could not say a single word to this, you know,
my dear. But you will guess at my thoughts of
what he said—So much passionate Love, lip-deep! So
prudent, and so dutifully patient at heart to a relation
he had till now so undutifully despised! —Why, why,
am I thrown upon such a man, thought I! 
He hesitated, as if contending with himself; and
after taking a turn or two about the room, He was at
a great loss what to determine upon, he said, because
he had not the honour of knowing when he was to be
made the happiest of men—Would to God it might
that very instant be resolved upon! 
He stopped a moment or two, staring in his usual
confident way, in my downcast face [Did I not, O
my beloved friend, think you, want a Father or a Mother
just then?]: But if he could not, so soon as he
wished, procure my consent to a day; in that case, he
thought the compliment might as well be made to
Lord M. as not—[See, my dear!] Since the Settlements
might be drawn and engrossed in the intervenient 

time, which would pacify his impatience, as no
time would be lost. 
You will suppose how I was affected by this speech,
by repeating the substance of what he said upon it; 
as follows. 
—But, by his Soul, he knew not, so much was I
upon the reserve, and so much latent meaning did my
eye import, whether, when he most hoped to please
me, he was not farthest from doing so. Would I
vouchsafe to say, Whether I approved of his compliment
to Lord M. or not? 
&dotup;To leave it to me, to chuse whether the speedy
Day he ought to have urged for with earnestness,
should be accelerated or suspended!&dotup; —Miss Howe,
thought I, at that moment, says, I must not run away
from This man! 
To be sure, Mr. Lovelace, if this matter be ever to
be, it must be agreeable to me to have the full approbation
of one side, since I cannot have that of the other. 
If this matter be ever to be! Good God! what
words are there at this time of day! And full approbation
of one side! Why that word approbation? When
the greatest pride of all my family is, That of having
the honour of so dear a creature for their relation? 
Would to Heaven, my dearest life, added he, that,
without complimenting Any-body, to-morrow might
be the happiest day of my life! —What say you, my
angel? With a trembling impatience, that seemed not
affected—What say you for to-morrow? 
It was likely, my dear, I could say much to it, or
name another day, had I been disposed to the latter,
with such an hinted delay from him. 
I was silent. 
&dotup;Next day, Madam, if not to-morrow?— 
&dotup;Had he given me time to answer, it could not
have been in the affirmative, you must think—But
in the same breath, he went on—Or the day after
that? —And taking both my hands in his, he stared 

me into a half-confusion—Would you have had
patience with him, my dear?&dotup; 
No, no, said I, as calmly as possible, you cannot
think, that I should imagine there can be reason for
such a hurry. It will be most agreeable, to be sure,
for my Lord to be present. 
I am all obedience and resignation, returned the
wretch, with a self-pluming air, as if he had acquiesced
to a proposal made by me, and had complimented
me with a great piece of self-denial. 
&dotup;Is it not plain, my dear, that he designs to vex and
teaze me? Proud, yet mean, and foolish man, if so! 
—But you say all Punctilio is at an end with me. Why,
why, will he take pains to make a heart wrap itself
up in Reserve, that wishes only, and that for his
sake as well as my own, to observe due decorum?&dotup; 
Modesty, I think, required of me, that it should
pass as he had put it: Did it not? —I think it did. 
Would to Heaven—but what signifies wishing? 
But when he would have rewarded himself, as he
had heretofore called it, for this self-supposed concession,
with a kiss, I repulsed him with a just and very
sincere disdain. 
He seemed both vexed and surprised, as one who had
made the most agreeable proposals and concessions, and
thought them ingratefully returned. He plainly said,
that he thought our situation would entitle him to
such an innocent freedom: And he was both amazed
and grieved to be thus scornfully repulsed. 
No reply could be made by me on such a subject. 
I abruptly broke from him. I recollect, as I passed
by one of the pier-glasses, that I saw in it his clenched
hand offered in wrath to his forehead: The words,
Indifference, by his Soul, next to hatred, I heard him
speak: And something of Ice he mentioned: I heard
not what. 
Whether he intends to write to my Lord, or to
Miss Montague, I cannot tell. But as all delicacy
ought to be over with me now, perhaps I am to blame 

to expect it from a man who may not know what it
is. If he does not, and yet thinks himself very polite,
and intends not to be otherwise, I am rather to
be pitied, than he to be censured. 
And after all, since I must take him as I find him, I
must: That is to say, as a man so vain and so accustomed
to be admired, that, not being conscious of internal
defect, he has taken no pains to polish more
than his outside: And as his proposals are higher
than my expectations; and as, in his own opinion, he
has a great deal to bear from me; I will (no new offence
preventing) sit down to answer them: —And, if
possible, in terms as unobjectible to him, as his are
to me. 
But after all, see you nor, my dear, more and
more, the mismatch that there is in our minds? 
However, I am willing to compound for my fault,
by giving up (if that may be all my punishment) the
expectation of what is deemed happiness in this life,
with such a husband as I fear he will make. In short,
I will content myself to be a suffering person through
the State to the end of my life. —A long one it cannot
be!— 
This may qualify him (as it may prove) from stings
of conscience from misbehaviour to a first wife, to be
a more tolerable one to a second, tho' not perhaps a
better deserving one: While my story, to all who
shall know it, will afford these instructions: That the
eye is a traitor, and ought ever to be mistrusted: That
form is deceitful: In other words; That a fine person
is seldom paired by a fine mind: And that sound
principles, and a good heart, are the only bases on
which the hopes of a happy future, either with respect
to this world, or the other, can be built. 
And so much at present for Mr. Lovelace's proposals: 
Of which I desire your opinion (a) . 

Four Letters are written by Mr. Lovelace from the
date of his last, giving the state of affairs between
him and the Lady, pretty much the same as in hers
in the same period, allowing for the humour in his,
and for his resentments expressed with vehemence
on her resolution to leave him, if her friends could
be brought to be reconciled to her. —A few extracts
from them will be only given. 
What, says he, might have become of me, and of
my projects, had not her Father, and the rest of the
Implacables, stood my friends? 
After violent threatnings of Revenge, he says, 
'Tis plain she would have given me up for ever: 
Nor should I have been able to prevent her abandoning
of me, unless I had torn up the tree by the roots 

to come at the fruit; which I hope still to bring down
by a gentle shake or two, if I can but have patience to
stay the ripening season. 
Thus triumphing in his unpolite cruelty, he says, 
After her haughty treatment of me, I am resolved
she shall speak out. There are a thousand beauties to
be discovered in the face, in the accent, in the bush-beating
hesitations of a woman who is earnest about
a subject which she wants to introduce, yet knows not
how. Silly fellows, calling themselves generous ones,
would value themselves for sparing a Lady's confusion: 
But they are silly fellows indeed; and rob themselves
of prodigious pleasure by their forwardness; 
and at the same time deprive her of displaying a world
of charms, which only can be manifested on these
occasions. 
&dotup;I'll tell thee beforehand, how it will be with my
Charmer in this case—She will be about it, and
about it, several times: But I will not understand
her: At last, after half a dozen hem—ings, she
will be obliged to speak out—I think, Mr. Lovelace— 
I think, Sir—I think you were saying some
days ago—Still I will be all silence—her eyes fixed
upon my shoe-buckles, as I sit over-against her— 
Ladies, when put to it thus, always admire a man's
shoe-buckles, or perhaps some particular beauties
in the carpet. I think you said, that Mrs. Fretchville—Then a crystal tear trickles down each crimson
cheek, vexed to have her virgin pride so little
assisted. But, come, my meaning dear, cry I to
myself, remember what I have suffered for thee,
and what I have suffered by thee! Thy tearful pausings
shall not be helped out by me. Speak out,
Love! —O the sweet confusion! Can I rob myself
of so many conflicting beauties by the precipitate
charmer-pitying folly, by which a politer man
[Thou knowest, Lovely, that I am no polite man!] 

betrayed by his own tenderness, and unused to female
tears, would have been overcome? I will
feign an irresolution of mind on the occasion, that
she may not quite abhor me—that her reflections
on the scene in my absence may bring to her remembrance
some beauties in my part of it: An
irresolution that will be owing to awe, to reverence,
to profound veneration; and that will have
more eloquence in it, than words can have. 
Speak out then, Love, and spare not.&dotup; 
Hard-heartedness, as it is called, is an essential of
the Libertine's character. Familiarized to the distresses
he occasions, he is seldom betrayed by tenderness
into a complaisant weakness unworthy of himself. 
Mentioning the Settlements, he says, 
I am in earnest as to the terms. If I marry her
[And I have no doubt but that I shall, after my Pride,
my Ambition, my Revenge, if thou wilt, is gratified]
I will do her noble justice. The more I do for such a
prudent, such an excellent oeconomist, the more shall
I do for myself. —But, by my Soul, Belford, her
haughtiness shall be brought down to own both Love
and Obligation to me. Nor will this sketch of Settlements
bring us forwarder than I would have it. 
Modesty of Sex will stand my friend at any time. At
the very Altar, our hands joined, I would engage to
make this proud Beauty leave the parson and me, and
all my friends who should be present, tho' twenty in
number, to look like fools upon one another, while
she took wing, and flew out of the church-door, or
window (if that were open, and the door shut); and
this only by a single word. 
He mentions his rash expression, that she should be
his, altho' his damnation were to be the purchase. 
At that instant, says he, I was upon the point of
making a violent attempt; but was checked in the 

very moment, and but just in time to save myself, by
the awe I was struck with on again casting my eye
upon her terrified but lovely face, and seeing, as I
thought, her spotless heart in every line of it. 
O Virtue, Virtue! proceeds he, what is there in
thee, that can thus against his will affect the heart of
a Lovelace! —Whence these involuntary tremors, and
fear of giving mortal offence? —What art Thou, that
acting in the breast of a feeble woman, canst strike so
much awe into a spirit so intrepid! Which never before,
no, not in my first attempt, young as I then was,
and frighted at my own boldness (till I found myself
forgiven) had such an effect upon me! 
He paints, in lively colours, that part of the scene
between him and the Lady, where she says, ‘The
word Father has a sweet and venerable sound
with it.’ 
I was exceedingly affected, says he, upon the occasion. 
But was ashamed to be surprised into such a fit
of unmanly weakness—So ashamed, that I was resolved
to subdue it at the instant, and to guard against
the like for the future. Yet, at that moment, I more
than half regretted, that I could not permit her to enjoy
a triumph which she so well deserved to glory
in—Her youth, her beauty, her artless innocence,
and her manner, equally beyond comparison or description. 
But her Indifference, Belford! —That she
could resolve to sacrifice me to the malice of my enemies; 
and carry on the design in so clandestine a
manner—Yet love her, as I do, to phrensy! —Revere
her, as I do, to adoration! —These were the recollections
with which I fortified my recreant heart
against her! Yet, after all, if she persevere, she must
conquer! —Coward, as she has made me, that never
was a coward before! 
He concludes his fourth Letter in a vehement rage,
upon her repulsing him, when he offered to salute 

her; having supposed, as he owns, that she
would have been all condescension on his proposals
to her. 
This, says he, I will for ever remember against
her, in order to steel my heart, that I may cut thro'
a rock of ice to hers; and repay her for the disdain,
the scorn, which glowed in her countenance, and
was apparent in her air, at her abrupt departure from
me, after such obliging behaviour on my side, and
after I had so earnestly pressed her for an early Day. 
The women below say, She hates me; she despises
me! —And 'tis true: She does; she must. —And
why cannot I take their advice? —I will not long,
my Fair one, be despised by thee, and laughed at by
them! 
Let me acquaint thee, Jack, adds he, by way of
postscript, That this effort of hers to leave me, if
she could have been received; her sending for a
coach on Sunday; no doubt, resolving not to return,
if she had gone out without me (for did she not declare,
that she had thoughts to retire to some of the
villages about town, where she could be safe and
private?) have, all together, so much alarmed me,
that I have been adding to the written instructions
for my fellow and the people below how to act in
case she should elope in my absence: Particularly
letting Will. know what he shall report to strangers
in case she shall throw herself upon any such with a
resolution to abandon me. To these instructions I
shall further add as circumstances offer. 