



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Tuesday, March 14. 
I now send you copies of my Letters to my Uncles: 
With their Answers. Be pleased to return the
latter by the first deposit. I leave them for you to
make remarks upon. I shall make none. 

To John Harlowe, Esq;
Sat. March 11. 
Allow me, my honoured Second Papa, as in
my happy days you taught me to call you, to
implore your interest with my Papa, to engage him 

to dispense with a command, which, if insisted upon,
will deprive me of my free-will, and make me miserable
for my whole life. 
For my whole life! let me repeat: Is that a small
point, my dear Uncle, to give up? Am not I to live
with the man? Is any-body else? Shall I not therefore
be allowed to judge for myself, whether I can, or cannot,
live happily with him? 
Should it be ever so unhappily, will it be prudence
to complain, or appeal? If it were, to whom could I
appeal with effect against a Husband? And would not
the invincible and avowed dislike I have for him at
setting out, seem to justify any ill usage from him, in
that State, were I to be ever so observant of him? 
And if I were to be at all observant of him, it must be
from Fear, not Love. 
Once more, let me repeat, That this is not a small
point to give up: And that it is for life. Why, I
pray you, good Sir, should I be made miserable for
life? Why should I be deprived of all comfort, but
that which the hope that it would be a very short one,
would afford me? 
Marriage is a very solemn engagement, enough to
make a young creature's heart ake, with the best prospects,
when she thinks seriously of it! —To be given
up to a strange man; To be engrafted into a strange
family; To give up her very Name, as a mark of her
becoming his absolute and dependent property; To be
obliged to prefer this strange man to Father, Mother,
—to every-body: —And his humours to all her
own—Or to contend perhaps, in breach of a vowed
duty, for every innocent instance of free-will—To go
no-whither; To make acquaintance; To give up
acquaintance; To renounce even the strictest friendships
perhaps; all at his pleasure, whether she think
it reasonable to do so or not: Surely, Sir, a young
creature ought not to be obliged to make all these
sacrifices but for such a man as she can love. —If she 

be, how sad must be the case! —How miserable the
life, if to be called life! 
I wish I could obey you all. What a pleasure
would it be to me, if I could! —Marry first, and Love
will come after, was said by one of my dearest friends: 
But this is a shocking assertion. A thousand things
may happen to make that state but barely tolerable,
where it is entered into with mutual affection: What
must it then be, where the Husband can have no confidence
in the Love of his Wife; but has reason rather
to question it, from the preference he himself believes
she would have given to somebody else, had
she had her own option? What doubts, what jealousies,
what want of tenderness, what unfavourable prepossessions,
will there be, in a Matrimony thus circumstanced! 
How will every look, every action, even
the most innocent, be liable to misconstruction! — 
While, on the other hand, an indifference, a carelessness
to oblige, may take place; and Fear only can
constrain even an appearance of what ought to be the
effect of undisguised Love! 
Think seriously of these things, dear good Sir, and
represent them to my Father in that strong light
which the subject will bear; but in which my Sex,
and my tender years and inexperience, will not permit
me to paint it; and use your powerful interest, that
your poor Niece may not be consigned to a misery so
durable. 
I have offered to engage not to marry at all, if that
condition may be accepted. What a disgrace is it to
me to be thus sequestred from company, thus banished
my Papa's and Mamma's presence; thus slighted
and deserted by you, Sir, and my other kind Uncle! 
And to be hindered from attending at that Public
Worship, which, were I out of the way of my duty,
would be most likely to reduce me into the right path
again! —Is this the way, Sir, can this be thought to
be the way, to be taken with a free and open spirit? 

May not this strange method rather harden than convince? 
I cannot bear to live in disgrace thus: The very
servants, so lately permitted to be under my own direction,
hardly daring to speak to me; my own servant
discarded with high marks of undeserved suspicion and
displeasure, and my Sister's maid set over me. 
The matter may be too far pushed. —Indeed it may. 
—And then, perhaps, every one will be sorry for their
parts in it. 
May I be permitted to mention an expedient? — 
‘If I am to be watched, banished, and confined; Suppose,
Sir, it were to be at your house?’ —Then the
neighbouring gentry will the less wonder, that the
person of whom they used to think so favourably, appeared
not at church here; and that she received not
their visits. 
I hope, there can be no objection to This. You
used to love to have me with you, Sir, when all went
happily with me: And will you not now permit me,
in my troubles, the favour of your house, till all this
displeasure be overblown? —Upon my word, Sir, I
will not stir out of doors, if you require the contrary
of me: Nor will I see any body, but whom you will
allow me to see; provided Mr. Solmes be not brought
to persecute me there. 
Procure, then, this favour for me; if you cannot
procure the still greater, that of a happy Reconciliation
(which nevertheless I presume to hope for, if you will
be so good as to plead for me); and you will then
add to those favours, and to that indulgence, which
have bound me, and will for ever bind me, to be 
Your dutiful and obliged Niece,
Cl. Harlowe. 
The Answer.

Sunday Night. 
My dear Niece,
It grieves me to be forced to deny you any-thing
you ask. Yet it must be so; for unless you can 

bring your mind to oblige us in this one point, in
which our promises and honour were engaged before
we believed there could be so sturdy an opposition,
you must never expect to be what you have been to
us all. 
In short, Niece, we are an embattled phalanx. Your
reading makes you a stranger to nothing, but what
you should be most acquainted with—So you will see
by that expression, that we are not to be pierced by
your persuasions, and invincible persistence. We have
agreed all to be moved, or none; and not to comply
without one another. So you know your destiny; 
and have nothing to do but to yield to it. 
Let me tell you, the virtue of obedience lies not in
obliging when you can be obliged again—But give up
an inclination, and there is some merit in That. 
As to your expedient; You shall not come to my
house, Miss Clary; tho' this is a prayer I little thought
I ever should have denied you: For were you to keep
your word as to seeing nobody but whom we please,
yet can you write to somebody else, and receive Letters
from him: This we too well know you can, and
have done—More is the shame and the pity! 
You offer to live single, Miss—We wish you married: 
But because you may not have the man your
heart is set upon, why, truly, you will have nobody
we shall recommend: And as we know, that somehow
or other you correspond with him, or at least
did, as long as you could; and as he defies us all, and
would not dare to do so, if he were not sure of you
in spite of us all (which is not a little vexatious to us,
you must think); we are resolved to frustrate him, and
triumph over him, rather than that he should triumph
over us: That's one word for all. So expect not any
advocateship from me: I will not plead for you; and
that's enough. From 
Your displeased Uncle,
John Harlowe. 
P. S. For the rest, I refer to my Brother Anthony. 


To Antony Harlowe, Esq;
Saturday, March 11. 
Honoured Sir,
As you have thought fit to favour Mr. Solmes with
your particular recommendation, and was very
earnest in his behalf, ranking him (as you told me,
upon introducing him to me) among your select friends; 
and expecting my regards to him accordingly; I beg
your patience, while I offer a few things, out of many
that I could offer, to your serious consideration, on
occasion of his address to me, if I am to use that word. 
I am charged with prepossession in another person's
favour. You will be pleased, Sir, to remember, that
till my Brother returned from Scotland, that other
person was not absolutely discouraged, nor was I forbid
to receive his visits. I believe it will not be pretended,
that in birth, education, or personal endowments,
a comparison can be made between the two. 
And only let me ask you, Sir, if the one would have
been thought of for me, had he not made such offers,
as, upon my word, I think, I ought not in justice to
accept of, nor he to propose: Offers, which if he had
not made, I dare say, my Papa would not have required
them of him. 
But the one, it seems, has many faults: —Is the
other faultless? —The principal thing objected to Mr.
Lovelace (and a very inexcusable one) is, that he is
immoral in his Loves—Is not the other in his Hatreds? 
—Nay, as I may say, in his Loves too (the object only
differing) if the love of money be the root of all evil. 
But, Sir, if I am prepossessed, what has Mr. Solmes
to hope for? —Why should he persevere? What must
I think of the man who would wish me to be his Wife
against my inclination? —And is it not a very harsh
thing for my friends to desire to see me married to one
I cannot love, when they will not be persuaded but
that there is one whom I do love? 

Treated as I am, now is the time for me to speak
out, or never. —Let me review what it is Mr. Solmes
depends upon on this occasion. Does he believe, that
the disgrace which I suffer on his account, will give
him a merit with me? Does he think to win my
esteem, thro' my Uncles sternness to me; by my Brother's
contemptuous usage; by my Sister's unkindness; 
by being denied to visit, or be visited; and to
correspond with my chosen friend, altho' a person of
unexceptionable honour and prudence, and of my own
Sex; my servant to be torn from me, and another servant
set over me; to be confined, like a prisoner, to
narrow and disgraceful limits, in order avowedly to
mortify me, and to break my spirit; to be turned out
of that family-management which I loved, and had
the greater pleasure in it, because it was an ease, as I
thought, to my Mamma, and what my Sister chose
not; and yet, tho' time hangs heavy upon my hands,
to be so put out of my course, that I have as little inclination
as liberty to pursue any of my choice delights? 
—Are these steps necessary to reduce me to a
level so low, as to make me a fit Wife for this man? 
—Yet these are all he can have to trust to—And if
his reliance is on these measures, I would have him to
know, that he mistakes meekness and gentleness of disposition
for servility and baseness of heart. 
I beseech you, Sir, to let the natural turn and bent
of his mind and my mind be considered: What are
his qualities, by which he would hope to win my
esteem? —Dear, dear Sir, if I am to be compelled, let
it be in favour of a man that can read and write— 
That can teach me something: For what a Husband
must that man make, who can do nothing but command; 
and needs himself the instruction he should be
qualified to give? 
I may be conceited, Sir; I may be vain of my little
reading; of my writing; as of late I have more than
once been told I am—But, Sir, the more unequal the 

proposed match, if so: The better opinion I have of
myself, the worse I must have of him; and the more
unfit are we for each other. 
Indeed, Sir, I must say, I thought my friends had
put a higher value upon me. My Brother pretended
once, that it was owing to such value, that Mr. Lovelace's
address was prohibited. —Can this be; and such
a man as Mr. Solmes be intended for me? 
As to his proposed Settlements, I hope I shall not
incur your greater displeasure, if I say, what all who
know me have reason to think (and some have upbraided
me for) that I despise those motives. Dear, dear
Sir; what are Settlements to one who has as much of
her own as she wishes for? —Who has more in her
own power, as a single person, than it is probable she
would be permitted to have at her disposal, as a Wife? 
—Whose expences and ambition are moderate; and
who, if she had superfluities, would rather dispense them
to the necessitous, than lay them by her useless? If then
such narrow motives have so little weight with me for
my own benefit, shall the remote and uncertain
view of family-aggrandizement, and that in the person
of my Brother and his descendents, be thought sufficient
to influence me? 
Has the behaviour of that Brother to me of late, or
his consideration for the family (which had so little
weight with him, that he could chuse to hazard a life
so justly precious as an only Son's, rather than not
gratify passions which he is above attempting to subdue,
and, give me leave to say, has been too much indulged
in, either with regard to his own good, or the
peace of any-body related to him; Has his behaviour,
I say) deserved of me in particular, that I should make
a sacrifice of my temporal (and, who knows? of my
eternal) happiness, to promote a plan formed upon
chimerical, at least upon unlikely contingencies; as I
will undertake to demonstrate, if I may be permitted
to examine it? 

I am afraid you will condemn my warmth : But
does not the occasion require it? To the want of a
greater degree of earnestness in my opposition, it
seems, it is owing, that such advances have been
made, as have been made. Then, dear Sir, allow
something, I beseech you, for a spirit raised and embittered
by disgraces, which (knowing my own heart)
I am confident to say, are unmerited. 
But why have I said so much, in answer to the supposed
charge of prepossession, when I have declared to
my Mamma, as now, Sir, I do to You, that if it be
not insisted upon that I shall marry any other person,
particularly this Mr. Solmes, I will enter into any engagements
never to have the other, nor any man else,
without their consents; that is to say, without the consents
of my Father and Mother, and of you my Uncle,
and my elder Uncle, and my Cousin Morden, as he is
one of the Trustees for my Grandfather's bounty to
me? —As to my Brother indeed, I cannot say, that his
treatment of me has been of late so brotherly, as to
entitle him to more than civility from me : And for
this, give me leave to add, he would be very much
my debtor. 
If I have not been explicit enough in declaring my
dislike to Mr. Solmes (that the prepossession which is
charged upon me may not be supposed to influence me
against him) I do declare solemnly, That, were there
no such man as Mr. Lovelace in the world, I would
not have Mr. Solmes. It is necessary, in some one of
my Letters to my dear friends, that I should write so
clearly as to put this matter out of all doubt : And to
whom can I better address myself with an explicitness
that can admit of no mistake, than to that Uncle who
professes the highest regard for plain dealing and sincerity? 
Let me then, for these reasons, be still more particular
in some of my exceptions to him. 
Mr. Solmes appears to me (to all the world indeed) 

to have a very narrow mind, and no great capacity: 
He is coarse and indelicate; as rough in his manners
as in his person: He is not only narrow, but covetous: 
Being possessed of great wealth, he enjoys it not; nor
has the spirit to communicate to a distress of any kind. 
Does not his own Sister live unhappily, for want of a
little of his superfluities? And suffers he not his aged
Uncle, the Brother of his own Mother, to owe to the
generosity of strangers the poor subsistence he picks up
from half-a-dozen families? —You know, Sir, my
open, free, communicative temper: How unhappy
must I be, circumscribed in his narrow, selfish circle!
out of which, being with-held by this diabolical parsimony,
he dare no more stir, than a conjurer out of
his; nor would let me. 
Such a man as this, love! —Yes, perhaps he may,
my Grandfather's Estate; which he has told several
persons (and could not resist hinting the same thing to
me, with that sort of pleasure which a low mind takes,
when it intimates its own interest as a sufficient motive
for it to expect another's favour) lies so extremely convenient
for him, that it would double the value of a
considerable part of his own. That Estate, and an
alliance which would do credit to his obscurity and
narrowness, may make him think he can love, and
induce him to believe he does: But at most, it is but a
second-place Love. Riches were, are, and always will
be, his predominant passion. His were left him by a
miser, on this very account: And I must be obliged to
forego all the choice delights of my life, and be as
mean as he, or else be quite unhappy. Pardon, Sir,
this severity of expression—One is apt to say more
than one would, of a person one dislikes, when more
is said in his favour than he can possibly deserve; and
when he is urged to my acceptance with so much vehemence,
that there is no choice left me. 
Whether these things be perfectly so, or not, while
I think they are, it is impossible I should ever look 

upon Mr. Solmes in the light he is offered to me. Nay,
were he to be proved ten times better than I have represented
him, and sincerely think him; yet would
he be still ten times more disagreeable to me than any
other man I know in the world. Let me therefore
beseech you, Sir, to become an advocate for your
Niece, that she may not be made a victim to a man so
highly disgustful to her. 
You and my other Uncle can do a great deal for
me, if you please, with my Papa. Be persuaded, Sir,
that I am not governed by obstinacy in this case; but
by aversion; an aversion I cannot overcome: For, if 
I have but endeavoured to reason with myself (out of
regard to the duty I owe to my Father's will) my heart
has recoiled, and I have been averse to myself, for
offering but to argue with myself, in behalf of a man
who, in the light he appears to me, has no one merit; 
and who, knowing this aversion, could not persevere
as he does, if he had the spirit of a man. 
If, Sir, you can think the contents of this Letter
reasonable, I beseech you to support them with your
interest: If not—I shall be most unhappy! —Nevertheless,
it is but just in me so to write, as that Mr.
Solmes may know what he has to trust to. 
Forgive, dear Sir, this tedious Letter; and suffer it
to have weight with you; and you will for ever oblige 
Your dutiful and affectionate Niece,
Cl. Harlowe. 

Mr. Antony Harlowe, To Miss Cl. Harlowe.
Niece Clary,
You had better not write to us, or to any of us. 
To me, particularly, you had better never to
have set pen to paper, on the subject whereupon you
have written. He that is first in his own cause, faith
the wise man, seemeth just: But his neighbour cometh,
and searcheth him. And so, in this respect, will I be
your neighbour; for I will search your heart to the 

bottom; that is to say, if your Letter be written from
your heart. Yet do I know what a task I have undertaken,
because of the knack you are noted for at
writing: But in defence of a Father's authority, in
behalf of the good, and honour, and prosperity of a
family one comes of, what a hard thing would it be,
if one could not beat down all the arguments a Rebel
child (How loth I am to write down that word of
Miss Clary Harlowe!) can bring, in behalf of her
obstinacy! 
In the first place, Don't you declare (and that contrary
to your declarations to your Mother; remember
that, girl!) that you prefer the man we all hate, and
who hates us as bad! —Then what a character have
you given of a worthy man! I wonder you dare write
so freely of one we all respect—But possibly it may be
for that very reason. 
How you begin your Letter! —Because I value Mr.
Solmes as my friend, you treat him the worse—That's
the plain Dunstable of the matter, Miss! —I am not
such a fool but I can see That. —And so a noted whoremonger
is to be chosen before a man who is a money-lover! 
Let me tell you, Niece, this little becomes so
nice a one as you have been always reckoned. Who,
think you, does most injustice, a prodigal man or a
saving man? —The one saves his own money; the
other spends other peoples. But your favourite is a
sinner in grain, and upon record. 
The devil's in your Sex! God forgive me for saying
so—The nicest of them will prefer a vile Rake and
Wh&wblank; I suppose I must not repeat the word: — 
The Word will offend, when the Vicious denominated
by that word will be chosen! —I had not been a
Bachelor to this time, if I had not seen such a mass of
contradictions in you all. —Such gnat-strainers and
camel-swallowers, as venerable Holy Writ has it. 
What names will perverseness call things by! —A
prudent man, who intends to be just to every-body, 

is a covetous man! —While a vile, profligate Rake is
christened with the appellation of a gallant man; and
a polite man, I'll warrant you! 
It is my firm opinion, Lovelace would not have so
much regard for you as he professes; but for two
reasons. And what are these? —Why, out of spite to
all of us—one of them: The other, because of your
independent fortune. I wish your good Grandfather
had not left what he did so much in your own power,
as I may say. But little did he imagine his beloved
Grand-daughter would have turned upon all her friends
as she has done! 
What has Mr. Solmes to hope for, if you are prepossessed! 
Hey-day! Is this you, Cousin Clary! —Has he
then nothing to hope for from your Father's, and
Mother's, and Our recommendations? —No, nothing
at all, it seems! —O brave! —I should think that this,
with a dutiful child, as we took you to be, was enough. 
Depending on this your duty, we proceeded: And
now there is no help for it: For we will not be
balked: Neither shall our friend Mr. Solmes, I can
tell you that. 
If your Estate is convenient for him, what then? 
Does that (pert Cousin) make it out that he does not
love you? He had need to expect some good with
you, that has so little good to hope for from you; 
mind that. But pray, is not this Estate our Estate, as
we may say? Have we not all an interest in it, and a
prior right, if right were to have taken place? And
was it more than a good old man's dotage, God rest
his soul! that gave it you before us all? —Well then,
ought we not to have a choice who shall have it in
marriage with you? And would you have the conscience
to wish us to let a vile fellow who hates us all,
run away with it? —You bid me weigh what you
write: Do you weigh this, girl: And it will appear
we have more to say for ourselves than you was
aware of. 

As to your hard treatment, as you call it, thank
yourself for That. It may be over when you will: 
So I reckon nothing upon that. You was not banished
and confined till all entreaty and fair speeches were
tried with you: Mind that. And Mr. Solmes can't
help your obstinacy. —Let that be observed too. 
As to being visited, and visiting; you never was
fond of either: So that's a grievance put into the scale
to make weight. —As to disgrace, that's as bad to us
as to you: So fine a young creature! So much as we
used to brag of you! —And too-besides, this is all in
your power, as the rest. 
But your heart recoils, when you would persuade
yourself to obey your Parents—Finely described, is it
not! —Too truly described, I own, as you go on. I
know, that you may love him if you will. I had a
good mind to bid you hate him; then, perhaps, you
would like him the better: For I have always found
a most horrid romantic perverseness in your Sex. —To
do and to love what you should not, is meat, drink,
and vesture, to you all. 
I am absolutely of your Brother's mind, That reading
and writing, tho' not too much for the wits of you
young girls, are too much for your judgments. — 
You say, you may be conceited, Cousin; you may be
vain! —And so you are, to despise this gentleman as
you do. He can read and write as well as most gentlemen,
I can tell you that. Who told you Mr. Solmes
cannot read and write? But you must have a Husband
who can learn you something! —I wish you knew but
your duty as well as you do your talents—That, Niece,
you have of late days to learn; and Mr. Solmes will
therefore find something to instruct you in. I will
not shew him this Letter of yours, tho' you seem to
desire it, lest it should provoke him to be too severe a
schoolmaster, when you are his'n. 
But now I think of it, suppose you are readier at
your pen than he—You will make the more useful 

wife to him; won't you? For who so good an oeconomist
as you? —And you may keep all his accounts,
and save yourselves a Steward. —And, let me tell you,
this is a fine advantage in a family: For those Stewards
are often sad dogs, and creep into a man's Estate before
he knows where he is; and not seldom is he
forced to pay them interest for his own money. 
I know not why a good wife should be above these
things. It is better than lying abed half the day, and
junketing and card-playing all the night, and making
yourselves wholly useless to every good purpose in
your own families, as is now the fashion among ye— 
The duce take you all that do so, say I! —Only that,
thank my Stars, I am a Bachelor! 
Then this is a province you are admirably versed
in: You grieve that it is taken from you here, you
know. So here, Miss, with Mr. Solmes you will have
something to keep account of, for the sake of you and
your children: With the other, perhaps you will have
an account to keep, too—But an account of what will
go over the left shoulder: Only of what he squanders,
what he borrows, and what he owes, and never will
pay. Come, come, Cousin, you know nothing of the
world; a man's a man ; and you may have many
partners in a handsome man, and costly ones too, who
may lavish away all you save. Mr. Solmes therefore
for my money, and I hope for yours. 
But Mr. Solmes is a coarse man. He is not delicate
enough for your niceness ; because I suppose he dresses
not like a fop and a coxcomb, and because he lays not
himself out in complimental nonsense, the poison of
female minds. He is a man of sense, I can tell you. 
No man talks more to the purpose to us: But you
fly him so, that he has no opportunity given him, to
express it to you: And a man who loves, if he have
ever so much sense, looks like a fool; especially when
he is despised, and treated as you treated him the last
time he was in your company. 

As to his Sister; she threw herself away (as you
want to do) against his full warning: For he told her
what she had to trust to, if she married where she did
marry. And he was as good as his word; and so an
honest man ought: Offences against warning ought
to be smarted for. Take care this be not your case. 
Mind that. 
His Uncle deserves no favour from him; for he
would have circumvented Mr. Solmes, and got Sir
Oliver to leave to himself the Estate he had always
designed for him his Nephew; and brought him up
in the hope of it. Too ready forgiveness does but encourage
offences: That's your good Father's maxim: 
And there would not be so many headstrong daughters
as there are, if this maxim were kept in mind. —Punishments
are of service to offenders; Rewards should
be only to the meriting: And I think the former are
to be dealt out rigorously, in wilful cases. 
As to his Love; he shews it but too much for your
deservings, as they have been of late; let me tell you
That: And This is his misfortune; and may in time
perhaps be yours. 
As to his Parsimony, which you wickedly call diabolical
[a very free word in your mouth, let me tell ye]
Little reason have you of all people for this, on whom
he proposes, of his own accord, to settle all he has in
the world: A proof, let him love Riches as he will,
that he loves you better. But that you may be without
excuse on this score, we will tie him up to your own
terms, and oblige him by the marriage-articles to allow
you a very handsome quarterly sum to do what you
please with. And this has been told you before; and
I have said it to Mrs. Howe (that good and worthy
Lady) before her proud daughter, that you might hear
of it again. 
To contradict the charge of prepossession to Lovelace,
you offer never to have him without our consents: And what is This saying, but that you will hope 

on for our consents, and to wheedle and tire us out? 
Then he will always be in expectation while you are
single: And we are to live on at this rate (are we?)
vexed by you, and continually watchful about you; 
and as continually exposed to his insolence and threats. 
Remember last Sunday, girl! —What might have happened,
had your Brother and he met? —Moreover,
you cannot do with such a spirit as his, as you can
with worthy Mr. Solmes: The one you make tremble; 
the other will make you quake—Mind that— 
And you will not be able to help yourself. And remember,
that if there should be any misunderstanding
between one of them and you, we should all interpose; 
and with effect, no doubt: But with the other, it
would be self-do, self-have; and who would either care
or dare to put in a word for you? Nor let the supposition
of matrimonial differences frighten you: Honey-moon
lasts not now-a-days above a fortnight; and
Dunmow Flitch, as I have been informed, was never
claimed; tho' some say once it was. Marriage is a
queer State, child, whether paired by the parties or by
their friends. Out of three Brothers of us, you know,
there was but one had courage to marry. And why
was it, do you think? We were wise by other peoples
experience. 
Don't despise money so much: You may come to
know the value of it: That is a piece of instruction
that you are to learn; and which, according to your
own notions, Mr. Solmes will be able to teach you. 
I do indeed condemn your warmth. I will not allow
for disgraces you bring upon yourself. If I thought
them unmerited, I would be your advocate. But it
was always my notion, that Children should not dispute
their Parents authority. When your Grandfather left
his Estate to you, tho' his three Sons, and a Grandson,
and your elder Sister, were in being, we all acquiesced: 
And why? Because it was our Father's doing. 
Do you imitate that example: If you will not, 

those who set it you have the more reason to hold you
inexcusable. Mind that, Cousin. 
You mention your Brother too scornfully: And,
in your Letter to him, are very disrespectful; and so
indeed you are to your Sister, in the Letter you wrote
to her. Your Brother, Madam, is your Brother; a
third older than yourself; and a Man: And pray be
so good as not to forget what is due to a Brother, who
(next to us three Brothers) is the head of the family; 
and on whom the name depends—As upon your dutiful
compliance depends the success of the noblest plan
that ever was laid down for the honour of the family
you are come of. And pray now let me ask you, If
the honour of That will not be an honour to you? — 
If you don't think so, the more unworthy you. You
shall see the plan, if you promise not to be prejudiced
against it right or wrong. If you are not besotted to
that man, I am sure you will like it. If you are, were
Mr. Solmes an angel, it would signify nothing: For
the devil is Love, and Love is the devil, when it gets
into any of your heads. Many examples have I seen
of that. 
If there were no such man as Lovelace in the world,
you would not have Mr. Solmes. —You would not,
Miss! —Very pretty, truly l&wblank;We see how your spirit
is embittered indeed. —Wonder not, since it is come
to your will not's, that those who have authority over
you, say, You shall have the other. And I am one. 
Mind that. And if it behoves You to speak out, Miss,
it behoves US not to speak in. What's sawce for
the goose is sawce for the gander: Take That in your
thought too. 
I humbly apprehend, that Mr. Solmes has the spirit
of a man, and a gentleman. I would admonish you
therefore not to provoke it. He pities you as much
as he loves you. He says, He will convince you of
his Love by deeds, since he is not permitted by you
to express it by words. And all his dependence is 

upon your generosity hereafter. We hope he may
depend upon That: We encourage him to think he
may. And this heartens him up. So that you may
lay his constancy at your Parents and your Uncles
doors; and This will be another mark of your duty,
you know. 
You must be sensible, that you reflect upon your
Parents, and all of us, when you tell me you cannot
in justice accept of the Settlements proposed to you. 
This reflection we should have wondered at from you
once; but now we don't. 
There are many other very censurable passages in
this free Letter of yours; but we must place them to
the account of your embittered spirit. I am glad you mentioned that word, because we should have been at
a loss what to have called it. —I should much rather
nevertheless have had reason to give it a better name. 
I love you dearly still, Miss. I think you, tho'
my Niece, one of the finest young gentlewomen I
ever saw. But, upon my conscience, I think you
ought to obey your Parents, and oblige me, and my
Brother John: For you know very well, that we
have nothing but your good at heart: Consistently indeed
with the good and honour of all of us. What
must we think of any one of it, who would not promote
the good of the whole? and who would set
one part of it against another? —Which God forbid,
say I! —You see I am for the good of all. What
shall I get by it, let things go as they will? Do I want
any thing of any-body for my own sake? Does my
Brother John? —Well, then, Cousin Clary, What
would you be at, as I may say? 
O but You can't love Mr. Solmes! —But, I say,
you know not what you can do. You encourage yourself
in your dislike. You permit your heart (little did
I think it was such a froward one) to recoil. Take it
to task, Niece; drive it on as fast as it recoils [We do
so in all our Sea-fights, and Land-fights too, by our 

Sailors and Soldiers, or we should not conquer]; and
we are all sure you will overcome it. And why? Because
you ought. So we think, whatever you think: 
And whose thoughts are to be preferred? You may
be wittier than we; but, if you are wiser, we have
lived some of us, let me tell you, to very little purpose
thirty or forty years longer than you. 
I have written as long a Letter as yours. I may not
write in so lively, or so polite a style as my Niece: 
But I think I have all the argument on my side: And
you will vastly oblige me, if you will shew me by
your compliance with all our desires, that you think
so too. If you do not, you must not expect an Advocate,
or even a Friend, in me, dearly as I love you. 
For then I shall be sorry to be called 
Your Uncle,
Antony Harlowe. 
Tuesday, Two in the Morning. 
Postscript.
You must send me no more Letters: But a compliable
one you may send. But I need not have forbid
you; for I am sure, this, by fair argument, is
unanswerable—I know it is. I have written day
and night, I may say, ever since Sunday morning,
only church-time, or the like of that: But this is
the last, I can tell you, from 
Ant. H. 