



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Monday, July 10. 
I now, my dearest friend, resume my pen, to
obey my Mother, in giving you her opinion upon
your unhappy Story. 
She still harps upon the old string, and will have
it, that all your calamities are owing to your first
fatal step; for she believes (what I cannot) that your
relations had intended, after one general trial more,
to comply with your aversion, if they had found it as
riveted a one, as, let me say, it was a folly to suppose
it would not be found to be, after so many ridiculously
repeated experiments. 
As to your latter sufferings from that vilest of
miscreants, she is unalterably of opinion, that if all
be as you have related (which she doubts not) with
regard to the Potions, and to the Violences you have
sustained, you ought, by all means, to set on foot a
prosecution against him, and against his devilish accomplices. 
She asks, What Murderers, what Ravishers, would
be brought to justice, if Modesty were to be a general
plea, and allowable, against appearing in a Court to
prosecute? 
She says, that the good of Society requires, that
such a Beast of Prey should be hunted out of it: And,
if you do not prosecute him, she thinks you will be
answerable for all the mischiefs he may do in the course
of this future villainous life. 
Will it be thought, Nancy, said she, that Miss
Clarissa Harlowe can be in earnest, when she says,
she is not solicitous to have her disgraces concealed
from the world, if she be afraid or ashamed to appear
in Court, to do justice to herself and her Sex against
him? Will it not be rather surmised, that she may 

be apprehensive, that some Weakness, or lurking
Love, will appear upon the Tryal of the strange
Cause? If, inferred she, such complicated villainy as
this (where Perjury, Potions, Forgery, Subornation,
are all combined to effect the ruin of an innocent
creature, and to dishonour a family of eminence, and
where those very crimes, as may be supposed, are
proofs of her innocence) is to go off with impunity,
what case will deserve to be brought into judgment; 
or what malefactor ought to be hanged? 
Then she thinks, and so do I, that the vile creatures,
his Accomplices, ought, by all means, to be brought
to condign punishment, as they must and will be,
upon bringing him to his Tryal: And this may be a
means to blow up and root out a whole Nest of
Vipers, and save many innocent creatures. 
She added, That, if Miss Clarissa Harlowe could
be so indifferent about having this public justice done
upon such a wretch for her own sake, she ought to
overcome her scruples out of regard to her Family,
her Acquaintance, and her Sex, which are all highly
injured and scandalized by his villainy to her. 
For her own part, she declares, That were she your
Mother, she would forgive you upon no other terms: 
And, upon your compliance with these, she herself
will undertake to reconcile all your family to you. 
These, my dear, are my Mother's sentiments upon
your sad Story. 
I cannot say, but there are reason and justice in
them: And it is my opinion, that it would be very
right for the Law to oblige an injured woman to prosecute,
and to make seduction on the man's part
capital, where his studied baseness, and no fault in her
will, appeared. 
To this purpose, the custom in the Isle of Man is
a very good one— 
‘If a single woman there prosecutes a single man
for a Rape, the Ecclesiastical Judges impanel a 

Jury; and, if this Jury find him guilty, he is returned
guilty to the Temporal Courts: Where, if
he be convicted, the Deemster, or Judge, delivers
to the woman a Rope, a Sword, and a Ring; and
she has it in her choice to have him hanged, beheaded,
or to marry him.’ 
One of the two former, I think, should always be
her option. 
I long for the full particulars of your Story. You
must have but too much time upon your hands, for a
mind so active as yours, if tolerable health and spirits
be afforded you. 
The villainy of the worst of men, and the virtue
of the most excellent of women, I expect will be exemplified
in it, were it to be written in the same connected
and particular manner, in which you used to
write to me. 
Try for it, my dearest friend; and since you cannot
give the Example without the Warning, give both, for
the sakes of all those who shall hear of your unhappy
fate; beginning from yours of June 5. your prospects
then not disagreeable. I pity you for the task; tho'
I cannot willingly exempt you from it. 
* *
My Mother will have me add, That she must insist
upon your prosecuting the Villain. She repeats, that
she makes that a condition on which she permits our
future correspondence. Let me therefore know your
thoughts upon it. I asked her, If she would be willing,
that I should appear to support you in Court, if
you complied? —By all means, she said, if that would
induce you to begin with him, and with the horrid
women. I think I could attend you, I am sure I
could, were there but a probability of bringing the
monster to his deserved end. 
Once more your thoughts of it, supposing it were
to meet with the approbation of your relations? 
But whatever be your determination on this head, 

it shall be my constant prayer, That God will give
you patience to bear your heavy afflictions, as a person
ought to do who has not brought them upon herself
by a faulty will; that He will speak peace and comfort
to your wounded mind; and give you many
happy years. I am, and ever will be, 
Your affectionate and faithful
Anna Howe. 
The two preceding Letters were sent by a special messenger: 
In the Cover were written the following
lines. 

Monday, July 10. 
I cannot, my dearest friend, suffer the inclosed to go
unaccompanied by a few lines, to signify to you,
that they are both less tender in some places, than I
would have written, had they not been to pass my
Mother's inspection. The principal reason, however,
of my writing thus separately, is, To beg of you to
permit me to send you money and necessaries; which
you must needs want: And that you will let me
know, if either I, or any-body I can influence, can be
of service to you. I am excessively apprehensive,
that you are not enough out of the Villain's reach
where you are. Yet London, I am persuaded, is the
place of all others, to be private in. 
I could tear my hair for vexation, that I have it
not in my power to afford you personal protection! — 
I am, 
Your ever devoted
Anna Howe. 
&dotup;Once more forgive me, my dearest creature, for
my barbarous tauntings in mine of the 5th! 
Yet I can hardly forgive myself. I to be so
cruel, yet to know you so well! —Whence,
whence, had I this vile impatiency of spirit!—&dotup; 