



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Wednesday, April 19. 
I have a piece of intelligence to give you, which concerns
you much to know. 
Your Brother having been assured, that you are not
married, has taken a resolution to find you out, waylay
you, and carry you off. A friend of his, a captain
of a ship, undertakes to get you on ship-board; and to
sail away with you, either to Hull or Leith, in the
way to one of your Brother's houses. 
They are very wicked: For in spite of your virtue
they conclude you to be ruined. But if they can be
assured when they have you, that you are not, they
will secure you till they can bring you out Mrs. Solmes. 
Mean time, in order to give Mr. Lovelace full employment,
they talk of a prosecution which will be set
up against him, for some crime they have got a notion
of, which they think, if it do not cost him his life,
will make him fly his country. 
This is very early news. Miss Bell told it in confidence,
and with mighty triumph over Lovelace, to
Miss Lloyd; who is at present her favourite; though
as much your admirer as ever. Miss Lloyd, being very
apprehensive of the mischief which might follow such an
attempt, told it to me, with leave to apprise you privately 

of it—And yet neither she nor I would be sorry,
perhaps, if Lovelace were to be fairly hanged—that is
to say, if you, my dear, had no objection to it. But
we cannot bear, that such an admirable creature should
be made the tennis-ball of two violent spirits—Much
less, that you should be seized, and exposed to the brutal
treatment of wretches who have no bowels. 
If you can engage Mr. Lovelace to keep his temper
upon it, I think you should acquaint him with it; but
not to mention Miss Lloyd. Perhaps his wicked agent
may come at the intelligence, and reveal it to him. 
But I leave it to your own discretion to do as you think
fit in it. All my concern is, that this daring and foolish
project, if carried on, will be a means of throwing
you more into his power than ever. But as it will convince
you, that there can be no hope of a Reconciliation,
I wish you were actually married, let the cause
for the prosecution hinted at be what it will, short of
Murder or a Rape. 
Your Hannah was very thankful for your kind present. 
She heaped a thousand blessings upon you for it. 
She has Mr. Lovelace's too, by this time. 
I am pleased with Mr. Hickman, I can tell you: — 
For he has sent her two guineas by the person who
carries Mr. Lovelace's five, as from an unknown hand: 
Nor am I, or you, to know it. But he does a great
many things of this sort; and is as silent as the night
in his charities; for nobody knows of them, till the
gratitude of the benefited will not let them be concealed. 
He is now-and-then my almoner, and I believe always
adds to my little benefactions. 
But his time is not come to be praised to his face for
these things; nor does he seem to want that encouragement. 
The man has certainly a good mind. Nor can we
expect in one man every good quality. But he is really
a silly fellow, my dear, to trouble his head about me,
when he sees how much I despise his whole Sex; and 

must of course make a common man look like a fool,
were he not to make himself look like one, by wishing
to pitch his tent so oddly. Our likings and dislikings,
as I have often thought, are seldom governed by
prudence, or with a view to happiness. The eye, my
dear, the wicked eye—has such a strict alliance with
the heart—And both have such enmity to the judgment! 
—What an unequal union, the mind and body! All
the senses, like the family at Harlowe-Place, in a confederacy
against that which would animate, and give
honour to the whole, were it allowed its proper precedence. 
Permit me, I beseech you, before you go to London,
to send you forty-eight guineas. I mention that sum
to oblige you, because, by accepting back the two to
Hannah, I will hold you indebted to me fifty. —Surely
this will induce you! You know that I cannot want
the money. I told you, that I have near double that
sum; and that the half of it is more than my Mother
knows I am mistress of. &dotup;You are afraid, that my
Mother will question me on this subject; and then
you think I must own the truth—But little as I love
equivocation, and little as you would allow of it in
your Anna Howe, it is hard, if I cannot (were I to
be put to it ever so closely) find something to say,
that would bring me off, and not impeach my veracity.&dotup; 
With so little money as you have, what can
you do at such a place as London? —You don't know
what occasion you may have for messengers, intelligence,
and such-like. If you don't oblige me, I shall
not think your stomach so much down as you say it is; 
and as, in this one particular, I think it ought to be. 
As to the state of things between my Mother and me,
you know enough of her temper, not to need to be told,
that she never espouses or resents with indifference. 
Yet will she not remember, that I am her Daughter. 
No, truly, I am all my Papa's girl. 
She was very sensible, surely, of the violence of my 

poor Father's temper, that she can so long remember
that, when acts of tenderness and affection seem quite
forgotten. Some Daughters would be tempted to
think, that controul sat very heavy upon a Mother
who can endeavour to exert the power she has over a
Child, and regret, for years after death, that she had
not the same over a Husband. 
If this manner of expression becomes not me, of
my Mother, the fault will be somewhat extenuated by
the Love I always bore to my Father, and by the reverence
I shall ever pay to his memory: For he was
a fond Father, and perhaps would have been as tender
a Husband, had not my Mother and he been too much
of one temper to agree. 
The misfortune was, in short, that, when one was
out of humour, the other would be so too: Yet neither
of their tempers comparatively bad. Notwithstanding
all which, I did not imagine, girl as I was
in my Father's life-time, that my Mother's part of
the yoke sat so heavy upon her neck as she gives me
room to think it did whenever she is pleased to disclaim
her part of me. 
Both Parents, as I have often thought, should be
very careful, if they would secure to themselves the
undivided Love of their children, that, of all things,
they should avoid such durable contentions with each
other, as should distress their children in chusing their
party, when they would be glad to reverence both as
they ought. 
But here is the thing: There is not a better manager
of her affairs in the Sex, than my Mother; and
I believe a notable. Wife is more impatient of controul,
than an indolent one. An indolent one, perhaps, thinks
she has somewhat to compound for; while women of
the other character, I suppose, know too well their
own significance to think highly of that of any-body
else. All must be their own way. In one word, Because
they are useful, they will be more than useful. 

I do assure you, my dear, were I a man, and a
man who loved my quiet, I would not have one of
these managing Wives on any consideration. I would
make it a matter of serious enquiry beforehand, whether
my mistress's qualifications, if I heard she was
notable, were masculine or feminine ones. If indeed
I were an indolent supine mortal, who might be in
danger of becoming the property of my Steward, I
would then perhaps chuse to marry for the qualifications
of a Steward. 
But, setting my Mother out of the question, because
she is my Mother, have I not seen how Lady
Hartley pranks up herself above all her Sex, because
she knows how to manage affairs that do not belong to
her Sex to manage? —Affairs that can do no credit to
her as a woman to understand; practically, I mean; 
for the theory of them may not be amiss to be known. 
Indeed, my dear, I do not think a Man-woman a
pretty character at all: And, as I said, were I a man,
I would sooner chuse a Dove, tho' it were fit for nothing,
but, as the Play says, to go tame about house,
and breed, than a Wife that is setting at work (my
insignificant self present perhaps) every busy hour my
never-resting servants, those of the Stud not excepted; 
and who, with a besom in her hand, as I may say,
would be continually filling me with apprehensions,
that she wanted to sweep me out of my own house as
useless lumber. 
Were indeed the mistress of a family (like the wonderful
young Lady I so much and so justly admire) to
know how to confine herself within her own respectable
rounds of the Needle, the Pen, the Housekeeper's
Bills, the Dairy for her amusement; to see the Poor
fed from superfluities that would otherwise be wasted; 
and exert herself in all the really useful branches of
Domestic Management; then would she move in her
proper sphere; then would she render herself amiably
useful, and respectably necessary; then would she become 

the Mistress-wheel of the family [Whatever you
think of your Anna Howe, I would not have her be
the Master-wheel]; and every-body would love her; 
as every-body did you, before your insolent Brother
came back, flushed with his unmerited acquirements,
and turned all things topsy-turvy. 
If you will be informed of the particulars of our
contention, after you have known in general, that
your unhappy affair was the subject; why then, I
think, I must tell you. 
Yet how shall I? —I feel my cheek glow with
mingled shame and indignation—Know then, my dear,
—that I have been—as I may say—that I have been
beaten—Indeed 'tis true. My Mother thought fit to
slap my hands to get from me a sheet of a Letter she
caught me writing to you; which I tore, because she
should not read it, and burnt it before her face. 
I know this will trouble you: So spare yourself the
pains to tell me it does. 
Mr. Hickman came in presently after. I would
not see him. I am either too much a Woman to be
beat, or too much a Child to have an Humble Servant. 
—So I told my Mother. What can one oppose but
Sullens, when it would be unpardonable so much as to
think of lifting up a finger? 
In the Harlowe-style, She will be obeyed, she says: 
And even Mr. Hickman shall be forbid the house, if
he contributes to the carrying on of a correspondence
which she will not suffer to be continued. 
Poor man! He stands a whimsical chance between
us. But he knows he is sure of my Mother; but not
of me. 'Tis easy then for him to chuse his party,
were it not his inclination to serve you, as it surely is. 
And this makes him a merit with me, which otherwise
he would not have had; notwithstanding the
good qualities which I have just now acknowleged in
his favour. For, my dear, let my faults in other
respects be what they may, I will pretend to say, that 

I have in my own mind those qualities which I praised
him for. And if we are to come together, I could
for that reason better dispense with them in him. — 
So if a Husband, who has a bountiful-tempered Wife,
is not a niggard, nor seeks to restrain her, but has an
opinion of all she does, that is enough for him: As,
on the contrary, if a bountiful-tempered Husband has
a frugal Wife, it is best for both. For one to give,
and the other to give, except they have prudence, and
are at so good an understanding with each other, as
to compare notes, they may perhaps put it out of
their power to be just. Good frugal doctrine, my
dear! But this way of putting it, is middling the
matter between what I have learnt of my Mother's
over-prudent and your enlarged notions. —But from
doctrine to fact— 
I shut myself up all that day; and what little I did
eat, eat alone. But at night she sent up Kitty, with
a command, upon my obedience, to attend her at
supper. 
I went down: But most gloriously in the Sullens. 
YES, and NO, were great words with me, to every
thing she asked, for a good while. 
That behaviour, she told me, should not do for
her. 
Beating should not with me, I said. 
My bold resistance, she told me, had provoked her
to slap my hand; and she was sorry to have been so
provoked. But again insisted, that I would either
give up my correspondence absolutely, or let her see
all that passed in it. 
I must not do either, I told her. It was unsuitable
both to my inclination and to my honour, at the instigation
of base minds, to give up a friend in distress. 
She rung all the maternal changes upon the words
Duty, Obedience, Filial obligation, and so forth. 
I told her, that a duty too rigorously and unreasonably
exacted had been your ruin, if you were ruined. 

If I were of age to be married, I hoped she would
think me capable of making, or at least of keeping, my
own friendships; such a one especially as this, with a
woman too, and one whose friendship she herself, till
this distressful point of time, had thought the most
useful and edifying that I had ever contracted. 
The greater the merit, the worse the action: The
finer the talents, the more dangerous the example. 
There were other duties, I said, besides the filial
one; and I hoped I need not give up a suffering
friend, especially at the instigation of those by whom
she suffered. I told her, that it was very hard to annex
such a condition as that to my duty; when I was
persuaded, that both duties might be performed, without
derogating from either: That an unreasonable
command (she must excuse me; I must say it, tho' I
were slapt again) was a degree of tyranny: And I
could not have expected, that at these years I should
be allowed no will, no choice of my own; where a
a woman only was concerned, and the devilish Sex
not in the question. 
What turned most in favour of her argument was,
that I desired to be excused from letting her read all
that passes between us. She insisted much upon this: 
And since, she said, you were in the hands of the
most intriguing man in the world; and a man, who
had made a jest of her favourite Hickman, as she has
been told; she knows not what consequences, unthought
of by you or me, may flow from such a correspondence. 
So you see, my dear, that I fare the worse on Mr.
Hickman's account! My Mother might see all that
passes between us, did I not know, that it would
cramp your spirit, and restrain the freedom of your
pen, as it would also the freedom of mine: And were
she not moreover so firmly attached to the contrary
side, that inferences, consequences, strained deductions,
censures, and constructions the most partial, would 

for ever be hawled in to teaze me, and would perpetually
subject us to the necessity of debating and canvassing. 
Besides, I don't chuse that she should know how
much this artful wretch has outwitted, as I may call
it, a person so much his Superior in all the nobler qualities
of the human mind. 
The generosity of your heart, and the greatness of
your soul, full well I know; but do not offer to dissuade
me from this correspondence. 
Mr. Hickman, immediately on the contention
above, offered his service; and I accepted of it, as
you will see by my last. He thinks, tho' he has all
honour for my Mother, that she is unkind to us both. 
He was pleased to tell me (with an Air, as I thought)
that he not only approved of our correspondence, but
admired the steadiness of my friendship; and having
no opinion of your man, but a great one of me, thinks
that my advice or intelligence from time to time may
be of use to you; and on this presumption, said, that
it would be a thousand pities that you should suffer for
want of either. 
Mr. Hickman pleased me in the main by his speech; 
and it is well the general tenor of it was agreeable; 
otherwise, I can tell him, I should have reckoned with
him for his word approve; for it is a style I have not
yet permitted him to talk to me in. And you see,
my dear, what these men are—No sooner do they
find that you have favoured them with the power of
doing you an agreeable service, but they take upon
them to approve, forsooth, of your actions! By which
is implied a right to disapprove, if they think fit. 
I have told my Mother, how much you wish to be
reconciled to your Relations, and how independent you
are upon Lovelace. 
Mark the end of the latter assertion, she says. And
as to Reconciliation, she knows that nothing will do
(and will have it, that nothing ought to do) but your 

returning back, without presuming to condition with
them. And this if you do, she says, will best shew
your independence on Lovelace. 
You see, my dear, what your duty is, in my Mother's
opinion. 
I suppose your next directed to Mr. Hickman, at
his own house, will be from London. 
Heaven preserve you in honour and safety, is my
prayer. 
What you do for change of cloaths, I cannot imagine. 
It is amazing to me, what your Relations can mean
by distressing you as they seem resolved to do. I see
they will throw you into his arms, whether you will
or not. 
I send this by Robert, for dispatch-sake: And can
only repeat the hitherto rejected offer of my best services. 
Adieu, my dearest friend. Believe me ever 
Your affectionate and faithful
Anna Howe. 