



My dear Miss,
I now proceed with my Journal, which I had
brought down to Thursday Night. 




The two Ladies resolving, as they said, to inspect
all my Proceedings, insisted upon it, that I would
take them with me in my benevolent Round, as
they, after we return'd, would call it, which I generally
take once a Week, among my poor and sick
Neighbours; and finding I could not get off, I set
out with them, my Lady Countess proposing Mrs.
Worden to fill up the fourth Place in the Coach. 
We talked all the Way of Charity, and the Excellency
of that Duty; and my Lady Davers took
Notice of the Text, that it would hide a Multitude
of Faults. And if, as she was pleased to say,
there was to be any Truth in the Popish Doctrine
of Supererogation, what abundance of such Merits
would arise from the Life and Actions of our dear
Friend here! kindly looking at me. 
I said, That when we had the Pleasure to reflect,
that we served a Master, who exacted no hard
Terms from us, but in every Case almost that could
be thought of, only required of us to do Justice,
and shew Mercy, to one another, and gave us Reason
to think he would judge us by those Rules,
it must be a mighty Inducement to Acts of Charity 

and Benevolence. But indeed, added I, were there
not that Inducement, the Pleasure that attends such
Acts, is an high Reward; and I am sure the Ladies I
have the Honour to speak to, must have found it in
an hundred Instances. 
The Countess said, She had once a much better
Opinion of herself, than she found she had Reason
for, within these few Days past: And indeed Mrs.
B said she, when I get home, I shall make a good
many People the better for your Example. And
so said Lady Davers; which gave me no small
inward Pleasure; and I acknowleg'd, in suitable
Terms, the Honour they both did me. 
The Coach set us down by the Side of a large
Common, about five Miles distant from our House; 
and we alighted, and walked a little Way, chusing not
to have the Coach come nearer, that we might be
taken as little Notice of as possible; and they entered
with me into two mean Cots with great Condescension
and Goodness; one belonging to a poor
Widow, and five Children, who had been all down
in Agues and Fevers; the other, to a Man and his
Wife, Bed-rid with Age and Infirmities, and two
honest Daughters, one a Widow with two Children,
the other married to an Husbandman, who had also
been ill, but now, by comfortable Cordials, and
good Physick, were pretty well, to what they had
been. 
The two Ladies were well pleased with my Demeanour
to the good Folks: To whom I said,
that as I should go soon to London, I was willing
to see them before I went, to wish them better
and better, and to tell them, that I should leave
Orders with Mrs. Jervis concerning them, to
whom they must make known their Wants; and
that Mr. Barrow would take care of 'em, I was 

sure; and do all that was in the Power of Physick
for the Restoration of their Healths. 
Now you must know, Miss, that I am not so
good as the old Ladies of former Days, who used
to distil Cordial Waters, and prepare Medicines,
and dispense them themselves. I knew, if I was so
inclined, my dear Mr. B. would not have been
pleased with it, because, in the Approbation he has
kindly given to my present Method, he has twice
or thrice praised me, that I don't carry my Charity
to Extremes, and make his House a Dispensatory. 
I would not, therefore, by aiming at doing
too much, lose the Opportunity of doing any
Good at all in these respects; and besides, as the
vulgar Saying is, One must creep before one goes! 
But this is my Method: 
I am upon an Agreement with this Mr. Barrow,
who is deemed a very skilful and honest Apothecary,
and one Mr. Simmonds, a Surgeon of like
Character, to attend all such Cases and Persons as
I shall recommend; Mr. Barrow to administer
Physick and Cordials, as he shall judge proper, and
even, in necessary Cases, to call in a Physician. 
And now-and-then calling one's self, or sending a
Servant to ask Questions, all is kept right. 
Besides, one can take this Method without the
Ostentation, as some would deem it, which would
attend the other; and having one's dear Friend's
Gate always crouded with unhappy Objects, and
some that deserve no Countenance, perhaps, and
would possibly be the most clamorous: And then
one does not subject the Poor neither to the Insolence
of Servants, who sometimes, in a Body's
Absence, might, were they some Servants, shew,
that they were far from being influenced by the
same Motives as their Principals: Besides the Advantage
the Poor have from the Skill and Experience 

which Education, and constant Practice, give
to the Gentlemen I imploy; and with whom I agree
but by the Quarter, because if there were a just
Foundation of Complaint, for Negligence, or Hardness
of Heart, I would not be sty'd down from
changing; for, in such Cases, in a Crisis, the poor
People depending on the Assistance of those Gentlemen,
might look no farther, and so my good Intentions
might not only be frustrated, but do Harm. 
My Lady Davers observed a Bible, a Common
Prayer Book, and a Whole Duty of Man, in each Cot,
in Leathern outside Cases, to keep them clean, and a
Church Catechism or two for the Children; and
was pleased to say, It was right: And her Ladyship
asked one of the Children, a pretty Girl, Who learnt
her her Catechism? And she court'sy'd, and look'd at
me; for I do ask the Children Questions, when I come,
to know how they improve: 'Tis as I thought, said
my Lady; my Sister provides for both Parts. God
bless you, my Dear! said she, and tapp'd my Neck. 
My Ladies left Tokens of their Bounty behind
them to both Families, and all the good Folks blessed
and pray'd for us at Parting: And as we went out,
my Lady Davers, with a serious Air, was pleased to
say to me, Take care of your Health, my dear
Sister, and God give you, when it comes, a happy
Hour; for how many real Mourners would you
have, if you were to be called early to reap the Fruits
of your Piety! 
God's Will must be done, my Lady, said I. The
same Providence that has so wonderfully put it in my
Power to do a little Good, will raise up new Friends
to the honest Hearts that rely upon Him. 
This I said, because some of the good People
heard my Lady, and seem'd troubled, and began to
redouble their Prayers for my Safety and Preservation. 

We walked thence to our Coach, and stretched
a little farther, to visit two Farmers Families, about
a Mile distant from each other. One had the Mother
of the Family, with two Sons, just recovering,
the former from a Fever, the latter from Tertian
Agues; and I asked when they saw Mr. Barrow? 
They told me, with great Commendations of him,
that he had but just left them. So having congratulated
their hopeful Way, and wished them to take
care of themselves, and not go too early to Business,
I said, I should desire Mr. Barrow to watch over
them, for fear of Relapse, and should hardly see 'em
again for some time; and so, under the Notion of
my Foy, I dropt a Couple of Guineas in the good
Woman's Hand: For I had had an Hint given me by
Mrs. Jervis, that their Illness had made it low
with them. 
We proceeded then to the other Farm, where
the Case was a marry'd Daughter, who had had a
very dangerous Lying-in, and a wicked Husband,
who had abus'd her, and run away from her: But she
was mending apace, by good comfortable Things,
which from time to time I had caused to be sent her. 
Her old Father had been a little unkind to her, before
I took Notice of her; for she marry'd against his Consent; 
and indeed the World went hard with the poor
Man, and he could not do much; and, besides, he had
a younger Daughter, who had lost all her Limbs, and
was forc'd to be ty'd in a Wicker Chair, to keep
her up in it; which (having expended much to relieve
her) was a great Pull-back, as the good old
Woman called it. And having been a Year in Arrear
to a cruel Landlord, who finding a good Stock
upon the Ground, wanted to distress the poor Family,
and turn them out of all, I advanced the Money
upon the Stock; and the poor Man has already paid
me half of it, (for I must keep within Compass too, 

Miss) which was 50l. at first, and is in a fair Way
to pay me the other Half, and make as much more
for himself. 
Here I found Mr. Barrow, and he gave me an
Account of the Success of two other Cases I had recommended
to him; and told me, that John Smith, a
poor Man, who, in thatching a Barn, had tumbled
down, and broken his Leg, and bruised himself all
over, was in a fair way of Recovery. 
This poor Creature had like to have perished by
the Cruelty of the Parish Officers, who would have
pass'd him away to Essex, where his Settlement was,
tho' in a burning Fever, occasioned by his Misfortune. 
But hearing of the Case, I directed Mr. Simmonds
to attend him, and provide for him, at my Expence,
and gave my Word, if he dy'd, to bury him. 
I was glad to hear he was in so good a way, and
told Mr. Barrow, I hoped to see him and Mr.
Simmonds together at Mr. B.'s, before I set out
for London, that we might advise about the Cases
under their Direction, and that I might acquit myself
of some of my Obligations to them. 
You are a good Man, Mr. Barrow, added I: God
will bless you for your Care and Kindness to these
poor destitute Creatures. They all praise you, and
do nothing but talk of your Humanity to them. 
O my good Lady, said he, who can forbear following
such an Example as you set? Mr. Simmonds
can testify, as well as I, (for now-and-then a Case requires
us to visit together) that we can hardly hear
any Complaints from our poor Patients, let 'em be
ever so ill, for the Praises and Blessings they bestow
upon you. 
It is good Mr. B. that enables and encourages me
to do what I do. Tell them, they must bless God,
and bless him, and pray for me, and thank you and
Mr. Simmonds: We all join together, you know, for
their Good. 

The Countess and Lady Davers asked the poor
lying-in Woman many Questions, and left with her,
and for her poor Sister, a miserable Object indeed! 
—(God be praised, that I am not such an one!) 
Marks of their Bounty in Gold, but I saw not how
much; and looking upon one another, and then
upon me, and lifting up their Hands, could not say a
Word, till they were in the Coach: And so we were
carry'd home, after we had just look'd in upon a
Country School, where I pay for the Learning of
Eight Children. 
And here, Miss, (—I hope I recite not this with
Pride, tho' I do with Pleasure) is a cursory Account
of my Benevolent Weekly Round, as my Ladies will
call it. 
I know you will not be displeased with it; but it
will highly delight my worthy Parents, who, in their
way, do a great deal of discrect Good in their Neighbourhood:
For, indeed, Miss, a little Matter, prudently
bestowed, and to true Objects of Compassion,
(whose Cases are soon at a Crisis, as are those
of most labouring People) will go a great way, and
especially if laid out properly for 'em, according to
the Exigencies of their respective Cases. —For such
poor People, who live generally low, want very seldom
any thing but reviving Cordials at first, and
good wholsome Kitchen Physick afterwards; and
then the Wheels of Nature being unclogg'd, new-oil'd,
as it were, and set right, they will go round
again with Pleasantness and Ease, for a good while
together, by virtue of that Exercise which their Labour
gives them; while the Rich and Voluptuous are
forced to undergo great Fatigues to keep theirs clean
and in Order. 
Thus is it well remarked in a Manuscript Poem,
in my dear Mr. B.'s Possession, written in Answer to
a Friend, who recommended a poor Man of Genius 

to the Favour of the Author, in order to induce the
benevolent Gentleman to lift him into a higher Life
than that to which he was born: 


 Wou'dst thou, by Change of Life, I should intail
Gouts, Fevers, Surfeits, ev'ry tort' ring Ail,
That our rich Blood infects, on this poor Swain?
And turn his fansy'd Woes to real Pain?


 If he want Food or Raiment, these will I,
Fit for his Station, chearfully supply.
But is his slavish Life much more fatiguing
Than our bad Hours, hard Huntings, lewd Intriguing?
For needful Exercise, don't all who've Wealth,
At times, but to preserve themselves in Health.
Our Bodies less prepar'd, our Nerves less strong.
Do more than any of the lab'ring Throng?


I mention'd before*  , that this Poem had given
me some proper Hints, in relation to the Good one
should dispense, in which one ought to consult a
Person's usual way of Life, and not to be so lavish
to some one Object or two, as should limit one's
Power to relieve others, and, at the same time, by
lifting the poor Folks into a State they had not been
used to, make them possibly more unhappy than
ever. I will transcribe a few more Lines from this
Piece, for your Entertainment: 


 –––But yet, my Friend, I cannot join with thee,
To think so hard of native Poverty.
Tis not to live at Ease, makes Happiness,
Eat and drink well, lie soft. 'Tis nothing less
Than sweet Content, whatever be the State,
Can make us truly happy, wise or great.



If this he want not, whate'er else he be,
He's happier far, I judge, than You or Me:
And if he want it, much I fear, my Friend,
He'll find no State will his Condition mend,
For human Minds, still on aspiring bent,
Not check'd at first, are seldom e'er content.


And again! 


 The Man who in one Way was always bred
Till thrice Twelve Winters have pass'd o'er his Head.
Is, or should be, contented with his Fate,
Nor covet to ally to change his State.
For Discontent once cherish'd in his Breast,
Desire of Change will never let him rest,
Unfix'd, unsettled, he, all Comfort past,
Knows his first Wish; but ne'er will know his last.


I must go on a little further. It seems that the recommending
Friend had praised the poor Man for a
Genius above the Sphere he was placed in. To
this the judicious Benefactor replies, stating the Plea
in the first Line: 


 But he has Parts and Wit above his Sphere;
The neighb'ring Throng will then his Wit revere,
If by sound Judgment temper'd. And who knows
How useful he may be, but to compose
Small Strifes, that even homely Cots invade
From rugged Minds by partial Passions sway'd?
Shall nought but Thistles in one Climate grow?
And, intermingling, no sweet Roses blow?


 Remote from Towns, among the rural Swains,
He'll be the Priest and Justice of the Plains:

And nothing sure, on Earth, yields more Delight,
Than diff'ring Minds in social Bands t'unite.


I believe you'll excuse me, if I transcribe more: 


 We the Discomforts know of what we are,
But little think what States superior share:
How aukwardly our Parts we should sustain
In a new Scene. And, Oh! what mighty Pain
(For this is not the least) t' a gen'rous Mind,
With Obligations press'd, or to Dependence join'd!
On sit they light from me, as e'er they will,
'Tis Obligation and Dependence still
To thoughtful Minds—


 And grant he might be happy while I live,
How may he fare with those who me survive?
My Fortune may, perhaps, to those descend,
Who knew not Joseph, nor lov'd Joseph's Friend;
Who, like too many Heirs, reverse whate'er
Was wont t' engage their Predecessors Care.
In such a Case, what Cause he'd have to mourn,
Forc'd to the Life he now beholds with Scorn
(By long Disuse, made still more grievous) to return?
Shall the slow Cart-horse with the Courser run?
Wou'd ev'ry twinkling Star become a Sun?
Yet in their Order, this adorns the Sky,
And that helps on the gen'ral Harmony.


Then follow some Lines, that I often think of
with Pleasure, and which used to please my dear
Lady; who made me write them down in my Common-place
Book. You, my honoured Father and
Mother, have seen them*  : But as you, my dear Miss,
have not, I will transcribe them: 



 For thou want'st not to know, wise Providence
Does various Parts, for various Minds dispense;
The meanest Slaves, or those who hedge and ditch,
Are useful, by their Sweat, to feed the Rich.
The Rich, in due Return, impart their Store;
Which comfortably seeds the lab'ring Poor.
Nor let the Rich the lowest Slave disdain,
He's equally a Link of Nature's Chain;
Labours to the same End, joins in one View;
And both alike the Will divine pursue:
And, at the last, are levèll'd, King and Slave,
Without Distinction, in the silent Grave.


But now you'll be curious to know, since this Gentleman
declin'd raising the poor Man, what Good
he really thought proper to do for him. This then
will satisfy you: 


 “But he has Children.” —Well, this is a Plea
That strongly recommends his Case to me.
I'll take a Boy or two; and if I find
The Youngsters honest, faithful, well inclin'd:
If able to sustain those Parts, which we
Call vainly better, I'll their Patron be.
First, To the menial Service I'll inure 'em,
And, as they merit, better will procure 'em.


 In short, the Swain, for what he is, I'll prize
Consistent with's Degree, augment his Joys:
And tell him this from me; That wou'd he know
True Happiness, unmix'd with certain Woe,
Here will he rest his Hopes; nor farther wish to go.


I don't remember ever to have read any thing of
this Subject placed in these natural, easy, and, I therefore 

think uncommon Lights, and believe you'll allow
them to be right Lights: For there are certainly no
Cases in the World that require more Judgment and
Distinction, than charitable ones. And except a
casual Distress among those who make a Trade of
Begging, such Persons (especially if I see them
often, and so much in the same Place, as if they
were as tenacious of their Stand, as others of their
Freehold) move not my Compassion or Notice. 
They cannot be lower in Spirit, nor (being frequently
brought up to it) do they often wish to be
higher in Calling, or to change their idle State for
a laborious one: But the poor industrious Souls,
reduced by Sickness, or Misfortune, or even Mistake
not wilful or persisted in, who sigh in Secret, and
cannot make known what they suffer; such unhappy
Objects are worthy of one's Pains to find out, and
relieve. 




It is hardly right to trouble either of you, my
honoured Correspondents, with an Affair, that has
vex'd me a good deal, and indeed should affect me
more than any other Mistress of a Family, for Reasons
which will be obvious to you, when I tell you
the Case. And this (it is so present with me) I
cannot forbear. 
A pretty genteel young Body, my Polly Barlow,
as I call her, having been well recommended, and
indeed behaved with great Prudence till this time, is
the Occasion. And this it is: 
My dear Mr. B. and the Two Ladies agreed with
me to take a little Airing in the Coach, and to fall
in upon Mr. Martin, who had a Present made him for
his Menagerie, in which he takes great Delight, 

of a rare and uncommon Creature, a Native of the
East Indies. But just as Sir Jacob was on Horseback
to accompany them, and the Ladies were ready
to go, I was taken with a sudden Disorder and
Faintishness, so that Lady Davers, who is very
tender of me, and watches every Turn of my Countenance,
would not let me go with them, tho' my
Disorder was going off, and my dear Mr. B. was
pleased to excuse me; and just meeting with Mr.
Williams as they went to the Coach, they took him
with them, to fill up the vacant Place. So I retir'd
to my Closet, and shut myself in. 
They had asked Mr. H. to go with them, as Company
to Sir Jacob; but he (as I believe, by what followed,
on purpose) could not be found, when they
set out: So they supposed he was upon some Ramble
with Mr. Colbrand, his great Favourite. 
I was writing to you, being pretty well recover'd,
when I heard Polly, as I supposed, and as it proved,
come into my Apartment; and down she sat, and
sung a little Catch, and cry'd Hem! twice; and
presently I heard two Voices. But suspecting nothing,
I wrote on, till I heard a kind of Rustling and
Struggling, and Polly's Voice crying, Fie! –––How
can you do so! –––Pray, Sir! 
This alarm'd me much, because we have such
orderly Folks about us; and I looked thro' the Keyhole,
and, to my Surprize and Concern, saw Mr.
H. –––foolish Gentleman! ––––taking Liberties with
Polly, that neither became him to offer, nor, more
foolish Girl! her to suffer. 
I did not know what to do: But having Reason to
think, that this was not their first Interview and
Freedom ––– and the Girl sometimes encouragingly
laughing, as at other times, inconsistently, struggling
and complaining, in an Accent that was too tender
for the Occasion, I forced a faint Cough: This 

frighted them both: Mr. H. swore, and said, Who
can that be? –––Your Lady's gone with them, i'n't
she? 
I believe so! I hope so! said the silly Girl ––– Yet
that was like her Voice! –––Me'm, are you in your
Closet, Me'm? said she, coming up to the Door,
Mr. H. standing, like a poor Thief, half behind the
Window-curtains, till he knew if it was I. 
I open'd the Door, away sneak'd Mr. H. and
she leap'd with Surprize, not hoping to find me
there, tho' she asked the Question. 
I thought ––– Indeed ––– Me'm ––– I thought you were
gone out. 
It is plain you did, Polly! –––Go and shut the
Chamber-door, and come to me again. 
She did, but trembled, and was so full of Confusion,
that I pity'd the poor Creature, and hardly
knew how to speak to her, or what to say. –––For
my Compassion got the Upper-hand of my Resentment; 
and as she stood quaking and trembling, and
looking on the Ground, with a Countenance I cannot
describe, I now-and-then cast my Eye upon her,
and was as often forced to put my Handkerchief to
it. 
At last I said, How long have these Freedoms
past, Polly, between you and Mr. H.? 
She said never a Word. 
I am loth to be censorious, Polly: But 'tis too
plain, that Mr. H. would not have followed you into
my Chamber, if he had not met you at other Places
before. 
Still the poor Girl said never a Word. 
Little did I expect, Polly, that you would have
shewn so much Imprudence. You have had Instances
of the vile Arts of Men against poor Maidens:
Have you any Notion, that Mr. H. intends to do
honourably by you? 

Me'm ––– Me'm ––– I believe ––– I hope ––– I dare
say, Mr. H. would not do otherwise. 
So much the worse, that you believe so, if you
have not very good Reason for your Belief. –––Does
he pretend he will marry you, Polly? 
She was silent. 
Tell me, Polly, if he does? 
He says, he will do honourably by me. 
But you know there is but one Word necessary to
explain that other precious Word Honour, in this
Case. It is Matrimony. That Word's as soon
spoken as any other, and if he means it, he will not
be shy to speak it. 
She was silent. 
Tell me, Polly, (for I am really greatly concern'd
for you) what you think yourself: Do you hope he
will marry you? 
She was silent. 
Do, good Polly, I hope I may call you good yet! ––– 
answer me. 
Pray, Madam! and she wept, and turn'd from me,
to the Wainscot ––– Pray, Madam, excuse me. 
But, indeed, Polly, I cannot excuse you. You
are under my Protection. I was once in as dangerous
a Situation as you can be. And I did not
escape it, Child, by the Language and Conduct I
heard from you. 
Language and Conduct, Me'm! 
Yes, Polly, Language and Conduct. For you
have heard my Story, no doubt: All the World has. 
And do you think, if I had sat me down in my Lady's
Bedchamber, and sung a Song, and hem'd twice, and
Mr. B. had come to me, upon that Signal, (for such
I doubt it was) and I had kept my Place, and suffer'd
myself to be tumpled, and only, in a soft
Voice, and with an encouraging Laugh, cry'd, How
can you do so? that I should have been what I am? 

Me'm, I dare say, my Lord (so all the Servants
call him, and his Aunt often, when she puts Jackey
to it) means me no Hurt. 
No Hurt, Polly! What, and make you cry Fie! –––Or do you intend to trust your Honour to his Mercy,
rather than to your own Discretion? 
I hope not, Me'm! 
I hope not too, Polly! –––But you know he was
free enough with you, to make you say Fie! –––And
what might have been the Case, who knows? had I
not coughed on Purpose; unwilling for your sake,
Polly, to find Matters so bad as I feared, and that
you would have been led beyond what was reputable? 
Reputable, Me'm! 
Yes, Polly, Reputable: I am sorry you oblige
me to speak so plain. But your Good requires
it. Instead of flying from him, you not only laughed
all the time you cry'd out, Fie! and How can you do so?
but had no other Care then to see if any body
heard you; and you observe how he slid away,
like a guilty Gentleman, as soon as I open'd my
Door –––– Do these Things look well, Polly? Do
you think they do? –––And if you hope to emulate
my good Fortune, do you think this is the
Way? 
I wish, Me'm, I had never seen Mr. H. For
nobody will look upon me, if I lose your Favour! 
It will still, Polly, (and I took her Hand, with a
kind Look) be in your own Power to keep it; and I
will not mention this Matter, if you make me your
Friend, and tell me all that has pass'd. 
Again she wept, and was silent. 
This made me more uneasy. Don't think,
Polly, said I, that I would envy any other Person's
Preferment; when I have been so much exalted 

myself. If Mr. H. has talked to you of Marriage,
tell me. 
No, Me'm, I cann't say, he has yet. 
Yet, Polly! Then he never will. For when
Men do talk of it, they don't always mean it: But
whenever they mean it, how can they confirm
a doubting Maiden, without mentioning it? But,
alas, alas for you, poor Polly! –––The Freedoms
you have permitted to him, no doubt, previous to
those I heard, and which would have been greater
possibly, had I not surpris'd you with my Cough,
shew too well, that he need not make any Promises
to you. 
Indeed, Me'm ––– Indeed, said she, sobbing, I might
be too little upon my Guard; but I would not
have done any Ill for the World. 
I hope you would not, Polly; but if you suffer
these Freedoms, you can't tell what you'd have permitted
–––Tell me, do you love Mr. H.? 
He is a very good-humour'd Gentleman, Madam,
and is not proud. 
No, 'tis not his Business to be proud, when he
hopes to humble you ––– Humble you indeed! Beneath
the lowest Person of the Sex, that is honest. 
I hope––– 
You hope, interrupted I ––– You hope too much; 
and I fear a great deal for you, because you fear
so little for yourself ––– But tell me, How often have
you been in private together? 
In private, Me'm! ––– I don't know what your
Ladyship calls private! 
Why that is private, Polly, when, as just now,
you neither hoped nor intended any body should
see you. 
She was silent; and I see, Miss, by this poor
Girl, that Lovers are true to their Secret, tho' perhaps,
their Ruin depends upon it. But it behov'd 

me, on more Accounts than it would any body
else, as I hinted before, to examine this Matter
narrowly; because, if Mr. H. should marry her,
it would have been laid upon Mr. B.'s Example––– 
And if my Polly should be ruin'd, it would be a
sad thing; and People would have said, Ay, she
could take Care enough of herself; but none at all
of her Servant: Her Waiting-maid had a much
more remiss Mistress, than Pamela found, or the
Matter would not have been thus. 
Well, Polly, I see, continued I, that you will
not speak out to me. You may have several Reasons
for it, possibly, tho' not one good one. But
as soon as Lady Davers comes in, who has a great
Concern in this Matter, as well as Lord Davers,
and are answerable to Lord H. in a Matter of so
much importance as this, I will leave it to her
Ladyship's Consideration, and shall no more concern
myself to ask you Questions about it ––– For
then I must take her Ladyship's Directions, and part
with you to be sure. 
The poor Girl, frighted at this, (for every body
fears Lady Davers) wrung her Hands, and begg'd,
for God's Sake, I would not acquaint Lady Davers
with it. 
But how can I help it? said I –––– Must I not
connive at your Proceedings, if I do not? You are
no Fool, Polly, in other Cases. Tell me, How is it
possible for me, in my Situation, to avoid it? 
I will tell you Ladyship the whole Truth; indeed
I will ––– if you will not tell Lady Davers. I
am ready to sink at the Thoughts of Lady Davers'
knowing any thing of this. 
This looked sadly. I pity'd her, but yet was angry
in my Mind; for I saw too plainly, that her
Conduct could not bear a Scrutiny, not even in her
own Opinion, poor Creature! 

I said, Make me acquainted with the Whole. 
Will your Ladyship promise––– 
I'll promise nothing, Polly––– When I have heard
all you think fit to say, I will do what befits me
to do; but with as much Tenderness as I can for
you ––– and that's all you ought to expect me to promise. 
Why then, Madam ––– But how can I speak it? –––I
can speak sooner to any body, but Lady Davers and
you, Madam ––– For her Ladyship's Passion, and your
Ladyship's Virtue ––– How shall I? —And then she
threw herself at my Feet, and hid her Face with
her Apron. 
I was in Agonies for her almost; I wept over her; 
I raised her up, and said, Tell me all ––– You cannot
tell me worse than I apprehend, nor, I hope, so
bad! O Polly, tell me soon ––– For you give me
great Pain––– 
And my Back, with Grief and Compassion for
the poor Girl, was ready to open, as it seem'd to
me––– In my former Distresses, I have been overcome
by Fainting next to Death, and was depriv'd of
Sense for some Moments––– But else I should have
imagin'd, I must have had some such affecting Sensations,
as the unhappy Girl's Case gave me. 
Then, Madam, I own, said she, I have been too
faulty. 
As how! ––– As what! ––– In what Way! ––– How
faulty? —asked I, as quick as Thought: You are not
ruin'd, are you! —Tell me, Polly? 
No, Madam, but— 
But, what? —Say, but what? 
I had consented— 
To what? 
To his Proposals, Madam. 
What Proposals? 
Why, Madam, I was to live with Mr. H. 

I understand you too well—But is it too late to
break so wretched a Bargain? —Have you already
made a Sacrifice of your Honour? 
No, Madam; but I have given it under my Hand. 
Under your Hand! —Ah! Polly, if you have
not given it under your Heart too, it were well. 
But what Foolishness is this! What Consideration
has he made you? 
He has given it under his Hand, that he will always
love me, and when his Lordship's Father dies,
he will own me. 
What Foolishness is this, said I, on both sides! 
—But are you willing to be released from this vile
Bargain? 
Indeed I am, Madam, and I told him so Yesterday. 
But, he says, he will sue me, and ruin me, if
I don't stand to it. 
You are ruin'd if you do! —And I wish— 
But tell me, Polly, Are you not ruin'd as it is? 
Indeed I am not, Madam. 
I doubt then, said I, you were upon the Brink of
it, had not this providential Indisposition kept me
at home—You met, I suppose, to conclude your
shocking Bargain. —O poor unhappy Girl! —But let
me see what he has given under his Hand? 
He has 'em both, Madam, to be drawn up fair,
and in a strong Hand, that shall be like a Record. 
Could I have thought, Miss, that a Girl of Nineteen
could be so ignorant and foolish in a Point so
important, when in every thing else she has shewn
no Instances like this imprudent Folly? 
Has he given you Money? 
Yes, Madam, he gave me–––he gave me–––a Note. 
Here it is. He says any body will give me Money
for it. 
And this was a Bank Note of 50l. which she pulled
out of her Bosom. 

I instantly thought of those Lines of Cowley,
which my dear Lady several times made me read to
her; tho' these supposed an infinitely more excuseable
Case––– Marriage for Money. 

 Take Heed, take Heed, thou lovely Maid!
 Nor be by glitt'ring Ills betray'd!
Thyself for Money! O let no Man know
 The Price of Beauty fall'n so low!
 What Dangers ought'st thou not to dread,
 When Love that's blind, is by blind Fortune led?

The Result was, He was to settle 100l. a Year
upon her and hers, poor, poor Girl! —And he was
to own her, as she calls it (but as Wife or Mistress,
she stipulated not) when his Father dy'd, and he
came into the Title and Estate. 
I told her, It was impossible for me to conceal
the Matter from Lady Davers, if she would not, by
her Promises to be govern'd intirely by me, and to
abandon all Thoughts of Mr. H. give me room to
conclude, that the wicked Bargain was at an End. 
And to keep the poor Soul in some Spirits, and
to enable her to look up, and to be more easy
under my Direction, I blamed him more than I did
her: Tho', considering what Virtue requires of a
Woman, and Custom has made shameless in a Man,
I think the poor Girl inexcuseable, and shall not
be easy while she is about me. For she is more
to blame, because, of the two, she has more Wit
than the Man. 
But what can I do, Miss, if I put her away? 
'Twill be to throw her directly into his Hands. He
won't stay long; and she may see her Folly. But
here her Eyes were open; She knew what she had
to trust to—And by their wicked Beginning, and 

her encouraging Repulses, I doubt she would have
been utterly ruin'd that very Day. 
I knew the Rage Lady Davers would be in with
both. So this was another Embarass. And yet, should
my good Intentions be frustrated, and they should
conclude their vile Bargain, and it appear'd that I
knew of it, but would not acquaint her, then should
I have been blam'd more than any Mistress of a Family,
being circumstanc'd as I am. 
Upon the Whole, As to the Girl, I resolv'd to
comfort her as well as I could, till I had gain'd her
Confidence, that my Advice might have the more
Weight with her, and by Degrees be the more likely
to reclaim her: For, poor Soul! there would be
an End of her Reputation, the most precious of all
Jewels, the Moment the Matter was known; and
that would be a sad thing. 
And as to the Man, I thought it best to take Courage
(and you that know me, will say, I must have a
good deal more than usual) to talk to Mr. H. on
this Subject. 
And the poor Body consenting I should, and,
with great Protestations, declaring her Sorrow and
Repentance, begging me to get her Note of Hand
again, on which she laid a foolish Stress, and desiring
me to give him back his Note of 50l. I went down
to find him. 
He shunn'd me, as a Thief would a Constable
at the Head of a Hue and Cry. As I entered one
Place or Room, he went into another, looking with
conscious Guilt, but yet confidently humming a
Tune. At last I fixed him speaking to Rachel, bidding
her tell Polly, he wanted to send a Message by
her to her Lady. By which I doubted not, he
was desirous to know what she had owned, in order
to govern himself accordingly. 

His Back was toward me; and I said, Mr. H.
here I am myself, to take your Commands. 
He gave a Caper half a Yard high–––Madam, I
wanted–––I wanted to speak to–––I would have spoken
with––– 
You wanted to send Polly to me, perhaps, Mr.
H. to ask if I would take a little Walk with you in
the Garden? 
Very true, Madam! —Very true indeed! —You have
guess'd the Matter–––I thought it was pity, this fine
Day, as every body was taking an Airing––– 
Well then, Sir, please to lead the Way, and I'll
attend you. 
Yet I fansy, Madam, the Wind is a little too high
for you—Won't you catch Cold? 
No, never fear, Mr. H. I am not afraid of a
little Air. 
I will attend you presently, Madam: You'll be in
the great Gravel Walk, or on the Terrace—I'll wait
upon you in an Instant. 
I had the Courage to take hold of his Arm, as if I
had like to have slipt; For, thought I, thou shalt not
fee the Girl, worthy Friend, till I have talk'd to thee
a little, if thou dost then—Excuse me, Mr. H. — 
I hope I have not hurt my Foot! —I must lean upon
you. 
Will you be pleas'd, Madam, to have a Chair? I
fear you have sprain'd your Foot—Shall I help you to
a Chair? 
No, no, Sir, I shall walk it off, if I hold by
you. 
So he had no Excuse to leave me, and we proceeded
into the Garden. But never did any thing look so
silly! —So like a foolish Fellow, as his Aunt calls
him. He looked, if possible, half a dozen Ways
at once, hem'd, cough'd, wriggled about, turn'd
his Head behind him every now-and-then, and started 

half a dozen silly Subjects, in hopes to hinder me
from speaking. 
I appear'd, I believe, under some Concern how
to begin with him; for he would have it, I was not
very well, and begg'd he might step in one Minute,
to desire Mrs. Jervis to attend me. 
So I resolved to begin with him, lest I should
lose the Opportunity, seeing my Eel so very slippery. 
And placing myself at the Seat at the upper End of
the Gravel Walk, I asked him to sit down. He declined
it, and would wait upon me presently, he
said, and seemed going. So I began—It is easy for
me, Mr. H. to penetrate the Reason why you are
so willing to leave me: But 'tis for your own Sake,
that I desire you to hear me, that no Mischief may
ensue among Friends and Relations, on an Occasion
to which you are no Stranger. 
Lord, Madam, What can you mean? —Surely,
Madam, you don't think amiss of a little innocent
Liberty, or so! 
Mr. H. reply'd I, I want not any Evidence of
your inhospitable Designs upon a poor unwary young
Creature, whom your Birth and Quality have found
it too easy a Task to influence. 
Inhospitable Designs, Madam! —A harsh Word,
by Gad! —You very nice Ladies cannot admit of
the least Freedom in the World! —Why, Madam,
I have kiss'd a Lady's Woman before now, in a civil
way or so, and never was call'd to an Account for
it, as a Breach of Hospitality. 
'Tis not for me, Mr. H. said I, to proceed to very
nice Particulars with a Gentleman who can act as
you have done, by a poor Girl, that could not have
had the Assurance to look up to a Man of your Quality,
had you not levell'd all Distinction between
you, in order to level the weak Creature to the common
Dirt of the Highway. I must tell you, that the 

poor Girl heartily repents of her Folly; and, to shew
you, that it signifies nothing to deny it, she begs
you will give her back the Note of her Hand you
have extorted from her Foolishness; and I hope
you'll be so much of a Gentleman, as not to keep in
your Power such a Testimony of the Weakness of
any of the Sex. 
Has she told you that, Madam? —Why may-be— 
indeed—I can't but say—Truly it mayn't look so
well to you, Madam: But young Folks will have
Frolicks—It was nothing but a Frolick—Let me be
hang'd, if it was! 
Be pleased then, Sir, to give up her Note to me
to return to her—Reputation should not be frolick'd
with, Sir; especially that of a poor Girl, who has
nothing else to depend upon. 
I'll give it to her myself, and laugh at her into the
Bargain, if you please, Madam. Why, 'tis comical
enough, if the little Pug thought I was in Earnest. 
I must have a Laugh or two at her, Madam, when I
give it her up. 
Mr. H. said I, since 'tis but a Frolick, you won't
take it amiss, that when we are set down to Supper,
we call Polly in, and demand a Sight of her Note,
and that will make every one merry, as well as you. 
Cot-so, Madam, that mayn't be so well neither! 
—For, perhaps, they will be apt to think it is in
Earnest; when, as I hope to live, 'tis but a Jest: Nothing
in the World else, upon Honour! 
I put on then a still more serious Air—As you
hope to live, say you, Mr. H.! —and upon your Honour! 
—How fear you not an instant Punishment for
this Appeal! and what is the Honour you swear by? 
—Take that, and answer me, Sir; Do Gentlemen
give away, Bank Notes for Frolicks, and for mere
Jests! and nothing in the World else! —I am sorry
to be obliged to deal thus with you. But I thought 

I was talking to a Gentleman, that would not forfeit
his Veracity; and that in so solemn an Instance
as this! 
He looked like a Man Thunder-struck. His
Face was distorted, and his Head seemed to turn
about upon his Neck, like a Weathercock in a Hurricane,
to all Points of the Compass. His Hands
clenched as in a Passion, and yet Shame and Confusion
struggling in every Limb and Feature. 
At last he said, I am confoundedly betrayed. But
if I am exposed (for the Wretch thought of nobody
but himself) to my Uncle and Aunt, I am undone,
and shall never be able to look 'em in the Face. 
'Tis true, I had a Design upon her; and since she
has betray'd me, I think I may say, that she was as
willing, almost, as I. 
Ungenerous, contemptible Wretch, thought I! ––– 
But our Sex that can thus give up their Virtue, ought
to expect no better: For he that sticks not at one
bad Action, will not scruple another to vindicate
himself: And so, Devil-like, become the Tempter,
and the Accuser too! 
But if you will be so good, said he, as to take
no Notice of this, to my Uncle, and especially to
my Aunt and Mr. B. I swear to you, I never will
think of her as long as I live. 
And you'll bind this Promise, will you, Sir? by
your Honour, and as you hope to live! 
Dear, good Madam, forgive me, I beseech you; 
Don't be so severe upon me. By all that's––– 
Don't swear, Mr. H. But as an Earnest that I
may believe you, give me back the Girl's foolish
Note, that, tho' 'tis of no Signification, she may not
have that to witness to her Folly. 
He took out his Pocket-Book: There it is, Madam! 
–––And I beg you'll forgive this Attempt. I see,
I ought not to have made it. I doubt it was a Breach 

of the Laws of Hospitality, as you say. But to
make it known, will only expose me, and it can do
no Good; and Mr. B. will resent it, may-be; and
my Aunt will never let me hear the last of it, nor
my Uncle neither–––And I shall be sent to travel
again––– And (added the poor Creature) I was once
in a Storm, and the crossing the Sea again, would
be Death to me. 
What a Wretch art thou, thought I! –––What
could such an one as thou find to say to a poor
Creature, that, if put in the Scale against Virtue
and Honour, should make the latter kick the Beam? 
–––Poor, poor Polly Barlow! thou art sunk indeed! 
Too low for Excuse, and almost beneath Pity! 
I told him, if I could observe, that nothing pass'd
between them, that should lay me under a Necessity
of revealing the Matter, I should not be forward
to expose him, nor the Maiden either. But that he
must, in his own Judgment, excuse me, if I made every
body acquainted with it, if I were to see the Correspondence
between them likely to be renewed or
carried on: For, added, in that Case, I should owe
it to myself, to Mr. B. to Lord and Lady Davers,
and to you, and the unhappy Body too, to do so. 
He would needs drop down on one Knee to
promise this; and, with a thousand Acknowlegements,
left me, to find Mr. Colbrand, in order to ride
to meet the Coach on its Return. 
I went in, and gave the foolish Note to the silly
Girl, which she receiv'd eagerly, and immediately
burnt; and I told her, I would not suffer her to come
near me but as little as possible, when I was in Company,
while Mr. H. staid; but consigned her intirely
to the Care of Mrs. Jervis, to whom only, I
said, I would hint the Matter as tenderly as I could:
And for this, I added, I had more Reasons than
one; First, To give her the Benefit of a good Gentlewoman's 

Advice, to which I had myself formerly
been beholden, and from whom I concealed nothing:
Next, To keep her out of Mr. H.'s Way:
And lastly, That I might have an Opportunity,
from Mrs. Jervis's Opinion, to judge of the Sincerity
of her Repentance: For, Polly, said I, you
must imagine, so regular and uniform as all our
Family is, and so good as I thought all the People
about me were, that I could not suspect, that she,
the Duties of whose Place made her nearest to my
Person, was the farthest from what I wished. 
I have set this Matter so strongly before her, and
Mrs. Jervis has so well seconded me, that I hope
the best; for the Grief the poor Creature carries
in her Looks, and expresses in her Words, cannot
be described; frequently accusing herself with Tears,
saying often to Mrs. Jervis, She is not worthy to
stand in the Presence of a Mistress, whose Example
she has made so bad an Use of, and whose Lessons
she had so ill followed. 
I am sadly troubled at this Matter however; but
I take great Comfort in reflecting, that my sudden
Indisposition look'd like a providential Thing, which
may save one poor Soul, and be a seasonable Warning
to her, as long as she lives. 
Mean time I must observe, that at Supper last
Night, Mr. H. look'd abject, and mean, and like
a poor Thief, as I thought; and (conscious of his
disappointed Folly, tho' I seldom glanc'd my Eye
upon him) had less to say for himself than ever. 
And once my Lady Davers laughing, said, I think
in my Heart, my Nephew looks more foolish every
time I see him, than the last. 
He stole a Look at me, and blush'd; and my
Lord said, Jackey has some Grace! –––He blushes! 
–––Hold up thy Head, Nephew! –––Hast thou nothing
at all to say for thyself? 

Sir Jacob said, A Blush becomes a young Gentleman! 
–––I never saw one before tho', in Mr. H. — 
What's the Matter, Sir? 
Only, said Lady Davers, his Skin or his Conscience
is mended, that's all. 
Thank you, Madam, was all he said, bowing to
his Aunt, and affecting a careless, yet confused Air,
as if he whisper'd a Whistle. 
Oh Wretch! thought I, see what it is to have a
condemning Conscience; while every innocent Person
looks round, unconscious, smiling, and erect! 
—But yet it was not the Shame of a bad Action, I
doubt, but being discovered and disappointed, that
gave him this Confusion of Face. 
What a sad Thing it is for a Person to be guilty
of such Actions, as shall put it into the Power of
another, even by a Look, to mortify him! And
if poor Souls can be thus abjectly struck at such a
Discovery as this, by a Fellow Creature, how must
they appear before an unerring and omniscient Judge,
with a Conscience standing in the Place of a thousand
Witnesses? —The Words Weeping and Wailing,
Howling and Gnashing of Teeth, exceedingly well
express, what nothing but the Divine Book can
equally express; which in another Place, points them
out as calling upon the Mountains to fall upon them,
and the Hills to cover them! —How serious this
Subject makes one! 




I am just retired from a kind of fatiguing Service; 
for who should come hither to dine with Mr. B.
but that sad Rake Sir Charles Hargrave, and Mr.
Walgrave, Mr. Sedley, and Mr. Floyd, three as bad
as himself; inseparable Companions, whose whole 

Delight, and that a vowedly, is Drinking, and Hunting,
and Lewdness; but otherwise, Gentlemen of
Wit, and large Estates? Three of them broke in
upon us, at the*  Hall, on the happiest Day of my
Life, to our great Regret; and they had been long
threatening to make this Visit, in order to see me, as
they told Mr. B. 
They whipt out two Bottles of Champaign instantly,
for a Whet, as they called it, and went to view
the Stud, and the Kennel, and then took a Walk in
the Garden till Dinner was ready; my Lord Davers,
Mr. H. and Sir Jacob, as well as Mr. B. (for they
are all acquainted) accompanying them. 
Sir Charles, it seems, as Lord Davers told me
afterwards, said, He long'd to see Mrs. B. She was
the Talk where-ever he went, and he had conceiv'd
an high Opinion of her before-hand. 
Lord Davers said, I defy you, Gentlemen, to
think so highly of her as she deserves, take Mind
and Person together. 
Mr. Floyd said, He never saw any Woman yet,
that came up to what he expected, where Fame had
been lavish in her Praise. 
But how, Brother Baronet, said Sir Charles to
Sir Jacob, came you to be reconcil'd to her? —I heard
that you would never own her. 
Oons, Man, said Sir Jacob, I was taken in ––– I
was, by my Soul! ––– They contrived to clap her upon
me, as Lady Jenny C. and pretended they'd keep
t'other out of my Sight; and I was plaguily bit, and
forced to get off as well as I could. 
That was a Bite indeed, said Mr. Walgrave; and
so you fell a praising Lady Jenny, I warrant, to the
Skies! 

Ye––as, ––– by my Soul, (drawling out the affirmative
Monosyllable) I was used most scurvily; 'faith I
was. ––– I bear 'em a Grudge for't still, I can tell 'em
that; ––– for I have hardly been able to hold up my
Head like a Man ever since ––– but am forc'd to sneak
about, and go and come, and do as they bid me. By
my Troth, I never was so manageable in my Life. 
Your Herefordshire Neighbours, Sir Jacob, said
Mr. Sedley, with an Oath, will rejoice to hear this; 
for the whole County there cannot manage you. 
I'm quite cow'd now, by my Soul, as you will see
by-and-by: Nay, for that Matter, if you can set
Mrs. B. a talking, there's ne'er a Puppy of you all
will care to open your Lips, except to say as she
says. 
Never fear, old Boy, said Sir Charles, we'll bear
our Parts in Conversation. I never saw the Woman
yet, that could give me either Awe or Love for six
Minutes together. What think you, Mr. B.? Have
you any Notion, that your Lady will have so much
Power over us? 
I think, Sir Charles, I have one of the finest Women
in England; but I neither expect nor desire you
Rakes should see her with my Eyes. 
You know, if I have a Mind to love her, and make
Court to her too, Mr. B. I will: And I am half in
Love with her already, altho' I have not seen her. 
They came in when Dinner was near ready, and
the Four Gentlemen took each a large Bumper of
Old Hock for another Whet. 
The Countess, Lady Davers, and I, came down
together. The Gentlemen knew our two noble
Guests, and were known to them in Person, as well
as by Character. Mr. B. in his usual kind and encouraging
Manner, took my Hand, and presented
the Four Gentlemen to me, each by his Name. Sir
Charles said, pretty bluntly, That he hoped he was 

more welcome to me now, than the last time he was
under the same Roof with me; for he had been told
since, that that was our happy Day. 
I said, Mr. B.'s Friends were always welcome to
me. 
'Tis well, Madam, said Mr. Sedley, we did not
know how it was. We should have quarter'd ourselves
upon Mr. B. for a Week together, and kept
him up Day and Night. 
I thought this Speech deserved no Answer, especially
as they were Gentlemen who wanted no Countenance,
and address'd myself to Lord Davers, who is
always kindly making Court to me: I hope, my good
Lord, said I, you find yourself quite recover'd of
your Head-ach? –––– (of which he complained at
Breakfast). 
I thank you, my dear Sister, pretty well. 
I was telling Sir Charles, and the other Gentlemen,
Niece, said Sir Jacob, how I was cheated here,
when I came first, with a Lady Jenny. 
It was a very lucky Cheat for me, Sir Jacob; for
it gave you a Prepossession in my Favour, under so
advantageous a Character, that I could never have
expected otherwise. 
I wish, said the Countess, my Daughter, for
whom Sir Jacob took you, had Mrs. B.'s Qualities
to boast of. 
How am I obliged to your Ladyship's Goodness,
return'd I, when you treat me with even greater Indulgence
than you use to so beloved a Daughter! 
Nay, now you talk of treating, said Sir Charles,
when, Ladies, will you treat our Sex with the Politeness
which you shew to one another? 
When your Sex deserve it, Sir Charles, said Lady
Davers. 
Who is to be Judge of that? said Mr. Walgrave. 
Not the Gentlemen, I hope, reply'd my Lady. 

Well then, Mrs. B. said Sir Charles, we bespeak
your good Opinion of us; for you have ours. 
I am obliged to you, Gentlemen; but I must be
more cautious in declaring mine, lest it should be
thought I am influenc'd by your kind, and perhaps
too hasty Opinions of me. 
Sir Charles swore they had seen enough of me the
Moment I entered the Parlour, and heard enough
the Moment I opened my Lips, to answer for their
Opinions of me. 
I said, I made no doubt, when they had as good a
Subject to expatiate upon, as I had, in the Pleasure
before me, of seeing so many agreeable Friends of
Mr. B.'s, they would maintain the Title they claim'd
to every one's good Opinion. 
This, said Sir Jacob, is binding you over, Gentlemen,
to your good Behaviour. ––– You must know,
my Niece never shoots flying, as you do. 
The Gentlemen laugh'd: Is it shooting flying, Sir
Jacob, return'd Sir Charles, to praise that Lady? 
Adsbud, I did not think of that. 
O Sir Jacob, said the Countess, you need not be
at a Fault; ––– for a good Sportsman always hits his
Mark, flying or not: And the Gentlemen had so
fair an one, that they could not well miss it. 
You are fairly help'd over the Stile, Sir Jacob, said
Mr. Floyd. 
And indeed I wanted it; tho' I limp'd like a Puppy,
before I was lame. One can't think of every
thing, as one us'd to do at your Time of Life,
Gentlemen. 
This flippant Stuff was all that pass'd, which I can
recite; for the rest, at Table, and after Dinner, was
too polite by half for me: Such as, The Quantity
of Wine each Man could carry off, that was the
Phrase; Dogs, Horses, Hunting, Racing, Cockfighting,
and all accompanied with Swearing, and 

Cursing, and that in good Humour, and out of Wantonness
(the least excusable and most profligate Sort
of Swearing and Cursing of all); loud Laughing,
with a little touching now-and-then on the Borders of
Sir Simon's beloved Subject, to try if they could
make a Lady shew she understood their Hints by her
Blushes*  ; a certain Indication, that those who seek a
Blush in others, are past it themselves, and, by their
turning it into Ridicule when they find it in their
Friends, that they would not for the World have it
imputed to them; talking three or four at once,
and as loud as if they were in the Field pursuing their
Game, at a Quarter of a Mile's Distance from one
another. 
These were the Subjects, and this the Entertainment,
that held my Ladies and me for one Hour
after a tedious Dinner; when we retir'd, and glad
we were to do so: And so well did the Gentlemen
like the Wine, that we had the Felicity to drink
Tea and Coffee by ourselves; only Mr. B. (upon
our inviting the Gentlemen to partake with us)
sliding in for a few Minutes, to tell us, they
would stick by what they had, and taking a Dish of
Coffee with us. 
I should not omit one Observation; That Sir
Jacob, when they were gone, said, They were pure
Company: And Mr. H. That he never was so delighted
in his born Days. –––– While the two Ladies
put up their Prayers, that they might never have such
another Entertainment. And being encouraged by
their Declaration, I presumed to join in the same
Petition. 
Yet, it seems, these are Men of Wit! I believe
they must be so ––– because I could neither like nor
understand them. —Yet, if their Conversation had
much Wit in it, I should think my Ladies would have
found it out. 

However, this they did find out, and agree in,
that these Gentlemen were of the true modern Cast
of Libertines and Foxhunters, and, indifferently as
they liked them, could not be easily out-done by any
of the same Stamp in England. 
God defend my dear Miss Darnford, and every
worthy single Lady, from such an Husband, as a
Gentleman of this Character would make! 
I wonder really, how Mr. B. who chuses not this
sort of Conversation, and always (whatever Faults
he had besides) was a sober Gentleman, can sit for
Hours so easy and chearful in it; and yet he never
says much, when they are in their high Delight. 
When all's done, Miss, there are very unpleasant
Things, which Persons in genteel Life are forced
to put up with, as well as those in lower; and were
the one to be balanced against the other, the Difference,
as to true Happiness, would not perhaps be so
great, as People in the latter imagine, –––– if it did not
turn in their Favour. Well says the above quoted
Manuscript, 

We the Discomforts know of what we are,
But little think what States superior share. –––

The Gentlemen, permit me to add, went away
very merry to ride ten Miles by Owl-light; for they
would not accept of Beds here. They had two
French Horns with them, and gave us a Blast, or
Flourish or two, at going off. Each had a Servant
besides: But the Way they were in, would have given
me more Concern than it did, had they been related
to Mr. B. and less used to it. And indeed it is a
Happiness, that such Gentlemen take no more Care,
than they generally do, to interest any body, intimately,
in their Healths and Preservation; for these
are all single Men. Nor is the Publick, any more
than the Private, under any Necessity to be much 

concern'd about them; for let such Persons go when
they will, if they continue single, their next Heir
cannot well be a worse Commonwealth's-man; and
there is a great Chance he may be a better. 
You know I end my Saturdays seriously. And
this, to what I have already said, makes me add, that
I cannot express how much I am, my dear Miss, 
Your faithful and affectionate
P. B. 

