



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

M. Hall, Sat. Night, July 15. 
All undone, undone, by Jupiter! —Zounds,
Jack, what shall I do now! A curse upon all my
plots and contrivances! —But I have it —In the very
heart and soul of me, I have it! 
Thou toldest me, that my punishments were but
beginning—Canst thou, O fatal prognosticator! canst
thou tell me, where they will end? 
Thy assistance I bespeak. The moment thou receivest
this, I bespeak thy assistance. This messenger
rides for life and death—And I hope he'll find you at
your town-lodgings; if he meet not with you at
Edgware; where, being Sunday, he will call first. 

This cursed, cursed woman, on Friday dispatched
man and horse with the joyful news (as she thought it
would be to me) in an exulting Letter from Sally
Martin, that she had found out my Angel as on Wednesday
last; and on Friday morning, after she had
been at prayers at Covent-garden Church—praying
for my Reformation perhaps—got her arrested by
two Sheriffs officers, as she was returning to her lodgings,
who (Villains!) put her into a chair they had
in readiness, and carried her to one of the cursed
fellows houses. 
She has arrested her for 150l. pretendedly due for
Board and Lodgings: A sum (besides the low villainy
of the proceeding) which the dear Soul could
not possibly raise; all her cloaths and effects, except
what she had on and with her when she went away,
being at the old devil's. 
And here, for an aggravation, has the dear creature
lain already two days; for I must be gallanting my
two Aunts and my two Cousins, and giving Lord
M. an airing after his lying-in—Pox upon the whole
family of us! And returned not till within this hour: 
And now returned to my distraction, on receiving the
cursed Tidings, and the exulting Letter. 
Hasten, hasten, dear Jack; for the Love of God,
hasten to the injured Charmer! My heart bleeds for
her—She deserved not This!—I dare not stir. It
will be thought done by my contrivance—And if
I am absent from this place, that will confirm the
suspicion. 
Damnation seize quick this accursed woman! —Yet
she thinks she has made no small merit with me. 
Unhappy, thrice unhappy circumstance! —At a time
too, when better prospects were opening for the sweet
Creature! 
Hasten to her! —Clear me of this cursed job. Most
sincerely, by all that's Sacred, I swear you may! — 
Yet have I been such a villainous plotter, that the 

charming Sufferer will hardly believe it; altho' the
proceeding be so dirtily low. 
Set her free the moment you see her: Without
conditioning, free! —On your knees, for me, beg
her pardon: And assure her, that, where-ever she
goes, I will not molest her: No, nor come near her,
without her leave: And be sure allow not any of the
damned crew to go near her—Only, let her permit
you to receive her commands from time to time. 
You have always been her friend and advocate. What
would I now give, had I permitted you to have been
a successful one! 
Let her have all her Cloaths and Effects sent her
instantly, as a small proof of my sincerity. And
force upon the dear creature, who must be moneyless,
what sums you can get her to take. Let me know
how she has been treated. If roughly, woe be to the
guilty! 
Take thy watch in thy hand, after thou hast freed
her, and damn the whole brood, dragon and serpents,
by the hour, till thou'rt tired; and tell them, I bid thee
do so, for their cursed officiousness. 
They had nothing to do, when they had found her,
but to wait my orders how to proceed. 
The great devil fly away with them all, one by one,
thro' the roof of their own cursed house, and dash
them to pieces against the tops of chimneys, as he flies; 
and let the lesser devils collect their scattered scraps,
and bag them up, in order to put them together again
in their allotted place, in the element of fire, with
cements of molten lead. 
A line! A line! A kingdom for a line! with tolerable
news, the first moment thou canst write! —This
fellow waits to bring it. 