



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

You may believe, my dear Miss Howe, that the
circumstance of the noise and outcry within the
garden-door, on Monday last, gave me no small uneasiness,
to think that I was in the hands of a man, who
could, by such vile premeditation, lay a snare to trick
me out of myself, as I have so frequently called it. 
Whenever he came in my sight, the thought of this
gave me an indignation that made his presence disgustful
to me; and the more, as I fansied I beheld in his
face a triumph which reproached my weakness on that
account; altho' perhaps it was only the same vivacity
and placidness that generally sit upon his features. 
I was resolved to task him upon this subject, the first
time I could have patience to enter upon it with him. 
For, besides that it piqued me excessively from the nature
of the artifice, I expected shuffling and evasion, if
he were guilty, that would have incensed me: And,
if not confessedly guilty, such unsatisfactory declarations,
as still would have kept my mind doubtful and 

uneasy; and would, upon every new offence that he
might give me, sharpen my disgusts to him. 
I have had the opportunity I waited for; and will
lay before you the result. 
He was making his court to my good opinion in
very polite terms, and with great seriousness lamenting
that he had lost it; declaring, that he knew not how
he had deserved to do so; attributing to me an indifference
to him, that seemed, to his infinite concern,
hourly to encrease. And he besought me to let him
know my whole mind, that he might have an opportunity
either to confess his faults and amend them, or
clear his conduct to my satisfaction, and thereby entitle
himself to a greater share of my confidence. 
I answered him with quickness—Then, Mr. Lovelace,
I will tell you one thing with a frankness, that
is, perhaps, more suitable to my character, than to
yours [He hoped not, he said] which gives me a very bad
opinion of you, as a designing artful man. 
I am all attention, Madam. 
I never can think tolerably of you, while the noise
and voice I heard at the garden-door, which put me
into the terror you took so much advantage of, remains
unaccounted for. Tell me fairly, tell me candidly, the
whole of that circumstance; and of your dealings with
that wicked Joseph Leman; and according to your explicitness
in this particular, I shall form a judgment of
your future professions. 
I will, without reserve, my dearest life, said he, tell
you the whole; and hope that my sincerity in the relation
will atone for any-thing you may think wrong
in the fact. 
‘I knew nothing, said he, of this man, this Leman,
and should have scorned a resort to so low a
method as bribing the servant of any family to let
me into the secrets of that family, if I had not detected
him in attempting to corrupt a servant of
mine, to inform him of all my motions, of all my 

supposed intrigues, and, in short, of every action of
my private life, as well as of my circumstances and
engagements; and this for motives too obvious to be
dwelt upon. 
‘My servant told me of his offers, and I ordered
him, unknown to the fellow, to let me hear a conversation
that was to pass between them. 
‘In the midst of it, and just as he had made an
offer of money for a particular piece of intelligence,
promising more when procured, I broke in upon
them, and by bluster, calling for a knife to cut off
his ears (one of which I took hold of) in order to
make a present of it, as I said, to his employers, I
obliged him to tell me who they were. 
‘Your Brother, Madam, and your Uncle Antony,
he named. 
‘It was not difficult, when I had given him my
pardon on naming them (after I had set before him
the enormity of the task he had undertaken, and the
honourableness of my intentions to your dear self)
to prevail upon him, by a larger reward, to serve
me; since, at the same time, he might preserve the
favour of your Uncle and Brother, as I desired to
know nothing, but what related to myself and to
you, in order to guard us both against the effects of
an ill-will, which all his fellow-servants, as well as
himself, as he acknowleged, thought undeserved. 
‘By this means, I own to you, Madam, I frequently
turned his principals about upon a pivot of
my own, unknown to themselves: And the fellow,
who is always calling himself a plain man, and
boasting of his Conscience, was the easier, as I condescended
frequently to assure him of my honourable
views; and as he knew that the use I made of
his intelligence, in all likelihood, prevented fatal
mischiefs. 
‘I was the more pleased with his services, as (let
me acknowlege to you, Madam) they procured to 

you, unknown to yourself, a safe and uninterrupted
egress (which perhaps would not otherwise have been
continued to you so long as it was) to the garden
and wood-house: For he undertook to them, to
watch all your motions: And the more chearfully
(for the fellow loves you) as it kept off the curiosity
of others (a) .’ 
So, my dear, it comes out, that I myself was obliged
to this deep contriver. 
I sat in silent astonishment; and thus he went on. 
‘As to the circumstance, for which you think so
hardly of me, I do freely confess, that having a suspicion
that you would revoke your intention of getting
away, and in that case apprehending that we
should not have the time together that was necessary
for that purpose; I had ordered him to keep off
every-body he could keep off, and to be himself
within view of the garden-door; for I was determined,
if possible, to induce you to adhere to your
resolution.’— 
But pray, Sir, interrupting him, how came you to
apprehend that I should revoke my intention? I had
indeed deposited a Letter to that purpose; but you had
it not: And how, as I had reserved to myself the privilege
of a revocation, did you know, but I might
have prevailed upon my friends, and so have revoked
upon good grounds? 
‘I will be very ingenuous, Madam—You had made
me hope that if you changed your mind, you would
give me a meeting to apprise me of the reasons for
it. I went to the loose bricks, and I saw the Letter
there: And as I knew your friends were immoveably
fixed in their schemes, I doubted not but the
Letter was to revoke or suspend your resolution; and
probably to serve instead of a meeting too. I therefore
let it lie, that if you did revoke, you might be
under the necessity of meeting me for the sake of the 

expectation you had given me: And as I came prepared,
I was resolved, pardon me, Madam, whatever
were your intentions, that you should not go
back. Had I taken your Letter, I must have been
determined by the contents of it, for the present, at
least: But not having received it, and you having
reason to think I wanted not resolution, in a situation
so desperate, to make your friends a personal
visit, I depended upon the Interview you had bid me
hope for.’ 
Wicked wretch! said I; It is my grief, that I gave
you opportunity to take so exact a measure of my
weakness! —But would you have presumed to visit the
family, had I not met you? 
Indeed I would. I had some friends in readiness,
who were to have accompanied me to them. And had
your Father refused to give me audience, I would have
taken my friends with me to Solmes. 
And what did you intend to do to Mr. Solmes? 
Not the least hurt, had the man been passive. 
But had he not been passive, as you call it, what
would you have done to Mr. Solmes? 
He was loth, he said, to tell me—Yet not the least
hurt to his person. 
I repeated my question. 
If he must tell me, he only proposed to carry off
the poor fellow, and to hide him for a month or two. 
And this he would have done, let what would have
been the consequence. 
Was ever such a wretch heard of! —I sighed from
the bottom of my heart: But bid him proceed from the
part I had interrupted him at. 
‘I ordered the fellow, as I told you, Madam, said
he, to keep within view of the garden-door: And
if he found any parley between us, and any-body
coming (before you could retreat undiscovered) whose
coming might be attended with violent effects, he
would cry out; and this not only in order to save 

himself from their suspicions of him, but to give me
warning to make off, and, if possible, to induce
you (I own it, Madam) to go off with me, according
to your own appointment. And I hope, all circumstances
considered, and the danger I was in of
losing you for ever, that the acknowlegement of this
contrivance, or if you had not met me, that upon
Solmes, will not procure me your hatred: For, had
they come, as I expected as well as you, what a despicable
wretch had I been, could I have lest you to
the insults of a Brother and others of your family,
whose mercy was cruelty when they had not the pretence
with which this detected Interview would have
furnished them!’ 
What a wretch, said I! —But if, Sir, taking your
own account of this strange matter to be fact, anybody
were coming, how happened it, that I saw only
that man Leman (I thought it was he) out of the door,
and at a distance, look after us? 
Very lucky! said he, putting his hand first in one
pocket, then in another—I hope I have not thrown it
away—It is, perhaps, in the coat I had on yesterday
—Little did I think it would be necessary to be produced
—But I love to come to a demonstration whenever
I can—I may be giddy—I may be heedless. I am
indeed—But no man, as to you, Madam, ever had a
sincerer heart. 
He then stepping to the parlour door, called his servant
to bring him the coat he had on yesterday. 
The servant did. And in the pocket, rumpled up,
as a paper he regarded not, he pulled out a Letter,
written by that Joseph, dated Monday night; in which
‘he begs pardon for crying out so soon—says, That
his fears of being discovered to act on both sides, had
made him take the rushing of a little dog (that always
follows him) thro' the phyllirea-hedge, for
Betty's being at hand, or some of his masters: And
that when he found his mistake, he opened the door 

by his own key (which the contriving wretch confessed
he had furnished him with) and inconsiderately
ran out in a hurry, to have apprised him that his
crying-out was owing to his fright only:’ And he
added, ‘that they were upon the hunt for me, by the
time he returned (a) .’ 
I shook my head—Deep! deep! deep! said I, at
the best! —O Mr. Lovelace! God forgive and reform
you! —But you are, I see plainly (upon the whole of
your own account) a very artful, a very designing man. 
Love, my dearest Life, is ingenious. Night and
day have I racked my stupid brain [O Sir, thought I,
not stupid! 'Twere well perhaps if it were] to contrive
methods to prevent the sacrifice designed to be made of
you, and the mischief that must have ensued upon it: 
So little hold in your affections: Such undeserved antipathy
from your friends: So much danger of losing
you for ever from both causes. I have not had for the
whole fortnight before last Monday, half an hour's rest
at a time. And I own to you, Madam, that I should
never have forgiven myself, had I omitted any contrivance
or forethought that would have prevented your
return without me. 
Again I blamed myself for meeting him: And justly; 
for there were many chances to one, that I had
not met him. And if I had not, all his fortnight's contrivances,
as to me, would have come to nothing; and
perhaps I might nevertheless have escaped Solmes. 
Yet, had he resolved to come to Harlowe-Place with
his friends, and been insulted, as he certainly would
have been, what mischiefs might have followed! 
But his resolution to run away with and to hide the
poor Solmes for a month or so, O my dear! what
a wretch have I let run away with me, instead of
Solmes! 

I asked him, if he thought such enormities as
these, such defiances of the Laws of Society, would
have passed unpunished? 
He had the assurance to say, with one of his usual
gay airs, That he should by this means have disappointed
his enemies, and saved me from a forced marriage. 
He had no pleasure in such desperate pushes. 
Solmes he would not have personally hurt. He must
have fled his country, for a time at least: And, truly,
if he had been obliged to do so (as all his hopes of my
favour must have been at an end) he would have had
a fellow-traveller of his own Sex out of our family,
whom I little thought of. 
Was ever such a wretch! —To be sure he meant my
Brother! 
And such, Sir, said I, in high resentment, are the
uses you make of your corrupt intelligencer— 
My corrupt intelligencer, Madam, interrupted he! 
He is to this hour your Brother's as well as mine. By
what I have ingenuously told you, you may see who
began this corruption. Let me assure you, Madam,
that there are many free things which I have been
guilty of as reprisals, in which I would not have been
the aggressor. 
All that I shall further say on this head, Mr. Lovelace,
is this: That as this vile double-faced wretch
has probably been the cause of great mischief on both
sides, and still continues, as you own, his wicked
practices, I think it would be but just, to have my
friends apprised what a creature he is whom some of
them encourage. 
What you please, Madam, as to that—My service,
as well as your Brother's, is now almost over for him. 
The fellow has made a good hand of it. He does not
intend to stay long in his place. He is now actually
in treaty for an Inn, which will do his business for
life. I can tell you further, that he makes Love to your
Sister's Betty: And that by my advice. They will be 

married when he is established. An Innkeeper's wife
is every man's mistress; and I have a scheme in my
head to set some engines at work to make her repent
her saucy behaviour to you to the last day of her life. 
What a wicked schemer are you, Sir! —Who shall
avenge upon you the still greater evils which you have
been guilty of? I forgive Betty with all my heart. 
She was not my servant; and but too probably, in
what she did, obeyed the commands of her to whom
she owed duty, better than I obeyed those to whom I
owed more. 
No matter for that, the wretch said [To be sure, my
dear, he must design to make me afraid of him]: The
decree was gone out—Betty must smart—Smart too
by an act of her own choice. He loved, he said, to
make bad people their own punishers. —Nay, Madam,
excuse me; but if the fellow, if this Joseph, in your
opinion, deserves punishment, mine is a complicated
scheme; a man and his wife cannot well suffer separately,
and it may come home to him too. 
I had no patience with him. I told him so. I see,
Sir, said I, I see, what a man I am with. Your Rattle
warns me of the Snake. —And away I flung; leaving
him seemingly vexed, and in confusion. 