


Miss Byron, To Lady G. 


Selby-house, Wedn. Sept. 20.
My dearest Lady G.
Do you know what is become of your brother? 
My grandmamma Shirley has seen his Ghost; 
and talked with it near an hour; and then it vanished. 
Be not surprised, my dear creature. I am still in
amaze at the account my grandmamma gives us of its
appearance, discourse, and vanishing! Nor was the
dear parent in a resverie. It happened in the middle
of the afternoon, all in broad day. Thus she tells
it: 
‘I was sitting, said she, in my own drawing-room,
yesterday, by myself; when, in came James,
to whom it first appeared, and told me, that a gentleman
desired to be introduced to me. I was reading
Sherlock upon Death, with that chearfulness with
which I always meditate the subject. I gave orders
for his admittance; and in came, to appearance,
one of the handsomest men I ever saw in my life,
in a riding-dress. It was a courteous Ghost: It saluted
me; or at least I thought it did: For it answering
to the description that you, my Harriet, had
given me of that amiable man, I was surprised. 
But, contrary to the manner of ghosts, it spoke
first—Venerable Lady, it called me; and said, its
name was Grandison, in a voice—so like what I had
heard you speak of it, that I had no doubt but it
was Sir Charles Grandison himself; and was ready
to fall down to welcome him. 
‘It took its place by me: You, madam, said it,
will forgive this intrusion: And it made several fine
speeches, with an air so modest, so manly—It had
almost all the talk to itself. I could only bow, and 

be pleased; for still I thought it was corporally, and
indeed, Sir Charles Grandison. It said, that it had
but a very little while to stay: It must reach, I
don't know what place, that night—What, said I,
will you not go to Selby-house? Will you not see
my daughter Byron? Will you not see her aunt
Selby? No, it desired to be excused. It talked of
leaving a pacquet behind it; and seemed to pull out
of its pocket a parcel of Letters sealed up. It broke
the seal, and laid the parcel on the table before me. 
It refused refreshment. It desired, in a courtly
manner, an answer to what it had discoursed upon— 
Made a profound reverence—and—vanished.’ 
And now, my dear Lady G. let me repeat my
question; What is become of your brother? 
Forgive me, this light, this amusing manner. My
grandmamma speaks of this visit as an appearance, so
sudden, and so short, and nobody seeing him but she; 
that it gave a kind of amusing levity to my pen, and
I could not resist the temptation I was under to surprise
you, as he has done us all. How could he take
such a journey, see nobody but my grandmamma, and
fly the country? Did he do it to spare us, or to spare
himself? 
The direct truth is this: My grandmamma was sitting
by herself, as above: James told her, as above,
that a gentleman desired to be introduced to her. He
was introduced. He called himself by his own name; 
took her hand; saluted her—Your character, madam,
and mine, said he, are so well known to each other,
that tho' I never before had the honour of approaching
you, I may presume upon your pardon for this intrusion. 
He then launched out in the praises of your happy
friend. With what delight did the dear, the indulgent
parent repeat them from his mouth! I hope she
mingled not her own partialities with them, whether
I deserved them, or not; for sweet is praise, from 

those we wish to love us. And then he said, You see
before you, madam, a man glorying in his affection
to one of the most excellent of your Sex; an Italian
Lady; the pride of Italy! And who, from motives
which cannot be withstood, has rejected him, at the
very time that all her friends consenting, and innumerable
difficulties overcome, he expected that she
would yield her hand to his wishes—And they were
his wishes. My friendship for the dear Miss Byron
(You and she must authorize me to call it by a still
dearer name, before I dare do it) is well known:
That also has been my pride. I know too well what
belongs to female delicacy in general, and particularly
to that of Miss Byron, to address myself first to her,
on the subject which occasions you this trouble. I am
not accustomed to make professions, not even to Ladies
—Is it consistent with your notions of delicacy,
madam; Will it be with Mr. and Mrs. Selby's; to
give your interest in favour of a man who is thus situated? 
A rejected man! A man who dares to own,
that the rejection was a disappointment to him; and
that he tenderly loved the fair rejecter. If it will, and
Miss Byron can accept the tender of a heart that has
been divided, unaccountably so (the circumstances, I
presume, you know) then will you, then will she, lay
me under an obligation that I can only endeavour to
repay by the utmost gratitude and affection. —But if
not, I shall admire the delicacy of the second refuser,
as I do the piety of the first, and, at least, suspend all
thoughts of a change of condition. 
Noblest of men—And my grandmamma was proceeding
in high strains, but very sincere ones; when,
interrupting her, and pulling out of his pocket the
pacquet I mentioned above; I presume, madam, said
he, that I see favour and goodness to me in your benign
countenance: But I will not even be favoured,
but upon your full knowlege of all the facts I am
master of myself. I will be the guardian of the delicacy 

of Miss Byron and all her friends in this important
case, rather than the discourager, tho' I were
to suffer by it. You will be so good as to read these
Letters to your daughter Byron, to her Lucy, to Mr.
and Mrs. Selby, and to whom else you will think fit
to call to the consultation: They will be those, I presume,
who already know something of the history of
the excellent Clementina. If, on the perusal of them,
I may be admitted to pay my respects to Miss Byron,
consistently, as I hinted, with her notions and yours of
that delicacy by which she was always directed, and
at the same time be received with that noble frankness
which has distinguished her in my eye above all
women but one (Excuse me, madam, I must always
put these sister-souls upon an equal foot of excellence); 
then shall I be a happier man than the happiest. Your
answer, madam, by pen and ink, will greatly oblige
me; and the more, the sooner I can be favoured with
it; because, being requested by my friends abroad to
set an example to their beloved Clementina, as you
will see in more than one of these Letters; I would
avoid all punctilio, and let them know, that I had
offered myself to Miss Byron, and have not been mortified
with absolute denial; if I may be so happy as to
be allowed to write so. 
Thus did this most generous of men prevent, by
this reference to the Letters, my grandmamma's heart
overflowing to her lips. He should directly, he said,
proceed on his journey to London; and was in such
haste to be gone, when he had said what he had to say,
that it precipitated a little my grandmamma's spirits:
But the joy she was filled with, on the occasion, was
so great, that she only had a concern upon her, when
he was gone, as if something was left by her undone
or unsaid, which she thought should have been said
and done to oblige him. 
The Letters he left on the table, were copies of
what he wrote from Lyons to the Marquis and Marchioness, 

the Bishop, the General, and Father Marescotti; 
as also to Lady Clementina, and her brother,
the good Jeronymo(a) . That to the Lady cannot
be enough admired, for the tenderness, yet for the acquiescence
with her will expressed in it. Surely they
were born for each other, however it happens, that
they are not likely to come together. 
A Letter from Signor Jeronymo, in answer to his
from Lyons, I will mention next. In this Sir Charles
is wished to use his supposed influence upon Lady
Clementina (What a hard task upon him!) to dissuade
her from the thoughts of going into a nunnery, and
to resolve upon marriage(b) . 
Next is a Letter of Lady Clementina to Sir Charles,
complaining tenderly of persecution from her friends,
who press her to marry; while she contends to be allowed
to take the veil, and applies to Sir Charles for
his interest in her behalf. 
The next is Sir Charles's reply to Lady Clementina. 
Then follows a Letter from Sir Charles to Signor Jeronymo. 
I have copied these three last, and inclose
them in confidence(c) . 
By these you will see, my dear, that the affair between
this excellent man and woman is entirely given
up by both; and also in his reply to Signor Jeronymo,
that your Harriet is referred to as his next
choice. And how can I ever enough value him, for
the dignity he has given me, in putting it, as it should
seem, in my power to lay an obligation upon him; in
making for me my own scruples; and now, lastly, in
the method he has taken in the application to my
grandmamma, instead of to me; and leaving all to
our determination. But thus should the men give
dignity, even for their own sakes, to the women
whom they wish to be theirs. Were there more Sir
Charles Grandisons, would not even the Female world 

(much better, as I hope it is, than the Male) be
amended? 
My grandmamma, the moment Sir Charles was
gone, sent to us, that she had some very agreeable
news to surprise us with; and therefore desired the
whole family of us, her Byron particularly, to attend
her at breakfast, the next morning. We looked upon
one another, at the message, and wondered. I was
not well, and would have excused myself; but my
aunt insisted upon my going. Little did I or any-body
else think of your brother having visited my grandmamma
in person. When she acquainted us that he
had, my weakened spirits wanted support: I was obliged
to withdraw with Lucy. 
I thought I could not bear, when I recovered myself,
that he should be so near, and not once call in,
and enquire after the health of the creature for whom
he professed so high an esteem, and even affection:
But when, on my return to company, my grandmamma
related what passed between them, and the
Letters were read; then again were my failing spirits
unable to support me. They all gazed upon me, as
the Letters were reading, as well as while my grandmamma
was giving the relation of what he said, and
of the noble, the manly air with which he delivered
himself. —With joy and silent congratulation they
gazed upon me; while I felt such a variety of sensibilities
in my heart, as I never felt before, sensibilities
mixed with wonder; and I was sometimes ready
to doubt whether I were not in a resverie; whether
indeed I was in this world, or another; whether I
was Harriet Byron—I know not how to describe what
I felt in my now fluttering, now rejoicing, now dejected heart— 
Dejected? —Yes, my dear Lady G. Dejection was
a strong ingredient in my sensibilities. I know not
why. Yet may there not be a fulness in joy, that will
mingle dissatisfaction with it? If there may, shall I 

be excused for my solemnity, if I deduce from thence
an argument, that the human Soul is not to be fully
satisfied by worldly enjoyments; and that therefore
the completion of its happiness must be in another, a
more perfect state? You, Lady G. are a very good
woman, tho' a lively one; and I will not excuse you,
if on an occasion that bids me look forward to a very
solemn event, you will not forgive my seriousness. — 
That bids me look forward, I repeat; for Sir Charles
Grandison cannot alter his mind: The world has not
wherewith to tempt him to alter it, after he has made
such advances, except I misbehave. 
Well, my dear, and what was the result of our
conference? —My grandmamma, my aunt, and Lucy,
were of opinion, that I ought no more to revolve the
notions of a divided or second-placed Love: That
every point of female delicacy was answered: That
he ought not only still to be allowed to love Lady
Clementina, but that I and all her Sex should revere
her: That my grandmamma, being the person applied
to, should answer for me, for us all, in words of
her own choosing. 
I was silent. What think you, my dear, said my
aunt? with her accustomed tenderness. 
Think! said my uncle, with his usual facetiousness; 
Do you think, if Harriet had one objection, she would
have been silent? I am for sending up for Sir Charles
out of hand. Let him come the first day of next
week, and let them be married before the end of it. 
Not quite so hasty, neither, Mr. Selby, said my
grandmamma, smiling: Let us send to Mr. Deane. 
His love for my child, and regard for us all, deserve
the most grateful returns. 
What a duce, and defer an answer to Sir Charles,
who gives a generous reason, for the sake of the Lady
abroad, and her family (and I hope he thinks a little
of his own sake) for wishing a speedy answer?— 
No, Mr. Selby: Not defer writing, neither. We 

know enough of Mr. Deane's mind already. But, for
my part, I don't know what terms, what conditions,
what additions to my child's fortune, to propose— 
Additions! madam—Why, ay; there must be
some, to be sure—And we are able, and as willing as
able, let me tell you, to make them— 
I beseech you, Sir, said I—Pray, madam—No
more of this—Surely it is time enough to talk of these
subjects. 
So it is, niece. Mr. Deane is a lawyer. God help
me! I never was brought up to any-thing but to live
on the fat of the land, as the saying is. Mr. Deane
and Sir Charles shall talk this matter over by themselves. 
Let us, as you say, send for Mr. Deane. But
I will myself be the messenger of these joyful tidings. 
My uncle then tuned out, in his gay manner, a line
of an old song; and then said, I'll go to Mr. Deane:
I will set out this very day—Pull down the wall, as one
of our kings said; the door is too far about. —I'll
bring Mr. Deane with me to-morrow, or it shall cost
me a fall. 
You know my uncle, my dear. In this manner
did he express his joy. 
My grandmother retired to her closet; and this
that follows is what she wrote to Sir Charles. Everybody
is pleased whenever she takes up the pen. No
one made objection to a single word in it. 

Dear Sir,
Reserve would be unpardonable on our side, tho'
the woman's, to a man who is above reserve,
and whose offers are the result of deliberation, and an
affection, that, being founded in the merit of our dearest
child, cannot be doubted. We all receive as an
honour the offer you make us of an alliance which
would do credit to families of the first rank. It will
perhaps be one day owned to you, that it was the
height of Mrs. Selby's wishes and mine, that the man 

who had rescued the dear creature from insult and distress,
might be at liberty to intitle himself to her
grateful Love. 
The noble manner in which you have explained
yourself on a subject which has greatly embarrassed
you, has abundantly satisfied Mrs. Selby, Lucy, and
myself: We can have no scruples of delicacy. Nor
am I afraid of suffering from yours by my frankness. 
But, as to our Harriet—You may perhaps meet with
some (not affectation; she is above it) difficulty with
her, if you expect her whole heart to be yours. She,
Sir, experimentally knows how to allow for a double,
a divided Love—Dr. Bartlett, perhaps, should not have
favoured her with the character of a Lady whom she
prefers to herself; and Mrs. Selby and I have sometimes,
as we read her melancholy story, thought, not
unjustly. If she can be induced to love, to honour,
the man of her choice, as much as she loves, honours,
and admires Lady Clementina; the happy man will
have reason to be satisfied. You see, Sir, that we,
who were able to give a preference to the same Lady
against ourselves (Harriet Byron is ourself) can have
no scruples on your giving it to the same incomparable
woman. May that Lady be happy! If she were not
to be so, and her unhappiness were to be owing to our
happiness; that, dear Sir, would be all that could pain
the hearts of any of us, on an occasion so very agreeable
to 
Your sincere Friend and Servant,
Henrietta Shirley. 

But, my dear Lady G. does your brother tell you
and Lady L. nothing of his intentions? Why, if he
does, do not you—But I can have no doubt. Is not
the man Sir Charles Grandison? And yet, methinks,
I want to know what the contents of his next Letters
from Italy will be. 
You will have no scruple, my dear Lady G. to 

shew my whole Letter to Lady L. and, if you please,
to my Emily—But only mention the contents, in your
own way, to the gentlemen. I beg you will yourself
shew it to Mrs. Reeves: She will rejoice in her prognostications. 
Use that word to her: She will understand
you. Your brother must now, less than ever,
see what I write. I depend upon your discretion, my
dear Lady G. 
Harriet Byron. 

