


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Miss Grandison has been making me read aloud
some part of the letter I had just writ to you,
Lucy. We know, said she, it is about us; but we
shall think what you have written, greatly to our disadvantage,
if we cannot hear some of it. Then she
insisted (she is an arbitrary dear creature) on my giving
the company [It was at tea, and Lord L. present]
such histories as she should call for of my own family. 
On this condition only, said she, will we consent to be
made fully known, as I find we shall, if I do not steal
away your pen and ink, to our grandmother Shirley,
our aunt Selby, and even to our Lucy. 
Do not you think, Lucy, I ran on with pleasure in
describing the persons and tempers of my father and
mother, and relating their fortunes, loves, difficulties; 
as my grandmamma and aunt had enabled me to
do, from what they used to recount in many a long
summer-day, and in many a winter-evening, as we
girls sat at work—Happy memorials! —Ay, but do 

you believe she did not question me about later events? 
She did, indeed, call upon me for two other histories. 
And of whom? methinks you ask. 
I won't tell you, Lucy: But if my aunt should be
solicitous to know, and should guess that my uncle's
and hers (so entertaining and instructive) was one of
them; and if you, Lucy, should guess that the history
of a young lady, whose discretion got the better
of her love, and who cannot be dearer to herself than
she is to me, is the other—Why, perhaps, neither
my aunt, nor you, my dear, may be much mistaken. 
Methinks I would fain rise now-and-then to my
former serene-pertness [Allow you of the words so connected?]:
But my heart is heavy. 
They were delighted with a certain gentleman's humourous
character and courtship; with his lady's prudence
and goodness, in the one story; and in the
other, with the young lady's victorious discretion. 
They wish to be personally acquainted with each, and
with my grandmamma. All the worthies in the
world, my dear, are not in the Grandison-family! 
* *
Before I resume the continuation of the ladies family-history,
let me ask; Don't you think, my dear,
that God has blessed these happy children, for the sake
of their excellent mother? And who knows, but for
their duty to their less-deserving father? It is my notion,
that one person's remissness in duty, where there
is a reciprocal one, does not absolve the other party
from the performance of his. It is difficult, indeed,
to love so well a faulty or remiss parent, as a kind and
good one. But our duty is indispensable; and where
it is paid, a blessing may the rather be expected, as
the parent has not done his. If, when you do well,
and suffer for it, says the Apostle, ye take it patiently,
this is acceptable with God. —Not to mention
one consideration, which, however, ought not to be
left out of the account; that a good child will be no 

less benefited by the warning, as Sir Charles no doubt
is, from his father's unhappy turn; than by the example;
as he is from that of his excellent mother. 
Lady L. referred to the paper given in by the short-hand
writer, for the occasion (as mentioned by Sir
Charles) to which these three worthy children owed
the loss of such a mother (a) : And this drew her into
a melancholy relation of some very affecting particulars. 
Among other things, she said, her mother
regretted, in her last hours, that she had no opportunity,
that she could think just and honourable, to lay
by any thing considerable for her daughters. Her
jewels, and some valuable trinkets, she hoped, would
be theirs: But that would be at their father's pleasure. 
I wish, said she, that my dear girls were to have between
them the tenth part of what I have saved—But
I have done but my duty. 
I have told you, Charlotte, said the Countess, what
my mother said to me, a few hours before she died; 
and I will repeat it to Miss Byron. After having, upon
general principles, recommended filial duty, and
brotherly and sisterly love to us all; and after my brother
and sister had withdrawn; My dear Caroline, said
she, let me add to the general arguments of the duty I
have been enforcing upon you all, one respecting your
interest, and let your sister know it. I am afraid there
will be but a slender provision made for my dear girls. 
Your papa has the notion riveted in him, which is
common to men of antient families, that daughters are
but incumbrances, and that the son is to be everything. 
He loves his girls: He loves you dearly: But
he has often declared, that, were he to have entire all
the fortune that descended to him from his father, he
would not give to his daughters, marry whom they
would, more than 5,000l. apiece. Your brother loves
you: He loves me. It will be in his power, should he 

survive your father, to be a good friend to you. —Love
your brother. 
To my brother afterwards she said something: I
believe, recommending his sisters to him; for we
coming in, boy as he was in years, but man in behaviour
and understanding, he took each of our hands— 
You remember it, Charlotte [Both sisters wept] and
kneeling down, and putting them in my mother's held-out
dying hands, and bowing his face upon all three— 
All, madam—All, my dearest best of mamma's, that
you have enjoin'd— 
He could say no more; and our arms were wet with
his tears. —Enough, enough, my son; I distress you! 
—And she kissed her own arm—These are precious
tears—You embalm me, my son, with your tears—O
how precious the balm! —And she lifted up her head
to kiss his cheek, and to repeat her blessings to the darling
of her heart. 
Who could refrain tears, my Lucy, on the representation
of such a scene? —Miss Jervois and I wept,
as if we had been present on the solemn occasion. 
But, my Charlotte, give Miss Byron some brief account
of the parting scene between my father and mother. 
She is affected as a sister should be—Tears,
when time has matured a pungent grief into a sweet
melancholy, are not hurtful: They are as the dew of
the morning to the green herbage. 
I cannot, said Miss Grandison—Do you, Lady L. 
Lady L. proceeded—My father had long kept his
chamber, from the unhappy adventure, which cost
him and us all so dear. My mother, till she was forced
to take to her bed, was constantly his attendant: And
then was grieved she could not attend him still. 
At last, the moment, happy to her, long dreaded
by us, the releasing moment, approached. One last
long farewel she wish'd to take of the man, who had
been ever dear to her; and who had cost her so dear. 
He was told of her desire to be lifted to his bed-side in 

her bed; for one of his wounds (too soon skinned
over) was broken out, and he was confined to his bed
—He ordered himself to be carried, in a great chair,
to hers. But then followed such a scene— 
All we three children were in the room, kneeling
by the bed-side—praying—weeping—O how ineffectually
—Not even hope remaining—Best beloved of
my soul! in faltering accents, said my mother, her
head raised by pillows, so as that she sat upright—Forgive
the desire of my heart once more to see you! — 
They would not bring me to you! —O how I distress
you! —For my father sobbed; every feature of his
face seem'd swelled almost to bursting, and working as
if in mortal agonies—Charlotte, relieve me!— 
The sweet lady's eyes were drowned in tears— 
I cannot, said Miss Grandison; her handkerchief
spread over her face. 
Miss Emily sobbed. She held her hand before her
eyes: Her tears trickled through her fingers. 
I was affected beyond measure—Yet besought her
Ladyship to proceed. —She went on. 
I have endeavour'd, said my mother, in broken sentences
—It was my wish—It was my pride: Indeed,
my chiefest pride, to be a good wife!— 
O my dear! —You have been—My father could
not say what. 
Forgive my imperfections, Sir!— 
O my dearest life! You had no imperfections: I,
I, was all imper—He could not speak out the word
for his tears. 
Bless your children in my sight: God hitherto has
blessed them! God will continue to bless them, if they
continue to deserve their father's blessing. Dear Sir
Thomas, as you love them, bless them in my sight. 
I doubt not your goodness to them—But the blessing of
a dying mother, joined with that of a surviving father
—must have efficacy! 

My father looked earnestly to us all—He could not
speak. 
My brother following my mother's dying eye, which
was cast upon my father, arose from his knees, and
approaching my father's chair, cast himself at his feet. 
My father threw his arms about his neck—God bless
—God bless my son, said he—and make him a better
man than his father. My mother demanding the cheek
of her beloved son, said, God bless my dearest child,
and make you an honour to your father's family, and
to your mother's memory! 
We girls followed my brother's example. 
God bless my daughters! —God bless you, sweet
loves, said my father; first kissing one, then the other,
as we kneeled. —God make you as good women as
your mother: Then, then, will you deserve to be
happy. 
God bless you, my dear girls, God bless you both,
said my mother, kissing each, as you are dutiful to
your father, and as you love one another—I hope I
have given you no bad example. 
My father began to accuse himself. My brother,
with the piety of the Patriarch's two best sons, retired,
that he might not hear his father's confessions. We
followed him to the farther end of the room. The
manly youth sat down between us, and held an hand
of each between his: His noble heart was soften'd:
He two or three times lifted the hand of each to his
lips. But he could only once speak, his heart seeming
ready to burst; and that was, as I remember, O
my sisters! —Comfort yourselves! —But who can say
comfort—These tears are equally our duty and our
relief. 
My mother retained to the last that generosity of
mind which had ever distinguished her. She would not
permit my father to proceed with his self-accusation:
Let us look forward, my dearest, my only Love, said
she. I have a blessed hope before me; I pity as well 

as pray for survivors: You are a man of sense, Sir, and
of enlarged sentiments: God direct you according to
them, and comfort you! All my fear was (and that
more particularly for some of the last past months)
that I should have been the mournful survivor. In a
very few moments all my sufferings will be over; and
God give you, when you come to this unavoidable period
of all human vanity, the same happy prospects
that are now opening to me! O Sir, believe me, all
worldly joys are now nothing; less than nothing:
Even my love of you and of the dear pledges of our mutual
love with-holds not now my wishes after an happier
state. There may we meet, and never be separated! 
—Forgive me only, my beloved husband, if I have
ever made you for one hour unhappy or uneasy—Forgive
the petulancies of my Love! 
Who can bear this goodness? said my father: I
have not deserved— 
Dear Sir, no more—Were you not the husband of
my choice? —And now your grief affects me—Leave
me, Sir. You bring me back again to earth—God
preserve you, watch over you, heal you, support you. 
Your hand, Sir Thomas Grandison, the name that
was ever so pleasant in my ears! Your hand, Sir! 
Your heart was my treasure: I have now, and only
now, a better treasure, a diviner Love, in view. Adieu,
and in this world for ever adieu, my husband, my
friend, my Grandison! 
She turned her head from him, sunk upon her pillows,
and fainted, and so saw not, had not the grief
to see, the stronger heart of my father overcome; for
he fainted away, and was carried out in his chair by
the servants who brought him in. He was in a strong
convulsion-fit, between his not half-cured wounds and
his grief; and recover'd not till all was over with
my blessed mother. 
After my father was carried out, she came to herself. 
Her chaplain was once more admitted. The 

fatal moment approached. She was asked, if she
would see her children again? No, she said; but bid
her last blessing be repeated to them, and her charge,
of loving one another, in the words of our Saviour, as
she had loved us: And when the chaplain came to read
a text, which she had imperfectly pointed to, but so as
to be understood, she repeated, in faltering accents, but
with more strength of voice than she had had for an hour
before, I have fought a good fight; I have finished my
course; I have kept the faith—There is laid up for me
a crown of righteousness: And then her voice failing,
she gave signs of satisfaction, in the hope of being entitled
to that crown; and expired in an ejaculation
that her ebbing life could not support. 
O my Lucy! may my latter end, and the latter end
of all I love, be like hers! The two ladies were in
speechless tears, so was Miss Jervois, so was I, for
some minutes. And for an hour or two, all the joys
of life were as nothing to me. Even the regard I had
entertained for the excellent son of a lady so excellent,
my protector, my deliverer, had, for some hours,
subsided, and was as nothing to me. Even now that
I have concluded this moving recapitulation, it seems
as nothing; and the whole world, my dear, is as a bit
of dirt under my feet. 

