


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Saturday, Sunday, Jan. 20, 21. 
Another long silence. Lucy will supply all
my defects. She will tell you how much I have
been engaged. She has sent you a charming Letter,
filled with observations on the good order established
here before our arrival by Dr. Bartlett and Mrs. Curzon; 
with accounts of some particular charities, both
public and private, that deserve to be imitated by
all who have ability; and of our visit made last Wednesday
at Mansfield-house. 
The Lady of it would not part with us, till Thursday,
the days being short, and the weather unfavourable. 
Mr. Dobson and his Lady were guests there. 
He is a credit to his cloth; his wife to him. They
are greatly beloved by all who know them. Lady
Mansfield and Miss Mansfield are all that is polite and
good. The three brothers were there. The eldest,
who was once a malancholy man, is now one of the
chearfullest. With what pleasure did I meditate, as
I looked upon them, the restoration of such a worthy
and antient family to affluence! They were born to
it: Yet when they were deprived of it, how glorious
was the resignation of mother and daughters! And
now, how easy sits the prosperity upon them! Never
saw I eyes more expressive of gratitude to a benefactor, 

than those both of Ladies and Gentlemen, as they
were often cast upon my dear Sir Charles. 
I heartily wish Mr. Orme may find his expectations
answered in the second voyage Nancy tells me
he is preparing for to Lisbon. She will make known
my best wishes for the restoration of his health. 
How good is his sister to accompany him! —I always
loved her. 
I received yesterday yours, madam, acquainting me
with Mr. Greville's visit and proposal, and asking my
opinion of the latter; and whether I would choose
to mention it to Lucy and my aunt. What can I
say? You once told me, madam, that you believed
Lucy would not have refused Mr. Greville, had he
first applied to her. Lucy's grandmother, you say,
is not averse to the match; and you think my uncle
would not refuse his consent, because of the contiguity
of their respective estates, and in hopes, that he
might resume with success, on such an event, his favourite
project of exchange of lands. Yet I am sure
this consideration would have no weight with him,
if he thought Lucy could not be happy with Mr. Greville. 
I have mentioned it to my aunt. She says, Mr.
Greville is not a bashful man. He knows how to
apply to Lucy himself. And she has no notion, in
such a case, of that pride which with-holds him till
he thinks himself sure of the family-interest. 
He will, if possible, he says, be related to me: Let
that be mentioned to Lucy, as one of his principal
motives, and his business with her is done for ever. 
Lady G. would laugh at the notion of a difficulty
from a first Love. First Love she calls first nonsense. 
Too frequently it is so. Lucy is a noble girl. She
has overcome a first attachment; the more laudably,
as it cost her some struggles to do it. Mr. Greville,
I doubt, has had several first Loves: This transition,
therefore, is nothing to him. So neither of them 

will be first Love to the other. It may therefore be
a match of discretion. Yet his character! The reformation
he boasts of! —I hope he is reformed: But
I have no notion of a good young woman, as Lucy
is, trusting her person, I may say, her principles, to
the arbitrary will of an impetuous man, who has
been an avowed Libertine, and pretends not to have
reformed from proper convictions. A scoffer too! 
How came he by his new Lights? —You, madam,
have told us young folks the difficulty of overcoming
evil habits. I own that Lucy always spoke of him with
more favour than any-body else. She was inclined to
think him a good-natured man; and was pleased with
what she called humour in him. Humour! I never
could call it so. Humour, I used to tell her, is a gentle,
a decent, tho' a lively thing. Mr. Greville is boisterous,
impetuous, rude, I had almost said: His courtship to me
was either rant, or affront; the one to shew his Plaindealing,
the other his Love. He knows not what
respectful Love is. In short, his mirth, his goodnature,
as it is called, has fierceness in it; it always
gave me apprehension. 
As to worldly matters, there can be no exception
to him: But I cannot be of the opinion of Lucy's
grandmother, that he is a generous man. He has
only qualities that look like generosity. His start to
me, when he resigned his pretensions to me, as they
have been called (for I know not any he had) was
only a start. He could not hold it. But be all these
things as they may, how can I, who love Lucy as
myself, propose to the dear girl a man, whom I
could not think of for myself? Lucy has a fine fortune,
and surely, there are men enow in the world,
who have never made pretensions to Lucy's cousin,
who would think themselves honoured by her acceptance; 
otherwise, I should, after Sir Rowland's hint,
and earnest wishes in his nephew's favour, much
sooner recommend Mr. Fowler to her than Mr. Greville. 

* *
My aunt had said, that, for her part, she should
choose to leave the above affair to its own workings:
Yet, could not forbear to acquaint Lucy with it. 
The dear girl came to me, to demand a sight of
your Letter, and of what I had written upon it. I
could not (tho' I had some little reluctance to shew
her the latter) deny her. I will give you, madam,
the substance of a short dialogue that passed between
us on the occasion; and leave it to you to draw such
conclusions from it, as you shall judge proper, with
regard to my Lucy's inclinations. 
She did not know what I meant, she said, by writing
to you, that she had always spoken of Mr. Greville
with more favour than any-body else. 
It is ungenerous, Lucy, if you are angry at what
you would oblige me to shew you against my will. 
I am not angry. But—She stopt, and would not
explain her half-sullen But. O Lucy, thought I,
you are a woman, my dear! 
As to what you write, said she, of his desire of being
related to you; who would not? —If that be not
his principal motive—Very well, Lucy! thought I. 
I know, said she, that my grandmamma Selby has
often wished Mr. Greville would make his addresses
to her grand-daughter! —So! So! So! Lucy,
thought I. 
His Libertinism indeed is an objection—But I have
not heard lately of any enormities— 
Go on, Lucy, thought I: Hitherto appears not
any reason for Mr. Greville to despair. 
He may have seen his folly. 
No doubt but he has! thought I. He saw it all the
time he was committing it: But, perhaps, he is the
more determined bad man for that. Is not purity of
heart, thought I, as well as of manners, an eligible
thing? 
If a woman is not to marry till she meet with a
strictly virtuous man— 

You have too often pleaded that argument, Lucy,
to me—I am sorry—I stopt; willing to hear her quite
out; for she held before her what I had written. 
How came he, you ask, said she, by his new
lights? I have nothing to do with how he came by
them. I should rather indeed he had them from proper
convictions—But if he has them, that's enough. 
Is it, my dear, let him have been what he will? 
I am for judging charitably— 
Charming! thought I—judging charitably! So I
have lost a virtue, and you, Lucy, have found it! 
Mr. Greville is nothing to me: Nor ever will be. 
Not quite so sure of that, thought I to myself. 
You say, Harriet, you have no notion of a good
young woman, trusting her principles to the arbitrary
will of a man who has been a free Liver—Must the
man be arbitrary? —Were a husband a free Liver,
must a wife's own principles be endangered? 
These questions from my Lucy! thought I. 
A scoffer, you say, Harriet! —The man's a fool
for that! —But what a poor soul must she be that
could not silence a scoffer! 
Silence a scoffer! Ah Lucy! said I: And would you
marry a man with a hope to be able to silence him? 
Mr. Greville is a conceited man: My Lucy has six times
his sense; but he will not be convinced of that. You
will have the less influence upon him, if he is jealous
of the superiority of your understanding. Mr. Greville
is obstinate as well as conceited. Few men, I believe,
will own conviction from a wise's arguments. 
To be sure the man is not a Sir Charles Grandison. 
Who is? —Let him, as my aunt Selby says, apply to
me; I shall give him his answer. 
You would wish he should, Lucy? 
I don't say so. 
I fansy, Lucy, you would not be very cruel if he
did. 
You fansy I would not—But I can, as you always 

did, treat the man who professes to love me, with
civility, yet not throw myself into his arms at the first
word— 
First word, Lucy! No! The second, or third, or
fourth, is time enough; so the man is not mean time
rendered quite hopeless. 
Very well, Lady Grandison: But let me go on
with what you have written—Good-natured man! — 
I do think he is not an ill natured man. 
So much the better for himself, and his future wife,
Lucy. 
That will not be I, Lady Grandison. 
Perhaps not, Lucy. 
—Humour! I do think he is a humorous goodnatured
man. A little too vehement perhaps in his
mirth; a little too frolick: But who is faultless? 
Proceed, my Lucy. 
—Generous! “Not a generous man!” —“Qualities
that look like generous ones.” —You are a nice
distinguisher, Harriet; you always were—But here
you tell your grandmamma, that you had rather I
should have Mr. Fowler than Mr. Greville— 
Well, my dear, and what say you to that? 
Why, I say, I think you are not so nice for me,
in this case, as you are in others. 
How so? 
How so! Why is there not a difference between
the actual proposals made by Mr. Greville to Mrs.
Shirley; and Sir Rowland's undertaking to try to
prevail upon Mr. Fowler to make his addresses to
me? 
Granted, my dear—I have not a word more to
say in behalf of Mr. Fowler. Mr. Greville, Lucy— 
Is a man I never will have— 
No rash resolutions, my dear. And yet I believe
a woman has seen the same man in a very different
ght, when he has offered himself to her acceptance,
from what she did before. 

I believe so—But I had a mind to sound you, Harriet; 
and to come at your opinion— 
You were intitled to it Lucy, without attempting
to sound me for it. 
True! But we women sometimes choose to come
at a point, by the roundabouts, rather than by the
forerights. 
That is, Lucy, either when we think the foreright
way, as you call it, would not answer our wishes; 
or when we are not willing to open our own hearts. 
Your servant, my dear: But the cap fits not. 
Whenever I speak to you, my heart is upon my
Lips. 
Let me try then, in this one doubtful instance, that
I ever had from you of its being so. Do you think
of encouraging Mr. Greville's proposal? 
It is not a proposal, till it comes in a direct way to
myself. 
Very well, my dear—I say no more till it does. 
* *
Sir Charles has just now heard that Mr. Lowther
is arrived in London. He longs (so I am sure do I)
to know, how affairs are situated in Italy. O for
good news from thence! Then will my happiness in
this Life be perfected! 

