


Sir Charles Grandison. In Continuation. 


Friday night, March 17. 
Mr. Sylvester, an honest pleasure shining in his
countenance, presented to me, first, Miss Danby; 
then, each of her brothers; who all received
my welcome with a little consciousness, as if they
had something to reproach themselves with, and were
generously ashamed to be overcome. The sister had
the least of it: And I saw by that, that she was the
least blameable, not the least modest; since I dare
say she had but followed her brothers lead; while they
looked down and bashful, as having all that was done
amiss to answer for. 
Miss Danby is a very pretty, and very genteel
young woman. Mr. Thomas and Mr. Edward Danby,
are agreeable in their persons and manners, and
want not sense. 
In the first moment I dissipated all their uneasiness
and we sat down together with confidence in each
other. The honest attorney had prepared them to be
easy after the first introduction. 
I offer not to read to you, said I, the will of your
uncle. It is sufficient to repeat what Mr. Sylvester
has, no doubt, told you; That you are each of you
entitled by it to a thousand pounds. 

They all bowed; and the elder brother signified
their united consent to accept it upon the terms of the
will. 
Three thousand pounds more are to be disposed of
to charitable uses, at the discretion of the executor:
Three other legacies are left to three different gentlemen
in France: And the large remainder, which will
not be less than four-and-twenty thousand pounds,
falls to the executor, as residuary legatee, equally unexpected
and undesired. 
The elder brother said, God bless you with it, Sir. 
The second said, It could not have fallen to a worthier
man. The young Lady's lips moved: But words
proceeded not from them. Yet her eyes shewed that
her lips made me a compliment. 
It is ungenerous, Dr. Bartlett, to keep expecting
minds in suspense, tho' with a view of obliging in the
end. The surprize intended to be raised on such an
occasion, carries in its appearance an air of insult. I
have, said I, a great desire to do you service. Now
let me know, gentlemen (I will talk to the young
Lady singly, perhaps) what your expectations were
upon your uncle; what will do for each of you, to
enable you to enter the world with advantage, in the
way you have been brought up; and, as I told your
worthy friend, Mr. Sylvester, I will be ready to do
you all reasonable service. —But, hold, Sir; for Mr.
Thomas Danby was going to speak; you shall consider
before you answer me. The matter is of importance. 
Be explicit. I love openness and sincerity. I will
withdraw, till you have consulted together. Command
me in when you have determined. 
I withdrew to my Study: And, in about a quarter
of an hour, they let me know, that they were ready
to attend me. I went in to them. They looked
upon one another. Come, gentlemen, don't fear
to speak: Consider me, for your uncle's sake, as
your brother. 

The elder brother was going to speak; but, hesitating,
Come, said I, let me lead you into the matter
—Pray, Sir, what is your present situation? What
are your present circumstances? 
My father, Sir, was unhappy—My father— 
Well, Sir, no more of your father—He could do
nothing for you. Your whole dependence, I presume,
was upon your uncle. 
My uncle, Sir, gave us all our education—My
uncle gave each brother a thousand guineas for putting
out each to a merchant; five hundred only of
which sums were so employed; and the other five
hundred guineas, are in safe hands. 
Your uncle, Sir, all reverence to his memory, was
an excellent man. 
Indeed, Sir, he was. 
And what, Sir, is the business you were brought
up to? 
My master is a West-India merchant. 
And what, Mr. Danby, are your prospects in that
way? 
Exceeding hopeful, Sir, they would have been— 
My master intended to propose to my uncle, had he
lived to come to town, to take me in a quarter-partner
with him directly; and, in a twelvemonth's time, an
half-partner. 
A very good sign in your favour, Sir. You must
have behaved yourself well. And will he now do it? 
Ah! Sir—And was silent. 
Upon what terms, Mr. Danby, would he have
proposed to your uncle to take you in a quarter-partner? 
Sir—he talked of— 
Of what? 
Four thousand pounds, Sir. But my uncle never
gave us hopes of more than three thousand guineas
each, besides the thousand he had given: And when
he had so much reason to resent the unhappy steps of 

my father, he let us know, that he would not do
any-thing for us: And, to say truth, the thousand
pounds left us in the will, is more than we expected. 
Very ingenuous. I love you for your sincerity. But,
pray, tell me, Will four thousand pounds be well laid
out in a quarter-partnership? 
To say truth, Sir, my master had a view, at the
year's end, if nothing unexpected happened to prevent
it, to give me his niece in marriage; and then
to admit me into a half of the business, which would
be equivalent to a fortune of as much more. 
And do you love the young woman? 
Indeed I do. 
And does she countenance your address? 
If her uncle—I don't doubt if her uncle could have
prevailed upon my uncle— 
Well, Sir, I am your uncle's executor. Now, Sir,
(to Mr. Edward Danby) let me know your situation; 
your prospects. 
Sir, I was put to a French wine-merchant. My
master is in years. I am the sole manager of his business; 
and he would leave off to me, I believe, and
to his nephew, who knows not so much of it as I do,
nor has the acquaintance, either in France or England,
that I have; could I raise money to purchase
half the stock. 
And what, Sir, is necessary for that purpose? 
O Sir! at least six thousand pounds. —But had my
uncle left me the three thousand we once hoped for,
I could have got the other half at an easy interest; 
for I am well beloved, and have always borne a good
character. 
What did you suppose your uncle would do with
the bulk of his fortune (you judged it, I suppose, to
be large) if you expected no more than three thousand
guineas each at the most, besides what he had given
you? 
We all thought, Sir, said Mr. Edward Danby, it 

would be yours, from the time that he owed his life
to your courage and conduct. We never entertained
hopes of being his heirs general: And he several
times told me, when I was in France, that you should
be his heir. 
He never hinted that to me. What I did was as necessary
to be done for my own safety, as for his. He
much over-rated my services. But what are your prospects,
Mr. Edward Danby, in the French wine-trade? 
O Sir, very great!— 
And will your master leave off to you and his nephew,
think you? 
I dare say he would, and be glad of retiring to Enfield,
where he has a house he is so fond of, that he
would be continually there, by his good-will. 
And have you, Sir, any prospect of adding to your
circumstances by marriage? 
Women are a drug, Sir. I have no doubt of offers,
if once I were my own master. 
I started. His sister looked angry. His brother
was not pleased: Mr. Sylvester, who, it seems, is an
old bachelor, laughed— 
A true merchant this already! thought I. 
Well, now, shall I have your consents, gentlemen,
to take your sister aside? —Will you trust yourself
with me, Miss Danby? Or had you rather answer my
questions in company? 
Sir, your character, your goodness, is so well known,
I scruple not to attend you. 
I took her hand, and led her to my study, leaving
the door open, to the drawing-room in which they
were. I seated her. Then sat down, but still held
her hand. 
Now, my dear Miss Danby, you are to suppose me,
as the executor of your uncle, his representative. If
you had that good uncle before you, and he was urging
you to tell him what would make you happy, with
an assurance, that he would do all in his power towards 

it; and if you would open your mind freely to
him; with equal freedom open it to me. There was
only this difference between us: He had resentments
against your father, which he carried too far, when
he extended them to his innocent children [But it was
an atrocious attempt, that embitter'd his otherwise benevolent
spirit]: I have no resentment; and am armed
with his power, and have all the will he ever could
have, to serve you. And now, let me know, what
will effectually do it? 
The worthy girl wept. She looked down. She
seemed as if she were pulling threads out of her handkerchief. 
But was unable to return any other answer,
than what her eyes, once cast up, as if to Heaven,
made for her. 
Give me, my good Miss Danby (I would not distress
you) give me, as your brothers did of their situation,
some account of yours. Do you live with either of
your brothers? 
No, Sir. I live with an aunt: My mother's sister. 
Is she good to you? 
Yes, Sir, very good. But she has children; and
cannot be so good as she would be to me. Yet she has
always been kind; and has made the best of my
uncle's allowance for my education: And my fortune,
which is unbroken, is the same sum that he
gave my brothers: And it is in good hands: And the
interest of it, with my aunt's additional goodness and
management, enables me to make a genteel figure:
And, with my own housewifry, I never have wanted
some little matters for my pocket. 
Good girl, thought I! —Mercantile carle! thy brother
Edward, pretty one! How dared he to say, that
women are drugs? —Who, in their oeconomy, short
as their power is, are generally superior to men! 
Your uncle was very good to put you upon a foot
with your brothers, in his bounty to them; as now he
has also done in his will: And assure yourself, that his 

representative, will be equally kind to you as to your
brothers. But. shall I ask you, as your uncle would
have done—Is there any one man in the world, whom
you prefer to another? 
She was silent; looked down; and again picked
her handkerchief. 
I called in her elder brother (not the drug-merchant)
and asked him, What he knew of his sister's affections? 
Why, my good Dr. Bartlett, are these women
ashamed of owning a laudable passion? Surely there is
nothing shameful in discreet Love. 
Her brother acquainted me with the story of her
Love; the good girl blushing, and looking down all
the while, with the consciousness of a sweet thief,
who had stolen a heart, and, being required to restore
it, had been guilty of a new cheat, and given
her own instead of it. 
The son of Mr. Galliard, an eminent Turky
merchant, is the man with whom she has made this
exchange. His father, who lives in the neighbour-hood
of her aunt, had sent him abroad, in the way of
his traffick; partly with a view to prevent his marrying
Miss Danby, till it should be seen whether her
uncle would do any-thing considerable for her: And
he was but just returned; and, in order to be allowed
to stay at home, had promised his father never to
marry without his consent: But nevertheless loved
his sister, Mr. Danby said, above all women; and
declared that he never would be the husband of any
other. 
I asked, whether the father had any objections, but
those of fortune, to his sorl's choice; and was answer'd,
No. He could have no other, the young
man, like a brother, said: There was not a more virtuous
and discreet young woman in the kingdom than
his sister, tho' he said it, that should not say it. 
Tho' you say it, that should say it. Is not our 

relation intitled to the same justice that we would do
to another? 
We must not blame indiscriminately, continued I, all
fathers who expect a fortune to be brought into their
family, in some measure equivalent to the benefit the
new-comer hopes to receive from it; especially in
mercantile families, if the young man is to be admitted
into a share with his father; who, by the way,
may have other children— 
He has— 
Something by way of equivalent for the part he
gives up, should be done. Love is a selfish Deity. 
He puts two persons upon preferring their own interests,
nay, a gratification of their passion often
against their interests, to those of every-body else; and
reason, discretion, duty, are frequently given up in a
competition with it. But Love, nevertheless, will not
do every-thing for the ardent pair. Parents know
this: And ought not to pay for the rashness they wish
to prevent, but cannot. 
They were attentive. I proceeded, addressing myself
to both in the mercantile style. 
Is a father, who by his prudence, has weather'd
many a storm, and got safe into port, obliged to re-embark
in the voyage of Life, with the young folks,
who perhaps in a little while, will consider him as
an incumbrance, and grudge him his cabin? Parents
(tho' a young man, I have always thought in this
manner) should be indulgent; but children, when
they put themselves into one scale, should allow the
parent his due weight in the other. You are angry
at this father, are you not, my dear Miss Danby? 
I said this, to hear what answer she would return. 
Indeed I am not. Mr. Galliard knows best his
own affairs, and what they require. I have said so
twenty and twenty times: And young Mr. Galliard
is convinced, that his father is not to be blamed,
having other children. And, to own the truth (looking 

on the floor, we both sit down, and wish together,
now-and-then: But what signifies wishing? 
My sister will now have two thousand pounds:
Perhaps when old Mr. Galliard sees, that his son's
affections— 
Old Mr. Galliard, interrupted I, shall be asked to
do nothing inconvenient to himself, or that is not
strictly right by his other children: Nor shall the niece
of my late worthy friend enter into his family, with
discredit to herself. 
Notice being given, that supper was ready, I took
the brother and sister each by the hand; and, entering
the drawing-room with them, Enjoy, said I, the
little repast that will be set before you. If it be in
my power to make you all three happy, happy you
shall be. 
It must give great pleasure, my dear Dr. Bartlett,
you will believe, to a man of my lively sensations, to
see three very different faces in the same persons, from
those they had entered with. I imagined more than
once, as the grateful eyes of the sister, and tongues of
the brothers, expressed their joy, that I saw my late
worthy friend looking down upon us, delighted, and
not with disapprobation, upon his choice of an executor,
who was determined to supply the defects,
which the frailty of human nature, by an ever-strong
resentment on one hand, and an overflowing gratitude
on the other, had occasioned. 
I told Mr. Thomas Danby, that besides his legacy,
he might reckon upon five thousand pounds, and
enter accordingly into treaty for and with his master's
niece. 
Mr. Edward Danby I commissioned, on the strength
of the like additional sum, to treat with the gentleman
he had served. 
And you, my good Miss Danby, said I, shall acquaint
your favoured Mr. Galliard, That, besides the
two thousand pounds already yours, you will have five 

thousand pounds more at his service. And if these
sums answer not your full purposes, I expect you will
let me know; since, whether they do or not, my respect
to the memory of your worthy uncle shall be
shewn to the value of more than these three sums to
his relations. I never will be a richer man than I
ought to be: And you must inform me, what other
relations you have, and of their different situations in
life, that I may be enabled to amend a will, made in
a long and painful sickness, which might sour a disposition
that was naturally all benevolence. 
They wept; looked at one another; dried their
eyes; and wept again. Mr. Sylvester also wept for
joy. I thought my presence painful to them; and
withdrew to my Study; and shut the door, that I
might not add to their pain. 
At my return—Do you—Do you, referred each
brother to the other: And Mr. Thomas Danby getting
up to speak, I see, my friends, said I, your grateful
hearts in your countenances. Do you think my
pleasure is not, at least, equal to yours? I am more
than rewarded in the consciousness of having endeavoured
to make a right use of the power entrusted
to me. You will each of you, I hope (thus set
forward) be eminent in his particular business. The
merchants of Great Britain are the most useful members
of the community. If I have obliged you, let
me recommend to you, each in his several way, according
to his ability, and as opportunity may offer, to
raise those worthy hearts, that inevitable calamities
shall make spiritless. Look upon what is done for
you, not as the reward of any particular merits in
yourselves, but as your debt to that Providence,
which makes it a principal part of your religion,
To do good to your fellow-creatures. In a word, let
me injoin you, in all your transactions, to remember
mercy, as well as justice. 
The brothers with folded hands, declared, that 

their hearts were opened by the example set them; 
and, they hoped, would never be shut. The sister
looked the same declaration. 
Mr. Sylvester, raised with this scene of gratitude
tears in his honest eyes, said, That he should be impatient
till he had looked into his affairs, and thro'
his acquaintance, in order to qualify himself to do
some little good, after such a self-rewarding example. 
If a private man, my dear Dr. Bartlett, could be
a means of expanding thus the hearts of four persons,
none of them unworthy, what good might not princes,
and those who have princely fortunes, do? —Yet, you
see, I have done nothing but mere justice. I have not
given up any-thing that was my own, before this
Will gave me a power, that perhaps was put into my
hands, as a new trial of the integrity of my heart. 
But what poor creatures are we, my dear friend,
that the very avoiding the occasion of a wrong action,
should gladden our hearts, as with the consciousness
of something meritorious? 
At parting, I told the nephews, That I expected to
hear from them the moment any-thing should be
brought to effect; and let their masters and them
agree, or not, I would take the speediest methods that
could be fallen upon, to transfer to them, and to their
sister, such actions and stocks, as would put them in
full possession of what they were intitled to, as well by
my promise, as by their uncle's will. 
I was obliged to injoin them silence. 
Their sister wept; and when I pressed her hand at
taking leave of her, gratefully returned the pressure,
but in a manner so modest (recollecting herself into
some little confusion) that shewed gratitude had possession
of her whole heart, and set her above the forms
of her Sex. 
The good attorney, as much raised, as if he were
one of the persons benefited, joined with the two brothers
in invoking blessings upon me. 

So much, my dear Dr. Bartlett, for this night. 
The past day is a day that I am not displeased with. 

