



Dear Father and Mother,
I Thank you a thousand times for your Goodness
to me, express'd in your last Letter. I now long
to get my Business done, and come to my New-Old
Lot, again, as I may call it. I have been quite another
thing since my Master has turn'd me off; and
as I shall come to you an honest Daughter, what
Pleasure it is to what I should have, if I could not
have seen you but as a guilty one! Well, my writing
Time will soon be over, and so I will make Use
of it now, and tell you all that has happen'd since my
last Letter. 
I wonder'd Mrs. Jervis did not call me to sup
with her, and fear'd she was angry; and when I had
finish'd my Letter, I long'd for her coming to Bed. 
At last she came up, but seem'd shy and reserv'd; 
and I said, O my dear Mrs. Jervis, I am glad to see
you: you are not angry with me, I hope. She said
she was sorry Things went so far; and that she had a
great deal of Talk with my Master after I was gone. 
She said, he seem'd mov'd at what I said, and at my
falling on my Knees to him, and my Prayer for him,
at my going away. He said, I was a strange Girl; he
knew not what to make of me: And is she gone? said
he: I intended to say something else to her, but she
behav'd so oddly, that I had not Power to stop her. 
She ask'd if she should call me again. He said, Yes; 
and then, No, let her go; it is best for her and me
too, that she shall go now I have given her Warning. 
But where she had, it I can't tell; but I never
met with the Fellow of her in my Life, at any Age. 
She said, he had order'd her not to tell me all: but
she believ'd he never would offer any thing to me 

again, and I might stay, she fansy'd, if I would beg
it as a Favour; tho' she was not sure neither. 
I stay! dear Mrs. Jervis, said I, why 'tis the best
News that could have come to me, that he will let
me go. I do nothing but long to go back again to
my Poverty and Distress, as he said I should; for,
tho' I am sure of the Poverty, I shall not have Half
the Distress I have had for some Months past, I'll
assure you. 
Mrs. Jervis, dear good Soul, wept over me, and
said, Well, well, Pamela, I did not think I had shew'd
so little Love to you, as that you should express so
much Joy to leave me. I am sure I never had a
Child half so dear to me as you! 
I cry'd to hear her so good to me, as indeed she
has always been; and said, What would you have me
to do, dear Mrs. Jervis? I love you next to my
own Father and Mother, and you are the chief Concern
I have to leave this Place; but I am sure it is
certain Ruin if I stay. After such Offers, and such
Threatenings, and his comparing himself to a wicked
Ravisher, in the very Time of his last Offer; 
and making a Jest of me, that we should make a
pretty Story in Romances; can I stay, and be safe? 
Has he not demean'd himself twice? and it behoves
me to beware of the third Time, for fear he should
lay his Snares surer; for may-hap he did not expect a
poor Servant would resist her Master so much. And
must it not be look'd upon as a sort of Warrant for
such Actions, if I stay after this? for I think, when
one of our Sex finds she is attempted, it is an Encouragement
to a Person to proceed, if one puts
one's self in the Way of it, when one can help it; and
it shews one can forgive what in short ought not to be
forgiven. Which is no small Countenance to foul
Actions, I'll assure you. 

She hugg'd me to her, and said, I'll assure you! 
Pretty-face, where gottest thou all thy Knowledge,
and thy good Notions, at these Years? Thou art
a Miracle for thy Age, and I shall always love thee! 
But, do you resolve to leave us, Pamela? 
Yes, my dear Mrs. Jervis, said I; for as Matters
stand, how can I do otherwise? —But I'll do all the
Duties of my Place first, if I may. And I hope
you'll give me a Character as to my Honesty, as it
may not look as if I was turn'd away for any Harm. 
Ay, that I will, said she; I will give thee such a
Character as never Girl at thy Years deserv'd. And
I am sure, said I, I will always love and honour you,
as my third best Friend, whenever I go, or whatever
becomes of me. 
And so we went to Bed, and I never wak'd 'till
'twas Time to rise; which I did, as blyth as a Bird,
and went about my Business with great Pleasure. 
But I believe my Master is fearfully angry with me; 
for he past by me two or three times, and would not
speak to me; and towards Evening he met me in the
Passage, going into the Garden, and said such a Word
to me as I never heard in my Life from him, to
Man, Woman or Child; for he first said, This Creature's
always in my way, I think! I said, standing up
as close as I could, and the Entry was wide enough
for a Coach too, I hope I shan't be long in your
Honcur's Way. D&wblank;n you! said he, (that was the
hard Word) for a little Witch; I have no Patience
with you. 
I profess I trembled to hear him say so; but I saw
he was vex'd, and as I am going away, I minded it
the less. But I see, my dear Parents, that when a
Person will do wicked Things, it is no Wonder he
will speak wicked Words. And so I rest 
Your dutiful Daughter. 

