


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Sat. Jan. 28. 
As to what you say of Mr. Greville's concern on
my absence (and, I think, with a little too much
feeling for him) and of his declaring himself unable to
live without seeing me; I have but one fear about it; 
which is, that he is forming a pretence from his
violent Love, to come up after me: And if he does,
I will not see him, if I can help it. 
And do you indeed believe him to be so much in
Love? By your seriousness on the occasion, you seem
to think he is. O my Lucy! What a good heart
you have! And did he not weep when he told you so? 
Did he not turn his head away, and pull out his
handkerchief? —O these dissemblers! The hyæna,
my dear, was a male devourer. The men in malice,
and to extenuate their own guilt, made the creature 

a female. And yet there may be male and female of
this species of monsters. But as women have more
to lose with regard to reputation than men, the male
hyæna must be infinitely the more dangerous creature
of the two; since he will come to us, even into our
very houses, fawning, cringing, weeping, licking our
hands; while the den of the female is by the high-way-side,
and wretched youths must enter into it,
to put it in her power to devour them. 
Let me tell you, my dear, that if there be an artful
man in England, with regard to us women (artful
equally in his free speaking, and in his sycophancies)
Mr. Greville is the man. And he intends to be so too,
and values himself upon his art. Does he not as
boldly as constantly insinuate, That flattery is dearer
to a woman than her food? Yet who so gross a flatterer
as himself, when the humour is upon him? And yet
at times he wants to build up a merit for sincerity or
plain-dealing, by saying free things. 
It is not difficult, my dear, to find out these men,
were we earnest to detect them. Their chief strength
lies in our weakness. But however weak we are, I
think we should not add to the triumph of those who
make our weakness the general subject of their satire. 
We should not prove the justice of their ridicule by
our own indiscretions. But the traitor is within us. 
If we guard against ourselves, we may bid defiance
to all the arts of man. 
You know, that my great objection to Mr. Greville
is for his immoralities. A man of free principles,
shewn by practices as free, can hardly make a tender
husband, were a woman able to get over considerations
that she ought not to get over. Who shall trust for
the performance of his second duties, the man who
avowedly despises his first? Mr. Greville had a good
education: He must have taken pains to render vain
the pious precepts of his worthy father; and still more
to make a jest of them. 

Three of his women we have heard of, besides her
whom he brought with him from Wales. You know
he has only affected to appear decent since he has cast
his eyes upon me. The man, my dear, must be an
abandon'd man, and must have a very hard heart, who
can pass from woman to woman, without any remorse
for a former, whom, as may be suppos'd, he has by
the most solemn vows seduced. And whose leavings
is it, my dear, that a virtuous woman takes, who
marries a profligate? 
Is it not reported that his Welshwoman, to whom,
at parting, he gave not sufficient for a twelvemonth's
scanty subsistence, is now upon the town? Vile man! 
He thinks it to his credit, I have heard, to own it a
seduction, and that she was not a vicious creature
till he made her so. 
One only merit has Mr. Greville to plead in this
black transaction: It is, That he has, by his whole
conduct in it, added a warning to our sex. And shall
I, despising the warning, marry a man, who, specious
as he is in his temper, and lively in his conversation,
has shewn so bad a nature? 
His fortune, as you say, is great. The more inexcusable
therefore is he for his niggardliness to his
Welshwoman. On his fortune he presumes: It will
procure him a too easy forgiveness from others of our
sex: But fortune without merit will never do with me,
were the man a prince. 
You say, that if a woman resolves not to marry
till she finds herself addressed to by a man of strict
virtue, she must be for ever single. If this be true, what
wicked creatures are men! What a dreadful abuse of
passions, given them for the noblest purposes, are they
guilty of! 
I have a very high notion of the marriage-state. 
I remember what my Uncle once averr'd; That a
woman out of wedlock is half useless to the end of
her being. How indeed do the duties of a good Wife, 

of a good Mother, and a worthy Matron, well performed,
dignify a woman! Let my Aunt Selby's example,
in her enlarged sphere, set against that of any
single woman of like years moving in her narrow
circle, testify the truth of the observation. My Grandfather
used to say, that families are little communities; 
that there are but few solid friendships out of
them; and that they help to make up worthily, and
to secure, the great community, of which they are so
many miniatures. 
But yet it is my opinion, and I hope, that I never
by my practice shall discredit it, that a woman who,
with her eyes open, marries a profligate man, had,
generally, much better remain single all her life; 
since it is very likely, that by such a step she defeats,
as to herself, all the good ends of society. What a
dreadful, what a presumptuous risque runs she, who
marries a wicked man, even hoping to reclaim him,
when she cannot be sure of keeping her own principles! 
—Be not deceived; evil communication corrupts
good manners; is a caution truly apostolical. 
The text you mention of the unbelieving husband
being converted by the believing wife, respects, as I
take it, the first ages of Christianity; and is an instruction
to the converted wife to let her unconverted
husband see in her behaviour to him, while he beheld
her chaste conversation coupled with fear, the efficacy
upon her own heart of the excellent doctrines she had
embraced. It could not have in view the woman
who, being single, chose a pagan husband in hopes of
converting him. Nor can it give encouragement for a
woman of virtue and religion to marry a profligate in
hopes of reclaiming him. Who can touch pitch, and not
be defiled? 
As to Mr. Fenwick, I am far from having a better
opinion of him than I have of Mr. Greville. You
know what is whispered of him. He has more decency
however: He avows not free principles, as the 

other does. But you must have observ'd how much
he seems to enjoy the mad talk and free sentiments
of the other: And that other always brightens up
and rises in his freedoms and impiety on Mr. Fenwick's
sly applauses and encouraging countenance. 
In a word, Mr. Fenwick, not having the same lively
things to say, nor so lively an air to carry them off,
as Mr. Greville has, tho' he would be thought not to
want sense, takes pains to shew that he has as corrupt
an heart. If I thought anger would not give him consequence,
I should hardly forbear to shew myself displeased,
when he points by a leering eye, and by a
broad smile, the free jest of the other, to the person
present whom he thinks most apt to blush, as if for
fear it should be lost; and still more when on the
mantling cheek's shewing the sensibility of the person
so insulted, he breaks out into a loud laugh, that she
may not be able to recover herself. 
Surely these men must think us women egregious
hypocrites: They must believe that we only affect
modesty, and in our hearts approve of their freedom. 
For, can it be supposed, that such as call themselves
Gentlemen, and who have had the education and
opportunities that these two have had, would give
themselves liberties of speech on purpose to affront us? 
I hope I shall find the London gentlemen more
polite than these our neighbours of the Fox-chace. 
And yet hitherto I have seen no great cause to prefer
them to the others. But about the court, and at the
fashionable public places, I expect wonders. Pray
Heaven, I may not be disappointed! 
Thank Miss Orme, in my name, for the kind wishes
she sends me. Tell her, that her doubts of my affection
for her are not just; and that I do really and indeed
love her. Nor should she want the most explicit
declarations of my love, were I not more afraid of
her in the character of a Sister to a truly respectable
man, than doubtful of her in that of a friend to me: 

In which latter light, I even joy to consider her. But
she is a little naughty, tell her, because she is always
leading to one subject. And yet, how can I be
angry with her for it, if her good opinion of me induces
her to think it in my power to make the Brother
happy, whom she so dearly and deservedly loves? 
I cannot but esteem her for the part she takes. —And
this it is that makes me afraid of the artlesly-artful
Miss Orme. 
It would look as if I thought my Duty, and Love,
and Respects, were questionable, if in every letter I
repeated them to my equally honoured and beloved
benefactors, friends, and favourers. Suppose them
therefore always included in my subscription to you,
my Lucy, when I tell you that I am, and will be, 
Your ever-affectionate
Harriet Byron. 

