



Miss Montague, To Miss Cl. Harlowe. 
[In Answer to hers of Aug. 3. See No xvii.] 

Monday, Aug. 7. 
Dear Madam,
We were all of opinion before your Letter came,
that Mr. Lovelace was utterly unworthy of
you, and deserved condign punishment, rather than
to be blessed with such a Wife: And hoped far more
from your kind consideration for us, than any we
supposed you could have for so base an injurer. For
we were all determined to love you, and admire you,
let his behaviour to you be what it would. 
But, after your Letter, what can be said? 
I am, however, commanded to write in all the subscribing
names, to let you know, how greatly your
sufferings have affected us: To tell you, that my
Lord M. has forbid him ever more to enter the doors
of the apartments where he shall be: And as you
labour under the unhappy effects of your friends
displeasure, which may subject you to inconveniencies, 

his Lordship, and Lady Sarah, and Lady Betty, beg
of you to accept, for your Life, or, at least, till you are
admitted to enjoy your own Estate, of one hundred
guineas per quarter, which will be regularly brought
you by an especial hand, and of the inclosed Bank
Bill for a beginning. And do not, dearest Madam,
we all beseech you, do not think you are beholden
(for this token of Lord M's and Lady Sarah's and
Lady Betty's Love to you) to the friends of this vile
man; for he has not one friend left among us. 
We each of us desire to be favoured with a place in
your esteem; and to be considered upon the same foot
of relationship, as if what once was so much our
pleasure to hope would be, had been. And it shall
be our united prayer, that you may recover health
and spirits, and live to see many happy years: And,
since this wretch can no more be pleaded for, that,
when he is gone abroad, as he now is preparing to do,
we may be permitted the honour of a personal acquaintance
with a Lady who has no equal. These
are the earnest requests, dearest young Lady, of 
Your affectionate Friends,
and most faithful Servants,
M.
Sarah Sadleir.
Eliz. Lawrance.
Charl. Montague.
Marth. Montague. 
You will break the hearts of the three first-named
more particularly, if you refuse them your acceptance. 
Dearest young Lady, punish not
them for his crimes. We send by a particular
hand, which will bring us, we hope, your accepting
favour. 
Mr. Lovelace writes by the same hand; but he
knows nothing of our Letter, nor we of his: For we
shun each other; and one part of the house holds
us, another him, the remotest from each other. 