



Lord M. To John Belford, Esq;
[Inclosed in the preceding]. 

M. Hall, Monday May 15. 
SIR,
If any man in the world has power over my nephew,
it is you. I therefore write this, to beg you
to interfere in the affair depending between him and
the most accomplished of women, as every one says; 
and what every one says, must be true. 

I don't know that he has any bad designs upon her; 
but I know his temper too well, not to be apprehensive
upon such long delays: And the ladies here have been
for some time in fear for her; my sister Sadleir, in
particular, who (you know) is a wise woman, says,
that these delays, in the present case, must be from
him, rather than from the lady. He had always indeed
a strong antipathy to marriage; and may think
of playing his dog's tricks by her, as he has by so
many others. If there's any danger of this, 'tis best
to prevent it in time: For, when a thing is done, advice
comes too late. 
He has always had the folly and impertinence to
make a jest of me for using proverbs: But as they
are the wisdom of whole nations and ages, collected
into a small compass, I am not to be shamed out
of sentences, that often contain more wisdom in them,
than the tedious harangues of most of our parsons and
moralists. Let him laugh at them, if he pleases: 
You and I know better things, Mr. Belford. —Tho'
you have kept company with a wolf, you have not learnt
to howl of him. 
But nevertheless, you must not let him know, that
I have written to you on this subject. I am ashamed
to say it; but he has ever treated me, as if I were a
man of very common understanding. And would
perhaps think never the better of the best advice in the
world, for coming from me. 
I am sure, he has no reason to slight me as he does. 
He may and will be the better for me, if he outlives
me; tho' he once told me to my face, That I might
do as I would with my estate; for that he, for his
part, loved his liberty as much as he despised money. 
He thought, I suppose, that I could not cover him with
my wings, without pecking at him with my bill; tho' I
never used to be pecking at him, without very great
occasion: And, God knows, he might have my very
heart, if he would but endeavour to oblige me, by 

studying his own good; for that is all I desire of him. 
Indeed, it was his poor mother that first spoil'd him; 
and I have been but too indulgent to him since. —A
fine grateful disposition, you'll say, to return evil for
good! But that was always his way. 
This match, however, as the lady has such an extraordinary
share of wisdom and goodness, might set
all to rights: and if you can forward it, I would
enable him to make whatever settlements he could
wish; and should not be unwilling to put him in possession
of another pretty estate besides: For what do I
live for (as I have often said), but to see him and my
two nieces well married and settled? May heaven
settle him down to a better mind, and turn his heart
to more of goodness and consideration! 
If the delays are on his side, I tremble for the lady; 
and, if on hers (as he tells my niece Charlotte), I
could wish the young lady were apprized, that Delays
are dangerous. Excellent as she is, I can tell her, she
ought not to depend on her merits with such a changeable
fellow, and such a professed marriage-hater, as
he has been. I know you are very good at giving
kind hints. A word to the wise is enough. 
I wish you would try what you can do with him; 
for I have warned him so often of his wicked practices,
that I begin to despair of my words having any
effect upon him. But let him remember, that Vengeance,
tho' it comes with leaden feet, strikes with iron
hands. If he behaves ill in this case, he may find it
so. What a pity it is, that a man of his talents and
learning should be so vile a rake! Alas! alas! Um
poignée de bonne vie vaut mieux que plein muy de
clergé; A handful of good life is better than a whole
bushel of learning. 
You may throw in, too, as his friend, that, should
he provoke me, it may not be too late for me to
marry. My old friend Wycherly did so, when he
was older than I am, on purpose to plague his nephew: 

And, in spite of this gout, I might have a child
or two still. And have not been without some thoughts
that way, when he has angered me more than ordinary: 
But these thoughts have gone off again hitherto,
upon my considering, that the children of very young
and very old men [tho' I am not so very old neither]
last not long; and that old men, when they marry young
women, are said to make much of death: Yet who
knows but that matrimony might be good against the
gouty humours I am troubled with? 
The sentences, that I have purposely wove into my
discourse, may be of some service to you in talking to
him; but use them sparingly, that he may not discover,
that you borrow your darts from my quiver. 
May your good counsels, Mr. Belford, founded upon
the hints I have given, pierce his heart, and incite
him to do what will be so happy for himself, and so
necessary for the honour of that admirable lady whom
I long to see his wife; and, if I may, I will not think
of one for myself. 
Should he abuse the confidence she has plac'd in
him, I myself shall pray, that vengeance may fall
upon his head. —Raro—Raro—(I quite forget all
my Latin! but I think it is)—Raro antecedentem scelestum
deseruit pede pœna claudo: Where vice goes
before, vengeance (sooner or later) will follow. 
I shall make no apologies to you for this trouble. I
know how well you love him and me; and there is
nothing in which you could serve us both more importantly,
than in forwarding this match to the utmost
of your power. When it is done, how shall I
rejoice to see you at M. Hall! Mean time, I shall
long to hear, that you are likely to be successful; and
am, 
Dear Sir,
Your most faithful friend and servant,
M. 

Mr. Lovelace having not returned an answer to
Mr. Belford's expostulatory letter, so soon as Mr.
Belford expected, he wrote to him, expressing his apprehension,
that he had disobliged him by his honest
freedom. Among other things, he says—‘I pass
my time here at Watford, attending my dying uncle,
very heavily. I cannot therefore, by any means,
dispense with thy correspondence. And why shouldst
thou punish me, for having more conscience and
remorse than thyself? Thou, who never thoughtest
either conscience or remorse an honour to thee. 
And I have, besides, a melancholy story to tell
thee, in relation to Belton and his Thomasine; and
which may afford a lesson to all the keeping class. 
‘I have a letter from each of our three companions
in the time. They have all the wickedness that
thou hast, but not the wit. Some new rogueries
do two of them boast of, which, I think, it completed,
deserve the gallows. 
‘I am far from hating intrigue upon principle. But
to have aukward fellows plot, and commit their
plots to paper, destitute of the seasonings, of the
acumen, which is thy talent, how extremely shocking
must their letters be! —But do thou, Lovelace, whether
thou art, or art not, determined upon thy
measures, with regard to the fine lady in thy power,
enliven my heavy heart by thy communications; 
and thou wilt oblige 
‘Thy melancholy friend,
J. Belford.’ 