


I am just now quite astonish'd! —I hope all
is right! —But I have a strange Turn to
acquaint you with. Mr. Williams and Mrs.
Jewkes came to me both together; he in Ecstasies,
she with a strange fluttering sort of Air. 
Well, said she, Mrs. Pamela, I give you Joy! 
I give you Joy! —Let nobody speak but me! 
Then she sat down, as out of Breath, puffing
and blowing. Why, every thing turns as I
said it would! said she: Why, there is to be
a Match between you and Mr. Williams! Well,
I always thought it. Never was so good a Master! 
—Go to, go to, naughty mistrustful Mrs.
Pamela, nay, Mrs. Williams, said the forward
Creature, I may as good as call you; you ought
on your Knees to beg his Pardon a thousand
times for mistrusting him. 
She was going on; but I said, Don't torture
me thus, I beseech you, Mrs. Jewkes. Let
me know all! —Ah! Mr. Williams, said I,
take care, take care! —Mistrustful again! said
she; why, Mr. Williams, shew her your Letter; 
and I will shew her mine: They were
brought by the same Hand. 
I trembled at the Thoughts of what
this might mean; and said, You have so surpris'd
me, that I cannot stand, nor hear, nor
read! Why did you come up in such a manner
to attack such weak Spirits? Said he, to Mrs. 

Jewkes, Shall we leave our Letters with Mrs.
Pamela, and let her recover from her Surprize? 
Ay, said she, with all my Heart; here
is nothing but flaming Honour and Good-will! 
And so saying, they left me their Letters, and
withdrew. 
My Heart was quite sick with the Surprize; 
so that I could not presently read them, notwithstanding
my Impatience; but after a-while,
recovering, I found the Contents thus strange
and unexpected: 

“Mr. Williams,
The Death of Mr. Fownes has now
given me the Opportunity I have long
wanted, to make you happy, and that in a
double respect: For I shall soon put you in
Possession of his Living, and, if you have
the Art of making yourself well receiv'd, of
one of the loveliest Wives in England. She
has not been used (as she has reason to think)
according to her Merit; but when she finds
herself under the Protection of a Man of
Virtue and Probity, and a happy Competency
to support Life, in the manner to
which she has been of late Years accustom'd,
I am persuaded she will forgive those seeming
Hardships which have pav'd the Way to so
happy a Lot, as I hope it will be to you both. 
I have only to account for and excuse the
odd Conduct I have been guilty of, which I
shall do, when I see you: But as I shall
soon set out for London, I believe it will not 

be yet this Month. Mean while, if you can
prevail with Pamela, you need not suspend
for that your mutual Happiness; only let me
have Notice of it first, and that she approves
of it; which ought to be, in so material a
Point, intirely at her Option; as I assure you,
on the other hand, I would have it at yours,
that nothing may be wanting to complete
your Happiness. I am 
“Your humble Servant.” 

Was ever the like heard! —Lie still, my
throbbing Heart, divided as thou art, between
thy Hopes and thy Fears! —But this is the
Letter Mrs. Jewkes left with me: 

“Mrs. Jewkes,
You have been very careful and diligent
in the Task, which, for Reasons I shall
hereafter explain, I had impos'd upon you. 
Your Trouble is now almost at an End; for
I have written my Intentions to Mr. Williams
so particularly, that I need say the less here,
because he will not scruple, I believe, to let
you know the Contents of my Letter. I
have only one thing to mention, that if you
find what I have hinted to him in the least
disagreeable to Either, you assure them Both,
that they are at intire Liberty to pursue their
own Inclinations. I hope you continue
your Civilities to the mistrustful, uneasy Pamela, 

who now will begin to think better
of hers and 
“Your Friend, &c.” 

I had hardly time to transcribe these Letters,
tho', writing so much, I write pretty fast,
before they came up again, in high Spirits; and
Mr. Williams said, I am glad at my Heart, Madam,
that I was before-hand in my Declarations
to you: This generous Letter has made me the
happiest Man on Earth; and Mrs. Jewkes, you
may be sure, that if I can procure this Fair-one's
Consent, I shall think myself—I interrupted
the good Man, and said, Ah! Mr. Williams!
take care, take care; don't let—There I
stopp'd, and Mrs. Jewkes said, Still mistrustful! 
—I never saw the like in my Life! —But I
see, said she, I was not wrong, whilst my old
Orders lasted, to be wary of you both—I
should have had a hard Task to prevent you,
I find; for, as the Saying is, Nought can restrain
Consent of Twain. 
I doubted not her taking hold of his joyful
Indiscretion. —I took her Letter, and said,
Here, Mrs. Jewkes, is yours; I thank you for
it; but I have been so long in a Maze, that I
can say nothing of this for the present. Time
will bring all to Light. —Sir, said I, here is
yours: May every thing turn to your Happiness! 
I give you Joy of my Master's Goodness in the
Living—It will be dying, said he, not a
Living, without you. —Forbear, Sir, said I:
While I've a Father and Mother, I am not my 

own Mistress, poor as they are: And I'll see
myself quite at Liberty, before I shall think myself
fit to make a Choice. 
Mrs. Jewkes held up her Eyes and Hands,
and said, Such Art, such Caution, such Cunning,
for thy Years! —Well! —Why, said
I, (that he might be more on his Guard, tho' I
hope there cannot be Deceit in this; 'twould be
strange Villainy, and that is a hard Word, if
there should!) I have been so used to be made a
Fool of by Fortune, that I can hardly tell how
to govern myself; and am almost an Infidel as
to Mankind. –––But, I hope, I may be wrong; 
henceforth, Mrs. Jewkes, you shall regulate
my Opinions as you please, and I will consult
you in every thing—(that I think proper, said
I to myself)—for to be sure, tho' I may forgive
her, I can never love her. 
She left Mr. Williams and me, a few Minutes,
together; and I said, Consider, Sir, consider
what you have done. 'Tis impossible, said he,
there can be Deceit. I hope so, said I; but
what Necessity was there for you to talk of your
former Declaration? Let this be as it will, that
could do no Good, especially before this Woman. 
Forgive me, Sir; they talk of Womens
Promptness of Speech; but indeed I see an
honest Heart is not always to be trusted with
itself in bad Company. 
He was going to reply; but, tho' her Task is
said to be almost (I took Notice of that
Word) at an End, she came up to us again; and
said, Well, I had a good mind to shew you the 

Way to Church To-morrow. I was glad of
this, because, tho’ in my present doubtful Situation
I should not have chosen it, yet I would
have encourag'd her Proposal, to be able to
judge by her being in Earnest or otherwise,
whether one might depend upon the rest. But
Mr. Williams again indiscreetly help'd her to an
Excuse, by saying, that it was now best to defer
it one Sunday, and till Matters were riper for
my Appearance; and she readily took hold of
it, and confirm'd his Opinion. 
After all, I hope the best; but if this
should turn out to be a Plot, I fear nothing but
a Miracle can save me. But sure the Heart of
Man is not capable of such black Deceit. Besides,
Mr. Williams has it under his own Hand,
and he dare not but be in Earnest; and then
again, tho’ to be sure, he has been very wrong
to me, yet his Education, and Parents Example,
have neither of them taught him such very
black Contrivances. So I will hope for the
best! 
Mr. Williams, Mrs. Jewkes, and I, have
been all three walking together in the Garden; 
and she pull'd out her Key, and we walk'd a
little in the Pasture to look at the Bull, an ugly,
grim, surly Creature, that hurt the poor Cook-maid; 
who is got pretty well again. Mr.
Williams pointed at the Sun-flower, but I
was forced to be very reserved to him; for
the good Gentleman has no Guard, no Caution
at all. 

We have just supp'd together, all three; and
I cannot yet think but all must be right. — 
Only I am resolv'd not to marry, if I can help
it; and I will give no Encouragement, I am
resolv'd, at least, till I am with you. 
Mr. Williams said, before Mrs. Jewkes, he
would send a Messenger with a Letter to my
Father and Mother. —I think the Man has no
Discretion in the world: But I desire you will
give no Answer, till I have the Pleasure and
Happiness, which now I hope for soon, of
seeing you. He will, in sending my Pacquet,
send a most tedious Parcel of Stuff, of my Oppressions,
my Distresses, my Fears; and so I
will send this with it (for Mrs. Jewkes gives
me Leave to send a Letter to my Father, which
looks well); and I am glad I can conclude, after
all my Sufferings, with my Hopes, to be soon
with you, which I know will give you Comfort; 
and so I rest, begging the Continuance of
your Prayers and Blessings, 
Your ever-dutiful Daughter. 
&line;

My dear Father and Mother,
I have so much Time upon my Hands, that
I must write on to employ myself. The
Sunday Evening, where I left off, Mrs. Jewkes
ask'd me, If I chose to lie by myself? I said,
Yes, with all my Heart, if she pleased. Well,
said she, after To-night you shall. I ask'd her 

for more Paper, and she gave me a little Bottle
of Ink, Eight Sheets of Paper, which she said
was all her Store, (for now she would get me to
write for her to our Master, if she had Occasion)
and Six Pens, with a Piece of Sealing-wax. 
This looks mighty well! 
She press'd me very much, when she came
to-bed, to give Encouragement to Mr. Williams,
and said many things in his Behalf; and blam'd
my Shyness to him. I told her, I was resolv'd
to give no Encouragement, till I had talk'd to
my Father and Mother. She said, she fansy'd I
thought of somebody else, or I could never be
so insensible. I assur'd her, as I could do very
safely, that there was not a Man on Earth I
wish'd to have; and as to Mr. Williams, he
might do better by far; and I had propos'd so
much Happiness in living with my poor Father
and Mother, that I could not think of any
Scheme of Life with Pleasure, till I had try'd
that. I ask'd her for my Money; and she said
it was above, in her strong Box, but that I
shall have it To-morrow. All these Things
look well, as I said. 
Mr. Williams would go home this Night,
tho’ late, because he would dispatch a Messenger
to you with a Letter he had propos'd
from himself, and my Pacquet. But pray
don't encourage him, as I said; for he is much
too heady and precipitate as to this Matter,
in my way of Thinking; tho', to be sure,
he is a very good Man, and I am much oblig'd
to him. 

