



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Sat. Sunday, May 20, 21. 
Now, my dear, for the promised Subject. You
must not ask me, how I came by the Originals
[Such they really are] that I am going to present you
with: For my Mother would not read to me those
parts of your Uncle's Letter, which bore hard upon
myself, and which leave him without any title to
mercy from me: Nor would she let me hear but
what she pleased of hers in answer; for she has condescended
to answer him—with a denial, however: 
But such a denial, as no one but an Old Bachelor
would take from a Widow. 
Any-body, except myself, who could have been
acquainted with such a fal-lal Courtship as this must
have been had it proceeded, would have been glad it
had gone on: And I dare say, but for the saucy
Daughter, it had. My good Mamma, in that case,
would have been ten years the younger for it, perhaps: 
And could I but have approved of it, I should
have been considered by her as if ten years older
than I am: Since, very likely, it would have been; 
‘We Widows, my dear, know not how to keep
men at a distance—So as to give them pain, in
order to try their Love. —You must advise me,
child: You must teach me to be cruel—Yet not
too cruel neither—So as to make a man heartless,
who has no time, God wot, to throw away.’ Then
would my behaviour to Mr. Hickman have been better
liked; and my Mother would have bridled like
her Daughter. 
O my dear, how might we have been diverted, by
the practisings for the recovery of the Long-forgottens!
could I have been sure that it would have been in my
power to have put them asunder, in the Irish style, 

before they had come together. But there's no trusting
to a Widow whose goods and chattels are in her own
hands, addressed by an Old Bachelor, who has fine
things, and offers to leave her Ten thousand pounds better
than he found her, and sole mistress besides, of all
her Notables! for these, as you will see by-and-by, are
his proposals. 
The old Triton's address carries the writer's marks
upon the very Superscription—To the equally amiable,
and worthy admired [There's for you!] Mrs. Annabella
Howe, Widow; the last word added, I suppose,
as Esquire to a man, as a word of honour; or
for fear the bella to Anna, should not enough distinguish
the person meant from the Spinster [Vain hussy
you'll call me, I know]: And then follows: — 
These humbly present. —Put down as a memorandum,
I presume, to make a leg, and behave handsomely at
presenting it; he intending very probably to deliver
it himself. 
And now stand by—To see 
Enter Old Neptune,
His head adorned with Sea-weed, and a crown of
Cockle-shells; as we see him decked out in Mrs.
Robinson's ridiculous Grotto. 

Monday, May 15. 
Madam,
I did make a sort of resolution ten years ago, never
to marry. I saw in other families, where they
lived best, you will be pleased to mark That, queernesses
I could not away with. Then, liked well
enough to live single for the sake of my Brother's
family; and for one child in it more than the rest. 
But that girl has turned us all off the hinges: And
why I should deny myself any comforts for them as
will not thank me for so doing, I don't know. 
So much for my motives, as from Self and Family: 
But the dear Mrs. Howe makes me go further. 

I have a very great Fortune, I bless God for it, all
of my own getting, or most of it; you will be pleased
to mark That; for I was the youngest Brother of
three. You have also, God be thanked, a great
Estate, which you have improved by your own frugality
and wise management. Frugality, let me stop
to say, is one of the greatest virtues in this mortal
life, because it enables us to do justice to all, and
puts it in our power to benefit some by it, as we see
they deserve. 
You have but one child; and I am a Bachelor,
and have never a one. —All Bachelors cannot say so: 
Wherefore your Daughter may be the better for me,
if she will keep up with my humour; which was
never thought bad: Especially to my Equals. Servants,
indeed, I don't matter being angry with,
when I please: They are paid for bearing it, and too-too
often deserve it; as we have frequently taken
notice of to one another. &dotup;And moreover, if we
keep not servants at distance, they will be familiar. 
I always made it a rule to find fault, whether reasonably
or not, that so I might have no reason to
find fault. Young women and servants in general
(as worthy Mr. Solmes observes) are better governed
by Fear than Love.&dotup; But this my humour
as to servants, will not affect either You or Miss,
you know. 
I will make very advantageous Settlements; such
as any common friend shall judge to be so. But
must have all in my own power, while I live: Because,
you know, Madam, it is as creditable to the
wife, as to the husband, that it should be so. 
I aim not at fine words. We are not children; 
tho' it is hoped we may have some; for I am a very
healthy sound man, I bless God for it: And never
brought home from my Voyages and Travels, a worser
constitution than I took out with me. I was none of
those, I will assure you. But this I will undertake, 

that if you are the survivor, you shall be at the least
Ten thousand pounds the better for me: What, in
the contrary case, I shall be the better for you, I
leave to you, as you shall think my kindness to you
shall deserve. 
But one thing, Madam, I should be glad of, that
Miss Howe might not live with us then [She need
not know I write thus]—But go home to Mr. Hickman,
as she is upon the point of marriage, I hear: 
And if she behaves dutifully, as she should do, to us
both, she shall be the better; for so I said before. 
You shall manage all things, both mine and your
own; for I know but little of Land-matters. All my
opposition to you shall be out of Love, when I think
you take too much upon you for your health. 
It will be very pretty for you, I should think, to
have a man of experience, in a long Winter's Evening,
to sit down by you, and tell you Stories of Foreign
Parts, and the Customs of the Nations he has
consorted with. And I have fine Curiosities of the
Indian growth, such as Ladies love, and some that
even my Niece Clary, when she was good, never
saw. These, one by one, as you are kind to me
(which I make no question of, because I shall be kind
to you) shall all be yours. —Prettier entertainment
by much, than sitting with a too smartish Daughter,
sometimes out of humour, and thwarting, and vexing,
as Daughters will (when women-grown especially,
as I have heard you often observe); and thinking
their parents old, without paying them the reverence
due to years; when, as in your case, I make no sort
of doubt, they are young enough to wipe their noses. 
You understand me, Madam. 
As for me myself, it will be very happy, and I am
delighted with the thinking of it, to have, after a
pleasant Ride, or so, a Lady of like experience with
myself, to come home to, and but one Interest betwixt
us: To reckon up our comings-in together; 

and what this day and this week has produced: — 
O how this will encrease Love! —Most mightily well
it encrease it! —And I believe I should never love you
enough, or be able to shew you all my Love. 
I hope, Madam, there need not be such maiden
niceties and hangings-off, as I may call them, between
us (for hanging-off sake) as that you will deny
me a line or two to this proposal, written down,
altho' you would not answer me so readily when I
spoke to you; your Daughter being, I suppose, hard
by; for you looked round you, as if not willing to
be overheard. So I resolved to write: That my
writing may stand as upon record, for my upright
meaning; being none of your Lovelaces; you will
mark That, Madam; but a downright, true, honest,
faithful Englishman. So hope you will not disdain
to write a line or two to this my proposal: And I
shall look upon it as a great honour, I will assure
you, and be proud thereof. —What can I say more? 
—For you are your own mistress, as I am my own
master: And you shall always be your own mistress,
be pleased to mark That; for so a Lady of your prudence
and experience ought to be. 
This is a long Letter. But the subject requires it; 
because I would not write twice where once would
do: So would explain my sense and meaning at one
time. 
I have had writing in my head, two whole months
very near; but hardly knew how (being unpractised in
these matters) to begin to write. And now, good Lady,
be favourable to 
Your most humble Lover,
and obedient Servant,
Ant. Harlowe. 
Here's a Letter of Courtship, my dear! —And let
me subjoin to it, that if now, or hereafter, I should
treat this hideous Lover, who is so free with me to 

my Mother, with asperity, and you should be disgusted
at it; I shall think you don't give me that
preference in your Love, which you have in mine. 
And now, Which shall I first give you; the answer
of my good Mamma; or, the dialogue that passed
between the widow Mother and the pert Daughter,
upon her letting the latter know that she had a Love-letter? 
I think you shall have the dialogue. But let me
premise one thing; that if you think me too free,
you must not let it run in your head, that I am writing
of your Uncle, or of my Mother; but of a couple
of old Lovers, no matter whom. Reverence is
too apt to be forgotten by children, where the Reverends
forget first what belongs to their own characters. 
A grave remark, and therefore at your service,
my dear. 
Well then, suppose my Mamma (after twice coming
into my closet to me, and as often going out, with
very meaning features, and lips ready to burst open,
but still closed, as if by compulsion, a speech going
off in a slight cough, that never went near the lungs)
grown more resolute the third time of entrance, and
sitting down by me, thus begin. 
Mother. I have a very serious matter to talk with
you upon, Nancy, when you are disposed to attend
to matters within ourselves, and not let matters without
ourselves wholly engross you. 
A good selve-ish speech? —But I thought that
Friendship, and Gratitude, and Humanity, were
matters that ought to be deemed of the most intimate
concern to us. But not to dwell upon words: 
Daughter. I am now disposed to attend to everything
my Mamma is disposed to say to me. 
M. Why then, child—Why then, my dear— 
[And the good Lady's face looked so plump, so smooth,
and so shining!] —I see you are all attention, Nancy! 

—But don't be surprised! —Don't be uneasy! —But
I have—I have—Where is it? —[And yet it lay next
her heart, never another near it. —So no difficulty to
have found it]—I have a Letter, my dear! —[And out
from her bosom it came: But she still held it in her
hand]—I have a Letter, child. —It is—It is—It is
from—from a Gentleman, I assure you!—[lifting up
her head, and smiling]. 
There is no delight to a Daughter, thought I, in
such surprizes as seem to be collecting. I will deprive
my Mother of the satisfaction of making a gradual
discovery. 
D. From Mr. Antony Harlowe, I suppose, Madam? 
M. [Lips drawn closer: Eye raised] Why, my
dear! —I cannot but own—But how, I wonder,
could you think of Mr. Antony Harlowe? 
D. How, Madam, could I think of any-body
else? 
M. How could you think of any-body else!— 
[angrily, and drawing back her face] But do you
know the subject, Nancy? 
D. You have told it, Madam, by your manner of
breaking it to me. But, indeed, I questioned not
that he had two motives in his visits here—Both
equally agreeable to me; for all that family love me
dearly. 
M. No Love lost, if so, between you and them. 
But this [Rising] is what I get—So like your Papa! — 
I never could open my heart to him! 
D. Dear Madam, excuse me. Be so good as to
open your heart to me. —I don't love the Harlowes— 
But pray excuse me. 
M. You have put me quite out with your forward
temper! [Angrily sitting down again]. 
D. I will be all patience and attention. May I
be allowed to read his Letter? 
M. I wanted to advise with you upon it. —But you 

are such a strange creature! —You are always for answering
one before one speaks! 
D. You'll be so good as to forgive me, Madam. — 
But I thought every-body (he among the rest) knew,
that you had always declared against a Second Marriage. 
M. And so I have. But then it was in the mind I
was in. Things may offer— 
I stared. 
M. Nay, don't be surprised! —I don't intend— 
I don't intend— 
D. Not, perhaps, in the mind you are in, Madam. 
M. Pert creature! [Rising again]—We shall
quarrel, I see! —There's no— 
D. Once more, dear Madam, I beg your excuse. 
I will attend in silence. —Pray, Madam, sit down
again—Pray do [She sat down]. —May I see the
Letter? 
No; there are some things in it, you won't like. — 
Your temper is known, I find, to be unhappy. But
nothing bad against you; intimations, on the contrary,
that you shall be the better for him, if you oblige
him. 
Not a living soul but the Harlowes, I said, thought
me ill-tempered: And I was contented that they
should, who could do as they had done by the most
universally acknowleged Sweetness in the world. 
Here we broke out a little; but at last, she read
me some of the passages in the Letter. But not the
most mightily ridiculous; yet I could hardly keep my
countenance neither, especially when she came to that
passage which mentions his sound health; and at which
she stopt; she best knew why—But soon resuming; 
M. Well now, Nancy, tell me what you think
of it. 
D. Nay, pray, Madam, tell me what you think
of it. 
M. I expect to be answered by an Answer; not 

by a Question! —You don't use to be so shy to speak
your mind. 
D. Not when my Mamma commands me to
do so. 
M. Then speak it now. 
D. Without hearing the whole of the Letter? 
M. Speak to what you have heard. 
D. Why then, Madam—You won't be my
Mamma Howe, if you give way to it. 
M. I am surprised at your assurance, Nancy! 
D. I mean, Madam, you will then be my Mamma
Harlowe. 
M. O dear heart! —But I am not a fool. 
And her colour went and came. 
D. Dear Madam [But, indeed, I don't love a
Harlowe—that's what I meant] I am your Child, and
must be your Child, do what you will. 
M. A very pert one, I am sure, as ever Mother
bore! And you must be my Child, do what I will! — 
As much as to say, you would not, if you could help
it, if I— 
D. How could I have such a thought! —It would
be forward, indeed, if I had—when I don't know
what your mind is as to the proposal: —When the
proposal is so very advantageous a one too. 
M. [looking a little less discomposed] Why, indeed,
Ten thousand pounds— 
D. And to be sure of outliving him, Madam! 
This staggered her a little. 
M. Sure! —Nobody can be sure—But it is very
likely, that— 
D. Not at all, Madam. You was going to read
something (but stopt) about his Constitution: His
Sobriety is well known. —Why, Madam, these gentlemen
who have used the Sea, and been in different
Climates, and come home to relax from cares in a
temperate one, and are sober—are the likeliest to live
long of any men in the world. Don't you see, that
his very Skin is a Fortification of Buff? 

M. Strange creature! 
D. God forbid, that any-body I love and honour,
should marry a man in hopes to bury him. —But suppose,
Madam, at your time of life— 
M. My time of life! —Dear heart! —What is my
time of life, pray? 
D. Not old, Madam; and that you are not, may
be your danger! 
As I hope to live (my dear) my Mother smiled, and
looked not displeased with me. 
M. Why, indeed, child—Why, indeed, I must
needs say—And then I should chuse to do nothing
(froward as you are sometimes) to hurt you. 
D. Why, as to that, Madam, I can't expect that
you should deprive yourself of any satisfaction— 
M. Satisfaction, my dear! —I don't say, it would
be a Satisfaction—But could I do any-thing that
would benefit you, it would perhaps be an inducement
to hold one conference upon the subject. 
D. My Fortune already will be more considerable
than my Match, if I am to have Mr. Hickman. 
M. Why so? —Mr. Hickman has Fortune enough
to entitle him to yours. 
D. If you think so, that's enough. 
M. Not but I should think the worse of myself,
if I desired any-body's death; but I think, as you
say, Mr. Antony Harlowe is a healthy man, and bids
fair for a long life. 
Bless me, thought I, how shall I do to know whether
this be an Objection or a Recommendation! 
D. Will you forgive me, Madam? 
M. What would the girl say? [Looking as if she
was half-afraid to hear what.] 
D. Only, that if you marry a man of his time of
life, you stand two chances instead of one, to be a
Nurse at your time of life. 
M. Saucebox! 
D. Dear Madam! —What I mean is only, that 

these healthy old men sometimes fall into lingering
disorders all at once. And I humbly conceive, that
the Infirmities of age are uneasily borne with, where
the remembrance of the pleasanter season comes not
in to relieve the healthier of the two. 
M. A strange girl! —Yet his healthy constitution
an objection just now! —But I always told you, that
you know either too much to be argued with, or too
little for me to have patience with you. 
D. I can't but say, I should be glad of your commands,
Madam, how to behave myself to Mr. Antony
Harlowe next time he comes. 
M. How to behave yourself! —Why, if you retire
with contempt of him, when he next comes, it will
be but as you have been used to do of late. 
D. Then he is to come again, Madam? 
M. And suppose he be? 
D. I can't help it, if it be your pleasure, Madam. 
He desires a line in answer to his fine Letter. If
he come, it will be in pursuance of that line, I
presume? 
M. None of your arch and pert leers, girl! —You
know I won't bear them. I had a mind to hear what
you would say to this matter. I have not written; 
but I shall presently. 
D. It is mighty good of you, Madam (I hope the
man will think so) to answer his first application by
Letter. —Pity he should write twice, if once will do. 
M. That fetch won't let you into my intention,
as to what I shall write. It is too saucily put. 
D. Perhaps I can guess at your intention, Madam,
were it to become me so to do. 
M. Perhaps I would not make a Mr. Hickman of
any man; using him the worse for respecting me. 
D. Nor, perhaps, would I, Madam, if I liked his
respects. 
M. I understand you. But, perhaps, it is in your
power to make me hearken, or not, to Mr. Harlowe. 

D. Young men, who have probably a great deal
of time before them, need not be in haste for a wife. 
Mr. Hickman, poor man! must stay his time, or take
his remedy. 
M. He bears more from you, than a man ought. 
D. Then, I doubt, he gives a reason for the treatment
he meets with. 
M. Provoking creature! 
D. I have but one request to make to you,
Madam. 
M. A dutiful one, I suppose. What is it, pray? 
D. That if you marry, I may be permitted to live
single. 
M. Perverse creature, I'm sure! 
D. How can I expect, Madam, that you should
refuse such terms? Ten thousand pounds! —At the least
ten thousand pounds! —A very handsome proposal! 
—So many fine things too, to give you one by one! — 
Dearest Madam, forgive me! —I hope it is not yet so
far gone, that rallying this man will be thought want
of duty to you. 
M. Your rallying of him, and your reverence to
me, it is plain, have one source. 
D. I hope not, Madam. But Ten thousand
pounds— 
M. Is no unhandsome proposal. 
D. Indeed I think so. I hope, Madam, you will
not be behindhand with him in generosity. 
M. He won't be Ten thousand pounds the better
for me, if he survive me. 
D. No, Madam; he can't expect that, as you have
a daughter, and as he is a bachelor, and has not a
child! 
—Poor Old Soul! 
M. Old Soul, Nancy! —And thus to call him for
being a bachelor, and not having a child? —Does this
become you? 
D. Not Old Soul for that, Madam. —But half the
sum; Five thousand pounds; you can't engage for
less, Madam. 

M. That Sum has your approbation then? [Looking
as if she'd be even with me.] 
D. As he leaves it to your generosity, Madam, to
reward his kindness to you, it can't be less. —Do,
dear Madam, permit me, without incurring your
displeasure, to call him poor old Soul again. 
M. Never was such a whimsical creature! —Turning
away to hide her involuntary smile [for I believe,
I looked very archly; at least I intended to do so]— 
I hate that wicked sly look. You give yourself very
free airs—Don't you? 
D. I snatched her hand, and kissed it—My dear
Mamma, be not angry with your girl! —You have
told me, that you was very lively formerly. 
M. Formerly! Good lack! —But were I to encourage
his proposals, you may be sure, that for Mr.
Hickman's sake, as well as yours, I should make a
wise agreement. 
D. You have both lived to years of prudence,
Madam. 
M. Yes, I suppose I am an Old Soul too. 
D. He also is for making a wise agreement, or
hinting at one, at least. 
M. Well, the short and the long I suppose is this: 
I have not your consent to marry. 
D. Indeed, Madam, you have not my wishes to
marry. 
M. Let me tell you, that if prudence consists in
wishing well to one's self, I see not but the Young
Flirts are as prudent as the Old Souls. 
D. Dear Madam, Would you blame me, if to wish
you not to marry Mr. Antony Harlowe, is to wish
well to myself? 
M. You are mighty witty. I wish you were as
dutiful. 
D. I am more dutiful, I hope, than witty; or I
should be a Fool, as well as a Saucebox. 
M. Let me judge of both. —Parents are only to 

live for their Children, let them deserve it or not. 
That's their dutiful notion! 
D. Heaven forbid that I should wish, if there be
Two interests between my Mother and me, that my
Mother postpone her own for mine! or give up anything
that would add to the real comforts of her life,
to oblige me! —Tell me, my dear Mamma, if you
think the closing with this proposal will? 
M. I say, That Ten thousand pounds is such an
acquisition to one's family, that the offer of it deserves
a civil return. 
D. Not the Offer, Madam: The Chance only! — 
If indeed you have a view to an encrease of family,
the money may provide— 
M. You can't keep within tolerable bounds! — 
That saucy fleer I cannot away with— 
D. Dearest, dearest Madam, forgive me; but Old
Soul ran in my head again! —Nay, indeed and upon
my word, I will not be robbed of that charming
smile! And again I kissed her hand. 
M. Away, bold creature! Nothing can be so provoking
as to be made to smile when one would chuse,
and ought, to be angry. 
D. But, dear Madam, if it be to be, I presume
you won't think of it before next winter. 
M. What now would the pert one be at? 
D. Because he only proposes to entertain you with
pretty Stories of Foreign Nations in a Winter's Evening. 
Dearest, dearest Madam, let me have the reading
of his Letter through. I will forgive him all he
says about me. 
M. It may be a very difficult thing perhaps, for a
man of the best sense to write a Love-letter, that may
not be cavilled at. 
D. That's because Lovers in their Letters hit not
the medium. They either write too much nonsense,
or too little. But do you call this Old Soul's letter 

[No more will I call him Old Soul, if I can help it]
a Love-letter? 
M. Well, well, I see you are averse to this matter. 
I am not to be your Mother; you will live single, if
I marry. I had a mind to see if generosity governed
you in your views. I shall pursue my own inclinations; 
and if they should happen to be suitable to
yours, pray let me for the future be better rewarded
by you, than hitherto I have been. 
And away she flung, without staying for a reply. — 
Vexed, I dare say, that I did not better approve of
the proposal—Were it only that the merit of denying
might have been all her own, and to lay the stronger
obligation upon her saucy Daughter. 
She wrote such a widow-like refusal when she went
from me, as might not exclude hope in any other
wooer; whatever it may do in Mr. Tony Harlowe. 
It will be my part, to take care to beat her off the
visit she half-promises to make him (as you will see in
her Answer) upon condition that he withdraw his suit. 
For who knows what effect the old bachelor's exotics
[Far-fetched and dear-bought you know is a proverb]
might otherwise have upon a woman's mind, wanting
nothing but Unnecessaries, Gewgaw, and Fineries,
and offered such as are not easily to be met with, or
purchased? 
Well, but now I give you leave to read here, in
this place, the copy of my Mother's Answer to your
Uncle's Letter. Not one comment will I make upon
it. I know my duty better. And here therefore,
taking the liberty to hope, that I may, in your present
less disagreeable, tho' not wholly agreeable situation,
provoke a smile from you, I conclude myself, 
Your ever-affectionate and faithful
Anna Howe. 


Mrs. Annabella Howe, To Antony Harlowe, Esq;
Mr. Antony Harlowe, 
Friday, May 19. 
Sir,
It is not usual I believe for our Sex to answer by
pen and ink the first Letter on these occasions. 
The first Letter! How odd is that! As if I expected
another; which I do not. But then I think, as I do
not judge proper to encourage your proposal, there
is no reason why I should not answer in civility where
so great a civility is intended. Indeed, I was always
of opinion, that a person was entitled to That, and
not to ill-usage, because he had a respect for me. And
so I have often and often told my Daughter. 
A woman I think makes but a poor figure in a
man's eye afterwards, and does no reputation to her
Sex neither, when she behaves like a tyrant to him
beforehand. 
To be sure, Sir, if I were to change my condition,
I know not a gentleman whose proposal could be more
agreeable. Your Nephew and your Nieces have
enough without you: My Daughter is a fine fortune
without me, and I should take care to double it, living
or dying, were I to do such a thing: So nobody
need to be the worse for it. But Nancy would not
think so. 
All the comfort I know of in children, is, that
when young they do with us what they will, and all
is pretty in them to their very faults; and when they
are grown up, they think their Parents must live for
them only; and deny themselves every-thing for their
sakes. I know Nancy could not bear a Father-in-law. 
She would fly at the very thought of my being
in earnest to give her one. Not that I stand in fear
of my Daughter neither. It is not fit I should. But
she has her poor Papa's spirit. A very violent one 

that was. And one would not chuse, you know, Sir,
to enter into any affair, that, one knows, one must
renounce a Daughter for, or she a Mother. —Except
indeed one's heart were much in it; which, I bless
God, mine is not. 
I have now been a widow these ten years; nobody
to controul me: And I am said not to bear controul: 
So, Sir, you and I are best as we are, I believe: 
Nay, I am sure of it: For we want not what either
has; having both more than we know what to do
with. And I know I could not be in the least accountable
for any of my ways. 
My Daughter indeed, tho' she is a fine girl, as
girls go [She has too much sense indeed for one of
her Sex; and knows she has it] is more a check to
me than one would wish a Daughter to be: For who
would chuse to be always snapping at each other? 
But she will soon be married; and then, not living
together, we shall only come together when we are
pleased, and stay away when we are not; and so,
like other Lovers, never see any-thing but the best
sides of each other. 
I own, for all this, that I love her dearly; and
she me, I dare say: So would not wish to provoke
her to do otherwise. Besides, the girl is so much regarded
every-where, that having lived so much of my
prime a widow, I would not lay myself open to her
censures, or even to her indifference, you know. 
Your generous proposal requires all this explicitness. 
I thank you for your good opinion of me. 
When I know you acquiesce with This my civil refusal
[And indeed, Sir, I am as much in earnest in it,
as if I had spoken broader] I don't know but Nancy
and I may, with your permission, come to see your
fine things; for I am a great admirer of Rarities that
come from abroad. 
So, Sir, let us only converse occasionally as we
meet, as we used to do, without any other view to 

each other, than good wishes: Which I hope may
not be lessened for this declining. And then I shall
always think myself 
Your obliged Servant,
Annabella Howe. 
P. S. I sent word by Mrs. Lorimer, that I would
write an Answer: But would take time for consideration. 
So hope, Sir, you won't think it a
slight, I did not write sooner. 