



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Sat. Midnight. 
No Rest, says a text that I once heard preached
upon, to the wicked—And I cannot close my
eyes (yet wanted only to compound for half an hour
in an elbow-chair)—So must scribble on. 
I parted with the Captain, after another strong debate
with him in relation to what is to be the Fate of
this Lady. As the fellow has an excellent head, and
would have made an eminent figure in any station of
life, had not his early days been tainted with a deep
crime, and he detected in it; and as he had the right
side of the argument; I had a good deal of difficulty
with him; and at last brought myself to promise, that
if I could prevail upon her generously to forgive me,
and to reinstate me in her favour, I would make it my
whole endeavour to get off of my contrivances, as
happily as I could (only that Lady Betty and Charlotte
must come); and then, substituting him for her
Uncle's Proxy, take shame to myself, and marry. 
But, if I should, Jack (with the strongest antipathy
to the State that ever man had) what a figure shall I
make in Rakish Annals? And can I have taken all
this pains for nothing? Or for a Wife only, that,
however excellent [and any woman, do I think, I 

could make good, because I could make any woman
fear as well as love me] might have been obtained
without the plague I have been at, and much more
reputably than with it? And hast thou not seen, that
this haughty woman [Forgive me that I call her
haughty! and a woman! Yet is she not haughty?]
knows not how to forgive with graciousness? Indeed
has not at all forgiven me? But holds my soul in a
suspense which has been so grievous to her own. 
At this silent moment, I think, that if I were to
pursue my former scheme, and resolve to try whether
I cannot make a greater fault serve as a sponge to
wipe out the less; and then be forgiven for that; I
can justify myself to myself; and that, as the fair Invincible
would say, is all in all. 
As it is my intention, in all my reflections, to
avoid repeating, at least dwelling upon, what I have
before written to thee, tho' the State of the Case may
not have varied; so I would have thee to re-consider
the old reasonings (particularly those contained in my
answer to thy last (a)  expostulatory nonsense); and
add the new, as they fall from my pen; and then I
shall think myself invincible;—at least, as arguing
Rake to Rake. 
I take the gaining of this Lady to be essential to
my happiness: And is it not natural for all men to
aim at obtaining whatever they think will make them
happy, be the object more or less considerable in the
eyes of others? 
As to the manner of endeavouring to obtain her,
by falsification of oaths, vows, and the like—Do not
the poets of two thousand years and upwards tell us,
that Jupiter laughs at the perjuries of Lovers? And
let me add to what I have heretofore mentioned on
that head, a question or two. 
Do not the Mothers, the Aunts, the Grandmothers,
the Governesses of the pretty Innocents, always, 

from their very cradles to riper years, preach
to them the deceitfulness of men? —That they are not
to regard their oaths, vows, promises? —What a parcel
of fibbers would all these reverend matrons be, if
there were not now-and-then a pretty credulous rogue
taken in for a justification of their preachments, and
to serve as a beacon lighted up for the benefit of the
rest? 
Do we not then see, that an honest prowling fellow
is a necessary evil on many accounts? Do we not
see, that it is highly requisite that a sweet girl should
be now-and-then drawn aside by him? —And the
more eminent the girl, in the graces of person, mind,
and fortune, is not the Example likely to be the more
efficacious? 
If these postulata be granted me, who, I pray, can
equal my Charmer in all these? Who therefore so fit
for an Example to the rest of the Sex? —At worst, I
am entirely within my worthy friend Mandeville's
assertion, That private Vices are public Benefits. 
Well then, if this sweet creature must fall, as it is
called, for the benefit of all the pretty fools of the
Sex, she must; and there's an end of the matter. 
And what would there have been in it of uncommon
or rare, had I not been so long about it? —And so I
dismiss all further argumentation and debate upon the
question: And I impose upon thee, when thou writest
to me, an eternal silence on this head. 
Wafer'd on, as an after-written introduction to the
paragraphs which follow, marked with turned
comma's [thus, “]: 
Lord, Jack, what shall I do now! —How one
evil brings on another! —Dreadful news to tell
thee! —While I was meditating a simple robbery,
here have I (in my own defence indeed) been guilty of
murder! A bloody murder! —So I believe it will 

prove. —At her last gasp! —Poor impertinent opposer! 
Eternally resisting! —Eternally contradicting! There
she lies, weltering in her blood! Her death's wound
have I given her! —But she was a thief, an impostor,
as well as a tormentor. She had stolen my pen. — 
While I was sullenly meditating, doubting, as to my
future measures, she stole it; and thus she wrote with
it, in a hand exactly like my own; and would have
faced me down, that it was really my own handwriting. 
“But let me reflect, before it be too late. On the
manifold perfections of this ever-admirable creature
let me reflect. The hand yet is only held up. 
The blow is not struck. Miss Howe's next Letter
may blow thee up. In policy thou shouldest
be now at least honest. Thou canst not live without
her. Thou wouldest rather marry her than
lose her absolutely. Thou mayest undoubtedly
prevail upon her, inflexible as she seems to be, for
Marriage. But if now she find thee a villain,
thou mayest never more engage her attention, and
she perhaps will refuse and abhor thee. 
“Yet already have I not gone too far? Like a
repentant thief, afraid of his gang, and obliged to
go on, in fear of hanging till he comes to be hanged,
I am afraid of the gang of my cursed contrivances. 
“As I hope to live, I am sorry (at the present
writing) that I have been such a foolish plotter, as
to put it, as I fear I have done, out of my own
power to be honest. I hate compulsion in all forms; 
and cannot bear, even to be compelled to be the
wretch my choice has made me! —So now, Belford,
as thou hast said, I am a machine at last,
and no free agent. 
“Upon my soul, Jack, it is a very foolish thing
for a man of spirit to have brought himself to such
a height of iniquity, that he must proceed, and 

cannot help himself; and yet to be next to certain,
that his very victory will undo him. 
“Why was such a woman as This thrown in my
way, whose very fall will be her glory, and perhaps
not only my shame, but my destruction? 
“What a happiness must that man know, who
moves regularly to some laudable end, and has nothing
to reproach himself with in his progress to it! 
When, by honest means, he attains this end,
how great and unmixed must be his enjoyments! 
What a happy man, in this particular case, had I
been, had it been given me to be only what I
wished to appear to be!” 
Thus far had my Conscience written with my pen; 
and see what a recreant she had made me! —I seized
her by the throat—There! —There, said I, thou vile
impertinent! —Take that, and that! —How often
have I given thee warning! —And now, I hope, thou
intruding varletess, have I done thy business! 
Puleing, and low-voiced, rearing up thy detested
head, in vain implorest thou my mercy, who, in thy
day, hast shewed me so little! —Take that, for a
rising blow! —And now will thy pain, and my pain
from thee, soon be over. —Lie there! —Welter on! — 
Had I not given thee thy death's wound, thou wouldest
have robbed me of all my joys. Thou couldest not
have mended me, 'tis plain. Thou couldest only
have thrown me into despair. Didst thou not see,
that I had gone too far to recede? —Welter on, once
more I bid thee! —Gasp on! —That thy last gasp,
surely! —How hard diest thou!— 
Adieu! —Unhappy Man! Adieu! 
'Tis kind in thee, however, to bid me Adieu!— 
Adieu, Adieu, Adieu, to thee, O thou inflexible,
and, till now, unconquerable bosom-intruder—Adieu
to thee for ever! 