



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;. 

St. Albans, Monday Night. 
I snatch a few moments, while my Beloved is
retired (as I hope, to rest), to perform my promise. 
No pursuit! —Nor have I apprehensions of
any; tho' I must make my charmer dread that there
will be one. 
And now, let me tell thee, that never was joy so
complete as mine! —But let me inquire! Is not the
angel flown away?— 
* *
O no! She is in the next apartment! —Securely
mine! —Mine for ever! 

O ecstasy!—My heart will burst my breast,
To leap into her bosom!—
I knew, that the whole stupid family were in a
combination to do my business for me. I told thee,
that they were all working for me, like so many underground
moles; and still more blind than the moles
are said to be, unknowing that they did so. I myself,
the director of their principal motions; which falling
in with the malice of their little hearts, they took to
be all their own. 
But did I say, my joy was perfect? —O no! —It
receives some abatement from my disgusted pride. For
how can I endure to think, that I owe more to her
relation's persecutions, than to her favour for me?—Or
even, as far as I know, to her preference of me to
another man? 
But let me not indulge this thought. Were I to do
so, it might cost my charmer dear. —Let me rejoice, 

that she has passed the Rubicon: That she cannot
return: That, as I have ordered it, the flight will
appear to the Implacables to be altogether with her
own consent: And that, if I doubt her love, I can
put her to tryals, as mortifying to her niceness, as
glorious to my pride. —For, let me tell thee, dearly
as I love her, if I thought there was but the shadow of
a doubt in her mind, whether she preferr'd me to any
man living, I would shew her no mercy. 
Tuesday, Day-dawn. 
But, on the wings of love, I fly to my charmer,
who, perhaps, by this time, is rising, to encourage
the tardy dawn. I have not slept a wink of the hour
and half I lay down to invite sleep. It seems to me,
that I am not so much Body, as to require such vulgar
renovation. 
But why, as in the chariot, as in the inn, at alighting,
all heart-bursting grief, my dearest creature?
So persecuted, as thou wert persecuted! —So much
in danger of the most abhorr'd compulsion! —Yet
grief so unsuspectably sincere for an escape so critical! 
—Take care! —Take care, O beloved of my soul: 
For jealous is the heart in which Love has erected a
temple to thee. 
Yet, it must be allow'd, that such a sudden transition
must affect her—Must ice her over. —When a
little more used to her new situation: When her hurries
are at an end: When she sees how religiously I
shall observe all her Injunctions, she will undoubtedly have the gratitude to distinguish between
the confinement she has escaped from, and the liberty
she has reason to rejoice in. 
She comes! She comes!—And the Sun is just rising
to attend her! —Adieu! —Be half as happy as I am
[for all diffidences, like night-fogs before the sun, exhale
at her approach]; and, next myself, thou wilt
be the happiest man in the world. 