


Lady G. In Continuation. 


Emily, Lucy, and I, went to pay our morning-congratulations
as soon as we arose, which
was not very early, to my brother, being told that he
was in the Cedar parlour, writing. He received us
like himself. I am writing, said he, a few very short
Letters. They are to demand the felicitations, one,
of our beloved Caroline; one of our aunt Grandison; 
one of the Earl of G. and one of our dear
Dr. Bartlett. There is another; you may read it,
Charlotte. 
That also was a short one; to signify, according to
promise, as I found, to Signor Jeronymo della Porretta,
the actual celebration of his Nuptials. I returned
it—‘Like my brother,’ was all I said. It
concluded with a caution, given in the most ardent 

terms, against precipitating the admirable Clementina. 
We went up to the Bride. She was dressing. Her
aunt was with her, and her two cousin Holles's, who
went not home the preceding night. 
The moment we entered, she ran to us; and,
clasping her arms about my neck, hid her blushing
face in my bosom—My dearest, dearest Lady G. murmured
she—Am I indeed your Sister, your Sister
Grandison? And will you love me as well as ever? 
My dearest, lovely Sister! My own Sister Grandison! 
My Brother's Wife! Most sincerely do I repeat,
Joy, Joy, Joy, to my Harriet! 
O Lady G! How you raise me! Your goodness is
a seasonable goodness to me! I never, never, but by
yours and your sister's example, shall be worthy of
your brother! 
Then disengaging herself from my arms; Yesterday,
Lucy, said she, was a happy, happy Day! I
have but one, one regret—There is a Lady in the
world that deserves the best of men better than your
Harriet—And, lifting up her hands and eyes, God preserve
and protect her! —She shall be the subject of my
prayers, as often as I pray for myself, and for him
who is dearer to me than myself. 
Then embracing Emily; Wish me Joy, my Love! 
In my Joy shall you find your own! 
Emily wept, and even sobbed—You must, you
must, treat me less kindly, madam. I cannot, cannot
bear your good—your goodness. On my knees I
acknowlege my other Guardian. God bless my dear,
dear Lady Grandison! 
At that moment, as they were folded in each
other's arms, entered my brother—He clasped his
round his sweet Bride; Pardon this intrusion, said he— 
Excellent creature, continue to love my Emily! — 
Continue, my dear Emily, to deserve the sisterly love
of my Harriet! 

Then turning to me, saluting me, My Charlotte
loves my Harriet; so does our Caroline. She fondly
loves you both. God continue your love to each
other! What Sisters has Yesterday's happy event
given to each other! —What a Wife to me! —We
will endeavour, my Love (to her) to deserve our happiness; 
and, I humbly trust, it will be continued to
us. 
He saluted Mrs. Selby—My own Aunt Selby! 
What obligations am I under to you, and to our venerable
Mrs. Shirley, for giving to an Angel an Angel's
education, and conferring on me the blessing! 
Congratulate me, my dear Cousin Holles's, saluting
each. May you both be as happy, whenever you alter
your single state, as I will endeavour to make your
lovely Cousin! 
He withdrew, bowing to us, and with so much respectfulness
to the happy Harriet, as delighted us all. 
Lucy went down with him, to pay her morning
compliments to the two Grandmamma's. 
Sister, said Kitty Holles, after he was gone—we
never, never, can think of marrying, after we have
seen Sir Charles Grandison, and his behaviour. 
Lucy came up with Nancy. They embraced their
cousin. Your grandmamma and my grandmamma,
my dearest cousin, are impatient to see you, in your
grandmamma's chamber; and the gentlemen are crying
out for their breakfasts in the great parlour. We
hurried down. The Bride threw herself at her grandmamma's
feet, for her blessing. It was given in such
a tender and pious manner, that we were all affected
by it. The best of Sons, of Men, said she, afterwards,
has but just left me. What a blessing to all
around him, is a good man! Sir Charles Grandison is
every thing. But, my dear Loves, to the younger
Ladies, Let a good man, let life, let manners, be the
principal motive of your choice: In goodness will you
have every sanction; and your Fathers, Mothers, Relations, 

Friends, every joy! My dearest Love, my
Harriet, taking her hand, there was a time that I
thought no man on earth could deserve you: Now it
is my prayer, and will be, that you may deserve this
man. But let us join the gentlemen. Fear not, my
Harriet—Sir Charles's character will preserve with
every one its dignity, and give a sanction to the solemnity
that has united you to him. My dearest
Love! be proud, and look assured: You may, or who
can? Yesterday's transaction is your Glory; glory in
it, my Harriet! 
We attended the two elder Ladies down. Harriet,
as bashful people ever do, increased her own difficulties,
by staying behind with her Lucy. We were all
seated at the breakfast-tables, and staid for them:
Mr. Selby grew impatient; every one having declared
themselves ready for breakfast. At last, down came
the blushing Bride, with her Lucy. Sir Charles seeing
Mr. Selby's countenance turning peevishly arch; 
just as he had begun ‘Let me tell you, Niece,’ and
was coming out with something, he arose, and taking
his Bride's hand, led her to her seat. Hush, my dear
Mr. Selby, said he; Nobody must call to account my
Wife, and I present. —How, Sir! How, Sir! Already
have I lost my Niece? 
Not so, Mr. Selby. All her duties will have strength
given them by the happy event of yesterday: But you
must not let a new-married man see how much easier
it is to find fault than to be faultless. 
Your servant, Sir! replied Mr. Selby—You'll one
day pay for your complaisance, or my Niece is not a
woman. But I was ready primed. You have robbed
me of a jest; and that, let me tell you, would have
been more to me than my breakfast. 
After breakfast, Lucy gave us a lesson on the harpsichord. 
Sir Charles accompanied her finger, at the
desire of the company. 
Lord and Lady W. excused themselves to breakfast, 

but came to dinner. We entertained one another
with reports of what passed yesterday; what people
said; how the tenants feast was managed; how the
populace behaved at the houses which were kept open. 
The Churchwardens List was produced of the Poor
recommended by them: It amounted to upwards of
140, divided into two classes; one of the acknowleged
poor, the other of poor housekeepers and labouring
people who were ashamed to apply; but to
whom the Churchwardens knew bounty would be acceptable. 
There were above thirty of these, to whom
Sir Charles gave very handsomely, but we knew not
what. The Churchwardens, who are known to be
good men, went away blessing him, with hearts running
over at their lips, as if they themselves were to
find their account in his goodness. 
Saturday.
We have had a smart debate this morning, on the
natural independency of our Sex, and the usurpation of
the other. Particulars by-and-by. 
My brother is an irresistable man. To-morrow
he has carried it to make his appearance at Church,
against all their first intentions, and that by their own
consents. He had considered every-thing: They had
not. Mr. Beauchamp has Letters which require him
to go up to town: Lord and Lady W. are desirous to
get thither; my Lord having some gouty warnings: I
am obliged to go up; having hated to set about anything
preparatory to your case, Caroline! [If the
wretch were to come in my way just now, I should
throw my standish at him, I believe.] The Earl
and Lady Gertrude are in town; and I am afraid of
another reprimand. The Earl never jests but he
means the same as if he were serious. I shall take
Emily with me, when I go. Mrs. Reeves wants to
be with her little boy. Yet all these people are desirous
to credit the appearance. —I had like to have
forgot your good man—He longs to see his Caroline; 

and hopes to engage my brother to stand in person as
his urchin's sponsor. So you see that there is a necessity
to consent to make the appearance to-morrow,
or the Bride will lose the flower of her company. 
On Monday it stands determined, that Mr. and Mrs.
Reeves, Mr. Beauchamp, Emily, Lord L. Lord and
Lady W. myself, and Lord G. will set out for London. 
God continue the happiness of this charming Pair! 
Their behaviour to each other is just what I would
wish it to be; tender, affectionate, without fulsome
fondness. He cannot be more respectful to the dear
creature now, than he was before marriage: But from
his present behaviour, I dare answer for him, that he
will not be less so: And yet he is so lively, that he
has all the young man in his behaviour, whenever occasions
call for relaxation; even when subjects require
seriousness, as they do sometimes, in conversations between
Mrs. Shirley, Mrs. Selby, Mr. Deane, and
him; his seriousness, as Mrs. Shirley herself finely
observed in his absence, is attended with such vivacity,
and intermingled with such entertaining illustrations,
all naturally arising from and falling into the subject,
that he is sure of every one's attention and admiration. 
The features of his manly face, and the turn
of his fine eye, observed she, on another occasion,
are cast for pity, and not for censure. And let me
add a speech of his, when he was called upon to censure
a person, on a slight representation of facts. 
‘The whole matter is not before us, said he: We
know not what motives he may have to plead by
way of extenuation, tho' he may not be able entirely
to excuse himself. But, as it appears to me, I
would not have done so.’ 
But what, my dear, am I about? Are they not my
brother's praises that I am expatiating upon? Was I
ever to be trusted with that subject? Is there no man,
I have been asked, that is like your brother? —He, I
have answered, is most likely to resemble him, who 

has an unbounded charity, and universal benevolence,
to men of all professions; and who, imitating the
Divinity, regards the heart, rather than the head, and
much more than either rank or fortune, tho' it were
princely; and yet is not a leveller, but thinks that
rank or degree intitles a man who is not utterly unworthy
of both, to respect. 
I will write one more Letter, and then give way
to other affairs. I never thought I should have been
such a scribbler. But the correspondence between my
Brother and Dr. Bartlett, into which we were all so
eager to peep; that of this dear creature with her
Lucy, which so much entertained us, and which led
us, in her absence, to wish to continue the series of it; 
the story of Clementina so interesting; all our suspenses
so affecting, and the state of this our lovely friend's
heart so peculiar; and the task removed from you to
me, of promoting and contributing to the correspondence:
All these, together, led me on. But now one
Letter more shall conclude my task. 
Lord L. has just now mentioned to my brother his
wishes that he would stand Godfather to the little
Lord. My brother caught his hand, and besought
his pardon for not offering himself. You do me, my
dear Lord, said he, both honour and pleasure. Where
was my thought? But this dear creature, turning to
his Bride, will be so good as to remind me of all my
imperfections. I am in a way to mend; for the duties
inseparable from my delightful new engagement will
strengthen all my other duties. 
I have taken upon me, Sir, said she, to request the
favour of my Lord and Lady L's acceptance of me
for a Godmother. 
To which I have objections, said I. I have a prior
claim. Aunt Eleanor has put in hers, Lady W. hers,
and this before Miss Byron was Lady Grandison. 
Your circumstance, my dear Lady G. according to
a general observation of our Sex, is prohibitory. 

Will you, my brother, appealed I, allow of superstitious
observances, prognostics, omens, dreams? 
O no! My Harriet has been telling me how much
she suffered lately from a dream, which she permitted
to give strength and terror to her apprehensions from
Mr. Greville. Guard, my dear Ladies, against these
imbecillities of tender minds. In these instances, if
in no other, will you give a superiority to our Sex,
which, in the debate of this morning, my Charlotte
would not allow of. 
I will begin my next Letter with an account of this
debate; and if I cannot comprise it in the compass I
intend to bring it into, my one more Letter may perhaps
stretch into two. 

