



Dear Mother,
You and my good Father may wonder that you
have not had a Letter from me in so many
Weeks; but a sad, sad Scene has been the Occasion
of it. For, to be sure, now it is too plain, that
all your Cautions were well-grounded. O my dear
Mother! I am miserable, truly miserable! —But yet,
don't be frighted, I am honest! —God, of his Goodness,
keep me so! 
O this Angel of a Master! this fine Gentleman!
this gracious Benefactor to your poor Pamela! who
was to take care of me at the Prayer of his good
dying Mother; who was so careful of me, lest I
should be drawn in by Lord Davers's Nephew; 
that he would not let me go to Lady Davers's: 
This very Gentleman (yes, I must call him Gentleman,
tho' he has fallen from the Merit of that Title)
has degraded himself to offer Freedoms to his poor
Servant! He has now shew'd himself in his true
Colours, and to me, nothing appears so black and
so frightful. 
I have not been idle; but have writ from time to
time how he, by sly mean Degrees, exposed his
wicked Views: But somebody stole my Letter, and
I know not what is become of it. It was a very
long one. I fear he that was mean enough to do
bad things, in one respect, did not stick at this; 
but be it as it will, all the Use he can make of it
will be, that he may be asham'd of his Part; I not
of mine. For he will see I was resolv'd to be honest,
and glory'd in the Honesty of my poor Parents. 
I will tell you all, the next Opportunity; 
for I am watch'd, and such-like, very narrowly; 

and he says to Mrs. Jervis, This Girl is always
scribbling; I think she may be better employ'd. 
And yet I work all Hours with my Needle, upon
his Linen, and the fine Linen of the Family; and
am besides about flowering him a Waistcoat. — 
But, Oh! my Heart's broke almost; for what am
I likely to have for my Reward, but Shame and
Disgrace, or else ill Words, and hard Treatment! 
I'll tell you all soon, and hope I shall find my long
Letter. 
Your most afflicted Daughter. 
I must he and him him now; for he has lost his
Dignity with me! 

