



Mr. Lovelace, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 
Superscribed, To Mrs. Lovelace. 

M. Hall, Wedn. Morn. One o'Clock, June 28. 
Not one line, my dearest life, not one word, in
answer to three Letters I have written! The
time is now so short, that this must be the last Letter
that can reach you on this side of the important hour
that might make us legally one. 
My friend Mr. Belford is apprehensive, that he
cannot wait upon you in time, by reason of some
urgent affairs of his own. 
I the less regret the disappointment, because I have
procured a more acceptable person, as I hope, to
attend you; Captain Tomlinson I mean: To whom
I had applied for this purpose, before I had Mr. Belford's
answer. 
I was the more solicitous to obtain this favour from
him, because of the office he is to take upon him, as
I humbly presume to hope, to-morrow. That office
obliged him to be in town as this day: And I acquainted
him with my unhappy situation with you; 

and desired, that he would shew me, on this occasion,
that I had as much of his favour and friendship, as
your Uncle had; since the whole treaty must be
broken off, if he could not prevail upon you in my
behalf. 
He will dispatch the messenger directly; whom I
propose to meet in person at Slough; either to proceed
onward to London with a joyful heart, or to return
back to M. Hall, with a broken one. 
I ought not (but cannot help it) to anticipate the
pleasure Mr. Tomlinson proposes to himself, in acquainting
you with the likelihood there is of your
Mother's seconding your Uncle's views. For, it seems,
he has privately communicated to her his laudable intentions: 
And her resolution depends, as well as his,
upon what to-morrow will produce. 
Disappoint not then, I beseech you, for an hundred
persons sakes, as well as for mine, that Uncle, and
that Mother, whose displeasure I have heard you so
often deplore. 
You may think it impossible for me to reach London
by the Canonical Hour. If it should, the Ceremony
may be performed in your own apartment, at
any time in the day, or at night: So that Captain
Tomlinson may have it to aver to your Uncle, that
it was performed on his Anniversary. 
Tell but the Captain, that you forbid me not to attend
you: And that shall be sufficient for bringing to
you, on the wings of Love, 
Your ever-grateful and affectionate 
Lovelace. 