



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Wednesday, May 24. 
He gives his friend an account of their Interview
that morning; and of the happy effects of his
Cousin Montague's Letter in his favour. Her reserves,
however, he tells him, are not absolutely
banished. But this he imputes to form. 
It is not in the power of woman, says he, to be
altogether sincere on these occasions. But why? 
—Do they think it so great a disgrace to be found
out to be really what they are? 
I regretted the illness of Mrs. Fretchville; as the
intention I had to fix her dear self in the house before
the happy knot was tied, would have set her
in that independence in appearance, as well as fact,
which was necessary to shew to all the world, that
her choice was free; and as the Ladies of my family
would have been proud to make their court to her
there; while the Settlements and our Equipages were
preparing. But on any other account, there was no
great matter in it; since when my happy day was
over, we could, with so much convenience, go
down to the Lawn, to my Lord M's, and to Lady
Sarah's or Lady Betty's, in turn; which would give
full time to provide ourselves with servants, and other
accommodations. 

How sweetly the Charmer listened! 
I asked her, If she had had the Small-pox? 
&dotup;Ten thousand pounds the worse in my estimation,
though I, if she has not; for not one of her charming
graces can I dispense with.&dotup; 
'Twas always a doubtful point with her Mother
and Mrs. Norton, she owned. But altho' she was
not afraid of it, she chose not unnecessarily to rush
into places where it was. 
Right, thought I—Else, I said, it would not have
been amiss for her to see the house before she went
into the country; for, if she liked it not, I was not
obliged to have it. 
She asked, If she might take a copy of Miss Montague's
Letter? 
I said, she might keep the Letter itself, and send it
to Miss Howe, if she pleased; for that, I supposed,
was her intention. 
She bowed her head to me. 
There, Jack!—I shall have her courtesy to me
by-and-by, I question not. What a-devil had I to
do, to terrify the sweet creature by my termagant
projects! —Yet it was not amiss, I believe, to make
her afraid of me. She says, I am an unpolite man— 
And every polite instance from such a one, is deemed
a favour. 
Talking of the Settlements, I told her, I had rather
that Pritchard (mentioned by my Cousin Charlotte)
had not been consulted on this occasion. 
Pritchard, indeed, was a very honest man; and had
been for a generation in the Family; and knew the
Estates, and the condition of them, better than either
my Lord or myself: But Pritchard, like other
old men, was diffident and slow; and valued himself
upon his skill as a draughts-man; and for the sake of
that paltry reputation, must have all his forms preserved,
were an imperial crown to depend upon his
dispatch. 

I kissed her unrepulsing hand no less than five
times during this conversation. Lord, Jack, how
my generous heart ran over! —She was quite obliging
at parting. —She in a manner asked me leave to
retire; to reperuse Charlotte's Letter. —I think she
bent her knees to me; but I won't be sure. —How
happy might we have both been long ago, had the
dear creature been always as complaisant to me! For
I do love respect, and, whether I deserved it or not,
always had it, till I knew this proud Beauty. 
And now, Belford, are we in a train, or the duce
is in it. Every fortified town has its strong and its
weak place. I had carried on my attacks against the
impregnable parts. I have no doubt but I shall either
shine or smuggle her out of her cloak, since she and
Miss Howe have intended to employ a Smuggler
against me. —All we wait for now is my Lord's Letter. 
But I had like to have forgot to tell thee, that we
have been not a little alarmed, by some enquiries
that have been made after me and my Beloved, by a
man of good appearance; who yesterday procured a
tradesman in the neighbourhood to send for Dorcas: 
Of whom he asked several questions relating to us; 
and particularly (as we boarded and lodged in one
house) whether we were married? 
This has given my Beloved great uneasiness. And
I could not help observing upon it, to her, how right
a thing it was, that we had given out below, that we
were married. The enquiry, most probably, I said,
was from her Brother's quarter; and now perhaps
that our Marriage was owned, we should hear no
more of his machinations. The person, it seems,
was curious to know the day that the ceremony was
performed. But Dorcas refused to give him any
other particulars, than that we were married; and
she was the more reserved, as he declined to tell her
the motives of his enquiry. 