



From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. 


My dearest Lady,
Mr. B. came back from Bedfordshire to his Time. 
Every thing being in Readiness, we set out,
my Baby, and his Nurse, and Polly, and Rachel, in
the Coach; Mr. B. and myself in the Chariot. The
other Maids are to go down with Mrs. Jervis, when
every thing in London is settled by her Direction, to
Bedfordshire; and all the Men-servants too, except
Mr. Jonathan, and Abraham, and John, who went
down with us on Horseback; as also did Mr. Colbrand. 
We were met by my Father and Mother in a
Chaise and Pair, which your kind Brother had presented
to them, unknown to me, that they might
often take the Air together, and go to Church in
it (which is at some Distance from them) on
Sundays. The Driver is cloathed in a good brown
Cloth Suit, but no Livery; for that my Parents
could not have borne, as Mr. B.'s Goodness made
him consider. 

Your Ladyship must needs think, how we were
all overjoy'd at this Meeting: For my own Part, I
cannot express how much I was transported when
we arrived at the Farm-house, to see all I delighted
in, upon one happy Spot together! 
Mr. B. is much pleased with the Alterations made
here*  , and it is a sweet, rural, and convenient
Place. 
We were welcomed into these Parts by the Bells,
and by the Minister, and People of most Note; and
were at Church together on Sunday. 
Mr. B. is to set out on Tuesday for Tunbridge,
with my Papers. A happy Issue attend that Affair,
I pray God! He has given me the following Particulars
of it, to the Time of my Trial, beginning
at the Masquerade. 
He says, That at the Masquerade, when, pleased
with the fair Nun's Shape, Air, and Voice, he
had followed her to a Corner most unobserv'd, she
said, in Italian, Why are my Retirements invaded,
audacious Spaniard? 
Because, my dear Nun, I hope you would
have it so. 
I can no otherwise, returned she, strike dead
thy bold Presumption, than to shew thee my Scorn
and Anger thus—And unmasking, she surpris'd
me, said Mr. B. with a Face as beautiful, but not
so soft, as my Pamela's. —And I, said Mr. B. to
shew I can defy your Resentment, will shew you a
Countenance as intrepid, as yours is lovely. And
so he drew aside his Mask too. 
He says, He observed his fair Nun to be followed,
where-ever she went, by a Mask habited 

like Testimony in Sir Courtly Nice, whose Attention
was fixed upon her and him; and he doubted
not, that it was Mr. Turner. So he and the fair
Nun took different Ways, and he joined me and
Miss Darnford, and found me engaged in the manner
I related to your Ladyship, in a former Letter; 
and his Nun at his Elbow, unexpected. 
That afterwards, as he was engag'd in French
with a Lady who had the Dress of an Indian
Princess, and the Mask of an Ethiopian, his fair
Nun said, in broken Spanish, Art thou at all Complections? 
—By St. Ignatius, I believe thou'rt a
Rover! 
I am trying, reply'd he, in Italian, whether I
can meet with any Lady comparable to my lovely
Nun. 
And what is the Result? 
Not one; no, not one. 
I wish you could not help being in Earnest, said
she; and slid from him. 
He engag'd her next at the Side-board, drinking
under her Veil a Glass of Champaign. You know,
Pamela, said he, there never was a sweeter Mouth
in the World, than the Countess's, except your own. 
She drew away the Glass, as if, unobserv'd by any
body, to shew me the lower Part of her Face. 
I cannot say, continued he, but I was struck
with her charming Manner, and an Unreservedness
of Air and Behaviour, that I had not before seen
so becoming. —The Place, and the Freedom of
Conversation and Deportment allowed there, gave
her great Advantages in my Eye, altho' her Habit
requir'd, as I thought, continued he, a little more
Gravity and Circumspection: And I could not tell 

how to resist a secret Pride and Vanity, which is
but too natural to both Sexes, when they are taken
notice of by Persons so worthy of Regard. 
Naturally fond of every thing that carry'd
the Face of an Intrigue, I long'd to know, proceeded
he, who this charming Nun was. —And
next Time I engag'd her, My good Sister, said I,
how happy should I be, if I might be admitted to
a Conversation with you at your Grate! 
Answer me, said she, thou bold Spaniard,
(for that was a Name she seem'd fond to call me
by, which gave me to imagine, that Boldness was
a Qualification with which she was not displeased:
'Tis not unusual with our vain Sex, observed he, to
construe even Reproaches to our Advantage) Is the
Lady here, whose Shackles thou wearest? 
Do I look like a Man shackled, my fairest Nun? 
N—No! not much like such an one. But I
fansy thy Wife is either a Widow, or a Quaker? 
Neither, reply'd I, taking, by Equivocation,
her Question literally. 
And art thou not a marry'd Wretch? Answer
me quickly! —We are observ'd. 
No—said I. 
Swear to me, thou art not— 
By St. Ignatius then: For, my Dear, I was no
Wretch, you know. 
Enough! said she—and slid away; and the
Fanatick would fain have engaged her; but she
avoided him as industriously. 
Before I was aware, continued Mr. B. she
was at my Elbow, and, in Italian, said, That fair
Quaker yonder is the Wit of the Assemblée: Her
Eyes seem always directed to thy Motions: And 

her Person shews some Intimacies have passed with
somebody: Is it with thee? 
It would be my Glory, if it was, said I, were
her Face answerable to her Person. 
Is it not? 
I long to know, reply'd Mr. B. 
I am glad thou dost not. 
I am glad to hear my fair Nun say that. 
Dost thou, said she, hate Shackles? Or is it,
that thy Hour is not yet come? 
I wish, reply'd he, this be not the Hour, the
very Hour—pretending (naughty Gentleman! — 
What Ways these Men have!—) to sigh. 
She went again to the Side-board, put her
Handkerchief upon it. Mr. B. follow'd her, and
observed all her Motions. She drank a Glass of
Lemonade, as he of Burgundy; and a Person in a
Domine, who was supposed to be the King, passing
by, took up every one's Attention but Mr. B.'s,
who eyed her Handkerchief, not doubting but she
laid it there on purpose to forget to take it up. Accordingly
she left it there; and slipping by him, he,
unobserved, as he believes, put it in his Pocket,
and at one Corner found the Cover of a Letter,
To the Right Honourable the Countess Dowager
of— 
That after this, the fair Nun was so shy, so reserved,
and seem'd so studiously to avoid him, that
he had no Opportunity to return her Handkerchief; 
and the Fanatick, observing how she shunned him,
said, in French, What, Monsieur, have you done
to your Nun? 
I found her to be a very Coquet; and told
her so;—and she is offended. 

How could you affront a Lady, reply'd he, with
such a charming Face? 
By that, I had Reason to think, said Mr. B. that
he had seen her unmask; and I said—It becomes
not any Character, but that you wear, to pry into
the Secrets of others, in order to make ill-natur'd
Remarks, and perhaps to take ungentlemanlike
Advantages. 
No Man would make that Observation, returned
he, whose Views would bear prying into. 
I was nettled, said Mr. B. at this warm Retort,
and drew aside my Mask: Nor would any Man,
who wore not a Mask, tell me so! 
He took not the Challenge, and slid from me,
and I saw him no more that Night. 
So! thought I, another Instance this might have
been of the glorious Consequences of Masqueradeing. 
—O my Lady, these Masquerades are abominable
Things! 
The King, they said, met with a free Speaker
that Night: In Truth, I was not very sorry for it; 
for if Monarchs will lay aside their sovereign Distinctions,
and mingle thus in Masquerade with the
worst as well as the highest (I cannot say best) of
their Subjects, let 'em take the Consequence. — 
Perhaps they might have a Chance to hear more
Truth here than in their Palaces—the only Good
that possibly can accrue from them—that is to
say—if they make a good Use of it, when they
heard it. For, you see, my Monarch, tho' told
the Truth, as it happen'd, receiv'd the Hint with
more Resentment than Thankfulness! —So, 'tis
too likely, did the Monarch of us both. 

And now, my Lady, you need not doubt, that
so polite a Gentleman would find an Opportunity
to return the Nun her Handkerchief! —To be
sure he would: For what Man of Honour would
rob a Lady of any Part of her Apparel? And should
He that wanted to steal a Heart, content himself
with a Handkerchief? —No, no, that was not to
be expected. —So what does he do, but resolve,
the very next Day, after Dinner, the soonest Opportunity
he could well take, because of the late
Hours the Night before, to pursue this Affair! 
Accordingly, the poor Quaker little thinking of
the Matter, away goes her naughty Spaniard, to
find out his Nun at her Grate, or in her Parlour
rather. 
He asks for the Countess. Is admitted into the
outward Parlour—Her Woman comes down; 
requires his Name, and Business. His Name he
mention'd not. His Business was, to restore into
her Lady's own Hands, something she had dropp'd
the Night before. —Was desir'd to wait. 
I should have told your Ladyship, That he
was dress'd very richly—having no Design at all
to make Conquests; no, not he! —O this wicked
Love of Intrigue! —A kind of Olive-colour'd
Velvet, and fine brocaded Waistcoat. I said, when
he took Leave of me, You're a charming Mr. B.— 
and saluted him, more pressingly than he return'd
it; but little did I think, when I plaited so smooth
his rich-lac'd Ruffles, and Bosom, where he was
going, or what he had in his plotting Heart. — 
He went in his own Chariot, that he did: So that
he had no Design to conceal who he was—But
Intrigue, a new Conquest, Vanity, Pride! —O 

these Men! —They had need talk of Ladies! — 
But it is half our own Fault, indeed it is, to encourage
their Vanity. 
Well, Madam, he waited till his Stateliness
was moved to send up again, That he would wait
on her Ladyship some other Time. —So down she
came, dress'd most richly; Jewels in her Breast,
and in her Hair, and Ears—But with a very reserved
and stately Air—He approached her—Methinks
I see him, dear saucy Gentleman. You know,
Madam, what a noble manner of Address he has! 
He took the Handkerchief, from his Bosom, with
an Air; and kissing it, presented it to her, saying,
This happy Estray, thus restored, begs Leave, by
me, to acknowlege its lovely Owner! 
What mean you, Sir? —Who be you, Sir? — 
What mean you? 
Your Ladyship will excuse me: But I am incapable
of meaning any thing but what is honourable. 
—(No, to be sure!) —This, Madam, you left
last Night, when the Domine took up every one's
Attention but mine, which was much better engag'd; 
and I take the Liberty to restore it to you. 
She turn'd to the Mark; a Coronet, at one
Corner. 'Tis true, Sir, I see now it is one of
mine: But such a Trifle was not worthy of being
brought by such a Gentleman as you seem to be; 
nor of my Trouble to receive it in Person. Your
Servant, Sir, might have deliver'd the Bagatelle to
mine. 
Nothing should be called so, that belongs to
the Countess of&wblank; 
She was no Countess, Sir, that dropp'd that
Handkerchief; and a Gentleman would not attempt 

to penetrate, unbecomingly, through the Disguises
that a Lady thinks proper to assume; especially at
such a Place, where every Inquiry should begin and
end. 
This, Madam, from a Lady, who had unmasked
—because she would not be known! —Very
pretty, indeed! —Oh! these slight Cobweb Airs
of Modesty! so easily seen thro'—Hence such
Advantages against us are taken by the Men. 
She had looked out of her Window, and seen
no Arms quarter'd with his own; for you know,
my Lady, I would never permit any to be procured
for me: So, she doubted not, it seems, but he
was an unmarried Gentleman, as he had intimated
to her the Night before. 
He told her, it was impossible, after having had
the Opportunity of seeing the finest Lady in the
World, not to wish to see her again: and that he
hop'd, he did not, unbecomingly, break thro' her
Ladyship's Reserves: Nor had he made any Inquiries
either on the Spot, or off of it; having had a
much better Direction by Accident. 
As how, Sir? said she, as he told me, with
so bewitching an Air, between Attentive and Pleasant,
that, bold Gentleman, forgetting all manner
of Distance, so early too! he clasped his Arms
round her Waist, and saluted her, struggling with
Anger and Indignation, he says: But I think little
of that! 
Whence this Insolence? —How now, Sir! 
—Begone! were her Words, and she rung the
Bell; but he set his Back against the Door—(I
never heard such Boldness in my Life, Madam!)— 
till she would forgive him. —And it is plain, she 

was not so angry as she pretended; for her Woman
coming, she was calmer: Nelthorpe, said she,
fetch my Snuff-box, with the Lavender in it. 
Her Woman went; and then she said, You
told me, Sir, last Night, of your Intrepidness: I
think you are the boldest Man I ever met with:
But, Sir, surely you ought to know, that you are
not now in the Hay-market. 
I think, truly, Madam, the Lady might have
sav'd herself that Speech; for, upon my Word,
they neither of them wore Masks—Tho' they
ought both to have put on one of Blushes. —I am
sure I do for them, while I am writing. 
Her irresistible Loveliness serv'd for an Excuse,
that she could not disapprove from a Man she disliked
not; and his irresistible—may I say, Assurance,
Madam?—found too ready an Excuse. 
Well, but, Sir, said I, pray, when her Ladyship
was made acquainted, that you were a marry'd
Gentleman, how then? —I long to hear, how
then! —Pray, did she find it out, or did you tell
her? 
Patience, my Dear! 
Well, pray, Sir, go on. —What was next? 
Why, next, I put on a more respectful and tender
Air: I would have taken her Hand indeed, but
she would not permit it; and when she saw I would
not go, till her Lavender Snuff came down, (for so
I told her, and her Woman was not in Haste) she
seated herself; and I took my Place by her, and
began upon a Subject of a charming Lady I saw the
Night before, after I had parted with her Ladyship,
but not equal by any means to her: And I was
confident this would engage her Attention; for I 

never knew the Lady, who thought herself handsome,
that was not taken by this Topick. Flattery
and Admiration, Pamela, are the Two principal
Engines by which our Sex make their first Approaches
to yours; and if you listen to us, we are
sure, either by the Sap or the Mine, to succeed,
and blow you up, whenever we please, if we do
but take care to suit ourselves to your particular
Foibles; or, to carry on the Metaphor, point our
Batteries to your weak Side: For the strongest Fortresses,
my Dear, are weaker in one Place than another. 
—A fine thing, Sir, said I, to be so learned
a Gentleman! —I wish, however, thought I you
had always come honestly by your Knowlege. 
When the Lavender Snuff came down, continu'd
he, we were engaged in an agreeable Disputation,
which I had raised on purpose to excite her
Opposition, she having all the Advantage in it; 
and in order to my giving it up, when she was intent
upon it, as a Mark of my Consideration for her. 
I the less wonder, Sir, said I, at your Boldness
(pardon the Word!) with such a Lady, in your first
Visit, because of her Freedoms, when mask'd; 
her Unmasking, and her Handkerchief, and Lettercover. 
To be sure the Lady, when she saw, next
Day, such a fine Gentleman, and such an handsome
Equipage, had little Reason, after her other
Freedoms, to be so very nice with you, as to decline
an insnaring Conversation, calculated on purpose to
engage her Attention, and to lengthen out your
Visit. But did she not ask you, who you were? 
Her Servants did of mine. —And her Woman
(for I knew all afterwards, when we were better
acquainted) came, and whisper'd her Lady, that I 

was Mr. B. of Bedfordshire; and had an immense
Estate; to which they were so kind as to add two
or three thousand Pounds a Year, out of pureGood-will
to me: I thank them. 
But pray, dear Sir, what had you in View in
all this? Did you intend to carry this Matter at
first, as far as ever you could? 
I had, at first, my Dear, no View, but such as
Pride and Vanity suggested to me. I was carried
away by Inconsideration, and the Love of Intrigue,
without so much as giving myself any Thought about
the Consequences. The Lady, I observed, had
abundance of fine Qualities. I thought I could converse
with her, on a very agreeable Foot; and her
Honour, I knew, at any Time, would preserve me
mine, if ever I should find it in Danger: And, in
my Soul, I preferr'd my Pamela to all the Ladies
on Earth, and question'd not, but that, and your
Virtue, would be another Barrier to my Fidelity. 
As to the Notion of Polygamy, I never, but in
the Levity of Speech, and the Wantonness of Argument,
like other lively young Fellows, who think
they have Wit to shew, when they advance something
out of the common way, had it in my Head. 
I thought myself doubly bound by the Laws of my
Country, to discourage that way of Thinking, as I
was a Five hundredth Part of one of the Branches
of the Legislature; and, inconsiderable as that is, yet
it makes one too considerable, in my Opinion, to
break those Laws, one should rather join all one's
Interest to inforce. 
In a Word, therefore, Pride, Vanity, Thoughtlessness,
were my Misguiders, as I said. The Countess's
Honour and Character, and your Virtue and 

Merit, my Dear, and my Obligations to you, were
my Defences: But I find one should avoid the first
Appearances of Evil. One knows not one's own
Strength. 'Tis presumptuous to depend upon it,
where Wit and Beauty are in the Way on one Side,
and Youth and strong Passions on the other. 
You certainly, Sir, say right. But be pleased
to tell me, what her Ladyship said, when she knew
you were marry'd? 
The Countess's Woman was in my Interest, and
let me into some of her Lady's Secrets, having a
great Share in her Confidence; and particularly acquainted
me, how loth her Lady was to believe I
was marry'd. I had paid her Three Visits in Town,
and attended her once to her Seat upon the Forest,
before she heard that I was. But when she was,
assured of it, and directed her Nelthorpe to ask me
about it, and I readily own'd it, she was greatly incensed,
tho' nothing but general Civilities, and Intimacies
not inconsistent with honourable Friendship,
had passed between us. The Consequence was, she
forbad me ever seeing her again, and set out with
her Sister, and the Viscount, for Tunbridge, where
she stay'd about Three Weeks. 
I thought I had already gone too far, and
blam'd myself for permitting her Ladyship so long
to believe me a single Man; and here the Matter
had dropp'd, in all Probability, had not a Ball,
given by Lord—, to which, unknown to each
other, we were both, as also the Viscountess, invited,
brought us again into one another's Company. 
The Lady withdrew, after a while, with her Sister,
to another Apartment; and being resolved upon
personal Recrimination, (which is what a Lady, 

who is resolved to break with a favourite Object,
should never trust herself with) sent for me, and
reproached me on my Conduct, in which her Sister
join'd. 
I own'd frankly, that it was rather Gaiety than
Design, that made me give Cause, at the Masquerade,
for her Ladyship to think I was not marry'd; 
for that I had a Wife, who had a thousand Excellencies,
and was my Pride, and my Boast: That I
held it very possible for a Gentleman and Lady to
carry on an innocent and honourable Friendship, in
a Family way; and I was sure, when she and her
Sister saw my Spouse, they would not be displeased
with her Acquaintance; and all that I had to reproach
myself with, was, that after having, at the
Masquerade, given Reason to think I was not marry'd,
I had been loth, officiously, to say I was, altho'
it never was my Intention to conceal it. 
In short, I acquitted myself so well to both
Ladies, that a Family Intimacy was consented to. 
I renew'd my Visits, and we accounted to
one another's Honour, by entering upon a kind of
Platonick System, in which Sex was to have no
manner of Concern. 
But, my dear Pamela, I must own myself extremely
blameable, because I knew the World, and
human Nature, I will say, better than the Lady,
who never before had been trusted into it upon her
own Feet; and who, notwithstanding that Wit and
Vivacity which every one admires in her, gave herself
little Time for Consideration, as she had met
with a Man whose Person and Conversation she did
not dislike, and whose Circumstances and Spirit set
him above sordid or mercenary Views: And besides, 

I made myself useful to her in some of her
Affairs, wherein she had been grosly abused; which
brought us into more intimate and frequent Conversations,
than otherwise we should have had Opportunities for. 
I ought therefore to have more carefully guarded
against Inconveniences, which I knew were so likely
to arise from such Intimacies; and the rather, as I
hinted, because the Lady had no Apprehension at all
of any: So that, my Dear, if I have no Excuse
from human Frailty, from Youth, and the Charms
of the Object, I am intirely destitute of any. 
I see, Mr. B. said I, there is a great deal to be
said for the Lady. I wish I could say there was for
the Gentleman. But such a fine Lady had been
safe, with all her Inconsideration, and so, forgive
me, Sir, would the Gentleman, with all his intriguing
Spirit, had it not been for these vile Masquerades. 
Never, dear Sir, think of going to another. 
Why, my Dear, he was pleased to say, those are
least of all to be trusted at these Diversions, who
are most desirous to go to them. —Of this I am
now fully convinced. 
Well, Sir, I long to hear the further Particulars
of this Story: For this generous Openness, now
the Affair is over, cannot but be grateful to me, as
it shews me you have no Reserves; and as it tends
to convince me, that the Lady was less blameable
than I apprehended she was: For dearly do I love,
for the Honour of my Sex, to find Ladies of Birth
and Quality innocent; who have so many Opportunities
of knowing and practising their Duties, above
what meaner Persons can have—Else, while the
one fails thro' Surprize and Ignorance, it will look 

as if the others were faulty from Inclination: And
what a Disgrace is that upon the Sex in general? 
And what a Triumph to the wicked ones of yours? 
Well observed, my Dear: This is like your
generous and deep way of Thinking. 
Well, but, dear Sir, proceed, if you please. 
—Your Reconciliation is now effected: A Friendship
Quadrupartite is commenced. And the Viscountess
and myself are to find Cement for the
erecting of an Edifice, that is to be devoted to
Platonick Love. What, may I ask, came next? 
And what did you design should come of it? 
The Oxford Journey, my Dear, follow'd next:
and it was my Fault, that you were not a Party in
it: For both Ladies were very desirous of your Company:
But it being about the Time you were going
abroad, after your Lying-in, I excused you to them. 
Yet they both long'd to see you; especially, as by
this Time, you may believe, they knew all your
Story: And besides, whenever you were mention'd,
I always did Justice, as well to your Mind, as to
your Person; and this, not only for the Sake of
Justice, but, to say Truth, because it gave the Two
Sisters, and the Viscount, (whose softly Character,
and his Lady's prudent and respectful Conduct to
him, notwithstanding that, are both so well known)
less Cause of Suspicion, that I had any dishonourable
Designs upon the Dowager Lady. 
Miss Darnford will have it, permit me, my
good Lady, to observe, that I shall have some Merit,
with regard to the rest of my Sex, if I can be
a means to reform such a dangerous Spirit of Intrigue,
as that of your dear Brother: And the History 

of this Affair from his own Mouth, made me begin
to pride myself on this Head: For was he not, think
you, my Lady, in this Case, a sad Gentleman! — 
And how deeply was he able to lay his Mischiefs! 
And how much had this fine Lady been to be pity'd,
had she fallen by his Arts; as he was almost
the only Man, who, by reason of the Gracefulness
of his Person, his Generosity, Courage, ample Fortunes,
and Wit, could have made her unhappy! — 
God be praised, that it was stopt in Time, (altho',
as it seems, but just in Time) as well for the poor
Lady's sake, as for Mr. B.'s, and my own. 
Excuse me, Madam, for this Digression. But
yet, for what I am going to repeat, I shall want still
farther Excuse; for I cannot resist a little rising Vanity,
upon a Comparison (tho' only as to Features)
drawn by Mr. B. between the Countess and me; 
which, however the Preference he gives me in it may
be undeserv'd, yet it cannot but be very agreeable,
in this particular Case of a Rivalry, to one who
takes so much Pride in his good Opinion, and who
makes it her chief Study, by all honest and laudable
Means, to preserve it; but who, else, I hope, am
far from considering such a transitory Advantage,
(had I it in as great a Degree as his kind Fancy imputes
it to me) but as it deserves. I will give it, as
near as I can, in his own Words: 
It may not be altogether amiss, my Dear, now
I have mention'd the Justice I always did your Character
and Merit, to give you a brief Account of
a Comparison, which once the Countess's Curiosity
drew from me, between your Features and
hers. 

She and I were alone in the Bow-window of
her Library, which commands a fine View over
Windsor Forest, but which View we could not enjoy; 
for it rain'd, and blew a Hurricane almost,
which detain'd us within, altho' we were ready
dress'd to go abroad. 
I began a Subject, which never fails to make
the worst of Weather agreeable to a fine Lady; 
that of praising her Beauty, and the Symmetry of
her Features, telling her, how much I thought
every graceful one in her Face adorn'd the rest, as
if they were all form'd to give and receive Advantage
from each other. I added, approaching her,
as if the more attentively to peruse her fine Face,
that I believ'd it possible, from the transparent Whiteness
of her Skin, and the clear Blueness of her Veins,
to discover the Circulation, without a Microscope. 
Keep your Distance, Mr. B. said she. Does
your magnifying thus egregiously the Graces you
impute to my outward Form, agree with your Platonick
Scheme? Your Eye, penetrating as you imagine
it to be, pierces not deep enough for a Platonick,
if you cannot look farther than the White and the
Blue, and discover the Circulation of the Spirit; for
our Friendship is all Mind, you know. 
True, Madam; but if the Face is the Index
of the Mind, when I contemplare yours, I see and
revere the Beauties of both in one. And what Platonick
Laws forbid us to do Justice to the one,
when we admire the other? 
Well, sit you down, bold Mr. B. sit you
down, and answer me a Question or two on this
Subject, since you will be always raising my Vanity
upon it. 

I did, saluting her Hand only; that was his
Word, which I took Notice of in the dear Platonick,
tho' I said nothing. 
Tell me now of a Truth, with all the Charms
your too agreeable Flattery gives me, Which is the
most lovely, your Pamela, or myself? 
I told her, You were both incomparable, in a
different Way. 
Well, said she, I give up the Person and Ait
in general, because I have heard, that she is slenderer,
and better shap'd, than most Ladies; but for
a few Particulars, as to Face, (invidious as the Comparison
may be, and concern'd as you are to justify
your Choice) I'll begin with the Hair, Mr. B.
Whose Hair is of most Advantage to her Complexion? 
—Come, I fansy, I shall, at least, divide
Perfections with your Pamela. 
Your Ladyship's delicate light Brown is extremely
beautiful, and infinitely better becomes
your Complexion and Features, than would that
lovely shining Auburn, which suits best with my
Girl's. 
You must know, Pamela, I always called you
my Girl, to her, as I do frequently to yourself and
others. 
So she excels me there, I find! 
I don't say so: 
Well, but, as to the Forehead, Mr. B.? 
Indeed, Madam, my Girl has some Advantage,
I presume to think, in her Forehead: She
has a noble Openness and Freedom there, which
bespeaks her Mind, and every body's Favour, the
Moment she appears: Not but that your Ladyship's,
next to hers, is the finest I ever saw. 

So! —Next to hers! rubbing her Forehead,
—Well, Brows, Mr. B.? 
Your Ladyship's fine Arch-Brow is a Beauty in
your fair Face, that a Pencil cannot imitate; but
then your fairer Hair shews it not to that Advantage,
I must needs say, which her darker Hair gives
to hers; for, as to Complexion, you are both
so charmingly fair, that I cannot, for my Life, tell
to which to give the Preference. 
Well, well, foolish Man, said she, peevishly,
thou art strangely taken with thy Girl! —I wish
thou wouldst go about thy Business! —What signifies
a little bad Weather to Men? —But if her
Complexion is as good as mine, it must look better,
because of her dark Hair. —I shall come
poorly off, I find! —Let's have the Eyes, however. 
For black Eyes in my Girl, and blue in your
Ladyship, they are both the loveliest I ever beheld. 
—And, Pamela, I was wicked enough to
say, That it would be the sweetest Travelling in
the World, to have you both placed at Fifty Miles
Distance from each other, and to pass the Prime of
one's Life from Black to Blue, and from Blue to
Black; and it would be impossible to know which
to prefer, but the present. 
Ah! naughty Mr. B. said I, were you not worse
than the Countess a great deal? 
The Countess is not bad, my Dear. I only was
in Fault. 
But what, Sir, did she say to you? 
Say! why, the saucy Lady did what very few
Ladies have ever done: She made the Powder fly
out of my Wig, by a smart Cuff, with her nimble
Fingers. 

And how, Sir, did you take that? 
How, my Dear! —Why I kiss'd her in Revenge. 
Fine Doings between Two Platonicks! thought
I to myself. 
But I will own to you, Madam, that my Vanity,
in this Comparison, was too much soothed, not to
wish to hear how it was carried on. 
Well, Sir, did you proceed further in your
Comparison? 
I knew, my Dear, you would not let me finish
at half your Picture. —O Pamela—Who says,
you are absolutely perfect? Who says, there is no
Sex in your Mind? and tapp'd my Neck. 
All is owing, Sir, to the Pride I take in your
Opinion. I care not how indifferent I appear in the
Eyes of all the World besides. 
The Cheek came next, proceeded Mr. B.
I allow'd her Ladyship to have a livelier Carmine in
hers; and that it was somewhat rounder, her Ladyship
being a little plumper than my Girl; but that
your Face, my Dear, being rather smaller featur'd
of the two, there was an inimitably finer Turn in
your Cheek, than I had ever seen in my Life, in any
Lady's. 
Her Ladyship, he said, stroked her Cheekbones,
which, however, Madam, I think are far
from being high, (tho' to be sure, she is a little larger
featur'd; in excellent Proportion, for all that,
as she is of a taller and a larger Make than me) and
said, Very well, Sir; you are determin'd to mortify
me. But, added her Ladyship, (which shewed,
Madam, she little depended upon Platonicism in
him) if you have a View in this, you will be greatly 

mistaken, I'll assure you: For, let me tell you, Sir,
the Lady who can think meanly of herself, is any
Man's Purchase. 
The Nose I lest in doubt, said Mr. B. but
allow'd, that each were exquisitely beautiful on its
own proper Face. 
Her Ladyship was sure of a Preference in her
Mouth. I allow'd, that her Lips were somewhat
plumper—and, saluting her by Surprize,
(for which I had much ado to preserve my Wig
from another Disorder—) a little softer, of Consequence; 
but not quite so red—for, said I, I
never saw a Lip of so rich and balmy a Red in my
Life, as my Girl's. 
But your Smiles, Madam, are more bewitchingly
free and attractive; for my Girl is a little too
grave. 
As to Teeth, charming as your Ladyship's
are, I think hers not a whit inferior in Whiteness
and Regularity. 
Her Chin is a sweet Addition to her Face,
by that easy soft half Round, that looks as if Nature
had begun at Top, and gave that as her finishing
Stroke to the rest: While, my dear Lady, yours is
a little, little too strong-featur'd; but such as so infinitely
becomes your Face, that my Girl's Chin
would not have half the Beauty upon your Face. 
Her Ears, my Lady, are just such as your
own:—Must they not be beautiful then? Her
Neck, tho' it must not presume—let me see,
Madam, approaehing her—(Keep your Distance,
Sit. I was forc'd to do so)—tho' it must not
pretend to excel yours for Whiteness, yet, except
yours, did I never see any Neck so beautiful. But 

your Ladyship, it must be confess'd, being a little
plumper in Person, has the Advantage here. 
I had a smart Rap on my Knuckles with her
Fan. And she would hear no more. But was resolv'd
she would see you, she said. 
And, my Dear, I am the more particular in repeating
this comparative Description of the Two
charming'st Persons in England, because you will
see the Reason, (and that it was not to insult you,
as you rightly judg'd in your Letter to my Sister* ,
but to your Advantage) that I gave way to the Importunity
of the Countess to see you; for I little
thought you were so well acquainted with our Intimacy; 
much less, that we had been made more
intimate to you, than ever, in Truth, we were, or
perhaps, might have been: And when I asked you,
Why you were not more richly dress'd, and had not
your Jewels, you may believe, (as I had no Reason
to doubt, that the Countess would come in all her
Ornaments) I was not willing my Girl should give
way to the noble Emulatress in any thing; being
concern'd for your own Honour, as well as mine,
in the Superiority of Beauty I had so justly given
you. 
Well, Sir, to be sure, this was kind, very
kind; and little was I disposed (knowing what I
knew) to pass so favourable a Construction on what
now appears to be your Generosity to me. 
My Question to her Ladyship, continu'd Mr. B.
at going away, Whether you were not the charming'st
Girl in the World, which, seeing you together
at one View, rich as she was dress'd, and plain as
you, gave me the double Pleasure (a Pleasure she 

said afterwards I exuited in) of deciding in your
Favour; my Readiness to explain to you what we
both said, and her not ungenerous Answer, I thought
would have intitled me to a better Return than a
Flood of Tears; which confirm'd me, that your
past Uneasiness was a Jealousy I was not willing to
allow in you; tho' I should have been more indulgent
to it, had I known the Grounds you thought
you had for it: And this was the Reason of my
leaving you so abruptly as I did. 
Here, Madam, Mr. B. broke off, referring to
another time the Conclusion of his Narrative. And,
having written a great deal, I will here also close this
Letter (tho' possibly I may not send it, till I send
the Conclusion of this Story in my next) with the
Assurance that I am 
Your Ladyship's obliged Sister and Servant,
P. B. 

