


Sir Charles Grandison. In Continuation. 


Bologna, Monday, July 10-21.
I Had no call for rest last night. I only reposed
myself in a chair for about an hour. I sent early
in the morning a note, to enquire, with the tenderest
solicitude, after all their healths; and particularly
Clementina's and Jeronymo's. A written answer was
returned by Jeronymo, that his sister had rested so very
ill, that it was thought adviseable to keep her quiet
all day; unless she should be particularly earnest to
see me; and, in that case, they would send me word. 
I was myself very much indisposed; yet had a difficulty
to deny myself, tho' uninvited, to attend them
at dinner. My own disorder, however, determined
me not to go, unless sent for. It would, I thought,
be too visible to them all; and might raise a suspicion,
that I wanted to move compassion: A meanness of
which I am not capable. Yet, indisposed as I was, still
more, in the afternoon, I hoped to have an invitation
for half an hour. But not being sent to, I repeated my
enquiries in another billet. No invitation followed. 
On the contrary, Jeronymo wrote one line, wishing
to see me in the morning. 
I had as little rest last night, as the night before. 
My impatience carried me to the palace of Porretta
sooner than usual this morning. 
Signor Jeronymo rejoiced to see me. He hoped
I did not take amiss, that they invited me not the
day before. To say the truth, said he, the day's
rest was judged entirely necessary for you both: For
my sister particularly: And she was so uneasy and displeased
at your going away on Saturday, without taking
leave of her, that she was the more easily persuaded
not to see you yesterday. But already this 

morning, I understand, she asks after you with impatience. 
You are angry at her, she supposes, and will
never see her more. You had but just left us, on Saturday
night, when Camilla came down, with her
request to see you. For my part, proceeded he, my
thoughts are so much carried out of myself, by the
extraordinary turn she has taken, that, at times, I forget
I ail any-thing. 
He then asked, if I could forgive his sister; and reflected
on the Sex, on her account, as never knowing
their own minds, but when they meet with obstacles
to their wills. But she must, she will, be yours, my
Grandison, said he; and, if it please God to restore
her, she will make you rich amends. 
The Bishop and Father Marescotti came in, to
make their morning compliments to Jeronymo: The
Marquis and Count entered soon after, to salute me. 
The Marchioness followed them. Clementina was
so uneasy on Saturday night, said she to me, on finding
you gone without taking leave of her, and so
much discomposed all day yesterday, that I chose not
to say any-thing to her on the great article. I am
glad you are come. 
Somebody just then tapping at the door, Come in,
Camilla, said the Marchioness. 
It is not Camilla; it is I, said Lady Clementina, entering. 
I am told the Chevalier—O there he is—Favour
me, Sir, with a few words—walking to a
window at the other end of the room. 
I followed her: Tears were in her eyes. She
looked earnestly at me: Then turning her face from
me—Why, madam, said I, taking her hand, why
this emotion? I have not, I hope, offended you 
O Chevalier! I cannot bear to be slighted, and
least of all by you; though, I must own, that I deserve
it most from you. A slight from you is a charge
of ingratitude upon me, that my heart cannot bear. 
Slight you, madam! —I revere you, as the most 

excellent of women. You have, indeed, filled my
heart with anguish: But I admire you more for the
cause of that anguish, than it is possible for me to express. 
Don't, don't say so. You will ruin me by your
generosity. I think you must be angry with me. I
think you must treat me ill, or how shall I keep my
purpose? 
Your purpose, dearest madam! —Your purpose! 
My purpose! Yes, Sir! Will it afflict you, if I do? 
Is it possible, madam, but it must? What would
you think— 
Hush, hush, my good Chevalier. I am afraid it
will: But don't tell me it will. I cannot bear to afflict
you. 
When I had the honour of every one's consent,
madam— 
That was in compassion to me, Sir. 
My dearest Love, said the Marquis, coming to us,
that was at first our motive: But now an alliance
with the Chevalier Grandison, in justice to his merits,
is become our choice. 
I bowed to the generous nobleman. She kneeled. 
Best and most indulgent of fathers! taking his hand,
and kissing it; let me thank you for bearing with me
as you have done. What trouble have I given you! 
—All the business of my future life shall be to shew
my gratitude, and my obedience to your will. The
Marchioness then tenderly raising her, took her to
the farther end of the room. They talked low; but
we heard all they said. You were so very indifferent
all day yesterday, and last night, said the Marchioness,
that I would not disturb you, Love, for fear of breaking
your rest; else I would have told you, how desirous
now we all are, of an alliance with the Chevalier
Grandison. No other way can he be rewarded
for his goodness to us all. 
Permit me, madam, answered Clementina, to give 

you the motives of my present conduct; of my self-denial;
such is my value for the Chevalier, I will
call it so: If I thought I could make the generous
man happy; if I thought I should not rather punish
than reward him; if I thought I could be happy in
myself, and my soul would not be endangered; if I
thought I could make you and my papa happy, by
giving my hand to him; God knows that my heart
would not make the least scruple. But, madam, the
Almighty has laid his hand upon me. My head is
not yet as it should be; and, before I took my resolution,
I considered every-thing, as much as my poor
shattered reason would permit me to consider it. This
was the way I took—I prayed that God would direct
me. I put myself in the situation of another person,
who, circumstanced as I was, I supposed, came to me
for advice. I saw plainly, that I could not deserve the
Chevalier, because I could not think as he thought, in
the most important of all articles; and there was no
likelihood of his thinking as I thought. I prayed for
fortitude. I doubted myself. I altered and altered
what I had written: But still all my alterations ran
one way. It was against my own wishes. So this I
took for an answer to my prayers. I transcribed it
fair; but still I doubted myself. I would not consult
you, madam: You had declared for the Chevalier. 
That would not have been to do justice to the question
before me, and to the divine impulse by which I was
determined to be governed, if my prayers for it
should be answered. I let not Camilla know my
struggles. I besought the assistance of the Blessed Virgin
to favour an unhappy maid, whose heart was in
her duty, but whose head was disturbed. It was suggested
to me what to do: Yet I would not send to
the Chevalier what I had written. I still doubted my
heart: And thought I never should be able to give
him the paper. At last I resolved. But when he
came, my heart recoiled. He could not but see the 

distress I was in. I am sure I met with his pity. 
Could I but give him the paper, thought I, my difficulty
would be over; for then I am sure, almost sure,
that, seeing my scruples, and the rectitude of my purpose,
he will himself generously support me in my resolution. 
At last I gave the paper to him. And now
let me say, that I verily think I shall be easier in my
mind, if I can be allowed to adhere to the contents,
yet not be thought ungrateful. Dear blessed Grandison,
turning to me, read once more that paper: And
then if you will not, if you cannot, set me free; I
will obey my friends, and make you as happy as I
can. 
She turned from every one, and fell upon her kness,
Great God, I thank thee, said she, for this serene moment! 
Serene as the noble Enthusiast thought her mind, I
saw it was too high set. From the turn of her eyes
I feared a relapse. It was owing to her greatness of
mind, her reason and her love combating with each
other, that she ever was disordered. I approached her
—Admirable Lady, said I, be you free! Whatever be
my destiny, be you, for me, what you wish to be. If
you are well and happy, I will, if possible, make myself
so. 
Dear Grandison, said the Bishop, coming up to
me, and taking my hand, how do I admire you! But
can you be thus great? 
Shall I not emulate, my Lord, such an example
set by a woman? I came over without any interested
views. I considered myself, indeed, as bound by the
conditions to which I had formerly yielded; but Lady
Clementina and your family as free. When I was
encouraged to hope, I did hope. I will now, though
with deep regret, go back to my former situation. If
Lady Clementina persists in her present resolution, I
will endeavour to acquiesce with it. If she should
change her mind, I will hold myself in readiness to 

receive her hand, as the greatest blessing that can be
conferred upon me. Only let me add, that in the
first case, the difficulty upon me will be greatly increased,
by the exalted contents of the paper she put
into my hands on Saturday. 
The Marchioness taking her daughter's hand and
mine—Why, why, said she, should minds thus pair'd
be sunder'd? —And will you, Chevalier, wait with
patience the result of my sweet child's—Caprice— 
shall I call it? 
Detain not my hand, my dear mamma; withdrawing
it a little wildly—Let me go up, and pray, that
my fortitude of mind, after the pain it has cost me to
obtain it, may not forsake me. Adieu! Adieu, Chevalier! 
I will pray for you as well as for myself. Never,
never, in my devotions, will we be separated. 
Away flew the angel. 
She met Camilla in the passage—Dear Camilla! I
have had an escape, as far as I know. My hand and
the Chevalier's hand, each in one of my mamma's! 
—My resolution was in danger. My mamma might
have joined them, you know; and then I must have
been his. 
Jeronymo in silence, but tears in his eyes, attended
to the scene between his sister and me. He embraced
me—Dearest of men, let me repeat my mother's
question: Can you with patience wait the result of
this dear girl's caprice? 
I can; I will. 
But I will talk to her myself, said he. 
So, said the Marquis, will we all. 
It will be right to do so, added the Count, lest she
should repent when it is too late. 
But I believe, said Father Marescotti, the Chevalier
himself would not wish, that Lady Clementina should
be too vehemently urged. She pleads her soul: A
strong plea: A plea that should not be over-ruled. 
I myself doubt very much, whether she will be able 

to adhere to her resolution: If she be, she will merit
Beatification. But let her not be over-persuaded. 
Once more I should be glad to read the paper, the contents
of which have so much surprised us all. 
I had it in my pocket; and he asked permission to
read it aloud. Jeronymo opposed his motion: But
the Bishop approving it, he read it. He laid great
emphasis upon particular words, and repeated several
of the passages in it: You will easily guess which,
my dear friend; and all were as much affected, they
owned, as when they heard it first read: Yet they
joined in one doubt, notwithstanding what she had so
lately said of the deliberation she had given her purpose,
that she would not be able to adhere to her resolution; 
and made me many compliments on the occasion. 
But, my dear friend, if she can continue to interest
her glory in the adherence, and they are not very urgent
with her in my favour, I am inclined to believe,
that she has greatness of mind sufficient to enable
her to carry her resolution into effect. Where
piety, my dear friend, engages the heart to give up
its first fervors to its superior duties, is it not probable
that all temporal impulses should receive abatement,
and become but secondary ones? And now will not
Father Marescotti once more try to revive his influences
over her mind? —Is it not his duty to do so, zealous
Catholic as he is? Can the Bishop refuse, good man
as he is, and as steady in his principles, to second the
Father? 
But what trials are these, my dear Dr. Bartlett, to
an expecting heart! —Will they not serve to convince
us of the vanity of all human reliance for happiness? 
I am in a very serious humour. But what can I say
to you on such subjects, that you knew not much better
before than I? “Let us, I remember you once
said, when we are called upon to act a great or
manly part, preach by action. Words then will 

be needless.” God only knows, whether the ardent
heart would be punished or rewarded, by the
completion of its wishes: But this I know, that were
Clementina to give me both her hand and her heart,
and could not, by reason of religious doubts, be
happy with me, I should myself be extremely miserable; 
especially if I had been earnest to prevail upon
her to favour me against her judgment. 

