



My dear Father and Mother,
I write again, tho', may-be, I shall bring
it to you in my Pocket; for I shall have no
Writing, nor Writing-time, I hope, when I
come to you. This is Wednesday Morning,
and I shall, I hope, set out to you to-morrow
Morning; but I have had more Trials, and
more Vexation; but of another Complexion
too a little, tho' all from the same Quarter. 
Yesterday my Master, after he came
from Hunting, sent for me. I went with great
Terror; for I expected he would storm, and be
in a fine Passion with me for my Freedom of
Speech before: So I was resolv'd to begin first,
with Submission, to disarm his Anger; and I 

fell upon my Knees as soon as I saw him; and
said, Good Sir, let me beseech you, as you hope
to be forgiven yourself, and for the sake of my
dear good Lady your Mother, who recommended
me to you with her last Words, to forgive
me all my Faults: And only grant me this
Favour, the last I shall ask you, that you will
let me depart your House with Peace and
Quietness of Mind, that I may take such a
Leave of my dear Fellow-servants as befits
me; and that my Heart be not quite broken. 
He took me up, in a kinder manner, than
ever I had known; and he said, Shut the
Door, Pamela, and come to me in my Closet:
I want to have a little serious Talk with you. 
How can I, Sir, said I, how can I? and wrung
my Hands. O pray, Sir, let me go out of
your Presence, I beseech you. By the G&sblank;&sblank;d that
made me, said he, I'll do you no Harm. Shut
the Parlour-door, and come to me in my Library. 
He then went into his Closet, which is his
Library, and full of rich Pictures besides; a
noble Apartment, tho' call'd a Closet, and next
the private Garden, into which it has a Door
that opens. I shut the Parlour-door, as he bid
me; but stood at it irresolute. Place some
Confidence in me, said he: Surely you may,
when I have spoken thus solemnly. So I crept
towards him with trembling Feet, and my
Heart throbbing thro' my Handkerchief. Come
in, said he, when I bid you. I did so. Pray,
Sir, said I, pity and spare me. I will, said he, 

as I hope to be sav'd. He sat down upon a
rich Settee; and took hold of my Hand, and
said, Don't doubt me, Pamela. From this
Moment I will no more consider you as my
Servant; and I desire you'll not use me with
Ingratitude for the Kindness I am going to express
towards you. This a little embolden'd
me; and he said, holding both my Hands between
his, You have too much Wit and good
Sense not to discover, that I, in spite of my
Heart, and all the Pride of it, cannot but love
you. Yes, look up to me, my sweet-fac'd
Girl! I must say I love you; and have put on
a Behaviour to you, that was much against my
Heart, in hopes to frighten you from your Reservedness. 
You see I own it ingenuously; and
don't play your Sex upon me for it. 
I was unable to speak; and he, seeing me
too much oppress'd with Confusion to go on
in that Strain, said, Well, Pamela, let me
know in what Situation of Life is your Father:
I know he is a poor Man; but is he as low and
as honest, as he was when my Mother took
you? 
Then I could speak a little; and with a
down Look, (and I felt my Face glow like
Fire) I said, Yes, Sir, as poor and as honest too,
and that is my Pride. Says he, I will do
something for him, if it be not your Fault,
and make all your Family happy. Ah! Sir,
said I, he is happier already than ever he can
be, if his Daughter's Innocence is to be the
Price of your Favour. And I beg you will not 

speak to me on the only Side that can wound
me. I have no Design of that sort, said he. 
O Sir, said I, tell me not so, tell me not so! 
—'Tis easy, said he, for me to be the Making
of your Father, without injuring you. Well,
Sir, said I, if this can be done, let me know
how; and all I can do with Innocence shall
be the Study and Practice of my Life. —But
Oh! what can such a poor Creature as I do,
and do my Duty? —Said he, I would have you
stay a Week or a Fortnight only, and behave
yourself with Kindness to me: I stoop to beg it
of you, and you shall see all shall turn out beyond
your Expectation. I see, said he, you are
going to answer otherwise than I would have
you; and I begin to be vex'd I should thus
meanly sue; and so I will say, that your Behaviour
before honest Longman, when I used
you as I did, and you could so well have vindicated
yourself, has quite charm'd me. And
tho' I am not pleased with all you said Yesterday,
while I was in the Closet, yet you have
mov'd me more to admire you than before; 
and I am awaken'd to see more Worthiness in
you, than ever I saw in any Lady in the World. 
All the Servants, from the highest to the lowest,
doat upon you, instead of envying you; 
and look upon you in so superior a Light, as
speaks what you ought to be. I have seen
more of your Letters than you imagine, (This
surpris'd me!) and am quite overcome with
your charming manner of Writing, so free, so
easy, and many of your Sentiments so much 

above your Years, and your Sex; and all put
together, makes me, as I tell you, love you to
Extravagance. Now, Pamela, when I have
stoop'd to acknowledge all this, oblige me only
to stay another Week or Fortnight, to give me
time to bring about some certain Affairs; and
you shall see how much you may find your Account
in it. 
I trembled to feel my poor Heart giving
way. —O good Sir, said I, spare a poor Maiden,
that cannot look up to you, and speak. My
Heart is full: And why should you wish to undo
me? –––Only oblige me, said he, in staying a Fortnight
longer, and John shall carry Word to
your Father, that I will see him in the Time,
either here, or at the Swan in his Village. O
Sir, said I, my Heart will burst; but on my
bended Knees, I beg you to let me go To-morrow,
as I designed: and don't offer to tempt a
poor Creature, whose whole Will would be to
do yours, if my Virtue would permit. —It
shall permit it, said he; for I intend no Injury
to you, God is my Witness! —Impossible!
said I; I cannot, Sir, believe you, after what
has passed: How many ways are there to undo
poor Creatures! Good God, protect me this
one Time, and send me but to my dear Father's
Cot in Safety! —Strange, damn'd Fate, says
he, that when I speak so solemnly, I can't be
believ'd! –––What should I believe, Sir? return'd
I; what can I believe? What have you said, but
that I am to stay a Fortnight longer? and what
then is to become of me? —My Pride of Birth 

and Fortune (damn them both! said he, since
they cannot obtain Credit with you, but must
add to your Suspicions) will not let me descend,
all at once; and I ask you but a Fortnight's Stay,
that, after this Declaration, I may pacify those
proud Demands upon me. 
O how my Heart throbb'd! and I began (for
I did not know what I did) to say the Lord's
Prayer. None of your Beads to me, Pamela,
said he; thou art a perfect Nun, I think. 
But I said aloud, with my Eyes lifted up
to Heaven, Lead me not into Temptation; but
deliver me from Evil, O my good God! He
hugg'd me in his Arms, and said, Well, my
dear Girl, then you stay this Fortnight, and you
shall see what I will do for you. —I'll leave you
a Moment, and walk into the next Room, to
give you time to think of it, and to shew you
I have no Design upon you. Well, this, I
thought, did not look amiss. 
He went out, and I was tortur'd with Twenty
different Doubts in a Minute: Sometimes I
thought, that to stay a Week or Fortnight
longer in this House to obey him, while Mrs.
Jervis was with me, could do no great Harm:
But then, thought I, how do I know what I
may be able to do? I have withstood his Anger;
but may I not relent at his Kindness? —How
shall I stand that! —Well, I hope, thought I,
by the same protecting Grace, in which I will
always confide! —But then, what has he promised? 
Why he will make my poor Father and 

Mother's Life comfortable. O! said I to my
self, that is a rich Thought; but let me not
dwell upon it, for fear I should indulge it to
my Ruin. —What can he do for me, poor
Girl as I am! —What can his Greatness stoop
to! He talks, thought I, of his Pride of Heart,
and Pride of Condition! O these are in his
Head, and in his Heart too, or he would not
confess them to me at such an Instant. Well
then, thought I, this can be only to seduce me! 
—He has promis'd nothing. —But I am to see
what he will do, if I stay a Fortnight; and this
Fortnight, thought I again, is no such great Matter; 
and I shall see in a few Days, how he carries it. 
—But then, when I again reflected upon the Distance
between him and me, and his now open
Declaration of Love, as he call'd it; and that
after this, he would talk with me on that Subject
more plainly than ever, and I should be
less arm'd, may-be, to withstand him; and then
I bethought myself, why, if he meant no
Dishonour, he should not speak before Mrs.
Jervis; and the odious frightful Closet came
again into my Head, and my narrow Escape
upon it; and how easy it might be for him to
send Mrs. Jervis and the Maids out of the
Way; and so that all the Mischief he design'd
me might be brought about in less than that
Time; I resolv'd to go away, and trust all to
Providence, and nothing to myself. And how
ought I to be thankful for this Resolution! — 
as you shall hear. 

But just as I have writ to this Place, John
sends me Word, that he is going this Minute
your Way; and so I will send so far as I have
written, and hope, by to-morrow Night, to
ask your Blessings, at your own poor, but
happy Abode, and tell you the rest by Word of
Mouth; and so I rest, till then, and for ever, 
Your dutiful Daughter. 

