


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Thursday, March 22. 
Nothing decisive yet, my dear grandmamma. 
There have been some generous contentions
between the family and Sir Charles. He has besought
them to make their hearts easy, and he will comply
with all their reasonable desires. 
They think not of dining with, or visiting us, till
they can hear some tidings of their beloved daughter. 
Lord G. Lord L. and Lady L. as also Mrs. Eleanor
Grandison, have been presented to them. 
Sir Charles has begun to enter into treaty, as I may
call it, with the Lady on one part, her Family on
the second, and the Count of Belvedere on the third. 
Lady Clementina, it seems, insists upon being allowed
to take the veil; and that in a manner that sometimes
carries wildness with it. The Bishop, Sir Charles
thinks, seems less fervent in his opposition to it, than
formerly. Father Marescotti, in his heart, he believes,
favours her wishes. But the Marquis and
Marchioness, and Signor Jeronymo, plead their own
inclinations, their Son the General's unabated fervor, 

in behalf of the marriage, were it but to secure the
performance of the grandfathers will, and to be an
effectual disappointment of the interested hopes of
Lady Sforza and her daughter Laurana. The Count
of Belvedere's passion for the Lady (notwithstanding
her unhappy malady past, and apprehended) makes a
great merit for him with the family; and the two
young Lords think so highly of him for his perseverance,
that they are attached to his interest; and declare,
that the Conte della Porretta their father is as
strongly on the same side as the General himself. 
In the mean time, the fond mother is so impatient
to see her daughter, that they are afraid of the consequences,
as to health both of mind and body, if a
speedy determination be not come to: On the other
hand, the young Lady grieves to find herself, as she says,
in such a situation, as to be obliged to insist on conditions
with her parents, before she can throw herself
at their feet; which she longs to do, tho' she dreads
to see them. Sometimes (and they are when she is
calmest) she blames herself for the step she has taken; 
at others, she endeavours to find excuses for it. 
Sunday morning, Mar. 25. 
Sir Charles has drawn up a paper at the request of
all parties. He last night gave a copy of it to the
Lady; another to the Count; a third to the Bishop; 
for them all to consider of the contents; and he will
attend them to-morrow for their answer. He has
been pleased to give me also a copy of it; which is as
follows: 

I. That Lady Clementina, in obedience to the
will of her two deceased grandfathers, in duty to
her parents and uncle, and in compliance with
the earnest supplications of the most affectionate
of brothers, shall engage her honour to give up
all thoughts of withdrawing from the world, 

not only for the present, but for all future time,
so long as she shall remain in her maiden state. 
II. She shall be at liberty to choose her way of
Life; and shall be allowed, at her own pleasure,
to visit her Brother and his Lady at Naples; her
Uncle at Urbino; Mrs. Beaumont at Florence; 
and be put into the immediate perception of the
profits of the estate bequeathed to her, if she
chooses it; that she may be enabled to do that
extensive good with the produce, that she could
not do, were she to renounce the world; in
which case, that estate would devolve to one,
who, it is but too probable, would make a very
different use of it. 
III. She shall have the liberty of nominating her
own attendants; and in case of death, or removal
by promotion, of Father Marescotti (whose
merits must at last render him conspicuous) to
choose her own confessor: But that her Father
and Mother shall have their negative preserved to
them, in either case, while she continues in their
palace: Nor will the dear Lady think this a
hardship; for she wishes not to be independent
on parents, of whose indulgent goodness to her
she is most dutifully sensible; and it is reasonable,
that they should be judges of the conduct of every
one who is to be a domestic in their family. 
IV. As Lady Clementina, from some late unhappy
circumstances, thinks she cannot marry any
man; and as a late extraordinary step taken by
her, has shewn, that there is at present too
much reason to attend to the weight of her plea; 
it is hoped, that the Count of Belvedere, for
his own sake; for the sake of the composure of
mind of the Lady so dear to all who have the
honour of knowing her; will resolve to discontinue
his addresses to her, and engage never to
think of resuming them, unless some hopes 

should arise, in course of time, of his succeeding
in her favour by her own consent. 
V. Her ever-honoured parents, for themselves and
for their absent brother the Count of Porretta; 
her right reverend brother for himself, and, as
far as he may, for his elder brother; Signor Jeronymo
for himself; will be so good as to promise,
that they will never with earnestness endeavour
to persuade, much less to compel, Lady
Clementina to marry any man whatever; nor
encourage her Camilla, or any other friend or
confident, to endeavour to prevail upon her to
change her condition: Her parents, however,
reserving to themselves the right of proposing,
as they shall think fit, but not of urging; because
the young Lady, who is by nature sweet-tempered,
gentle, obliging, dutiful, thinks herself
(however determined by inclination) less able
to withstand the persuasions of indulgent friends,
than she should be to resist the most despotic
commands. 
VI. These terms conceded to, on all sides, it is
humbly proposed, that the young Lady shall
throw herself (as she is impatient to do) at the
feet of her indulgent parents; and that all acts
of disobligation shall be buried in everlasting oblivion. 
The proposer of the above six articles takes the
liberty to add, on the presumption that they
may be carried into effect, that his noble guests
will allow him to rejoice with them on their
mutual happiness restored, for months to come,
in his native country. 
He hopes that they will accept of his endeavours
to make England as agreeable to them, as they
heretofore made Italy to him. 
He begs that they will consider their family and his, 

as one family, ever to be united by the indissoluble
ties of true friendly Love. 
He hopes for their company at his country seat. 
He will seek for opportunities to oblige and accommodate
them in every article, whether devotional
or domestic. 
And when they will be no longer prevailed upon
to stay in England, he will (no accidents, no
events, preventing, of which themselves shall be
judges) attend them to Italy; and if his beloved
Wife and Sisters, and their Lords, shall have
made to themselves, as he hopes they will, an
interest in their affections, he questions not to
prevail on them to be of the party. 
Ch. Grandison. 
Monday morn. ten o'clock. 
Sir Charles is gone to attend the Count at his Lodgings,
in pursuance of his request signified by a note
last night. 
Two o'clock. 
The following Billet is just now brought me. 

My dearest Love will have the goodness to excuse
my dining with her this day. Signor Marsigli,
and her Ever-devoted, are hastening to Grosvenor-Square;
where we shall dine. This worthy nobleman
deserves pity. Adieu, my dearest Life! 
Ch. Grandison. 

I am all impatience for the issue of these conferences:
But I will not dine by myself, when I can sit
down at table with Lady L. and Lady Clementina at
Lord L's—and with my Lord himself, so much my
brother and friend. Here therefore will I close this
Letter. Forgive, my ever-honoured grandmamma,
the abruptness of 
Your ever-dutiful
Harriet Grandison. 
