


My Master came up, and, in a pleasanter manner
than I expected, said, So, Pamela, we
have seized, it seems, your treasonable Papers? 
Treasonable? said I, very sullenly. Ay, said he, I
suppose so; for you are a great Plotter; but I have
not read them yet. 
Then, Sir, said I, very gravely, it will be truly
honourable in you not to read them; but give them
to me again. Whom, says he, are they written to? — 
To my Father, Sir, said I; but I suppose you see
to whom. —Indeed, return'd he, I have not read three
Lines as yet. Then pray, Sir, said I, don't read
them; but give them to me again. No, that I
won't, said he, till I have read them. Sir, said I,
you serv'd me not well in the Letters I used to write
formerly; I think it was not worthy your Character
to contrive to get them into your Hands, by that
false John Arnold; for should such a Gentleman as
you, mind what your poor Servant writes? — Yes,
said he, by all means, mind what such a Servant as
my Pamela writes. 
Your Pamela! thought I. Then the sham Marriage
came into my Head; and indeed it has not been
out of it, since the Gypsey's Affair. — But, said he,
have you any thing in these Papers you would not
have me see? To be sure, Sir, said I, there is; for
what one writes to one's Father and Mother is not
for every body. Nor, said he, am I every body. 
Those Letters, added he, that I did see by John's
Means, were not to your Disadvantage, I'll assure
you; for they gave me a very high Opinion of your
Wit and Innocence: And if I had not loved you,
do you think I would have troubled myself about
your Letters? 
Alas! Sir, said I, great Pride to me that! For
they gave you such an Opinion of my Innocence,
that you was resolved to ruin me. And what Advantage
have they brought me? —Who have been
made a Prisoner, and used as I have been between
you and your House-keeper? 
Why, Pamela, said he, a little serious, why this
Behaviour, for my Goodness to you in the Garden? 
—This is not of a Piece with your Conduct and
Softness there, that quite charm'd me in your Favour: 
And you must not give me Cause to think,
that you will be the more insolent, as you find me
kinder. Ah! Sir, said I, you know best your own
Heart and Designs! But I fear I was too openhearted
then; and that you still keep your Resolution
to undo me, and have only changed the Form
of your Proceedings. 
When I tell you once again, said he, a little sternly,
that you cannot oblige me more, than by placing
some Confidence in me, I will let you know, that
these foolish and perverse Doubts are the worst
things you can be guilty of. But, said he, I shall
possibly account for the Cause of them, in these Papers
of yours; for I doubt not you have been sincere
to your Father and Mother, tho' you begin to
make me suspect you: For I tell you, perverse Girl,
that it is impossible you should be thus cold and insensible,
aster what last passed in the Garden, if you
were not prepossessed in some other Person's Favour. 
And let me add, that if I find it so, it shall be attended
with such Effects, as will make every Vein
in your Heart bleed. 
He was going away in Wrath; and I said, One
Word, good Sir, one Word, before you read them,
since you will read them: Pray make Allowances for
all the harsh Reflections that you will find in them,
on your own Conduct to me: And remember only, 
that they were not written for your Sight; and were
penn'd by a poor Creature hardly used, and who was
in constant Apprehension of receiving from you
the worst Treatment that you could inflict upon
her. 
If that be all, said he, and there be nothing of
another Nature, that I cannot forgive, you have no
Cause for Uneasiness; for I had as many Instances
of your sawcy Reflections upon me in your former
Letters, as there were Lines; and yet, you see, I
have never upbraided you on that Score; tho', perhaps,
I wished you had been more sparing of your
Epithets, and your Freedoms of that Sort. 
Well, Sir, said I, since you will, you must read
them; and I think I have no Reason to be afraid
of being found insincere, or having, in any respect,
told you a Falsehood; because, tho' I don't remember
all I wrote, yet I know I wrote my Heart; and
that is not deceitful. And remember, Sir, another
thing, that I always declared I thought myself right
to endeavour to make my Escape from this forced
and illegal Restraint; and so you must not be angry
that I would have done so, if I could. 
I'll judge you, never fear, said he, as favourably
as you deserve; for you have too powerful a Pleader
for you within me. And so went down Stairs. 
About nine o'Clock he sent for me down in the
Parlour. I went a little fearfully; and he held the
Papers in his Hand, and said, Now, Pamela, you
come upon your Trial. Said I, I hope I have a
just Judge to hear my Cause. Ay, said he, and you
may hope for a merciful one too, or else I know
not what will become of you. 
I expect, continu'd he, that you will answer me
directly, and plainly, to every Question I shall ask
you. —In the first Place, Here are several Love-letters 
between you and Williams. Love-letters! Sir, said
I. —Well, call them what you will, said he, I don't
intirely like them, I'll assure you, with all the Allowances
you desired me to make for you. Do you
find, Sir, said I, that I encouraged his Proposal, or
do you not? Why, said he, you discourage his Address
in Appearance; but no otherwise than all
your cunning Sex do to ours, to make us more
eager in pursuing you. 
Well, Sir, said I, that is your Comment; but it
does not appear so in the Text. Smartly said! says
he; where a D&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;l, gottest thou, at these Years, all
this Knowledge; and then thou hast a Memory, as
I see by your Papers, that nothing escapes it. Alas! 
Sir, said I, what poor Abilities I have, serve only to
make me more miserable! ––– I have no Pleasure in
my Memory, which impresses things upon me, that
I could be glad never were, or everlastingly to forget. 
Well, said he, so much for that; but where are
the Accounts, (since you have kept so exact a Journal
of all that has befallen you) previous to these here
in my Hand? My Father has them, Sir, said I. ––– 
By whose Means, said he? —By Mr. Williams's, said
I. Well answered, said he. But cannot you contrive
to get me a Sight of them? That would be
pretty, said I. I wish I could have contrived to
have kept those you have from your Sight. Said
he, I must see them, Pamela, or I shall never be
easy: For I must know how this Correspondence,
between you and Williams, begun: And if I can
see them, it shall be better for you, if they answer
what these give me Hope they will. 
I can tell you, Sir, very faithfully, said I, what
the Beginning was; for I was bold enough to be the
Beginner. That won't do, said he; for tho' this may
appear a Punctilio to you; to me it is of high Importance. 
Sir, said I, if you please to let me go 
to my Father, I will send them to you by any Messenger
you shall send for them. Will you so? said
he. But I dare say, if you will write for them, they
will send them to you, without the Trouble of such
a Journey to yourself. And I beg you will. 
I think, Sir, said I, as you have seen all my former
Letters, thro' John's Baseness, and now these,
thro' your faithful Housekeeper's officious Watchfulness,
you might see all the rest. But I hope you
will not desire it, till I can see how much my pleasing
you in this Particular, will be of Use to myself. 
You must trust to my Honour for that. But tell
me, Pamela, said the sly Gentleman, since I have
seen these, Would you have voluntarily shewn me
those, had they been in your Possession? 
I was not aware of his Inference, and said, Yes,
truly, Sir, I think I should, if you commanded it. 
Well, then, Pamela, said he, as I am sure you have
found means to continue your Journal, I desire, while
the former Part can come, that you will shew me
the succeeding? —O, Sir, Sir, said I, have you caught
me so! —But indeed you must excuse me there. 
Why, said he, tell me truly, Have you not continued
your Account till now? Don't ask me, Sir,
said I. But I insist upon your Answer, reply'd he. 
Why then, Sir, said I, I will not tell an Untruth; I
have. —That's my good Girl! said he. I love Sincerity
at my Heart. —In another, Sir, said I, I presume,
you mean! — Well, said he, I'll allow you to
be a little witty upon me; because it is in you, and
you cannot help it. But you will greatly oblige me,
to shew me, voluntarily, what you have written. I
long to see the Particulars of your Plot, and your
Disappointment, where your Papers leave off. For
you have so beautiful a manner, that it is partly that,
and partly my Love for you, that has made me desirous
of reading all you write; tho' a great deal of 
it is against myself; for which you must expect to
suffer a little. And as I have furnished you with the
Subject, I have a Title to see the Fruits of your Pen. ––– 
Besides, said he, there is such a pretty Air of Romance,
as you relate them, in your Plots, and my
Plots, that I shall be better directed in what manner
to wind up the Catastrophe of the pretty Novel. 
If I was your Equal, Sir, said I, I should say this
is a very provoking way of jeering at the Misfortunes
you have brought upon me. 
O, said he, the Liberties you have taken with my
Character, in your Letters, set us upon a Par, at
least, in that respect. Sir, reply'd I, I could not have
taken these Liberties, if you had not given me the
Cause: And the Cause, Sir, you know, is before the
Effect. 
True, Pamela, said he; you chop Logick very
prettily. What the Duce do we Men go to School
for? If our Wits were equal to Womens, we might
spare much Time and Pains in our Education. For
Nature learns your Sex, what, in a long Course of
Labour and Study, ours can hardly attain to. —But
indeed, every Lady is not a Pamela. 
You delight to banter your poor Servant, said I. 
Nay, continued he, I believe I must assume to myself
half the Merit of your Wit, too; for the innocent
Exercises you have had for it from me, have certainly
sharpen'd your Invention. 
Sir, said I, could I have been without those innocent
Exercises, as you are pleased to call them, I
should have been glad to have been as dull as a
Beetle. But then, Pamela, said he, I should not have
lov'd you so well. But then, Sir, reply'd I, I should
have been safe, easy, and happy—Ay, may-be so,
and may-be not; and the Wife too of some clouterly
Plough-boy. 
But then, Sir, I should have been content and
innocent; and that's better than being a Princess,
and not so. And may-be not, said he; for if you
had had that pretty Face, some of us keen Foxhunters
should have found you out; and, spite of
your romantick Notions, (which then too, perhaps,
would not have had such strong Place in your
Mind) would have been more happy with the
Ploughman's Wife, than I have been with my Mother's
Pamela. I hope, Sir, said I, God would have
given me more Grace. 
Well, but, resum'd he, as to these Writings of yours,
that follow your fine Plot, I must see them. Indeed,
Sir, you must not, if I can help it. Nothing,
said he, pleases me better, than that, in all your Arts,
Shifts and Stratagems, you have had a great Regard
to Truth; and have, in all your little Pieces of Deceit,
told very few wilful Fibs. Now I expect you'll
continue this laudable Rule in your Conversation
with me. —Let me know then, where you have
found Supplies of Pen, Ink, and Paper; when Mrs.
Jewkes was so vigilant, and gave you but two Sheets
at a Time? —Tell me Truth. 
Why, Sir, little did I think I should have such
Occasion for them; but, when I went away from
your House, I begg'd some of each of good Mr.
Longman, who gave me Plenty. Yes, yes, said he,
It must be good Mr. Longman! All your Confederates
are good, every one of them: But such of my Servants
as have done their Duty, and obey'd my Orders,
are painted out, by you, as black as Devils; 
nay, so am I too, for that matter. 
Sir, said I, I hope you won't be angry; but, saving
yourself, do you think they are painted worse than
they deserve? or worse than the Parts they acted
require? 
You say, saving myself, Pamela; but is not that
Saving a mere Compliment to me, because I am
present, and you are in my Hands? Tell me truly. 
—Good Sir, excuse me; but I fansy I may ask you,
Why you should think so, if there was not a little bit
of Conscience that told you, there was but too
much Reason for it? 
He kissed me, and said, I must either do thus, or
be angry with you; for you are very sawcy, Pamela. 
—But, with your bewitching Chit-chat, and pretty
Impertinence, I will not lose my Question. Where
did you hide your Paper, Pens and Ink? 
Some, Sir, in one Place, some in another; that I
might have some left, if others should be found. ––– 
That's a good Girl! said he. I love you for your sweet
Veracity. Now tell me where it is you hide your
Written-papers, your sawcy Journal? —I must beg
your Excuse for that, Sir, said I. But indeed, answer'd
he, you will not have it; for I will know, and
I will see them! —This is very hard, Sir, said I; but
I must say, you shall not, if I can help it. 
We were standing most of this Time; but he
then sat down, and took me by both my Hands,
and said, Well said, my pretty Pamela, if you can
help it: But I will not let you help it. Tell me,
Are they in your Pocket? No, Sir, said I, my Heart
up at my Mouth. Said he, I know you won't
tell a downright Fib for the World; but for Equivocation! 
no Jesuit ever went beyond you. Answer
me then, Are they in neither of your Pockets? 
No, Sir, said I. Are they not, said he, about your
Stays? No, Sir, reply'd I; but pray, no more
Questions: For ask me ever so much, I will not
tell you. 
O, said he, I have a way for that. I can do as
they do abroad, when the Criminals won't confess; 
torture them till they do. —But pray, Sir, said I, Is 
this fair, just or honest? I am no Criminal; and I
won't confess. 
O, my Girl. said he, many an innocent Person has
been put to the Torture, I'll assure you. But let me
know where they are, and you shall escape the
Question, as they call it abroad. 
Sir, said I, the Torture is not used in England; 
and I hope you won't bring it up. Admirably said!
said the naughty Gentleman. —But I can tell you
of as good a Punishment. If a Criminal won't
plead with us here in England, we press him to Death,
or till he does plead. And so now, Pamela, that is
a Punishment shall certainly be yours, if you won't
tell without. 
Tears stood in my Eyes, and I said, This, Sir, is
very cruel and barbarous. —No matter, said he, it
is but like your Lucifer, you know, in my Shape! 
And after I have done so many heinous things by
you, as you think, you have no great Reason to
judge so hardly of this; or, at least, it is but of a
Piece with the rest. 
But, Sir, said I, (dreadfully afraid he had some
Notion they were about me) if you will be obey'd
in this unreasonable Matter; tho' it is sad Tyranny
to be sure!—let me go up to them, and read them
over again; and you shall see so far as to the End of
the sad Story that follows those you have. 
I'll see them all, said he, down to this Time, if
you have written so far! —Or at least, till within
this Week. ––– Then let me go up to them, said I, and
see what I have written, and to what Day to shew
them to you; for you won't desire to see every thing. 
But I will, reply'd he. ––– But say, Pamela, tell me
Truth; Are they above? I was more affrighted. He
saw my Confusion. Tell me Truth, said he. Why,
Sir, answer'd I, I have sometimes hid them under the
dry Mould in the Garden; sometimes in one Place, 
sometimes in another; and those you have in your
Hand, were several Days under a Rose-bush, in
the Garden. Artful Slut! said he; What's this to
my Question? Are they not about you? ––– If, said
I, I must pluck them out of my Hiding-place, behind
the Wainscot, won't you see me? Still more
and more artful! said he. ––– Is this an Answer to
my Question? ––– I have searched every Place
above, and in your Closet, for them, and cannot find
them; so I will know where they are. Now, said
he, it is my Opinion they are about you; and I never
undrest a Girl in my Life; but I will now begin
to strip my pretty Pamela; and hope I shall not
go far, before I find them. 
I fell a crying, and said, I will not be used in this
manner. Pray, Sir, said I, (for he began to unpin
my Handkerchief) consider! Pray, Sir, do! ––– And
pray, said he, do you consider. For I will see these
Papers. But may-be, said he, they are ty'd about
your Knees with your Garters, and stooped. Was
ever any thing so vile, and so wicked! ––– I fell on
my Knees, and said, What can I do? what can I
do? If you'll let me go up, I'll fetch them you. 
Will you, said he, on your Honour, let me see them
uncurtail'd, and not offer to make them away; no,
not a single Paper? ––– I will, Sir.—On your Honour? 
Yes, Sir. And so he let me go up-stairs,
crying sadly for Vexation to be so used. Sure nobody
was ever so serv'd as I am! 
I went to my Closet, and there I sat me down,
and could not bear the Thoughts of giving up my
Papers. Besides, I must all undress me in a manner
to untack them. So I writ thus: 


‘SIR,
To expostulate with such an arbitrary Gentleman,
I know will signify nothing. And most
hardly do you use the Power you so wickedly
have got over me. I have Heart enough, Sir,
to do a Deed that would make you regret using
me thus; and I can hardly bear it, and what I
am further to undergo. But a superior Consideration
with-holds me; thank God, it does! —I
will, however, keep my Word, if you insist upon
it when you have read this; but, Sir, let me beg
you to give me time till to-morrow Morning,
that I may just run them over, and see what I put
into your Hands against me. And I will then
give my Papers to you, without the least Alteration,
or adding or diminishing. But I should
beg still to be excused, if you please. But if not,
spare them to me, but till to-morrow Morning. 
And this, so hardly am I used, shall be thought a
Favour, which I shall be very thankful for.’ 

I guessed it would not be long before I heard
from him. And he accordingly sent up Mrs. Jewkes
for what I had promised. So I gave her this Note
to carry to him. And he sent word, that I must
keep my Promise, and he would give me till Morning; 
but that I must bring them to him without
his asking again. 
So I took off my Under-coat, and, with great
Trouble of Mind, unsew'd them from it. And
there is a vast Quantity of it. I will just slightly touch
upon the Subject; because I may not, perhaps, get
them again for you to see. 
They begin with an Account of my attempting
to get away, out of the Window, first, and then throwing 
my Petticoat and Handkerchief into the Pond. 
How sadly I was disappointed; the Lock of the
Back-door being changed. How, in trying to climb
over the Door, I tumbled down, and was piteously
bruised; the Bricks giving way, and tumbling upon
me. How, finding I could not get off, and dreading
the hard Usage I should receive, I was so wicked
to be tempted to throw myself into the Water. 
My sad Reflections upon this Matter. How Mrs.
Jewkes used me on this Occasion, when she found
me. How my Master had like to have been drown'd
in Hunting; and my Concern for his Danger, notwithstanding
his Usage of me. Mrs. Jewkes's wicked
Reports to frighten me, that I was to be marry'd
to an ugly Swiss; who was to sell me on the
Wedding-day to my Master. Her vile way of talking
to me, like a London Prostitute. My Apprehensions
on seeing Preparations made for my Master's
coming. Their causless Fears, that I was trying
to get away again, when I had no Thought of
it; and my bad Usage upon it. My Master's dreadful
Arrival; and his hard, very hard Treatment of
me; and Mrs. Jewkes's insulting of me. His Jealousy
of Mr. Williams and me. How Mrs. Jewkes
vilely instigated him to Wickedness. And down to
here, I put into one Parcel, hoping that would
content him. But for fear it should not, I put into
another Parcel the following, viz. 
A Copy of his Proposals to me, of a great Parcel
of Gold, and fine Cloaths and Rings, and an Estate
of I can't tell what a Year; and 50l. a Year for the
Life of both of you, my dear Parents, to be his
Mistress; with an Insinuation, that, may-be, he would
marry me at a Year's End. All sadly vile; with
Threatnings, if I did not comply, that he would
ruin me, without allowing me any thing. A Copy 
of my Answer, refusing all with just Abhorrence. 
But begging at last his Goodness to me, and Mercy
on me, in the most moving manner I could think
of. An Account of his angry Behaviour, and Mrs.
Jewkes's wicked Advice hereupon. His trying to
get me to his Chamber; and my Refusal to go. 
A deal of Stuff and Chit-chat between me and the
odious Mrs. Jewkes; in which she was very wicked,
and very insulting. Two Notes I wrote, as if to be
carry'd to Church, to pray for his reclaiming, and
my Safety; which Mrs. Jewkes seiz'd, and officiously
shew'd him. A Confession of mine, that notwithstanding
his bad Usage, I could not hate him. My
Concern for Mr. Williams. A horrid Contrivance of
my Master's to ruin me; being in my Room, disguised
in Cloaths of the Maid's, who lay with me and Mrs.
Jewkes. How narrowly I escaped, (it makes my
Heart ake to think of it still!) by falling into Fits. 
Mrs. Jewkes's detestable Part in this sad Affair. How
he seem'd mov'd at my Danger, and forbore his
abominable Designs; and assur'd me he had offer'd
no Indecency. How ill I was for a Day or two
after; and how kind he seem'd. How he made me
forgive Mrs. Jewkes. How, after this, and great
Kindness pretended, he made rude Offers to me in
the Garden, which I escaped. How I resented them. 
Then I had written how kind and how good he behav'd
himself to me; and how he pralsed me, and
gave me great Hopes of his being good at last. Of
the too tender Impression this made upon me; and
how I began to be afraid of my own Weakness and
Consideration for him, tho' he had used me so ill. 
How sadly jealous he was of Mr. Williams; and
how I, as I justly could, clear'd myself as to his
Doubts on that Score. How, just when he had
raised me up to the highest Hope of his Goodness,
he dash'd me sadly again, and went off more 
coldly. My free Reflections upon this trying Occasion. 
This brought Matters down from Thursday the
20th Day of my Imprisonment, to Wednesday the
41st. 
And there I was resolv'd to end, let what would
come; for there is only Thursday, Friday and Saturday,
to give an Account of; and Thursday he
set out to a Ball at Stamford; and Friday was the
Gypsey Story, and this is Saturday, his Return from
Stamford. And, truly, I shall have but little Heart
to write, if he is to see all. 
So these two Parcels of Papers I have got ready
for him against to-morrow Morning. To be sure I
have always used him very freely in my Writings,
and shew'd him no Mercy; but yet he must thank
himself for it; for I have only writ Truth; and I
wish he had deserv'd a better Character at my hands,
as well for his own sake as mine. —So, tho' I don't
know whether ever you'll see what I write, I must
say, that I will go to-bed, with remembring you in
my Prayers, as I always do, and as I know you do
me: And so God bless you. Good Night. 