


My reception by that lady—I become enamoured
of Narcissa—recount the particulars
of my last misfortune—acquire
the good opinion of my mistress—an
account of the young 'Squire—I am made
acquainted with more particulars of Narcissa's
situation—conceive a mortal hatred
against Sir Timothy—I examine my lady's
library and performances—her extravagant
behaviour. 
Fraught with these useful instructions,
I repaired to the place of her habitation,
and was introduced by the waiting-woman, to
the presence of my lady, who had not before
seen me. —She sat in her study, with one foot
on the ground, and the other upon a high stool
at some distance from her seat; her sandy locks
hung down in a disorder I cannot call beautiful
from her head, which was deprived of its coif, for
the benefit of scratching with one hand, while
she held the stump of a pen in the other. — 
Her fore-head was high and wrinkled, her eyes
large, grey and prominent; her nose long, sharp
and aquiline; her mouth of vast capacity; her
visage meagre and freckled, and her chin peeked
like a shoemaker's paring-knife: Her upper-lip
contained a large quantity of plain Spanish, which
by continual falling, had embroidered her neck 

that was not naturally very white, and the breast
of her gown, that flowed loose about her with
a negligence truly poetic, discovering linen that
was very fine and to all appearance, never washed
but in Castalian streams. —Around her lay
heaps of books, globes, quadrants, telescopes,
and other learned apparatus: Her snuff-box stood
at her right hand, at her left lay her handkerchief
sufficiently used, and a convenience to spit
in appeared on one side of her chair. —Being in
a reverie when we entered, the maid did not
think proper to disturb her; so that we waited
some minutes unobserved, during which time,
she bit the quill several times, altered her position,
made many wry faces, and at length, with an
air of triumph, repeated aloud; 
“Nor dare th' immortal Gods my rage oppose!”
Having committed her success to paper, she
turned toward the door, and perceiving us, cried,
“What's the matter?” —“Here's the young
man (replied my conductress) whom Mrs.
Sagely recommended as a footman to your
ladyship.” On this information, she stared in
my face a considerable time, and then asked my
name, which I thought proper to conceal under
that of John Brown. —After having surveyed me
with a curious eye, she broke out into “O!
ay, thou wa'st shipwrecked I remember. — 
Whether didst thou come on shore on the
back of a whale or a dolphin?” To this I answered,
I had swam ashore without any assistance. 
—Then she demanded to know if I had
ever been at the Hellespont, and swam from
Sestos to Abydos. I replied in the negative: 

Upon which, she bid the maid order a suit of
new livery for me, and instruct me in the articles
of my duty; so saying, she spit in her snuff-box,
and wiped her nose with her cap which
lay on the table, instead of a handkerchief. — 
We returned to the kitchin, where I was regaled
by the maids, who seemed to outvie with one
another, in expressing their regard for me. — 
From them I understood, that my business consisted
in cleaning knives and forks, laying the
cloth, waiting at table, carrying messages, and
attending my lady when she went abroad. — 
There being a very good suit of livery in the
house, which had belonged to my predecessor
deceased, I dressed myself in it, and found it
fitted me exactly, so that there was no occasion
for employing a taylor on my account. —I had
not been long equipped in this manner, when my
lady's bell rung; upon which I ran up stairs, and
found her stalking about the room in her shift
and under-petticoat only, I would have immediately
retired, as became me; but she bid me come
in, and air a clean shift for her; which having done
with some backwardness, she put it on before
me without any ceremony, and I verily believe
was ignorant of my sex all the time, being quite
absorpt in contemplation. —About four o'clock
in the afternoon, I was ordered to lay the cloth,
and place two covers, which I understood was for
my mistress and her niece, whom I had not as
yet seen. —Though I was not very dexterous at
this operation, I performed it pretty well for a
beginner, and when dinner was upon the table,
saw my mistress approach accompanied with the
young lady, whose name for the present shall be
Narcissa. —So much sweetness appeared in the 

countenance and carriage of this amiable apparition,
that my heart was captivated at first
sight, and while dinner lasted I gazed upon her
without intermission. —Her age seemed to be
seventeen, her stature tall, her shape unexceptionable,
her hair, that fell down upon her ivory
neck in ringlets, black as jet; her arched eyebrows
of the same colour; her eyes piercing,
yet tender; her lips of the consistence and hue of
cherries; her complexion clear, delicate and
healthy; her aspect noble, ingen'ous and humane; 
and the whole so ravishingly delightful,
that it was impossible for any creature, endued
with sensibility, to see without admiring, and admire
without loving her to excess! How often
did I curse the servile station, that placed me so
infinitely beneath the regard of this idol of my
adoration! and how often did I bless my fate,
that enabled me to enjoy daily the sight of so
much perfection! When she spoke, I listened
with pleasure; but when she spoke to me, my
soul was thrilled with an exstasy of tumultuous
joy! I was even so happy as to be the subject of
their conversation: For Narcissa having observed
me, said to her aunt, “I see your new footman
is come.” Then addressing herself to me,
asked, with ineffable complacency, if I was the
person who had been so cruelly used by robbers? 
When I satisfied her in this, she expressed a desire
of knowing the particulars of my fortune both before
and since my being shipwrecked: Hereupon
(as Mrs. Sagely had counselled me) I told her,
that I had been bound apprentice to the master of
a ship, contrary to my inclination, which ship
had foundered at sea;—that I and four more,
who chanced to be on deck when she went down, 

made shift to swim to the shore, where my companions,
after having overpowered me, stript
me to the shirt, and left me, as they imagined,
dead of the wounds I received in my own defence: 
Then I related the circumstances of my
being found in a barn, with the inhuman treatment
I met with from the country people and
parson; which I perceived, drew tears from the
charming creature's eyes! When I had finished
my recital, my mistress said, “Ma foy! le garçon
est bien fait!” To which opinion Narcissa
assented, with a compliment to my understanding
in the same language, that flattered my
vanity extremely. 
The conversation, among other subjects, turned
upon the young 'Squire, whom my lady enquired
after, under the title of the Savage; and was informed
by her niece, that he was still in bed, repairing
the fatigue of last night's debauch, and
recruiting strength and spirits to undergo a fox-chace
to-morrow morning, in company with Sir
Timothy Thicket, 'Squire Bumper, and a great
many other gentlemen of the same stamp, whom
he had invited on that occasion; so that by daybreak,
the whole house would be in an uproar. 
—This was a very disagreeable piece of news to
the virtuosi, who protested she would stuff her
ears with cotton when she went to bed, and take
a dose of opium to make her sleep the more sound,
that she might not be disturbed and distracted
by the clamour of the brutes. 
When their dinner was over, I and my fellow-servants
sat down to ours in the kitchen, where
I understood that Sir Timothy Thicket was a
wealthy knight in the neighbourhood, between
whom and Narcissa a match had been projected 