


Which, it is to be hoped, will be, on
more accounts than one, agreeable to
the reader. 
Sir Launcelot having vindicated
the liberty, confirmed the safety,
and secured the heart of his charming
Aurelia, now found leisure to unravel
the conspiracy which had been executed
against his person; and with
that view commenced a law-suit
against the owner of the house where
he and his mistress had been separately
confined. Mr. Shackle was, notwithstanding
all the submissions and
atonement which he offered to make,
either in private or in public, indicted
on the statute of kidnapping, tried,
convicted, punished by a severe fine, 

and standing in the pillory. A judicial
writ ad inquirendum being executed,
the prisons of his inquisition
were laid open, and several innocent
captives enlarged. 
In the course of Shackle's trial, it
appeared that the knight's confinement
was a scheme executed by his
rival Mr. Sycamore, according to the
device of his counsellor Dawdle, who,
by this contrivance, had reconciled
himself to his patron, after having
deserted him in the day of battle. Our
hero was so incensed at the discovery
of Sycamore's treachery and ingratitude,
that he went in quest of him
immediately, to take vengeance on
his person, accompanied by captain
Crowe, who wanted to ballance accounts
with Mr. Dawdle. But those
gentlemen had wisely avoided the impending
storm, by retiring to the continent,
on pretence of travelling for
improvement. 
Sir Launcelot was not now so much
of a knight-errant, as to leave Aurelia
to the care of Providence, and pursue 

the traitors to the farthest extremities
of the earth. He practiced a
much more easy, certain, and effectual
method of revenge, by instituting a
process against them, which, after
writs of capias, alias, & pluries, had
been repeated, subjected them both
to outlawry. Mr. Sycamore and his
friend being thus deprived of the benefit
of the law, by their own neglect,
would likewise have forfeited their
goods and chattels to the king, had
not they made such submissions as appeased
the wrath of Sir Launcelot and
captain Crowe; then they ventured
to return, and by dint of interest obtained
a reversal of the outlawry. But
this grace they did not enjoy, till long
after our adventurer was happily established
in life. 
While the knight waited impatiently
for the expiration of Aurelia's minority,
and, in the mean time, consoled
himself with the imperfect happiness
arising from her conversation,
and those indulgences which the most
unblemished virtue could bestow; 

captain Crowe projected another plan
of vengeance against the conjurer,
whose lying oracles had cost him such
a world of vexation. The truth is,
the captain began to be tired of idleness,
and undertook this adventure to
keep his hand in use. He imparted
his design to Crabshaw, who had
likewise suffered in spirit from the
predictions of the said offender, and
was extremely well disposed to assist
in punishing the false prophet. He
now took it for granted that he should
not be hanged for stealing a horse; 
and thought it very hard to pay so
much money for a deceitful prophecy,
which, in all likelihood, would
never be fulfilled. 
Actuated by these motives, they
set out together for the house of consultation; 
but they found it shut up
and abandoned, and, upon inquiry in
the neighbourhood, learned that the
conjurer had moved his quarters that
very day on which the captain had
recourse to his art. This was actually
the case: he knew the fate of Sir 

Launcelot would soon come to light,
and he did not chuse to wait the consequence. 
He had other motives for
decamping. He had run a score at
the public-house, which he had no
mind to discharge, and wanted to disengage
himself from his female associate,
who knew too much of his affairs,
to be kept at a proper distance. 
All these purposes he had answered,
by retreating softly, without beat of
drum, while his Sybil was abroad
running down prey for his devouring. 
He had not, however, taken his measures
so cunningly, but that this old
hag discovered his new lodgings, and,
in revenge, gave information to the
publican. This creditor took out a
writ accordingly; and the bailiff had
just secured his person as Capt. Crowe
and Timothy Crabshaw chanced to
pass by the door in their way homewards,
through an obscure street near
the Seven Dials. 
The conjurer having no subterfuge
left, but a great many particular reasons
for avoiding an explanation with 

the justice, like the man between
the devil and the deep sea, of
two evils chose the least; and beckoning
to the captain, called him by
his name. Crowe, thus addressed,
replied with a “Hilloah!” and looking
towards the place from whence he
was hailed, at once recognized the
negromancer. Without farther hesitation
he sprang across the street, and
collaring Albumazar, exclaimed, “Aha!
old boy; is the wind in that corner? 
—I thought we should grapple
one day—now will I bring you up
by the head, tho' all the devils in hell
were blowing abast the beam.” 
The bailiff seeing his prisoner so
roughly handled before, and at the
same time assaulted behind by Crabshaw,
who cried, “Shew me a liar,
and I'll shew you a thief—who is to
be hanged now?” —I say, the bailiff,
fearing he should lose the benefit of
his job, began to put on his contentious
face, and, declaring the doctor
was his prisoner, swore he could not
surrender him without a warrant from 

the lord chief justice. The whole
groupe adjourning into the parlour,
the conjurer desired to know of Crowe,
whether Sir Launcelot was found? being
answered, “Ey, ey, safe enough
to see you made fast in the bilboes,
brother;” he told the captain he had
something of consequence to communicate
for his advantage; and proposed
that Crowe and Crabshaw should
bail the action, which lay only for a
debt of three pounds. 
Crowe stormed, and Crabshaw grinned
at this modest proposal: but when
they understood that they could only
be bound for his appearance, and reflected
that they needed not part with
him until his body should be surrendered
unto justice, they consented to
give bail; and the bond being executed,
conveyed him directly to the
house of our adventurer. The boisterous
Crowe introduced him to Sir
Launcelot with such an abrupt unconnected
detail of his offence, as the
knight could not understand without
Timothy's annotations. These were 

followed by some questions put to the
conjurer, who laying aside his black
gown, and plucking off his white
beard, exhibited to the astonished
spectators the very individual countenance
of the empyrical politician Ferret,
who had played our hero such a
slippery trick after the electioneoring
adventure. 
“I perceive (said he) you are preparing
to expostulate, and upbraid me
for having given a false information
against you to the country justice. I
look upon mankind to be in a state of
nature, a truth which Hobbes hath
stumbled upon by accident: I think
every man has a right to avail himself
of his talents, even at the expence of
his fellow-creatures; just as we see
the fish, and other animals of the creation
devouring one another. —I found
the justice but one degree removed
from ideotism, and knowing that he
would commit some blunder in the
execution of his office, which would
lay him at your mercy, I contrived to
make his folly the instrument of my 

escape—I was dismissed without being
obliged to sign the information I
had given; and you took ample
vengeance for his tyranny and impertinence. 
I came to London, where my
circumstances obliged me to live in
disguise. In the character of a conjurer,
I was consulted by your follower
Crowe, and your 'squire Crabshaw. 
I did little or nothing but eccho
back the intelligence they brought
me, except prognosticating that Crabshaw
would be hanged; a prediction
to which I found myself so irresistibly
impelled, that I am persuaded it was
the real effect of inspiration—I am
now arrested for a paultry sum of money,
and, moreover, liable to be sent
to Bridewell as an impostor—let those
answer for my conduct whose cruelty
and insolence have driven me to the
necessity of using such subterfuges— 
I have been oppressed and persecuted
by the government for speaking truth
—your omnipotent laws have reconciled
contradictions. That which is
acknowledged to be truth in fact, is 

construed falshood in law; and great
reason we have to boast of a constitution
founded on the basis of absurdity— 
But, waving these remarks, I own I
am unwilling to be either imprisoned
for debt, or punished for imposture— 
I know how far to depend upon generosity,
and what is called benevolence; 
words to amuse the weak-minded
—I build upon a surer bottom
—I will bargain for your assistance— 
it is in my power to put twelve thousand
pounds in the pocket of Samuel
Crowe, that there sea-ruffian, who by
his good will would hang me to the
yard's arm—” 
There he was interrupted by the
seaman. “Damn your rat's eyes!
none of your—hang thee! fish my
topmasts! if the rope was fairly reeved,
and the tackle sound, d'ye see—” 
Mr. Clarke, who was present, began
to stare; while the knight assured
Ferret, that if he was really able and
willing to serve captain Crowe in any
thing essential, he should be amply
rewarded. In the mean time, he discharged 

the debt, and assigned him an
apartment in his own house. That
same day Crowe, by the advice of
Sir Launcelot and his nephew, entered
into conditional articles with the
Cynic, to allow him the interest of
fifteen hundred pounds for life; provided,
by his means, the captain should
obtain possession of the estate of Hobby-hole
in Yorkshire, which had belonged
to his grandfather, and of
which he was heir of blood. 
This bond being executed, Mr.
Ferret discovered that he himself was
the lawful husband of Bridget Maple,
aunt to Samuel Crowe, by a clandestine
marriage; which, however, he
convinced them he could prove by undeniable
evidence. This being the
case, she, the said Bridget Maple, alias
Ferret, was a covert femme, consequently
could not transact any deed of
alienation without his concurrence; 
ergo, the docking of the intail
of the estate of Hobby-hole was
illegal and of none effect. This was
a very agreeable declaration to the 

whole company, who did not fail to
congratulate captain Crowe on the
prospect of his being restored to his
inheritance. Tom Clarke, in particular,
protested, with tears in his
eyes, that it gave him unspeakable
joy; and his tears trickled the faster,
when Crowe with an arch look signified,
that now he was pretty well victualled
for life, he had some thoughts
of embarking on the voyage of matrimony. 
But that point of happiness to which,
as the north pole, the course of these
adventures hath been invariably directed,
was still unattained; we mean,
the indissoluble union of the accomplished
Sir Launcelot Greaves and the
enchanting Miss Darnel. Our hero
now discovered in his mistress a thousand
charms, which hitherto he had
no opportunity to contemplate. He
found her beauty excelled by her good
sense, and her virtue superior to both. 
He found her untainted by that giddiness,
vanity, and affectation, which
distinguish the fashionable females of 

the present age. He found her uninfected
by the rage for diversion and
dissipation; for noise, tumult, gew-gaws,
glitter, and extravagance. He
found her not only raised by understanding
and taste far above the amusements
of little vulgar minds; but
even exalted by uncommon genius
and refined reflection, so as to relish
the more sublime enjoyments of rational
pleasure. He found her possessed
of that vigour of mind which
constitutes true fortitude, and vindicates
the empire of reason. He found
her heart incapable of disguise or dissimulation; 
frank, generous, and
open; susceptible of the most tender
impressions; glowing with a keen
sense of honour, and melting with
humanity. A youth of his sensibility
could not fail of being deeply affected
by such attractions. The nearer he
approached the center of happiness,
the more did the velocity of his passion
increase. Her uncle still remained
insensible, as it were, in the arms
of death. Time seemed to linger in 

its lapse, 'till the knight was inflamed
to the most eager degree of impatience. 
He communicated his distress
to Aurelia; he pressed her with the
most pathetic remonstrances to abridge
the torture of his suspence. He interested
Mrs. Kawdle in his behalf; 
and, at length, his importunity succeeded. 
The banns of marriage were
regularly published, and the ceremony
was performed in the parish church,
in the presence of Dr. Kawdle and his
lady, captain Crowe, lawyer Clarke,
and Mrs. Dolly Cowslip. 
The bride, instead of being disguised
in tawdry stuffs of gold or silver,
and sweating under a harness of diamonds,
according to the elegant taste
of the times, appeared in a negligee
of plain blue sattin, without any other
jewels than her eyes, which far outshone
all that ever was produced by
the mines of Golconda. Her hair had
no other extraneous ornament than a
small sprig of artificial roses; but the
dignity of her air, the elegance of her
shape, the sweetness and sensibility of 

her countenance, added to such
warmth of colouring, and such exquisite
symmetry of features, as could
not be excelled by human nature, attracted
the eyes and excited the admiration
of all the beholders. The
effect they produced in the heart of
Sir Launcelot, was such a rapture as
we cannot pretend to describe. He
made his appearance on this occasion,
in a white coat and blue sattin vest,
both embroidered with silver; and all
who saw him could not but own that
he alone seemed worthy to possess the
lady whom heaven had destined for
his consort. Captain Crowe had taken
off a blue suit of cloaths strongly
guarded with bars of broad gold lace,
in order to honour the nuptials of his
friend: he wore upon his head a bag-wig
a la pigeon, made by an old acquaintance
in Wapping; and to his
side he had girded a huge plate-hilted
sword, which he had bought of a
recruiting serjeant. Mr. Clarke was
dressed in pompadour, with gold buttons,
and his lovely Dolly in a smart 

checked lutestring, a present from her
mistress. 
The whole company dined, by invitation,
at the house of Dr. Kawdle,
and here it was that the two most deserving
lovers on the face of the earth
attained to the consummation of all
earthly felicity. The captain and his
nephew had a hint to retire in due
time. Mrs. Kawdle conducted the
amiable Aurelia, trembling, to the
marriage-bed: our hero glowing with
a bridegroom's ardour, claimed the
husband's privilege: Hymen lighted
up his brightest torch at virtue's lamp,
and every star shed its happiest influence
on their heaven-directed union. 
Instructions had been already dispatched
to prepare Greavesbury-hall for the
reception of its new mistress; and for
that place the new-married couple set
out next morning, according to the
plan which had been previously concerted. 
Sir Launcelot and lady
Greaves, accompanied by Mrs. Kawdle,
and attended by Dolly, travelled
in their own coach drawn by six dappled 

horses. Dr. Kawdle, with captain
Crowe, occupied the doctor's post-chariot,
provided with four bays: Mr.
Clark had the honour to bestride the
loins of Bronzomarte: Mr. Ferret
was mounted upon an old hunter:
Crabshaw stuck close to his friend
Gilbert; and two other horsemen
completed the retinue. There was not
an aching heart in the whole cavalcade,
except that of the young lawyer, which
was by turns invaded with hot desires
and chilling scruples. Though he
was fond of Dolly to distraction, his
regard to worldly reputation, and his
attention to worldly interest, were continually
raising up bars to a legal gratification
of his love. His pride was
startled at the thought of marrying the
daughter of a poor country publican; 
and he moreover dreaded the resentment
of his uncle Crowe, should he
take any step of this nature without
his concurrence. Many a wishful
look did he cast at Dolly, the tears
standing in his eyes; and many a
woeful sigh did he utter. 

Lady Greaves immediately perceived
the situation of his heart, and,
by questioning Mrs. Cowslip, discovered
a mutual passion between these
lovers. She consulted her dear knight
on the subject; and he catechised the
lawyer, who pleaded guilty. The captain
being sounded, as to his opinion,
declared he would be steered in that
as well as every other course of life,
by Sir Launcelot and his lady, whom
he verily revered as beings of an order
superior to the ordinary race of mankind. 
This favourable response being
obtained from the sailor, our hero
took an opportunity on the road, one
day after dinner, in presence of the
whole company, to accost the lawyer
in these words: “My good friend
Clarke, I have your happiness very
much at heart—your father was an
honest man, to whom my family had
manifold obligations. I have had
these many years a personal regard for
yourself, derived from your own integrity
of heart and goodness of disposition
—I see you are affected, and 

shall be brief—Besides this regard, I
am indebted to your friendship for the
liberty—what shall I say?—for the
inestimable happiness I now enjoy, in
possessing the most excellent—But I
understand that significant glance of
my Aurelia—I will not offend her
delicacy—The truth is, my obligation
is very great, and it is time I should
evince my gratitude—If the stewardship
of my estate is worth your acceptance,
you shall have it immediately,
together with the house and farm
of Cockerton in my neighbourhood. 
I know you have a passion for Mrs.
Dolly; and believe she looks upon
you with the eyes of tender prepossession
—don't blush Dolly,—besides
your agreeable person, which all the
world must approve, you can boast of
virtue, fidelity, and friendship. Your
attachment to lady Greaves neither
she or I shall ever forget—if you are
willing to unite your fate with Mr.
Clarke, your mistress gives me leave
to assure you she will stock the farm
at her own expence; and we will celebrate 

the wedding at Greavesbury-hall—” 
By this time the hearts of these
grateful lovers had overflowed. Dolly
was sitting on her knees, bathing
her lady's hand with her tears; and
Mr. Clarke appeared in the same attitude
by Sir Launcelot. The uncle, almost
as much affected as the nephew,
by the generosity of our adventurer,
cried aloud, “I pray God that you
and your glorious consort may have
smooth seas and gentle gales whithersoever
you are bound—as for my
kinsman Tom, I'll give him a thousand
pounds, to set him fairly afloat; 
and if he prove not a faithful tender
to you his benefactor, I hope he will
founder in this world, and be damned
in that which is to come.” Nothing
now was wanting to the completion
of their happiness, but the consent of
Dolly's mother, at the Black Lyon,
who they did not suppose could have
any objection to such an advantageous
match for her daughter: but in this
particular they were mistaken. 

In the mean time, they arrived at
the village where the knight had exercised
the duties of chivalry; and
there he received the gratulation of
Mr. Fillet, and the attorney who
had offered to bail him before justice
Gobble. Mutual civilities having passed,
they gave him to understand, that
Gobble and his wife were turned methodists. 
All the rest of the prisoners
whom he had delivered came to testify
their gratitude, and were hospitably
entertained. Next day they halted
at the Black Lyon, where the good
woman was overjoyed to see Dolly so
happily preferred: but when Sir
Launcelot unfolded the proposed marriage,
she interrupted him with a
scream. “Christ Jesus forbid—marry
and amen! match with her own
brother!” 
At this exclamation Dolly fainted:
her lover stood with his cars erect, and
his mouth wide open; Crowe stared; 
while the knight and his lady expressed
equal surprize and concern. When
Sir Launcelot intreated Mrs. Cowslip 

to explain this mystery, she told him
that about sixteen years ago, Mr.
Clarke senior had brought Dolly, then
an infant, to her house, when she and
her late husband lived in another part
of the country; and as she had
then been lately delivered of a child
which did not live, he hired her as
nurse to the little foundling. He
owned she was a love-begotten babe,
and from time to time paid handsomely
for the board of Dolly, who he desired
might pass for her own daughter. 
In his last illness, he assured her
he had taken care to provide for the
child; but since his death she had received
no account of any such provision. 
She, moreover, informed his
honour, that Mr. Clarke had deposited
in her hands a diamond ring and
a sealed paper, never to be opened
without his order, until Dolly should
be demanded in marriage by the man
she should like; and not then, except
in presence of the clergyman of the
parish. “Send for the clergyman this
instant, (cried our hero, reddening, 

and fixing his eyes on Dolly) I hope
all will yet be well.” 
The vicar arriving, and being made
acquainted with the nature of the
case, the landlady produced the paper; 
which being opened, appeared
to be an authentic certificate, that the
person, commonly known by the
name of Dorothy Cowslip, was in fact
Dorothea Greaves, daughter of Jonathan
Greaves, esq; by a young gentlewoman
who had been some years deceased.— 
“The remaining part of the mystery
I myself can unfold—(exclaimed
the knight, while he ran and embraced
the astonished Dolly, as his
kinswoman.) Jonathan Greaves was
my uncle, and died before he came
of age; so that he could make no
settlement on his child, the fruit of a
private amour founded on a promise
of marriage, of which this ring was
a token. Mr. Clarke, being his confident,
disposed of the child, and at
length finding his constitution decay,
revealed the secret to my father, who, 

in his will, bequeathed one hundred
pounds a year to this agreeable foundling:
but as they both died while I
was abroad, and some of the memorandums
touching this transaction probably
were mislaid, I never till now
could discover where or how my
pretty cousin was situated. I shall
recompence the good woman for her
care and fidelity, and take pleasure
in bringing this affair to a happy issue.” 
The lovers were now overwhelmed
with transports of joy and gratitude,
and every countenance was
lighted up with satisfaction. From
this place to the habitation of Sir
Launcelot the bells were rung in
every parish, and the corporation in
their formalities congratulated him in
every town through which he passed. 
About five miles from Greavesbury-hall
he was met by above five thousand
persons of both sexes and every
age, dressed out in their gayest apparel,
headed by Mr. Ralph Mattox
from Darnel-hill, and the rector from 

the knight's own parish. They were
preceded by music of different kinds,
ranged under a great variety of flags
and ensigns; and the women, as well as
the men, bedizened with fancy-knots
and marriage-favours. At the end of
the avenue, a select bevy of comely
virgins arrayed in white, and a separate
band of choice youths, distinguished
by garlands of laurel and holly
interweaved, fell into the procession,
and sung in chorus a rustic epithalamium
composed by the curate. 
At the gate they were received by the
venerable house-keeper Mrs. Oakley,
whose features were so brightened by
the occasion, that with the first glance
she made a conquest of the heart of
captain Crowe; and this connexion
was improved afterwards into a legal
conjunction. 
Mean while the houses of Greavesbury-hall
and Darnel-hill were set
open for the entertainment of all
comers, and both ecchoed with the
sounds of festivity. After the ceremony
of giving and receiving visits 

had been performed by Sir Launcelot
Greaves and his lady, Mr. Clarke
was honoured with the hand of the
agreeable Miss Dolly Greaves; and
the captain was put in possession of
his paternal estate. The perfect and
uninterrupted felicity of the knight
and his endearing consort, diffused itself
through the whole adjacent country,
as far as their example and influence
could extend. They were admired,
esteemed, and applauded by
every person of taste, sentiment, and
benevolence; at the same time beloved,
revered, and almost adored by
the common people, among whom
they suffered not the merciless hand
of indigence or misery to seize one
single sacrifice. 
Ferret, at first, seemed to enjoy his
easy circumstances; but the novelty
of this situation soon wore off, and all
his misanthropy returned. He could
not bear to see his fellow-creatures
happy around him; and signified his
disgust to Sir Launcelot, declaring his
intention of returning to the metropolis, 

where he knew there would be
always food sufficient for the ravenous
appetite of his spleen. Before he departed,
the knight made him partake
of his bounty, though he could not
make him taste of his happiness,
which soon received a considerable
addition in the birth of a son, destined
to be the heir and representative
of two worthy families, whose mutual
animosity the union of his parents
had so happily extinguished. 