


The memoirs of a lady of quality. 


By the circumstances of the story which I am
going to relate, you will be convinced of
my candour, while you are informed of my indiscretion; 
and be enabled, I hope, to perceive,
that howsoever my head may have erred, my
heart hath always been uncorrupted, and that I
have been unhappy, because I loved, and was a
woman. 
I believe I need not observe, that I was the
only child of a man of good fortune, who indulged
me, in my infancy, with all the tenderness
of paternal affection; and when I was six
years old, sent me to a private school, where I
stayed till my age was doubled, and became such
a favourite, that I was (even in those early days)
carried to all the places of public diversion, the
court itself not excepted; an indulgence that flattered
my love of pleasure, to which I was naturally
addicted, and encouraged those ideas of vanity
and ambition, which spring up so early in
the human mind. 
I was lively and good-natured, my imagination
apt to run riot, my heart liberal and disinterested; 
though I was so obstinately attached to my own
opinions, that I could not well brook contradiction; 
and in the whole of my disposition, resembled 

that of Henry the fifth, as described by
Shakespear. 
In my thirteenth year I went to Bath, where
I was first introduced into the world as a woman,
having been intitled to that privilege by
my person, which was remarkably tall for my
years; and there my fancy was quite captivated
by the variety of diversions in which I was continually
engaged: not that the parties were altogether
new to me, but because I now found myself
considered as a person of consequence, and
surrounded by a croud of admirers, who courted
my acquaintance, and fed my vanity with praise
and adulation. In short, whether or not I deserved
their encomiums, I leave the world to
judge; but my person was commended, and my
talent in dancing met with universal applause. 
No wonder then, that every thing appeared joyous
to a young creature, who was so void of experience
and dissimulation, that she believed every
body's heart as sincere as her own, and every object
such as it appeared to be. 
Among the swains who sighed, or pretended
to sigh for me, were two that bore a pretty equal
share of my favour; (it was too superficial to deserve
the name of love.) One of these was a forward
youth of sixteen, extremely handsome,
lively, and impudent, who attended in quality
of page upon the princess Amelia, who spent
that season at the Bath; the other was a Scotch
nobleman turned of thirty, who was graced with
a red ribbon, and danced particularly well, two
qualifications of great weight with a girl of my
age, whose heart was not deeply interested in the
cause. Nevertheless, the page prevailed over
this formidable rival; though our amour went 

no farther than a little flirting, and ceased intirely
when I left the place. 
Next year, however, I revisited this agreeable
scene, and passed my time in the same circle of
amusements; in which, indeed, each season at
Bath is exactly resembled by that which succeeds,
allowing for the difference of company, which is
continually varying. There I met with the same
incense, and again had my favourite, who was
a North Briton, and captain of foot, near forty
years of age, and a little lame, an impediment
which I did not discover, until it was pointed out
by some of my companions, who rallied me upon
my choice. He was always chearful, and very
amorous, had a good countenance and an excellent
understanding, possessed a great deal of
art, and would have persuaded me to marry him,
had I not been restrained by the authority of my
father, whose consent was not to be obtained in
favour of a man of his fortune. 
At the same time, many proposals of marriage
were made to my parents; but, as they came
from people whom I did not like, I rejected them
all, being determined to refuse every man who
did not make his addresses to myself in person,
because I had no notion of marrying for any
thing but love. 
Among these formal proposers was a Scottish
earl, whose pretensions were broke off by some
difference about settlements; and the son of an
English baron, with whom my father was in
treaty, when he carried me to town, on a visit
to a young lady, with whom I had been intimate
from my infancy. She was just delivered of her
first son, for whom we stood sponsors; so that
this occasion detained us a whole month, during 

which, I went to a ball at court on the queen's
birth-day, and there, for the first time, felt what
love and beauty were. 
The second son of duke—, who had
just returned from his travels, was dancing with
the princess royal, when a young lady came and
desired me to go and see a stranger, whom all the
world admired: upon which, I followed her into
the circle, and observed this object of admiration. 
He was dressed in a coat of white cloth,
faced with blue sattin embroidered with silver, of
the same piece with his waistcoat; his fine hair
hung down his back in ringlets below his waist,
and his hat was laced with silver, and garnished
with a white feather; but his person beggared all
description. He was tall and graceful, neither
corpulent nor meagre, his limbs finely proportioned,
his countenance open and majestic, his
eyes full of sweetness and vivacity, his teeth regular,
and his pouting lips of the complexion of
the damask rose. In short, he was formed for
love, and inspired it wherever he appeared; nor
was he a niggard of his talents, but liberally returned
it; at least what passed for such: for he
had a flow of gallantry, for which many ladies
of this land can vouch from their own experience:
but he exclaimed against marriage, because
he had, as yet, met with no woman, to
whose charms he would surrender his liberty,
though a princess of France, and a lady of the
same rank in—, were said to be, at that
time, enamoured of his person. 
I went home, totally ingrossed by his idea,
flattering myself, that he had observed me with
some attention; for I was young and new, and 

had the good fortune to attract the notice and
approbation of the queen herself. 
Next day, being at the opera, I was agreeably
surprised with the appearance of this amiable
stranger, who no sooner saw me enter, than he
approached so near to the place where I sat, that
I overheard what he said to his companions; 
and was so happy as to find myself the subject of
his discourse, which abounded with rapturous
expressions of love and admiration. 
I could not listen to these transports without
emotion; my colour changed, my heart throbbed
with unusual violence, and mine eyes betrayed
my inclinations in sundry favourable glances,
which he seemed to interpret aright, though he
could not then avail himself of his success, so far
as to communicate his sentiments by speech, because
we were strangers to each other. 
I passed that night in the most anxious suspence,
and several days elapsed, before I saw him again. 
At length, however, being at court on a ballnight,
and determined against dancing, I perceived
him among the croud, and, to my unspeakable
joy, saw him advance with my lord
P&wblank;, who introduced him to my acquaintance. 
He soon found means to alter my resolution; and
I condescended to be his partner all the evening; 
during which, he declared his passion in the most
tender and persuasive terms that real love could
dictate, or fruitful imagination invent. 
I believed his protestations, because I wished
them true, and was an unexperienced girl of fifteen. 
I complied with his earnest request of
being permitted to visit me, and even invited
him to breakfast next morning; so that you may
imagine (I speak to those that feel) I did not, 

that night, enjoy much repose. Such was the
hurry and flutter of my spirits, that I rose at six
to receive him at ten. I dressed myself in a new
pink sattin-gown and my best laced night-cloaths,
and was so animated by the occasion, that if
ever I deserved a compliment upon my looks, it
was my due at this meeting. 
The wished-for moment came, that brought
my lover to my view: I was overwhelmed with
joy, modesty, and fear of I knew not what. 
We sat down to breakfast, but did not eat. He
renewed his addresses with irresistible eloquence,
and pressed me to accept of his hand, without
farther hesitation: but, to such a precipitate step,
I objected, as a measure repugnant to decency,
as well as to that duty which I owed to my father,
whom I tenderly loved. 
Though I withstood this premature proposal,
I did not attempt to disguise the situation of my
thoughts; and thus commenced a tender correspondence,
which was maintained by letters while
I remained in the country, and carried on (when
I was in town) by private interviews, twice or
thrice a week, at the house of my milliner, where
such endearments passed as refined and happy lovers
know, and others can only guess. Truth
and innocence prevailed on my side, while his
heart was fraught with sincerity and love. Such
frequent intercourse created an intimacy which
I began to think dangerous, and therefore yielded
to his repeated desire, that we might be united
for ever: nay, I resolved to avoid him, until the
day should be fixed, and very innocently (though
not very wisely) told him my reason for this
determination, which was no other than a
consciousness of my incapacity to refuse him 

any thing he should demand as a testimony of my
love. 
The time was accordingly appointed, at the
distance of a few days, during which I intended
to have implored my father's consent, though I
had but faint hopes of obtaining it: but, he was
by some means or other apprized of our design,
before I could prevail upon myself to make him
acquainted with our purpose. I had danced with
my lover at the Ridotto on the preceding evening,
and there, perhaps, our eyes betrayed us. 
Certain it is, several of lord W&wblank;m's relations,
who disapproved of the match, came up and rallied
him on his passion; lord S&wblank;k in particular,
used this remarkable expression, “Nephew,
as much love as you please, but no matrimony.” 
Next day, the priest being prepared, and the
bridegroom waiting for me at the appointed place,
in all the transports of impatient expectation, I
was, without any previous warning, carried into
the country by my father, who took no notice
of the intelligence he had received, but decoyed
me into the coach, on pretence of taking the
air; and when we had proceeded as far as Turnham
green, gave me to understand, that he
would dine in that place. 
There was no remedy: I was obliged to bear
my disappointment, though with an aching heart,
and followed him up stairs into an apartment,
where he told me he was minutely informed of
my matrimonial scheme. I did not attempt to
disguise the truth, but assured him, while the
tears gushed from my eyes, that my want of
courage alone had hindered me from making him
privy to my passion; though I owned, I should 

have married lord W&wblank;m, even though he
had disapproved of my choice. I reminded him
of the uneasy life I led at home, and frankly acknowledged,
that I loved my admirer too well
to live without him; though if he wou'd favour
me with his consent, I would defer my intention,
and punctually observe any day he should fix for
our nuptials. Mean while, I begged he would
permit me to send a message to lord W&wblank;m,
who was waiting in expectation of my coming,
and might (without such notice) imagine I was
playing the jilt. He granted this last request; 
in consequence of which, I sent a letter to my lover,
who, when he received it, had almost fainted
away, believing that I should be locked up in the
country, and snatched for ever from his arms. 
Tortured with these apprehensions, he changed
cloaths immediately, and taking horse, resolved
to follow me whithersoever we should go. 
After dinner, we proceeded as far as Brentford,
where we lay, intending to be at my father's
country-house next night; and my admirer
putting up at the same inn, practised every expedient
his invention could suggest, to procure an
interview; but all his endeavours were unsuccessful,
because I, who little dream'd of his being
so near, had gone to bed upon our first arrival,
overwhelmed with affliction and tears. 
In the morning I threw myself at my father's
feet, and conjured him by all the ties of paternal
affection, to indulge me with an opportunity of
seeing my admirer once more, before I should be
conveyed from his wishes. The melancholy
condition in which I preferred this supplication,
melted the tender heart of my parent, who yielded 

to my solicitation, and carried me back to town,
for that purpose. 
Lord W&wblank;m, who had watched our motions,
and arrived at his own lodgings, before
we alighted at my father's house, obeyed my
summons on the instant, and appeared before me
like an angel. Our faculties were, for some minutes,
suspended by a conflict of grief and joy. 
At length, I recovered the use of speech, and
gave him to understand, that I was come to
town, in order to take my leave of him, by the
permission of my father, whom I had promised
to attend into the country next day, before he
would consent to my return; the chief cause and
pretence of which, was my earnest desire to convince
him, that I was not to blame for the disappointment
he had suffered, and that I should
see him again in a month, when the nuptial knot
should be tied in spite of all opposition. 
My lover, who was better acquainted with the
world, had well nigh run distracted with this information. 
He swore he would not leave me,
until I should promise to meet and marry him next
day; or, if I refused to grant that request, he
would immediately leave the kingdom, to which
he would never more return; and before his departure,
sacrifice lord H&wblank; B&wblank;, son to the duke
of S. A&wblank;, who was the only person upon earth
who could have betrayed us to my father, because
he alone was trusted with the secret of our
intended marriage, and had actually undertaken
to give me away; an office which he afterwards
declined. Lord W&wblank;m also affirmed, that
my father decoyed me into the country, with a
view of cooping me up, and sequestering me intirely
from his view and correspondence. 

In vain I pleaded my father's well-known tenderness,
and used all the arguments I could recollect
to divert him from his revenge upon lord
H&wblank;. He was deaf to all my representations,
and nothing, I found, would prevail upon him
to suppress his resentment, but a positive promise
to comply with his former desire. I told him, I
would hazard every thing to make him happy; 
but could not, with any regard to my duty, take
such a step, without the knowledge of my parent; 
or, if I were so inclined, it would be impracticable
to elude his vigilance and suspicion. 
However, he employed such pathetic remonstrances,
and retained such a powerful advocate
within my own breast, that before we parted, I
assured him, my whole power should be exerted
for his satisfaction; and he signified his resolution
of sitting up all night, in expectation of seeing
me at his lodgings. 
He had no sooner retired, than I went into
the next room, and desired my father to fix a
day for the marriage; in which case, I would
chearfully wait upon him into the country; 
whereas, should he deny my request, on pretence
of staying for the consent of my lover's relations,
which was very uncertain, I would seize the first
opportunity of marrying lord W&wblank;m, cost
what it would. He consented to the match, but
would not appoint a day for the ceremony, which
he proposed to defer until all parties should be
agreed; and such a favourable crisis, I feared,
would never happen. 
I therefore resolved within myself to gratify
my lover's expectation, by eloping, if possible,
that very night; though the execution of this
plan was extremely difficult, because my father 

was upon the alarm, and my own maid, who
was my bedfellow, altogether in his interest. 
Notwithstanding these considerations, I found
means to engage one of the house-maids in my
behalf, who bespoke an hackney-coach, to be
kept in waiting all night; and to bed I went with
my Abigail, whom (as I had not closed an eye)
I waked about five in the morning, and sent to
pack up some things for our intended journey. 
While she was thus employed, I got up, and
huddled on my cloaths, standing upon my pillow,
lest my father, who lay in the chamber below,
should hear me afoot, and suspect my design. 
Having dressed myself with great dispatch and
disorder, I flounced down stairs, stalking as heavily
as I could tread, that he might mistake me
for one of the servants; and my confederate opening
the door, I sallied out into the street, though
I knew not which way to turn, and, to my unspeakable
mortification, neither coach nor chair
appeared. 
Having travelled on foot a good way, in hope
of finding a convenience; and being not only disappointed
in that particular, but also bewildered
in my peregrination, I began to be exceedingly
alarmed with the apprehension of being met by
some person who might know me; because, in
that case, my design would undoubtedly have
been discovered, from every circumstance of my
appearance at that time of day; for I had put
on the very cloaths which I had pulled off over
night, so that my dress was altogether odd and
peculiar: my shoes were very fine, and over a
large hoop I wore a pink sattin quilted petticoat
trimmed with silver, which was partly covered 

by a white dimity night-gown, a full quarter of
a yard too short: my handkerchief and apron
were hurried on without pinning; my night-cap
could not contain my hair, which hung about
my ears in great disorder, and my countenance
denoted a mixture of hope and fear, joy and
shame. 
In this dilemma, I made my addresses to that
honourable member of society a shoe-black, whom
I earnestly intreated to provide me with a coach
or chair, promising to reward him liberally for
his trouble: but he having the misfortune to be
lame, was unable to keep up with my pace; so
that, by his advice and direction, I went into the
first public-house I found open, where I stayed
some time, in the utmost consternation, among
a crew of wretches whom I thought proper to
bribe for their civility, not without the terror of
being stripped. At length, however, my messenger
returned with a chair, of which I took
immediate possession; and fearing that, by this
time, my family would be alarmed, and send directly
to lord W&wblank;m's lodgings, I ordered myself
to be carried thither backwards, that so I
might pass undiscovered. 
This stratagem succeeded according to my
wish; I ran up stairs, in a state of trepidation,
to my faithful lover, who called an hackneycoach,
in which we went to church and were
married. 
His fears were then all over, but mine recurred
with double aggravation: I dreaded the sight of
my father, and shared all the sorrow he suffered on
account of my undutiful behaviour: for I loved
him with such piety of affection, that I would
have endured every other species of distress, rather 

than have given him the least uneasiness: but
love (where he reigns in full empire) is altogether
irresistible, surmounts every difficulty, and
swallows up all other considerations. This was
the case with me; and now the irrevocable step
was taken, my first care was to avoid his sight. 
With this view, I begged that lord W&wblank;m
would think of some remote place in the country,
to which we might retire for the present; 
and he forthwith conducted me to an house on
Blackheath, where we were very civilly received
by a laughter-loving dame, who seemed to mistake
me for one of her own sisterhood. 
I no sooner perceived her opinion, than I desired
lord W&wblank;m to undeceive her; upon
which she was made acquainted with the predicament
in which I stood, and shewed us into a private
room, where I called for pen and paper, and
wrote an apology to my father, for having acted
contrary to his will, in so important a concern. 
This task being performed, the bridegroom
gave me to understand, that there was a necessity
for our being bedded immediately, in order to
render the marriage binding, lest my father should
discover and part us before consummation. I
pleaded hard for a respite till the evening, objecting
to the indecency of going to bed before
noon; but he found means to invalidate all my
arguments, and to convince me, that it was now
my duty to obey. Rather than hazard the imputation
of being obstinate and refractory on the
first day of my probation, I suffered myself to be
led into a chamber, which was darkened by my
express stipulation, that my shame and confusion
might be the better concealed, and yielded to the 

privilege of a dear husband, who loved me to
adoration. 
About five o'clock in the afternoon we were
called to dinner, which we had ordered to be
ready at four; but such a paultry care had been
forgot, amidst the transports of our mutual bliss. 
We got up, however, and when we came down
stairs, I was ashamed to see the light of day, or
meet the eyes of my beloved lord. I ate little,
said less, was happy, though overwhelmed with
confusion, underwent a thousand agitations, some
of which were painful, but by far the greater
part belonged to rapture and delight; we were
imparadised in the gratification of our mutual
wishes, and felt all that love can bestow, and sensibility
enjoy. 
In the twilight, we returned to lord W&wblank;m's
lodgings in town, where I received a letter from
my father, importing, that he would never see
me again. But there was one circumstance in his
manner of writing, from which I conceived an
happy presage of his future indulgence. He had
begun with his usual appellation of Dear Fanny,
which, though it was expunged to make way for
the word Madam, encouraged me to hope that
his paternal fondness was not yet extinguished. 
At supper, we were visited by lord W&wblank;m's
youngest sister, who laughed at us for our inconsiderate
match, though, she owned, she envied
our happiness, and offered me the use of her
cloaths, until I could retrieve my own. She
was a woman of a great deal of humour, plain
but genteel, civil, friendly, and perfectly well-bred. 
She favoured us with her company till the
night was pretty far advanced, and did not take
her leave till we retired to our apartment. 

As our lodgings were not spacious or magnificent,
we resolved to see little company; but
this resolution was frustrated by the numerous acquaintance
of lord W&wblank;m, who let in half the
town; so that I ran the gauntlet for a whole
week among a set of wits, who always delight
in teazing a young creature of any note, when
she happens to make such a stolen match. Among
those that visited us upon this occasion, was my
lord's younger brother, who was at that time in
keeping with a rich heiress of masculine memory,
and took that opportunity of making a parade
with his equipage, which was indeed very magnificent,
but altogether disregarded by us, whose
happiness consisted in the opulence of mutual
love. 
This ceremony of receiving visits being performed,
we went to wait on his mother the duchess
of H&wblank;, who hearing I was an heiress,
readily forgave her son for marrying without her
knowledge and consent, and favoured us with a
very cordial reception; insomuch that, for several
months, we dined almost constantly at her table; 
and I must own, I always found her unaltered in
her civility and affection, contrary to her general
character, which was haughty and capricious. 
She was undoubtedly a woman of great spirit
and understanding, but subject to an infirmity
which very much impairs and disguises every other
qualification. 
In about three weeks after our marriage, I was
so happy as to obtain the forgiveness of my father,
to whose house we repaired, in order to pay
our respects and submission. At sight of me he
wept; nor did I behold his tears unmoved: my
heart was over-charged with tenderness and sorrow, 

for having offended such an indulgent parent; 
so that I mingled my tears with his, while
my dear husband, whose soul was of the softest
and gentlest mould, melted with sympathy at the
affecting scene. 
Being thus reconciled to my father, we attended
him into the country, where we were received
by my mother, who was a sensible good
woman, though not susceptible of love, and therefore
less apt to excuse a weakness, to which she
was an utter stranger. This was likewise the
case with an uncle, from whom I had great expectations. 
He was a plain good-natured man,
and treated us with great courtesy; though his
notions, in point of love, were not exactly conformable
to ours. Nevertheless, I was, and
seemed to be so happy in my choice, that my family
not only became satisfied with the match,
but exceedingly fond of lord W&wblank;m. 
After a short stay with them in the country,
we returned to London, in order to be introduced
at court, and then set out for the North, on a
visit to my brother-in-law the duke of H&wblank;,
who had, by a letter to lord W&wblank;m, invited
us to his habitation. My father accordingly
equipped us with horses and money; for our own
finances were extremely slender, consisting only
of a small pension allowed by his grace, upon
whom the brothers were intirely dependent, the
father having died suddenly, before suitable provision
could be made for his younger children. 
When I took my leave of my relations, bidding
adieu to my paternal home, and found myself
launching into a world of care and trouble,
though the voyage on which I had embarked was
altogether voluntary, and my companion the person 

on whom I doated to distraction, I could not
help feeling some melancholy sensations, which,
however, in a little time, gave way to a train of
more agreeable ideas. I was visited in town by
almost all the women of fashion, many of whom,
I perceived, envied me the possession of a man
who had made strange havock among their hearts,
and some of them knew the value of his favour. 
One in particular endeavoured to cultivate my
friendship with singular marks of regard; but I
thought proper to discourage her advances, by
keeping within the bounds of bare civility; and
indeed, to none of them was I lavish of my complaisance; 
for I dedicated my whole time to the
object of my affection, who engrossed my wishes
to such a degree, that although I was never jealous
(because I had no reason to be so) I envied
the happiness of every woman whom he chanced
at any time to hand into a coach. 
The duchess of—, who was newly
married to the earl of P&wblank;, a particular friend
of lord W&wblank;m's, carried me to court, and
presented me to the queen, who expressed her approbation
of my person in very particular terms,
and observed the satisfaction that appeared in my
countenance with marks of admiration; desiring
her ladies to take notice, how little happiness depended
upon wealth, since there was more joy
in my face than in all her court beside. 
Such a declaration could not fail to overwhelm
me with blushes, which her majesty seemed to
behold with pleasure; for she frequently repeated
the remark, and shewed me to all the foreigners
of distinction, with many gracious expressions of
favour. She wished lord W&wblank;m happiness instead
of joy, and was pleased to promise, that she 

would provide for her pretty beggars: and poor
enough we certainly were in every article but
love. Nevertheless, we felt no necessities, but
passed the summer in a variety of pleasures and
parties, the greatest part of which were planned
by lord W&wblank;m's sister and another lady, who
was at that time mistress to the prime minister. 
The first was a wit, but homely in her person; 
the other, a woman of great beauty and masculine
understanding; and a particular friendship
subsisted between them, though they were both
lovers of power and admiration. 
This lady, who sat at the helm, was extremely
elegant as well as expensive in her diversions,
in many of which we bore a share; particularly
in her parties upon the water, which
were contrived in all the magnificence of taste. 
In the course of these amusements, a trifling circumstance
occurred, which I shall relate as an
instance of that jealous sensibility which characterised
lord W&wblank;'s disposition. A large company
of ladies and gentlemen having agreed to
dine at Vauxhall, and sup at Marblehall, where
we proposed to conclude the evening with a
dance, one barge being insufficient to contain the
whole company, we were divided by lots; in
consequence of which, my husband and I were
parted. This separation was equally mortifying
to us both, who, though married, were still lovers; 
and my chagrin was increased, when I
perceived that I was doomed to sit by Sir W&wblank; 
Y&wblank;, a man of professed gallantry: for, although
lord W&wblank;m had, before his marriage,
made his addresses to every woman he saw, I
knew very well he did not desire that any person
should make love to his wife. 

That I might not therefore give umbrage,
by talking to this gallant, I conversed with a
Scotch nobleman, who, according to common
report, had formerly sighed among my admirers:
by these means, in seeking to avoid one
error, I unwittingly plunged myself into a
greater; and disobliged Lord W&wblank;m so much,
that he could not conceal his displeasure; nay,
so deeply was he offended at my conduct, that
in the evening, when the ball began, he would
scarce deign to take me by the hand in the course
of dancing, and darted such unkind looks as
pierced me to the very soul; and what augmented
my concern, was my ignorance of the trespass
I had committed. I was tortured with a thousand
uneasy reflections; I began to fear that I
had mistaken his temper, and given my heart to
a man who was tired of possession; tho' I resolved
to bear without complaining the misfortune
I had entailed upon myself. 
I seized the first opportunity of speaking to
him, and thereby discovered the cause of his
chagrin; but, as there was no time for expostulation,
the misunderstanding continued on his
side, with such evident marks of uneasiness, that
every individual of the company made up to
me, and inquired about the cause of his disorder; 
so that I was fain to amuse their concern, by
saying that he had been ill the day before, and
dancing did not agree with his constitution. So
much was he incensed by this unhappy circumstance
of my conduct, which was void of all intention
to offend him, that he determined to be
revenged of me, for my indiscretion, and at supper,
chancing to sit between two very handsome
ladies, (one of whom is lately dead, and the other, 

at present, my neighbour in the country)
he affected an air of gaiety, and openly coquetted
with them both. 
This was not the only punishment he inflicted
on his innocent wife. In the course of our entertainment,
we engaged in some simple diversion,
in consequence of which, the gentlemen
were ordered to salute the ladies; when Lord
W&wblank;m, in performing this command, unkindly
neglected me in my turn; and I had occasion
for all my discretion and pride, to conceal from
the company the agonies I felt at this mark of
indifference and disrespect. However, I obtained
the victory over myself, and pretended to laugh
at his husband-like behaviour, while the tears
stood in my eyes, and my heart swelled even to
bursting. 
We broke up about five, after having spent
the most tedious evening I had ever known; and
this offended lover went to bed in a state of sullen
silence and disgust. Whatever desire I had to
come to an explanation, I thought myself so
much aggrieved by his unreasonable prejudice,
that I could not prevail upon myself to demand a
conference, till after his first nap, when my pride
giving way to my tenderness, I clasped him in
my arms, though he pretended to discourage
these advances of my love: I asked how he could
be so unjust as to take umbrage at my civility to
a man whom, he knew, I had refused for his
sake. I chid him for his barbarous endeavours
to awake my jealousy, and used such irresistible
arguments in my own vindication, that
he was convinced of my innocence, sealed my
acquittal with a kind embrace, and we mutually 

enjoyed the soft transports of a fond reconciliation. 
Never was passion more eager, delicate, or
unreserved, than that which glowed within our
breasts. Far from being cloyed with the possession
of each other, our raptures seemed to increase
with the term of our union. When we
were parted, though but for a few hours, by the
necessary avocations of life, we were unhappy
during that brief separation, and met again, like
lovers who knew no joy but in one another's
presence. How many delicious evenings did we
spend together, in our own little apartment, after
we had ordered the candles to be taken away,
that we might enjoy the agreeable reflection of the
moon, in a fine summer's evening. Such a mild
and solemn scene naturally disposes the mind to
peace and benevolence; but when improved with
the conversation of the man one loves, it fills the
imagination with ideas of ineffable delight! For
my own part, I can safely say, my heart was so
wholly ingrossed by my husband, that I never
took pleasure in any diversion, where he was
not personally concerned; nor was I ever guilty
of one thought repugnant to my duty and my
love. 
In the autumn we set out for the north, and
were met on the road by the duke and twenty
gentlemen, who conducted us to H&wblank;n, where
we lived in all imaginable splendor. His grace, at
that time, maintained above an hundred servants,
with a band of music, which always performed
at dinner, kept open table, and was visited by a
great deal of company. The œconomy of his
house was superintended by his eldest sister, a
beautiful young lady of an amiable temper, with 

whom I soon contracted an intimate friendship. 
She and the duke used to rally me upon my fondness
for lord W&wblank;m, who was a sort of an
humourist, and apt to be in a pet, in which case
he would leave the company, and go to bed by
seven o'clock in the evening. On these occasions
I always disappeared, giving up every consideration
to that of pleasing my husband, notwithstanding
the ridicule of his relations, who taxed me
with having spoiled him with too much indulgence. 
But how could I express too much
tenderness and condescension for a man, who
doated upon me to such excess, that when business
obliged him to leave me, he always snatched
the first opportunity to return, and often rode
through darkness, storms and tempests to my
arms. 
Having stayed about seven months in this
place, I found myself in a fair way of being a
mother; and that I might be near my own relations,
in such an interesting situation, I and my
dear companion departed from H&wblank;n, not without
great reluctance; for I was fond of the Scots
in general, who treated me with great hospitality
and respect; and to this day, they pay me the
compliment of saying, I was one of the best
wives in that country, which is so justly celebrated
for good women. 
Lord W&wblank;m having attended me to my father's
house, was obliged to return to Scotland,
to support his interest in being elected member
of parliament; so that he took his leave of me,
with a full resolution of seeing me again, before
the time of my lying-inn; and all the comfort I
enjoyed in his absence, was the perusal of his
letters, which I punctually received, together 

with those of his sister, who, from time to time,
favoured me with assurances of his constancy and
devotion. Indeed these testimonials were necessary
to one of my disposition; for I was none of
those who could be contented with half an heart. 
I could not even spare one complacent look to any
other woman, but expected the undivided homage
of his love. Had I been disappointed in this expectation,
I should (though a wife) have rebelled
or died. 
Mean while, my parents treated me with great
tenderness, intending that lord W&wblank;m should
be settled in a house of his own, and accommodated
with my fortune; and his expectations from
the queen were very sanguine, when I was taken
ill, and delivered of a dead child: an event
which affected me so much, that when I understood
the extent of my misfortune, my heart
throbbed with such violence, that my breast
could scarce contain it; and my anxiety being aggravated
by the absence of my lord, produced a
dangerous fever, of which he was no sooner apprized
by letter, than he came post from Scotland; 
but before his arrival, I was supposed to be
in a fair way. 
During this journey, he was tortured with
all that terrible suspence which prevails in the
minds of those who are in danger of losing that
which is most dear to them; and when he entered
the house, was so much overwhelmed with
apprehension, that he durst not inquire about the
state of my health. 
As for my part, I never closed an eye from
the time on which I expected his return; and
when I heard his voice, threw open my curtains,
and sat up in the bed to receive him, though at 

the hazard of my life. He ran towards me with
all the eagerness of passion, and clasp'd me in his
arms; he kneeled by my bed-side, kissed my hand
a thousand times, and wept with transports of
tenderness and joy. In short, this meeting was
so pathetic, as to overcome my enfeebled constitution; 
and we were parted by those who were
wiser than ourselves, and saw that nothing was
so proper for us as a little repose. 
But how shall I relate the deplorable transition
from envied happiness to excess of misery, which I
now sustained! My month was hardly up, when my
dear husband was taken ill: perhaps the fatigue of
body as well as mind, which he had undergone on
my account, occasioned a fatal ferment in his blood,
and his health fell a sacrifice to his love. Physicians
were called from London; but alas! they
brought no hopes of his recovery. By their advice,
he was removed to town, for the convenience
of being punctually attended. Every
moment was too precious to be thrown away; 
he was therefore immediately put into the coach,
though the day was far spent; and I, though exceedingly
weak, accompanied him in the journey,
which was performed by the light of flambeaus,
and rendered unspeakably shocking, by the dismal
apprehension of losing him every moment. 
At length, however, we arrived at our lodgings
on Pall-mall, where I lay by him on the floor,
and attended the issue of his distemper, in all the
agonies of horror and despair. In a little time
his malady settled upon his brain, and in his delirium,
he uttered such dreadful exclamations, as
were sufficient to pierce the most savage heart. 
What effect then must they have had on mine,
which was fraught with every sentiment of the 

most melting affection! It was not a common
grief that took possession of my soul; I felt all
the aggravation of the most acute distress. I
sometimes ran down to the street in a fit of distraction: 
I sent for the doctors every minute: 
I wearied heaven with my prayers; even now
my heart akes at the remembrance of what I suffered,
and I cannot without trembling proceed
with the woeful story. 
After having lain insensible some days, he recovered
the use of speech, and called upon my
name, which he had a thousand times repeated,
while he was bereft of reason. All hopes of his
life were now relinquished, and I was led to his
bed-side to receive his last adieu, being directed
to summon all my fortitude, and suppress my sorrow,
that he might not be disturbed by my agitation. 
I collected all my resolution to support
me in this affecting scene: I saw my dear lord in
extremity; the beauties of his youth were all decayed,
yet his eyes, though languid, retained unspeakable
sweetness and expression. He felt his
end approaching, put forth his hand, and with a
look full of complacency and benevolence, uttered
such a tender tale—Good heaven! how
had I deserved such accumulated affliction! the
bare remembrance of which now melts me into
tears. Human nature could not undergo my situation,
without suffering an extasy of grief! I
clasped him in my arms, and kissed him a thousand
times, with the most violent emotions of
woe: but I was torn from his embrace, and in a
little time he was ravished for ever from my
view. 
On that fatal morning, which put a period to
his life, I saw the duchess of L&wblank; approach my 

bed, and, from her appearance, concluded that
he was no more; yet I begg'd she would not
confirm the unhappy presage, by announcing his
death; and she accordingly preserved the most
emphatic silence. I got up, and trod softly over
his head, as if I had been afraid of interrupting
his repose. Alas! he was no longer sensible of
such disturbance. I was seized with a stupification
of sorrow: I threw up the window, and
looking around, thought the sun shone with the
most dismal aspect; every thing was solitary,
chearless, and replete with horror. 
In this condition I was, by the direction of
my friend, conveyed to her house, where my faculties
were so overpowered by the load of anguish
which oppressed me, that I know not what
passed during the first days of my unhappy widowhood:
this only I know, the kind duchess
treated me with all imaginable care and compassion,
and carried me to her country-house,
where I stayed some months; during which, she
endeavoured to comfort me with all the amusements
she could invent, and laid me under such
obligations, as shall never be erased from my remembrance:
yet, notwithstanding all her care
and concern, I was, by my excess of grief,
plunged into a languishing distemper, for which
my physicians advised me to drink the Bath
waters. 
In compliance with this prescription, I went
thither towards the end of summer, and found
some benefit by adhering to their directions; 
though I seldom went abroad, except when I visited
my sister-in-law, who was there with the
princess; and upon these occasions, I never failed
to attract the notice of the company, who were 

struck with the appearance of such a young creature
in weeds. Nor was I free from the persecution
of professed admirers; but being dead to all
joy, I was deaf to the voice of adulation. 
About Christmas, I repaired to my father's
house, where my sorrows were revived by every
object that recalled the idea of my dear lamented
lord. But these melancholy reflections I was obliged
to bear, because I had no other home or habitation,
being left an unprovided widow, altogether
dependant on the affection of my own family. 
During this winter, divers overtures were made
to my father, by people who demanded me in
marriage; but my heart was not yet sufficiently
weaned from my former passion, to admit the
thoughts of another master. Among those that
presented their proposals, was a certain young
nobleman, who upon the first news of lord
W&wblank;m's death, came post from Paris, in order
to declare his passion. He made his first appearance
in a hired chariot and six, accompanied
by a big fat fellow, whom (as I afterwards
learn'd) he had engaged to sound his praises, with
the promise of a thousand pounds, in lieu of
which he paid him with forty. Whether it was
with a view of screening himself from the cold,
or of making a comfortable medium in case of
being overturned, and falling under his weighty
companion, I know not; but certain it is, the
carriage was stuffed with hay, in such a manner,
that when he arrived, the servants were at some
pains in rummaging and removing it, before they
could come at their master, or help him to alight. 
When he was lifted out of the chariot, he exhibited
a very ludicrous figure to the view: he
was a thin, meagre, shivering creature, of a low 

stature, with little black eyes, a long nose, sallow
complexion, and pitted with the small pox,
dressed in a coat of light brown frize, lined with
pink-coloured shag, a monstrous solitaire and
bag, and (if I remember aright) a pair of huge
jack-boots. In a word, his whole appearance
was so little calculated for inspiring love, that I
had (on the strength of seeing him once before
at Oxford) set him down as the last man on
earth, whom I would chuse to wed; and I will
venture to affirm, that he was, in every particular,
the very reverse of my late husband. 
As my father was not at home, he stayed but
one evening, and left his errand with my mother,
to whom he was as disagreeable as to myself; so
that his proposal was absolutely rejected; and
I heard no more of him during the space of
three whole months, at the expiration of which,
I went to town, where this mortifying figure
presented itself again, and renewed his suit, offering
such advantageous terms of settlement,
that my father began to relish the match, and
warmly recommended it to my consideration. 
Lord W&wblank;m's relations advised me to embrace
the opportunity of making myself independent; 
all my acquaintance plied me with with arguments
to the same purpose: I was uneasy at
home, and indifferent to all mankind. I weighed
the motives with the objections, and with reluctance
yielded to the importunity of my friends. 
In consequence of this determination, the little
gentleman was permitted to visit me; and the
manner of his address did not at all alter the
opinion I had conceived of his character and understanding. 
I was even shocked at the prospect
of marrying a man whom I could not love; and, 

in order to disburthen my own conscience, took
an opportunity of telling him one evening, as
we sat opposite to each other, that it was not in
my power to command my affection, and therefore
he could not expect the possession of my
heart, lord W&wblank;m's indulgence having spoiled
me for a wife. Nevertheless, I would endeavour
to contract a friendship for him, which would intirely
depend upon his own behaviour. 
To this declaration he replied (to my great
surprize) that he did not desire me to love him,
my friendship was sufficient; and next day,
repeated this strange instance of moderation in a
letter, which I communicated to my sister, who
laughed heartily at the contents, and persuaded
me, that since I could love no man, he was the
properest person to be my husband. 
Accordingly, the wedding cloaths and equipage
being prepared, the day—the fatal day was fixed!
on the morning of which, I went to the house of
my brother-in-law duke H&wblank;, who, loved me
tenderly, and took my leave of the family; a
family which I shall always remember with love,
honour, and esteem. His grace received me in
the most affectionate manner, saying at parting,
“Lady W&wblank;m, if he does not use you well,
I will take you back again.” 
The bridegroom and I met at Ox—chapel,
where the ceremony was performed by the bishop
of W&blank;, in presence of his mother, my father,
and another lady; and the nuptial knot
being tied, we set out for my father's house in
the country, and proceeded full twenty miles on
our journey, before my lord opened his mouth; 
my thoughts having been all that time employed
on something quite foreign to my present situation; 

for I was then but a giddy girl of eighteen. 
At length my father broke silence, and clapping
his lordship on the shoulder, told him he was but
a dull bridegroom; upon which, my lord gave
him to understand, that he was out of spirits. 
This dejection continued all the day, notwithstanding
the refreshment of a plentiful dinner,
which he ate upon the road; and in the evening we
arrived at the place of destination, where we were
kindly received by my mother, though she had
no liking to the match; and after supper, we retired
to our apartment. 
It was here that I had occasion to perceive the
most disagreeable contrast between my present
help-mate and my former lord: instead of flying to
my arms with all the eagerness of love and rapture,
this manly representative sat moping in a
corner, like a criminal on execution-day, and
owned he was ashamed to bed a woman, whose
hand he had scarce ever touched. 
I could not help being affected with this pusilanimous
behaviour: I remembered lord W&blank;m,
while I surveyed the object before me, and made
such a comparison as filled me with horror and
disgust: nay, to such a degree did my aversion
to this phantom prevail, that I began to sweat
with anguish at the thought of being subjected to
his pleasure: and when, after a long hesitation,
he ventured to approach me, I trembled as if I
had been exposed to the embraces of a rattlesnake. 
Nor did the efforts of his love diminish
this antipathy; his attempts were like the pawings
of an imp, sent from hell to teize and torment
some guilty wretch, such as are exhibited in
some dramatic performance, which I never see
acted, without remembering my wedding-night. 

By such shadowy, unsubstantial, vexatious behaviour,
was I tantalized, and robb'd of my repose; 
and early next morning I got up, with a
most sovereign contempt for my bedfellow, who
indulged himself in bed till eleven. 
Having passed a few days in this place, I went
home with him to his house at Twickenham; 
and soon after we were presented at court, when
the queen was pleased to say to my lord's mother,
she did not doubt that we should be an happy
couple, for I had been a good wife to my former
husband. 
Whatever deficiencies I had to complain of in
my new spouse, he was not wanting in point of
liberality: I was presented with a very fine chariot
studded with silver nails, and such a profusion
of jewels as furnished a joke to some of my
acquaintance, who observed that I was formerly
queen of hearts, but now metamorphosed into
the queen of diamonds. This uncommon splendour
attracted the eyes and envy of my competitors,
who were the more implacable in their resentments,
because, notwithstanding my marriage,
I was as much as ever followed by the men
of gallantry and pleasure, among whom it is a
constant maxim, that a woman never with-holds
her affections from her husband, without an intention
to bestow them somewhere else. I never
appeared without a train of admirers, and my
house in the country was always crouded with
gay young men of quality. 
Among those who cultivated my good graces
with the greatest skill and assiduity, were the earl
C&wblank;, and Mr. S&wblank;, brother to lord F&wblank;. 
The former of whom, in the course of his addresses,
treated me with an entertainment of surprising 

magnificence, disposed into a dinner, supper,
and ball; to which I, at his desire, invited
eleven ladies, whom he paired with the like number
of his own sex: so that the whole company
amounted to twenty-four. We were regaled
with a most elegant dinner, in an apartment
which was altogether superb, and served by
gentlemen only, no livery-servant being permited
to come within the door. In the afternoon
we embarked in two splendid barges, being attended
by a band of musick, in a third; and enjoyed
a delightful evening upon the river, till the
twilight, when we returned, and began the ball,
which was conducted with such order and taste,
that mirth and good humour prevailed, and no
dissatisfaction appeared, except in the countenance
of one old maid, since married to a son of the
duke of—, who, tho' she would not refuse to
partake of such an agreeable entertainment, was
displeased that I should have the honour of inviting
her. O baleful Envy! thou self-tormenting
fiend! How do'st thou predominate in all assemblies,
from the grand gala of a court to the meeting
of simple peasants at their harvest-home! Nor
is the prevalence of this sordid passion to be wondered
at, if we consider the weakness, pride, and
vanity of our sex. The presence of one favourite
man shall poison the enjoyment of a whole company,
and produce the most rancorous enmity
betwixt the closest friends. 
I danced with the master of the ball, who employed
all the artillery of his eloquence in making
love; yet I did not listen to his addresses, for he
was not to my taste, tho' he possessed an agreeable
person, and a good acquired understanding; 
but he was utterly ignorant of that gentle prevailing 

art which I afterwards experienced in Mr.
S&wblank;, and which was the only method he could
have successfully practised, in seducing a young
woman like me, born with sentiments of honour,
and trained up in the paths of religion and
virtue. He was, indeed, absolutely master of
those insinuating qualifications which few women
of passion and sensibility can resist; and had
a person every way adapted for profiting by these
insidious talents. He was well acquainted with
the human heart, conscious of his own power and
capacity, and exercised these endowments with
unwearied perseverance. He was tall and thin,
which was perfectly agreeable to my taste, with
large blue eloquent eyes, good teeth, and a long
head turned to gallantry. His behaviour was the
standard of politeness, and all his advances were
conducted with the most profound respect; which
is the most effectual expedient a man can use
against us, if he can find means to persuade us,
that it proceeds from the excess and delicacy of
his passion. It is no other than a silent compliment,
by which our accomplishments are continually
flattered, and pleases in proportion to the
supposed understanding of him who pays it. 
By these arts and advantages this consummate
politician in love began by degrees to sap the
foundations of my conjugal faith; he stole imperceptibly
into my affection, and, by dint of opportunity,
which he well knew how to improve,
triumphed, at last, over all his rivals. 
Nor was he the only person that disputed
my heart with Earl C&wblank;, who was also rivaled
by lord C&wblank; H&wblank;, a Scotchman, who had been
an intimate and relation of my former husband. 
This gentleman I would have preferred to most 

of his competitors, and I coqueted with him for
some time: but this amour was interrupted by
his going to Ireland; upon which occasion, understanding
that he was but indifferently provided
with money, I made him a present of a gold
snuff-box, in which was inclosed a bank-note; a
trifling mark of my esteem, which he afterwards
justified by the most grateful, friendly, and genteel
behaviour; and as we corresponded by letters,
I frankly told him, that Mr. S&wblank; had stept
in, and won the palm from all the rest of my admirers. 
This new favourite's mothers and sisters, who
lived in the neighbourhood, were my constant
companions; and, in consequence of this intimacy,
he never let a day pass without paying his
respects to me in person; nay, so ingenious was
he in contriving the means of promoting his suit,
that whether I rode or walked, went abroad or
stayed at home, he was always of course one of the
party: so that his design seemed to ingross his whole
vigilance and attention. Thus he studied my disposition,
and established himself in my good opinion,
at the same time. He found my heart
was susceptible of every tender impression, and
saw that I was not free from the vanity of youth; 
he had already acquired my friendship and esteem,
from which he knew there was a short and easy
transition to love; and by his penetration choosing
proper seasons for the theme, urged it with such
pathetic vows and artful adulation, as well
might captivate a young woman of my complexion
and inexperience, and circumstanced as I was,
with a husband whom I had such reason to despise. 

Tho' he thus made an insensible progress in
my heart, he did not find my virtue an easy conquest; 
and I myself was ignorant of the advantage
he had gained, with regard to my inclinations,
until I was convinced of his success by an alarm
of jealousy which I one day felt, at seeing him
engaged in conversation with another lady. I
forthwith recognized this symptom of love, with
which I had been formerly acquainted, and
trembled at the discovery of my own weakness. 
I underwent a strange agitation and mixture of
contrary sensations: I was pleased with the passion,
yet ashamed of avowing it even to my own
mind. The rights of a husband (tho' mine was
but a nominal one) occurred to my reflexion,
and virtue, modesty and honour forbad me to
cherish the guilty flame. 
While I encouraged these laudable scruples,
and resolved to sacrifice my love to duty and reputation,
my lord was almost every day employed
in riding post to my father, with complaints of
my conduct, which was hitherto irreproachable; 
tho' the greatest grievance which he pretended to
have suffered, was my refusing to comply with
his desire, when he intreated me to lie a whole
hour every morning, with my neck uncovered,
that by gazing he might quiet the perturbation of
his spirits. From this request you may judge of
the man, as well as of the regard I must entertain
for his character and disposition. 
During the whole summer I was besieged by
my artful undoer, and in the autumn set out
with my lord for Bath, where, by reason of the
intimacy that subsisted between our families, we
lived in the same house with my lover and his
sister, who, with another agreeable young lady, 

accompanied us in this expedition. By this time
Mr. S&wblank; had extorted from me a confession of a
mutual flame, tho' I assured him that it should
never induce me to give up the valuable possessions
of an unspotted character, and a conscience
void of offence. I offered him all the enjoyment
he could reap from an unreserved intercourse
of souls, abstracted from any sensual consideration; 
and he eagerly embraced the Platonic
proposal, because he had sagacity enough to
foresee the issue of such chimerical contracts, and
knew me too well to think he could accomplish
his purpose without seeming to acquiesce in my
own terms, and cultivating my tenderness under
the specious pretext. 
In consequence of this agreement we took all
opportunities of seeing each other in private; and
these interviews were spent in mutual protestations
of disinterested love. This correspondence,
tho' dangerous, was (on my side) equally innocent
and endearing; and many happy hours we
pass'd, before my sentiments were discovered. 
At length my lover was taken ill, and then my
passion burst out beyond the power of concealment; 
my grief and anxiety became so conspicuous
in my countenance, and my behaviour was
so indiscreet, that every body in the house perceived
the situation of my thoughts, and blamed
my conduct accordingly. 
Certain it is I was extremely imprudent, tho'
intentionally innocent. I have lain whole nights
by my lord, who teized and tormented me for
that which neither I could give nor he could take,
and ruminated on the fatal consequence of this
unhappy flame, until I was worked into a fever
of disquiet. I saw there was no safety but in 

flight, and often determined to banish myself for
ever from the sight of this dangerous intruder. 
But my resolution always failed at the approach
of day, and my desire of seeing him as constantly
recurred. So far was I from persisting in such
commendable determinations, that, on the eve of
our departure from Bath, I felt the keenest pangs
of sorrow at our approaching separation; and as
we could not enjoy our private interviews at my
house in town, I promised to visit him at his own
apartments, after he had sworn by all that's sacred,
that he would take no sinister advantage of
my condescension, by presuming upon the opportunities
I should give. 
He kept his word; for he saw I trusted to it
with fear and trembling, and perceived that my
apprehension was not affected, but the natural
concern of a young creature, distracted between
love and duty, whom, had he alarmed, he never
would have seen within his doors again. Instead
of pressing me with sollicitations in favour of his
passion, he was more than ever respectful and
complaisant; so that I found myself disengaged
of all restraint, conducted the conversation,
shortened and repeated my visits, at my own
pleasure, till, at last, I became so accustomed to
this communication, that his house was as familiar
to me as my own. 
Having in this manner secured himself in my
confidence, he resumed the favourite topic of
love, and warming my imagination by gradual
advances on the subject, my heart began to pant; 
and when he saw me thus, he snatched the favourable
occasion to practise all his eloquence and
art. I could not resist his energy, nor even fly
from the temptation that assailed me, until he 

had obtained a promise that he should, at our
next meeting, reap the fruits of his tedious expectation. 
Upon this condition I was permitted
to retire, and blessed heaven for my escape,
fully determined to continue in the path of virtue
I had hitherto trod, and stifle the criminal flame,
by which my peace and reputation were endangered. 
But his idea, which reigned within my
heart, without controul, soon baffled all those
prudent suggestions. 
I saw him again; and he reminded me of my
promise, which I endeavoured to evade with affected
pleasantry; upon which he manifested the utmost
displeasure and chagrin, shedding some crocodile
tears, and upbraiding me with levity and
indifference. He observed, that he had sollicited
my favour for ten long months, without intermission,
and imagined I had held out so long
on virtuous motives only; but now he could
plainly perceive that his want of success had been
owing to my want of affection; and that all my
professions were insincere: in a word, he persuaded
me, that his remonstrances were just and
reasonable. I could not see the affliction of a man
I loved, when I knew it was in my power to remove
it; and rather than forfeit his opinion of
my sincerity and love, I consented to his wish. 
My heart now flutters at the remembrance of the
dear, tho' fatal indiscretion; yet I reflect without
remorse, and even remember it with pleasure. 
If I could not avoid the censure of the world,
I was resolved to bear it without repining; and
sure the guilt (if there was any in my conduct)
was but venial; for I considered myself as a person
absolved of all matrimonial ties, by the insignificance 

of lord &wblank;, who, tho' a nominal
husband, was, in fact, a mere non-entity. I
therefore contracted a new engagement with my
lover, to which I resolved to adhere with the
most scrupulous fidelity, without the least intention
of injuring my lord or his relations; for had
our mutual passion produced any visible effects, I
would immediately have renounced and abandoned
my husband for ever, that the fruit of my
love for Mr. S&wblank; might not have inherited, to
the detriment of the right heir. This was my
determination, which I thought just, if not prudent; 
and for which I have incurred the imputation
of folly, in the opinion of this wise and honest
generation, by whose example and advice I
have, since that time, been a little reformed in
point of prudentials, tho' I still retain a strong
tendency to return to my primitive way of thinking. 
When I quitted Mr. S&wblank;, after the sacrifice
I had made, and returned to my own bed, it
may perhaps be supposed that I slept but little. 
True: I was kept awake by the joyful impatience
of revisiting my lover. Indeed I neglected
no opportunity of flying to his arms: when
lord &wblank; was in the country we enjoyed each
other's company without interruption, but when
he resided in town our correspondence was limited
to stolen interviews, which were unspeakably
delicious, as genuine love presided at the entertainment. 
Such was my happiness, in the course of this
tender communication, that to this day I remember
it with pleasure, tho' it has cost me dear in
the sequel, and was at that time enjoyed at a
considerable expence; for I devoted myself so intirely 

to my lover, who was desirous of engrossing
my time and thoughts, that my acquaintance,
which was very numerous, justly accused
me of neglect, and of consequence cooled
in their friendships: but I was all for love, or the
world well lost. And were the same opportunity
to offer, I would act the same conduct over
again. 
Some there are who possibly may wonder how
I could love twice with such violence of affection:
but all such observers must be unacquainted with
the human heart. Mine was naturally adapted
for the tender passions, and had been so fortunate,
so cherished, in its first impressions, that it felt
with joy the same sensations revive, when influenced
by the same engaging qualifications. 
Certain it is I loved the second time as well as the
first, and better was impossible. I gave up my
all for both: fortune and my father's favour for
the one; reputation, friends, and fortune for the
other. Yet, notwithstanding this intimate connexion,
I did not relinquish the world all at
once; on the contrary I still appeared at court,
and attracted the notice and approbation of my
royal patroness; I danced with the p&wblank; of W&wblank;; 
a circumstance which so nearly affected Mr. S&wblank;,
who was present, that, in order to manifest his
resentment, he chose the ugliest woman in the
ball for his partner; and I no sooner perceived his
uneasiness than I gave over, with a view of appeasing
his displeasure. 
Without repeating particular circumstances,
let it suffice to say, our mutual passion was a
perfect copy of that which had subsisted between
me and my dear lord W&wblank;m. It was jealous,
melting and delicate, and checquered with little 

accidents, which serve to animate and maintain
the flame, in its first ardency of rapture. When
my lover was sick, I attended and nursed him
with indefatigable tenderness and care; and during
an indisposition which I caught in the performance
of this agreeable office, he discharged
the obligation with all the warmth of sympathy
and love. 
It was, however, judged necessary by the
physicians, that I should use the Bath-waters for
the recovery of my health; and I set out for that
place, glad of a pretence to be absent from lord
—, with whom I lived on very unhappy terms. 
He had, about nine months after our marriage,
desired that we might sleep in separate beds, and
gave a very whimsical reason for this proposal. 
He said, the immensity of his love deprived him
of the power of gratification, and that some
commerce with an object, to which his heart was
not attached, might, by diminishing the transports
of his spirits, recompose his nerves, and enable
him to enjoy the fruits of his good fortune. 
You may be sure I made no objections to this
plan, which was immediately put in execution. 
He made his addresses to a nymph of Drury-lane,
whose name (as he told me) was Mrs. Rock. 
She made shift to extract some money from her
patient; but his infirmity was beyond the power
of her art; though she made some mischief between
us; and I communicated my suspicion to
duke H&wblank;, who intended to have expostulated
with her upon the subject; but she got intimation
of his design, and saved him the trouble,
by a precipitate retreat. 
After my return from the Bath, where Mr. S.
and I had lived happily, until we were interrupted 

by the arrival of my husband, his lordship expressed
an inclination to be my bedfellow again; 
but in this particular I desired to be excused: for
though I would not be the first to propose the separation,
which, though usual in other countries,
is contrary to the custom of England, being unwilling
to furnish the least handle for censure,
as my character was still unblemished; yet, when
the proposal came from himself, I thought myself
intitled to refuse a re-union, to which I accordingly
objected. 
This opposition produced a quarrel, which rose
to a state of perpetual animosity; so that we began
to talk of parting. My lord relished the expedient,
agreeing to add three hundred pounds a
year to my pin-money, which (by the bye) was
never paid; and I renounced all state and grandeur,
to live in a small house that I hired at Casehorton,
where I passed my time for two months,
in the most agreeable retirement, with my dear
over, till I was disturbed by the intrusion of my
Lord, who molested me with visits and solicitations
to return, pretending that he had changed
his mind, and insisting upon my compliance with
his desire. 
I exhausted my invention in endeavours to
evade his request; but he persecuted me without
ceasing: so that I was fain to capitulate, on condition
that we should immediately set out for
France; and that he should not presume to approach
my bed, till our arrival at Calais. We accordingly
departed for that kingdom; and, far
from infringing the last article of our treaty, his
lordship did not insist upon his privilege, before
we reached the capital of France. 

Mean while, I began to feel the effect of my
passion in a very interesting manner, and communicated
my discovery to the dear author of it,
who would not leave me in such an affecting situation,
but took the first opportunity of following
us to France. 
In our road to Paris, we stopp'd to visit Chantilly,
a magnificent Chateau belonging to the
prince of Condé, and there met by accident with
some English noblemen, to whom I was known. 
The prince and his sisters invited me very politely
into the gallery where they sat. They complimented
me on my person, and seemed to admire
my dress, which was altogether new to them,
being a blue English riding-habit trimmed with
gold, and an hat with a feather. They were
particularly well pleased with my hair, which
hung down to my waist, and pressed me to stay
a fortnight at their house; an invitation which I
was very much mortified at being obliged to refuse,
because my lord did not understand the
French language. I was inchanted with the
place and the company, the women being amiable
and the men polite; nor were they strangers to
my name and story; for Mr. S&wblank; calling at
the same place a few days after, they rallied him
on my account. 
When we arrived at Paris, the first thing I
did was to metamorphose myself into a French
woman. I cut off my hair, hid a very good
complexion of my own with Rouge, reconciled
myself to powder, which I had never used before,
put on a robe with a large hoop, and went to
the Thuilleries, full of spirits and joy; for at that
time every thing conspired to make me happy: I
had health, youth and beauty, love, vanity and 

affluence, and found myself surrounded with diversions,
which were gay, new and agreeable. 
My appearance drew upon me the eyes of the
whole company, who considered me as a stranger,
but not a foreigner, so compleatly was I equipped
in the fashion of the French; and when they understood
who I was, they applauded my person
with the most lavish encomiums, according to
their known politeness. 
After having made a circuit round all the public
places of entertainment in Paris, I was introduced
into company, by an English family residing
in that city; and, among others, became
acquainted with a French lady, whose charms
were remarkably attractive. The duke of K&wblank; 
was her admirer; but she lived in reputation
with her mother and an agreeable sister, whose
lover was the prince of C&wblank;, (for almost every
lady in France has her Amant.) 
With this charming woman, whose name was
Madam De la T&wblank;, I often made parties of
pleasure. The duke, Mr. S&wblank;, she and I,
used to meet in the Bois de Boulogne, which is
a pleasant wood at a small distance from Paris,
whither the company repairs, in the summer-season,
for the benefit of the air; and after having
amused ourselves among the groves, embarked
in his grace's equipage, which was extremely
elegant, being a calash drawn by six
fine long-tailed greys, adorned with ribbons in
the French taste; and thus we were conducted
to a little inchanted, or at least inchanting palace,
possessed by the duke, at one end of the town. 
The lower apartment, appropriated to me, was
furnished with yellow and silver, the bed surrounded
with looking-glasses, and the door opened 

into a garden, laid out in a cradle-walk, and intervening
parterres of roses and other flowers. 
Above stairs my female companion lodged, in a
chamber furnished with chintz. We supped all
together in the saloon, which, though small, was
perfectly elegant. The company was always
good-humoured, the conversation sprightly and
joyous, and the scene, though often repeated,
still delightful and entertaining. 
At other times, Mr. S&wblank; and I used to pass
our evenings at the palace of the prince of C&wblank;,
which his highness lent us for our accommodation. 
The apartments opened into the gardens
of the Luxembourg, and were, in point of magnificence,
suitable to the owner. Thither I used
to repair in a flaming equipage, on pretence of
visiting, and spent the best part of the night with
him, who was dearer to me than all the princes
in the world. 
While I was happily engaged in these ravishing
parties, my little lord was employed in efforts to
recover his health by restoratives, and I know not
what; for he still lamented the enfeebling effects
of his passion, and complained, that he loved me
more like an angel than a woman, though he
strove to govern his affection according to the
doctrines of the christian religion, as he regulated
his life by the maxims of Charles the twelfth
of Sweden. The meaning of this declaration I
could never learn; and indeed, I have been often
tempted to believe he had no meaning at all. 
Be that as it will, I found my size visibly increasing,
and my situation extremely uneasy, on
account of the perpetual wrangling which prevailed
betwixt us, in consequence of his desiring
to sleep with me again, after we had parted beds 

for the second time: and, that I might be no
longer exposed to such disagreeable persecution, I
resolved to leave him, though at the hazard of
my life. 
Thus determined, I went to the British embassador
in an hackney coach; and, in order to
disguise my youth, which might have prepossessed
him against my judgment, muffled myself up in
a black hood, which (as he said) instead of lending
an air of gravity to my countenance, added a wildness
to my looks, which was far from being disagreeable. 
He had been a gallant man in his youth,
and even then, though well stricken in years,
was not insensible to the power of beauty. This
disposition, perhaps, rendered him more favourable
to my cause, though he at first advised me to
return to my husband; but finding me obstinate, he
undertook to serve me in my own way, and procure
a protection from the French king, by virtue
of which, I could live at Paris unmolested by my
lord. Nevertheless, he advised me (if I was determined
to leave him) to make the best of my
way to England, and sue for a divorce. 
I relished his opinion, and concealed myself
about three days in Paris, during which I borrowed
some linen; for, as it was impossible to
convey any thing out of my own house without
suspicion, I had neither cloaths for my accommodation,
nor a servant to wait on me. 
In this solitary condition I took the road to
Flanders, after I had put my lord upon a wrong
scent, by writing a letter to him, dated at Calais,
and travelled through an unknown country, without
any other attendant than the postilion, being
subjected to this inconvenience by the laws of
France, which are so severe in some particulars, 

that if any person had been apprehended with
me, he would have suffered death, for going
off with a man's wife; though any man might
go to bed with the same woman, without fear of
incurring any legal punishment. 
I proceeded night and day without intermission,
that I might the sooner reach Flanders,
where I knew I should be safe; and as the nights
were excessively cold, I was fain to wrap myself
up in flannel, which I bought for the purpose,
as I had no cloaths to keep me warm, and travelled
in an open chaise. While we passed
through dreary woods, quite remote from the habitations
of men, I was not without apprehension
of being stripped and murthered by the postilion; 
and, in all probability, owed my safety to
the indigence of my appearance, which might
also protect me in two miserable places where I
was obliged to lie, before I got out of the territories
of France; for, as I could not reach the
great towns where I intended to lodge, I was
under the necessity of putting up at little wretched
hovels, where no provision was to be had, but
four brown bread and sourer cheese; and every
thing seemed to denote the dens of despair and assassination. 
I made shift, however, to subsist on this fare,
uncomfortable as it was, confided in the meanness
of my equipage for the security of my person; 
and at length arriving at Brussels, fixed my quarters
in the Hotel de Flandre (so well known to the
English since) where I thought myself extremely
happy in the accomplishment of my flight. 
I had not been full two days in this place,
when I was blessed with the sight of my lover; 
and having concerted measures for proceeding to 

England, I hired a tall fine Liegeoise for a maid; 
and setting out for Ostend, we embarked in a
vessel, in which Mr. S&wblank; had bespoke our passage. 
Our voyage was short and prosperous, and
the time most agreeably spent in the company of
my dear partner, who was a most engaging man
in all respects, as I dare say my lady O&wblank; has
since found him. 
I assumed a fictitious name, took private lodgings
in Poland-street, retained lawyers, and commenced
a suit for separation against my lord. I
communicated the reasons of my elopement to
my father, who was shocked and surprised at my
conduct, which he condemned with expressions
of sorrow and resentment. But the step was taken; 
nor did I repent of what I had done, except
on his account. 
In the morning after my arrival at London, I
waited upon the lord-chief-justice, to whom I
complained of the usage I had received from my
lord, whose temper was teazing, tiresome, and
intolerably capricious. His behaviour was a strange
compound of madness and folly, seasoned with a
small proportion of sense: no wonder then that
I, who am hot and hasty, should be wretched,
under the persecution of such a perverse humourist,
who used to terrify me, and scold at
me the whole night without intermission, and
shake my pillow from time to time, that I might
not sleep, while he tormented me with his disagreeable
expostulations. I have been often
frightened almost out of my senses, at seeing
him convulsed by the most unreasonable passion; 
and chagrined to the highest degree of
disgust, to find (by repeated observation) his disposition
so preposterous, that his satisfaction and 

displeasure never depended upon the cause he had
to be satisfied or disobliged; but, on the contrary,
when he had most reason to be pleased, he
was always most discontented, and very often in
good humour, when he had reason enough for
vexation. 
While I lived in Poland-street, I was engaged
with lawyers, and so often visited by my father,
that I could not dedicate my whole time, as
usual, to my lover; nor was it convenient that
he should be seen in my company: he therefore
took a small house at Camberwell, whither I
went as often as I had an opportunity; and maintained
the correspondence with such eagerness and
industry, that although I was six months gone
with child, I have often, by myself, set out for
his habitation, in an hackney-coach, at eleven
o'clock at night, and returned by six in the morning,
that I might be in my own bed, when my
father came to see me; for I concealed my amour,
as well as the effects of it, from his knowledge,
and frequently took water from the Bridge, that
my motions might not be discovered. Nothing
but the most passionate love could have supported
my spirits under such vicissitudes of fatigue,
or enabled my admirer to spend whole
days by himself, in such a solitary retirement. 
By this time, my lord was arrived in England,
and employed in discovering the place of my retreat; 
so that I lived in continual alarm, and
provided myself with a speaking-trumpet, which
stood by my bed side, to be used in calling for
assistance, in case my pursuer should make an
attack upon my lodgings. 
This situation being extremely uncomfortable
I had no sooner begun my process against him, 

than I put myself intirely under the protection of
Mr. S&wblank;, who conducted me to the house of a
friend of his who lived in the country, where I
was secure from the attempts of my husband. 
The world had now given me up, and I had
renounced the world with the most perfect resignation. 
I weighed in my own breast what I
should lose in point of character, with what I
suffered in my peace at home, and found, that
my reputation was not to be preserved, except at
the expence of my quiet, (for his lordship was
not disposed to make me easy, had I been never
so discreet.) I therefore determined to give up a
few ceremonial visits, and empty professions, for
the more substantial enjoyments of life. 
We passed our time very agreeably, in various
amusements, with this friend of Mr. S&wblank;, until
the term of my reckoning was almost expired,
then returned to London, and took lodgings in
Southampton-street, where I began to make preparations
for the approaching occasion. Here I
proposed to live with the utmost circumspection. 
I disguised my name, saw nobody but my lawyer
and lover, and never approached the window,
lest I should be discovered by accident. 
Notwithstanding these precautions, my French
maid, whom I had sent for some of my cloaths,
was dogged in her return, and next morning my
lord took my lodgings by storm. Had he given
the assault in his own person only, I make
no doubt but he would have suffered a repulse,
from the opposition of the Ligeoise, who made
all the resistance in her power, but was obliged
to give way to superior number. 
I was at that time abed, and hearing an unusual
noise below, rung my bell, in order to 

know the cause of such disturbance. I drew my
curtain at the same time, and who should I see
entering my chamber but his lordship, attended
by a constable, and the footman who had detected
my retreat! 
Such an unexpected visit could not fail to affect
me with surprize and consternation: however, I
summoned all my fortitude to my aid, and perceiving
the fellows were about to open my window-shutters,
desired their principal to order them down
stairs. He readily complied with my request, and
sitting down by my bed-side, told me with an air
of triumph, that he had found me at last; and I
frankly owned, that I was heartily sorry for his
success. Instead of upbraiding me with my
escape, he proceeded to entertain me with all the
news in town, and gave me a minute detail of
every thing which had happened to him since our
parting; among other articles of intelligence,
giving me to understand, that he had challenged
Mr. S&wblank;, who had refused to fight him, and
was in disgrace with the prince of W&wblank; on
that account. 
But here his lordship did not strictly adhere to
the naked truth: he had indeed, before our departure
for the country, gone to my lover, and
insisted upon having satisfaction in Hyde-park,
two days from the date of his demand, and at
three o' clock in the afternoon; S&wblank; believing
him in earnest, accepted the invitation; though
he observed, that these affairs could not be discussed
too soon, and wished the time of meeting
might be at an earlier hour. But his lordship
did not choose to alter the circumstances of his
first proposal; and when he went away, said he 

should expect him at the appointed time and
place, if it did not rain. 
His antagonist gave me an account of the conversation,
when I assured him the whole business
would end in smoke. Accordingly, my lord sent
him a letter on Monday, desiring that the assignation
might be deferred till Thursday, that he
might have time to settle his affairs, and pay S&wblank; 
an hundred pounds, which he had formerly borrowed
of him. When Thursday came, he was
favoured with another epistle, importing, that
the challenger had changed his mind, and would
seek satisfaction at law. Thus ended that heroic
exploit, which his lordship now boasted of with
such arrogant misrepresentation. 
Whilst he regaled me with these interesting particulars,
I was contriving a scheme to frustrate
the discovery he had made; so that I did not contradict
his assertions, but told him, that if he
would go down stairs, I would rise and come to
breakfast. He consented to this proposal with
great chearfulness; and I own, I was not a little
surprized to find him, at this first interview, in
as good humour, as if nothing had happened to
interrupt the felicity of our matrimonial union. 
It cost me some invention to conceal my condition
from his notice, being now within a week
of the expected crisis: but I knew I had to do
with a man of no great penetration, and succeeded
in my attempt accordingly. We breakfasted
with great harmony, and I invited him to
dinner, after having prevailed upon him to send
away his myrmidons, whom, nevertheless, he
ordered to return at eleven o'clock at night. 
We conversed together with great gaiety and
mirth; and when I rallied him for visiting me in 

such a dishabille, he stood a tiptoe to view himself
in the glass; and owning I was in the right,
said he would go and dress himself before dinner. 
He accordingly went away, charging my maid
to give him entrance at his return; and he was
no sooner gone than I wrote to Mr. S&wblank;, giving
him an account of what had happened; then,
without having determined upon any certain
plan, huddled on my cloaths, muffled myself up,
and calling a chair, went to the next tavern,
where I stayed no longer than was sufficient to
change my vehicle; and, to the astonishment of
the drawers, who could not conceive the meaning
of my perturbation, proceeded to a shop in
the neighbourhood, where I dismissed my second
chair, and procured an hackney coach, in which
I repaired to the lodgings of my lawyer, whom I
could trust. Having made him acquainted with
the circumstances of my distress, and consulted
him about a proper place of retreat, after some
recollection he directed me to a little house in a
court, to which, by the assistance, of my lover,
my woman and cloaths were safely conveyed that
same evening. 
My lord, however, came to dinner, according
to invitation, and did not seem at all alarmed
when my maid told him I was gone, but stepped
to my lawyer, to know if he thought I should return; 
and upon his answering in the affirmative,
and advising his lordship to go back in the mean
time, and eat the dinner I had provided, he very
deliberately took his advice, made a very hearty
meal, drank his bottle of wine, and, as I did not
return, according to his expectation, withdrew,
in order to consult his associates. 

This motion of his furnished my woman with
an opportunity of making her retreat; and when
he returned at night, the coast was clear, and he
found no body in the house but a porter, who
had been left to take care of the furniture. He
was so enraged at this disappointment, that he
made a furious noise, which raised the whole
neighbourhood, reinforced his crew with the authority
of a justice of the peace, tarried in the
street till three o'clock in the morning, discharged
a lodging he had hired at a barber's shop, opposite
to the house from which I had escaped, and
retired with the comfortable reflexion of having
done every thing which man could do to retrieve
me. 
The hurry of spirits, and surprize I had undergone
in effecting this retreat, produced such a
disorder in my constitution, that I began to fear
I should be delivered before I could be provided
with necessaries for the occasion. I signified my
apprehension to Mr. S&wblank;, who with infinite
care and concern endeavoured to find a more
convenient place; and, after all his inquiries,
was obliged to fix upon a paultry apartment in the
city, tho' his tenderness was extremely shocked
at the necessity of choosing it. However, there
was no remedy, nor time to be lost: to this miserable
habitation I was carried in an hackney
coach; and, tho' extremely ill, bore my fate
with spirit and resignation, in testimony of my
sincere and indelible attachment to my lover,
for whose ease and pleasure I could have suffered
every inconvenience, and even sacrificed my
life. 
Immediately after I had taken possession of my
wretched apartment, I was constrained by my indisposition 

to go to bed, and send for the necessary
help; and in a few hours a living pledge of
my love and indiscretion saw the light, tho' the
terrors and fatigue I had undergone had affected
this little innocent so severely, that it scarce discovered
any visible signs of life. 
My grief at this misfortune was inexpressible: 
I forthwith dispatched a message to the dear, the
anxious father, who flew to my arms, and shared
my sorrow, with all the gentleness of love and
parental fondness; yet our fears were happily
disappointed by the recovery of our infant daughter,
who was committed to the charge of a nurse
in the neighbourhood; so that I could every day
be satisfied in my inquiries about her health. 
Thus I continued a whole fortnight, in a state
of happiness and tranquillity, being blessed with the
conversation and tender offices of my admirer,
whose love and attention I wholly ingrossed. In
a word, he gave up all business and amusement,
and concentred all his care and assiduity in ministring
to my ease and satisfaction. And sure I
had no cause to regret what I had suffered on his
account. 
But this my agreeable situation was one day
disturbed by a most alarming accident, by which
my life was drawn into imminent danger. The
room under my bed-chamber took fire; I immediately
smelled it, and saw the people about me
in the utmost perplexity and consternation, tho'
they would not own the true cause of their confusion,
lest my health should suffer in the fright. 
Nevertheless I was so calm in my inquiries, that
they ventured to tell me my suspicion was but too
just: upon which I gave such directions as I
thought would secure me from catching cold, in 

case there should be a necessity for removing me; 
but the fire being happily extinguished, I escaped
that ceremony, which might have cost me my
life. Indeed it was surprising, that the agitation
of my spirits did not produce some fatal effect upon
my constitution; and I looked upon my deliverance
as the protection of a particular providence. 
Tho' I escaped the hazard of a sudden removal,
I found it was high time to change my lodgings,
because the neighbours rushing into the
house, upon the alarm of fire, had discovered
my situation, though they were ignorant of
my name; and I did not think myself safe, in
being the subject of their conjectures. Mr. S&wblank; 
therefore procured another apartment, with better
accommodation, to which I was carried, as
soon as my health would admit of my removal; 
and soon after my lord wrote to me, by the
hands of my lawyer, earnestly intreating me to
drop my prosecution, and come home. But I
would not comply with his request; and nothing
was farther from my intention than the desire of
receiving any favours at his hands. 
Thus repulsed, he set on foot a most accurate
search for my person; in the course of which he
is said to have detected several ladies and young
girls, who had reasons for keeping themselves
concealed; and had like to have been very severely
handled for his impertinent curiosity. Being
unsuccessful in all his attempts, he entered
into treaty with one Sir R&wblank; H&wblank;, a person of a
very indifferent character, who undertook to furnish
him with an infallible expedient to discover
the place of my abode, if he would gratify him
with a bond for a thousand pounds; which being
executed accordingly, this worthy knight advertised 

me and my maid in the public papers,
offering one hundred pounds as a reward to any
person who should disclose the place of our retirement. 
As soon as the paper fell into my hands I was
again involved in perplexity; and being afraid of
staying in town, resolved, with the concurrence
of my lover, to accept of an invitation I had received
from the duke of K&wblank;, who had by this
time arrived in England, with that lady whom
I have already mentioned, as one of our parties
at Paris. Having visited my little infant, I next
day set out for the duke's country-seat, which is
a most elegant chateau, and stands in a charming
situation: Mr. S&wblank; followed in a few days; we
met with a very cordial reception; his grace
was civil and good-natured, lived nobly and
loved pleasure; Madam la T&wblank; was formed to
please: there was always a great deal of good
company in the house; so that we passed our
time agreeably in playing at billiards and cards,
hunting, walking, reading and conversation. 
But my terms of happiness were generally of
short duration. In the midst of all this felicity
I was overtaken by a most severe affliction, in the
death of my dear hapless infant, who had ingrossed
a greater share of my tenderness than perhaps
I even should have paid to the offspring of a
legitimate contract, because the circumstance of
her birth would have been an unsurmountable
misfortune to her thro' the whole course of her
life, and rendered her absolutely dependent on
my love and protection. 
While I still lamented the untimely fate of
this fair blossom, lord &wblank; came down, and demanded
me as his wife; but the suit which I then 

maintained against him deprived him, for the present,
of an husband's right; and therefore the
duke would not deliver me into his hands. 
In six months he repeated his visit and demand; 
and an agreement was patched up, in
consequence of which I consented to live in the
same house with him, on condition that he
should never desire to sleep with me, or take any
other measure to disturb my peace; otherwise I
should be at liberty to leave him again, and intitled
to the provision of a separate maintenance. 
To these articles I assented, by the advice of my
lawyers, with a view of obtaining the payment
of my pin-money, which I had never received
since our parting, but subsisted on the sale of my
jewels, which were very considerable, and had
been presented to me with full power of alienation. 
As to my lover, he had no fortune to support
me; and for that reason I was scrupulously
cautious of augmenting his expence. 
We had now enjoyed each other's company
for three years, during which our mutual passion
had suffered no abatement, nor had my happiness
been mixed with any considerable allay, except
that late stroke of providence which I have
already mentioned, and the reflexion of the sorrow
that my conduct had intailed upon my dear
father, whom I loved beyond expression, and
whom nothing could have compelled me to disoblige
but a more powerful flame, that prevailed
over every other consideration. As I was now
forced to break off this inchanting correspondence,
it is not to be doubted that our parting cost us the
most acute sensations of grief and disappointment. 
However, there was no remedy: I tore myself
from his arms, took my leave of the family, after 

having acknowledged my obligations to the duke,
and set out for the place of rendezvous, where I
was met by my lord, attended by a steward whom
he had lately engaged, and who was one chief
cause of our future separations. My lord having
quitted his house in town, conducted me to his
lodgings in Pall-Mall, and insisted upon sleeping
with me the first night; but I refused to gratify
his desire, on the authority of our agreement. 
This dispute produced a quarrel, in consequence
of which I attempted to leave the house; 
and he endeavouring to prevent my retreat, I
fairly locked him in, ran down stairs, and calling
a hackney coach, made the best of my way into
the city, to my father's lodgings, where I lay,
the family being in town, tho' he himself was in
the country. I wrote to him immediately, and
when he came to London, declared my intention
of separating from my lord, with which, seeing
me obstinate and determined, he at length acquiesced,
and a formal separation accordingly ensued,
which at that time I thought binding and
immutable. 
I was now sheltered under the wings of an indulgent
father, who had taken me into favour
again, on the supposition that my commerce
with Mr. S&wblank; was absolutely at an end. Nevertheless,
tho' we had separated, in all appearance,
for ever, we had previously agreed to maintain
our correspondence in private interviews, which
should escape the notice of the world, with
which I was again obliged to keep some measures. 



Our parting at the duke of K&wblank;'s house in the
country was attended with all the genuine marks
of sincere and reciprocal affection, and I lived in 

the sweet hope of seeing him again, in all the
transport of his former passion, when my lawyer,
who received my letters, brought me a billet one
night, just as I had gone to bed. Seeing the superscription
of S&wblank;'s hand-writing, I opened it
with all the impatience of an absent lover; but
how shall I describe the astonishment and consternation
with which I was seized, when I perused
the contents! Instead of the most tender
vows and protestations, this fatal epistle began
with, Madam, the best thing you can do is to return
to your father; or some cold and killing
expression, to that effect. 
Heaven and earth! what did I feel at this dire
conjuncture! The light forsook my eyes, a cold
sweat bedewed my limbs, and I was overwhelmed
with such a torrent of sorrow and surprize,
that every body present believed I would have
died under the violent agitation. They endeavoured
to support my spirits with repeated draughts
of strong liquor, which had no sensible effect upon
my constitution, tho' for eight whole years I
had drank nothing stronger than water; and I
must have infallibly perished in the first extasy of
my grief, had it not made its way in a fit of tears
and exclamation, in which I continued all night,
to the amazement of the family, whom my condition
had alarmed, and raised from their repose. 
My father was the only person who guessed the
cause of my affliction; he said he was sure I had
received some ill usage in a letter or message from
that rascal S&wblank; (so he termed him in the bitterness
of passion). 
At mention of that name my agony redoubled
to such a degree, that all who were present wept
at sight of my deplorable condition. My poor 

father shed a flood of tears, and conjured me to tell
him the cause of my disquiet: upon which, rather
than confess the truth, I amused his concern,
by pretending that my lover was ill. The whole
family having stayed by me till I was a little more
composed, left me to the care of my maid, who
put me into bed about six in the morning; but I
enjoyed no rest: I revolved every circumstance
of my conduct, endeavouring to find out the
cause of this fatal change in S&wblank;'s disposition; and
as I could recollect nothing which could justly
give offence, concluded that some malicious persons
had abused his ears with stories to my prejudice. 
With this conjecture I got up, and sent my
lawyer to him with a letter, wherein I insisted
upon seeing him, that I might have an opportunity
of justifying myself in person; a task which
would be easily performed, as I had never offended,
but in loving too well. I waited with the
most anxious impatience for the return of my
messenger, who brought me an answer couched
in the coldest terms of civility which indifference
could dictate; acknowledging, however, that he
had nothing to lay to my charge, but that it was
for the good of us both we should part. —He
ought to have reflected on that before, not after
I had sacrificed my all for his love! I was well
nigh distracted by this confirmation of his inconstancy; 
and I wonder to this day how I retained
the use of reason, under such circumstances of
horror and despair! My grief laid aside all decorum
and restraint; I told my father that S&wblank; 
was dying, and that I would visit him with all
expedition. 

Startled at the proposal, this careful parent demonstrated
the fatal consequence of such an unguarded
step, reminded me of the difficulty with
which he had prevailed upon my mother and
uncle to forgive my former imprudence, observed
that his intention was to carry me into the
country next day, in order to effect a perfect reconciliation; 
but now I was on the brink of forfeiting
all pretensions to their regard, by committing
another fatal error, which could not possibly be
retrieved; and that for his part, whatever pangs
it might cost him, he was resolved to banish me
from his sight for ever. 
While he uttered this declaration the tears
trickled down his cheeks, and he seemed overwhelmed
with the keenest sorrow and mortification; 
so it may be easily conceived what were
the impressions of my grief, reinforced with the
affliction of a father whom I dearly loved, and
the consciousness of being the cause of all his disquiet! 
I was struck dumb with remorse and
woe; and when I recovered the use of speech, I
told him how sensible I was of his great goodness
and humanity, and owned how little I deserved
his favour and affection; that the sense of my
own unworthiness was one cause of my present
distraction; for such was the condition of my
fate, that I must either see S&wblank; or die. I said,
tho' I could not expect his forgiveness, I was
surely worthy of his compassion; that nothing
but the most irresistible passion could have misled
me at first from my duty, or tempted me to incur
the least degree of his displeasure; that the same
fatal influence still prevailed, and would, in all
probability, continue to the grave, which was
the only abode in which I hoped for peace. 

While I expressed myself in this manner, my
dear good father wept with the most tender sympathy,
and saying I might do as I pleased, for he
had done with me, quitted the room, leaving me
to the cruel sensations of my own heart, which
almost bursted with anguish, upbraiding me with
a fault which I could not help committing. 
I immediately hired a chariot and six, and
would have set out by myself, had not my father's
affection, which all my errors could not
efface, provided an attendant. He saw me quite
delirious and desperate; and therefore engaged a
relation of my own to accompany and take care
of me in this rash expedition. 
During this journey, which lasted two days, I
felt no remission of grief and anxiety, but underwent
the most intolerable sorrow and suspense:
at last we arrived at a little house called the Hut,
on Salisbury plain, where, in the most frantic
agitation, I wrote a letter to S&wblank;, describing the
miserable condition to which I was reduced by
his unkindness, and desiring to see him, with the
most earnest sollicitations. 
This billet I committed to the care of my attendant,
and laid strong injunctions upon him to
tell Mr. S&wblank;, my injuries were so great, and
my despair so violent, that if he did not favour
me with a visit, I would go to him, though at his
sister's house, where he then was. 
He received my message with great coldness,
and told my friend, that if I would return to
London, without insisting upon the interview I
demanded, he would in a little time follow me to
town, and every thing should be amicably adjusted. 
But when the messenger assured him,
that I was too much transported with grief, to 

hear of such a proposal, he consented to meet
me in the middle of Salisbury-plain, that we
might avoid all observation: and though I was
little able to walk, I set out on foot for the place
of assignation, my companion following at a small
distance. 
When I saw him leading his horse down the
hill, I collected all my fortitude, and advanced
to him with all the speed I could exert; but when
I made an effort to speak, my tongue denied its
office; and so lively was the expression of unutterable
sorrow in my countenance, that his
heart (hard as it was) melted at sight of my sufferings,
which he well knew proceeded from the
sincerity of my love. At length I recovered the
use of speech, enough to tell him, that I was
come to take my leave; and when I would have
proceeded, my voice failed me again: but, after
a considerable pause, I found means, with great
difficulty, to let him know how sensible I was of
my own incapacity to retrieve his lost affections; 
but that I was willing (if possible) to retain his
esteem, of which, could I be assured, I would
endeavour to compose myself; that I was determined
to leave the kingdom, because I could not
bear the sight of those places where we had been
so happy in our mutual love; and that, till my
departure, I hoped he would visit me sometimes,
that I might, by degrees, wean myself from his
company; for, I should not be able to survive the
shock of being deprived of him all at once. 
This address may seem very humble to an unconcerned
observer; but love will tame the
proudest disposition, as plainly appeared in my
case; for I had naturally as much spirit, or more,
than the generality of people have. Mrs. S&wblank; 

was so much confounded at the manner of my
behaviour, that he scarce knew what answer to
make; for (as he afterwards owned) he expected
to hear himself upbraided; but he was not
proof against my tenderness. After some hesitation,
he said he never meant to forsake me intirely,
that his affection was still unimpaired, and
that he would follow me directly to London. I
imposed upon myself, and believed what he said,
because I could not bear to think of parting with
him for ever, and returned to town in a more
tranquil state of mind than that in which I had
left my father, though my heart was far from
being at ease; my fears being ingenious enough
to foresee, that I should never be able to overcome
his indifference. 
I took lodgings in Mount-street, and my maid
having disposed of herself in marriage, hired another,
who supplied her place very much to my
satisfaction; she was a good girl, had a particular
attachment to me, and for many years, during
which she lived in my service, was indefatigably
assiduous in contributing to my ease, or rather,
in alleviating my affliction: for, though S&wblank; 
came up to town according to promise, and renewed
a sort of correspondence with me for the
space of five months, his complaisance would extend
no farther; and he gave me to understand,
that he had determined to go abroad with Mr.
V&wblank;, whom he accordingly accompanied in his
envoyship to D&wblank;n. 
I understood the real cause of this expedition,
which, notwithstanding his oaths and protestations
of unabated love and regard, I construed
into a palpable mark of dislike and disrespect; not
could the repeated assurances I received from him 

in letters, mitigate the anguish and mortification
that preyed upon my heart. I therefore gave up
all hopes of recovering the happiness I had lost: 
I told him, on the eve of his departure, that he
might exercise his gallantry a great while, before he
would meet with my fellow, in point of sincerity
and love; for I would rather have been a servant
in his house, with the privilege of seeing him,
than the queen of England, debarred of that
pleasure. 
When he took his leave, and went down stairs,
I shrunk at every step he made, as if a new
wound had been inflicted upon me; and when I
heard the door shut behind him, my heart died
within me. (I had the satisfaction to hear afterwards,
he lamented the loss of me prodigiously,
and that he had never been so happy
since.) I sat down to write a letter, in which
I forgave his indifference, because I knew
the affections are altogether involuntary, and
wished him all the happiness he deserved. I then
walked up and down the room in the most restless
anxiety, was put to bed by my maid, rose at
six, mounted my horse, and rode forty miles, in
order to fatigue myself, that I might, next night,
enjoy some repose. This exercise I daily underwent
for months together; and when it did not
answer my purpose, I used to walk round Hydepark
in the evening, when the place was quite
solitary, and unvisited by any other human creature. 
In the course of this melancholy perambulation,
I was one day accosted by a very great
man, who, after the first salutation, asked whether
or not my intercourse with S&wblank; was at an
end; and if I had any allowance from my husband? 

To the first of these questions I replied
in the affirmative; and to the last answered, that
my lord did not allow me a great deal; indeed I
might have truly said, nothing at all: but I was
too proud to own my indigence. He then expressed
his wonder, how one like me, who had
been used to splendor and affluence from my
cradle, could make shift to live in my present
narrow circumstances; and when I told him that
I could make a very good shift, so I had peace,
he seemed to lament my situation, and very
kindly invited me to sup with his wife, at his
house. I accepted the invitation, without any
apprehension of the consequence; and when I
went to the place, was introduced into an apartment,
magnificently lighted up (I suppose) for
my reception. 
After I had stayed alone for some time in this
mysterious situation, without seeing a living
soul, my inviter appeared, and said, he hoped I
would not take it amiss, that he and I were to
sup by ourselves, as he had something to say,
which could not be so properly communicated
before company or servants. I then, for the
first time, perceived his drift, to my no small
surprize and indignation; and with evident marks
of displeasure told him, I was sure he had nothing
to propose that would be agreeable to my
inclination, and that I would immediately leave
the house. Upon which, he gave me to understand,
that I could not possibly retire, because
he had sent away my chair, and all his servants
were disposed to obey his orders. 
Incensed at this declaration, which I considered
as an insult, I answered with an air of resolution,
it was very well; I despised his contrivance, 

and was afraid of nobody. Seeing me, thus
alarmed, he assured me I had no reason to be
afraid; that he had loved me long, and could
find no other opportunity of declaring his passion. 
He said, the Q&wblank; had told him, that lord C&wblank; 
had renewed his addresses to me; and as he understood
from my own mouth, my correspondence
with S&wblank; was absolutely broke off, he
thought himself as well intitled as another to my
regard. In conclusion, he told me, that I might
command his purse, and that he had power
enough to bring me into the world again with
éclat. To these advances I replied, that he was
very much mistaken in his opinion of my character,
if he imagined I was to be won by any
temptations of fortune, and very frankly declared,
that I would rather give myself to a footman,
than sell myself to a prince. 
Supper being served, we sat down together; 
but I would neither eat nor drink any thing,
except a little bread and water; for I was an odd
whimsical girl; and it came into my head, that
he might, perhaps, have mixed something in the
victuals or wine, which would alter my way of
thinking. In short, finding himself baffled in
all his endeavours, he permitted me, about twelve
o'clock, to depart in peace, and gave up his suit,
as a desperate cause. 
This uncomfortable life did I lead for a whole
twelvemonth, without feeling the least abatement
of my melancholy; and finding myself worn to
a skeleton, I resumed my former resolution of
trying to profit by change of place, and actually
went abroad with no other attendant but my woman,
and the utmost indifference for life. My
intention was to have gone to the South of 

France, where I thought I could have subsisted
on the little I had left, which amounted to five
hundred pounds, until the issue of my law-suit,
by which I hoped to obtain some provision from
my lord; and, without all doubt, my expectation
would have been answered, had I put this
my plan in execution: but being at Paris, from
whence I purposed to set forward in a few days, I
sent to Mr. K&wblank;, who had been formerly
intimate with my father, and shewn me many civilities
during my first residence in France. 
This gentleman favoured me with a visit, and
when I made him acquainted with my scheme,
dissuaded me from it, as an uncomfortable determination,
and advised me to stay at Paris, where,
with good œconomy, I could live as cheap as in any
other place, and enjoy the conversation and countenance
of my friends, among which number he
declared himself one of the most faithful; assuring
me, that I should be always welcome to his table,
and want for nothing; and promising to recommend
me as a lodger to a friend of his, with
whom I would live in a frugal and decent manner; 
and that, as the woman was well known
and esteemed by all the English company in Paris,
it would be the most reputable step I could take,
(considering my youth and situation) to lodge
with a creditable person, who could answer for
my conduct. Thus persuaded, I very simply
followed his advice; I say simply, because, notwithstanding
his representations, I soon found my
money melt away, without any prospect of a
fresh supply. In lieu of this, however, I passed
my time very agreeably in several English,
and some French families, where, in a little 

time, I became quite intimate, saw a great deal
of company, and was treated with the utmost
politeness and regard; yet, in the midst of these
pleasures, many a melancholy sigh would rise at
the remembrance of my beloved S&wblank;, whom
for several years I could not recollect without
emotion; but time, company, amusements, and
change of place, in a great measure dissipated
these ideas, and enabled me to bear my fate with
patience and resignation. 
On my last arrival at Paris, I was surrounded
by a croud of professed admirers, who sighed and
flattered in the usual forms; but, besides that my
heart was not yet in a condition to contract new
engagements, I was prepossessed against them all,
by supposing that they presumed upon the knowledge
of my indiscretion with S&wblank;; and
therefore rejected their addresses with detestation
and disdain: for, as I have already observed, I
was not to be won, but by the appearance of
esteem and the most respectful carriage; and
though, by a false step, I had, in my own opinion,
forfeited my title to the one, I was resolved
to discourage the advances of any man who seemed
deficient in the other. 
In this manner, my lovers were, one by one,
repulsed, almost as soon as they presented themselves,
and I preserved the independance of my
heart, until I became acquainted with a certain
peer, whom I often saw at the house of Mrs.
P&wblank;, an English lady then resident at Paris. 
This young nobleman professed himself deeply
enamoured of me, in a stile so different from that
of my other admirers, that I heard his protestations
without disgust; and though my inclinations
were still free, could not find in my heart to
discountenance his addresses, which were preferred 

with the most engaging modesty, disinterestedness
and respect. 
By these never-failing arts, he gradually conquered
my indifference, and gained the preference
in my esteem from lord C&wblank;y and the prince
of C&wblank;, who were at that time his rivals. 
But what contributed (more than any consideration)
to his success, was his declaring openly,
that he would marry me without hesitation, as
soon as I could obtain a divorce from my present
husband, which, in all probability, might have
been easily procured; for before I left England,
lord &wblank; had offered me five thousand pounds,
if I would consent to such a mutual release, that
he might be at liberty to espouse one Miss W&wblank; 
of Kent, to whom he then made love upon honourable
terms: but I was fool enough to refuse
his proposal, by the advice of S&wblank;: and whether
or not his lordship finding it impracticable to
wed his new mistress, began to make love upon
another footing, I know not; but certain it is,
the mother forbad him the house, a circumstance
which he took so heinously ill, that he appealed
to the world in a public advertisement, beginning
with, Whereas, for some time, I have passionately
loved Miss W&wblank;, and upon my not
complying with the mother's proposals, they have
turned me out of doors; this is to justify, &c. 
This declaration, signed with his name, was
actually printed in a number of detached advertisements,
which he ordered to be distributed to
the public; and afterwards, being convinced by
some of his friends, that he had done a very silly
thing, he recalled them at half a guinea apiece. 
A copy of one of them was sent to me at Paris; 
and I believe my father has now one of the originals
in his possession. After this wise vindication 

of his conduct, he made an attempt to carry
off the lady from church, by force of arms; but
she was rescued by the neighbours, headed by her
brother, who being an attorney, had like to have
made his lordship smart severely for this exploit. 
Mean while, my new admirer had made some
progress in my heart; and my finances being exhausted,
I was reduced to the alternative of returning
to lord &wblank; again, or accepting earl
B&wblank;'s love. When my affairs were brought
to that issue, I made no hesitation in my choice,
putting myself under the protection of a man of
honour, whom I esteemed, rather than suffer
every sort of mortification, from a person who
was the object of my abhorrence and contempt. 
From a mistaken pride, I chose to live in lord
B&wblank;k's house, rather than be maintained at his
expence in any other place. We spent several
months agreeably in balls and other diversions, visited
lord B&wblank;k, who lived at the distance of a few
leagues from Paris, and stayed some days at his
house, where the entertainment was, in all respects,
delightful, elegant, and refined. Their habitation
was the rendezvous of the best company in
France; and lady B&wblank;k maintained the same superiority
in her own sex, for which her lord is
so justly distinguished among the men. 
About Christmas we set out for England, accompanied
by a little North Briton, who lived
with lord B&wblank; as his companion, and did not
at all approve of our correspondence; whether
out of real friendship for his patron, or apprehension
that in time I might supersede his own
influence with my lord, I shall not pretend to
determine. Be that as it will, the frost was so
severe, that we were detained ten days at Calais,
before we could get out of the harbour; and 

during that time, I reflected seriously on what
my new lover had proposed: as he was very
young, and unacquainted with the world, I
thought my story might have escaped him; and
therefore determined to give him a faithful detail
of the whole, that he might not have any thing
to reproach me with in the sequel; besides, I did
not think it honest to engage him to do more
for me than he might afterwards, perhaps, think
I was worth. Accordingly, I communicated to
him every particular of my life; and the narration,
far from altering his sentiments, rather
confirmed his good opinion, by exhibiting an
undoubted proof of my frankness and sincerity. 
In short, he behaved with such generosity, as
made an absolute conquest of my heart: but my
love was of a different kind from that which had
formerly reigned within my breast, being founded
upon the warmest gratitude and esteem, exclusive
of any other consideration, though his person
was very agreeable, and his address engaging. 
When we arrived in England, I went directly
to his country-seat, about twelve miles from
London, where he soon joined me, and we
lived some time in perfect retirement, his relations
being greatly alarmed with the apprehension that
lord &wblank; would bring an action against him; 
though he himself desired nothing more, and
lived so easily under that expectation, that they
soon laid aside their fears on his account. 
We were visited by Mr. H&wblank; B&wblank;, a relation
of my lord, and one Mr. R&wblank; of the
guards, who, with the little Scotch gentleman
and my lover, made an agreeable set, among
whom I enjoyed hunting, and all manner of
country diversions. As to Mr. H&wblank; B&wblank;, 

if ever there was perfection in one man, it centered
in him; or at least, he, of all the men I
ever knew, approached nearest to that idea which
I had conceived of a perfect character. He was
both good and great, possessed an uncommon
genius and the best of hearts. Mr. R&wblank; was a
very sociable man, had a good person and cultivated
understanding; and my lord was excessively
good humoured; so that, with such companions,
no place could be dull or insipid: for my own
part, I conducted the family; and as I endeavoured
to please and make every body happy,
I had the good fortune to succeed. Mr. B&wblank; 
told me, that before he saw me, he heard I was
a fool; but finding (as he was pleased to say)
that I had been egregiously misrepresented, he
courted my friendship, and a correspondence commenced
between us: indeed, it was impossible
for any person to know him, without entertaining
the utmost esteem and veneration for his
virtue. 
After I had lived some time in this agreeable
retreat, my husband began to make a bustle: he
sent a message, demanding me from lord B&wblank;; 
then came in person, with his night-cap in his
pocket, intending to have stayed all night, had
he been asked, and attended by a relation, whom
he assured that I was very fond of him, and detained
by force from his arms. 
Finding himself disappointed in his expectations,
he commenced a law-suit against lord B&wblank;,
though not for a divorce, as we desired, but
with a view to reclaim me as his lawful wife. 
His lawyers, however, attempted to prove criminal
conversation, in hopes of extorting money
from my lover; but their endeavours were altogether 

fruitless; for no servant of lord B&wblank;'s
or mine, could with justice say, we were ever
seen to trespass against modesty and decorum; so
that the plaintiff was nonsuited. 
While this cause was depending, all my lover's
friends expressed fear and concern for the
issue, while he himself behaved with the utmost
resolution, and gave me such convincing proofs
of a strong and steady affection, as augmented
my gratitude, and rivetted the ties of my love,
which was unblemished, faithful and sincere. 
Soon after this event, I was seized with a violent
fit of illness, in which I was visited by my
father, and attended by two physicians, one of
whom despaired of my life, and took his leave
accordingly; but Dr. S&wblank;, who was the other,
persisted in his attendance, and, in all human
appearance, saved my life; a circumstance by
which he acquired a great share of reputation:
yet, notwithstanding all his assistance, I was confined
to my bed for ten weeks; during which,
lord B&wblank;'s grief was immoderate, his care and
generosity unlimited. Whilst I lay in this extremity,
Mr. S&wblank;, penetrated by my melancholy
condition, which revived his tenderness,
begg'd leave to be admitted to my presence; and
lord B&wblank; would have complied with his request,
had I not been judged too weak to bear
the shock of such an interview. My constitution,
however, agreeably disappointed their fears; 
and the fever had no sooner left me, than I was
removed to a hunting-seat belonging to my lover,
from whence, after I had recovered my strength,
we went to B&wblank; Castle, where we kept open
house: and while we remained at this place, lord
B&wblank; received a letter from lord &wblank;, dated 

in November, challenging him to single combat
in May, upon the frontiers of France and Flanders. 
This defiance was sent in consequence of
what had passed betwixt them long before my indisposition,
at a meeting in a certain tavern, where
they quarrelled, and in the fray my lover threw
his antagonist under the table. I counselled him
to take no notice of this rhodomontade, which I
knew was void of all intention of performance; 
and he was wise enough to follow my advice; 
resolved, however, should the message be repeated,
to take the challenger at his word. 
Having resided some time in this place, we returned
to the other country-house which we had
left, where lord B&wblank; addicted himself so much
to hunting, and other male diversions, that I began
to think he neglected me, and apprized him
of my suspicion; assuring him, at the same time,
that I would leave him as soon as my opinion
should be confirmed. 
This declaration had no effect upon his behaviour,
which became so remarkably cold, that
even Mr. R&wblank;, who lived with us, imagined
that his affection was palpably diminished. When
I went to town, I was usually attended by his
cousin, or this gentleman, or both, but seldom
favoured with his company; nay, when I repaired
to Bath, for the re-establishment of my health,
he permitted me to go alone; so that I was quite
persuaded of his indifference; and yet, I was mistaken
in my opinion: but, I had been spoiled by
the behaviour of my first husband, and Mr. S&wblank;,
who never quitted me for the sake of any amusement,
and often resisted the calls of the most
urgent business, rather than part from me, tho'
but for a few hours. I thought every man who 

loved me truly, would act in the same manner; 
and whether I am right or wrong in my conjectures,
I leave wiser casuists to judge. Certain it
is, such sacrifice and devotion is the most pleasing
proof of an admirer's passion; and Voyez moi
plus souvent, & ne mé donnez rien, is one of my
favourite maxims. A man may give money, because
he is profuse; he may be violently fond, because
he is of a sanguine constitution; but if he
gives me his time, he gives me an unquestionable
proof of my being in full possession of his heart. 
My appearance at Bath, without the company
of lord B&wblank;, occasioned a general surprize, and
encouraged the men to pester me with addresses; 
every new admirer endeavouring to advance his
suit, by demonstrating the unkind and disrespectful
behaviour of his lordship. Indeed, this was
the most effectual string they could touch: my
pride and resentment were alarmed, and I was
weak enough to listen to one man, who had like
to have insinuated himself into my inclinations. 
He was tall and large boned, with white hair, inclining
to what is called sandy, and had the reputation
of being handsome, tho' I think he scarce
deserved that epithet. He possessed a large fortune,
loved mischief, and stuck at nothing for the
accomplishment of his designs; one of his chief
pleasures, being that of setting any two lovers at
variance. He employed his address upon me with
great assiduity, and knew so well how to manage
my resentment, that I was pleased with his manner,
heard his vows without disgust, and, in a
word, promised to deliberate with myself upon
his proposals, and give him an account of my
determination in writing. 

Thus resolved, I went to lord B&wblank;, in Wiltshire,
whither I was followed by this pretender to
my heart, who visited us on the footing of an acquaintance; 
but when I reflected on what I had
done, I condemned my own conduct, as indiscreet,
though nothing decisive had passed between
us, and began to hate him in proportion to the
self-conviction I felt; perceiving that I had involved
myself in a difficulty from which I should
not be easily disengaged. For the present, however,
I found means to postpone my declaration; 
he admitted my excuse, and I returned to London
with lord B&wblank;, who was again summoned
to the field by his former challenger. 
H&wblank;d&wblank;n, governor, counsellor, and steward
to this little hero, came to lord B&wblank; with a verbal
message, importing, that his lordship had
changed his mind about going to Flanders, but
expected to meet him, on such a day and hour,
in the burying-ground near Red-lion-square. 
Lord B&wblank; accepted the challenge, and gave me
an account of what had passed; but he had been
anticipated by the messenger, who had already
tried to alarm my fears, from the consideration of
the consequence, that I might take some measures
to prevent their meeting. But I perceived his
drift, and told him plainly that lord &wblank; had
no intention to risque his person, tho' he endeavoured
with all his might to persuade me, that his
principal was desperate and determined. I knew
my little husband too well, to think he would
bring matters to any dangerous issue, and was apprehensive
of nothing but foul play, from the villainy
of H&wblank;n, with which I was equally well
acquainted. Indeed I signified my doubts on that
score to Mr. B&wblank;, who would have attended 

his kinsman to the field, had he not thought he
might be liable to censure, if any thing should
happen to lord B&wblank;, because he himself was
heir at law: for that reason, he judiciously declined
being personally concerned; and we pitched
upon the earl of A&wblank;, his lordship's uncle, who
willingly undertook the office. 
At the appointed time they went to the place
of rendezvous, where they had not waited long
when the challenger appeared, in a new pink satin
waistcoat, which he had put on for the occasion,
with his sword under his arm, and his
steward by him, leaving, in an hackney coach,
at some distance, a surgeon whom he had provided
for the care of his person. Thus equipped,
he advanced to his antagonist, and desired him to
choose his ground; upon which lord B&wblank; told
him,that if he must fall, it was not material
which grave he should tumble over. 
Our little hero finding him so jocose and determined,
turned to lord A&wblank;, and desired to
speak with him, that he might disburden his conscience
before they should begin the work of
death. They accordingly went aside; and he
gave him to understand, that his motive for
fighting was lord B&wblank;'s detaining his wife from
him, by compulsion. The earl of A&wblank; assured
him, he was egregiously mistaken in his conjecture; 
that his nephew used no force or undue
influence, to keep me in his house; but it could
not be expected that he would turn me out of
doors. 
This explanation was altogether satisfactory
to lord &wblank;, who said he was far from being so
unreasonable as to expect lord B&wblank; would commit
such a breach of hospitality; and all he desired 

was, that his wife should be left to her own
inclinations. Upon these articles peace was concluded,
and they parted without bloodshed. At least
these are the particulars of the story, as they were
related by lord A&wblank;, with whom I laugh'd
heartily at the adventure; for I never doubted
that the challenger would find some expedient to
prevent the duel, tho' I wondered how he mustered
up resolution enough to carry it so far. 
That he might not, however, give us any
more trouble, we resolved to go and enjoy ourselves
in France, whither I went by myself, in
hopes of being soon joined by my lover, who was
obliged to stay some time longer in England, to
settle his affairs. He was so much affected at our
parting (tho' but for a few weeks) that he was
almost distracted; and this affliction renewed my
tenderness for him, because it was an undoubted
proof of his love. I wrote to him every post
from France; and, as I had no secrets, desired
him to take care of all the letters that should
come to his house, directed to me, after my departure
from England. 
This was an unfortunate office for him, in the
execution of which he chanced to open a letter
from Sir T&wblank; A&wblank;, with whom (as I have already
observed) I had some correspondence at
Bath. I had, according to my promise, given
this gentleman a decisive answer, importing, that
I was determined to remain in my present situation; 
but as lord B&wblank; was ignorant of my sentiments
in that particular, and perceived from the
letter that something extraordinary had passed between
us, and that I was earnestly sollicited to
leave him, he was seized with the utmost consternation
and concern; and having previously obtained 

the king's leave to go abroad, set out that
very night for France, leaving his affairs in the
greatest confusion. 
Sir T&wblank; A&wblank; hearing I was gone, without
understanding the cause of my departure, took
the same rout, and both arrived at Dover next
day. They heard of each other's motions:
each bribed the master of a packet-boat to transport
him with expedition; but that depending
upon the wind, both reached Calais at the same
time, tho' in different vessels. Sir T&wblank; sent his
valet de chambre, post, with a letter, intreating
me to accompany him into Italy, where he
would make me mistress of his whole fortune, and
to set out directly for that country, that he might
not lose me by the arrival of lord B&wblank;, promising
to join me on the road, if I would consent to
make him happy. I sent his messenger back with
an answer, wherein I expressed surprize at his
proposals, after having signified my resolution to
him before I left England; and he was scarce
dismissed, when I received another letter from
lord B&wblank;, beseeching me to meet him at Clermont,
upon the road from Calais; and conjuring
me to avoid the sight of his rival, should he get
the start of him in travelling. This, however,
was not likely to be the case, as lord B&wblank; rode
post, and the other was, by his corpulence,
obliged to travel in a chaise; yet, that I might
not increase his anxiety, I left Paris immediately
on the receit of his message, and met him at the
appointed place, where he received me with all
the agitation of joy and fear, and asked if I had
ever encouraged Sir T&wblank; A&wblank; in his addresses. I
very candidly told him the whole transaction, at
which he was incensed; but his indignation was 

soon appeased, when I professed my penitence,
and assured him, that I had totally rejected his
rival. Not that I approve of my behaviour to
Sir T&wblank; who (I own) was ill used in this affair; 
but surely it was more excusable to halt here, than
proceed farther in my indiscretion. 
My lover being satisfied with my declaration,
we went together to Paris, being attended by
the Scotchman whom I have already mentioned,
tho' I believe he was not over and above well
pleased to see matters thus amicably compromised. 
The furious knight followed us to the
capital; insisted upon seeing me in person; told
this North Briton, that I was actually engaged
to him; wrote every hour, and railed at my perfidious
conduct. I took no notice of these delirious
transports, which were also disregarded by
lord B&wblank;, till one night he was exasperated by
the insinuations of Mr. C&wblank;, who, I believe, inflamed
his jealousy, by hinting a suspicion that I
was really in love with his rival. What passed
betwixt them I know not, but he sent for me
from the opera, by a physician of Paris, who was
a sort of go-between among us all, and who told
me, that if I did not come home on the instant,
a duel would be fought on my account. 
I was very much shocked at this information; 
but by being used to alarms from the behaviour
of lord &wblank;, I had acquired a pretty good share of
resolution, and with great composure entered the
room where lord B&wblank; was, with his companion,
whom I immediately ordered to withdraw. I
then gave his lordship to understand, that I was
informed of what had passed, and thought myself
so much injured by the person who had just 

quitted the apartment, that I would no longer
live under the same roof with him. 
Lord B&wblank; raved like a bedlamite, taxing me
with want of candour and affection; but I easily
justified my own integrity, and gave him such assurances
of my love, that his jealousy subsided,
and his spirits were recomposed. Nevertheless
I insisted upon his dismissing Mr. C&wblank;, on pain
of my leaving the house, as I could not help
thinking he had used his endeavours to prejudice
me in the opinion of my lord. If his conduct
was the result of friendship for his patron, he
certainly acted the part of an honest and trusty
adherent. But I could not easily forgive him,
because, a few weeks before, he had, by my interest,
obtained a considerable addition to his allowance; 
and even after the steps he had taken
to disoblige me, I was not so much his enemy
but that I prevailed upon lord B&wblank; to double his
salary, that his leaving the family might be no
detriment to his fortune. 
His lordship having complied with my demand,
this gentleman, after having stayed three
days in the house, to prepare for his departure,
during which I would not suffer him to be admitted
into my presence, made his retreat with a
fine young girl who was my companion; and I
have never seen him since that time. 
Sir T&wblank; still continued furious, and would not
take a denial, except from my own mouth; upon
which, with the approbation of lord B&wblank;, I
indulged him with an interview. He entered
the apartment with a stern countenance, and told
me I had us'd him ill. I pleaded guilty to the
charge, and begg'd his pardon accordingly. I
attempted to reason the case with him, but he 

would hear no arguments except his own, and
even tried to intimidate me with threats; which
provoked me to such a degree, that I defied his
vengeance, telling him that I feared nothing but
the reproach of my own conscience; that tho' I
had acted a simple part, he durst not say there
was any thing criminal in my conduct; and
that, from his present frantic and unjust behaviour,
I thought myself happy in having escaped
him. He swore I was the most inflexible of all
creatures, asked if nothing would move me?
and when I answered, “Nothing,” took his
leave, and never afterwards persecuted me with
his addresses; tho' I have heard he was vain and
false enough to boast of favours, which, upon my
honour, he never received, as he himself, at one
time, owned to doctor Cantwell at Paris. 
While he underwent all this frenzy and distraction
upon my account, he was loved
with the same violence of passion by a certain
Scotch lady of quality, who, when he followed
me to France, pursued him thither with the
same eagerness and expedition; and, far from
being jealous of me as a rival, us'd to come to
my house, implore my good offices with the object
of her love, and laying herself on the floor at
full length, before the fire, weep and cry like a
person bereft of her senses. She bitterly complained,
that he had never obliged her but once; 
and begg'd, with the most earnest supplications,
that I would give her an opportunity of seeing
him at my house. But I thought proper to
avoid her company, as soon as I perceived her
intention. 
We continued at Paris for some time, during
which I contracted an acquaintance with the 

sister of madam la T&wblank;. She was the supposed
mistress of the prince of C&wblank;, endowed with a
great share of understanding, and loved pleasure
to excess, tho' she maintained her reputation on
a respectable footing, by living with her husband
and mother. This lady, perceiving that I had
inspired her lover with a passion, which gave me
uneasiness on her account, actually practised all
her eloquence and art, in persuading me to listen
to his love; for it was a maxim with her, to
please him at any rate. I was shocked at her
indelicate complaisance, and rejected the proposal,
as repugnant to my present engagement,
which I held as sacred as any nuptial tie, and
much more binding than a forced or unnatural
marriage. 
Upon our return to England we lived in great
harmony and peace; and nothing was wanting to
my happiness, but the one thing to me most needful; 
I mean the inchanting tenderness and delightful
enthusiasm of love. Lord B&wblank;'s heart (I
believe) felt the soft impressions; and, for my
own part, I loved him with the most faithful affection. 
It is not enough to say I wished him
well; I had the most delicate, the most genuine
esteem for his virtue, I had an intimate regard and
anxiety for his interest, and felt for him as if he
had been my own son: but still there was a vacancy
in my heart; there was not that fervour,
that transport, that ecstasy of passion which I had
formerly known; my bosom was not filled with
the little deity; I could not help recalling to my
remembrance the fond, the ravishing moments I
had passed with S&wblank;; and had I understood the
conditions of life, those pleasures were happily
exchanged for my present situation, because, if 

I was now deprived of those rapturous enjoyments,
I was also exempted from the cares and
anxiety that attended them; but I was generally
extravagant in my notions of happiness, and
therefore construed my present tranquillity into
an insipid languor and stagnation of life. 
While I remained in this inactivity of sentiment,
lord &wblank; having received a very considerable
addition to his fortune, sent a message to
me, promising, that if I would leave lord B&wblank;,
he would make me a present of an house and
furniture, where I should live at my ease, without
being exposed to his visits, except when I
should be disposed to receive them. This proposal
he made, in consequence of what I had
always declared, namely, that if he had not reduced
me to the necessity of putting myself under
the protection of some person or other, by depriving
me of any other means of subsistence, I
should never have given the world the least cause
to scandalize my reputation; and that I would
withdraw myself from my present dependance,
as soon as he should enable me to live by myself. 
I was therefore resolved to be as good as my
word, and accepted his offer, on condition that
I should be wholly at my own disposal, and that
he should never enter my door but as a visitant
or common friend. 
These articles being sanctioned by his word
and honour (the value of which I did not then
know) an house was furnished according to my
directions; and I signified my intention to lord
B&wblank;, who consented to my removal, with this
proviso, that I should continue to see him. I
wrote also to his relation Mr. B&wblank;, who, in his
answer, observed, that it was too late to advise 

when I was actually determined. All my friends
and acquaintance approved of the scheme, tho' it
was one of the most unjustifiable steps I had ever
taken, being a real act of ingratitude to my benefactor; 
which I soon did, and always shall regret
and condemn. So little is the world qualified
to judge of private affairs! 
When the time of our parting drew near, lord
B&wblank; became gloomy and discontended, and even
intreated me to postpone my resolution; but I
told him, that now every thing was prepared for
my reception, I could not retract without incurring
the imputation of folly and extravagance. 
On the very day of my departure Mr. B&wblank; endeavoured,
with all the arguments he could suggest,
to dissuade me from my purpose; and I
made use of the same answer which had satisfied
his friend. Finding me determined upon removing,
he burst out into a flood of tears, exclaiming,
“By G&wblank;d, if lord B&wblank; can bear
it, I can't.” I was thunderstruck at this expression; 
for tho' I had been told that Mr. B&wblank; 
was in love with me, I gave no credit to the report,
because he had never declared his passion,
and this was the first hint of it that ever escaped
him in my heating. I was therefore so much
amazed at the circumstance of this abrupt explanation,
that I could make no answer; but having
taken my leave, went away, ruminating on
the unforeseen event. 
Lord B&wblank; (as I was informed) spoke not a
word that whole night, and took my leaving him
so much to heart, that two years elapsed before
he got the better of his grief. This intelligence
I afterwards received from his own mouth, and
asked his forgiveness for my unkind retreat, tho' 

I shall never be able to obtain my own. As for
Mr. B&wblank;, he was overwhelmed with sorrow, and
made such efforts to suppress his concern, as had
well nigh cost him his life. Dr. S&wblank; was called
to him in the middle of the night, and found him
almost suffocated. He soon guessed the cause,
when he understood that I had left the house:
so that I myself was the only person concerned
who was utterly ignorant of his affection; for I
solemnly declare he never gave me the least reason
to suspect it while I lived with his relation,
because he had too much honour to entertain a
thought of supplanting his friend, and too good
an opinion of me to believe he should have succeeded
in the attempt. Tho' my love for lord B&wblank; 
was not so tender and interesting as the passion I
had felt for S&wblank;, my fidelity was inviolable,
and I never harboured the most distant thought
of any other person, till after I had resolved to
leave him, when (I own) I afforded some small
encouragement to the addresses of a new admirer,
by telling him, that I should, in a little time, be
my own mistress, tho' I was not now at my own
disposal. 
I enjoyed my new house as a little paradise:
it was accommodated with all sorts of conveniences; 
every thing was new, and therefore
pleasing, and the whole absolutely at my command. 
I had the company of a relation, a very
good woman, with whom I lived in the most
amicable manner; was visited by the best people
in town (I mean those of the male sex, the ladies
having long ago forsaken me;) I frequented
all reputable places of publick entertainment, and
had a concert at home once a week: so that my
days rolled on in happiness and quiet, till all my 

sweets were imbittered by the vexatious behaviour
of my husband, who began to importune me
again to live with him; and by the increasing
anxiety of lord B&wblank;, who (tho' I still admitted
his visits) plainly perceived that I wanted to relinquish
his correspondence. This discovery
raised such tempests of jealousy and despair within
his breast, that he kept me in continual
alarms: he sent messages to me every hour, signed
his letters with his own blood, raved like a
man in an ecstasy of madness, railed at my ingratitude,
and praised my conduct, by turns; 
offered to sacrifice every thing for my love, to
leave the kingdom forthwith, and live with me
for ever in any part of the world where I should
choose to reside. 
These were generous and tempting proposals; 
but I was beset with counsellors who were not totally
disinterested, and who dissuaded me from
embracing the proffers of my lover, on pretence
that lord &wblank; would be highly injured by my
compliance. I listened to their advice, and hardened
my heart against lord B&wblank;'s sorrow and solicitations. 
My behaviour on this occasion is altogether
unaccountable; this was the only time
that ever I was a slave to admonition. The condition
of lord B&wblank; would have melted any heart
but mine, and yet mine was one of the most sensible:
he employed his cousin as an advocate with
me, till that gentleman actually refused the office,
telling him candidly, that his own inclinations
were too much engaged, to permit him to perform
the task with fidelity and truth. He accordingly
resolved to avoid my presence, until my
lord and I should come to some final determination,
which was greatly retarded by the perseverance 

of his lordship, who would not resign his
hopes even when I pretended that another man
had engaged my heart, but said, that in time my
affection might return. 
Our correspondence, however, gradually wore
off; upon which Mr. B&wblank; renewed his visits, and
many agreeable and happy hours we passed together. 
Not that he, or any other person whom I
now saw, succeeded to the privilege of a fortunate
lover: I knew he loved me to madness; but
I would not gratify his passion any other way than
by the most profound esteem and veneration for
his virtues, which were altogether amiable and
sublime; and I would here draw his character
minutely, but it wou'd take up too much time to
set forth his merits; the only man living of my
acquaintance who resembles him is lord F&wblank;, of
whom I shall speak in the sequel. 
About this time, I underwent a very interesting
change in the situation of my heart. I had
sent a message to my old lover S&wblank;, desiring he
would allow my picture, which was in his possession,
to be copied; and he now transmitted it to
me by my lawyer, whom he directed to ask, if I
intended to be at the next masquerade. This
curiosity had a strange effect upon my spirits; 
my heart fluttered at the question, and my imagination
glowed with a thousand fond presages. I
answered in the affirmative, and we met by accident
at the ball. I could not behold him without
emotion; when he accosted me, his well-known
voice made my heart vibrate, like a musical chord,
when its unison is struck. All the ideas of our
past love, which the lapse of time and absence
had enfeebled and lulled asleep, now awoke, and
were reinspired by his appearance; so that his 

artful excuses were easily admitted: I forgave
him all that I had suffered on his account, because
he was the natural lord of my affection; and our
former correspondence was renewed. 
I thought myself in a new world of bliss, in
consequence of this reconciliation, the raptures
of which continued unimpaired for the space of
four months, during which time he was fonder of
me, if possible, than before, repeated his promise of
marriage, if we should ever have it in our power; 
assured me he had never been happy since he left
me; that he believed no woman had ever loved
like me: and indeed, to have a notion of my
passion for that man, you must first have loved as
I did: but, through a strange caprice, I broke
off the correspondence, out of apprehension that
he would forsake me again. From his past conduct,
I dreaded what might happen; and the remembrance
of what I had undergone by his inconstancy,
filled my imagination with such horror,
that I could not endure the shocking prospect,
and prematurely plunged myself into the danger,
rather than endure the terrors of expectation. In
consequence of this desertion, I received a letter
from him, acknowledging that he was rightly served,
but that it gave him inexpressible concern. 
Mean while, lord &wblank; continued to act in
the character of a fiend, tormenting me with
his nauseous importunities: he prevailed upon
the duke of L&wblank; to employ his influence in
persuading me to live with him; assuring his
grace, that I had actually promised to give him
that proof of my obedience, and that I would
come home the sooner for being pressed to compliance
by a person of his rank and character. 
Induced by these representations, the duke honoured 

me with a visit; and in the course of his
exhortations I understood how he had been thus
misinformed: upon which I sent for lord &wblank;,
and in his presence convicted him of the falshood,
by communicating to his grace the articles of our
last agreement, which he did not think proper to
deny; and the duke being undeceived, declared
that he would not have given me the trouble of
vindicating myself, had he not been misled by
the insincerity of my lord. 
Baffled in this attempt, he engaged Mr. H&wblank; 
V&wblank;, and afterwards my own father, in the same
task; and tho' I still adhered to my first resolution,
persisted with such obstinacy in his endeavours
to make me unhappy, that I determined to
leave the kingdom; and accordingly, after I
had spent the evening with him at Ranelagh, I
went away about two o'clock in the morning,
leaving my companion, with directions to restore
to my lord his house, furniture, plate, and
every thing he had given me since our last accommodation; 
so far was I, upon this occasion,
or at any other time of my life, from embezzling
any part of his fortune. My friend followed my
instructions most punctually; and his lordship
knows, and will acknowledge, the truth of this
assertion. 
Thus have I explained the true cause of my
first expedition to Flanders, whither the world
was good-natured enough to say I followed Mr.
B&wblank; and the whole army, which happened to
be sent abroad that summer. Before my departure
I likewise transmitted to lord B&wblank; the dressing-plate,
china, and a very considerable settlement,
of which he had been generous enough to make
me a present. This was an instance of my integrity, 

which I thought due to a man who had
laid me under great obligations; and tho' I have
lived to be refused a small sum both by him and
S&wblank;, I do not repent of my disinterested behaviour; 
and all the revenge I harbour against the
last of these lovers, is the desire of having it in
my power to do him good. 
I now found myself adrift in the world again,
and very richly deserved the hardships of my condition,
for my indiscretion in leaving lord B&wblank;,
and in trusting to the word of lord &wblank;, without
some farther security; but I have dearly paid
for my imprudence. The more I saw into the
character of this man whom destiny hath appointed
my scourge, the more was I determined
to avoid his fellowship and communication; for
he and I are, in point of disposition, as opposite
as any two principles in nature. In the first place,
he is one of the most unsocial beings that ever
existed; when I was pleased and happy he was
always out of temper, but if he could find means
to overcast and cloud my mirth, tho' never so
innocent, he then discovered the signs of uncommon
satisfaction and content, because, by
this disagreeable temper, he banished all company
from his house. He is extremely weak of
understanding, tho' he possesses a good share of
low cunning, which has so egregiously imposed
upon some people, that they have actually believed
him a good-natured easy creature, and
blamed me because I did not manage him to better
purpose; but, upon further acquaintance,
they have always found him obstinate as a mule,
and capricious as a monkey. Not that he is utterly
void of all commendable qualities: he is
punctual in paying his debts, liberal when in 

good humour, and would be well bred, were he
not subject to fits of absence, during which he is
altogether unconversable; but he is proud, naturally
suspicious, jealous, equally with and without
cause, never made a friend, and is an utter
stranger to the joys of intimacy; in short, he
hangs like a damp upon society, and may be properly
called Kill-joy, an epithet which he has
justly acquired. He honours me with constant
professions of love, but his conduct is so opposite
to my sentiments of that passion, as to have been
the prime source of all my misfortunes and affliction; 
and I have often wished myself the
object of his hate, in hopes of profiting by a
change in his behaviour. 
Indeed, he has not been able to make me more
unhappy than, I believe, he is in his own mind; 
for he is literally a self-tormentor, who never
enjoyed one gleam of satisfaction, except at the
expence of another's quiet; and yet with this (I
had almost called it diabolical) quality, he expects
that I should cherish him with all the tenderness
of affection; and after he has been at
pains to incur my aversion, punishes my disgust,
by contriving schemes to mortify and perplex
me, which have often succeeded so effectually,
as to endanger my life and constitution; for I
have been fretted and frighted into sundry fits of
illness, and then I own I have experienced his
care and concern. 
Over and above the oddities I have mentioned,
he is so unsteady in his œconomy, that he is always
new modelling his affairs, and exhausting
his fortune, by laying out ten pounds, in order to
save a shilling; he inquires into the character of a
servant after he has lived two years in his family, 

and is so ridiculously stocked with vanity and self-conceit,
that notwithstanding my assurance before,
and the whole series of my conduct since
our marriage, which ought to have convinced
him of my dislike, he is still persuaded, that at
bottom, I must admire and be enamoured of his
agreeable person and accomplishments, and that
I would not fail to manifest my love, were I not
spirited up against him by his own relations. 
Perhaps it might be their interest to foment the
misunderstanding betwixt us; but really, they
give themselves no trouble about our affairs; 
and, so far as I know them, are a very good
sort of people. On the whole, I think I may
with justice pronounce my precious yoke-fellow a
trifling, teazing, insufferable, inconsistent creature. 
With the little money which remained of what
I had received from his lordship, for housekeeping,
I transported myself to Flanders, and arrived
in Ghent, a few days after our troops were
quartered in that city, which was so much
crowded with these new visitants, that I should
have found it impracticable to procure a lodging,
had I not been accommodated by lord R&wblank; B&wblank;,
the duke of A&wblank;'s youngest brother, who very
politely gave me up his own. Here I saw my
friend Mr. B&wblank;, who was overjoyed at my
arrival, though jealous of every man of his acquaintance; 
for he loved me with all the ardour
of passion, and I regarded him with all the perfection
of friendship, which, had he lived, in time
might have produced love; but it never did. Notwithstanding
his earnest solicitations to the contrary,
I stayed but a week in Ghent, from whence
I proceeded to Brussels, and fixed my abode in
the Hotel de Flandre, among an agreeable set of 

gentlemen and ladies, with whom I spent my
time very chearfully. There being a sort of
court in this city, it was frequented by all the
officers, who could obtain permission to go thither; 
and the place in general was gay and agreeable. 
I was introduced to the best families, and
very happy in my acquaintance; for the ladies
were polite, good tempered, and obliging, and
treated me with the utmost hospitality and respect. 
Among others, I contracted a friendship
with Madam la comtesse de C&wblank;, and her
two daughters, who were very amiable young ladies; 
and became intimate with the princess
C&wblank; and countess W&wblank;, lady of the bed-chamber
to the queen of Hungary, and a great
favourite of the governor Monsieur D'H&wblank;,
in whose house she lived with his wife, who was
also a lady of a very engaging disposition. 
Soon after I had fixed my habitation in Brussels,
the company at our Hotel was increased by
three officers, who professed themselves my admirers,
and came from Ghent, with a view of
soliciting my love. This triumvirate consisted
of the Scotch earl of—, lord R&wblank; M&wblank;, and
another young officer: the first was a man of a
very genteel figure and amorous complexion,
danced well, and had a great deal of good humour,
with a mixture of vanity and self-conceit. 
The second had a good face, though a clumsy
person, and a very sweet disposition, very much
adapted for the sentimental passion of love: and
the third (Mr. W&wblank; by name) was tall, thin,
and well-bred, with a great stock of good nature
and vivacity. These adventurers began their
addresses in general acts of gallantry, that comprehended
several of my female friends, with 

whom we used to engage in parties of pleasure,
both in the city and the environs, which are extremely
agreeable; and when they thought they
had taken the preliminary steps of securing themselves
in my good opinion and esteem, they
agreed to go on without farther delay, and that
lord &wblank; should make the first attack upon my
heart. 
He accordingly laid siege to me, with such
warmth and assiduity, that I believe he deceived
himself, and began to think he was actually in
love; though at bottom, he felt no impulse that
deserved the sacred name. Though I discouraged
him in the beginning, he persecuted me
with his addresses; he always sat by me at dinner,
and imparted a thousand trifles in continual
whispers, which attracted the notice of the company
so much, that I began to fear his behaviour
would give rise to some report to my prejudice; 
and therefore avoided him with the utmost caution. 
Notwithstanding all my care, however,
he found means one night, while my maid, who
lay in my room, went down stairs, to get into
my chamber after I was abed: upon which, I
started up, and told him, that if he should approach
me, I would alarm the house; for I never
wanted courage and resolution. Perceiving my
displeasure, he kneeled by the bed-side, begg'd I
would have pity on his sufferings, and swore I
should have carte blanche to the utmost extent of
his fortune. To these proposals I made no other
reply, but that of protesting I would never speak
to him again, if he did not quit my apartment
that moment; upon which, he thought proper
to withdraw; and I never afterwards gave him
an opportunity of speaking to me on the same 

subject: so that, in a few weeks, he separated
himself from our society; though the ladies of
Brussels considered him as my lover, because, of
all the other officers, he was their greatest favourite. 
His lordship being thus repulsed, Mr. W&wblank; 
took the field, and assailed my heart in a very
different manner. He said, he knew not how
to make love, but was a man of honour, would
keep the secret, and so forth. To this cavalier
address I answered, that I was not angry, as I
otherwise should have been at his blunt declaration,
because I found, by his own confession, he
did not know what was due to the sex; and my
unhappy situation in some shape excused him for
a liberty, which he would not have dream'd of
taking, had not my misfortunes encouraged his
presumption. But I would deal with him in
his own way; and far from assuming the prude,
frankly assured him, that he was not at all to my
taste, hoping he would consider my dislike as a
sufficient reason to reject his love. 
Lord R&wblank; began to feel the symptoms of a
genuine passion, which he carefully cherished in
silence, being naturally diffident and bashful; 
but, by the very means he used to conceal it from
my observation, I plainly discerned the situation
of his heart, and was not at all displeased at the
progress I had made in his inclinations. Mean
while, he cultivated my acquaintance with great
assiduity and respect, attended me in all my excursions,
and particularly in an expedition to
Antwerp, with two other gentlemen, where, in
downright gaietè de cœur, we sat for our pictures,
which were drawn in one piece; one of the
partie being represented in the dress of an hussar, 

and another in that of a running footman. This
incident I mention, because the performance,
which is now in my possession, gave birth to a
thousand groundless reports, that circulated in
England at our expence. 
It was immediately after this jaunt, that lord
R&wblank; began to disclose his passion; though he,
at the same time, started such objections as
seemed well nigh to extinguish his hopes, lamenting,
that even if he should have the happiness
to engage my affections, his fortune was
too inconsiderable to support us against the efforts
of lord &wblank;, should he attempt to interrupt our
felicity; and that he himself was obliged to follow
the motions of the army. In short, he
seemed to consider my felicity more than his
own, and behaved with such delicacy, as gradually
made an impression on my heart; so
that when we parted, we agreed to renew our
correspondence in England. 
In the midst of these agreeable amusements,
which I enjoyed in almost all the different towns
of Flanders, I happened to be at Ghent one day,
sitting among a good deal of company, in one of
their Hotels, when a post-chaise stopped at the
gate; upon which we went to the windows to
satisfy our curiosity, when who should step out
of the convenience, but my little insignificant
lord. I no sooner announced him to the company,
than all the gentlemen asked whether they should
stay and protect me, or withdraw; and when I
assured them, that their protection was not necessary,
one and all of them retired; though lord
R&wblank; M&wblank; went no farther than the parlour
below, being determined to screen me
against all violence and compulsion. I sent a 

message to my lord, desiring him to walk up into
my apartment; but although his sole errand was
to see and carry me off, he would not venture to
accept of my invitation, till he had demanded me
in form, from the governor of the place. 
That gentleman being altogether a stranger to
his person and character, referred him to the
commanding officer of the English troops, who
was a man of humour, and upon his lordship's
application, pretended to doubt his identity; observing,
that he had always heard lord &wblank; represented
as a jolly corpulent man. He gave
him to understand, however, that even granting
him to be the person, I was by no means subject
to military law, unless he could prove, that I had
ever inlisted in his majesty's service. 
Thus disappointed in his endeavours, he returned
to the inn, and, with much persuasion,
trusted himself in my dining-room, after having
stationed his attendant at the door, in case of accidents. 
When I asked, what had procured me
the honour of this visit; he told me, his business
and intention were to carry me home; and this
declaration produced a conference, in which I
argued the case with him; and matters were accommodated
for the present, by my promising to
be in England some time in September, on condition
that he would permit me to live by myself,
as before, and immediately order the arrears
of my pin-money to be paid. He assented to
every thing I proposed, returned in peace to his
own country, and the deficiencies of my allowance
were made good; while I returned to Brussels,
where I stayed until my departure for England,
which I regulated in such a manner as was
consistent with my engagement. 

I took lodgings in Pall-mall, and sending for
my lord, convinced him of my punctuality, and
put him in mind of his promise; when, to my
utter astonishment and confusion, he owned, that
his promise was no more than a decoy to bring
me over, and that I must lay my account with
living in his house, like a dutiful and obedient
wife. I heard him with the indignation such
treatment deserved, upbraided him with his perfidious
dealing, which I told him would have determined
me against cohabitation with him, had
I not been already resolved: and being destitute
of all resource, repaired to Bath, where I afterwards
met with Mr. D&wblank; and Mr. R&wblank;,
two gentlemen who had been my fellow-passengers
in the yacht from Flanders, and treated me
with great friendship and politeness, without either
talking or thinking of love. 
With these gentlemen, who were as idle as
myself, I went to the jubilee at Preston, which
was no other than a great number of people assembled
in a small town extremely ill accommodated,
to partake of diversions that were bad
imitations of plays, concerts, and masquerades. 
If the world should place to the account of my
indiscretion, my travelling in this manner, with
gentlemen to whom I had no particular attachment; 
let it also be considered, as an alleviation,
that I always lived in terror of my lord, and consequently
was often obliged to shift my quarters; 
so that my finances being extremely slender, I
stood the more in need of assistance and protection. 
I was, besides, young, inconsiderate, and
so simple, as to suppose the figure of an ugly
man would always secure me from censure on
his account: neither did I ever dream of any 

man's addresses, until he made an actual declaration
of his love. 
Upon my return to Bath, I was again harrassed
by lord &wblank;, who came thither accompanied
by my father, whom I was very glad to
see, though he importuned me to comply with
my husband's desire, and for the future keep
measures with the world. This remonstrance
about living with my lord, which he constantly
repeated, was the only instance of his unkindness
which I ever felt. But all his admonitions were
not of force sufficient to shake my resolution in
that particular; though the debate continued so
late, that I told his lordship, it was high time to
retire, for I could not accommodate him with a
bed. He then gave me to understand, that he
would stay where he was; upon which my father
took his leave, on pretence of looking out
for a lodging to himself. 
The little gentleman being now left tête a tête
with me, began to discover some signs of apprehension
in his looks; but mustering up all his resolution,
he went to the door, called up three of
his servants, whom he placed as centinels upon
the stair, and flung himself in my elbow-chair,
where he resigned himself to rest. Intending to
go to bed, I thought it was but just and decent
that I should screen myself from the intrusion of
his footmen, and with that view bolted the door. 
Lord &wblank; hearing himself locked in, started up
in the utmost terror and consternation, kicked
the door with his heel, and screamed aloud, as if
he had been in the hands of an assassin. My father,
who had not yet quitted the house, hearing
these outcries, ran up stairs again, and coming
through my bed-chamber, into the dining-room 

where we were, found me almost suffocated with
laughter, and his heroic son-in-law staring like
one who had lost his wits, with his hair standing
on end. 
When my father asked the meaning of his
exclamations, he told him with all the symptoms
of dismay, that I had lock'd him in, and he did
not understand such usage: but I explained the
whole mystery, by saying, I had bolted the door,
because I did not like the company of his servants,
and could not imagine the cause of his
pannic, unless he thought I designed to ravish
him; an insult, than which nothing was farther
from my intention. My father himself could
scarce refrain from laughing at his ridiculous fear; 
but seeing him in great confusion, took pity on
his condition, and carried him off to his own
lodgings, after I had given my word, that I
would not attempt to escape, but give him audience
next morning. I accordingly kept my
promise, and found means to persuade them to
leave me at my own discretion. Next day, I
was rallied upon the stratagem I had contrived to
frighten lord &wblank;; and a thousand idle stories
were told about this adventure, which happened
literally as I have related it. 
From Bath I betook myself to a small house
near Lincoln, which I hired of the d&wblank; of
A&wblank;, because a country life suited best with
my income, which was no more than four hundred
pounds a year, and that not well paid. 
I continued some months in this retirement, and
saw no company, except lord R&wblank; M&wblank;,
who lived in the neighbourhood, and visited me
twice; till finding myself indisposed, I was obliged
to remove to London, and took lodgings 

in Maddox-street, where my garison was taken
by storm, by my lord and his steward, reinforced
by Mr. L&wblank; V&wblank;, (who, as my lord
told me, had a subsidy of five and twenty pounds,
before he would take the field) and a couple of
hardy footmen. This formidable band rushed
into my apartment, laid violent hands upon me,
dragged me down stairs, without gloves or a
cloak, and thrusting me into a coach that stood
at the door, conveyed me to my lord's lodgings
in Gloucester-street. 
Upon this occasion, his lordship courageously
drew his sword upon my woman, who attempted
to defend me from his insults, and, in all probability,
would have intimidated him from proceeding; 
for he looked pale and aghast, his knees
knocked together, and he breathed thick and
hard, with his nostrils dilated, as if he had seen
a ghost. But he was encouraged by his mercenary
associate, who, for the five and twenty
pounds, stood by him in the day of trouble, and
spirited him on to this gallant enterprize. 
In consequence of this exploit, I was cooped
up in a paultry apartment in Gloucester-street,
where I was close beset by his lordship, and his
worthy steward Mr. H&wblank;, with a set of servants
that were the creatures of this fellow, of
whom lord &wblank; himself stood in awe; so that
I could not help thinking myself in Newgate,
among thieves and ruffians: and to such a degree
did my terror prevail, that I actually believed I
was in danger of being poisoned, and would not
receive any sustenance, except from the hands of
one harmless-looking fellow, a foreigner, who
was my lord's valet de chambre. I will not pretend
to say my fears were just; but such was my 

opinion of H&wblank;n, that I never doubted he would
put me out of the way, if he thought my life interfered
with his interest. 
On the second day of my imprisonment, I was
visited by the duke of L&wblank;, a friend of my
lord, who found me sitting upon a trunk, in a poor
little dining-room filled with lumber, and lighted
with two bits of tallow-candle, which had been
left over night. He perceived in my countenance
a mixture of rage, indignation, terror and
despair: he compassionated my sufferings, though
he could not alleviate my distress, any other way
than by interceding with my tyrant to mitigate my
oppression. Nevertheless, I remained eleven days
in this comfortable situation: I was watched like
a criminal all day, and one of the servants
walked from one room to another all night, in
the nature of a patrole; while my lord, who lay
in the chamber above me, got out of bed, and
tripp'd to the window, at the sound of every
coach that chanced to pass through the street. 
H&wblank;n, who was consummate in the arts of a
sycophant, began to court my favour, by condoling
my affliction, and assuring me, that the
only method by which I could regain my liberty,
was a chearful compliance with the humour of
my lord. I was fully convinced of the truth of
this observation; and though my temper is altogether
averse to dissimulation, attempted to affect
an air of serenity and resignation. But this disguise,
I found, would not answer my purpose; and
therefore I had recourse to the assistance of my
maid, who was permitted to attend me in my
confinement. With her I frequently consulted
about the means of accomplishing my escape; 
and, in consequence of our deliberations, she directed 

a coach and six to be ready at a certain
part of the town, and to wait for me three days
in the same place, in case I could not come before
the expiration of that term. 
This previous measure being taken according
to my instructions, the next necessary step was to
elude the vigilance of my guard: and in this
manner did I effectuate my purpose. Being, by
this time, indulged in the liberty of going out
in the coach, for the benefit of the air, attended
by two footmen, who had orders to watch all my
motions, I made use of this privilege one forenoon,
when lord &wblank; expected some company
to dinner, and bad the coachman drive to the
lodgings of a man who wrote with his mouth,
intending to give my spies the slip, on pretence
of seeing this curiosity: but they were too alert
in their duty to be thus outwitted, and followed
me up stairs into the very apartment. 
Disappointed in this hope, I revolved another
scheme, which was attended with success: I
bought some olives at an oil-shop; and telling the
servants I would proceed to St. James's gate, and
take a turn in the park, broke one of the bottles
by the way, complained of the misfortune when
I was set down, and desired that my coach might
be cleaned before my return. While my attendants
were employed in this office, I tripp'd
across the parade to the horse-guards, and chanced
to meet with an acquaintance in the park, who
said, he saw by my countenance, that I was upon
some expedition. I owned his supposition was
just; but, as I had not time to relate particulars,
I quickened my pace, and took possession of a
hackney-coach, in which I proceeded to the vehicle
which I had appointed to be in waiting. 

While I thus compassed my escape, there was
nothing but perplexity and confusion at home; 
dinner was delayed till six o'clock; my lord ran
half over the town in quest of his equipage,
which at last returned, with an account of my
elopement. My maid was brought to the question,
and grievously threatened; but (like all
the women I ever had) remained unshaken in her
fidelity. In the mean time, I travelled night and
day towards my retreat in Lincolnshire, of which
his lordship had not, as yet, got the least intelligence; 
and as my coachman was but an unexperienced
driver, I was obliged to make use of
my own skill in that exercise, and direct his endeavours
the whole way, without venturing to
go to bed, or take the least repose, until I reached
my own habitation, where I lived in peace and
tranquillity for the space of six weeks, when I
was alarmed by one of my lord's myrmidons,
who came into the neighbourhood, blustering
and swearing, that he would carry me off, either
dead or alive. 
It is not to be supposed that I was perfectly
easy, when I was made acquainted with his purpose
and declaration, as my whole family consisted
of no more than a couple of women and one
footman. However, I summoned up my courage,
which had been often tried, and never forsook
me in the day of danger; and sent him
word, that if ever he should presume to approach
my house, I would order him to be shot, without
ceremony. The fellow did not choose to put me
to the trial, and returned to town without his
errand. But as the place of my abode was now
discovered, I laid my account with having a visit
from his employer: I therefore planted spies upon 

the road, with a promise of reward to him who
should bring me the first intelligence of his
lordship's approach. 
Accordingly, I was one morning apprized of
his coming; and mounting horse immediately,
with my woman and valet, away we rode, in
defiance of winter, and in two days got through
the wilds of Lincolnshire and hundreds of Essex,
crossed the river at Tilbury, breakfasted at Chatham,
by the help of a guide and moon-light, arrived
at Dover the same evening, and embarked
for Calais, in which place I found myself next day
at two o'clock in the afternoon; and being heartily
tired with my journey, betook myself to
rest. My maid, who was not able to travel with
such expedition, followed me at an easier pace; 
and the footman was so astonished at my perseverance,
that he could not help asking upon the
road, if ever I was weary in my life. Certain it
is, my spirits and resolution have enabled me to
undergo fatigues that are almost incredible. From
Calais I went to Brussels, where I again set up
my rest in private lodgings; was again perfectly
well received by the fashionable people of
that place; and, by the interest of my friends,
obtained the queen of Hungary's protection against
the persecution of my husband, while I should reside
in the Austrian Netherlands. 
Thus secured, I lived uncensured, conversing
with the English company, with which this city
was crouded, but spent the most agreeable part
of my time with the countess of Calemberg, in
whose house I generally dined and supped; and I
also contracted an intimacy with the princess of
Chemay, who was a great favourite with Madam
D'Harrach, the governor's lady. 

I had not been long in this happy situation,
when I was disturbed by the arrival of lord &wblank;,
who demanded me of the governor; but finding
me sheltered from his power, he set out for Vienna; 
and, in consequence of his representations,
strengthened with the duke of N&wblank;'s name, my
protection was withdrawn. But, before this application,
he had gone to the camp, and addressed
himself to my lord Stair, who was my particular
friend, and ally by my first marriage, desiring
he would compel me to return to his house. 
His lordship told him, that I was in no shape subject
to his command; but invited him to dinner,
with a view of diverting himself and company, at
the expence of his guest. In the evening, he
was plied with so many bumpers to my health,
that he became intoxicated, and extremely obstreperous,
insisted upon seeing lord Stair, after
he was retired to rest, and quarrelled with lord
D&wblank;, who being a tall, large, raw-boned
Scotchman, could have swallowed him at one
mouthful; but he thought he might venture to
challenge him, in hopes of being put under arrest
by the general: though he reckoned without
his host; lord Stair knew his disposition, and,
in order to punish his presumption, winked at the
affair. The challenger, finding himself mistaken
in his conjecture, got up early in the morning,
and went off post for Vienna: and lord Stair desired
a certain man of quality to make me a visit,
and give me an account of his behaviour. 
Being now deprived of my protection and pin-money,
which my generous husband would no longer
pay, I was reduced to great difficulty and distress. 
The duchess D'Aremberg, lord G&wblank;, and many
other persons of distinction, interceded in my behalf 

with his majesty, who was then abroad; 
but he refused to interpose between man and
wife. The countess of Calemberg wrote a letter to
my father, in which she represented my uncomfortable
situation, and undertook to answer for
my conduct, in case he would allow me a small
annuity, on which I could live independant of
lord &wblank;, who, by all accounts, was a wretch
with whom I could never enjoy the least happiness
or quiet; otherwise, she would be the first to
advise me to an accommodation. She gave him
to understand, that her character was neither
doubtful nor obscure; and that if my conduct
there had not been irreproachable, she should not
have taken me under her protection: that as I
proposed to board in a convent, a small sum
would answer my occasions; but, if that should
be denied, I would actually go to service, or take
some other desperate step, to avoid the man who
was my bane and aversion. 
To this kind remonstrance my father answered,
that his fortune would not allow him to assist
me; he had now a young family; and that I
ought, at all events, to return to my husband. 
By this time, such was the extremity of my circumstances,
that I was forced to pawn my
cloaths, and every trifling trinket in my possession,
and even to descend so far as to sollicit Mr.
S&wblank; for a loan of fifty pounds, which he refused. 
Thus was I deserted, in my distress, by two
persons, to whom, in the season of my affluence,
my purse had been always open. Nothing so
effectually subdues a spirit unused to supplicate, as
want: repulsed in this manner, I had recourse to
lord B&wblank;, who was also (it seems) unable to relieve 

my necessities. This mortification I deserved at
his hands, tho' he had once put it in my power
to be above all such paultry demands; and I
should not have been compelled to the disagreeable
task of troubling my friends, had not I voluntarily
resigned what he formerly gave me. 
As to the other gentleman to whom I addressed
myself, on this occasion, I think he might have
shewn more regard to my application, not only
for the reasons already mentioned, but because
he knew me too well to be ignorant of what I
must have suffered, in condescending to make
such a request. 
Several officers, who guess'd my adversity,
generously offered to supply me with money; but
I could not bring myself to make use of their
friendship, or even to own my distress, except
to one person, of whom I borrowed a small sum. 
To crown my misfortunes, I was taken very
ill, at a time when there was no other way of
avoiding the clutches of my persecutor, but by a
precipitate flight. In this emergency, I applied
to a worthy gentleman of Brussels, a very good
friend of mine, but no lover. I say no lover,
because every man is supposed to act in that capacity
who befriends a young woman in distress. 
This generous Fleming set out with me, in the
night, from Brussels, and conducted me to the
frontiers of France. Being very much indisposed
both in mind and body when I was obliged to
undertake this expedition, I should, in all probability,
have sunk under the fatigue of travelling,
had not my spirits been kept up by the conversation
of my companion, who was a man of business
and consequence, and undertook to manage 

my affairs in such a manner as would enable me
to re-establish my residence in the place I had
left. He was young and active, attended me
with the utmost care and assiduity, and left nothing
undone which he thought would contribute
to my ease and satisfaction. I believe his friendship
for me was a little tinctured with another
passion; but he was married, and lived very well
with his wife, who was also my friend; so that
he knew I would never think of him in the light
of a lover. 
Upon our arrival at Valenciennes, he accommodated
me with a little money (for a little was
all I would take) and returned to his own city,
after we had settled a correspondence by letters. 
I was detained a day or two in this place by my
indisposition, which increased; but nevertheless
proceeded to Paris, to make interest for a protection
from the king of France, which that
monarch graciously accorded me, in three days
after my first application; and his minister sent
orders to all the governors and intendants of the
province towns, to protect me against the efforts
of lord &wblank;, in whatever place I should choose
to reside. 
Having returned my thanks at Versailles for
this favour, and tarried a few days at Paris,
which was a place altogether unsuitable to the
low ebb of my fortune, I repaired to Lisle, where
I intended to fix my habitation; and there my
disorder recurred with such violence, that I was
obliged to send for a physician, who seemed to
have been a disciple of Sangrado; for he scarce
left a drop of blood in my body, and yet I found
myself never a whit the better. Indeed I was so
much exhausted by these evacuations, and my 

constitution so much impaired by fatigue and perturbation
of mind, that I had no other hope of
recovering but that of reaching England, and
putting myself under the direction of a physician
on whose ability I could depend. 
With this doubtful prospect, therefore, I determined
to attempt a return to my native air,
and actually departed from Lisle, in such a melancholy
enfeebled condition, that I had almost
fainted when I was put into the coach. But before
I resolved upon this journey I was reduced
to the utmost exigence of fortune; so that I
could scarce afford to buy provisions, had it been
in my power to eat, and should not have been
able to defray my travelling expences, had I not
been generously befriended by lord R&wblank; M&wblank; 
who (I am sure) would have done any thing for
my ease and accommodation, tho' he has unjustly
incurred the imputation of being parsimonious,
and I had no reason to expect any such
favour at his hands. 
In this deplorable state of health I was conveyed
to Calais, being all the way (as it were) in
the arms of death, without having swallowed the
least sustenance on the road; and so much was
my indisposition augmented by the fatigue of the
journey, that I swooned when I was brought into
the inn, and had almost expired before I could
receive the least assistance or advice: however,
my spirits were a little revived by some bread and
wine, which I took at the persuasion of a French
surgeon, who chancing to pass by the door, was
called up to my relief; and having sent my servant
to Brussels to take care of my cloaths, embarked
in the packet-boat, and by that time we
arrived at Dover, was almost in extremity. 

Here I found a return coach, in which I was
carried to London, and was put to bed in the house
at which we put up, more dead than alive. The
people of the inn sent for an apothecary, who administred
some cordial that recalled me to life; 
and when I recovered the use of speech, I told
him who I was, and desired him to wait upon
Dr. S&wblank; and inform him of my situation. A
young girl who was niece to the landlord's wife,
seeing me unattended, made a tender of her service
to me, and I accepted the offer, as well as
of a lodging in the apothecary's house, to which
I was conveyed as soon as my strength would admit
of my removal; and there was visited by my
physician, who was shocked to find me in such a
dangerous condition: however, having considered
my case, he perceived that my indisposition proceeded
from the calamities I had undergone,
and encouraged me with the hope of a speedy
cure, provided I could be kept easy and undisturbed. 
I was accordingly tended with all imaginable
care; my lord's name being never mentioned in
my hearing, because I considered him as the fatal
source of all my misfortunes; and in a month I
recovered my health, by the great skill and tenderness
of my doctor, who now finding me
strong enough to encounter fresh troubles, endeavoured
to persuade me, that it would be my
wisest step to return to my husband, whom, at
that time, he had often occasion to see. But I
rejected his proposal, commenced a new lawsuit
for separation, and took a small house in St.
James's Square. 



About this time, my woman returned from
Brussels, but without my cloaths, which were 

detained on account of the money I owed in that
place; and asking her dismission from my service,
set up shop for herself. I had not lived many
weeks in my new habitation, when my persecutor
renewed his attempts to make himself master of
my person; but I had learn'd from experience,
to redouble my vigilance, and he was frustrated
in all his endeavours. I was again happy in the
conversation of my former acquaintance, and visited
by a great number of gentlemen, mostly
persons of probity and sense, who cultivated
my friendship, without any other motive
of attachment. Not that I was unsolicited on
the article of love; that was a theme on which I
never wanted orators; and could I have prevailed
upon myself to profit by the advances that
were made, I might have managed my opportunities,
so as to have set fortune at defiance for the
future. But I was none of those œconomists,
who can sacrifice their hearts to interested considerations. 
One evening, while I was conversing with
three or four of my friends, my lawyer came in,
and told me he had something of consequence to
impart: upon which, all the gentlemen but one
went away; and he gave me to understand, that
my suit would immediately come to trial; and
though he hoped the best, the issue was uncertain:
that if it should be given against me, the
decision would inspire my lord with fresh spirits
to disturb my peace; and therefore it would be
convenient for me to retire, until the affair should
be brought to a determination. 
I was very much disconcerted at this intelligence; 
and the gentleman who stayed perceiving
my concern, asked what I intended to do, or if 

he could serve me in any shape, and desired to
know whither I proposed to retreat. I affected
to laugh, and answered, “To a garret I believe.” 
To this over-strained raillery he replied,
that if I should, his friendship and regard would
find the way to my apartment; and I had no
reason to doubt the sincerity of his declaration. 
We consulted about the measures I should take,
and I determined to remove into the country,
where I was soon favoured with a letter from
him, wherein he expressed the infinite pleasure
he had, in being able to assure me, that my suit
had been successful, and that I might appear again
with great safety. 
Accordingly, I returned to town in his coach
and six, which he had sent for my convenience,
and the same evening went with him to the masquerade,
where we passed the night very agreeably,
his spirits, as well as mine, being elevated to a
joyous pitch, by the happy event of my process. 
This gentleman was a person of great honour,
worth and good nature; he loved me extremely,
but did not care that I should know the extent of
his passion: on the contrary, he endeavoured to
persuade me, he had laid it down as a maxim,
that no woman should ever have power enough
over his heart, to give him the least pain or disquiet. 
In short, he had made a progress in my
affection, and to his generosity was I indebted
for my subsistence two whole years; during
which, he was continually professing this philosophic
indifference, while, at the same time, he
was giving me daily assurances of his friendship
and esteem, and treating me with incessant marks
of the most passionate love: so that I concluded 

his intention was cold, though his temper was
warm; and considering myself as an incumbrance
upon his fortune, I redoubled my endeavours to
obtain a separate maintenance from my lord, and
removed from St. James's Square to lodgings at
Kensington, where I had not long enjoyed myself
in tranquillity, before it was interrupted by
a very unexpected visit. 
While I was busy one day dressing in my
dining-room, I found his lordship at my elbow,
before I was aware of his approach, although his
coach was at the door, and the house already in
the possession of his servants. He accosted me
in the usual stile, as if we had parted the night
before; and I answered him with an appearance
of the same careless familiarity, desiring him to
sit down, while I retreated to my chamber,
lock'd the door, and fairly went to bed; being,
perhaps, the first woman who went thither for
protection from the insults of a man. Here then
I immured myself with my faithful Abigail; and
my lord finding me secured, knocked at the door,
and through the key-hole begg'd to be admitted; 
assuring me, that all he wanted was a conference. 
I desired to be excused, though I believed his assurance; 
but I had no inclination to converse
with him, because I knew from experience the
nature of his conversation, which was so disagreeable
and tormenting, that I would have exchanged
it at any time for a good beating, and thought
myself a gainer by the bargain. However, he
persisted in his importunities to such a degree,
that I assented to his proposal, on condition that
the duke of L&wblank; should be present at the interview; 
and he immediately sent a message to
his grace, while I in peace ate my breakfast, 

conveyed in a basket, which was hoisted up to
the window of my bed-chamber. 
The duke was so kind as to come at my lord's
request, and before I would open the door, gave
me his word, that I should be protected from all
violence and compulsion. Thus assured, they
were permitted to enter; and my little gentleman
sitting down by the bed-side, began to repeat
the old hackneyed arguments he had formerly
used, with the view of inducing me to
live with him; and I, on my side, repeated my
former objections, or pretended to listen to his
representations, while my imagination was employed
in contriving the means of effecting an
escape, as the duke easily perceived by my countenance. 
Finding all his remonstrances ineffectual, he
quitted the chamber, and left his cause to the
eloquence of his grace, who sat with me a whole
half hour, without exerting himself much in behalf
of his client, because he knew I was altogether
obstinate, and determined on that score; 
but joked upon the behaviour of his lordship,
who (though jealous of most people) had
left him alone with me in my bed-chamber, observing,
that he must either have great confidence
in his virtue, or a very bad opinion of him
otherwise. In short, I found means to defer the
categorical answer till next day, and invited the
duke and his lordship to dine with me to-morrow. 
My wife yoke-fellow seemed to doubt the sincerity
of this invitation, and was very much disposed
to keep possession of my fort: but, by the
persuasions of his grace, and the advice of H&wblank;n,
who was his chief counsellor and back, he was 

prevailed upon to take my word, and for the present
left me. 
They were no sooner retired, than I rose with
great expedition, pack'd up my cloaths, and took
shelter in Essex for the first time. Next day,
my lord and his noble friend came to dinner, according
to appointment; and being informed of
my escape by my woman, whom I had left in the
house, his lordship discovered some signs of discontent,
and insisted upon seeing my papers; 
upon which, my maid produced a parcel of bills
which I owed to different people. Notwithstanding
this disappointment, he sat down to
what was provided for dinner, and with great deliberation
ate up a leg of lamb, the best part of
a fowl, and something else, which I do not now
remember; and then very peaceably went away,
giving my maid an opportunity of following me
to the place of my retreat. 
My intention was to have sought refuge, as
formerly, in another country; but I was prevented
from putting my design in execution by a
fit of illness, during which I was visited by my
physician and some of my own relations, particularly
a distant cousin of mine, whom my lord had
engaged in his interests, by promising to recompence
her amply, if she could persuade me to
comply with his desire. In this office she was assisted
by the doctor, who was my friend, and a
man of sense, for whom I have the most perfect
esteem, though he and I have often differed in
point of opinion. In a word, I was exposed to
the incessant importunities of all my acquaintance,
which, added to the desperate circumstances of
my fortune, compelled me to embrace the terms 

that were offered, and I again returned to the
domestic duties of a wife. 
I was conducted to my lord's house by an old
friend of mine, a gentleman turned of fifty, of
admirable parts and understanding; he was a
pleasing companion, chearful and humane, and
had acquired a great share of my esteem and respect. 
In a word, his advice had great weight in
my deliberations, because it seemed to be the result
of experience and disinterested friendship. 
Without all doubt, he had an unfeigned concern
for my welfare; but, being an admirable politician,
his scheme was to make my interest coincide
with his own inclinations; for I had unwittingly
made an innovation upon his heart; 
and as he thought I should hardly favour his
passion, while I was at liberty to converse with
the rest of my admirers, he counselled me to
surrender that freedom, well knowing that my
lord would be easily persuaded to banish all his rivals
from the house; in which case, he did not
doubt of his being able to insinuate himself into
my affections; because he laid it down as an
eternal truth, that if any two persons of different
sexes were obliged to live together in a desart,
where they would be excluded from all other
human intercourse, they would naturally and inevitably
contract an inclination for each other. 
How just this hypothesis may be, I leave to
the determination of the curious; though, if I
may be allowed to judge from my own disposition,
a couple so situated would be apt to imbibe
mutual disgusts, from the nature and necessity
of their union; unless their association
was at first the effect of reciprocal affection and
esteem. Be this as it will, I honour the gentleman 

man for his plan, which was ingeniously contrived,
and artfully conducted: but I happened
to have too much address for him in the sequel,
cunning as he was, though at first I did not perceive
his drift; and his lordship was much less
likely to comprehend his meaning. 
Immediately after this new accommodation, I
was carried to a country-house belonging to my
lord, and was simple enough to venture myself
(unattended by any servant on whose integrity I
could depend) in the hands of his lordship and
H&wblank;n, whose villainy I always dreaded; tho'
at this time my apprehensions were considerably
increased, by recollecting, that it was
not his interest to let me live in the house, lest
his conduct should be inquired into; and by remembering,
that the very house to which we
were going, had been twice burnt down in a
very short space of time, not without suspicion
of his having been the incendiary, on account of
some box of writings, which was lost in the conflagration. 
True it is, this imputation was never
made good; and perhaps he was altogether innocent
of the charge, which nevertheless affected
my spirits in such a manner, as rendered me the
most miserable of all mortals; and in this terror
did I remain, till my consternation was weakened
by the arrival of Mr. Bal&wblank;, a good natured
worthy man, whom my lord had invited to his
house, and I thought would not see me ill used; 
and in a few weeks, we were joined by Dr. S&wblank; 
and his lady, who visited us according to their
promise; and it was resolved that we should set
out for Tunbridge, on a partie of pleasure, and
at our return examine H&wblank;n's accounts. 

This last part of our scheme was not all relished
by our worthy steward, who, therefore,
determined to overturn our whole plan, and succeeded
accordingly. My lord, all of a sudden,
declared himself against the jaunt we had projected,
and insisted upon my staying at home,
without assigning any reason for this peremptory
behaviour; his countenance became cloudy, and
for the space of three days he did not open his
mouth. 
At last, he one night entered my bed-chamber,
to which he now had free access, with his
sword under his arm, and, if I remember aright,
it was ready drawn. I could not help taking notice
of this alarming circumstance, which shocked
me the more, as it happened immediately after a
gloomy fit of discontent. However, I seemed
to overlook the incident, and dismissing my maid,
went to bed; because I was ashamed to acknowledge,
even to my own heart, any dread of
a person whom I despised so much. However,
the strength of my constitution was not equal to
the fortitude of my mind: I was taken ill, and
the servants were obliged to be called up; while
my lord himself, terrified at my situation, ran up
stairs to Mrs. S&wblank;, who was in bed, told her,
with evident perturbation of spirits, that I was
very much indisposed, and said, he believed I
was frightened by his entering my chamber with
his sword in hand. 
This lady was so startled at his information,
that she ran into my apartment half-naked, and
as she went down stairs, asked what reason could
induce him to have carried his sword with him? 
Upon which he gave her to understand, that his
intention was to kill the bats. I believe and 

hope he had no other design than that of intimidating
me, but when the affair happened, I was
of a different opinion. Mrs. S&wblank; having put on
her cloaths, sat up all night by my bed-side, and
was so good as to assure me, that she would not
leave me, until I should be safely delivered from
the apprehensions that surrounded me in this
house, to which she and the doctor had been the
principal cause of my coming; for my lord had
haunted and importuned them incessantly on this
subject, protesting that he loved me with the
most inviolable affection; and all he desired was,
that I would sit at his table, manage his family,
and share his fortune. By these professions, uttered
with an air of honesty and good-nature, he
had imposed himself upon them, for the best
tempered creature upon earth; and they used
all their influence with me to take him into favour. 
This hath been the case with a great
many people, who had but a superficial knowledge
of his disposition; but, in the course of
their acquaintance, they have never failed to discern
and acknowledge their mistake. 
The doctor, on his return from Tunbridge,
to which place he had made a trip by himself,
found me ill a-bed, and the whole family in confusion:
surprized and concerned at this disorder,
he entered into expostulation with my lord, who
owned, that the cause of his displeasure and disquiet
was no other than jealousy: H&wblank; had informed
him, that I had been seen to walk out
with Mr. Bal&wblank; in a morning; and that our correspondence
had been observed with many additional
circumstances, which were absolutely false
and groundless. This imputation was no sooner
understood, than it was resolved that the accuser 

should be examined, in presence of us all. He
accordingly appeared, exceedingly drunk, tho'
it was morning, and repeated the articles of the
charge, as an information he had received from
a man who came from town to hang the bells,
and was long ago returned to London. 
This was an instance of his cunning and address,
which did not forsake him even in his
hours of intoxication. Had he fixed the calumny
on any one of the servants, he would have been
confronted and detected in his falshood. Nevertheless,
tho' he could not be legally convicted, it
plainly appeared that he was the author of this
defamation, which incensed Mr. Bal&wblank; to such a
degree, that he could scarce be with-held from
punishing him on the spot, by manual chastisement. 
However, he was prevailed upon to abstain
from such immediate vengeance, as a step
unworthy of his character; and the affair was
brought to this issue, that his lordship should either
part with me or Mr. H&wblank; for I was fully
determined against living under the same roof
with such an incendiary. 
This alternative being proposed, my lord dismiss'd
his steward, and we returned to town with
the doctor and Mrs. S&wblank;; for I had imbibed such
horror and aversion for this country seat (tho' one
of the pleasantest in England) that I could not
bear to live in it. We therefore removed to an
house in Bond-street, where, according to the
advice of my friends, I exerted my whole power
and complaisance, in endeavours to keep my
husband in good humour; but was so unsuccessful
in my attempts, that if ever he was worse
tempered, more capricious, or intolerable, at
one time than at another, this was the season in 

which his ill-humour predominated to the most
rancorous degree. I was scarce ever permitted
to stir abroad, saw no-body at home but my old
male-friend whom I have mentioned above, and
the doctor with his lady, from whose conversation
also I was at last excluded. 
Nevertheless, I contrived to steal a meeting,
now and then, with my late benefactor, for whom
I entertained a great share of affection, exclusive
of that gratitude which was due to his generosity. 
It was not his fault that I compromised matters
with my lord; for he was as free of his purse as
I was unwilling to use it. It would, therefore,
have been unfriendly, unkind, and ungrateful in
me (now that I was in affluence) to avoid all intercourse
with a man who had supported me in
adversity. —I think people cannot be too shy and
scrupulous in receiving favours; but once they
are conferred, they ought never to forget the
obligation: and I was never more concerned at
any incident of my life, than at hearing that this
gentleman did not receive a letter, in which I
acknowledged the last proof of his friendship and
liberality which I had occasion to use, because I
have since learned, that he suspected me of neglect. 
But, to return to my situation in Bond-street,
I bore it as well as I could for the space of three
months, during which I lived in the midst of
spies who were employed to watch my conduct; 
and underwent every mortification that malice,
power, and folly could inflict. Nay, so ridiculous,
so unreasonable was my tyrant in his spleen,
that he declared he would even be jealous of Heydigger,
if there was no other man to incur his suspicion:
he expected that I should spend my
whole time with him, tête a tête; and when I 

sacrificed my enjoyment to these comfortable
parties, he never failed to lay hold on some innocent
expression of mine, which he made the
foundation of a quarrel; and when I strove to
avoid these disagreeable misinterpretations, by
reading or writing, he incessantly teized and tormented
me with the imputation of being peevish,
sullen and reserved. 
Harrassed by this insufferable behaviour, I
communicated my case to Dr. S&wblank; and his lady,
intimating that I neither could nor would expose
myself any longer to such usage. The doctor
exhorted me to bear my fate with patience, and
Mrs. S&wblank; was silent on the subject; so that I still
hesitated between staying and going, when the
doctor being one night at supper, happened to
have some words with my lord, who was so violently
transported with passion, that I was actually
afraid of going to bed with him; and next
morning when he waked, there was such an expression
of frantic wildness in his countenance,
that I imagined he was actually distracted. 
This alarming circumstance confirmed me in
my resolution of decamping; and I accordingly
moved my quarters to an house in Sackville-street,
where I had lodged when I was a widow; 
and when I was settled, sent a message to the
duke of L&wblank;, desiring he would make my lord
acquainted with the place of my abode, my reasons
for removing, and my intention to defend
myself against all his attempts. The first night
of this separation I went to bed by myself, with
as much pleasure as a man could do in going to
bed to his mistress, whom he had long solicited
in vain. So rejoiced was I to be delivered from
my obnoxious bedfellow! 

I had not long changed my lodgings, which
I did to Brook-street, and enjoyed the sweets of
my escape, when I was importuned to return, by
a new steward whom my lord had engaged in the
room of H&wblank;n. This gentleman, who bore a
very fair character, made such judicious representations,
and behaved so candidly in the discharge
of his function, that I agreed he should
act as umpire in the difference between us; and
once more a reconciliation was effected, tho' his
lordship began to be dissatisfied even before the
execution of our agreement, in consequence of
which he attended me to Bath, whither I went
for the benefit of my health, which was not a
little impaired. 
This accommodation had a surprising effect
upon my lover, who, notwithstanding his repeated
declarations, that no woman should ever
gain such an ascendency over his heart, as to be
able to give him pain, suffered all the agonies of
disappointed love, when he now found himself
deprived of the opportunities of seeing me, and
behaved very differently from what he had imagined
he should: his words and actions were desperate; 
one of his expressions to me was, “It
is like twisting my heart-strings, and tearing
it out of my body.” And I should never have
done it, had I thought he would have suffered; 
but I protest I believed him when he said otherwise
so much, that it was the occasion of my giving
him up; and it was now too late to retract. 
In our expedition to the Bath I was accompanied
by a very agreeable young lady,
with whom I pass'd my time very happily, amid
the diversions of the place, which screened 

me, in a good measure, from the vexatious society
of my hopeful partner. From this place
we repaired to his seat in the country, where we
spent a few months, and thence returned again
to our house in Bond-street. Here, while I was
confined to my bed by illness, it was supposed
my indisposition was no other than a private lying
in, tho' I was under the roof with my lord,
and attended by his servants. 
While my distemper continued, my lord (to
do him justice) behaved with all imaginable tenderness
and care; and his concern on these occasions
I have already mentioned, as a strange inconsistency
in his disposition. If his actions were
at all accountable, I should think he took pains
to fret me into a fever first, in order to manifest
his love and humanity afterwards. When I recovered
my strength and spirits, I went abroad,
saw company, and should have been easy, had he
been contented; but as my satisfaction increased,
his good humour decayed, and he banished, from
his house, one by one, all the people whose conversation
could have made my life agreeable. 
I often expostulated with him upon this malignant
behaviour, protesting my desire of living
peaceably with him; and begging he would not
lay me under the necessity of changing my measures. 
He was deaf to all my remonstrances,
(tho' I warned him more than once of the event)
persisted in his maxims of persecution; and, after
repeated quarrels, I again left his house, fully determined
to suffer all sorts of extremity, rather
than subject myself to the tyranny of his disposition. 
This year was productive of one fatal event,
which I felt with the utmost sensibility of sorrow, 

and shall always remember with regret: I mean
the death of Mr. B&wblank;, with whom I had constantly
maintained an intimate correspondence
since the first commencement of our acquaintance. 
He was one of the most valuable men, and
promised to be one of the brightest ornaments that
this or any other age had produced. I enjoyed
his friendship, without reserve; and such was the
confidence he reposed in my integrity, from long
experience of my truth, that he often said he
would believe my bare assertion, even tho' it
should contradict the evidence of his own senses. 
These being the terms upon which we lived, it is
not to be supposed that I bore the loss of him
without repining: indeed my grief was unspeakable; 
and tho' the edge of it be now smoothed
by the lenient hand of time, I shall never cease
to cherish his memory with the most tender remembrance. 
During the last period of my living with my
lord, I had agreed to the expediency of obtaining
an act of parliament, which would enable
him to pay his debts; on which occasion there
was a necessity for cancelling a deed that subsisted
between us, relating to a separate maintenance; 
to which, on certain provisos, I was intitled:
and this was to be set aside, so far as it
interfered with the above mentioned scheme,
while the rest of it should remain in force. When
this affair was about to be transacted, my lord
very generously insisted upon my concurrence, in
annulling the whole settlement; and when I refused
to comply with this demand, because this
was the sole resource I had against his ill usage, he
would not proceed in the execution of his plan,
tho' by dropping it he hurt no-body but himself; 

and accused me of having receded from my word,
after I had drawn him into a considerable expence. 
This imputation of breaking my word, which
I defy the whole world to prove I ever did, incensed
me the more, as I myself had proposed the
scheme for his service, altho' I knew the accomplishment
of it would endanger the validity of
my own settlement; and my indignation was
still more augmented by the behaviour of Mr.
G&wblank;, who had always professed a regard for my
interest, and upon my last accommodation with
my lord, undertaken to effect a reconciliation between
my father and me: but when he was questioned
about the particulars of this difference,
and desired to declare whether his lordship or I
was to blame, he declined the office of arbitrator,
refused to be explicit on the subject, and by
certain shrewd hums and ha's signified his disapprobation
of my conduct; and yet this very man,
when I imparted to him, in confidence, my intention
of making another retreat, and frankly
asked his opinion of my design, seemed to acquiesce
in the justice of it, in these remarkable
words: “Madam, if I thought, or had hopes
of my lord's growing better, I would down
on my knees, to desire you to stay; but as I
have not, I say nothing.” 
If he connived at my conduct in this particular,
why should he disapprove of it, when all I
asked was but common justice? But he was a dependent; 
and therefore I excuse his phlegmatic
(not to call it unfriendly) behaviour. Indeed he
could not be too cautious of giving offence to his
lordship, who sometimes made him feel the effects
of that wrath which other people had 

kindled; particularly, in consequence of a small
adventure which happened about this very period
of time. 
A very agreeable, sprightly, good-natured
young man, a near relation of my lord, happening
to be at our house one evening, when
there was a fire in the neighbourhood, we agreed
to go and sup at a tavern, en famille; and having
spent the evening with great mirth and good
humour, this young gentleman, who was naturally
facetious, in taking his leave, saluted us all
round. My lord, who had before entertained
some jealousy of his kinsman, was very much
provoked by this trifling incident, but very prudently
suppressed his displeasure till he returned to
his own house, where his rage co-operating with
the Champagne he had drank, inflamed him to
such a degree of resolution, that he sprung upon
the innocent G&blank;n, and collared him with great
fury, though he was altogether unconcerned in
the cause of his indignation. 
This extravagant and frantic behaviour, added
to the other grievances under which I laboured,
hastened my resolution of leaving him; and he
to this day blames his relation, as the immediate
cause of my escape, whereas he ought to place it
to the account of his own madness and indiscretion. 
When I retired to Park-street, he cautioned
all my tradesmen (not even excepting my
baker) against giving me credit, assuring them
that he would not pay any debts I should contract; 
and the difficulties to which I was reduced,
in consequence of this charitable declaration,
together with the reflection of what I had
suffered, and might undergo, from the caprice
and barbarity of his disposition, affected my 

health so much, that I was taken again ill, and
my life thought in danger. 
My constitution, however, got the better of
my distemper, and I was ordered into the country
by my physicians, for the benefit of the air; 
so that I found myself under the necessity of keeping
two houses, when I was little able to support
one, and set up my chariot, because I could
not defray the expence of an hackney coach; for
I had as much credit given me as I ask'd for, notwithstanding
my lord's orders to the contrary. 
Having recruited my spirits in the country, I
returned to town, and was visited by my friends,
who never forsook me in adversity, and in the
summer removed to an house in Essex, where I
lived a few months in great tranquillity, unmolested
by my tyrant, who sometimes gave me a
whole year's respite. Here I used to ride and
drive by turns (as my humour dictated) with
horses which were lent me; and I had the company
of my lover, and another gentleman, who
was a very agreeable companion, and of singular
service to me in the sequel. 
At last, my lord having received intelligence
of the place of my abode, and his tormenting humour
recurring, he set out for my habitation,
and in the morning appeared in his coach and
fix, attended by Mr. G&wblank;n, and another person,
whom he had engaged for the purpose, with several
domesticks armed. I immediately shut up
my doors at his approach, and refused him admittance,
which he endeavoured to obtain by a succession
of prayers and threats; but I was deaf to
both, and resolved to hold out to the last. Seeing
me determined, he began his attack, and his
servants actually forced their way into the house; 

upon which I retreated up stairs, and fortified
myself in an apartment, which the assailants
stormed with such fury, that the door began to
give way, and I retired into another room. 
Whilst I remained in this post, Mr. G&wblank;n
demanded a parley, in which he begg'd I would
favour my lord with an interview, otherwise he
knew not what would be the consequence. To
this remonstrance I replied, that I was not disposed
to comply with his request; and that
though their design should be murder, I was not
at all afraid of death. Upon this declaration they
renewed their attacks, which they carried on
with indifferent success till the afternoon, when
my lord (as if he had been at play) sent a formal
message to me, desiring that all hostilities should
cease, till after both parties should have dined. 
At the same time, my own servants came for instructions; 
and I ordered them to let him have
every thing which he should call for, as far as the
house would afford. 
He did not fail to make use of this permission; 
but, sitting down with his companions, ate up
my dinner without hesitation, after he had paid
me the compliment, of desiring to know what he
should send up to my apartment. Far from having
any stomach to partake of his meal, I sat solitary
upon my bed, in a state of melancholy expectation,
having fastened the door of the outward
room for my security, while I kept my
chamber open for the convenience of air, the
weather being excessively hot. 
His lordship having indulged his appetite, resumed
his attempt, and all of a sudden I heard a
noise in the next room; upon which I started up,
and perceiving that he had got into my anti-chamber, 

by the help of a bench that stood under
the window, I flung to the door of my room,
which I locked with great expedition, and opening
another that communicated with the staircase,
ran out of the house, through a croud of
more than an hundred people, whom this fray
had gathered together. 
Being universally beloved in the neighbourhood,
and respected by my lord's servants, I
passed among them untouched, and took refuge
in a neighbouring cottage; while his lordship
bawled and roared for assistance, being afraid to
come out as he had got in. Without waiting
for his deliberations, I changed cloaths with the
poor woman who had given me shelter, and in
her blue apron and straw-hat sallied out into the
fields, intending to seek protection at the house
of a gentleman not far off, though I was utterly
ignorant of the road that led to it. However, it
was my good fortune to meet with a farmer, who
undertook to conduct me to the place; otherwise
I should have missed my way, and, in all probability,
lain in the fields; for, by this time, it
was eight o'clock at night. 
Under the direction of this guide, I traversed
hedges and ditches, (for I would not venture to
travel in the highway, lest I should fall into the
hands of my pursuer) and after I had actually
tumbled in the mire, and walked six or seven long
miles, by the help of a good spirit, which never
failed me on such occasions, I arrived at the
place, and rung the bell at the garden-gate for
admittance. Seeing my figure, which was very
uncouth, together with my draggled condition,
they denied me entrance; but when they understood
who I was, immediately opened the door, 

and I was hospitably entertained, after having
been the subject of mirth, on account of my
dress and adventure. 
Next day I returned, and took possession of
my house again, where I resumed my former
amusements, which I enjoyed in quiet, for the
space of a whole month, waiting with resignation
for the issue of my law-suit; when one afternoon,
I was apprized of his lordship's approach,
by one of my spies, whom I always employed to
reconnoitre the road; and so fortunate was I in
the choice of these scouts, that I never was betrayed
by one of them, though they were often
bribed for that purpose. 
I no sooner received this intelligence, than I
ordered my horse to be saddled, and mounting,
rode out of sight immediately, directing my
course a different way from the London road. I
had not long proceeded in this tract, when my
career was all of a sudden stopp'd by a five-bar
gate, which, after some hesitation, I resolved to
leap (my horse being an old hunter) if I should
find myself pursued. However, with much difficulty
I made shift to open it, and arrived in
safety at the house of my very good friend Mr.
G&wblank;, who being a justice of the peace, had
promised me his protection, if it should be
wanted. 
Thus secured for the present, I sent out spies
to bring information of his lordship's proceedings,
and understood that he had taken possession of
my house, turned my servants adrift, and made
himself master of all my moveables, cloaths and
papers. As for the papers, they were of no consequence,
but of cloaths I had a good stock; and
when I had reason to believe that he did not intend
to relinquish his conquest, I thought it was 

high time for me to remove to a greater distance
from his quarters. Accordingly, two days after
my escape, I set out at eleven o'clock at night,
in a chariot and four, which I borrowed of my
friend, attended by a footman, who was a stout
fellow and well armed, I myself being provided
with a brace of good pistols, which I was fully
determined to use, against any person who should
presume to lay violent hands upon me, except
my lord, for whom a less mortal weapon would
have sufficed, such as a bodkin or a tinder-box. 
Nothing could be farther from my intention, than
the desire of hurting any living creature, much
less my husband; my design was only to defend
myself from cruelty and oppression, which I
knew, by fatal experience, would infallibly be
my lot, should he get me into his power: and I
thought I had as good a right to preserve my
happiness, as that which every individual has to
preserve his life, especially against a set of ruffians,
who were engaged to rob me of it, for a
little dirty lucre. 
In the midst of our journey, the footman
came up, and told me I was dogg'd; upon which
I looked out, and seeing a man riding by the
chariot-side, presented one of my pistols out at
the window, and preserved that posture of defence,
until he thought proper to retreat, and
rid me of the fears that attended his company. 
I arrived in town, and changing my equipage,
hired an open chaise, in which (though I was almost
starved with cold) I travelled to Reading,
which I reached by ten next morning; and from
thence proceeded farther in the country, with a
view of taking refuge with Mrs. C&wblank;, who
was my particular friend. Here I should have 

found shelter, though my lord had been beforehand
with me, and endeavoured to prepossess her
against my conduct, had not the house been
crouded with company, among whom I could
not possibly have been concealed, especially from
her brother, who was an intimate friend of my
persecutor. 
Things being thus situated, I enjoyed but a
very short interview with her, in which her sorrow
and perplexity on my account appeared with
great expression in her countenance; and though
it was not in her power to afford me the relief I
expected, she, in the most genteel manner, sent
after me a small sum of money, thinking that,
considering the hurry in which I left my house, I
might have occasion for it on the road. I was
by this time benumbed with cold, fatigued with
travelling, and almost fretted to death by my disappointment. 
However, this was no time to indulge
despondence; since no body could, or
would, assist me, I stood the more in need of
my own resolution and presence of mind. After
some deliberation, I steered my course back to
London; and being unwilling to return by the
same road in which I came, as well as impatient
to be at the end of my journey, I chose the Bagshot
way, and ventured to cross the heath by
moon-light. 
Here I was attacked by a foot-pad armed with
a broad-sword, who came up, and demanded my
money. My stock amounted to twelve guineas; 
and I foresaw, that should I be stripp'd of the
whole sum, I could not travel without discovering
who I was, and, consequently, running the risk
of being detected by my pursuer. On these considerations,
I gave the fellow three guineas and 

some silver; with which he was so far from being
satisfied, that he threatened to search me for
more: but I ordered the coachman to proceed,
and by good fortune escaped that ceremony; 
though I was under some apprehension of being
overtaken with a pistol-bullet in my flight, and
therefore held down my head in the chaise, in
imitation of some great men, who are said to
have ducked in the same manner, in the day of
battle. 
My fears happened to be disappointed: I lay
at an inn upon the road, and next day arrived in
town, in the utmost difficulty and distress; for I
knew not where to fix my habitation, and was
destitute of all means of support. In this dilemma,
I applied to my lawyer, who recommended
me to the house of a tradesman in Westminster,
where I lodged and boarded, upon credit,
with my faithful Abigail, (whom I shall distinguish
by the name of Mrs. S&wblank;r) for the
space of ten weeks, during which I saw nobody,
and never once stirred abroad. 
While I was thus harrassed out of all enjoyment
of life, and reduced to the utmost indigence,
by the cruelty of my persecutor, who had
even stripp'd me of my wearing apparel, I made
a conquest of lord D&wblank;, a nobleman who is
now dead, and therefore I shall say little of his
character, which is perfectly well known: this
only will I observe, that, next to my own tyrant,
he was the only person of whom I had the
greatest abhorrence. Nevertheless, when these
two came in competition, I preferred the offers
of this new lover, which were very considerable; 
and as an asylum was the chief thing I wanted,
agreed to follow him to his country-seat, whither 

I actually sent my cloaths, which I had purchased
upon credit. 
However, upon mature deliberation, I changed
my mind, and signified my resolution in a letter,
desiring at the same time, that my baggage might
be sent back. In consequence of this message, I
expected a visit from him, in all the rage of indignation
and disappointment, and gave orders,
that he should not be admitted into my house:
yet, notwithstanding this precaution, he found
means to procure entrance; and one of the first
objects that I saw, next morning, in my bed-chamber,
was my lover, armed with his horse-whip,
against which (from the knowledge of the
man) I did not think myself altogether secure; 
though I was not much alarmed, because I believed
myself superior to him in point of bravery,
should the worst come to the worst: but, contrary
to my expectation, and his usual behaviour
to our sex, he accosted me very politely, and
began to expostulate upon the contents of my
letter. I freely told him, that I had rashly assented
to his proposal, for my own convenience
only; that when I reflected on what I had done,
I thought it ungenerous in me to live with him
upon these terms; and that, as I did not like
him, and could not dissemble, such a correspondence
could never tend to the satisfaction of either. 
He allowed the inference was just, though
he was very much chagrined at my previous proceeding:
he relinquished his claim, restored my
cloaths, and never afterwards upbraided me with
my conduct in this affair; though he at one time
owned, that he still loved me, and ever should,
because I had used him ill; a declaration that
strongly marks the peculiarity of his character. 

As for my own part, I own that my behaviour on
this occasion, is no other way excusable, than
on account of the miserable perplexity of my circumstances,
which were often so calamitous,
that I wonder I have not been compelled to take
such steps, as would have rendered my conduct
much more exceptionable than it really is. 
At last, all my hopes were blasted by the issue
of my suit, which was determined in favour of
my lord. Even then I refused to yield; on the
contrary, coming out of retirement, I took lodgings
in Suffolk-street, and set my tyrant at defiance. 
But, being unwilling to trust my doors
to the care of other people, I took an house in
Conduit-street; and no sooner appeared in the
world again, than I was surrounded by divers
and sundry sorts of admirers. I believe I received
the incense and addresses of all kinds under the
sun, except that sort which was most to my
liking, a man capable of contracting and inspiring
a mutual attachment; but such a one is
equally rare and inestimable: not but that I own
myself greatly obliged to all those who cultivated
my good graces, though they were very little beholden
to me; for, where I did not really love, I
could never profess that passion: that sort of dissimulation
is a slavery that no honest nature will undergo. 
Except one worthy young man whom I
sometimes saw, they were a strange medley of
insignificant beings; one was insipid, another
ridiculously affected, a third void of all education,
a fourth altogether inconsistent; and in short, I
found as many trifling characters among the men,
as ever I observed in my own sex. Some of them
I endeavoured to bring over to my maxims,
while they attempted to make a proselyte of me; 

but finding the task impracticable on both sides,
we very wisely dropt each other. 
At length, however, I was blessed with the acquaintance
of one nobleman, who is, perhaps,
the first character in England, in point of honour,
integrity, with, sense and benevolence:
when I have thus distinguished him, I need
scarce mention lord &wblank;. This great, this
good man, possesses every accomplishment requisite
to inspire admiration, love and esteem. 
With infinitely more merit than almost ever fell
to one man's share, he manifests such diffidence
of his own qualifications, as cannot fail to prepossess
every company in his favour. He seems
to observe nothing, yet sees every thing; his
manner of telling a story, and making trifles elegant,
is peculiar to himself; and though he has a
thousand oddities, they serve only to make him
more agreeable. After what I have said, it may
be supposed that I was enamoured of his person:
but this was not the case; love is altogether capricious
and fanciful; yet I admire, honour, and
esteem him to the highest degree; and when I
observe, that his character resembled that of my
dear departed friend Mr. B&wblank;; or rather, that
Mr. B&wblank;, had he lived, would have resembled
lord &wblank;, I pay the highest compliment I
can conceive both to the living and the dead. 
In this nobleman's friendship and conversation
I thought myself happy; though I was, as usual,
exposed to the indefatigable efforts of my lord,
who, one day, while I was favoured with the
company of this generous friend, appeared at my
door in his coach, attended by another gentleman,
who demanded entrance, with an air of
authority. A very honest footman, who had 

been long in my service, ran up stairs in the utmost
consternation, and gave me an account of
what had happened below. Upon which, I told
him he had nothing to answer for, and ordered
him to keep the door fast shut against all opposition:
though I was so much affected with this
unexpected assault, that lord &wblank; said, he
was never more surprized and shocked in his life,
than at the horror which appeared in my countenance,
when I saw the coach stop at my door. 
My little hero being refused admittance, went
away, threatening to return speedily with a reinforcement; 
and during this interval, I provided
myself with a soldier, whom I placed centinel at
the door withinside, to guard me from the danger
of such assaults for the future. My lord, true to
his promise, marched back with his auxiliaries,
reinforced with a constable, and repeated his demand
of being admitted; and my soldier opening
the sash, in order to answer him according
to my directions, he no sooner perceived the red
coat, than he was seized with such a pannic, that
he instantly fled with great precipitation; and
when he recounted the adventure, like Falstaff in
the play, multiplied my guard into a whole file
of musqueteers. He also made shift to discover
the gentleman, who had been so kind as to lend
me one of his company, and complained of him
to the duke of N&wblank;, in hopes of seeing him
broke for this misdemeanour; but in that expectation
he was luckily disappointed. 
Perceiving that in England I should never enjoy
peace, but be continually subject to those
alarms and disquiets which had already impaired
my health and spirits, I resolved to repair again
to France, my best refuge and sure retreat from 

the persecution of my tyrant. Yet, before I
took this step, I endeavoured, by the advice of
my friends, to conceal myself near Windsor; 
but was in a little time discovered by my lord,
and hunted out of my lurking place, accordingly. 
I then removed to Chelsea, where I suffered inconceivable
uneasiness and agitation of mind,
from the nature of my situation, my tranquillity
being thus incessantly invaded by a man who
could not be satisfied with me, and yet could not
live without me: so that, though I was very
much indisposed, I set out for France, by the
way of the Hague, as the war had shut up all
other communication, having no other attendant
but my woman S&wblank;r, who, though she dreaded
the sea, and was upon the brink of matrimony,
would not quit me in such a calamitous condition,
until I was joined by my footman and other
maid, whom I ordered to follow me with the
baggage. But, before my departure, I sent a
message to lord &wblank;, demanding my cloaths,
which he had seized in Essex; and he refusing to
deliver them, I was obliged to equip myself anew,
upon credit. 
I was supplied with money for my journey by
my good friend L&wblank;; and after a short and
pleasant passage, arrived at the Hague, where I
stayed two months, and parted with S&wblank;r, on
whom I settled an annuity of five and twenty
pounds, payable out of the provision which I had
or might obtain from my husband. The same
allowance had I prevailed upon lord B&wblank; to
grant to another maid, who attended me while
I lived in his house. 
I did not much relish the people in Holland,
because they seemed entirely devoted to self-interest, 

without any taste for pleasure or politeness; 
a species of disposition that could not be
very agreeable to me, who always despised money,
had an unbounded benevolence of heart,
and loved pleasure beyond every other consideration. 
When I say pleasure, I would not be understood
to mean sensuality, which constitutes
the supreme happiness of those only, who are
void of sentiment and imagination. Nevertheless,
I received some civilities in this place; and
among the rest, the reputation of having for my
lover the king of P&wblank;'s minister, who was young
and airy, and visited me often; circumstances that
were sufficient to lay me under the imputation of
an amour, which I frequently incurred, without
having given the least cause of suspicion. 
Having taken leave of my Dutch friends, I
departed from the Hague, in company with an
Englishwoman, whom I had chose for that purpose,
and arrived at Antwerp, with much difficulty
and danger, the highway being infested
with robbers. After having reposed myself a few
days in this city, I hired a coach for myself, and
set out, with my companion, for Brussels; but,
before we reached Mechlin, our vehicle was attacked
by two hussars, who, with their sabres
drawn, obliged the coachman to drive into a
wood near the road. I at first imagined they
wanted to examine our passports, but was soon
too well convinced of their design; and though
very much shocked at the discovery, found resolution
enough to suppress my concern, so that it
should not aggravate the terrors of the young
woman, who had almost died with apprehension. 
I even encouraged her to hope for the best; and
addressing myself to the robbers in French, begg'd
in the most suppliant manner, that they would 

spare our lives; upon which, one of them, who
was a little fellow, assured me in the same language,
that we had nothing to fear for our
persons. 
When we were conveyed in a state of dreadful
suspence about three quarters of a mile into the
wood, the ruffians came into the coach, and taking
my keys, which I kept ready in my hand
for them, opened three large trunks, that contained
my baggage, and emptying them of every
thing but my hoops and a few books, packed up
their booty in a cloth; then robbing me of my
money and jewels, even to my shoe-buckles and
sleeve-buttons, took my footman's laced hat,
and gave it, by way of gratification, to a peasant,
who came from behind the bushes, and assisted
them in packing. 
This affair being dispatched, they ordered us
to return to the road, by a different way from
that in which we were carried into the wood; 
and mounting their horses, rode off with the
plunder, though not before the little fellow, who
was the least ferocious of the two, had come and
shaken me by the hand, wishing us a good journey; 
a compliment which I heartily returned,
being extremely well pleased at the retreat of two
such companions, who had detained us a whole
half hour; during which, notwithstanding the
assurance I had received, I was in continual apprehension
of seeing their operation conclude
with the murder of us all; for I supposed they
were of that gang, who had some time before
murthered a French officer, and used a lady extremely
ill, after having rifled her of all she had. 
Having thus undergone pillage, and being reduced
to the extremity of indigence in a foreign 

land, it is not to be supposed that my reflections
were very comfortable; and yet, though I sustained
the whole damage, I was the only person
in the company who bore the accident with any
resolution and presence of mind. My coachman
and valet seemed quite petrified with fear; and it
was not, till I had repeated my directions, that
the former drove farther into the wood, and took
the first turning to the right, in order to regain
the road, according to the command of the
robbers, which I did not choose to disobey. 
This misfortune I suffered by the misinformation
I received at Antwerp, where I would have
provided myself with an escort, had I not been
assured, that there was not the least occasion to
put myself to such extraordinary expence: and
indeed, the robbers took the only half hour in
which they could have had an opportunity of
plundering us; for we no sooner returned into
the Highway, than we met with the French artillery
coming from Brussels, which was a security
to us, during the rest of our journey. We
were afterwards informed at a small village, that
there was actually a large gang of deserters, who
harboured in that wood, from which they made
excursions in the neighbourhood, and kept the
peasants in continual alarms. 
Having proceeded a little way, we were stopp'd
by the artillery crossing a bridge; and as the
train was very long, must have been detained till
night, had not a soldier informed me, that if I
would take the trouble to come out of my coach,
and apply to the commandant, he would order
them to halt, and allow me to pass. I took the
man's advice, and was by him conducted, with
much difficulty, through the croud to some officers, 

who seemed scarce to deserve the name; 
for, when I signified my request, they neither
rose up, nor desired me to sit down; but lolling
in their chairs, with one leg stretched out, asked,
with an air of disrespectful raillery, where I was
going; and when I answered, “To Paris;” desired
to know what I would do there. 
I, who am naturally civil where I am civilly
used, and saucy enough where I think myself
treated with disregard, was very much piqued at
their insolent and unmannerly behaviour, and began
to reply to their impertinent questions, very
abruptly; so that a very tart dialogue would have
ensued, had not the conversation been interrupted
by a tall, thin, genteel young French nobleman,
an officer in the army, who chancing to come in,
asked with great politeness, what I would please
to have. I then repeated my desire, and produced
my passports, by which he learn'd who I
was. He immediately gave orders, that my
coach should pass; and afterwards visited me at
Paris, having obtained my permission, and taken
my address at parting; while the others, understanding
my name and quality, asked pardon for
their impolite carriage, which they told me was
owing to the representation of the soldier, who
gave them to understand, that I was a strolling
actress. 
I could not help laughing heartily at this mistake,
which might have proceeded from the circumstances
of my appearance, my footman having
been obliged to change hats with the peasant,
and myself being without buckles in my shoes,
and buttons in my riding-shirt, while my countenance
still retained marks of the fear and confusion
I had undergone. After all, perhaps the fellow 

was a droll, and wanted to entertain himself
at my expence. 
The day was so far consumed in these adventures,
that I was obliged to take up my lodging
at Mechlin, where I addressed myself to the intendant,
giving him an account of the disaster I
had met with, and desiring I might have credit
at the inn, as our whole company could not raise
the value of a six-pence. This gentleman, tho'
a provincial, was polite in his way, and not only
granted my request, but invited me to lodge at
his own house. I accordingly gave him my company
at supper, but did not choose to sleep in his
quarters, because he appeared to be what the
French call un vieux debauché. 
Next day, he sent a trumpet to the general,
with a detail of my misfortune, in hopes of retrieving
what I had lost; but, notwithstanding
all possible search, I was fain to put up with my
damage, which, in linen, laces, cloaths and baubles,
amounted to upwards of seven hundred
pounds: a loss which never deprived me of one
moment's rest; for though I lodged at a miserable
inn, and lay in a paultry bed, I slept as
sound as if nothing extraordinary had happened,
after I had written to London and Paris, directing
that the payment of my bills of credit might
be stopp'd. Indeed, I know but of two misfortunes
in life, capable of depressing my spirits,
namely, the loss of health and friends; all others
may be prevented, or endured. The articles of
that calamity, which I chiefly regretted, were a
picture of lord W&wblank;m, and some inimitable
letters from Mr. B&wblank;. 
From Mechlin I proceeded to Brussels, where
being known, I got credit for some necessaries, 

and borrowed twenty guineas, to defray the expence
of my journey to Paris. Having consulted
with my friends, about the safest method of travelling
through Flanders, I was persuaded to
take places in the public Voiture; and accordingly
departed, not without fears of finding one
part of the country as much infested with robbers
as another. Nor were these apprehensions assuaged
by the conversation of my fellow-travellers,
who being of the lower sort of people, that delight
in exaggerating dangers, entertained me all
the way, with an account of all the robberies
and murders which had been committed on that
road, with many additional circumstances of their
own invention. 
After having been two days exposed to this
comfortable conversation, among very disagreeable
company, which is certainly one of the most
disagreeable situations in life, I arrived at Lisle,
where, thinking the dangerous part of the journey
was now past, I hired a post-chaise, and in
two days more reached Paris, without any farther
molestation. 
Upon my arrival in this capital, I was immediately
visited by my old acquaintances, who
hearing my disaster, offered me their cloaths, and
insisted upon my wearing them, until I could be
otherwise provided. They likewise engaged me
in parties, with a view of amusing my imagination,
that I might not grow melancholy in reflecting
upon my loss; and desired me to repeat
the particulars of my story forty times over, expressing
great surprize at our not being murthered,
or ravished at least. As for this last species
of outrage, the fear of it never once entered
my head, otherwise I should have been more 

shocked and alarmed than I really was: but it
seems this was the chief circumstance of my
companion's apprehension; and I cannot help observing,
that an homely woman is always more
apt to entertain those fears, than one whose person
exposes her to much more imminent danger. 
However, I now learned, that the risk I ran was
much greater than I imagined it to be, those ruffians
being familiarized to rape as well as murder. 
Soon after my appearance in Paris, I was favoured
with the addresses of several French lovers; 
but I never had any taste for foreigners, or
indeed for any amusement of that kind, except
such as were likely to be lasting, and settled upon
a more agreeable footing than that of common
gallantry. When I deviated from this principle,
my conduct was the effect of compulsion, and
therefore I was never easy under it, having been
reduced to the alternative of two evils, the least
of which I was obliged to choose, as a man leaps
into the sea, in order to escape from a ship that is
on fire. 
Though I rejected their love, I did not refuse
their company and conversation; and though my
health was considerably impaired by the shock I
received in my last adventure, which was considerably
greater than I at first imagined, and affected
my companion so much, that she did not
recover her spirits, till she returned to England: 
I say, though I was for some time a valetudinarian,
I enjoyed myself in great tranquillity for the
space of ten months, during which I was visited
by English, Scotch, and French, of all parties and
persuasions; for pleasure is of no faction, and
that was the chief object of my pursuit; neither
was I so ambitious of being a politician, as to 

employ my time and thoughts upon subjects
which I did not understand. I had admirers of
all sides, and should have spent my time very
much to my liking, had not I felt my funds sensibly
diminish, without any prospect of their being
repaired; for I had been obliged to lay out a great
part of the sum allotted for my subsistence, in
supplying my companion, my servant and myself
with necessaries, in lieu of those which we had
lost. 
Having before mine eyes the uncomfortable
prospect of wanting money in a strange place, I
found myself under the necessity of returning to
England, where I had more resources than I could
possibly have among foreigners; and with that
view wrote to lord &wblank;'s agents, desiring that I
might be enabled to discharge my obligations at
Paris, by the payment of my pin-money. Thus
a negotiation commenced, and his lordship promised
to remit money for the clearance of my
Paris debts, which amounted to four hundred
pounds: but he would not advance one farthing
more, though I gave him to understand, that
while he protracted the agreement, I must inevitably
be adding to my incumbrances, and that I
should be as effectually detained by a debt of
twenty pounds, as if I owed a thousand. Notwithstanding
all my representation, he would
not part with one shilling over the neat sum which
I had at first stipulated; so that all my measures
were rendered abortive, and I found it altogether
impracticable to execute those resolutions I had
formed in his favour. 
Thus did he, for a meer trifle, embarrass the
woman for he professes the most unlimited
love, and whose principles he pretends to hold in 

the utmost veneration. Indeed his confidence in
my integrity is not without foundation; for many
wives, with one half of my provocation, would
have ruined him to all intents and purposes; 
whereas, notwithstanding all the extraordinary
expences, to which I have been exposed by his
continual persecution, he never paid a shilling on
my account, except one thousand pounds, exclusive
of the small allowance which was my
due. In a word, so much time elapsed before
my lord could prevail upon himself to advance
the bare four hundred, that I was involved in
fresh difficulties, from which I found it impossible
to extricate myself: and though I had occasion
to write a letter to my benefactor lord &wblank;, in
which I expressed my acknowledgment for past
favours, I could not venture to sollicit more; 
even when I was encouraged by a very obliging
answer, wherein he declared, that the good qualities
of my mind and heart, would bind him to
me in friendship for ever. 
While I ruminated on my uncomfortable situation,
which would neither permit me to return
to England, nor to stay much longer where I
was, a young Englishman of immense fortune
took Paris in his way from Italy, accompanied
by a most agreeable Scotchman of very good
sense and great vivacity. It was my good or ill
fortune to become acquainted with these gentlemen,
who having seen me at the opera, expressed
a desire of being known to me, and accordingly
favoured me with a visit one afternoon, when the
brisk North Briton ingrossed the whole conversation; 
while the other seemed fearful and diffident
even to a degree of bashfulness, through which,
however, I could discern a delicate sensibility 

and uncommon understanding: there was in his
person (which was very agreeable) as well as in
his behaviour, a certain naivetè that was very
pleasing; and at this first interview, we relished
each other's company so well, that a sort of intimacy
immediately commenced, and was carried
on in a succession of parties of pleasure, in
the course of which I found him fraught with all
the tenderness and sentiment that render the
heart susceptible of the most refined love; a disposition
that immediately made me partial to him,
while it subjected his own heart to all the violent
impressions of a passion, which I little imagined
our correspondence would have produced. 
Nevertheless, I was far from being displeased
with my conquest, because his person and qualifications,
as well as his manner of address, were
very much to my liking, and recommended him
in a particular manner to my affection. Indeed,
he made a greater progress in my heart than I
myself suspected; for there was something congenial
in our souls, which from our first meeting
I believe had attracted us (unknown to ourselves)
under the notions of friendship and regard, and
now disclosed itself in the most passionate love. 
I listened to his addresses, and we were truly
happy. His attachment was the quintessence of
tenderness and sincerity, while his generosity
knew no bounds. Not contented with having
paid twelve hundred pounds on my account, in
the space of one fortnight, he would have loaded
me with present after present, had not I absolutely
refused to accept such expensive marks of
his munificence. I was even mortified at those
instances of his liberality, which my situation
compelled me to receive, lest, being but little 

acquainted with my disposition, he should suspect
me of being interested in my love, and judge
my conduct by the malicious reports of common
fame, which (he afterwards owned) had at first
obtained such credit with him, that he believed
our mutual attachment would not be of long duration. 
But, in this particular, he was soon undeceived:
his heart, though naturally adapted for
the melting passion, had hitherto escaped untouched
by all the ladies of Italy and France; 
and therefore the first impressions were the more
deeply fixed. As he was unpractised in the ways
of common gallantry and deceit, the striking
simplicity in his character was the more likely to
engage the heart of one who knew the perfidy
of the world, and despised all the farce and bombast
of fashionable profession, which I had always
considered as the phrase of vanity and ostentation,
rather than the genuine language of love. 
Besides, gratitude had a considerable share in augmenting
my affection, which manifested itself in
such a warm, cordial, artless manner, as increased
his esteem, and rivetted his attachment; 
for he could easily perceive, from the whole tenour
of my conduct, that my breast was an utter
stranger to craft and dissimulation: yet I was at
first fearful of contracting any engagement with
him, because, being younger than me, he might
be the more apt to change, and the world might
be malicious enough to suppose I had practised
upon his inexperience; but, conscious of my
own integrity, I set slander at defiance, trusting
to my own behaviour, and his natural probity,
for the continuance of his love. Though we
did not live together in the same house, the
greatest part of our time was spent in each other's 

company; we dined and supped at the same table,
frequented public places, went upon parties
to the country, and never parted, but for a few
hours in the night, which we passed in the utmost
impatience to meet again. 
In this agreeable manner did the days roll on,
when my felicity was interrupted by a fit of jealousy
with which I happened to be seized. I had
contracted an acquaintance with a young married
lady, who, though her personal attractions were
but slender, was, upon the whole, an agreeable,
chearful, good-natured companion, with a little
dash of the coquette in her composition. This
woman being in very indigent circumstances, occasioned
by some losses her husband had sustained,
no sooner had an opportunity of seeing and conversing
with my lover, than she formed the design
of making a conquest of him. I should
have forgiven her for this scheme, whatever
pangs it might have cost me, had I believed it
the effect of real passion; but I knew her too
well, to suppose her heart was susceptible of
love, and accordingly resented it. In the execution
of her plan, she neglected nothing which
she thought capable of engaging his attention. 
She took all opportunities of sitting near him at
table, ogled him in the most palpable manner,
directed her whole discourse to him, trod upon
his toes; nay, I believe, squeezed his hand. 
My blood boiled at her, though my pride, for
some time, enabled me to conceal my uneasiness; 
till at length her behaviour became so arrogant
and gross, that I could no longer suppress my indignation,
and one day told my lover, that I
would immediately renounce his correspondence. 

He was greatly alarmed at this unexpected declaration; 
and when he understood the cause of
it, assured me, that for the future he would never
exchange one word with her. Satisfied with
this mark of his sincerity and regard, I released
him from this promise, which he could not possibly
keep, while she and I lived upon any terms; 
and we continued to visit each other as usual,
though she still persisted in her endeavours to
rival me in his affection, and contracted an intimacy
with his companion, who seemed to entertain
a passion for her, that she might have the
more frequent opportunities of being among us; 
for she had no objection against favouring the
addresses of both. One evening, I remember,
we set out in my coach for the opera; and in the
way, this inamorata was so busy with her feet,
that I was incensed at her behaviour; and when
we arrived at the place, refused to alight; but, setting
them down, declared my intention of returning
home immediately. She was so much pleased
with this intimation, that she could not conceal the
joy she felt at the thoughts of conversing with
him, uninterrupted by my presence; an opportunity
with which I had never favoured her before. 
This open exultation increased my anger
and anxiety: I went home; but, being still tortured
with the reflection of having left them together,
adjusted myself in the glass, though I
was too angry to take notice of my own figure,
and without farther delay returned to the opera. 
Having inquired for the box in which they sat,
I took possession of one that fronted them, and
reconnoitring them, without being perceived,
had the satisfaction of seeing him removed to as
great a distance from her as the place would permit, 

and his head turned another way. Composed
by this examination, I joined them without
further scruple, when my young gentleman
expressed great joy at my appearance, and told
me he was determined to have left the entertainment,
and come in quest of me, had not I returned
at that instant. 
In our way homewards, my rival repeated her
usual hints, and with her large hoop almost overshadowed
my lover from my view: upon which
my jealousy and wrath recurred with such violence,
that I pulled the string, as a signal for the
coachman to stop, with a view of getting out,
and going home afoot; a step which would have
afforded a new spectacle to the people of Paris. 
But I reflected, in a moment, upon the folly of
such a resolution, and soon recollected myself,
by calling my pride to my assistance. I determined,
however, that she should act no more
scenes of this kind in my presence, and that same
night insisted upon my lover's dropping all intercourse
and connexion with this tormentor. He
very chearfully complied with my desire, and was
even glad of an occasion to break off his acquaintance
with a person about whom I had plagued
him so much. 
Thus was I freed from the persecution of one
of those creatures, who, tho' of little consequence
in themselves, are yet the pests of society,
and find means to destroy that harmony
which reigns between two lovers, by the intrusion
of a loose appetite, void of all sensibility and
discretion: having no feeling themselves, they
cannot sympathize with that of other people, and
do mischief out of meer wantonness. 

My lover being obliged to go to England, had
settled me in a genteel house in Paris, with a
view of returning when his affairs should be adjusted; 
but when the time of his departure approached,
he began to be uneasy at the prospect
of separation, and, in order to alleviate his
anxiety, desired me to accompany him to Calais,
where we stayed together three or four
days, during which the dread of parting became
more and more intense: so that we determined
upon my following him into England, by the
first opportunity, where I should live altogether
incog, that I might be concealed from the inquiries
and attempts of my lord. Even after this
resolution was fixed, we parted with all the agonies
of lovers who despair of ever meeting again; 
and the wind blowing very high after he had imbarked,
increased my fears. But by the return
of the packet-boat, I was blessed with the report
of his being safe arrived in England, and had the
satisfaction of perusing his letters by every post. 
My admirer being thus detached from me, my
thoughts were intirely employed in concerting
some private method of conveying myself to him. 
As I would not trust myself in the common
packet, for fear of being discovered, after having
revolved divers schemes, I determined to transport
myself in one of the Dutch fishing-boats,
tho' I knew the passage would be hazardous; 
but, in a case of such interesting concern, I overlooked
all danger and inconvenience. Before I
put this resolution in practice, I was so fortunate
as to hear of a small English vessel that arrived at
Calais with a prisoner of war, in which I embarked
with my companion, and another lady,
who lived with me for some time afterwards; 

and when we came on board, discovered that the
ship was no other than a light collier, and that
her whole company amounted to no more than
three men. Nevertheless, tho' the sea was so
rough, and the weather so unpromising, that no
other boat would venture to put to sea, we set
sail, and between two storms, in about three
hours arrived in safety at Dover. 
From hence my first companion went to her
friends, in the stage-coach, while the other lady
and I hired an open post-chaise (tho' it snowed
very hard) and without any accident performed
our journey to London, where I met with my
lover, who flew to my arms in all the transports
of impatient joy; and, doubtless, I deserved his
affection, for the hardships, perils, and difficulties
I had undergone to be with him; for I never
scrupled to undertake any thing practicable, in
order to demonstrate the sincerity of what I professed. 
In consequence of our plan, I assumed a fictitious
name, and never appeared in publick, being
fully satisfied and happy in the company and
conversation of the man I loved; and when he
went into the country, contented myself with
his correspondence, which he punctually maintained,
in a series of letters equally sensible, sincere
and affectionate. 
Upon his return to town for the remainder of
the season, he devoted the greatest part of his
time to our mutual enjoyment; left me with reluctance,
when he was called away by indispensible
business, and the civility which was due to his
acquaintance, and very seldom went to any place of
publick entertainment, because I could not accompany
and share with him in the diversion: nay, 

so much did I ingross his attention, that one evening,
after he had been teized into an agreement
of meeting some friends at a play, he went thither
precisely at the appointed hour, and as they
did not arrive punctually at the very minute, he returned
to me immediately, as much rejoiced at his
escape as if he had met with some signal deliverance. 
Nor was his constancy inferior to the ardour of
his love: we went once together to a ball in the
Hay-market, where, in the midst of a thousand
fine women, whose charms were inhanced by the
peculiarity of the dresses they wore, he remained
unshaken, unseduced, preserving his attachment
for me, in spite of all temptation. 
In the summer he provided me with a house in
the neighbourhood of his own; but the accommodations
being bad, and that country affording
no other place fit for my residence, he brought
me home to his own seat, and by that step raised
an universal clamour, tho' I saw no company,
and led such a solitary life, that nothing but excessive
love could have supported my spirits: not
but that he gave me as much of his time as he
could possibly spare from the necessary duties of
paying and receiving visits, together with the
avocations of hunting, and other country amusements,
which I could not partake. Formerly,
indeed, I used to hunt and shoot, but I had left
off both; so that I was now reduced to the alternative
of reading and walking by myself: but,
Love made up for all deficiencies to me, who think
nothing else worth the living for! —Had I been
blessed with a partner for life, who could have
loved sincerely, and inspired me with a mutual
flame, I would have asked no more of fate. Interest
and ambition have no share in my composition; 

love which is pleasure, or pleasure which is love,
makes up the whole. A heart so disposed cannot be
devoid of other good qualities; it must be subject to
the impressions of humanity and benevolence, and
enemy to nothing but itself. This you will give me
leave to affirm, in justice to myself, as I have
frankly owned my failings and misconduct. 
Towards the end of summer my heart was a
little alarmed by a report that prevailed, of my
lover's being actually engaged in a treaty of marriage:
however, I gave little credit to this rumour,
till I was obliged to go to town about
business, and there I heard the same information
confidently affirmed. Tho' I still considered it
as a vague surmise, I wrote to him an account of
what I had heard; and in his answer, which is
still in my possession, he assured me, with repeated
vows and protestations, that the report
was altogether false. Satisfied with this declaration,
I returned to his house; and tho' the tale
was incessantly thundered in my ears, still believed
it void of all foundation, till my suspicion
was awaked by a very inconsiderable circumstance. 
One day, on his return from hunting, I perceived
he had a very fine pair of Dresden ruffles
on his shirt, which I could not suppose he would
wear at such a rustic exercise; and therefore my
fears immediately took the alarm. When I
questioned him about this particular of his dress,
his colour changed; and tho' he attempted to
elude my suspicion, by imputing it to a mistake
of his servant, I could not rest satisfied with this
account of the matter, but inquired into the
truth with such eagerness and penetration, that
he could not deny he had been to make a visit; 

and, by degrees, I even extorted from him a confession,
that he had engaged himself farther than
he ought to have proceeded, without making me
acquainted with his design, tho' he endeavoured
to excuse his conduct, and pacify my displeasure,
by saying that the affair would not be brought to
bear for a great while, and perhaps might never
come to a determination: but he was in great
confusion, and indeed hardly knew what he
said. 
I would have quitted his house that moment,
had not he, before-hand, obtained a promise that
I would take no rash resolution of that kind, and
put it out of my power to procure any method of
conveyance by which I could make my retreat. 
I gave no vent to reproaches, and only upbraided
him with his having permitted me to return
in ignorance to the country, after I was once
fairly gone: upon which he swore that he could
not bear the thoughts of parting with me. This
declaration was a mystery at that time, but I
have been since so fully satisfied of his reasons
for his conduct, that I heartily acquit him of all
injustice to me. And indeed, it is my sincere
opinion, that if ever young man deserved to be
happy, he is certainly intitled to that privilege; 
and, if I may be allowed to judge, has
an heart susceptible of the most refined enjoyment. 
The violence of the grief and consternation
which I suffered from this stroke, having a little
subsided, I deliberated with myself about the
measures I should take, and determined to leave
his house some day when he should be abroad. I 

was encouraged in this resolution by the advice of
our Scotch friend, who came about this time
from London, on a visit to his fellow-traveller:
we thought such an abrupt departure would be
less shocking than to stay and take a formal leave
of my lover, whose heart was of such a delicate
frame, that after I told him I should one day
withdraw myself, in his absence, he never came
home from the chace, or any other avocation,
without trembling with apprehension that I had
escaped. 
After he had been some time accustomed to
these fears by my previous intimation, I at length
decamped, in good earnest, tho' my heart aked
upon the occasion, because I left him loving and
beloved; for his affection was evident, notwithstanding
the step he had taken, by the advice and
importunity of all his relations, who laid a disagreeable
restraint upon his inclinations, while
they consulted his interest in every other particular. 
While I halted in the next great town, until
I could be supplied with fresh horses, I was visited
by a gentleman who had been formerly intimate
with my lover; but a breach had happened in
their friendship, and he now came to complain
of the treatment he had received. Perceiving
that I was not in a humour to listen to his story,
he shifted the conversation to my own, and observed,
that I had been extremely ill used. I
told him I was of a different opinion: that it
was not only just, but expedient, that a young
man of Mr. &wblank;'s fortune should think of
making some alliance to strengthen and support 

the interest of his family; and that I had nothing
to accuse him of but his letting me remain
so long in ignorance of his intention. He then
gave me to understand, that I was still ignorant
of a great part of the ill usage I had received, affirming,
that while I lived in his house, he had
amused himself with all the common women in
that town, to some of whom this gentleman
had personally introduced him. 
At first, I could not believe this imputation; 
but he supported his assertions with so many convincing
circumstances, that I could no longer
doubt the truth of them; and I felt so much resentment,
that my love vanished immediately
into air. Instead of proceeding in my journey to
London, I went back a considerable way, and
sent a message, desiring to see him in a little
house, about mid way between his own habitation
and the town from whence I came. He
obeyed my summons, and appeared at the place
appointed, where I reproached him with great
bitterness. He pleaded guilty to the charge, so
far as acknowledging that he had corresponded
with other women lately, in order to get the better
of his affection for me, but the experiment
had failed, and he found that he should be for
ever miserable. 
I did not look upon this candid confession as a
sufficient atonement for his past dissimulation,
and, in the sharpness of my revenge, demanded
a settlement, which he peremptorily refused; so
that, for the present, we held each other in the
utmost contempt. Indeed, I afterwards despised
myself for my condescension, which was owing
to the advice of my companion, supported and
inflamed by the spirit of resentment. Nevertheless, 

he begged that I would return to his house,
or stay all night where I was; but I was deaf to
his intreaties, and, after a great deal of ironical
civility on my side, I took my leave, and
went away; yet, before I set out, I looked back,
and saw him on horseback, with such an air of
simplicity and truth, as called up a profound sigh,
notwithstanding all that had passed in our conversation. 
Upon my arrival in London, I took lodgings
in Leicester-Fields, and answered a letter which
I had some months before received from my lord; 
telling him, that I would go home to him, without
stipulating for any terms, to try what effect
my confidence would have upon his generosity. 
He readily embraced the offer, and took an house
in St. James's street, where I proposed to comply
with his humour in every thing that was
consistent with my own peace and tranquillity. 
Mean while, my lover passed his time very
disagreeably in the country, with his friend, of
whom (it seems) he had conceived some jealousy,
which was increased by a letter I wrote to that
gentleman, till he was made acquainted with the
contents, which he read over forty times; and
then his passion breaking out with more violence
than ever, he not only expressed his feeling, in
an epistle which I immediately received, but
when he came to town, suffered such agonies of
despair as I had never seen before, except in lord
B&wblank;. It was then in my power to have taken
ample revenge upon him, as well as upon my
insolent rival, who had insisted upon my leaving
his house, in a very abrupt manner, tho' he absolutely
refused to gratify her malice; for he was 

now disposed to do any thing for my satisfaction:
but I knew his worth, and had too much regard
for his reputation to advise him to act inconsistent
with his honour. 
About this time, many tender meetings and
sorrowful partings happened between us, till the
marriage-knot was tied, when he sent me a
bank-note for a thousand pounds, by way of specimen
(as he called it) of his friendship, and of
what he would do for me, should I ever want
his assistance. This mark of his generosity I received
in a most tender billet, which I shall never
part with, together with his picture set in diamonds. 
I now employed my thoughts in keeping measures
with my lord; we lay in the same apartment,
and for the first four or five months I neither
dined nor supped abroad, above twice; and
then he knew where I was, and approved of my
company. But all this complacency and circumspection
had no effect upon his temper,
which remained as capricious and dissatisfied as
ever. Nay, to such a provoking degree did this
unhappy humour prevail, that one day, in the
presence of his lawyer, he harrangued upon my
misconduct since our last re-union; and very
freely affirmed, that every step I had taken was
diametrically opposite to his will. 
Conscious of the pains I had been at to please
him, I was so incensed at these unjust invectives,
that starting up, I told him he was a little dirty
fellow; and would have left the house immediately,
had not his lawyer, and others, who
were in the next room, interposed, and by dint
of argument and importunity diverted me from
my purpose. By the bye, I have been informed 

by a person of rank, that my lord discovered exactly
the same disposition in his father's life-time,
and only changes the subject of his complaint
from the word father to that of wife. Indeed
he takes all opportunities of plaguing my dear
parent, as he has just sagacity enough to know,
that this is the most effectual way he can take
to distress me. 
After repeated trials, I have given up all hopes
of making him happy, or of finding myself easy
in my situation; and live with him at present to
avoid a greater inconvenience. Not that his ill-nature
is all the grievance of which I complain:
exclusive of the personal disgust I entertain for
him, his folly is of that species which disobliges
rather than diverts, and his vanity and affectation
altogether intolerable; for he actually believes
himself, or at least would impose himself
upon mankind, as a pattern in gallantry and
taste; and, in point of business, a person of infinite
sagacity and penetration: but the most ridiculous
part of his character is his pretended talent
for politics, in which he so deeply concerns
himself, that he has dismissed many a good servant,
because he suspected him of having wrong
connexions; a theme upon which he has often
quarrelled with me, even almost to parting, accusing
me of holding correspondence with the
earls of B&wblank; and C&wblank;, and Mr. H&wblank; V&wblank; tho' I
never had the least acquaintance with any of these
gentlemen, except the earl of C&wblank;, to whom I
have not spoke for these ten years past. 
In short, I have often been at a loss to know,
whether he was more mad or malicious in those
fits of enthusiasm, wherein he seemed transported
with zeal for the commonwealth, and tormented 

me with his admonitions, out of all
temper and patience. At length, however, I
contrived an expedient which freed me from
these troublesome expostulations, and silenced
him effectually on the score of politicks. This
was no other than an open avowal of being connected
with all those people whom I have named. 
Indeed, I knew him too well to believe
there was any thing solid in his intention or professions,
even when he carried them so far as to
demand a private audience of the K&wblank;, in order
to communicate a scheme for suppressing the rebellion; 
and that being denied, sollicited the
duke of D&wblank;'s interest, for permission to raise
and head a regiment of Kentish smugglers: nay,
to such a pitch did his loyalty soar, that he purchased
a firelock of particular mechanism, calculated
for the safety of the bearer, in case he
had been placed centinel at his majesty's door; 
and kept his horses ready caparisoned, with a
view of attending his sovereign to the field. Notwithstanding
all these pompous preparations, had
he been put to the proof, he would have infallibly
crept out of his engagements, thro' some
sneaking evasion, his imagination being very fertile
in such saving pretences. Yet he will talk
sometimes so fervently, and even sensibly, on
the subject, that a stranger would mistake him
for a man of understanding, and determined zeal
for the good of his country. 
Since my last return to his house, that act of
parliament passed, by which he was enabled to
pay his debts, and among the rest, a thousand
pounds of my contracting, the only burden of
that kind I ever intailed upon him, exclusive of
my pin-money, which was never regularly paid; 

nor would he have been subject to this, had he
not, by his persecution and pursuit, exposed me
to an extraordinary expence. I have also had it
in my power to reward some of my faithful Abigails; 
in particular, to relieve from extreme distress
that maid to whom (as I have already observed)
lord B&wblank; granted an annuity, which she
had sold: so that she was reduced to the most
abject poverty, and I found her in a dismal hole,
with two infants, perishing for want; a spectacle
which drew tears from my eyes, and indeed
could not but make a deep impression upon an
heart like mine, which the misery of my fellow-creatures
never failed to melt. 
Nor did I, upon this occasion, forget the attachment
and fidelity of my other woman Mrs.
S&wblank;, who hearing I was robbed in my passage
thro' Flanders, had generously relinquished the
allowance I had settled upon her at parting. The
exercise of such acts of humanity and benevolence,
and the pleasure of seeing my dear and
tender parent often, in some measure alleviate
the chagrin to which I am subject, from the disagreeable
disposition of my lord, who, consistent
with his former inconsistency, upon our last reconciliation
chearfully agreed to a proposal I
made of having concerts in the house, and even
approved of the scheme with marks of particular
satisfaction: but before one half of the winter
was expired, he found means to banish all the
company, beginning with lord R&wblank; B&wblank;, who,
as he walked up stairs one evening, was stopped
by a footman, who plainly told him he had orders
to say to him in particular, that his lordship
was not at home: yet the very next day perceiving
that nobleman and me walking together in
the park, he joined us with an air of alacrity, as 

if no such thing had happened, and even behaved
to lord R&wblank; with the most fawning
complaisance. His deportment was equally absurd
and impertinent to the rest of our friends,
who forsook us gradually, being tired of maintaining
any friendly communication with such a
disagreeable composition of ignorance and arrogance. 
For my own part, I look upon him as
utterly incorrigible; and as fate hath subjected
me to his power, endeavour to make the bitter
draught go down, by detaching myself, as much
as possible, from the supposition that there is any
such existence upon earth. Indeed, if I had not
fatal experience of the contrary, I should be apt
to believe that such a character is not to be found
among the sons of men; because his conduct is
altogether unaccountable by the known rules
and maxims of life, and falls intirely under the
poet's observation, when he says, 

'Tis true, no meaning puzzles more than wit.
Her ladyship having thus concluded her story,
to the entertainment of the company, and the
admiration of Peregrine, who expressed his astonishment
at the variety of adventure she had undergone,
which was such as he thought sufficient
to destroy the most hardy and robust constitution,
and therefore infinitely more than enough to
overwhelm one of her delicate frame; one of the
gentlemen present, roundly taxed her with want
of candour, in suppressing some circumstances of
her life, which he thought essential in the consideration
of her character. 
She reddened at this peremptory charge, which
had an evident effect upon the countenances of
the whole audience, when the accuser proceeded 

to explain his imputation, by observing, that, in
the course of her narration, she had omitted to
mention a thousand acts of uncommon charity,
of which he himself knew her to be guilty; that
she had concealed a great many advantageous
proposals of marriage, which she might have
accepted, before she was engaged; that she
had not spoke one word of her first husband's
debts, which, to his certain knowledge, she had
paid out of her own privy purse, after her second
marriage, and on that account received the
thanks of lord W&wblank;'s elder brother, who,
though he had undertaken to discharge them, delayed
the execution of his purpose longer than
she thought they should remain unpaid: and that,
in relating her inducements for leaving Mr. S&wblank;,
(whether out of forgetfulness, or from tenderness
to a lover once so dear to her, he would not
pretend to say) she had omitted a very cogent
motive for her own conduct; for as he had first
courted her favour in her rising fortune, and left
her in its decline, she could not avoid reflecting,
that, after this precipitate re-engagement, when
the first transports of their meeting were over,
he would again act the same conduct, as soon as
her tranquillity should be disturbed by the persecution
of her lord. 
The company were agreeably undeceived by
this explanation; which her ladyship acknowledged
in very polite terms, as a compliment
equally genteel and unexpected: and our hero,
after having testified the sense he had of her
complaisance and condescension, in regaling him
with such a mark of her confidence and esteem,
took his leave, and went home in a state of
confusion and perplexity; for, from the circumstances
of the tale he had heard, he plainly 

perceived, that her ladyship's heart was too delicate
to receive such incense, as he, in the capacity
of an admirer, could at present pay; because,
though he had in some measure abridged
the empire of Emilia in his own breast, it was
not in his power to restrain it so effectually, but
that it would interfere with any other sovereign
whom his thoughts should adopt: and, unless
lady—could ingross his whole love, time
and attention, he foresaw, that it would be
impossible for him to support the passion which
he might have the good fortune to inspire. He
was, moreover, deterred from declaring his love,
by the fate of her former admirers, who seemed
to have been wound up to a degree of enthusiasm,
that looked more like the effect of inchantment,
than the inspiration of human attractions; 
an extasy of passion which he durst
not venture to undergo; therefore resolved to
combat with the impressions he had already received,
and, if possible, cultivate her friendship
without soliciting her affection: but, before he
could fix upon this determination, he desired to
know the predicament in which he stood in her
opinion; and by the intelligence of Crabtree, obtained
in the usual manner, understood that her
sentiments of him were very favourable, though
without the least tincture of love. He would have
been transported with joy, had her thoughts of
him been of a more tender texture; though his
reason was better pleased with the information he
received; in consequence of which, he mustered
up the ideas of his first passion, and set them in
opposition to those of this new and dangerous attachment; 
by which means, he kept the balance
in equilibrio, and his bosom tolerably quiet. 
