


He receives a letter from his aunt, breaks with the
commodore, and disobliges the lieutenant, who,
nevertheless, undertakes his cause. 
Mean while he quitted the youth in
high dudgeon, and that same evening
dispatched a letter for Mrs. Trunnion, which
was dictated by the first transports of his passion,
and of course replete with severe animadversions
on the misconduct of his pupil. 
In consequence of this complaint, it was not
long before Peregrine received an epistle from
his aunt, wherein she commemorated all the circumstances
of the commodore's benevolence towards
him, when he was helpless and forlorn,
deserted and abandoned by his own parents, upbraided
him for his misbehaviour and neglect of
his tutor's advice, and insisted upon his breaking
off all intercourse with that girl who had seduced
his youth, as he valued the continuance of her
affection and her husband's regard. 
As our lover's own ideas of generosity were
extremely refined, he was shocked at the indelicate
insinuations of Mrs. Trunnion, and felt
all the pangs of an ingenuous mind, that labours
under obligations to a person whom it contemns; 
far from obeying her injunction, or humbling
himself by a submissive answer to her reprehension,
his resentment buoyed him up above every
selfish consideration; he resolved to attach himself
to Emilia, if possible, more than ever; and
although he was tempted to punish the officiousness
of Jolter, by recriminating upon his life and 

conversation, he generously withstood the impulse
of his passion, because he knew that his
governor had no other dependance than the good
opinion of the commodore. He could not,
however, digest in silence the severe expostulations
of his aunt; to which he replied by the
following letter, addressed to her husband. 

SIR,
Tho' my temper could never stoop to offer,
nor, I believe, your disposition deign
to receive that gross incense which the illiberal
only expect, and none but the base-minded condescend
to pay; my sentiments have always done
justice to your generosity, and my intention scrupulously
adhered to the dictates of my duty. 
Conscious of this integrity of heart, I cannot
but severely feel your lady's unkind (I will not
call it ungenerous) recapitulation of the favours
I have received; and as I take it for granted,
that you knew and approved of her letter, I must
beg leave to assure you, that far from being
swayed by menaces and reproach, I am determined
to embrace the most abject extremity of
fortune, rather than submit to such dishonourable
compulsion. When I am treated in a more delicate
and respectful manner, I hope I shall behave
as becomes, 
SIR,
Your obliged
P. Pickle.” 
The commodore, who did not understand
those nice distinctions of behaviour, and dreaded
the consequence of Peregrine's amour, against 

which he was strangely prepossessed, was exasperated
at the insolence and obstinacy of this
adopted son; to whose epistle he wrote the following
answer, which was transmitted by the
hands of Hatchway, who had orders to bring the
delinquent along with him to the garison. 

“Heark ye, child,
You need not bring your fine speeches to
bear upon me. You only expend your
ammunition to no purpose. Your aunt told you
nothing but truth; for it is always fair and honest
to be above board, d'ye see. I am informed
as how you are in chace of a painted galley,
which will decoy you upon the flats of destruction,
unless you keep a better look-out and a
surer reckoning than you have hitherto done; 
and I have sent Jack Hatchway to see how the
land lies, and warn you of your danger: if so
be as you will put about ship, and let him steer
you into this harbour, you shall meet with a safe
birth and friendly reception; but if you refuse
to alter your course, you cannot expect any further
assistance from yours, as you behave, 
Hawser Trunnion.” 
Peregrine was equally piqued and disconcerted
at the receit of this letter, which was quite different
from what he had expected, and declared
in a resolute tone to the lieutenant, who brought
it, that he might return as soon as he pleased; 
for he was determined to consult his own inclination,
and remain for some time longer where
he was. 

Hatchway endeavoured to persuade him by all
the arguments which his sagacity and friendship
could supply, to shew a little more deference for
the desire of the old man, who was by this time
rendered fretful and peevish by the gout, which
now hindered him from enjoying himself as usual,
and who might, in his passion, take some step
very much to the detriment of the young gentleman,
whom he had hitherto considered as his
own son. Among other remonstrances, Jack
observed that mayhap Peregrine had got under
Emilia's hatches, and did not choose to set her
adrift; and if that was the case, he himself would
take charge of the vessel, and see her cargo safely
delivered; for he had a respect for the young
woman, and his needle pointed towards matrimony; 
and as, in all probability, she could not
be much the worse for the wear, he would make
shift to scud thro' life with her under an easy
sail. 
Our lover was deaf to all his admonitions,
and having thanked him for this last instance of
his complaisance, repeated his resolution of adhering
to his first purpose. Hatchway having
profited so little by mild exhortations, assumed a
more peremptory aspect, and plainly told him he
neither could nor would go home without him; 
so he had best make immediate preparation for
the voyage. 
Peregrine made no other reply to this declaration
than by a contemptuous smile, and rose
from his seat in order to retire; upon which the
lieutenant started up, and posting himself by
the door, protested with some menacing gestures,
that he would not suffer him to run a-head neither. 
The other, incensed at his presumption 

in attempting to detain him by force, tripped up
his wooden leg, and laid him on his back in a
moment; then walked deliberately towards the
park, in order to indulge his reflection, which at
that time teemed with disagreeable thoughts. He
had not proceeded two hundred steps, when he
heard something blowing and stamping behind him; 
and looking back, perceived the lieutenant at his
heels, with rage and indignation in his countenance. 
This exasperated seaman, impatient of
the affront he had received, and forgetting all
the circumstances of their former intimacy, advanced
with great eagerness to his old friend,
saying, “Look ye, brother, you're a saucy boy,
and if you was at sea, I would have your arse
brought to the David for your disobedience; but
as we are on shore, you and I must crack a pistol
at one another; here is a brace, you shall take
which you please.” 
Peregrine, upon recollection, was sorry for
having been laid under the necessity of disobliging
honest Jack, and very frankly asked his pardon
for what he had done. But this condescension
was misinterpreted by the other, who refused any
other satisfaction but that which an officer ought
to claim; and, with some irreverent expressions,
asked if Perry was afraid of his bacon. The
youth, inflamed at this unjust insinuation, darted
a ferocious look at the challenger, told him he
had paid but too much regard to his infirmities,
and bad him walk forward to the park, where
he would soon convince him of his error, if he
thought his concession proceeded from fear. 
About this time, they were overtaken by
Pipes, who having heard the lieutenant's fall,
and seen him pocket his pistols, suspected that 

there was a quarrel in the case, and followed
him with a view of protecting his master. Peregrine
seeing him arrive, and guessing his intention,
assumed an air of serenity, and pretending
that he had left his handkerchief at the inn, ordered
his man to go thither and fetch it to him
in the park, where he would find them at his return. 
This command was twice repeated before
Tom would take any other notice of the
message, except by shaking his head: but being
urged with many threats and curses to obedience,
he gave them to understand that he knew their
drift too well to trust them by themselves. “As
for you, lieutenant Hatchway (said he) I have
been your ship-mate, and know you to be a sailor,
that's enough; and as for master, I know
him to be as good a man as ever stept betwixt
stem and stern, whereby, if you have any thing
to say to him, I am your man, as the saying is. 
Here's my sapling, and I don't value your crackers
of a rope's end.” This oration, the longest that
ever Pipes was known to make, he concluded
with a flourish of his cudgel, and enforced with
such determined refusals to leave them, that
they found it impossible to bring the cause to
mortal arbitrement at that time, and strolled
about the park in profound silence; during
which, Hatchway's indignation subsiding, he all
of a sudden thrust out his hand as an advance to
reconciliation, which being cordially shaken by
Peregrine, a general pacification ensued; and
was followed by a consultation about the means
of extricating the youth from his present perplexity. 
Had his disposition been like that of
most other young men, it would have been no
difficult task to overcome his difficulties; but 

such was the obstinacy of his pride, that he
deemed himself bound in honour to resent the
letters he had received; and, instead of submitting
to the pleasure of the commodore, expected
an acknowledgment from him, without
which he would listen to no terms of accommodation. 
“Had I been his own son (said he) I
should have bore his reproof, and sued for forgiveness; 
but knowing myself to be on the
footing of an orphan who depends entirely upon
his benevolence, I am jealous of every thing
that can be construed into disrespect, and insist
upon being treated with the most punctual regard. 
I shall now make application to my father,
who is obliged to provide for me by the
ties of nature, as well as the laws of the land; 
and if he shall refuse to do me justice, I can
never want employment while men are required
for his majesty's service.” 
The lieutenant, alarmed at this intimation,
begged he would take no new step, until he
should hear from him; and that very evening
set out for the garison, where he gave Trunnion
an account of the miscarriage of his negotiation,
told him how highly Peregrine was offended at
the letter, communicated the young gentleman's
sentiments and resolution; and finally assured
him, that unless he should think proper to ask
pardon for the offence he had committed, he
would, in all appearance, never more behold
the face of his godson. 
The old commodore was utterly confounded
at this piece of intelligence; he had expected
all the humility of obedience and contrition from
the young man; and instead of that, received
nothing but the most indignant opposition, and 

even found himself in the predicament of an offender,
obliged to make atonement, or forfeit
all correspondence with his favourite. These
insolent conditions at first threw him into an
agony of wrath, and he vented execrations with
such rapidity, that he left himself no time to
breathe, and had almost been suffocated with his
choler. He inveighed bitterly against the ingratitude
of Peregrine, whom he mentioned with
many opprobrious epithets, and swore that he
ought to be keel-hauled for his presumption; 
but when he began to reflect more coolly upon
the spirit of the young gentleman, which had already
manifested itself on many occasions, and
listened to the suggestions of Hatchway, whom
he had always considered as an oracle in his
way, his resentment abated, and he determined
to take Perry into favour again; this placability
being not a little facilitated by Jack's narrative
of our hero's intrepid behaviour at the assembly,
as well as in the contest with him in the park. 
But still this plaguy amour occurred like a bug-bear
to his imagination; for he held it as an infallible
maxim, that woman was an eternal source
of misery to man. Indeed this apothegm he seldom
repeated since his marriage, except in the
company of a very few intimates, to whose secrecy
and discretion he could trust. Finding
Jack himself at a nonplus in the affair of Emilia,
he consulted Mrs. Trunnion, who was equally
surprised and offended, when she understood that
her letter did not produce the desired effect; and
after having imputed the youth's obstinacy to his
uncle's unseasonable indulgence, had recourse to
the advice of the parson, who, still with an eye
to his friend's advantage, counselled them to send 

the young gentleman on his travels, in the course
of which he would, in all probability, forget the
amusements of his greener years. The proposal
was judicious, and immediately approved, when
Trunnion going into his closet, after divers efforts,
produced the following billet, with which
Jack departed for Windsor that same afternoon. 

My good lad,
If I gave offence in my last letter, I'm sorry
for it, d'ye see; I thought it was the likeliest
way to bring you up; but, in time to come, you
shall have a larger swing of cable. When you
can spare time, I shall be glad if you will make
a short trip, and see your aunt, and him who is 
Your loving godfather,
and humble servant,
Hawser Trunnion. 
P.S. If you want money, you may draw upon
me payable at sight.” 