


DEAR MARY,
SAUNDERS MACULLY, the Scotchman
who pushes directly for Vails, has promised to
give it you into your own hand, and therefore I
would not miss the opportunity to let you now as I
am still in the land of the living; and yet I have
been on the brink of the other world since I sent
you my last letter. —We went by sea to another
kingdom called Fife, and coming back, had like
to have gone to pot in a storm. —What between
the frite and sickness, I thought I should have
brought my heart up; even Mr. Clinker was not
his own man for eight and forty hours, after we
got ashore —It was well for some folks that we 

scaped drounding; for mistress was very frexious,
and seemed but indifferently prepared for a change; 
but, thank God, she was soon put in a better
frame by the private exaltations of the reverend
Mr. Macrcodile. —We afterwards churned to
Starling and Grascow, which are a kiple of handsome
towns; and then we went to a gentleman's
house at Loff-Loming, which is a wonderful sea
of fresh water, with a power of hylands in the
midst on't —They say as how it has got ne'er a bottom,
and was made by a musician; and, truly, I
believe it; for it is not in the course of nature. — 
It has got waves without wind, fish without sins,
and a floating byland; and one of them is a crutchyard,
where the dead are buried; and always before
the person dies, a bell rings of itself to give
warning. 
O Mary! this is the land of congyration — 
The bell knolled when we were there. —I saw
lights, and heard lamentations. —The gentleman,
our landlord, has got another house, which he was
fain to quit, on account of a mischievous ghost,
that would not suffer people to lie in their beds. — 
The fairies dwell in a hole of Kairmann, a mounting
hard by; and they steal away the good women
that are in the straw, if so be as how there a'n't a
horshoe nailed to the door: and I was shewn an
ould vitch, called Elspath Ringavey, with a red
petticoat, bleared eyes, and a mould of grey bristles
on her sin. —That she mought do me no
harm, I crossed her hand with a taster, and bid
her tell my fortune; and she told me such things
—descriving Mr. Clinker to a hair—but it shall
ne'er be said, that I menchioned a word of the
matter. —As I was troubled with sits, the advised
me to bathe in the toss, which was holy water; 
and so I went in the morning to a private place
along with the house-maid, and we bathed in our 

birth-day soot, after the fashion of the country; and
behold, whilst we dabbled in the loff, sir George
Coon started up with a gun; but we clapt our
hands to our faces, and passed by him to the place
where we had left our smocks —A civil gentleman
would have turned his head another way. —My
comfit is, he new not which was which, and, as
the saying is, all cats in the dark are grey. — 
Whilst we stayed at Loff-Loming, he and our two
squires went three or four days churning among
the wild men of the mountings; a parcel of felvidges
that lie in caves among the rocks, devour
young children, speak Velch, but the vords
are different. Our ladies would not part with Mr.
Clinker, because he is so stout, and so pyehouse,
that he fears neither man nor devils, if so be as
they don't take him by surprise. —Indeed, he was
once so flurried by an operition, that he had like
to have founded. —He made belive as if it had
been the ould edmiral; but the ould edmiral could
not have made his air to stand on end, and his
teeth to shatter; but he said so in prudence, that
the ladies mought not be affear'd. Miss Liddy
has been puny, and like to go ento a decline — 
I doubt her pore art is too tinder—but the got's-fey
has sat her on her legs again. —You nows
got's-fey is mother's milk to a Velchvoman. As
for mistress, blessed be God, she ails nothing. — 
Her stomick is good, and she improves in grease
and godliness; but, for all that, she may have infections
like other people, and I believe, she
wouldn't be sorry to be called your ladyship, whenever
sir George thinks proper to ax the question. 
But, for my part, whatever I may see or hear,
not a particle shall ever pass the lips of, 
Dear Molly,
Your loving friend,
Win. Jenkins. 
Grasco, Sept. 7. 

Remember me, as usual, to Saul —We are now
coming home, though not the nearest road. — 
I do suppose, I shall find the kitten a fine boar
at my return. 