


Doctor,
The pills are good for nothing—I might as
well swallow snow-balls to cool my reins—I
have told you over and over, how hard I am to
move; and at this time of day, I ought to know something
of my own constitution. Why will you be so
positive? Prithee send me another prescription—I
am as lame and as much tortured in all my limbs as
if I was broke upon the wheel: indeed, I am equally
distressed in mind and body—As if I had not
plagues enough of my own, those children of my
sister are left me for a perpetual source of vexation
—what business have people to get children to
plague their neighbours? A ridiculous incident
that happened yesterday to my niece Liddy, has
disordered me in such a manner, that I expect to
be laid up with another sit of the gout—perhaps, 

I may explain myself in my next. I shall set out
to-morrow morning for the Hot-Well at Bristol,
where I am afraid I shall stay longer than I could
wish. On the receipt of this, send Williams thither
with my saddle-horse and the demi pique. 
Tell Barns to thresh out the two old ricks, and
send the corn to market, and sell it off to the poor
at a shilling a bushel under market price. —I have
received a snivelling letter from Griffin, offering to
make a public submission and pay costs I want
none of his submissions; neither will I pocket any
of his money—The fellow is a bad neighhour, and
I desire to have nothing to do with him: but as he
is purse-proud, he shall pay for his insolence: let
him give five pounds to the poor of the parish, and
I'll withdraw my action; and in the mean time you
may tell Prig to stop proceedings. —Let Morgan's
widow have the Alderney cow, and forty shillings
to clothe her children: but don't say a syllable of
the matter to any living soul—I'll make her pay
when she is able. I desire you will lock up all my
drawers, and keep the keys till meeting; and be
sure you take the Iron chest with my papers into
your own custody—Forgive all this trouble from, 
Dear Lewis,
Your affectionate
M. Bramble. 
Gloucester, April 2. 