


Peregrine and his friend Cadwallader proceed in
the exercise of the mystery of fortune-telling, in
the course of which they atchieve various adventures. 
These preliminaries being adjusted, our
hero forthwith repaired to a card assembly,
which was frequented by some of the most notable
gossips in town, and having artfully turned
the conversation upon the subject of the fortune-teller,
whose talents he pretended to ridicule, incensed
their itch of knowing secrets to such a degree
of impatience, that their curiosity became
flagrant, and he took it for granted, that all or
some of them would visit Albumazar on his very
first visiting-day. While Peregrine was thus engaged,
his associate made his appearance in another
convocation of fashionable people, where
he soon had the pleasure of hearing the conjurer
brought upon the carpet by an elderly gentlewoman, 

remarkable for her inquisitive disposition,
who addressing herself to Cadwallader, asked, by
the help of the finger-alphabet, if he knew any
thing of the magician that made such a noise in
town? The misanthrope answered as usual, in
a surly tone, “By your question you must either
take me for a pimp or an ideot. What, in the
name of nonsense, should I know of such a rascal,
unless I were to court his acquaintance with
a view to feast my own spleen, in seeing him fool
the whole nation out of their money? Tho', I
suppose, his chief profits arise from his practice,
in quality of pander. All fortune-tellers are
bawds, and for that reason are so much followed
by people of fashion. This fellow (I warrant)
has got sundry convenient apartments for the benefit
of procreation; for it is not to be supposed
that those who visit him on the pretence of consulting
his supernatural art, can be such fools,
such drivelers, as to believe that he can actually
prognosticate future events.” 
The company, according to his expectation,
imputed his remarks to the rancour of his disposition,
which could not bear to think that any
person upon earth was wiser than himself; and
his ears were regaled with a thousand instances of
the conjurer's wonderful prescience, for which
he was altogether indebted to fiction. Some of
these specimens being communicated to him, by
way of appeal to his opinion, “They are (said
he) meer phantoms of ignorance and credulity,
swelled up in the repetition, like those unsubstantial
bubbles which the boys blow up in soap-suds
with a tobacco pipe. And this will ever be
the case in the propagation of all extraordinary
intelligence: the imagination naturally magnifies 

seeing him very much irritated, positively
denied that he had mentioned a brace; one indeed
(said he) I own I took notice of, upon the
authority of your own physician, who gave me
an account of it this morning.” “By the Lord!
(cried the sufferer in a rage which he could no
longer contain) that rascal has been suborned by
my rival, to slander my character in this manner; 
but I'll be revenged, if there be either law
or equity in England.” He had scarce pronounced
these words, when the doctor happened
to enter the room; when his exasperated patient
lifting up his cane, “Sirrah (said he) if I live,
I'll make that black crow the blackest circumstance
of thy whole life and conversation.” “The
physician, confounded at this address, assured
him that he was utterly ignorant of his meaning,
and when the other gentleman explained it, absolutely
denied the charge, affirming he had said
no more than that he had vomited a quantity of
something as black as a crow. The landlord of
the house acknowledged that he might have been
mistaken; and thus the whole mystery was explained.” 
The company seemed to relish the story of the
three black crows, which they considered as an
impromptu of Cadwallader's own invention; but,
granting it to be true, they unanimously declared
that it could have no weight in invalidating the
testimony of divers persons of honour, who had
been witnesses of the magician's supernatural
skill. On the next day of consultation, the necromancer
being in the chair, and his friend behind
the curtain, the outward door was scarce
opened, when a female visitant flounced in, and
discovered to the magician the features of one of 

those inquisitive ladies, whose curiosity, he knew,
his confederate had aroused, in the manner above
described. She addressed herself to him with a
familiar air, observing, that she had heard much
of his great knowledge, and was come to be a
witness of his art, which she desired him to display,
in declaring what he knew to be her ruling
passion. 
Cadwallader, who was no stranger to her disposition,
assumed the pen without hesitation, and
furnished her with an answer, importing, that
the love of money predominated, and scandal
possessed the next place in her heart. Far from
being offended at his freedom, she commended
his frankness with a smile; and, satisfied of his
uncommon talents, expressed a desire of being
better acquainted with his person: nay, she
began to catechise him, upon the private history
of divers great families, in which he happened
to be well versed; and he, in a mysterious manner,
dropt such artful hints of his knowledge,
that she was amazed at his capacity, and actually
asked if his art was communicable. The conjurer
replied in the affirmative; but, at the same
time, gave her to understand, that it was attainable
by those only who were pure and undefiled
in point of chastity and honour; or such as, by
a long course of penitence, had weaned themselves
from all attachments to the flesh. She not
only disapproved, but seemed to doubt the truth
of this assertion; telling him, with a look of
disdain, that his art was not worth having, if one
could not use it for the benefit of one's pleasure:
she had even penetration enough to take notice
of an inconsistency in what he had advanced; 
and asked, why he himself exercised his knowledge 

for hire, if he was so much detached from
all worldly concerns. “Come, come, doctor,
added she, you are in the right to be cautious
against impertinent curiosity; but, perhaps, I
may make it worth your while to be communicative.” 
These overtures were interrupted by a rap at
the door, signifying the approach of another
client; upon which the lady inquired for his
private passage, thro' which she might retire,
without the risque of being seen: and when she
understood he was deficient in that convenience,
she withdrew into an empty room, adjoining to
the audience-chamber, in order to conceal herself
from the observation of the new-comer. This
was no other than the inamorata, who came by
appointment to receive the solution of her doubts:
and the Misanthrope, glad of an opportunity to
expose her to the censure of such an indefatigable
minister of fame as the person, who (he knew)
would listen from the next apartment; laid her
under the necessity of refreshing his remembrance
with a recapitulation of her former confession,
which was almost finished, when she was alarmed
by a noise at the door, occasioned by two gentlemen
who attempted to enter by force. 
Terrified at this uproar, which disconcerted
the magician himself, she ran for shelter into the
place which was pre-occupied by the other lady,
who, hearing this disturbance, had closed the
window-shutters, that she might have the better
chance of remaining unknown. Here they ensconced
themselves, in the utmost consternation,
while the necromancer, after some recollection,
ordered Hadgi to open the door, and admit the
rioters, who (he hoped) would be over-awed by 

the authority of his appearance. The janitor
had no sooner obeyed his instructions, than in
rushed a young libertine, who had been for some
time upon the town, together with his tutor,
who was a worn-out debauchee, well known to
the magician. They were both in that degree of
intoxication necessary to prepare such dispositions
for what they commonly call frolicks, and the
sober part of mankind feel to be extravagant outrages
against the laws of their country, and the
peace of their fellow-subjects. Having staggered
up to the table, the senior, who undertook to be
spokesman, saluted Cadwallader with “How
do'st do, old Capricorn? Thou seem'st to be a
most venerable pimp, and, I doubt not, hast
abundance of discretion. Here is this young
whoremaster (a true chip of the old venereal
block his father) and myself, come for a comfortable
cast of thy function. I don't mean that
stale pretence of conjuring: damn futurity; let
us live for the present, old Haly. Conjure me
up a couple of hale wenches, and, I warrant,
we shall get into the magic circle in a twinkling. 
What says Galileo? What says the reverend
Brahe? Here is a purse, you pimp: hark, how it
chinks! This is sweeter than the musick of the
spheres.” 
Our necromancer, perplexed at this rencounter,
made no reply; but taking up his wand,
waved it around his head in a very mysterious
motion, with a view of intimidating these forward
visitants, who, far from being awed by
this sort of evolution, became more and more obstreperous,
and even threatened to pull him by
the beard, if he would not immediately comply
with their desire. Had he called his associate, or 

even Hadgi, to his aid, he knew he could have
soon calmed their turbulence; but, being unwilling
to run the risque of a discovery, or even of
a riot, he bethought himself of chastising their
insolence in another manner that would be less
hazardous, and rather more effectual. In consequence
of this suggestion, he pointed his wand
towards the door of the apartment in which the
ladies had taken sanctuary; and the two rakes,
understanding the hint, rushed in without hesitation. 
The females finding their place of retreat
taken by assault, ran about the room in great
consternation, and were immediately taken prisoners
by the assailants, who pulling them towards
the windows, opened the shutters at the
same instant of time, when (strange to tell!) one
of the heroes discovered, in the prize he had made,
the very wife of his bosom; and his companion
perceived that he had stumbled in the dark upon
his own mother. Their mutual astonishment
was unspeakable at this eclaircissement, which
produced an universal silence for the space of several
minutes; and during this pause the ladies
having recollected themselves, an expostulation
was begun by the elder of the two, who roundly
took her son to task for his disorderly life, which
laid her under the disagreeable necessity of watching
his motions, and detecting him in such an
infamous place. 
While the careful mother thus exercised her
talent for reprehension, the hopeful young gentleman,
with an hand in each fob, stood whistling
an opera-tune, without seeming to pay the most
profound regard to his parent's reproof: and the
other lady, in imitation of such a consummate 

pattern, began to open upon her husband, whom
she bitterly reproached with his looseness and intemperance,
demanding to know what he had to
alledge in alleviation of his present misconduct. 
The surprize occasioned by such an unexpected
meeting had already in a great measure destroyed
the effects of the wine he had so plentifully drank,
and the first use he made of his recovered sobriety,
was to revolve within himself the motives that
could possibly induce his wife to give him the
rendezvous in this manner. As he had good
reason to believe she was utterly void of jealousy,
he naturally placed this rencontre to the account
of another passion; and his chagrin was not at
all impaired by the effrontery with which she now
presumed to reprimand him. He listened to her,
therefore, with a grave, or rather grim aspect; 
and to the question with which she concluded her
rebuke, answered with great composure, “All
that I have to alledge, madam, is that the bawd
has committed a mistake, in consequence of
which we are both disappointed: and so, ladies,
your humble servant.” So saying, he retired
with manifest confusion in his looks; and as he
passed through the audience-chamber, eying the
conjurer askance, pronounced the epithet of precious
rascal, with great emphasis. Mean while,
the junior, like a dutiful child, handed his
mamma to her chair; and the other client, after
having reviled the necromancer, because he could
not foresee this event, went away in a state of
mortification. 
The coast being clear, Peregrine came forth
from his den, and congratulated his friend upon
the peaceable issue of the adventure which he had
overheard: but, that he might not be exposed 

to such inconvenience for the future, they resolved,
that a grate should be fixed in the middle
of the outward door, through which the conjurer
himself should reconnoitre all the visitants, before
their admission; so that, to those whose appearance
he should not like, Hadgi should, without
opening, give notice, that his master was engaged. 
By this expedient too, they provided
against those difficulties which Cadwallader must
have encountered, in giving satisfaction to strangers,
whom he did not know; for the original
intention of the founders was to confine the practice
of their art to people of fashion only, most
of whom were personally known to the counterfeit
magician and his coadjutor. 
Indeed, these associates, Cadwallader in particular,
notwithstanding his boasted insight into
the characters of life, never imagined that his
pretended skill would be consulted by any but the
weaker-minded of the female sex, incited by that
spirit of curiosity which he knew was implanted
in their nature: but, in the course of his practice,
he found himself cultivated in his preternatural
capacity, by people of all sexes, complexions,
and degrees of reputation, and had occasion to
observe, that when the passions are concerned,
howsoever cool, cautious and deliberate, the disposition
may otherwise be, there is nothing so
idle, frivolous, or absurd, to which they will not
apply for encouragement and gratification. The
last occurrence, according to the hopes and expectation
of the confederates, was whispered
about by the ladies concerned, in such a manner,
that the whole affair was, in a few days, the universal
topic of discourse, in which it was retailed
with numberless embellishments, invented by the 

parties themselves, who had long indulged a pique
at each other, and took this opportunity of enjoying
their revenge. 
These incidents, while they regaled the spleen,
at the same time augmented the renown of the
conjurer, who was described on both sides as a
very extraordinary person in his way; and the
alteration in his door was no sooner performed,
than he had occasion to avail himself of it, against
the intrusion of a great many, with whom he
would have found it very difficult to support the
fame he had acquired. 
Among those who appeared at his grate, he
perceived a certain clergyman, whom he had long
known an humble attendant on the great, and
with some the reputed minister of their pleasures: 
This Levite had disguised himself in a great coat,
boots, and dress quite foreign to the habit worn
by those of his function; and being admitted, attempted
to impose himself as a country squire
upon the conjurer, who calling him by his name,
desired him to sit down. This reception corresponding
with the report he had heard, touching
our magician's art, the doctor said he would lay
aside all dissimulation; and after having professed
an implicit belief, that his supernatural knowledge
did not proceed from any communication
with evil spirits, but was the immediate gift of
heaven, he declared the intention of his coming
was to inquire into the health of a good friend
and brother of his, who possessed a certain living
in the country, which he named; and, as he
was old and infirm, to know what space of time
was allotted to him in this frail state of mortality,
that he might have the melancholy satisfaction of 

attending him in his last moments, and assisting
him in his preparations for eternity. 
The, conjurer, who at once perceived the purport
of this question, after a solemn pause, during
which he seemed absorpt in contemplation,
delivered this response to his consulter, “Tho' I
foresee some occurrences, I do not pretend to be
omniscient. I know not to what age that clergyman's
life will extend, but so far I can penetrate
into the womb of time, as to discern, that
the incumbent will survive his intended successor.” 
This dreadful sentence in a moment banished
the blood from the face of the appalled
consulter, who hearing his own doom pronounced,
began to tremble in every joint; he lifted up
his eyes in the agony of fear, and saying, “The
will of God be done,” withdrew in silent despondence,
his teeth chattering with terror and dismay. 
This client was succeeded by an old man
about the age of seventy-five, who being resolved
to purchase a lease, desired to be determined
in the term of years by the necromancer's
advice, observing, that as he had no children of
his own body, and had no regard for his heirs at
law, the purchase would be made with a view to
his own convenience only; and therefore, considering
his age, he himself hesitated in the period
of the lease, between thirty and threescore
years. 
The conjurer, upon due deliberation, advised
him to double the last specified term, because
he distinguished in his features something
portending extreme old age and second childhood,
and he ought to provide for that state of incapacity,
which otherwise would be attended with
infinite misery and affliction. The superannuated 

wretch, thunderstruck with this prediction,
held up his hands, and, in the first transports of
his apprehension, exclaimed, “Lord have mercy
upon me! I have not wherewithal to purchase
such a long lease, and I have long outlived all
my friends; what then must become of me, sinner
that I am, one hundred and twenty years
hence!” Cadwallader (who enjoyed his terror)
under pretence of alleviating his concern, told
him, that what he had prognosticated did not deprive
him of the means which he and every person
had in their power, to curtail a life of misfortune; 
and the old gentleman went away,
seemingly comforted with the assurance, that it
would always be in his power to employ an halter
for his own deliverance. 
“Soon after the retreat of this elder, the magician
was visited by one of those worthies known
among the Romans by the appellation of Heredipetes,
who had amassed a large fortune by a
close attention to the immediate wants and
weakness of raw unexperienced heirs. This honourable
usurer had sold an annuity upon the life
of a young spendthrift, being thereto induced by
the affirmation of his physician, who had assured
him his patient's constitution was so rotten, that
he could not live one year to an end: he had, nevertheless,
made shift to weather eighteen months,
and now seemed more vigorous and healthy than
he had ever been known; for he was supposed
to have nourished an hereditary pox from his
cradle. Alarmed at this alteration, the seller
came to consult Cadwallader not only about the
life of the annuitant, but also concerning the
state of his health at the time of his purchasing
the annuity, purposing to sue the physician for 

false intelligence, should the conjurer declare
that the young man was found, when the doctor
pronounced him diseased. But this was a
piece of satisfaction he did not obtain from the
Misanthrope, who, in order to punish his sordid
disposition, gave him to understand, that the
physician had told him the truth, and nothing
but the truth; and that the young gentleman was
in a fair way of attaining a comfortable old age.” 
“That is to say (cried the client, in the impatience
of his mortification at this answer) bating accidents; 
for, thank God, the annuitant does not
lead the most regular life: besides, I am credibly
informed he is choleric and rash; so that he may
be concerned in a duel: then there are such
things as riots in the street, in which a rake's
skull may be casually cracked; he may be overturned
in a coach, overset in the river, thrown
from a vicious horse, overtaken with a cold, endangered
by a surfeit; but what I place my chief
confidence in, is an hearty pox, a distemper
which hath been fatal to his whole family. Not
but that the issue of all these things is uncertain; 
and expedients might be found, which would
more effectually answer the purpose. I know
they have arts in India, by which a man can secure
his own interest, in the salutation of a
friendly shake by the hand; and I don't doubt
that you who have lived in that country, are
master of the secret. To be sure, if you was inclined
to communicate such a nostrum, there are
abundance of people who would purchase it, at
a very high price.” 
Cadwallader understood this insinuation, and
was tempted to amuse him in such a manner as
would tend to his disgrace and confusion; but, considering 

that the case was of too criminal a nature
to be tampered with, he withstood his desire of
punishing this rapacious cormorant any other
way than by telling him, he would not impart
that secret for his whole fortune ten times doubled; 
so that the usurer retired, very much dissatisfied
with the issue of his consultation. 
The next person who presented himself at this
altar of intelligence, was an author, who recommended
himself to a gratis advice, by observing
that a prophet and poet were known by the same
appellation among the antients; and that, at this
day, both the one and the other spoke by inspiration. 
The conjurer refused to own this affinity,
which, he said, formerly subsisted, because
both species of the Vates were the children of
fiction; but as he himself did not fall under that
predicament, he begged leave to disown all connexion
with the family of the poets; and the
poor author would have been dismissed without
his errand, tho' he offered to leave an ode as security
for the magician's fee, to be paid from the
profits of his first third night, had not Cadwallader's
curiosity prompted him to know the subject
of this gentleman's inquiry. He therefore told
him, that in consideration of his genius, he
would for once satisfy him, without a fee; and
desired him to specify the doubts in which he
wished to be resolved. 
The son of Parnassus, glad of this condescension,
for which he thanked the necromancer,
gave him to understand, that he had some time
before presented a play in manuscript to a certain
great man, at the head of taste, who had not
only read and approved the performance, but
also undertaken to introduce and support it on 

the stage; that he (the author) was assured by
this patron, that the play was already (in consequence
of his recommendation) accepted by one
of the managers, who had faithfully promised to
bring it to light; but that, when he waited on
this same manager, to know when he intended
to put his production into rehearsal, the man declared
he had never seen or heard of the piece: 
“Now, Mr. Conjurer (said he) I want to
know whether or not my play has been presented,
and if I have any sort of chance of seeing it
acted this winter?” 
Cadwallader, who had, in his younger days,
sported among the theatrical muses, began to lose
his temper at this question, which recalled the
remembrance of his own disappointments; and
dispatched the author with an abrupt answer, importing,
that the affairs of the stage were altogether
without the sphere of his divination, being
intirely regulated by the dæmons of dissimulation,
ignorance, and caprice. 
It would be an endless task to recount every
individual response which our magician delivered,
in the course of his conjuration. He was consulted
in all cases of law, physic, and trade, over
and above the ordinary subjects of marriage and
fornication; his advice and assistance were sollicited
by sharpers who desired to possess an infallible
method of cheating, unperceived; by fortune-hunters
who wanted to make prize of widows
and heiresses; by debauchees who were
disposed to lye with other men's wives; by coxcombs
who longed for the death of their fathers; 
by wenches with child, who wished themselves
rid of their burthens; by merchants who had insured
above value, and thirsted after the news of 

a wreck; by under-writers who prayed for the
gift of prescience, that they might venture money
upon such ships only, as should perform the
voyage in safety; by Jews who wanted to foresee
the fluctuations of stock; by usurers who advance
money upon undecided causes; by clients
who were dubious of the honesty of their council:
in short, all matters of uncertain issue were
appealed to this tribunal; and, in point of calculation,
De Moivre was utterly neglected. 