


Mrs. Trunnion erects a tyranny in the garrison,
while her husband conceives an affection for his
nephew Perry, who manifests a peculiarity of
disposition even in his tender years. 
Having exercised herself three months
in such pious amusements, she appeared
again in the world; but her misfortune had made
such an impression on her mind, that she could
not bear the sight of a child, and trembled whenever
the conversation happened to turn upon a
christening. Her temper, which was naturally
none of the sweetest, seemed to have imbibed a
double proportion of souring from her disappointment; 
of consequence her company was
not much coveted, and she found very few people
disposed to treat her with those marks of consideration
which she looked upon as her due. 
This neglect detached her from the society of an
unmannerly world; she concentred the energy of
all her talents in the government of her own
house, which groaned accordingly under her arbitrary
sway, and in the brandy-bottle found
ample consolation for all the affliction she had
undergone. 
As for the commodore, he in a little time weathered
his disgrace, after having sustained many
severe jokes from the lieutenant; and now his
chief aim being to be absent from his own house
as much as possible, he frequented the publick-house
more than ever, more assiduously cultivated
the friendship of his brother-in-law Mr. Pickle,
and in the course of their intimacy conceived an 

affection for his nephew Perry, which did not
end but with his life. Indeed it must be owned
that Trunnion was not naturally deficient in the
social passions of the soul, which, tho' they were
strangely warped, disguised and overborne by the
circumstances of his boisterous life and education,
did not fail to manifest themselves occasionally
thro' the whole course of his behaviour. 
As all his hopes of propagating his own name
had perished, and his relations lay under the interdiction
of his hate, it is no wonder that thro'
the familiarity and friendly intercourse subsisting
between him and Mr. Gamaliel, he contracted a
liking for the boy, who by this time entered the
third year of his age, and was indeed a very
handsome, healthy and promising child; and what
seemed to ingratiate him still more with his uncle,
was a certain oddity of disposition for which
he had been remarkable even from his cradle. It
is reported of him, that before the first year of
his infancy was elapsed, he used very often, immediately
after being dressed, in the midst of the
caresses which were bestowed upon him by his
mother while she indulged herself in the contemplation
of her own happiness, all of a sudden to
alarm her with a fit of shrieks and cries, which
continued with great violence till he was stripped
to the skin with the utmost expedition by order
of his affrighted parent, who thought his tender
body was tortured by the misapplication of some
unlucky pin; and when he had given them all
this disturbance and unnecessary trouble, he would
lie sprawling and laughing in their faces, as if
he ridiculed the impertinence of their concern. 
Nay it is affirmed, that one day, when an old
woman who attended in the nursery had by 

stealth conveyed a bottle of cordial waters to
her mouth, he pulled his nurse by the sleeve,
and by a slight glance detecting the theft,
tipt her the wink with a particular slyness of
countenance, as if he had said with a sneer,
“Ay, ay, that is what you must all come to.” 
But these instances of reflection in a babe nine
months old are so incredible, that I look upon
them as ex post facto observations, founded upon
imaginary recollection, when he was in a more
advanced age, and his peculiarities of temper became
much more remarkable: of a piece with the
ingenious discoveries of those sagacious observers,
who can discern something evidently characteristic
in the features of any noted personage whose
character they have previously heard explained; 
yet, without pretending to specify at what period
of his childhood this singularity first appeared, I
can with great truth declare, that when he first
attracted the notice and affection of his uncle, it
was plainly perceivable. 
One would imagine he had marked out the
commodore as a proper object of ridicule, for
almost all his little childish satire was levelled
against him. I will not deny that he might have
been influenced in this particular by the example
and instruction of Mr. Hatchway, who delighted
in superintending the first essays of his genius. 
As the gout had taken up its residence in Mr.
Trunnion's great toe, from whence it never removed,
no not for a day, little Perry took great
pleasure in treading by accident on this infirm
member; and when his uncle, incensed by the
pain, used to damn him for a hell-begotten brat,
he would appease him in a twinkling by returning
the curse with equal emphasis, and asking
what was the matter with old Hannibal Tough? 

an appellation by which the lieutenant had taught
him to distinguish this grim commander. 
Neither was this the only experiment he tried
upon the patience of the commodore, with whose
nose he used to take indecent freedoms even
while he was fondled on his knee; in one month
he put him to the expence of two guineas in
seal-skin, by picking his pocket of divers tobacco
pouches, all of which he in secret committed to
the flames. Nor did the caprice of his disposition
abstain from the favourite beverage of
Trunnion, who more than once swallowed a
whole draught in which his brother's snuff-box
had been emptied, before he perceived the disagreeable
infusion: and one day, when the commodore
had chastised him by a gentle tap with his
cane, he fell flat on the floor as if he had been
deprived of all sense and motion, to the terror
and amazement of the striker; and after having
filled the whole house with confusion and dismay,
opened his eyes and laughed heartily at the success
of his own imposition. 
It would be an endless and perhaps no very
agreeable task, to enumerate all the unlucky
pranks he played upon his uncle and others, before
he attained the fourth year of his age; about
which time he was sent, with an attendant, to a
day-school in the neighbourhood, that (to use
his good mother's own expression) he might be
out of harm's way. Here, however, he made
little progress, except in mischief, which he practised
with impunity, because the school-mistress
would run no risk of disobliging a lady of fortune,
by exercising unnecessary severities upon
her only child. Nevertheless Mrs. Pickle was
not so blindly partial as to be pleased with such 

unseasonable indulgence. Perry was taken out
of the hands of this courteous teacher, and committed
to the instruction of a pedagogue, who
was ordered to administer such correction as the
boy should in his opinion deserve. This authority
he did not neglect to use; his pupil was regularly
flogged twice a day, and after having been
subjected to this course of discipline for the space of
eighteen months, declared the most obstinate, dull
and untoward genius that ever had fallen under his
cultivation; instead of being reformed, he seemed
rather hardened and confirmed in his vicious inclinations,
and was dead to all sense of fear as
well as shame. His mother was extremely mortified
at these symptoms of stupidity, which she
considered as an inheritance derived from the spirit
of his father, and consequently insurmountable
by all the efforts of human care. But the commodore
rejoiced over the ruggedness of his nature,
and was particularly pleased when upon inquiry
he found that Perry had beaten all the boys
in the school; a circumstance from which he
prognosticated every thing that was fair and fortunate
in his future fate; observing, that at his
age he himself was just such another. The boy,
who was now turned of six, having profited so
little under the birch of his unsparing governor,
Mrs. Pickle was counselled to send him to a boarding-school
not far from London, which was kept
by a certain person very eminent for his successful
method of education. This advice she the more
readily embraced, because at that time she found
herself pretty far gone with another child, that she
hoped would console her for the disappointment she
had met with in the unpromising talents of Perry,
or at any rate divide her concern, so as to enable
her to endure the absence of either. 