

—That provision should be
made for continuing the race
of so great, so exalted and godlike a
Being as man—I am far from denying— 
but philosophy speaks freely of every
thing; and therefore I still think and
do maintain it to be a pity, that it should
be done by means of a passion which
bends down the faculties, and turns all
the wisdom, contemplations, and operations
of the soul backwards—a passion,
my dear, continued my father, addressing
himself to my mother, which couples
and equals wise men with fools, and
makes us come out of our caverns and
hiding-places more like satyrs and four-footed
beasts than men. 

I know it will be said, continued my
father (availing himself of the Prolepsis)
that in itself, and simply taken—like
hunger, or thirst, or sleep—'tis an affair
neither good or bad—or shameful or
otherwise. —Why then did the delicacy
of Diogenes and Plato so recalcitrate against
it? and wherefore, when we go about to
make and plant a man, do we put out
the candle? and for what reason is it,
that all the parts thereof—the congredients
—the preparations—the instruments,
and whatever serves thereto, are so held
as to be conveyed to a cleanly mind by
no language, translation, or periphrasis
whatever? 
—The act of killing and destroying
a man, continued my father raising his
voice—and turning to my uncle Toby— 

you see, is glorious—and the weapons by
which we do it are honourable—We
march with them upon our shoulders— 
We strut with them by our sides—We
gild them—We carve them—We
in-lay them—We enrich them— 
Nay, if it be but a scoundril cannon, we
cast an ornament upon the breech of it.— 
—My uncle Toby laid down his
pipe to intercede for a better epithet— 
and Yorick was rising up to batter the
whole hypothesis to pieces— 
—When Obadiah broke into the
middle of the room with a complaint,
which cried out for an immediate hearing. 
The case was this: 

My father, whether by ancient custom
of the manor, or as improprietor of
the great tythes, was obliged to keep a
Bull for the service of the Parish, and
Obadiah had led his cow upon a pop-visit
to him one day or other the preceeding
summer—I say, one day or
other—because as chance would have it,
it was the day on which he was married
to my father's house-maid—so one
was a reckoning to the other. Therefore
when Obadiah's wife was brought to
bed—Obadiah thanked God— 
—Now, said Obadiah, I shall have
a calf: so Obadiah went daily to visit his
cow. 

She'll calve on Monday—on Tuesday
—or Wednesday at the farthest— 
The cow did not calve—no—she'll
not calve till next week—the cow put
it off terribly—till at the end of the
sixth week Obadiah's suspicions (like a
good man's) fell upon the Bull. 
Now the parish being very large, my
father's Bull, to speak the truth of him,
was no way equal to the department; he
had, however, got himself, somehow
or other, thrust into employment—and as
he went through the business with a grave
face, my father had a high opinion of
him. 

—Most of the townsmen, an'
please your worship, quoth Obadiah, believe
that 'tis all the Bull's fault— 
—But may not a cow be barren?
replied my father, turning to Doctor
Slop. 
It never happens: said Dr. Slop, but
the man's wife may have come before
her time naturally enough—Prithee
has the child hair upon his head?—added
Dr. Slop— 
—It is as hairy as I am; said Obadiah. 
—Obadiah had not been shaved
for three weeks—Wheu –– u –––– 
u –––––––– cried my father; beginning
the sentence with an exclamatory 

whistle—and so, brother Toby, this
poor Bull of mine, who is as good a
Bull as ever p&sblank;ss'd, and might have
done for Europa herself in purer times
—had he but two legs less, might
have been driven into Doctors Commons
and lost his character—which to a
Town Bull, brother Toby, is the very
same thing as his life— 
L&sblank;&sblank;d! said my mother, what is all
this story about?— 
A COCK and a BULL, said
Yorick—And one of the best of its
kind, I ever heard. 