



The Author at his Master's Commands informs him
of the State of England. The Causes of War
among the Princes of Europe. The Author begins
to explain the English Constitution. 

The Reader may please to observe,
that the following Extract of many
Conversations I had with my Master,
contains a Summary of the most material
Points, which were discoursed
at several times for above two Years; his Honour
often desiring fuller Satisfaction as I farther improved
in the Houyhnhnm Tongue. I laid before him, as
well as I could, the whole State of Europe; I discoursed
of Trade and Manufactures, of Arts and
Sciences; and the Answers I gave to all the Questions
he made, as they arose upon several Subjects,
were a Fund of Conversation not to be exhausted. 
But I shall here only set down the Substance of
what passed between us concerning my own Country, 

reducing it into Order as well as I can, with,
out any Regard to Time or other Circumstances,
while I strictly adhere to Truth. My only Concern
is, that I shall hardly be able to do Justice to
my Master's Arguments and Expressions, which
must needs suffer by my Want of Capacity, as well
as by a Translation into our barbarous English. 
In Obedience therefore to his Honour's Commands,
I related to him the Revolution under the
Prince of Orange; the long War with France entered
into by the said Prince, and renewed by his
Successor the present Queen; wherein the greatest
Powers of Christendom were engaged, and which
still continued: I computed at his Request, that
about a Million of Yahoos might have been killed
in the whole Progress of it; and perhaps a Hundred
or more Cities taken, and five times as many
Ships burnt or sunk. 
He asked me what were the usual Causes or Motives
that made one Country go to War with another. 
I answered, they were innumerable; but I
should only mention a few of the chief. Sometimes
the Ambition of Princes, who never think
they have Land or People enough to govern:
Sometimes the Corruption of Ministers, who engage
their Master in a War in order to stifle or
divert the Clamour of the Subjects against their
evil Administration. Difference in Opinions hath
cost many Millions of Lives: For Instance, whether
Flesh be Bread, or Bread be Flesh: Whether
the Juice of a certain Berry be Blood or Wine:
Whether Whistling be a Vice or a Virtue: Whether
it be better to kiss a Post, or throw it into the
Fire: What is the best Colour for a Coat, whether 

Black, White, Red or Grey; and whether it should
be long or short, narrow or wide, dirty or clean;
with many more. Neither are any Wars so furious
and bloody, or of so long Continuance, as those
occasioned by Difference in Opinion, especially if
it be in things indifferent. 
Sometimes the Quarrel between two Princes is
to decide which of them shall dispossess a Third of
his Dominions, where neither of them pretend to
any Right. Sometimes one Prince quarrelleth with
another, for fear the other should quarrel with
him. Sometimes a War is entered upon, because
the Enemy is too strong, and sometimes because he
is too weak. Sometimes our Neighbours want the
Things which we have, or have the Things which
we want; and we both fight, till they take ours
or give us theirs. It is a very justifiable Cause of
War to invade a Country after the People have been
wasted by Famine, destroyed by Pestilence, or embroiled
by Factions amongst themselves. It is justifiable
to enter into a War against our nearest Ally,
when one of his Towns lies convenient for us, or
a Territory of Land, that would render our Dominions
round and compact. If a Prince send Forces
into a Nation, where the People are poor and ignorant,
he may lawfully put half of them to Death,
and make Slaves of the rest, in order to civilize and
reduce them from their barbarous Way of Living. 
It is a very kingly, honourable, and frequent Practice,
when one Prince desires the Assistance of another
to secure him against an Invasion, that the
Assistant, when he hath driven out the Invader,
should seize on the Dominions himself, and kill,
imprison or banish the Prince he came to relieve. 

Allyance by Blood or Marriage, is a sufficient
Cause of War between Princes; and the nearer the
Kindred is, the greater is their Disposition to quarrel:
Poor Nations are hungry, and rich Nations
are proud; and Pride and Hunger will ever be at
Variance. For these Reasons, the Trade of a Soldier
is held the most honourable of all others: Because
a Soldier is a Yahoo hired to kill in cold Blood
as many of his own Species, who have never offended
him, as possibly he can. 
There is likewise a Kind of beggarly Princes in
Europe, not able to make War by themselves, who
hire out their Troops to richer Nations for so much
a Day to each Man; of which they keep three
Fourths to themselves, and it is the best Part of
their Maintenance; such are those in many Northern
Parts of Europe. 
What you have told me, (said my Master)
upon the Subject of War, doth indeed discover
most admirably the Effects of that Reason you
pretend to: However, it is happy that the Shame is
greater than the Danger; and that Nature hath left
you utterly uncapable of doing much Mischief:
For your Mouths lying flat with your Faces, you
can hardly bite each other to any Purpose, unless
by Consent. Then, as to the Claws upon your
Feet before and behind, they are so short and tender,
that one of our Yahoos would drive a Dozen
of yours before him. And therefore in recounting
the Numbers of those who have been killed in
Battle, I cannot but think that you have said the
Thing which is not. 
I could not forbear shaking my Head and smiling
a little at his Ignorance. And, being no Stranger 

to the Art of War, I gave him a Description
of Cannons, Culverins, Muskets, Carabines, Pistols,
Bullets, Powder, Swords, Bayonets, Sieges, Retreats,
Attacks, Undermines, Countermines, Bombardments,
Sea-fights; Ships sunk with a Thousand
Men; twenty Thousand killed on each Side; dying
Groans, Limbs flying in the Air: Smoak, Noise,
Confusion, trampling to Death under Horses Feet:
Flight, Pursuit, Victory; Fields strewed with Carcases
left for Food to Dogs, and Wolves, and Birds
of Prey; Plundering, Stripping, Ravishing, Burning
and Destroying. And, to set forth the Valour
of my own dear Countrymen, I assured him, that
I had seen them blow up a Hundred Enemies at
once in a Siege, and as many in a Ship; and beheld
the dead Bodies drop down in Pieces from the
Clouds, to the great Diversion of all the Spectators. 
I was going on to more Particulars, when my
Master commanded me Silence. He said, whoever
understood the Nature of Yahoos might easily believe
it possible for so vile an Animal, to be capable
of every Action I had named, if their Strength
and Cunning equalled their Malice. But, as my
Discourse had increased his Abhorrence of the
whole Species, so he found it gave him a Disturbance
in his Mind, to which he was wholly a
Stranger before. He thought his Ears being used
to such abominable Words, might by Degrees admit
them with less Detestation. That, although he
hated the Yahoos of this Country, yet he no more
blamed them for their odious Qualities, than he did
a Gnnayh (a Bird of Prey) for its Cruelty, or a
sharp Stone for cutting his Hoof. But, when a 

Creature pretending to Reason, could be capable of
such Enormities, he dreaded lest the Corruption of
that Faculty might be worse than Brutality itself. 
He seemed therefore confident, that instead of Reason,
we were only possessed of some Quality fitted
to increase our natural Vices; as the Reflection
from a troubled Stream returns the Image of an ill-shapen
Body, not only larger, but more distorted. 
He added, That he had heard too much upon
the Subject of War, both in this, and some former
Discourses. There was another Point which a little
perplexed him at present. I had said, that some
of our Crew left their Country on Account of being
ruined by Law: That I had already explained
the Meaning of the Word; but he was at a Loss
how it should come to pass, that the Law which
was intended for every Man's Preservation, should
be any Man's Ruin. Therefore he desired to be
farther satisfied what I meant by Law, and the Dispensers
thereof, according to the present Practice in
my own Country: Because he thought, Nature
and Reason were sufficient Guides for a reasonable
Animal, as we pretended to be, in shewing us what
we ought to do, and what to avoid. 
I assured his Honour, that Law was a Science
wherein I had not much conversed, further than
by employing Advocates, in vain, upon some Injustices
that had been done me. However, I would
give him all the Satisfaction I was able. 
I said there was a Society of Men among us,
bred up from their Youth in the Art of proving by
Words multiplied for the Purpose, that White is
Black, and Black is White, according as they are 

paid. To this Society all the rest of the People are
Slaves. 
For Example. If my Neighbour hath a mind
to my Cow, he hires a Lawyer to prove that he
ought to have my Cow from me. I must then hire
another to defend my Right; it being against all
Rules of Law that any Man should be allowed to
speak for himself. Now in this Case, I who am
the true Owner lie under two great Disadvantages. 
First, my Lawyer being practiced almost from his
Cradle in defending Falshood; is quite out of his
Element when he would be an Advocate for Justice,
which as an Office unnatural, he always attempts
with great Awkwardness, if not with Ill-will. 
The second Disadvantage is, that my Lawyer
must proceed with great Caution: Or else he
will be reprimanded by the Judges, and abhorred
by his Brethren, as one who would lessen the Practice
of the Law. And therefore I have but two
Methods to preserve my Cow. The first is, to gain
over my Adversary's Lawyer with a double Fee; 
who will then betray his Client, by insinuating that
he hath Justice on his Side. The second Way is
for my Lawyer to make my Cause appear as unjust
as he can; by allowing the Cow to belong to my
Adversary; and this if it be skilfully done, will
certainly bespeak the Favour of the Bench. 
Now, your Honour is to know, that these
Judges are Persons appointed to decide all Controversies
of Property, as well as for the Tryal of Criminals; 
and picked out from the most dextrous
Lawyers who are grown old or lazy: And having
been byassed all their Lives against Truth and Equity,
lie under such a fatal Necessity of favouring 

Fraud, Perjury and Oppression; that I have known
some of them to have refused a large Bribe from
the Side where Justice lay, rather than injure the
Faculty, by doing any thing unbecoming their Nature
or their Office. 
It is a Maxim among these Lawyers, that whatever
hath been done before, may legally be done
again: And therefore they take special Care to record
all the Decisions formerly made against common
Justice and the general Reason of Mankind. 
These, under the Name of Precedents, they produce
as Authorities to justify the most iniquitous
Opinions; and the Judges never fail of directing
accordingly. 
In pleading, they studiously avoid entering into
the Merits of the Cause; but are loud, violent and
tedious in dwelling upon all Circumstances which
are not to the Purpose. For Instance, in the Case
already mentioned: They never desire to know
what Claim or Title my Adversary hath to my
Cow; but whether the said Cow were Red or Black; 
her Horns long or short; whether the Field I graze
her in be round or square; whether she were
milked at home or abroad; what Diseases she is
subject to, and the like. After which they consult
Precedents, adjourn the Cause, from Time to Time,
and in Ten, Twenty, or Thirty Years come to an
Issue. 
It is likewise to be observed, that this Society
hath a peculiar Cant and Jargon of their own, that
no other Mortal can understand, and wherein all
their Laws are written, which they take special
Care to multiply; whereby they have wholly confounded
the very Essence of Truth and Falshood, 

of Right and Wrong; so that it will take Thirty
Years to decide whether the Field, left me by my
Ancestors for six Generations, belong to me, or to
a Stranger three Hundred Miles off. 
In the Tryal of Persons accused for Crimes
against the State, the Method is much more short
and commendable: The Judge first sends to sound
the Disposition of those in Power; after which he
can easily hang or save the Criminal, strictly preserving
all the Forms of Law. 
Here my Master interposing, said it was a Pity,
that Creatures endowed with such prodigious Abilities
of Mind as these Lawyers, by the Description
I gave of them must certainly be, were not rather
encouraged to be Instructors of others in Wisdom
and Knowledge. In Answer to which, I assured
his Honour, that in all Points out of their own
Trade, they were usually the most ignorant and
stupid Generation among us, the most despicable
in common Conversation, avowed Enemies to all
Knowledge and Learning; and equally disposed to
pervert the general Reason of Mankind, in every
other Subject of Discourse, as in that of their own
Profession. 
