



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Wedn. July 12. 
So, Jack, they think they have gain'd a mighty point. 
But, were I to change my mind, were I to repent, I
fancy I am safe. —And yet this very moment it rises to my
mind, that 'tis hard trusting too; for surely there must be
some embers, where there was fire so lately, that may be
stirr'd up to give a blaze to combustibles strew'd lightly
upon them. Love (like some self-propagating plants or 

roots, which have taken strong hold in the earth), when
once got deep into the heart, is hardly ever totally extirpated,
except by Matrimony indeed, which is the Grave
of Love, because it allows of the End of Love. Then these
ladies, all advocates for herself, with herself, Miss Howe
at their head, perhaps—Not in favour to me—I don't
expect That from Miss Howe. —But perhaps in favour to
herself: For Miss Howe has reason to apprehend vengeance
from me, I ween. Her Hickman will be safe too, as she may
think, if I marry her beloved friend: For he has been a
busy fellow, and I have long wish'd to have a slap at him! 
—The lady's case desperate with her friends too; and
likely to be so, while single, and her character exposed to
censure. 
A husband is a charming cloak; a fig-leaf'd apron for
a wife: And for a lady to be protected in liberties, in diversions,
which her heart pants after—and all her faults,
even the most criminal, were she to be detected, to be
thrown upon the husband, and the ridicule too; a charming
eligible for a wife! 
But I shall have one comfort, if I marry, which pleases
me not a little. If a man's wife has a dear friend of her sex,
a hundred liberties may be taken with that friend, which
could not be taken, if the single lady (knowing what a
title to freedoms marriage has given him with her friend)
was not less scrupulous with him than she ought to be, as to
herself. Then there are broad freedoms (shall I call them?)
that may be taken by the husband with his wife, that may
not be quite shocking, which if the wife bears before her
friend, will serve for a lesson to that friend; and if that
friend bears to be present at them without check or bashfulness,
will shew a sagacious fellow, that she can bear as
much herself, at proper time and place. Chastity, Jack,
like Piety, is an uniform thing. If in look, if in speech,
a girl waves way to undue levity, depend upon it, the devil
has got one of his cloven feet in her heart already–– 
So, Hickman, take care of thyself, I advise thee, whether
I marry or not. 
Thus, Jack, have I at once reconciled myself to all
my relations–––And, if the lady refuses me, thrown the
fault upon her. This, I knew, would be in my power 

to do at any time: And I was the more arrogant to them,
in order to heighten the merit of my compliance. 
But after all, It would be very whimsical, would it not,
if all my plots and contrivances should end in wedlock? 
What a punishment would this come out to be, upon myself
too, that all this while I have been plundering my
own treasury? 
But, Jack, two things I must insist upon with thee, if
this is to be the case. –––Having put secrets of so high a
nature between me and my spouse into thy power, I
must, for my own honour and the honour of my wife
and my illustrious progeny, first oblige thee to give up
the letters I have so profusely scribbled to thee; and, in
the next place, do by thee, as I have heard whisper'd in
France was done by the true father of a certain monarque; 
that is to say, cut thy throat, to prevent thy telling of tales. 
I have found means to heighten the kind opinion my
friends here have begun to have of me, by communicating
to them the contents of the four last letters which I wrote
to press my elected spouse to solemnize. My Lord has
repeated one of his phrases in my favour, that he hopes
it will come out, That the devil is not quite so black as he
is painted. 
Now pr'ythee, dear Jack, since so many good consequences
are to flow from these our nuptials (one of which
to thyself; since the sooner thou diest, the less thou wilt
have to answer for); and that I now-and-then am apt to
believe there may be something in the old fellow's notion,
who once told us, that he who kills a man, has all that
man's sins to answer for, as well as his own, because he
gave him not the time to repent of them, that Heaven
design'd to allow him (A fine thing for thee if thou consentest
to be knock'd of the head; but a cursed one for
the manslayer!); and since there may be room to fear,
that Miss Howe will not give us her help; I pr'ythee now
exert thyself to find out my Clarissa Harlowe, that I may
make a Lovelace of her. Set all the city bellmen, and
the country criers, for ten miles round the metropolis, at
work, with their “O yes's! and if any man, woman or
child can give tale or tidings” —Advertise her in all
the news-papers; and let her know, “That if she will 

repair to Lady Betty Lawrence, or to Miss Charlotte
Montague, she may hear of something greatly to her
advantage.” 
* *
My two cousins Montague are actually to set out tomorrow,
to Mrs. Howe's, to engage her vixen daughter's
interest with her friend: To flaunt it away in a chariot
and six, for the greater state and significance. 
Confounded mortification to be reduced thus low! ––– 
My pride hardly knows how to brook it. 
Lord M. has engaged the two venerables to stay here,
to attend the issue: And I, standing very high at present
in their good graces, am to gallant them to Oxford, to
Blenheim, and several other places. 