



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday, March 10. 
You will permit me, my dear, to touch upon a
few passages in your last Letter, that affect me
sensibly. 
In the first place, you must allow me to say, low
as I am in spirits, that I am very angry with you for 

your reflections on my relations, particularly on my
Father and Mother, and on the memory of my
Grandfather. Nor, my dear, does your own Mother
always escape the keen edge of your vivacity. One
cannot one's self forbear to write or speak freely of
those we love and honour, when grief from imagined
hard treatment wrings the heart: But it goes against
one to hear any-body else take the same liberties. 
Then you have so very strong a manner of expression
where you take a distaste, that when passion has subsided,
and I come (upon reflection) to see by your
severity what I have given occasion for, I cannot help
condemning myself. 
&dotup;But least of all can I bear that you should reflect
upon my Mother. What, my dear, if her meekness
should not be rewarded? Is the want of reward,
or the want even of a grateful acknowlegement,
a reason for us to dispense with what we think our
duty? They were my Father's lively spirits that
first made him an interest in her gentle bosom. 
They were the same spirits turned inward, as I have
heretofore observed (a) , that made him so impatient
when the cruel malady seized him. He always
loved my Mother: And would not Love and
Pity, excusably, nay laudably, make a good Wife
(who was an hourly witness of his pangs, when
labouring under a paroxysm, and his paroxysms becoming
more and more frequent, as well as more
and more severe) give up her own will, her own
likings, to oblige a Husband, thus afflicted, whose
love for her was unquestionable? —And if so, was
it not too natural [Human nature is not perfect,
my dear] that the Husband thus humoured by the
Wife, should be unable to bear controul from anybody
else? much less contradiction from his children? 
&dotup;If then you would avoid my highest displeasure,
you must spare my Mother: And, surely, you will 

allow me, with her, to pity, as well as to love and
honour my Father. 
&dotup;I have no friend but you to whom I can appeal,
to whom I dare complain. Unhappily circumstanced
as I am, it is but too probable that I shall complain,
because it is but too probable that I shall have more
and more cause given me for complaint.&dotup; But be it
your part, if I do, to sooth my angry passions, and
to soften my resentments; and this the rather, as you
know what an influence your advice has upon me; 
and as you must also know, that the freedoms you
take with my friends, can have no other tendency,
but to weaken the sense of my duty to them, without
answering any good end to myself.&dotup; 
I cannot help owning, however, that I am pleased
to have you join with me in opinion of the contempt
which Mr. Solmes deserves from me. But yet, permit
me to say, that he is not quite so horrible a creature
as you make him: As to his Person, I mean; for
with regard to his Mind, by all I have heard, you
have done him but justice: But you have such a talent
at an ugly likeness, and such a vivacity, that they
sometimes carry you out of verisimilitude. In short,
my dear, I have known you, in more instances than
one, sit down resolved to write all that wit, rather
than strict justice, could suggest upon the given occasion. 
Perhaps it may be thought, that I should say
the less on this particular subject, because your dislike
of him arises from love to me: But should it not be
our aim to judge of ourselves, and of every-thing that
affects us, as we may reasonably imagine other people
would judge of us, and of our actions? 
As to the advice you give, to resume my Estate,
I am determined not to litigate with my Father, let
what will be the consequence to myself. I may give
you, at another time, a more particular answer to
your reasonings on this subject: But, at present, will
only observe, that it is my opinion, that Lovelace 

himself would hardly think me worth addressing, were
he to know this to be my resolution. These Men, my
dear, with all their flatteries, look forward to the
Permanent. Indeed, it is fit they should. For
Love must be a very foolish thing to look back upon,
when it has brought persons born to affluence into
indigence, and laid a generous mind under obligation
and dependence. 
You very ingeniously account for the Love we bear
to one another, from the difference in our tempers. 
I own, I should not have thought of That. There
may possibly be something in it: But whether there
be, or not, whenever I am cool, and give myself
time to reflect, I will love you the better for the correction
you give me, be as severe as you will upon
me. Spare me not therefore, my dear friend, whenever
you think me in the least faulty. I love your
agreeable raillery: You know I always did: Nor,
however over-serious you think me, did I ever think
you flippant, as you harshly call it. One of the first
conditions of our mutual friendship was, that each
should say or write to the other whatever was upon
her mind, without any offence to be taken: A condition,
that is indeed indispensable in friendship. 
I knew your Mother would be for implicit obedience
in a child. I am sorry my case is so circumstanced,
that I cannot comply. It would be my
duty to do so, if I could. You are indeed very
happy, that you have nothing but your own agreeable,
yet whimsical, humours to contend with, in
the choice she invites you to make of Mr. Hickman. 
How happy should I be, to be treated with so much
lenity! —I should blush to have my Mother say, that
she begged and prayed me, and all in vain, to encourage
a man so unexceptionable as Mr. Hickman. 
Indeed, my beloved Miss Howe, I am ashamed to
have your Mother say, with Me in her view, ‘What
strange effects have Prepossession and Love upon 

young creatures of our Sex!’ This touches me the
more sensibly, because you yourself, my dear, are so
ready to persuade me into it. 
I should be very blameable to endeavour to hide
any the least byas upon my mind, from you: And I
cannot but say—that this man—this Lovelace—is a
man that might be liked well enough, if he bore such
a character as Mr. Hickman bears; and even if there
were hopes of reclaiming him. And further still I will
acknowlege, that I believe it possible that one might
be driven, by violent measures, step by step, as it
were, into something that might be called—I don't
know what to call it—A conditional kind of liking,
or so. But as to the word Love—justifiable and
charming as it is in some cases (that is to say, in all
the relative, in all the social, and, what is still beyond
both, in all our superior duties, in which it may
be properly called divine); it has, methinks, in the
narrow, circumscribed, selfish, peculiar sense, in which
you apply it to me (the man too so little to be approved
of for his morals, if all that report says of him be
true) no pretty sound with it. Treat me as freely
as you will in all other respects, I will love you, as I
have said, the better for your friendly freedom: But,
methinks, I could be glad, that you would not let
this imputation pass so glibly from your pen, or your
lips, as attributable to one of your own Sex, whether I
be the person or not: Since the other must have a
double triumph, when a person of your delicacy (armed
with such contempts of them all, as you would have
one think) can give up a friend, with an exultation
over her weakness, as a silly, love-sick creature! 
I could make some other observations upon the
contents of your last two Letters; but my mind is
not free enough at present. The occasions for the
above stuck with me; and I could not help taking
the earliest notice of them. 
Having written to the end of my second sheet, I 

will close this Letter, and in my next acquaint you
with all that has happened here since my last. 