



Mrs. Hervey, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
[In answer to Letter xlviii.] 

Dear Niece,
It would be hard not to write a few lines, so much
pressed to write, to one I ever loved: Your former
letter I received, yet was not at liberty to answer
it. I break my word to answer you now. 
Strange informations are every day received about
you. The wretch you are with, we are told, is
every hour triumphing and defying—Must not these
informations aggravate? You know the uncontroulableness
of the man. He loves his own humour better
than he loves you—tho' so fine a creature as you are! 
I warn'd you over and over: No young lady was ever
more warn'd! —Miss Clarissa Harlowe to do such a
thing! 
You might have given your friends the meeting. 
If you had held your aversion, it would have been
comply'd with. As soon as I was intrusted myself
with their intention to give up the point, I gave you
a hint—a dark one perhaps (a) ! —But who would
have thought—O Miss! —Such an artful flight! — 
Such cunning preparation! 
But you want to clear up things—What can you
clear up? Are you not gone off? —With a Lovelace
too? —What, my dear, would you clear up? 
You did not design to go, you say. Why did you
meet him then, chariot-and-six, horsemen, all prepared
by him? O, my dear, how Art produces Art! 
—Will it be believed? —If it would, what power
will he be thought to have had over you! —He! — 
Who? —Lovelace! —The vilest of libertines! — 
Over whom? —A Clarissa Harlowe! —Was your 

love for such a man above your reason? —Above
your resolution? —What credit would a belief of
this, if believed, bring you? —How mend the
matter? —Oh! that you had stood the next meeting!— 
I'll tell you all that was intended, if you had. 
It was indeed imagined, that you would not have
been able to resist your father's intreaties and commands. 
He was resolved to be all condescension, if
anew you had not provoked him. I love my Clary
Harlowe, said he, but an hour before the killing tidings
were brought him; I love her as my life; I will
kneel to her, if nothing else will do, to prevail upon her
to oblige me! 
Your father and mother (reverse to what should
have been!) would have humbled themselves to you: 
And if you could have denied them, and refused
to sign the settlements previous to the meeting, they
would have yielded, altho' with regret. 
But it was presumed, so naturally sweet your temper,
so self-denying, as they thought you, that you
could not have withstood them, notwithstanding all
your dislike of the one man, without a greater degree
of headstrong passion for the other, than you had given
any of us reason to expect from you. 
If you had, the meeting on Wednesday would
have been a lighter trial to you. You would have
been presented to all your assembled friends, with a
snort speech only, ‘That this was the young creature,
till very lately faultless, condescending, and obliging,
now having cause to glory in a triumph over
the wills of father, mother, uncles, the most indulgent; 
over family interests, family views, and
preferring her own will to every-body's; and this
for a transitory preference to person only; the morals
of the men not to be compared with each
other's.’ 

Thus complied with, and perhaps blessed, by your
father and mother, and the consequences of your disobedience
deprecated in the solemnest manner by
your inimitable mother, your generosity would have
been appealed to, since your duty would have been
found too weak an inducement, and you would have
been bid to withdraw for one half-hour's consideration: 
Then would the settlements have been again
tendered for your signing, by the person least disobliging
to you; by your good Norton perhaps; she
perhaps seconded by your father again: And if again
refused, you would again have been led in, to declare
such your refusal. Some restrictions, which you
yourself had proposed, would have been insisted upon. 
You would have been permitted to go home with me,
or with your uncle Antony [which, not agreed upon,
because they hoped you might be prevailed with], there
to tarry till the arrival of your cousin Morden; or till
your father could have borne to see you; or till assured,
that the views of Lovelace were at an end. 
This the intention, your father so set upon your
compliance, so much in hopes that you would have
yielded, that you would have been prevailed upon by
methods so condescending and so gentle; no wonder
that he, in particular, was like a distracted man, when
he heard of your flight—of your flight, so premeditated; 
—with your ivy summer-house dinings, your
arts to blind me, and all of us!—naughty, naughty
young creature! 
I, for my part, would not believe it, when told of it. 
Your uncle Hervey would not believe it. We rather
expected, we rather feared, a still more desperate adventure. 
There could be but one more desperate; 
and I was readier to have the cascade first resorted
to, than the garden back-door. —Your mamma fainted
away, while her heart was torn between the two apprehensions. 
—Your father, poor man! your father,
was beside himself for near an hour. To this day he 

can hardly bear your name: Yet can think of nobody
else. Your merits, my dear, but aggravate your
fault. —Something of fresh aggravation almost every
hour. —How can any favour be expected? 
I am sorry for it; but am afraid, nothing you ask
will be complied with. 
Why mention you, my dear, the saving you from
mortifications; who have gone off with a man? 
What a poor pride is it to stand upon any thing
else? 
I dare not open my lips in your favour. Nobody
dare. Your letter must stand by itself. This has
caused me to send it to Harlowe-place. Expect therefore
great severity. May you be enabled to support
the lot you have chosen! O my dear! how unhappy
have you made every-body! Can you expect to be
happy? Your father wishes you had never been born. 
Your poor mother—But why should I afflict you? 
There is now no help! —You must be changed indeed,
if you are not very unhappy yourself in the
reflections your thoughtful mind must suggest to you. 
You must now make the best of your lot. Yet
not married, it seems! 
It is in your power, you say, to perform whatever
you shall undertake to do: You may deceive yourself: 
You hope that your reputation, and your
friends favour, may be retrieved. Never, never,
both, I doubt; if either. Every offended person (and
that is all who loved you, and are related to you) must
join to restore you: When can these be of one mind,
in a case so notoriously wrong? 
It would be very grievous, you say, to be precipitated
upon measures, that may make the desirable
reconciliation more difficult. Is it now, my dear, a
time for you to be afraid of being precipitated? At
present, if ever, there can be no thought of reconciliation. 
The upshot of your precipitation must first
be seen. There may be murder yet, as far as we know. 

Will the man you are with, part willingly with you? 
If not, what may be the consequence? If he will,
Lord bless me! what shall we think of his reasons for
it? —I will fly this thought. I know your purity—But,
my dear, are you not out of all protection? — 
Are you not unmarry'd? —Have you not (making
your daily prayers useless) thrown yourself into temptation? 
And is not the man the most wicked of
plotters? 
You have hitherto, you say (and I think, my dear,
with an air unbecoming your declared penitence), no
fault to find with the behaviour of a man from whom
every evil was apprehended: Like Cæsar to the Roman
augur, which I heard you tell of, who had bid
him Beware of the ides of March: The ides of March,
said Cæsar, seeing the augur among the croud, as he
marched in state to the senate house, which he never
was to return from alive, The ides of March are come. 
But they are not past, the augur reply'd. Make the
application, my dear: May you be able to make this
reflection upon his good behaviour to the last of your
knowlege of him! May he behave himself better to
you, than he ever did to any-body else whom he had
power over! Amen! 
No answer, I beseech you. I hope your messenger
will not tell any-body that I have written to you. 
And I dare say you will not shew what I have written
to Mr. Lovelace—For I have written with the less
reserve, depending upon your prudence. 
You have my prayers. 
My Dolly knows not that I write. Nobody does: 
Not even Mr. Hervey. 
Dolly would have several times written: But, having
defended your fault with heat, and with a partiality,
that alarmed us [Such a fall as yours, my dear,
must be alarming to all parents], she has been forbidden,
on pain of losing our favour for ever: And this
at your family's request, as well as by her father's
commands. 

You have the poor girl's hourly prayers, however,
I will tell you, tho' she knows not that I do, as well
as those of 
Your truly afflicted aunt,
D. Hervey. 
Friday, April 21. 