



My dearest Mr. B.
Having in my former Letters said as much as is
necessary to let you into my Notion of the
excellent Book you put into my Hands, and having 

touch'd those Points in which the Children of both
Sexes may be concern'd, (with some Art in my Intention,
I own) in Hopes that they would not be so
much out of the way, as to make you repent of the
Honour and Pleasure you have done me in committing
the dear Miss Goodwin to my Care; I shall
now very quickly set myself about the little Book
which I have done myself the Honour to mention to
you. 
You have been so good as to tell me, (at the same
time that you have not disapprov'd these my Specimen
Letters, as I may call them) that you will
kindly accept of my intended Present, and you encourage
me to proceed in it; and as I shall leave one
Side of the Leaf blank for your Corrections and Alterations,
those Corrections will be a fine Help and
Instruction to me in the pleasing Task, which I
propose to myself, of assisting in the early Education
of the dear Children, which it has pleased God to
give you. And altho' I shall be Years in writing
it, perhaps, as the dear Babies improve, and as I
improve, by the Opportunities which their Advances
in Years will give me, and the Experience I shall
gain, I shall, perhaps, venture to give my Notions
and Observations on the more material and nobler
Parts of Education, as well as the inferior; for, (but
that I think the Subjects above my present Abilities)
Mr. Locke's Book would lead me into several Remarks,
that might not be unuseful, and which appear
to me intirely new; tho' that may be owing to
my slender Reading and Opportunities perhaps. 
But what, my dearest Mr. B. I would now
touch upon, is a Word or two still more particularly
upon the Education of my own Sex; a Topick
which naturally rises to me from the Subject of
my last Letter. For there, dear Sir, we saw, that 

the Mothers might teach the Child this Part of
Science, and that Part of Instruction; and who, I
pray, as our Sex is generally educated, shall teach
the Mothers? How, in a Word, shall they come
by their Knowlege? 
I know you'll be apt to say, That Miss Goodwin
gives all the Promises of a fine young Lady, and
takes her Learning, and loves Reading, and makes
very pretty Reflections on all she reads, and asks
very pertinent Questions, and is as knowing, at her
Years, as most young Ladies. This is very true,
Sir; but it is not every one that can boast Miss
Goodwin's Capacity, and Goodness of Temper,
which have enabled her to get up a good deal of lost
Time, as I must call it; for the first four Years in
the dear Child were a perfect Blank, as far as I can
find, just as if the pretty Dear was born the Day
she was four Years old: For what she had to unlearn
as to Temper, and Will, and such things, set
against what little Improvements she had made,
might very fairly be compounded for, as a Blank. 
I would indeed have a Miss brought up to her
Needle; but I would not have all her Time imploy'd
in Samplers, and learning to mark, and to
do those unnecessary things, which she will never,
probably, be call'd upon to practise. 
And why, pray, my dear Mr. B. are not Girls
intitled to the same first Education, tho' not to the
same Plays and Diversions, as Boys; so far at least,
as it is supposed by Mr. Locke a Mother can instruct
them? 
Would not this lay a Foundation for their future
Improvement, and direct their Inclinations to useful
Subjects, such as should make them above the Imputations
of some unkind Gentlemen, who allot to
their Parts common Tea-table Prattle, while they 

do all they can to make them fit for nothing else,
and then upbraid them for it? And would not the
Men find us better and more suitable Companions
and Assistants to them in every useful Purpose of
Life? –––O that your lordly Sex were all like my
dear Mr. B. –––I don't mean, that they should all
take raw, uncouth, unbred, lowly Girls, as I was,
from the Cottage, and, destroying all Distinction,
make such their Wives. I cannot mean this: Because
it is a far greater Likelihood, that such an one,
when she comes to be lifted up into so dazzling a
Sphere, would have her Head made giddy with her
Exaltation, than that she would balance herself well
in it: And then to what a Blot, over all the fair
Page of a long Life, would this little Drop of dirty
Ink spread itself! What a standing Disreputation to
the Choice of a Gentleman! 
But this I mean, that after a Gentleman had enter'd
into the Marriage State with a young Creature
(saying nothing at all of Birth or Descent) far inferior
to him in Learning, in Parts, in Knowlege
of the World, and in all the Graces that make
Conversation agreeable and improving, he would,
as you do, endeavour to make her fit Company for
himself, as he shall find she is willing to improve,
and capable of Improvement: That he would direct
her Taste, point out to her proper Subjects
for her Amusement and Instruction; travel with
her now-and-then, a Month in a Year perhaps; 
and shew her the World, after he has encourag'd
her to put herself forward at his own Table, and
at the Houses of his Friends, and has seen, that she
will not do him great Discredit any-where. What
Obligations, and Opportunities too, will this give
her to love and honour such an Husband, every
Hour, more and more! as she will see his Wisdom 

in a thousand Instances, and experience his Indulgence
to her in ten thousand, (for which otherwise
no Opportunity could have so fitly offer'd) to
the Praise of his Politeness, and the Honour of them
both! –––And then, when select Parties of Pleasure
or Business engag'd him not abroad, in his home
Conversation, to have him, as my dear Mr. B. does,
delight to instruct, and open her Prospects, and
inspire her with an Ambition to inlarge her Mind, and
more and more to excel! What an intellectual Kind
of marry'd Life, as I may call it, would such Persons
find theirs! And how suitable to the Rules of
Policy and Self-love in the Gentleman! For is not
the Wife, and are not her Improvements, all his
own? ––––Absolutely, as I may say, his own? And
does not every Excellence she can be adorned by,
redound to her Husband's Honour, because she is
his, even more than to her own?— In like manner
as no Dishonour affects a Man so much, as that
which he receives from a bad Wife. 
But where, would some say, were they to see
what I write, is such a Gentlemen as Mr. B. to be
met with? Look around, and see, with all the Advantages
of Sex, of Education, of Travel, of Conversation
in the open World, where a Gentleman of
his Abilities to instruct and inform, is to be found? 
And there are others, who, perhaps, will question
the Capacities and Inclinations of our Sex in general,
to improve in useful Knowlege, were they to
meet with such kind Indulgers, either in the Characters
of a Parent or Husband. 
As to the first, I grant, that it is not easy to find
such a Gentleman: But for the second, (would it
be excus'd in me, who am one of the Sex, and so
may be thought partial to it) I could, by Comparisons
drawn from the Gentlemen and Ladies within 

the Circle of my own Acquaintance, produce Instances
to the Advantage of Ladies, which are so
flagrantly in their Favour, that might make it suspected,
that it is Policy more than Justice, in those
who would keep our Sex unacquainted with that
more eligible Turn of Education, which gives the
Gentlemen so many Advantages over us in that;
and which will shew, that they have none at all in
Nature or Genius. 
I know you'll pardon me, dear Sir! for you are
so exalted above your Pamela, by Nature and Education
too, that you cannot apprehend any Inconvenience
from bold Comparisons. I will take the
Liberty therefore to mention a few Instances among
our Friends, where the Ladies, notwithstanding their
more cramp'd and confin'd Education, make more
than an equal Figure with the Gentlemen in all the
graceful Parts of Conversation, in Spite of the Contempts
pour'd out upon our Sex by some witty
Gentlemen, whose Writings I have in my Eye. 
To begin then with Mr. Murray, and Miss Darnford
that was: Mr. Murray has the Reputation of
Scholarship, and has travell'd too; but how infinitely
is he surpass'd in every noble and useful Quality, and
in Greatness of Mind, and Judgment, as well as
Wit, by the young Lady I have nam'd? This we
saw, when last at the Hall, in Fifty Instances, where
the Gentleman was, you know, Sir, on a Visit to
Sir Simon and his Lady. 
Next, dear Sir, permit me to observe, that my
good Lord Davers, with all his Advantages, born a
Counsellor of the Realm, and educated accordingly,
does not surpass his Lady, your noble Sister. 
My Countess, as I delight to call her, and Lady
Betty, her eldest Daughter, greatly surpass the Earl,
and my Lord, her eldest Brother, in every Point of 

Knowlege, and even Learning, as I may say, altho'
both Ladies owe that Advantage principally to their
own Cultivation and Acquirement. 
Let me presume, Sir, to name Mr. H. and when
I have nam'd him, shall we be puzzled to find
any-where in our Sex, one Remove from vulgar
Life, a Woman that will not out-do Mr. H? 
Lady Darnford, upon all useful Subjects, makes
a much brighter Figure than Sir Simon; whose
Knowlege of the World has not yet made him
acquainted with himself. 
Mr. Arthur excels not his Lady. 
Mrs. Towers, a Maiden Lady, is an Over-match
for half a dozen of the neighbouring Gentlemen I
could name, in what is call'd Wit and Politeness,
and not inferior to any of them in Judgment. 
I could multiply Instances of this Nature, were
it needful, to the Confutation of that low, and I
had almost said unmanly Contempt, with which a
certain celebrated Genius treats our Sex in general,
in most of his Pieces that I have seen; particularly
in his Letter of Advice to a new-marry'd Lady: A
Letter written in such a manner, as must disgust, instead
of instructing, and looks more like the Advice
of an Enemy to the Sex, and a partial one too, than a
Friend to the particular Lady. But I ought to beg
Pardon for this my Presumption, for two Reasons; 
first, Because of the truly admirable Talents of this
Writer; and next, Because we know not what Ladies
the ingenious Gentleman may have fallen among in
his younger Days. 
Upon the Whole therefore I conclude, That Mr.
B. the noble minded Mr. B. is almost the only Gentleman,
who excels every Lady I have seen; so greatly
excels, that even the Emanations of his Excellence
irradiate a low Cottage-born Girl, and make her pass
among Ladies of Birth and Education for Somebody. 

Forgive my Pride, dear Sir; but it would be
almost a Crime in your Pamela not to glory in the
mild Benignity of those Rays, by which her beloved
Mr. B. endeavours to make her look up to his own
sunny Sphere; while she, by the Advantages only of
his reflected Glory, in his Absence, which makes a
dark Night to her, glides along with her paler and
fainter Beaminess, and makes a distinguishing Figure
among such lesser Planets, as can only poorly twinkle
and glimmer, for want of the Aids she boasts of:
Tho', after all, her silvery Lustre is easily overshadow'd
by those crossing Clouds, that make his
Glory shine the brighter. 
I dare not, dear Sir, conjecture, whence arises
this more than Parity in the Genius of the Sexes,
among the Persons I have mention'd, notwithstanding
the Disparity of Education, and the Difference
in the Opportunities of each. It might lead one
into too proud a Thought in Favour of a Sex too
contemptuously treated by some other Wits I might
name, who, indeed, are the less to be regarded, as
they love to jest upon all God Almighty's Works:
Yet might I better do it, too, than any body, since,
as I have intimated above, I am so infinitely transcended
by my dear Gentleman, that no Competition,
Pride or Vanity, could be apprehended from
me. 
But, however, I would only beg of the Gentlemen,
who are so free in their Contempts of us,
that they will, for their own sakes, (and that, with
such, generally goes a great way) rather try to
improve than depreciate us: We shall then make better
Daughters, better Wives, better Mothers, and
better Mistresses: And who (permit me, Sir, to ask
these People) would be so much the better for these
Opportunities and Amendments, as our Upbraiders
themselves? 

On re-perusing what I have written, I must repeatedly
beg your Excuse, dear Sir, for these proud
Notions in behalf of my Sex. I can truly say, That
they are not, if I know myself, owing to Partiality,
because I have the Honour to be one of it; but to
a better Motive by far: For what does this contemptuous
Treatment of one Half, if not the better
Half, of the human Species, naturally produce, but
Libertinism, and abandon'd Wickedness? For does it
not tend to make the Daughters, the Sisters, the Wives
of Gentlemen, the Subjects of profligate Attempts? 
–––Does it not render the Sex vile in the Eyes of the
most Vile? And when a Lady is no longer beheld
by such Persons with that Dignity and Reverence,
with which, perhaps, the Graces of her Person, and
the Innocence of her Mind, should sacredly, as it
were, encompass her, do not her very Excellencies
become so many Incentives for base Wretches to
attempt her Virtue, and bring about her Ruin? 
What then may not wicked Wit have to answer
for, when its Possessors prostitute it to such unmanly
Purposes? And, as if they had never had a
Mother, a Sister, a Daughter of their own, throw
down, as much as in them lies, those sacred Fences,
which may lay the fair Inclosure open to the Invasions
of every clumsier and viler Beast of Prey,
who, tho' destitute of their Wit, yet corrupted by
it, shall fill their Mouths, as well as their Hearts,
with the borrow'd Mischief, and propagate it, from
one to another, to the End of Time; and who,
otherwise, would have pass'd by the uninvaded Fence,
and only shew'd their Teeth, and snarl'd at the well-secured
Fold within it! 
You cannot, my dearest Mr. B. I know you
cannot, be angry at this Romantick Painting; since
you are not affected by it: For when you were at
worst, you acted (more dangerously, 'tis true, for 

the poor Innocents) a principal Part, and were as a
Lion among Beasts––– Do, dear Sir, let me say among,
this one time––– You scorn'd to borrow any Man's
Wit*  , and if nobody had follow'd your Example,
till they had had your Qualities, the Number of
Rakes would have been but small: Yet; dearest Sir,
don't mistake me neither; I am not so mean as to
bespeak your Favour by extenuating your Failings:
If I were, you would deservedly despise me. For,
undoubtedly, (I must say it, Sir) your Faults were the
greater for your Perfections; and such Talents misapply'd,
as they made you more capable of Mischief,
so did they increase the Evil of your Practices. All
then that I mean by saying you are not affected by
this Painting, is, that you are not affected by the
Description I have given of clumsy and sordid Rakes,
whose Wit is borrow'd, and their Wickedness only what
they may call their own. 
Then, dear Sir, since that noble Conversation,
which you held with me at Tunbridge, in relation
to the Consequences, that might, had it not been
for God's Grace intervening, have follow'd the
Masquerade Affair, I have the Pleasure, the inexpressible
Pleasure, to find a thorough Reformation,
from the best Motives, taking Place; and your joining
with me in my Closet, (as Opportunity permits)
in my Evening Duties, is the charming Confirmation
of your kind, and voluntary, and, I am proud
to say, your pious Assurances! So that this makes
me fearless of your Displeasure, while I rather
triumph in my Joy, for your precious Soul's sake,
than presume to think of recriminating; and when,
(only this one time for all, and for ever) I take the
Liberty of looking back from the delightful Now,
to the painful Formerly! 

But, what a Rambler am I again! You command
me, Sir, to write to you all I think, without Fear. 
I obey, and, as the Phrase is, do it without either
Fear or Wit. 
If you are not displeas'd, it is a Mark of the true
Nobleness of your Nature, and the Sincerity of your
late pious Declarations. 
If you are, I shall be sure I have done wrong in
having apply'd a Corrosive to eat away the Proud
Flesh of a Wound, that is not yet so throughly digested,
as to bear a painful Application, and requires Balsam,
and a gentler Treatment. But when we were
at Bath, I remember what you said once of the
Benefit of Retrospection; and you charg'd me, when
ever a proper Opportunity offer'd, to remind you,
by that one Word, Retrospection, of the charming
Conversation we had there, on our Return from
the Rooms. 
If this be not one of those proper Opportunities,
forgive, dearest Sir, the Unseasonableness of your
very impertinent, but, in Intention, and Resolution, 
Ever dutiful,
P. B. 

