



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Thursday afternoon, Aug. 3. 
I am just now agreeably surprised by the following letter,
delivered into my hands by a messenger from
the lady. The letter she mentions, as inclosed (a) , I
have returned, without taking a copy of it. The contents
of it will soon be communicated to you, I presume, by
another way. They contain an absolute rejection of
thee—Poor Lovelace:— 


To John Belford, Esq;
Aug. 3. 
SIR,
You have frequently offered to oblige me in anything
that shall be within your power: And I have
such an opinion of you, as to be willing to hope you meant
me, at the times, more than mere compliment. 
I have therefore two requests to make to you; the first
I will now mention; the other, if this shall be comply'd
with, otherwise not. 
It behoves me to leave behind me such an account as
may clear up my conduct to several of my friends who will
not at present concern themselves about me: And Miss
Howe, and her mother, are very solicitous that I will
do so. 
I am apprehensive, that I shall not have time to do
this; and you will not wonder, that I have less and less inclination
to set about such a painful task; especially as I
find myself unable to look back with patience on what I
have suffered; and shall be too much discomposed by it,
to proceed with the requisite temper in a task of still greater
importance, which I have before me. 
It is very evident to me, that your wicked friend has
given you, from time to time, a circumstantial account of
all his behaviour to me, and devices against me; and you
have more than once assured me, that, both by writing
and speech, he has done my character all the justice I could
wish for. 
Now, Sir, if I may have a fair, a faithful specimen
from his letters or accounts to you, upon some of the most
interesting occasions, I shall be able to judge, whether there
will or will not be a necessity for me, for my honour's
sake, to enter upon the solicited task. 
You may be assured, from my inclosed answer to the
letter which Miss Montague has honoured me with (and
which you'll be pleased to return me as soon as read), that
it is impossible for me ever to think of your friend, in the
way I am importuned to think of him: He cannot therefore
receive any detriment from the requested specimen: 
And I give you my honour, that no use shall be made of
it to his prejudice, in Law, or otherwise. And that it 

may not, after I am no more, I assure you, that it is a
main part of my view, that the passages you shall oblige
me with shall be always in your own power, and not in
that of any other person. 
If, Sir, you think fit to comply with my request, the
passages I would wish to be transcribed (making neither
better nor worse of the matter), are those which he has
written to you, on or about the 7th and 8th of June,
when I was alarmed by the wicked pretence of a fire; and
what he was written from Sunday June 11. to the 19th. 
And in doing this you will much oblige 
Your humble Servant,
Cl. Harlowe. 
Now, Lovelace, since there are no hopes for thee of
her returning favour; Since some praise may lie for thy ingenuity,
having never offered (as more diminutive-minded
libertines would have done) to palliate thy crimes, by
aspersing the lady, or her sex; Since she may be made
easier by it; Since thou must fare better from thy own pen,
than from hers; and, finally, Since thy actions have manifested,
that thy letters are not the most guilty part of what
she knows of thee; I see not why I may not oblige her, upon
her honour, and under the restrictions, and for the reasons
she has given; and this without breach of the confidence
due to friendly communications; especially, as I might
have added, Since thou gloriest in thy pen, and in thy wickedness,
and canst not be ashamed. 
But, be this as it may, she will be obliged before thy
remonstrances or clamours against it can come; so, pr'ythee
now, make the best of it, and rave not; except for the
sake of a pretence against me, and to exercise thy talent
of execration! —And, if thou likest to do so for these reasons,
rave and welcome. 
I long to know what the second request is: But this I
know, that if it be any-thing less than cutting thy throat,
or endangering my own neck, I will certainly comply; and
be proud of having it in my power to oblige her. 
And now I am actually going to be busy in the Extracts. 