



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Well, but now my plots thicken; and my employment
of writing to thee on this subject will
soon come to a conclusion. For now, having got
the Licence; and Mrs. Townsend with her Tars being
to come to Hamstead next Wednesday or Thursday; 
and another Letter possibly or message from Miss
Howe, to enquire how Miss Harlowe does, upon
the Rustic's report of her ill health, and to express
her wonder that she has not heard from her in answer
to hers on her escape;—I must soon blow up the
Lady, or be blown up myself. And so I am preparing,
with Lady Betty and my Cousin Montague,
to wait upon my Beloved with a coach-and-four, or
a Set; for Lady Betty will not stir out with a pair,
for the world; tho' but for two or three miles. And
this is a well-known part of her character. 
But as to the arms and crest upon the coach and
trappings? 
Dost thou not know, that a Blunt's must supply
her, while her own is new-lining and repairing? An
opportunity she is willing to take now she is in Town. 
Nothing of this kind can be done to her mind in the
Country. Liveries nearly Lady Betty's. 
Thou hast seen Lady Betty Lawrance several times
—Hast thou not, Belford? 
No, never in my life. 
But thou hast; and lain with her too; or fame
does thee more credit than thou deservest—Why,
Jack, knowest thou not Lady Betty's other name? 

Other name! —Has she two? 
She has. And what thinkest thou of Lady Bab.
Wallis? 
O the devil! 
Now thou hast it. Lady Barbara, thou knowest,
lifted up in circumstances, and by pride, never appears
or produces herself, but on occasions special— 
To pass to men of Quality or Price, for a Duchess,
or Countess, at least. She has always been admired
for a grandeur in her air, that few women of Quality
can come up to: And never was supposed to be other
than what she passed for; tho' often and often a paramour
for Lords. 
And who, thinkest thou, is my Cousin Montague? 
Nay, how should I know? 
How indeed! Why, my little Johanetta Golding,
a lively, yet modest-looking girl, is my Cousin Montague. 
There, Belford, is an Aunt! —There's a Cousin! 
Both have wit at will. Both are accustomed to ape
Quality. Both are genteelly descended. Mistresses of
themselves; and well educated—Yet past pity. — 
True Spartan dames; ashamed of nothing but detection
—Always, therefore, upon their guard against
that. And in their own conceit, when assuming
top parts, the very Quality they ape. 
And how dost think I dress them out? —I'll tell
thee. 
Lady Betty in a rich gold Tissue, adorned with
Jewels of high price. 
My Cousin Montague in a pale pink, standing an
end with silver flowers of her own working. Charlotte,
as well as my Beloved, is admirable at her
needle. Not quite so richly jewel'd out as Lady Betty; 
but Ear-rings and Solitaire very valuable, and infinitely
becoming. 
Johanetta, thou knowest, has a good complexion,
a fine neck, and ears remarkably fine—So has Charlotte. 
She is nearly of Charlotte's stature too. 

Laces both, the richest that could be procured. 
Thou canst not imagine what a sum the Loan of
the Jewels cost me; tho' but for three days. 
This sweet girl will half ruin me. But seest thou
not by this time, that her reign is short? —It must be
so. And Mrs. Sinclair has already prepared everything
for her reception once more. 
* *
Here come the Ladies—Attended by Susan Morrison,
a tenant-farmer's daughter, as Lady Betty's
woman; with her hands before her, and thoroughly
instructed. 
How dress advantages women!—especially those,
who have naturally a genteel air and turn, and have
had education! 
Hadst thou seen how they paraded it—Cousin, and
Cousin, and Nephew, at every word; Lady Betty
bridling, and looking haughtily-condescending: Charlotte
galanting her fan, and swimming over the floor
without touching it. 
How I long to see my Niece-elect! cries one— 
For they are told, that we are not married; and are
pleased, that I have not put the slight upon them,
that they had apprehended from me. 
How I long to see my dear Cousin that is to be,
the other! 
Your La'ship, and your La'ship, and an aukward
courtesy at every address, prim Susan Morrison. 
Top your parts, ye villains! —You know how
nicely I distinguish. There will be no passion in this case
to blind the judgment, and to help on meditated delusion,
as when you engage with Titled sinners. My
Charmer is as cool and as distinguishing, tho' not
quite so learned in her own Sex, as I am. Your
commonly assumed dignity won't do for me now. 
Airs of superiority, as if born to rank. —But no overdo! 
—Doubting nothing. Let not your faces arraign
your hearts. 

Easy and unaffected! —Your very dresses will give
you pride enough. 
A little graver, Lady Betty. More significance,
less bridling in your dignity. 
That's the air! Charmingly hit—Again—You
have it. 
Devil take you! —Less arrogance. You are got
into airs of young Quality. Be less sensible of your
new Condition. People born to dignity command
respect without needing to require it. 
Now for your part, Cousin Charlotte!— 
Pretty well. But a little too frolicky that air— 
Yet have I prepared my Beloved to expect in you
both, great vivacity and quality-freedom. 
Curse those eyes! —Those glancings will never do. 
A down-cast bashful turn, if you can command it— 
Look upon me. Suppose Me now to be my Beloved. 
Devil take that Leer. Too significantly arch! — 
Once I knew you the girl I would now have you to
be. 
Sprightly, but not confident, Cousin Charlotte! — 
Be sure forget not to look down, or aside, when
looked at. When eyes meet eyes, be yours the retreating
ones. Your face will bear examination. 
O Lord! O Lord! that so young a creature can so
soon forget the innocent appearance she first charmed
by; and which I thought born with you all! —Five
years to ruin what Twenty had been building up! 
How natural the latter lesson! How difficult to regain
the former! 
A stranger, as I hope to be saved, to the principal
Arts of your Sex! —Once more, what-a-devil has
your heart to do in your eyes? 
Have I not told you, that my Beloved is a great
observer of the eyes? She once quoted upon me a
text (a) , which shewed me how she came by her 

knowlege. —Dorcas's were found guilty of treason
the first moment she saw her. 
Once more, suppose me to be my Charmer. —Now
you are to encounter my examining eye, and my
doubting heart— 
That's my dear! 
Study that Air in the pier-glass!— 
Charming! —Perfectly right! 
Your honours, now, devils!— 
Pretty well, Cousin Charlotte, for a young country
Lady! —Till form yields to familiarity, you may
courtesy low. You must not be supposed to have
forgot your boarding-school airs. 
But too low, too low, Lady Betty, for your years
and your quality. The common fault of your Sex
will be your danger: Aiming to be young too long! 
—The devil's in you all, when you judge of yourselves
by your wishes, and by your vanity! Fifty, in
that case, is never more than Fifteen. 
Graceful ease, conscious dignity, like that of my
Charmer, O how hard to hit! 
Both together now— 
Charming! —That's the Air, Lady Betty! —That's
the Cue, Cousin Charlotte, suited to the character of
each! —But, once more, be sure to have a guard
upon your Eyes. 
Never fear, Nephew!— 
Never fear, Cousin. 
A dram of Barbados each— 
And now we are gone— 