



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday Morning, Eight o'Clock. 
I am more and more displeased with Mr. Lovelace,
on reflection, for his boldness in hoping to make
me, tho' but passively, as I may say, testify to his great
untruth. And I shall like him still less for it, if his
view in it does not come out to be the hope of accelerating
my resolution in his favour, by the difficulty it
will lay me under as to my behaviour to him. He has
sent me his compliments by Dorcas, with a request
that I will permit him to attend me in the Dining-room; 
—perhaps, that he may guess from thence, whether I
will meet him in good humour, or not: But I have
answered, that as I shall see him at breakfast-time, I
desire to be excused. 
Ten o'Clock. 
I tried to adjust my countenance before I went
down, to an easier air than I had a heart, and was received
with the highest tokens of respect by the Widow,
and her two Nieces: Agreeable young women enough
in their persons; but they seemed to put on an air of
reserve; while Mr. Lovelace was easy and free to all,
as if he were of long acquaintance with them: Gracefully
enough, I cannot but say; an advantage which
travelled gentlemen have over other people. 

The Widow, in the conversation we had after
breakfast, gave us an account of the military merit of
the Colonel her Husband; and, upon this occasion,
put her handkerchief to her eyes twice or thrice. I hope,
for the sake of her sincerity, she wetted it, because she
would be thought to have done so; but I saw not that
she did. She wished that I might never know the loss
of a Husband so dear to me, as her beloved Colonel
was to her: And again she put her handkerchief to her
eyes. 
It must, no doubt, be a most affecting thing to be
separated from a good Husband, and to be left in difficult
circumstances besides, and that not by his fault,
and exposed to the insults of the base and ingrateful, as
she represented her case to be at his death. This moved
me a good deal in her favour. 
You know, my dear, that I have an open and free
heart; and, naturally, have as open and free a countenance; 
at least my complimenters have told me so. At
once, where I like, I mingle minds without reserve,
encouraging reciprocal freedoms, and am forward to
dissipate diffidences. But with those two Nieces of the
Widow I never can be intimate—I don't know why. 
Only, that circumstances, and what passed in conversation,
encouraged not the notion, or I should have
been apt to think, that the young Ladies and Mr. Lovelace
were of longer acquaintance than of yesterday. For
he, by stealth, as it were, cast glances sometimes at
them, which they returned; and, on my ocular notice,
their eyes fell, as I may say, under my eye, as if they
could not stand its examination. 
The Widow directed all her talk to me, as to Mrs.
Lovelace; and I, with a very ill grace, bore it. And
once she expressed, more forwardly than I thanked her
for, her wonder that any vow, any consideration, however
weighty, could have force enough with so charming
a couple, as she called him and me, to make us
keep separate beds. 

Their eyes, upon this hint, had the advantage of
mine. Yet was I not conscious of guilt. How know
I then, upon recollection, that my censures upon theirs
are not too rash? There are, no doubt, many truly
modest persons (putting myself out of the question)
who, by blushes at an injurious charge, have been suspected,
by those who cannot distinguish between the
confusion which guilt will be attended with, and the
noble consciousness that overspreads the face of a fine
spirit, to be thought but capable of an imputed evil. 
The great Roman, as we read, who took his surname
from one part in three (the fourth not then discovered)
of the world he had triumphed over, being
charged with a mean crime to his soldiery, chose rather
to suffer exile (the punishment due to it, had he been
found guilty) than to have it said, that Scipio was
questioned in public, on so scandalous a charge. And
think you, my dear, that Scipio did not blush with indignation,
when the charge was first communicated to
him? 
Mr. Lovelace, when the Widow expressed her forward
wonder, looked sly and leering, as if to observe
how I took it; and said, they might take notice that
his regard for my will and pleasure (calling me his dear
creature) had greater force upon him, than the oath by
which he had bound himself. 
Rebuking both him and the Widow, I said, It was
strange to me to hear an oath or vow so lightly treated,
as to have it thought but of second consideration, whatever
were the first. 
The observation was just, Miss Martin said; for
that nothing could excuse the breaking of a solemn vow,
be the occasion of making it what it would. 
I asked after the nearest church; for I have been too
long a stranger to the sacred worship. They named St.
James's, St. Anne's, and another in Bloomsbury; and
the two Nieces said, they oftenest went to St. James's
church, because of the good company, as well as for the
excellent preaching. 

Mr. Lovelace said, the Royal Chapel was the place
he oftenest went to, when in town. Poor man! little
did I expect to hear he went to any place of devotion. 
I asked, If the presence of the visible king of, comparatively,
but a small territory, did not take off, too generally,
the requisite attention to the service of the invisible
King and Maker of a thousand worlds? 
He believed this might be so with such as came for
curiosity, when the Royal Family were present. But
otherwise, he had seen as many contrite faces at the
Royal Chapel, as any-where else: And why not? Since
the people about Courts have as deep scores to wipe off,
as any people what whatsoever. 
He spoke this with so much levity, that I could not
help saying, that nobody questioned but he knew how
to chuse his company. 
Your servant, my dear, bowing, were his words; 
and turning to them, You will observe, upon numberless
occasions, Ladies, as we are further acquainted,
that my Beloved never spares me upon these topics. But
I admire her as much in her reproofs, as I am fond of
her approbation. 
Miss Horton said, There was a time for every-thing. 
She could not but say, that she thought innocent mirth
was mighty becoming in young people. 
Very true, joined in Miss Martin. And Shakespeare
says well, That youth is the spring of life, The
bloom of gaudy years [With a theatrical air she spoke
it]: And, for her part, she could not but admire in my
spouse, that charming vivacity which so well suited his
time of life. 
Mr. Lovelace bowed. The man is fond of praise. 
More fond of it, I doubt, than of deserving it. Yet
this sort of praise he does deserve. He has, you know,
an easy free manner, and no bad voice: And this praise
so expanded his gay heart, that he sung the following
lines from Congreve, as he told us they were: 


Youth does a thousand pleasures bring,
 Which from decrepit Age will fly;
Sweets that wanton in the bosom of the spring,
 In winter's cold embraces die.
And this for a compliment, as he said, to the two
Nieces. Nor was it thrown away upon them. They
encored it; and his compliance fixed them in my memory. 
We had some talk about meals; and the Widow
very civilly offered to conform to any rules I would
set her. I told her, how easily I was pleased, and how
much I chose to dine by myself, and that from a plate
sent me from any single dish. But I will not trouble
you, my dear, with such particulars. 
They thought me very singular; and with reason: 
But as I liked them not so very well as to forego my
own choice in compliment to them, I was the less
concerned for what they thought. —And still the less,
as Mr. Lovelace had put me very much out of humour
with him. 
They, however, cautioned me against melancholy. 
I said, I should be a very unhappy creature if I could
not bear my own company. 
Mr. Lovelace said, That he must let the Ladies into
my Story; and then they would know how to allow
for my ways. But, my dear, as you love me, said the
confident wretch, give as little way to melancholy as
possible. Nothing but the sweetness of your temper,
and your high notions of a duty that never can be
deserved where you place it, can make you so uneasy
as you are. —Be not angry, my dear Love, for saying
so [seeing me frown, I suppose]: And snatched my
hand, and kissed it. 
I left him with them; and retired to my closet and
my pen. 
Just as I have written thus far, I am interrupted by
a message from him, that he is setting out on a journey, 

and desires to take my commands. —So here I will leave
off, to give him a meeting in the Dining-room. 
* *
I was not displeased to see him in his riding-dress. 
He seemed desirous to know how I liked the gentlewomen
below. I told him, that altho' I did not think
them very exceptionable; yet as I wanted not, in my
present situation, new acquaintance, I should not be
fond of cultivating theirs. 
&dotup;He urged me still further on this head. 
&dotup;I could not say, I told him, that I greatly liked
either of the young gentlewomen, any more than
their Aunt: And that were my situation ever so
happy, they had much too gay a turn for me. 
&dotup;He did not wonder, he said, to hear me say so. 
He knew not any of the Sex who had been accustomed
to shew themselves at the Town Diversions and
Amusements, that would appear tolerable to me. 
Silence and Blushes, Madam, are now no graces with
our fine Ladies in Town. Hardened by frequent
public appearances, they would be as much ashamed
to be found guilty of these weaknesses, as men. 
&dotup;Do you defend these two gentlewomen, Sir, by
reflections upon half the Sex? But you must second
me, Mr. Lovelace (and yet I am not fond of being
thought particular) in my desire of breakfasting and
supping (when I do sup) by myself.&dotup; 
If I would have it so, to be sure it should be so. The
people of the house were not of consequence enough to
be apologized to, in any point where my pleasure was
concerned. And if I should dislike them still more on
further knowlege of them, he hoped I would think of
some other lodgings. 
He expressed a good deal of regret at leaving me, declaring,
that it was absolutely in obedience to my commands: 
But that he could not have consented to go,
while my Brother's schemes were on foot, if I had not
done him the credit of my countenance in the report he 

had made that we were married; which, he said, had
bound all the family to his interest, so that he could
leave me with the greater security and satisfaction. 
He hoped, he said, that on his return I would name
his happy day; and the rather as I might be convinced,
by my Brother's projects, that no Reconciliation was to
be expected. 
I told him, that perhaps I might write one Letter to
my Uncle Harlowe. He once loved me. I should be
easier when I had made one direct application. I might
possibly propose such terms, in relation to my Grandfather's
Estate, as might procure me their attention; 
and I hoped he would be long enough absent to give
me time to write to him, and receive an answer from
him. 
That, he must beg my pardon, he could not promise. 
He would inform himself of Singleton's and my Brother's
motions; and if on his return he found no reason
for apprehension, he would go directly to Berks, and
endeavour to bring up with him his Cousin Charlotte,
who, he hoped, would induce me to give him an earlier
Day, than at present I seemed to think of. —I seemed to
think of, my dear! —Very acquiescent, as I should imagine!— 
I told him, that I should take that young Lady's
company for a great favour. 
I was the more pleased with this motion, as it came
from himself, and with no ill grace. 
He earnestly pressed me to accept of a Bank Note: 
But I declined it. And then he offered me his servant
William for my attendant in his absence; who, he
said, might be dispatched to him, if any-thing extraordinary
fell out. I consented to that. 
He took his leave of me in the most respectful manner,
only kissing my hand. He left the Bank Note,
unobserved by me, upon the table. You may be sure,
I shall give it him back at his return. 
I am now in a much better humour with him than I
was. 

Where doubts of any person are removed, a mind
not ungenerous is willing, by way of amends for having
conceived those doubts, to construe every-thing that
happens capable of a good construction, in that person's
favour. Particularly, I cannot but be pleased to observe,
that altho' he speaks of the Ladies of his family with
the freedom of Relationship, yet it is always with tenderness. 
And from a man's kindness to his relations of
the Sex, a woman has some reason to expect his good
behaviour to herself, when married, if she be willing to
deserve it from him. 
And thus, my dear, am I brought to sit down satisfied
with this man, where I find room to infer that
he is not by nature a savage. &dotup;But how could a creature
who (treating herself unpolitely) gave a man an
opportunity to run away with her, expect to be
treated by that man with a very high degree of politeness? 
&dotup;But why, now, when fairer prospects seem to
open, why these melancholy reflections, will my beloved
friend ask of her Clarissa? 
&dotup;Why? Can you ask why, my dearest Miss Howe,
of a creature, who, in the world's eye, has enrolled
her name among the giddy and the inconsiderate; 
who labours under a Parent's curse, and the cruel uncertainties
which must arise from reflecting, that,
equally against duty and principle, she has thrown
herself into the power of a man, and that man an
immoral one? —Must not the sense she has of her inconsideration
darken her most hopeful prospects? Must
it not even rise strongest upon a thoughtful mind,
when her hopes are the fairest? Even her pleasures,
were the man to prove better than she expects, coming
to her with an abatement, like that which persons
who are in possession of ill-gotten wealth must then
most poignantly experience (if they have reflecting
and unseared minds) when, all their wishes answered,
(if the wishes of such persons can ever be wholly answered) 

they sit down in hopes to enjoy what they
have unjustly obtained, and find their own reflections
their greatest torment.&dotup; 
May you, my dear friend, be always happy in your
reflections, prays 
Your ever-affectionate
Cl. Harlowe. 
Mr. Lovelace, in his next Letter, triumphs on his having
carried his two great points of making the Lady yield
to pass for his wife to the people of the house, and to
his taking up his Lodging in it, tho' but for one
night. He is now, he says, in a fair way, and doubts
not but that he shall soon prevail, if not by persuasion,
by surprize. Yet he pretends to have some little
remorse, and censures himself as acting the part of
the grand tempter. But having succeeded thus far,
he cannot, he says, forbear trying, according to the
resolution he had before made, whether he cannot go
farther. 
He gives the particulars of their debates on the above-mentioned
subjects, to the same effect as in the Lady's
last Letters. 
It will by this time be seen, that his whole merit, with regard
to this Lady, lies in doing justice to her excellencies
both of mind and person, tho' to his own condemnation. 
Thus he begins his succeeding Letter: 

And now, Belford, will I give thee an account of
our first breakfast conversation. 
All sweetly serene and easy was the lovely brow and
charming aspect of my goddess, on her descending among
us; commanding reverence from every eye; a courtesy
from every knee; and silence, awful silence, from every
quivering lip: While she, armed with conscious worthiness
and superiority, looked and behaved, as an Empress
would look and behave among her vassals; yet
with a freedom from pride and haughtiness, as if born
to dignity, and to a behaviour habitually gracious. 

He takes notice of the jealousy, pride and vanity of Sally
Martin and Polly Horton, on his respectful behaviour
to the Lady: Creatures who, brought up too high for
their fortunes, and to a taste of pleasure, and the public
diversions, had fallen an easy prey to his seducing
Arts (as will be seen in the conclusion of this work): 
And who, as he observes, ‘had not yet got over that
distinction in their Love, which makes a woman
prefer one man to another.’ 
How difficult is it, says he, to make a woman subscribe
to a preference against herself, though ever so
visible; especially where Love is concern'd! This violent,
this partial little devil, Sally, has the insolence to
compare herself with my angel—yet owns her to be an
angel. I charge you, Mr. Lovelace, says she, shew
none of your extravagant acts of kindness before me, to
this sullen, this gloomy Beauty—I cannot bear it. 
Then was I reminded of her first sacrifice. 
What a rout do these women make about nothing
at all! Were it not for what the learned Bishop in his
Letter from Italy calls The Entanglements of Amour,
and I the Delicacies of Intrigue, what is there, Belford,
in all they can do for us? 
How do these creatures endeavour to stimulate me! 
A fallen woman is a worse devil than even a profligate
man. The former is incapable of remorse: That am
not I—Nor ever shall they prevail upon me, though
aided by all the powers of darkness, to treat this admirable
creature with indignity. —So far, I mean, as indignity
can be separated from the trials which will prove
her to be either woman or angel. 
Yet with them, I am a craven. I might have had
her before now, if I would. If I would treat her as
flesh and blood, I should find her such. They thought
I knew, if any man living did, that if a man made a
goddess of a woman, she would assume the goddess; 
that if power were given her, she would exert that 

power to the giver, if to nobody else—And D&wblank;r's
wife is thrown into my dish, who, thou knowest,
kept her ceremonious husband at haughty distance, and
whined in private to her insulting footman. O how
I cursed the blaspheming wretches! They will make
me, as I tell them, hate their house, and remove from
it. And by my soul, Jack, I am ready at times to
think that I should not have brought her hither, were
it but on Sally's account. And yet, without knowing
either Sally's heart, or Polly's, the dear creature resolves
against having any conversation with them but such as
she cannot avoid. I am not sorry for this, thou mayst
think; since jealousy in woman is not to be concealed
from woman. And Sally has no command of herself. 
&dotup;What dost think! —Here this little devil Sally,
not being able, as she told me, to support life under
my displeasure, was going into a fit: But when I saw
her preparing for it, I went out of the room; and so
she thought it would not be worth her while to shew
away. 
&dotup;In this manner he mentions what his meaning was in
making the Lady the compliment of his absence: 
&dotup;As to leaving her; if I go but for one night, I have
fulfilled my promise: And if she think not, I can
mutter and grumble, and yield again, and make a
merit of it; and then, unable to live out of her presence,
soon return. Nor are women ever angry at
bottom for being disobeyed thro' excess of Love. 
They like an uncontroulable passion. They like to
have every favour ravished from them; and to be
eaten and drunk quite up by a voracious Lover. Don't
I know the Sex? —Not so, indeed, as yet, my Clarissa: 
But however, with her my frequent egresses
will make me look new to her, and create little busy
scenes between us. At the least, I may surely, without
exception salute her at parting, and at return; 
and will not those occasional freedoms (which civility 

will warrant) by degrees familiarize my charmer to
them? 
&dotup;But here, Jack, what shall I do with my Uncle
and Aunts, and all my loving Cousins? For I understand,
that they are more in haste to have me married
than I am myself.&dotup; 