



Lady Betty Lawrance, To Miss Cl. Harlowe. 

Saturday, July 1. 
Dear Madam,
I find, that all is not as it should be between you and
my Nephew Lovelace. It will very much afflict
me, and all his friends, if he has been guilty of any designed
baseness to a Lady of your character and merit. 
We have been long in expectation of an opportunity
to congratulate you and ourselves upon an event
most earnestly wished for by us all; since all our hopes
of him are built upon the power you have over him: 
For if ever man adored a woman, he is that man,
and you, Madam, are that woman. 
Miss Montague, in her last Letter to me, in answer
to one of mine, enquiring if she knew, from him,
whether he could call you his, or was likely soon to
have that honour, has these words: ‘I know not
what to make of my Cousin Lovelace, as to the
point your Ladyship is so earnest about. He sometimes
says, He is actually married to Miss Cl. Harlowe: 
At other times, that it is her own fault if he
be not. —He speaks of her not only with Love, but
with Reverence: Yet owns, that there is a misunderstanding
between them; but confesses, that she is
wholly faultless. An angel, and not a woman, he
says she is: And that no man living can be worthy
of her.’— 
This is what my Niece Montague writes. 
God grant, my dearest young Lady, that he may
not have so heinously offended you, that you cannot
forgive him! If you are not already married, and refuse
to be his, I shall lose all hopes that he ever will
marry, or be the man I wish him to be. So will Lord
M. So will Lady Sarah Sadleir. 
I will now answer your questions: But indeed I
hardly know what to write, for fear of widening still 

more the unhappy difference between you. But yet
such a young Lady must command every-thing from
me. This then is my answer. 
I wrote not any Letter to him on or about the 7th
of June. 
Neither I nor my Steward know such a man as
Capt. Tomlinson. 
I wrote not to my Niece to meet me at Reading,
nor to accompany me to my Cousin Leeson's in
town. 
My Chancery-affair, tho' like most Chancery-affairs,
it be of long standing, is nevertheless now
in so good a way, that it cannot give me occasion
to go to town. 
Nor have I been in town these six months: Nor at
Hamstead for several years. 
Neither shall I have any temptation to go to town,
except to pay my congratulatory compliments to
Mrs. Lovelace. On which occasion I should go
with the greatest pleasure; and should hope for
the favour of your accompanying me to Glenham-Hall,
for a month at least. 
Be what will the reason of your enquiry, let me entreat
you, my dear young Lady, for Lord M's sake; 
for my sake; for this giddy man's sake, soul as well
as body; and for all our family's sakes; not to
suffer this answer to widen differences so far as to make
you refuse him, if he already has not the honour of
calling you his; as I am apprehensive he has not, by
your signing by your family-name. 
And here let me offer to you my mediation to compose
the difference between you, be it what it will. 
You cause, my dear young Lady, cannot be put into
the hands of any-body living more devoted to your
service, than into those of 
Your sincere Admirer, and humble Servant,
Eliz. Lawrance. 