


Lady Grandison, To Mrs. Shirley. 


London, Friday, March 2. 
Again, my ever-honoured grandmamma, does
your Harriet resume the pen. Lucy and my
aunt, between them, have given you an account of
every-thing that passed since my last. 
We arrived last night. With what tenderness did
the best of men, and of husbands, receive his Harriet,
and her friends! 
This afternoon, at tea, I am to be presented to
Lady Clementina at Lord L's. Don't you believe my
heart throbs with expectation? Indeed it does. Sir
Charles says, her emotions are as great on the occasion. 
What honour does my dear Sir Charles do to his
Harriet! He consults her, as if he doubted his own
judgment, and wanted to have it confirmed by hers. 
What happiness is hers, who marries a good man! 
Such a one will do obliging things for principle's sake:
He will pity involuntary failings: He will do justice to 

good intentions, and give importance to all his fellow-creatures,
because he knows they and he are equally
creatures of the Almighty. What woman, who thinks,
but will prefer a good man to all others, however
distinguished by rank, fortune, or person? But my
Sir Charles is a good man, and distinguished by all
those advantages. What a creature should I be, blessed
with a husband of a heart so faithful, and so well-principled,
if I were not able to let my Love and
compassion flow to a Clementina, tho' once (and indeed
for that very reason) the only beloved of his
heart! —Why are not real calls made upon me, to
convince such a man, that I have a mind emulative
of his own, at least of Clementina's? The woman
who, from motives of Religion, having the heart of a
Sir Charles Grandison in her hand, loving him above all
earthly creatures, and all her friends consenting, could
refuse him her vows, must be, in that act, the greatest,
the most magnanimous, of women. But could the
noble Lady have thus acted, my dear grandmamma,
had not she been stimulated by that glorious Enthusiasm,
of which her disturbed imagination had
shewn some previous tokens; and which, rightly directed,
has heretofore given the palm of martyrdom
to Saints? 
We have just now been welcomed to town by Sir
Edward Beauchamp. Sir Charles, on presenting him
to me, thus expressed himself: You remember, my
dearest Life, what I wrote to you of the last part of
the conversation between Sir Edward and me, in relation
to my Emily. Your prudence, my Harriet,
and love of the good girl; your discretion and
generosity, Sir Edward; will join you together as
counsellors and advisers of your Grandison. My Wife
and my Friend cannot err in this instance, because
you will both consider what belongs to the characters
of a Guardian, and a Ward so beloved by you both; 
and, if you doubt, have Dr. Bartlett at hand. 

My uncle, aunt, and Lucy, are determined to set
out next Wednesday for Northamptonshire. Sir Edward
desired to know of Sir Charles, If he had any
objection to his attending them down? None at all,
surely, was Sir Charles's answer. 
Mr. Deane accompanies them, in order to adjust
some matters at Peterborough, preparative to the favour
he does us of settling with us or near us, for the
remainder of his days. May that remainder be long
and happy! 
Sir Charles asked Emily just now, If she held her
mind, as to going down? Indeed she did, she said:
Her heart was in it; and she would go that instant to
acquaint her mother with her intention, and to buy
some things preparatory to her journey: She should
take it for a great favour, she told Lucy, if she would
go with her on both occasions. 
Lucy has made to herself a great interest in Emily's
heart. They are both sure they shall be happy in
each other. My aunt loves her: So does my uncle. 
Who does not? I am sure you-will, my dear grandmamma,
and pity her too. Dear pretty soul! She
costs me now-and-then a tear. But had I not been
in her way, it would have been worse. She could
have no hope: I am sure she knows she could not. 
But what a sad gradation is there in that Love, which,
tho' begun in hopelesness of succeeding, rises by self-flattery,
to a possibility, then to probability, to hope;
and, sinking again to hopelesness, ends in despair! — 
But how coolly I write on, for one who is by-and-by
to see a Clementina! 
I am waiting Sir Charles's kind leisure to carry me
to Lady L's. He has Mr. Lowther with him just
now; who, however, finding us engaged, will not stay. 
Sir Charles approved my dress, as he passed by me
to go to Mr. Lowther in the Study. He snatched my
hand, and pressed it with his lips: My ever-lovely, 

my ever-considerate Harriet, you want no ornaments:
But I was sure you would not give yourself any but
those that flowed from a compassionate and generous
heart, when you were to visit a Lady who at present
is not in happy circumstances; yet is intitled by merit,
as well as rank, to be in the happiest. 
My aunt and Lucy long for my return, to have an
account of the Lady, and what passes between us. 
How my heart—What is the matter with my heart? 

