


Miss Lucy Selby, To Lady Grandison.
[Inclosed in the preceding.] 


Thursday, April 3. 
Every hour in the day some circumstance or
other makes me wish my dear Lady Grandison
in Northamptonshire. Emily charms us all—But
still every object reminds us of our Harriet. Not that
Harriet alone would content us now. Nor could Sir
Charles and Lady Grandison be at this time spared by
their noble guests. After all therefore, every-thing 

is best as it is. But indeed we all wished for you yesterday
evening, most particularly, at Shirley-manor. The
conversation was an interesting one to all us girls; 
and Emily, Nancy, and our cousin Holles's, have
brought me to give you an account of it, and to appeal
to you upon it; and through you to Lady G. And
yet we are all of us more than half afraid of a Lady,
who has already treated but lightly a subject that
young women think of high importance. 
The conversation began with my cousin Kitty's
greatly pitying Lady Clementina; describing, in her
pathetic way, the struggles she had had between her
first duties and her inclination; the noble preference
she had given to the former; and the persecution,
as she called it, of all her friends to induce her to
marry when she chose to live single all her life. 
Every one of us young folks joined with my cousin
Kitty. 
But your grandmamma Shirley could not, she said,
perfectly agree with us in the hardship of Lady Clementina's
situation; who having from noble motives
spontaneously rejected the man of her choice, was, from
reasons of family convenience, and even of personal
happiness, urged to marry a nobleman, who, by all
accounts, is highly deserving and agreeable, and everyway
suitable to her: A man, in short, to whom she
pretended not an aversion; nor hoped nor wished to
be the wife of any other man; proposing to herself
only the Single Life, and having given up all thoughts
of taking the veil. 
Personal happiness! cried out Miss Kitty Holles:
Can the woman be happy in a second choice, whose
first was Sir Charles Grandison? 
And whom, for noble motives, she refused, said
my aunt Selby, remember that, Kitty; and whom she
wished to be, and who actually is, the husband of another
woman. 
The girls looked at one another: But Mrs. Shirley
speaking, they were all silent. 

The happiness of human Life, my dears, replied
your grandmamma, is at best but comparative. The
utmost we should hope for here, is such a situation, as,
with a self-approving mind, will carry us best through
this present scene of trial: Such a situation, as, all
circumstances considered, is, upon the whole, most
eligible for us, tho' some of its circumstances may be
disagreeable. 
Young people set out with false notions of happiness; 
gay, fairy-land imaginations; and when these
schemes prove unattainable, sit down in disappointment
and dejection. Tell me now, Kitty Holles,
and speak freely, my Love [She would not address
herself to some of us for a reason I, your Lucy, for
one, need not give] we are all friends; the gravest
of us have been young; tell us, Kitty, your ideas of
happiness for a young woman just setting out in Life. 
Poor Emily answered only with a sudden blush, and
a half-stifled sigh: But all the rest, as with one voice,
cried out, Harriet, our Harriet, is the happy woman— 
To be married to the man of her choice; The man
chosen by her friends, and applauded by all the world. 
And so, said Mrs. Selby, as there is but one Sir
Charles Grandison in the world, were his scheme of
Protestant Nunneries put in execution, all the rest of
womankind, who had seen him with distinction, might
retire into cloisters. 
Were men to form themselves by his example,
said Emily [No unfavourable hint for Sir Edward]— 
There she stopt. 
Besides, said I (my own case in view) when our
eye has led our choice, imagination can easily add all
good qualities to the plausible appearance. But to
give our hand where we cannot give a preference, is
surely, madam, acting against conscience in the most
important article of Life. 
A preference we ought to give, my Lucy: But
need this be the preference of giddy inclination? No 

aversion pre-supposed, will not reason and duty give
this preference in a securer and nobler way to the man
who, upon the whole, is most suitable to us? It is
well known, that I was always for discouraging our
Harriet's declarations, that she never would be the
wife of any other man than him she is now so happy
as to call hers. If (as we all at one time apprehended)
our hopes had been absolutely impracticable, the
noble Countess of D. who gave such convincing reasons
on her side of the question (a) , would have had
my good wishes for the Earl of D. So, before him, had
not ill health been an objection, would Mr. Orme. 
You all know, that I wished but to live to see my
Harriet the wife of some worthy man. A single
woman is too generally an undefended, unsupported
creature. Her early connexions, year by year, drop
off; no new ones arise; and she remains solitary
and unheeded, in a busy bustling world; perhaps
soured to it by her unconnected state. Is not some gratitude
due to a worthy man, who early offers himself
for her guide and protector through Life? Gratitude
was the motive even of Harriet's inclination at first. 
Nancy smiled. Why smiles my Nancy? asked
your smiling grandmamma. I am sure you think,
child, there is weight in what I said. 
Indeed, madam, there is—Great weight—But just
as you gave us an idea of the dreary unconnected Life
of a single woman in years, I thought of poor Mrs.
Penelope Arby. You all know her. I saw her in
imagination, surrounded with parrots and lap-dogs! — 
So spring-like at past fifty, with her pale pink Lustring,
and back head—Yet so peevish at girls!— 
And she, resumed Mrs. Shirley, refused some good
offers in her youth, out of dread of the tyranny of
a husband, and the troublesomeness of a parcel of
Brats! —Yet now she is absolutely governed by a favourite
maid, and as full of the Bon-most of her parrots, 

as I used to be of yours, my Loves, when you
were prattlers. 
Yet let us not, said Mrs. Selby, with the insolence
of Matrons or Brides-expectant, be too severe upon
Old Maids. Lady G. surely is faulty in this particular. 
Many worthy and many happy persons in that
class, have I known: Many amiable and useful in society,
even to their latest age—You, madam, to Mrs.
Shirley had a friend—Mrs. Eggleton. 
I had, my dear Mrs. Selby—Never has any length
of time, any variety of scene, at all effaced the dear
idea, tho' she died many years ago. She never married; 
but that was not her own fault. She was addressed
when near twenty, by a young gentleman of
unexceptionable character. She received his addresses,
on condition that both their friends approved of them. 
She was a visiter in town. The relations of both
lived in the country. The young couple loved each
other: But neither of their families, when consulted,
approving the match, to the great regret of both,
it was broken off. The gentleman married, and was
not unhappy. In three or four years, another worthy
man made his addresses to Mrs. Eggleton. All
her friends approved. She found him deserving of
her affection, and agreed to reward his merit. He was
to make one voyage to the Indies, on prospects too
great to be neglected, and on his return they were to
be married. His voyage was prosperous to the extent
of all his wishes. He landed in his native country; 
flew to his belowed mistress. She received his
visit with grateful joy. It was his last visit. He was
taken ill of a violent fever; died in a few days, delirious,
but blessing her. 
She and I have talked over the subject we are
upon a hundred times. In those days I was young,
and had my romantic notions. 
Indeed, madam! said Patty Holles. Indeed, madam!
said Emily—Dear, dear madam, said Kitty 

Holles, if it be not too bold a request, let us hear
what they were. 
The reading in fashion when I was young, was Romances. 
You, my children, have, in that respect,
fallen into happier days. The present age is greatly
obliged to the authors of the Spectators. But till I became
acquainted with my dear Mrs. Eggleton, which
was about my sixteenth year, I was over-run with
the absurdities of that unnatural kind of writing. 
And how long, madam, did they hold? 
Not till I was quite twenty. That good Lady
cured me of so false a taste: But till she did, I had
very high ideas of first impressions; of eternal constancy; 
of Love raised to a pitch of idolatry. In
these dispositions, not more than nineteen, was my
dear Mr. Shirley proposed to me, as a person whose
character was faultless; his offers advantageous. I
had seen him in company two or three times, and
looked upon him merely as a good sort of man; a
sensible man—But what was a good sort of man to
an Oroondates? He had paid no addresses to me: He
applied to my friends on a foot of propriety and prudence. 
They laid no constraint upon me. I consulted
my own heart—But, my dear girls, what a
temptation have you thrown in the way of narrative
old age! 
All of us most eagerly besought her to go on. 
The excellent Mrs. Eggleton knew my heart better
than I did myself. Even now, said she, you dislike
not this worthy man. You can make no reasonable
objection to his offer. You are one of many
Sisters [We were then a numerous family—Alas!
how many dear friends have I out-lived!] A match
so advantageous for you, will be of real benefit to
your whole family. Esteem, heightened by Gratitude,
and enforced by Duty, continued she, will soon ripen
into Love: The only sort of Love that suits this imperfect
state; a tender, a saithful affection. There 

is a superior ardor due only to Supreme perfection,
and only to be exercised by us mortal creatures in
humble devotion. My dear Henrietta, concluded she,
condescend to be happy in such a way as suits this mortal
state. 
I replied to her, with distress of mind, proceeded
Mrs. Shirley, that I could not depend on my own
sentiments. I had seen little of the world. Suppose,
after I have vowed Love to a man quite indifferent
to me, I should meet with the very one, the kindred
soul, who must irresistably claim my whole heart? I
will not suspect myself of any possibility of misconduct,
where the duty and the crime would be so
glaring; but must I not, in such a case, be for
ever miserable? 
The mild Mrs. Eggleton did not chide: She only
argued with me. Often afterwards did I with delight,
repeat this conversation to the best of men, my dear
Mr. Shirley, when a length of happy years had verified
all she said. 
Dear madam, cried Kitty, tell us how she argued,
or we shall all remain on your side of the question. 
O my children! said the venerable parent, in what
talkativeness do you engage me! 
I fear, Henrietta, said Mrs. Eggleton, that tho'
you are a good Christian, your opinions in this point
are a little heathenish. You look upon Love as a
blind irresistable Deity, whose darts fly at random,
and admit neither defence nor cure. Consider the
matter, my dear, in a more reasonable light. The
passions are intended for our servants, not our masters,
and we have, within us, a power of controuling them,
which it is the duty and the business of our lives to
exert. You will allow this readily in the case of any
passion that poets and romance-writers have not set
off with their false colourings. To instance in anger;
Will my Henrietta own, that she thinks it probable,
anger should ever transport her beyond the bounds of
duty? 

I pleaded, that I was not naturally of an angry
temper; and was asked with a smile, whether I meant
by that distinction, to own myself of a loving one. 
I could not be angry with my good Mrs. Eggleton; 
yet I remember I was vexed to the heart. 
But why then, rejoined she, should you think yourself
more likely to fall in Love after you are married,
than before? 
At least, said I, a little peevishly, let me stay till
I am in Love, as you are pleased to call it, before I
marry. 
I would not by any means, replied she, have you
marry a man for whom you have not a preferable
inclination; but why may you not find, on admitting
Mr. Shirley's addresses, young, agreeable, worthy,
and every way suitable to you, as he is, that
he is that man whom your inclination can approve? 
I never saw him yet, said I, with the least emotion. 
I have no aversion to him: I might esteem
him: But what is that to the Love one is so solemnly
to vow a husband? And should I, after that
vow, behold an object whom I could indeed have
loved?— 
A Duke de Nemours! said she, taking up the
Princess of Cleves, that unluckily lay on my table— 
Ah my Henrietta, have I found you out! —That
princess, my dear, was a silly woman. Her story
is written with dangerous elegance; but the whole
foundation of her distresses was an idle one. To fansy
herself in Love with a mere stranger, because he
appeared agreeable at a Ball, when she lived happily
with a worthy husband, was mistaking mere Liking
for Love, and combating all her Life after with a
chimera of her own creating. I do not tell you it
is impossible for you meet hereafter with persons in
some external accomplishments superior to the deserving
man whose wish is to make you happy: But will
you suffer your eye to lead you into misery then, when 

an additional tie of duty forbids its wandering? If so,
I must suppose it would equally mislead you now. 
Tell me, Henrietta, What think you of those girls,
who blast all the hopes of their fond parents, by eloping
with a well-drest captain, a spruce dancing-master,
or a handsome player? 
She struck me dumb with shame. 
You see then, my dear, the filial duty, the duty
of a reasonable and modest woman, were she even
without parents or friends, forbids fancy to be her
guide, as much as the sacred engagement of marriage
forbids it to be her tormenter. 
But have there not been instances, said I; do not
you and I know one [We did] in this neighbourhood,
where a truly good woman was made miserable
for years, by having her heart and hand differently
engaged? 
Mrs. Eggleton reminded me, that there were, in
that case, such extremely particular circumstances, as
made it absurd to form from thence a general judgment. 
In almost every thing, said she, we act but
upon probabilities; and one exception out of a thousand
ought never to determine us. Even this exception
in the case you hint at, is owing, in some measure,
to a pitiably misguided imagination. Let us take our
rules, my dear, from plain common sense, and not
from poetical refinements. 
Say, my children, said the condescending parent,
did my friend argue well? 
I think, madam, answered Kitty, she argued poor
Love out of doors. She did not seem to allow the
possibility of any persons being in Love at all. 
I told her so, replied my grandmamma. 
So far from it, said she, with a sigh, and a look
expressive of the softest tenderness, that my own affections,
as you know, were deeply engaged. The
amiable youth, to whom I was to be united by marriage,
died. His memory will ever be dear to my 

heart. Love authorized by reasonable prospects; 
Love guided and heightened by duty, is every-thing
excellent that poets have said of it: Yet even this
Love must submit to the awful dispensations of Providence,
whether of death or other disappointment; 
and such trials ought to be met with chearful resignation,
and not to be the means of embittering our
lives, or of rendering them useless: And every thing
we ought to do, be assured, my dear, we shall be
enabled to do, if we set about it rightly, and with
equal humility and trust. As for that kind of Love,
which in its very beginning is contrary to Duty, to suppose
that unconquerable, is making ourselves wretched
indeed: And for first-sight impressions, and beginning
inclinations, though always dangerous, and often
guilty to indulge, they are absolutely trifles to overcome
and suppress, to a person of prudence and
virtue. 
How we dwelt upon every sweet document that
fell from the lips of the dear Mrs. Shirley! 
But now, Harriet, for the appeals. After all, were
you, or were you not, a romantic girl, when you declared,
that you never would be the wife of any man
living, if you were not Sir Charles Grandison's; even
at the time when neither you nor we thought there
could be any hopes of such a happy event?— 
But had we not, however, better appeal to Lady G.
than to you? You were always so wise! —Yet you
could not be contented with the worthy Orme. You
knew, instinctively, as I may say, that your kindred
mind dwelt in St. James's Square. And Lady G.
forty years hence, will be looking back, I suppose, with
wonder, on the time when she gave her then fair
hand of swan-skin, changed to buff [Her own flighty
idea!] with reluctance, to her deserving Lord. So,
perhaps, we had best make no appeals at all. If we
did, neither you nor she are at leisure now to answer
them. Yet we have one appeal more to make; but 

it must be to our Harriet; not to Lady G. —Was
not even our venerable parent a little too severe upon
Old Maids? That wicked Nancy fell a laughing— 
Does she know what may be her own case? Here is
a great parcel of girls of us—Have not I, her Elder,
been crossed in Love already? But if no proper match
ever offers, must we take an improper one, to avoid
the ridicule of a mere name? An unsupported state is
better than an oppressed, a miserable one, however:
And how many rashly-chosen husbands, and repentant
wives, could I set against Nancy's Mrs. Arby? —But
the post is just going out; so that, far from entering
on so copious a subject, I have barely time to add,
that I am, with the truest affection, my dearest creature, 
Your faithful Lucy. 

