


Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Sat. April 22. 
I Cannot for my life account for your wretch's teazing
ways. But he certainly doubts your love of
him. In this he is a modest man, as well as somebody
else; and tacitly confesses, that he does not deserve
it. 
Your Israelitish hankerings after the Egyptian
onions [testify'd still more in your letter to your aunt]
Your often-repeated regrets for meeting him; for
being betrayed away by him: These he cannot bear. 
I have been retrospecting the whole of his conduct,
and comparing it with his general character; and find,
that he is more consistently, more uniformly, mean, revengeful,
and proud, than either of us once imagin'd. 
From his cradle, as I may say, as an only child, and
a boy, humoursome, spoiled, mischievous; the governor
of his governors. 

A libertine in his riper years, hardly regardful of
appearances; and despising the Sex in general, for the
faults of particulars of it, who made themselves too
cheap to him. 
What has been his behaviour in your family, a
Clarissa in view (from the time your foolish brother
was obliged to take a life from him) but defiance
for defiances? —Getting you into his power by terror,
by artifice. What politeness can be expected from
such a man? 
Well, but what in such a situation is to be done? 
—Why, you must despise him—You must hate him— 
if you can—and run away from him—But whither? 
—Especially now that your brother is laying foolish
plots to put you in a still worse condition, as it may
happen? 
But if you cannot despise and hate him—If you care
not to break with him, you must part with some punctilio's; 
and if the so doing bring not on the solemnity,
you must put yourself into the protection of the ladies
of his family. 
Their respect for you is of itself a security for
his honour, if there could be any room for doubt. 
And at least you should remind him of his offer to
bring one of the Miss Montague's to attend you at
your new lodgings in town, and accompany you, till
all is happily over. 
This, you'll say, will be as good as declaring yourself
to be his. And so let it. You ought not now to
think of any thing else but to be his. Does not your
brother's project convince you more and more of
this? 
Give over then, my dearest friend, any thoughts of
this hopeless reconciliation, which has kept you balancing
thus long. You own, in the letter before me,
that he made very explicit offers, tho' you give me
not the very words. —And he gave his reasons, I perceive, 

with his wishes that you should accept them: 
Which very few of the sorry fellows do; whose plea
is generally but a compliment to our self-love—That
we must love them, however presumptuous and unworthy,
because they love us. 
Were I in your place, and had your charming delicacies,
I should, perhaps, do as you do. No doubt
but I should expect that the man should urge me
with respectful warmth; that he should supplicate
with constancy, and that all his words and actions
should tend to the one principal point—Nevertheless,
if I suspected art or delay, founded upon his doubts of
my love, I would either condescend to clear up his
doubts, or renounce him for ever. 
And in this last case, I, your Anna Howe, would
exert myself, and either find you a private refuge, or
resolve to share fortunes with you. 
What a wretch, to be so easily answer'd by your
reference to the arrival of your cousin Morden? But
I am afraid that you was too scrupulous: —For did he
not resent that reference? 
Could we have his account of the matter, I fancy,
my dear, I should think you over-nice, over-delicate. 
Had you laid hold of his acknowleged explicitness,
he would have been as much in your power, as now
you seem to be in his? —You wanted not to be told,
that the person who had been tricked into such a step
as you had taken, must of necessity submit to many
mortifications. 
But were it to me, a girl of spirit, as I am thought
to be, I do assure you, I would in a quarter of an
hour (all the time I would allow to punctilio in such
a case as yours) know what he drives at. Since
either he must mean well or ill. If ill, the sooner
you know it, the better. If well, whose modesty is
it he distresses, but that of his own wife? 
And methinks you should endeavour to avoid all 

exasperating recriminations, as to what you have heard
of his failure in morals; especially while you are so
happy, as not to have occasion to speak of them by
experience. 
I grant, that it gives a worthy mind some satisfaction,
in having borne its testimony against a bad one: But
if the testimony be not seasonably borne, and when
the faulty person be fitted to receive the correction, it
may probably rather harden, or make an hypocrite,
than reclaim him. 
I am pleased, however, as well as you, with his
making light of your brother's wife project. —Poor
creature! —And must master Jemmy Harlowe, with
his half-wit, pretend to plot, and contrive mischief,
yet rail at Lovelace for the same things? —A witty villain
deserves hanging at once (and without ceremony,
if you please); but a half-witted one deserves broken
bones first, and hanging afterwards. I think Lovelace
has given his character in few words. 
Be angry at me, if you please; but as sure as you
are alive, now that this poor creature, whom some
call your brother, finds he has succeeded in making
you fly your father's house, and that he has nothing to
fear but your getting into your own, and into an independence
of him, but he thinks himself equal to any
thing, and so has a mind to fight Lovelace with his
own weapons? 
Don't you remember his pragmatical triumph, as
told you by your aunt, and prided in by that sawcy
Betty Barnes, from his own foolish mouth (a) ? 
I expect nothing from your letter to your aunt. I
hope Lovelace will never know the contents of it. In
every one of yours, I see that he as warmly resents as
he dares, the little confidence you have in him. I
should resent it too, were I him; and knew I deserved
better. 

Don't be scrupulous about cloaths, if you think of
putting yourself into the protection of the ladies of his
family. They know how matters stand between you
and your relations; and love you never the worse for
their cruelty. —As to money, why will you let me
offer in vain? 
I know you won't demand possession of your estate. 
But give him a right to demand it for you; and that
will be still better. 
Adieu, my dear! —May Heaven guide and direct
you in all your steps, is the daily prayer of 
Your ever-affectionate and faithful
Anna Howe. 