



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Sat. July 22. 
My dearest Friend,
We are busy in preparing for our little journey
and voyage: But I will be ill, I will be very
ill, if I cannot hear you are better before I go. 
Rogers greatly afflicted me, by telling me the bad
way you are in. But now you have been able to
hold a pen, and as your sense is strong and clear, I
hope that the amusement you will receive from
writing will make you better. 
I dispatch this by an extraordinary way, that it
may reach you time enough to move you to consider
well before you absolutely decide upon the contents
of mine of the 13th, on the subject of the two Misses 

Montague's visit to me; since, according to what
you write, must I answer them. 
In your last, you conclude very positively, that you
will not be his. To be sure, he rather deserves an infamous
death, than such a wife. But, as I really believe
him innocent of the Arrest, and as all his family
are such earnest pleaders, and will be guarantees, for
him, I think the compliance with their entreaties, and
his own, will be now the best step you can take; your
own family remaining implacable, as I can assure you
they do. He is a man of sense; and it is not impossible
but he may make you a good Husband, and in
time may become no bad man. 
My Mother is entirely of my opinion: And on
Friday, pursuant to a hint I gave you in my last,
Mr. Hickman had a conference with the strange
wretch: And tho' he liked not, by any means, his
behaviour to himself; nor, indeed, had reason to do
so; yet he is of opinion, that he is sincerely determined
to marry you, if you will condescend to have him. 
Perhaps Mr. Hickman may make you a private
visit before we set out. If I may not attend you myself,
I shall not be easy, except he does. And
he will then give you an account of the admirable
character the surprising wretch gave of you, and of
the justice he does to your virtue. 
He was as acknowleging to his relations, tho' to
his own condemnation, as his two Cousins told me. 
All that he apprehends, as he said to Mr. Hickman,
is, that if you go on exposing him, Wedlock itself
will not wipe off the dishonour to both: And moreover,
‘that you would ruin your constitution by your
immoderate sorrow; and, by seeking death when
you might avoid it, would not be able to escape it
when you would wish to do so.’ 
So, my dearest friend, I charge you, if you can,
to get over your aversion to this vile man. You may
yet live to see many happy days, and be once more 

the delight of all your friends, neighbours, and acquaintance,
as well as a stay, a comfort, and a blessing,
to your Anna Howe. 
I long to have your answer to mine of the 13th. 
Pray keep the messenger till it be ready. If he return
on Monday night, it will be time enough for his affairs,
and to find me come back from Colonel Ambrose's; 
who gives a ball on the anniversary of Mrs. Ambrose's
birth and marriage, both in one. The gentry all
round the neighbourhood are invited this time, on
some good news they have received from Mrs. Ambrose's
Brother the Governor. 
My Mother promised the Colonel for me and herself,
in my absence. I would fain have excused myself
to her; and the rather, as I had exceptions on
account of the day (a) : But she is almost as young as
her Daughter; and thinking it not so well to go without
me, she told me, She could propose nothing that
was agreeable to me. And having had a few sparring
blows with each other very lately, I think I must comply. 
For I don't love jangling when I can help it; 
tho' I seldom make it my study to avoid the occasion,
when it offers of itself. I don't know, if either were
not a little afraid of the other, whether it would be
possible that we could live together: —I, All my Father! 
—My Mamma—What? —All my Mother—What
else should I say? 
O my dear, how many things happen in this life
to give us displeasure! How few to give us joy! —I
am sure I shall have none on this occasion; since the
true partner of my heart, the principal half of the one
soul, that, it used to be said, animated The pair of
friends, as we were called; You, my dear [who
used to irradiate every Circle you set your foot into,
and to give me real significance in a second place to
yourself] cannot be there! —One hour of your company,
my ever-instructive friend [I thirst for it!] how 

infinitely preferable would it be to me, to all the diversions
and amusements with which our Sex are generally
most delighted—Adieu, my dear!— 
A. Howe. 