



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq;
[In answer to his Letters, Num. LIV. LVII.] 

Edgware, Monday, July 24. 
What pains thou takest to persuade thyself, that
the lady's ill health is owing to the vile arrest, and
to her friends implacableness! Both, primarily (if they
were), to be laid at thy door. What poor excuses will
good heads make for the evils they are put upon by bad
hearts! —But 'tis no wonder, that he who can sit down
premeditatedly to do a bad action, will content himself with
a bad excuse: And yet, what fools must he suppose the
rest of the world to be, if he imagines them as easily to
be imposed upon, as he can impose upon himself? 
In vain dost thou impute to pride or wilfulness the necessity
to which thou hast reduced this lady of parting with
her cloaths: For can she do otherwise, and be the noble-minded
creature she is? 
Her implacable friends have refused her the current cash
she left behind her; and wished, as her sister wrote to her,
to see her reduced to want: Probably therefore they will
not be sorry that she is reduced to such streights; and will
take it for a justification from Heaven of their wicked hard-heartedness. 
Thou canst not suppose she would take supplies
from thee: To take them from me would, in her
opinion, be taking them from thee. Miss Howe's mother
is an avaritious woman; and, perhaps, the daughter could
do nothing of that sort unknown to her; and, if she could
is too noble a girl to deny it, if charged. And then Miss
Harlowe is firmly of opinion, that she shall never want
nor wear the things she disposes of. 
Having heard nothing from town that obliges me to go
thither, I shall gratify poor Belton with my company till 

to-morrow, or perhaps till Wednesday: For the unhappy
man is more and more loth to part with me. I shall soon
set out for Epsom, to endeavour to serve him there, and reinstate
him in his own house. Poor fellow! he is most
horribly low-spirited; mopes about; and nothing diverts
him. I pity him at my heart; but can do him no good. — 
What consolation can I give him, either from his past life,
or from his future prospects? 
Our friendships and intimacies, Lovelace, are only calculated
for strong life and health. When sickness comes,
we look round us, and upon one another, like frighted
birds, at the sight of a kite ready to souse upon them. Then,
with all our bravery, what miserable wretches are we! 
Thou tellest me, that thou seest reformation is coming
swiftly upon me. I hope it is. I see so much difference in
the behaviour of this admirable woman in her illness, and
that of poor Belton in his, that it is plain to me, the sinner
is the real coward, and the saint the true hero; and,
sooner or later, we shall all find it to be so, if we are not
cut off suddenly. 
The lady shut herself up at six o'clock yesterday afternoon; 
and intends not to see company till seven or eight
this; not even her nurse; imposing upon herself a severe
fast. And why? It is her birth day! —Blooming, yet
declining in her blossom! —Every birth-day till this, no
doubt, happy! —What must be her reflections! —What
ought to be thine! 
What sport dost thou make with my aspirations, and
my prostrations, as thou callest them; and with my dropping
of the bank note behind her chair. I had too much
awe of her at the time, and too much apprehended her
displeasure at the offer, to make it with the grace that
would better have become my intention. But the action,
if aukward, was modest. Indeed, the fitter subject for
ridicule with thee; who canst no more taste the beauty
and delicacy of modest obligingness, than of modest love. 
For the same may be said of inviolable respect, that the
poet says of unfeigned affection. 

 I speak, I know not what!—
Speak ever so; and if I answer you
I know not what, it shews the more of love.
Love is a child that talks in broken language;
Yet then it speaks most plain.

The like may be pleaded in behalf of that modest respect,
which made the humble offerer afraid to invade the
awful eye, or the revered hand; but aukwardly to drop
its incense beside the altar it should have been laid upon. 
But how should that soul, which could treat delicacy itself
brutally, know any-thing of this? 
But I am still more amazed at thy courage, to think of
throwing thyself in the way of Miss Howe, and Miss Arabella
Harlowe! —Thou wilt not dare, surely, to carry
this thought into execution! 
As to my dress, and thy dress, I have only to say, That
the sum total of thy observation is this: That my outside
gettest thou by the comparison? Do thou reform the one,
and I'll try to mend the other. I challenge thee to begin. 
Mrs. Lovick gave me, at my request, the copy of a meditation
she shewed me, which was extracted by the lady
from the Scriptures, while under arrest at Rowland's, as
appears by the date. She is not to know, that she has
taken such a liberty. 
You and I always admired the noble simplicity, and
natural ease and dignity of style, which are the distinguishing
characteristics of these books, whenever any passages
from them, by way of quotation in the works of other
authors, popt upon us. And once I remember you, even
you, observed, that those passages always appeared to you
like a rich vein of golden ore, which runs thro' baser metals; 
embellishing the work they were brought to authenticate. 
Try, Lovelace, if thou canst relish a divine beauty. I
think it must strike transient (if not permanent) remorse
into thy heart. Thou boastest of thy ingenuity; let this
be the test of it; and whether thou canst be serious on a
subject so deep, the occasion of it resulting from thyself. 
MEDITATION.
Saturday, July 15.
O that my grief were thoroughly weighed, and my calamity
laid in the balance together! 
For now it would be heavier than the sand of the sea: 
Therefore my words are swallowed up. 
For the arrows of the Almighty are within me; the poison 

whereof drinketh up my spirit. The terrors of God do set
themselves in array against me. 
When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise? When will
the night be gone? And I am full of tossings to and from, unto
the dawning of the day. 
My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle, and are
spent without hope—Mine eye shall no more see good. 
Wherefore is light given to her that is in misery; and life
unto the bitter in soul? 
Who longeth for death; but it cometh not; and diggeth
for it more than for hid treasures? 
Why is light given to one whose way is hid; and whom
God hath hedged in? 
For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me! 
I was not in safety; neither had I rest; neither was I
quiet: Yet trouble came. 
O that my words were now written! O that they were
printed in a book! that they were graven with an iron pen
and lead in the book for ever! 
I have a little leisure, and am in a scribbling vein: Indulge
me, Lovelace, a few reflections on these sacred books. 
We are taught to read the Bible, when children, and as
a rudiment only; and, as far as I know, this may be the
reason, why we think ourselves above it, when at a maturer
age. For, you know, that our parents, as well as we,
wisely rate our proficiency by the books we are advanced
to, and not by our understanding what we have passed
through. But, in my uncle's illness, I had the curiosity,
in some of my dull hours (lighting upon one in his
closet), to dip into it: And then I found, where ever I
turned, that there were admirable things in it. I have
borrowed one, on receiving from Mrs. Lovick the above
meditations; for I had a mind to compare them by the
book, hardly believing they could be so exceedingly apposite
as I find they are. And one time or other, it is very
likely, that I shall make a resolution to give it a thorough
perusal, by way of course, as I may say. 
This, mean time, I will venture to repeat, is certain,
that the style is that truly easy, simple, and natural one,
which we should admire in other authors excessively. Then
all the world join in an opinion of its antiquity, and authenticity 

too; and the learned are fond of strengthening
their different arguments by its sanctions.  Indeed, I was so
much taken with it at my uncle's, that I was half ashamed
that it appeared so new to me. And yet, I cannot but say,
that I have some of the Old Testament history, as it is called,
in my head: But, perhaps, am more obliged for it to
Josephus, than to the Bible itself. 
Odd enough, with all our pride of learning, that we
choose to derive the little we know from the under-currents,
perhaps muddy ones too, when the clear, the pellucid
fountain-head is much nearer at hand, and easier to
be come at—Slighted the more, possibly, for that very
reason! 
But man is a pragmatical foolish creature; and the more
we look into him, the more we must despise him. —Lords
of the creation! —Who can forbear indignant laughter! 
When we see not one of the individuals of that creation,
except his perpetually excentric self, but acts within its
own natural and original appointments: And all the time,
proud and vain as the conceited wretch is of fancied and
self-dependent excellence, he is obliged not only for the ornaments,
but for the necessaries of life, (that is to say, for food
as well as raiment) to all the other creatures; strutting with
their blood and spirits in his veins, and with their plumage
on his back: For what has he of his own, but a very mischievous,
monkey-like, bad nature? Yet thinks himself
at liberty to kick, and cuff, and elbow out every worthier
creature: And when he has none of the animal creation to
hunt down and abuse, will make use of his power, his
strength, or his wealth, to oppress the less powerful and
weaker of his own species! 
When you and I meet next, let us enter more largely
into this subject: And, I dare say, we shall take it by
turns, in imitation of the two sages of antiquity, to laugh
and to weep at the thoughts of what miserable, yet conceited
beings men in general, but we libertines in particular,
are. 
I fell upon a piece at Dorrell's this very evening, intitled,
The sacred Classics, written by one Blackwall. 
I took it home with me; and had not read a dozen pages,
when I was convinced, that I ought to be ashamed of myself
to think, how greatly I have admired less noble and 

less natural beauties in pagan authors; while I have known
nothing of this all-excelling collection of beauties, the Bible! 
By my faith, Lovelace, I shall for the future have a better
opinion of the good sense and taste of half a score parsons,
whom I have fallen in with in my time, and despised for
magnifying, as I thought they did, the language and the
sentiments to be found in it, in preference to all the antient
poets and philosophers. And this is now a convincing
proof to me, and shames as much as infidel's presumption
as his ignorance, that those who know least, are the greatest
scoffers. A pretty pack of would-be-wits of us, who
censure without knowlege, laugh without reason, and are
most noisy and loud against things we know least of! 