



Dear Mother,
For the last was to my Father, in Answer
to his Letter; and so I will now write to
you; tho' I have nothing to say but what will
make me look more like a vain Hussy, than any
thing else: However, I hope I shan't be so
proud as to forget myself. Yet there is a secret
Pleasure one has to hear one's self prais'd. You
must know then, that my Lady Davers, who, I
need not tell you, is my Master's Sister, has
been a Month at our House, and has taken great
Notice of me, and given me good Advice to
keep myself to myself. She told me I was a very
pretty Wench, and that every body gave me a
very good Character, and lov'd me; and bid
me take care to keep the Fellows at a Distance; 
and said, that I might do, and be more valued
for it, even by themselves. 

But what pleas'd me much, was what I am
going to tell you; for at Table, as Mrs. Jervis
says, my Master and her Ladyship talking of
me, she told him she thought me the prettiest
Wench she ever saw in her Life; and that I was
too pretty to live in a Batchelor's House; since
no Lady he might marry, would care to continue
me with her. He said, I was vastly improv'd,
and had a good Share of Prudence, and
Sense above my Years; and it would be Pity,
that what was my Merit, should be my Misfortune. 
—No, says my good Lady, Pamela shall
come and live with me, I think. He said,
With all his Heart; he should be glad to have
me so well provided for. Well, said she, I'll
consult my Lord about it. She ask'd, How
old I was; and Mrs. Jervis said, I was Fifteen
last February. O! says she, if the Wench (for
so she calls us Maiden-servants) takes care of
herself, she'll improve yet more and more, as
well in her Person as Mind. 
Now, my dear Father and Mother, tho' this
may look too vain to be repeated by me, yet
are you not rejoiced, as well as I, to see my
Master so willing to part with me? —This
shews that he has nothing bad in his Heart. But
John is just going away, and so I have only to
say, that I am, and will always be, 
Your honest, as well as dutiful Daughter. 

Pray make use of the Money. You may now do it safely. 
