



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

And now it is time to confess (and yet I know,
that thy conjectures are aforehand with my exposition),
that this Captain Tomlinson, who is so great
a favourite with my charmer, and who takes so much
delight in healing breaches, and reconciling differences,
is neither a greater man nor a less, than honest
Patrick McDonald, attended by a discarded footman
of his own finding out. 
Thou knowest what a various-lifed rascal he is; and
to what better hopes born and educated. But that
ingenious knack of Forgery, for which he was expelled
the Dublin-University, and a detection since in
Evidenceship, have been his ruin. For these have
thrown him from one country to another; and at
last, into the way of life, which would make him a
fit husband for Miss Howe's Townsend with her contrabands. 
He is, thou knowest, admirably qualified
for any enterprize that requires adroitness and solemnity. 
And can there, after all, be a higher piece of
justice aimed at, than to keep one Smuggler in readiness
to play against another? 
‘Well but, Lovelace (methinks thou questionest),
how camest thou to venture upon such a contriveance 

as this, when, as thou hast told me, the Lady
used to be a month at a time at this uncle's; and
must therefore, in all probability, know, that there
was not a Captain Tomlinson in all his neighbourhood; 
at least no one of the name so intimate with
him, as this man pretends to be?’— 
This objection, Jack, is so natural a one, that I
could not help observing to my charmer, that she must
surely have heard her uncle speak of this gentleman. 
No, she said, she never had. Besides, she had not been
at her uncle Harlowe's for near ten months [This I had
heard her say before]: And there were several gentlemen
who used the same Green, whom she knew not. 
We are all very ready, thou knowest, to believe
what we like. 
And what was the reason, thinkest thou, that she
had not been of so long time at this uncle's? —Why,
this old sinner, who imagines himself intitled to call
me to account for my freedoms with the Sex, has
lately fallen into familiarities, as it is suspected, with
his housekeeper, who assumes airs upon it. —A cursed
deluding Sex! —In youth, middle age, or dotage, they
take us all in. 
Dost thou not see, however, that this housekeeper
knows nothing, nor is to know any thing, of the
treaty of reconciliation designed to be set on foot; 
and therefore the Uncle always comes to the Captain,
the Captain goes not to the Uncle: And this I surmised
to the Lady. And then it was a natural suggestion,
that the Captain was the rather applied to, as
he is a stranger to the rest of the family: Need I tell
thee the meaning of all this? 
But this intrigue of the Antient is a piece of private
history, the truth of which my beloved cares not to
own, and indeed affects to disbelieve. As she does
also some puisny gallantries of her foolish brother; 
which, by way of recrimination, I have hinted at,
without naming my informant in their family. 

Well but, methinks, thou questionest again, Is it
not probable that Miss Howe will make inquiry after
such a man as Tomlinson? —And when she cannot— 
I know what thou wouldst say—But I have no
doubt, that Wilson will be so good, if I desire it, as to
give into my own hands any letter that may be brought
by Collins to his house, for a week to come. And
now I hope thou'rt satisfied. 
I will conclude with a short story. 
‘Two neighbouring sovereigns were at war together,
about some pitiful chuck-farthing thing or
other; no matter what; for the least trifles will set
princes and children at loggerheads. Their armies
had been drawn up in battalia some days, and the
news of a decisive action expected every hour to arrive
at each court. At last, issue was joined; a
bloody battle was fought; and a fellow, who had
been a spectator of it, arriving with the news of a
complete victory, at the capital of one of the princes,
some time before the appointed couriers, the bells
were set a ringing, bonfires and illuminations were
made, and the people went to bed intoxicated with
joy and good liquor. But the next day all was reversed: 
The victorious enemy, pursuing his advantage,
was expected every hour at the gates of the
almost defenceless capital. The first-reporter was
hereupon sought for, and found; and being questioned,
pleaded a great deal of merit, in that he
had, in so dismal a situation, taken such a space of
time from the distress of his fellow-citizens, and
given it to festivity, as were the hours between the
false good news and the real bad.’ 
Do thou, Belford, make the application. This I
know, that I have given greater joy to my Beloved,
than she had thought would so soon fall to her share. 
And as the human life is properly said to be chequor-work,
no doubt but a person of her prudence will
make the best of it, and set off so much good against 

so much bad, in order to strike as just a balance as possible. 
The Lady, in three several letters, acquaints her
friend with the most material passages and conversations
contained in those of Mr. Lovelace's preceding. 
These are her words, on relating what the commission
of the pretended Tomlinson was, after the apprehensions
that his distant inquiry had given her. 
‘At last, my dear, all these doubts and fears were
cleared up, and banished; and, in their place, a
delightful prospect was opened to me. For it comes
happily out (but at present it must be an absolute
secret, for reasons which I shall mention in the sequel),
that the gentleman was sent by my uncle
Harlowe [I thought he could not be angry with me
for ever]; all owing to the conversation that passed
between your good Mr. Hickman and him. For
although Mr. Hickman's application was too harshly
rejected at the time, my uncle could not but think
better of it afterwards, and of the arguments that
worthy gentleman used in my favour. 
‘Who, upon a passionate repulse, would despair
of having a reasonable request granted? —Who
would not, by gentleness and condescension, endeavour
to leave favourable impressions upon an
angry mind; which, when it comes coolly to
reflect, may induce it to work itself into a condescending
temper? To request a favour, as I have
often said, is one thing; to challenge it as our due,
is another. And what right has a petitioner to be
angry at a repulse, if he has not a right to demand
what he sues for as a debt?’ 
She describes Captain Tomlinson, on his breakfast
visit, to be ‘a grave good sort of man.’ And in another
place, ‘A genteel man, of great gravity, and a
good aspect; she believes upwards of fifty years of
age I liked him, says she, as soon as I saw him.’ 

As her prospects are now more favourable than heretofore,
she wishes, that her hopes of Mr. Lovelace's
so often promised reformation were better grounded,
than she is afraid they can be. 
‘We have both been extremely puzzled, my
dear, says she, to reconcile some parts of Mr. Lovelace's
character with other parts of it: His good
with his bad; such of the former in particular, as,
His generosity to his tenants; His bounty to the inn-keeper's
daughter; His readiness to put me upon
doing kind things by my good Norton, and others. 
‘A strange mixture in his mind, as I have told him! 
For he is certainly (as I have reason to say, looking
back upon his past behaviour to me in twenty instances)
a hard-hearted man. —Indeed, my dear, I
have thought more than once, that he had rather see
me in tears, than give me reason to be pleased with him. 
‘My cousin Morden says, that free livers are remorseless (a) . And so they must be in the very nature
of things. 
‘Mr. Lovelace is a proud man. That we have
long observed. And I am truly afraid, that his very
generosity is more owing to his pride and his vanity,
than to that philanthropy, which distinguishes a beneficent
mind. 
‘Money he values not, but as a means to support
his pride and his independence. And it is easy, as
I have often thought, for a person to part with a
secondary appetite, when, by so doing, he can promote
or gratify a first. 
‘I am afraid, my dear, that there must have been
some fault in his Education. His natural byas was
not, I fancy, sufficiently attended to. He was instructed,
perhaps (as his power was likely to be 

large), to do good and beneficent actions; but not
from proper motives, I doubt. 
‘If he had, his generosity would not have stopt at
pride, but would have struck into humanity; and
then would he not have contented himself with doing
praiseworthy things by fits and starts, or, as if
relying on the doctrine of merits, he hoped by a good
action to atone for a bad one (a) ; but he would have
been uniformly noble, and done the good for its own
sake. 
‘O my dear! what a lot have I drawn! Pride his
virtue; and Revenge his other predominating quality! 
—This one consolation, however, remains: 
He is not an infidel, an unbeliever: Had he been
an infidel, there would have been no room at all for
hope of him; but (priding himself, as he does, in
his fertile invention) he would have been utterly
abandoned, irreclaimable, and a savage.’ 
When she comes to relate those occasions, which
Mr. Lovelace in his narrative, acknowleges himself to
be affected by, she thus expresses herself: 
‘He endeavoured, as once before, to conceal his
emotion. But why, my dear, should these men (for
Mr. Lovelace is not singular in this) think themselves
above giving these beautiful proofs of a feeling 

heart? Were it in my power again to choose, or
refuse, I would reject the man with contempt, who
sought to suppress, or offered to deny, the power
of being affected upon proper occasions, as either a
savage-hearted creature, or as one who was so ignorant
of the principal glory of the human nature,
as to place his pride in a barbarous insensibility. 
‘These lines translated from Juvenal by Mr. Tate,
I have been often pleased with:’ 

 Compassion proper to mankind appears,
Which nature witness'd, when she lent us tears.
Of tender sentiments We only give
These proofs: To weep is Our prerogative;
To shew by pitying looks, and melting eyes,
How with a suff'ring friend we sympathize.
Who can all sense of others ills escape,
Is but a brute at best, in human shape.
This natural piety did first refine
Our wit, and rais'd our thoughts to things divine:
This proves our spirit of the gods descent,
While that of beasts is prone and downward bent.
To them, but earth-born life they did dispense;
To us, for mutual aid, celestial sense.
She takes notice, to the advantage of the people
of the house, that such a good man, as Captain Tomlinson,
had spoken well of them, upon inquiry. 