



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Tuesday, Aug. 29. 
My dearest Friend,
We are at length returned to our own home. I
had intended to wait on you in London: But
my Mother is very ill—Alas! my dear, she is very
ill indeed—Aud you are likewise very ill—I see that
by yours of the 25th—What shall I do, if I lose two
such near, and dear, and tender friends? She was
taken ill yesterday at our last stage in our return
home—And has a violent surfeit and fever, and the
Doctors are doubtful about her. 
If she should die, how will all my pertnesses to
her fly in my face! —Why, why, did I ever vex her? 
She says I have been all duty and obedience! —She
kindly forgets all my faults, and remembers everything
I have been so happy as to oblige her in. And
this cuts me to the heart. 
I see, I see, my dear, you are very bad—And I
cannot bear it. Do, my beloved Miss Harlowe, if
you can be better, do, for my sake, be better; and
send me word of it. Let the bearer bring me a line. 
Be sure you send me a line. If I lose you, my more
than Sister, and lose my Mother, I shall distrust my
own conduct, and will not marry. And why should
I? —Creeping, cringing in courtship! —O my dear,
these men are a vile race of Reptiles in our day, and
mere Bears in their own. See in Lovelace all that is
desirable in figure, in birth, and in fortune: But in
his heart a devil! —See in Hickman—Indeed, my
dear, I cannot tell what any-body can see in Hickman,
to be always preaching in his favour. And is
it to be expected, that I, who could hardly bear
controul from a Mother, should take it from a Husband? 
—From one too, who has neither more wit,
nor more understanding, than myself? Yet He to 

be my instructor! —So he will, I suppose; but more
by the insolence of his will, than by the merit of his
counsel. It is in vain to think of it. I cannot be a
Wife to any man breathing whom I at present know. 
This I the rather mention now, because, on my
Mother's danger, I know you will be for pressing me
the sooner to throw myself into another sort of protection,
should I be deprived of her. But no more
of this subject, or indeed of any other; for I am
obliged to attend my Mamma, who cannot bear me
out of her sight. 
Wednesday, Aug. 30. 
My Mother, Heaven be praised! has had a fine
night, and is much better. Her fever has yielded
to medicine! And now I can write once more with
freedom and ease to you, in hopes that you also are
better. If this be granted to my prayers, I shall again
be happy. I write with still the more alacrity, as I
have an opportunity given me to touch upon a subject
in which you are nearly concerned. 
You must know then, my dear, that your Cousin
Morden has been here with me. He told me of an
Interview he had on Monday at Lord M's with Lovelace; 
and asked me abundance of questions about
you, and about that villainous man. 
I could have raised a fine flame between them if I
would: But, observing that he is a man of very
lively passions, and believing you would be miserable
if any thing should happen to him from a quarrel with
a man who is known to have so many advantages at
his sword, I made not the worst of the subjects we
talked of. But, as I could not tell untruths in his
favour, you must think I said enough to make him
curse the wretch. 
I don't find, well as they all used to respect Colonel
Morden, that he has influence enough upon them
to bring them to any terms of Reconciliation. 

What can they mean by it! —But your Brother is
come home, it seems: So, The Honour of the house,
The Reputation of the family, is all the cry! 
The Colonel is exceedingly out of humour with
them all. Yet has he not hitherto, it seems, seen
your brutal Brother. —I told him how ill you were,
and communicated to him some of the contents of
your Letter. He admired you, cursed Lovelace, and
raved against all your family. —He declared, that they
were all unworthy of you. 
At his earnest request, I permitted him to take
some brief notes of such of the contents of your Letter
to me, as I thought I could read to him; and,
particularly, of your melancholy conclusion (a) . 
He says, That none of your friends think you so
ill as you are; nor will believe it. He is sure they
all love you, and that dearly too. 
If they do, their present hardness of heart will be
the subject of everlasting remorse to them should you
be taken from us—But now it seems [Barbarous
wretches!] you are to suffer within an inch of your life. 
He asked me questions about Mr. Belford: And
when he had heard what I had to say of that gentleman,
and his disinterested services to you, he raved
at some villainous surmises thrown out against you by
that officious pedant, Brand: Who, but for his gown,
I find, would come off poorly enough between your
Cousin and Lovelace. 
He was so uneasy about you himself, that on
Thursday the 24th he sent up an honest serious man
(b) , one Alston, a gentleman farmer, to enquire of
your condition, your visitors, and the like; who
brought him word, that you was very ill, and was
put to great streights to support yourself: But as this
was told him by the gentlewoman of the house where
you lodge, who it seems mingled with it some tart,
tho' deserved, reflections upon your relations cruelty, 

it was not credited by them: And I myself hope it
cannot be true; for surely you could not be so unjust,
I will say, to my friendship, as to suffer any inconveniencies
for want of money. I think I could not
forgive you, if it were so. 
The Colonel (as one of your Trustees) is resolved
to see you put into possession of your Estate: And,
in the mean time, he has actually engaged them to
remit to him for you the produce of it accrued since
your Grandfather's death (a very considerable sum); 
and proposes himself to attend you with it. But, by
a hint he dropt, I find you had disappointed some
peoples littleness, by not writing to them for money
and supplies; since they were determined to distress
you, and to put you at defiance. 
Like all the rest! —I hope I may say that without
offence. 
Your Cousin imagines, that, before a Reconciliation
takes place, they will insist, that you shall make
such a Will, as to that Estate, as they shall approve
of: But he declares, he will not go out of England
till he has seen justice done you by every-body; and
that you shall not be imposed on either by Friend or
Foe— 
By Relation or Foe, should he not have said? —For
a Friend will not impose upon a friend. 
So, my dear, you are to buy your peace, if some
people are to have their wills! 
Your Cousin [Not I, my dear, tho' it was always
my opinion (a) ] says, that the whole family is too
rich to be either humble, considerate, or contented. And
as for himself, he has an ample fortune, he says, and
thinks of leaving it wholly to you. 
Had this villain Lovelace consulted his worldly interest
only, what a fortune would he have had in you,
even altho' your marrying him had deprived you of a
paternal share? 

I am obliged to leave off here. But having a good
deal still to write, and my Mother better, I will pursue
the subject in another Letter, altho' I send both
together. I need not say how much I am, and will
ever be, 
Your affectionate, &c.
Anna Howe. 