


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Tuesday, April 4. 
Sir Charles Grandison came to town last night. 
He was so polite, as to send to enquire after my
health; and to let Mr. Reeves know, that he would
do himself the honour, as he called it, of breakfasting
with him this morning. Very ceremonious either for
his own sake or for mine—Perhaps for both. 
So I am in expectation of seeing within this half-hour,
the noble Clementina's future—Ah Lucy! 
The compliment, you see, is to Mr. Reeves—Shall
I stay above, and see if he will ask for me? He owes
me something for the emotion he gave me in Lord L.'s
library. Very little of him since have I seen. 
“Honour forbids me, said he, then: Yet honour
bids me. —But I cannot be ungenerous, selfish”— 
These words are still in my ear. —What could he
mean by them? —Honour forbids me—What! to explain
himself? He had been telling me a tender tale: He
had ended it. What did honour forbid him to do? — 
Yet honour bids me! Why then did he not follow the
dictates of honour? 
But I cannot be unjust:—To Clementina he means. 
Who wished him to be so? —Unjust! I hope not. It
is a diminution to your glory, Sir Charles Grandison,
to have the word unjust, in this way of speaking, in
your thoughts! As if a good man had lain under a
temptation to be unjust; and had but just recollected
himself. 
“I cannot be ungenerous.” To the noble Lady, I
suppose? He must take compassion on her. And did
he think himself under an obligation to my forwardness
to make this declaration to me, as to one who
wished him to be ungenerous to such a lady for my 

sake! —I cannot bear the thought of this. Is it not as
if he had said, “Fond Harriet, I see what you expect
from me—But I must have compassion for, I cannot
be ungenerous to, Clementina!” —But, what a poor
word is compassion! Noble Clementina! I grieve for
you, tho' the man be indeed a generous man! —O
defend me, my better genius, from wanting the compassion
even of a Sir Charles Grandison! 
But what means he by the word selfish! He cannot
be selfish! —I comprehend not the meaning of this
word—Clementina has a very high fortune—Harriet
but a very middling one. He cannot be unjust,
ungenerous to Clement na—Nor yet selfish—This word
confounds me, from a man that says nothing at random! 
Well, but breakfast-time is come, while I am busy
in self-debatings. I will go down, that I may not
seem to affect parade. I will endeavour to see with
indifference, him that we have all been admiring and
studying for this last fortnight, in such a variety of
lights. The Christian: The Hero: The Friend:— 
Ah, Lucy! The Lover of Clementina: The generous
Kinsman of Lord W.: The modest and delicate Benefactor
of the Mansfields: The free, gay, Raillier
of Lady Beauchamp; and in her of all our Sex's Foibles! 
But he is come! While I am prating to you with
my pen, he is come. —Why, Lucy, would you detain
me? —Now must the fool go down in a kind of
hurry: Yet stay till she is sent for. —And that is now. 

