



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sunday Afternoon. 
I am in great apprehensions. Yet cannot help repeating
my humble thanks to your Mother and
you, for your last favour. I hope her kind end is
answered by the contents of my last. Yet I must
not think it enough to acknowlege her goodness to
me, with a pensil only, on the Cover of a Letter
sealed up. A few lines give me leave to write with
regard to my anonymous Letter to Lady Drayton. 
If I did not at that time tell you, as I believe I did,
that my excellent Mrs. Norton gave me her assistance
in that Letter; I now acknowlege that she did. 
Pray let your Mother know this, for two reasons: 
One, that I may not be thought to arrogate to myself
a discretion which does not belong to me; the
other, that I may not suffer by the severe, but just
inference she was pleased to draw; doubling my faults
upon me, if I myself should act unworthy of the advice
I was supposed to give. 
Before I come to what most nearly affects me, I
must chide you, once more, for the severe, the very
severe things you mention of our family, to the disparagement
of their Morals. Indeed, my dear, I
wonder at you! —A slighter occasion might have
passed me, after I have written to you so often to so
little purpose, on this topic. But, affecting as my
own circumstances are, I cannot pass by without
animadversion the reflection I need not repeat in
words. 
There is not a worthier woman in England than
my Mother. Nor is my Father that man you sometimes
make him. Excepting in one point, I know
not any family which lives up more to their duty,
than the principals of ours. A little too uncommunicative 

for their great circumstances—that is all. — 
Why, then, have they not reason to insist upon unexceptionable
morals in a man whose sought-for relationship
to them, by a marriage in their family,
they have certainly a right either to allow of, or to
disallow? 
Another line or two, before I am engrossed by my
own concerns—Upon your treatment of Mr. Hickman. 
Is it, do you think, generous to revenge upon
an innocent person, the displeasure you receive from
another quarter, where I doubt you are a trespasser
too? —But one thing I could tell him; and you had
not best provoke me to it: It is this, That no woman
uses ill the man she does not absolutely reject, but she
has it in her heart to make him amends, when her tyranny
has had its run, and he has completed the measure
of his services and patience. My mind is not enough
at ease, to push this matter further. 
I will now give you the occasion of my present
apprehensions. 
I had reason to fear, as I mentioned in mine of this
morning, that a storm was brewing. Mr. Solmes
came home from Church this afternoon with my
Brother. Soon after, Betty brought me up a Letter,
without saying from whom. It was in a Cover, and
directed by a hand I never saw before; as if it were
supposed that I would not receive and open it, had
I known from whom it came. 
There are the contents: 

To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
Sunday, March 26. 
Dearest Madam,
I think myself a most unhappy man, in that I have
never yet been able to pay my respects to you with
youre consent, for one halfe-hour. I have something
to communicat to you that concernes you much, if
you be pleased to admit me to youre speech. Youre
honour is concerned in it, and the honour of all youre 

familly. It relates to the designes of one whom you
are sed to valew more than he desarves; and to some
of his reprobat actions; which I am reddie to give
you convincing proofes of the truth of. I may appear
to be interested in it: But neverthelesse, I am
reddie to make oathe, that every tittle is true: And
you will see what a man you are sed to favour. But
I hope not so, for youre owne honour. 
Pray, Madam, vouchsafe me a hearing, as you valew
your honour and familly: Which will oblidge,
dearest Miss, 
Your most humble and most faithful Servant,
Roger Solmes. 
I waite below for the hope of admittance. 
I have no manner of doubt, that this is a poor device,
to get this man into my company. I would have
sent down a verbal Answer; but Betty refused to
carry any message, which should prohibit his visiting
me. So I was obliged either to see him, or to write
to him. I wrote therefore an Answer, of which I
shall send you the rough draught. And now my
heart akes for what may follow from it; for I hear a
great hurry below. 

To Roger Solmes, Esq;
Sir,
Whatever you have to communicate to me, which
concerns my honour, may as well as be done by
writing as by word of mouth. If Mr. Lovelace is
any of my concern, I know not that therefore he
ought to be yours: For the usage I receive on your
account [I must think it so!] is so harsh, that were
there not such a man in the world as Mr. Lovelace, I
would not wish to see Mr. Solmes, no, not for one
half-hour, in the way he is pleased to be desirous to
see me. I never can be in any danger from Mr. 

Lovelace (and of consequence, cannot be affected
by any of your discoveries) if the proposal I made be
accepted. You have been acquainted with it, no
doubt. If not, be pleased to let my friends know,
that if they will rid me of my apprehensions of one
gentleman, I will rid them of theirs of another: And
then, of what consequence to them, or to me, will it
be, whether Mr. Lovelace be a good man, or a bad? 
And if not to them, nor to me, I see not how it can
be of any to you. But if you do, I have nothing to
say to That; and it will be a Christian part, if you
will expostulate with him upon the errors you have
discovered, and endeavour to make him as good a
man, as, no doubt, you are yourself, or you would
not be so ready to detect and expose him. 
Excuse me, Sir: But after my former Letter to
you, and your ungenerous perseverance; and after
this attempt to avail yourself at the expence of another
man's character, rather than by your own proper
merit; I see not that you can blame any asperity in
Her, whom you have so largely contributed to make
unhappy. 
Cl. Harlowe. 
Sunday Night. 
My Father was for coming up to me, in great
wrath it seems; but was persuaded to the contrary. 
My Aunt Hervey was permitted to send me This
that follows. —Quick work, my dear!— 

To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
Niece,
Every-body is now convinced, that nothing is to
be done with you by way of gentleness or persuasion. 
Your Mother will not permit you to stay in
the house; for your Father is so incensed by your
strange Letter to his friend, that she knows not what 

will be the consequence if you do. So, you are commanded
to get ready to go to your Uncle Antony's
out of hand. 
Your Uncle thinks he has not deserved of you such
an unwillingness as you shew to go to his house. 
You don't know the wickedness of the man for
whose sake you think it worth while to quarrel with
all your friends. 
You must not answer me. There will be no end
of That. 
You know not the affliction you give to everybody; 
but to none more than to 
Your affectionate Aunt,
Dorothy Hervey. 
Forbid to write to my Aunt, I took a bolder liberty. 
I wrote a few lines to my Mother; beseeching
her to procure me leave to throw myself at my Father's
feet, and hers, if I must go (no-body else present)
to beg pardon for the trouble I had given them
both, and their Blessings; and to receive their commands
as to my removal, and the time for it, from
their own lips. 
‘What new boldness This! —Take it back; and
bid her learn to obey,’ was my Mother's angry Answer,
with my Letter returned, unopened. 
But that I might omit nothing, that had an appearance
of duty, I wrote a few lines to my Father himself,
to the same purpose; begging, that he would not
turn me out of his house, without his Blessing. But
This, torn in two pieces, and unopened, was brought
me up again by Betty, with an air, one hand held up,
the other extended, the torn Letter in her open palm; 
and a See here! —What a sad thing is This! —Nothing
will do but duty, Miss! —Your Papa said, Let
her tell me of deeds! —I'll receive no words from her: 
And so he tore the Letter, and flung the pieces at my
head. 

So desperate my case, I was resolved not to stop
even at this repulse. I took my pen, and addressed
myself to my Uncle Harlowe, inclosing that which
my Mother had returned unopened, and the torn
unopened one sent to my Father; having first hurried
off a transcript for you. 
My Uncle was going home, and it was delivered
to him just as he stepped into his chariot. What may
be the fate of it therefore I cannot know till to-morrow. 
The following is a copy of it. 

To John Harlowe, Esq;
My dear and ever-honoured Uncle,
I have no-body now but you, to whom I can apply,
with hope, so much as to have my humble addresses
opened and read. My Aunt Hervey has given
me commands which I want to have explained; but
she has forbid me writing to her. Hereupon I took
the liberty to write to my Father and Mother: You
will see, Sir, by the torn one, and by the other
(both unopen'd) what has been the result. This
Sir, perhaps you already know: But, as you know
not the contents of the disgraced Letters, I beseech you
to read them both, that you may be a witness for me,
that they are not filled either with complaints or expostulations,
nor contain any-thing undutiful. Give me
leave to say, Sir, That if deaf-eared anger will neither
grant me a hearing, nor, what I write a perusal, some
time hence the hard-heartedness may be regretted. I
beseech you, dear, good Sir, to let me know what is
meant by sending me to my Uncle Antony's house,
rather than to yours, or to my Aunt Hervey's, or elsewhere? 
If it be for what I apprehend it to be, life
will not be supportable upon the terms. I beg also
to know, WHEN I am to be turned out of doors! — 
My heart strongly gives me, that if once I am compelled
to leave this house, I never shall see it more. 

It becomes me, however, to declare, that I write
not This thro' perverseness, or in resentment. God
knows my heart, I do not! But the treatment I apprehend
I shall meet with, if carried to my other
Uncle's, will, in all probability, give the finishing
stroke to the distresses, the undeserved distresses I will
be bold to call them, of 
Your once highly favoured,
But now most unhappy,
Cl. Harlowe. 