


My dear, dear—Master (I'm sure I should
still say; but I will learn to rise to a softer
Epithet, now-and-then) is not yet come. I hope he
is safe and well! —So Mrs. Jewkes and I went to
Breakfast. But I can do nothing but talk and think
of him, and all his Kindness to me, and to you, 
which is still me, more intimately! —I have just receiv'd
a Letter from him, which he wrote Over-night,
as I find by it, and sent early the next Morning. This
is a Copy of it. 

To Mrs. Andrews.
Monday Night. 
My dearest Pamela,
I Hope my not coming home this Night will
not frighten you. You may believe I can't
help it. My poor Friend is so very ill, that I
doubt he can't recover. His Desires to have me
stay with him are so strong, that I shall sit up all
Night with him, as it is now near One o'Clock in
the Morning; for he can't bear me out of his
Sight: And I have made him and his distress'd
Wife and Children so easy, in the kindest Assureances
I could give him, of my Consideration for him
and them, that I am look'd upon (as the poor disconsolate
Widow, as she, I doubt, will soon be, tells
me) as their good Angel. I could have wish'd we
had not engag'd to the good Neighbourhood at Sir
Simon's for to-morrow Night; but I am so desirous
to set out on Wednesday for the other House, that, as
well as in Return for the Civilities of so many good
Friends, who will be there on Purpose, I would
not put it off. What I beg of you, therefore, my
Dear, is, that you would go in the Chariot to
Sir Simon's, the sooner in the Day the better, because
you will be diverted with the Company, who
all so much admire you; and I hope to join you
there by your Tea-time in the Afternoon, which
will be better than going home, and returning
with you, as it will be six Miles Difference to me; 
and I know the good Company will excuse my
Dress, on the Occasion. I count every Hour of 
this little Absence for a Day; for I am, with the
utmost Sincerity, 
‘My dearest Love,
For ever Yours, &c. 
‘If you could go to dine with them, it will be a
Freedom that would be very pleasing to them,
and the more, as they don't expect it.’ 
I began to have a little Concern, lest his Fatigue
should be too great, and for the poor sick Gentleman
and Family; but told Mrs. Jewkes, that the
least Intimation of his Choice should be a Command
to me, and so I would go to Dinner there; and order'd
the Chariot to be got ready to carry me: when
a Messenger came up, just as I was dress'd, to tell her,
she must come down immediately. I see at the Window,
that Visitors are come; for there is a Chariot
and six Horses, the Company gone out of it, and
three Footmen on Horseback; and I think the Chariot
has Coronets. Who can it be, I wonder? —But
here I will stop, for I suppose I shall soon know. 
Good-sirs! how unlucky this is! What shall I do? 
–––Here is Lady Davers come; her ownself! And
my kind Protector a great, great many Miles off. 
–––Mrs. Jewkes out of Breath comes and tells me
this, and says she is inquiring for my Master and me. 
She ask'd her, it seems, naughty Lady as she is, if I
was whor'd yet! There's a Word for a Lady's
Mouth! —Mrs. Jewkes says, she knew not what to
answer. And my Lady said, She is not marry'd, I hope? 
And, said she, I said, No; because you have not
own'd it yet publickly. My Lady said, That was well
enough. Said I, I will run away, Mrs. Jewkes; and 
let the Chariot go to the Bottom of the Elm-walk'
and I will steal out of the Door unperceiv'd.––– But,
said she, she is inquiring for you, Madam, and I
said you was within, but going out; and she said,
she would see you presently, as soon as she could have
Patience. What did she call me, said I? The
Creature, Madam: I will see the Creature, said she,
as soon as I can have Patience. Ay, but, said I,
the Creature won't let her, if she can help it. 
Pray, Mrs. Jewkes favour my Escape for this
once, for I am sadly frighted. —Said she, I'll bid the
Chariot go down as you order, and wait till you
come; and I'll step down, and shut the Hall-door,
that you may pass down unobserv'd; for she sits
cooling herself in the Parlour over-against the Staircase. 
That's a good Mrs. Jewkes! said I: But who
has she with her? Her Woman, said she, and her
Nephew; but he is on Horseback, and is gone into
the Stables; and they have three Footmen. —And I
wish, said I, they were all three hundred Miles off! 
–––What shall I do!––– So I wrote thus far, and
wait impatiently to hear the Coast is clear.— 
Mrs. Jewkes tells me, I must come down, or she
will come up. What does she call me now? said
I. Wench, Madam. Bid the Wench come down
to me. And her Nephew, and her Woman are
with her. 
Said I, I can't go, and that's enough! —You might
contrive it that I might get out, if you would.–––– 
Indeed, Madam, said she, I cannot; for I went to
shut the Door, and she bid me let it stand open; 
and there she sits over-against the Stair-case. Then,
said I, I'll get out of the Window, I think!––– (and
fann'd myself) for I am sadly frighted. Laud, Madam,
said she, I wonder you so much disturb yourself!––– 
You're on the right Side the Hedge, I'm 
sure; and I would not be so discompos'd for any
body. Ay, said I, but who can help Constitution? 
I dare say you would no more be so discompos'd, than
I can help it.––– Said she, Indeed, Madam, if it was
to me, I would put on an Air as Mistress of the
House, as you are, and go and salute her Ladyship,
and bid her welcome. Ay, ay, reply'd I, fine Talking! 
––– But how unlucky this is, your good Master
is not at home! 
What Answer shall I give her, said she, to her
desiring to see you?––– Tell her, said I, I am sick abed; 
I'm dying, and must not be disturb'd; I'm
gone out, ––– or any thing! 
But her Woman came up to me, just as I had
utter'd this, and said, How do you do, Mrs. Pamela? 
My Lady desires to speak with you. So I must go. 
––– Sure she won't beat me! ––– Oh that my dear
Protector was at home! 
Well, now I will tell you all that happen'd in
this frightful Interview. ––– And very bad it was. 
I went down, dress'd as I was, and my Gloves
on, and my Fan in my Hand, to be just ready to
get into the Chariot, when I could get away; and I
thought all my trembling Fits had been over now; 
but I was mistaken, for I trembled sadly. Yet resolv'd
to put on as good an Air as I could. 
So I went to the Parlour, and said, making a very
low Curchee, Your Servant, my good Lady! And
your Servant again, said she, my Lady; for I think
you are dress'd out like one. 
A charming Girl tho', said her rakish Nephew,
and swore a great Oath; dear Aunt, forgive me, but
I must kiss her, and was coming to me. And I said,
Forbear, uncivil Gentleman! I won't be us'd freely. 
Jackey, said my Lady, sit down, and don't touch the 
Creature! ––– She's proud enough already. There's
a great Difference in her Air, I'll assure you, since I
saw her last. 
Well, Child, said she, sneeringly, how dost find
thyself? ––– Thou'rt mightily come on of late! ––– I
hear strange Reports about thee! ––– Thou'rt almost
got into Fool's Paradise, I doubt! ––– And wilt find
thyself terribly mistaken in a little while, if thou
thinkest my Brother will disgrace his Family to humour
thy Baby-face! 
I see, said I, sadly vex'd, (her Woman and Nephew
smiling by) your Ladyship has no very important
Commands for me, and I beg Leave to
withdraw. Beck, said she, to her Woman, shut the
Door; my young Lady and I must not have done
so soon. 
Where's your well-manner'd Deceiver gone,
Child? says she. —Said I, When your Ladyship is
pleas'd to speak intelligibly, I shall know how to
answer. 
Well, but my dear Child, said she in Drollery, don't
be too pert neither, I beseech thee. Thou wilt not
find thy Master's Sister half so ready to take thy
Freedoms, as thy mannerly Master is! ––– So, a
little of that Modesty and Humility that my Mother's
Waiting-maid used to shew, will become thee better
than the Airs thou givest thyself, since my
Mother's Son has taught thee to forget thyself. 
I would beg, said I, one Favour of your Ladyship,
that if you would have me keep my Distance, you
will not forget your own Degree. —Why, suppose,
Miss Pert, I should forget my Degree, wouldst thou
not keep thy Distance then? 
If you, Madam, said I, lessen the Distance yourself,
you will descend to my Level, and make an
Equality, which I don't presume to think of; for I 
can't descend lower than I am, ––– at least in your
Ladyship's Esteem! 
Did I not tell you, Jackey, said she, that I should
have a Wit to talk to? —He, who swears like a
Gentleman, at every Word, rapt out an Oath, and
said, drolling, I think, Mrs. Pamela, if I may be so
bold as to say so, you should know you are speaking
to Lady Davers! —Sir, said I, I hope there was no
Need for your Information, and so I can't thank
you for it; especially as you seem to think it wants
an Oath to convince me of it. 
He look'd more foolish than I at this, if possible,
not expecting such a Reprimand ––– And said at last,
Why, Mrs. Pamela, you put me half out of Countenance
with your witty Reproof! ––– Sir, said I, you
seem quite a fine Gentleman, and it will not be easily
done, I dare say. 
How now, Pert-ones, said my Lady, do you
know who you talk to? ––– I think I do not, Madam,
reply'd I: And, for fear I should forget myself more,
I'll withdraw. Your Ladyship's Servant, said I, and
was going: But she rose, and gave me a Push, and
pull'd a Chair, and setting the Back against the
Door, sat down in it. 
Well, said I, I can bear any thing at your Ladyship's
Hands; but I was ready to cry tho'. And I
went, and sat down, and fann'd myself at the other
End of the Room. 
Her Woman, who stood all the Time, said softly,
Mrs. Pamela, you should not sit in my Lady's Presence. 
And my Lady, tho' she did not hear her,
said, You shall sit down, Child, in the Room where
I am, when I give you Leave. 
So I stood up, and said, When your Ladyship will
hardly permit me to stand, one might be indulg'd to
sit down. But I ask'd you, said she, Whither your 
Master is gone? To one Mr. Carlton, Madam,
said I, about eighteen Miles off, who is very sick. 
And when does he come home? ––– This Evening,
Madam, said I. And where are you going? To
a Gentleman's House in the Town, Madam. And
how was you to go? —In the Chariot, Madam.––– 
Why, you must be a Lady in time, to be sure!––– I
believe you'd become a Chariot mighty well, Child! 
––– Was you ever out in it, with your Master? 
Pray your Ladyship, said I, be pleased to ask half
a dozen such Questions together; because one Answer
may do for all! ––– Why, Boldface, said she,
you'll forget your Distance, and bring me to your
Level before my Time. 
So I could no longer refrain Tears, but said, Pray
your Ladyship, let me ask what I have done to be
thus severely treated? I never did your Ladyship any
Harm. And if you think I am deceived, as you was
pleas'd to hint, I should be more intitled to your
Pity than your Anger. 
She arose, and took me by the Hand, and led me
to her Chair, and then sat down; and still holding
my Hand, said, Why, Pamela, I did indeed pity you
while I thought you innocent; and when my Brother
seiz'd you, and brought you down hither, without
your Consent, I was concern'd for you. And I was
still more concern'd for you, and lov'd you, when
I heard of your Virtue and Resistance, and your virtuous
Efforts to get away from him. But when, as
I fear, you have suffer'd yourself to be prevail'd upon,
and have lost your Innocence, and added another
to the Number of the Fools he has ruin'd, (This
shock'd me a little!) I cannot help shewing my Displeasure
to you. 
Madam, reply'I, I must beg no hasty Judgment; 
I have not lost my Innocence! ––– Take care, take
care, Pamela, said she! ––– Don't lose your Veracity, 
as well as your Honour! ––– Why are you here, when
you are at full Liberty to go whither you please?––– 
I will make one Proposal to you, and if you are innocent,
I am sure you'll accept it. Will you go and
live with me?––– I will instantly set out with you, in
my Chariot, and not stay half an Hour longer in
this House, if you'll go with me. ––– Now, if
you're innocent, and willing to keep so, deny me,
if you can. 
I am innocent, Madam, reply'd I, and willing to
keep so; and yet I cannot consent to this. Then,
said she, very mannerly, Thou lyest, Child, that's
all; and I give thee up! 
And so she arose, and walk'd about the Room in
great Wrath. Her Nephew and her Woman said,
Your Ladyship's very good; 'tis a plain Case; a very
plain Case! 
I would have remov'd the Chair, to have gone
out, but her Nephew came and sat in it. This provok'd
me; for I thought I should be unworthy of
the Honour I was rais'd to, tho' I was afraid to own
it, if I did not shew some Spirit; and I said, What,
Sir, is your Pretence in this House, to keep me a
Prisoner here? Because, said he,––– I like it.––– Do
you so, Sir? reply'd I: If that's the Answer of a
Gentleman to such a one as I, it would not, I dare
say, be the Answer of a Gentleman to a Gentleman. 
–––My Lady! my Lady! said he, a Challenge, a
Challenge, by Gad! No, Sir, said I, I am of a Sex that
gives no Challenges; and you think so too, or you
would not give this Occasion for the Word. 
Said my Lady, Don't be surpriz'd, Nephew; 
the Wench could not talk thus, if she had not been
her Master's Bed-fellow. ––– Pamela, Pamela, said
she, and tapp'd me upon the Shoulder, two or three
times, in Anger, thou hast lost thy Innocence, Girl; 
and thou hast got some of thy bold Master's Assureance, 
and art fit to go any-whither.––– Then, and please
your Ladyship, said I, I am unworthy of your Presence,
and desire I may quit it. 
No, reply'd she, I will know first what Reason you
can give for not accepting my Proposal, if you are
innocent? I can give, said I, a very good one; but I
beg to be excus'd. I will hear it, said she. Why
then, answer'd I, I should perhaps have less Reason
to like this Gentleman, than where I am. 
Well then, said she, I'll put you to another Trial. 
I'll set out this Moment with you to your Father and
Mother, and give you up safe to them. What do
you say to that?––– Ay, Mrs. Pamela, said her Nephew,
now what does your Innocence say to that? 
–––'Fore Gad, Madam, you have puzzled her now. 
Be pleas'd, Madam, said I, to call off this fine
Gentleman. Your Kindness in these Proposals makes
me hope you will not have me baited. I'll be d–––– 
said he, if she does not make me a Bull-dog! Why
she'll toss us all by-and-by! Sir, said I, you indeed
behave as if you were in a Bear-garden. 
Jackey, be quiet, said my Lady. You only give
her a Pretence to evade my Questions. Come, answer
me, Pamela. I will, Madam, said I, and it is
thus: I have no Occasion to be beholden to your
Ladyship for this Honour; for I am to set out tomorrow
Morning on the Way to my Parents.––– Now
again, thou lyest, Wench. ––– I am not of Quality,
said I, to answer to such Language. —Once again,
said she, provoke me not, by these Reflections, and
this Pertness; if thou dost, I shall do something by
thee unworthy of myself. That, thinks I, you
have done already; but I ventur'd not to say so. 
But who is to carry you, said she, to your Father
and Mother? Who my Master pleases, Madam,
said I. Ay, said she, I doubt not, thou wilt do every
thing he pleases, if thou hast not already. Why now 
tell me, Pamela, from thy Heart, hast thou not been
in Bed with thy Master? Ha, Wench! —I was quite
shock'd at this, and said, I wonder how your Ladyship
can use me thus! —I am sure you can expect
no Answer; and my Sex, and my tender Years,
might exempt me from such Treatment, with a
Person of your Ladyship's Birth and Quality, and
who, be the Distance ever so great, is of the same
Sex with me. 
Thou art a confident Wench, said she, I see! 
—Pray, Madam, said I, let me beg you to permit me
to go. I am waited for in the Town to Dinner. 
No, reply'd she, I can't spare you, and whoever you
are to go to, will excuse you, when they are told
'tis I that commands you not to go;—and you
may excuse it too, young Lady Wou'd-be, if you
consider that 'tis the unexpected Coming of your
late Lady's Daughter, and your Master's Sister, that
commands your Stay. 
But a Pre-engagement, your Ladyship will consider,
is something! —Ay, so it is; but I know not what
Reason Waiting-maids have to assume these Airs of
Pre-eng agements! —Oh Pamela, Pamela, I am sorry
for thy thus aping thy Betters, and giving thyself
such Airs; I see thou'rt quite spoil'd! Of a modest,
innocent Girl, that thou wast, and humble too,
thou now art fit for nothing in the World, but what
I fear thou art. 
Why, please your Ladyship, said her Kinsman,
what signifies all you say? The Matter's over with
her, no doubt; and she likes it; and she is in a
Fairy-dream, and 'tis pity to awaken her before her
Dream's out. —Bad as you take me to be, Madam,
said I, I am not used to such Language or Reflections
as this Gentleman gives me; and I won't
bear it. 
Well, Jackey, said she, be silent; and shaking
her Head, Poor Girl, said she! —What a sweet
Innocence is here destroy'd! —A thousand Pities! — 
I could cry over her, if that would do her good! 
But she is quite lost, quite undone; and then has
assum'd a Carriage upon it, that all those Creatures
are distinguish'd by!— 
I cry'd sadly for Vexation; and said, Say what
you please, Madam: If I can help it, I will not
answer another Word.— 
Mrs. Jewkes came in, and ask'd, If her Ladyship
was ready for Dinner. She said, Yes. I would
have gone out with her; but my Lady said, taking
my Hand, she could not spare me. And, Miss,
said she, you may pull off your Gloves, and lay
your Fan by, for you shan't go; and if you behave
well, you shall wait upon me at Dinner, and then I
shall have a little further Talk with you. 
Mrs. Jewkes said to me, Madam, may I speak
one Word with you? —I can't tell, Mrs. Jewkes,
said I; for my Lady holds my Hand, and you see
I am a kind of Prisoner. 
What you have to say, Mrs. Jewkes, said she,
you may speak before me. But she went out, and
seem'd vex'd for me; and she says, I look'd like the
very Scarlet. 
The Cloth was-laid in another Parlour, and for
three Persons, and she led me in: Come, my little
Dear, said she, with a Sneer, I'll hand you in, and
I wou'd have you think it as well as if it was my
Brother. 
What a sad Case, thought I, should I be in, if
I were as naughty as she thinks me! It was bad
enough as it was. 
Jackey, said my Lady, come, let us go to Dinner. 
She said to her Woman, Do you, Beck, help
Pamela to 'tend us; we will have no Men-fellows. 
––&blank; Come, my young Lady, shall I help you off
with your white Gloves? —I have not, Madam,
said I, deserv'd this at your Ladyship's Hands. 
Mrs. Jewkes coming in with the first Dish, she
said, Do you expect any body else, Mrs. Jewkes, that
you lay the Cloth for three? —Said she, I hop'd
your Ladyship and Madam would have been so well
reconcil'd, that she would have sat down too. —What
means the clownish Woman? said my Lady, in great
Disdain: Could you think the Creature should sit
down with me. —She does, Madam, and please
your Ladyship, with my Master. —I doubt it not,
good Woman, said she, and lyes with him too, does
she not? Answer me, Fat-face! —How these
Ladies are privileg'd! 
If she does, Madam, said she, there may be a
Reason for it, perhaps! And went out. —So, said
she, has the Wench got thee over too! —Come,
my little Dear, pull off thy Gloves, I say; and
off she pull'd my Left Glove herself, and 'spy'd
my Ring. O my dear God! said she, if the Wench
has not got a Ring! —Well, this is a pretty Piece
of Foolery, indeed! Dost know, my Friend, that
thou art miserably trick'd! —And so, poor Innocent,
thou hast made a fine Exchange, hast thou not? Thy
Honesty for this Bauble! And I'll warrant, my little
Dear has topp'd her Part, and paraded it like any
real Wife; and so mimicks still the Condition! — 
Why, said she, and turn'd me round, thou art as mincing
as any Bride! No wonder thou art thus trick'd
out, and talkest of thy Pre-engagements! Pr'ythee,
Child, walk before me to that Glass, survey thyself,
and come back to me, that I may see how finely
thou canst act the Theatrical Part given thee! 
I was then resolv'd to try to be silent; although
most sadly vex'd. —So I went and sat me down in the
Window, and she took her Place at the upper End 
of the Table; and her sawcy Jackey, fleering at me
most provokingly, sat down by her. —Said he,
Shall not the Bride sit down by us, Madam? Ay,
well thought of, said my Lady: Pray, Mrs. Bride,
your Pardon for sitting down in your Place? —I
said nothing. 
Said she, with a poor Pun, Thou hast some Modesty,
however, Child! For thou canst not stand it,
so must sit down, tho' in my Presence! —I still kept
my Seat, and said nothing. —Thinks I, this is a sad
Thing, and I am hinder'd too from shewing my
Duty where it is most due, and shall have Anger there
too, may-be, if my dear Master should be there before
me! —So she eat some Soup, as did her Kinsman; 
and then as she was cutting up a Fowl, said,
If thou long'st, my little Dear, I will help thee to a
Pinion, or Breast, or any thing. But may-be, Child,
said he, thou likest the Rump, shall I bring it thee? 
And then laugh'd like an Idiot, for all he is a Lord's
Son, and may be a Lord himself. —For he is the
Son of the Lord&wblank;; and his Mother, who was
Lord Davers's Sister, being dead, he has receiv'd
what Education he has, from Lord Davers's Direction. 
Poor Wretch! for all his Greatness! he'll
ne'er die for a Plot,—at least of his own hatching. 
If I could then have gone up, I would have given
you his Picture. But for one of 25 or 26 Years of
Age, much about the Age of my dear Master, he
is a most odd Mortal. 
Pamela, said my Lady, help me to a Glass of
Wine. No, Beck, said she, you shan't; for she
was offering to do it. I will have my Lady Bride
confer that Honour upon me; and then I shall
see if she can stand up. I was silent, and never
stirr'd. 
Dost hear, Chastity? said she. Help me to a Glass
of Wine, when I bid thee. —What! not stir! Then 
I'll come and help thee to one. Still I stirr'd not, and
fanning myself, continu'd silent. Said she, When I
have ask'd thee, Meek-ones, half a dozen Questions
together, I suppose thou wilt answer them all at once! 
Pretty Creature, is not that it? 
I was so vex'd, I bit a Piece of my Fan out, not
knowing what I did; but still I said nothing, and
did nothing but flutter it, and fan myself. 
I believe, said she, my next Question will make
up half a dozen; and then, Modest-ones, I shall be
intitled to an Answer. 
He arose, and brought the Bottle and Glass, Come,
said he, Mrs. Bride, be pleas'd to help my Lady,
and I will be your Deputy. Sir, reply'd I, it is in a
good Hand; help my Lady yourself. —Why, Creature,
said she, dost thou think thyself above it? — 
And then flew into a Passion, Insolence! continued
she, this Moment, when I bid you, know your
Duty, and give me a Glass of Wine; or— 
So, I took a little Spirit then—thinks I, I can
but be beat—If, said I, to attend your Ladyship at
Table, or even kneel at your Feet, was requir'd of
me, I would most gladly do it, were I only the Person
you think me; but, if it be to triumph over one
who has received Honours, that she thinks requires
her to act another Part, not to be utterly unworthy
of them, I must say, I cannot do it. 
She seem'd quite surpriz'd, and look'd now upon
her Kinsman, and then upon her Woman. —I'm
astonish'd! I'm quite astonish'd! —Well then, I suppose
you would have me conclude you my Brother's
Wife; wou'd you not? 
Your Ladyship, said I, compels this from me! — 
Well, return'd she, but dost thou thyself think thou
art so? —Silence, said her Kinsman, gives Consent. 
'Tis plain enough she does. Shall I rise, Madam,
and pay my Duty to my new Aunt? 
Tell me, said my Lady, what, in the Name of Impudence,
possesses thee, to dare to look upon thyself
as my Sister? —Madam, reply'd I, that is a Question
will better become your most worthy Brother to
answer, than me? 
She was rising in great Wrath; but her Woman
said, Good your Ladyship; you'll do yourself more
Harm, than her; and if the poor Girl has been deluded
so, as you have heard, with the Sham-marriage,
she'll be more deserving of your Ladyship's
Pity than Anger. True, Beck, very true, said my
Lady; but there's no bearing the Impudence of the
Creature mean-time. 
I would have gone out at the Door, but her Kinsman
run and set his Back against it. I expected bad
Treatment from her Pride and violent Temper; 
but this was worse than I could have thought of. 
And I said to him, Sir, when my Master comes to
know your rude Behaviour, you will, may-be, have
Cause to repent it. And went and sat down in the
Window again. 
Another Challenge, by Gad! said he; but I am
glad she says her Master! —You see, Madam,
she herself does not believe she is marry'd, and so
has not been so much deluded as you think for. 
And coming to me with a most barbarous Air of
Insult, he said, kneeling on one Knee before me; 
My new Aunt, your Blessing, or your Curse, I care
not which; but quickly give me one or other, that
I may not lose my Dinner! 
I gave him a most contemptuous Look: Tinsel'd
Toy, said I, (for he was lac'd all over) Twenty or
Thirty Years hence, when you are at Age, I shall
know how to answer you better; mean-time, sport
with your Footmen, and not me! And so I remov'd
to another Window nearer the Door, and he look'd
like a sad Foolish, as he is. 
Beck, Beck, said my Lady, this is not to be borne! 
Was ever the like heard! Is my Kinsman and Lord
Davers's to be thus used by such a Slut? And was
coming to me: And indeed I began to be afraid; 
for I have but a poor Heart, after all. But Mrs.
Jewkes, hearing high Words, came in again, with
the second Course, and said, Pray your Ladyship,
don't so discompose yourself. I am afraid this Day's
Business will make Matters wider than ever between
your good Ladyship and your Brother: For my
Master doats upon Madam. 
Woman, said she, do thou be silent! Sure, I, that
was born in this House, may have some Privilege
in it, without being talk'd to by the saucy Servants
in it! 
I beg Pardon, Madam, reply'd Mrs. Jewkes; and
turning to me, said, Madam, my Master will take
it very ill, if you make him wait for you thus. So
I rose to go out; but my Lady said, If it was only
for that Reason, she shan't go. —And went to the
Door, and shut it, and said to Mrs. Jewkes, Woman,
don't come again till I call you; and coming to
me, took my Hand, and said, Find your Legs, Miss,
if you please. 
I stood up, and she tapp'd my Cheek! Oh! says
she, that scarlet Glow shews what a rancorous little
Heart thou hast, if thou durst shew it; but come
this way. And so led me to her Chair: Stand there,
said she, and answer me a few Questions while I
dine, and I'll dismiss thee, till I call thy impudent
Master to Account; and then I'll have you Face to
Face, and all this Mystery of Iniquity shall be unravell'd; 
for, between you, I will come to the Bottom
of it. 
When she had sat down, I mov'd to the Window
on the other Side the Parlour, looking into
the private Garden; and her Woman said, Mrs. 
Pamela, don't make my Lady angry. Stand by her
Ladyship, as she bids you. Said I, Pray, good now,
let it suffice you to attend your Lady's Commands,
and don't lay yours upon me. —Your Pardon, sweet
Mrs. Pamela, said she. Times are much alter'd
with you, I'll assure you! Said I, Her Ladyship has
a very good Plea to be free in the House that she was
born in. But you may as well confine your Freedoms
to the House in which you had your Breeding. 
Why, how now, Mrs. Pamela, said she! Since you
provoke me to it, I'll tell you a Piece of my Mind. 
Hush, hush, good Woman, said I, alluding to my
Lady's Language to Mrs. Jewkes; my Lady wants
not your Assistance! —Besides, I can't scold! 
The Woman was ready to stutter with Vexation; 
and Lord Jackey laugh'd as if he would burst his
Sides; G&wblank; d&wblank; me, Beck, said he, you'd better let
her alone to my Lady here; for she'll be too many
for twenty such as you and I. —And then he
laugh'd again, and repeated—I can't scold, quoth-a!
but, by Gad, Miss, you can speak d&wblank;d spightful
Words, I can tell you that! —Poor Beck! poor
Beck! —'Fore Gad, she's quite dumb-founder'd! 
Well, but, Pamela, said my Lady, come hither,
and tell me truly: Dost thou think thyself really
marry'd? —Said I, and approach'd her Chair, My
good Lady, I will answer all your Commands, if
you'll have Patience with me, and not be so angry
as you are; but I can't bear to be us'd thus by this
Gentleman, and your Ladyship's Woman. Child, said
she, thou art very impertinent to my Kinsman; 
thou can'st not be civil to me; and my Ladyship's
Woman is much thy Betters. But that's not
the Thing! —Dost thou think thou art really
marry'd? 
I see, Madam, said I, you are resolv'd not to be
pleas'd with any Answer I shall return: If I should 
say, I am not, then your Ladyship will call me hard
Names, and perhaps I should tell a Fib. If I should
say, I am, your Ladyship will ask how I have the
Impudence to be so,—and will call it a Sham-marriage. 
I will, said she, be answer'd more directly. 
Why, what, and please your Ladyship, does
it signify what I think? Your Ladyship will believe
as you please. 
But canst thou have the Vanity, the Pride, the
Folly, said she, to think thyself actually marry'd to
my Brother? He is no Fool, Child; and Libertine
enough of Conscience; and thou art not the first in
the List of his credulous Harlots. —Well, well, said
I, (and was in a sad Flutter) as I am easy and pleas'd
with my Lot, pray your Ladyship let me continue
so, as long as I can. It will be Time enough for me
to know the worst, when the worst comes. And if
it will be so bad, your Ladyship should pity me,
rather than thus torment me before my Time. 
Well, said she, but dost not think I am concern'd
that a young Wench, whom my poor dear Mother
lov'd so well, should thus cast herself away, and
suffer herself to be deluded and undone, after such a
noble Stand as thou mad'st for so long a Time? 
I think myself far from being deluded and undone,
and please your Ladyship; and am as innocent and
virtuous as ever I was in my Life. Thou lyest,
Child, said she. So your Ladyship told me twice
before! 
She gave me a Slap on the Hand for this; and I
made a low Curchee, and said, I humbly thank your
Ladyship!—but I could not refrain Tears. And
added, Your dear Brother, Madam; however, won't
thank your Ladyship for this Usage of me, tho' I
do. Come a little nearer me, my Dear, said she,
and thou shalt have a little more than that to tell
him of, if thou think'st thou hast not made Mischief 
enough already between a Sister and Brother But,
Child, if he was here, I would serve thee worse, and
him too. I wish he was, said I. —Dost thou
threaten me, Mischief-maker, and insolent as thou
art? 
Now, pray your Ladyship, said I, (but got to a
little Distance) be pleas'd to reflect upon all that
you have said to me, since I have had the Honour, or
rather Misfortune, to come into your Presence; 
whether you have said one Thing befitting your
Ladyship's Degree to me, even supposing I was
the Wench, and the Creature, you suppose me to
be? —Come hither, my pert Dear, reply'd she; 
come but within my Reach for one Moment, and
I'll answer thee as thou deservest. 
To be sure she meant to box my Ears. But I
should be unworthy of my happy Lot, if I could
not shew some Spirit. 
When the Cloth was taken away, I said, I suppose
I may now depart your Presence, Madam? I
suppose not, said she. Why, I'll lay thee a Wager,
Child, thy Stomach's too full to eat, and so thou
may'st fast till thy mannerly Master comes home. 
Pray your Ladyship, said her Woman, let the
poor Girl sit down at Table with Mrs. Jewkes and
me.––– Said I, you are very kind, Mrs. Worden; but
Times, as you said, are much alter'd with me; and
I have been of late so much honour'd by better
Company, that I can't stoop to yours. 
Was ever such Confidence, said my Lady! Poor
Beck, poor Beck, said her Kinsman; why, she beats
you quite out of the Pit!––– Will your Ladyship,
said I, be pleased to tell me how long I am to tarry
For you'll please to see by that Letter, that I am
oblig'd to attend my Master's Commands. And so
I gave her the dear Gentleman's Letter from Mr.
Carlton's, which I thought would make her use me 
better, as she might judge by it of the Honour done
me by him. Ay, said she, this is my worthy Brother's
Hand. It is directed to Mrs. Andrews. That's
to you, I suppose, Child? And so she read on, making
Remarks as she went along, in this manner: 
My dearest PAMELA, ––– “Mighty well!”––– I
hope my not coming home this Night will not
frighten you!––– “Vastly tender, indeed!––– And did
it frighten you, Child!”––– You may believe I can't
help it. “No, to be sure!––– A Person in thy Way
of Life, is more tenderly used than an honest Wife. 
But mark the End of it!”––– I could have wish'd,
“Prythee, Jackey, mind this,” we “mind the significant
We,” had not engaged to the good Neighbourhood,
at Sir Simon's for to-morrow Night.–––– 
“Why, does the good Neighbourhood, and does
Sir Simon, permit thy Visits, Child? They shall
have none of mine then, I'll assure them!” But
I am so desirous to set out on Wednesday for the
other House–––“So, Jackey, we but just nick'd it,
I find.”––– that, as well as in Return for the Civilities
of so many good Friends, who will be there on
purpose, I would not put it off.––– “Now mind,
Jackey.”––– What I beg of you,–––“Mind the Wretch,
that could use me and your Uncle, as he has
done; he is turn'd Beggar to this Creature!” I beg
of you, therefore, my Dear, “My Dear! there's for
you!––– I wish I may not be quite sick before I
get thro'.”––– What I beg of you, therefore, my Dear,
[and then she look'd me full in the Face] is, that
you will go in the Chariot to Sir Simon's, the sooner
in the Day, the better;–––“Dear Heart! and why
so, when WE were not expected till Night? Why,
pray observe the Reason–––Hem!” [said she]
Because you will be diverted with the Company; 
“Mighty kind indeed!”–––– who all, “Jackey, 
Jackey, mind this,”––– who all so much admire you. 
“Now he'd ha' been hang'd to have said so complaisant
a thing, had he been marry'd, I'm sure!”––– 
“Very true, Aunt, said he: A plain Case that!”––– 
[Thinks I, that's hard upon poor Matrimony, tho'. 
I hope my Lady don't find it so. But I durst not
speak out.] Who all so much admire you, [said she]
“I must repeat that––– Pretty Miss–– I wish thou
wast as admirable for thy Virtue, as for that
Baby-face of thine!” —And I hope to join you
there by your Tea-time, in the Afternoon! —“So,
you're in very good Time, Child, an Hour or two
hence, to answer all your important Pre-engagements!” 
—which will be better than going home,
and returning with you; as it will be six Miles Difference
to me; and I know the good Company will excuse
my Dress on the Occasion. “Very true, any
Dress is good enough, I'm sure, for such Company
as admire thee, Child, for a Companion in
thy ruin'd State! —Jackey, Jackey, mind, mind
again! more fine things still.” I count every Hour
of this little Absence for a Day;—“There's for
you! Let me repeat it,” I count every Hour of this
little Absence for a Day!––– “Mind too the Wit of
the good Man! One may see Love is a new thing
to him. Here is a very tedious time gone since
he saw his Deary; no less than, according to his
amorous Calculation, a Dozen Days and Nights,
at least! and yet, TEDIOUS as it is, it is but a
Little Absence. Well said, my good accurate
and consistent Brother. —But wise Men in
Love, are always the greatest Simpletons!––– But
now comes the Reason, why this little Absence,
which, at the same time, is so GREAT an
Absence, is so tedious:” For I am, “Ay, now for
it!”––– with the utmost Sincerity, My dearest Love,
“Out upon Dearest Love! I shall never love the 
Word again! Pray bid your Uncle never call me
Dearest Love, Jackey!” —For Ever Yours!––– 
“But, Brother, thou lyest! —Thou knowest thou
dost.––– And so, my good Lady Andrews, or what
shall I call you? Your dearest Love will be for
Ever Yours! And hast thou the Vanity to believe
this! —But stay, here is a Postscript. The poor
Man knew not when to have done to his dearest
Love. —He's sadly in for't, truly! Why, his
dearest Love, you are mighty happy in such a
Lover!”––– If you could go to dine with them,––– 
“Cry your Mercy, my dearest Love, now comes
the Pre-engagement!” it will be a Freedom that
will be very pleasing to them, and the more as they
don't expect it. 
Well, so much for this kind Letter! But you see
you cannot honour this admiring Company with this
little-expected, and, but in Complaisance to his Folly,
I dare say, little-desired Freedom. And I cannot
forbear admiring you so much myself, my dearest
Love, that I will not spare you at all, this whole
Evening. For 'tis a little hard, if thy Master's Sister
may not be blest a little bit with thy charming
Company. 
So I found I had shewed her my Letter to very
little Purpose, and repented it several times, as she
read on. —Well then, I hope, said I, your Ladyship
will give me Leave to send my Excuses to your
good Brother, and say, that your Ladyship is come,
and is so fond of me, that you will not let me leave
you.––– Pretty Creature! said she; and wantest thou
thy good Master to come, and quarrel with his Sister
on thy Account? —But thou shalt not stir from
my Presence; and I would now ask thee, What it
is thou meanest by shewing me this Letter?––– Why,
Madam, said I, to shew your Ladyship how I was 
engaged for this Day and Evening.––– And for nothing
else? said she. Why, I can't tell, Madam, said
I: But if you can collect from it any other Circumstances,
I might hope I should be not the worse
treated. 
I saw her Eyes began to sparkle with Passion; 
and she took my Hand, and said, grasping it very
hard, I know, confident Creature, that you shew'd
it me to insult me!––– You shew'd it me, to let me
see, that he could be civiller to a Beggar-born,
than to me, or to my good Lord Davers!––– You
shew'd it me, as if you'd have me be as credulous
a Fool as yourself, to believe your true Marriage,
when I know the whole Trick of it, and have Reason
to believe you do too; and you shew'd it
me, to upbraid me with his stooping to such painted
Dirt, to the Disgrace of a Family, ancient and untainted
beyond most in the Kingdom; and now
will I give thee One hundred Guineas for one bold
Word, that I may fell thee at my Foot. 
Was not this very dreadful! To be sure, I had
better have kept the Letter from her. I was quite
frighten'd!––– And this fearful Menace, and her
fiery Eyes, and rageful Countenance, made me lose
all my Courage!––– So I said, weeping, Good your
Ladyship, pity me! —Indeed I am honest; indeed I
am virtuous; indeed I would not do a bad thing for
the World. 
Tho' I know, said she, the whole Trick of thy
pretended Marriage, and thy foolish Ring here, and
all the rest of the wicked Nonsense; yet I should
not have Patience with thee, if thou but offerest to
let me know thy Vanity prompts thee to believe thou
art marry'd to my Brother! —I could not bear the
Thought!––– So take care, Pamela; take care, beggarly
Brat; take care. 
Good your Ladyship, said I, spare my dear Parents. 
They are honest and industrious: They were once
in a very creditable Way, and never were Beggars. 
Misfortunes may attend any body: And I can bear
the cruellest Imputations on myself, because I know
my Innocence; but upon such honest, industrious
Parents, who lived thro' the greatest Trials, without
being beholden to any thing but God's Blessing, and
their own hard Labour; I cannot bear Reflection. 
What! art thou setting up for a Family, Creature
as thou art! God! give me Patience with thee! I
suppose my Brother's Folly for thee, and his Wickedness
together, will, in a little while, occasion a Search
at the Herald's-office, to set out thy wretched Obscurity. 
Provoke me, I desire thou wilt. One hundred
Guineas will I give thee, to say but thou thinkest
thou art marry'd to my Brother! 
Your Ladyship, I hope, won't kill me. And since
nothing I can say, will please; but your Ladyship is
resolved to quarrel with me; since I must not say
what I think, on one hand nor another, whatever
your Ladyship designs by me, be pleased to do, and
let me depart your Presence! 
She gave me a Slap on the Hand, and reached to
box my Ear; but Mrs. Jewkes hearkening without,
and her Woman too, they both came in at that Instant; 
and Mrs. Jewkes said, pushing herself in between
us, Your Ladyship knows not what you do. 
Indeed you don't. My Master would never forgive
me, if I suffer'd, in his House, one he so dearly loves,
to be so used; and it must not be, tho' you are
Lady Davers. Her Woman too interposed, and told
her, I was not worth her Ladyship's Anger. But she
was like a Person beside herself. 
I offer'd to go out, and Mrs. Jewkes took my
Hand, to lead me out: But her Kinsman set his
Back against the Door, and put his Hand to his 
Sword, and said, I should not go, till his Aunt permitted
it. He drew it half-way; and I was so terrified,
that I cry'd out, Oh! the Sword! the Sword!
and, not knowing what I did, I run to my Lady herself,
and clasp'd my Arms about her, forgetting, just
then, how much she was my Enemy, and said, sinking
on my Knees, Defend me, good your Ladyship! 
The Sword! the Sword! —Mrs. Jewkes said, Oh!
my Lady will fall into Fits; but Lady Davers was,
herself, so startled at the matter being carry'd so far,
that she did not mind her Words, and said, Jackey,
don't draw your Sword!––– You see, as great as her
Spirit is, she can't bear that. 
Come, said she, be comforted; he shan't fright
you!––– I'll try to overcome my Anger, and will pity
you. So, Wench, rise up, and don't be foolish. 
Mrs. Jewkes held her Salts to my Nose, and I did
not faint. And my Lady said, Mrs. Jewkes, if you
would be forgiven, leave Pamela and me by ourselves; 
and, Jackey, do you withdraw; only you, Beck,
stay. 
So I sat down in the Window, all in a sad Fluster; 
for, to be sure, I was sadly frighted. —Said
her Woman, You should not sit in my Lady's Presence,
Mrs. Pamela. Yes, let her sit till she is a little
recover'd of her Fright, said my Lady, and set my
Chair by her. And so she sat over-against me, and
said, To be sure, Pamela, you have been very provoking
with your Tongue, to be sure you have, as
well upon my Nephew, (who is a Man of Quality
too) as me. And, palliating her cruel Usage, and
beginning, I suppose, to think herself, she had carry'd
it further than she could answer it to her Brother,
she wanted to lay the Fault upon me; Own,
said she, you have been very saucy, and beg my
Pardon, and beg Jackey's Pardon; and I will try to 
pity you: For you are a sweet Girl, after all;––– if
you had but held out, and been honest. 
'Tis injurious to me, Madam, said I, to imagine
I am not honest! —Said she, Have you not been
a-bed with my Brother? tell me that. —Your Ladyship,
reply'd I, asks your Questions in a strange Way,
and in strange Words. 
Oh! your Delicacy is wounded, I suppose, by my
plain Question!––– This Niceness will soon leave you
Wench: It will indeed. But answer me directly. 
Said I, Then your Ladyship's next Question will be,
Am I marry'd? And you won't bear my Answer to
that,—and will beat me again. 
I han't beat you yet; have I, Beck? said she. So
you want to make out a Story, do you? —But, indeed,
I can't bear thou should'st so much as think
thou art my Sister. I know the whole Trick of it; 
and so, 'tis my Opinion, dost thou. It is only thy
little Cunning, that it may look like a Cloak to thy
yielding, and get better Terms from him. Pr'ythee,
pr'ythee, Wench, thou seest I know the World a
little;—almost at much at Thirty-two, as thou dost
at Sixteen. —Remember that! 
I rose from the Window, and walking to the other
End of the Room, Beat me again, if you please, said
I; but I must tell your Ladyship, I scorn your Words,
and am as much marry'd as your Ladyship! 
At that she run to me, but her Woman interposed
again; Let the vain wicked Creature go from your
Presence, Madam, said she. She is not worthy to be
in it. She will but vex your Ladyship. Stand away,
Beck, said she. That's an Assertion that I would not
take from my Brother. I can't bear it. As much
marry'd as I! —Is that to be borne? But if the Creature
believes she is, Madam, said her Woman, she
is to be as much pity'd for her Credulity, as despised
for her Vanity. 
I was in hopes to have slipt out of the Door; 
but she caught hold of my Gown, and pulled me
back. Pray your Ladyship, said I, don't kill me!––– 
I have done no Harm. —But she lock'd the Door,
and put the Key in her Pocket. So seeing Mrs.
Jewkes before the Window, I lifted up the Sash,
and said, Mrs. Jewkes, I believe it would be best
for the Chariot to go to your Master, and let him
know, that Lady Davers is here; and I cannot leave
her Ladyship. 
She was resolved to be displeased, let me say what
I would. Said she, No, no; he'll then think that I
make the Creature my Companion, and know not
how to part with her. I thought your Ladyship,
reply'd I, could not have taken Exceptions at this Message. 
Thou knowest nothing, Wench, said she, of
what belongs to People of Condition: How shouldst
thou? Nor, thought I, do I desire it, at this Rate. 
What shall I say, Madam? said I. Nothing at all,
reply'd she; let him expect his Dearest Love, and be
disappointed; it is but adding a few more Hours, and
he will make every one a Day, in his amorous Account. 
—Mrs. Jewkes coming nearer me, and my
Lady walking about the Room, being then at the
End, I whisper'd, Let Robert stay at the Elms; I'll
have a Struggle for't by-and-by. 
As much marry'd as I! repeated she. —The Insolence
of the Creature! —And so she walk'd about
the Room, talking to herself, to her Woman, and
now-and-then to me; but seeing I could not please
her, I thought I had better be silent. And then it
was, Am I not worthy an Answer? If I speak, said I,
your Ladyship is angry at me, tho' ever so respectfully; 
if I do not, I cannot please: Would your Ladyship
tell me but how I shall oblige you, and I would
do it with all my Heart? 
Confess the Truth, said she, that thou't an undone
Creature; hast been in Bed with thy Master; and
art sorry for it, and for the Mischief thou hast occasion'd
between him and me; and then I'll pity
thee, and persuade him to pack thee off, with a
hundred or two of Guineas, and some honest Farmer
may take Pity of thee, and patch up thy Shame,
for the sake of the Money; and if nobody will have
thee, thou must vow Penitence, and be as humble
as I once thought thee. 
I was quite sick at Heart, at all this passionate Extravagance,
and to be hinder'd from being where
was the Desire of my Soul, and afraid too of incurring
my dear Master's Displeasure; and, as I sat, I
saw it was no hard matter to get out of the Window,
into the Front-yard, the Parlour being even with
the Yard, and so have a fair Run for it; and after I
had seen my Lady at the other End of the Room
again, in her Walks, having not pulled down the
Sash, when I spoke to Mrs. Jewkes, I got upon the
Seat, and whipt out in a Minute, and ran away as
hard as I could drive, my Lady calling after me to
return, and her Woman at the other Window: But
two of her Servants appearing at her crying out, and
she bidding them stop me, I said, Touch me at your
Peril, Fellows; but their Lady's Commands would
have prevail'd on them, had not Mr. Colbrand, who,
it seems, had been kindly order'd, by Mrs. Jewkes,
to be within Call, when she saw how I was treated,
come up, and put on one of his deadly fierce Looks,
the only time, I thought, it ever became him, and
said, He would chine the Man, that was his Word,
who offer'd to touch his Lady; and so he run alongside
of me; and I heard my Lady say, The Creature
flies like a Bird! And, indeed, Mr. Colbrand,
with his huge Strides, could hardly keep pace with
me; and I never stopt till I got to the Chariot; and 
Robert had got down, seeing me running at a Distance,
and held the Door in his Hand, with the
Step ready down; and in I jumpt, without touching
the Step, saying, Drive me, drive me, as fast as you
can, out of my Lady's Reach! And he mounted, and
Colbrand said, Don't be frighten'd, Madam; nobody
shall hurt you. —And shut the Door, and away Robert
drove; but I was quite out of Breath, and did
not recover it, and my Fright, all the Way. 
Mr. Colbrand was so kind, but I did not know it
till the Chariot stopt at Sir Simon's, to step up behind
the Coach, lest, as he said, my Lady should send
after me; and he told Mrs. Jewkes, when he got
home, that he never saw such a Runner as me, in
his Life. 
When the Chariot stopt, which was not till Six
o'Clock, so long did this cruel Lady keep me, Miss
Darnford run out to me; O, Madam, said she, ten
times welcome! but you'll be beat, I can tell you; 
for here has been the 'Squire come these two
Hours, and is very angry at you. 
That's hard indeed, said I! —Indeed I can't afford
it!—for I hardly knew what I said, having not recover'd
my Fright. Let me sit down, Miss, anywhere,
said I; for I have been sadly off. So I sat
down, and was quite sick with the Hurry of my
Spirits, and lean'd upon her Arm. 
Said she, Your Lord and Master came in very
moody; and when he had staid an Hour, and you
not come, he began to fret, and said, He did not
expect so little Complaisance from you. And he is
now sat down, with great Persuasions, to a Game
at Loo. —Come, you must make your Appearance,
Lady fair; for he's too sullen to attend you, I
doubt. 
You have no Strangers, have you, Miss, said I? — 
Only two Women Relations from Stamford, reply'd 
she, and an humble Servant of one of them. —Only
all the World, Miss! said I. —What shall I do, if
he be angry? I can't bear that. 
Just as I had said so, came in Lady Darnford and
Lady Jones, to chide me, as they said, for not
coming sooner. And before I could speak, came
in my dear Master. I ran to him. How d'ye, Pamela,
said he, and saluted me, with a little more Formality
than I could well bear. —I expected half a
Word from me, when I was so complaisant to your
Choice, would have determin'd you, and that you'd
been here to Dinner;—and the rather, as I made
my Request a reasonable one, and what, I thought,
would be agreeable to you. O dear Sir, said I, pray,
pray hear me, and you'll pity me, and not be displeased: 
Mrs. Jewkes will tell you, that as soon as I
had your kind Commands, I said, I would obey you,
and come to Dinner with these good Ladies; and
so prepared myself instantly, with all the Pleasure in
the World. Lady Darnford and Miss said, I was their
Dear! —Look you, said Miss, did I not tell you,
Stately-ones, that something must have happen'd? 
But O these Tyrants! these Men! 
Why, what hinder'd it, my Dear? said he: Give
yourself Time; you seem out of Breath! —O Sir,
said I, Out of Breath! well I may! —For, just as I
was ready to come away, who should drive into the
Court-yard, but Lady Davers! —Lady Davers! 
Nay, then, my sweet Dear, said he, and kissed me
more tenderly, hast thou had a worse Trial than
I wish thee, from one of the haughtiest Women in
England, tho' my Sister! —For she, too, my Pamela,
was spoiled by my good Mother! —But have
you seen her? 
Yes, Sir, said I, and more than seen her! —Why,
sure, said he, she has not had the Insolence to strike
my Girl!––– Sir, said I, but tell me you forgive me; 
for indeed I could not come sooner; and these good
Ladies but excuse me; and I'll tell you all another
time; for to take up the good Company's Attention
now, will spoil their Pleasantry, and be to them,
tho' more important to me, like the Lady's broken
China, you caution'd me about. 
That's a dear Girl! said he; I see my Hints are not
thrown away upon you; and I beg Pardon for being
angry at you; and, for the future, will stay till I hear
your Defence before I judge you. Said Miss
Darnford, This is a little better! To own a Fault,
is some Reparation; and what every lordly Husband
will not do. He said, But tell me, my Dear, Did
Lady Davers offer you any Incivility? O Sir, reply'd
I, she is your Sister, and I must not tell you all; but
she has used me very severely. Did you tell her,
said he, you was marry'd?––– Yes, Sir, I did at
last: But she will have it, 'tis a Sham-marriage,
and that I am a vile Creature: And she was ready
to beat me, when I said so; for she could not have
Patience that I should be deem'd her Sister, as she
said. 
How unlucky it was, reply'd he, I was not at home? 
––– Why did you not send to me here? Send, Sir! 
I was kept Prisoner by Force. They would not
let me stir, or do you think, I would have been
hinder'd from obeying you? Nay, I told them, that
I had a Pre-engagement; but she ridiculed me, and
said, Waiting-maids talk of Pre-engagements! and
then I shew'd her your kind Letter; and she made
a thousand Remarks upon it, and made me wish I
had not. In short, whatever I could do or say, there
was no pleasing her; and I was a Creature, and
Wench, and all that was naught. But you must not
be angry with her, on my Account. 
Well, but, said he, I suppose she hardly asked you
to dine with her; for she came before Dinner, I 
suppose, if it was soon after you had received my
Letter? No, Sir, dine with my Lady! no indeed! 
Why, she would make me wait at Table upon her,
with her Woman, because she would not expose herself
and me before the Men-servants; which, you
know, Sir, was very good of her Ladyship. 
Well, said he, but did you wait at Table upon
her? Would you have had me, Sir? said I.––– Only,
Pamela, reply'd he, if you did, and knew not what
belong'd to your Character, as my Wise, I shall be
very angry with you. Sir, said I, I did not; but
refused it, out of Consideration of the Dignity you
have raised me to; else, Sir, I could have waited on
my Knees upon your Sister. 
Now, said he, you confirm my Opinion of your
Prudence and Judgment. She is an insolent Woman,
and shall dearly repent it. But, Sir, she is to
be excus'd, because she won't believe I am indeed
marry'd; so don't be too angry at her Ladyship. 
He said, Ladies, pray don't let us keep you from
the Company; I'll only ask a Question or two more,
and attend you. Said Lady Jones, I so much long
to hear this Story of poor Madam's Persecution, that
if it was not improper, I should be glad to stay. 
Miss Darnford would stay for the same Reason; my
Master saying, he had no Secrets to ask, and that it
was kind of them to interest themselves in my Grievances. 
But Lady Darnford went in to the Company, and
told them the Cause of my Detention; for, it seems,
my dear Master loved me too well, to keep to himself
the Disappointment my not being here to receive
him, had given him; and they had all given the two
Miss Boroughs's, and Mr. Perry, the Stamford Guests,
such a Character of me, that they said they were impatient
to see me. 
Said my Master, But, Pamela, you said, They and
Them; Who had my Sister with her, besides her
Woman? Her Nephew, Sir, and three Footmen on
Horseback; and she and her Woman were in her
Chariot and Six. 
That's a sad Coxcomb, said he: How did he
behave to you?––– Not extraordinarily, Sir; but I
should not complain; for I was even with him; 
because I thought I ought not to bear with him as
with my Lady. 
By Heaven! said he, if I knew he behav'd unhandsomely
to my Jewel, I'd send him home to his Uncle
without his Ears. Indeed, Sir, return'd I, I was as
hard upon him, as he was upon me. Said he, 'Tis
kind to make the best for them. But I believe I
shall make them dearly repent their Visit, if I find
their Behaviour to call for my Resentment. 
But, sure, my Dear, you might have got away
when you went to your own Dinner? Indeed, Sir,
said I, her Ladyship locked me in, and would not
let me stir.––– So you han't eat any Dinner? No,
indeed, Sir, nor had a Stomach to any. My poor
Dear! said he. But then, how got you away at last? 
–––O, Sir, reply'd I, I jump'd out of the Parlour Window,
and run away to the Chariot, which had waited
for me several Hours, by the Elm-walk, from the
Time of my Lady's coming (for I was just going,
as I said); and Mr. Colbrand saw me thro' her Servants,
whom she call'd to, to stop me; and was so
kind to step behind the Chariot, unknown to me, and
saw me safe here. 
I'm sure, said he, these insolent Creatures must
have treated you vilely. But tell me, What Part
did Mrs. Jewkes act in this Affair? A very kind Part,
Sir, said I, in my Behalf; and I shall thank her for
it. Sweet Creature, said he, thou makest the best
for every body; but I hope she deserves it; for she 
knew you are married. —But come, we'll now join
the Company, and try to forget all you have suffer'd,
for two or three Hours, that we may not fill the
Company with our Concerns; and resume the Subject
as we go home. And you shall find, I will do
you Justice as I ought. But you forgive me, Sir,
said I, and are not angry? Forgive you, my Dear!
return'd he. —I hope you forgive me! —I shall never
make you Satisfaction for what you have suffer'd from
me, and for me! And with those Words, he led me
into the Company. 
He very kindly presented me to the two Stranger
Ladies, and the Gentleman, and them to me; and
Sir Simon, who was at Cards, rose from Table, and
saluted me: Adad! Madam, said he, I'm glad to see
you here. What, it seems you have been a Prisoner! 
'Tis well you was, or your Spouse and I
should have sat in Judgment upon you, and condemned
you to a fearful Punishment for your first
Crime of Læsæ Majestatis (I had this explained to
me afterwards, as a sort of Treason against my Liege
Lord and Husband). For we Husbands, hereabout,
said he, are resolv'd to turn over a new Leas with
our Wives, and your Lord and Master shall shew
us the Way, I can tell you that. But I see by your
Eyes, my sweet Culprit, added he, and your Complection,
you have had sour Sauce to your sweet
Meat. 
Miss Darnford said, I think we are oblig'd to our
sweet Guest, at last; for she was forced to jump out
at a Window to come to us. Indeed! said Mrs.
Peters;—and my Master's Back being turn'd, says
she, Lady Davers, when a Maiden, was always vastly
passionate; but a very good Lady when it was over. 
And she'd make nothing of slapping her Maids
about, and begging their Pardons afterwards, if they
took it patiently; otherwise she used to say, The
Creatures were even with her. 
Ay, said I, I have been a many Creatures and
Wenches, and I know not what; for these were
the best of her Names. And I thought I ought to
act up to the Part her dear Brother has given me; 
and so, truly, I have but just escaped a good Cuffing. 
Miss Boroughs said to her Sister, as I heard, but
she did not design it, What a sweet Creature is this! 
And then she takes so little upon her, is so free, so
easy, and owns the Honour done her so obligingly! 
Said Mr. Perry, softly, The loveliest Person I ever
saw! Who could have the Heart to be angry with
her one Moment? 
Says Miss Darnford, Here, my dearest Neighbour,
these Gentry are admiring you strangely; and Mr.
Perry says, you are the loveliest Lady he ever saw; 
and says it to his own Mistress's Face too, I'll assure
you—Or else, says Miss Boroughs, I should think
he much flatter'd me. 
O Miss, return'd I, you are exceedingly obliging; 
but your kind Opinion ought to learn me Humility,
and to reverence so generous a Worth as can give a
Preference against yourself, where it is so little due. 
Indeed, Madam, said Miss Nanny Boroughs, I love
my Sister well; but it would be a high Compliment
to any Lady, to be deem'd worthy of a second or
third Place after you. 
There is no answering such Politeness, said I: I
am sure Lady Davers, was very cruel to keep me
from such kind Company. 'Twas our Loss, Madam,
said Miss Darnford. I'll allow it, said I, in
Degree, Miss; for you have all been deprived, several
Hours, of an humble Admirer. 
Mr. Perry said, I never before saw so young a
Lady shine forth with such Graces of Mind and
Person. Alas! Sir, said I, my Master coming up,
Mine is but a borrow'd Shine, like that of the Moon: 
Here is the Sun, to whose fervent Glow of Generosity
I owe all the saint Lustre that your Goodness
is pleased to look upon with so much kind Distinction. 
Mr. Perry was pleased to hold up his Hands; and
the Ladies look'd upon one another. And my Master
said, hearing part of the last Sentence, What's
the pretty Subject, that my Pamela is displaying, so
sweetly, her Talents upon? 
Oh! Sir, said Mr. Perry, I will pronounce you
the happiest Gentleman in England. And I, said
Miss Boroughs; And I, said Miss Darnford; And I,
said each of the other. 
My Master said, most generously, Thank ye,
Thank ye, Thank ye, all round, my dear Friends. 
I know not your Subject; but if you believe me
so, for a single Instance of this dear Girl's Goodness,
what must I think myself, when blest with a thousand
Instances, and experiencing it in every single
Act and Word! I do assure you, my Pamela's Person,
all lovely as you see it, is far short of her Mind; 
That first impress'd me in her Favour; but that only
made me her Lover: But they were the Beauties of
her Mind, that made me her Husband; and proud,
my sweet Dear, said he, pressing my Hand, am I of
that Title. 
Well, said Mr. Perry, very kindly and politely,
Excellent as your Lady is, I know not the Gentleman
that could deserve her, but that one, who
could say such just and such fine things. 
I was all abash'd; and took Miss Darnford's Hand,
and said, Save me, dear Miss, by your sweet Example,
from my rising Pride. But could I deserve
half these kind things, what a happy Creature should
I be! Said Miss Darnford, You deserve them all, indeed
you do. 

The greatest Part of the Company being sat down
to Loo, my Master being press'd, said, he would
take one Game at Whist; but had rather be excused
too, having been up all Night; and I asked
how his Friend did? We'll talk of that, said he,
another time; which, and his Seriousness, made me
fear the poor Gentleman was dead, as it prov'd. 
We cast in, and Miss Boroughs and my Master
were together, and Mr. Perry and I; and I had all four
Honours the first time, and we were up at one Deal. 
Said my Master, An honourable Hand, Pamela,
should go with an honourable Heart; but you'd not
have been up, if a Knave had not been one. Whist,
Sir, said Mr. Perry, you know, was a Court Game
originally, and the Knave, I suppose, signified always
the prime Minister. 
'Tis well, said my Master, if now there is but One
Knave in a Court, out of Four Persons, take the
Court thro'. 
The King and Queen, Sir, said Mr. Perry, can
do no Wrong, you know. So there are Two that
must be good out of Four; and the Ace seems too
plain a Card to mean much Hurt. 
We compliment the King, said my Master, in
that manner; and 'tis well to do so, because there
is something sacred in the Character. But yet, if
Force of Example be consider'd, it is going a great
way; for certainly a good Master makes a good
Servant, generally speaking. 
One thing, added he, in regard to the Ace; I
have always look'd upon that plain and honest-looking
Card, in the Light you do. And have consider'd
Whist as an English Game in its Original; 
which has made me fonder of it than of any other. 
For, by the Ace, I have always thought the Laws
of the Land denoted; and, as the Ace is above the
King or Queen, and wins them; I think the Law 
should be thought so too; tho', may-be, I shall be
deem'd a Whig for my Opinion. 
I shall never play at Whist, said Mr. Perry, without
thinking of this, and shall love the Game the
better for the Thought; tho' I am no Party-man. 
Nor I, said my Master; for I think the Distinctions
of Whig and Tory odious; and love the one or
the other, only as they are honest and worthy Men; 
and have never, (nor ever shall, I hope) given
a Vote, but according to what I thought was for
the publick Good, let either Whig or Tory propose
it. 
I wish, Sir, reply'd Mr. Perry, all Gentlemen, in
your Station, would act so. If there was no undue
Influence, said my Master, I am willing to think so
well of all Mankind, that I believe they generally
would. 
But you see, said he, by my Pamela's Hand, when
all the Court-cards get together, and are acted by
one Mind, the Game is usually turn'd accordingly. 
Tho' now-and-then, too, it may be so circumstanced,
that Honours will do them no Good; and they are
forced to depend altogether upon Tricks. 
I thought this way of Talking prettier than the
Game itself. But I said, Tho' I have won the Game,
I hope, Sirs, I am no Trickster. No, said my Master,
God forbid but Court-cards should sometimes
win with Honour! But you see, for all that, your
Game is as much owing to the Knave, as the King; 
and you, my Fair-one, lost no Advantage, when it
was put into your Power. 
Else, Sir, said I, I should not have done Justice
to my Partner: You are certainly right, Pamela,
reply'd he; tho' you thereby beat your Husband. Sir,
said I, You may be my Partner next, and I must do
Justice, you know. Well, said he, always chuse so
worthy a Friend, as Chance has given you for a Partner, 
and I shall never find Fault with you, do what
you will. 
Mr. Perry said, You are very good to me, Sir; 
and Miss Boroughs, I observed, seem'd pleas'd with
the Compliment to her humble Servant; by which
I saw she esteem'd him, as he seems to deserve. 
Dear-sirs! said I, how much better is this, than to
be lock'd in by Lady Davers? 
The Supper was brought in sooner on my Account,
because I had had no Dinner; and there
passed very agreeable Compliments on the Occasion. 
Lady Darnford would help me first, because I had
so long fasted, as she said. Sir Simon would have
placed himself next me: And my Master said, he
thought it was best, where there was an equal Number
of Ladies and Gentlemen, that they should sit
intermingled, that the Gentlemen might be employ'd
in helping and serving the Ladies. Lady Darnford
said, She hoped Sir Simon would not sit above any
Ladies, at his own Table especially. Well, said he,
I shall fit over-against her however; and that's as well. 
My dearest Sir could not keep his Eye off me,
and seem'd generously to be delighted with all I did,
and all I said; and every one was pleased to see his
kind and affectionate Behaviour to me. 
Lady Jones brought up the Discourse about Lady
Davers again; and my Master said, I fear, Pamela
you have been hardly used, more than you'll say. I
know my Sister's passionate Temper too well, to
believe she could be over-civil to you, especially as
it happen'd so unluckily that I was out. If, added he,
she had had no Pique to you, my Dear, yet what
has passed between her and me, has so exasperated
her, that I know she would have quarrel'd with my
Horse, if she had thought I valued it, and nobody
else was in her way. Dear Sir, said I, don't say so
of good Lady Davers. 
Said he, Why, my Dear, I know she came on
purpose to quarrel; and had she not found herself
under a very violent Uneasiness, after what had passed
between us, and my Treatment of her Lord's
Letter, she would not have offer'd to come near
me. What sort of Language had she for me, Pamela? 
O, Sir, very good, only her well-manner'd
Brother, and such as that! 
Only, said he, 'tis taking up the Attention of the
Company disagreeably, or I could tell you almost
every Word she said. Lady Jones wish'd to hear a
further Account of my Lady's Conduct, and most
of the Company join'd with her, particularly Mrs.
Peters; who said, That as they knew the Story, and
Lady Davers's Temper, tho' she was very good in
the main, they could wish to be so agreeably entertain'd,
if he and I pleas'd; because they imagin'd I
should have no Difficulties after this. 
Tell me then, Pamela, said he, did she lift up her
Hand at you? Did she strike you? But I hope not! 
A little Slap of the Hand, said I, or so!––– Insolent
Woman! She did not, I hope, offer to strike your
Face? Why, said I, I was a little saucy once or
twice, and she would have given me a Cuff on the
Ear, if her Woman and Mrs. Jewkes had not interpos'd? 
Why did you not come out at the Door? 
Because, said I, her Ladyship sat her Chair against
it, one while, and another while lock'd it; else I
offer'd, several times, to get away. 
She knew I expected you here? You say, you
shew'd her my Letter to you? Yes, Sir, said I; but
I had better not; for she was then more exasperated,
and made strange Comments upon it. I doubt it
not, said he; but, did she not see, by the kind Epithets
in it, that there was room to think we were
marry'd? O, Sir, reply'd I, and made the Company
smile, she said, For that very Reason, she was sure I
was not marry'd. 
That's like my Sister! said he, exactly like her; 
and yet she lives very happily herself. For her poor
Lord never contradicts her. Indeed he dare not. 
You was a great many Wenches, was you not, my
Dear? for that's a great Word with her. —Yes, Sir,
said I, Wenches and Creatures out of Number; and
worse than all that. What? tell me, my Dear. Sir,
said I, I must not have you angry with Lady Davers. 
While you are so good to me, 'tis all nothing,
only the Trouble that I cannot be suffer'd to shew
how much I honour her Ladyship, as your Sister. 
Well, said he, you need not be afraid to tell me: 
I must love her, after all; tho' I shall not be pleas'd
with her on this Occasion. And I know it is her
mistaken Love for me, that makes her so uneasy; 
and, after all, she comes, I know, to be reconciled
to me; tho' it must be thro' a good hearty Quarrel
first. For she can shew a deal of Sun-shine; but it
must be always after a Storm. And I'll love her
dearly, if she has not been, and will not be, too
hard upon my Dearest. 
Mr. Peters said, Sir, you are very good, and very
kind. I love to see this Complaisance to your Sister,
tho' she be in Fault, so long as you can shew it with
so much Justice to the sweetest Innocence and Merit
in the World. By all that's good, Mr. Peters,
said he, I'd present my Sister with One thousand
Pounds, if she would kindly take my dear Pamela
by the Hand, and wish her Joy, and call her Sister! 
––– And yet I should be unworthy of the dear Creature
that smiles upon me there, if it was not principally
for her sake, and the Pleasure it would give
her, that I say this: For I will never be thoroughly
reconciled to my Sister, till she does; for I most
sincerely think, as to myself, that my dear Spouse,
there she sits, does me more Honour in her new
Relation, than she receives from me! 
Sir, said I, I am overwhelm'd with your Goodneess! 
—And my Eyes were filled with Tears of
Joy and Gratitude. And all the Company, with
one Voice, blessed him. And Lady Jones was pleased
to say, The Company and Behaviour of you two
happy Ones to each other, are the most edifying I
ever knew. I am always improv'd when I see you. 
How happy would every good Lady be with such
a Gentleman, and every good Gentlman with such
a Lady! —In short, you seem made for one another. 
O, Madam, said I, you are so kind, so good to
me, that I know not how to thank you enough. 
Said she, You deserve more than I can express; for,
to all who know your Story, you are a matchless
Person. You are an Ornament to our Sex, and
your Virtue, tho' your dear Spouse is so excellent
and generous as he is, has met with no more than
its due Reward. And God long bless you together. 
You are, said my dearest Sir, very good to me,
Madam, I am sure. I have taken Liberties in my
former Life, that deserved not so much Excellence. 
I have offended extremely, by Trials glorious to
my Pamela, but disgraceful to me, against a Virtue
that I now consider as almost sacred; and I shall
not think I deserve her, till I can bring my Manners,
my Sentiments, and my Actions, to a Conformity
with her own. And, in short, my Pamela, said he,
I want you to be nothing but what you are, and
have been. You cannot be better; and if you
could, it would be but filling me with Despair to
attain the awful Heights of Virtue, at which you are
arrived. Perhaps, added the dear Gentleman, the
Scene I have beheld within these twelve Hours, has
made me more serious than otherwise I should have
been; But I'll assure you, before all this good Company,
I speak the Sentiments of my Heart; and those
not of this Day only. 
What a happy Daughter is yours, O my dear Father
and Mother! I owe it all to God's Grace, and
yours and my good Lady's Instructions; and to these
let me always look back with grateful Acknowledgments,
that I may not impute to myself, and be
proud, my very great Happiness. 
The Company were so kindly pleas'd with our
Concerns, and my dear Master's Goodness, that he
observing their Indulgence, and being himself curious
to know what had pass'd between my Lady and
me, repeated his Question, What she had call'd me
besides Wench and Creature? And I said, My Lady,
supposing I was wicked, lamented over me very
kindly, my Depravity and Fall, and said what a
thousand Pities it was, so much Virtue, as she was
pleas'd to say, was so destroy'd, and that I had yielded
after so noble a Stand, as she said. 
Excuse me, Gentlemen and Ladies, said I; you
know my Story, it seems; and I am commanded by
one, who has a Title to all my Obedience, to proceed. 
They gave all of them Bows of Approbation, that
they might not interrupt me; and I continued my
Story.— 
I told her Ladyship, continued I, that I was still
innocent, and would be so, and it was injurious to
suppose me otherwise! Why, tell me, Wench, said
she,—but I think I must not tell you what she said. 
Yes, do, said my Master, to clear my Sister; we
shall think it very bad else. 
I held my Hand before my Face, and said, Why,
she said, Tell me, Wench, hast thou not been a-bed
with thy Master! —That she said. —And when I
said, she ask'd strange Questions, and in strange
Words, she ridicul'd my Delicacy, as she call'd it,
and said my Niceness would not last long. She said,
I must know I was not really marry'd, that my 
Ring was only a Sham, and all was my Cunning to
cloak my yielding, and get better Terms: She said,
she knew the World as much at Thirty-two, as I
did at Sixteen; and bid me remember that. 
I took the Liberty to say, (but I got a good way
off) That I scorn'd her Ladyship's Words, and was as
much marry'd as her Ladyship. And then, Goodsirs,
I had certainly been cuff'd, if her Woman had
not interposed, and told her I was not worth her
Anger; and that I was as much to be pitied for my
Credulity, as despis'd for my Vanity. 
My poor Pamela, said my Master, this was too-too
hard upon you! O Sir, said I, how much
easier it was to me, than if it had been so! —That
would have broke my Heart quite! —For then I
should have deserv'd it all, and worse; and these Reproaches,
added to my own Guilt, would have made
me truly wretched! 
Lady Darnford, at whose Right-hand I sat, kissed
me with a kind of Rapture, and call'd me a sweet
Exemplar for all my Sex. Mr. Peters said very
handsome Things. So did Mr. Perry; and Sir Simon
had Tears in his Eyes, and said to my Master, Why,
Neighbour, Neighbour, this is excellent, by my
Troth. I believe there is something in Virtue,
that we had not well considered. On my Soul there
has been but one Angel come down for these thousand
Years, and you have got her. 
Well, my Dearest, said my Master, pray proceed
with your Story till we have done Supper, since the
Ladies seem pleas'd with it. Why, Sir, said I, her
Ladyship went on in the same manner; but said one
time, (and held me by the Hand) she would give me
a hundred Guineas for one provoking Word, or if
I would but say, I believ'd myself marry'd, that she
might sell me at her Foot. But, Sir, you must not
be angry with her Ladyship. She call'd me Painted 
Dirt, Baby-face, Waiting-maid, Beggar-brat, and
Beggar-born; but I said, as long as I knew my Innocence,
I was easy in every thing, but to have my
dear Parents abused. I said, they were never Beggars,
nor beholden to any body; nor to any thing
but God's Grace, and their own Labour: That they
once lived in Credit; that Misfortunes might befal
any body; and that I could not bear they should
be treated so undeservedly. 
Then her Ladyship said, Ay, she supposed my
Master's Folly would make us now set up for a Family,
and that the Herald's Office would shortly be
search'd to make it out. 
Exactly my Sister again! said he. So you could
not please her any way? 
No, indeed, Sir. When she commanded me
to fill her a Glass of Wine, and would not let her
Woman do it, she ask'd, If I was above it? I then
said, If, to attend your Ladyship at Table, or even
kneel at your Feet, was requir'd of me, I would
most gladly do it, were I only the Person you think
me. But, if it be to triumph over one, who has
received Honours that she thinks require from her
another Part, that she may not be utterly unworthy
of them, I must say, I cannot do it. This quite
astonish'd her Ladyship; and a little before, her
Kinsman brought me the Bottle and Glass, and
requir'd me for fill it for my Lady at her Command,
and call'd himself my Deputy; and I said, 'Tis in a
good Hand; help my Lady yourself. So, Sir, added
I, you see I could be a little saucy upon Occasion. 
You please me well, my Pamela, said he. This
was quite right. But proceed. 
Her Ladyship said, She was astonish'd! adding,
She suppos'd I would have her look upon me as her
Brother's Wife: And ask'd me, What, in the Name 
of Impudence, possessed me, to dare to look upon
myself as her Sister! And I said, That was a Question
better became her most worthy Brother to
answer than me. And then I thought I should have
had her Ladyship upon me; but her Woman interposed. 
I afterwards told Mrs. Jewkes at the Window,
That since I was hinder'd from going to you, I believ'd
it was best to let Robert go with the Chariot, and
say, Lady Davers was come, and I could not leave
her Ladyship. But this did not please, and I thought
it would, too; for she said, No, no, he'll think I
make the Creature my Companion, and know not
how to part with her. 
Exactly, said he, my Sister again! 
And she said, I knew nothing what belong'd to
People of Condition; how should I? —What shall
I say, Madam? said I. Nothing at all, answer'd she; 
let him expect his dearest Love, alluding to your kind
Epithet in your Letter, and be disappointed; it is
but adding a few more Hours to this heavy Absence,
and every one will become a Day in his amorous
Account. 
So, to be short, I saw nothing to be done, and I
fear'd, Sir, you would wonder at my Stay, and be
angry; and I watch'd my Opportunity, while my
Lady, who was walking about the Room, was at the
further End; and the Parlour being a Ground-floor
in a manner, I jump'd out of the Window, and run
for it. 
Her Ladyship call'd after me; so did her Woman; 
and I heard her say, I flew like a Bird; and she
call'd to two of her Servants in Sight to stop me; 
but I said, Touch me at your Peril, Fellows. And
Mr. Colbrand having been planted at hand by Mrs.
Jewkes, (who was very good in the whole Affair,)
and incurr'd her Ladyship's Displeasure, once or 
twice, by taking my Part, seeing how I was us'd)
put on a fierce Look, cock'd his Hat with one Hand,
and put t'other on his Sword, and said, He would
chine the Man who offer'd to touch his Lady. And
so he ran a long-side of me, and could hardly keep
Pace with me: —And here, my dear Sir, concluded I,
I am, at yours, and the good Company's Service. 
They seem'd highly pleas'd with my Relation; 
and my Master said, he was glad Mrs. Jewkes behav'd
so well, as also Mr. Colbrand. Yes, Sir, said
I, when Mrs. Jewkes interposed once, her Ladyship
said, It was hard, she, who was born in that House,
could not have some Privilege in it, without being
talk'd to by the saucy Servants. And she call'd her
another time Fat-face, and woman'd her most violently. 
Well, said my Master, I am glad, my Dear, you
have had such an Escape. My Sister was always passionate,
as Mrs. Peters knows. And my poor Mother
had enough to do with us both. For we neither
of us wanted Spirit; and when I was a Boy, I
never came home from School or College, for a
few Days, but tho' we long'd to see one another before,
yet ere the first Day was over, we had a Quarrel; 
for she being seven Years older than me, was
always for domineering over me, and I could not
bear it. And I used, on her frequently quarrelling
with the Maids, and being always a Word and a
Blow, to call her Captain Bab; for her Name is
Barbara. And when my Lord Davers courted her,
my poor Mother has made up Quarrels between
them three times in a Day; and I, used to tell her,
she would certainly beat her Husband, marry whom
she would, if he did not beat her first, and break her
Spirit. 
Yet has she, continued he, very good Qualities. She
was a dutiful Daughter, is a good Wife; she is bountiful 
to her Servants, firm in her Friendships, charitable
to the Poor, and, I believe, never any Sister
better loved a Brother, than she me: And yet, she
always lov'd to vex and teaze me; and as I would
bear a Resentment longer than she, she'd be one
Moment the most provoking Creature in the World,
and the next would do any thing to be forgiven; and
I have made her, when she was the Aggressor, follow
me all over the House and Garden to be upon
good Terms with me. 
But this Case piques her the more, because she had
found out a Match for me, in the Family of a
Person of Quality, and had set her Heart upon bringing
it to Effect, and had even proceeded far in it,
without my Knowledge, and brought me into the
Lady's Company, unknowing of her Design: But I
was then averse to Matrimony at all; and was
angry at her proceeding in it so far without my
Privity or Encouragement: And she cannot, for
this Reason, bear the Thoughts of my being
now marry'd; and to her Mother's Waiting-maid
too, as she reminds my dear Pamela, when I had
declin'd her Proposal with the Daughter of a noble
Earl. 
This is the whole Case, said he; and allowing for
the Pride and Violence of her Spirit, and that she
knows not, as I do, the transcendent Excellencies of
my dear Spouse, and that all her View, in her own
Conception, is, mine and my Family's Honour, she
is a little to be allow'd for. Tho' never fear, my
Pamela, but that I, who never had a Struggle with
her, that I did not get the better, will do you Justice,
and myself too. 
This Account of Lady Davers pleas'd every body,
and was far from being to her Ladyship's Disadvantage
in the main: And I would do any thing in the
World to have the Honour to be in her Ladyship's 
good Graces. Yet I fear it will not be easily, if at all
effected. But I will proceed! 
After Supper, nothing would serve Miss Darnford
and Miss Boroughs, but we must have a Dance,
and Mr. Peters, who plays a good Fiddle, urg'd it
forward; my dear Master, tho' in a Riding-dress,
danc'd (and danc'd sweetly) with Miss Boroughs. 
Sir Simon, for a Gentleman of his Years, danc'd
well, and took me out; but put on one of his free
Jokes, that I was fitter to dance with a younger
Gentleman; and he would have it, tho' I had not
danc'd since my dear Lady's Death to signify, except
once or twice to please Mrs. Jervis, and indeed
believ'd all my dancing Days over, that as my
Master and I were the best Dancers, we should dance
once together before Folks, as the odd Gentleman
said; and my dear Sir was pleas'd to oblige him: 
And he afterwards danc'd with Miss Darnford, who
I think has much more Skill and Judgment than I; 
tho' they compliment me with an easier Shape and
Air. 
We left the Company, with great Difficulty, at
about Eleven, my dear Master having been up all
Night before, and we being at the greatest Distance
from Home; tho' they seem'd inclinable not to
break up so soon, as they were Neighbours; and
the Ladies said they long'd to hear what would be
the End of Lady Davers's Interview with her Brother. 
My Master said, He fear'd we must not now
think of going next Day to Bedfordshire, as we
had intended, and perhaps might see them again. 
And so we took Leave, and set out for Home; where
we arriv'd not till Twelve o' Clock; and found
Lady Davers had gone to Bed about Eleven, wanting sadly that we should come home first; but so
did not I. 
Mrs. Jewkes told us, That my Lady was sadly
fretted, that I had got away so; and seem'd a little
apprehensive of what I would say of the Usage I had
receiv'd from her. She ask'd Mrs. Jewkes, If she
thought I was really marry'd? And Mrs. Jewkes telling
her, Yes, she fell into a Passion, and said, Begone,
bold Woman; I cannot bear thee. See not
my Face till I send for thee. Thou hast been very
impudent to me once or twice to-day already, and
art now worse than ever. She said, She would not
have told her Ladyship, if she had not ask'd her; 
and was sorry she had offended. 
She sent for her at Supper-time; Said she, I have
another Question to ask thee, Woman, and tell me
Yes, if thou darest. Was ever any thing so odd? — 
Why then, said Mrs. Jewkes, I will say No, before
your Ladyship speaks. —My Master laugh'd, Poor
Woman! said he. —She call'd her insolent, and
Assurance; and said, Begone, bold Woman as thou
art; –––but come hither. Dost thou know if that
young Harlot is to lie with my Brother to-night? 
She said, she knew not what to answer, because
she had threaten'd her, if she said Yes. But at last,
my Lady said, I will know the Bottom of this Iniquity. 
I suppose they won't have so much Impudence to lie
together, while I'm in the House; but I dare say
they have been Bed-fellows. 
Said she, I will lie to-night in the Room I was
born in; so get that Bed ready. That Room being our
Bed-chamber, Mrs. Jewkes, after some Hesitation,
reply'd, Madam, my Master lies there, and has the Key. 
I believe, Woman, said she, thou tellest me a Story
Indeed Madam, said she, he does; and has some
Papers there he will let nobody see; for Mrs. Jewkes
said, she fear'd she would beat her, if she went up,
and found by my Cloaths, and some of my Master's,
how it was. 
So she said, I will then lie in the best Room, as
it is called; and Jackey shall lie in the little green
Room adjoining to it. Has thy Master got the Key
of those? ––– No, Madam, said Mrs. Jewkes; I
will order them to be made ready for your Ladyship. 
And where dost thou lay thy pursy Sides, said
she? Up two Pair of Stairs, Madam, next the Garden
And where lies the young Harlotry, continued
she? Sometimes with me, Madam, said she. And
sometimes with thy virtuousMaster, I suppose, said my
Lady.––– Ha, Woman! what say'st thou? I must not
speak, said Mrs. Jewkes. Well, thou mayst go, said
she; but thou hast the Air of a Secret-keeper of that
sort: I dare say thou'lt set the good Work forward
most cordially. Poor Mrs. Jewkes! said my Master,
and laugh'd most heartily. 
This Talk we had whilst we were undressing. 
So she and her Woman lay together in the Room
my Master lay in before I was happy. 
I said, Dear Sir, pray in the Morning let me lock
myself up in the Closet, as soon as you rise; and
not be call'd down for ever so much; for I am
afraid to see her Ladyship: And I will employ
myself about my Journal, while these Things are in
my Head. Don't be afraid, my Dear, said he; am
not I with you? 
Mrs. Jewkes pity'd me for what I had undergone in
the Day; and I said, We won't make the worst of
it to my dear Master, because we won't exasperate
where we would reconcile; but, added I, I am much
oblig'd to you, Mrs. Jewkes, and I thank you. Said
my Master, I hope she did not beat your Lady, Mrs.
Jewkes? Not much, Sir, said she; but I believe I
sav'd my Lady once: Yet, added she, I was most vex'd
at the young Lord. Ay, Mrs. Jewkes, said my Master,
let me know his Behaviour. I can chastise 
him, tho' I cannot my Sister, who is a Woman; 
let me therefore know the Part he acted. 
Nothing, my dear Sir, said I, but Impertinence,
if I may so say, and Foolishness, that was very
provoking; but I spar'd him not, and so there is no
Room, Sir, for your Anger. No, Sir, said Mrs.
Jewkes, nothing else indeed. 
How was her Woman? said my Master. Pretty
impertinent, reply'd Mrs. Jewkes, as Ladies Women
will be. But, said I, you know she sav'd me once or
twice. Very true, Madam, retturn'd Mrs. Jewkes. 
And she said to me at Table, continued she, that
you was a sweet Creature; she never saw your
Equal; but that you had a Spirit, and she was sorry
you answer'd her Lady so, who never bore so much
Contradiction before. I told her, added Mrs. Jewkes,
that if I was in your Ladyship's Place, I should have
taken much more upon me, and that you was all
Sweetness. And she said, I was got over, she saw. 