



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

I have just now had a specimen of what the resentment
of this dear creature will be when quite recovered: 
An affecting one! —For, entering her apartment
after Dorcas; and endeavouring to sooth and
pacify her disordered mind; in the midst of my blandishments,
she held up to Heaven, in a speechless
agony, the innocent Licence (which she has in her
own power); as the poor distressed Catalans held up
their English treaty, on an occasion that keeps the
worst of my actions in countenance. 
She seemed about to call down vengeance upon me; 
when, happily, the Leaden God, in pity to her trembling
Lovelace, waved over her half-drowned eyes his
somniferous wand, and laid asleep the fair Exclaimer,
before she could go half thro' with her intended imprecation. 
Thou wilt guess, by what I have written, that some
little Art has been made use of: But it was with a generous
design (if thou'lt allow me the word on such an
occasion) in order to lessen the too quick sense she was 

likely to have of what she was to suffer. A contrivance
I never had occasion for before, and had not thought
of now, if Mrs. Sinclair had not proposed it to me: To
whom I left the management of it: And I have done
nothing but curse her ever since, lest the quantity
should have for ever damped her charming intellects. 
Hence my concern—For I think the poor Lady
ought not to have been so treated. Poor Lady, did I
say? —What have I to do with thy creeping style? — 
But have not I the worst of it; since her insensibility
has made me but a thief to my own joys? 
I did not intend to tell thee of this little innocent
trick; for such I designed it to be; but that I hate
disingenuousness: To thee, especially: And as I cannot
help writing in a more serious vein than usual, thou
wouldst perhaps, had I not hinted the true cause, have
imagined that I was sorry for the fact itself: And this
would have given thee a good deal of trouble in scribbling
dull persuasives to repair by Matrimony; and
me, in reading thy crude nonsense. Besides, one day
or other, thou mightest, had I not confessed it, have
heard of it in an aggravated manner; and I know
thou hast such an high opinion of this Lady's virtue,
that thou wouldst be disappointed, if thou hadst reason
to think, that she was subdued by her own consent, or
any the least yielding in her will. And so is she beholden
to me, in some measure, that, at the expence
of my honour, she may so justly form a plea, which
will intirely salve hers. 
And now is the whole secret out. 
Thou wilt say I am a horrid fellow! —As the Lady
does, that I am the unchained Beelzebub, and a plotting
villain: And as this is what you both said beforehand,
and nothing worse can be said, I desire, if thou wouldst
not have me quite serious with thee, and that I should
think thou meanest more by thy Tilting hint, than I
am willing to believe thou dost, that thou wilt forbear 

thy invectives: For is not the thing done? —Can it
be helped? —And must I not now try to make the
best of it? —And the rather do I enjoin thee this, and
inviolable secrecy; because I begin to think, that my
punishment will be greater than the fault, were it to
be only from my own reflection. 