


Miss Emily Jervois, To Lady Grandison. 


Sat. May 19. 
I have something to communicate to you, my dear
Lady Grandison, and take your advice about: yet,
so young a creature as I am, I am quite ashamed. But
you must keep my secret from every living soul, and
from my guardian too, for the present, since in writing
to you, I think I write to him, as you know all
his heart, and are so prudent a Lady. It is true, I
was, (or I might have been, I should rather say) a forward
girl with regard to him: But then my whole heart
was captivated by his perfections, by his greatness of
mind; that was all. May not a creature, tho' ever
so young, admire a good man's goodness? May she
not have a deep sense of gratitude for kindness conferred? 
That gratitude may indeed, as she grows
up, engage her too deeply; and I found myself in
danger; but made my escape in time. Thank God!
–––and thank you, who assisted me!–––what an excellent
Lady are you, that one can speak to you of
these tender matters! But you are the Queen of our
Sex, and sit inthroned, holding out your scepter in
pity to one poor girl, and raising another, and another; 
for it is glory enough for you to call the man
yours, for whom so many hearts have sighed in
secret. 

But this was always my way–––I never sat myself
down to write to my guardian or to you, but my preambles
were longer than my matter–––To the point
then–––but be sure keep my secret––– 
Here every-body is fond of Sir Edward Beauchamp. 
He is indeed a very agreeable man. Next to my
guardian, I think him the most agreeable of men. 
He is aways coming down to us. I cannot but see
that he is particularly obliging to me. I really believe,
young as I am, he loves me: But every body is so
silent about him: yet they slide away, and leave us
together very often. It looks as if all favoured him; 
yet would not interfere. He has not made any
declaration of love neither. –––I am so young a creature,
you know; and to be sure he is a very prudent
man. 
My guardian dearly loves him–––who does not? 
His address is so gentle: His words are so soothing:
His voice–––To be sure he is a very amiable man! 
Now tell me freely–––Do you think my guardian (but
pray only sound him–––I am so young a creature,
you know) would be displeased if matters were to
come to something in time? —Three or four
years hence, suppose, if Sir Edward would think it
worth while to stay for so silly a creature? –––I would
not think of sooner. –––If not, I would not allow myself
to be so much in his company, you know. 
He has a very good estate; and tho' he is ten or
twelve years older than I; yet he never will be more
than that; since every year that goes over his head,
will go over mine likewise–––So you will be pleased
to give me your opinion. 
And here all the world is for marrying, I think. 
Miss Selby is as good as gone, you know. Her brother
courts Miss Patty Holles: Miss Kitty is not
without her humble servant. Nay, Miss Nancy Selby,
for that matter—But let these intelligences come from
themselves. 

You, my dear Lady Grandison, have led up this
dance–––So happy as you are–––I think it is a right
thing for young women to marry when young men
are so desirous to copy Sir Charles Grandison. 
Hasten to me your advice, if but in six lines. We
expect Sir Edward down next week. I must like his
company, because he is always telling us one charming
thing or other of my guardian; and because he
so sincerely rejoices in your happiness and his. 
God continue it to you both. This is our prayer
night and morning, for our own sakes, as well as
yours, believe 
Your ever-obliged and affectionate
Emily Jervois. 

