



I will now, my dearest, my best beloved Correspondent
of all, begin, since the tender Age of
my dear Babies will not permit me to have an Eye
yet to their better Part, to tell you, what are the little
Matters, to which I am not quite so well reconcil'd,
in Mr. Locke: And this I shall be better enabled
to do, by my Observations upon the Temper
and natural Bent of my dear Miss Goodwin, as well
as by those, which my Visits to the bigger Children
of my little School, and those at the Cottages adjacent, 

have enabled me to make: For human Nature,
Sir, you are not to be told, is human Nature, whether
in the High-born, or in the Low. 
This excellent Author, in his Fifty-second Section,
having justly disallow'd of slavish and corporal
Punishments in the Education of those we would
have to be wise, good, and ingenious Men, adds:–––– 
‘On the other side, to flatter Children by Rewards
of Things, that are pleasant to them, is as
carefully to be avoided. He that will give his
Son Apples, or Sugar-plums, or what else of this
kind he is most delighted with, to make him learn
his Book, does but authorize his Love of Pleasure,
and cockers up that dangerous Propensity, which
he ought, by all means, to subdue and stifle in
him. You can never hope to teach him to master
it, whilst you compound for the Check you give
his Inclination in one Place, by the Satisfaction
you propose to it in another: To make a good, a
wise, and a virtuous Man, 'tis fit he should learn
to cross his Appetite, and deny his Inclination to
Riches, Finery, or pleasing his Palate, &c.’ 
This, Sir, is excellently said; but is it not a little
too philosophical and abstracted, not only for
the Generality of Children, but for the Age he supposes
them to be of, if one may guess by the Apples
and the Sugar-plums proposed for the Rewards of
their Well-doing? Would not this, Sir, require
that Memory or Reflection in Children, which the
same Author, in another Place, calls the Concomitant
of Prudence and Age, and not of Childhood? 
It is undoubtedly very right, to check an unreasonable
Appetite, and that at its first Appearance:
But if so small and so reasonable an Inducement 

will prevail, surely, Sir, it might be comply'd with. 
A generous Mind takes Delight to win over others
by good Usage and Mildness, rather than by Severity; 
and it must be a great Pain to such a one, to be
always inculcating, on his Children or Pupils, the
Doctrine of Self-denial, by Methods quite grievous
to his own Nature. 
What I would then humbly propose, is, That
the Encouragements offer'd to Youth, should, indeed,
be innocent ones, as the Gentleman injoins,
and not such as would lead to Luxury, either of
Food or Apparel: But I humbly think it necessary,
that Rewards, proper Rewards, should be propos'd,
as Incentives to laudable Actions: For is it not by
this Method, that the whole World is influenc'd
and govern'd? Does not God himself, by Rewards
and Punishments, make it our Interest, as well as our
Duty, to obey Him? And can we propose to ourselves,
for the Government of our Children, a better
Example than that of the Creator? 
This fine Author seems, dear Sir, to think he
had been a little of the strictest, and liable to some
Exception. ‘I say not this, proceeds he, (§ 53.) that
I would have Children kept from the Conveniencies
or Pleasures of Life, that are not injurious to
their Health or Virtue. On the contrary, I would
have their Lives made as pleasant and as agreeable
to them as may be, in a plentiful Enjoyment of
whatsoever might innocently delight them.’ And
yet, dear Sir, he immediately subjoins a very hard
and difficult Proviso, to the Indulgence he has
now granted:—‘Provided, says he, it be with
this Caution, That they have those Enjoyments
only as the Consequences of the State of Esteem 

and Acceptation they are in with their Parents
and Governors.’ 
I doubt, my dear Mr. B. this is expecting such
a Distinction and Discretion in Children, as they
are seldom capable of in their tender Years, and requiring
such Capacities as are not commonly to be
met with: So that it is not prescribing to the Generality,
as this excellent Author intended. 'Tis, I
humbly conceive, next to impossible, that their
tender Minds should distinguish beyond Facts. They
covet this or that Plaything, and the Parent, or
Governor, takes Advantage of its Desires, and annexes
to the Indulgence which the Child hopes for,
such or such a Task or Duty, as a Condition; and
shews himself pleas'd with its Compliance with it:
So the Child wins its Plaything, and receives the
Praise and Commendation so necessary to lead on
young Minds to laudable Pursuits. But, dear Sir,
shall it not be suffer'd to enjoy the innocent Reward
of its Compliance, unless it can give Satisfaction,
that its greatest Delight is not in having the Thing
coveted, but in performing the Task, or obeying
the Injunctions, impos'd upon it as a Condition of
its being oblig'd? I doubt, Sir, this is a little too
strict, and not to be expected from Children. A
Servant, full-grown, would not be able to shew,
that, on Condition he comply'd with such and such
Terms, (which, it is to be suppos'd, by the Offer,
he would not have comply'd with, but for that Inducement)
he should have such and such a Reward; 
I say, he would hardly be able to shew, that he preferr'd
the Pleasure of performing the require Gonditions
to the stipulated Reward. Nor is it necessary
he should; for he is not the less a good Servant, or 

a virtuous Man, if he own the Conditions painful,
and the Reward necessary to his low State in the
World, and that otherwise he would not undergo
any Service at all. —Why then should this be exacted
from a Child? 
Let therefore, if I may presume to say so, innocent
Rewards be propos'd, and let us be contented
to lead on the ductile Minds of Children to a Love
of their Duty, by obliging them with such: We
may tell them what we expect in this Case; but we
ought not, I humbly conceive, to be too rigorous
in exacting it; for, after all, the Inducement will
certainly be the uppermost Consideration with the
Child: 'Tis out of Nature to suppose it otherwise; 
nor, as I hinted, had it been offer'd to it, if the
Parent himself had not thought so. And therefore
we can only let the Child know his Duty in this
respect, and that he ought to give a Preference to
that; and then rest ourselves contented, altho' we
should discern, that the Reward is the chief Incentive,
if it do but oblige to the Performance of it. 
For this, from whatever Motive inculcated, may
beget a Habit in the Child of doing it; and then,
as it improves in Years, one may hope, Reason will
take place, and enable him, from the most solid
and durable Motives, to give a Preference to the
Duty. 
Upon the Whole, then, may I, Sir, venture to
say, That we should not insist upon it, that the
Child should so nicely distinguish away its little innate
Passions, as if we expected it to be born a Philosopher? 
Self-denial is indeed a most excellent
Doctrine, to be inculcated into Children; and it
must be done early too: But we must not be too severe 

in our exacting it; for a Duty too rigidly insisted
upon, will make it odious. This Mr. Locke himself
excellently observes in another Place, on the
Head of too great Severity; which he illustrates by
a familiar Comparison: ‘Offensive Circumstances,
says he, ordinarily affect innocent Things, which
they are joined with. And the very Sight of a
Cup, wherein any one uses to take nauseous Physick,
turns his Stomach; so that nothing will relish
well out of it, tho' the Cup be never so clean and
well-shap'd, and of the richest Materials.’ 
Permit me, dear Sir, to add, That Mr. Locke
proceeds to explain himself still more rigorously on
the Subject of Rewards; which I quote, to shew I
have not misunderstood him: ‘But these Enjoyments,
says he, should never be offer'd or bestow'd
on Children, as the Rewards of this or
that particular Performance, that they shew an
Aversion to, or to which they would not have apply'd
themselves without that Temptation.’ If, my
dear Mr. B. the Minds of Children can be led on
by innocent Inducements to the Performance of a
Duty, of which they are capable, what I have humbly
offer'd, is enough, I presume, to convince one,
that it may be done. But if ever a particular Study
be propos'd to be master'd, or a Byas to be overcome,
(that is not an indispensable Requisite to his
future Life or Morals) to which the Child shews an
Aversion, I would not, methinks, have him be too
much tempted, much less compell'd, to conquer or
subdue it, especially if it appear to be a natural or
rivetted Aversion. 
For, Sir, permit me to observe, that the Education
and Studies of Children ought, as much as 

possible, to be suited to their Capacities and Inclinations:
And, by this means, we may expect to
have always useful, and often great Men, in different
Professions: For, that Genius, which does
not prompt to the Prosecution of one Study, may
shine in another no less necessary Part of Science. 
But, if the Promise of innocent Rewards would
conquer this Aversion, yet they should not be applied
with this View; for the best Consequence
that can be hop'd for, will be tolerable Skill in one
thing, instead of most excellent in another. 
Nevertheless, I must repeat, that if, as the
Child grows up, and is capable of so much Reason,
that, from the Love of the Inducement, one can
raise his Mind to the Love of the Duty, it should
be done by all means. But, my dear Mr. B. I am
afraid, that that Parent or Tutor will meet but
with little Success, who, in a Child's tender Years,
shall refuse to comply with its Foibles, till he sees
it values its Duty, and the Pleasure of obeying its
Commands, beyond the little Enjoyment on which
its Heart is fixed. For, as I humbly conceive, that
Mind, which can be brought to prefer its Duty to
its Appetites, will want little of the Perfection of
the wisest Philosophers. 
Besides, Sir, permit me to say, That I am
afraid, this perpetual Opposition between the Passions
of the Child, and the Duty to be inforced,
especially when it sees how other Children are indulg'd,
(for if this Regimen could be observ'd by
any, it would be impossible it should become general,
while the fond and the inconsiderate Parents
are so large a Part of Mankind) will cow and dispirit
a Child; and will, perhaps, produce a Necessity 

of making use of Severity, to subdue him to this
Temper of Self-denial; for if the Child refuses, the
Parent must insist; and what will be the Consequence? 
—Must it not introduce a harsher Discipline
than this Gentleman allows of? —And which,
I presume to say, did never yet do Good to any,
but to slavish and base Spirits, if to them: A Discipline
which Mr. Locke every-where justly condemns. 
See here, dear Sir, a Specimen of the Presumption
of your Girl: What will she come to in time?
you will perhaps say—Her next Step will be to
arraign myself. —No, no, dear Sir, don't think
so: For my Duty, my Love, and my Reverence,
shall be your Guards, and defend you from every
thing saucy in me, but the bold Approaches of my
Gratitude; which shall always testify for me, how
much I am 
Your obliged and dutiful
P. B. 

