



Mr. Mowbray, To John Belford, Esq; 

Uxbridge, Sunday morn. 9 o'Clock. 
Dear Jack,
I send you inclosed a letter from Mr. Lovelace; 
which, tho' written in the cursed Algebra, I know to
be such a one as will shew what a queer way he is in; for
he read it to us with the air of a tragedian. You will see by
it what the mad fellow had intended to do, if we had not all
of us interposed. He was actually setting out with a Surgeon
of this place, to have the lady opened and embalmed. 
—Rot me if it be not my full persuasion, that if he had,
her heart would have been found to be either iron or marble. 
We have got Lord M. to him. His Lordship is also
much afflicted at the Lady's death. His sisters and nieces,
he says, will be ready to break their hearts. What a rout's
here about a woman? For after all she was no more. 
We have taken a pailful of black bull's blood from him; 
and this has lowered him a little. But he threatens Colonel
Morden, he threatens you for your cursed reflections
(Cursed reflections indeed, Jack!) and curses all the world
and himself still. 
Last night his mourning (which is full as deep as for a
wife) was brought home, and his fellows mourning too. 
And tho' 8 o'clock he would put it on and make them attend
him in theirs. 
Every-body blames him on this Lady's account. But I
see not for why. She was a vixen in her virtue. And her
relations are ten times more to blame than he. I will prove
this to the teeth of them all. If they could use her ill, why
should they expect him to use her well? —You, or I, or
Tourville, in his shoes, would have done as he has done. 
Are not all the girls forwarned? —‘Has he done by her
as that Caitiffe Miles did to the farmer's daughter, whom
he tricked up to town (a pretty girl also, just such another
as Bob's Rosebud!) under a notion of waiting on a lady
—Drill'd her on, pretending the lady was abroad. Drank
her light-hearted; then carried her to a Play; then it
was too late, you know, to see the pretended lady: Then
to a Bagnio: Ruined her, as they call it, and all the 

same day. Kept her on (an ugly dog too!) a fortnight
or three weeks; then left her to the mercy of the people
of the Bagnio (never paying for any thing;) who
stript her of all her cloaths, and because she would not
take on, threw her into prison; where she died in want
and in despair!” —A true story thou knowest, Jack— 
This fellow deserved to be damn'd. But has our Bob been
such a villain as this? —And would he not have married
this flinty-hearted lady? —So he is justified very evidently. 
Why then should such cursed quawms take him? —Who
would have thought he had been such poor blood? Now
(Rot the puppy!) to see him sit silent in a corner, when he
has tired himself with his mock-majesty, and with his argumentation
(who so fond of arguefying as he?) and teaching
his shadow to make mouths against the wainscot— 
Lords-zounter, if I have patience with him! 
But he has had no rest for these ten days: That's the
thing! —You must write to him; and pr'ythee coax him,
Jack, and send him what he writes for, and give him all
his way: There will be no bearing him else. And get
the lady buried as fast as you can; and don't let him know
where. 
This letter should have gone yesterday. We told him
it did. But were in hopes he would not have inquired
after it again. But he raves as he has not any answer. 
What he vouchsafed to read of other of your letters has
give my Lord such a curiosity, as makes him desire you
to continue your accounts. Pray do: But not in your
hellish Araback; and we will let the poor fellow only into
what we think fitting for his present way. 
I live a cursed dull poking life here. With what I so
lately saw of poor Belton, and what I now see of this
charming fellow, I shall be as crazy as he soon, or as dull
as thou, Jack; so must seek for better company in town
than either of you. I have been forced to read sometimes
to divert me; and you know I hate reading. It
presently sets me into a sit of drowsiness, and then I yawn
and stretch like a devil. 
Yet in Dryden's Palemon and Arcite have I just now
met with a passage, that has in it much of our Bob's case. 
These are some of the lines. 

Mr. Mowbray then recites some lines from that poem describing
a distracted man, and runs the parallel; and
then priding himself in his performance; says, 
Let me tell you that had I begun to write as early as you
and Lovelace, I might have cut as good a figure as either
of you. Why not? But boy or man I ever hated a book. 
'Tis a folly to lie. I loved action, my boy. I hated
droning; and have led in former days more boys from their
book, than ever my master made to profit by it. Kicking
and cuffing and orchard-robbing, were my early glory. 
But I am tired of writing. I never wrote such a long
letter in my life. My wrists and my fingers and thumb
ake damnably. The pen is an hundred weight at the least. 
And my eyes are ready to drop out of my head upon the
paper. —The cramp but this minute in my fingers. Rot
the goose and the goose-quill! I will write no more long
letters for a twelvemonth to come. Yet one word: We
think the mad fellow coming to. Adieu. 