


My dear Master is all Love and Tenderness! He
sees' my Weakness, and he generously pities
and comforts me! I begg'd to be excus'd Supper; 
but he brought me down himself from my Closet; 
and plac'd me by him, bidding Abraham not wait. 
I could not eat, and yet I try'd, for fear he should be
angry. He kindly forbore to hint any thing of the
dreadful, yet delightful to-morrow! and put, now-and-then,
a little Bit on my Plate, and guided it to
my Mouth. I was concern'd to receive his Goodness
with so ill a Grace. Well, said he, if you won't
eat with me, drink at least, with me: I drank two
Glasses by his Over-persuasions, and said, I am really
asham'd of myself. Why, indeed, said he, my dear
Girl, I am not a very dreadful Enemy, I hope! 
I cannot bear any thing that is the least concerning
to you. Oh! Sir, said I, all is owing to the Sense
I have of my own Unworthiness! —To be sure, it
cannot be any thing else. 
He rung for the Things to be taken away! And
then reach'd a Chair, and sat down by me, and put
his kind Arms about me, and said the most generous
and affecting Things that ever dropt from the Honey-flowing
Mouth of Love! All I have not time to
repeat. Some I will; and oh! indulge your foolish
Daughter, who troubles you with her weak Nonsense; 
because what she has to say, is so affecting to
her; and because, if she went to-bed, instead of
scribbling, she cannot sleep. 
This sweet Confusion and Thoughtfulness in my
beloved Pamela, said the kind Man, on the near
Prospect of our happy Union, when I hope all
Doubts are clear'd up, and nothing of Dishonour is
apprehended, shew me most abundantly, what a
Wretch I was to attempt such Purity with a worse
Intention! ––– No wonder, that one so virtuous,
should find herself deserted of Life itself, on a Violence
so dreadful to her Honour, and refuge herself
in the Shadow of Death. —But now, my dearest
Pamela, that you have seen a Purity on my Side, as
nearly imitating your own, as our Sex can shew to
yours; and that I have, all the Day long, suppress'd
even the least Intimation of the coming Day, that I
might not alarm your tender Mind; why all this
Concern, why all this affecting, yet sweet Confusion! 
You have a generous Friend, my dear Girl, in me!
a Protector now, not a Violator of your Innocence! 
Why then, once more I ask, this strange Perplexity,
this sweet Confusion? 
O Sir, said I, and hid my Face in his Arms! expect
not Reason from a foolish Creature! You
should have still indulg'd me in my Closet! ––– I am 
ready to beat myself for this ungrateful Return to
your Goodness. But I know not what! ––– I am, to
be sure, a silly Creature. O had you but suffer'd me
to stay by myself above, I should have made myself
asham'd of so culpable a Behaviour! —But Goodness
added to Goodness every Moment, and the
Sense of my own Unworthiness, quite confound me! 
Now, said the generous Man, will I, tho' reluctantly,
make a Proposal to my sweet Girl. —If
I have been too pressing for the Day: If another
Day will still be more obliging: If you have Fears
that will not then be, you shall say but the Word,
and I'll submit. Yes, tho' I have, my Pamela, for
these three Days past, thought every tedious Hour a
Day, till Thursday comes, if you earnestly desire it,
I will postpone it. Say, my dear Girl, freely say; 
but accept not my Proposal, without great Reason; 
which yet I will not ask for. 
Sir, said I, I can expect nothing but superlative
Goodness, I have now been so long us'd to it from
you. This is a most generous Instance of it; but,
I fear––– yes, I fear, it will be but too much the same
thing, some Days hence, when the happy, yet, Fool
that I am! dreaded Time, shall be equally near!––– 
Kind, lovely Charmer, said he, now do I see
you are to be trusted with Power, from the generous
Use you make of it! ––– Not one offensive Word,
or Look from me, shall wound your nicest Thoughts; 
but pray try to subdue this Over-scrupulousness, and
unseasonable Timidity. I persuade myself you will
if you can! 
Indeed, Sir, I will, said I; for I am quite asham'd
of myself, with all these lovely Prospects before
me! ––– The Honours you do me, the Kindness you
shew me! I cannot forgive myself! For oh! if I
know the least of this idle foolish Heart of mine, it
has not a misgiving Thought of your Goodness, 
and I should abhor it, if it were capable of the least
Affectation. ––– But, dear good Sir, leave me a little
to myself, and I will take myself to severer Task than
your Goodness will let you do! And I will present
my Heart before you, a worthier Offering to you,
than at present its wayward Follies will let it seem
to be. ––– But one thing is, one has no kind Friend
of one's own Sex, to communicate one's foolish
Thoughts to, and to be strengthen'd by their Comfortings! 
––– But I am left to myself, and oh! what a
weak silly Thing I am!––– 
He kindly withdrew, to give me Time to recollect
myself, and in about half an Hour return'd. 
And then, that he might not begin at once upon the
Subject, and say at the same time something agreeable
to me, said, Your Father and Mother have had
a great deal of Talk by this Time, about you, Pamela. 
O, Sir, return'd I, your Goodness has made
them quite happy. But I can't help being concern'd
about Lady Davers. 
He said, I am vex'd I did not hear the Footman
out; because it runs in my Head, he talk'd somewhat
about her coming hither. She will meet
with but an indifferent Reception from me, without
she comes resolv'd to behave better than she
writes. 
Pray, Sir, said I, be pleas'd to bear with my good
Lady, for two Reasons. What are they, said he? 
Why first, Sir, answer'd I, Because she is your Sister,
and, to be sure, may very well think, what all the
World will, that you have much demean'd yourself
in making me happy. And next, Because, if her
Ladyship finds you out of Temper with her, it will
still aggravate her more against me; and every
time that any warm Words you may use between
you, come into her Mind, she will disdain me
more. 
Don't concern yourself about it, said he; for we
have more proud Ladies than she in our t'other
Neighbourhood, who perhaps, have still less Reason
to be punctilious about their Descent, and yet will
form themselves upon her Example, and say, Why,
his own Sister will not forgive him, nor visit him! 
And so, if I can subdue her Spirit, which is more
than her Husband ever could, or indeed any body
else, it is a great Point gain'd: And, if she gives
me Reason, I'll try for it, I assure you. 
Well, but my dear Girl, continu'd he, since the
Subject is so important, may I not say one Word about
to-morrow?  ––– Sir, said I, I hope I shall be less a
Fool: I have talk'd as harshly to my Heart, as
Lady Davers can do, and the naughty Thing suggests
to me a better and more grateful Behaviour. 
He smil'd, and kissing me, said, I took Notice,
Pamela, of what you observ'd, that you have none
of your own Sex with you: I think it is a little hard
upon you; and I should have lik'd you should have
had Miss Darnford; but then her Sister must have
been ask'd; and I might as well make a publick
Wedding; which, you know, would have requir'd
Cloaths, and other Preparations. Besides,
added he, a foolish Proposal was once made me of
that second Sister, who has two or three thousand
Pounds more than the other, left her by a Godmother,
and she can't help being a little piqu'd; 
tho', said he, it was a Proposal they could not expect
should succeed; for there is nothing in her
Person nor Mind; and her Fortune, as that must
have been the only Inducement, would not do by
any means; and so I discourag'd it at once. 
I am thinking, Sir, said I, of another mortifying
Thing too; That were you to marry a Lady of Birth
and Fortune, answerable to your own, all the Eve to 
the Day, would be taken up in reading, signing and
sealing of Settlements, and Portion, and such-like. 
But now the poor Pamela brings you nothing at
all! And the very Cloaths she wears, so very low is
she, are intirely the Effects of your Bounty, and that
of your good Mother! This makes me a little sad!
––– For, alas! Sir, I am so much oppressed by your
Favours, and the Sense of the Obligations I owe
you, that I cannot look up with the Confidence that
I otherwise should, on this awful Occasion. 
There is, my dear Pamela, said he, where the
Power is wanting, as much Generosity in the Will
as in the Action. To all that know your Story and
your Merit, it will appear, that I cannot recompense
you for what I have made you suffer. You have
had too many hard Struggles and Exercises; and
have nobly overcome; and who shall grudge you
the Reward of the hard-bought Victory? —This
Affair is so much the Act of my own Will, that I
glory in being capable of distinguishing so much
Excellence; and my Fortune is the more pleasureable
to me, as it gives me Hope that I may make
you some Part of Satisfaction for what you have
undergone. 
This, Sir, said I, is all Goodness, unmerited on
my Side; and makes my Obligations the greater! I
can only wish for more Worthiness! —But how
poor is it to offer nothing but Words for such generous
Deeds! —And to say, I wish!––– For what is
a Wish, but the acknowledg'd want of Power to
oblige! And a Demonstration of one's Poverty, in
every thing but Will? 
And that, my dear Girl, said he, is every thing! 
'Tis All I want! 'Tis All that God himself requires
of us; for where there is a Will, the Actions must
be govern'd by it, or it cannot be called a Will: 
But no more of these little Doubts, tho' they are 
the natural Impulses of a generous and grateful Heart. 
I want not to be employ'd in Settlements: That is
for those to regard, who make Convenience and
Fortune the prime Considerations. I have Possessions
ample enough for us both; and you deserve
to share them with me; and you shall do it, with
as little Reserve, as if you had brought me what
the World reckons an Equivalent: For, as to
my own Opinion, you bring me what is infinitely
more valuable, an experienc'd Truth, a well-try'd
Virtue, and a Wit and Behaviour more than equal
to the Station you will be placed in: To say nothing
of this sweet Person, that itself might captivate
a Monarch; and of the Meekness of a Temper, and
Sweetness of Disposition, which make you superior
to all the Women I ever saw. 
Thus kind and soothing, and honourably affectionate
was the dear Gentleman, to the unworthy,
doubting, yet assured Pamela; and thus patiently did
he indulge, and generously pardon, my impertinent
Weakness. He offer'd to go himself to Lady Jones,
in the Morning, and reveal the Matter to her, and
desine her Secrecy and Presence; but I said, That
would disoblige the young Lady Darnfords. No,
Sir, said I, I will cast myself upon your generous
Kindness; for why should I fear the kind Protector
of my Weakness, and the Guide and Director of
my future Steps? 
You cannot, said he, forgive Mrs. Jewkes; for
she must know it; and suffer her to be with you? 
Yes, Sir, said I, I can: She is very civil to me now: 
And her former Wickedness I will forgive, for the
sake of the happy Fruits that have attended it; and
because you mention her. 
Well, said he, I will call her in, if you please!––– 
As you please, Sir, said I. And he rung for her; 
and when she came in, he said, Mrs. Jewkes, I am 
going to intrust you with a Secret. Sir, answer'd she,
I will be sure to keep it as such. Why, said he, we
intend to-morrow, privately as possible, for our
Wedding-day; and Mr. Peters and Mr. Williams are
to be here, as to Breakfast with me, and to shew
Mr. Peters my little Chapel. As soon as the Ceremony
is over, we will take a little Airing in the
Chariot, as we have done at other times; and so it
will not be wonder'd that we are dress'd. And the
two Parsons have promis'd Secrecy, and will go
home. I believe you can't well avoid letting one
of the Maids into the Secret; but that I leave to
you. 
Sir, reply'd she, we all concluded it would be in a
few Days; and I doubt it won't be long a Secret. 
No, said he, I don't desire it should; but you know
we are not provided for a publick Wedding, and
I shall declare it when we go to Bedfordshire, which
won't be long. But the Men, who lie in the Outhouses,
need not know it; for, by some means or
other, my Sister Davers knows all that passes. 
Do you know, Sir, said she, that her Ladyship
intends to be down here with you, in a few Days? 
Her Servant told me so, who brought you the Letter
you was angry at. I hope, said he, we shall be
set out for t'other House first; and shall be pleased
she loses her Labour. Sir, continu'd she, her Ladyship
proposes to be here time enough to hinder your
Nuptials; which she, as well as we did, takes will
be the Latter-end of next Week. Well, said he, let
her come; but yet I desire not to see her. 
Mrs. Jewkes said to me, Give me Leave, Madam, to
wish you all manner of Happiness. But I am afraid
I have too well obey'd his Honour, to be forgiven
by you. Indeed, Mrs. Jewkes, return'd I, you will be
more your own Enemy than I will be. I will look
all forward: And shall not presume, so much as by 
a Whisper, to set my good Master against any one
he pleases to approve of. And, as to his old Servants,
I shall always value them, and never offer to
dictate to his Choice, or influence it by my own
Caprices. 
Mrs. Jewkes, said my Master, you find you have
no Cause to apprehend any thing. My Pamela is
very placable; and as we have both been Sinners
together, we must be both included in one Act of
Grace. 
Such an Example of Condescension, as I have
before me, Mrs. Jewkes, said I, may make you very
easy; for I must be highly unworthy, if I did not
forego all my little Resentments, if I had any, for
the sake of so much Goodness to myself. 
You are very kind, Madam, said she; and you
may depend upon it, I will atone for all my Faults,
by my future Duty and Respect to you, as well as
to my Master. 
That's well said on both sides, said he; but, Mrs.
Jewkes, to assure you that my good Girl here has
no Malice, she chuses you to attend her in the Morning,
at the Ceremony, and you must keep up her
Spirits. —I shall, reply'd she, be very proud of the
Honour: But I cannot, Madam, but wonder to see
you so very low-spirited, as you have been these two
or three Days past, with so much Happiness before
you. 
Why, Mrs. Jewkes, answer'd I, there can be but
one Reason given; and that is, that I am a sad Fool!––– 
But, indeed, I am not ingrateful neither; nor would
I put on a foolish Affectation: But my Heart, at
times, sinks within me; I know not why, except at
my own Unworthiness, and because the Honour
done me is too high for me to support myself under,
as I should do. It is an Honour, Mrs. Jewkes, added
I, I was not born to; and no wonder then, I behave 
so aukwardly. She made me a fine Compliment
upon it, and withdrew, repeating her Promises
of Care, Secrecy, &c. 
He parted with me, with infinite Tenderness; 
and I came up, and set to writing, to amuse my
Thoughts, and wrote thus far. And Mrs. Jewkes
being come up, and it being past Twelve, I will go
to-bed; but not one Wink, I fear, shall I get this
Night. ––– I could beat myself for Anger. Sure
there is nothing ominous in this strange Folly! ––– But
I suppose all young Maidens are the same, so near
so great a Change of Condition, tho' they carry it
off more discreetly than I. 