


Sir Charles Grandison. In Continuation. 


Sat. Feb. 24. 
The arrival of the Leghorn-frigate is every day
expected. The merchants have intelligence, that
it put in at Antibes. If the journey by land from 

thence to Paris, and so to Calais, could be made favourable
to my dear friend Jeronymo, I have no
doubt but our expected guests landed there, at this
season of the year, so unpropitious to tender passengers. 
The house in Grosvenor-square is now, thanks to
good Lord G. quite ready for their reception. There
will be room, I believe, as they propose to be here
incognito, and with only necessary attendants, for the
Marquis and his Lady, for Mrs. Beaumont (who will
be both their comforter and interpreter) for the two
Brothers, and Father Marescotti. Saunders has already
procured handsome lodgings for the Count of Belvedere. 
I wish with you, my Love, that the Count
were not to accompany them. The poor Lady must
not know it, if it can be avoided. The two young
Lords, whom I invited when I was in Italy, must be
more immediately our own guests, if my dearest Life
has no objection. 
Assure yourself, my generous Harriet, that the
Lady shall not be either compelled, or too urgently
persuaded, if I have weight with the family when they
arrive. They shall not know where she is, nor see
her, but by her own consent, and as I see their disposition
to receive her as I wish. Excellent creature!
what a noble solicitude is yours for her tranquillity of
mind! 
I have not yet been able to break to her the daily
expectation I have of seeing in England her parents
and brothers: Yet am uneasy, that she knows it not. 
I want courage, my Harriet, to acquaint her with
it. I have more than once essayed to do it. Dear
creature! she looks with so much innocence, and so
much reliance upon me; and is, at times, so apprehensive! 
—I know not how to break it to her. 
She depends upon my mediation. She urges me to
begin a treaty of reconciliation with them. I defer
writing, I tell her, till I have seen Mrs. Beaumont. 

Little does she think they are upon their journey,
and that I know not where to direct to them. She
longs for Mrs. Beaumont's arrival; and hopes, she
says, she will bring with her the poor Camilla, that
she may have an opportunity to obtain her excuse for
the harsh treatment she gave her: And yet Camilla,
said she, was a teazing woman. 
Were you ever sensible, my Harriet, of the tender
pain that an open heart (yours is an open and an enlarged
one) feels; longing, yet, for its friend's sake,
afraid, to reveal unwelcome tidings, which, however,
it imports the concerned to know? How loth to disturb
the tranquillity which is built upon ignorance of the
event! Yet that very tranquillity (contemplated upon)
adding to the pain of the compassionating friend; 
who reflects, that when the unhappy news shall be
revealed, Time, and Christian philosophy, only, will
ever restore it to the heart of the sufferer! 
Lord and Lady L. are endeavouring to divert their
too thoughtful guest by carrying her to see what they
think will either entertain or amuse her. To-morrow
(Lady L. contributing to the dear Lady's proper
appearance there) they purpose to attend her to the
drawing-room. But hitherto she seems not to have a
very high opinion of the country. If her heart could
be easy, every thing would have a different appearance
to her. 
I have this moment the favour of yours of yesterday. 
If our kind friends will stay no longer with
you at the Hall, do you, my dearest Love, as you
propose, accompany them up. They are extremely
obliging in proposing to give me here two or three
days of their company, before they return to Northhamptonshire. 
My consent, my Harriet! —Why, if you have a
choice of your own, do you ask it? I must approve
of whatever you wish to do. Could I have been certain, 

I would have met my Love. But you will have
many dear friends with you. 
Tell my Emily, that I have had a visit from her
Mother and Mr. O-Hara; and was so much pleased
with them, that I propose on Monday to return their
visit at their own lodgings. 
Now I know I am to be soon blessed with the presence
of my Harriet, I have given way to all my
wishes: One of them is, Never to be separated from
the joy of my heart. Such, I trust, will she ever
be, to 
Her grateful, ever-faithful,
Grandison. 

