


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Jan. 25. 
You rejoice me, my dear, in the hopes which
you tell me, Dr. Mitchell from London gives 

you in relation to our Nancy. May our incessant
prayers for the restoration of her health be answer'd! 
Three things my Aunt Selby, and you, in the
name of every one of my friends, injoined me at
parting. The first, To write often, very often, were
your words. This injunction was not needful: My
heart is with you; and the good news you give me
of my Grandmamma's health, and of our Nancy,
enlarges that heart. The second, To give you a description
of the persons and characters of the people
I am likely to be conversant with in the London world. 
And, thirdly, Besides the general account which you
all expected from me of the visits I made and received,
you injoined me to acquaint you with the very beginnings
of every address (and even of every silent and
respectful distinction, were your words) that the girl
whom you all so greatly favour, might receive on this
excursion to town. 
Don't you remember what my Uncle Selby answer'd
to this? —I do: And will repeat it, to shew, that his
correcting cautions shall not be forgotten. 
The vanity of the Sex, said he, will not suffer any
thing of this sort to escape our Harriet. Women,
continued he, make themselves so cheap at the public
places in and about town, that new faces are more
enquired after than even fine faces constantly seen. 
Harriet has an honest artless bloom in her cheeks; 
she may attract notice as a novice: But wherefore
do you fill her head with an expectation of conquests? 
Women, added he, offer themselves at every public
place, in rows, as at a market. Because three or
four silly fellows here in the country (like people at
an auction, who raise the price upon each other above
its value) have bid for her, you think she will not be
able to set her foot out of doors, without increasing
the number of her followers. 
And then my Uncle would have it, that my head
would be unable to bear the consequence which the
partiality of my other friends gave me. 

It is true, my Lucy, that we young women are
too apt to be pleased with the admiration pretended
for us by the other Sex. But I have always endeavour'd
to keep down any foolish pride of this sort, by such
considerations as these: That flattery is the vice of
men: That they seek to raise us in order to lower us,
and in the end to exalt themselves on the ruins of the
pride they either hope to find, or inspire: That humility,
as it shines brightest in an high condition, best
becomes a flatter'd woman of all women: That she
who is puffed up by the praises of men, on the supposed
advantages of person, answers their end upon
her; and seems to own, that she thinks it a principal
part of hers, to be admired by them: And what can
give more importance to them, and less to herself,
than this? For have not women souls as well as men,
and souls as capable of the noblest attainments, as
theirs? Shall they not therefore be most solicitous to
cultivate the beauties of the mind, and to make those
of person but of inferior consideration? The bloom
of beauty holds but a very few years; and shall not
a woman aim to make herself mistress of those perfections
that will dignify her advanced age? And then
may she be as wife, as venerable—as my Grandmamma. 
She is an example for us, my dear: Who
is so much respected, who is so much beloved, both
by old and young, as my Grandmamma Shirley? 
In pursance of the second injunction, I will now describe
some young ladies and gentlemen who paid my
Cousins their compliments on their arrival in town. 
Miss Allestree, Daughter of Sir John Allestree,
was one. She is very pretty, and very genteel, easy,
and free. I believe I shall love her. 
Miss Bramber was the second. Not so pretty as
Miss Allestree; but agreeable in her person and air. 
A little too talkative, I think. 
It was one of my Grandfather's rules to me, Not
impertinently to start subjects, as if I would make an 

ostentation of knowlege; or as if I were fond of indulging
a talking humour: But frankness and complaisance
required, he used to say, that we women
should unlock our bosoms, when we were called
upon, and were expected to give our sentiments upon
any subject. 
Miss Bramber was eager to talk. She seemed,
even when silent, to look as if she was studying for
something to say, altho' she had exhausted two or three
subjects. This charge of volubility, I am the rather
inclined to fix upon her, as neither Mr. nor Mrs. Reeves
took notice to me of it, as a thing extraordinary; 
which, probably, they would have done, if she had
exceeded her usual way. And yet, perhaps, the joy
of seeing her newly-arrived friends might have open'd
her lips. If so, your pardon, sweet Miss Bramber! 
Miss Sally, her younger Sister, is very amiable and
very modest; a little kept down, as it seems, by the
vivacity of her elder Sister; between whose ages there
are about six or seven years: So that Miss Bramber
seems to regard her Sister as one whom she is willing
to remember as the girl she was two or three years
ago; for Miss Sally is not above seventeen. 
What confirmed me in this, was, that the younger
lady was a good deal more free when her Sister was
withdrawn, than when she was present; and again
pursed-up her really pretty mouth when she returned:
And her Sister addressed her always by the word Child,
with an air of eldership; while the other called her
Sister, with a look of observance. 
These were the Ladies. 
The two gentlemen who came with them, were,
Mr. Barnet, a Nephew of Lady Allestree, and Mr.
Somner. 
Mr. Somner is a young gentleman lately married; 
very affected, and very opinionated. I told Mrs.
Reeves, after he was gone, that I believed he was a
dear Lover of his person; and she owned he was. 

Yet had he no great reason for it. It is far from extraordinary; 
tho' he was very gaily dressed. His wife, it
seems, was a young widow of great fortune; and till
she gave him consequence by falling in love with him,
he was thought to be a modest good sort of young
man; one that had not discovered any more perfections
in himself, than other people beheld in him; 
and this gave her an excuse for liking him. But now
he is loquacious, forward, bold, thinks meanly of
the Sex; and, what is worse, not the higher of the
lady, for the preference she has given him. 
This gentleman took great notice of me; and yet
in such a way, as to have me think, that the approbation
of so excellent a judge as himself, did me no
small honour. 
Mr. Barnet is a young man, that I imagine will be
always young. At first I thought him only a fop. He
affected to say some things, that tho' trite, were sententious,
and carried with them the air of observation. 
There is some degree of merit in having such a memory,
as will help a person to repeat and apply other
mens wit with some tolerable propriety. But when he
attempted to walk alone, he said things that it was
impossible a man of common sense could say. I pronounce
therefore boldly about him: Yet by his outward
appearance he may pass for one of your pretty fellows; 
for he dresses very gaily. Indeed if he has any
taste, it is in dress; and this he has found out; for he
talked of little else, when he led the talk; and boasted
of several parts of his. What finished him with me,
was, that as often as the conversation seemed to take
a serious turn, he arose from his seat, and humm'd an
Italian air; of which however he knew nothing: But
the sound of his own voice seemed to please him. 
This fine gentleman recollected some high-flown
compliments, and, applying them to me, looked as
if he expected I should value myself upon them. 

No wonder that men in general think meanly of
us women, if they believe we have ears to hear, and
folly to be pleased with, the frothy things that pass
under the name of Compliments from such randomshooters
as these. 
Miss Stevens paid us a visit this afternoon. She is
daughter of Colonel Stevens, a very worthy man. 
She appears sensible and unaffected; has read, my
cousin says, a good deal; and yet takes no pride in
shewing it. 
Miss Darlington came with her. They are related. 
This young lady has, I find, a pretty taste in poetry. 
Mrs. Reeves prevailed on her to shew us three of her
performances. And now, as it was with some reluctance
that she shewed them, is it fair to say any
thing about them? I say it only to you, my friends. 
—One was on the parting of two Lovers; very sensible; 
and so tender, that it shewed the fair writer
knew how to describe the pangs that may be innocently
allowed to arise on such an occasion. —One on
the Morning-dawn, and Sun-rise; a subject that gave
credit to herself; for she is, it seems, a very early
riser. I petitioned for a copy of this, for the sake of
two or three of my dear cousins, as well as to confirm
my own practice; but I was modestly refused. —The
third was on the death of a favourite Linet; a little
too pathetic for the occasion; since were Miss Darlington
to have lost her best and dearest friend, I imagine
that she had in this piece, which is pretty long,
exhausted the subject; and must borrow from it some
of the images which she introduces to heighten her
distress for the loss of the little songster. It is a very
difficult matter, I believe, for young persons of genius
to rein-in their imaginations. A great flow of spirits,
and great store of images crouding in upon them, carry
them too frequently above their subject; and they are
apt rather to say all that may be said on their favourite
topics, than what is proper to be said. But it is
a pretty piece, however. 

Thursday Morning. 
Lady Betty Williams supp'd with us the same evening. 
She is an agreeable woman, the widow of a
very worthy man, a near relation of Mr. Reeves. 
She has a great and just regard for my cousin, and consults
him in all affairs of importance. She seems to
be turned of Forty; has a son and a daughter; but
they are both abroad for education. 
It hurt me to hear her declare, that she cared not
for the trouble of Education; and that she had this
pleasure, which girls brought up at home seldom
give their mothers; that she and Miss Williams
always saw each other, and always parted, as Lovers. 
Surely there must be some fault either in the temper
of the mother, or in the behaviour of the daughter; 
and if so, I doubt it will not be amended by seeing
each other but seldom. Do not Lovers thus cheat
and impose upon one another? 
The young gentleman is about Seventeen; his
sister about Fifteen: And, as I understand she is a
very lively, and, 'tis feared, a forward girl, shall we
wonder, if in a few years time she should make such
a choice for her husband as Lady Betty would least
of all choose for a son-in-law? What influence can
a mother expect to have over a daughter from whom
she so voluntarily estranges herself? and from whose example
the daughter can receive only hearsay benefits? 
But after all, may not, methinks I hear my correcting
Uncle ask, Lady Betty have better reasons for her
conduct in this particular, than she gave you? —She
may, my Uncle, and I hope she has: But I wish she
had condescended to give those better reasons, since
she gave any; and then you had not been troubled
with the impertinent remarks of your saucy kinswoman. 
Lady Betty was so kind as to take great notice of
me. She desired to be one in every party of pleasure
that I am to be engaged in. Persons who were often 

at public places, she observed, took as much delight
in accompanying strangers to them, as if they were
their own. The apt comparisons, she said; the new
remarks; the pretty wonder; the agreeable passions
excited in such, on the occasion, always gave her high
entertainment. And she was sure from the observation
of such a young lady, civilly bowing to me, she should
be equally delighted and improved. I bowed in silence. 
I love not to make disqualifying speeches; by such we
seem to intimate that we believe the complimenter to
be in earnest, or perhaps that we think the compliment
our due, and want to hear it either repeated or
confirmed; and yet, possibly, we have not that pretty
confusion, and those transient blushes, ready, which
Mr. Greville archly says are always to be at hand when
we affect to disclaim the attributes given us. 
Lady Betty was so good as to stop there; tho' the
muscles of her agreeable face shewed a polite promptitude,
had I, by disclaiming her compliments, provok'd
them to perform their office. 
Am I not a saucy creature? 
I know I am. But I dislike not Lady Betty, for all
that. 
I am to be carried by her to a Masquerade, to a Ridotto; 
when the season comes, to Ranelagh and Vauxhall:
In the mean time, to Balls, Routs, Drums, and
so-forth; and to qualify me for these latter, I am to
be taught all the fashionable Games. Did my dear
Grandmamma, twenty or thirty years ago, think she
should live to be told, That to the Dancing-master,
the Singing or Music-master, the high mode would
require the Gaming-master to be added for the completing
of the female education? 
Lady Betty will kindly take the lead in all these
diversions. 
And now, Lucy, will you not repeat your wishes, that
I return to you with a sound heart? And are you not
afraid that I shall become a modern fine Lady? As 

to the latter fear, I will tell you when you shall suspect
me—If you find that I prefer the highest of these entertainments,
or the Opera itself, well as I love music,
to a good Play of our favourite Shakespeare, then, my
Lucy, let your heart ake for your Harriet: Then, be
apprehensive that she is laid hold on by levity; that
she is captivated by the Eye and the Ear; that her
heart is infected by the modern taste; and that she will
carry down with her an appetite to pernicious gaming; 
and, in order to support her extravagance, will think
of punishing some honest man in marriage. 
James has signified to Sally his wishes to be allowed
to return to Selby-house. I have not therefore bought
him the new liveries I designed for him on coming to
town. I cannot bear an unchearful brow in a servant; 
and he owning to me, on my talking with him, his
desire to return, I have promised that he shall, as soon
as Mr. Reeves has provided me with another servant. 
—Silly fellow! But I hope my Aunt will not dismiss
him upon it. The servant I may hire, may not
care to go into the country perhaps, or may not so
behave, as that I should choose to take him down with
me. And James is honest; and his mother would
break her heart, if he should be dismissed our service. 
Several servants have already offered themselves; 
but, as I think people are answerable for the character
of such as they choose for their domestics, I find no
small difficulty in fixing. I am not of the mind of
that great man, whose good-natur'd reason for sometimes
preferring men no way deserving, was, that he
loved to be a friend to those whom no other person
would befriend. This was carrying his goodness very
far (if he made it not an excuse for himself, for having
promoted a man who proved bad afterwards,
rather than as supposing him to be so at the time); 
since else, he seemed not to consider, that every bad
man he promoted, ran away with the reward due to
a better. 

Mr. and Mrs. Reeves are so kind to me, and their
servants are so ready to oblige me, that I shall not be
very uneasy, if I cannot soon get one to my mind. 
Only if I could fix on such a one, and if my Grandmamma's
Oliver should leave her, as she supposes he
will, now he has married Ellen, as soon as a good Inn
offers, James may supply Oliver's place, and the new
servant may continue mine instead of James. 
And now that I have gone so low, don't you wish
me to put an end to this letter! —I believe you do. 
Well then, with Duty and Love ever remember'd
where so justly due, believe me to be, my dear Lucy, 
Your truly affectionate
Harriet Byron. 
I will write separately to what you say of Mr. Greville,
Mr. Fenwick, and Miss Orme; yet hope
to be time enough for the post. 

