


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 


Sunday, Mar. 19. 
I Have had two happy hours of forgetfulness. 
I could not, tho' I tried for it, prevail for more:
And I will continue my subject. 
After dinner, every attendant being dismissed, my
Lord, making me first see that nobody was listening
in the passages, began as follows: 

I am determined, nephew, to part with this Giffard. 
She is the plague of my life. I would have
done it half a year ago, on an occasion that I will
not mention to you, because you would despise me,
if I did, for my weakness: And now she wants to
bring in upon me, a sister of hers, and her husband,
and to part with two other worthy folks, that I know
love me; but of whom, for that reason, she is jealous; 
and then they would divide me among them:
For this man and his wife have six children; all of
whom, of late, make an appearance that cannot be
honestly supported. 
And have you any difficulty, my Lord, in parting
with her, but what arises from your own want of resolution? 
The most insolent devil that ever was about a man
at one time, and the most whining at another. Don't
despise me, nephew; you know I have taken her as— 
You know what I mean— 
I understand you, my Lord. 
But say, you don't despise me, Sir Charles Grandison. 
As I hope to live, I am half afraid of you. 
My pity, my Lord, where I see compunction, is
stronger than my censure. 
That is well said. —Now I agreed with this woman,
in a weak moment, and she has held me to it, to
give her an annuity of 150l. for life; which was
to be made up 250l. if I parted with her, without
her consent; and here we have been, for several
months, plaguing one another, whether I shall turn
her out of the house, or she will leave me: For she
has told me, that she will not stay, unless I take in
her sister and brother; yet will not go, because she
will then have no more than the 150l. a year. And
that is too much for her deserts for these two years past. 
Your Lordship sees the inconveniencies of this
way of life; and I need not mention to you, how 

much happier that state is, which binds a man and
woman together by interest, as well as by affection,
if discretion be not forgotten in the choice. But let
me express my surprize, that your Lordship, who has
so ample an estate, and no child, should seem to value
your peace of mind at so low a rate as 100l. a year. 
I will not let her go away with such a triumph. 
She has not deserved from me— 
Pray, my Lord, was she of reputation when you
took her? 
She was a widow— 
But was her character tolerable in the eye of the
world? She might be a greater object of pity for being
a widow. 
My gouty disorders made me want a woman about
me. I hated men-fellows— 
Well, my Lord, this regards your motive. But
have you any previous or later incontinence to charge
her with? 
I can't say I have. Her cursed temper would
frighten, rather than invite, Lovers. I heard, it was
no good one; but it broke not out to me till within
these two years. 
Your Lordship, surely, must not dispute the matter
with her. If you are determined to part with her,
give her the 250l. a year, and let her go. 
To reward a cursed woman for misbehaviour! —I
cannot do it. 
Give me leave to say, that your Lordship has deserved
some punishment: Give her the annuity, not
as a reward to her, but as a punishment to yourself. 
You hurt my sore place, nephew. 
Consider, my Lord, that 250l. a year for life, or
even for ever, is a poor price, for the reputation of a
woman with whom a man of your quality and fortune
condescended to enter into treaty. Every quarterly
payment must strike her to the heart, if she live to
have compunction seize her, when she thinks that she 

is receiving, for subsistence, the wages of her shame. 
Be that her punishment. You intimate, that she has
so behaved herself, that she has but few friends: Part
with her, without giving her cause of complaint, that
may engage pity for her, if not friends, at your expence. 
A woman who has lost her reputation, will
not be regardful of yours. Suppose she sue you for
non-performance of covenants: Would your Lordship
appear to such a prosecution? You cannot be
capable of pleading your privilege on such a prosecution
as would otherwise go against you. You cannot
be in earnest to part with this woman, she cannot
have offended you beyond forgiveness, if you scruple
100l. a year to get rid of her. 
He fervently swore, that he was in earnest; and
added, I am resolved, nephew, to marry, and live
honest. 
He looked at me, as if he expected that I should be
surprised. 
I believe I could not change countenance, on such
an hint as this. You have come to a good resolution,
my Lord; and if you marry a prudent woman, your
Lordship will find the difference in your own reflexions,
as well as in your reputation and interest. And shall
the difference of 100l. a year—Don't let me say, that
I am ashamed for my Lord W. 
I knew that you would despise me, Sir Charles. 
I know, my Lord, that I should despise myself,
were I not to deal freely with you in this respect. Indeed,
my Lord, you have not had so good reason (forgive
me!) to think hardly of my father's spirit, as you
had to correct your own. 
I cannot bear this, nephew. He looked displeased. 
You must not be angry, my Lord. I will not bear
anger from any man breathing, and keep him company,
who, consulting me, shall be displeased with
me for speaking my mind with freedom and sincerity. 

What a man am I talking to! —Well, rid me of
this torment [You have spirit, nephew; and nobody
can reproach you with acting contrary to your own
principles] and I will for ever love you. But talk to
her: I hardly dare. She whimpers and sobs, and
threatens, by turns, and I cannot bear it. —Once she
was going to tie herself up—Would to God I had not
prevented her—And then (O my folly!) we went on
again. 
My good Dr. Bartlett, I was ashamed of my uncle. 
But you see what an artful, as well as insolent woman,
this is. What folly is there in wickedness! Folly encounters
with folly, or how could it succeed so often
as it does? —Yet my mother's brother to wish he had
suffered a creature, with whom he had been familiar,
to destroy herself! —I could hardly bear him. Only
that I thought it would be serving both wretches, and
giving both a chance for repentance; or I should not
have kept my seat—But we see in my mother, and in
her brother, how habitual wickedness debases, and
how habitual goodness exalts, the human mind. In
their youth they were supposed nearer an equality in
their understandings and attainments, than in their
maturity, when occasion called out into action their
respective talents. But perhaps the brother was not
the better man for the uninterrupted prosperity that
attended him, and for having never met with check or
controul; whereas the most happily married woman
in the world must have a will to which she must sometimes
resign her own. What a glory to a good woman
must it be, who can not only resign her will, but make
so happy an use of her resignation, as my mother did! 
My Lord repeated his request, that I would talk
with the woman; and that directly. 
I withdrew, and sent for her, accordingly. 
She came to me, out of breath with passion; and,
as I thought, partly with apprehension for what her
own behaviour might be before me. 

I see, Mrs. Giffard, said I, that you are in great
emotion. I am desired to talk with you; a task I
am not very fond of: But you will find nothing but
civility, such as is due to you, for your sex's sake, from
me. Calm, therefore, your mind: I will see you
again, in a few moments. 
I took a turn, and soon came back. Her face
looked not quite so bloated; and she burst into tears. 
She began to make a merit of her services; her care; 
her honesty; and then inveighed against my Lord for
the narrowness of his spirit. She paid some compliments
to me, and talked of being ashamed to appear
before me as a guilty creature; introductory to what
she was prepared to say of her sacrifices, the loss of
her good name, and the like; on which, with respect
to my Lord, and his ingratitude to her, as she called
it, she laid great stress. 
I am never displeased, my dear friend, with the
testimony which the most profligate women bear to
the honour of virtue, when they come to set a value
upon their departure from it. 
You have it not to say, Mrs. Giffard, that my
Lord betrayed, seduced, or deceived you. I say not
this so much for reproach, as for justice-sake; and
not to suffer you to deceive yourself, and to load him
with greater faults than he has been guilty of. You
were your own mistress: You had no father, mother,
husband, to question you, or to be offended with you. 
You knew your duty. You were treated with as a sole
and independent person. One hundred and fifty
pounds a year, Mrs. Giffard, tho' a small price for
the virtue of a good woman, which is indeed above
all price, is, nevertheless, greatly above the price of
common service. I never seek to palliate faults of a
flagrant nature; tho' it is not my meaning to affront,
a woman especially, and one who supposes herself in
distress. You must know, madam, the frail tenure
by which you were likely to hold: You stipulated, 

therefore, for a provision, accordingly. The woman
who never hoped to be a wife, can have no hardships
to take the stipulation, and once more give herself the
opportunity to recover her lost fame. This independence
my Lord is desirous to give you— 
What independence, Sir? 
One hundred and fifty— 
Two hundred and fifty, Sir, if you please—If my
Lord thinks fit to dismiss me. 
My Lord has told me, that that was indeed the stipulation; 
but he pleads misbehaviour. 
I was willing to make a little difficulty of the 100l.
a year, tho' I thought my Lord ought not—And as
to misbehaviour, Dr. Bartlett, I hardly know how to
punish a woman for that, to her keeper. Does she
not first misbehave to herself, and to the laws of God
and man? And ought a man, that brings her to violate
her first duties, to expect from her a regard to a mere
discretionary obligation? I would have all these moralists,
as they affect to call themselves, suffer by such
libertine principles as cannot be pursued, but in violation
of the very first laws of morality. 
Misbehaviour! Sir. He makes this plea to cover
his own baseness of heart. I never misbehaved, as
he calls it, till I saw— 
Well, madam, this may lead to a debate that can
answer no end. I presume, you are as willing to
leave my Lord, as he is to part with you. It must be
a wretchedness beyond what I can well imagine, to
live a life of guilt (I must not palliate in this case)
and yet of hatred and animosity, with the person who
is a partaker in that guilt. 
I am put upon a very unequal task, Sir, to talk
with you on this subject. My Lord will not refuse to
see me, I hope. I know what to say to him. 
He has requested me to talk with you, madam. As
I told you, I am not fond of the task. We have all,
our faults. God knows what he will pardon, and 

what he will punish. His pardon, however, in a
great measure depends upon yourself. You have
health and time, to all appearance, before you: Your
future life may be a life of penitence. I am no divine,
madam; I would not be thought to preach to you:
But you have now a prospect opened of future happiness,
thro' your mutual misunderstandings, that
you never otherwise might have had. And let me
make an observation to you; That where hate or
dislike have once taken place of liking, the first separation,
in such a case as this, is always the best. 
Affection or esteem between man and woman, once
forfeited, hardly ever is recovered. Tell me truth— 
Don't you as heartily dislike my Lord, as he does
you? 
I do, Sir—He is— 
I will not hear what he is, from the mouth of declared
prejudice. He has his faults. One great fault
is, that which you have been joint partakers in—But
if you might, would you choose to live together to be
torments to each other? 
I can torment him more than he can me— 
Diabolical temper! —Woman! (and I stood up,
and looked sternly) Can you forget to whom you say
this—and of whom? —Is not Lord W. my uncle? 
This (as I intended it should) startled her. She
asked my pardon. 
What a fine hand, proceeded I, has a Peer of the
realm made of it! to have this said of him, and perhaps; 
had you been in his presence, to him, by a woman
whose courage is founded in his weakness? —Let me
tell you, madam— 
She held up her clasped hands—For God's sake, forgive
me, Sir! and stand my friend. 
An hundred and fifty pounds a year, madam, is rich
payment for any consideration that a woman could
give, who has more spirit than virtue. Had you kept
that, madam, you would, tho' the daughter of cottagers, 

have been superior to the greatest man on earth,
who wanted to corrupt you. —But thus far, and as a
punishment to my Lord for his wilful weakness, I will
be your friend—Retire from my Lord: You shall
have 250l. a year: And as you were not brought up
to the expectation of one half of the fortune, bestow
the hundred a year, that was in debate, upon young
creatures of your sex, as an encouragement to them
to preserve that chastity, which you, with your eyes
open, gave up; and, with the rest, live a life suitable
to that disposition; and then, as my fellow-creature, I
will wish you happy. 
She begged leave to withdraw: She could not, she
said, stand in my presence. I had, indeed, spoken
with warmth. She withdrew, trembling, courtesying,
mortified; and I returned to my Lord. 
He was very earnest to hear my report. I again
put it to him, Whether he adhered to his resolution of
parting with his woman? He declared in the affirmative,
with greater earnestness than before; and begged
to know, if I could manage it that she should go, and
that without seeing him? I cannot bear to see her,
said he. 
Bravoes of the Law, cowards and cullies to their
paramours, are these keepers, generally. I have ever
suspected the courage (to magnanimity they must
be strangers) of men who can defy the laws of society. 
I pitied him: And believing that it would not be difficult
to manage this heroine, who had made her weak
Lord afraid of her; I said, Have you a mind, my
Lord, that she shall quit the house this night, and
before I leave it? If you have, I think I can undertake,
that she shall. 
And can you do this for me? If you can, you shall
be my great Apollo. That will, indeed, make me
happy: For the moment you are gone, she will force
herself into my presence, and will throw the gout, perhaps,
into my stomach. She reproaches me, as if she 

had been an innocent woman, and I the most ungrateful
of men. For God's sake, nephew, release
me from her, and I shall be happy. I would have
left her behind me in the country, proceeded he, but
she would come with me. She was afraid that I
would appeal to you: She stands in awe of nobody
else. You will be my guardian Angel, if you will rid
me of this plague. 
Well, then, my Lord, you will leave it to me to
do the best I can with her: But it cannot be the best
on your side, for your honour's sake, if we do her
not that justice that the law would, or ought to do
her. In a word, my Lord, you must forgive me for
saying, that you shall not resume that dignity to distress
this woman, which you laid aside when you entered
into treaty with her. 
Well, well, I refer myself to your management:
Only this 100l. a year—Once again, I say, it would
hurt me to reward a woman for plaguing me: And
150l. a year is two-thirds more than ever she, or any
of her family, were intitled to. 
The worst and meanest are intitled to justice, my
Lord; and I hope your Lordship will not refuse to
perform engagements that you entered into with your
eyes open: You must not, if I take any concern in
this affair. 
Just then the woman sent in, to beg the favour of
an audience, as she called it, of me. 
She addressed me in terms above her education. 
There is something, said she, in your countenance,
Sir, so terrible, and yet so sweet, that one must fear
your anger, and yet hope for your forgiveness, when
one has offended. I was too free in speaking of my
Lord to his nephew—And then she made a compliment
to my character, and told me, She would be
determined by my pleasure, be it what it would. 
How seldom are violent spirits true spirits! When
over-awed, how tame are they, generally, in their submission! 

Yet this woman was not without art in
hers. She saw, that, displeased as she apprehended I
was with her, I had given her hopes of the payment
of the hundred pounds a year penalty; and this made
her so acquiescent. 
I was indeed displeased with you, Mrs. Giffard; 
and could not, from what you said, but conclude in
your disfavour, in justification of my Lord's complaints
against you. 
Will you give me leave, Sir, to lay before you the
true state of every-thing between my Lord and me? 
Indeed, Sir, you don't know— 
When two persons, who have lived in familiarity,
differ, the fault is seldom wholly on one side: But
thus far I judge between you, and desire not to hear
particulars: The man who dispenses with a known
duty, in such a case as this before us, must render
himself despicable in the eyes of the very person
whom he raises into consequence by sinking his own. 
Chastity is the crown and glory of a woman. The
most profligate of men love modesty in the sex, at the
very time they are forming plots to destroy it in a particular
object. When a woman has submitted to put
a price upon her honour, she must appear, at times,
despicable in the eyes even of her seducer; and when
these two break out into animosity, ought either to
wish to live with the other? 
Indeed, indeed, Sir, I am struck with remorse: I
see my error. And she put her handkerchief to her
eyes, and seemed to weep. 
I proceeded; You, Mrs. Giffard, doubted the continuance
of my Lord's passion: You made your
terms, therefore, and proposed a penalty besides. My
Lord submitted to the terms, and by that means secured
his right of dismissing you, at his pleasure; the
only conveniency that a man dishonouring himself by
despising marriage, can think he has. Between him
and you, what remains to be said (tho' you are both 

answerable at a tribunal higher than your own) but
that you should have separated long ago? Yet you
would not consent to it: You would not leave him at
liberty to assert the right he had reserved to himself. 
Strange weakness in him, that he would suffer that to
depend upon you! But one weakness is the parent of
another. 
She then visibly wept. 
You found it out, that you could torment your Lord
in an higher degree, than he could torment you; and
how, acting upon such principles, you have lived together
for some time past, you have let every one see. 
She, on her knees, besought my pardon for the freedom
of that expression; not from motives of contrition,
as I apprehend; but from those of policy. 
She was strong enough to raise herself, without my
assistance. She did, unbidden, on seeing me step
backward a pace or two, to give her an opportunity
to do so; and looked very silly; and the more,
for having missed my assisting hand: By which I supposed,
that she had usually better success with my Lord,
whenever she had prevailed on herself to kneel to
him. 
It is easy, my good Dr. Bartlett, from small crevices,
to discover day in an artful woman's heart. Nothing
can be weaker, in the eye of an observer, who
himself disdains artifice, than a woman who makes
artifice her study. In such a departure from honest
nature, there will be such curvings, that the eyes, the
countenance, must ever betray the heart; while the
lips, either breaking out into apologies, or aiming at
reserve, confirm the suspicion, that all is not right in
the mind. 
I excuse you, Mrs. Giffard, said I; my Lord has
deservedly brought much of what has distressed him,
upon himself: But now it is best for you to part. My
Lord chooses not to see you. I would advise you to
remove this very afternoon. 

What, Sir, and not have my 250l. a year! 
Will you leave the house this night, if I give you
my word— 
For the whole sum, Sir? —Two hundred and fifty
pounds a year, Sir? 
Yes, for the whole sum. 
I will, Sir, with all my heart and soul. Most of my
things are in the country. My Lord came up in a
passion, to talk with you, Sir. Two or three band-boxes
are all I have here. Mr. Halden (he is my
Lord's favourite) shall go down, and see I take nothing
but my own—I will trust to your word of honour,
Sir—and leave, for ever, the most ungrateful— 
Hush, Mrs. Giffard, these tears are tears of passion. 
There is not a female feature, at this instant,
in your face—[What a command of countenance! It
cleared up in a moment. I expected it from her] A
penitent spirit is an humble, a broken spirit: You
shew, at present, no sign of it. 
She dropt me a courtesy, with such an air (tho' not
designed, I believe,) as shewed that the benefit she was
to reap from the advice, would not be sudden, if ever; 
and immediately repeated her question, If she had my
honour for the payment of the entire sum—And you
don't insist, Sir (I have poor relations) that I shall
pay out the hundred a year, as you mentioned? 
You are to do with the whole annuity as you
please. If your relations are worthy, you cannot do
better than to relieve their necessities. But remember,
Mrs. Giffard, that every quarter brings you the wages
of iniquity, and endeavour at some atonement. 
The woman could too well bear this severity. 
Had a finger been sufficient to have made her feel, I
would not have laid upon her the weight of my whole
hand. 
She assured me, that she would leave the house in
two hours time; and I returned to my Lord, and told
him so. 

He got up, and embraced me, and called me his
good Angel. I advised him to give his orders to
Halden, or to whom he thought fit, to do her and
himself justice, as to what belonged to her in the
country. 
But the terms! the terms! cried my Lord. If you
have brought me off for 150l. I will adore you. 
These are the terms (You promised to leave them
to me): You pay no more than 150l. a year for her
life, till you assure me, upon your honour, that you
chearfully and on mature consideration, make it up
250l. 
How is that! How is that, nephew? —Then I
never shall pay more, depend upon it. 
Nor will I ever ask you. 
He rubbed his hands, forgetting the gout; but was
remembered by the pain, and cried, Oh!— 
But how did you manage it, kinsman? —I never
should have brought her to any-thing. How did you
manage it? 
Your Lordship does not repent her going? 
He swore, that it was the happiest event that could
have befallen him. I hope, said he, she will go without
wishing to see me. Whether she would whine, or
curse, it would be impossible for me to see her, and be
myself. 
I believe she will go without desiring to see you; 
perhaps while I am here. 
Thank God! a fair riddance! Thank God! 
But is it possible, kinsman, that you could bring
me off for 150l. a year? Tell me, truly. 
It is: And I tell your Lordship, that it shall cost
you no more, till you shall know how to value the
comfort and happiness of your future life at more
than 100l. a year: Till then, the respect I pay to my
mother's brother, and the regard I have for his honour,
will make me chearfully pay the 100l. a year
in dispute, out of my own pocket. 

He looked around him, his head turning as if on a
pivot; and, at last, bursting out into tears and speech
together—And is it thus, Is it thus, you subdue me? 
Is it thus you convince me of my shameful littleness? 
I cannot bear it: All that this woman has done to me,
is nothing to this. I can neither leave you, nor stay
in your presence. Leave me, leave me, for six minutes
only—Jesus! how shall I bear my own littleness? 
I arose. One word, only, my Lord. When I re-enter,
say not a syllable more on this subject: Let it
pass as I put it. I would part with a greater sum than
an hundred a year, for the satisfaction of giving to my
uncle the tranquillity he has so long wanted in his own
house, rather than that a person, who has had a dependence
upon him, should think herself intitled to
complain of injustice from him. 
He caught my hand, and would have met it with
his lips. I withdrew it hastily, and retired; leaving
him to recollect himself. 
When I returned, he thrust into my hand a paper,
and held it there, and swore that I should take it. If
the wretch live ten years, nephew, said he, that will
reimburse you; if she die sooner, the difference is
yours: And, for God's sake, for the sake of your
mother's memory, don't despise me; that is all the
favour I ask of you: No man on earth was ever so
nobly overcome. By all that's good, you shall chalk
me out my path. Blessed be my sister's memory, for
giving me such a kinsman! The name of Grandison,
that I ever disliked till now, is the first of names:
And may it be perpetuated to the end of time! 
He held the paper in my hand till he had done speaking. 
I then opened it, and found it to be a bank
note of 1000l. I was earnest to return it; but he
swore so vehemently, that he would have it so, that I,
at last, acquiesced; but declared, that I would pay
the whole annuity, as far as the sum went; and this, 

as well in justice to him, as to save him the pain of
attending to an affair that must be grievous to him:
And I insisted upon giving him an acknowlegement
under my hand, for that sum; and to be accountable
to him for it, as his banker would, in the like case. 
And thus ended this affair. The woman went away
before me. She begged the favour, at the door, of
one word with me. My Lord started up, at her voice:
His complexion varied: He whipt as nimbly behind
the door, as if he had no gout in his foot. I will
not see her, said he. 
I stepped out. She complimented, thanked me,
and wept; but, in the height of her concern, would
have uttered bitter things against my Lord: But I
stopped her mouth, by telling her, that I was to be her
paymaster, quarterly, of the 250l. a year. She turned
her execrations, against her Lord, into blessings on
me: But, after all, departed with reluctance. 
Pride, and not tenderness, was visibly the occasion. 
Could she have secured her whole annuity, she would
have gratified that pride, by leaving her Lord in triumph
while she thought her departure would have
given him regret: But to be dismissed, was a disgrace
that affected her, and gave bitterness to her insolent
spirit. 

