



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Thursday, Apr. 13. 
&dotup;Why, Jack, thou needest not make such a wonderment,
as the girls say, if I should have taken
large strides already towards reformation: For dost
thou not see, that while I have been so assiduously,
night and day, pursuing this single Charmer, I have
infinitely less to answer for, than otherwise I should 

have had? Let me see, how many days and nights? 
—Forty, I believe, after open trenches, spent in the
sap only, and never a mine sprung yet! 
&dotup;By a moderate computation, a dozen kites might
have fallen, while I have been only trying to ensnare
this single lark. Nor yet do I see when I shall be
able to bring her to my lure: More innocent days
yet, therefore! —But reformation for my stalking-horse,
I hope, will be a sure, tho' a slow method to
effect all my purposes. 
&dotup;Then, Jack, thou wilt have a merit too in engaging
my pen, since thy time would be otherwise worse
employed: And, after all, who knows but by creating
new habits, at the expence of the old, a real
reformation may be brought about? I have promised
it; and I believe there is a pleasure to be found in being
good, reversing that of Nat. Lee's madmen, 

&dotup;—Which none but good men know.
&dotup;By all this, seest thou not, how greatly preferable it
is, on twenty accounts, to pursue a difficult, rather than
an easy chace? I have a desire to inculcate this pleasure
upon thee, and to teach thee to fly at nobler game
than daws, crows, and wigeons: I have a mind to
shew thee from time to time, in the course of the correspondence
thou hast so earnestly wished me to begin
on this illustrious occasion, that these exalted Ladies
may be abased, and to obviate one of the objections
that thou madest to me, when we were last together,
that the pleasure which attends these nobler aims, remunerates
not the pains they bring with them; since,
like a paltry fellow as thou wert, thou assertedst that
all women are alike. 
&dotup;Thou knowest nothing, Jack, of the delicacies of
intrigue: Nothing of the glory of outwitting the
Witty and the Watchful: Of the joys that fill the
mind of the inventive or contriving genius, ruminating
which to use of the different webs that offer to 

him for the entanglement of a haughty charmer, who
in her day has given him unnumbered torments. 
—Thou, Jack, who, like a dog at his ease, contentest
thyself to growl over a bone thrown out to thee,
dost not know the joys of the chace, and in pursuing
a winding game: These I will endeavour to rouse thee
to, and then thou wilt have reason doubly and trebly
to thank me, as well because of thy present delight,
as with regard to thy prospects beyond the moon. 
&dotup;To this place I had written, purely to amuse myself,
before I was admitted to my Charmer. But now
I have to tell thee, that I was quite right in my conjecture,
that she would set up for herself, and dismiss
me: For she has declared in so many words, that
such was her resolution: And why? Because, to be
plain with me, the more she saw of me, and of my
ways, the less she liked of either. 
&dotup;This cut me to the heart! —I did not cry indeed! 
—Had I been a woman, I should tho'; and that most
plentifully: But I pulled out a white cambrick handkerchief: 
That I could command, but not my tears. 
&dotup;She finds fault with my protestations; with my
professions; with my vows: I cannot curse a servant,
the only privilege a master is known by, but I am
supposed to be a trooper (a) —I must not say, By my
soul; nor, As I hope to be saved. Why, Jack, how
particular this is! Would she not have me think, I
have a precious soul, as well as she? —If she thinks
my salvation hopeless, what a devil [Another exceptionable
word!] does she propose to reform me for? 
—So I have not an ardent expression left me.&dotup; 
* *
What can be done with a woman who is above flattery,
and despises all praise but that which flows from
the approbation of her own heart? 
&dotup;Well, Jack, thou seest it is high time to change my 

measures. I must run into the Pious a little faster
than I had designed. 
&dotup;What a sad thing would it be, were I, after all,
to lose her person, as well as her opinion! The only
time that further acquaintance, and no blow struck,
nor suspicion given, ever lessened me in a Lady's
favour! —A cursed mortification! —'Tis certain I
can have no pretence for holding her, if she will
go. —No such thing as force to be used, or so much
as hinted at: Lord send us safe at London! 
—That's all I have for it now: And yet it must be
the least part of my speech.&dotup; 
But why will this admirable creature urge her destiny? 
Why will she defy the power she is absolutely
dependent upon? Why will she still wish to my face,
that she had never left her Father's house? Why will
she deny me her company, till she makes me lose my
patience, and lay myself open to her resentment? 
And why, when she is offended, does she carry her
indignation to the utmost length that a scornful Beauty,
in the very height of her power and pride, can go? 
Is it prudent, thinkest thou, in her circumstances,
to tell me, repeatedly to tell me, ‘That she is every
hour more and more dissatisfied with herself and
me? That I am not one, who improve upon her
in my conversation and address?’ [Couldst thou,
Jack, bear this from a captive!] ‘That she shall not
be easy while she is with me? That she was thrown
upon me by a perverse fate? That she knows better
than to value herself upon my volubility? That if
I think she deserves the compliments I make her,
I may pride myself in those Arts, by which I have
made a fool of so extraordinary a person? That
she shall never forgive herself for meeting me, nor
me for seducing her away? [Her very words] That
her regrets increase instead of diminish? That she
will take care of herself; and since her friends think
it not worth while to pursue her, she will be left to 

her own care? That I shall make Mrs. Sorlings's
house more agreeable by my absence? —And go
to Berks, to town, or where-ever I will’ [to the
devil, I suppose] ‘with all her heart?’ 
The impolitic Charmer! —To a temper so vindictive
as she thinks mine! To a Free-liver, as she believes
me to be, who has her in his power! I was
before, as thou knowest, balancing; now this scale,
now that, the heaviest. I only waited to see how
her will would work, how mine would lead me on. 
Thou seest what biass hers takes—And wilt thou
doubt that mine will be determined by it? Were not
her faults before this, numerous enough? Why will
she put me upon looking back? 
I will sit down to argue with myself by-and-by,
and thou shalt be acquainted with the result. 
If thou didst but know, if thou hadst but beheld,
what an abject slave she made me look like! —I had
given myself high airs, as she called them: But they
were airs that shewed my Love for her: That shewed
I could not live out of her company. But she took
me down with a vengeance! She made me look about
me. So much advantage had she over me; such
severe turns upon me; by my Soul, Jack, I had
hardly a word to say for myself. I am ashamed to
tell thee, what a poor creature she made me look
like! But I could have told her something that would
have humbled her pretty pride at the instant, had she
been in a proper place, and proper company about
her. 
To such a place then—and where she cannot fly me
—And then to see how my will works, and what can
be done by the amorous See-saw; now humble; now
proud; now expecting, or demanding; now submitting,
or acquiescing—till I have tired resistance. 
But these hints are at present enough. I may further
explain myself as I go along; and as I confirm
or recede in my future motions. If she will revive 

past disobligations! If she will—But no more, no
more, as I said, at present, of threatenings. 