



From Lady Davers to Mrs. B. in Answer to the preceding. 


My dear Pamela,
I am glad to hear Miss Darnford is likely to be
so happy in a Husband, as Sir W. G. will certainly
make her. I was afraid, that the Proposal I
made, would not do with Miss, had she not had so
good a Tender. I want too, to have the foolish
Fellow marry'd—for several Reasons; one of
which is, He is continually teizing us to permit
him to go up to Town, and to reside there for some
Months, in order that he may see the World, as he
calls it. But we are convinc'd he would feel it, as
well as see it, if we gave way to his Request: For,
in Understanding, Dress, and inconsiderate Vanity,
he is so exactly cut out and siz'd for a Town Fop,
Coxcomb, or Pretty Fellow, that he will undoubtedly
fall into all the Vices of those People; and,
perhaps, having such Expectations as he has, will
be made the Property of Rakes and Sharpers. He
complains, That we use him like a Child in a Go-cart,
or a Baby with Leading-strings, and that he
must not be trusted out of our Sight. 'Tis a sad
thing, that these Bodies will grow up to the Stature
of Men, when the Minds improve not at all
with them, but are still those of Boys and Children. 
Yet, he would certainly make a fond Husband; for,
at present, he has no very bad Qualities. But is
such a Narcissus! —But this between ourselves; 
for his Uncle is wrapp'd up in the Fellow—And 

why? Because he is good-humour'd, that's all. He
has vex'd me lately, which makes me write so-angrily
about him—But 'tis not worth troubling
you with the Particulars. 
I hope Mrs. Jewkes is happy, as you say! — 
Poor Woman! she seem'd to promise for a longer
Life! But what shall we say! 
Your Compliment to me, about my Beck's
Sister, is a very kind one. I am greatly obliged to
you for it. Mrs. Oldham is a sober, grave Widow,
a little aforehand in the World, but not much; has
liv'd well; understands Houshold Management thoroughly; 
is diligent, and has a Turn to serious
Things, which will make you like her the better. 
I'll order Beck and her to wait on you in a
Chaise and Pair, and she will satisfy you in every
thing, as to what you may, or may not, expect of
her. 
You can't think how kindly I take this Motion
from you. You forget nothing that can oblige your
Friends. Little did I think you would remember
me, of (what I had forgotten in a manner) my favourable
Opinion and Wishes for her, express'd so
long ago—But you are what you are—a dear
obliging Creature. 
Beck is all Joy and Gratitude upon it; and her
Sister had rather serve you than the Princess. You
need be under no Difficulty about Terms: She
would serve you for nothing, if you would accept
of her Service. 
I am glad, because it pleases you so much, that
Miss Goodwin will be soon put into your Care. It
will be happy for the Child, and I hope she will be
so dutiful to you, as to give you no Pain for your 

generous Goodness to her. Her Mamma has sent
me a Present of some choice Products of that Climate,
with Acknowlegements of my Kindness to
Miss. I will send Part of it to you by your new
Servant; for so I presume to call her already. 
What a naughty Sister are you, however, to
be so far advanc'd again, as to be obliged to shorten
your intended Excursions, and yet not to send me
Word of it yourself! Don't you know how much
I interest myself in every thing that makes for my
Brother's Happiness and yours? —More especially
in so material a Point, as is the Increase of a Family,
that it is my Boast to be sprung from—Yet I must
find this out by Accident, and by other Hands! — 
Is not this very slighting? —But never do so again,
and I'll forgive you now, because of the Joy it
gives me: Who am 
Your truly affectionate and obliged Sister,
B. Davers. 
I thank you for your Book upon the Plays you
saw. Inclosed is a List of some others, which
I desire you to read, and to oblige me with
your Remarks upon them at your Leisure; tho'
you may not perhaps have seen them by the
Time you will favour me with your Observations. 

