


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Wednesday, April 12. 
Dr. Bartlett was so good as to breakfast with
my cousins and me this morning. He talks
of setting out for Grandison-hall on Saturday or Monday
next. We have settled a correspondence; and he
gives me hope, that he will make me a visit in Northamptonshire. 
I know you will all rejoice to see him. 
Emily came in before the Doctor went. She brought
me the compliments of the Bride, and Lord W. with
their earnest request, that I would dine with them. Sir
Charles was gone, she said, to make a farewel visit
to the Danby set; but would be at home at dinner. 
It would be better for me, I think, Lucy, to avoid
all opportunities of seeing him: Don't you think so? — 
There is no such thing as seeing him with indifference. 
But, so earnestly invited, how could I deny? 
My cousins were also invited: But having engaged
to be at home in the afternoon, they excused themselves. 
Miss Jervois whispered me at parting. I never before,
said she, had an opportunity to observe the behaviour
of a new-married couple to each other: But
is it customary, madam, for the Bride to be more
snappish, as the Bridegroom is more obliging? 

Lady G. is very naughty, my dear, if she so behaves,
as to give you reason to ask this question. 
She does: And upon my word, I see more obedience
where it was not promised, than where it was. Dear
madam, is not what is said at church to be thought
of afterwards? But why did not the doctor make her
speak out? What signified bowing, except a woman
was so bashful that she could not speak? 
The bowing, my dear, is an assent. It is as efficacious
as words. Lord G. only bowed, you know. 
Could you like to be called upon, Emily, to speak
out? 
Why, no. But then I would be very civil and good-natured
to my husband, if it were but for fear he
should be cross to me: But I should think it my duty
as well—Sweet innocent! 
She went away, and left the doctor with me. 
When our hearts are set upon a particular subject,
how impertinent, how much beside the purpose, do
we think every other! I wanted the doctor to talk of
Sir Charles Grandison: But as he fell not into the
subject, and as I was afraid lie would think me to be
always leading him into it, if I began it, I suffered
him to go away at his first motion: I never knew him
so shy upon it, however. 
Sir Charles returned to dinner. He has told Lady
L. who afterwards told us, that he had a hint from
Mr. Galliard, senior, that if he were not engaged in
his affections, he was commissioned to make him a
very great proposal in behalf of one of the young ladies
he had seen the Thursday before; and that from her
father. 
Surely, Lucy, we may pronounce without doubt,
that we live in an age in which there is a great dearth
of good men, that so many offers fall to the lot of
one. But, I am thinking, 'tis no small advantage to
Sir Charles, that his time is so taken up, that he cannot
stay long enough in any company to suffer them 

to cast their eyes on other objects, with distinction. 
He left the numerous assembly at Enfield, while they
were in the height of their admiration of him. Attention,
love, admiration, cannot be always kept at
the stretch. You will observe, Lucy, that on the return
of a long-absent dear friend, the rapture lasts not
more than an hour: Gladdened, as the heart is, the
friend received, and the friends receiving, perhaps in
less than that time, can sit down quietly together, to
hear and to tell stories, of what has happened to either
in the long-regretted absence. It will be so with us,
Lucy, when I return to the arms of my kind friends:
And now, does not Sir Charles's proposed journey to
Italy endear his company to us? 
The Earl of G. Lady Gertrude, and two agreeable
nieces of that Nobleman's, were here at dinner. 
Lady G. behaved pretty well to her Lord before them:
But I, who understood the language of her eyes, saw
them talk very saucily to him, on several occasions. 
My Lord is a little officious in his obligingness; which
takes off from that graceful, that polite frankness,
which so charmingly, on all occasions, distinguishes
one happy man, who was then present. Lord G.
will perhaps appear more to advantage in that person's
absence. 
Mr. Beauchamp was also present. He is indeed
an agreeable, a modest young man. He appeared to
great advantage, as well in his conversation, as by his
behaviour: And not the less for subscribing in both to
the superiority of his friend; who nevertheless endeavoured
to draw him out, as the first man. 
After dinner, Lady L. Lady G. and I, found an
opportunity to be by ourselves for one half-hour. 
Lady G. asked Lady L. what she intended to do with
the thousand pounds with which Lord W. had so generously
presented her? —Do with it, my dear! — 
What do you think I intend to do with it? —It is already
disposed of. 

I'll be hanged, said Lady G. if this good creature
has not given it to her husband. 
Indeed, Charlotte, I have. I gave it to him before
I slept. 
I thought so! She laughed—And Lord L. took it? 
Did he? 
To be sure he did. I should otherwise have been
displeased with him. 
Dear, good soul! —And so you gave him a thousand
pounds to take part of it back from him, by four
or five paltry guineas at a time, at his pleasure? 
Lord L. and I, Charlotte, have but one purse. 
You may not perhaps, know how we manage it. 
Pray, good, meek, dependent creature! how do
you manage it? 
Thus, Charlotte: My Lord knows that his wife
and he have but one interest; and from the first of
our happy marriage, he would make me take one key,
as he has another, of the private drawer, where his
money and money-bills lie. There is a little memorandum-book
in the drawer, in which he enters on
one page, the money he receives; on the opposite,
the money he takes out: And when I want money,
I have recourse to my key. If I see but little in
the drawer, I am the more moderate; or, perhaps,
if my want is not urgent, defer the supplying of it
till my Lord is richer: But little, or much, I minute
down the sum, as he himself does; and so we know
what we are about; and I never put it out of my
Lord's power, by my unseasonable expences, to preserve
that custom of his for which he is as much respected,
as well served; not to suffer a demand to be
twice made upon him where he is a debtor. 
Good soul! —And, pray, don't you minute dowa
too the use to which you put the money you take out? 
Indeed I often do: Always indeed, when I take out
more than five guineas at one time: I found my Lord
did so; and I followed the example of my own accord. 

Happy pair! said I—O Lady G. what a charming
example is this! —I hope you'll follow it. 
Thank you, Harriet, for your advice. Why, I
can't but say, that this is one pretty way of coaxing
each other into frugality: But don't you think, that
where an honest pair are so tender of disobliging,
and so studious of obliging each other, that they seem
to confess that the matrimonial good understanding
hangs by very slender threads? 
And do not the tenderest friendships, said I, hang
by as slender? Can delicate minds be united to each
other but by delicate observances? 
Why thou art a good soul, too, Harriet! —And so
you would both have me make a present to Lord G.
of my thousand pounds before we have chosen our
private drawer; before he has got two keys made
to it? 
Let him know, Charlotte, what Lord L. and I do,
if you think the example worth following—And
then— 
Ay, and then give him my thousand pounds for a
beginning, Lady L.? —But see you not that this proposal
should come from him, not from me? —And
should we not let each other see a little of each other's
merits, first? 
See, first, the merits of the man you have married,
Charlotte! 
Yes, Lady L. —But yesterday married, you know. 
Can there be a greater difference between any two
men in the world, than there often is between the
same man, a lover, and an husband? —And now, my
generous advisers, be pleased to continue silent. You
cannot answer me fairly. And besides, wot ye not
the indelicacy of an early present, which you are not
obliged to make? 
We were both silent, each expecting the other to
answer the strange creature. 
She laughed at us both. Soft souls, and tender! 

said she, let me tell you, that there is more indelicacy
in delicacy, than you very delicate people are
aware of. 
You, Charlotte, said Lady L. have odder notions
than any-body else. Had you been a man, you would
have been a sad rake. 
A rake perhaps I might have been; but not a sad
one, Lady L. 
Lady G. can't help being witty, said I: It is sometimes
her misfortune, sometimes ours, that she cannot:
However, I highly approve of the example set
by Lord L. and followed by Lady L. 
And so do I. Harriet. And when Lord G. sets the
example, I shall—consider of it. I am not a bad
oeconomist. Had I ten thousand pounds in my hands,
I would not be extravagant: Had I but one hundred,
I would not be mean. I value not money but as it
enables me to lay an obligation, instead of being under
the necessity of receiving one. I am my mother's
daughter, and brother's sister; and yours, Lady L. in
this particular; and yours too, Harriet: Different
means may be taken to arrive at the same end. Lord
G. will have no reason to be dissatisfied with my prudence
in money-matters, altho' I should not make
him one of my best courtesies, as if—as if—(and she
laughed; but checking herself) I were conscious—again
she laughed—that I had signed and sealed to my absolute
dependence on his bounty. 
What a mad creature! said Lady L.: But, my Harriet,
don't you think that she behaved pretty well to
Lord G. at table? 
Yes, answered I, as those would think who observe
not her arch looks: But she gave me pain for
her several times; and I believe her brother was not
without his apprehensions. 
He had his eyes upon you, Harriet, reply'd Lady G.
more earnestly than he had upon me, or any-body
else. 

That's true, said Lady L. I looked upon both him
and you, my dear, with pity. My tears were ready
to start more than once, to reflect how happy you two
might be in each other, and how greatly you would
love each other, were it not— 
Not one word more on this subject, dear Lady L.! 
I cannot bear it. I thought my-self, that he often cast
an eye of tenderness upon me. I cannot bear it. I
am afraid of myself; of my justice— 
His tender looks did not escape me, said Lady G.
Nor yet did my dear Harriet's. But we will not
touch this string: It is too tender a one. I, for my
part, was forced, in order to divert myself, to turn my
eyes on Lord G.: He got nothing by that. The most
officious— 
Nay, Lady G. interrupted I, you shall not change
the discourse at the expence of the man you have
vowed to honour. I will be pained myself, by the
continuation of the former subject, rather than that
shall be. 
Charming Harriet! said Lady L. I hope your generosity
will be rewarded. Yet tell me, my dear, can
you wish Lady Clementina may be his? I have no
doubt but you wish her recovery; but can you wish
her to be his? 
I have debated the matter, my dear Lady L. with
myself. I am sorry it has admitted of debate: So excellent
a creature! Such an honour to her Sex! So
nobly sincere! So pious! —But I will confess the truth:
I have called upon justice to support me in my determination:
I have supposed myself in her situation, her
unhappy malady excepted: I have supposed her in
mine: And ought I then to have hesitated to which to
give the preference? —Yet— 
What yet, most frank, and most generous of women,
said Lady L. clasping her arms about me; what
yet— 
Why, yet—Ah Ladies—Why, yet, I have many a 

pang, many a twitch, as I may call it! —Why is your
brother so tender-hearted, so modest, so faultless! — 
Why did he not insult me with his pity! Why does
he on every occasion shew a tenderness for me, that
is more affecting than pity! and why does he give me
a consequence that exalts, while it depresses me? 
I turned my head aside to hide my emotion—Lady
G. snatch'd my handkerchief from me; and wiped
away a starting tear; and called me by very tender
names. 
Am I dear, continued I, to the heart of such a man? 
You think I am: Allow me to say, that he is indeed
dear to mine: Yet I have not a wish but for his happiness,
whatever becomes of me. 
Emily appeared at the door—May I come in, Ladies? 
—I will come in! —My dear Miss Byron affected! 
My dear Miss Byron in tears! 
Her pity, without knowing the cause, sprung to
her eyes. She took my hand in both hers, and repeatedly
kissed it! —My guardian asks for you. O with
what tenderness of voice—Where is your Miss Byron,
Love? He calls every one by gentle names, when he
speaks of you—His voice then is the voice of Love— 
Love, said he to me! Thro' you, madam, he will
love his ward—And on your Love will I build all my
merit. But you sigh, dear Miss Byron, you sigh— 
Forgive your prating girl! —You must not be grieved. 
I embraced her. Grief, my dear, reaches not my
heart at this time. It is the merit of your guardian
that affects me. 
God bless you, madam, for your gratitude to my
guardian! 
A Clementina and an Harriet! said Lady L. two
women so excellent! What a fate is his! How must
his heart be divided! 
Divided, say you, Lady L.! resumed Lady G. 
The man who loves virtue for virtue's sake, loves it
where-ever he finds it: Such a man may distinguish 

more virtuous women than one: And if he be of a
gentle and beneficent nature, there will be tenderness
in his distinction to every one, varying only according
to the difference of her circumstances. 
Let me embrace you, my Charlotte, resumed Lady
L. for that thought. Don't let me hear, for a
month to come, one word from the same lips, that
may be unworthy of it. 
You have Lord G. in your head, Lady L.: But
never mind us. He must now-and-then be made to
look about him. I'll take care to keep up my consequence
with him, never fear: Nor shall he have reason
to doubt the virtue of his wife. 
Virtue, my dear! said I: What is virtue only? She
who will not be virtuous for virtue's sake, is not worthy
to be called a woman: But she must be something
more than virtuous for her husband's, nay, for
her vow's sake. Complacency, obligingness— 
Obedience too, I warrant—Hush, hush, my sweet
Harriet! putting her hand before my mouth, we will
behave as well as we can: And that will be very well,
if nobody minds us. And now let us go down together. 

