



Mr. Lovelace, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 
Superscribed, To Mrs. Lovelace. 

M, Hall, Monday, June 26. 
Once more, my dearest Love, do I conjure you
to send me the Four requested words. There is
no time to be lost. And I would not have next Thursday
go over, without being entitled to call you mine,
for the world; and that as well for your sake as my
own. Hitherto all that has passed is between you and
me only; but, after Thursday, if my wishes are unanswered,
the whole will be before the world. 
My Lord is extremely ill, and endures not to have
me out of his sight for one half-hour. But this shall
not have the least weight with me, if you be pleased to
hold out the olive-branch to me in the Four requested
words. 
I have the following intelligence from Captain Tomlinson. 

‘All your family are at your Uncle Harlowe's. 
Your Uncle finds he cannot go up; and names
Captain Tomlinson for his Proxy. He proposes to
keep all your family with him, till the Captain
assures him, that the Ceremony is over. 
‘Already he has begun, with hope of success, to
try to reconcile your Mother to you. 
‘My Lord M. but just now has told me, how
happy he should think himself to have an opportunity,
before he dies, to salute you as his Niece. 
I have put him in hopes, that he shall see you; and
have told him, that I will go to town on Wednesday,
in order to prevail upon you to accompany me
down on Thursday or Friday. I have ordered a Set
to be in readiness to carry me up; and, were not my
Lord so very ill, my Cousin Montague tells me, she
would offer her attendance on you. If you please,
therefore, we can set out for this place the moment
the Solemnity is performed.’ 
Do not, dearest creature, dissipate all these promising
appearances, and, by refusing to save your own
and your family's reputation in the eye of the world,
use yourself worse than the ungratefullest wretch on
earth has used you. For, if we are married, all the
disgrace you imagine you have suffered while a single
Lady, will be my own; and only known to ourselves. 
Once more then, consider well the situation we
are both in; and remember, my dearest life, that
Thursday will be soon here; and that you have no
time to lose. 
In a Letter sent by the messenger whom I dispatch
with this, I have desired, that my friend, Mr. Belford,
who is your very great admirer, and who knows
all the secrets of my heart, will wait upon you, to
know what I am to depend upon, as to the chosen
day. 

Surely, my dear, you never could, at any time,
suffer half so much from cruel suspense, as I do. 
If I have not an answer to this, either from your
own goodness, or thro' Mr. Belford's intercession, it
will be too late for me to set out: And Captain Tomlinson
will be disappointed, who goes to town on purpose
to attend your pleasure. 
One motive for the gentle restraint I have presumed
to lay you under, is, to prevent the mischiefs
that might ensue (as probably to the more innocent,
as to the less) were you to write to any body while
your passions were so much raised and inflamed against
me. Having apprised you of my direction to the
women in town on this head, I wonder you should
have endeavoured to send a Letter to Miss Howe,
altho' in a Cover directed to that young Lady's (a) 
servant; as you must think it would be likely to fall
into my hands. 
The just sense of what I have deserved the contents
should be, leaves me no room to doubt what they are.
Nevertheless, I return it you inclosed, with the Seal,
as you will see, unbroken. 
Relieve, I beseech you, dearest Madam, by the
Four requested words, or by Mr. Belford, the anxiety of 
Your ever-affectionate and obliged
Lovelace. 
Remember, there will not, there cannot be time for
further writing, and for my coming-up by Thursday,
your Uncle's Birth day. 