



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tired with a succession of fatiguing days and sleepless
nights, and with contemplating the precarious
situation I stand in with my Beloved, I fell into a profound
Resverie; which brought on Sleep; and that produced
a Dream; a fortunate Dream; which, as I imagine,
will afford my working mind the means to effect
the obliging double purpose my heart is now once more
set upon. 
What, as I have often contemplated, is the enjoyment
of the finest woman in the world, to the contrivance,
the bustle, the surprizes, and at last the happy
conclusion, of a well-laid plot? —The charming round-abouts,
to come the nearest way home;—the doubts; 
the apprehensions; the heart-akings; the meditated triumphs
—These are the joys that make the blessing dear. 

—For all the rest, what is it? —What but to find an
Angel in imagination dwindled down to a Woman in
fact? —But to my Dream— 
Methought it was about Nine on Wednesday morning
that a chariot, with a dowager's arms upon the
doors, and in it a grave matronly Lady [Not unlike
Mother H. in the face; but in her heart O how unlike!]
stopped at a grocer's shop about ten doors on the
other side of the way, in order to buy some groceries: 
And methought Dorcas, having been out to see if the
coast were clear for her Lady's flight, and if a coach
were to be got near the place, espied this chariot with
the dowager's arms, and this matronly Lady: And what,
methought, did Dorcas, that subtle traitress, do, but
whip up to the old matronly Lady, and, lifting up her
voice, say, Good my Lady, permit me one word with
your Ladyship! 
What thou hast to say to me, say on, quoth the old
Lady; the Grocer retiring, and standing aloof, to give
Dorcas leave to speak; who, methought, in words like
these, accosted the Lady. 
‘You seem, Madam, to be a very good Lady; and
here in this neighbourhood, at a house of no high repute,
is an innocent Lady of rank and fortune, beautiful
as a May-morning, and youthful as a Rose-bud,
and full as sweet and lovely; who has been tricked
thither by a wicked gentleman, practised in the ways
of the town; and this very night will she be ruined,
if she get not out of his hands. Now, O Lady! if
you will extend your compassionate goodness to this
fair young Lady, in whom, the moment you behold
her, you will see cause to believe all I say; and let
her but have a place in your chariot, and remain in
your protection for one day only, till she can send a
man and horse to her rich and powerful friends; you
may save from ruin a Lady who has no equal for Virtue
as well as Beauty.’ 

Methought the old Lady, moved with Dorcas's story,
answered and said, ‘Hasten, O damsel, who in a happy
moment art come to put it in my power to serve the
innocent and the virtuous, which it has always been
my delight to do: Hasten to this young Lady, and
bid her hie hither to me with all speed; and tell her,
that my chariot shall be her asylum: And if I find all
that thou sayest true, my house shall be her sanctuary,
and I will protect her from all her oppressors.’ 
Hereupon, methought, this traitress Dorcas hied
back to the Lady, and made report of what she had
done. And, methought, the Lady highly approved
of Dorcas's proceeding, and blessed her for her good
thought. 
And I lifted up mine eyes, and behold the Lady
issued out of the house, and without looking back, ran
to the chariot with the dowager's coat upon it; and was
received by the matronly Lady with open arms, and
‘Welcome, welcome, welcome, fair young Lady,
who so well answer the description of the faithful
damsel: And I will carry you instantly to my
house, where you shall meet with all the good usage
your heart can wish for, till you can apprise your rich
and powerful friends of your past dangers, and present
escape.’ 
‘Thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you,
worthy, thrice worthy Lady, who afford so kindly
your protection to a most unhappy young creature,
who has been basely seduced and betrayed, and brought
to the very brink of destruction.’ 
Methought then, the matronly Lady, who had by
the time the young Lady came to her, bought and paid
for the goods she wanted, ordered her coachman to
drive home with all speed; who stopped not till he had
arrived in a certain Street, not far from Lincoln's-inn-fields,
where the matronly Lady lived in a sumptuous
dwelling, replete with damsels who wrought curiously
in Muflins, Cambricks, and fine linen, and in every 

good work that industrious damsels love to be employed
about, except the Loom and the Spinning-wheel. 
And methought, all the way the young Lady and
the old Lady rode, and after they came in, till dinner
was ready, the young Lady filled up the time with the
dismal account of her wrongs and her sufferings, the
like of which was never heard by mortal ear; and this
in so moving a manner, that the good old Lady did
nothing but weep, and sigh, and sob, and inveigh
against the arts of wicked men, and against that abominable
'Squire Lovelace, who was a plotting villain,
methought she said; and, more than that, an unchained
Beelzebub. 
Methought I was in a dreadful agony, when I found
the Lady had escaped; and in my wrath had like to
have slain Dorcas, and our Mother, and every one I
met. But, by some quick transition, and strange metamorphosis,
which dreams do not usually account for,
methought, all of a sudden, this matronly Lady was
turned into the famous Mother H. herself; and, being
an old acquaintance of Mother Sinclair, was prevailed
upon to assist in my plot upon the young Lady. 
Then, methought, followed a strange Scene; for,
Mother H. longing to hear more of the young Lady's
Story, and night being come, besought her to accept
of a place in her own bed, in order to have all the talk
to themselves. For, methought, two young Nieces of
hers had broken in upon them in the middle of the dismal
tale. 
Accordingly going early to bed, and the sad story
being resumed, with as great earnestness on one side,
as attention on the other, before the young Lady had
gone far in it, Mother H. methought, was taken with
a fit of the Colic; and her tortures encreasing, was
obliged to rise to get a cordial she used to find specific in
this disorder, to which she was unhappily subject. 
Having thus risen, and slept to her closet, methought
she let fall the wax taper in her return; and then [O 

metamorphosis still stranger than the former! What
unaccountable things are Dreams!] coming to bed again
in the dark, the young Lady, to her infinite astonishment,
grief, and surprize, found Mother H. turned
into a young person of the other Sex: And altho' Lovelace
was the abhorred of her Soul, yet, fearing it was
some other person, it was matter of some consolation to
her, when she found it was no other than himself, and
that she had been still the bedfellow of but one and the
same man. 
A strange promiscuous huddle of adventures followed; 
Scenes perpetually shifting; now nothing heard from
the Lady, but sighs, groans, exclamations, faintings,
dyings —From the gentleman, but vows, promises,
protestations, disclaimers of purposes pursued; and all
the gentle and ungentle pressures of the Lover's warfare. 
Then, as quick as thought (for Dreams thou knowest
confine not themselves to the Rules of the Drama) ensued
Recoveries, Lyings-in, Christenings, the smiling
Boy, amply, even in her own opinion, rewarding the
suffering Mother. 
Then the Grandfather's Estate yielded up, possession
taken of it: Living very happily upon it: Her beloved
Norton her companion; Miss Howe her visitor; and
(admirable! thrice admirable!) enabled to compare notes
with her; a charming Girl, by the same father, to her
friend's charming Boy; who, as they grow up, in order
to consolidate their mammas friendships (for neither
have Dreams regard to consanguinity) intermarry; change
Names by Act of Parliament, to enjoy my Estate — 
And I know not what of the like incongruous stuff. 
I awoke, as thou mayest believe, in great disorder,
and rejoiced to find my Charmer in the next room, and
Dorcas honest. 
Now thou wilt say this was a very odd Dream. And
yet (for I am a strange dreamer) it is not altogether improbable
that something like it may happen; as the 

pretty Simpleton has the weakness to confide in Dorcas,
whom till now she disliked. 
But I forgot to tell thee one part of my Dream; and
that was, That, the next morning, the Lady gave
way to such transports of grief and resentment, that she
was with difficulty diverted from making an attempt
upon her own life. But however at last was prevailed
upon to resolve to live, and to make the best of the
matter: A Letter, methought, from Capt. Tomlinson
helping to pacify her, written to apprise me, that her
Uncle Harlowe would certainly be at Kentish-town on
Wednesday night June 28. the following day (the 29th)
being his birth-day; and he doubly desirous on that account
that our Nuptials should be then privately solemnized
in his presence. 
But is Thursday the 29th her Uncle's anniversary,
methinks thou askest? —It is; or else the day of Celebration
should have been earlier still. Three weeks ago
I heard her say it was; and I have down the Birth-day
of every one of her family, and the Wedding-day of her
Father and Mother. The minutest circumstances are
often of great service, in matters of the last importance. 
And what sayest thou now to my Dream? 
Who says, that, sleeping and waking, I have not
fine helps from some body, some spirit rather, as thou'lt
be apt to say? But no wonder that a Beelzebub has his
devilkins to attend his call. 
I can have no manner of doubt of succeeding in Mother
H's part of the scheme; for will the Lady (who
resolves to throw herself into the first house she can enter,
or to bespeak the protection of the first person she meets; 
and who thinks there can be no danger out of this house,
equal to what she apprehends from Me in it) scruple to
accept of the chariot of a dowager, accidentally offering? 
And the Lady's protection engaged by her faithful
Dorcas, so highly bribed to promote her escape? — 
And then Mrs. H. has the air and appearance of a venerable
matron, and is not such a forbidding devil as
Mrs. Sinclair. 

The pretty Simpleton knows nothing of the world; 
nor that people who have money, never want assistants
in their wives, be they what they will. How else could
the Princes of the earth be so implicitly served as they
are, change they hands ever so often, and be their purposes
ever so wicked? 
If I can but get her to go on with me till Wednesday
next week, we shall be settled together pretty quietly
by that time. And indeed if she has any gratitude, and
has in her the least of her Sex's foibles, she must think I
deserve her favour, by the pains she has cost me. For
dearly do they all love that men should take pains about
them and for them. 
And here, for the present, I will lay down my pen,
and congratulate myself upon my happy invention (since
her obstinacy puts me once more upon exercising it)— 
But with this resolution, I think, That, if the present
contrivance fail me, I will exert all the faculties of my
mind, all my talents, to procure for myself a Legal
Right to her favour, and that in defiance of all my antipathies
to the Married State; and of the suggestions of
the great devil out of the house, and of his secret agents
in it. —Since, if now she is not to be prevailed upon, or
drawn in, it will be in vain to attempt her further. 