



Miss Clarissa Harlowe; In Continuation. 

You may believe, my dear, that these letters put
me in good humour with him. He saw it in my
countenance, and congratulated himself upon it. But
yet I wonder'd that I could not have the contents of
them communicated to me last night. 
He then urged me to go directly to Lady Betty's,
on the strength of her letter. 
But how, said I, can I do that, were I out of all
hope of a reconciliation with my friends [which yet,
however improbable to be brought about, is my duty
to attempt] as her ladyship has given me no particular
invitation? 
That, he was sure, was owing to her doubt that it
would be accepted: Else she had done it with the
greatest pleasure in the world. 
That doubt itself, I said, was enough to deter me: 
Since her ladyship, who knew so well the boundaries
of the fit and the unfit, by her not expecting I would
accept of an invitation, had she given it, would have
reason to think me very forward, if I had accepted it; 

and much more forward to go without it. Then, said
I, I thank you, Sir, I have no cloaths fit to go anywhere,
or to be seen by any-body. 
O, I was fit to appear in the 'drawing-room, were
full dress and jewels to be excused, and should make
the most amiable [extraordinary he must mean] figure
there. He was astonish'd at the elegance of my dress. 
By what art he knew not, but I appeared to such advantage,
as if I had a different suit every day. Besides,
his cousins Montague would supply me with all I
wanted for the present; and he would write to Miss
Charlotte accordingly, if I would give him leave. 
Do you think me the jay in the fable? said I. — 
Would you have me visit the owners of the borrowed
dresses in their own cloaths? —Surely, Mr. Lovelace,
you think I have either a very low, or a very confident
mind. 
Would I choose to go to London, for a few days
only, in order to furnish myself with cloaths? 
Not at his expence. I was not prepared to wear his
livery yet. 
I could not have appeared in earnest to him, in my
displeasure at his artful contrivances to get me away,
if I were not occasionally to shew my real fretfulness
upon the destitute condition he has reduced me to. 
When people set out wrong together, it is very difficult
to avoid recriminations. 
He wish'd he knew but my mind—That should
direct him in his proposals, and it would be his delight
to observe it, whatever it was. 
My mind was, that he should leave me out of hand. 
—How often must I tell him so?— 
If I were any-where but here, he would obey me,
he said, if I insisted upon it. But if I would assert my
right, that would be infinitely preferable, in his opinion,
to any other measure but one; which he durst
only hint at: For then, admitting his visits, or refusing
them, as I pleased [granting a correspondence by 

letter only] it would appear to all the world, that
what I had done, was but in order to do myself
justice. 
How often must I tell you, Sir, that I will not
litigate with my papa? —Do you think that my unhappy
circumstances will alter my notions of my own
duty, so far as it is practicable for me to perform it? —How can I obtain possession without litigation, and
but by my trustees? One of them will be against me; 
the other is abroad. This must take up time, were
I disposed to fall upon this measure. —And what I
want, is present independence, and your immediate
absence. 
Upon his soul, the wretch swore, he did not think
it safe, for the reasons he had before given, to leave
me here. —He hoped I would think of some place, to
which I should like to go. But he must take the
liberty to say, that he hoped his behaviour had not
been so exceptionable, as to make me so very earnest
for his absence in the interim: And the less, surely,
as I was almost eternally shutting up myself from him; 
altho' he presumed, he said, to assure me, that he
never went from me, but with a corrected heart, and
with strengthened resolutions of improving by my
example. 
Eternally shutting myself up from you! repeated I— 
I hope, Sir, that you will not pretend to take it
amiss, that I expect to be uninvaded in my retirements. 
I hope you do not think me so weak a creature
(novice as you have found me in a very capital
instance) as to be fond of occasions to hear your fine
speeches, especially as no differing circumstances
require your over-frequent visits; nor that I am to be
addressed to as if I thought hourly professions needful
to assure me of your honour. 
He seemed a little disconcerted. 
You know, Mr. Lovelace, proceeded I, why I am
so earnest for your absence. It is, that I may appear 

to the world independent of you; and in hopes, by that
means, to find it less difficult to set on foot a reconciliation
with my friends. And now let me add (in
order to make you easier as to the terms of that hoped-for
reconciliation) that since I find I have the good
fortune to stand so well with your relations, I will,
from time to time, acquaint you, by letter, when
you are absent, with every step I shall take, and with
every overture that shall be made to me. But not
with an intention to render myself accountable to
you, neither, as to my acceptance or non-acceptance
of those overtures. They know, that I have a power
given me by my grandfather's will, to bequeath the
estate he left me, together with my share of the effects,
in a way that may affect them, though not absolutely
from them: This consideration, I hope, will procure
me some from them, when their passion subsides,
and they know I am independent of you. 
Charming reasoning! —And let him tell me, that
the assurance I had given him was all he wished-for. It
was more than he could ask. —What a happiness to
have a woman of honour and generosity to depend
upon! —Had he, on his first entrance into the world,
met with such a one, he had never been other than a
man of strict virtue—But all, he hoped, was for the
best; since, in that case, he had never, perhaps, had the
happiness now in his view; because his relations had
been always urging him to marry; and that before he
had the honour to know me. —And now, as he had
not been so bad as some peoples malice reported
him to be, he hoped, he should have more merit in
his repentance, than if he had never err'd. 
I said, I took it for granted, that he assented to the
reasoning he seemed to approve, and would leave me. 
And then I asked him, What he really, and in his
most deliberate mind, would advise me to, in my present
situation? He must needs see, I said, that I was
at a great loss what to resolve upon; intirely a stranger 

to London, having no adviser, no protector, at
present: —Himself, he must give me leave to tell him,
greatly deficient in practice, if not in the knowlege, of
those decorums, which, I had apprehended, were
indispensable in the character of a man of birth, fortune,
and education. 
He imagines himself, I find, to be a very polite
man, and cannot bear to be thought otherwise. He put
up his lip,—I am sorry for it, Madam. —A man of
breeding, a man of politeness, give me leave to say,
colouring, is much more of a black swan with you,
than with any lady I ever met with. 
Then that is your misfortune, Mr. Lovelace, as
well as mine, at present. —Every woman of discernment,
I am confident, knowing what I know of you
now, would say as I say [I had a mind to mortify a
pride, that I am sure deserves to be mortify'd] that
your politeness is not regular, nor constant. It is
not habit. It is too much seen by fits, and starts, and
sallies, and those not spontaneous. You must be
reminded into them. 
O Lord! O Lord! —Poor I!—was the light, yet
the half-angry wretch's self-pitying expression!— 
I proceeded. —Upon my word, Sir, you are not
the accomplish'd man, which your talents and opportunities
would have led one to expect you to be. — 
You are indeed in your noviciate [He had, in a former
conversation, used that word] as to every laudable
attainment.— 