



From Miss Darnford to Lady Darnford. 


My honoured Mamma,
You cannot conceive how you and my dear
Papa have delighted the Heart of my good
Mrs. B. and obliged her Mr. B. by the Permission
you have given me to attend her till the important
Hour shall be over with her; for the dear Lady is
exceedingly apprehensive, and one can hardly blame
her; since there is hardly such another happy Couple
in the World. 
I am glad to hear, that the Ceremony is over, so
much to both your Satisfactions: May this Matrimony
be but a Tenth Part as happy, as that I am
Witness to here; and Mr. and Mrs. Murray will
have that to boast of, which few marry'd People
have, even among those we call happy! 
For my Part, I believe I shall never care to
marry at all; for tho' I cannot be so deserving as
Mrs. B. yet I shall not bear to think of a Husband
much less excellent than hers. Nay, by what I
see in her Apprehensions, and conceive of the Condition
she hourly expects to be in, I don't think a
Lady can be required with a less worthy one, for
all she is likely to suffer on a Husband's Account,
and for the sake of his Family and Name. 
Mrs. Andrews, a discreet worthy Soul, as ever
I knew, and who, in her Aspect and Behaviour, is
far from being a Disgrace even to Mr. B.'s Lady,
is with her dear Daughter, to her no small Satisfaction,
as you may suppose; who now-and-then 

says, What a foolish Creature, my dear Mother,
have you for a Daughter! —You did not behave
so weakly as I do, when you were in the same Circumstances,
I dare say; and yet you had a dear
good Husband, tho' not a rich one, to hope to live
for! —But, come, I will have a good Heart, to
make myself as worthy of the Company and Chearings
of Three such Friends, as I am bless'd with, in
my Mother, my Miss Darnford, and Mrs. Jervis! 
Mr. B. ask'd my Advice Yesterday, about having
in the House a Midwife, to be at hand, at a
Moment's Warning. I told him, I fear'd the Sight
of such a Person would terrify her: And so he instantly
started an Expedient, of which her Mother,
Mrs. Jervis, and myself, approved, and have put
into Practice; for, this Day, Mrs. Harris, a distant
Relation of mine, tho' not of yours, Sir and Madam,
is arrived from Essex, to make me a Visit; 
and Mr. B. has been so good as to prevail upon
her, in Compliment to me, as he pretended, to accept
of her Board in his House, while she stays in
Town, which, she says, will be about a Week. 
Now, you must know, that this Mrs. Harris
being a discreet, modest, matron-like Person, Mrs. B.
took a Liking to her at first Sight, and is already
very familiar with her; and understanding that she
is a Gentlewoman who was a Doctor of Physick's
Lady, and takes as much Delight in administring to
the Health of her own Sex, as her Husband used to
do to that of both, Mrs. B. says It is very fortunate,
that she has so experienc'd a Lady to consult, as she
is such a Novice in her own Case. 
Mr. B. however, to carry on the honest Imposture
better, just now, in Presence of Mrs. Harris, 

and Mrs. Andrews, and me, ask'd the former, If it
was not necessary to have in the House the good
Woman? This frighted Mrs. B. who turn'd pale,
and said she could not bear the Thoughts of it. 
Mrs. Harris said, It was highly necessary, That
Mrs. B. if she would not permit the Gentlewoman
to be in the House, should see her; and that then,
she apprehended, there would be no Necessity, as
she suppos'd she did not live far off, to have her in
the House, since Mrs. B. was so uneasy upon that
Account. This pleased Mrs. B. much; and Mrs. Thomas
was admitted to attend her. 
Now, you must know, that this is the Assistant
of my new Relation; and she, being appris'd of
the Matter, came; but never did I see so much
Shyness and Apprehension, as Mrs. B. shew'd all
the time Mrs. Thomas was with her, holding sometimes
her Mother, sometimes Mrs. Harris; by the
Hand, and being ready to sweat with Terror. 
Mrs. Harris scrap'd Acquaintance with Mrs. Thomas,
who, pretending to recollect her, gave Mrs.
Harris great Praises; which increased Mrs. B.'s
Confidence in her: And she undertakes to govern
the Whole so, that the dreaded Mrs. Thomas need
not come till the very Moment; which is no small
Pleasure to the over-nice Lady. And she seems
every Hour to be better pleas'd with Mrs. Harris,
who, by her prudent Talk, will more and more
familiarize her to the Circumstance, unawares to
herself in a manner. 
But notwitstanding this Precaution of a Midwife
in the House, Mr. B. intends to have a Gentleman
of the Profession in Read in Readiness, for fear of the
worst. 

I tell Mr. B. He is very happy, in this Stratagem; 
but that, I suppose, he has been more used
to Contrivances of this sort, than he ought to have
been; and was so free as to add, That I presum'd
his Lady is hardly the first he has cheated into a
Child. And, indeed, I think, Mrs. B's Merit to
the rest of her Sex is very great, were it only in
reforming such an uncommonly agreeable and manly
Rake as this; for no doubt he has done, and would
have done, a world of Mischief among the Thoughtless
and Indiscreet in Upper Life; for, it seems,
when he was at the worst, he never made the Vulgar
the Subjects of his vile Attempts. 
Mrs. B. has written a Letter, and the Superscription
following will tell you to whom it is
directed: ‘To the ever-honour'd and ever-dear
Mr. B. with Prayers for his Health, Honour, and
Prosperity in this World, and everlasting Felicity
in that to come. P. B.’ It is seal'd with black
Wax, and she gave it me this Moment, on her
being taken ill, to give to Mr. B. if she dies. But
God, of his Mercy, avert that! and preserve the
dear Lady, for the Honour of her Sex, and the
Happiness of all who know her, and particularly
for that of your Polly Darnford; for I cannot
have a greater Loss, I am sure, while my honour'd
Papa and Mamma are living: And may that be for
many, very many, happy Years! 
I will not close this Letter, till all be over:
Happily, as I hope! —Mrs. B. is better again,
and has, occasionally, made some fine Reflections,
directing herself to me, but design'd for the Benefit
of her Polly, on the Subject of the Inconsideration 

of some of our Sex, with regard to the Circumstances
she is in; inferring, that if such are her Apprehensions,
tho' a lawful Wife, and such the
Danger attending this Case, how must it leave a
poor Creature destitute of all spiritual Consolation,
(as well as of the Assistance and Comfortings of
the nearest Friends, and of a kind Husband) when
she has sacrific'd her Honour, and cannot think of
any thing so probable, as the Moment approaches,
but that God will punish her in Kind, as she call'd
it; that is to say, added she, by the very Sufferings,
which are the natural Consequences of the
Sin she has so wickedly committed! 
I knew what her Design was, and said, Ay,
Polly, let you and me, and every single young Body,
bear these Reflections in Mind, pronounced by so
excellent a Lady, in Moments so arduous as these! 
The Girl wept, and very movingly fell down by
the Door, on her Knees, praying to God to preserve
her dear Lady, and she should be happy for
ever! —That, as Mrs. B. so often prettily writes,
was her Word. 
Mrs. B. is exceedingly pleas'd with my new
Relation, Mrs. Harris, as we call her; who behaves
with so much Prudence, that she suspects
nothing, and told Mrs. Jervis, She wish'd nobody
else was to come near her. And as she goes out
(being a Person of Eminence in her way) two or
three times a Day, and last Night staid out late,
Mrs. B. said, she hoped she would not be abroad,
when she should wish her to be at home. 
I have the Pleasure, the very great Pleasure,
my dear Papa and Mamma, to acquaint you, and 

I know you will rejoice with me upon it, that just
half an Hour ago, my dear Mrs. B. was brought
to bed of a fine Boy. 
We are all out of our Wits for Joy almost. I
ran down to Mr. B. myself, who receiv'd me with
trembling Impatience. A Boy! a fine Boy! dear
Mr. B. said I: A Son and Heir indeed! 
But how does my Pamela? Is she safe? Is she
like to do well? We hope so, said I: Or I had
not come down to you, I'll assure you. He folded
me in his Arms, in a joyful Rapture: How happy
you make me, dearest Miss Darnford! If my Pamela
is safe, the Boy is welcome, welcome indeed! 
But when may I go up to thank my Jewel? 
Mrs. Andrews is so overjoy'd, and so thankful,
that there's no getting her from her Knees. 
A man and Horse is dispatched already to Lady
Davers, and another order'd to Kent, to the good
old Man. 
Mrs. Jervis, when I went up, said, She must
go down, and release the good Folks from their
Knees; for, half an Hour before, they declared
they would not stir from that Posture, till they
heard how it went with their Lady; and when the
happy News was brought them of her Safety, and
of a young Master, they were quite ecstatick, she
says, in their Joy, and not a dry Eye among them,
shaking Hands, and congratulating one another,
Men and Maids: Which must make it one of the
most affecting Sights that can be imagined. And
Mr. Longman, who had no Power to leave the
House for Three Days past, (tho' Business required
his Presence in Bedfordshire) hasted to congratulate
his worthy Principal; and never was so much 

moving Joy seen, as this honest-hearted Steward
ran over with. 
I cannot draw these affecting Scenes of Joy,
as Mrs. B. could have done, had she been in my Case. 
—Let me only say, I never saw such a Family-Joy
in my Life: And who would care for Royalty,
or any of its Pageantry, when Virtue can thus
interest every body in its Concerns, and, on such an
Occasion as this, give that general and sincere Joy
to All within its Circle, which could fill a Nation
on the Birth of a first-born Prince from Sovereigns
the most beloved? 
I did a foolish thing in my Joy—I gave Mr. B.
the Letter design'd for him had an unhappy Event
follow'd; and he won't give it me again; but says,
he will obtain Mrs. B.'s Leave, when she is better,
to open it; and the happier Turn will augment his
Thankfulness to God, and Love to her, when he
shall, by this means, be bless'd with Sentiments so
different from what the other Case would have
afforded. But I will get it from him, if I can,
and give it her back; for one knows not what it
may contain; yet her Innocence and Purity make
one less apprehensive a good deal; for, I dare say,
she has no Excuses to make for Failings he knows
nothing of. 
Mrs. B. had a very sharp Time. Never more,
my dear Papa, talk of a Husband to me. Indeed,
in the Mind I am in, I will never be marry'd.— 
Place all your Expectations on Nancy! Not one
of these Men, that I have yet seen, Mr. B. excepted,
(and you know what a Chance it was, that
he would be so good) is worth running/these
Risques for! But his Endearments and Tenderness 

to his Lady, his thankful and manly Gratitude and
Politeness, when he was admitted to pay his Respects
to her, and his Behaviour to Mrs. Andrews,
and to us all, tho' but for a Visit of Ten Minutes,
was alone worthy of all her Risque! 
I would give you a Description of it, had I
Mrs. B.'s Pen, and of Twenty agreeable Scenes
and Conversations besides: But, for want of that,
must conclude, with my humble Duty, as becomes,
honour'd Sir and Madam, 
Your ever-grateful
Polly Darnford. 
I have been Three Days writing this Letter, Piece
by Piece. 

