



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Wedn. Evening. 
I have been reading thy shocking letter. —Poor
Belton! what a multitude of lively hours have we
passed together! 'Twas a fearless, chearful fellow! — 
Who'd ha' thought all should end in such dejected whimpering
and terror? 
But, why didst thou not comfort the poor man about
the rencounter between him and that poltroon Metcalfe? 
He acted in that affair like a man of true honour, and
as I should have acted in the same circumstances. Tell
him I say so, and what happened, he could neither help
nor foresee. 

Some people are as sensible of a scratch from a pin's
point, as others from a push of a sword: And who can
say any thing for the sensibility of such fellows? Metcalfe
would resent for his sister, when his sister resented
not for herself. Had she demanded her brother's protection
and resentment, that would have been another
man's matter, as Lord M. phrases it: But she herself
thought her brother a coxcomb to busy himself, undesired,
in her affairs, and wished for nothing but to be
provided for decently, and privately, in her lying-in; 
and was willing to take the chance of Maintenon-ing his
conscience in her favour (a) , and getting him to marry,
when the little stranger came; for she knew what an
easy, good-natured fellow he was. And, indeed, if she
had prevailed upon him, it might have been happy for
both; as then he would not have fallen in with his cursed
Thomasin. But truly this officious brother of hers must
interpose. This made a trifling affair important: And
what was the issue? Metcalfe challenged; Belton met
him; disarmed him; gave him his life: But the fellow,
more sensible in his skin than in his head, having received
a scratch, he was frighted; it gave him first a puke, then
a fever, and then he died. That was all. And how
could Belton help that? —But sickness, a long tedious
sickness, will make a bugbear of any thing to a languishing
heart, I see that. And so far was Mowbray
apropos in the verses from Nat. Lee; which thou hast transcribed. 
Merely to die, no man of reason fears; is a mistake, say
thou, or say thy author, what ye will. And thy solemn
parading about the natural repugnance between life and
death, is a proof that it is. 
Let me tell thee, Jack, that so much am I pleased with
this world, in the main; tho' in some points too, the
world, (to make a person of it,) has been a rascal to me; 
so delighted am I with the joys of youth; with my worldly
prospects as to fortune; and now, newly, with the 

charming hopes given me by dear, thrice dear, and forever
dear Miss Harlowe; that were I even sure that
nothing bad would come hereafter, I should be very
loth, (very much afraid if thou wilt have it so) to lay
down my life and them together; and yet upon a call of
honour, no man fears death less than myself. 
But I have not either inclination or leisure to weigh thy
leaden arguments, except in the pig, or, as thou wouldst
say, in the lump. 
If I return thy letters, let me have them again some
time hence, that is to say, when I am married, or when
poor Belton is half-forgotten; or when time has inrolled the
honest fellow among those whom we have so long lost, that
we may remember them with more pleasure than pain; and
then I may give them a serious perusal, and enter with
thee as deeply as thou wilt into the subject. 
When I am married, said I? —What a sound has that! 
I must wait with patience for a sight of this charming
creature, till she is at her father's: And yet, as the but
blossoming beauty, as thou tellest me, is reduced to a
shadow, I should have been exceedingly delighted to see
her now, and every day till the happy one; that I might
have the pleasure of beholding how sweetly, hour by
hour, she will rise to her pristine glories, by means of that
state of ease and contentment, which will take place of
the stormy past, upon her reconciliation with her friends,
and our happy nuptials. 