



From Mr. B. to Lady Davers. 


My dear Sister,
I Take very kindly your Solicitude for the Health
of my beloved Pamela. The last Line she
wrote, was to you; for she took to her Bed the
Moment she laid down her Pen. 
I told her your kind Message, and Wishes for
her Safety, by my Lord's Gentleman; and she
begg'd I would write a Line to thank you in her
Name for your affectionate Regards to her. 
She is in a fine way to do well: For, with her
accustomed Prudence, she had begun to prepare herself
by a proper Regimen, the Moment she knew
the Child's Illness was the Small-pox. 
The worst is over with the Boy, which keeps
up her Spirits; and her Mother is so excellent a
Nurse to both, and we are so happy likewise in the
Care of a skilful Physician, Dr. M. (who directs
and approves of every thing the good Dame does)
that it is a singular Providence this Malady seized 

them here; and affords no small Comfort to the
dear Creature herself. 
When I tell you, that, to all Appearance, her
charming Face will not receive any Disfigurement
by this cruel Enemy to Beauty, I am sure you will
congratulate me upon a Felicity so desirable: But
were it to be otherwise, if I were capable of slighting
a Person, whose principal Beauties are much
deeper than the Skin, I should deserve to be thought
the most unworthy and superficial of Husbands. 
Whatever your Notions have been, my
ever-ready censuring Lady Davers, of your Brother,
on a certain Affair, I do assure you, That I never
did, and never can, love any Lady, as I love my
Pamela. 
It is indeed impossible I can ever love her better
than I do; and her outward Beauties are far from
being indifferent to me; yet, if I know myself, I
am sure I have Justice enough to love her equally,
and Generosity enough to be more tender of her,
were she to suffer by this Distemper. But, as her
Humility, and her Affection to me, would induce
her to think herself under greater Obligation to me,
for such my Tenderness to her, were she to lose
any the least valuable of her Perfections, I rejoice,
that she will have no Reason for Mortification on
that Score. 
My Respects to Lord Davers, and all your noble
Neighbours. I am 
Your affectionate Brother,
and humble Servant. 

