


Sir Charles Grandison, To Lady Clementina. 


Rome, Aug. 11. N. S.
“Nothing”, says the most generous and
pious of her Sex, “but the due consideration
of the brevity as well as vanity of this life, and
of the duration of the next, could have influenced
me to act against my heart.” —Condescending goodness! 
What acknowlegements do you make in my
favour! —But, favour—can I say? —No, not in my
favour; but, on the contrary, to the extinction of all
my hopes; for what pleas remain to be urged, when
you doubt not my affection, my gratitude, my tenderness,
my good faith, and think from them will arise
your danger? 
My “extricating hand,” at your command, “is
held out;” and it shall not be my fault, if you recover
not the “smooth and pleasant path, in which
you were accustomed to walk with undoubting
feet.” 
You bid me “tell you what you shall do to be
indifferent to me”—What pain does the gracious
manner of your rejection give me? Exalted goodness! 
—“Your brother, your friend, your faithful, your
disinterested friend,” will “tell you,” against himself,
to the forfeiture of all his hopes; “he will tell
you,” that you ought not “to give your hand as 

your heart” (condescending excellence!) “would
have directed,” if you cannot do it, “and think
your Soul secure.” 
You “will help me to words,” you say—I repeat
them after you. “Persevere, Clementina—I will
not,” I cannot, “account you ungrateful.” 
How much does the dear, the generous Clementina,
over-rate the services, which Heaven, for my
consolation (so I will flatter myself) in a very heavy
disappointment that was to follow, made me an humble
instrument of rendering to the worthiest of families! 
To that Heaven be all the glory! By ascribing so
much to the agent, fear you not that you depreciate
the First Cause? Give to the Supreme His due, and
what will be left for me to claim? What but a common
service, which any one of your family would,
in the like circumstances, have done for me? 
It is generous, it is noble, in you, madam, to declare
your regard for the man you refuse: But what
a restraint must I act under, who value, and must for
ever value, the fair refuser; yet think myself bound
in honour to acquiesce with the refusal; and to prefer
your peace of mind to my own? To lay open my
heart before you, would give you pain. I will not
give you pain: Yet let me say, that the honour once
designed me, had it been conferred, would have laid
me under unreturnable obligations to as many persons
as are of your family. It was, at one time, an honour
too great even for my ambition; and that is one
of the constitutional faults, that I have found it most
difficult to restrain. But I will glory in their intended
goodness; and that I lost not their or your favour from
any act of unworthiness—Continue to me, most excellent
Clementina; continue to me, Lords and Ladies
of your illustrious house; your friendship; and I
will endeavour to be satisfied. 
Your “tutor,” as you are pleased to call him; 
your friend, your “Brother” (too clearly do I see 

the exclusive force of that last recognition!) owns, that
“he cannot be indifferent to those motives, that have
so great weight with you.” He sees your stedfastness,
and that your conscience is engaged: He submits
therefore, whatever the submission may cost him,
to your reasoning; and repeats your words—“Persevere,
Clementina.” 
I did tell your elder brother, and I am ready to tell
all the world, “that I would not, in a beginning address,
tho' to a princess, have signed to the articles
I yielded to by way of compromise.” Allow me,
madam, to repeat his question, to which my declaration
was an answer—“What would the daughters
have done, that they should have been consigned
to perdition (a) ?” —I had in my thoughts this further
plea, that our church admits of a possibility of
salvation out of its own pale. God forbid but it should! 
The church of God, we hold, will be collected from
the sincerely pious of all communions. Yet, I own,
that had the intended honour been done me, I should
have rejoiced that none but sons had blessed our nuptials. 
But how do your next words affect me—“Compassion
and Love, say you, were equally, perhaps,
your inducements—Poor Clementina!” add you. 
Inimitably great as what follows this is, I should
have thought myself concerned, as well for my own
honour, as for your delicacy, to have expatiated on the
self-pitying reflexion conveyed in these words, had we
been otherwise circumstanced than we are: But to
write but one half of what, in happier circumstances,
I would have written, must, as I have hinted, give
pain to your noble heart. The excellent Clementina,
I am sure, would not wish me to say much on
this subject. If she would, I must not; I cannot. 
The best of fathers, mothers, brothers, and of spiritual
directors, in your own way, are yours. They, 

madam, will strengthen your mind. Their advices,
and their indulgent love, will be your support in the
resolution you have taken. You call upon me again
to approve of that resolution. I do, I must approve of
it. “The Lover of your soul” concludes with the
repetition of the words you prescribe to his pen—If
cooler reflexion, if reconsideration of those arguments
which persuaded me to hope, that you would have
been in no way unhappy or unsafe, had you condescended
to be mine—If mature and dispassionate
thought, cannot alter your present persuasion on this
head—“Persevere, Clementina,” in the rejection of
a man as steady in his own faith as you are in yours. 
If your conscience is concerned—If your peace of
mind is engaged—you ought to refuse. “You cannot
be thought ungrateful”—So, against himself,
decides your called-upon, and generously acknowleged, 
“Tutor, Friend, Brother,”
Grandison. 

