


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Wednesday, March 7. 
Our grief will be your joy, my dearest grandmamma! 
My Uncle, my Aunt, Lucy, Emily,
Mr. Deane! —They are just gone: Just left me. 
What a parting! —But Emily! Dear creature!
what was her grief, her noble struggle with herself, to
conceal her anguish from her guardian! 
She will now be yours, and my aunt Selby's; and,
when once settled, will, must, be happy; for she is
good, and you all love her, and will love her the
more for this great instance of her nobleness of mind. 
About half an hour before we parted, she begged
to speak a few words to me in my closet. I led her
thither. When we entered it, she shut the door,
and dropt down on her knees. I would have raised
her; but she would not be raised. I clasped my arms
about her neck. I have revealed all my folly to you,
said she. Forgive the weakness of a poor girl. A
thousand, thousand thanks to you, madam, for your
indulgent goodness to me. I longed to live with you
and my guardian. I placed my whole happiness in
the grant. You gave me an opportunity to try the
experiment. What I little expected happened: I was
more unhappy than before. I revere your grandmamma:
She is a blessed Lady! How good was she
on your wedding-day, to wish me, poor me! to supply
to her the loss of her Harriet! Her goodness, her
condescension, that of all your family, overcame me:
It would not, perhaps, had I not tried the other experiment. 
All that I have now to beg of you, is, to
pardon me for the trouble I must have given to your
noble heart: It is a noble heart, or it could not have
borne with me as it has done. But promise to write a 

Letter to me once a fortnight—and permit me to write
to you once a week; and I shall think myself a happy
creature. Not a thought of my heart but I will
reveal to you. 
I do promise, my Love, my Emily. The correspondence
between us will delight me. Nobody shall
see any of our Letters, but at your choice. 
Lady L. Lady G. may, madam: They love the
poor Emily. Nobody else may, I believe; I shall
write so poorly! —But I shall improve as I have more
years, and more sense. But my present concern is
more for Lady Clementina than for myself. Poor
Lady! Pray write something of her friends behaviour
to her, and hers to them, to me particularly, besides
what you write to your grandmamma: I shall take
it for such a favour! And it will make me look so important! 
You don't know how proud it will make
me; and it will induce your Lucy, and every-body,
to shew me every-thing you write to them; and I
shall have it in my power to read out of your Letters
to me something in return; which will look like an
acquittal of obligation. 
All that she wished me to do, and still more, as
occasions offered, I promised. 
She arose from her knees; called me by many
tender names; kissed one cheek, then the other; 
then one hand, then the other. I folded her to my
fond heart: My Sister, my Friend, my Emily, I
called her. We wetted each other's bosom with our
tears; and both went down with red eyes. 
Extremely tender, but delicate, was the leave she
took of her guardian. The Brother, the affectionate
Friend, and Father, I may say, appeared in his unreserved
tenderness to her. She hurried into my
uncle's coach, which stood ready, when she parted
with him, that her emotion might not be too visible. 
I hastened in after her, lest she should be too much 

affected; while my Aunt, Lucy, and my Uncle, were
taking their leaves in the hall. 
My dearest Emily, I admire you! said I. 
Do you, do you! —Best of wives, of women, of
friends, of sisters, do you say so? —I behaved not
amiss, then? 
Amiss! No, my dear: Charmingly, my Love! 
You are great as ever woman was. 
How you comfort me! 
Adieu, adieu! my best Love! said I. —My best
Lady Grandison! said she: Both in a breath, as from
one heart, embracing; and quitting each other with
regret; her arms folded about herself, when I left
her; as if I were still within them. 
I gave my hand to Sir Edward Beauchamp, on
stepping out of the coach; for he was ready to attend
them; and hurrying into the hall, threw myself
into the arms of my aunt. My Love, said she,
take care of yourself: Emily shall not need to be your
concern: She will be our Harriet. 
Indeed she shall, said Lucy. Dear girl, she shall
be mine: And, thank God, I now have two Harriets
instead of one. 
My uncle wept like a child at parting with me. He
would have carried it off, smiling in his tears. What,
what, sobbed he, shall I do for my girl! I shall miss,
I shall miss, your sau-sau-sauciness sometimes—Was I
ever angry with you in my life? 
Mr. Deane comforted himself, that he should but
settle his affairs at Peterborough, and then would make
our residence his, where-ever we should be. 
All of them departed blessing us, and we them; 
hoping for a speedy meeting in Northamptonshire. 
Every one express'd their solicitude for the happiness
of Lady Clementina, as well for her own sake,
as for Sir Charles's and mine. 
God give you, and my dearest, dearest friends, now 

on their journey to you, a happy meeting, with every
felicity that on this earth can fall to the lot of persons
so dear to the heart of 
Your ever-dutiful
Harriet Grandison. 

