


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Wednesday, May 16. 
The conference was held in Italian. It was but
just turned of seven in the morning, when we
met in my drawing-room. 
I had told Lady Clementina that she must lead the
subject; but Sir Charles, seeing her in some confusion,
relieved her–––You do me, madam, said he,
great honour (and it is worthy of our brotherly and
sisterly friendship in proposing to ask my opinion on
any subject in which you are interested. Our dear
Harriet's recovery (God be praised for it!) has left
no wish in my heart so ardent as for your happiness. 
Permit me to say, my dear Lady Clementina, it is
necessary for that of us both. 
Indeed, madam, it is, said I, taking her hand. 
Tenderness, love, respect, I am sure, were in my
countenance, if it spoke my heart. She condescendingly
bowed upon mine: Tears were in her eyes: You
pain me, Chevalier, you pain me, madam, by your
goodness–––How many of my friends have I made unhappy! 
For some days past, said Sir Charles, I have observed,
that you have seemed more uneasy than usual. 
Would to Heaven it were in my power to remove the
cause! 

Perhaps it may. Ah, Chevalier! I thought when
I came into the compromise, that I might have made
myself happier in it, than I now find I can be. 
Dear Lady Clementina! said Sir Charles; and
stopt. 
Be not displeased with me, Chevalier. I must hold
myself bound by it, if it be insisted on. But tho' my
condescending friends urge me not by entreaties, by
persuasions, see you not that their wishing eyes, and
sighing hearts, break every hour the Articles agreed
to? 
Dear Lady Clementina! 
I knew you would be angry with me. 
I am not. It would be equally unfriendly and insolent
if I were. But, my dear Clementina, what
an affecting picture have you drawn of the resignation
of parents to the will of their child, in an article
which their hearts were fixed upon. 
Add not weight, Sir, to my uneasy reflexions. I can
hardly bear to see in them the generous suppression
of their own wishes. 
She then addressed herself to me. –––Bear with me,
dear Lady Grandison, if I cast an eye back to former
situations. You know my whole story. –––For a few
moments bear with me. –––I never, God is my witness,
envied you. On the contrary, I rejoiced to find
those merits which I had not power to reward, so
amply rewarded by you; and that the Chevalier was
so great a gainer by my declining his vows. –––She
stopt. 
Proceed, dearest Lady Clementina, said I–––Are
we not sisters? And do I not know, that yours
is the noblest of female minds? 
I rejoice, Sir, from my heart, that I was enabled
to act as I did.––– 
Again she stopt. Sir Charles bowed in silence. 
But still I hoped, that one day my parents would
have been overcome in favour of the divine dedication. 

That was always my wish, till you, Sir, induced
me to come into a compromise. And then I
was resolved to make myself, if possible, happy, in
the single Life allowed me. But what can I do? 
My former wishes recur. I cannot help it: And it
seems evident to me, that there is but one measure,
and that is the convent, which can make me happy. 
Dear Lady Clementina! said Sir Charles, will you
be pleased to allow me––– 
Olivia, Sir, interrupted she (you don't, perhaps,
know that) reflects upon me. It was indeed a rash
step which I took, when I fled to England: How has
it countenanced the excursion she made hither? Tho',
God knows, our motives were widely different: Hers
was to obtain what mine was intended to avoid. But
your sudden indisposition, madam, pointed the sting,
and carried it into my heart. That flashed full upon
me, the impropriety of my situation. Can there be,
say, Chevalier, can there be, any expedient which
will free me from reflexion, from slander, except that
of the veil? 
You lead the question, madam, replied Sir Charles:
I but follow you. Surely there can. 
You are not angry with me, Chevalier? You do
not upbraid me with breach of Articles? 
I do not, madam, while we only reason, not resolve. 
Assure yourself that your tranquillity of mind is one of
the principal objects of my daily vows. Say, Lady
Clementina, all that is in your heart to say. Your
friend, your brother, hears his sister with all the tenderness
of fraternal love. 
How soothing! How kind! –––You say there is
another expedient. What, excepting marriage, is it? 
Were it that, and that could be an acceptable expedient
–––We are only reasoning, madam; not resolving––– 
Do you, Chevalier, (with a look of impatience;)
propose that to me? 

I do not, madam–––I said we were reasoning only. 
–––But surely you may be very happy in the single
Life. You may have thought of plans, which, on
consideration, may not please you: But it is yet
early. Lady Clementina has too much greatness of
mind to permit any-thing that may be said by malevolent
people to affect her. She knows her heart; 
and has reason to be satisfied with it. Were your former
wishes to take place, will not ill-will and slander
follow you into the most sacred retirements? There
are several tender points to be considered in your past
situation. These are considered by your parents. They
have no view but to your happiness. You and they
indeed have different notions of the means. They
think marriage with a worthy man of your own faith,
would tend to establish it. You think assuming the
veil the only expedient. This subject has been much
canvassed. They are determined not to urge you:
Yet their judgments are not changed. Shall they not
be allowed to wish? Especially when they urge not,
speak not, their wishes? Your father was earnest with
the count of Belvedere, in my hearing, when last in
town, to give up all expectations from you. God
preserve their lives till they see you happy! You must
be convinced, that they are not so intent upon the
means as to obtain the end. 
My father, my mother, are all goodness! –––God
preserve their precious lives! –––Tears trickled down
her cheeks. 
I am sure, my dear Lady Clementina, you cannot
be happy in any state of life, if your choice, pursued,
would make your parents unhappy. –––Could Lady
Clementina, were she even professed, divest herself of
all filial, of all family regards? Would not that very
contemplative life, of which she is at present so fond,
make her, when it was too late to retrieve the step
(and with the more regret, perhaps, because it was
too late) carry her thoughts, her affections, with 

greater force, back to parents, if living, so deservedly
dear, to brothers so disinterestedly kind, to her; and
who have all shared so largely in her distresses? 
She sighed. She wept. O Chevalier! was all
she said. 
You cannot, madam, live only to yourself, for
yourself: And you may live to your God in the
world, perhaps, more efficaciously than in the convent,
with regard to your soul's health, as you have
such large ability to do good: For, wants not the
world, as I have heretofore pleaded, such an example
as you can give it? –––The heart, madam, not the
profession is the truly acceptable. Your maternal
grandfather, tho' a sound Catholic, would have it,
that there were many sighing hearts in convents; 
and on this supposition (confirmed to him by a singular
instance which affected him) he inserted in his
will the clauses which he thought would oblige you to
marry. Your other grandfather joined in the enforcement
of them. 
And what, Sir, was the penalty? Only the forfeiture
of an estate, which I wish not for; which none
of us want. We are all rich. It is a purchased, not
a paternal estate. 
And purchased with what view, madam? And for
whom? 
I would have my family superior to such motives. 
Must they not, my dear Clementina, be judges for
themselves? 
I do not believe, proceeded she, that there are many
sighing hearts in convents: But if there were,
and my friends would be satisfied (for that, I own, is
an essential point with me) I should not, I am sure,
add to the number of such. As to what you say of
the world wanting such an example as I could set it,
I have not vanity enough to be convinced by that argument. 
Whether my soul's peace could be best
promoted in the world, or in the convent, must be 

left to me to judge; who know that in the turmcils
and disturbances I have met with, both of mind and
body, the retired, the sequestred life, is most likely
to re-compose my shattered spirits. 
Those turmoils, those disturbances, madam, thank
God! are over. 
I pity, I can forgive, I do forgive, the poor Laurana. 
Ah Sir! you know not, perhaps, that Love,
a passion which is often the cause of guilty meanness,
as sometimes indeed of laudable greatness, was the
secret cause of Laurana's cruelty to me. She hated
me not, till that passion invaded her bosom. Shall I
remember the evil of her behaviour, and not the
good? 
Admirable Clementina! said Sir Charles: Admirable
lady! said his Harriet; both in a breath. 
She was the companion of my childhood, proceeded
the exalted Lady. We had our education together. 
I was the sufferer; thank God! not the aggressor. She
has made me great, by putting it into my power to
forgive her. Let all my revenge be in her compunction
from my forgiveness, and from my wishes
to promote her welfare! 
And a revenge indeed would that be, said Sir
Charles, were she, who had acted by an excellent
creature, as she has done by you, capable of generous
compunction. But, noblest of women, can it be
expected, if you can forgive her, that your family
should join, by giving up their reversionary expectance,
to reward her for her cruelty to their child,
who was entrusted to her kindest care and protection? 
Can you, madam, treat lightly those instances
of your parents and brother's Love, which have made
them resent her barbarity to you? –––My dear Lady
Clementina, you must not aim at being above Nature. 
Remember that your grandfather never designed
this estate for Laurana. It was only to be
provisionally hers, in order to secure it the more effectually 

to you; and, on failure of descendants from
you, to your elder brother, who, however, wishes
not for it. His heart is in your marriage. He only
wishes, that it may not be the cruel Laurana's. If
you can defeat the design of your grandfathers, with
regard to your own interest, ought you to do injustice
to your brother's claim? 
O Chevalier! 
Ought you to think of disposing of your brother's
right? Has not he much better reason to be considered
by you for his affection, than Laurana has for her cruelty? 
–––Abhorred be that sort of Love, my dear
Lady Clementina, which is pleaded in excuse of barbarity,
or of any extravagant, undutiful, or unnatural
action! 
She sighed. Tears again stole down her checks. 
After a short silence–––O spare me, Chevalier! ––– 
Despise me not, Lady Grandison! –––My enfeebled
reason may lead me into error; but when I know it
is error, I will not continue in it. I see that, with
regard to my brother's interest in this estate, I reasoned
wrong. I was guilty, my dear Lady Grandison,
I doubt, in your eye, of a false piece of heroism. 
I was for doing less than justice to a brother, that I
might do more than justice to an unnatural relation. 
All that Laurana can hope from you, my dear Lady
Clementina, said Sir Charles, is, that you will intitle
her to the receipt of the considerable legacy your
grandfather bequeathed to her––– 
And how is that to be done, interrupted she, but
by my marriage? –––Ah, Chevalier! 
Such, indeed, is the state of the case. Such was it
designed to be. I, madam, but state it. I advise nothing. 
Still, Sir, the motive which may allowably have
weight with my friends, ought not to have principal
weight with me. Consider, Sir: Is it not setting an
earthly estate against my immortal soul? 

Far otherwise, madam. Can you so far doubt of
the divine grace, can you so far disparage your own
virtues, as to suppose they want the security of a
convent? Do justice, my dear Lady Clementina, to
yourself. You have virtues which cannot be exerted
in a convent; and you have means to display them
for the good of hundreds. I argue not as a protestant,
when I address myself to you. The most zealous
catholic, if unprejudiced, circumstanced as you are,
must allow of what I say. 
Ah, Chevalier! how you anticipate me! I was
going to charge you with arguing like a protestant. 
Did not your grandfathers, madam, in effect, argue
as I argue, when they made their wills? Did not
your father, mother, uncle, brothers, thus argue,
when they wished you to relinquish all thoughts of
the veil? And are not the one, were not the others,
all zealous catholics? Does not your brother the bishop,
does not your truly pious confessor, acquiesce in
their reasonings, and concur with (at least not oppose)
the family-reasons? 
She looked down, sweetly conscious. Sir Charles
proceeded. 
Has not your mother, madam, who gave you and
your three brothers to the world, a merit both with
God and man, one of you dedicated, as he is, to
God (you see, madam, I address myself to you in the
catholic stile) which the cloistered life could not have
given her? Are not the conjugal and maternal duties
(performed as she has performed them) of higher account,
than any of those can be, which may be exerted
in the sequestred life? Clementina would not
wish to be a better woman in the convent, than her mother
has always been out of it. 
She hesitated, sighed, looked down: At last, What
can I say? said she. I have signed to the waving of
my wishes after the veil; and must, I see, abide by
my signing. It is, however, generous in you, Sir, not 

to plead against me that my act; and to hear me with
patience want to be absolved from it. But I am not
happy–––She stopt; and turned away her face to
conceal her emotion. 
Sir Charles was affected, as well as I. 
She recovered her speech. I am, at times, said she,
too sensible of running into flight and absurdity. My
late unhappy malady has weakened my reasoning powers. 
You both can, I see you both do, pity me. Let me
say, Chevalier, that when I came into your proposed
compromise (which, after so grievous a fault committed,
as the flying from my native country, and indulgent
parents, I could the less refuse) I promised
myself happiness in a situation, in which, I now see,
it is not to be found. Your friendship, your united
friendship for me, happy pair! I thought (as I knew
I deserved it by my disinterested affection for you both)
would contribute to it; I was therefore desirous to cultivate
it. My wounded reason allowed me not to
consider, that there were improprieties in my scheme,
of which the world would judge otherwise, than I
did: And when I heard of vile and undeserved reflexions
cast upon me; but most when that sudden
indisposition seized you, my dear Lady Grandison,
and seemed to my frighted imagination to threaten a
life so precious––– 
She paused: Then proceeded. –––I have told you,
madam, my reflexions. –––Before you, Chevalier, I
have said enough. –––And now advise me what to do. 
–––To say truth, I almost as much long to quit England,
as I did to fly to it. I am unhappy. O my
fluctuating heart! When, when, shall I be settled? 
What, madam, can I say? answered Sir Charles:
What can I advise? You say you are not happy. 
You think your parents are not so. We all believe
you can make them so. But God forbid it should be
to your own unhappiness, who have already been so
great a sufferer, tho' hardly a greater than every one 

of your friends has been from your sufferings. I plead
not, madam, the cause of any one man. I have told
you, that your father himself advises a certain nobleman
to give over all hopes of you: And that person
himself says, that he will endeavour to do so; first,
because he promised you, that he would; and next,
because he is now too well assured, that you have an
aversion to him. 
An aversion, Chevalier! God forbid that I should
have an aversion to any human creature! I thought
my behaviour to that gentleman had been such—She
stopt. 
It was great; it was worthy of Clementina. But
this is his apprehension: And if it be just, God forbid
that Lady Clementina should think of him! 
My dear Lady Grandison, do you advise me upon
all that has passed in this conference. You assured
me at the beginning of it, that my peace of mind was
necessary to your happiness. 
From my affection for you, my dear Lady Clementina,
and from my affection only, it is necessary. You
cannot have a distress, which will not, if I know it,
be a distress to me. You know best what you can
do. God give you happiness, and make yours the
foundation of that of your indulgent parents! 
They are of opinion, that a settled life with some
worthy man of your own country and faith, will
greatly contribute to it. Your mamma is firmly of
opinion it will: So is Mrs. Beaumont. You see that
you cannot, in justice to your brother, and to his children
yet unborn, as well as in duty to your deceased
grandfathers, assume the veil: You see that the unnatural
Laurana, whom you still are so great as to
love, cannot enjoy a considerable legacy bequeathed
her, but on your marriage. –––If you have a dislike to
the nobleman who has so large a share in the affections
of all your family, by no means think of him. 
Rejoice, madam, in a single life, if you think you can 

be happy in it, till some man offer whom you can favour
with your esteem. Let me be honoured mean
time with the continuance of your Love, as I shall be
found to deserve it. We are already sisters. In presence,
we will be one; in absence, we will not be
divided; for we will mingle souls and sentiments on
paper.––– 
I was proceeding; but she wrapt her arms about
my neck. She bathed my cheek with her tears. ––– 
O how generously did she extol me! how delighted,
how affected, was the dearest of men! how delicate
was his behaviour to both! The tender friend in her,
the beloved wife, were with the nicest propriety, distinguished
by him. 
The dear Lady was too much disordered by her own
grateful rapture, to recover a train of reasoning. She
told me, however, that she would ponder, weigh, consider
every-thing that had passed. 
God give her happiness! prays with her whole
heart, 
Your
Harriet Grandison. 

