



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Monday, Mary 29. 
Now have I established myself for ever in my
charmer's heart. 
The Captain came at seven, as promised, and ready
equipped for his journey. My beloved chose not to
give us her company till our first conversation was
over. —Ashamed, I suppose [But to my shame, if she
was], to be present at that part of it, which was to
restore her to her virgin state, by my confession, after
her wifehood had been reported to her uncle. But she
took her cue nevertheless, and listened to all that
passed. 
The modestest women, Jack, must think, and
think deeply sometimes. —I wonder whether they
ever blush at those things by themselves, at which
they have so charming a knack of blushing in company. 
—If not; and if blushing be a sign of grace or
modesty, have not the sex as great a command over
their blushes, as they are said to have over their tears? 
This reflection would lead me a great way into female
minds, were I disposed to pursue it. 
I told the Captain, that I would prevent his question; 
and accordingly, after I had injoined the
strictest secrecy, that no advantage might be given to
James Harlowe; and which he answered for as well
on Mr. Harlowe's part as his own; I acknowleged
nakedly and fairly the whole truth. —To wit, ‘That
we were not yet married. —I gave him hints of the
causes of procrastination. —Some of them owing to 

unhappy misunderstanding: But chiefly to the Lady's
desire of previous reconciliation with her friends; 
and to a delicacy that had no example.’ 
Less nice ladies than this, Jack, love to have delays,
wilful and studied delays, imputed to them in
these cases—Yet are indelicate in their affected delicacy; 
for do they not thereby tacitly confess, that
they expect to be the greatest gainers in wedlock; 
and that there is self-denial in the pride they take in
delaying? 
‘I told him the reason of our passing to the people
below as marry'd—Yet as under a vow of restriction,
as to consummation, which had kept us both to the
height, one of forbearing, the other of vigilant
punctilio; even to the denial of those innocent freedoms,
which betrothed lovers never scruple to allow
and to take. 
‘I then communicated to him a copy of my proposals
of settlement; the substance of her written
answer; the contents of my letter of invitation to
Lord M. to be her nuptial father; and of my Lord's
generous reply. But said, that having apprehensions
of delay from his infirmities, and my beloved
choosing by all means (and that from principles of
unrequited duty) a private solemnization, I had
written to excuse his lordship's presence; and expected
an answer every hour. 
‘The settlements, I told him, were actually drawing
by counsellor Williams, of whose eminence he
must have heard [He had]; and of the truth of this
he might satisfy himself before he went out of town. 
‘When these were drawn, approved, and ingrossed,
nothing, I said, but signing, and the nomination
of my happy day, would be wanting. I had a pride,
I declared, in doing the highest justice to so beloved
a creature, of my own voluntary motion, and without
the intervention of a family from whom I had
received the greatest insults. And this being our 

present situation, I was contented, that Mr. John
Harlowe should suspend his reconciliatory purposes
till our marriage were actually solemnized.’ 
The Captain was highly delighted with all I had said: 
Yet owned, that as his dear friend Mr. Harlowe had
expressed himself greatly pleased to hear that we were
actually marry'd, he could have wished it had been so. 
But nevertheless, he doubted not that all would be
well. 
He saw my reasons, he said, and approved of them,
or making the gentlewomen below (whom again he
understood to be good sort of people) believe, that the
ceremony had passed; which so well accounted for
what the Lady's maid had told Mr. Harlowe's friend. 
Mr. James Harlowe, he said, had certainly ends to
answer in keeping open the breach; and as certainly
had formed a design to get his sister out of my hands. 
Wherefore it as much imported his worthy friend to
keep this treaty a secret, as it did me; at least till he
had formed his party, and taken his measures. Ill-will
and passion were dreadful misrepresenters. It
was amazing to him, that animosity could be carried
so high against a man capable of views so pacific and
so honourable, and who had shown such a command of
his temper, in this whole transaction. Generosity,
indeed, in every case, where love of stratagem and
intrigue [I would excuse him] were not concerned,
was a part of my character— 
He was proceeding, when breakfast being ready,
in came the empress of my heart, irradiating all around
her, as with a glory—A benignity and graciousness in
her aspect, that, tho' natural to it, had been long banished
from it. 
Next to prostration lowly bowed the Captain. O
how the sweet creature smiled her approbation of him! 
Reverence from one, begets reverence from another. 
Men are more of monkeys in imitation, than they
think themselves—Involuntarily, in a manner, I bent 

my knee—My dearest life—and made a very fine
speech on presenting the captain to her. No title,
myself, to her lip or cheek, 'tis well he attempted not
either—He was indeed ready to worship her;—could
only touch her charming hand— 
I have told the Captain, my dear creature—And
then I briefly repeated, as if I had supposed she had
not heard it, all I had told him. 
He was astonish'd, that any-body could be displeased
one moment with such an angel. He undertook her
cause as the highest degree of merit to himself. 
Never, I must needs say, did the angel so much
look the angel. All placid, serene, smiling, self-assured: 
A more lovely flush than usual heightening
her natural graces, and adding charms, even to radiance,
to her charming complexion. 
After we had seated ourselves, the agreeable subject
was renew'd, as we took our chocolate. How
happy should she be in her uncle's restored favour! 
The Captain engaged for it—No more delays, he
hoped, of her part! Let the happy day be but once
over, all would then be right! —But was it improper
to ask for copies of my proposals, and of her answer,
in order to shew them to his dear friend her uncle? 
As Mr. Lovelace pleased—O that the dear creature
would always say so! 
It must be in strict confidence then, I said—But
would it not be better to shew her uncle the draught
of the settlements, when drawn? 
And will you be so good, as to allow of this, Mr.
Lovelace? 
There, Belford! We were once The Quarrelsome,
but now we are The Polite, Lovers.— 
Indeed, my dearest creature, I will, if you desire
it; and if Captain Tomlinson will engage, that Mr.
Harlowe shall keep them absolutely a secret; that I
may not be subjected to the cavil and controul of any
other of a family that have used me so very ill. 

Now indeed, Sir, you are very obliging. 
Dost think, Jack, that my face did not now also
shine? 
I held out my hand (first consecrating it with a
kiss) for hers. She condescended to give it me. I
pressed it to my lips: You know not, Captain Tomlinson
(with an air), all storms overblown, what a
happy man— 
Charming couple! His hands lifted up—How will
my good friend rejoice! —O that he were present! — 
You know not, Madam, how dear you still are to
your uncle Harlowe!— 
I am unhappy ever to have disobliged him! 
Not too much of that, however, fairest, thought I! 
He repeated his resolutions of service, and that in
so acceptable a manner, that the dear creature wished,
that neither he, nor any of his, might ever want a
friend of equal benevolence. 
None of his, she said; for the captain brought it in,
that he had five children living, by one of the best of
wives and mothers, whose excellent management made
him as happy, as if his eight hundred pounds a year
(which was all he had to boast of) were two thousand. 
Without oeconomy, the oraculous lady said, no
estate was large enough. With it, the least was not
too small. 
Lie still, teazing villain! lie still! —I was only
speaking to my conscience, Jack. 
And let me ask you, Mr. Lovelace, said the Captain; 
yet not so much from doubt, as that I may proceed
upon sure grounds—You are willing to co-operate
with my dear friend in a general reconciliation? 
Let me tell you, Mr. Tomlinson, that if it can be
distinguished, that my readiness to make up with a
family, of whose generosity I have not had reason to
think highly, is intirely owing to the value I have for
this angel of a woman, I will not only co-operate
with Mr. John Harlowe, as you ask; but I will meet 

Mr. James Harlowe senior, and his lady, all the way 
And furthermore, to make the son James and Arabella
quite easy, I will absolutely disclaim any further
interest, whether living or dying, in any of the three
brothers estates; contenting myself with what my beloved's
grandfather has bequeathed to her: For I have
reason to be abundantly satisfied with my own circumstances
and prospects—Enough rewarded, were
she not to bring a shilling in dowry, in a lady who has
a merit superior to all the goods of fortune. True as
the Gospel, Belford! Why had not this scene a real
foundation? 
The dear creature, by her eyes, expressed her gratitude,
before her lips could utter it. O Mr. Lovelace,
said she—You have infinitely—And there she
stopt— 
The Captain run over in my praise. He was really
affected. 
O that I had not such a mixture of revenge and
pride in my love, thought I! —But [my old plea
cannot I make her amends at any time? —And is not
her virtue now in the heighth of its probation? — 
Would she lay aside, like the friends of my uncontending
Rosebud, all thought of defiance—Would
she throw herself upon my mercy, and try me but on
fortnight in the Life of Honour—What then?— 
cannot say, What then. 
Do not despise me, Jack, for my inconsistency— 
In no two letters perhaps agreeing with myself— 
Who expects consistency in men of our character? — 
But I am mad with love—Fired by revenge—Puzzled
with my own devices—My inventions are my curse— 
My pride my punishment—Drawn five or six ways
at once—Can she possibly be so unhappy as I? 
O why, why was this woman so divinely excellent! — 
Yet how know I that she is? —What have been her
tryals? Have I had the courage to make a single one
upon her person, tho' fifty upon her temper? — 

Enough, I hope, to make her afraid of ever disobliging
me more!— 
* *
I must banish reflection, or I am a lost man. For
these two hours past have I hated myself for my own
contrivances. And this not only from what I have
related to thee; but from what I have further to relate. 
But I have now once more steeled my heart. 
My vengeance is uppermost; for I have been re-perusing
some of Miss Howe's virulence. The contempt
they have both held me in, I cannot bear.— 
The happiest breakfast-time, my beloved owned,
that she had ever known since she had left her father's
house. She might have let this alone. The Captain
renewed all his protestations of service. He would
write me word how his dear friend received the account
he should give him of the happy situation of our
affairs, and what he thought of the settlements, as
soon as I should send him the kindly-promised
draughts. And we parted with great professions of
mutual esteem; my beloved putting up vows for the
success of his generous mediation. 
When I returned from attending the Captain down
stairs, which I did to the outward door, my beloved
met me as I entered the dining-room; complacency
reigning in every lovely feature. 
You see me already, said she, another creature. 
You know not, Mr. Lovelace, how near my heart
this hoped-for reconciliation is. I am now willing to
banish every disagreeable remembrance. You know
not, Sir, how much you have obliged me. And Oh,
Mr. Lovelace, how happy shall I be, when my heart
is lightened from the all-sinking weight of a father's
curse! When my dear mamma (You don't know,
Sir, half the excellencies of my dear mamma! and
what a kind heart she has, when it is left to follow its
own impulses—When this blessed mamma) shall once
more fold me to her indulgent bosom! When I shall 

again have uncles and aunts, and a brother and sister,
all striving who shall shew most kindness and favour
to the poor outcast, then no more an outcast! —And
you, Mr. Lovelace, to behold all this, and to be received
into a family so dear to me, with welcome— 
What tho' a little cold at first? when they come to
know you better, and to see you oftener, no fresh
causes of disgust occurring, and you, as I hope, having
enter'd upon a new course, all will be warmer
and warmer love on both sides, till every one perhaps
will wonder, how they came to set themselves against
you. 
Then drying her eyes with her handkerchief, after
a few moments pausing, on a sudden, as if recollecting
that she had been led by her joy to an expression of it,
which she had not intended I should see, she retired
to her chamber with precipitation—Leaving me almost
as unable to stand it, as herself. 
In short, I was—I want words to say how I was— 
My nose had been made to tingle before; my eyes
have before been made to glisten by this soul-moving
beauty; but so very much affected, I never was—for,
trying to check my sensibility, it was too strong for
me, and I even sobbed—Yes, by my soul, I audibly
sobbed, and was forced to turn from her before she had
well finished her affecting speech. 
I want, methinks, now I have owned the odd sensation,
to describe it to thee—The thing was so strange
to me—Something choaking, as it were, in my throat—
I know not how—Yet, I must needs say, tho' I am
out of countenance upon the recollection, that there
was something very pretty in it; and I wish I could
know it again, that I might have a more perfect idea
of it, and be better able to describe it to thee. 
But this effect of her joy on such an occasion gives
me a high notion of what that virtue must be [What
other name can I call it?] which in a mind so capable
of delicate transport, should be able to make so charming 

a creature in her very bloom, all frost and snow
to every advance of Love from the man she hates not. 
This must be all from Education too: —Must it not,
Belford? Can Education have stronger force in a woman's
heart than Nature? —Sure it cannot. But if it
can, how intirely right are parents to cultivate their
daughters minds, and to inspire them with notions of
reserve and distance to our sex; and indeed to make
them think highly of their own? For pride is an excellent
substitute, let me tell thee, where virtue shines
not out, as the sun, in its own unborrowed lustre. 